LedgerThesis_OnlineVersion
Intestinal parasites in the Roman Empire, their regional 
distribution and ecosocial determinants 
Marissa L. Ledger 
Department of Archaeology 
University of Cambridge 
Trinity Hall College 
This thesis is submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Submitted November 2019 
Declaration 
This thesis is the result of my own work and includes nothing which is the outcome of work 
done in collaboration except as declared in the Preface and specified in the text. It is not 
substantially the same as any that I have submitted, or, is being concurrently submitted for a 
degree or diploma or other qualification at the University of Cambridge or any other 
University or similar institution except as declared in the Preface and specified in the text. I 
further state that no substantial part of my thesis has already been submitted, or, is being 
concurrently submitted for any such degree, diploma or other qualification at the University 
of Cambridge or any other University or similar institution except as declared in the Preface 
and specified in the text. It does not exceed the prescribed word limit for the relevant Degree 
Committee. 
Intestinal parasites in the Roman Empire, their regional distribution and ecosocial 
determinants 
Marissa L. Ledger 
Abstract 
As one of the main categories of pathogens, an understanding of parasitic infection in the past 
is essential to understanding disease in past populations. Evidence for parasites in the human 
past is steadily growing with examples from many different continents and time periods. 
Studies have been done in the Roman period however, this evidence does not cover all 
regions of the Roman empire. At its greatest extent the empire covered much of Europe, 
North Africa, and parts of the Middle East and different regions had strong cultural 
influences, not only from pre-existing cultural groups, but also from connections outside the 
empire. For these reasons there are likely to be variations in disease presence regionally. One 
of the main aims of this dissertation is to illuminate possible regional variations in parasitic 
infection in the Roman empire and compare this to earlier and later time periods in order to 
consider possible explanations for parasite taxonomic diversity in the empire. Archaeological 
sediments were collected from Roman period sites in previously understudied regions, such as 
Italy, Turkey, and the frontier regions, as well as pre-Roman and post-Roman time periods 
that had limited or no data. These samples were analysed for preserved parasite eggs and cysts 
using microscopy and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In the Roman period, 
predominately soil-transmitted helminths were found in samples from the Mediterranean 
region while those from northern Europe had additional zoonotic taxa. In the pre-Roman 
period the taxonomic diversity found was much higher, especially at the Bronze Age site of 
Must Farm in the marshes of Britain. The parasites found in the post-Roman sites studied here 
were very similar to that in the Roman period. A consideration of sanitation infrastructure 
presence, design, and use based on archaeological and historical evidence points to some 
potential reasons for the consistent presence of roundworm and whipworm across the Roman 
empire. Additionally, differences in diet, cooking practices, animal husbandry, and climate 
are considered as contributors to taxonomic diversity in different regions of the empire.  
Preface 
This thesis has been completed under the supervision of Dr. Piers Mitchell in the Department 
of Archaeology beginning in October 2016. This thesis is the result of my own work and to 
the best of my ability I have indicated throughout where material was contributed by 
collaborators, in most cases this was to provide context for the materials being studied. Some 
parts of this thesis have already been published or submitted for publication and I have 
detailed those below and have tried to clearly state this throughout the text. Copies of that 
material can be found in Appendix A and a full list of publications in Section 10. 
In section 2 the overview of the evolution of parasites formed the start of a publication in the 
International Journal of Osteoarchaeology (Ledger and Mitchell, 2019). This publication was 
written by me with Dr. Mitchell as supervising author. 
The work on Must Farm in section 4.2.1 has been published in Parasitology (Ledger et al., 
2019a). Some of the sediment samples collected from the site were analysed by other students 
in our lab, Madison Fairey and Elisabeth Grimshaw, the details of which samples were 
analysed by me is described in the materials section. All parasites identified were found in the 
samples that I analysed and many were found in the samples they analysed as well. This 
manuscript was written by me with edits and input from collaborators. The section on lipid 
biomarkers was written by Helen Whelton and Ian Bull who completed this analysis. Dr. 
Mitchell was the supervising author of this publication. 
The work on atalhyk in section 4.2.2 has been published in Antiquity (Ledger et al., 
2019b). The work of this thesis was combined with analysis of separate samples from the site 
by Dr. Evilena Anastasiou in that publication. The material described in this thesis is only the 
samples that I studied. This publication was written jointly by myself and Dr. Mitchell with 
input from all coauthors. 
The work on Viminacium in section 4.3.9 has been incorporated into a manuscript submitted 
for publication in the American Journal of Archaeology (Appendix A.5). This article was 
written by me and all analysis described was completed by me. Dr. Mitchell was the 
supervising author and all coauthors also gave their input. 
The work on Ephesus in section 4.3.10 has been published in the Journal of Archaeological 
Sciences: Reports (Ledger et al., 2018). This article was written by me with Dr. Mitchell as 
supervising author. All coauthors also provided input on the article. 
The work on Sardis in section 4.3.11 has been incorporated into a manuscript submitted for 
publication in the American Journal of Archaeology (Appendix A.5). This article was written 
by me and all analysis described was completed by me. Dr. Mitchell was the supervising 
author and all coauthors also gave their input. 
Major parts of section 5.2 have been turned into a manuscript submitted for publication in the 
American Journal of Archaeology (Appendix A.5). This article was written by me and all 
analysis described was completed by me. Dr. Mitchell was the supervising author and all 
coauthors also gave their input. 
Acknowledgments 
I would first like to thank Dr. Mitchell for his supervision and thoughtful guidance throughout 
my PhD. I would also like to thank Dr. Tracy Prowse for being a supportive mentor 
throughout all of my academic studies and especially in my PhD. 
The numerous collaborators who helped me acquire samples, shared their research, 
and discussed my results with me to help put them in context, without whom none of this 
work would have been possible. I cannot thank them enough for being so generous with their 
time and their openness to collaborating. Especially Erica Rowan for collaborations on a 
number of samples from various sites including Sardis, Aphrodisias, and Vacone. 
Vagnari: Thanks to the various Vagnari excavation teams and a number of individuals 
and organizations who make excavation possible. In particular, the Ministero per i Beni e le 
Attivit Culturali, the British School at Rome, Dott. Mario De Gemmis Pellicciari, Dott. Luigi 
LaRocca, Dottsa. Francesca Radina and Dottsa. Maria Rosaria Depalo. 
Oplontis: Kristina Killgrove for collecting samples and providing osteobiographical 
data on the skeletal remains as well as and Nicola Terrenato (University of Michigan). The 
numerous organizations that make excavation possible including the Parco Archeologico 
Pompeii for permission to excavate the remains at Oplontis and permission to take samples of 
bones, teeth, and soil. John Clarke for initial discussions about material from Oplontis. 
Vacone: Thanks to the various excavation teams from the Upper Sabina Tiberina 
Project, the superintendency for granting permission to excavate, the directors of the project 
Candace Rice, Gary Farney, Tyler Franconi, and Dylan Bloy, as well as Devin Ward for 
collecting pelvic soil samples.  
Sardis: Thanks to Nicholas Cahill, Frances Gallart Marques, John Sigmier, and Erica 
Rowan for collection of samples and providing very detailed information on the context of the 
samples studied. Thanks to the various excavation teams.  
Ephesus: Thanks to members of the excavating team and researchers from AW. 
Thanks to Friederike Stock, Helmut Schwaiger, Maria Knipping, Helmut Brckner, and 
Sabine Ladsttter for collecting samples and providing information on context. 
Viminaicum: Thanks to Nataa arki and Saa Redi for collecting samples and 
providing information on the context and to the excavating teams of the Viminacium Project. 
Arlon: Thanks to Koen Deforce for collaborating on the samples from the Arlon 
latrine. 
Paphos: Thanks to members of the project from the Cyprus Institute especially Kirsi 
Lorentz and Grigoria Ioannou for collecting samples and providing osteobiographical data on 
the skeletal remains. 
Lauriacum: Thanks to Maria Marschler for collecting samples and providing 
information about the context of the cemetery. 
West Smithfield: Thanks to Rebecca Redfern for collecting samples from the West 
Smithfield cemetery and to excavation teams. 
Winterborne: Thanks to Martin Smith and the excavation teams for collecting samples 
for parasite analysis. 
Must Farm: Thanks to the Cambridge Archaeological Unit who excavated the site. 
Thanks in particular to Mark Knight and Rachel Ballantyne who organized collection of 
samples and who were always available to discuss results of the parasite analysis and foster 
collaboration with other researchers working on the project. Thanks to Helen Whelton and Ian 
Bull who undertook the faecal lipid biomarker analysis to identify the source of the coprolites 
studied. 
Catalhoyuk: Thanks to Scott Haddow and Chris Knsel for providing samples to 
analyse and for thoughtful discussion of the results. Thanks to Evilena Anastasiou who did 
the initial analysis of the coprolites collected from the site. 
Boncuklu: Thanks to Doug Baird for collecting samples for parasite analysis and all 
excavation teams. 
Griffin Warrior: Thanks for Sharon Stocker, Jack Davis, and Lynne Schepartz for 
collecting samples for analysis and providing information about the burial and excavations. 
Hatherdene Close: Thanks to the Oxford Archaeological Unit who undertook 
excavations of the cemetery and collected samples for parasite analysis, in particular Richard 
Mortimer and Natasha Dodwell. 
Of course my friends and family, all of whom I will not name but I could not ask for a 
more loving and supportive group of people. As well as, other members of Biological 
Anthropology and Archaeology community at Cambridge who have made my PhD run 
smoothly and created a very welcoming environment to work in.  
Finally, those in the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Alberta, Canada who 
were always so supportive of me undertaking PhD to augment my medical studies. Firstly, 
Sarah Forgie who encouraged me to pursue PhD in the first place and take the step to enter 
the MD/PhD program. Tracey Hillier, Alan Underhill, and Peter Hamilton who made the 
whole program feasible. Also the late Richard Fedorak, who probably without even realizing 
it was one of the most encouraging people, whose enthusiasm and interest in my research kept 
me going when my research became very difficult, I will always value our chats about his 
research studying the gut microbiome of mummies.  
Table of Contents 
A.3 Tracing Zoonotic Parasites Throughout Human Evolution (International Journal of 
List of Figures 
Figure 10: Parasites found at Roman-period sites, mapped onto Roman provinces in 117 CE
Figure 14: Roman-period sites where fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) has been found.
Figure 16: Roman-period sites where lancet liver fluke (Dicrocoelium sp.) has been found. . 58 
Figure 17: Roman-period sites where Giardia duodenalis and Entamoeba histolytica have 
Figure 19: Roman-period sites where Echinococcus sp., pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis), 
Figure 23: Plan of Must Farm settlement with sediment sampling locations marked by black 
Figure 26: Diphyllobothrium sp. eggs found in coprolites from the Must Farm settlement. ... 96 
Figure 29: Plan of Must Farm settlement with locations of sediment samples and taxa found 
Figure 31: Ascaris sp. eggs found in pelvic soil from burials at West Smithfield cemetery, 
Figure 32: Ascaris sp. eggs from Arlon latrine. Fertile eggs with mamillated coats (left and 
Figure 34: Dimensions of Trichuris sp. (whipworm) eggs from the Arlon latrine plotted 
Figure 37: Ascaris sp. eggs from the pelvic soil of skeleton 1, in the sarcophagus of MP3939 
not defined. 
Figure 45: Cappuccina drain and the possible latrine, Room 33 from the villa at Vacone. ... 128 
Figure 47: Ascaris sp. egg found in drain 931 (context 1514.1) from the villa at Vacone. 
Figure 48: Photo of Viminacium thermae with latrine and location of coprolite in latrine drain 
Figure 49: Plan of Viminacium thermae with location of coprolite in latrine marked by red dot 
Figure 53: Photo of the fill of the drain of the public latrine at Ephesus. Mineralised material 
Figure 54: Trichuris trichiura egg from Ephesus house latrine and Ascaris sp. egg from public 
Figure 60: Frequency of positive sites for Ascaris sp. and Trichuris sp. in different time 
Figure 61: Distribution of whipworm (Trichuris sp.) before, during, and after the Roman 
Figure 62: Distribution of roundworm (Ascaris sp.) before, during, and after the Roman 
Figure 64: Distribution of Giardia duodenalis and Entamoeba histolytica before, during, and 
Figure 65: Distribution of Fasciola liver fluke before, during, and after the Roman period. 191 
Figure 66: Distribution of the lancet liver fluke (Dicrocoelium sp.) before, during, and after 
Figure 67: Frequency of positive sites for Dicrocoelium sp. and Fasciola sp. in different time 
Figure 69: Distribution of beef/pork tapeworm (Taenia sp.) before, during, and after the 
Figure 70: Frequency of positive sites for Diphyllobothrium sp. in different time periods. .. 196 
Figure 71: Distribution of fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) before, during, and after the 
List of Tables 
Table 10: Characteristics used to identify common helminth eggs found in archaeological 
Table 13: Helminth species and egg concentrations (eggs/g) found in each coprolite studied 
Table 14: Mean dimensions and standard deviations (SD) of helminth eggs from coprolites 
Table 15: Details of burials from atalhyk, from which soil samples were collected from 
Table 16: Details of burials from Boncuklu, from which soil samples were collected from the 
Table 17: Details of burials from West Smithfield Cemetery, London from which soil samples 
Table 18: Mean length, width, standard deviations (SD), and egg concentrations (eggs/g) of 
Table 19: Details of burials from Winterborne, Dorset from which soil samples were collected 
Table 20: Details of burials from Lauriacum, Austria from which soil samples were collected 
Table 22: Details of burials from Paphos, Cyprus from which soil samples were collected 
Table 23: Details of burials from Oplontis, Italy from which soil samples were collected from 
Table 24: Dimensions and egg concentrations of helminths found in pelvic soil from Oplontis.
Table 26: Details of burials from the Vagnari cemetery from which soil samples were 
Table 27: Description of Roman period samples collected and analysed from the villa at 
Table 29: Dimensions of Ascaris sp. and Trichuris trichiura eggs found in the coprolite from 
Table 31: Skeletons from Hatherdene Close from which soil was collected from the pelvis for 
Table 32: Details of burials from Vacone from which soil samples were collected from the 
1 Introduction 
Palaeoparasitology is defined as a branch of palaeopathology that aims to study parasites in 
past populations. Situated within the broader field of anthropology, palaeoparasitology uses 
theoretical frameworks from anthropology which aim to study ancient diseases through a lens 
that incorporates the relevant cultural and ecological context of the material being studied. 
Archaeological samples including coprolites (dried or mineralized faeces), pelvic soil 
samples, sediment from latrines, and mummified remains are commonly used to find evidence 
for parasites that infected past populations. Multiple methods can be employed in an attempt 
to detect parasites, these include direct visualization using light microscopy, immunological 
methods including enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and biomolecular 
techniques to detect DNA from the parasites themselves. While both endoparasites (parasites 
that live inside the body) and ectoparasites (parasites that live outside the body) can be 
studied in archaeological settings, this project is focused on endoparasites and more 
specifically gastrointestinal endoparasites. 
 Parasitic diseases have contributed to the disease burden of human beings throughout 
our evolution. Some parasites have been passed down from our primate ancestors and some 
have been acquired more recently as Homo sapiens and their hominin ancestors moved 
around the world and interacted with different animals and disease vectors. Today, we know 
that more than 1.5 billion people are infected with three of the most common intestinal 
parasites: roundworm, whipworm, and hookworm; and the prevalence is much higher if other 
parasitic diseases are included (Hotez et al., 2014). The field of palaeoparasitology has 
already shown that many of these parasites were present throughout human evolution and we 
have now begun to investigate when different species began to infect humans, how these 
species have been geographically distributed in the past, and what ecological, cultural, and 
biological factors have allowed for parasites to flourish as human pathogens. This research 
will contribute to these investigations by contributing new evidence and understanding of 
parasites in the Roman period. 
 Disease in the Roman period has been widely studied focusing on trauma, malaria, 
brucellosis, tuberculosis, and nutritional deficiencies to name a few. However, we have 
relatively little evidence for parasitic infection in these same populations. This project aims to 
remedy this situation by providing evidence for intestinal parasites in some of the 
understudied regions of the empire, mainly the Mediterranean and frontier provinces of the 
Empire (provinces located along the borders of the empire). The presence and distribution of 
pathogens is influenced by cultural, social, and environmental factors that interplay with the 
biology of parasites and their hosts to allow for the establishment of disease. Thus, in-depth 
studies of pathogen presence in the past, in this case intestinal parasites, can allow for 
exploration of the cultural, social, and ecological determinants of disease presence. In the 
Roman period we are lucky to have historical texts, archaeological evidence, and human 
remains to aid in the interpretation of the factors shaping parasite presence and distribution. 
Beyond allowing for the presence of disease, many of these social and cultural factors also 
influence the impact these diseases may have had on people living in the Roman Empire. 
Intestinal parasites could have had a major impact on the health of past populations if 
they were present, and there is evidence that they were present throughout much of the human 
past. This impact on health is due to their ability to affect their hosts immune response and 
subsequently increase host susceptibility to other infections; and their ability to cause nutrient 
deficiencies by competing for nutrients and/or interrupting nutrient absorption in the host 
(Nematian et al., 2008; Oliveira, 2015). The effect that intestinal parasites can have on many 
disease processes makes them an integral piece to understanding diseases in past populations. 
Currently there is limited evidence for intestinal parasites in the entirety of the Roman 
Empire; this project aims to increase this evidence and contribute to our growing knowledge 
of health and disease in the Roman Empire. 
1.1 Overview 
The general focus of this research is to explore the presence of intestinal parasites in 
understudied regions of the Roman Empire. I will contribute original data to the current 
knowledge of parasite species that infected people living in the Roman Empire, as well as 
consolidate these new data with existing reports of species identified from Roman period 
archaeological samples, in order to create a more comprehensive view of intestinal parasitic 
infections in Roman populations. These data will be interpreted within their own social and 
ecological context, using historical and archaeological data, to understand the factors 
contributing to the presence of intestinal parasites in these populations. Similarly, modern 
biomedical and epidemiological knowledge will be used as a theoretical model to briefly 
discuss the impact that these parasites may have had on Roman people. 
 After laying out the research questions steering this research in chapter 1, the second 
chapter takes a look at parasitology from an evolutionary perspective to provide the necessary 
background information on parasitology needed to understand the organisms themselves and 
their evolutionary history. It then reviews published palaeoparasitological studies that provide 
the existing evidence for parasites in the Roman Empire, and similarly those that have 
identified parasites in Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa prior to the Roman Empire, 
and after the fall of the Roman Empire. This is necessary to allow us to understand if the 
species distribution in the Roman period is different from the surrounding time periods, and in 
turn determine if changes that occurred in the Roman period may have had an impact on 
parasitic infections. For example, if a certain species of parasite found in the Neolithic and 
Bronze/Iron Age disappears in the Roman period, this may indicate that lifestyle changes after 
Roman conquest protected people from that species. Similarly, the opposite is possible, if a 
new species is found in Roman sites that was not previously endemic in the area this can hint 
towards introduction of that species perhaps via trade or migration of infected people. 
There are two major methods that are well established in the field of 
palaeoparasitology that were used to analyse samples in this research and they are discussed 
in chapter 3. These are microscopy and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). For 
microscopy, samples are suspended in solution then placed on microscope slides so that 
preserved parasite eggs, that would have been present in human faeces during infection, can 
be directly visualized. ELISA uses immunological methods to detect the antigens of smaller 
protozoal parasites that would similarly be found in human faeces, but are not large enough or 
do not preserve well enough to be visualized with microscopy. 
 Samples that can be used to look for evidence of ancient parasites generally include 
anything that contains human faecal material; this is primarily sediment samples (e.g. latrine 
sediments, cesspit sediments, pelvic soil, etc.), preserved tissues, and coprolites. The samples 
used for this research are presented in chapter 4 followed by the results; they come from 
Roman sites in seven different countries and more than half of these are pelvic soil. These 
samples have provided some of the first evidence for parasite infection in Turkey and Serbia 
and added to regions where very few other sites have been studied such as in Italy, Belgium, 
and Austria. It is necessary to compare results from Roman period sites to those of sites that 
pre-date and post-date the Roman period in the same regions, in order to understand if any 
changes occurred during the Roman period. As such, an additional set of comparative samples 
was also studied. Indeed some of the understudied regions of the Roman Empire have been 
understudied in all time periods so, where possible, samples were collected to provide 
additional comparative data for earlier and later time periods.  
 After presentation of the results of laboratory analysis of samples in chapter 4, the data 
is presented in discussion with collected published data from other authors in chapter 5 to 
understand species diversity in the Roman Empire and look for temporal changes in species 
diversity. This is done on a regional basis as the samples studied in most cases form neat 
groups that allow for discussion of regional factors contributing to taxonomic diversity in that 
region and how it compares to other regions. Thus the results and discussion are presented as 
a series of case studies on regions that formed the focus of the research including the Eastern 
Mediterranean, Italy, the frontiers, and Britain. In all cases discussion of these patterns 
necessarily attempts to incorporate the relevant historical, archaeological, biomedical, and 
epidemiological evidence. As much as possible I have tried to discuss the results based on the 
Roman province that they are from rather than the modern day country as the Roman borders 
are what formed regional separations and possible cultural differences at the time. These 
province names are italicized throughout to try and make the distinction between modern 
countries and Roman provinces more clear. 
 In chapter 6, a broader discussion of what these parasites mean for the empire as a 
whole is presented as an initial effort to tie these regions together. This is first done by 
looking at temporal changes from the Pre-Roman, Roman, through Medieval periods in order 
to contextualize the parasite evidence from the Roman period and detect changes that may 
have occurred in the Roman period. Though there are limitations to this, mainly due to the 
paucity of evidence, this discussion is meant to serve as a starting point that can be further 
developed as research continues. This chapter then further contextualizes the results of 
palaeoparasitological work in the Roman period by considering what Romans understood 
about parasite infection, how it should be treated, and finally how it may have impacted daily 
life in the Roman period.   
 The final chapters include a brief discussion of the cautions that need to be taken with 
interpreting the results of this work as well as limitations of the research. Finally, I finish with 
suggestions for future directions in palaeoparasitology both in the Roman period and more 
broadly as it pertains to this research. 
1.2 Research Questions 
The first, overarching research question for this project is, what species of intestinal parasites 
were present in the Roman Empire? Further to this I will answer the questions; how were 
these species distributed geographically throughout the empire?; what explanations exist for 
any regional variations in parasite taxonomic diversity?; and were there any differences in 
infection between different age groups, sexes, or rural and urban populations?  
 The next set of research questions involves comparing the evidence gathered for 
parasites in the Roman Empire to what is known about parasites prior to and after the fall of 
the Roman Empire, in any geographical area that was ever part of the Roman Empire. This 
will allow me to determine to what extent the spread of the Roman Empire impacted intestinal 
parasitic infections. This temporal comparison is important for determining what changes in 
species diversity may have been a direct result of changes to the living conditions, 
environment, or biology of these organisms during the Roman period. I will aim to create a 
broader understanding of how biological, cultural, and ecological factors during the Roman 
Empire may have allowed for the presence of certain species to flourish by exploring the 
distribution of parasite species geographically and temporally. This will be undertaken by 
questioning how the actions and cultural practices of a civilization can lead to changes in the 
infective potential of parasites and spread of these parasites to new locations. 
 Finally, I will explore how these parasitic infections may have impacted the daily lives 
of people living in the Roman Empire. Using modern biomedical knowledge as a model, I can 
hypothesize what impact these parasitic infections may have had on the people who had them. 
For example, would they have exacerbated other diseases that we know were present in the 
Roman period?; would they have increased the risk for other diseases?; would they have 
impacted an individual's ability to work?; would they have negatively impacted growth and 
development of children?; and so forth.  
1.3 Significance and Potential Impact of Work 
As will be explored further in the next section, there have been a number of studies performed 
that have identified parasites in the Roman Empire. However, these have been concentrated in 
only a few countries, and used mostly latrine samples and occupation layer sediments to look 
for parasites. This research will first expand on what we know about parasitic infection in the 
Roman period by studying samples from new countries that have, up until now, been 
understudied compared to other regions of the empire, and studying parasitic infection at the 
individual level using pelvic soil samples. Secondly, this research expands on what is known 
about social, cultural, and environmental contributors to health and disease in the Roman 
period by discussion of the presence of these parasites in combination with other 
archaeological, historical, and biological perspectives. 
 This project also has the potential to contribute to our understanding of the evolution 
of these parasite species alongside human beings. The field of palaeoparasitology has made 
continual efforts to determine when certain species first appeared in different populations 
around the world, and if this introduction was a result of parasites migrating with people or 
parasites jumping the species barrier as humans interacted with new animals and vectors as 
they moved to new areas and domesticated different animals. There are still many parasite 
species that we have very little archaeological evidence for. 
 The broader goal of this work in combination with others in biological anthropology is 
to begin to reconstruct the presence of infectious diseases throughout human history and 
explore how the evolutionary trajectories of humans and pathogens have been interconnected 
and influenced by each other. This work, in combination with similar work in 
palaeoparasitology, can be used to understand the reciprocal relationships between humans 
and parasites. Parasites are an ideal pathogen for investigating the coevolution of humans and 
pathogens because of our long evolutionary history together which has resulted in many 
species of parasites being particularly well adapted to living in the human host.  
 By investigating and comparing the presence and prevalence of parasites in past 
populations we can understand what factors have allowed for different species to flourish as 
human pathogens. We can understand what environments, lifestyles, population structures, 
and health strategies result in higher or lower susceptibilities to infection with parasites. This 
in-depth understanding can help us to predict future infectivity patterns and inform modern-
day decisions on where to aim preventative strategies to help the largest number of people 
escape the burden of parasitic disease. 
2 Parasitology from an Evolutionary Perspective 
Parasites have a very long evolutionary history. In certain cases fossil evidence has provided 
insights into very early parasites, existing well before the origins of the hominin lineage. The 
earliest fossil evidence for nematodes (roundworms), a type of helminth, in animals comes 
from the Upper Triassic period (240 million years ago [mya]) (Hugot et al., 2014), while even 
earlier evidence exists for cestodes (tapeworms) in a shark coprolite from the Middle Permian 
(275 mya) (Dentzien-Dias et al., 2013). The earliest evidence for parasites in humans comes 
from the Pleistocene (30,000 ya), where an egg of roundworm (Ascaris sp.) was found in a 
cave in France (Bouchet et al., 1996). The majority of evidence for parasites in the human 
past is much more recent, from the Neolithic period onwards. However, it is expected that the 
origins of many human parasites are much earlier (Poinar, 2015). Certainly, recent advances 
in parasite genomics is showing the significantly ancient origins of many parasites known to 
infect humans. In many cases, this evolutionary history extends far beyond the origins of the 
hominin lineage leaving many opportunities for helminths and protozoa to spread around the 
globe and develop necessary molecular mechanisms for surviving and thriving in diverse 
hosts before they were introduced to hominins (Blaxter and Koutsovoulos, 2015; Zarowiecki 
and Berriman, 2015). 
Many parasites of humans are shared with modern primates and are thought to have 
been inherited from our hominin ancestors; these are sometimes called heirloom parasites 
(Mitchell, 2013). Parasites that have been acquired more recently as hominins moved out of 
Africa and were exposed to new environments and their unique ecological systems are then 
referred to as souvenir parasites. It is estimated that around 15% of parasites known to infect 
humans are human-specific while the remaining 85% are generalist pathogens that can infect 
many mammals (Perrin et al., 2010). Phylogenetic work and research on animal parasites has 
shown that some taxa were likely originally spread around the world by early animal 
migrations (Lotfy et al., 2008; Lawton et al., 2011). Therefore, it is not necessarily the case 
that humans picked up parasites in Africa and then spread them around the world with early 
migrations, but quite possibly that humans were first exposed in Africa and then continually 
exposed as they moved to other regions where the parasites had already been spread by 
migrations of other animals in the past, and where the climate and intermediate hosts allow 
the parasite to persist. Certainly this appears to be the case for certain species of 
schistosomiasis (e.g. S. haematobium) and Fasciola, and possibly others such as Trichinella 
and fish tapeworm (Attwood et al., 2007; Lotfy et al., 2008; Lawton et al., 2011). The 
exception is geographically restricted parasites (e.g. D. pacificum, T. cruzi, S. japonicum, C. 
sinensis) which can only exist in certain parts of the world due to the need for an intermediate 
host that can only survive in certain regions of the planet. In consequence, these parasites 
would have only emerged as human diseases when humans migrated to their endemic region. 
For further discussion of the evolution of parasites and their presence throughout human 
history see Ledger and Mitchell (2019). We will go into specific details on the characteristics 
of these different parasites in the following subsection. 
Genetic evidence, particularly in the form molecular phylogenetic studies, highlights 
the ancient origins of many parasites and their ubiquity throughout much of human evolution. 
However, archaeological evidence from palaeoparasitological studies has pointed to various 
human actions that have changed the diseases we experience or the prevalence of these 
diseases through time. This is where we are focused when exploring parasite infection in the 
Roman period. 
2.1 Relevant Intestinal Parasites Causing Disease in Humans 
Today, there are around 300 species of parasites known to infect man (Cox, 2002). For 
practical reasons, we cannot look for all of these species in past populations and indeed some 
of them are quite rare. However, the methods used to look for parasites in past populations 
allow us to look for a large number of these, and in particular we have been successful in 
finding intestinal parasites in many time periods and locations around the world as the eggs of 
these parasites are quite robust and preserve well in archaeological sediments. Mummified 
remains can be used to find evidence for even more species that do not always preserve well 
in other material.  
 Parasites can be broken up into two broad categories: endoparasites and ectoparasites. 
Endoparasites are parasites that live inside the body. They are mainly helminths (worms), for 
example roundworm and hookworm, and protozoa such as Giardia and Entamoeba. On the 
other hand, ectoparasites generally live on the skin or in superficial layers of the skin, for 
example ticks and lice. While there is evidence for ectoparasites in the archaeological record, 
they are typically found in different materials than endoparasites. For example, lice may be 
found on preserved hair of a mummy or on combs. Ectoparasites are not typically considered 
to cause infection themselves but rather infestation. However, they can transmit other 
pathogens (i.e. bacteria, viruses, protozoa) which can cause serious infections. Due to the fact 
that ectoparasites do not cause infection themselves, this project is focused on endoparasites, 
which can cause true infection on their own.  
 Endoparasites can be broken up into two distinct groups: Protozoa and Metazoa 
(helminths) (Levinson, 2016). Protozoa are generally much smaller and are unicellular, 
whereas helminths are multicellular worms. There are multiple subtypes of Protozoa 
including amoebas, sporozoas, flagellates, and ciliates. Helminths are further subdivided into 
two Phyla: Nemathelminthes (nematodes or roundworms), and Platyhelminthes (flatworms) 
which can be broken down into two clades; trematodes (flukes) and cestodes (tapeworms) 
(Figure 1). In the following sections, we will explore the relevant human parasites in each of 
these groups. Most parasites that will be discussed have both a common name as well as their 
scientific name. In the remaining sections common names will be used as much as possible 
for ease of understanding; however scientific names are often required to indicate the 
taxonomic level to which parasites were identified. 
Figure 1: Classification of endoparasites causing infection in humans. After Levinson (2016). 
2.1.1 Nematodes 
Intestinal nematodes are the most common species of parasites infecting humans worldwide 
(Hotez et al., 2014). Nematodes or roundworms are nonsegmented worms that have both male 
and female forms and possess an intestinal tract. As with most helminths the adult form is 
found in the definitive host, in this case humans, where reproduction occurs. During the 
developmental process the nematodes also require a period of time to mature outside of the 
definitive host. The exact life cycle varies between different species but generally consists of 
five stages of development including multiple larval stages that then develop into mature 
adults (Weller, 2018).  
 Table 1 describes various characteristics of the most common human nematodes, 
including the endemic region, the route of infection, the major sites of infection in the body, 
and the most common clinical symptoms. Figure 2 includes images of common intestinal 
nematodes that infect humans. It is important to note that many nematode infections are 
asymptomatic, or only begin with minor symptoms as the parasite migrates through the body 
to its final destination, followed by a longer asymptomatic period. More serious and in some 
cases life-threatening symptoms develop if the individual is continuously reinfected and is 
host to a large number of helminths (Garcia, 2016).  The major method of detection in 
palaeoparasitology is also listed and corresponds to the site of infection and principles of 
reproduction. Microscopy is useful for parasites that release eggs from the host in the faeces 
or urine, which can then be identified in coprolites and sediments containing faecal material. 
Nematodes like guinea worm and Trichinella spp. can only be diagnosed if the adult worms 
or cysts which contain larvae are found in preserved tissues, as these nematodes do not release 
eggs into the faeces. 
Table 1: Characteristics of relevant human nematodes (Weller and Nutman, 2018; Garcia, 
2016) 
Nematode 
Endemic 
Region 
Route of 
Infection 
Site of 
Infection 
Clinical Signs and 
Symptoms 
Method of 
Detection 
Ascaris sp. 
(roundworm) 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
Intestinal Pneumonitis, fever, 
cough, intestinal 
obstruction, abdominal 
pain, nausea/vomiting,  
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Trichuris 
trichiura 
(whipworm) 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
Intestinal Diarrhoea, anaemia, 
abdominal pain 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Ancylostoma 
duodenale/ 
Necator 
americanus 
(hookworm) 
Southern 
Europe, 
Africa, Asia, 
Americas (in 
areas with 
warm moist 
climates) 
Larvae 
penetrate skin 
Intestinal Pruritus at entry site, 
pneumonitis, fatigue, 
nausea/vomiting, 
abdominal pain, 
diarrhoea, weakness, 
pallor, iron deficiency 
anaemia 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Enterobius 
vermicularis 
(pinworm) 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
Intestinal Anal pruritus Microscopy 
of faeces 
Strongyloides 
stercoralis 
Tropical Larvae 
penetrate skin; 
autoinfection 
Intestinal Larva migrans, 
Loeffler's syndrome, 
diarrhoea, anorexia, 
abdominal pain, 
hyperinfection 
syndrome 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Capillaria spp. Worldwide 
(depends on 
species) 
Ingestion of 
larvae from 
contaminated 
foods 
Intestinal Diarrhoea, weight loss, 
abdominal pain 
Microscopy 
of tissue or 
faeces 
Trichostrong-
ylus spp. 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
larvae on 
plants 
Intestinal Abdominal pain, 
diarrhoea, anorexia, 
nausea, dizziness, 
fatigue 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Dioctophyma 
renale (giant 
kidney worm) 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
raw freshwater 
fish or frogs 
Kidney Kidney failure, 
abdominal pain 
Microscopy 
faeces/urine 
Dracunculus 
medinensis 
(guinea worm) 
Africa (Asia 
in the past) 
Ingestion of 
infected 
copepod 
(water fleas) 
Subcutan-
eous tissues 
Rash, pruritus, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhoea, 
blisters 
Microscopy 
of preserved 
tissue 
Trichinella 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
raw or 
undercooked 
meat from 
infected 
mammals 
Striated 
muscle 
Diarrhoea, nausea, 
abdominal pain, fever, 
muscle pain, weakness, 
specific symptoms 
depending on area 
infected 
Microscopy 
of preserved 
tissue 
Figure 2: Images of common intestinal nematodes. Left image is an adult roundworm (Ascaris 
sp.). Image from CDC (2019),  https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/ascariasis/index.html.  
Right image is an adult whipworm (Trichuris trichiura). Image from CDC (2017), 
https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/trichuriasis/index.html 
2.1.2 Cestodes 
Cestodes, commonly known as tapeworms, are segmented worms made up of a head, which 
can attach to the intestinal mucosa, and a varying number of proglottids. These proglottids 
possess both male and female sexual organs, allowing them to become pockets of eggs that 
can be released from the host (Weller, 2018). The life cycle of cestodes involves an 
intermediate host besides humans. When these animals ingest eggs released from the 
definitive host the eggs hatch and the larvae migrate through tissues to form a cysticercus in 
varying tissues or organs. When the definitive host then ingests any tissue containing 
cysticerci the parasite completes its life cycle and develops into a mature adult in the 
intestinal tract. 
Table 2 lists some of the most common cestodes that infect human beings and that can 
be found in archaeological samples. Figure 3 includes images of common intestinal cestodes 
that infect humans. Most tapeworms that infect humans are acquired through ingestion of 
undercooked meat containing larvae. One exception is Echinococcus granulosus, also known 
as hydatid disease. Infection with E. granulosus in humans is caused by ingestion of eggs 
rather than infected animal meat. This is because humans are an intermediate host for E. 
granulosus not the definitive host, which is usually dogs (Garcia, 2016). When eggs passed in 
the faeces of dogs are swallowed, cysts containing the larvae develop in the tissues of 
humans. Similarly, humans can become accidental intermediate hosts to Taenia solium (pork 
tapeworm) if eggs from the faeces of oneself or other people are ingested, usually as a result 
of poor hand hygiene. Space occupying cysts, that contain parasite larvae, can then develop in 
almost any area of the body but often occur in the brain, a disease known as 
neurocysticercosis. 
Figure 3: Images of common intestinal cestodes. Left is an image of an adult beef tapeworm 
(Taenia saginata). Image is from CDC (2017), https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/taeniasis/index.html.  
Right is an image of an adult fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum). Image is from CDC 
(2019), https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/diphyllobothriasis/index.html 
Table 2: Characteristics of relevant human cestodes (White and Weller, 2018; Garcia, 2016) 
Cestode 
Endemic 
Region 
Route of 
Infection 
Site of 
Infection 
Clinical Signs and 
Symptoms 
Method of 
Detection 
Taenia saginata 
(beef tapeworm) 
Worldwide Raw or 
undercooked 
Intestinal Diarrhoea, intestinal 
obstruction, weight 
loss, appendicitis 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Taenia solium 
(pork tapeworm) 
Worldwide Raw or 
undercooked 
Intestinal and 
tissue 
Indigestion, 
diarrhoea, 
constipation, 
cysticercosis 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Echinococcus 
granulosus 
complex 
(hydatid disease) 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
Tissue 
(usually lungs 
and liver) 
Symptoms from 
enlarging cysts 
dependent on tissue 
location, allergic 
reactions 
Microscopy 
of preserved 
tissue/cyst 
Hymenolepis 
nana (dwarf 
tapeworm) 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
eggs; 
autoinfection 
Intestinal Headache, anorexia, 
abdominal pain, 
diarrhoea 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Diphyllobothr-
ium spp. (fish 
tapeworm) 
Worldwide Raw or 
undercooked 
Intestinal Intestinal obstruction, 
diarrhoea, abdominal 
pain, megaloblastic 
anaemia 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Spirometra spp. Worldwide Ingestion of 
contaminated 
water, raw or 
undercooked 
fish, reptiles, 
amphibians 
Tissue Quite varied 
depending on 
location in body   
Microscopy 
of faeces 
2.1.3 Trematodes 
Trematodes, commonly known as flukes, are the second major group of flatworms. Most 
trematodes are hemaphroditic, meaning they contain both male and female sex organs. Once 
eggs are released from the definite host their life cycle involves different species of snails as 
an intermediate host (Vennervald, 2018). The larvae released from the snails can either 
penetrate the skin of the definitive host directly or are ingested from the snail or another 
intermediate host. Once in the definitive host (humans or other mammals) the trematodes can 
live in blood, biliary ducts, intestines, or the lungs. 
Table 3: Characteristics of relevant human trematodes (Vennervald, 2018; Garcia, 2016) 
Trematode 
Endemic 
Region 
Route of 
Infection 
Site of 
Infection 
Clinical Signs and 
Symptoms 
Method of 
Detection 
Schistosoma 
South 
America, 
Caribbean, 
Africa, the 
Middle East, 
Southeast 
Cercariae 
penetrate skin 
Blood vessels 
around 
bladder and 
intestines 
Cercarial dermatitis, 
acute schistosomiasis 
(Katayama 
syndrome), tissue 
fibrosis from trapped 
eggs, colonic 
obstruction 
Microscopy 
faeces/urine 
Fasciola spp. 
(Fasciola liver 
fluke) 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
metacercariae 
on aquatic 
plants 
Bile ducts Abdominal pain, 
fever, rash, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
inflammation of 
liver/gallbladder/ 
pancreas, biliary 
obstruction 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Echinostoma 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
molluscs, 
snails, 
freshwater fish 
Intestines Localized 
inflammation, 
ulceration, diarrhoea, 
abdominal pain 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Dicrocoelium 
dendriticum 
(Lancet liver 
fluke) 
Europe, 
Turkey, 
northern 
Africa, 
northern 
Asia, North 
America, 
South 
America 
Ingestion of 
infected ants 
Bile ducts Chronic constipation, 
flatulence, jaundice, 
hepatomegaly, 
diarrhoea, vomiting 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Opisthorchis 
felineus 
Southeast 
Asia, Eastern 
Europe 
Ingestion of 
raw or 
undercooked 
Bile ducts Abdominal pain, 
diarrhoea, 
constipation, 
cholangitis, 
cholangiocarcinoma 
Microscopy 
of faeces 
Figure 4: Image of an adult Fasciola liver fluke worm (Fasciola hepatica). Image is from 
CDC (2019), https://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/fascioliasis/index.html. 
Table 3 lists characteristics of some of the most common trematodes that infect 
humans. Though many of these species are not primarily found in the intestines, eggs can 
migrate through the body tissues and are still released in the faeces (as in the case of 
Schistosoma mansoni), or they are released into the urine (as in the case of Schistosoma 
haematobium) and can be found during microscopic analysis of sediment samples 
contaminated with human excrement. For the organisms that live in the bile ducts, eggs are 
carried through the intestines with bile and can be found in the faeces of infected individuals. 
There are also cases where eggs are primarily found in urine though these can often be 
detected in the same archaeological samples that contain faeces. 
2.1.4 Protozoa 
Table 4: Characteristics of relevant human protozoa (Garcia, 2016) 
Protozoan 
Endemic 
Region 
Route of 
Infection 
Site of 
Infection 
Clinical Signs and 
Symptoms 
Method of 
Detection 
Entamoeba 
histolytica 
(amoebic 
dysentery) 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
faecal 
contamina-
ted water or 
Intestinal Bloody diarrhoea, 
colitis, appendicitis, 
amoebic granulomas, 
toxic megacolon, liver 
abscess, peritonitis 
ELISA 
Giardia duodenalis Worldwide Ingestion of 
faecal 
contamina-
ted water or 
Intestinal Diarrhoea, abdominal 
pain, nausea, vomiting 
ELISA 
Cryptosporidium 
Worldwide Ingestion of 
faecal 
contamina-
ted water or 
Intestinal Watery diarrhoea, 
abdominal pain, 
nausea, vomiting, 
fever, weight loss 
ELISA 
Leishmania spp. Africa, Asia, 
Middle East, 
South 
America 
Sand fly bite Cutaneous 
or visceral 
Cutaneous: nodular and 
ulcerative skin lesions; 
Visceral: fever, 
malaise, weight loss, 
diarrhoea, 
lymphadenopathy, 
hepatosplenomegaly, 
darkening of skin 
Plasmodium spp. 
(malaria) 
Worldwide 
in the past; 
today in the 
tropics and 
subtropics 
mainly 
Anopheles 
mosquito 
Liver and 
red blood 
cells 
cyclical fever, anaemia, 
hepatomegaly 
Protozoa are the other major group of endoparasites alongside helminths. They are unicellular 
organisms that do not lay eggs but reproduce via asexual reproduction and are often preserved 
in their inactive cyst form in the environment. There are a number of protozoal species that 
are some of the most common causes for diarrhoea today. These include: the only pathogenic 
amoeba Entamoeba histolytica, the flagellate Giardia duodenalis (synonym Giardia lamblia), 
and the sporozoan Cryptosporidium spp. (Garcia, 2016). These three organisms live in the 
intestines and release cysts, trophozoites, or oocysts in the faeces which can survive in moist 
environmental conditions and then infect new individuals if they are ingested.  
 The other common protozoa found in the past that cause infections in humans are 
Leishmania spp., which cause leishmaniasis, and Plasmodium spp. which cause malaria. The 
life cycle of these parasites is much more complicated and so far the most successful methods 
for detecting their presence in past populations relies on ancient DNA (aDNA) analysis of 
preserved tissue or bone. 
2.2 Palaeoparasitology 
Palaeoparasitology has been said to have started with early work done by Marc Armund 
Ruffer in 1910 when he identified eggs of the blood fluke, Schistosoma haematobium, in an 
Egyptian mummy dated between 12501000 BCE. In fact, many of the first studies in 
palaeoparasitology used mummified remains to look for ancient parasites. Szidat (1944) 
looked for parasite eggs in the intestinal remains of two bog bodies from Prussia. In the body 
of a young woman known as Drobnitz girl, dated to 600 BCE, eggs from whipworm 
(Trichuris sp.) and roundworm (Ascaris sp.) were found. In the body of a man known as 
Karwinden man, dated to 500 CE, eggs from whipworm, roundworm, and fish tapeworm 
(Diphyllobothrium latum) were found. Taylor (1955) was the first to highlight the value in 
studying archaeological sediments from excavated latrines. Eggs of human roundworm 
(Ascaris sp.), human whipworm (Trichuris trichiura), and the Lancet liver fluke 
(Dicrocoelium dendriticum) were found in a medieval pit from Winchester, Britain. Callen 
and Cameron (1960) published a landmark paper in the field describing methods for 
rehydrating and analysing coprolites for parasite eggs. Around the same time, Witenberg 
(1961) studied coprolites, for evidence of ancient parasites. Witenberg analysed coprolites 
from Nahal-Mishmar valley in Israel and found human whipworm, and possible dysentery-
causing protozoa (Entamoeba histolytica and Giardia duodenalis). More recently, 
palaeoparasitologists have begun to advocate for the use of pelvic soil to look for ancient 
parasites (Reinhard et al., 1992; Bouchet et al., 2001a; Fugassa et al., 2006). Throughout this 
time, palaeoparasitology has established itself as its own field and larger questions exploring 
the evolution and spread of parasites around the world have become the focus of 
palaeoparasitologists. There are now various labs dedicated to palaeoparasitology around the 
world that have contributed to a steadily increasing body of work on parasite presence in past 
populations and what this can tell us about our ancestors.  
 Palaeoparasitological studies have been used to answer many questions about our 
human ancestors and the evolution of human parasites. These range from tracking parasite 
introduction to new regions to trace early human migrations and detecting the origins of 
human parasites, to the wider spread of parasites around the globe, and more specifically 
identifying parasites present at various points in human evolutionary history. One well known 
example of the usefulness of investigations in palaeoparasitology is the evidence for 
hookworm in the New World and what it means for the peopling of the Americas. Evidence 
of hookworm has been found in South America from 7,000 years before present (BP) (Arajo 
et al., 1988). Many explanations were proposed for how hookworm reached the Americas, 
however as an obligate human parasite they all centred around how people could have arrived 
in the Americas with hookworm infection. The life cycle of hookworm requires the eggs to 
hatch in the soil and the larvae to develop in a warm and moist environment, this ruled out 
hookworm entering the Americas with early human migrations via the Bering land bridge 
because hookworm would not have been able to survive the cool arctic temperatures. Rather, 
Arajo and colleagues (2008) proposed that hookworm entered the Americas with later 
coastal or transpacific migrations. In another similar example, Yeh and colleagues (2016) 
found Chinese liver fluke (Clonorchis sinensis) on hygiene sticks from a relay station along 
the Silk Road. Due to the location of this station in a region of China where this parasite 
cannot survive this provided support for the movement of the parasite with an individual 
travelling along the Silk Road from areas of eastern or southern China where the parasite is 
endemic. 
Understanding the origins of parasites has also been a focus of palaeoparasitologists. 
Mitchell (2013) reviewed the evidence gained from various palaeoparasitological studies to 
conclude when certain species were seen first in different parts of the world and then infer if 
these parasites are heirloom parasites (passed down from our human ancestors in Africa) or 
souvenir parasites (acquired later as we moved out of Africa). While palaeoparasitology has 
shown its value in understanding past human populations there are still many questions we 
have yet to answer about the origins of some common human parasites as well as the presence 
of parasitic disease in past populations. Particularly for this research we still do not 
understand what parasitic infections were present in many parts of the Roman Empire. 
2.3 Palaeoparasitological Review Relevant to the Roman Empire 
The Roman imperial period has been a heavily studied period in human history and has long 
held a great interest for many people. With expansion of the Roman Empire, most of Europe, 
the Near East, and even some of Africa went through a period of changing social norms and 
mixing of cultures, as existing cultures melded with the newly introduced Roman cultural 
norms and social practices. As the extent of the Roman Empire increased there were 
corresponding increases in the movement of goods and individuals throughout Europe and the 
surrounding areas (Ligt and Tacoma, 2016). This trade and migration had inevitable impacts 
on the spread of disease and likely parasite infections as well. As archaeological excavations 
were taken up at Roman period sites, the analysis of parasites at these sites was achieved both 
as the primary goal of research and as secondary outcomes of other analyses, such as 
archaeobotanical or palynological analysis.  
In this section I will review the relevant studies that have looked for evidence for 
endoparasites in Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa. At the height of the Roman 
Empire, the borders of the empire extended into the Middle East and into North Africa 
(Figure 5), thus these regions must be included in our review.  First, I will look at what 
evidence exists from the Neolithic period up until the Roman period. I will then review the 
evidence that we already have for parasites at Roman period sites. Finally, I will review the 
evidence we have for parasites in Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa after the Roman 
period. I have organized the parasite discussed in each major time period by transmission 
category including, faecal oral helminths, zoonotic cestodes (tapeworms), zoonotic 
trematodes (flukes), protozoa, and other parasites. The main zoonotic cestodes found in the 
time periods discussed are beef/pork tapeworm (Taenia spp.) and fish tapeworm 
(Diphyllobothrium spp.), thus these are included in the zoonotic cestodes sections. The main 
zoonotic trematodes found in the time periods discussed are liver flukes including the lancet 
liver fluke (Dicrocoelium dendriticum) and Fasciola liver fluke, thus these are the trematodes 
included in the zoonotic trematodes sections. To maintain consistency between time periods, 
other parasites found infrequently are included in the other parasites sections. 
It is important to note that in some cases published reports have no photos of the 
parasite eggs found so their results cannot be confirmed. Furthermore, many studies were 
unable to determine if the parasites identified came from humans or animals. This evidence 
has been included in the review if it could reasonably come from a human context but its 
uncertainty is noted where necessary.  
Figure 5: Map of Roman provinces in 117 CE. Provincial boundaries from the Digital Atlas of 
Roman and Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
 As with any literature review there is certain evidence that has been excluded from 
this review or needs to be interpreted with caution. As much as possible I have reported the 
parasites found as identified by the authors of the studies. One consideration to be taken is the 
debate around the distinction between Ascaris lumbricoides and Ascaris suum, which affects 
how these species are reported. It has been common to assume that roundworm eggs from 
human contexts must be from the human species (A. lumbricoides) rather than pig roundworm 
(A. suum), however recent analysis of the genomes of these organisms have pointed out 
considerable similarities between the two and questioned their classification as distinct 
species (Nejsum et al., 2012; Betson et al., 2014). Furthermore, both A. lumbricoides and A. 
suum can infect humans so roundworm could be considered zoonotic in some cases. Despite 
this, it is classified as a faecal-oral parasite as this is the most common route of transmission 
between humans. Some authors report eggs in human contexts as A. lumbricoides due to the 
context of the material studied and some eggs are not identified to the species level. As much 
as possible I have chosen to keep the authors level of identification however, in my own 
work roundworm eggs are not identified to the species level but recorded as Ascaris sp. 
Another consideration to bear in mind is that many older publications do not include photos 
making it difficult to confirm their results, as such I have chosen to say that authors have 
identified these eggs. Some commonly cited evidence has been excluded from the review 
where I felt that recent advances in parasitology have made the evidence unreliable as in the 
case of microscopic identification of Entamoeba histolytica cysts (Witenberg, 1961), as these 
cannot be distinguished from cysts of the non-pathogenic organism Entamoeba dispar. 
Finally, where I have counted the number of taxa identified the number reflects the minimum 
number of unique organisms identified either to the genus or species level. So, if multiple 
species from the same genus were reported these are counted as separate taxa but an 
additional genus level identification is not counted as an additional taxon; whereas in cases 
where parasites are identified to the genus level these are counted as one taxon. 
 To the best of my abilities I have included all evidence for parasites that have been 
found in regions that came under Roman rule. However, it is possible that there is some 
evidence missing, especially from excavation reports where mention of parasites was made in 
environmental studies and where these reports are not in English. In many cases Ascaris sp. 
and Trichuris sp. are identified in palynological analyses as very recognizable parasite eggs, 
therefore it is possible that including a large number of these reports may skew the data to 
emphasize these parasites if uncommon parasites were missed or unidentified in these cases. 
2.3.1 Parasites in the Palaeolithic Period 
Preserved parasite eggs from the Palaeolithic have been found at one site in France. Human 
roundworm eggs (Ascaris lumbricoides) were identified from samples taken in the cave of 
Grand-Grotte at Arcy-sur-Cure (28,00022,600 BCE) (Bouchet et al., 1996). The eggs were 
determined to be human roundworm because there was no evidence of swine or boar in the 
area, the definitive hosts of Ascaris suum. There was evidence for the presence of humans and 
bears in the cave, however Ascaris spp. are not known to infect bears, leaving humans as the 
most likely hosts for the eggs found in the cave. 
2.3.2 Parasites in the Mesolithic Period 
Similar to the Palaeolithic period there is little evidence for parasites in the Mesolithic. The 
only evidence for parasites that comes from a region that later fell under control of the Roman 
Empire is from Wales (Dark, 2004). Samples from intertidal peat deposits were studied and 
found to contain eggs of Trichuris sp. These samples were radiocarbon dated to 58405620 
BCE which corresponds to the late Mesolithic in this region. It is important to note that these 
eggs came from environmental samples so could be T. suis from pigs or T. trichiura from 
humans. 
2.3.3 Parasites in the Neolithic Period 
Though there is some variation in exactly what dates encompass the Neolithic, for the 
purposes of this work I have included sites in Neolithic Europe that date between 6,5002,500 
BCE, if the time period was not otherwise specified by the authors (Fowler et al., 2015). This 
covers the period from the earliest known Neolithic site in Greece to the spread of a Neolithic 
lifestyle into northern Europe. When we start to look at countries in the Middle East the 
Neolithic period is defined a bit differently due to the difference in progression of material 
culture in that area, therefore evidence included for the Neolithic period from sites in the 
Middle East are dated between 10,0003,300 BCE.  
Table 5: Parasites found at Neolithic period sites. 
Country Site Date Parasites 
Sample 
Type Citation 
Cyprus Shillouroka-
83007000 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp.,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Harter-
Lailheugue et al., 
 Khirokitia 70006000 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Fasciola sp.,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Harter-
Lailheugue et al., 
France Clairvaux 3600 BCE Ancylostomatidae, 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Sediment Dommelier-
Espejo, 2001 
 Chalain 32002980 
Capillaria sp., 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola hepatica,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Coprolites/ 
occupation 
sediment 
Bouchet et al., 
1995a; Bouchet, 
1997; Dommelier 
et al., 1998; 
Dommelier-
Espejo, 2001 
Germany Leipzig-
Zwenkau 
52595258 
Dicrocoelium sp. Pit Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010 
 Hornstaad-
Hornle 
39173905 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly, 2005 
 Sipplingen 3711-3306 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp.,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly, 2005 
 Wallhausen-
Ziegelhtte 
37002900 
Capillaria sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly, 2005 
 Torwiesen 
32833281 
Capillaria sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp.,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly, 2005 
 Seekirch-
Stockwiesen 
30002900 
Capillaria sp., 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly, 2005 
 Karsdorf 30002000 
Fasciola hepatica Pelvic soil Dittmar and 
Teegen, 2003 
 Alleshausen-
Taschenwiese 
29002600 
Dicrocoelium sp. Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010 
Greece Kouphovou-
50002000 
Entamoeba histolytica Pelvic soil Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2006 
 Kephala 40003000 
Trichuris trichiura Pelvic soil Anastasiou et al., 
Italy Otzi 
mummy 
33003200 
Trichuris trichiura Mummy Aspck et al., 
Netherlands Swifterbant 34003230 
Capillaria sp.,  
Fasciola sp.,  
Opisthorcis sp., 
Oxyuridae,  
Trichuris sp. 
Coprolites Roever-Bonnet et 
al., 1979 
 Amsterdam 34003230 
Trichuris sp. ? Jansen and 
Boersma, 1972 
Switzerland Concise 3700 BCE Dicrocoelium sp., 
Entamoeba histolytica 
Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010; 
Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2015 
 Arbon 33843370 
Ascaris sp.,  
Capillaria sp., 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Dioctophyma renale, 
Diphyllobothrium sp.,  
Entamoeba histolytica, 
Fasciola sp.,  
Opisthorchis sp.,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Coprolites Dommelier-
Espejo, 2001; Le 
Bailly et al., 
2003a; Gonalves 
et al., 2004 
 Parkhaus-
Opra, 
Zrich 
31763153 
Ascaris sp.,  
Capillaria sp., 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Echinostoma sp.,  
Fasciola gigantica, 
Taenia/Echinococcus sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Occupation 
sediment 
Flammer et al., 
2018; Maicher et 
al., 2019 
Spain La Draga 53204980 
Ascaris sp.,  
Capillaria sp., 
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Enterobius vermicularis,  
Maracanthorhynchus sp., 
Taenia saginata,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Occupation 
sediment 
Maicher et al., 
Syria Tell Zeidan 45504050 
Schistosoma sp. Pelvic soil Anastasiou et al., 
Figure 6: Parasites found at Neolithic period sites, mapped onto modern-day countries. 
A=Ancylostomatidae, As=Ascaris, Ca=Capillaria, Dc=Dicrocoelium, Do=Dioctophyma, 
Dp=Diphyllobothrium, Eh=Entamoeba histolytica, Es=Echinostoma, Ev=Enterobius 
vermicularis, Fa=Fasciola, Ma=Maracanthorhynchus, O=Oxyuridae, Op=Opisthorchis, 
Sc=Schistosoma, T/E=Taenia/Echinococcus, Ta=Taenia, Tr=Trichuris. 
In the Neolithic period, the intestinal parasites that have been identified from 
archaeological contexts are Ancylostomatidae, Capillaria sp., Dicrocoelium sp. liver fluke, 
Echinostoma sp., Entamoeba histolytica, Fasciola liver flukes, fish tapeworm, giant kidney 
worm, Maracanthorhynchus sp., Opisthorchis sp., Oxyuridae, pinworm, roundworm, 
Schistosoma sp., Taenia tapeworms, and whipworm. These results have come from studies 
performed at 22 different sites. The sites that have been studied, sample details, and parasites 
identified can be found in Table 5. The taxa found in each country are summarized in Figure 
6. While most of these cases are presumed to be a result of human infection, a large number 
of parasite remains from these sites come from occupation sediments thus we cannot be sure 
if these parasites came from animals or humans. 
2.3.3.1 Faecal-Oral Helminths 
Roundworm (Ascaris sp.) has been found at 5 of the 22 Neolithic period sites studied. 
Whipworm (Trichuris sp.) has been found at 16 Neolithic period sites. Interestingly in the 
Neolithic period we see whipworm found in the absence of roundworm more often than in 
later time periods. 
 Roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides) and whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) eggs have 
been found at two sites in Cyprus, Shillourokambos and Khirokitia. These eggs were found 
alongside other zoonotic taxa in pelvic soil from burials at the two sites dating between 8300
6000 BCE (Harter-Lailheugue et al., 2005).  
Roundworm (Ascaris sp.) and whipworm (Trichuris sp.) were also found at the site of 
Arbon in Switzerland alongside other zoonotic taxa. These eggs were identified in coprolites 
dating between 33843370 BCE (Dommelier-Espejo, 2001; Le Bailly et al., 2003a; 
Gonalves et al., 2004). Also in Switzerland, sitewide analysis of occupation sediment 
(Maicher et al., 2019) and aDNA analysis (Flammer et al., 2018) has provided evidence for 
roundworm and whipworm as well as six other taxa at the site of Parkhaus-Opra in Zrich.  
In Spain, roundworm (Ascaris sp.) and whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) were found in 
occupation layer sediments from the site of La Draga. This was a lakeside settlement dating 
between 53204980 BCE (Maicher et al., 2017). 
Whipworm was found in the absence of roundworm at two sites in France, Clairvaux 
and Chalain. At Clairvaux, Trichuris sp. eggs were identified in occupation layer sediments 
(Dommelier-Espejo, 2001) and at Chalain Trichuris trichiura eggs were identified in 
coprolites and sediment (Bouchet et al., 1995a).  
In Germany, a series of sediment samples from a number of sites throughout the 
Neolithic period were studied by Le Bailly (2005) and reported in his PhD thesis. The sites 
are dated between 39172900 BCE. Roundworm was not found at any of these sites though 
whipworm (Trichuris sp.) eggs were found at all of these sites. Whipworm eggs were not 
found at the three sites in Germany (Leipzig-Zwenkau, Karsdorf, and Alleshausen-
Taschenwiese) studied by other authors (Dittmar and Teegen, 2003; Le Bailly and Bouchet, 
2010). 
Whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) has been found in pelvic soil from the site of Kephala 
in Neolithic Greece (Anastasiou et al., 2018) and in a mummy from Neolithic Italy (Aspck et 
al., 1996), both in the absence of any other taxa. The mummy from Italy was that of Otzi, who 
was discovered naturally mummified in the Alps on the border between Austria and Italy. He 
is thought to have lived between 33003200 BCE. Faecal samples taken from his intestines 
contained the whipworm eggs (Aspck et al., 1996). 
In the Netherlands, whipworm (Trichuris sp.) eggs were found in coprolites dating 
between 34003230 BCE from the site of Swifterbant alongside other zoonotic taxa (Roever-
Bonnet et al., 1979) as well as in an unknown sample type from Amsterdam dated to 3400
3230 BCE (Jansen and Boersma, 1972). 
 Another helminth often found alongside roundworm and whipworm in modern 
populations is hookworm, as these are all soil-transmitted helminths. Ancylostomatidae eggs 
have been identified from the site of Clairvaux in France dated to 3600 BCE (Dommelier-
Espejo, 2001). However, these potential Ancylostomatidae eggs were only identified to the 
Family level and are not necessarily human hookworm. Further they should be interpreted 
with caution as hookworm eggs are very fragile and do not often preserve in archaeological 
contexts. 
2.3.3.2 Zoonotic Cestodes 
The two types of tapeworms that have been found in Neolithic Europe and the Middle East 
are fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) and beef/pork tapeworms (Taenia spp.). Fish 
tapeworm was been found at 11 sites studied and beef/pork tapeworm at 8 sites.  
 Fish tapeworm eggs were found in pelvic soil samples from the site of 
Shillourokambos in Cyprus dating between 83007000 BCE (Harter-Lailheugue et al., 2005). 
They were found at both Clairvaux and Chalain in France at later time periods between 3600
2980 BCE (Dommelier-Espejo, 2001; Bouchet et al., 1995a). They have also been found in 
occupation layer sediments from the five sites in Germany studied by Le Bailly (2005) for his 
thesis. In Switzerland, fish tapeworm eggs were found in coprolites from the site of Arbon 
(33843370 BCE) (Dommelier-Espejo, 2001) and in occupation sediment from Parkhaus-
Opra, Zrich (31763153 BCE) (Maicher et al., 2019). They were also found in occupation 
layer sediment from the lakeside settlement of La Draga in Spain, dating between 53204980 
BCE (Maicher et al., 2017). 
 Beef and pork tapeworms (Taenia spp.) were found in pelvic soil from 
Shillourokambos (83007000 BCE) and Khirokitia (70006000 BCE) in Cyprus (Harter-
Lailheugue et al., 2005). They were found in coprolites from Chalain in France (Dommelier et 
al., 1998). They were found in two of five sites studied in Germany by Le Bailly (2005). 
These were Sipplingen (3711-3306 BCE) and Torwiesen II (32833281 BCE).  
Taenia sp. eggs were found alongside fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) at Arbon 
and Parkhaus-Opra, Zrich in Switzerland. They were also found alongside fish tapeworm at 
La Draga in Spain, and in this case sequencing of helminth DNA retrieved using multiplex 
PCR from the samples confirmed that these eggs belonged the beef tapeworm (Taenia 
saginata) (Maicher et al., 2017). 
2.3.3.3 Zoonotic Trematodes 
Trematodes (flukes) including the lancet liver fluke (Dicrocoelium dendriticum) and Fasciola 
liver fluke (Fasciola sp.) have been found in many Neolithic period sites in Europe and the 
Middle East. Dicrocoelium sp. eggs have been found at 10 Neolithic period sites in Europe 
and the Middle East and Fasciola sp. eggs have been found at 13 sites. Dicrocoelium sp. eggs 
were found at sites in France, Germany, Switzerland, and Spain. Fasciola sp. eggs were found 
at sites in Cyprus, France, Germany, Netherlands, and Switzerland. While most eggs are not 
identified to the species level due to similar morphology with other species in the same genus, 
it is expected that most Dicrocoelium eggs in Europe are from the lancet liver fluke 
(Dicrocoelium dendriticum) because that is the only species found in Europe today (Le Bailly 
and Bouchet, 2010). 
 Dicrocoelium sp. eggs and Fasciola hepatica eggs were found together at the site of 
Chalain, France dating between 32002980 BCE (Bouchet et al., 1995a; Bouchet, 1997; 
Dommelier et al., 1998; Dommelier-Espejo, 2001). Dicrocoelium sp. eggs have been found at 
five Neolithic sites in Germany including Leipzig-Zwenkau, Hornstaad-Hornle, Sipplingen, 
Seekirch-Stockwiesen, and Alleshausen-Taschenwiese (Le Bailly, 2005; Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010). These were all found in occupation layer sediments except for the eggs from 
Leipzig-Zwenkau, which were found in sediment from a pit. These sites date from 5259 to 
2000 BCE. In Switzerland, Dicrocoelium eggs were found at all three sites that have been 
studied including Concise, Arbon, and Parkhaus-Opra, Zrich (Dommelier-Espejo, 2001; Le 
Bailly and Bouchet, 2010; Maicher et al., 2019). These eggs come from occupation layer 
sediment and coprolites from the 4th millennium BCE. Finally in Spain, lancet live fluke 
(Dicrocoelium dendriticum) eggs were found at the lakeside settlement of La Draga (5320
4980 BCE) (Maicher et al., 2017). 
 Fasciola liver fluke was found in pelvic soil samples from both sites that have been 
studied from Neolithic Cyprus; Shillourokambos and Khirokitia dating from 8300 to 6000 
BCE (Harter-Lailheugue et al., 2005). Fasciola liver fluke was found in occupation layer 
sediment from Clairvaux in France (3600 BCE) and Fasciola hepatica was found in 
coprolites and occupation layer sediment from the site of Chalain in France (32002980 BCE) 
(Dommelier-Espejo, 2001).  Fasciola sp. eggs have been found at six sites in Neolithic 
Germany including Hornstaad-Hornle, Sipplingen, Wallhausen-Ziegelhtte, Torwiesen II, 
Seekirch-Stockwiesen, and Karsdorf (Le Bailly, 2005). All of these eggs were found in 
occupation layer sediment except for those from Karsdorf which were found in pelvic soil 
from burials dated between 30002000 BCE (Dittmar and Teegen, 2003). In the Netherlands, 
Fasciola liver fluke eggs have been found in coprolites from the site of Swifterbant (Roever-
Bonnet et al., 1979). In Switzerland, they were found in coprolites from Arbon (Dommelier-
Espejo, 2001). Also in Switzerland, Fasciola gigantica eggs were found in occupation layer 
sediment from Parkhaus-Opra, Zrich (Maicher et al., 2019). However, it is important to 
note that the samples studied from Parkhaus-Opra, Zrich were sediments from occupation 
layers, and none of the parasites found are human-specific and could have been a result of 
animal infection at the site. The presence of Paramphistomum sp. in some of these samples 
suggests the presence of animal faecal material in some areas.  
2.3.3.4 Protozoa 
The only protozoan parasite so far found in Neolithic Europe and the Middle East is 
Entamoeba histolytica. Entamoeba was detected from both the site of Arbon (33843370 
BCE) and the site of Concise (3700 BCE) in Switzerland using ELISA (Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2015). At Arbon it was detected in coprolites and at Concise it was detected in 
occupation layer sediments. In Greece, Entamoeba histolytica was found in pelvic soil from 
burials at Kouphovouno dating between 5000-2000 BCE (Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2006). 
2.3.3.5 Other Parasites 
Other helminths that have been found less commonly in the Neolithic period compared to 
those already mentioned are Capillaria sp., Opisthorchis sp., Maracanthorhynchus sp., 
Dioctophyma renale, Echinostoma sp., Schistosoma sp., and Oxuyuridae. 
 Capillaria sp. worm has been found at 8 sites in the Neolithic period. These sites are 
located in France, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland, and Spain. First, Capillaria sp. eggs 
were found in coprolites and sediment from Chalain in France (Bouchet et al., 1995a). They 
were found in occupation layer sediment from three sites in Germany (Le Bailly, 2005). 
These three sites were Wallhausen-Ziegelhtte, Torwiesen II, and Seekirch-Stockwiesen. 
They were found in the coprolites studied from Swifterbant in the Netherlands (Roever-
Bonnet et al., 1979). They were found at both Arbon and Parkhaus-Opra, Zrich in 
Switzerland (Dommelier-Espejo, 2001; Maicher et al., 2019). Finally, they were found in 
occupation layer sediments from La Draga in Spain (Maicher et al., 2017). Most evidence for 
Capillaria sp. in this time period comes from occupation layer sediment however, there is 
also some evidence from coprolites. It is unclear if these are all cases of human infection as 
Capillaria sp. can infect many mammals. Furthermore, its presence in human coprolites may 
not represent true infection but may be a result of human ingestion of liver from infected 
animals where the eggs are found.  
 Opisthorchis sp. eggs have been found in coprolites from Arbon, Switzerland and 
Swifterbant, Netherlands. Similarly, Maracanthorhynchus sp, a common parasite of animals 
has been found at La Draga in Spain. 
In Switzerland, the site of Arbon was a rich source for ancient parasites; ten taxa were 
found at this site including the only case of giant kidney worm (Dioctophyma renale) in 
archaeological samples from Europe (Le Bailly et al., 2003a). This egg was found in a 
coprolite, however the eggs are typically released in the urine which could indicate some 
mixing of urine in the faeces or false parasitism with ingestion of an egg that did not hatch in 
the intestines of an individual.  
Also in Switzerland, Echinostoma sp. was found at Parkhaus-Opra, Zrich (Maicher 
et al., 2019). This is a rare parasite in the archaeological record which has also been found in 
Mesolithic Ireland (Perri et al., 2018). 
Pelvic soil from a burial in Syria gives us the only evidence for schistosomiasis in the 
Neolithic period (Anastasiou et al., 2014). The species of schistosome was suggested to be 
either S. intercalatum or S. haematobium. The geographical distribution of these two species 
is restricted to warmer climates and is not often found in Europe today but is endemic in 
Africa and parts of the Middle East, the lack of sites studied in these endemic regions in the 
Neolithic period is likely the reason we have little evidence for it. Another species, 
Schistosoma bovis has been detected in the southern Mediterranean where it has also been 
shown to hybridize with S. haematobium in humans. These hybrid infections have recently 
been recorded in Corsica, France (Oleaga et al., 2019). 
Pinworm, is another very common parasite today that is transmitted by ingestion of 
eggs. Eggs are often present on hands after itching the anus and can be transmitted to food or 
other objects to later be ingested. Eggs can also be found and transmitted through objects such 
as bedding or clothing of an infected individual. At the site of Swifterbant in Switzerland, 
Oxyuridae eggs were found in coprolites (Roever-Bonnet et al., 1979). These eggs could only 
be identified to the Family level and could be from human pinworm. Interestingly, the only 
other evidence for pinworm in Europe is from the Neolithic site of La Draga in Spain 
(Maicher et al., 2017)) until the Medieval period; although we have cases of it from Sudan 
starting in the Bronze Age. The eggs of pinworm have thin eggshells that are thought to be 
less resistant to degradation and thus not found very commonly in Europe and the Middle 
East.   
 Overall, in Neolithic Europe there is a large diversity of parasite taxa found. With 
most sites having more than one species present and some having as many as ten different 
taxa at one site. Comparatively, there has been much less work done in Neolithic Middle East 
and North Africa compared to Europe. 
2.3.4 Parasites in the Bronze Age 
Relatively little is known about parasites in Bronze Age and Iron Age Europe. For the 
purposes of this work, I have included samples dating between 2,500600 BCE in the 
evidence for Bronze Age Europe, where the time period was not already specified. As with 
the Neolithic period, the dates encompassing the Bronze Age in the Middle East and Northern 
Africa vary slightly from that of Europe, as such for this region I have included evidence from 
samples that date between 33001200 BCE (Liverani, 2007). Six taxa have been identified 
from five different European countries including Austria, Britain, the Czech Republic, France, 
and Greece; these are Dicrocoelium liver fluke, Entamoeba histolytica, fish tapeworm, 
hookworm, roundworm, and whipworm. Most of the work undertaken on Bronze Age 
parasites from countries outside Europe that at one point fell under Roman rule is in Egypt 
and Sudan. In these countries a minimum of twelve taxa have been found including 
Dicrocoelium liver fluke, Fasciola liver fluke, filarial worms, guinea worm, Leishmania sp., 
pinworm, roundworm, Schistosoma haematobium, Schistosoma mansoni, Taenia sp., 
Trichinella spiralis, and whipworm. 
Table 6: Parasites found at Bronze Age sites. 
Country Site Date Parasites Sample Type Citation 
Austria Hallstatt salt 
mines 
800350 BCE Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Coprolites Aspck et al., 
1973a; Aspck 
et al., 1973b 
Britain Brean Down 1940650 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Coprolites Jones, 1990 
Czech 
Republic 
Huln 16001500 
Ancylostoma duodenale, 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil ebela et al., 
Egypt Mummy 
BM32753 
3200 BCE Schistosoma haematobium Mummy Deelder et al., 
 Mummies 
from Thebes 
20501650 
Leishmania donovani Mummy Zink et al., 2006 
 Mummy from 
Valley of 
Nobles 
1450 BCE Dracunculus medinensis Mummy Horne and 
Redford, 1995 
 Mummy 12501000 
Schistosoma haematobium Mummy Ruffer, 1910 
 Mummy 
Natsef Amun 
1200 BCE Lymphatic filariasis Mummy Tapp and 
Wildsmith, 
 Mummy 
Nakht-ROM I 
1200 BCE Schistosoma sp.,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichinella spiralis 
Mummy Reyman et al., 
1977; Boni et 
al., 1977 
 Mummies 
from Thebes 
11981150 
Schistosoma haematobium  Mummy Deelder et al., 
France Grsine, 
Bourget Lake 
34003230 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Entamoeba histolytica 
Occupation 
sediment 
Gonalves et al., 
2004; Le Bailly 
and Bouchet, 
2010; Le Bailly 
and Bouchet, 
Greece Ayia Irini 16001100 
Ascaris sp. Pelvic soil Anastasiou et 
al., 2018 
Sudan Sai Island 2700 BCE Ascaris sp.,  
Enterobius vermicularis, 
Schistosoma sp. 
Pelvic soil Harter, 2003 
 Kerma 24001750 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Dicrocoelium sp.,  
Fasciola sp.,  
Schistosoma haematobium, 
Schistosoma mansoni, 
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Harter, 2003 
Figure 7: Parasites found at Bronze Age sites, mapped on modern-day countries. 
An=Ancylostoma, As=Ascaris, Dc=Dicrocoelium, Dp=Diphyllobothrium, Dr=Dracunculus 
medinensis, Eh=Entamoeba histolytica, Ev=Enterobius vermicularis, Fa=Fasciola, 
Le=Leishmania, Lf=Lymphatic filariasis, Sc=Schistosoma, Ta=Taenia, Tr=Trichuris, 
Ts=Trichinella spiralis. 
2.3.4.1 Faecal-Oral Helminths 
Roundworm and whipworm have also been found at sites in the Bronze Age. Roundworm 
(Ascaris sp.) has been found at 6 sites and whipworm (Trichuris sp.) has been found at 4 sites. 
Coprolites from the Bronze Age studied from the Hallstatt salt mines give us evidence for 
roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides) and whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) in Austria (Aspck et 
al., 1973a, 1973b). Similarly, only one site from Bronze Age Britain has been studied for 
intestinal parasites; this is the site of Brean Down, Somerset. Sediment samples and coprolites 
were studied and revealed eggs of roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides) and whipworm 
(Trichuris trichiura) (Jones, 1990). The eggs were presumed to be from human infections 
because the size of the whipworm eggs fit within the range for modern human whipworm. 
This is the earliest evidence that currently exists for parasites in Britain. 
In the Czech Republic, evidence for intestinal parasites in the Bronze Age comes from 
pelvic soil from burials at the site of Huln, in which hookworm, roundworm (Ascaris 
lumbricoides) and whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) were reported in pelvic soil samples 
(ebela et al., 1990). The report of hookworm (Ancylostoma duodenale) is unusual as this is a 
fragile egg not often found in archaeological sites in Europe. This is in part because of its thin 
eggshell but also due to the fact that the eggs hatch in the soil and larvae penetrate the skin of 
humans directly, meaning that numerous unhatched eggs would not be expected if the parasite 
is completing its life cycle. 
 From the site of Ayia Irini in Greece roundworm (Ascaris sp.) eggs were found in 
pelvic soil from one of two individuals analysed that were buried during the Bronze Age 
(Anastasiou et al., 2018). 
 Finally, pelvic soil from Bronze Age sites in Sudan have contributed evidence for 
roundworm at Sai Island (2700 BCE) and Kerma (24001750 BCE) (Harter, 2003). 
Whipworm was also found in pelvic soil from Kerma.  
2.3.4.2 Zoonotic Cestodes 
Cestodes (tapeworms) including fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) and beef/pork 
tapeworm (Taenia sp.) have been found at Bronze Age sites in Europe, the Middle East, and 
North Africa.  
 In Egypt, a mummy known as Nakht-ROM I dating to 1200 BCE, was shown to be 
infected with Taenia tapeworm (Reyman et al., 1977). The only other evidence for Taenia sp. 
tapeworms in the Bronze Age comes from pelvic soil from the site of Kerma (24001750 
BCE) in the Sudan (Harter, 2003). 
 In France, our understanding of parasites in the Bronze Age comes from the site of 
Grsine near Bourget Lake (34003230 BCE). The site was a lakeside settlement in France; 
compared to the other sites studied in Bronze Age Europe it appears that its proximity to 
freshwater may have affected the taxa of parasite found there as this is the only site where fish 
tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) was found (Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2013). 
2.3.4.3  Zoonotic Trematodes 
Trematodes (flukes) have been found at a few Bronze Age sites. The most common is 
Dicrocoelium sp. which has been found at two sites. Fasciola liver fluke has been found at 
one site. This is far fewer than in the Neolithic period though there is more evidence for 
helminths in the Neolithic period in general. 
 Dicrocoelium liver fluke was also found at the lakeside settlement of Grsine, France. 
The eggs were found in occupation layer sediment dated to 34003230 BCE (Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010). Pelvic soil from Bronze Age Kerma in the Sudan contributed evidence for 
Dicrocoelium liver fluke and Fasciola liver fluke (Harter, 2003). 
2.3.4.4 Protozoa 
The only evidence for gastrointestinal protozoa in the Bronze Age comes from the site of 
Grsine in France where Entamoeba histolytica was detected in occupation layer sediment 
(Gonalves et al., 2004). 
2.3.4.5 Other Parasites 
Other parasites that have been found in Bronze Age sites from Europe, the Middle East, and 
North Africa include Dracunculus medinensis, Leishmania donovani, lymphatic filariasis, 
pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis), schistosomiasis (Schistosoma sp.), and Trichinella 
spiralis. Many of these more rare species in archaeological contexts have been found in 
mummified remains from Egypt where worms and larvae that live in tissue have the chance to 
preserve along with eggs.  
 Pelvic soil from Sai Island in Sudan has contributed the only evidence for pinworm in 
the Bronze Age. Also in pelvic soil from Sail Island eggs from Schistosoma sp. were found. 
In pelvic soil from Kerma, Sudan eggs from Schistosoma haematobium and Schistosoma 
mansoni have been identified (Harter, 2003). 
 In Egypt, most of the evidence we have for parasitism has come from the autopsy of 
high status mummies. Guinea worm (Dracunculus medinensis) was found in a mummy from 
the Valley of the Nobles dated to 1450 BCE (Horne and Redford, 1995). Lymphatic filariasis, 
caused by one of three species, Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia malayi, or Brugia timori was 
found in the mummy Natsef Amun dated to 1200 BCE (Tapp and Wildsmith, 1992). DNA 
analysis has confirmed one of the earliest cases of leishmaniasis from Thebes in ancient 
Egypt. DNA of Leishmania donovani was amplified from bone tissues from four mummies 
dated between 20501650 BCE (Zink et al, 2006). Other mummies from Thebes have been 
shown to have schistosomiasis. The first dates to 11981150 BCE (Deelder et al., 1990) and 
the second the mummy Nakht-ROM I dates to 1200 BCE (Reyman et al., 1977). Nakht-ROM 
I was also shown to be infected with Taenia tapeworm and Trichinella spiralis (Boni et al., 
1977). Finally, Ruffer (1910) reported finding eggs of Schistosoma haematobium in an 
Egyptian mummy dated between 12501000 BCE, in what is commonly noted as the first 
paleoparasitological study undertaken. Overall, there are many unique species identified in 
Egypt during the Bronze Age including, guinea worm, leishmaniasis, and lymphatic filariasis. 
However, this is in part a result of differential preservation of parasites in different sample 
types; in Egypt most evidence for parasite infection has come from the autopsy of mummies 
whereas in other areas sediment samples are the dominant sample type studied. Mummified 
remains offer the possibility to identify the adult worms of various parasites as well as eggs or 
cysts preserved in soft tissue. 
2.3.5 Parasites in the Iron Age 
For the Iron Age material, I have included samples from Europe that date between 600 BCE
100 CE and 1200200 BCE for the Middle East and North Africa, where the time period is 
not otherwise specified by the authors. As can be seen there is very little evidence for 
parasites in the Iron Age compared to any other time period. Paleoparasitological studies on 
Iron Age sites have revealed eggs from 11 unique taxa in four different countries (Table 7 and 
Figure 8). These include Dicrocoelium liver fluke, Echinococcus sp., Fasciola liver fluke, fish 
tapeworm, pinworm, roundworm, Schistosoma haematobium, Schistosoma mansoni, 
Strongyloides sp., Taenia tapeworm, and whipworm. 
Table 7: Parasites found at Iron Age sites. 
Country Site Date Parasites 
Sample 
Type Citation 
Austria Hallein salt 
500200 
Ascaris sp.,  
Dicrocoelium sp.,  
Fasciola hepatica;  
Taenia sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Coprolites Aspck et al., 
1973a; Aspck 
et al., 1973b; 
Aspck et al., 
1999; Le Bailly 
and Bouchet, 
Egypt Mummy Asru 
from Thebes 
750525 
Echinococcus sp., 
Strongyloides sp. 
Mummy Tapp, 1984 
 Deir el-
Medineh 
400300 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Diphyllobothrium sp.,  
Fasciola hepatica, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Harter, 2003 
 Saqqara 400300 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Harter, 2003 
 Mummy 2001 
B.C.E 
Taenia sp. Mummy Bruschi et al., 
 Mummy Pum 
170 BCE Ascaris lumbricoides Mummy Cockburn et al., 
Israel City of David, 
Jerusalem 
700500 
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Cahill et al., 
Sudan Sai Island 700300 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Enterobius vermicularis, 
Fasciola sp.,  
Schistosoma haematobium, 
Schistosoma mansoni, 
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Harter, 2003 
Figure 8: Parasites found at Iron Age sites, mapped onto modern-day countries. As=Ascaris, 
Dc=Dicrocoelium, Dp=Diphyllobothrium, Ec=Echinococcus, Ev=Enterobius vermicularis, 
Fa=Fasciola, Sc=Schistosoma, St=Strongyloides, Ta=Taenia, Tr=Trichuris. 
2.3.5.1 Faecal-Oral Helminths 
Roundworm (Ascaris sp.) has been found four sites in the Iron Age and whipworm (Trichuris 
sp.) has been found at five sites. The only Iron Age site studied from Europe is the Hallein 
salt mines in Austria (500200 BCE). In coprolites from the site, roundworm (Ascaris sp.) 
and whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) eggs were found (Aspck et al., 1973a; Aspck et al., 
1973b; Aspck et al., 1999). Roundworm and whipworm eggs were also found in pelvic soil 
from Deir el-Medineh in Egypt (Harter, 2003) and in pelvic soil from Iron Age Sai Island in 
the Sudan (Harter, 2003). 
 Roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides) was the only helminth found in a mummy known 
as Pum II from Egypt (Cockburn et al., 1975). This mummy is dated to 170 BCE. 
 Whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) was found in the absence of roundworm in pelvic soil 
samples from Saqqara in Egypt (Harter, 2003), as well as in a latrine from Jerusalem, Israel 
(Cahill et al., 1991). 
2.3.5.2 Zoonotic Cestodes 
Cestodes (tapeworms) have been found a six of the eight sites studied in the Iron Age. 
Beef/pork tapeworms (Taenia sp.) have been found at four sites and fish tapeworm 
(Diphyllobothrium sp.) at three sites. 
 Taenia sp. eggs were found in coprolites from the Hallein salt mines in Austria (500
200 BCE) (Aspck et al., 1999).  In Iron Age Egypt, pelvic soil taken from burials at Deir el-
Medineh and Saqqara revealed eggs of fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) (Harter, 2003). 
Also, an Egyptian mummy dated to 2001 BCE was found to have a cyst containing the 
larvae of pork tapeworm and was confirmed using immunochemical staining (Bruschi et al., 
2006). 
 In the latrine from Jerusalem, eggs from beef/pork tapeworm (Taenia sp.) were found 
alongside whipworm (Cahill et al., 1991). This latrine was dated to 700500 BCE. 
Pelvic soil from burials on Sai Island in the Sudan contained similar species to Bronze 
Age burials in Kerma and Sai Island. However, in the Iron Age Dicrocoelium liver fluke was 
not found and fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) was found in addition to the other taxa 
seen one of which is beef/pork tapeworm (Taenia sp.) (Harter, 2003). 
2.3.5.3 Zoonotic Trematodes 
Flukes have been found in coprolites, mummies, and pelvic soil from the Iron Age. 
Dicrocoelium sp. eggs and Fasciola hepatica eggs were found in coprolites from the Hallein 
salt mines in Austria (Aspck et al., 1999; Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2010). Pelvic soil from 
Deir el-Medineh and Saqqara in Egypt contained eggs from Fasciola liver fluke (Harter, 
2003). Fasciola sp. eggs were also found in pelvic soil from Sai Island in the Sudan (Harter, 
2003). 
2.3.5.4 Other Parasites 
Other parasites that have been found in the Iron Age include Echinococcus sp. which causes 
hydatid disease, pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis), schistosomiasis (Schistosoma 
haematobium and Schistosoma mansoni), and Strongyloides sp.  
In the mummy named Asru from Thebes (750525 BCE) a hydatid cyst indicating 
Echinococcus sp. infection was found along with evidence for infection with Strongyloides 
sp. (Tapp, 1984). In the pelvic soil from Iron Age Sai Island (700300 BCE) eggs of pinworm 
and two species of Schistosoma (Schistosoma haematobium and Schistosoma mansoni) were 
identified (Harter, 2003). 
2.3.6 Parasites in the Roman Empire 
Currently 13 different taxa of parasites have been identified from Roman period sites and 
these come from 12 countries including Austria, Belgium, Britain, Egypt, France, Germany, 
Greece, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and Turkey (Table 8). These taxa include 
Capillaria sp., Dicrocoelium liver fluke, Echinococcus sp., Entamoeba histolytica, Fasciola 
liver fluke, fish tapeworm, Giardia duodenalis, Macracanthorhynchus sp., pinworm, 
roundworm, Taenia tapeworms, Toxocara sp., and whipworm. Though Oxyuris equi (horse 
pinworm) has been found at some of these sites and in a number of Roman samples (Dufour, 
2015), I have not included it in further discussions as it is not known to infect humans. While 
this seems like a fair number of studies there are still major gaps in our knowledge of the 
entirety of the Empire. Of the 53 Roman sites where parasites have been reported, 30 (57%) 
are in Britain and France. Egypt is the only country that has been studied from Roman North 
Africa. Though the heart of the Roman Empire lies in Italy, only three sites in Italy have been 
studied for intestinal parasites (the number increases to six if malaria is included). Similarly, 
there are no data from Spain, Portugal, Hungary, Croatia and most countries in the Eastern 
Mediterranean (Figure 9). In order to draw conclusions about which parasites were present in 
the Roman Empire, and how changes occurring during this time impacted parasite diversity, 
we need to have a more even spread of data from across the Empire. 
 Whipworm (Trichuris sp.) is the most common parasite found in Roman period sites, 
being found at 34 sites. Roundworm (Ascaris sp.) is also very common, being found at 31 
sites. The next most common parasite found is Fasciola liver fluke followed by the lancet 
liver fluke (Dicrocoelium sp.), beef/pork tapeworm (Taenia sp.), fish tapeworm 
(Diphyllobothrium sp.), and Capillaria sp. worm. Other less common helminths that have 
been found include hydatid disease (Echinococcus granulosus), pinworm (Enterobius 
vermicularis), and Toxocara sp. Intestinal protozoa including Entamoeba histolytica and 
Giardia duodenalis have also been found, as well as other protozoa including malaria 
(Plasmodium falciparum) and toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii). 
Table 8: Parasites found at sites in the Roman Empire. 
Country 
Roman 
Province Site Date Parasites 
Sample 
Type Citation 
Austria Pannonia 
Superior 
Carnuntum 
300 CE 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Taenia sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Sewer and 
latrine 
Aspck et 
al., 2011; 
Petznek, 
Belgium Belgica Arlon 1300 
Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Vats or pits Defgne et 
al., 2008; 
Gourevitch 
et al., 2011 
 Belgica Mageroy Roman Entamoeba histolytica Latrine Le Bailly 
Bouchet, 
Britain Britannia Leicester 1200 
Ascaris sp., 
Fasciola sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Cesspit Boyer, 
 Britannia London, 
Hibernia 
Wharf 
1200 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Diphyllobothrium latum, 
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Well Rouffignac
, 1985 
 Britannia Orton 
Longueville 
1200 
Echinococcus granulosus Cyst from 
skeleton 
Wells and 
Dallas, 
 Britannia Carlisle 1300 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Fasciola sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Occupation 
sediment 
Jones and 
Hutchison, 
 Britannia Ambleside 1400 
Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Pit Jones, 
 Britannia Church 
Street 
Sewer, 
1500 
Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Sewer Wilson and 
Rackham, 
 Britannia London, 
1535 
Copthall 
400 CE 
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Occupation 
sediment 
Moulins, 
 Britannia Bearsden 142
158 CE 
Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Sewer Knights et 
al., 1983 
 Britannia Lincoln, 
Waterside 
400 CE 
Trichuris sp. Occupation 
sediment 
Carrott et 
al., 1995 
 Britannia Owslebury, 
Winchester 
Roman Ascaris sp.,  
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Trichuris/Capillaria sp. 
Pit Pike, 1968 
 Britannia Poundbury, 
Dorset 
Roman Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Coffin 
sediment 
Jones, 
Egypt Aegyptus Dakhleh 
Oasis 
30 CE 
Enterobius vermicularis Mummy Horne, 
 Aegyptus El-Deir 301
500 CE 
Taenia sp. Mummy Le Bailly 
et al., 2010 
France Lugdunensis Bobigny 
hospital 
100 CE 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Rousset et 
al., 1996 
 Narbonensis Marseille 14 
27 CE 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Occupation 
sediment 
Harter-
Lailheugue
, 2006 
 Narbonensis Lattes 1200 
Entamoeba histolytica Cesspit Le Bailly 
Bouchet, 
 Lugdunensis Beauvais 1300 
Ascaris sp.,  
Capillaria sp., 
Dicrocoelium sp.,  
Macracanthorhynchus sp.,  
Taenia/Echinococcus sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Latrine Dufour, 
 Germania 
Superior 
Horbourg-
1300 
Ascaris sp.,  
Capillaria sp., 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp., 
Macracanthorhynchus sp.,  
Taenia/Echinococcus sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Pits, latrines, 
ditches 
Dufour, 
 Aquitania Bordeaux 4051 
Ascaris sp.,  
Taenia sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Sewer or 
latrine 
Sireix, 
 Belgica Reims, 
Venise 
200 CE 
Ascaris sp., 
Fasciola sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Pits, wells, 
occupation 
sediment 
Bouchet et 
al., 2001b; 
Le Bailly 
et al., 
2003b 
 Aquitania Jaunay-
300 CE 
Trichuris trichiura Coffin 
sediment 
Dufour et 
al., 2016 
 Narbonensis La 
Gramiere, 
Castillon 
du Gard 
300 CE 
Entamoeba histolytica Cesspit Gonalves 
et al., 2004 
 Lugdunensis Amiens 201
401 CE 
Capillaria hepatica, 
Echinococcus granulosus 
Cyst from 
skeleton 
Mowlavi et 
al., 2014 
 Germania 
Superior 
Andilly-
Bassigny 
Roman Ascaris sp.,  
Fasciola sp.,  
Taenia/Echinococcus sp. 
? Dufour, 
 Lugdunensis Autun Roman Ascaris sp.,  
Capillaria sp., 
Macracanthorhynchus sp.,  
Taenia/Echinococcus sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
? Dufour, 
 Lugdunensis Evreux Roman Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Pelvic soil Dufour, 
 Lugdunensis Lisses Roman Entamoeba histolytica Pit Le Bailly 
Bouchet, 
 Belgica Metz Roman Ascaris sp., 
Capillaria sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Fasciola sp. 
Toxocara sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
? Dufour, 
 Aquitania Mikelauen
-Zilo 
Roman Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp. 
Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly 
Bouchet, 
2010; Le 
Bailly and 
Bouchet, 
 Belgica Reims, 
Rue Carnot 
Roman Dicrocoelium sp. Cesspit Le Bailly 
Bouchet, 
 Lugdunensis Troyes, 
Place de la 
Liberation 
Roman Dicrocoelium sp., 
Entamoeba histolytica 
Cesspit Le Bailly 
Bouchet, 
2010; Le 
Bailly and 
Bouchet, 
 Narbonensis Villevieille Roman Ascaris sp. ? Dufour, 
Germany Germania 
Superior 
Ladenburg 1200 
Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Latrine Goppelsr
der and 
Sommer, 
 Belgica Belginum 101
300 CE 
Ascaris sp.,  
Capillaria sp.,  
Taenia sp. 
Pit Dittmar et 
al., 2002 
 Raetia Knzing 140
250 CE 
Trichuris trichiura Pit Specht, 
Greece Achaia Ayia Irini 101
300 CE 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Anastasiou 
et al., 2018 
Israel Iudaea Qumran 100 
68 CE 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Enterobius vermicularis, 
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Harter et 
al., 2004; 
Zias et al., 
 Iudaea Silwan 1100 
Echinococcus granulosus Cyst from 
skeleton 
Zias and 
Mumcuogl
u, 1991 
 Iudaea Nahal-
Mishmar 
Valley 
160 CE Trichuris trichiura Coprolites Witenberg, 
 Iudaea Caesarea Roman Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Diphyllobothrium sp. 
Latrine Harter, 
Italy Italia Pompeii 100 
79 CE 
Trichuris trichiura Sewer Heirbaut et 
al., 2011 
 Italia Portus 25660 
Ascaris sp.,  
Fasciola sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Sediment 
cores 
Dufour, 
 Italia Roma Roman Entamoeba histolytica ? Le Bailly 
Bouchet, 
Netherlands Germania 
Inferior 
Utigeest 101 
300 CE 
Trichuris sp. Well Van Geel 
et al,. 2003 
 Germania 
Inferior 
Alphen on 
the Rhine 
1100 
Ascaris sp.,  
Taenia/Echinococcus sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Latrine Kuijper 
Turner, 
 Germania 
Inferior 
Valkenburg 
(Roman 
Camp) 
1100 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Occupation 
sediment 
Jansen and 
Over, 1966 
Switzerland Germania 
Superior 
Augst 1100 
Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Latrine Hnggi et 
al., 1989; 
Hufschmid 
Stterlin, 
 Germania 
Superior 
Eschenz 1200 
Ascaris lumbricoides 
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Jauch, 
 Germania 
Superior 
Vindonissa 3045 
Ascarididae 
Trichuris sp. 
Latrines Le Bailly 
et al., 
2003c 
Turkey Asia Sagalassos 101-
500 CE 
Ascaris sp.,  
Giardia duodenalis 
Latrine Williams 
et al., 2017 
Figure 9: Parasites found at Roman-period sites, mapped onto modern-day countries. 
As=Ascaris, Ca=Capillaria, Dc=Dicrocoelium, Dp=Diphyllobothrium, Ec=Echinococcus, 
Eh=Entamoeba histolytica, Ev=Enterobius vermicularis, Fa=Fasciola, Gi=Giardia, 
Ma=Macracanthorhynchus, Ox=Oxyuris equi, T/C=Taenia/Capillaria,  
T/E=Taenia/Echinococcus, Ta=Taenia, Tr=Trichuris, Tx=Toxocara. 
Figure 10: Parasites found at Roman-period sites, mapped onto Roman provinces in 117 CE. 
Borders of the Roman provinces are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval 
Civilizations, Harvard University. As=Ascaris, Ca=Capillaria, Dc=Dicrocoelium, 
Dp=Diphyllobothrium, Ec=Echinococcus, Eh=Entamoeba histolytica, Ev=Enterobius 
vermicularis, Fa=Fasciola, Gi=Giardia, Ma=Macracanthorhynchus, T/C=Taenia/Capillaria,  
T/E=Taenia/Echinococcus, Ta=Taenia, Tr=Trichuris, Tx=Toxocara. 
2.3.6.1 Faecal-Oral Helminths 
Whipworm (Trichuris sp.) and roundworm (Ascaris sp.) have been the most commonly 
identified parasites in the Roman Empire with whipworm being identified from 34 sites and 
roundworm from 31 sites. Whipworm has been found in the modern-day countries of Austria, 
Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, and Switzerland.  
Figure 11: Roman-period sites where whipworm (Trichuris sp.) has been found. Sites are 
marked by red dots and placed in the corresponding Roman province. Roman provincial 
boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval Civilizations, 
Harvard University. 
 One quarter of the samples that were found to have whipworm come from Britain, 
these all correspond to the Roman province of Britannia. In London, sediments from Roman 
period wells (Rouffignac,1985) and ditches (De Moulins, 1990) were found to contain human 
whipworm. Human whipworm was also identified in occupation layer sediments from the site 
of Carlisle, Britain (Jones, 1987) and from sediments found within the coffins of individuals 
buried at Poundbury, Dorset (Jones and Hutchison, 1991). Pike (1968) studied sediment 
samples from a pit in Owslebury, Britain and found eggs that were identified as either 
Trichuris sp. or Capillaria sp. However, it was not known if these parasites were of human or 
animal origin. In an analysis of sediment from a Roman period sewer in York, Wilson and 
Rackham (1976) identified Trichuris sp. eggs. Similarly in Leicester, eggs of Trichuris sp. 
were identified in sediment from a cesspit (Boyer, 1999). However, they were also uncertain 
if these eggs were from the human whipworm or an animal species. Eggs from the genus 
Trichuris were also found in samples from a Roman period sewer at the fort of Bearsden, 
Scotland (Knights et al., 1983). Again, the authors were not sure if these were human 
whipworm eggs or animal in origin.  
 Samples from ten sites in France have contained eggs from whipworm. Human-
specific whipworm was identified at two sites; the first was pelvic soil from Roman period 
burials at Bobigny hospital (Rousset et al., 1996); and the second in sediments from coffins of 
individuals buried in Jaunay-Clan (Dufour et al, 2016). Trichuris sp. eggs were identified in 
pelvic soil from Evreux (Dufour, 2015), based on the context these most likely represent 
human infection. Trichuris sp. were identified in latrine or pit sediment from Beauvais 
(Dufour, 2015), Bordeaux (Sireix, 2008), Horbourg-Wihr (Dufour, 2015), and Reims (Le 
Bailly et al., 2003b). Trichuris sp. were also identified in occupation sediments from 
Marseille and samples from Metz and Autun (Dufour, 2015). 
 In Austria, one case of whipworm comes from the fill of a cesspit at the site of 
Carnuntum (Petznek, 2018). In the Netherlands, human whipworm was identified in sediment 
samples taken from the fort of Valkenburg on the Rhine (Jansen and Over, 1966). Trichuris 
sp. eggs were identified from a latrine at the site of Alphen on the Rhine (Kuijper and Turner, 
1992) and in sediment from a well at Utigeest (Van Geel et al., 2003). Human whipworm has 
also been found in the intestines of a bog body from the Netherlands (Searcey et al., 2013). 
The body, known as Zweeloo woman, is that of a female between 35 and 50 years old and 
though her body was found just outside the border of the Roman Empire she was presumed to 
have lived in a Roman settlement nearby, that has not yet been found (Searcey et al., 2013). 
 In Switzerland, whipworm has been identified in sediment from latrines at three 
different sites; Augst (Hnggi et al., 1989), Eschenz (Jauch, 1997), and Vindonissa (Le Bailly 
et al., 2003c). 
 In Germany, human whipworm (T. trichiura) was identified in pit sediment from 
Knzing (Specht, 1963) and Trichuris sp. was identified in a latrine from Ladenburg 
(Goppelsrder and Sommer, 1996).  
 At two of three sites studied in Roman Italy whipworm eggs have been found. It is not 
clear if the sample from Roma, the only sample without whipworm, was studied for both 
helminths and protozoa or if it was only analysed for protozoa using ELISA. Whipworm has 
also been found at Pompeii. In samples taken from sewers and drains human whipworm was 
identified and presumed to have infected Romans living in the city (Heirbaut et al., 2011). 
Trichuris sp. eggs were also found in sediment cores from Portus, these core samples date 
between 25660 CE, though it is unclear if parasites in these cores are from humans infected 
in the city or animals (Dufour, 2015). They do, however, show what taxa of parasites were 
present in the community. 
 In Israel, human whipworm has been identified from both coprolites and latrine 
sediments. Witenberg (1961) analysed coprolites from a Roman period site in the Nahal-
Mishmar Valley and identified human whipworm. Whipworm was also identified in latrine 
samples taken from the site of Qumran (Harter et al., 2004; Zias et al., 2006). 
 In Greece, human whipworm was recently identified in pelvic soil from burials at the 
site of Ayia Irini on the island of Kea (Anastasiou et al., 2018). One of the ten individuals 
studied was infected with whipworm. 
 Finally, in Belgium we also have evidence for whipworm from one site, the Roman 
vicus (village) at Arlon (Defgne et al., 2008). The Trichuris sp. eggs came from vats and 
pipes that were thought to be part of a fullers shop thus these eggs could very likely be from 
animals. Roman texts suggest that human urine was collected to be reused in the process of 
fulling (Flohr and Wilson, 2011) thus it is possible that these eggs come from humans if 
faecal material was also present. 
Human roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides) is the second most common parasite found 
in the Roman Empire. It has been found at Roman period sites in Austria, Belgium, Britain, 
France, Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and Turkey. The 
geographical distribution of roundworm (Figure 12) is very similar to that of whipworm 
(Figure 11). 
 Similar to whipworm, roundworm has been identified in sediment samples taken from 
sites throughout Britain. Roundworm was identified alongside human whipworm in sediments 
from Hibernia Wharf, London (Rouffignac, 1985), in the coffin sediments from Poundbury, 
Dorset (Jones, 1987), and in the sediment samples from the site of Carlisle (Jones and 
Hutchison, 1991). At Owslebury, Pike (1968) identified eggs from Ascaris sp. alongside 
whipworm. In the sewer samples from the Church Street Sewer in York and Bearsden in 
Scotland, roundworm was found with whipworm (Wilson and Rackham, 1976; Knights et al., 
1983). Finally, roundworm was also found alongside whipworm in the cesspit sediment from 
Leicester (Boyer, 1999) and the pit sediment from Ambleside (Jones, 1985). Thus, whipworm 
was found at all sites in Britain where roundworm was identified, though whipworm has been 
identified in the absence of roundworm at two sites (Table 8).  
Figure 12: Roman-period sites where roundworm (Ascaris sp.) has been found. Sites are 
marked by red dots and placed in the corresponding Roman province. Roman provincial 
boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval Civilizations, 
Harvard University. 
 In France, human roundworm was found alongside whipworm in pelvic soil from 
burials at Bobigny hospital (Rousset et al., 1996) and Evreux (Dufour, 2015). Ascaris sp. eggs 
were also found in pits, latrines, and sediment samples from Andilly-en-Bassigny, Autun, 
Beauvais, Bordeaux, Horbourg-Wihr, Metz, Reims, and Villevieille. Andilly-en-Bassigny and 
Villevieille are the only two sites where roundworm was found in the absence of whipworm. 
Similarly, there are two sites that had evidence for whipworm in the absence of roundworm, 
Marseille and Jaunay-Clan. 
 Roundworm eggs have been found at two Roman sites in Germany. They were found 
in pit sediment from Belginum (Dittmar et al., 2002) and cesspit sediment from Ladenburg 
(Goppelsrder and Sommer, 1996). 
 In the Netherlands, roundworm was identified in the two samples where whipworm 
was found; the sediments from the Valkenburg Army camp (Jansen and Over, 1966) and 
latrine sediment from Alphen on the Rhine (Kuijper and Turner, 1992). The samples from the 
intestines of Zweeloo woman also contained roundworm eggs (Searcey et al., 2013). 
In Israel, human roundworm has been found in sediment from a latrine at the site of 
Caesarea Maritima (Harter, 2003). It was also found in the latrine sediments studied from 
Qumran which also contained eggs of whipworm (Harter et al., 2004; Zias et al., 2006). 
In Switzerland, roundworm eggs were found alongside whipworm eggs in latrines at 
Augst (Hnggi et al., 1989) and Eschenz (Jauch, 1997). In the latrine from Vindonissa where 
whipworm eggs were identified, eggs from the family Ascarididae were found but they could 
not be identified more specifically (Le Bailly et al,. 2003c). However, based on the other 
latrines studied in Switzerland and northern Europe it seems quite likely that these could be 
eggs from Ascaris sp. 
In Belgium, eggs of Ascaris sp. were found in the vats and pipes that were thought to 
be part of the fullers workshop in the vicus at Arlon (Defgne et al., 2008). Again these eggs 
could be from infected animals or humans. 
 Human roundworm has been identified at one site in Austria. The site of Carnuntum, 
from which a latrine and a sewer were sampled and found to contain roundworm eggs 
(Aspck et al., 2011). 
 Pelvic soil from one of the ten individuals studied from the site of Ayia Irini in Kea 
was found to contain roundworm eggs (Anastasiou et al., 2018). This was a different 
individual than the one who was found to be infected with whipworm. 
 In Turkey, roundworm eggs were found in sediment samples collected from a 
communal latrine in the city of Sagalassos (Williams et al., 2017). Though the latrine was 
later reused as a stable, the samples from these layers were confirmed to contain human faecal 
material using faecal lipid biomarkers including 5 stanols which can differentiate omnivore 
and herbivore faeces (Bull et al., 2002).  
 High levels of roundworm and whipworm in the Roman Empire may point towards 
poor hygiene and sanitation as these parasites are spread by the faecal-oral route. The co-
occurrence of these two parasites in samples from Roman sites is very apparent. There are 
few sites where parasite eggs can be attributed to a single individual, which does not allow for 
us to determine if individuals living in these communities were co-infected or if both parasites 
existed but many individuals were infected with one or the other. The only site where this 
evidence exists is Ayia Irini in Greece where roundworm eggs were found alone in one 
individual and whipworm eggs were found alone in another. 
2.3.6.2 Zoonotic Cestodes 
Taenia tapeworm has been identified in seven samples studied from Roman period sites. 
There are three species of Taenia tapeworm that are known to infect humans; Taenia 
saginata, Taenia solium, and Taenia asiatica. Infection with T. saginata primarily comes 
from eating beef, T. solium from pork, and T. asiatica which is primarily found in Asia is 
acquired by eating pork. These three species of Taenia cannot be distinguished based on 
morphological differences of eggs seen under the microscope, therefore they are commonly 
identified in archaeological samples as Taenia sp. without identification down to the species 
level. In order to differentiate a taeniid egg, DNA analysis would be necessary and the cost of 
this type of analysis is often not realistic in many projects. The seven sites from the Roman 
Empire that had samples positive for Taenia sp. come from Austria, Britain, Egypt, France, 
Germany, Israel, and the Netherlands (Figure 13). 
Figure 13: Roman-period sites where beef/pork tapeworm (Taenia sp.) has been found. Red 
dots are sites where Taenia sp. were identified and black dots are where eggs were identified 
as Taenia sp. or Echinococcus sp. Sites are placed in the corresponding Roman province. 
Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval 
Civilizations, Harvard University. 
In addition, it is often not possible to distinguish the various Taeniid eggs (including 
Taenia spp. and Echinococcus spp.) under the microscope (Craig et al., 1986; Dufour, 2015). 
As such there are an additional four sites where eggs attributed to Taenia/Echinococcus sp. 
have been found in France, and one in Germany (Figure 13).  
In Austria, Taenia sp. eggs were found in the fill of a 2nd c. CE cesspit (Petznek, 
2018). In Britain, Rouffignac (1985) identified Taenia sp. tapeworm in the sediment samples 
from Hibernia Wharf, London. In Egypt, Taenia sp. eggs were identified from samples taken 
from the abdomen of a mummy from the site of El-Deir (Le Bailly et al., 2010). Taenia 
tapeworm eggs were also identified in latrine sediments from the site of Qumran, Israel dated 
between 100 BCE and 68 CE (Harter et al., 2004; Zias et al., 2006). Taenia sp. eggs were 
found in sediment samples from a latrine in the Netherlands (Kuijper and Turner, 1992) and 
pit sediment from Germany (Dittmar et al., 2002). 
 In France, Taenia sp. eggs were found in sediment from a latrine and drain from 
Bordeaux (Sireix, 2008). Eggs belonging to either Taenia sp. or Echinococcus sp. were found 
in sediment samples from four other sites in France; Andilly-en-Bassigny, Autun, Beauvais, 
and Horbourg-Wihr (Dufour, 2015).  
Eggs from Taenia or Echinococcus sp. were identified in latrine sediment from 
Germany from the site of Alphen on the Rhine (Kuijper and Turner, 1992). 
 Infection with Taenia tapeworms is acquired through ingestion of undercooked pork 
or beef. Commonly agreed upon staples of the Roman diet included cereals, olive oil, wine, 
and dry legumes which likely made up a majority of the caloric intake for lower class 
individuals (Garnsey, 1999a). However, pork and beef were known to be eaten in varying 
quantities across the Roman Empire and this would vary based on social status and region 
(King, 1999; Cool, 2006). It is also known that pork was not always cooked but was also 
eaten salted and dried (Garnsey, 1999a), this could have put individuals at risk for infection 
with Taenia solium. 
Fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp., recently renamed Dibothriocephalus sp.) has 
been found at six Roman period sites; in Britain, France, and Israel (Figure 14). There are 
many species of fish tapeworm with around fourteen species in the genus of 
Diphyllobothrium known to infect humans (Scholz et al., 2009; Garcia, 2016); and the eggs 
from different species can be quite difficult to distinguish from one another based on 
morphology. For this reason, many diagnoses in the archaeological record are only genus-
level identifications, or the species-level identification has been made based on the most 
common species found in the corresponding region.  
Figure 14: Roman-period sites where fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) has been found. 
Sites are marked by red dots and placed in the corresponding Roman province. Roman 
provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval 
Civilizations, Harvard University. 
 In Britain, Rouffignac (1985) identified Diphyllobothrium latum in sediment samples 
from a Roman well at Hibernia Wharf, London. The approach used for determining the 
species of the eggs retrieved was not described. 
 In a review of fish tapeworm published by Le Bailly and Bouchet (2013) including 
previous publications identifying fish tapeworm in the past, as well as listing new results from 
their lab, Diphyllobothrium sp. was identified from the Roman period site of Mikelauen-Zilo. 
The eggs were found in sediment samples from occupation layers at the site. As mentioned 
previously, the eggs of the lancet liver fluke were also found at Mikelauen-Zilo and published 
separately. Diphyllobothrium sp. were also identified in occupation sediment from Marseille 
(Harter-Lailheugue, 2006), pits from Horbourg-Wihr, and an unknown sample type from 
Metz (Dufour, 2015). This evidence all comes from France.  
 In Israel, Diphyllobothrium sp. was found in sediments from latrines at the site of 
Caesarea Maritima (Harter, 2003). The latrine samples that were taken came from residential 
latrines outside the city centre. 
 Fish tapeworm is acquired by eating raw or undercooked fish. There are four common 
species of fish tapeworm known to infect humans (D. latum, D. nihonkaiense, D. pacificus, 
and D. dendriticum); all are parasites of freshwater fish except for D. pacificus which is found 
in marine fish in S. America and Australia. The common human-infecting species present in 
Europe and the Mediterranean are all acquired from eating freshwater fish. The proportion of 
freshwater and marine fish that contributed to Roman diets likely varied across the Empire. 
We might expect that marine fish were more commonly eaten in the Mediterranean basin 
which may have resulted in fewer infections in these regions. We know that fish was part of 
the Roman diet and was traded extensively in the Roman Empire in the form of garum (fish 
sauce) or salsamentum (salted fish) (Curtis, 1991; Marzano, 2018). Fish in both of these 
preparations is uncooked and could have been a source of infection. Further evidence for fish 
tapeworm in the Roman Empire may allow us to determine if fish tapeworm infection was 
primarily from local fish or widespread trade of preserved fish to areas without regular access 
to freshwater fish. 
2.3.6.3 Zoonotic Trematodes 
Fasciola liver fluke has been found at eight sites from the Roman Empire. These are located 
in Britain, France, and Italy (Figure 15). These samples are a mix of sediment from latrines, 
cesspits, and occupation layer sediment; as such it is difficult to tie any of these eggs 
specifically to human infections as eggs could be from animal faeces that were dumped in 
latrines or contaminated settlement areas. However, if animal faeces were found around 
settlement areas it is likely that cases of pseudoparasitism existed if humans ingested Fasciola 
sp. eggs that contaminated food or water or ate raw liver from sheep or cattle. Similarly, true 
infections could have occurred if aquatic plants carrying the encysted metacercariae were 
eaten, especially from bodies of freshwater near grazing sheep or cattle.  
In Britain, Jones and Hutchison (1991) recovered eggs of a parasite from the genus 
Fasciola, but were unable to determine the species. These eggs came from sediment samples 
taken from the site of Carlisle, however, a mix of animal and human parasites were found in 
these samples so they could not determine if the Fasciola sp. eggs were of human or animal 
origin. Fasciola sp. eggs were also identified in sediment from a cesspit in Leicester (Boyer, 
1999). 
Figure 15: Roman-period sites where Fasciola sp. liver fluke has been found. Sites are 
marked by red dots and placed in the corresponding Roman province. Roman provincial 
boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval Civilizations, 
Harvard University.  
 Most evidence for Fasciola liver fluke in the Roman Empire comes from France. 
Fasciola sp. eggs have been found in pits, latrines, and occupation sediments from Andilly-
en-Bassigny, Horbourg-Wihr, Marseille, Metz, and Reims (Le Bailly et al., 2003b; Harter-
Lailheugue, 2006; Dufour, 2015). However, none of these samples can give convincing 
evidence for human infection with Fasciola sp. though they do indicate that the parasite was 
present in Roman settlements in France and humans were at risk for infection. 
 Fasciola hepatica is a zoonotic disease that occurs when humans are living in close 
proximity to the natural hosts of the parasite including sheep, goats, and cattle (Garcia, 2016: 
499). Infection is typically a result of consumption of contaminated water, or ingestion of 
metacercariae encysted on aquatic plants such as watercress and water chestnuts (Vennervald, 
2018). Therefore, it is especially prevalent in areas where animal faeces are used as a form of 
fertilizer. Today, Fasciola hepatica can be found in most countries around the world. In the 
past, we would expect it would have been most often found in populations living closely with 
herded animals especially sheep. It is known from archaeological and historical evidence that 
sheep and cattle were herded and eaten in Roman Britain and Gaul, both of which could have 
been sources of F. hepatica infection (King, 1999; Cool, 2006). While sheep and goats were 
not always a major source of meat they were kept for wool/hair and cheese (Garnsey, 1999a). 
Even if these animals did not constitute a large portion of the diet, if they were kept in 
proximity to residences they could have posed a risk for zoonotic infection with F. hepatica. 
The lancet liver fluke (Dicrocoelium dendriticum) is a trematode that infects humans 
after ingestion of ants, often accidently when ants are on plants being eaten (Garcia, 
2016:505). The lancet liver fluke has been found at eight Roman sites, located in Britain, 
France, and Israel (Figure 16). Five out of eight of these sites are in France, many of which 
were reported in a review of dicrocoeliosis in the past (Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2010). All 
evidence for Dicrocoelium sp. in France has come from sediment samples from latrines, 
cesspits, or occupation layers. This evidence comes from sites in Beauvais, Horbourg-Wihr, 
Mikelauen-Zilo, Reims, and Troyes (Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2010; Dufour, 2015). 
Figure 16: Roman-period sites where lancet liver fluke (Dicrocoelium sp.) has been found. 
Sites are marked by red dots and placed in the corresponding Roman province. Roman 
provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval 
Civilizations, Harvard University. 
 Aside from France, Dicrocoelium sp. eggs have been found at two sites in Britain. 
Pike (1968) identified eggs of Dicrocoelium sp. in the pit sediments studied from the site of 
Owslebury; these were found alongside the eggs of whipworm and roundworm. Dicrocoelium 
dendriticum eggs were found in ditch sediment from London (1535 Copthall Ave.) (De 
Moulins, 1990). 
  The lancet liver fluke was also found in the bog body of Zweeloo woman from the 
Netherlands (Searcey et al., 2013). However, rather than finding the eggs in the intestinal 
wash, as was the case for whipworm and roundworm, the eggs of the lancet liver fluke were 
found in thin sections of preserved liver tissue, indicating true infection.  
  In Israel, the lancet liver fluke was identified in the samples from the latrine at 
Qumran, alongside whipworm and roundworm (Zias et al., 2006).  
 Apart from Israel, the lancet liver fluke has not yet been found from Roman sites east 
of France which includes most of the Mediterranean basin. However, with only this limited 
amount of data it is difficult to interpret if this is a sampling bias, as relatively more sites have 
been studied in France and Britain, or if the lancet liver fluke was truly absent in other parts 
of the Roman Empire. The lancet liver fluke has been found at Neolithic sites in Germany (Le 
Bailly, 2005), Switzerland (Dommelier-Espejo, 2001), and Spain (Maicher et al., 2017), and 
as far south as Sudan in the Bronze Age (Harter, 2003), which indicates that it was already 
present in these areas before their occupation by the Romans, and quite possibly could have 
persisted throughout the Roman Empire. 
 The geographical distribution of the lancet liver fluke in the Roman period (Figure 16) 
is very similar to Fasciola liver fluke (Figure 15). This may be a result of similar animal hosts 
for these two species and the potential for eggs to be found in human faeces as a result of 
similar cultural practices (e.g. eating liver). 
2.3.6.4 Protozoa 
Protozoa such as Giardia duodenalis and Entamoeba histolytica that are known to cause 
dysentery or severe diarrhoea have also been found in Roman period samples. The cysts of 
these protozoa are smaller than helminth eggs and do not preserve well in archaeological 
samples so are difficult to find using light microscopy. Therefore, they are often detected 
using immunological methods, particularly direct-antigen ELISA, which can detect preserved 
antigens specific to these protozoa in cases where the cysts can longer be visualized.  
Figure 17: Roman-period sites where Giardia duodenalis (red dots) and Entamoeba 
histolytica (blue dots) have been found. Sites are placed in the corresponding Roman 
province. Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and 
Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
 Entamoeba histolytica has been found in six Roman period sites. These samples have 
come from Belgium, France, and Italy. In their review of Entamoeba histolytica in the past, 
Le Bailly and Bouchet (2015) reported detection of E. histolytica using ELISA performed on 
latrine samples taken from the site of Mageroy, Belgium; from sediment taken from the site of 
Roma, Italy; and from samples taken from a pit at the site of Lisses and a latrine at Troyes, 
France. Also in France, Le Bailly and Bouchet (2006) found E. histolytica in cesspit samples 
taken from the site of Lattes. Gonalves et al. (2004) found E. histolytica in cesspit samples 
from the Roman villa La Gramiere.  
 In Israel, Witenberg (1961) reported finding E. histolytica in samples using 
microscopic analysis of coprolites taken from the Nahal-Mishmar Valley. This is an 
exceptional finding because the cysts of these organisms are smaller than helminth eggs and 
do not preserve as well, so are not typically seen with microscopy. No pictures of the protozoa 
were included in the report so its presence cannot be confirmed. Furthermore, the cysts of 
Entamoeba histolytica are indistinguishable from the non-pathogenic Entamoeba dispar using 
microscopy, bringing these results further into question. He also reported finding Giardia 
duodenalis, but again without pictures this finding cannot be confirmed. 
 Currently, there is evidence for Giardia duodenalis from one site in the Roman 
Empire. Sediment samples from layers of a communal latrine at the site of Sagalassos tested 
positive for G. duodenalis using ELISA (Williams et al., 2017). These layers also contained 
roundworm eggs. 
Malaria is an intracellular parasite that must live in the red blood cells of its host in 
order to survive; as such it cannot be detected in human faecal material. The methods used to 
detect the malaria parasite (Plasmodium spp.) are very different from intestinal parasites. 
Pathogen DNA extracted from dental pulp of skeletons excavated from Roman period sites 
has been used to confirm the presence of Plasmodium falciparum infection in a few 
individuals from the Imperial Roman period in Italy. Confirmed cases of Plasmodium 
falciparum come from one individual buried in the cemetery of Vagnari (Marciniak et al., 
2016), one individual from Velia (Marciniak et al. 2016), and one infant from Lugnano 
(Sallares and Gomzi, 2001). 
 Finally, Plasmodium falciparum alongside the protozoa causing toxoplasmosis was 
found in an Egyptian mummy using aDNA analysis of muscle tissue (Khairat et al., 2013). 
When humans are infected with toxoplasmosis, through the ingestion of oocysts or raw 
infected meat, the protozoa proliferate in cells and can remain in inactive form in neural and 
muscle tissue for the entire life of the host. This is usually not an issue for adults but can 
cause severe symptoms in neonates infected in utero and immunocompromised individuals. It 
is not surprising that this is the only case so far identified in the Roman Empire because 
Toxoplasma gondii causes tissue infection and does not release any oocysts in human faeces; 
therefore the only way to diagnose it is by looking at preserved tissue. Furthermore, aDNA 
analysis has not currently been used to study any parasites in the Roman Empire except this 
case of toxoplasmosis and the cases of malaria previously discussed. 
2.3.6.5 Other Helminths (Capillaria sp., Echinococcus sp., Macracanthorhynchus sp., 
Pinworm, Toxocara sp.) 
Capillaria sp. worm has been identified from a few sites in the Roman Empire. These sites 
are mostly concentrated in modern-day France. The eggs have been found at six sites in total, 
five from France and one from Germany (Figure 18).  
 The only convincing evidence for human infection comes from the site of Amiens in 
France where eggs of Capillaria hepatica were identified in the wall of a hydatid cyst from an 
adolescent living sometime during the 3rd4th c. CE (Mowlavi et al., 2014). The eggs 
preserved in a cyst indicate that this individual had a co-infection with Echinococcus 
granulosus (hydatidosis) and Capillaria hepatica.  
 Capillaria sp. eggs were also identified in a number of sediment samples from France. 
These include latrine and pit sediment from Beauvais and Horbourg-Wihr and unknown 
sample types from Autun and Metz (Dufour, 2015). In these cases it is impossible to know if 
eggs were from humans infected with Capillaria or if the eggs were from infected rodents 
whose faeces were present in these samples. Similarly, eggs could be found in human faeces 
in the absence of true infection in cases of pseudoparasitism. 
Figure 18: Roman-period sites where Capillaria sp. has been identified. Sites are marked by 
red dots and placed in the corresponding Roman province. Roman provincial boundaries (117 
CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
 Capillaria sp. eggs were also found at one site in Germany. These eggs were found in 
pit sediment from the site of Belginum (Dittmar et al., 2002). These were found alongside 
Taenia sp. and roundworm, two species that were likely from human infections.  
Other intestinal helminths that have been found from Roman period samples are 
hydatid disease (Echinococcus granulosus), pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis), and 
Toxocara sp. These parasites have only been found in one or two archaeological samples in 
the Roman Empire thus far.  
Figure 19: Roman-period sites where Echinococcus sp., pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis), 
Maracanthorhynchus sp., or Toxocara sp. have been identified. Sites are placed in the 
corresponding Roman province. Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital 
Atlas of Roman and Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
 Hydatid disease was identified in a Roman period burial from Jerusalem (Zias and 
Mumcuoglu, 1991). The authors proposed that two calcified cysts found in the skeletonized 
remains of an adult were from Echinococcus granulosus, based on their size and the 
corresponding collapsed vertebrae. However, due to the infrequency with which hydatid 
disease causes vertebral collapse in adults and the large number of other conditions that can 
result in vertebral collapse this finding is by no means conclusive. As mentioned previously, 
Mowlavi and colleagues (2014) identified two calcified cysts from the thoraco-abdominal 
cavity of a Roman period burial in Amiens, France as hydatid cysts. Hydatid cysts were also 
identified in Britain from the skeleton of a female (~45 years old) from the site of Orton 
Longueville (Wells and Dalls, 1976). 
 Pinworm has been found in a coprolite from an Egyptian mummy dated to the Roman 
period (Horne, 2002), and a sediment sample from a latrine at the site of Qumran, Israel (Zias 
et al., 2006). There are few cases of pinworm in the Old World as a whole, likely due to the 
delicate nature of the eggs. It has also been found in Germany (Herrmann, 1985), Greenland 
(Reinhard et al., 2016), Czech Republic (Bartoov et al., 2011), Iran (Nezamabadi et al., 
2013), Spain (Maicher et al., 2017), and Sudan (Harter, 2003) in other time periods. Recent 
ancient DNA analysis has found evidence for pinworm in the absence of preserved eggs from 
Denmark (11th c. CE) and the Netherlands (14th19th c. CE) (Se et al., 2018). Today, 
pinworm is the most common helminth infection in Western Europe and it is probable that the 
prevalence was also quite high in the past even though it is not always found in archaeological 
samples. One reason for the lack of evidence for pinworm in the past is due to the delicate 
nature of pinworm eggs; pinworm eggs have a very thin eggshell and are thus more 
susceptible to degradation especially in poor soil conditions (Bouchet et al., 2003).   
 Macracanthorhynchus sp. eggs were identified in sediment samples from three sites in 
Roman France. These were sediment samples from pits, latrines, ditches, and occupation 
layers from the sites of Autun, Beauvais, and Horbourg-Wihr (Dufour, 2015). Though 
Macracanthorhynchus sp. can cause infection in humans it is much more common in animals 
(Garcia, 2016), and the sample types studied do not allow for us to definitively say if these 
eggs came from the faeces of humans or other animals. Toxocara sp. eggs were also reported 
by Dufour (2015) in samples from the site of Metz. 
2.3.7 Parasites in the Medieval Period 
Currently, there is a larger amount of comparative evidence for parasites in Europe, the 
Middle East, and North Africa after the Roman period compared to time periods prior to the 
Roman period. Again, the Medieval period is defined differently depending on the region. For 
this work I have included sites identified as Medieval by authors and sites dated between the 
end of the Roman period up until the early modern period, which starts after the 15th c. CE in 
Europe and the Middle East. A minimum of 18 taxa have been found in Medieval period 
Europe, Middle East and North Africa. These include Capillaria sp., Dicrocoelium sp. liver 
fluke, Echinococcus sp., Entamoeba histolytica, Fasciola sp. liver fluke, fish tapeworm, 
Giardia duodenalis, Hymenolepis sp., Leishmania donovani, pinworm, roundworm, 
Schistosoma haematobium, Schistosoma mansoni, Taenia sp., Taenia saginata, Toxocara sp., 
and whipworm. Similar to the Roman period, archaeological sites from Britain and France 
have been the most extensively studied for parasites in the Medieval period but evidence also 
comes from Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Germany, Israel, Italy, Jordan, 
Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sudan, and Switzerland. 
 The most common helminths found in the Medieval period are roundworm (Ascaris 
sp.) and whipworm (Trichuris sp.) followed by the lancet liver fluke (Dicrocoelium sp.), 
beef/pork tapeworm (Taenia sp.), fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.), and Fasciola liver 
fluke. The protozoa Entamoeba histolytica and Giardia duodenalis have also been found. 
Other less common parasites that have been found include Echinococcus sp., Hymenolepis 
sp., leishmaniasis, pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis), schistosomiasis, and Toxocara sp. 
Table 9: Parasites found at Medieval period sites. 
Country Site Date Parasites 
Sample 
Type Citation 
Austria Am Hof, Wien Medieval Ascaris lumbricoides Sewer Auer and 
Aspck, 2014 
Belgium Namur 9th15th c. 
Ascaris sp.,  
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Entamoeba histolytica, 
Fasciola hepatica,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Cesspit Gonalves et al., 
2004; da Rocha 
et al., 2006 
 Nivelles 10th13th c. 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura  
Coprolites Rcz et al., 2015 
 Malines 
Prison 
14th c. CE Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Cesspits Troubleyn et al., 
 Bruges 14th15th c. 
Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Cesspits Deforce et al., 
 Raversijde 16th c. CE Ascaris sp., 
Capillaria sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Latrines Fernandes et al., 
Britain London 600871 CE Ascaris sp.,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pit Tibensky and 
Sidell, 2003 
 Lincoln, 
Waterside NW 
Woolworths 
10th13th c. 
Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Occupation 
sediment 
Carrott et al., 
 York (Bedern) 10th14th c. 
Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Latrine Hall et al., 1983 
 York, 1622 
Coppergate 
10th14th c. 
Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Pit Hall et al., 1983 
 York 1000 CE Ascaris sp.,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Coprolite Flammer et al., 
 Winchester 11th12th c. 
Ascaris sp.,  
Dicrocoelium dendriticum,  
Trichuris sp. 
Pit Taylor, 1955; 
Pike and Biddle, 
 London, 15
35 Copthall 
11th12th c. 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Ditch de Moulins, 
 Finzels Reach, 
Bristol 
11501700 
Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Waste 
deposit 
Flammer et al., 
 Southampton 13th14th c. 
Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Cesspit Pike, 1975 
 York 14th16th c. 
Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Latrine Jones and 
Nicholson, 1988 
 Worcester 15th c. CE Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Latrine Greig, 1981 
 King Richard 
1485 CE Ascaris lumbricoides Pelvic soil Mitchell et al., 
 Leicester Medieval Ascaris sp.,  
Fasciola sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Cesspit Boyer, 1999 
 London, 
Hibernia 
Wharf 
Medieval Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Diphyllobothrium latum, 
Fasciola hepatica,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pit Rouffignac, 
Cyprus Saranda 
Kolones 
11911222 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Anastasiou and 
Mitchell, 2013 
Czech 
Republic 
Breclav-
Pohansko 
850950 CE Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Flammer et al., 
 Chrudim 13th18th c. 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Diphyllobothrium latum, 
Enterobius vermicularis, 
Fasciola hepatica,  
Giardia duodenalis, 
Hymenolepis nana, 
Toxocara canis,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Cesspit Bartoov et al., 
France Collge de 
France 
4th5th c. CE Dicrocoelium sp. Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010 
 Mikelauen-
10th14th c. 
Dicrocoelium sp. Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010 
 Charavine 11th c. CE Dicrocoelium sp. Coprolite Bouchet et al., 
 Pineuilh 11th13th c. 
Entamoeba histolytica, 
Giardia duodenalis 
Occupation 
sediment 
Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2006; 
Le Bailly et al., 
 Grand Louvre, 
Paris 
11th16th c. 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Bouchet, 1995 
 Ile de la Cit 12th15th c. 
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, 
Fasciola hepatica,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris sp. 
Cesspit Bouchet et al., 
 Epinal 13th c. CE Dicrocoelium sp. Latrine Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010 
 Villiers-le-Bel 14th c. CE Dicrocoelium sp., 
Entamoeba histolytica 
sediment 
Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010; 
Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2015 
 Montbliard 14501550 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium latum, 
Schistosoma haematobium, 
Schistosoma mansoni, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Bouchet and 
Paicheler, 1995; 
Gonalves et al., 
2003; Bouchet 
et al., 2002; Le 
Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010 
 Rue Cardinal 
Lemoine, 
Paris 
15th c. CE Dicrocoelium sp. Latrine Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2010 
 Rigny 15th16th c. 
Ascaris sp.,  
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Latrine Bouchet et al., 
1995b 
 Marly-le-Roy 16801715 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Fasciola hepatica,  
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Bouchet et al., 
 Brouage 17th c. CE Entamoeba histolytica Latrine Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2015 
Germany Lbeck 11001650 
Ascaris sp., 
Diphyllobothrium latum, 
Taenia saginata,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Flammer et al., 
 Ellwangen-
Jagst 
14001600 
Ascaris sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Flammer et al., 
Israel Acre 11901291 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Diphyllobothrium latum,  
Entamoeba histolytica, 
Giardia duodenalis, 
Taenia sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Mitchell and 
Tepper, 2007; 
Mitchell et al., 
2008; Mitchell 
et al., 2011 
 Jerusalem 14501550 
Ascaris lumbricoides,  
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Entamoeba histolytica, 
Giardia duodenalis, 
Taenia sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Coprolites 
and cesspit 
Yeh et al., 2015 
Italy Piazza 
Garibaldi 
10th11th c. 
Ascaris sp., 
Capillaria sp., 
Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Taenia/Echinococcus sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Cesspit Bosi et al., 
2011; 
Florenzano et 
al., 2012 
Jordan Gerasa 650750 CE Ascaris lumbricoides Latrine Se et al., 2018 
Netherlands Utrecht 13th14th c. 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Cesspit Boersema and 
Jansen, 1975 
 Kampen 13501425 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Enterobius vermicularis, 
Taenia sp., 
Toxocara sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Latrine Se et al., 2018 
Portugal Santarm 9th-12th c. 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Cunha et al., 
 Mrtola 12th13th c. 
Ascaris sp. Latrine Knorr et al., 
Spain Crdoba 10th11th c. 
Ascaris sp. Latrine Knorr et al., 
 Collegiate-
Basilica of St. 
Isidoro 
10th13th c. 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Mummy Hidalgo-
Argello et al., 
Sudan Sedeinga 3001500 
Ascaris lumbricoides, 
Enterobius vermicularis, 
Hymenolepis nana, 
Schistosoma sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Harter, 2003 
 Wadi Halfa 350550 CE Schistosoma mansoni Mummy Miller et al., 
 Kulubnarti 5501500 
Leishmania donovani, 
Schistosoma mansoni 
Mummy Zink et al., 
2006; Hibbs et 
al., 2011 
 Sai Island 1500 CE Hymenolepis sp.,  
Trichuris trichiura 
Pelvic soil Harter, 2003 
Switzerland Chevenez 7th9th c. CE Entamoeba histolytica, 
Giardia duodenalis 
Pelvic soil Le Bailly, 2005; 
Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2006 
 Mummy Medieval Echinococcus granulosus Mummy Baud and 
Kramer, 1991 
Figure 20: Parasites found at Medieval period sites, mapped onto modern-day countries. 
As=Ascaris, Ca=Capillaria, Dc=Dicrocoelium, Dp=Diphyllobothrium, Ec=Echinococcus, 
Eh=Entamoeba histolytica, Ev=Enterobius vermicularis, Fa=Fasciola, Gi=Giardia, 
Hy=Hymenolepis, Le=Leishmania, Sc=Schistosoma, T/E=Taenia/Echinococcus, Ta=Taenia, 
Tr=Trichuris, Tx=Toxocara. 
2.3.7.1 Faecal-Oral Helminths 
Roundworm and whipworm are the most common parasites found in the Medieval period. 
Roundworm has been identified at 40 sites and whipworm has been identified at 37 sites in 
Medieval Europe, Middle East and North Africa. Roundworm has been found in every 
country that has been studied except for Switzerland. In Austria, human roundworm was 
found in a sewer at the site of Am Hof, Wien (Auer and Aspck, 2014). In Belgium, 
roundworm eggs were identified in cesspits and latrines from Namur, Malines prison, Bruges, 
Raversijde, and in coprolites from Nivelles (Gonalves et al., 2003; Rcz et al., 2013).  
 At the end of the 20th century, sediment samples taken from pits or ditches at 
Medieval period sites in Britain were commonly studied for botanical remains and parasites 
as part of the environmental analysis of archaeological excavations. For many of these, the 
eggs could not be confirmed to be from human parasites. Roundworm eggs were identified in 
ditches or pit sediments from three sites in London (Rouffignac, 1985; de Moulins, 1990; 
Tibensky and Sidell, 2003), one in York (Hall et al., 1983), and in Winchester (Taylor, 1955). 
They have also been found in cesspit sediments and latrines from two sites in York (Hall et 
al., 1983; Jones and Nicholson, 1988), one in Southampton (Pike, 1975), in Worcester (Greig, 
1981), and in Leicester (Boyer, 1999). Using aDNA Flammer and colleagues (2018) 
identified Ascaris sp. in waste deposits from Bristol and coprolites from York. Finally, the 
only pelvic soil samples studied in Medieval Britain are from King Richard III and they were 
found to contain roundworm eggs (Mitchell et al., 2013). 
 In Cyprus, human roundworm was found in a latrine from the site of Saranda Kolones 
(Anastasiou and Mitchell, 2013). In the Czech Republic, human roundworm was reported 
from a cesspit in Chrudim (Bartoov et al., 2011) and from pelvic soil at Breclav-Pohansko, 
a finding that was confirmed with aDNA studies (Flammer et al., 2018). 
 In France, human roundworm was identified in latrine samples spanning the 11th18th 
centuries CE. These samples come from three sites including the Grand Louvre in Paris, 
Marly-le-Roy, Montbliard, and Rigny (Bouchet, 1995; Bouchet et al., 1995b; Bouchet et al., 
1998; Gonalves et al., 2003). 
 Ancient DNA analysis also confirmed the presence of roundworm in a latrine from 
Lbeck in Germany and in pelvic soil samples from the site of Ellwangen-Jagst in Germany 
(Flammer et al., 2018). Microscopic analysis of sediment samples from Crusader latrines in 
Acre, Israel revealed eggs of roundworm (Mitchell and Tepper, 2007). Roundworm eggs were 
also found in coprolites and latrine sediment from Mamluk period Jerusalem (Yeh et al., 
2015). 
 In Italy, roundworm eggs have been found in cesspits that were presumed to be used 
by humans excavated in Piazza Garibaldi, Parma (Bosi et al., 2011; Florenzano et al., 2012). 
 The only paleoparasitological data from Jordan is from a latrine (650750 CE) in 
Gerasa where only roundworm eggs were found using aDNA analysis (Se et al., 2018). 
 In the Netherlands, roundworm has been found in cesspits and latrines from two sites 
which date between the 13th15th c. CE (Boersema and Jansen, 1975; Se et al., 2018). 
 On the Iberian peninsula, roundworm has also been found in pelvic soil from Portugal 
(Cunha et al., 2017) and a mummy from Spain (Hidalgo-Argello et al., 2003). It was also 
recently found in latrines from Crdoba in Spain and Mrtola in Portugal (Knorr et al., 2019). 
 Finally, in Sudan roundworm was been found in pelvic soil collected from burials 
dating from 3001500 CE from the site of Sedeinga (Harter, 2003). 
Whipworm has been found in samples from 37 sites in Medieval Europe, Middle East, 
and North Africa. Whipworm is found alongside roundworm in 95% of sites where 
whipworm has been found. There are only two sites in the Medieval period where whipworm 
is found without roundworm. These are from a cesspit at Ile de la Cit, France and pelvic soil 
studied from Sai Island, Sudan. 
 Similarly there are only five sites where roundworm is found in the absence of 
whipworm these are the sewer from An Hof Wien in Austria, the pelvic soil from King 
Richard III, the latrines from Mrtola in Portugal, the latrines from Crdoba in Spain, and the 
latrine from Gerasa in Jordan. As such I will not describe all the evidence for whipworm in 
the Medieval period as they have already been described in the evidence for roundworm. 
2.3.7.2 Zoonotic Cestodes 
In the Medieval period Taenia spp. eggs have been found in Belgium, Britain, France, 
Germany, Israel, and the Netherlands. In addition, eggs identified as Taenia or Echinococcus 
sp. have been found in Italy. 
 In Belgium, Taenia eggs were found alongside roundworm and whipworm in the 
latrine at Namur (da Rocha et al., 2006). In Britain, they were found in pit sediments from 
two sites in Medieval London (Rouffignac, 1985; Tibensky and Sidell, 2003). They were also 
found in a coprolite from York (Flammer et al., 2018). In France, they were found in cesspit 
samples from Ile de la Cit, Paris and a latrine at Marly-le-Roy (Bouchet et al., 1989; Bouchet 
et al., 1998). In Germany, aDNA analysis was used to identify beef tapeworm (Taenia 
saginata) in a latrine from the site of Lbeck. In Israel, Taenia sp. eggs were found in a 
latrine at Acre (Mitchell and Tepper, 2007) and coprolites from a Mamluk period latrine in 
Jerusalem (Yeh et al., 2015). In the Netherlands, eggs from Taenia sp. were found in a latrine 
at Kampen, and their presence was confirmed by aDNA analysis, though this did not yield a 
species-level identification (Se et al., 2018). 
Finally, in Italy eggs that were either Echinococcus sp. or Taenia sp. were found in a 
cesspit alongside roundworm and whipworm (Florenzano et al., 2012). In most cases, unless 
aDNA analysis was done, it was not possible to distinguish between pork and beef tapeworm 
as the eggs are identical. 
Fish tapeworm has been found at nine Medieval period sites, three more than the 
Roman period. These sites are located in Belgium, Britain, the Czech Republic, France, 
Germany, Israel, Italy, and the Netherlands. In the Roman period fish tapeworm has only been 
found in Britain, France, and Israel.  
 In Belgium, Diphyllobothrium sp. eggs were found in the cesspit at Namur. In Britain, 
eggs identified as Diphyllobothrium latum came from pit sediments in Medieval London 
(Rouffignac, 1985). Diphyllobothrium latum was also identified in 13th18th c. CE cesspits 
from Chrudim, Czech Republic (Bartoov et al., 2011), latrine samples from Montbliard, 
France (Gonalves et al., 2003), and both a latrine and cesspit from Acre in Israel (Mitchell et 
al., 2008; Mitchell et al., 2011). Diphyllobothrium sp. eggs were also identified in a coprolite 
from Mamluk period Jerusalem (Yeh et al., 2015) and a cesspit in Italy (Florenzano et al., 
2012). 
 However, the only conclusive evidence for a species-level diagnosis of fish tapeworm 
comes from latrine samples from Lbeck in Germany that were analysed using aDNA 
(Flammer et al., 2018). D. latum has typically been considered the most, if not only, relevant 
Diphyllobothrium species in Europe (Garcia, 2016). Due to difficulties in distinguishing the 
eggs based on morphology, most previous species-level diagnoses were based on the known 
geographical distribution of the eggs, and eggs found in human contexts were often assumed 
to be D. latum. However, another species known to be present in Europe is D. dendriticum 
which cannot be easily distinguished from D. latum based on morphology of the eggs though 
D. dendriticum eggs tend to be slightly smaller (Letinov et al., 2016). Other work has 
shown that subtle differences in surface texture and size may be used to differentiate some 
species of Diphyllobothrium (Le Bailly et al., 2005). Though the latrine samples were studied 
using aDNA, Se and colleagues (2018) were unable to determine the species of 
Diphyllobothrium present in samples from Kampen. 
2.3.7.3 Zoonotic Trematodes 
In the Medieval period the lancet liver fluke (Dicrocoelium sp.) has only been found at 12 
sites, the majority of which are in France. However, it has also been found in Britain and 
Italy.  
 In Britain, the lancet liver fluke has been found in two samples from Winchester, 
including cesspits and occupation layer sediments (Taylor, 1955; Pike and Biddle, 1966). 
 In France, there is a relatively large collection of literature identifying the lancet liver 
fluke in the Medieval period. Eggs were recovered from occupation layer sediments from 
Collge de France (Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2010). Then in occupation layer sediments from 
Mikelauen-Zilo (Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2010), coprolites from Charavine, and latrine 
sediments from the Grand Louvre, Paris (Bouchet, 1995). From the 12th16th c. CE, evidence 
comes from cesspits at Ile de la Cit, Paris, samples taken from tombs at Villiers-le-Bel, and 
latrine samples from Epinal, Rigny, Montbliard, and Rue Cardinal Lemoine, Paris (Bouchet 
et al., 1989; Bouchet et al., 1995b; Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2010). Though there are many 
species of Dicrocoelium, which can be difficult to differentiate on microscopy, the only 
species which is known to be present in Europe is Dicrocoelium dendriticum. As Le Bailly 
and Bouchet (2010) pointed out in their review of dicrocoeliosis, the geographic distributions 
of the different species are such that most eggs of Dicrocoelium found in past populations in 
Europe should be D. dendriticum. 
 The only other evidence for lancet liver fluke comes from refuse pits in Piazza 
Garibaldi, Parma, Italy (Florenzano et al., 2012). These refuse pits contained different 
helminth eggs compared to the cesspit from the site which contained eggs from Taenia or 
Echinococcus sp., roundworm, whipworm. It is possible that the Dicrocoelium sp. eggs in this 
pit were from infected animals or animal refuse thrown in the pit. As Dicrocoelium is a 
common parasite of sheep, deer, and other animals this seems more likely than true human 
infection which is acquired from ingestion of ants or false parasitism if liver of an infected 
animal is eaten. 
Fasciola liver fluke has been identified in samples from six different sites in Medieval 
period Europe, Middle East, and North Africa. These sites are located in Belgium, Britain, the 
Czech Republic, and France. There is no evidence for Fasciola liver fluke in Medieval Italy 
though it was found there during the Roman period; in fact the only evidence for Fasciola sp. 
in Italy is from the cores taken from Portus whose dates span the Roman period (Dufour, 
2015). 
 The evidence for Fasciola liver fluke in the Medieval period comes from latrine 
sediments taken from the site of Namur, Belgium (da Rocha et al., 2006), and cesspit 
sediment from Chrudim, Czech Republic (Bartoov et al., 2011). In Britain, Fasciola liver 
fluke was found in pit sediments from London (Rouffignac, 1985), and cesspit sediments 
from Medieval period Leicester (Boyer, 1999). In France, it was found in cesspit sediments 
from Ile de la Cit, Paris and latrine sediments from Marly-le-Roy (Bouchet et al., 1989; 
Bouchet et al., 1998). 
2.3.7.4 Protozoa (Entamoeba histolytica and Giardia duodenalis) 
Entamoeba histolytica and Giardia duodenalis, two of the most common protozoa causing 
severe diarrhoea, have been found in the Medieval period. The earliest evidence for Giardia 
duodenalis in areas that were once part of the Roman Empire comes from Roman-period 
Turkey at the site of Sagalassos (Williams et al., 2017). In the Medieval period, we have more 
extensive evidence for Giardia duodenalis than in any other time period, from ELISA 
analyses. Positive results came from five sites in the Czech Republic, France, Israel, and 
Switzerland (Gonalves et al., 2002; Le Bailly, 2005; Le Bailly et al., 2008; Mitchell et al., 
2008; Bartoov et al., 2011). Similarly, Entamoeba histolytica has been found at all of these 
sites as well except Chrudim in the Czech Republic. 
 In addition, Entamoeba histolytica has been found in the absence of Giardia 
duodenalis in Brouage and Villiers-le-Bel in France and Namur in Belgium. Positive results 
have come from a mix of sample types. Most are from cesspits or latrines, but both protozoa 
were found in occupation layer sediment from Pineuilh, France; Entamoeba histolytica was 
found in sediment from a tomb at Villiers-le-Bel, France; and both protozoa were found in 
pelvic soil from Chevenez in Switzerland. 
2.3.7.5 Other Helminths (Echinococcus sp., Hymenolepis sp., Leishmaniasis, Pinworm, 
Schistosomiasis, Toxocara sp.) 
Evidence for Echinococcus granulosus, or hydatid disease, has been found at one Medieval 
period site in Switzerland (Baud and Kramar, 1991). A calcified hydatid cyst was found with 
the skeletal remains of a child.   
The dwarf tapeworm, Hymenolepis sp., has been found at Chrudim, Czech Republic 
(Bartoov et al., 2011) as well as Sedeinga and Sai Island, Sudan (Harter, 2003). In Sudan 
these eggs were found in pelvic soil samples whereas evidence from the Czech Republic is 
from a cesspit. There is no previous evidence for Hymenolepis sp. in the Roman period or 
earlier periods in Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa. 
 Pinworm has been found at three sites in the Medieval period. The first is from cesspit 
samples from the site of Chrudim in the Czech Republic, the second is from pelvic soil from 
burials at Sedeinga in the Sudan, and the third from a latrine at Kampen in the Netherlands 
(Harter, 2003; Bartoov et al., 2011; Se et al., 2018). In the Roman period the only evidence 
for pinworm came from Egypt and Israel. 
 Toxocara canis, commonly called the dog roundworm, was identified in 13th18th c. 
CE cesspits from Chrudim, Czech Republic (Bartoov et al., 2011). Eggs from Toxocara sp. 
were also found in two latrines from Kampen, Netherlands though DNA could be not be 
found in the samples. Toxocara canis can infect humans if embryonated eggs are ingested 
causing larva migrans, a condition where the worm migrates through the tissues causing 
irritation. However, it is more likely that the eggs found were from animal faeces deposited in 
the latrines or were a result of false parasitism where the eggs were ingested accidentally and 
passed unchanged through the intestinal tract. 
 Evidence for schistosomiasis in the Medieval period comes from France and Sudan. S. 
haematobium and S. mansoni have been found at Montbliard, France (Bouchet and 
Paicheler, 1995; Bouchet et al., 2002). The authors suggested that the presence of schistosome 
eggs in France may have been the result of movement of African slaves into France, as these 
parasites are typically found in Africa. S. mansoni has also been found in mummies from 
Sudan, at the sites of Kulubnarti and Wadi Halfa (Miller et al., 1992; Hibbs et al., 2011). Eggs 
identified to the genus Schistosoma but of an unknown species were found in pelvic soil from 
burials at Sedeinga, Sudan (Harter, 2003). 
 In addition to these helminths, aDNA analysis confirmed the presence of the protozoa 
Leishmania donovani, which commonly causes visceral leishmaniasis, in mummies from 
Kulubnarti, Sudan dated to 5501500 CE (Zink et al., 2006). 
2.4 Integrating the Evidence 
As has been seen, there have been quite a few studies undertaken to identify parasites in 
Neolithic Europe and the Middle East which gives us good evidence to compare to parasites 
found in the Roman period. However, relatively few studies have been performed in Iron Age 
and Bronze Age Europe. By far, the Medieval period has the most data currently which 
should allow for a better understanding of how parasitic infection may have changed after the 
Roman period. We also have very little evidence for parasites in the Middle East and North 
Africa compared to Europe from all time periods. Based on climate differences in these areas, 
and the evidence for parasites that we do have, there are a variety of species endemic in these 
regions that are not seen farther north in Europe. Though there appears to be quite a bit of 
evidence for parasites in the Roman period, when we start to look at the distribution of any 
one species there is not enough information from all countries to make meaningful 
conclusions and, therefore additional studies on samples from all countries and especially 
understudied regions are required for more meaningful conclusions. 
Currently, there is very little evidence for parasitic infection at the individual level, as 
most studies in all of these time periods have focused on latrines, cesspits, or occupation layer 
sediments. Finding parasite eggs in latrines, cesspits, and occupation layer sediments can give 
us a good indication of taxa present at a population level but limits our understanding of how 
they were distributed in the community, for example in different age groups. Studying pelvic 
soil samples will allow us to further understand how parasite infections were distributed 
amongst individuals within a population. 
 When we look at species diversity through time, the published data to date suggest 
that species diversity was higher in Neolithic sites, with some sites having evidence for as 
many as nine different species. Based on what is known about the way of life in a Neolithic 
settlement, where population size was much smaller and the subsistence relied on farming or 
herding, we may expect to see more zoonotic parasites acquired from individuals living in 
close proximity to animals and still relying on wild animals as a food source. With larger 
population sizes and more densely populated cities in the Roman period, it appears that we are 
beginning to see an increase in species associated with poor sanitation or faecal contamination 
of food and water. Though the Romans had latrines, sewers, bathhouses, and some form of 
organized waste disposal it appears that this was not enough to prevent the spread of parasitic 
infection. Further evidence from a wider range of sites in the Roman Empire will allow us to 
look for patterns of infection in different areas of the empire and gain more information about 
how the prevalence of individual parasite species changed over this time period. We have a 
large body of evidence from the Medieval period to use as a comparison. 
3 Methods 
Two main methods were used to analyse all samples for preserved parasite eggs. The first is 
microscopic analysis and the second is enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). 
Microscopic analysis is used to look for eggs of intestinal helminths and ELISA is used to 
look for smaller protozoal parasites that are typically found in their inactive cyst form outside 
their host. Before either type of analysis can be performed the samples need to be prepared 
using rehydration and disaggregation and microsieving to concentrate any eggs or cysts 
present in the sediment. For an overview of the methods used see Figure 21. 
Figure 21: Overview of methods used with sample preparation depicted on the top and 
microscopy or ELISA on the bottom. 
3.1 Sample Preparation 
Rehydration and disaggregation was used to separate out the particles of interest. 
Disaggregation of the sample ensures that any parasite eggs that may be trapped in larger 
pieces of sediment are released into the liquid suspension. For each sample, a 0.2 g subsample 
was taken. This subsample was then disaggregated with 0.5% trisodium phosphate until all 
material was suspended in the liquid and soluble material was dissolved. The 0.2 g subsample 
was placed in a 15 mL test tube and ~8 mL of 0.5% trisodium phosphate was added. The 
sample was left in trisodium phosphate for a minimum of 2 hours or until all material was 
disaggregated, with sand and other insoluble particulates floating freely in the liquid 
suspension. The samples were periodically shaken or mixed with a vortex every 30 minutes to 
ensure that all material was broken up.   
 Trisodium phosphate was used for the disaggregation process because it is well 
supported in the literature as an effective solvent to rehydrate and disaggregate various 
archaeological samples for parasite egg analysis without damaging parasite eggs (Callen and 
Cameron, 1960; Reinhard et al., 1986; Bouchet et al., 2001a; Bouchet et al., 2003; Fugassa et 
al., 2006). There is evidence that distilled water is equally as effective for disaggregation of 
latrine soil samples (Anastasiou and Mitchell, 2013b). In their study, Anastasiou and Mitchell 
did not find any substantial loss of taxa identified when they used distilled water for 
disaggregation. However, it is possible that a dilute salt solution like trisodium phosphate may 
still be better for rehydrating certain types of archaeological material such as dried coprolites, 
which were not tested in this study. The use of 0.5% trisodium phosphate for rehydration of 
palaeoparasitology samples was established by Callen and Cameron (1960) to allow them to 
identify parasites in coprolites from Peru. It has been shown to be effective for all sample 
types, and is still the current standard in the field. The use of trisodium phosphate was used 
for disaggregation of the samples studied in this dissertation as it has been shown to be 
equally effective as water and it is more widely accepted in the field. 
 For samples that do not disaggregate with trisodium phosphate (e.g. heavily 
mineralized material), addition of acids and bases can aid in visualization of parasite eggs by 
releasing these eggs from concretions. Dufour and Le Bailly (2013) evaluated the use of 
different acids and bases in preparing archaeological samples for paleoparasitological 
analysis. Acids, such as dilute hydrochloric acid, can be added to sediments to break down 
carbonates (Warnock and Reinhard, 1992). In samples that are heavily mineralized like 
concretions the addition of the acid can be helpful to release parasite eggs from this solid 
mass of material. Similarly, other acids and bases like sodium hydroxide and hydrofluoric 
acid can be added to break down organic and plant material if this material is unusually dense 
and obstructs parasite eggs from view (Dufour and Le Bailly, 2013). It should be noted that 
the addition of strong acids or bases has been shown to decrease the number of species of 
parasites identified so should only be used when analysis cannot proceed effectively without 
them (Dufour and Le Bailly, 2013). The only samples studied here that required the use of 
additional chemicals for disaggregation were the concretions from the private latrine at 
Ephesus and the coprolite from Viminacium. These samples would not disaggregate with 
trisodium phosphate so dilute hydrochloric acid was added. It is expected that dilute acids 
have less of an effect on parasite eggs than the strong acids tested by Dufour and Le Bailly 
(2013). 
 In the two cases where it was needed, dilute hydrochloric acid (~10%) was added 
dropwise to the subsample until the reaction started, evident by bubbling as CO2 gas was 
released from the breakdown of carbonates. HCl was continuously added to keep the reaction 
going until the material had completely broken up. The sample was centrifuged at 4,000 rpm 
for 5 minutes, the supernatant removed and the 15 mL tube filled with distilled water, mixed 
and recentrifuged. The supernatant from the addition of distilled water was removed and the 
tube refilled with distilled water for a total of five washes to ensure that the sample was 
brought back to a neutral pH. 
After samples were fully disaggregated they were then passed through a set of three 
microsieves. The purpose of the microsieves is to separate out the particles that are similar in 
size to parasite eggs. This approach is also used by labs in France (Bouchet et al., 2001a; 
Dufour and Le Bailly, 2013). In the United States, labs use a single mesh measuring 300 m 
and sedimentation by centrifugation to concentrate parasite eggs (Reinhard and Urban, 2003; 
Camacho et al., 2018). For processing of the samples studied here, a stack of three sieves with 
a catchment container at the bottom was used. The sieves have mesh sizes of 300 m, 160 
m, followed by 20 m. The disaggregated sample was poured onto the top (300 m) sieve 
and the material was thoroughly washed through with distilled water. The material that was 
deposited on the 160 m sieve was also washed through with distilled water, and the material 
that remained on the top of the 20 m sieve was collected and put into a 15 mL test tube. Any 
parasite eggs present in the samples should fall between the 20 m and the 160 m sieves, as 
the typical size range of human intestinal helminth eggs in this part of the world is 20-140 m 
(Garcia, 2016). Protozoal cysts are often smaller than 20 m but these can be detected using 
ELISA, as will be discussed later. The collected material was then centrifuged at 4,000 rpm 
for 5 minutes. Centrifuging results in the remaining sample particles, and any parasite eggs 
present, being separated from solution to the bottom of the test tube and then the clear 
supernatant can be removed from on top of this pellet. The remaining material was then 
processed to visualize any parasite eggs using microscopy. 
To ensure no contamination between samples, sieves were cleaned between each use. 
The sieves were placed in an ultrasonic bath with DECON 90 (a detergent) for 30 minutes, 
then thoroughly rinsed and dried before being used for the next sample. All other materials 
used were consumable, including plastic weigh boats, centrifuge tubes, and single use plastic 
pipettes. 
3.2 Microscopy 
Once the archaeological sample was disaggregated and centrifuged, it was mixed with 
glycerol and placed on microscope slides to be visualized. Parasite eggs were then identified 
based on morphological characteristics (Table 10). Parasitology reference manuals and 
previously published palaeoparasitological results were used as an aid for egg identification 
(World Health Organization, 1994; Ash and Orihel, 2015; Garcia, 2016). The size of helminth 
eggs is relatively constant and usually only varies from 5 to 20 m between eggs of the same 
species (Garcia, 2016). The key features used to diagnose parasite eggs are size, shape, 
symmetry, uniform egg shell thickness, colour, and any unique features (e.g. polar plugs or 
opercula). Other material that is often present in archaeological samples that can be difficult 
to distinguish from parasite eggs are fungal spores, pollen, and plant material. However, in 
most cases it should be possible to distinguish parasite eggs from other material if close 
attention is paid to the size and morphology of the eggs.  
 In some cases presence or absence of certain morphological features and shape of eggs 
can hint at the preservation of the eggs. For example numerous eggs with preserved polar 
plugs, in the case of Trichuris sp. and Capillaria sp. eggs, is often found in sites with good 
preservation (Morrow et al., 2014; Rcz et al., 2015). Similarly presence of mamillated coats 
on Ascaris sp. eggs is often found in areas with good preservation though this is not always 
the case (Morrow et al., 2016); and modern eggs have been shown to lose their mamillated 
coats after exposure to different chemicals (Oh et al, 2016). 
Table 10: Characteristics used to identify common helminth eggs found in archaeological 
sediments in Europe. 
Parasite Egg Dimensions Characteristic morphological features 
Ascaris 
lumbricoides 
(roundworm) 
Fertile 
Length: 5575 m 
Width: 3550 m 
Infertile 
Length: 8595 m 
Width: 4347 m 
Round to oval shape 
Thick shell 
Smooth surface or covered in mamillations 
(typically yellow to brown in colour) 
Capillaria sp. Length: 3667 m 
Width: 3045 m 
(size ranges are more 
narrow for specific 
species) 
Thick shell 
Two opposing polar plugs with shallow 
prominences 
Reticulated or striated shell surface 
Dicrocoelium 
dendriticum (lancet 
liver fluke) 
Length: 3845 m 
Width: 2230 m 
Thick brown shell 
Operculum 
Diphyllobothrium 
sp. (fish tapeworm) 
Length: 5875 m 
Width: 4050 m 
Oval shape 
Moderately thick shill 
Operculum, often indistinct (continuous with 
outer shell) 
Knob at abopercular end 
Taenia sp. (beef or 
pork tapeworm) 
Diameter: 3145 m Spherical shape 
Thick yellow/brown shell with radial striations 
Trichuris trichiura 
(whipworm) 
Length: 5055 m 
Width: 2224 m 
Thick yellow/brown shell 
Lemon-shaped 
Two opposing polar plugs with clear colour 
Smooth surface 
Note: dimensions are from Ash and Orihel (2015); morphological characteristics from Ash and Orihel (2015) 
and Garcia (2016). 
A total of five slides from each subsample were viewed and if no parasite eggs were 
found no more slides were analysed. If any eggs were found then the entire 0.2 g subsample 
was analysed in order to calculate the concentration of eggs (see below). While it is possible 
that some parasite eggs were missed by not viewing larger subsamples, it has been reported 
that in 75% of samples the maximum number of taxa was identified within the first six slides, 
and any taxa identified in the following slides are represented by very few eggs (Dufour, 
2015). Five slides were analysed in order to balance the ability to identify all taxa present in a 
sample and analysing larger numbers of samples from multiple individuals or areas of a site. 
In this research it was also observed that analysing additional slides after the first five did not 
result in identification of new taxa in most cases. 
Microscopy is the most common method used for detection of parasites in 
palaeoparasitology. This is likely due to a number of factors; mainly that it is relatively 
inexpensive and though slightly more time consuming than some other methods it can be used 
to diagnose most intestinal parasites. Microscopy has remained a core method in 
palaeoparasitology since the advent of the field. In fact, it is also an important diagnostic tool 
in clinical parasitology. Though preparation of modern human faecal samples for microscopic 
ova and parasite analysis differs from preparation of archaeological samples, the principles of 
identifying the parasites under the microscope is very similar. In clinical medicine adult 
worms, and helminths at various stages of development can be seen (e.g. larvae and eggs), 
however in archaeological samples eggs are typically the only developmental stage that are 
preserved well enough to be visualized. One exception to this is in mummified remains where 
adult worms and larvae may be preserved due to the same processes that allow the human 
tissues to resist decomposition.  
Even though microscopy is the main method used clinically and archaeologically to 
detect parasitic infection there are some major limitations to microscopic analysis. First, it can 
be difficult to make a species-level diagnosis in all cases. Some animal species have eggs that 
are indistinguishable from the human species. This is the case for roundworm infecting pigs 
(Ascaris suum) and roundworm infecting humans (Ascaris lumbricoides) (Betson et al., 
2014). There are also cases where different species of human parasites cannot be 
differentiated. For example, beef and pork tapeworm, Taenia saginata and Taenia solium, 
respectively. The eggs of both of these species are nearly identical and the only way to 
differentiate the two would be to undertake ancient DNA (aDNA) analysis. For other 
intestinal parasites such as fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium spp.) and Capillaria spp., 
differentiating the species based on morphology of the eggs alone can be quite difficult but is 
possible. For example, there are 16 different species of Diphyllobothrium that can infect 
humans (Letinov et al., 2016). Four of these, including D. latum, D. pacificum, D. 
dendriticum, and D. nihonkaiense, are common causes of fish tapeworm infection in humans. 
It has been argued that it is not possible to differentiate these different species using 
microscopic analysis of the eggs (Holiday et al., 2003). In the past, in both modern 
parasitology and palaeoparasitology, eggs of fish tapeworm were often identified broadly as 
Diphyllobothrium sp. or simply as the most common species known to infect humans, 
Diphyllobothrium latum (Kuchta et al., 2013). However, more recently there have been a 
number of studies undertaking analysis of a larger number of eggs from different species and 
different hosts that have argued that size along with differences in depth and density of pores 
on the eggshell can in fact be used to differentiate between species of Diphyllobothrium (Le 
Bailly and Bouchet, 2013; Letinov et al., 2016).  
 Furthermore, in some cases, taking into consideration the different geographic 
distributions of species of the same genus can inform which species is most likely to be 
present in the samples being studied. This of course assumes that the infected individual had 
not migrated from an area where different species were endemic. For example, Le Bailly and 
Bouchet (2010) have argued that the majority of Dicrocoelium eggs in Europe are likely from 
Dicrocoelium dendriticum (the lancet liver fluke) because this is the only species of 
Dicrocoelium found in Europe today. This type of assumption can be helpful, though we have 
to remember that the geographical distribution of species in the past could have been very 
different from what we find today. In fact, this is something we are trying to understand by 
studying parasitic infections in past populations. 
3.3 ELISA 
ELISA is another common method used in palaeoparasitology. The first study to use ELISA 
to detect protozoan parasites in archaeological sediment samples was in 1999. Allison and 
colleagues used a commercially available ELISA kit to detect Giardia duodenalis and 
Cryptosporidium (Allison et al., 1999). Since this time, ELISA has become a well-established 
method to be used alongside microscopy in order to detect intestinal protozoa. Gonalves and 
colleagues (2004) tested samples from 15 different sites for Entamoeba histolytica and Le 
Bailly and Bouchet (2015) have recently published a review of data for Entamoeba histolytica 
in the past showing that almost all information for this organism has come from studies using 
ELISA. Of the three protozoa which can cause severe diarrhoea in humans, we have the most 
evidence for Entamoeba histolytica, but our knowledge of the distribution of Giardia 
duodenalis in the past has increased greatly with the use of ELISA (Gonalves et al., 2002; Le 
Bailly et al., 2008; Mitchell et al., 2008). Evidence for Cryptosporidium in past populations is 
still sparse, with only a few positive results in South America (Allison et al., 1999; Ortega and 
Bonavia, 2003). 
 When undertaking lab analysis of archaeological samples using ELISA kits, the 
samples were prepared using the same disaggregation process as was used for microscopy. 
However, 1 g subsamples were used and when the sample was sieved the material from the 
catchment container underneath the 20 m sieve was collected. This is because the cysts of 
the protozoa being studied are typically smaller than 20 m (Garcia, 2016). The material 
collected from the catchment container was placed in a 15 mL test tube and centrifuged at 
4,000 rpm for five minutes. The clear supernatant is then removed, leaving 2.5 mL of sample 
in the tube to be used in the three ELISA kits, one for each organism of interest. 
 The ELISA kits used for the analysis were commercial TechLab kits, which are 
validated for use in a clinical setting. For detection of Entamoeba histolytica, the E. 
HISTOLYTICA II kit was used. For Giardia duodenalis, the GIARDIA II kit was used and 
for Cryptosporidium, the CRYPTOSPORIDIUM II kit. The tests were undertaken following 
the procedures laid out in the manuals provided with the kits. Each kit contains an ELISA 
plate with 96 test wells. Each well has an organism-specific antibody immobilized to the 
plate. For the Entamoeba histolytica kit this is an antibody specific to the galactose adhesin 
found on E. histolytica cysts. For the Giardia duodenalis kit the antibody is specific for a cell-
surface antigen, and the Cryptosporidium kit uses an antibody specific for an oocyst antigen. 
When the sample is added to the well, if the organism or even just the antigen we are looking 
for is present it will bind to the antibody on the plate and be stuck to the plate. A second 
antibody linked to an enzyme is then added to each well and will bind to the antibody-antigen 
complex already present in any wells containing the organism. The addition of a substrate will 
interact with any enzyme-antibody-antigen complexes formed resulting in a colour change in 
these wells. The colour change is a visible yellow, however for increased accuracy an ELISA 
plate reader was used to determine the exact absorbance value of each well. After addition of 
the stop solution, which produces the yellow colour change, the plates were incubated for 2 
minutes and absorbance values were read within five minutes after this. A BioTek Synergy 
HT ELISA plate reader was used at 450 nm to acquire the absorbance values for each well, 
which were then compared to the TechLab published values to determine which wells were 
positive. For Giardia and Cryptosporidium, a positive read is an absorbance value 0.150. 
For Entamoeba, a positive read is an absorbance value that is 0.050 or higher after the value 
from the negative control well has been subtracted. For each ELISA plate, an entire column (8 
wells) was dedicated to each sample. The same sample was placed in each of 8 test wells, 
acting as a technical repeat. Each plate had one positive and one negative control well to 
validate the plates. The positive controls are provided with each kit and are an antigen from 
the organism of interest. 
 The TechLab kits have high sensitivity and specificity for the parasites they test for 
with no cross reactivity with other organisms. For the E. histolytica kit the sensitivity is 
96.9% and specificity is 100% and it has no cross-reactivity with E. dispar, for Giardia 
duodenalis the sensitivity and specificity are 100%, and for Cryptosporidium the sensitivity is 
97.7% and specificity is 100%. However, it is important to note that the kits were designed 
for use in a modern clinical setting where fresh or frozen faecal samples would be tested for 
protozoan organisms. The sensitivity and specificity of these tests is likely different when 
they are applied to archaeological samples because the antigens (proteins) being tested for 
degrade over time resulting in changes to their tertiary structure and reducing their binding 
capacity (Brown and Brown, 2011) potentially resulting in higher false negatives. Though 
much less likely due to the specificity of the antibodies, we cannot rule out that changes to 
protein structure could result in false positives. For this reason, each test is rerun on a 
different day using a new subsample of material, this second test with a new subsample 
represents the biological repeat. A sample is only considered to have a positive result if 
positive wells are present on both tests. 
The benefits of using ELISA in combination with microscopy is that we can detect 
protozoan parasites that are typically found in cyst form rather than egg form in 
archaeological samples, and as such do not preserve as well to be directly visualized. While 
there have been reports of protozoan cysts being seen under the microscope it is quite rare. 
This is because the cyst walls are much thinner than eggshells and are much more susceptible 
to degradation (Mitchell, 2015a). By using ELISA to detect only one specific antigen we can 
detect any complete cysts as well as any poorly preserved cysts as long as the antigen is still 
present in a form that can bind to the antibody and that they are present in high enough 
concentrations to trigger a positive result. 
3.4 Egg Quantification Techniques 
In order to quantify the number of eggs present in each subsample studied the entire 0.2 g 
sample was analysed and the total number of eggs found for each taxa was counted, which is 
equivalent to the number of eggs in 0.2 g of sediment. This number was multiplied by five to 
arrive at the number of eggs per gram (epg). 
"#$ = 	"$$'	()*+,"-	  5 
 There are other methods for quantifying eggs including the use of Lycopodium spore 
tablets (Warnock and Reinhard, 1992; Fugassa et al., 2006; Jimnez et al., 2012). These 
tablets contain known amounts of Lycopodium spores and the dissolved tablet is added at the 
rehydration and disaggregation phase of sample preparation. As parasite eggs are identified, 
spores are also counted and an approximate concentration of eggs can then be calculated 
based on the number of spores counted.  
"#$ = 0
"$$'	()*+,"-
'#)1"'	()*+,"-2		0
3+)4+	5*6+,7,8	)9	'#)1"'
'*:'6;#<"	4"7$,	($) 2 
3.5 Skeletal Age and Sex Estimations 
Age-at-death and sex estimations were available from collaborators for many of the pelvic 
soil sample sets. From Vagnari these estimations were done by myself and Dr. Tracy Prowse. 
I will describe our methods for these estimations, the methods used by other collaborators are 
similar though there may be slight variations. Age and sex estimations were collected in the 
hopes of understanding distributions of parasitic infections within the skeletal samples. 
 First, age estimations were made using both the dentition and skeleton. For juveniles, 
tooth eruption and development for both deciduous and permanent dentition was recorded and 
compared to reference ranges (Gustafson and Koch, 1974; Buikstra and Ubelaker, 1994). In 
addition, fusion of epiphyses of various bones occurs at relatively standard ages and these 
were also recorded (McKern and Stewart, 1957; Buikstra and Ubelaker, 1994). Finally, in 
some infants who had no teeth present, the length of long bones was used for a, generally less 
specific, estimation of age (Scheuer and Black, 2000). Tooth development has been found to 
be more consistent with chronological age than bone development (White and Folkens, 2005). 
It needs to be kept in mind that certain diseases such as parasitic infection can lead to stunting 
of growth meaning that an age estimation made from long bone lengths alone may 
underestimate the actual age of the individual. In any case, all age estimations in 
archaeological settings are given as a range usually of years not months, except in very young 
individuals.  
In adult individuals where dentition is fully erupted and bones are fused, other bony 
traits were used for age estimation including the appearance of the auricular surface on the os 
coxa and the pubic symphysis (Buikstra and Ubelaker, 1994). In many cases these skeletal 
elements were not preserved or were unobservable and age could not be estimated beyond 
classifying the individual as an adult. 
 Sex estimations were undertaken for individuals who had gone through puberty, as 
this is when development of secondary sex characteristics results in better observed sex 
differentiation in the skeletal remains. Morphological features on both the cranium and pelvis 
were used. Features on the cranium including the supraorbital ridges, glabellar region, nuchal 
lines, mastoid process, and shape of the mandible were recorded (Buikstra and Ubelaker, 
1994). On the pelvis, the shape of the greater sciatic notch and the three features used in the 
Phenice method (Phenice, 1969) including ventral arc, subpubic concavity, and the medial 
aspect of the ischiopubic ramus were observed. For juveniles (<18 years) no sex estimation 
was made and these individuals were listed as undetermined. Similarly, for skeletons that did 
not have good enough preservation for sex to be estimated, their sex is listed as undetermined. 
In the case of adult individuals where the various morphological features were inconclusive, 
falling in the mid-range for male and female traits, these individuals were recorded as 
indeterminate.  
4 Study Sites and Results 
4.1 Materials Overview 
The samples analysed for this dissertation were chosen to fill in some of the major gaps in our 
knowledge about intestinal parasites in the Roman Empire. As such, there are two main foci; 
1) samples from the Mediterranean region, especially the eastern Mediterranean, and 2) pelvic 
soil samples that can give more concrete evidence for infection at an individual level in 
regions where we have good comparative data. In addition to samples from Roman sites, a 
number of samples from earlier and later time periods were studied to increase the amount of 
comparative data. The collection of samples was limited by availability of material from 
previous and ongoing excavations. Collaborations were established to study samples from 
each site, and the key individuals involved in collection of samples and discussion of context 
of the samples are listed in the Acknowledgments section and the materials section for each 
site.  
 First, the Roman period samples come from twelve different sites and are a mix of 
sample types (Table 11). In the understudied Mediterranean region I analysed samples from 
Cyprus, Italy, Serbia, and Turkey (Figure 22). In Northern Europe where we have a lot more 
palaeoparasitological work to use as comparative material I studied pelvic soil samples from 
two cemeteries in the United Kingdom and one in Austria as well as latrine sediments from 
Belgium. From some sites multiple latrines or drains were studied and some also had multiple 
layers from inside one latrine or drain. As such a total of 98 individuals or features were 
studied from Roman sites while a total of 112 samples were analysed, not including control 
samples.  
Table 12 lists the comparative samples studied as part of this work. Though it was not 
possible to collect or analyse enough samples to even out geographic or temporal coverage, 
these samples were a start to filling in major gaps in our understanding of pre-Roman and 
post-Roman parasites in regions that at one point were part of the Roman Empire. For 
example, very few archaeological samples had been analysed for parasites from Turkey in any 
time period, prior to this dissertation, so samples were collected from other time periods to 
provide some comparative evidence. In fact, no other ancient parasite studies had been 
undertaken in Turkey except from the Roman site of Sagalassos which was completed by our 
lab during this doctoral research (Williams et al., 2017). 
Table 11: Details of samples analysed from Roman sites. 
Site Country 
Roman 
Province Date Sample Type 
Number of 
Samples 
Smithfield, 
London 
UK Britannia Roman Pelvic soil 30 
Winterborne, 
Dorset UK Britannia Roman Pelvic soil 5 
Lauriacum Austria Noricum 3rd4th c. CE Pelvic soil 13 
Arlon Belgium Belgica 250280 CE Latrine 1 
Paphos Cyprus Cyprus Hellenistic/ Roman Pelvic Soil 6 
Oplontis Italy Italia 79 CE Pelvic soil 8 
Vagnari 
Cemetery Italy Italia 2
nd4th c. CE Pelvic soil 22 
Vagnari Vicus Italy Italia 2nd4th c. CE Drains 4 
Vacone Italy Italia Roman Latrine/drains 3 (10) 
Viminacium Serbia Moesia Superior 2
nd3rd c. CE Coprolites 1(4) 
Ephesus Turkey Asia 3rd6th c. CE Latrines 2 (5) 
Sardis Turkey Asia 6th7th c. CE Drains 3 (4) 
Total     98 (112) 
Notes: Number of samples listed refers to either number of individuals sampled for pelvic soil or number of 
features sampled if they are from latrines and drains. The numbers in brackets are the total number of samples 
analysed as some latrines and drains had multiple layers and the coprolite from Viminacium had multiple 
subsamples taken from it due to its large size.  
Table 12: Comparative samples analysed from other time periods. 
Site Country Date Sample Type 
Number of 
Samples 
Must Farm UK 9
th c. BCE  
(Late Bronze Age) 
Occupation 
sediments 14 
Must Farm UK 9
th c. BCE  
(Late Bronze Age) Coprolites 15 
Hatherdene Close UK 5
th6th c. CE 
(Anglo-Saxon) Pelvic soil 92 
atalhyk Turkey 71006300 BCE (Neolithic) Pelvic soil 7 
Boncuklu Turkey 83007800 BCE (Neolithic) Pelvic soil 9 
Griffin Warrior, 
Pylos Greece 
14501400 BCE 
(Bronze Age) Pelvic soil 1 
Vacone Italy 608770 CE (Lombard) Pelvic soil 6 
Total    138 
Figure 22: Location of sites studied. Black dots are pre-Roman sites, red dots are Roman sites, 
and blue dots are post-Roman sites. Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the 
Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
4.2 Pre-Roman Sites 
4.2.1 The Must Farm Settlement 
4.2.1.1 Materials 
The parasitological analysis of samples from the Must Farm settlement has been published 
(Ledger et al., 2019a, see Appendix A.1). As such, material in this dissertation is adapted 
from that publication and a chapter written for the site monograph. 
The Late Bronze Age pile-dwelling settlement at Must Farm was located in eastern 
England in an area known as the Flag Fen basin, which was part of a large wetland covering 
46,000 km2. The Flag Fen basin was formed with rising sea levels after the last glacial 
maximum, and was later drained in the 17th century CE. This wetland area has a number of 
other important prehistoric archaeological sites including Flag Fen and Fengate (Pryor, 2001). 
During the Bronze Age this wetland area contained numerous bodies of freshwater and 
brackish water interspersed by pockets of dry land, with periodic fluctuations in water levels 
(French, 2003: 108). The settlement at Must Farm consisted of a series of five stilted timber 
structures surrounded by a palisade, all built over this freshwater. Analysis of insect and plant 
remains at the site shows that the water beneath the settlement flowed at an extremely slow 
rate and contained dense aquatic plants. 
Excavations of the site were undertaken in two seasons; a small exploratory excavation 
in 2006 (Gibson et al., 2010; Robinson et al., 2015) and a larger excavation of the rest of the 
site from 20152016. These excavations revealed an exceptionally well-preserved Late 
Bronze Age settlement and associated artefacts including wood, textiles, ceramics, and 
metalwork. Radiocarbon dates place the period of occupation of the settlement during the 9th 
century BCE, which is the terminal Bronze Age in southern Britain (Knight et al., 2019). 
Dendrochronological evidence suggests that the settlement was constructed and inhabited for 
a very short period, around one year, before a large fire tore through the settlement causing 
the structures to collapse into the channel below where they were subsequently covered in 
alluvial silts. This waterlogged and anaerobic environment created ideal conditions for the 
preservation of organic and inorganic material from the Late Bronze Age settlement. 
 Occupation layer sediment and coprolites were collected for parasite analysis during 
the 20152016 excavations of the site. The sampling strategies were adapted from those that 
have been found effective at other prehistoric stilted settlements in Europe (Dommelier et al., 
1998; Maicher et al., 2017). Sediment samples were collected by the site excavators under the 
direction of Rachel Ballantyne and Mark Knight. Samples were collected from three 
identified layers or contexts; the construction/occupation layer, the conflagration ash, and the 
post-conflagration river silts. Structures 14 were sampled, but Structure 5 was not sampled 
due to its prior excavation for evaluation of the site in 2006. Two locations from each 
structure were sampled; one from underneath the centre of the structure, and one from the 
outer edge of the structure. The samples from the outer edges of the structures were taken in 
locations where other refuse was found. These refuse locations were chosen because it was 
thought that they were the most likely areas where humans would dump excrement. Single 
samples were also taken from upstream of the entire settlement and downstream of the entire 
settlement (Figure 23). All samples were collected by the excavators of the site. The two 
construction/occupation layer sediment samples from Structure 3 were studied by an 
undergraduate student, Madison Fairey. The two construction/occupation layer samples from 
Structures 2 and 4 were studied by an MPhil student, Elisabeth Grimshaw. I analysed all other 
layers and samples from other locations, eight samples in total. I also analysed all coprolites. 
 Waterlogged coprolites (preserved pieces of faeces) were also collected from around 
the structures; a total of fifteen were used for analysis (Figure 23). Faecal biomarker analyses 
were conducted on the coprolites to determine their source, work done by Ian D. Bull and 
Helen Whelton from the University of Bristol. This approach uses gas chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS) to characterize 5-stanols and bile acids in the coprolites. These lipids 
are present in faeces as a result of foods eaten and from biological processes. The ratios of 5-
stanols are used to distinguish omnivore (e.g. pig, human, or canine) from ruminant coprolites 
(Evershed and Bethell, 1996). 5-stanol profiles dominated by coprostanols are indicative of 
human or pig origin while those dominated by cholesterols are indicative of canine origin 
(Bull et al., 2002). Bile acid profiles can then be used to distinguish pig from human faeces 
(Simpson et al., 1999). Eleven of the fifteen coprolites yielded lipid profiles adequate for 
source identification. Four were of human origin (SF3082, SF3127, SF3631, and SF3642) and 
seven were of canine origin (SF3175, SF3177, SF3178, SF3492, SF3677, SF3955, and 
SF4029) while the remaining four had inconclusive profiles due to high levels of compounds 
from the surrounding environment (SF3080, SF3176, SF3365, SF4034). However, the size 
and morphology of these coprolites is consistent with the coprolites of identified origin, 
indicating that they could also be from humans or canines. Human, canine, and inconclusive 
coprolites were all analysed for parasites. 
Figure 23: Plan of Must Farm settlement with sediment sampling locations marked by black dots and coprolites marked by coloured circles. From each 
sediment sampling location around the structures (large dashed circles) samples were collected from three layers (construction/occupation, ash, post-
conflagration); for the upstream and downstream locations samples were collected from one layer corresponding to occupation of the site. Human 
coprolites are marked by yellow circles, canine by red, and inconclusive by blue. Image credit: Vicki Herring, Cambridge Archaeological Unit. (taken 
from Ledger et al., 2019a)
4.2.1.2 Results 
Eggs from five different taxa of helminths were found in the samples studied from the Must 
Farm settlement. First, in the sediment samples eggs from four taxa were found, namely 
Capillaria sp., Dioctophyma renale, Diphyllobothrium sp., and Trichuris sp. The distribution 
and concentrations of these eggs in samples from around the site can be seen in Figure 29. 
Figure 24: Capillaria sp. egg found in a coprolite from the Must Farm settlement. Both 
images are of the same egg, the image on the right shows the surface structure of the egg. 
Scale bars are 20 m. 
Figure 25: Dioctophyma renale egg found in a coprolite from the Must Farm settlement. Scale 
bar is 20 m. 
Figure 26: Diphyllobothrium sp. eggs found in coprolites from the Must Farm settlement. 
Scale bars are 20 m. 
Figure 27: Echinostoma sp. eggs found in coprolites from the Must Farm settlement. The egg 
on the left shows an intact egg with abopercular thickening, many eggs were broken such as 
the one on the right. Scale bars are 20 m. 
Figure 28: Trichuris sp. egg found in a coprolite from the Must Farm settlement. Scale bar is 
20 m. 
Figure 29: Plan of Must Farm settlement with locations of sediment samples marked by black 
dots. Boxes indicate taxa found in that layer and concentrations (eggs/gram) of eggs per gram 
are in brackets; unless no eggs were found then the box is empty. 
 In the coprolites studied from the Must Farm settlement, five taxa of helminths were 
found on microscopy. These include Capillaria sp. (Figure 24), Dioctophyma renale (Figure 
25), Diphyllobothrium sp. (Figure 26), Echinostoma sp. (Figure 27), and Trichuris sp. (Figure 
28). Fourteen of the fifteen coprolites studied contained helminth eggs, the one coprolite that 
did not contain any eggs was SF3080. This was one of the coprolites that had an uncertain 
origin. The same taxa were found in the canine and human coprolites, though a Dioctophyma 
renale egg was found in one of the canine coprolites but no other coprolites. 
 Capillaria sp. eggs and Trichuris sp. eggs have a very similar shape but can be 
distinguished by the surface structure of the eggs (Moravec, 1980; Bouchet, 1997; Fugassa et 
al., 2008; Traversa et al., 2011). The Capillaria sp. eggs found at Must Farm had a punctuated 
surface (see Figure 24) consistent with eggs identified in the literature, while Trichuris sp. 
eggs had a smooth surface. Furthermore, the mean length and width of the Capillaria sp. eggs 
was slightly higher than that of Trichuris sp. (Table 14), which is consistent with modern size 
ranges (Mehlhorn, 2016; 381). For further discussion of species identification of eggs from 
Must Farm see Ledger et al. (2019a). 
Table 13: Helminth species and egg concentrations (eggs/g) found in each coprolite studied 
from the Must Farm settlement. 
Coprolite Host 
Capillaria 
Dioctophyma 
renale 
Diphyllobothrium 
Echinostoma 
Trichuris 
SF3080 unknown - - - - - 
SF3082 human 20 - - 20 30 
SF3127 human 60 - 5 85 195 
SF3175 canine 325 - - 70 5 
SF3176 unknown 55 - - 10 - 
SF3177 canine 55 - - - - 
SF3178 canine 290 - - 20 - 
SF3365 unknown 20 - - 10 5 
SF3492 canine 615 - 25 15 175 
SF3631 human 10 - - 215 45 
SF3642  human - - - 185 125 
SF3677 canine 30 - 5 5 20 
SF3955 canine 380 - - 5 - 
SF4029 canine 1,750 5 9,415 270 5 
SF4034 unknown 1,250 - 11,420 360 10 
Table 14: Mean dimensions and standard deviations (SD) of helminth eggs from coprolites 
and sediment samples from the Must Farm settlement. 
Species Mean Length (m)  SD Mean Width  (m)  SD 
Capillaria sp. 59.9  3.4 31.3  1.5 
    without polar plugs 59.1  3.1 31.2  1.4 
    with polar plugs 62.8  2.8 31.4  1.6 
Dioctophyma renale 74.9  5.5 40.2  2.1 
Diphyllobothrium sp. 58.4  4.7 40.4  2.3 
without opercula 57.9  4.6 40.3  2.3 
with opercula 61.1  4.5 40.5  2.2 
Echinostoma sp. 104.4  8.2 69.9  6.3 
without opercula 104.4  8.3 70.0  6.3 
with opercula 104.9  7.0 68.1  5.4 
Trichuris sp. 54.0 28.3 
    without polar plugs 53.7 28.2 
    with polar plugs 58.6 30.0 
The ELISA tests run on the sediment samples and coprolites from Must Farm were 
inconclusive. The first ELISA test was done using sediment samples only. Nine samples were 
tested. These were the upstream control, the construction/occupation layer from the centre of 
Structures 1, 2, 3, and 4, the construction layer from outside Structure 3, the post-
conflagration layer from inside Structures 1 and 3, and the downstream control. On the first 
Cryptosporidium ELISA test, one positive well out of 8 was found for each of the samples 
from the construction/occupation layer from the centre of Structure 1, from post-conflagration 
layer from the centre of Structure 1, and from the downstream control. None of these samples 
were positive on the re-test. On the first Entamoeba histolytica test multiple positive wells 
were found in samples from the construction/occupation layers from the centre of the four 
structures, from the upstream control, and from the outer edge of Structure 3. Again none of 
these positive results were found on the re-test. On the first Giardia duodenalis test, positive 
results were found in multiple wells from all samples except from the post-conflagration 
sample from Structure 3 and the downstream control, again none of these positive results 
were found on the second test. For this reason we cannot confidently say that any of these 
parasites were present in the sediment samples from Must Farm. However, it is possible that 
the biological repeats were all negative because different subsamples were tested that did not 
contain the high enough concentrations of the parasite to trigger a positive. 
The ELISA tests run on the coprolites were also inconclusive. For the first test, all 
three ELISA tests were run on SF3127, SF3631, SF3642, SF3082, and SF4029. Due to an 
inadequate amount of coprolite for a re-test the second ELISA test was run on SF3080, 
SF3177, SF3642, SF3492, and SF4029. Therefore the only coprolites that were tested twice 
were SF3642 and SF4029. On the first test nearly all wells were positive for each organism in 
every coprolite studied. In the second test no coprolites had positive results for Giardia 
duodenalis, each coprolite had positive wells for Cryptosporidium, and nearly all wells for 
each coprolite were positive for Entamoeba histolytica. Therefore, the Giardia duodenalis 
results were not confirmed by the second test while the Cryptosporidium and Entamoeba 
histolytica results were. However, it was surprising to find positives for every coprolite for all 
three organisms. The positive and negative control wells produced the proper absorbance 
values to ensure that the test was performed properly and the ELISA plate and reagents 
performed as expected. However, so many positive results was very unusual for 
archaeological samples and combined with the large number of positives on the first run of 
the sediment samples it is possible that the samples were contaminated with modern waste in 
the water or that something was cross-reacting with the antibodies in the kits. As such I have 
recently started a project to look for ancient DNA from these protozoa in the sediment 
samples and coprolites to see if we can use a second method to confirm or refute the results 
and at the same time explore the damage patterns of any DNA recovered to determine if 
modern contamination may be an issue. All absorbance values from the Must Farm samples 
can be found in Appendix B.1. 
For an in-depth discussion of microscopy results from the Must Farm settlement see 
Ledger et al., (2019a) (Appendix A.1).  
4.2.2 atalhyk 
4.2.2.1 Materials 
Parasitological analysis of the pelvic soil from atalhyk is published in Antiquity in 
combination with work done by a previous PhD student, Evilena Anastasiou, who looked for 
parasite eggs in human coprolites recovered from middens at the site (Ledger et al., 2019b, 
see Appendix A.2). The samples studied as part of this PhD were the pelvic soil samples from 
the site. 
atalhyk is an early Neolithic site in Turkey, part of which was occupied through to 
the Chalcolithic. As an early farming community in the Near East this site provides important 
evidence for parasitic infection with the onset of agriculture. Secondly, the site is one of the 
best preserved large settlement agglomerations in the Near East. The density of the population 
at this site was much higher than other Neolithic sites at the time. The settlement structure of 
the East Mound (71006000 cal BCE) consisted of densely packed multi-storey buildings, 
partially dug into the ground, with little space between them (Bayliss et al., 2015; Hodder, 
2014). Archaeological excavations have shown that middens formed directly adjacent to the 
buildings and these also contained animal and human faeces (Shillito et al., 2011a; Shillito et 
al., 2011b). Many of the human burials at the site were placed beneath the platforms inside 
the buildings.  
Table 15: Details of burials from atalhyk, from which soil samples were collected from 
the pelvis of the skeletons (adapted from Ledger et al., 2019b). 
Sample 
Number Burial ID Age Sex Location Date 
Helminth 
30348.s3 Burial F.7508; Skeleton 30351 
2035 
years 
Possible 
female 
South Area, 
Building 43 71006700 BC - 
30929.s4 Burial F.3484 Skeleton 30927 
9  3 
months Unknown 
South Area, 
Building 89 67006500 BC - 
30929.s8 Burial F.3484 Skeleton 30928 
3550 
years 
Possible 
female 
South Area, 
Building 89 67006500 BC - 
19435.s3 Burial F.3629 Skeleton 8598 
2035 
years Male 
North Area, 
Building 114 67006500 BC - 
22027.s5 Burial F.7333 Skeleton 22026 
12  2.5 
years Unknown 
North Area, 
Building 77 67006500 BC - 
20450.s14 Burial F.3630 Skeleton 19460 
11  2.5 
years Unknown 
North Area, 
Building 129 65006300 BC - 
The samples studied which were included in this dissertation were pelvic soil samples from 
six human burials, all of which were found buried inside the houses. The burials date from 
71006300 BCE. Soil was collected by the excavators, and obtained for analysis in 
collaboration with Scott D. Haddow and Chirstopher Knsel. Soil was collected from the 
pelvis directly anterior to the sacrum and control samples were taken from inside the cranium 
and around the feet, following standard sampling protocols from our lab (Mitchell, 2017a). 
Figure 30: Plan of atalhyk showing location of burials studied and coprolites previously 
studied by Evilena Anastasiou. Image Credit: Camilla Mazzucato (Ledger et al., 2019b). 
4.2.2.2 Results 
No helminth eggs were found in the slides studied from the subsamples of pelvic soil from the 
six individuals studied from atalhyk. As such, and due to the low yields of pelvic soil, 
these samples were not tested for the presence of protozoan parasites using ELISA. However, 
previous analysis of human coprolites, done by Evilena Anastasiou, from the site found eggs 
from Trichuris trichiura (Ledger et al., 2019b; Appendix A.2). 
4.2.3 Boncuklu 
4.2.3.1 Materials 
Boncuklu is a neighbouring site to atalhyk in Turkey, located approximately 9.5 km 
north. Its occupation spans the 9th8th millennia BCE, slightly earlier than atalhyk (Baird, 
2012). Paleoenvironmental reconstructions suggest that the area of the Konya Plain where 
Boncuklu is located was a wetland habitat at this time. The site consists of a series of mud-
brick structures interspersed by open spaces covering an area of about 1 hectare (Baird et al., 
2018). Similar to atalhyk, it represents one of the earliest agricultural societies in this 
region of the world though inhabitants likely relied on foraging as well. This site has some of 
the earliest evidence for domestic cereals including emmer wheat. In terms of herding and 
wild animal consumption, bones of wild boar are the most common animals in the 
zooarchaeological record, but wild cattle and fish also contributed to the diet of inhabitants 
(Baird et al., 2018). 
 Similar to atalhyk, burials were found beneath the floors of the houses. In 
particular, under floors that have been called clean areas of the houses as opposed to dirty 
areas that contained hearths and served as a kitchen areas. Soil from the pelvis of skeletons 
excavated during the 2014 and 2015 field seasons was analysed. These soils were obtained in 
collaboration with the director of the site, Doug Baird. Samples were collected by the 
excavators from directly on top of the sacrum and control samples were also collected from 
inside the cranium and around the feet where possible. Samples were collected from 9 
individuals (Table 16).  
Table 16: Details of burials from Boncuklu, from which soil samples were collected from the 
pelvis of skeletons. 
Context 
Number Sample ID Samples Collected 
Helminth Eggs in 
Pelvic Soil 
ZHCB MS476 Grave 40 Pelvis and control from cranium - 
ZHCB MS 478 Grave 40 Pelvis and control from cranium - 
ZPV MS 448 Pelvis and control from cranium and hand area - 
ZPS MS 444 Grave 38 Pelvis and control from feet - 
MMVW MS 479 Grave 39 Pelvis and control - 
MMVO MS 539 Pelvis - 
MMXC MS588 Grave 46 Pelvis and control from cranium - 
ZJB MS552 Pelvis and control from cranium - 
ZJB MS608 Grave 48 Pelvis and control from cranium - 
4.2.3.2 Results 
No helminth eggs were found in the slides studied from the subsamples of pelvic soil from the 
nine individuals sampled from Boncuklu. As such, and due to the low yields of pelvic soil 
these samples were not tested for the presence of protozoan parasites using ELISA. 
4.2.4 Griffin Warrior, Palace of Nestor, Pylos 
4.2.4.1 Materials 
The Griffin Warrior was a Mycenaean individual from Greece. This was the burial of a male, 
3035 years old at the time of death, who was buried in a shaft grave near the Palace of 
Nestor, Pylos (Davis and Stocker, 2016). The grave good assemblage exemplified the wealth 
and status of this individual and included numerous weapons, jewellery, and metal vessels 
which led to the name and identification of this male as a warrior with high status in the 
community. Ceramic fragments in the fill of the tomb and grave goods were used to date the 
burial to the Late Helladic IIA period (14501400 BCE). The tomb itself consisted of a shaft 
cut into the bedrock that was lined with stones. The body of the Griffin Warrior was placed in 
a wooden coffin inside this grave. The tomb of the Griffin Warrior was located near Tholos 
Tomb IV, which was likely in use during the Middle Bronze Age, slightly earlier than the 
burial of the Griffin Warrior (Davis and Stocker, 2016). 
 The nearby Palace of Nestor is located in the western Peloponnese in Pylos, and is one 
of the best preserved palaces of its time. It is thought to have been at its height during the 
Early Mycenaean period and would have been inhabited by local dynasty, the Neleid family, 
the most famous of whom was Nestor. The palace was destroyed sometime near the end of 
the 13th c. BCE when it was abandoned (Blegen and Rawson, 1967). 
Soil taken from the pelvic area of the individual was studied for this work, this was 
collected by the excavators of the grave under the direction of Sharon Stocker, Jack Davis, 
and Lynne Schepartz. Control samples from the cranium and above the burial were also 
collected. 
4.2.4.2 Results 
No helminth eggs were found in the slides studied from the subsamples of the Griffin Warrior 
pelvic soil. The sample was not tested for protozoan parasites using ELISA due to the low 
yield of pelvic soil and the high cost of the tests. 
4.3 Roman Sites 
4.3.1 West Smithfield, London 
4.3.1.1 Materials 
The cemetery to which the burials from West Smithfield belong is referred to as the Roman 
Western Cemetery by the Museum of London, UK. The cemetery is located to the west of the 
Roman city of Londinium (modern-day London). The cemetery is thought to have been 
located along a road connecting London to Silchester. The excavations of West Smithfield (1
4 Giltspur Street) are one of many excavations that are all part of the same cemetery (Redfern 
and Mikulski, 2009). The earliest burials from the cemetery date to the 1st c. CE and it was 
used into the early 5th c. CE. Demographic analysis of skeletal remains from the site suggest 
that the cemetery was used for inhabitants of Roman period London. Individuals from all age 
groups, except those <1 year were observed and both males and females are represented 
(Redfern and Mikulski, 2009). 
 From the West Smithfield excavations 29 individuals were sampled during 
excavations for parasitological analysis. These samples were obtained from collections at the 
Museum of London in collaboration with Rebecca Redfern. As with other sites, soil was 
collected from the pelvis directly on top of the sacrum and control samples came from above 
or below the skeleton in most cases (Table 17). In addition, one Medieval period coprolite 
was also collected and analysed (Context 311). 
Table 17: Details of burials from West Smithfield Cemetery, London from which soil samples 
were collected from the pelvis of skeletons. 
Context 
Number Age Sex Samples Collected 
Helminth 
228 1217 years Undetermined Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
311 N/A N/A Medieval coprolite Ascaris sp. 
467 3645 years Male Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
485 Adult Male Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
493 Adult Undetermined Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
504 2635 years Female Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
512 3645 years Male Pelvis - 
527 611 years Undetermined Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
558 Adult Undetermined Pelvis - 
570 Adult Undetermined Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
579 Adult Undetermined Pelvis (sample 36) and control from above skeleton 
579 Adult Undetermined Pelvis (sample 43) and control from above skeleton 
599 3645 years Female Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
611 Adult Intermediate Pelvis - 
656 Adult Female Pelvis - 
660 1217 years Undetermined Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
686 3645 years Male Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
691 1825 years Female Pelvis and control from below skeleton - 
761 Adult Male Pelvis and control from above skeleton Ascaris sp. 
781 611 years Undetermined Pelvis - 
785 Subadult Undetermined Pelvis and control from below skeleton - 
837 Adult Male Pelvis and controls from head and above skeleton 
841 Adult Intermediate Pelvis and control from above skeleton Ascaris sp. 
848 1217 years Undetermined Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
870 Adult Female Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
877 Adult Intermediate Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
885 Adult Male Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
915 1825 years Intermediate Pelvis and control from below skeleton - 
935 Adult Female Pelvis and control from above skeleton Ascaris sp. 
1004 611 years Undetermined Pelvis - 
1052 Adult Female Pelvis and control from above skeleton - 
Note: Age and sex data provided by Rebecca Redfern, Museum of London. All burials are Roman except 
Context 311 which is a Medieval coprolite. 
4.3.1.2 Results 
Helminth eggs were found in the pelvic soil of three of the 29 individuals studied from the 
cemetery of West Smithfield in London. Only Ascaris sp. eggs were found in all three 
individuals (Figure 31). The positive individuals were 761 (Adult Male), 841 (Adult, 
Undetermined Sex), and 935 (Adult Female). The egg concentrations were low in the pelvic 
soil samples. Five eggs were found in the 0.2g subsample from individual 761, three in 
individual 841, and two in individual 935. The egg concentrations and mean dimensions of 
these eggs are listed in Table 18. No helminth eggs were found in the control samples from 
the three individuals, the entire 0.2g subsample was analysed for the control samples. 
Figure 31: Ascaris sp. eggs found in pelvic soil from burials at West Smithfield cemetery, 
London. Scale bars are 20m. 
Table 18: Mean length, width, standard deviations (SD), and egg concentrations (eggs/g) of 
Ascaris sp. found in pelvic soil from West Smithfield. 
Context 
Number Species Egg Concentration 
Mean Length (m)  
Mean Width (m)  
761 Ascaris sp. 25 58.0  3.2 46.1  2.6 
841 Ascaris sp. 15 52.3  8.6 44.6  6.3 
935 Ascaris sp. 10 59.5 and 68.8 45.2 and 45.7 
Medieval 
Coprolite Ascaris sp. 55 58.7  4.1 45.3  2.4 
Note: For Context 935 only two eggs were found so their dimensions are listed without a calculated mean. 
In addition, Ascaris sp. eggs were also found in the medieval coprolite recovered in 
the cemetery excavations. A higher concentration of eggs was found in the coprolite 
compared to the pelvic soil from Roman individuals (see Table 18). 
 ELISA analysis was not used to test for protozoan parasites in these samples due to 
the low yield of pelvic soil and high cost of the tests. 
4.3.2 Winterborne, Dorset 
4.3.2.1 Materials 
Additional pelvic soil samples from Roman Britain were studied from the site of Winterborne, 
Dorset in southwest Britain. This area was occupied by a tribe known as the Durotriges in the 
Iron Age until Britain came under control of the Roman Empire (Russell et al., 2014). 
Previous excavations on the site focused on an Iron Age banjo enclosure that was used 
between the 2nd c. BCE and 3rd c. CE., though its use declined in the 1st c. CE. Banjo 
enclosures are a feature found on multiple Iron Age sites in Britain. They typically consist of 
a sub-circular enclosure with an elongated passageway thought to serve as an entrance, they 
are thought to be occupation areas (McOmish, 2018). Artefacts found at the banjo enclosure 
and associated settlement included both Durotrigian and Roman items indicating the continual 
use of the site through this transitional period. This makes it an interesting site to consider the 
influence of pre-Roman populations on Roman settlements. 
 Southwest of the banjo there was a small Roman villa with other features around it 
that may have been houses (Russell et al., 2015). The villa was built around 320 CE and the 
area occupied up to the 5th c. CE. A number of ditches were excavated from near the villa one 
of which contained the burials of five Roman individuals; two adult males and three adult 
females. Pelvic soil from these five individuals was collected by the excavators, under the 
direction of Martin Smith, for analysis (Table 19). The burials are all Roman, dated to the 4th 
c. CE. 
Table 19: Details of burials from Winterborne, Dorset from which soil samples were collected 
from the pelvis of skeletons. 
Burial 
Number 
Skeleton 
Number Samples Collected 
Helminth Eggs in 
Pelvic Soil 
1073 1167 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet 
1075 1164 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet 
1077 1165 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet 
1079 1166 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet 
1107 1168 Pelvis - 
4.3.2.2 Results 
No helminth eggs were found in the subsamples of pelvic soil from the five burials at 
Winterborne, Dorset. ELISA analysis was not used to test for protozoan parasites in these 
samples due to the low yield of pelvic soil and high cost of the tests. 
4.3.3 Lauriacum 
4.3.3.1 Materials 
Lauriacum is a Roman site in Austria located on the Enns river. Lauriacum was located on the 
Danube limes, in the province of Noricum, and was an important legionary fortress. The 
Roman limes in the province of Noricum were built along the Danube river starting in the 1st 
c. CE with major legionary bases between those at Vienna and Carnuntum (Jilek et al., 2011). 
After the Marcomannic wars (166180 CE) a new legion was placed at Lauriacum. It was 
located along roads into Germany and from Italy and Asia Minor (Ubl, 2002). The city was 
built up around its legionary fortress located between the river Ens and Danube, which was 
established in the 2nd c. CE. There is some evidence for a small vicus (village) around the 1st 
c. CE but the larger civilian settlements were built in the 2nd c. CE (Ubl, 2002). The 
settlement at Lauriacum was typical of other civilian towns along the limes. It consisted of 
residential areas (insulae) some of which had painted walls and mosaic floors, there are also 
workshops, small gardens and cemeteries. The population was diverse likely consisting of 
recruited soldiers from local areas and farther regions of the empire, their families, and 
merchants. The city of Lauriacum was destroyed during invasions of Germanic tribes in the 
early 3rd c. CE, after which it was rebuilt. The city appears to have been abandoned in the 5th 
c. CE after invasion by the Huns.  
 The burials studied here come from one of the cemeteries found at the site, the 
cemetery of Steinpass. The burials mostly date between the 3rd4th c. CE. Pelvic soil was 
collected from thirteen individuals housed in the Obersterreichisches Landesmuseum 
collections. Soil was collected from the skeletal collection by Maria Marschler. Soil present in 
the sacral foramina was collected for analysis. Soil present in the cranium of these individuals 
was collected as a control. 
Table 20: Details of burials from Lauriacum, Austria from which soil samples were collected 
from the pelvis of skeletons. 
Grave 
Number Individual Age Sex Samples Collected 
Helminth Eggs in 
Pelvic Soil 
147 1 2125 years Female 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
230 N/A 3040 years Male 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
273 1 1822 years Male 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
282 N/A 2030 years Male 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
284 N/A 4060 years Male 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
290 N/A 2025 years Indeterminate 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
291 N/A 2025 years Female 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
293 N/A 69 years Undetermined Sacrum and control from cervical vertebrae 
301 N/A 1822 years Female 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
308 1 3550 years Male 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
343 N/A 2540 years Female 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
363 N/A 2025 years Male 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
368 1 2540 years Female 
Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
Note: Age and sex data was collected by Maria Marschler. 
4.3.3.2 Results 
No helminth eggs were found in the subsamples of pelvic soil from the 13 burials sampled 
from Lauriacum. ELISA analysis was not used to test for protozoan parasites in these samples 
due to the low yield of pelvic soil and high cost of the tests. 
4.3.4 Arlon 
4.3.4.1 Materials 
Arlon, or Orolauno, was a Roman vicus in modern-day Belgium, the Roman province of 
Belgica. It flourished between the 1st3rd c. CE, and is thought to have had an economy reliant 
on various crafts as established by the many workshops that have been excavated from the 
site. These workshops include those for iron metallurgy, wood turning, leather processing, 
and glass making (Defgne et al., 2008). Around the 4th c. CE a military fortress was built on 
the vicus covering an area of about 5 hectares (Pigire and Henrotay, 2012). It was located 
along two Roman roads, one from Reims to Trier and one from Metz to Tongeren (Pigire 
and Henrotay, 2012). 
 Numerous buildings have been identified that are thought to be workshops for 
different types of craft. One of these has been analysed fairly extensively, it is a large building 
with good water supply, and numerous vats and pits. Sediment from the pipes and vats 
underwent archaeobotanical analysis and at the time helminth eggs were also identified. 
These eggs were identified as roundworm (Ascaris sp.) and whipworm (Trichuris sp.) 
(Defgne et al., 2008). The organization of the building and associated analysis led to 
identification of the building as a fullers workshop. As urine from animals and in some cases 
humans is often used in the fulling process, it is unclear if these eggs were from humans or 
animals. It is possible that the reused urine was contaminated with faecal material and could 
easily contain some helminth eggs. 
 The samples studied as part of this research came from the fill of a Roman period 
latrine (F05) at the site that dates between 250280 CE. The area of the site where the latrine 
was found was excavated in 20032006 by the archaeological heritage agency of the Walloon 
region and samples were obtained from a collaboration with Koen Deforce. The latrine was 
found while excavating an artisanal and residential quarter of the vicus. As this latrine was 
primarily for human use, this context should help us clarify if roundworm and whipworm 
were infecting humans living at the Arlon vicus. 
4.3.4.2 Results 
Eggs from Ascaris sp. (roundworm) and Trichuris sp. (whipworm) were found in the 
subsample studied from the Roman latrine at Arlon, Belgium (Figure 32 and Figure 33), as 
well as two eggs each of Capillaria sp. and Dicrocoelium dendriticum. These eggs were well 
preserved, as indicated by the presence of a mamillated coat on most of the roundworm eggs 
which is often lost in archaeological samples. The concentration of roundworm eggs in the 
sample was 990 eggs/gram and the concentration of whipworm was 1,795 eggs/g. The 
majority of roundworm eggs found were fertile eggs though far fewer infertile eggs were 
present as well. The mean length of fertile roundworm eggs was 66.7 m, and the mean width 
was 51.9 m. For infertile eggs, the mean length was 84.0 m and the mean width was 47.6 
m. The dimensions of whipworm eggs are presented in Table 21 for eggs with and without 
polar plugs. The mean length of whipworm eggs with both polar plugs was 52.9 m, with one 
polar plug 51.9 m, and with no polar plugs 50.3 m. The mean width of all whipworm eggs 
was 26.7 m. There is a large overlap in the size ranges of T. trichiura and T. suis, however, 
as can be seen in Figure 34 most of the eggs found in the Arlon latrine are clustering in the 
size range of human whipworm (T. trichiura). In conjunction with this, these eggs were found 
in a latrine used by humans so they are most likely from the human-infecting species T. 
trichiura. 
Figure 32: Ascaris sp. eggs from Arlon latrine. Fertile eggs with mamillated coats (left and 
centre), infertile egg (right). Scale bars are 20m. 
Figure 33: Trichuris sp. egg from Arlon latrine. Scale bar is 20m. 
Figure 34: Dimensions of Trichuris sp. (whipworm) eggs from the Arlon latrine plotted 
against reported dimensions of T. trichiura eggs (solid box) and T. suis eggs (dashed box) 
without polar plugs (Beer, 1976). Eggs without polar plugs are marked by open blue circles, 
eggs with one polar plug are marked by red squares, and eggs with both polar plugs are 
marked by black circles. 
In addition to roundworm and whipworm, two eggs of Capillaria sp. were found and 
two eggs of Dicrocoelium dendriticum were found (Figure 35 and Figure 36). Therefore, the 
concentration of both Capillaria sp. and Dicrocoelium dendriticum eggs was 10 eggs/g. 
Capillaria sp. eggs were differentiated from Trichuris sp. based on the characteristic pitted 
surface of Capillaria sp., while Trichuris sp. eggs have smooth egg shells. Both Capillaria sp. 
eggs were missing their polar plugs. The length of the eggs was 49.3 m and 58.4 m, and the 
corresponding widths were 30.3 m and 24.4 m. Both Dicrocoelium eggs found had their 
opercula still attached. The length of the eggs was 42.3 m and 40.1 m, and the 
corresponding widths were 24.9 m and 22.5 m. These eggs are most likely from D. 
dendriticum as this is the species that is the most common in Europe, while D. hospes is 
found mainly in Africa and D. chinensis in East Asia (Otranto and Traversa, 2002; Mehlhorn, 
2016). 
Figure 35: Capillaria sp. egg from the Arlon latrine. The images are of the same egg, the 
surface structure of the egg is visible in the image on the right. Scale bars are 20m. 
Figure 36: Dicrocoelium dendriticum eggs from the Arlon latrine, both with attached 
opercula. Scale bars are 20m. 
Table 21: Details of eggs found in the latrine sample from Arlon. Egg concentrations are in 
eggs/g and mean dimensions are presented for each species for eggs that could be measured. 
Species 
Number of 
eggs Eggs/g 
Mean Length 
 SD (m) 
Mean Width  
SD (m) 
Ascaris sp. 198 990   
fertile 155 775 66.7  4.9 51.9  4.2 
infertile 11 55 84.0  6.2 47.6  4.4 
Capillaria sp. (no polar plugs) 2 10 53.8  6.4 27.3 4.2 
Dicrocoelium dendriticum  
(with opercula) 
2 10 41.2  1.5 23.7  1.7 
Trichuris sp. 359 1,795 50.5  2.4 26.7  1.3 
both polar plugs 10 50 52.9  1.2 27.9  2.1 
one polar plug 16 80 51.9  2.1 26.6  1.9 
no polar plugs 299 1,495 50.3  2.3 26.6  1.3 
Notes: Dimensions in shaded rows are for all eggs that could be measured. To calculate concentrations all eggs 
were counted even if they could not be measured. 
The first ELISA test produced one positive well out of eight for Giardia duodenalis. 
However, on the repeat test with a different subsample there were no wells with positive 
results for Giardia duodenalis, thus we cannot confidently say that Giardia is present in the 
sample. However, it is possible that the parasite was present in very low concentrations and 
thus was only detected in one of 8 technical repeats on the first test and not detected in the 
second subsample. All tests were negative for E. histolytica and Cryptosporidium. The 
absorbance values for the ELISA tests can be found in Appendix B.2. 
4.3.5 Paphos 
4.3.5.1 Materials 
Paphos is an ancient city in Cyprus, occupied from the Neolithic period onwards. All samples 
studied here are from the Hellenistic/Roman period. Pelvic soil from individuals buried in 
three Hellenistic-Roman tombs excavated from the centre of the modern city was collected 
for analysis. These were part of rescue excavations by the Department of Antiquities of 
Cyprus. A total of six tombs were excavated though samples could only be collected from 
three. These tombs are thought to be part of a larger cemetery located 3.5 km north of the 
ancient city of Nea Paphos, which was the capital of Cyprus during the Hellenistic and 
Roman periods. They were rock-cut tombs, typical of this period in Cyprus, with a dromos 
leading into a central chamber that had a series of niches in the walls. Most tombs had 
multiple individuals, buried in the niches or in the centre of the central chamber. Some 
individuals were placed in sarcophagi. 
 Soil from the pelvis of six skeletons was collected by the excavators for analysis, these 
samples were obtained from a collaboration with Kirsi Lorentz and Grigoria Ioannou. These 
six individuals were buried in tombs MP3937, MP3938, and MP3939. Four individuals were 
sampled from tomb MP3937, all were buried in the central chamber. They were all supine in 
the extended position. The individual sampled from tomb MP3938 was buried in one of the 
niches, supine in the flexed position. Finally the individual from tomb MP3939 was buried in 
a sarcophagus in the central chamber. Samples were collected from the pelvis directly anterior 
to the sacrum and, where possible, controls were taken from inside the cranium and around 
the feet. 
Table 22: Details of burials from Paphos, Cyprus from which soil samples were collected 
from the pelvis of skeletons. 
Number 
Skeleton 
Number Age Sex Samples Collected 
Helminth Eggs in 
Pelvic Soil 
MP3937 SK1 4451 years Male Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet 
MP3937 SK2 3034 years Male Pelvis - 
MP3937 SK3 3039 years Male Pelvis - 
MP3937 SK4 4044 years Female Pelvis and control from feet - 
MP3938 SK1 Adult Undetermined Pelvis and control from feet - 
MP3939 SK1 4044 years Male Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet Ascaris sp. 
Note: Age and sex data for each individual was provided by Grigoria Ioannou. 
4.3.5.2 Results 
Parasite eggs were recovered from the pelvic soil of one individual, skeleton 1 in tomb 
MP3939, out of the six individuals studied from Paphos. This was the individual buried in the 
sarcophagus. No parasite eggs were found in the 0.2g control subsample from the cranium or 
feet of this individual. No parasite eggs were found in the pelvic soil samples from any other 
individuals.  
 Two roundworm (Ascaris sp.) eggs were found in the subsample of pelvic soil from 
the individual buried in the sarcophagus (Figure 37). This gives an egg concentration of 10 
eggs/g. The dimensions of the two eggs was 57.7 m long and 46.3 m wide for the first, and 
59.6 m long and 45.3 m wide for the second. These dimensions fit into the typical size 
range of fertile roundworm eggs which is 4575 m long and 3550 m wide (Garcia, 2016). 
Both eggs were decorticated, meaning they had lost their outermost mamillated coat. As a 
result, these eggs would be expected to fall on the lower end of the typical size ranges. 
Figure 37: Ascaris sp. eggs from the pelvic soil of skeleton 1, in the sarcophagus of MP3939 
at Paphos. Scale bars are 20m. 
Recovery of roundworm eggs in the pelvic soil from the individual buried in the 
sarcophagus, in the absence of any eggs in control samples collected from the cranium and the 
feet, suggests that this individual did have a true infection. In the case of the individual buried 
in the sarcophagus it is likely that this represents a true infection as the individual was buried 
in a closed environment, the sarcophagus. This makes it less likely for eggs from 
contaminated soil to be introduced, for example as might happen when a body buried in the 
ground has soil from the surface contaminated with parasite eggs thrown over the body when 
filling in the grave. When studying samples collected from latrines, egg concentrations are 
often much higher as we have the chance to find helminth eggs from many people who used 
the latrine over an extended period of time, making this a location where helminth eggs can 
accumulate. On the other hand in the case of pelvic soil we will only detect helminth eggs that 
were present in the individuals intestines at the time of death. Therefore, the low 
concentration of 10 eggs/g could still represent an infection in this individual. 
ELISA analysis was not used to test for protozoan parasites in these samples due to 
the low yield of pelvic soil and high cost of the tests. 
4.3.6 Oplontis 
4.3.6.1 Materials 
Oplontis, located in the modern city of Torre Annunziata, is a Roman site in the Bay of 
Naples, Italy. The site was destroyed by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 CE, similar to 
Pompeii. At the time of occupation, the villa would have been located on the coast of the Bay 
of Naples and shares similarities with other villas found in the Italian countryside of 
Campania. There are two main building areas at the site, referred to as Villa A and Villa B. 
Villa A is an elite villa that would have been built by and visited by wealthy Romans. Villas 
such as these in the Italian countryside served as vacation homes as well as a way to display 
ones social status and maintain social and political obligations (Gazda, 2014). Villa A at 
Oplontis consists of opulently decorated rooms and gardens for hosting guests, dining, leisure, 
as well as service areas for slaves who would have worked at the villa. Villa B on the other 
hand, is not in true sense a villa as has been made clear by further excavation, it is actually 
thought to be a commercial area for shops and trade or distribution of goods, with some living 
areas (Gazda and Clarke, 2016). Villa B consists of a central courtyard surrounded by two-
storey buildings with more than 70 rooms (Thomas, 2016; Van der Graaff et al., 2016). Some 
of these rooms contained large numbers of shipping jars (amphorae) which were used to 
transport wine and fish sauce attesting to the trade connections of the villa (Muslin, 2016). 
Furthermore, the opulent materials used to decorate some of the upper floor rooms can be 
traced to various locations. For example, marble quarried from Greece, Tunisia, and Egypt 
was found in the residential areas (Muslin, 2016). 
In one of these rooms, room 10, the skeletal remains of 54 individuals were discovered 
(Ward, 2016) and these were recently excavated in 2017 by Kristina Killgrove and Nicola 
Terrenato (Error Reference source not found.). It seems likely that the individuals found in 
this room were residents of Oplontis and possibly refugees from the surrounding area hiding 
out during the eruption of Vesuvius. Some scholars have suggested that a subset of the 
individuals who were recovered with jewellery and other precious finds were wealthy 
individuals and even potentially the owner of the villa and his family, while the others may 
have been servants or slaves (Ward, 2016). As some individuals had been exposed since their 
first discovery it was not possible to collect soil samples from the pelvis of all skeletons but 
samples were collected by the excavators, under the direction of Kristina Killgrove, from 
eight undisturbed individuals (Table 23). These individuals died during the eruption of Mount 
Vesuvius. 
Table 23: Details of burials from Oplontis, Italy from which soil samples were collected from 
the pelvis of skeletons. 
Skeleton 
ID Age Sex Samples Collected 
Helminth Eggs in 
Pelvic Soil 
C Middle Adult Female Pelvis and control from cranium - 
D Young Adult Female Pelvis and control from cranium Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
E Middle Adult Female Pelvis and control from cranium - 
I Adolescent Indeterminate Pelvis and control from cranium Ascaris sp. 
J Middle Adult Female Pelvis and control from cranium - 
K Young Adult Female Pelvis and control from cranium - 
M Young Adult Female Pelvis and control from cranium - 
O Older Child Indeterminate Pelvis and control from cranium - 
Note: Age and sex data provided by Kristina Killgrove. 
4.3.6.2 Results 
Helminth eggs were found in the pelvic soil from two of the eight individuals sampled from 
Oplontis. In Individual D eggs from Ascaris sp. and Trichuris trichiura were found (Figure 38 
and Figure 40). In Individual I only eggs from Ascaris sp. were found. The control samples 
from the cranium of these two individuals did not contain any parasite eggs. No other 
individuals had helminth eggs in the subsample of soil studied.  
 In Individual D a total of 197 Ascaris sp. eggs were found in the 0.2 g subsample 
studied, giving a concentration of 985 eggs/g. All of the Ascaris sp. eggs were fertile and 
decorticated  missing their mamillated coats. The mean length of Ascaris sp. eggs was 55.8 
m and the width was 44.4 m. Six Trichuris trichiura eggs were found giving a 
concentration of 30 eggs/g. None of the eggs had either polar plug present. The mean length 
of T. trichiura eggs was 44.9 m and width was 24.3 m. This fits within the standard size 
range for T. trichiura eggs missing their polar plugs and is not in the overlapping range with 
T. suis (Beer, 1976). 
 In Individual I only Ascaris sp. eggs were found. All were fertile and decorticated 
similar to Individual D. The concentration of eggs found was 45 eggs/g with the mean length 
56.3 m and width 43.6 m.  
Table 24: Dimensions and egg concentrations of helminths found in pelvic soil from Oplontis. 
Individual Species 
Number 
of eggs Eggs/g 
Mean Length  
SD (m) 
Mean Width  
SD (m) 
D Ascaris sp. 197 985 55.8  3.4 44.4  2.0 
 Trichuris trichiura 6 30 44.9  2.1 24.3  1.2 
I Ascaris sp. 9 45 56.3  3.4 43.6  2.2 
 The eggs identified as Ascaris sp. eggs in the pelvic soil from Oplontis are the proper 
shape and size however, their initial identification was uncertain do the irregularity of the 
surface of the egg shell. The surface of the shell appears to be slightly porous or spiculated 
(Figure 39) while typically decorticated roundworm eggs are smooth. For this reason images 
of the eggs were sent to a number of other specialists to ensure that they were not 
misidentified. Collaborators from Oplontis and Italy more widely have confirmed that they 
are not pollen, fungal spore, or other non-pollen palynomorphs thus the most likely 
explanation still seems to be that they are Ascaris sp. eggs. It is possible that the high heat and 
ash environment that they were exposed to during the eruption of Mount Vesuvius resulted in 
the irregular appearance of the eggs.  
Figure 38: Ascaris sp. eggs from pelvic soil of Individual D from Oplontis. Scale bars are 
20m. 
Figure 39: An Ascaris sp. egg from Oplontis. The surface structure of the egg is visible in the 
image on the right. Scale bars are 20m. 
Figure 40: Trichuris trichiura eggs from the pelvic soil of Individual D from Oplontis. Scale 
bars are 20m. 
4.3.7 Vagnari 
4.3.7.1 Materials 
Vagnari is an Imperial Roman estate in southern Italy, located near the modern-day city of 
Gravina in Puglia. The site consists of a vicus (village) and associated cemetery. During the 
expansion of the Roman Republic into southern Italy in the 2nd c. BCE land was seized by the 
Roman state and local Italian populations were enslaved or employed (Roselaar, 2014). Land 
seized in this time period became public property of the Roman people or was parcelled out to 
certain individuals. Some of this public land was later claimed by Roman elite and established 
as private estates. In the case of the estate at Vagnari, stamped tiles suggest that the estate was 
owned by the Emperor and individuals working on it may have been enslaved or employed 
(Small, 2011b). Archaeological support for the hypothesis that workers at Vagnari were 
slaves comes from the finding of a tile stamped with GRATI CAESARIS (of Gratus (slave) of 
Caesar) (Small, 2011a). Stable isotope and mitochondrial DNA studies on skeletons from the 
Vagnari cemetery suggest that the majority of people buried at Vagnari were local or 
immigrated from nearby southern Italy (Emery et al., 2018a; Emery et al., 2018b). 
 The vicus at Vagnari was constructed in the area of a minor Iron Age site, and became 
the centre of the Imperial Estate around the 1st c. CE. Industries including tile production, iron 
working, lead processing, and wine production were established (Small, 2011b; Prowse and 
Carroll, 2017). The area around the estate also likely continued to be used as pastures, as it 
had been in the Iron Age. These industries would have been established to produce revenue 
for the Emperor. The excavated areas of the vicus so far have revealed a number of buildings. 
Notably one of the buildings consists of a series of small rooms with beaten earth floors and 
no hearths or other domestic features, which may have been for housing of slaves or workers, 
or storage of goods (Carroll, 2014). There are also buildings that appear to be dedicated to 
specific industries, as well as an area for wine production and a number of kilns around the 
site. There were a series of drains running underneath the buildings at the vicus which were 
hypothesized to contain waste or water run-off (Figure 41), though the origins of these drains 
is still unknown. Four sediment samples from the fill of three drains were collected to test for 
parasites (Table 25), and the presence of faecal waste in these drains. These samples were 
collected by excavators at the site under the direction of Maureen Carroll. 
Table 25: Details of samples collected from drains at the vicus at Vagnari. 
Drain 
Number 
Context 
Number 
5013 5020 
5045 5046 
5045 5050 
5051 5065 
Figure 41: Excavated drain from Vagnari vicus. Image credit: Maureen Carroll. 
The cemetery associated with the vicus at Vagnari was in use between the 1st4th 
centuries CE. To date around 140 burials have been excavated, with excavations starting in 
2002. The most common burial type in the cemetery is alla cappuccina burials constructed by 
placing the body in a shallow pit that is covered with large roofing tiles (tegulae) in an 
inverted v then capped with imbrices (Figure 42). Other burials are in pits with no coverings 
or covered with a layer of flat roofing tiles, and some also contain libation tubes. Most burials 
are inhumations, only four cremation burials have been excavated so far (none of which were 
sampled for paleoparasitological analysis) (Prowse and Carroll, 2017). Starting in 2012, soil 
samples were collected from the pelvis of skeletons for palaeoparasitological analysis. 
Samples were collected from directly on top of the sacrum and control samples were collected 
from inside or around the cranium and around the feet where possible. Currently 22 
individuals have been sampled and were studied as part of this doctoral research (Table 26). 
These samples were collected by myself and other excavators at the site under the direction of 
Tracy Prowse. 
Figure 42: Example of an alla cappuccina burial from the cemetery at Vagnari (F327). Image 
Credit: Tracy Prowse. 
Table 26: Details of burials from the Vagnari cemetery from which soil samples were 
collected from the pelvis. 
Feature 
Number Burial Type Age Sex Samples Collected 
Helminth Eggs in 
Pelvic Soil 
F289 Cappuccina 1516 years Undetermined Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F290 Cappuccina 45+ years Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F291 Cappuccina Adult Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F298 Cappuccina Adult Female Pelvis and control from 
midchest 
F306 Cappuccina Adult Female Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F308B Cappuccina Adult Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F309 Cappuccina Young 
Adult 
Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F312 Cappuccina Young 
Adult 
Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F313 Cappuccina 1923 years Female Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F314C Cappuccina 811 years Undetermined Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F315 Cappuccina 2027 years Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F318 Cappuccina Adult Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F319 Cappuccina Young 
Adult 
Female Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F320 Cappuccina 2749 years Female Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F321 Pit Young 
Adult 
Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F323 Cappuccina 3358 years Female Pelvis and control from 
F324 Flat tile Adult Female Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F327 Cappuccina 3358 years Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F331 Pit Adult Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F333 Cappuccina 3049 years Female Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F336 Cappuccina 812 years Undetermined Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
F345B Cappuccina 1516 years Female Pelvis and control from 
cranium and feet 
Note: Age and sex data were collected by Tracy Prowse and Marissa Ledger. 
4.3.7.2 Results 
No helminth eggs were found in the subsamples of pelvic soil from the 22 burials sampled 
from Vagnari. ELISA analysis was not used to test for protozoan parasites in these samples 
due to the low yield of pelvic soil and high costs of the tests. 
 Eggs from Ascaris sp. were found in subsamples studied from one of the three drains 
in the vicus (village) at Vagnari (Figure 43). These eggs were found in very low 
concentrations and were poorly preserved. The only sample that had eggs in it was Context 
5046 in drain 5045. There were two sediment samples collected from drain 5045 but only this 
one sample had eggs in it. A total of 5 eggs were found, giving a concentration of 25 eggs/g. 
The mean length of the eggs was 62.5 m (SD 2.4) and the mean width was 48.8 m (SD 
1.6). All eggs were fertile and decorticated. 
Figure 43: Ascaris sp. eggs from Vagnari vicus drain 5045 (context 5046). Scale bars are 
20m. 
 It is not possible to differentiate between A. lumbricoides from humans and A. suum 
from pigs and as mentioned earlier these parasites are not necessarily host specific. Therefore, 
it is possible that these eggs could have been washed into the drains if animal (especially) pig 
faeces contaminated this area of the vicus and were washed into the drains. A latrine has not 
yet been found on the vicus site, however there likely was one somewhere in the area that has 
not yet been excavated. It is possible that the drains studied were connected to latrines or even 
a bath complex in other areas of the site, which is how Ascaris sp. eggs from human 
infections could wind up in the drains. The low concentration of eggs in the drain sample 
suggests that the area was not heavily contaminated with faecal material or few 
individuals/animals were infected. They may also be reflective of poor preservation at the 
site. Compared to skeletal remains from Roman period Britain the skeletons at Vagnari are 
poorly preserved, though there is a range in completeness. This may also play a role in the 
negative results from the pelvic soil samples. 
ELISA analysis was not used to test for protozoan parasites in the pelvic soil or drain 
samples from Vagnari. Due to the high cost of the tests and the low concentration of eggs in 
the Vagnari drain, which may indicate a low concentration of faecal material. At the time of 
writing, other samples were prioritized for testing, however, this sample will be processed on 
a later run when extra wells are available. 
4.3.8 The Vacone Villa 
4.3.8.1 Materials 
The Roman villa of Vacone is being excavated as part of the Upper Sabina Tiberina Project. 
The villa is located 55 km north of Rome in the small town of Vacone. The first period of 
construction of the villa was in the late-Republican period (2nd c. BCE) however, it appears to 
have been extensively renovated in the early Imperial period (the time of Augustus) (Bloy et 
al., 2014). This rural villa was extensively decorated with numerous preserved mosaic floors 
and painted plaster walls (Bloy et al., 2017). The villa consists of numerous rooms for living 
and production. Areas dedicated to olive oil production have been identified, and agricultural 
activity also took place around the villa. The villa was abandoned in the early 3rd c. CE after it 
was damaged, possibly by an earthquake.  Some attempts at repair were made but the villa 
was eventually abandoned. There is then another phase of activity at the site at the time of 
Lombard expansions into Italy, and several burials have been found dating from the 7th to 8th 
c. CE. For further discussion of the post-Roman occupation see section 4.4.2 below. 
 Sediment samples were collected from three areas at the villa that were thought to 
contain faecal material, either because they were sewage drains or latrines. The first was from 
the subfloor of Room 33, a potential latrine at the villa (VAC1, 1142, Room 33) (Figure 44). 
This room was suspected to be a latrine (personal communication) and soil was collected 
from the floor of the room. Three samples were collected from the room for analysis. The 
second set of samples came from a cappuccina drain that may have carried faecal material 
and other sewage (VAC1, 1350, cappuccina) (Figure 44). Three soil samples were collected 
from this drain. The third set of samples came from another drain excavated from the site in 
2019 (VAC19, drain 931). The drain was sampled in four locations: 1) the exposed drain 
entrance (context 1514); 2) the first 2m of the drain channel (context 1514.1); 3) 2m down the 
drain channel to the corner (context 1514.2); and 4) at the corner of the drain (context 
1514.3). The samples were obtained from a collaboration with Candace Rice and Erica 
Rowan. The samples from drain 931 were collected by Erica Rowan who also studied them 
for archaeobotanical and insect remains. Her results strongly suggested that this was a sewer 
likely to contain faecal material. Identification of human parasites in these samples could also 
confirm the suspected purpose of these contexts as part of the sanitation infrastructure of the 
villa with a primary use to carry faecal material and waste. 
Figure 44: Cappuccina drain (left) and the possible latrine, Room 33 (right) from the villa at 
Vacone. Image credit: Upper Sabina Tiberina Project. 
Table 27: Description of Roman period samples collected and analysed from the villa at 
Vacone. 
Sample 
Context 
Number 
Description of sampling 
location 
Room 33, 
subfloor 1142 Floor of possible latrine 
Cappuccina 
drain 1350 Drain 
Drain 931 1514 Opening of drain 
 1514.1 Opening to 2m 
 1514.2 2m to corner 
 1514.3 corner 
4.3.8.2 Results 
Similar to Vagnari, the only helminth eggs found in the sediment samples from the villa at 
Vacone were Ascaris sp. In subsample 1 from Room 33 one Ascaris sp. egg was found 
(Figure 45), giving a concentration of 5 eggs/g in the sample. It was suspected during 
excavation that this room may have held a latrine (personal communication). The egg found 
measured 69.4 m in length and 50.1 m in width. This fits within the average size range for 
modern roundworm eggs. The egg was decorticated (missing its outer mamillated coat) and 
fertile. As the egg was found in a sample taken from the subfloor of the room it is possible it 
was deposited there during use of the room or even during construction of the floor if it was 
present in sediment moved from another area of the site. 
Figure 45: Ascaris sp. egg found in Room 33 from the villa at Vacone. Scale bar is 20m. 
No eggs were found in the subsamples from the cappuccina drain. This could be 
because it was used primarily to carry water runoff rather than waste. Alternatively, it is also 
possible that any faecal material and parasite eggs present in the drain did not preserve. If the 
drain was still functioning to carry water after the abandonment of the villa it is possible that 
any eggs present were washed away.  
ELISA was not done on the samples from the Vacone villa due to the low 
concentration of eggs found in the first subsamples studied, which may indicate a low 
concentration of faecal material in the samples. The samples from drain 931 were obtained 
close to the date of submission of this thesis so were not tested. The subsamples from drain 
931 will be tested at a later date when additional ELISA kits are available. 
 Ascaris sp. eggs were found in higher concentrations in the samples from drain 931. 
The egg concentrations in the four samples ranged from 140620 eggs/g. All eggs were 
decorticated with the mean length ranging from 59.661.6 m and the mean width ranging 
from 46.546.6 m in the different samples (Table 28). In addition, one Trichuris sp. egg was 
found in context 1514.3 from drain 931. This is the only whipworm egg found in any sample 
from the villa at Vacone. This egg was 47.5 m long and 25.2 m wide, missing both polar 
plugs (Figure 46). These results strongly suggest that this drain was used to carry sewage 
including human faecal material. 
Figure 46: Ascaris sp. egg found in drain 931 (context 1514.1) from the villa at Vacone (left). 
Trichuris sp. egg found in drain 931 (context 1514.3) from the villa at Vacone (right). Scale 
bars are 20m. 
Table 28: Details of helminth eggs found in samples from the villa at Vacone. For each 
sample, helminth taxa identified are listed as well as egg concentrations in eggs per gram and 
mean length and width with standard deviations.  
Sample Context Species Eggs/g 
Mean Length  
SD (m) 
Mean Width  
SD (m) 
Room 33, 
subfloor 
1142 Ascaris sp. 5 69.4 50.1 
Cappuccina drain  1350 none 0 N/A N/A 
Drain 931 1514 Ascaris sp. 620 61.5  3.4 46.5  1.9 
 1514.1 Ascaris sp. 405 61.5  2.7 46.5  1.5 
 1514.2 Ascaris sp. 140 59.6  3.9 46.6  2.1 
 1514.3 Ascaris sp. 185 61.6  3.6 46.5  1.8 
  Trichuris sp. 5 47.5 25.2 
4.3.9 Viminacium 
4.3.9.1 Materials 
The results from Viminacium have been included in a manuscript submitted to the American 
Journal of Archaeology. The description here is adapted from that work (Ledger et al., under 
review; see Appendix A.5). 
The northeastern frontiers of the Roman Empire were partially located in the Balkans 
and due to their location as bordering kingdoms to the east they had a large military presence 
and numerous forts to protect the border. Viminacium was the capital of the Roman province 
of Moesia Superior, and was a major legionary fortress and city in Serbia, the Danube region 
of the Roman Empire. It was strategically located near the northern frontier of the empire and 
at the junction of major roads leading in all directions that were important for military 
movements and trade in the region. It was likely established in the 1st c. AD as a military 
camp with a legion permanently stationed there, and due to its location along major roads and 
rich agricultural land, a thriving city grew around it. Viminacium was a base for smaller forts 
in the region and archaeological excavations have shown it had a number of workshops to 
supply goods to other forts and cities in the region (Wilkes, 2005). The population of the city 
has been estimated to be around 40,000 at its peak, and was quite diverse with influences 
from the Celtic Scordisci who lived there in pre-Roman times, the Dacians on the other side 
of the Danube, and many travellers from elsewhere in the empire (Golubovi and Mrdi, 
2010). 
While excavating the city bath complex at Viminacium in 2004 (Figure 47), a public 
communal latrine was identified. Around its outer circumference there was a channel into 
which water flowed from the baths to drain faeces from the latrine (Figure 48). Water would 
have entered the channel in the southwest corner, leaving the room at its northwest corner 
through the opening in the west wall. The flow of water through the room was enabled by the 
slope of the floor whose highest angle is registered in the southwest corner, while the lowest 
is recorded in the northwest corner at the hole in the west wall. Coprolite deposits were 
discovered on the floor near the northeast corner of the room. Coins found on the floor of the 
latrine, one of which dates to the second half of the 2nd c. CE, suggest the use of the latrine 
and the deposition of the coprolites discovered to date from the middle of the 2nd c. to the 
beginning of the 3rd c. CE (personal communication). A large coprolite found in the drain of 
the latrine was used to look for preserved parasite eggs. Its surface contour reflects the 
internal shape of the human colon and rectum (Figure 49). Four separate subsamples were 
collected from different areas of the coprolite. These samples were obtained through a 
collaboration with Nataa arki and Saa Redi. 
Figure 47: Photo of Viminacium thermae with latrine and location of coprolite in latrine drain 
marked by red arrow. Image credit: Nataa arki and Saa Redi, Viminacium 
Archaeological Project. 
Figure 48: Plan of Viminacium thermae with location of coprolite in latrine marked by red dot 
in top left corner. Image Credit: Nataa arki and Saa Redi, Viminacium Archaeological 
Project. 
Figure 49: Coprolite recovered from Viminacium thermae. Its max length is 243 mm, max 
width 146 mm, and max thickness 60 mm. Image Credit: Nataa arki and Saa Redi, 
Viminacium Archaeological Project. 
4.3.9.2 Results 
In the four subsamples studied from the coprolite recovered from the public latrine at 
Viminacium, eggs from Ascaris sp. and Trichuris trichiura were found (Figure 50 and Figure 
51). Most roundworm eggs were fertile but two infertile eggs were found, and some had 
preserved mamillated coats. The mean length of fertile roundworm eggs was 61.4 m and the 
mean width of fertile eggs was 48.2 m (Table 29). The concentration of roundworm eggs in 
the four different subsamples from the same coprolite ranged from 2550 eggs/g. 
 The Trichuris trichiura eggs found were also well preserved, some still had polar 
plugs. The mean length of eggs with both polar plugs was 53.9 m and without polar plugs 
was 49.4 m. The mean width of all eggs was 26.9 m (Table 29). This fits within standard 
size ranges for human whipworm both with and without polar plugs, though the mean is 
within the overlapping range with T. suis (Beer, 1976; Garcia, 2016). The concentration of 
whipworm eggs in the four different subsamples ranged from 65150 eggs/g. The presence of 
the eggs in a human coprolite in relatively high concentrations makes them most likely to 
represent a true human infection with the human-infecting species of Trichuris, therefore they 
have been identified as T. trichiura. 
Figure 50: Ascaris sp. eggs from Viminacium coprolite. Scale bars are 20m. 
Figure 51: Trichuris trichiura eggs from Viminacium coprolite. Scale bars are 20m. 
Table 29: Dimensions of Ascaris sp. and Trichuris trichiura eggs found in the coprolite from 
Viminacium. 
Species 
Mean Length  
SD (m) 
Mean Width  
SD (m) 
Ascaris sp.   
fertile 61.4  4.9 48.2  4.1 
infertile 87.3  0.0 42.8  8.5 
Trichuris trichiura 51.5  4.0 26.9  1.7 
both polar plugs 53.9  3.1 26.5  1.7 
one polar plug  51.8  5.0 27.1  1.7 
no polar plugs 49.4  3.4 27.1  1.8 
All ELISA tests were negative for the Viminacium coprolite, including technical and 
biological repeats. On the first test, sample 3 was processed in two different ways due to the 
fact that trisodium phosphate was not adequate to disaggregate the heavily mineralized 
coprolite. The first subsample was ground with a mortar and pestle then disaggregated in 
trisodium phosphate overnight (~19 hours) before sieving. A second subsample was 
disaggregated with 1M HCl until all carbonate material was broken up and the sample 
stopped bubbling when HCl was added dropwise. The sample was then rinsed with distilled 
water 5 times, centrifuged, and concentrated to a final volume of 2.5 mL. The two variations 
were done because the stop solution in the ELISA kits is a concentrated acid (HS) and so it is 
possible that if the sample was not brought back to a nearly neutral pH it would prevent the 
necessary enzyme reactions in the kits. On the retest the sample was prepared with mortar and 
pestle and only ran in one column. The absorbance values for these tests can be found in 
Appendix B.3. 
4.3.10 Ephesus 
4.3.10.1 Materials 
The material from Ephesus has been published and the information here has been taken from 
that publication: Ledger, M.L. et al. (2018) Intestinal parasites from public and private 
latrines and the harbour canal in Roman period Ephesus, Turkey (1st c. BCE to 6th c. CE), 
Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports, 21, pp. 289297 (see Appendix A.4). 
 The city of Ephesus has been well studied both from a historical and archaeological 
perspective due to its impressive ruins and religious history. It is the site of the famed Temple 
of Artemis and the library of Celsus. Ephesus has a long history of occupation beginning in 
the 7th millennium BCE. The Hellenistic city was founded by one of Alexander's successors, 
Lysimachos, in 296 BCE, and became part of the Roman Republic in 133 BCE (Ladsttter et 
al., 2016). Under the reign of Augustus, Ephesus was declared the capital of the province of 
Asia, in place of the former capital Pergamum, after which the city grew extensively through 
the Imperial period (Scherrer, 2001). It was situated along roads connecting the Aegean coast 
to the interior of Asia Minor as well as the Persian Royal Road and trade routes through the 
Meander valley (Ladsttter, 2019). It was also well connected to the rest of the Mediterranean 
region by its harbour. Historical records give further evidence for many high-status visitors 
who came to Ephesus for political reasons. As the seat of the proconsul in Asia and a centre 
for early Christian communities, it was a centre for commerce, politics, and scholarship, 
particularly in medicine.  
 Archaeological excavations began at the site in 1863 by J.T. Wood in his search for 
the Temple of Artemis. Since 1895 excavations have been continued by the Austrian 
Archaeological Institute, uncovering public and private spaces of the Late Antique/Byzantine 
city and harbour area (Ladsttter et al., 2016). Sediment samples collected during recent 
excavations were used to look for evidence of parasitic infection in the population of the city. 
These samples and archaeological information about the site were obtained through a 
collaboration with Friederike Stock, Helmut Schwaiger, Maria Knipping, Helmut Brckner, 
and Sabine Ladsttter. 
 The first set of sediment samples analysed from Ephesus were collected from the drain 
of a public latrine associated with the adjacent Varus bath complex, also called the Baths of 
Scholastica (Jansen, 2006). This bath complex was located along a major public street 
through the ancient city. The public latrine was available for use by anyone visiting the baths. 
This means it would have attracted not only locals but also those from other provinces within 
the Empire who were visiting Ephesus for trade, politics, scholarship, or passing through on 
their way to other cities. Sediment samples were taken at four depths from the surface (020 
cm, 4060 cm, 90110 cm, and at 150 cm) in the drain of the public latrine, after modern 
sediment had been removed (Figure 52). All samples date to the 6th century CE, the latest 
period of use of the latrine. 
Figure 52: Photo of the fill of the drain of the public latrine at Ephesus (left); image credit: 
Friederike Stock. Mineralised material from sewer connected to private latrine at Ephesus 
(right); image credit: Marissa Ledger. From Ledger et al. (2018). 
 The second sample was collected from a private latrine (Room No. 34/34a) of one of 
the nearby Terrace houses, dated from the Augustan period to the 3rd century CE (Ladsttter, 
2013; Ployer, 2016). Archaeological excavation of the Terrace houses at Ephesus has shown 
that they were quite opulent and would have been inhabited by higher class individuals who 
were able to afford the luxury of a private latrine. Mineralised material adherent to the sides 
of the sewer connected to the latrine from Terrace House 2 (unit 7) was scraped off and used 
for analysis (Figure 52). The seating component of the latrine was destroyed in the 3rd century 
4.3.10.2 Results 
In the drain from the public latrine at Ephesus eggs of Ascaris sp. were found exclusively. 
Eggs were found in all four samples from different depths in the drain. A total of 20 eggs 
were found in all samples, all eggs were fertilized and decorticated (Figure 53). In the 
subsample studied from 02cm one egg was found. In the two subsamples studied from 4
6cm deep seven eggs were found (17.5 eggs/g). In the two subsamples studied from 911cm 
deep ten eggs were found (25 eggs/g). Finally, in the subsample studied from 15cm deep two 
eggs were found (10 eggs/g). The mean length of all eggs was 60.9 m (SD 3.4) and the mean 
width was 46.5 m (SD 2.8). 
 In the mineralised material from the private latrine at Ephesus eggs of Trichuris 
trichiura were found (Figure 53). A total of 11 eggs were found in the subsample studied (55 
eggs/g). All eggs were missing one or both polar plugs. The mean length of the eggs was 50.1 
m (SD 3.6) and the mean width was 26.4 m (SD 1.2).  
Figure 53: Trichuris trichiura egg from Ephesus house latrine and Ascaris sp. egg from public 
latrine drain. Scale bars are 20 m. 
 All ELISA results were negative for the samples from the public latrine. The 
mineralised material from the private latrine was not tested as it needed HCl to be 
disaggregated and it was thought that this could inhibit the enzymes in the ELISA kits, 
although it was later shown that this may not be the case (see section 4.3.9). All absorbance 
values can be found in Appendix B.4. 
For an in-depth discussion of microscopy results from the Roman period latrines at 
Ephesus see Ledger et al., (2018) (Appendix A.4).  
4.3.11 Sardis 
4.3.11.1 Materials 
The results from Sardis have been included in a manuscript submitted to the American 
Journal of Archaeology. The description here is taken from that work (Ledger et al., under 
review; see Appendix A.5). 
Sardis was a city roughly 150 km northeast of Aphrodisias, and was a Lydian settlement 
that later became part of the Roman Empire. It flourished during the Imperial period under 
Roman control, which is when many of its public monuments were built (Greenwalt, 2010). 
Sardis has a long history as a Lydian city and it is likely that even when it came under Greek 
control, the mostly indigenous population maintained some of the Lydian cultural heritage 
while adopting a Greek way of life (Ratt, 2008). In Late Antiquity Sardis became the capital 
of the new province of Lydia, and flourished in the 4th5th centuries which is when 
construction of its monumental synagogue may have begun (Hanfmann et al., 1983). It was a 
large city, with an estimated population in the Late Roman period around 50,000100,000 
inhabitants (Rautman, 2011). As with other sites in the eastern Mediterranean, Sardis began to 
decline in the 7th c. CE, with abandonment of certain public spaces, subdivision and 
repurposing of houses, and abandonment of the Byzantine shops after an earthquake and fire 
in the early 7th century (Rautman, 2011). 
During excavations at Sardis, sediment was collected from two drains within the city. 
The first drain was connected to a Late Roman house (F55, trench 17.1). This house latrine 
was located off the courtyard of the house and inhabitants likely had to exit into the courtyard 
in order to enter the latrine. Based on the building materials and construction, the latrine 
appears to be a later addition to the house. Similarly, the drain running beneath multiple 
rooms in the house appears to be an addition in the Late Roman period. The latrine dates from 
the late 6th c. to early 7th c. CE. The latrine was a small room that had an opening at the back 
wall, and a drainage system consisting of a pipe that exited to the north underneath room 2 
and connected to a larger drain that was sampled (Cahill, 2018:335337; Cahill, 2019:105
106). This larger drain was also connected to other latrines and would contain faecal material 
from other parts of the city. Therefore, any parasites found in this drain can give evidence for 
infection in the inhabitants of this house and any visitors as well as possibly individuals using 
latrines in other areas of the city.  
Figure 54: Plan of Late Roman house from Sardis with drain running below floors (outlined 
in red). Location of sediment sample collected from drain attached to latrine in the house is 
marked by the red dot and the location of the latrine room is marked by the black dot. Image 
credit: The Archaeological Exploration of Sardis Project. 
An additional three samples came from a drain running through the centre of the city 
(road trench 17.1). This second drain, or series of drains, ran below the synagogue though did 
not connect to any drainage from the synagogue, but would have carried waste material from 
elsewhere in the city. There were multiple branches to the drain that are thought to join a 
larger drain later in their course, samples were collected from two branches that joined 
together downstream. Similar to the drain near the Late Roman house, this drain dates to the 
Late Antique period, and was probably used beginning in the 6th c. CE until the 7th c. CE. The 
drains sampled run beneath a portico along a major street in the city. The area they are 
connected to is inaccessible as it is under a modern road. On the other side of the modern road 
is a residential area of the site so it is possible that the drains were connected to houses in this 
area. Thus, parasite eggs found in the city drain can give wider population-level evidence for 
parasitic infection in the general population of the city. 
Samples from Sardis were collected by the excavators of the site and were obtained 
through a collaboration with Nicholas Cahill and Erica Rowan. Additional information about 
the context of the samples was provided by Frances Gallart Marques and John Sigmier. 
4.3.11.2 Results 
Parasite eggs were present in samples from both the city drains and the drain connected to the 
house latrine from Sardis. Eggs from Ascaris sp. were found in all samples studied; this was 
the only helminth found in the samples (Figure 55). In the drain connected to the house 
latrine, Ascaris sp. eggs were found in a lower concentration of 55 eggs/g compared to the 
city drain, where the concentration ranged from 170305 eggs/g. The mean length of all 
Ascaris sp. eggs was 62.2 m (SD 4.3) and the mean width was 47.3 m (SD 2.5). The 
dimensions of eggs in the different samples can be found in Table 30. All eggs were fertile 
and decorticated. Due to the lack of distinction between human and pig roundworm, and the 
apparent low host-specificity of the two species (Betson et al., 2014), I have identified the 
eggs found as Ascaris sp. 
Figure 55: Ascaris sp. eggs from Sardis drains. Scale bars are 20 m. 
Table 30: Dimensions and egg counts of Ascaris sp. eggs from drains at Sardis. 
Sample Location Species 
Number 
of Eggs Eggs/g 
Mean Length  
SD (m) 
Mean Width  
SD (m) 
F55, Trench 
17.1, Basket 
House latrine 
drain 
Ascaris sp. 11 55 62.9  4.9 46.0  2.1 
RT, Trench 
17.1, Basket 
66 Top 
City drain Ascaris sp. 34 170 62.5  4.0 47.5  2.8 
RT, Trench 
17.1, Basket 
66 Bottom 
City drain Ascaris sp. 61 305 61.9  3.8 46.5  2.1 
RT, Trench 
17.1, Basket 
City drain Ascaris sp. 41 205 62.2  5.1 48.5  2.4 
All three ELISA tests were negative for protozoan parasites in the samples from Sardis. 
Absorbance values can be found in Appendix B.5. 
4.4 Post-Roman Sites 
4.4.1 Hatherdene Close Cemetery 
4.4.1.1 Materials 
The cemetery at Hatherdene Close, Cherry Hinton, Cambridge was excavated by the Oxford 
Archaeological Unit in 2016/2017. It was found to contain remains of individuals who lived 
during the Anglo-Saxon period (5th6th c. CE). Samples were collected by the Oxford 
Archaeological Unit and obtained through a collaboration with Richard Mortimer and 
Natasha Dodwell. 
A total of 92 individuals were studied from the cemetery (Table 31). Soil samples 
from the anterior surface of the sacrum and the sacral foramina of each individual were 
analysed for preserved parasite eggs and collected following published standards (Mitchell, 
2017a). Control samples from the cranium and feet of each individual were also collected. 
These samples were collected by the Oxford Archaeological Unit and then analysed in the 
Ancient Parasites lab at the University of Cambridge, UK. 
Table 31: Skeletons from Hatherdene Close from which soil was collected from the pelvis for 
analysis. 
Skeleton 
Number Samples Collected 
Helminth Eggs in Pelvic 
201 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
205 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
209 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
220 Pelvis and control from feet - 
221 Pelvis and control from cranium - 
224 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
225 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
226 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
228 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
241 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
246 Pelvis and control cranium - 
249 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
256 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
259 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
274 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
285 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
294 Pelvis and control from cranium - 
297 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
300 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
323 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
325 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
353 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet Ascaris sp. 
356 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
366 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
373 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
376 Pelvis and control from cranium - 
417 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
422 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
440 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
443 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
468 Pelvis and control from feet - 
493 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
505 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
506 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
526 Pelvis and control from cranium - 
554 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
557 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
559 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
603 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
611 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
634 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
640 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
691 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
705 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
716 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
737 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
767 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
856 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
956 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
964 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
967 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
976 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
999 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1016 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1036 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1051 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1056 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1059 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1070 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1073 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1092 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1095 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1098 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1116 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1119 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1127 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1134 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1138 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1140 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1148 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1149 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet Trichuris trichiura 
1151 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1159 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1164 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1165 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1168 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1178 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet Dicrocoelium dendriticum 
1182 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1186 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1202 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1229 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1261 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1266 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1272 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1275 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1293 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1300 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1303 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1311 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1314 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1319 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
1326 Pelvis and controls from cranium and feet - 
4.4.1.2 Results 
A single parasite egg was found in the pelvic soil from three different individuals studied 
from Hatherdene Close, this was out of the total of 92 individuals studied. Skeleton 353 had 
one decorticated roundworm (Ascaris sp.) egg in the subsample studied. Skeleton 1149 had 
one whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) egg in the subsample studied, and skeleton 1178 had one 
egg from the lancet liver fluke (Dicrocoelium dendriticum). The subsamples studied from 
both the head and feet of these three individuals did not contain any parasite eggs. None of the 
other individuals studied had any parasite eggs in the soil collected from their pelvis.  
Due to the presence of only a single egg in the 0.2 g subsamples studied it is difficult 
to determine if these eggs represent true infections. Though these three individuals did not 
have any corresponding eggs in the control samples from the cranium or feet, with such a low 
concentration of eggs in the pelvic soil their presence needs to be interpreted with caution. It 
is possible that the soil in the cemetery was contaminated with parasite eggs and these could 
have found their way into the burial contexts in very low levels. Furthermore, it is possible 
that eggs percolated down from higher levels in the soil. Eggs have been shown to percolate 
through soil over time to be displaced from their original deposition, however this process is 
quicker and most problematic in particularly rainy and sandy environments and this is the 
reason for taking control samples (Camacho et al., 2016). 
Figure 56: Helminth eggs found in pelvic soil from Hatherdene Close. Ascaris sp. egg from 
skeleton 353 (left); Trichuris trichiura egg from skeleton 1149 (centre); and Dicrocoelium 
dendriticum egg from skeleton 1178 (right). Scale bars are 20 m. 
ELISA analysis was not used to test for protozoan parasites in these samples due to 
the low yield of pelvic soil and high cost of the tests. 
4.4.2 The Vacone Villa (Lombard Period Burials) 
4.4.2.1 Materials 
As mentioned in section 4.3.7.2, after initial abandonment of the Roman villa at Vacone there 
was renewed activity at the site in the Migration period during the Lombard occupation of 
Italy. Though there is no evidence that the villa was occupied or used as a dwelling in this 
later phase there are a series of burials around the villa that date between then 7th8th c. CE. 
Pelvic soil was collected from the burials as it could provide useful information about what 
parasites continued to be present in the area after Roman occupation, similarly it is possible 
that Lombard individuals carried parasites with them from northern Europe and we may see a 
change in diversity in this later time period. Primary osteological analysis of these individuals 
and collection of pelvic soil was done by Devin Ward. Currently four burials have been 
sampled from the site and excavations are ongoing to collect more (Table 32). 
Table 32: Details of burials from Vacone from which soil samples were collected from the 
pelvis for analysis. 
Grave 
Number 
Date Age Sex Samples Collected 
Helminth Eggs 
in Pelvic Soil 
1 1 660770 
cal CE 
years 
Undetermined Pelvis and controls from 
cranium and feet 
1 3 608684 
cal CE 
3042 
years 
Male Pelvis and control from 
cranium 
1 5 650750 
cal CE 
4050 
years 
Male Pelvis Ascaris sp. 
2 1 Not 
dated 
2023 
years 
Male Pelvis and controls from 
cranium and feet 
Ascaris sp. 
Note: Age and sex estimations were done by Devin Ward. 
4.4.2.2 Results 
Two of the four Lombard period individuals studied had roundworm eggs in the soil in their 
pelvis, these were VAC1, Grave 5, Individual 1 and VAC2, Grave 1, Individual 1 (Figure 57). 
Both of these individuals are adult males. A total of 6 eggs were found in the 0.2 g subsample 
studied in both individuals giving an egg concentration of 30 eggs per gram. For VAC1, 
Grave 5, Individual 1, the mean length of eggs was 62.3 m (SD 6.3 m) and the mean width 
was 45.9 m (SD 2.4 m). For VAC2 Grave 1 Individual 1, the mean length was 59.9 m 
(SD 2.1 m) and the mean width was 45.1 m (SD 5.7 m). All eggs recovered from the 
pelvic soil were decorticated (missing their mamillated coat or outermost layer) which is 
common for eggs recovered from archaeological samples. All eggs were fertile, infertile 
Ascaris sp. eggs are larger than fertile and more elongated. There were no control samples to 
be studied from VAC1 Grave 5 Individual 1. The control sample from the feet of VAC2, 
Grave 1, Individual 1 contained a single roundworm egg in the 0.2 g subsample. The sample 
from the cranium of this individual contained three roundworm eggs (15 eggs per gram). 
Though eggs were found in higher concentrations in the pelvis of this individual compared to 
the control samples, it is possible that there was general contamination of the site with 
roundworm eggs and these were present in the burial soil. Thus, it is unclear if the eggs found 
in the pelvis represent true infection of the individual or contamination of the surrounding 
soil. 
Figure 57: Ascaris sp. eggs from Vacone Lombard period pelvic soil. Scale bars are 20 m. 
4.5 Summary of Results for All Sites 
The most common species identified in all Roman sites studied was Ascaris sp., which was 
found in nine of the twelve Roman period sites studied. This fits with the overall pattern seen 
in Roman sites studied by other authors so far. In addition, Trichuris sp. was found in five of 
the twelve sites. The Roman period site with the highest taxonomic diversity was Arlon in 
Belgium where Ascaris sp., Capillaria sp., Dicrocoelium dendriticum, and Trichuris trichiura 
were all found together in sediment from a latrine.  
 In the pre-Roman sites, the samples from the Late Bronze Age settlement of Must 
Farm, UK had the highest taxonomic diversity of any site studied where five taxa were found 
in the sediment and coprolite samples. In the Neolithic samples from atalhyk and 
Boncuklu in Turkey no helminth eggs were found in the pelvic soil samples. Similarly, no 
eggs were found in the pelvic soil of the Griffin Warrior from Mycenean Greece. 
 All of the post-Roman samples studied for this dissertation were pelvic soil. Few 
parasites were found in these samples. From the site of Hatherdene Close a single egg was 
found in the pelvic soil of three individuals, these include an Ascaris sp. egg, a Dicrocoelium 
dendriticum egg, and an egg from Trichuris trichiura. From the Lombard period burials at the 
villa of Vacone Ascaris sp. eggs were found in two of four individuals. However, this result 
should be interpreted with caution because Ascaris sp. eggs were also found in the control 
samples from one of the two individuals. 
These results will be discussed in detail in the following section. First, I will place 
these results within regional categories in the Roman Empire to explore how parasite diversity 
was different in various regions and how cultural variations, sociocultural factors, and local 
ecology may have influenced parasite diversity in these different regions. Then in Chapter 6 
the results will be considered in combination with previously published work from Pre-
Roman, Roman, and Medieval sites to analyse temporal changes in parasitic infection in the 
Roman period. 
Table 33: Summary of helminths found at each site studied. 
Site Date Sample Type Helminths 
Pre-Roman    
Must Farm 9th c. BCE Sediment Samples Capillaria sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Dioctophyma renale, 
Trichuris sp. 
  Coprolites Capillaria sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., 
Dioctophyma renale, 
Echinostoma sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
atalhyk 71006300 BCE Pelvic Soil None 
Boncuklu 83007800 BCE Pelvic Soil None 
Griffin Warrior 14501400 BCE Pelvic Soil None 
Roman    
West Smithfield, London Roman Pelvic Soil Ascaris sp. 
Winterborne, Dorset Roman Pelvic Soil None 
Lauriacum 3rd4th c. CE Pelvic Soil None 
Arlon 250280 CE Latrine Ascaris sp., 
Capillaria sp., 
Dicrocoelium 
dendriticum, 
Trichuris trichiura 
Paphos Hellenistic/Roman Pelvic Soil Ascaris sp. 
Oplontis 79 CE Pelvic Soil Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Vagnari 2nd4th c. CE Pelvic Soil None 
  Drains Ascaris sp. 
Vacone Villa (Roman 
period) 
Roman Drains and Latrine Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris sp. 
Viminacium 2nd3rd c. CE Coprolite Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Ephesus 3rd6th c. CE Latrines Ascaris sp., 
Trichuris trichiura 
Sardis 6th7th c. CE Drains Ascaris sp. 
Post-Roman    
Hatherdene Close 5th6th c. CE Pelvic Soil Ascaris sp., 
Dicrocoelium dendriticum 
Trichuris trichiura 
Vacone Villa (Lombard 
period) 
608770 CE Pelvic Soil Ascaris sp. 
5 Regional Case Studies 
In the following chapter, I will discuss the results from the various sites studied within a 
regional framework. These regions were chosen to broadly match regional categories of the 
Roman period, whether that be a specific province or group of provinces. It is important to 
note that the interconnectedness, mobility of individuals, and trade of both ideas and material 
items between parts of the empire means that these categories could be redrawn and grouped 
in numerous ways. I have chosen regional categories that allow for consideration of different 
aspects of ecology and sociocultural contexts while remaining aware of Roman definitions of 
territory. Similarly, this is by no means the way that individuals may have chosen to be 
grouped in the past and thus the same for the diseases they carried. These can be thought of as 
micro-communities. Within a defined set of individuals there may be multiple other ways that 
people choose to organize themselves, such as by ethnicity, religion, age, status, or 
occupation, and all of these groupings may impact sociocultural actions. Thus, by focusing on 
regional groupings the intricacies of these categories are lost.  
Though many discussions exist of how culture changed in newly conquered regions of 
the empire, we also know that the existing practices in many regions were persistent and 
strongly influenced the daily life of people living within the borders of the empire (Woolf, 
1997; Braund, 1998: 22; Huskinson, 2009; Garnsey and Saller, 2015). Thus we would expect 
that there is not one model of infectious diseases in the Roman period but that the diseases of 
those living within the empire also varied, and some of these variations are likely regional.  
 The concept of Romanization, heavily used and debated in the discussion of Roman 
culture, brings to light the diversity of culture that existed and changed within the centuries of 
Imperial rule. While the concept of Romanization has been used to describe the process of 
newly conquered regions becoming more Roman in their way of life, a definition often 
based on cultural practice in the Mediterranean and especially Italy, it also exemplifies the 
existing variations that must have existed around the empire before the cultural changes that 
occurred in the Imperial period. Arguments against the use of the term have emphasized the 
lack of cultural unity within the empire and the lack of a standard Roman culture (Woolf, 
1998: 7; Mattingly, 2004). Further to this, it has been argued that cultural change was not 
simply a mixing of cultural traits from the Mediterranean with existing cultures in new 
provincial territories, but rather as the empire expanded to new regions the characteristics of 
Roman cultural itself continuously changed (Woolf, 1997). Keay and Terrenato (2001) 
propose a redefinition Romanization as the formation of a composite Roman culture made up 
of a constellation of ideas from various areas which is locally variable with various levels of 
acculturation and cultural resistance. Others have favoured to view these processes of cultural 
change within the framework of globalization theory or world-systems analysis (Hingley, 
2005; Pitts, 2008). No matter what theory or framework we accept these discussions highlight 
the cultural variability that existed within the empire. 
At its greatest extent the Roman Empire had territory in three continents, including 
much of Europe, North Africa, and western regions of the Near East. Estimates of population 
size in the Roman period are heavily debated and fraught with error (Bagnall and Frier, 1994; 
Frier, 2000; Scheidel, 2009) however, if we accept a conservative estimate of the population 
being 50 million in the Roman Empire in the 1st c. CE, with nearly 6 million being defined as 
Roman citizens, that leaves 46 million not technically defined as Roman in political terms. 
Most of these citizens were concentrated in Rome, Italy, and the Mediterranean. This is a 
point that Richard Hingley (2005) uses to show that identity and culture in the Roman Empire 
must be diverse across the Empire. A large percentage of the population were not defined as 
Roman citizens, in general these individuals would include slaves and local populations from 
the provinces. Further to this, extensive trade networks both within and with regions outside 
the empire were established during this time which likely impacted disease transmission, 
dietary choices, and transmission of knowledge such as medical practices. In addition, these 
trade networks allowed for introduction of new foodstuffs and spread of culinary practices, 
for example the spread of the popular Roman condiment garum. For these reasons it is 
expected that there are also variations in parasite transmission in different regions of the 
empire. So far there have been few studies directly comparing disease in different regions of 
the empire, though these few have shown variations in health and disease regionally 
(Gowland and Redfern 2010; Scheidel 2012; Mays et al. 2018). 
In the following sections we will explore variations in parasite diversity in four regions 
of the Empire: 1) Italia; 2) Asia and the eastern Mediterranean more broadly; 3) the frontier 
provinces; and 4) Britannia. These regions were chosen as the newly studied sites fit into 
these categories and provide some of the first evidence for human parasites in these regions or 
add to previous evidence collected by other researchers.  
5.1 Italia  
5.1.1 Previous Work 
As the epicentre of the Roman Empire, Italy, home to the capital city Rome, is where we shall 
start. This research has increased the amount of evidence for parasitic infection in Roman 
Italy as prior to this work only three sites had been studied, namely Rome, Pompeii, and 
Portus. The finding of parasite remains at Vagnari, Vacone, and Oplontis thus doubles the 
number of sites studied in Roman Italy. From the previous parasitological studies done in 
Italy we have evidence for whipworm, Entamoeba histolytica, roundworm, and Fasciola liver 
fluke in Roman contexts (Table 8). Sewer samples from one of the best known cities in 
Roman Italy, Pompeii, contained eggs from Trichuris trichiura (Heirbaut et al., 2011). 
Similarly a sample from a latrine of unknown location in the city of Rome tested positive for 
Entamoeba histolytica using ELISA, however no evidence or record of analysis for helminth 
eggs using microscopy was reported (Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2015). Finally sediment cores, 
dated between 90245 CE, taken from Portus, the main port for the city of Rome located 
north of Ostia, contained eggs of Ascaris sp., Trichuris sp., and Fasciola sp. which could be 
from human or animal activity in the area (Dufour, 2015). Based on parasitological evidence 
from elsewhere in the Roman Empire and in particular in the Mediterranean, it seems likely 
that the presence of Ascaris and Trichuris in the core samples from the port may be a result of 
drainage from buildings around Portus itself, which likely contained human faecal material, 
and also its connection to the Tiber River where large amounts of sewage were dumped from 
the city of Rome (35km away) and any communities between Rome and Portus (Gowers, 
1995; Keay, 2012; Keay et al., 2014; Taylor, 2015). 
5.1.2 New Results 
The results of this doctoral research are very much in line with this previous work. In the 
samples studied from Italy I found solely soil-transmitted helminths. First, in the pelvic soil of 
individuals who died in Villa B at Oplontis, one individual was infected with roundworm and 
whipworm and another with only roundworm. While none of the pelvic soil samples from the 
Imperial Roman cemetery at Vagnari was positive, samples from a drain of the associated 
vicus contained roundworm eggs. Finally, at the Villa of Vacone a single roundworm egg was 
found in a sample from the subfloor of a room that was thought to be a latrine and in higher 
concentrations in one drain. The presence of roundworm in the possible latrine does not offer 
convincing evidence to support or refute the use of this room as a latrine. The higher 
concentrations of roundworm eggs in the Roman drains suggest that they were carrying faecal 
material and individuals at the site were likely infected. In addition, one whipworm egg was 
found in a drain at the villa of Vacone. The egg concentrations in most of these samples were 
relatively low, especially at Vagnari. While it is difficult to interpret the meaning of egg 
concentrations due to the number of factors that can influence them, this may imply poor 
preservation of helminth eggs in the region or low levels of infection in these communities. 
When we compare the results from Oplontis to the other two sites, the egg concentrations are 
higher in the Oplontis samples compared to the others, despite the fact that the Oplontis 
samples are pelvic soil samples which usually have lower concentrations compared to drains, 
as they are a reflection of infection in a single individual rather than multiple. At Oplontis, 
Individual D had 985 eggs/g of Ascaris and 30 eggs/g of Trichuris trichiura in the pelvis, and 
no eggs in soil from the cranium; a level that seems to indicate true infection. The drain at 
Vagnari had Ascaris eggs at a concentration of 25 eggs/g, and at Vacone the subfloor of the 
possible latrine only had one egg while the drains had higher concentrations of eggs ranging 
from 140620 eggs/g. These drastic differences in concentrations may be a result of better 
preservations of eggs at Oplontis because these skeletons were buried in a closed room at the 
villa, and possibly the eruption of Vesuvius and covering of the remains in volcanic ash may 
have provided exceptional conditions for preservation. It is also possible that the individuals 
at Oplontis generally had higher levels of infection or that the skeletal sample studied 
happened to contain the individuals with the highest rates of infection. From modern 
epidemiological studies we know that helminth infections are often overdispersed (Crofton, 
1971; Churcher et al., 2005), which means that a small proportion of the population carries 
the majority of the worm burden. It is possible that at Oplontis we happened to sample some 
of these individuals. 
5.1.3 Sites in Context 
We will first explore some of the differences amongst these three sites to put them into 
context and then consider them more generally as a group within the Roman Empire. Two of 
the sites studied in Italy were villas, Oplontis and Vacone. While there are many definitions 
of what villas actually were, the simplest definition is a rural residence (Percival, 2002; 
Pollard, 2016). While the spectrum of what constituted a villa was broad, the countryside was 
littered with them. One particular area that was known for its elaborate villas, often described 
as palatial, was the Bay of Naples. This is where many of Romes influential elite had villas 
to host guests and showcase their position in society. Oplontis was one of these opulent villas 
in the Bay of Naples, that consisted of the villa itself and a commercial area. The skeletons 
studied were found in the commercial area making it possible that they were typical 
inhabitants of the villa or people who worked and traded at Oplontis, or a combination of the 
two. Villas also had a production side in most cases, which could be through agriculture, tile 
production, olive-pressing or wine production to name a few possibilities (Pollard, 2016). The 
villa at Vacone, located north of Rome, had areas for olive pressing and ample agricultural 
land that likely formed its economic base. The hilly landscape may be in part responsible for 
the lack of urbanisation of this region in antiquity thought it was dotted with villas. The villa 
showed evidence of significant wealth in its mosaic floors and painted plaster walls, which 
may have been generated by olive oil production or agriculture or a reflection of the wealth of 
the villas owner. Vagnari on the other hand, was a different type of property. It was a rural 
Imperial Estate or vicus whose main purpose was production for the emperor. The individuals 
working and buried at the estate are largely local southern Italian inhabitants of a lower class 
(Emery et al., 2018b). As such all three sites can be considered rural which is in contrast to 
the existing parasite data from urban centres of Rome, Pompeii, and Portus. 
 The occupants of these different sites would have varied, the owners and visitors to 
the villas would have represented the elite of Roman Italy, while the workers on the estate of 
Vagnari were non-elite workers or slaves of the emperor. This means that the samples from 
Vagnari are likely a reflection of infection of lower class workers on a rural estate. On the 
other hand the villas were likely occupied by individuals who spent a large portion of their 
time in large urban centres and may have moved around the empire. However, one must 
consider that the villas, though owned and visited by Italys elite would have also had 
numerous staff and slaves that would have used latrines as well. While the context of the 
samples studied does not in all cases allow us to determine exactly who was infected it is 
notable that the taxa causing infections did not vary between these groups. Similarly, previous 
work from urban contexts such as Pompeii and Rome have shown that parasites transmitted 
by the direct faecal-oral route were found in urban environments just as I have found at rural 
villas and a rural Imperial estate. 
5.1.4 Soil-Transmitted Helminths and Sanitation 
From a more general perspective one of the first questions to ask of these results is why were 
soil-transmitted helminths the dominant category of helminths found across Roman Italy? The 
answer to this is not simple but a start is to consider social practices and infrastructure that 
influenced sanitation and hygiene. The amount of archaeological and historical evidence for 
sanitation infrastructure, water systems, and waste disposal in large urban centres in Roman 
Italy such as Rome, Pompeii, and Ostia give ample evidence to describe various routes for the 
spread of soil-transmitted helminths. Studies on the distribution of latrines within the city of 
Pompeii have shown that there is one sanitation feature (latrine or downpipe indicating upper 
level latrine) for every two residential properties (Trusler, 2017), in addition to numerous 
public latrines (Koloski-Ostrow, 2015:510). The idea of privacy during toilet use was not 
necessarily expected, and having upwards of 20 seats in one latrine with about 60 cm of space 
per person was not uncommon (Petznek et al., 2011:99106). While this served the purpose 
of giving many people a latrine to use, and even making it a potential social venture, modern 
studies have shown that sharing latrines may actually be worse for the spread of helminth 
infections and other faecal-oral pathogens compared to a lack of latrines (Heijnen et al., 2014; 
Oswald et al., 2017). This is likely due to increased exposure to the faecal material of other 
people in shared latrines (Emch, 1999). In a Roman public latrine, users would have 
interacted while using these facilities whether it be just by sitting next to one other, sharing a 
wash basin, or sharing sponge sticks thought to be used instead of toilet paper (Koloski-
Ostrow, 2015: 85). Evidence from cities such as Pompeii have also shown that latrines were 
located in shops, bars, and possibly even small rooms opening directly off the street, and these 
were likely used by passers-by when the need arose (Hobson, 2009:5560; Rowan, 2017). 
While private latrines have been found commonly in major cities in Roman Italy, such 
as at Pompeii where almost every house has a latrine, these also had their pitfalls. The design 
of private latrines varies across the empire. In general, many private latrines had one or two 
seats and depending on the city could be connected to main sewers or had cesspits to collect 
excrement (Hoss et al., 2011:5155). For those that were connected to sewers, most did not 
have running water and would have needed to be flushed by pouring water down the latrine. 
The design of an open cesspit, or a poorly drained latrine connecting to public sewers, would 
have posed a risk for microscopic parasite eggs to be transferred from the latrine into the 
living spaces. One potential vector for the movement of eggs around the living environment is 
flies. Large numbers of flies in Roman living spaces have been suggested (Scobie, 1986) and 
analysis of latrine and sewer samples has attested to their presence (Knights et al., 1983; 
Rowan, 2014). Many private latrines were located in or adjacent to kitchens (Prez et al., 
2011:113118). For these latrines located near kitchens flies may have easily transmitted eggs 
from the latrine onto food preparation areas or food itself if helminth eggs stuck to their legs 
as they landed in the latrine and then on other surfaces. The eggs of roundworm in particular 
are sticky, and are known to adhere to flies to be transmitted around living spaces where they 
could then be ingested and complete their life cycle causing infection in humans (Hall, 1982). 
Though most evidence for latrines in Roman Italy comes from these large urban centres, their 
ubiquity would suggest that smaller rural Roman towns also had latrines and their design was 
likely similar. 
 Another aspect of sanitation infrastructure that is often discussed in reference to large 
cities in Roman Italy is drains and sewers. While drains are typically designed for carrying 
water and sewers for carrying waste such as human excrement, in the Roman period it is 
thought that these categories likely overlapped in many instances (Rogers, 2018:40). The 
famed Cloaca Maxima, Romes largest drain that ran through the city emptying into the Tiber 
river is the prime example of the extensive architectural effort placed into designing drainage 
networks in Roman cities. It is thought that it was primarily designed to carry excess water 
from the streets but also would have carried various waste such as excrement, bodies, animal 
carcasses, and other forms of garbage; thus it is also called a sewer (Koloski-Ostrow, 2015: 
66). The design of sewer systems varies from city to city and the best evidence comes from 
Pompeii, Herculaneum, Rome, and Ostia. As already mentioned Rome has an intricate 
sewage network consisting of the Cloaca Maxima and many tributaries. Pompeii and 
Herculaneum were both built on slopes which provided a natural direction of flow for sewage 
into the sea (Koloski-Ostrow, 2015: 76). Both cities had main sewage networks to drain water 
from overflowing fountains, storms, and sewers that were connected to some latrines that did 
not have cesspits. At Pompeii stepping stones across streets attest to the use of the natural 
flow of water to clean streets and also the potential for standing water in areas of the city. 
Roman towns may have had open street drains or newer towns may have benefitted from 
urban planning that included building drainage networks underneath streets from the start 
(Wilson, 2000b). In more rural cities with smaller populations the need for extensive sewage 
networks may have been lower. At Vagnari for example, a series of small drains has been 
identified but it is so far unclear what they were connected to or where they would have 
emptied. 
Though sewers and drains would have greatly contributed to removal of waste 
material from living spaces they could have also posed a significant risk for contamination of 
living spaces in times of flooding or backups. For example, regular flooding of the Tiber river 
is known to have occurred in the Roman period. Aldrete has found historical accounts of 42 
floods in the city of Rome from 414 BCE to 398 CE, most of which are written about by Livy 
and Cassius Dio (Aldrete, 2007:14). When these floods occurred the sewers, most of which 
did not have traps or backwater valves would have flowed back into the city (Wilson, 2000b), 
depositing any waste that they carried, such as human and animal excrement. On top of 
regular flooding of rivers, these sewage channels are thought to have regularly backed up due 
to accumulation of debris and sediment (Koloski-Ostrow, 2015:65, 79). Historical texts refer 
to individuals who were paid to clean sewers and empty cesspits. Pliny the Younger describes 
convicts being charged with cleaning sewers and Diocletians Edict on Maximum Prices 
described the pay of a cloacarius, a person to clean cloaca or sewers (Taylor, 2015). How 
effective these individuals were at stopping backups in large sewer networks is unknown. 
Sewage backflow into the city during times of flooding or backup could increase the rates of 
soil-transmitted helminth infection, such as roundworm and whipworm, as helminth eggs 
could be redeposited in living spaces. 
Aqueducts were also an important part of sanitation infrastructure in Roman Italy. The 
large scale construction of aqueducts in Roman Italy began in the 4th c. BCE and though some 
of the most impressive examples come from the city of Rome, they spread outside Italy under 
Augustus to be found across the Mediterranean and in North Africa (Wilson, 2009). Along 
with wells, cisterns, and channels these water systems functioned to supply clean drinking 
water to those living in Roman cities. These aqueducts fed water into public fountains which 
people in the city could use to collect drinking water, if they did not have access to a well or 
cistern. While it was possible to get permission from the Emperor to connect a private 
residence to piped water, it is thought that this would have only been accessible to those of 
higher socioeconomic status (Jansen, 2000). Part of the reason for this is that property owners 
would have had to pay for this connection. While aqueducts and cisterns can generally bring 
in water free from pathogens, jugs used to collect water from public fountains or basins may 
have served as a source of contaminants as has been observed in modern populations without 
piped water (Khairy et al., 1982; Worrell et al., 2016). Access to piped water has been linked 
to a decrease in soil-transmitted helminth infections, especially roundworm and whipworm, in 
many modern communities (Strunz et al., 2014). Ascaris and Trichuris eggs can remain viable 
in water for up to a year and Taenia for 270 days (Geldreich, 1996; Sengupta et al., 2012). 
There are multiple potentially human-infecting species within the genus of Ascaris. 
The two that have eggs that look very similar under the microscope are Ascaris lumbricoides 
and Ascaris suum. Classically, Ascaris lumbricoides has been identified as the human-
infecting species while Ascaris suum infects pigs. However, recent genetic work has shown 
that these two species are very similar genetically and it is debated if they are truly distinct 
species or the same species with regional variants (Betson et al., 2014). In addition the ability 
for cross-species transmission is high, in modern settings it has been shown that many human 
infections in developed countries are caused by Ascaris suum. Similarly, the human 
roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides) can also infect pigs (Nejsum et al., 2012). As mentioned 
earlier, it is for this reason that I have identified eggs as Ascaris sp. because their presence in 
human contexts, even pelvic soil, does not preclude the possibility that they are Ascaris suum 
eggs acquired from pigs. Pigs were a major source of meat in Roman period and particularly 
so in Italy (King, 1999). In most cases, especially rurally, pigs would have been kept outside 
of settlement areas. At Vagnari and in southern Italy more generally there is no archaeological 
evidence for pig sties, though few pigs may have been kept within settlement areas 
(MacKinnon, 2011:313). It is possible that faecal material from live pigs kept within 
settlement areas could contaminate living areas, or that faecal material during slaughtering 
could lead to the presence of eggs in streets and sewers. Similarly, in agricultural areas pig 
faecal material may contaminate crops leading to human infections with Ascaris suum. It 
seems likely that many of the eggs found are from the human-infecting species A. 
lumbricoides due to their presence in human contexts however, for these reasons it remains 
possible that some eggs are from A. suum. 
5.1.5 Summary 
In summary, the sole finding of soil-transmitted helminths in samples studied from Roman 
Italy is consistent with previously published palaeoparasitological work. It appears that 
intestinal parasites reliant on poor sanitation and hygiene for transmission were the major 
contributors to parasitic disease in Roman Italy. So far there is very little evidence for 
zoonotic parasites in Roman Italy, while Ascaris sp. has some zoonotic potential it can also be 
transmitted directly between humans without an animal host. 
  Sanitation systems and latrines have been relatively well studied in Roman Italy 
compared to other regions, mostly in major cities such as Pompeii and Herculaneum. This 
information allows us to pinpoint potential routes for spread of faecal-oral parasites such as 
those relating to the design of latrines and sewer networks, access to latrines, and access to 
drinking water. There are many other sanitation practices that may contribute to the spread of 
faecal-oral parasites, some of which will be explored in the following sections. 
 There does not appear to be any differences in the taxa of parasites found in urban 
centres such as Rome and Pompeii compared to countryside villas such as Oplontis and 
Vacone, or compared to rural Imperial estates such as Vagnari. Roundworm has been found in 
samples from all of these sites and whipworm was found at Pompeii, Oplontis, and Vacone. 
Thus, the first few sites studied in Roman Italy suggest that there were no differences in the 
types of infections in rural or urban communities though analysis of additional sites would 
allow for stronger conclusions.  
5.2 Asia and the Eastern Mediterranean 
The purpose of this section is to combine evidence from sites studied in the eastern 
Mediterranean to explore variations in infection in the eastern Mediterranean compared to the 
better studied provinces in northern Europe, namely those in France and Britain. In order to 
find evidence for intestinal parasitic infection in the eastern Mediterranean during the Roman 
period, a series of sediment samples were collected and analysed from two sites in modern-
day TurkeyEphesus, and Sardis; as well as one from CyprusPaphos. These correspond to 
the Roman provinces of Asia and Cyprus, respectively. These results are discussed in 
conjunction with the recently published work from our lab on the Roman site of Sagalassos 
(Williams et al., 2017). A large part of this work has been written up in a manuscript 
submitted to the American Journal of Archaeology and is adapted from that manuscript (see 
Appendix A.5). 
5.2.1 New Results 
Helminth eggs were found in all samples studied from Ephesus, Sardis, and Paphos. In 
sediment samples from the drain of a public latrine in the Baths of Scholastica at Ephesus 
roundworm eggs were found (17 eggs/g), and whipworm eggs were found in a private house 
latrine from Ephesus (55 eggs/g). In the drain samples from Sardis only roundworm eggs 
were found, in lower concentrations in the drain connected to the house latrine (55 eggs/g) 
compared to the city drain (170305 eggs/g). No other taxa were found in any of the samples 
studied. From the pelvic soil studied from Paphos in Cyprus, roundworm eggs were found in 
the pelvis of one individual. When we combine these results with those from our previously 
published work on samples from Roman period Sagalassos, another city in Anatolia, we can 
get a better sense of the parasite taxa found in the eastern Mediterranean. From a public 
latrine associated with a bath complex at Sagalassos eggs of roundworm (1045 eggs/g) and 
Giardia duodenalis was found (Williams et al., 2017). The ubiquity of roundworm and 
whipworm in the eastern Mediterranean is becoming apparent as more sites are studied in the 
region. To add to this pattern, roundworm and whipworm were also the only parasites found 
in Roman period samples from Kea in Greece (Anastasiou et al., 2018). 
5.2.2 Previous Work 
The majority of palaeoparasitological studies performed at Roman period sites have taken 
place in northern Europe (see 2.3.6). From the Roman provinces of Belgica, Germania 
Inferior, and Germania Superior, which cover parts of modern day Belgium, Germany, 
Netherlands and Switzerland; beef/pork tapeworm, Capillaria worm, Entamoeba histolytica, 
Fasciola liver fluke, lancet liver fluke, roundworm, and whipworm have all been found. From 
the province of Britannia, beef/pork tapeworm, Fasciola liver fluke, fish tapeworm, lancet 
liver fluke, roundworm, and whipworm have been found. At one site, Carnuntum, in the 
province of Pannonia Superior (Austria) roundworm was found. At one site, Knzing, in the 
province of Raetia, whipworm was found. From the provinces of Aquitania and Lugdunensis, 
which cover most of modern-day France, beef/pork tapeworm, Entamoeba histolytica, fish 
tapeworm, lancet liver fluke, roundworm, and whipworm have all been found. 
Moving to the Mediterranean region, in the province of Narbonensis, in southern 
France, there is evidence for Entamoeba which can cause dysentery, Fasciola liver fluke, fish 
tapeworm, and whipworm (Harter-Lailheugue, 2006; Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2006). In the 
central and eastern Mediterranean region, Roman sites have been studied from Greece, Israel, 
Italy and now Turkey. A similar species diversity to northern Europe has been found in Israel 
(province of Iudaea) where evidence exists for beef/pork tapeworm, fish tapeworm, lancet 
liver fluke, pinworm, roundworm, and whipworm (Harter, 2003; Zias et al., 2006). In Egypt, 
mummified remains have given evidence for pinworm and beef/pork tapeworm (Horne, 2002, 
Le Bailly et al., 2010). While in Greece, Italy and Turkey so far there is only evidence for 
Giardia duodenalis, roundworm, and whipworm (Heirbaut et al., 2011; Le Bailly and 
Bouchet, 2015; Williams et al., 2017; Anastasiou et al., 2018; Ledger et al., 2018.), the same 
taxa found at the sites analysed in this study. There is no evidence for the zoonotic parasites 
beef/pork tapeworms, fish tapeworm, and liver flukes that have been found in other regions. 
5.2.3 Predominance of Sanitation Related Parasites 
Since they are all transmitted by accidental ingestion of faecal material, usually through 
contaminated food or water, the presence of roundworm, whipworm, and Giardia duodenalis 
in Roman cities in Asia and Cyprus gives an indication of sanitation and hygiene levels in 
cities in these provinces. The evidence for roundworm and whipworm across the eastern 
Mediterranean suggests that while construction of public and private latrines took place in 
towns throughout the Roman Empire, and were already present in many Greek cities in the 
east (Grzer et al., 2011:2939), these did not stop the transmission of gastrointestinal 
diseases reliant on the faecal-oral route as one might expect. At Ephesus, for example, 
eighteen latrines have been identified with the majority having multiple seats (Jansen, 2006). 
Though toilet use has been linked to a decrease in faecal-oral parasite transmission in modern 
communities, their presence alone cannot stop transmission and there are various aspects of 
their design, maintenance, and use as well as other sociocultural practices around hygiene that 
may undermine simply their presence.  
The purpose of sewers and latrines in Roman cities was not aimed at stopping the 
transmission of pathogens as they are today, as the concept of micro-organisms was not yet 
understood at that time. Rather, it is more likely that sewers and latrines were built to remove 
what was viewed as unclean smells and behaviours from public view (Koloski-Ostrow, 2015: 
66). The Romans are well known for building large multi-seat latrines across the empire, and 
these are particularly prominent in bath complexes in the Mediterranean. It is in Greek cities 
in the Mediterranean that some of the first evidence for multi-seat latrines is found, such as 
that at Amorgos, Delos, and Thera (Antoniou and Angelakis, 2015:6264).  It appears that 
these sanitation technologies were then widely adapted by the Romans who built latrines that 
could seat even more people at one time. Indeed a majority of the evidence for intestinal 
parasites from the Eastern Mediterranean comes from these multi-seat latrines such as that at 
Ephesus and Sagalassos. Although we were not able to collect samples from multi-seat 
latrines at Sardis, the city had them as well (Yegl, 1986: 22).  
There are of course a number of other places where one could come into contact with 
faecal material in a Roman city, aside from just in the latrines. Text painted and carved on 
walls and monuments in Roman cities in the Mediterranean give us some indication that not 
everyone in these cities used latrines. The numerous warnings against defecating in public 
places such as on graves, beside houses, and in other public places (Wilson, 2000a:310311) 
indicate that this was something that happened frequently enough to be an annoyance. There 
is also evidence for the use of chamber pots in Roman cities, especially by the elite, and these 
would have been regularly emptied by slaves either into latrines within the house or 
somewhere acceptable outside the home (Hobson, 2009: 69). It has even been suggested that 
the elite may have preferred to use chamber pots at home and latrines located on the main 
floor of residences were primarily for slaves or freedmen working in the house (Trusler and 
Hobson, 2017). For residences with no latrines, faecal material would have needed to be 
collected and dumped into latrines, open sewers, the street, or on dung heaps (Taylor, 2015). 
Cesspits would have required regular emptying and sewers cleaned, which would have been a 
job for slaves or stercorarii (individuals whose job it was to empty cesspits and collect 
manure). A similar job seems to have existed in Hellenistic cities (Owens, 1983) and thus 
likely persisted in these Roman period cities in the Eastern Mediterranean. The number of 
individuals handling faecal material and disposing of it outside urban centres may have had a 
considerable impact on the transmission of these parasites and certainly these individuals 
would be at high risk for infection with intestinal parasites transmitted by the faecal-oral 
route.  
Finally, the reuse of human faecal material as fertilizer is mentioned in Roman texts 
on agriculture. Varro cites the work of Cassius who stated that human faecal material was 
second only to pigeon dung as a fertilizer (Varro, Rust. 1.38.13). Similarly, Columella in his 
texts on agriculture discusses three types of manure, that from birds, humankind, and cattle; 
and ranks human excrement after that from birds if it is mixed with other refuse (Columella, 
Rust. 2.14.18). Varro even suggests that the latrines of slaves should be placed over the 
farms manure pits (Varro, Rust. 1.13.4). From cesspits of private latrines, faecal material 
may have been reused on gardens of the same home or it could have been collected by 
stercorarii and sold as manure (Flohr and Wilson, 2011:147148). If it was in fact re-used in 
this way especially in private gardens where vegetables and fruits were grown, parasite eggs 
from infected individuals could easily be ingested on unwashed fruits and vegetables thus 
transmitting roundworm, whipworm, and dysentery in these communities.  
5.2.4 Absence of Other Zoonotic Parasites 
The absence of certain taxa of intestinal parasites is difficult to interpret because we do not 
know the degree to which certain eggs may have been lost over time. The samples that have 
been studied from other published sites are a mix of latrine/cesspit sediment, sewer sediment, 
occupation layer sediment, pelvic soil, and mummies in Egypt; thus they are broadly similar 
to what I have studied in Asia and Cyprus except for the mummified remains from Egypt. It is 
possible that some parasite taxa are not represented if they were present in lower 
concentrations that were not picked up during analysis, or if their eggs did not preserve as 
well as those of roundworm and whipworm. However, it is also possible that zoonotic 
parasites were just not as common in this region, which is why we have not found them at any 
of these five sites. This is a similar pattern to what was seen in the wider Mediterranean 
region from Italy as well. Infection with beef/pork tapeworms, fish tapeworm, lancet liver 
fluke, Fasciola liver fluke, and Capillaria generally require interaction with infected animals 
either by ingestion of poorly cooked liver, meat, or fish, or ingestion of plants that have larvae 
encysted on them from water contaminated with animal faecesas in the case of Fasciola 
(Ledger and Mitchell, 2019). 
Asia was a heavily urbanized region of the Roman Empire with many large cities 
including Sardis, Ephesus, and Pergamum (Hanson, 2011). The degree of urbanisation and 
population density could have contributed to differential transmission of certain parasites. The 
sites studied in the province of Asia are all urban cities where individuals may have had less 
interaction with animals compared to more rural settings. In conjunction with this, as the 
number of individuals within a city increased with urbanization, the removal of human waste 
from the city would have become more of a challenge. This may have increased the 
transmission and prevalence of faecal-oral parasites if removal approaches could not keep up 
with the amount of waste generated by inhabitants. While Paphos was not located in the 
heavily urbanized province of Asia, we know it was a prominent urban city in Cyprus with 
strong Hellenistic roots. 
Beef/pork tapeworm and fish tapeworm are acquired when poorly cooked beef/pork or 
fish are eaten. There are numerous potential explanations for their absence in the eastern 
Mediterranean; perhaps meat was not widely eaten by all inhabitants of the city (especially 
those of the lower classes), or meat and fish were generally well cooked. Instead cereals, 
legumes, olive oil, and wine have been suggested to be core foods in the Roman diet in the 
Mediterranean (Garnsey, 1999a; Mitchell, 2015b). Currently there is one stable isotope study 
done on human remains from Ephesus (Lsch et al. 2014) which has shown that crops such as 
wheat and barley were likely staple foods, and nitrogen values were low perhaps as a result of 
legume consumption. Other isotope studies done in Croatia, Italy, and Greece also show a 
general reliance on C3 plants with minor additions of fish and terrestrial animals for protein 
though there is some variation in different sites (see Prowse et al., 2005; Lightfoot et al., 
2012; Dotsika and Michael, 2018; McConnan Borstad et al., 2018; OConnell et al., 2019). 
Furthermore, cultural influences in the Greek East may have further impacted diet in these 
cities. A regional exploration of diet in the Roman Empire based on zooarchaeological 
remains has shown that there were distinct variations in diet in the different provinces. In 
particular, cities in the Greek East seem to be heavily influenced and consistent with 
Hellenistic patterns that mainly relied on goat and sheep with the addition of beef and pork, 
but not at the levels seen in Roman Italy (King, 1999). Zooarchaeological remains from 
Sagalassos do generally follow this pattern with sheep/goat consistently found in high 
proportions, though cattle become distinctly more important in the Late Imperial period 
(Fuller et al., 2012). If consumption of beef and pork was generally minimal, this explains the 
absence of beef/pork tapeworm. Similarly, while sheep are commonly infected with Fasciola, 
if they were herded away from living areas they may not have posed as much of a risk for 
infection. 
In addition, Hellenistic cooking practices likely influenced how meat was prepared for 
eating and would impact the risk for infection with foodborne parasites in the region. Eating 
raw meat (aside from salted products) was compared with the dietary practices of barbarians 
(Chandezon, 2015:142). However, descriptions of how to prepare salted pork exist, 
suggesting that it was eaten this way to some extent (Cato, Agr. 162.13). Preparing meat by 
salting can kill parasite larvae, however, this requires very high levels of salt for extended 
periods of time to effectively kill larvae (Khalil, 1969; Adams et al., 1997). Similarly, 
thorough cooking of meat can effectively kill any parasite larvae, stopping the transmission of 
parasites like beef and pork tapeworm. The popularity of salted fish or fish sauce (garum and 
liquamen) in the Roman Empire is well known, and has been suggested as a potential cause of 
fish tapeworm infections where this parasite has been found in northern Europe (Mitchell, 
2017b). The Mediterranean region of the empire is known for its production of salted fish and 
fish sauces, and the salting process for preserving fish is thought to have originated in the east 
and spread to the rest of the Mediterranean (Mylona, 2018). However, it has been suggested 
that the majority of salted fish products were made from marine fish (Curtis 1991:14; Van 
Neer et al., 2010) which cannot act as an intermediate host to Diphyllobothrium sp. in this 
region of the world. Common intermediate hosts for Diphyllobothrium sp. in Europe include 
perch and pike (Scholz et al. 2009). If freshwater fish was ever used to make garum, it is 
unclear if the salting process was adequate to kill fish tapeworm larvae found in freshwater 
fish. Consumption of raw or undercooked freshwater fish in regions where they were readily 
available could have caused the cases of fish tapeworm found in the Roman period. 
Finally, climate in the Mediterranean likely has an impact on parasite diversity. 
Though this can be challenging to disentangle from the sociocultural impacts on parasite 
transmission, we have to consider that it also played a role. The Mediterranean region is 
generally warmer and drier than northern Europe (Kottek et al., 2006). This may have 
affected egg survival but at the same time, this warmer climate would increase the rate at 
which meat and fish would spoil if they were not cooked or preserved with extensive salting. 
Thus, climate may have also affected food preparation practices that could prevent parasite 
infections. In conjunction with an overall drier climate at certain times of year, paleoclimate 
reconstructions have indicated that there was an almost century-long drought in Anatolia from 
350470 C.E. (Izdebski et al., 2016). This drought would have affected the length of growing 
seasons and the crops that could have been supported. Crop failures may have increased the 
use and perceived need for fertilizer, some of which could contain human faeces thus 
spreading faecal-oral pathogens. Paleoparasitological studies from all time periods have 
shown that the highest taxonomic diversity of parasites is often found in lakeside regions 
(Ledger et al., 2019a; Maicher et al., 2019). This is likely in part a result of an increase in 
species that can complete their life cycles using both terrestrial and aquatic animals as 
intermediate and definitive hosts, potential impacts on egg viability in wetter soils, and 
increased preservation of parasite eggs in wetter soils. 
The ecology and environment of each site is also very important in the parasite species 
that would have survived and flourished there. Many of the zoonotic species require very 
specific intermediate hosts and environmental conditions to complete their life cycles. For 
example although Fasciola liver fluke has a worldwide distribution it needs a freshwater 
environment and appropriate intermediate hosts (many species of lymnaeid snails) to develop. 
After eggs are shed from the definitive host (humans and animals, especially sheep) miracidia 
develop in the eggs in the environment for 12 weeks then hatch (Garcia, 2016: 499). The 
miracidia from the eggs penetrate the snail intermediate host where they further develop. 
Cercariae are shed from the snail into water. Cercariae typically swim in water for ~1 hour or 
until they attach and encyst on aquatic plants, such as dandelion or watercress (Mas-Coma et 
al., 2018). Ingestion of these aquatic plants leads to infection. Since sheep, cattle, and goats 
are common definitive hosts that can act as reservoirs for Fasciola, human infections are 
more likely in areas where these animals graze near freshwater and human settlements, or 
their faeces are used as fertilizer for aquatic vegetation (Garcia, 2016: 268). Although 
zooarchaeological evidence suggests that sheep and goat, both hosts for Fasciola, were 
herded in Anatolia we do not find evidence for the parasite in human contexts in this region. 
In part, this may be due to climate. The snail hosts for Fasciola are found in modern-day 
Turkey, and the eastern Mediterranean more widely. Lymnae schirazensis (one snail host of 
the parasite) has been suggested to have originated in the Near East and spread from there 
(Bargues et al., 2011). However, the snails need freshwater environments to survive. Snail 
populations may have been maintained around rivers, man-made irrigation channels, and 
standing water in rainy seasons. The drier summers in Anatolia and droughts in fourth and 
fifth centuries may have decreased snail populations at certain time periods while wetter 
climates with fewer temperature fluctuations can maintain transmission for more of the year. 
In western Europe, there is often biseasonal transmission, with some transmission of the 
parasite in spring and high transmission in autumn (Mas-Coma et al., 2018). In Scotland 
infected snails have been recorded from April through October (Ross, 1977). Modern work 
comparing sheep Fasciola infections in Europe found that 62% of farms in Ireland were 
positive, compared to 8% in southern Italy and 4% in Switzerland (Rinaldi et al., 2015). 
Modern mappings of risk for Fasciola transmission across Europe and the Near East based on 
climate generally follow the distribution of Fasciola eggs found in Roman period sites (see 
Fig. 3 in Caminade et al., 2015). This may explain why 6 of the 8 cases of Fasciola liver fluke 
from the Roman period are found north of the Alps (Figure 15). 
It is important to consider that differential preservation of parasite eggs from different 
taxa may be contributing to the patterns observed. The eastern Mediterranean region of the 
empire has a much warmer and drier climate than that in northern Europe which has an 
impact on parasite species that can survive there but likely also has an impact on the 
preservation of parasite eggs. There is little experimental evidence for how specific soil 
conditions impact parasite egg survival. However, we may expect that parasite eggs survive 
better in waterlogged conditions; similar to other archaeological materials. Indeed a high 
diversity of parasite eggs have been recovered from waterlogged sites in northern Europe and 
these eggs are very well preserved based on the morphology of the eggs (Maicher et al., 2017; 
Ledger et al., 2019a; Maicher et al., 2019). This may be part of the reason why a higher 
species diversity has been recovered from Roman sites in northern Europe. However, we must 
also consider that the eggs from different species will preserve differently. For example, 
roundworm and whipworm are known to be quite robust and have been found across Eurasia 
from the Neolithic period onwards in a variety of climates (Anastasiou, 2015). The structure 
of the egg shells is likely to be very important in this differential preservation. The egg shells 
of helminth eggs have multiple layers, one of which is a chitinous layer (Wharton, 1980). 
Different species have varying thicknesses of this chitinous layer, with varying orientations of 
protein fibrils (Wharton, 1980). As chitin is known to be resistant to degradation and its 
purpose it to provide strength this likely impacts egg preservation (see section 7.3 for a further 
discussion). Therefore, I would expect that eggs, such as Taenia sp. and Dicrocoelium 
dendriticum, with thick chitinous walls similar to roundworm and whipworm could preserve 
in the same sites these eggs have been found in, if they were present. 
5.2.5 Summary 
Overall in the eastern Mediterranean we are seeing a similar pattern of parasite taxonomic 
diversity as is seen in Italy, a predominance of parasites transmitted by the direct faecal-oral 
route and an absence of zoonotic species. So far in the Mediterranean region almost 
exclusively soil-transmitted helminths and protozoa causing severe diarrhea or dysentery have 
been found. This is in contrast to the much wider taxonomic diversity found in northern 
Europe such as that in the frontier regions of the empire which will be discussed in the 
following sections.  
 There are numerous social, environmental, and ecological explanations for the 
transmission of these parasites. An examination of archaeological and historical evidence that 
describe the design of latrines and sewers, some aspects of their use, common methods for 
disposal of human excrement, and reuse of human excrement show that there are numerous 
pathways for people in Roman communities in the Mediterranean to come into contact with 
faecal material or to have it contaminate their food. Furthermore, historical and archaeological 
evidence for dietary preferences and cooking practices provide some insights into the absence 
of foodborne parasites such as beef and pork tapeworm, which have been found in other 
regions. Climate is also a strong determinant of parasite transmission, and particularly may 
have affected snail populations and transmission of Fasciola liver fluke. 
5.3 The Frontier Regions 
The focus of this section is on the frontier regions of the Roman Empire along the Rhine and 
Danube rivers. The subsequent section will focus on Roman Britain specifically, which is also 
considered a frontier region but will be discussed separately. The Rhine and Danube rivers 
served as the borders of the Empire in central Europe and the frontier provinces in this region 
include Germania Inferior and Superior, Raetia, Noricum, Pannonia Inferior and Superior, 
Moesia Inferior and Superior, and Dacia. The Roman frontiers have often been studied from 
a military perspective because as bordering regions they had a large military presence to 
protect from rebellions and invasions (Elton, 1996). Forts that were built along the edges of 
the Roman Empire attracted civilians and in many places settlements were also established in 
these areas. These areas also served as links for trade between the empire and regions beyond 
5.3.1 Previous Work 
Evidence for disease amongst the inhabitants of the frontier provinces in Central Europe is not 
as numerous as that in Roman Britain or the Mediterranean region. Thus the evidence for 
intestinal parasite infection in these provinces is an important addition to the picture of what 
daily life was like in these areas of the empire. Previous parasitological work done on frontier 
provinces along the Danube and Rhine rivers has contributed evidence for intestinal parasites 
in modern-day Austria, Belgium, Germany, Netherlands, and Switzerland. However, we will 
discuss this evidence in relation to the Roman province that these settlements were found in. 
From Germania Inferior the sites of Alphen on the Rhine, Valkenburg Army Camp, and 
Utigeest have been studied. Trichuris sp. eggs were found at all three sites. At Alphen on the 
Rhine eggs of Ascaris sp. and Taenia/Echinococcus sp. were also found in the 1st c. CE 
latrine studied (Kuijper and Turner, 1992). At Valkenburg occupation layer samples also 
contained eggs of Ascaris sp. (Jansen and Over, 1966).  
In Germania Superior six sites have been studied. A highly diverse set of parasites 
was found in samples from Horbourg-Wihr. First to third century CE samples from pits, 
latrines, and ditches at the site provided evidence for Ascaris sp., Capillaria sp., Dicrocoelium 
sp., Diphyllobothrium sp., Fasciola sp., Macracanthorhynchus sp., Oxyuris equi, 
Taenia/Echinococcus sp., and Trichuris sp. (Dufour, 2015). However, without further details 
of the samples studied it is impossible to know what proportion of these parasites were from 
human or animal infections. Especially with the findings of parasites that infect animals such 
as Oxyuris equi and Macracanthorhynchus sp., a number of these taxa must be from animals 
at the site. In an unknown sample type from the site of Andilly-en-Bassigny eggs of Ascaris 
sp., Fasciola sp., and Taenia/Echinococcus sp. were found (Dufour, 2015). At the other four 
sites, all samples were from 12nd c. CE latrines and contained eggs of Ascaris sp. and 
Trichuris sp. (Hnggi et al., 1989; Hufschmid and Stterlin, 1992; Goppelsrder and Sommer, 
1996; Jauch, 1997; Le Bailly et al., 2003c). 
The province of Belgica has also been well studied previously with evidence from five 
sites, Arlon, Mageroy, Reims, Metz, and Belginum. Previously studied samples from the city 
of Arlon include soil samples from vats and pits of a fullers shop which contained eggs of 
Ascaris sp. and Trichuris sp. (Defgne et al., 2008). At Mageroy soil samples from a latrine 
tested positive for Entamoeba histolytica using ELISA (Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2015), the 
only evidence for protozoan infection in this region. From Reims, Metz, and Belginum eggs 
of Ascaris sp., Capillaria sp., Dicrocoelium sp., Diphyllobothrium sp., Fasciola sp., Taenia 
sp., Toxocara sp., and Trichuris sp. were all identified in a variety of samples including 
cesspits, pits, wells, and occupation sediments (Dittmar et al., 2002; Le Bailly et al., 2003b; 
Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2010; Dufour, 2015). While the diversity of taxa at these sites is quite 
high compared to other provinces along the Rhine and Danube it should be noted that the 
diversity of sample types studied is also higher than in other provinces in the region.  
Other evidence for the frontiers comes from one site in each of the provinces of Raetia 
and Pannonia Superior. At Knzing in Raetia eggs of Trichuris trichiura were identified in a 
pit whose use dated between 140250 CE (Specht, 1963). In latrine and sewer samples from 
the 1st2nd c. CE eggs of Ascaris lumbricoides, Taenia sp., and Trichuris trichiura were 
reported at the site of Carnuntum in Pannonia Superior (Aspck et al., 2011; Petznek, 2018). 
All of these sites are located in provinces in frontier regions however, not all of them 
are strictly frontier sites. A frontier site in the Roman Empire is one that is located directly on 
the borders (frontiers or limes) of the empire and thus had a strong military presence 
(Whittaker, 2004; 56; Breeze, 2018). Of the sites studied in the frontier provinces those that 
are actually frontier sites include: Alphen on the Rhine, Valkenburg, Carnuntum, and 
Knzing. The newly studied sites Lauriacum and Viminicium are also frontier sites. 
5.3.2 New Results 
Work from this dissertation contributes additional evidence for parasitic infection in the 
frontiers of central Europe from human contexts at the site of Arlon in the province of 
Belgica, as well as the first evidence for parasites from the provinces of Noricum and Moesia 
Superior. Soil from a latrine at the site of Arlon in Belgica contained the eggs of Ascaris sp., 
Capillaria sp., Dicrocoelium dendriticum, and Trichuris trichiura. Pelvic soil from skeletons 
buried between the 3rd4th c. CE at Lauriacum, in the province of Noricum, did not contain 
any preserved parasite eggs. At the site of Viminacium in the province of Moesia Superior, a 
coprolite collected from the bath complex contained eggs of Ascaris sp. and Trichuris 
trichiura. These findings are generally in line with previously published work from the 
frontier provinces. In Belgica there is a more diverse range of intestinal parasites, similar to 
results from sites in central and northern Europe, while in Moesia Superior the presence of 
Ascaris sp. and Trichuris sp. is similar to what has been found in the wider Eastern 
Mediterranean region. 
The highest diversity of parasites in this region is in Germania Inferior, Germania 
Superior, and Belgica, while the exclusive presence of soil-transmitted helminths in Moesia 
Superior, Pannonia Superior, Noricum, and Raetia is more in line with what is found in the 
Mediterranean region. It first needs to be acknowledged that this pattern may be a result of the 
higher number of sites studied in Germania Superior, Germania Inferior, and Belgica. Only a 
single site has been studied in each of the other provinces and indeed there are sites in 
Germania Inferior, Germania Superior, and Belgica that only have Ascaris sp. and Trichuris 
sp. Furthermore, many of the sites in Belgica are not predominately military sites, rather they 
include a number villas and villages (vici). At the sites that are frontier sites, directly on the 
borders, only Ascaris sp., Trichuris sp., and Taenia sp. have been found.  
5.3.3 Soil-Transmitted Helminths 
The presence of soil-transmitted helminths and other sanitation related parasites such as 
Entamoeba histolytica can be attributed to similar cultural and social practices that have been 
discussed in relation to Italy and the eastern Mediterranean. As discussed in the previous two 
sections multi-seat latrines found in the Roman Empire were common in the East and Italy 
and were likely adopted from their Greek counterparts. However, beginning in the 1st c. CE 
latrines are found much more widely in Gaul and the frontier provinces of the northeast, and 
in the 2nd c. CE public latrines become more common in the region (Bouet, 2009:157). 
Published examples of multi-seat latrines in bath complexes in Germany come from Colonia 
Ulpia Traiana (Zieling, 2018), Aachen (Schaub, 2018), and the vicus of Bonn (White, 2018). 
Dodt (2018) describes a number of public latrines associated with bathhouses from Heerlen, 
Zlpich, Soller, and a further seven from private bathhouses at villae. Most of these have 
flushing mechanisms where water from the frigidarium was channeled underneath the latrine 
seats to wash away faecal material. A rather opulent latrine, for German standards, has been 
reported from Rottenburg. It had seating for 3554 people, plastered sandstone columns, 
painted walls, and a stone basin for washing (Hoss, 2018). Additionally, a latrine was found 
in the garden area of a house at the vicus of Bonn (Andrikopoulou et al., 2018). There are few 
examples of private latrines published from the frontier provinces, however an interesting 
example comes from Nijmegen where cesspits that likely had wood structures built over them 
were found in the gardens of most land parcels (Heirbaut, 2018), a similar placement of 
cesspits in gardens was found at the vicus of Oberwintherthur in Switzerland (Jauch, 2018).  
Bouet (2009) also provides a catalogue of latrines from Germania Superior, Germania 
Inferior, and Belgica many of which are private latrines or pits behind houses but there are 
also larger communal latrines associated with bath complexes and larger villas. The floors of 
some of these latrines are also described and can be earth-beaten, cement, or wood; often 
dependent on what material the building itself was made out of, and whether the latrine was a 
stand-alone building or part of a larger complex (Bouet, 2009:137). Earth-beaten floors are 
more common in simple private latrines. Unfinished floors have been linked to an increased 
risk for soil-transmitted helminths in modern communities (Worrell et al., 2016) and may 
have contributed to the transmission of soil-transmitted helminths in these provinces. 
Especially in a latrine where floors could easily be contaminated with faecal material from 
various users, this may have increased the risk for transmission if floors were not cleaned 
regularly. 
Chamber pots would have also been widely used in these provinces, as they were in 
the Mediterranean. Numerous examples and shapes are described by Petznek (2018) and 
Bouet (2009:68). Interestingly it is noted that there is regional pattern to the different shapes 
that likely relate to differences in dress, with men of Celtic tribes wearing pants that would 
require sitting while defecating as opposed to tunics which could allow for squatting. 
Nevertheless, the potential for spread of soil-transmitted helminths as a result of dumping 
chamber pots into the street or other collection areas is similar to that in the Mediterranean 
region. 
5.3.4 Diet and Animal Interactions 
What is notable at these sites compared to the Mediterranean is the presence of parasites that 
are acquired from undercooked meat or interactions with animals more generally. While 
Ascaris sp. and Trichuris sp. have some potential to be zoonotically acquired they are not 
necessarily zoonotic like some other species such as Taenia tapeworms and fish tapeworm 
(Ledger and Mitchell, 2019). 
The provinces along the Danube and Rhine rivers were sparsely populated before the 
stationing of military legions and the growth of towns, this would have necessitated an 
increase in food production and import of foodstuffs (Whittaker, 1994: 99). There is evidence 
from various sites in the northeastern provinces of the empire suggesting that local animal 
husbandry practices exhibited measurable continuity after stationing of Roman military troops 
and urbanization (Groot and Deschler-Erb, 2017; Trixl et al., 2017). Most of the people living 
in these provincial regions of the empire would have been local populations to begin with. 
The Roman individuals would have consisted of the military troops, the governor and 
administrative officials, and merchants and families who followed military troops (Elton, 
1996:15). Continuation of pre-existing foodways may have been necessary to support a 
growing population until imports from elsewhere in the empire were well established. Many 
foodstuffs and items may have been imported to meet the preferences of the Roman military 
and administrative individuals, until they became a regular items produced in these 
communities.  
In Belgica zooarchaeological assemblages have suggested a diet dominated by beef as 
opposed to the heavier reliance on pork seen in Italy and the Mediterranean (King, 2001). 
Similarly in Germania Inferior and areas along the Rhine, King (2001) has reported cattle 
bones making up 60% of the assemblages. When these data are compared to pre-Roman 
settlements it appears that cattle was also the main domesticate before the Roman conquest. 
Furthermore, changes to husbandry practices in different settlements in the provinces were 
varied, with some maintaining foodways very similar to the pre-Roman period (Valenzuela-
Lamas and Albarella, 2017). The reliance on cattle may explain the eggs of Taenia sp. found 
at Carnuntum, Belginum, Alphen on the Rhine, and Andilly-en-Bassigny. If any of this beef 
was eaten raw or undercooked, infection with beef tapeworm (Taenia saginata) could occur. 
Certainly, if we relied upon the opinions of elite writers from the Mediterranean we would be 
informed that those living in the farther northern areas of the empire such as the Gauls ate 
very differently to elite Romans. These individuals living in northern regions of the empire 
are said to have relied on milk and the flesh of many animals available to them sometimes 
even to be eaten raw (Garnsey, 1999b). Despite the reliance on cattle shown by 
zooarchaeological remains, Taenia sp. is only found at these four sites in the frontier regions 
indicating a low prevalence of the tapeworm, that meat was generally well cooked, or that 
meat was not eaten as frequently as the zooarchaeological assemblages on their own may 
suggest.  
Even within Roman settlements in the northeastern region of the empire the 
zooarchaeological remains vary, likely as a result of local ecology (Trixl et al., 2017). For 
example, Deschler-Erb (2017) analysed zooarchaeological remains from three fortresses in 
Roman Switzerland finding that proportions of wild animal remains ranged from 217% with 
the higher end likely reflecting hunting among military personnel and populations of deer, 
elk, beaver, and wild boar in the area. Similar variations are seen in different types of 
settlements, with some villae having higher proportions of wild animal remains likely due to 
local populations of deer and popular hunted animals. Military sites in Switzerland and the 
Netherlands have been found to have higher proportions of pig remains than cattle, in 
opposition to other rural and urban sites in the area, suggesting that the Roman military diet 
may be closer to Roman diets in the Mediterranean (Groot, 2017; Groot and Deschler-Erb, 
2017). We may then expect that dietary patterns at sites along the frontiers may be reflective 
of the diet of the previous Celtic Iron Age tribes in the region with additions taken from the 
typical Roman diet in the Mediterranean. For Viminacium that would be the Scordisci in 
Serbia, the Treveri around Arlon in Belgium, and the Hallstatt culture in pre-Roman Austria 
where Lauriacum was located. Further research on these Iron Age communities would be very 
valuable. 
Viminacium, one of the sites studied as part of this research, is located farther south 
than those in Austria and Belgium and thus it is worth considering it separately. This is the 
first palaeoparasitological evidence from a site in Serbia in any time period so unfortunately 
there is very little comparative data. Viminacium was established as a legionary camp that 
had two civilian settlements around the camp. Viminacium was granted municipal status 
under the reign of Hadrian. As a site located much closer to the Mediterranean region with a 
consistently heavy military presence it may be expected that it was influenced more heavily 
by cultural practices in the Mediterranean. Certainly, the presence of solely Ascaris sp. and 
Trichuris trichiura is similar to what was found in Asia and Cyprus (see previous section). 
The settlement was located on fertile land and a number of crops were grown around the 
legionary camp and civilian settlements. Thus agriculture was likely an important part of the 
economy of the city and these crops would have been a necessary food source for the legion 
stationed there. There is evidence for various crops including wheat, millet, barley, rye, 
lentils, broad-beans, common vetch, and reliance on local fruits (Medovi, 2013). The 
presence of the bath complex and communal latrine where the coprolite studied came from 
attests to the influence of Roman culture from the Mediterranean.  
Cereals, wine, and olives are often referred to as staples in the Roman diet (Garnsey, 
1999a:13; Purcell, 2003) however the types of cereals and availability of wine and olive oil 
would have varied immensely based on ecology and distance from production areas 
(Erdkamp, 2015). For the typical individual living in the Roman Empire meat and fish were 
actually not a consistent or major part of the diet but fruits, vegetables, cereals, and pulses 
would have been the major contributors to caloric intake (Garnsey, 1999a:18; Craig et al., 
2009). Though fish was part of the diet of many individuals in the Roman empire, 
Diphyllobothrium sp. eggs have only been found at six Roman period sites, none of which are 
in the provinces along the Rhine and Danube river and no additional evidence for fish 
tapeworm was found at the sites studied as part of this dissertation. If freshwater were 
consumed widely in this region perhaps they were often well cooked. That being said, fish 
sauce was a popular condiment in the Roman Empire and it was widely traded within the 
empire and local variants were produced in Gaul, Britain, and Belgium (Van Neer and 
Lentacker, 1994; Ven Neer et al., 2005). It is possible that the fish sauce imported and 
produced in the region was made primarily using marine fish which are not an intermediate 
host for the parasite in this region of the world.  
5.3.5 Summary 
In summary, the pattern of parasites found in the frontier provinces of the northeastern Roman 
Empire is more diverse than that in the Mediterranean region. Though the only existing Iron 
Age data come from Austria, the species found at that site are similar to those found at Roman 
period sites. Additional samples may show that there was a continuity of Celtic patterns of 
parasite infection very similar to what has been observed for cultural practices such as diet. 
Furthermore, the ecology and environment of the settlements in these regions would have had 
strong influences on the species of parasites that could survive and flourish there and it does 
not appear that changing cultural practices as a result of Roman occupation drastically 
changed the types of intestinal parasites that people were infected with. There is very little 
data that is well dated, thus to get a better sense of how Roman occupation influenced parasite 
infections it will be necessary to study further samples from various time periods and from 
additional Iron Age and Medieval contexts. 
5.4 Britannia  
The majority of previously published palaeoparasitological work in the Roman period is on 
sites from Roman Britain (see section 2.3). However, most of this work has used samples 
from pits, occupation layers, and some latrines. The samples analysed for this dissertation 
came from the pelvis of skeletons in an attempt to gather more information about intestinal 
parasite infection at an individual level. Previous work has revealed evidence for six different 
taxa of intestinal parasites in Roman Britain, namely Ascaris sp., Dicrocoelium sp., 
Diphyllobothrium sp., Fasciola sp., Taenia sp., and Trichuris trichiura. 
5.4.1 New Results 
The two sites studied as part of this dissertation were the Roman cemetery at West Smithfield, 
London and Winterborne, Dorset. From West Smithfield, pelvic soil samples from 29 
individuals with ages ranging from 645 years were analysed. Three adults, both male and 
female, were found to be infected with Ascaris sp. None of the five individuals studied from 
Winterborne, Dorset had parasite eggs in their pelvic soil. As such the data do not allow us to 
determine if there were any patterns in infections at the individual level. For example, if 
certain types of parasites were more common in males compared to females, or in children 
compared to adults. This type of study would be useful for confirming if the distribution of 
parasite infections in past populations was similar to what is observed in modern populations. 
In modern epidemiological studies the highest intensities of helminth infections are often seen 
in school-aged children (515 years), while rates of infection are often similar between 
genders (Hotez et al., 2006). Analysis of these samples does give us additional evidence for 
roundworm infection in Roman London.  
5.4.2 Patterns in Roman Britain 
As the region with the largest amount of evidence, the parasite data from Roman Britain was 
analysed more closely for patterns of infection by site type and sample type (Figure 58; for 
raw data see Appendix B.6). The site type was broken up into three categories: military, 
urban, and rural. A military site was any site that was a camp, fort, or fortress (Ambleside, 
Bearsden, Carlisle, and Poundbury); an urban site was any site designated as a large town or 
colonia where samples did not come from areas that would have been primarily occupied by 
the military (Leicester, Lincoln, London, and York); and a rural site was other small 
settlements not associated with a main military camp, fort, or fortress (Owslebury). Of course 
it should be acknowledged that many military sites in the Roman Empire had small civilian 
settlements located nearby thus, these categories are a general assignment based on the 
primary activities that occurred at the site. Sample types were based on the description of the 
samples by the original authors; it is possible that some pits are actually cesspits but were not 
identified as such during excavation. The burial sample type includes pelvic soil and soil from 
inside coffins.   
Figure 58: Distribution of parasite taxa at Romano-British sites. Overall proportion of sites in 
which each taxa of parasite was found (centre); number of sites each taxa is found in by 
category of site (left); number of taxa found in different sample types (right). 
As can be seen in Figure 58 the most common parasites identified in Romano-British 
sites are Ascaris sp. and Trichuris sp.; with Ascaris sp. eggs identified at 82% of sites and 
Trichuris sp. at 91%. Dicrocoelium sp. and Fasciola sp. were the next most commonly 
identified parasites, but were found at a much lower proportion of sites; 18% for each. The 
least common taxa were tapeworms; Diphyllobothrium sp. and Taenia sp. eggs were both 
found at 9% of sites. When we look at the different site types, Ascaris and Trichuris are the 
most commonly identified eggs in military and urban sites, and they have been identified at 
the one rural site studied. This is in line with what has been found in the rest of the Roman 
Empire (see section 2.3.6). Urban sites have the highest taxonomic diversity of any site type. 
Fasciola sp. eggs were identified at military and urban sites but not in rural sites. 
Dicrocoelium sp. eggs were identified in urban and rural sites but not at military sites. No 
statistical analysis of these comparisons has been done because the sample sizes are very 
small. 
5.4.3 Soil-Transmitted Helminths 
The high proportion of sites where roundworm and whipworm were found is not surprising 
after the patterns already discussed from Italia, Asia, and the other frontier provinces. Soil-
transmitted helminths were widespread in the Roman Empire despite regional variations in 
cultural practices, variations in sanitation infrastructure, and urbanisation. The evidence for 
latrines in Britannia varies based on the type of site. In military camps and forts, latrines were 
often set up even on a semi-permanent basis. In temporary camps, latrines would have been 
trenches dug into the ground that could then be filled over (Hobson, 2009:33). The pit that 
was studied from Ambleside may have been one of these temporary latrines. The specific 
context of this pit is not described in the report on parasites found in the pit (Jones, 1985). In 
more permanent forts and fortresses, latrines (private and multi-seater) were built either as 
part of bath complexes or independently (Revell, 2007; Hobson, 2009:35; Rushworth, 
2009:222). Less work has been done looking at the location of private latrines in typical 
Roman houses in Britain. Most information on private latrines comes from elite villas, large 
towns, and military settlements. We may expect that many modest houses did not have private 
latrines, or had cesspits located outside the house similar to what has been found in Germania 
Inferior (see 5.3). It is also likely that chamber pots were widely used, and in a region reliant 
on agriculture, excrement may have been collected in dung heaps and reused as fertilizer for 
crops or small gardens.  
Housing layout was also different from what is seen in the urbanised cities studied 
from Asia and Italia. Many rural farmsteads and buildings were constructed primarily of 
timber (Perring, 2002:83). Other buildings such as bathhouses, and later forts, were 
constructed of stone or brick (Wacher, 2000:20, 56). It is not until the mid 2nd c. CE when 
masonry becomes more widespread in Roman Britain (Perring, 2002:106). This is in contrast 
to the marble, stone, terracotta, mortar, and brick found in the Mediterranean quite widely. 
Many early Roman buildings in Britain had earth-beaten floors, these have even been called 
standard (Perring, 2002:126). Where stone was readily available, stone-flagged floors have 
been found in working areas of houses and lime-based cement floors were also common in 
nicer houses. Mortar and mosaic floors are found mostly in higher class buildings such as the 
villa at Fishbourne and some houses in London (Perring, 2002:32). Flooring and building 
techniques can influence pathogen transmission, and in particular soil-transmitted helminths. 
Worrell and colleagues (2016) found that having finished household floors was a protective 
factor against soil-transmitted helminths in modern populations in Kenya. Earth-beaten floors 
may have been harder to wash compared to those finished with materials such as stone or 
concrete, and any contamination of the living space with faecal material on shoes, from 
chamber pots, or from numerous flies known to be present in Roman settlements could have 
resulted in helminth eggs surviving in the home. 
 The economy of Roman Britain was heavily based on agriculture as it was in the 
preceding Iron Age (Millett, 2005:38). Agricultural improvements were happening in the area 
before the conquest by the Romans, and continued with the introduction of new agricultural 
equipment by the Romans. Production likely expanded after Roman occupation in response to 
increased population sizes brought on by the presence of large military troops, an estimated 
55,000 people at its peak (Millett, 2005:37), and export to other areas of the empire. This 
meant that previously unused land may have started to be used as agricultural land in this 
period (Millett, 2005:38). Wacher (2000:20) has also estimated that 1000 km2 of woodland 
was deforested over the first 150 years of occupation both to supply wood for building new 
forts and settlements, and for fuel. This area would have also provided additional land for 
agriculture, neighboring newly established forts or settlements. With most towns relying on 
agriculture and farmland, it is expected that even people living in more urbanised centres may 
have had continual interaction with farm animals. Nonetheless most of the population is 
estimated to have lived in rural settlements with an agrarian focus similar to the preceding 
Iron Age. Millett (2005:36) estimated a rural population of 3.6 million and only 240,000 in 
larger towns. This may have been a factor in the presence of zoonotic parasites found in 
Britain but not in large cities in Asia or the wider Mediterranean. 
5.4.4 Liver flukes 
After roundworm and whipworm, the next most common parasites found in Roman Britain 
are the liver flukes, Dicrocoelium sp. and Fasciola sp. While both of these genera include 
species that can infect humans they also often cause pseudoparasitism (ingestion of eggs that 
does not result in infection). Certainly liver is included in many Roman recipes from the 
Apicius (7.3.1-2 and 7.10.1-2) and in particular it is listed under luxury dishes. The liver of 
chicken, sheep, and pigs are specified in recipes, but there are also recipes where the type of 
liver is not specified. In most cases the recipes call for cooking by boiling or frying (Apicius 
8.8.5). It seems unlikely that these preparations of liver were common in the Roman Empire 
and may have been consumed more often by elite individuals, though liver may have been 
regularly consumed by anyone. Dicrocoelium sp. eggs have only been found at sites in 
Britain, France, and Israel; and Fasciola sp. has been found at sites in Britain, France, and 
Italy. It is also possible that dietary practices in these regions were more likely to contain raw 
or undercooked liver, that these are cases of pseudoparasitism if animal faeces contaminated 
living spaces, or animal faeces were dumped in latrines, cesspits, and other refuse pits. The 
evidence for Fasciola and Dicrocoelium in Britain was found in occupation layer soil, pits, 
and ditches; none of which can be confidently linked to human ingestion of eggs or human 
infection. However, the presence of eggs in living areas at all site types indicates that humans 
were at risk for infection with these parasites. Liver was eaten in the Roman period and 
known to be a nutritious food. Thus, for individuals whose main source of income came from 
agriculture and pastoralism, selling or eating the liver of animals may have been common 
even if not prepared for the elite tastes that the Apicius catered to. 
 Fasciola hepatica is the most common species of Fasciola to infect humans and it is 
acquired through the consumption of aquatic plants such as watercress, dandelion, and 
spearmint which have larvae encysted as metacercariae on them as a result of human or 
animal faeces finding their way into water (Mas-Coma et al., 1999; Garcia, 2016). Common 
animals that carry Fasciola hepatica are sheep which were known to be herded in Roman 
Britain and were the most common herded animal in Iron Age Britain. The presence of 
Fasciola sp. eggs in occupation layer soils at Carlisle and a cesspit at Leicester may reflect 
local consumption of aquatic plants and proximity to sheep. 
5.4.5 Tapeworms 
The only evidence for tapeworms, both fish and beef/pork, comes from urban centres, in 
particular London. This may be a result of access to a larger variety of foods and exotic foods 
in major centres. Archaeobotanical evidence from 514 sites in Roman Britain has shown that 
imported foods that were new to Britain in the Roman period were more often found in major 
towns such as London (van der Veen, 2008). These include things like figs, grapes, mulberry, 
pine nut, olives, and lentils. It appears that people living in major cities like London had 
greater access to more exotic foods that were imported from elsewhere in the empire. This 
may have included other items such as fish sauce and preserved meats which could have been 
responsible for tapeworm infections. The only evidence for pre-Roman parasites in Britain 
comes from the Bronze Age site of Brean Down (Jones, 1990) and the Must Farm settlement 
studied here (Ledger et al., 2019a). Taenia sp. was not found at either of these sites though 
Diphyllobothrium sp. was found in coprolites and soil samples from Must Farm indicating its 
previous presence in the Fens of England.  
 The most common species of fish recovered from Roman sites in Britain are eel, 
herring, plaice, cyprinid, and salmonid (Locker, 2007). Cyprinids are exclusively freshwater 
fish while eel and salmon spend part of their life in freshwater. Diphyllobothrium sp. can be 
found in salmon and cyprinids thus consumption of these fish could result in infection if they 
were eaten raw or undercooked. Marine fish was generally preferred over freshwater fish in 
the Roman period though it was more expensive and there is ample evidence for freshwater 
fish consumption especially amongst the lower classes (Locker, 2007). There is less evidence 
for fish consumption in Iron Age Britain, both based on zooarchaeological remains and stable 
isotope data (Jay and Richards, 2006; Dobney and Ervynck, 2007; Jay, 2008). Fish 
consumption then increases in the Roman period. Fish remains are found throughout sites in 
Roman Britain though fish, and fish tapeworm, becomes much more common in Britain in the 
Medieval period as a result of the spread of Christianity (Cool, 2006:105; Locker, 2007; 
Mitchell, 2015a). 
If fish sauce was produced from freshwater fish in this area of Britain it is possible 
that it could transmit fish tapeworm if salting conditions were not adequate to kill larvae. 
Recovery of fish bones and amphora, common shipping containers, has given evidence for 
importation of fish sauce and pickled fish from Iberia starting in the Iron Age and increasing 
into the Roman period (Cool, 2006:59). These amphorae become less common in the 2nd c. 
CE, it has been suggested that this may be a reflection of fish sauce production in Britain 
(Cool, 2006:61). The only evidence for fish tapeworm in Roman Britain comes from London, 
there has been evidence for garum or liquamen production at a waterfront site in London 
(Bateman and Locker, 1982). However, the fish remains found suggest that garum was made 
from herring and splat which are not common intermediate hosts of Diphyllobothrium sp. 
Cool (2006:62) has suggested that fish sauce was mainly consumed by the military and in 
urban sites, and it was less popular at rural sites and certainly not consumed regularly by most 
people living in Roman Britain. 
 The presence of Taenia tapeworm, also in London, may represent infection with beef 
tapeworm (Taenia saginata) or pork tapeworm (Taenia solium). Though the dominant faunal 
remains in Iron Age sites in Britain are sheep, in the Roman period there is a shift to high 
levels of cattle across the province and high levels of pig at some sites, mainly military and 
urban (King, 2001). As one of the major urban centres in Britain, London is one of the sites 
where higher proportions of pig remains would be expected and some faunal assemblages 
show this (Maltby, 2016). Sheep or goat were more common on rural sites, showing 
continuity with Iron Age sites (King, 1978). Numerous cattle scapulae have been found with a 
hole through the centre which suggests that shoulders were hung to be dried or smoked (Cool, 
2006:89). Smoking and drying are not always effective at killing parasite larvae and this 
could be another practice leading to beef tapeworm infection. High levels of pig remains but 
also the practices of preserving cattle mean it is possible that the Taenia sp. eggs found in 
London could have come from infective beef or pork. Pigs were also a major source of meat 
in the Mediterranean region however Taenia sp. eggs have not been found in the 
Mediterranean region in the Roman period so far. Cooking practices, levels of meat 
consumption as well as the fact that more samples have been studied in Britain compared to 
much of the Mediterranean all likely contribute to his pattern to some extent. 
 One point to consider when comparing the parasite remains from Britain to other 
regions of the Empire is the exceptional organic preservation at some of these sites where 
waterlogged conditions have resulted in excellent preservation of archaeobotanical remains, 
wood, and bone (Wilcox, 1977; Millet, 2005:20). Other sites such as York, London, and 
Carlisle have also provided waterlogged deposits. It is unclear where the distinction is 
between increased organic preservation due to these wet conditions and increased support of 
the life cycles of a more diverse set of parasites both in antiquity and modern-day. There is 
little comparative evidence for intestinal parasites in earlier time periods in Britain but work 
discussed as part of this doctoral research in the Fens during the Bronze Age shows that the 
freshwater aquatic environment of the Fens is an ideal ecological niche for a range of parasite 
taxa (Ledger et al., 2019a). Despite this I would expect that Taenia eggs, with their thick 
chitinous walls, would be equally robust as Ascaris and Trichuris. All of these species do not 
rely on hatching in the environment for their life cycles, thus should have similar rates of 
preservation. 
5.4.6 Summary 
In summary, the parasite evidence from Romano-British sites follows the pattern seen in other 
regions where the soil-transmitted helminths, whipworm and roundworm, are the most 
frequently identified. However, in Britain we also see cases of zoonotic parasites including 
liver flukes and tapeworms. At least one species of liver fluke, either Dicrocoelium sp. or 
Fasciola sp., was found at each site type and both species were found together at urban sites. 
The presence of liver flukes may be a result of consumption of liver from various animals or 
contamination of sites with animal faeces. Tapeworms including, beef/pork tapeworm (Taenia 
sp.) and fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) were only found at urban sites which may 
reflect a more diverse diet or access to more exotic foods at these sites.  
6 Wider Trends in Parasitic Infection 
From the different regional foci a few trends start to become evident. Soil-transmitted 
helminths are the most common parasites identified in each region and they are found in all 
regions of the empire. Their transmission in these communities is likely reliant in part on 
sanitation infrastructure design and use. Furthermore, approaches to waste disposal and reuse, 
as fertilizer for example, can be a major contributor to transmission. 
 Another trend that starts to appear is the presence of foodborne or zoonotic parasites 
primarily in regions north of the Mediterranean. Taxa such as liver flukes (Dicrocoelium sp. 
and Fasciola sp.), tapeworms (Taenia sp. and Diphyllobothrium sp.) and others such as 
Capillaria sp. are found in the frontier regions of the empire and in France but have not been 
identified from most of the Mediterranean sites studied. This may be a result of diverse 
dietary practices, locally defined culinary preferences, variations in animal husbandry 
practices, and ecology. 
Alongside social factors, cultural practices, and environmental factorsincluding the 
design of cities and infrastructure, climate and ecology likely has an important role to play in 
parasite presence in these regions. As many parasites spend a part of their life cycle outside of 
a host, their life cycles as well as preservation are reliant on local ecology. Many more sites in 
the northern provinces have waterlogged contexts, compared to the Mediterranean region, 
which could result in better egg preservation (for a further discussion of preservation see 
section 7.3). It is important to note that this may in part account for the higher diversity of 
parasite species that has been found in these provinces in past and current research, however 
the climatic impact on egg preservation is largely unknown. Climate and local ecosystems are 
important for parasite survival and reproduction, and latitude in particular has been shown to 
be correlated with parasite diversity. As latitude increases so does helminth species diversity 
(Nunn et al., 2005; Lindenfors et al., 2007; Morand, 2015). The complex life cycles involving 
intermediate and definitive hosts means that parasites can only survive in ecosystems where 
the proper climate and host organisms all come together in the same locality.  
Aside from exploring the variations in parasite taxonomic diversity across the empire 
we can also look at how this has changed through time. With the comparative data gathered 
here we can broadly analyse changes from the Neolithic period through the Medieval period. 
6.1 Temporal Changes  Neolithic Through Medieval 
Similar to the point made by Keay (2001), that the Pre-Roman period is important in 
providing the context for understanding cultural variation in the Roman Empire, the Pre-
Roman and Post-Roman disease-scapes are essential to understanding the presence of disease 
in the Roman Empire, particularly in teasing apart potential causal factors or determinants of 
disease. Without an idea of the infectious diseases in a region prior to the time period of 
interest it is impossible to tell if environmental and sociocultural changes that occurred at that 
time are responsible for changes in infectious disease transmission; additional comparison 
with later time periods can also help tease this apart. 
Due to the imprecision of many dates for samples studied from the Roman period 
(many cannot be determined more specifically than a range of two centuries or even more 
broadly as Roman in general), I have made little mention of changes throughout the Roman 
period. Nevertheless, we may expect that there were changes in patterns and rates of infection 
throughout the Roman period as a result of population growth, further adoption of Roman 
cultural practices in the frontiers, the instability brought about by droughts, regional conflicts, 
and so on. Further samples and more precise dating may allow us to explore this in the future. 
6.1.1 Whipworm and Roundworm 
The presence of whipworm and roundworm is quite consistent from the Neolithic period 
through the Medieval period. These parasites are consistently the most frequently identified 
intestinal parasite eggs in archaeological samples in these time periods. This exemplifies the 
ability of these two helminths to infect humans in a range of ecological niches and through 
varying cultural and social practices. Though prevalence of infection may have changed over 
time as a result of changing social practices and climate, these intricacies cannot always be 
established with the current state of palaeoparasitological data as a result of differences in the 
numbers of sites and locations of sites studied in different time periods, and the lack of 
knowledge about preservation dynamics of parasite eggs. 
When we look at the proportion of sites where roundworm and whipworm were found 
in the different periods this becomes more clear. Roundworm was found at 40 out of 62 
(64.5%) sites in the Roman period, and whipworm was found at 38 out of 62 (61.3%). In the 
Medieval period, roundworm was found at 41 out of 55 (74.5%) sites studied, and whipworm 
at 37 out of 55 (67.3%) sites studied. Roundworm is less common in the Pre-Roman period, 
being found at only 14 out of 46 (30.4%) sites studied, while whipworm is still fairly common 
being found at 25 out of 46 (54.3%) sites studied. The only significant difference is between 
the frequency of sites in the pre-Roman and Roman period with Ascaris sp. (X2=12.2693, 
p=0.0005) (Figure 59). To fairly calculate proportions combining previously published 
literature and results from this dissertation I have added in the sites that were studied as part 
of this research; however, I have not counted sites where no parasites were found because 
these types of sites are generally invisible in the published record and it is unclear if parasites 
were not present in the past or just have not preserved. This is the same for the remaining taxa 
discussed in this section.  
Figure 59: Frequency of positive sites for Ascaris sp. and Trichuris sp. in different time 
periods. Significant differences are marked by an asterisk. 
 Whipworm and roundworm are found spread across areas of Europe and the Middle 
East that were once part of the Roman Empire, before, during, and after the Roman period 
(Figure 60 and Figure 61). In the Pre-Roman period the lack of latrines and wider sanitation 
infrastructure was likely a strong determinant for the presence of soil-transmitted helminths. 
This was exemplified at the Neolithic site of atalhyk, Turkey (Ledger et al., 2019b; see 
Appendix A.2) and the Bronze Age settlement of Must Farm, UK (Ledger et al, 2019a; see 
Appendix A.1). In both of these sites faecal material was dumped in and around living spaces. 
In the case of the settlement at Must Farm this resulted in general contamination of water 
around the settlement with parasite eggs as well as recovery of numerous eggs in human 
faeces. At atalhyk, the presence of rubbish areas near houses that contained human faecal 
material meant that eggs could be easily transmitted around living spaces resulting in 
infections in the community.  
 It is interesting that the proportion of sites that had preserved roundworm eggs was 
lower in the Pre-Roman period compared to the Medieval and Roman periods yet whipworm 
was still found at nearly 50% of sites. One possible explanation for this is the number of 
lakeside settlements that have been studied in the Neolithic period and a few in the Bronze 
Age. The lakeside settlements that have been studied from the Neolithic period include those 
from Germany studied by Le Bailly (2005), Chalain and Clairvaux in France (Bouchet, 1997; 
Bouchet et al., 1995a; Dommelier et al., 1998; Dommelier-Espejo, 2001), Arbon and 
Parkhaus-Opra, Zrich in Switzerland (Maicher et al., 2019), and La Draga in Spain (Le 
Bailly et al., 2003a; Maicher et al., 2017). In the Bronze Age, lakeside or freshwater 
settlements have been studied from Bourget Lake (Le Bailly and Bouchet, 2010; Le Bailly 
and Bouchet, 2013) and Must Farm (Ledger et al., 2019a; Appendix A1). Very few of these 
sites have roundworm present while most have whipworm, and in general they have the 
highest level of taxonomic diversity seen in all time periods. Modern epidemiological studies 
on geographical distribution of soil-transmitted helminths show that climate and 
environmental factors (e.g. soil pH, rainfall, temperature, elevation, soil type) affect these 
three parasites differently (Spindler, 1929; Pullan and Brooker, 2012; Pullan et al., 2014; 
Wardell et al., 2017). Despite these environmental factors that may differentially affect sites 
studied in different time periods, with increasing urbanisation, population sizes, and resultant 
waste production we may expect that roundworm prevalence did truly increase in the Roman 
period.  
Figure 60: Distribution of whipworm (Trichuris sp.) before, during, and after the Roman 
period. Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and 
Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
Figure 61: Distribution of roundworm (Ascaris sp.) before, during, and after the Roman 
period. Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and 
Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
Despite more advanced sanitation infrastructure and widespread construction of 
latrines in the Roman period, these soil-transmitted helminths are still found in sites across the 
empire. As has been discussed in each regional focus (see 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4), there were 
numerous other pathways for the movement of helminth eggs around living spaces in Roman 
communities that may have combined to contribute to a general presence of roundworm and 
whipworm infections in Roman populations. As has been noted in modern epidemiological 
studies, latrines and sewers alone are not effective at stopping the transmission of soil-
transmitted helminths and there are many other social, cultural, economic, and environmental 
factors involved in their transmission in communities (Mascarini-Serra, 2011; Schmidlin et 
al., 2013; Strunz et al., 2014; Worrell et al., 2016; Oswald et al., 2017). Cultural practices that 
may have contributed to transmission include sharing large latrines, preference for chamber 
pots especially amongst the elite, and lack of general hand hygiene. These lead to 
environmental conditions that would have aided in the transmission of these parasites. The 
emptying of chamber pots in streets, dumping human waste in the street, use of open cesspits 
without traps or covers, continual defecation in public spaces, and location of latrines in or 
near kitchens would have resulted in faecal contamination of towns. Economic factors 
contributing to spread of soil-transmitted helminths include the lack of access to private 
latrines for everyone and the reuse of human faeces as fertilizer. While the categories of 
environmental, cultural, and economic can be overlapping it is clear that there are numerous 
intricate factors at play in these communities that would have allowed for the spread of 
faecal-oral pathogens.  
 Sanitation conditions are not thought to have drastically improved in the Medieval 
period, if anything they may have gotten worse, and this is likely the reason for the continual 
presence of roundworm and whipworm at many sites (Mitchell, 2015a). Inadequate disposal 
of human waste and lack of clean water were likely major factors involved in the continuity of 
roundworm and whipworm infections. Sanitation infrastructure does not continue to improve 
in the Medieval period. Many private latrines could still be found with cesspits, and chamber 
pots were still widely used (Sabine, 1934; Mitchell, 2015a; Taylor, 2015). Flushing latrines 
were less common while latrines with simple pits or cesspits were more standard. Access to 
clean water may have decreased as Roman aqueducts fell out of use and underground sewers 
in many cities were not adequately repaired (Taylor, 2015).  
The villa at Vacone offered the opportunity to study intestinal parasites in the Roman 
period and the subsequent period of Lombard occupation in Italy and has shown possible 
evidence for the continuation of roundworm infection at the site (see results in 4.3.8 and 
4.4.2). The Lombards were a Germanic tribe that migrated from Pannonia and more northern 
climates into central Italy around 568 CE (Barbiera, 2005) (see Figure 62). This is the first 
study of parasite infection in Lombard period individuals from Italy. The presence of 
roundworm eggs in the pelvis of Lombard period individuals from the villa hints that 
roundworm may have continued to infect people living in Italy after the fall of the Roman 
Empire, and after the migration of Lombard individuals. However, due to the presence of 
roundworm eggs in control samples further individuals need to be studied to distinguish true 
infections from general contamination of the site with roundworm eggs. The only other 
evidence for parasites from Italy comes from later in the Medieval period (10th11th c. CE). 
From Piazza Garibaldi in Parma multiple species were found in cesspit sediment, namely 
Taenia or Echinococcus sp., and whipworm (Trichuris trichiura) (Bosi et al., 2011; 
Florenzano et al., 2012). From other pits that were more likely to contain animal faecal 
material and thus animal parasites, other species found were Capillaria sp., Dicrocoelium sp., 
and fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.). Analysis of additional Lombard period samples 
and Medieval samples from Italy will allow us to determine if there was continuity between 
the Roman and Lombard period or if perhaps Lombard populations from Northern Europe 
introduced new parasites into communities in Italy through migration with parasites or 
changing cultural practices.  
Figure 62: Overview of Lombard migrations into Italy. Proposed areas occupied by the 
Lombards and path of movement into Italy in the 6th c. CE (adapted from Vai et al., 2015). 
The Anglo-Saxon period samples studied from Hatherdene Close also offered the 
chance to investigate how parasite infection may have changed directly after the Roman 
period, this time in Britain. Out of the 92 individuals studied, a single parasite egg was found 
in the pelvic soil of three individuals. One had an egg of Ascaris sp., one an egg of 
Dicrocoelium dendriticum, and one an egg of Trichuris trichiura. Unfortunately, none of 
these offer convincing evidence for infection despite the absence of eggs in the control 
samples. It is possible that the soil in the cemetery was contaminated with parasite eggs and 
these could have found their way into the burial contexts in very low levels. 
The lack of evidence for parasitic infection in the individuals at Hatherdene Close is 
notable based on the widescale presence in other Medieval sites in Britain. It is possible that a 
rural living environment, with a smaller population size compared to overcrowded urban 
centres, may have decreased transmission and spread of these parasites even if they were 
present in the environment. Though roundworm and whipworm can be maintained in small 
populations, their prevalence does tend to increase with overcrowding leading to poor 
sanitation and hygiene in modern populations (Kan et al., 1989; Crompton and Savioli, 1993; 
Phiri et al., 2000; Pullan and Brooker, 2012). 
However, in combination with previously published literature it generally does still 
appear that roundworm and whipworm remained the most common intestinal parasites 
infecting people in the Medieval period in Europe. It is possible that roundworm increased in 
frequency in the Roman period compared to the Pre-Roman period though this may also be a 
reflection of the underlying ecology of the sites studied. 
6.1.2 Protozoa 
None of the sites studied as part of this dissertation provided new evidence for intestinal 
protozoa in the Roman Empire. Currently the only evidence for Giardia in the Roman period 
comes from a communal latrine at the site of Sagalassos in Turkey (Williams et al., 2017). 
Entamoeba histolytica has been found more widely, at six sites; one in Italy, one in Belgium, 
three in France, and one in Israel. There is no earlier evidence for Giardia from sites studied 
in the Pre-Roman period, and it then becomes more common in the Medieval period being 
found at five different sites. Entamoeba is found more consistently through all time periods, it 
has been found at four Pre-Roman sites, six Roman sites, and six sites in the Medieval period. 
There is no obvious geographic clustering of these protozoan species though it should be 
noted that most of the samples that have been tested are from central Europe, with very few 
that I am aware of done on British sites. Similarly, the Mediterranean region is understudied 
compared to northern Europe more generally.  
Figure 63: Distribution of Giardia duodenalis and Entamoeba histolytica before, during, and 
after the Roman period. Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of 
Roman and Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
6.1.3 Liver flukes 
Liver flukes including Fasciola sp. and Dicrocoelium sp., both primarily zoonotic parasites 
from sheep, have been found in all time periods in regions that were once a part of the Roman 
Empire. However, looking at the distribution of them it appears that they are more common in 
northern Europe with less evidence for them in the Mediterranean and Middle East (Figure 64 
and Figure 65), and that this is a pattern seen across all time periods. This becomes most 
evident when compared to the widespread distribution of sanitation related parasites such as 
whipworm (Figure 60), roundworm (Figure 61), and gastrointestinal protozoa (Figure 63).  
Figure 64: Distribution of Fasciola liver fluke before, during, and after the Roman period. 
Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval 
Civilizations, Harvard University. 
Figure 65: Distribution of the lancet liver fluke (Dicrocoelium sp.) before, during, and after 
the Roman period. Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of 
Roman and Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
In the Roman period both Dicrocoelium sp. and Fasciola sp. have been found at 8 out 
of 62 (12.9%) sites, most of which are in Britain and eastern France. In the Pre-Roman period 
Dicrocoelium sp. eggs have been found at 13 out of 46 (28.2%) sites and Fasciola sp. at 18 
out of 46 (39.1%) sites. In the Medieval period Dicrocoelium sp. eggs have been found at 12 
out of 55 (21.8%) sites and Fasciola sp. at 6 out of 55 (10.9%) sites. Therefore, based on 
current evidence the proportion of sites where liver fluke eggs were found decreased in the 
Roman period in comparison to previous Neolithic, Bronze Age, and Iron Age sites, and this 
is a significant difference (X2=3.9763, p=0.0461 for Dicrocoelium and X2=9.9378, p=0.0016 
for Fasciola sp.). Then Dicrocoelium increased in the Medieval period and Fasciola eggs 
were still found at about 10% of sites (Figure 66). 
Today, the regions of Europe with the highest seasonal risk for Fasciola transmission 
are still in northern Europe, with lower transmission in the Mediterranean region (Caminade 
et al., 2015). Thus, ecological conditions appear to be a very strong determinant for the 
presence of Fasciola in past and present communities. 
Figure 66: Frequency of positive sites for Dicrocoelium sp. and Fasciola sp. in different time 
periods. Significant differences are marked by an asterisk.  
The lower rates of liver flukes in the Roman period may be a reflection of the overall 
decreased reliance on sheep in the Roman period with a general preference for pig and cattle 
as food sources and working animals (King, 1999). Sheep are common hosts for 
Dicrocoelium and Fasciola liver flukes, though cattle can carry the parasites as well. This was 
not necessarily the case in every area of the Roman Empire and as discussed previously there 
are some areas, especially rural sites in Britain and areas in northeastern France, where sheep 
were still relied upon. This may explain the concentration of liver flukes in this area during 
the Roman period if this practice carried through from earlier Iron Age traditions. Also in 
these areas humans may have lived closer to water sources where lymnaeid snails (necessary 
intermediate hosts) are found with sheep and cattle grazing nearby allowing for completion of 
the parasite life cycle (Mas-Coma et al., 2018).  
This is a pattern that has also been noted by Le Bailly and Bouchet (2010) in regards 
to Dicrocoelium presence in Europe during Antiquity. If faeces from infected sheep were used 
as fertilizer for herbs or other vegetables, cases of pseudoparasitism could result from 
ingestion of Dicrocoelium sp. eggs or true infection if infected antsthe necessary 
intermediate host, were accidentally eaten with unwashed produce. Similarly in settlements of 
northeastern France and Britain located near water, ingestion of aquatic plants contaminated 
with sheep faeces could result in infections with Fasciola hepatica. For both types of liver 
fluke, ingestion of sheep liver or liver of other infected animals could result in passing of eggs 
in human faeces which could then be found in archaeological samples. 
One additional explanation for the lower percentage of positive sites in the Roman 
period is urbanisation, especially given that many sites studied in the Roman period so far 
have been larger towns or cities. In these urban areas people were less likely to come into 
contact with herded animals like sheep or eat aquatic plants such as watercress and dandelion 
directly from these areas which can have encysted Fasciola larvae from sheep faeces. In more 
urban centres where people get water from fountains the main risk may have come from 
buying aquatic plants/vegetables leading to potentially lower rates of infection in larger 
towns. 
6.1.4 Beef and Pork Tapeworm 
Taenia spp. tapeworms (beef and pork tapeworms) are found in all time periods. There are 
very few cases where it has been possible to distinguish between Taenia saginata and Taenia 
solium in archaeological settings. This is because the eggs of the two species look very similar 
morphologically and the most reliable way to distinguish between the two species is using 
ancient DNA analysis which is time consuming and costly. Although pork is regarded as the 
meat eaten in a typical Roman elite diet, beef was also fairly common and so it is definitely 
possible that both species were infecting people in the Roman period. Taenia tapeworms have 
been found at 7 out of 62 (11.3%) sites studied in the Roman Empire. They have been found 
in more samples from the Pre-Roman period at 14 out of 46 (30.4%) sites, and in more 
samples from the Medieval period, 11 out of 55 (20%) sites (Figure 67). However, there is 
only a significant difference between the pre-Roman and Roman period (X2=6.1790, 
p=0.0129). Similar to liver flukes these sites are concentrated in areas north of the 
Mediterranean and in Israel and Egypt (Figure 68). 
Figure 67: Frequency of positive sites for Taenia sp. in different time periods. Significant 
differences are marked by an asterisk. 
 The lower proportion of positive samples for Taenia tapeworms in the Roman period 
may reflect a spread of dietary preferences for cooked meat in the Roman period. As has been 
discussed in the section on Asia and the eastern Mediterranean (5.2) eating raw meat was 
discussed in Roman texts as a repulsive practice of uncivilized people and barbarians in the 
northern reaches of the empire (Garnsey, 1999b; Chandezon, 2015). These texts give us the 
opinion of elite Romans, likely from the Mediterranean region, and though their opinions 
cannot necessarily be trusted as to how individuals living in the northern provinces of the 
empire may have cooked their food, they do highlight a distaste for raw meat. In order to kill 
Taenia larvae in raw pork or beef, pork needs to be heated to a temperature of 65C and beef 
to 56 C (Wittner et al., 2011). Leaving beef in brine with a concentration of 25% has been 
reported to kill larvae in 56 days. In general, traditional salting and smoking recipes for pork 
and beef are not always effective at killing larvae (Rodriguez-Canul, 2002; Rivera-Guerrero, 
2004). Though there is evidence for smoking meat (Cool, 2006:89) and recipes for salted 
meat (Apicius, 1.7) in the Roman Empire it is possible that most meat was eaten cooked. 
Figure 68: Distribution of beef/pork tapeworm (Taenia sp.) before, during, and after the 
Roman period. Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman 
and Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
6.1.5 Fish tapeworm 
When we look at the distribution of fish tapeworm from the Neolithic period through the 
Medieval period it appears that fish tapeworm is more common in the Pre-Roman period and 
Medieval period than it is during the Roman period. In other words, fish tapeworm was less 
common in the Roman period than earlier or later time periods. It was found at 6 out of 62 
(9.7%) sites, when the newly studied sites in this dissertation are added not counting Arlon 
twice. In the Pre-Roman period it was found at 16 out of 46 (34.8%) sites studied from the 
Neolithic, Bronze Age, and Iron Age. In the Medieval period it was found at 9 out of 55 
(16.4%) sites studied (Figure 69). The only significant difference is between the pre-Roman 
and Roman period (X2=10.2608, p=0.0014). 
Figure 69: Frequency of positive sites for Diphyllobothrium sp. in different time periods. 
Significant differences are marked by an asterisk. 
Figure 70: Distribution of fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium sp.) before, during, and after the 
Roman period. Roman provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman 
and Medieval Civilizations, Harvard University. 
 Looking at the proportions it becomes clear that fish tapeworm was most common in 
the Pre-Roman period, particularly in the Neolithic period, and then decreased in the Roman 
period and increased slightly again in the Medieval period. The increase in fish tapeworm 
infection from the Roman period to the Medieval period has been noted by other authors and 
is expected to be a result of increased fish consumption as a result of the spread of 
Christianity in Europe, which imposes restrictions on meat consumption on specific days 
(Mitchell, 2015a). However, as mentioned previously, in areas of the empire such as Britain 
zooarchaeological evidence has shown an increase in fish consumption in the Roman period 
compared to the Iron Age. The only evidence for Pre-Roman fish tapeworm in Britain comes 
from the Late Bronze Age settlement at Must Farm. Due to the lack of studies on Iron Age 
sites it is difficult to know what was happening in other areas of Europe immediately prior to 
the Roman period and the pattern of lower rates of fish tapeworm may have already started in 
the Iron Age.  
 As I have mentioned in previous sections, the presence of fish tapeworm in the Roman 
period in northern provinces including Britannia, Belgica, Germania Superior, Aquitania, and 
Lugdunensis may be a reflection of fish consumption in the Roman period in the form of 
inadequately cooked fresh fish and preserved fish. The data from preceding periods shows 
that fish tapeworm was able to survive in many regions of the empire though it is not found 
there in the Roman period. This may be a result of preferences for certain types of fish and 
preparation of fish. Though both freshwater and marine fish were sold and consumed in the 
Roman Empire there appears to be a preference for marine fish, especially amongst the elite. 
Based on Diocletians Edict on Maximum Prices we know that marine fish were generally 
more expensive than freshwater fish (Marzano, 2018). Fish was very popular and when it was 
eaten fresh, it was often eaten cooked (Giacosa, 1992:122). It has been thought that most fish 
in the diet of the Romans came from the sea and that river fish were not as common (Curtis, 
1991:14). In the sewers at Herculaneum for example, remains of a wide variety of plants were 
found alongside animal bones that were dominated by coastal fish and shellfish (Robinson 
and Rowan, 2015). This pattern is likely different than in the northern provinces where 
freshwater lakes and rivers were more common and would have made acquisition of 
freshwater fish much easier than marine fish. 
 Long distance trade of fish and fish products did occur. For example, at Sagalassos in 
Turkey aDNA analysis of fish remains have identified a species of fish that must have come 
from the Nile valley (Arndt et al., 2003). In most cases in order for long distance trade of fish 
to occur without spoiling, the fish would have needed to be preserved. This would have been 
in the form of popular Roman fish dishes including salted fish and fish sauce. Though the 
terminology has been debated salted fish is called salsamenta and fish sauce can be either 
garum, liquamen, or muria, while the residue or sediment from making the sauce was called 
allec (Grainger, 2013; Grainger, 2018). It is thought that preserved fish in its various forms 
was accessible to people of varying socioeconomic statuses and while there were certain 
sought after varieties it was widely made and consumed across the empire (Marzano, 2018). 
The practice of processing fish by salting appears to have spread from the eastern 
Mediterranean prior to the Roman period and was well established across the Mediterranean 
by the 5th c. BCE (Mylona, 2018). Salting workshops are found along the Mediterranean coast 
and fish sauce (garum, liquamen, muria) was produced in high quantities in the Spanish and 
African provinces and transported around the empire (Garnsey, 1999a:16; Van Neer et al., 
2010). There is also evidence for local production of fish sauce, for example in Britain (see 
5.4), Gaul and Belgium (see 5.3). For a consistent supply of fish, farms were set up along the 
coasts where a range of fish could be farmed to be sold in markets, and also used to produce 
garum and salsamenta. Kron (2015) notes that in the early Imperial period 82 fish farms had 
already been established along the coasts of Italy. 
Various fish were used to make fish sauce and these would have varied by region. A 
recipe from the 3rd c. CE by Gargilius Martialis, now considered to be a Medieval gloss, 
specifies fatty fish such as sardines should be used to make the sauce (Giacosa, 1992; 
Grainger, 2013). It specifies that there should be a layer of salt on top of the fish that is two 
fingers high and that it should sit for seven days in the sun then be mixed daily for twenty 
days (Gargilius Martialis, Medicinae ex holeribus et pomis, 62; Grainger, 2018). There are 
two additional recipes in the Geoponica, a Byzantine text, that was a 10th-c. farming manual 
that preserved material from the entire Roman period. One of these recipes states that the 
mixture should be pickled for 23 months (Grainger, 2013). Pliny wrote that any fish could be 
used but mackerel was most common (Curtis, 1991:14). Lower quality garum may have been 
made for slaves using leftover parts of fish that would not have been eaten by the household 
(Giacosa, 1992:28) and local varieties would have likely relied on fish that could be caught 
nearby. Fish sauce produced in the Mediterranean mainly used sardines, sardinella, anchovies, 
and sea breams, whereas mackerel and scad were used for salted fish (salsamenta) (Van Neer 
et al., 2010).  
Despite this widescale evidence for fish consumption, including preserved fish, the 
rates of fish tapeworm infection do not appear to be very high in the Roman Empire as a 
whole. The preference for marine fish may be in part responsible for this pattern as the 
species of Diphyllobothrium found in Europe can only use freshwater fish as an intermediate 
host. There is evidence for freshwater fish consumption, especially as it was a cheaper variety 
of fish and more commonly found in some of the northern provinces of the empire. However, 
this freshwater fish was often eaten cooked. Inadequate cooking in some cases may have 
resulted in cases of fish tapeworm infection. 
6.1.6 Capillaria and Other Helminths 
One other taxa that is found in all time periods is Capillaria sp., though it is found more 
commonly in the Pre-Roman time periods and the Roman period compared to the Medieval 
period. It has been found at 9 sites in the Pre-Roman period, 8 of which are Neolithic period 
and one is the Late Bronze Age site of Must Farm. In the Roman period Capillaria sp. has 
been found at six sites, and in the Medieval period it has only been found at two sites (Figure 
71). None of these differences are significant. Similar to other zoonotic parasites such as the 
liver flukes and Taenia tapeworms it is found most commonly in northern Europe in all time 
periods. Two sites that stand out as farther south than the rest of the sites where it has been 
found are in northern Italy and Spain, one is Pre-Roman and one is Medieval (Figure 72). In 
the Roman period all Capillaria sp. eggs have been found in sites in Belgica and very near to 
its borders, these sites are in the modern-day countries of France and Germany. 
Figure 71: Frequency of positive sites for Capillaria sp. in different time periods. Significant 
differences are marked by an asterisk. 
 There are over 300 species of capillarids known, with diverse life cycles and in most 
archaeological settings it has not been possible to identify the species found but eggs are 
simply identified as Capillaria sp. (Borba et al., 2019). Capillaria is a common parasite of 
rodents but can also be acquired from fish consumption, a possible explanation for the 
presence of this taxa at the Must Farm settlement (Ledger et al., 2019a). Another species 
known to infect humans is Capillaria hepatica, which is acquired from ingestion of infective 
eggs in the soil. However, an infected individual does not release eggs in the stool as these are 
found in the liver in the case of true infection. One convincing case of Capillaria hepatica 
infection in the Roman period comes from the site of Amiens in France where Capillaria 
hepatica eggs were seen in an Echinococcus cyst of the liver indicating concurrent infection 
with these two species (Mowlavi et al., 2014). 
Figure 72: Distribution of Capillaria sp. before, during, and after the Roman period. Roman 
provincial boundaries (117 CE) are from the Digital Atlas of Roman and Medieval 
Civilizations, Harvard University. 
 There are some other taxa of parasites that are found in the Pre-Roman period but not 
in the Roman period such as Ancylostoma sp., Dioctophyma renale, Echinostoma sp., and 
Schistosoma sp. Similarly, there are some parasites found in Egyptian mummies in the Pre-
Roman period that are not found in the Roman period such as Dracunculus medinensis and 
filarial worm. However, the additional findings in mummies is due to enhanced preservation 
of the worms as a result of the mummification process. In general, there is a higher diversity 
of parasites found in Neolithic sites compared to other time periods. The Bronze Age and Iron 
Age also have some very taxonomically diverse sites, though far fewer sites have been 
studied in these periods. In general, a more diverse parasite burden is found in Neolithic 
communities due to consumption of undercooked food, wild animals, and insects resulting in 
infections with species that are more rare today such as Dioctophyma renale and Echinostoma 
(Le Bailly et al. 2003a; Fugassa et al. 2010; Ledger et al., 2019a). With domestication of 
animals, beginning around 16,000 ya (Perri et al., 2019), and increasing reliance on farmed 
animals in the Roman period there appears to have been an increase in parasites from 
domesticates, such as Taenia, Fasciola, and Diphyllobothrium (Sianto et al. 2009). 
In the Medieval period we see the first evidence for Hymenolepis sp. and Strongyloides 
sp. neither of which was found at the sites studied in the Pre-Roman or Roman period in 
regions that were once part of the Roman Empire. 
6.2 The Roman Perspective 
6.2.1 Roman Understanding of Parasites 
Having established the presence of intestinal parasites in many Roman communities, 
especially soil-transmitted helminths, one can ask the question; what did the Romans 
themselves understand about these pathogens? While microorganisms were not accepted as 
the cause for disease until the end of the 19th century, helminths are unlike bacteria and 
viruses in that they are large enough to be seen and thus we may expect that there was some 
knowledge about what they were, where they came from, the symptoms they caused, and how 
they should be treated. There are various sources we can use to get an insight into the Roman 
perspective on intestinal diseases including medical texts, other historical texts, and 
depictions in art. There are of course limitations to these sources in that they mainly provide 
evidence for what a specific group of people understood, and in many cases when we look at 
Roman texts these are elite individuals often from the Mediterranean. Furthermore, even in 
the Roman period there were multiple schools of thought in medicine, and thus various 
understandings of what caused diseases and how they should be treated (Hanson, 2010:520). 
Due to the limited number of surviving texts, our understanding from these texts is not 
necessarily a balanced picture of the various opinions that existed at the time. In addition, the 
individual describing the disease may not have actually interacted with that disease but 
instead be recounting their knowledge of it gained from someone else, possibly even writing 
in another time period (Mitchell, 2011). Artistic representations are not always accurate or 
can be exaggerated, thus they also need to be interpreted with caution. 
 Prominent Roman medical writers include Cornelius Celsus (26 BCE50 CE), 
Scribonius Largus who wrote a collection of prescriptions in 47 CE for the emperors 
freedman, Soranus of Ephesus who practiced during the reign of Trajan and Hadrian (98128 
CE), and the physician Galen of Pergamum (129216 CE). Other informative texts come 
from Marcus Porcius Cato the Elder (234149 BCE) whose text On Agriculture describes the 
many principles involved in managing an estate but also provides medical advice for 
managing healthcare in ones own household, the job of the pater familias. Many of these 
writers described intestinal worms or treatments for worms in their works. 
 From Celsus we get a description of two types of wormsroundworms and 
flatworms. He also describes that roundworms especially trouble children (De Med. 4.24.2). 
Again, worms also occasionally take possession of the bowel, and these are discharged at 
one time from the lower bowel, at another more nastily from the mouth: and we observe them 
sometimes to be flattened, which are the worse, at times to be rounded. (De Med. 4.24.1). 
 Galen describes three types of intestinal worms (lumbrici), lati, teretes, and ascarides. 
Some believe that lumbrici teretes or round worms are roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides), 
the ascarides are smaller round worms possibly Enterobius vermicularis (pinworm), and that 
lumbrici lati are tapeworms (Jirsa and Winiwarter, 2010). These three types of worms were 
also described by Aristotle (Hoeppli, 1956). As we can see there was a general knowledge of 
the presence of intestinal worms, especially those that are common and visible. Roundworm 
can grow up to 1530 cm in the human intestines and thus when expelled would have been 
very visible. Similarly, tapeworm expels pouches of eggs, proglottids, that are often visible in 
the stool. Though these common worms were known, it does not appear that all types of 
intestinal worms found in the Roman period were described. However, some may have been 
grouped into these three categories and some may have been recognized only in animals.  
 Galen also describes the origins of intestinal worms in his works. He believed that 
worms arose in the bowels and were not acquired from outside the body, and that they were  
formed from the putrefaction and heat or rotting of organic material (Jirsa and Winiwarter, 
2010). He also acknowledged that they could be found in other animals. Based on his views 
that worms did not arise from outside the body, it seems unlikely that he would believe 
animals could pass parasites to humans. Similarly, the risk of acquiring parasites from ones 
external environment directly does not fit with the idea that they are generated within the 
body.  
Galen also recognizes that worms are particularly prevalent in children but links this 
to the fact that worms need a lot of heat to be generated. In alignment with theories of the four 
humours and necessary balance of warm and cold at the time, it was believed that in 
childhood blood dominates over other humours and thus children are warmer which makes 
them more susceptible to worms (Jirsa and Winiwarter, 2010). This fits with what we know 
about the transmission of gastrointestinal helminths today, children are a high risk group for 
infection. More specifically those between 515 years, or school-aged children in modern 
populations, are more often infected in endemic communities compared to older or younger 
individuals (Bundy et al., 1987; Crompton and Nesheim, 2002). While there is ample 
evidence for higher intensities of infection in children there are fewer studies directly looking 
at factors responsible for infection in this group. Some proposed factors include outdoor play 
in areas with infected soil, open defecation, maternal education, and hand hygiene (Wang et 
al., 2012; Krause et al., 2015; Pabalan et al., 2018).  
Galen, who was a follower of Hippocrates often citing his work, spread the humoral 
theory. Using the four humors (blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile) from the 
Hippocratic corpus he proposed that health was achieved through a necessary balance of 
these bodily fluids and the four qualities (hot or cold and wet or dry). Though proposed at the 
time it is unclear to what extent this theory was accepted during Galens life. Certainly, there 
were other medical sects practising in the Roman period who were not followers of 
Hippocrates such as the Methodists, Empiricists, Erasistrateans, and Pneumatists (Nutton, 
2004; Nutton, 2005). The ideas of these other groups in regards to the origins and treatments 
for intestinal worms are unclear, though we can imagine that there were a variety of 
understandings and ideas about how they should be prevented and treated, if at all.  
6.2.2 Medical Treatments 
There are numerous treatments for intestinal worms in the works of medical writers and 
others from the Roman period. Celsus (25 BCE50 CE) mentions treatments for roundworms 
and flatworms including a decoction of lupins or mulberry bark with hyssop, or a vinegar of 
pepper. He also suggests eating garlic and vomiting, followed by drinking a mix of boiled 
pomegranate roots with soda the following day. Additionally, to treat roundworms he 
suggests pounded seeds of nettles, cumin, cabbage, or mint in water. He also suggests a 
decoction of wormwood, hyssop, or cress seeds in vinegar (De Med. 4.24.12). 
Galen (129210 CE), as one of the most prolific medical writers of his time mentions 
numerous treatments for intestinal worms in his works. Many of these are plant based such as 
mint, cardamom, myrrh, and cumin as well as artemisia specifically for roundworms (Jirsa 
and Winiwarter, 2010). Most of the treatments described by Galen are very aromatic and 
bitter and were thought to have drying effects. These properties were important as he believed 
that worms were spontaneously formed by putrefaction and heat in particularly moist 
environments (Jirsa and Winiwarter, 2010). While some of these herbal remedies have been 
shown to be effective at treating certain types of parasites, such as artemisia (Tagboto and 
Townson, 2001; Cheraghipour et al., 2018), this relies on the dosage or the quantity of the 
herbal remedy taken, and we do not know what this would have been in the Roman period.  
Medical texts from prominent Roman physicians, such as Celsus and Galen, give us a 
view of medical beliefs at the time from the perspective of high status physicians. Though 
doctors (medici or iatroi) were present in many Roman cities and one could enter a system of 
informal training to become a physician, the profession was not regulated and anyone could 
assert themselves as a doctor. Rather the qualifications of doctors appear to have been based 
on who they trained under (Harris, 2016:32). Medical treatment would have also fallen under 
the responsibility of the head of the household, the pater familias, who would treat the day-to-
day ailments of his household. Aside from these documented forms of medicine there would 
have also been forms of popular medicine adopted by the general public, especially by those 
who could not afford to hire a doctor. Popular medicine as opposed to what has been called 
the rational medicine of doctors includes the healing invoked from deities such as Asclepius, 
healers, drug-sellers, and the numerous herbal cures and remedies that would have been 
passed between lay people. 
 Others writing in the Roman period who would not be considered doctors or healers 
are Cato (234149 BCE), acting as a pater familias, who gives us one insight into what 
popular medicine or folk medicine suggested for intestinal worms. In his treatise On 
Agriculture, he suggests that for tapeworms or stomach-worms one should crush 30 acid 
pomegranates and mix them with black wine to set for 30 days (De Re Rust. 126). While that 
does not seem to fall too far from the treatments of Galen or Celsus, he then recommends that 
the patient needs to climb a square pillar and jump down ten times before going for a walk 
(De Re. Rust. 127.13). Pliny, writing in 77 CE, describes a decoction of wild lupins with rue 
and pepper as a treatment to expel intestinal worms in people under thirty (Nat. Hist. 
22.74.15). 
 Many of the suggested remedies for treatment of intestinal worms have not been 
systematically tested to determine their efficacy in humans. Therefore, the anti-parasitic 
properties of the treatments suggested by Roman writers to treat intestinal worms is largely 
unknown. Certain herbal remedies such as artemisia have shown some efficacy in treating 
parasites though not all types of parasites. Artemisia and its derivatives have been shown to 
be effective in treating malaria and schistosomiasis in humans (Dhingra et al., 2000; Ogwang 
et al., 2012; Munyangi et al., 2018). Experimental studies have also shown that artemisia is 
effective at killing the cestode Hymenolepis nana in mice (Beshay, 2018). Pomegranate, a 
treatment suggested by Celsus and Cato, has been shown to be effective in reducing oocyst 
shedding in mice infected with Cryptosporidium parvum (Al-Mathal and Alsalem, 2012). In 
in vitro tests, it was also shown to be active against Entamoeba histolytica (Calzada et al., 
2006); though its effectiveness as a treatment in humans is unknown. This evidence shows 
that some of the treatments suggested could have treated certain species of parasites though 
likely not all of them, and there is no experimental evidence for the effectiveness of these 
remedies in treating parasites that were found to be ubiquitous in the Roman period such as 
roundworm and whipworm. 
Symptoms from intestinal worm infections are often minor or even asymptomatic. 
Therefore, in many cases individuals may have not known they were infected until a worm 
was shed during a bowel movement. An exception would be with cestode infections where 
proglottids can be seen in the stool during the course of infection. In heavier infections 
symptoms often include abdominal pain and diarrhoea or constipation. These types of 
symptoms were likely more commonly treated than the worms themselves and there are 
countless suggestions for how to deal with general intestinal upset in the works of Galen, 
Celsus, and many other writers at the time.  
6.2.3 Impacts on Health 
Average life expectancy at birth in the Roman Empire has been estimated to be 2225 years 
and if a child made it to 10 years of age this increased to 3638 years based on census data 
from Roman Egypt (Bagnall and Frier, 1994). While these estimates have to be taken as 
rough estimates due to problems with interpreting the census data and the wide variations in 
life expectancy that must have existed across the empire (Scheidel, 2001), what we can 
conclude is that life expectancy was probably more in line with patterns seen in developing 
countries today. High infant mortality and childhood mortality would have pulled average life 
expectancy down while endemic infectious disease and periodic epidemics would have 
resulted in higher mortality than is seen in western countries today. Today one of the leading 
causes of mortality in children under five is diarrhoea, and this was probably similar in the 
Roman period. Despite this we know very little about gastrointestinal diseases in past 
populations due to the difficulties in finding evidence for the presence of these pathogens. In 
fact, gastrointestinal diseases in general were probably commonplace in the Roman period, 
and certainly the evidence for intestinal parasites points to their consistent presence in 
communities across the empire.  
 Disease in the Roman period has been widely studied from various perspectives, often 
with the intent of focusing on certain diseases or epidemics. Diseases with high mortality such 
as malaria and major epidemics, such as the Antonine Plague and the Plague of Cyprian, 
known from historical accounts have been widely studied. There are full books on malaria 
(Sallares, 2002) and ancient DNA studies confirming its presence in Roman Italy (Marciniak 
et al., 2016). Aside from focus on particular diseases, some regions have also been well 
studied for disease more broadly. For example, Roberts and Cox (2003) provide an account of 
diseases in Roman Britain known from palaeopathological evidence. Similar work has been 
done for Rome (Minozzi et al., 2013; Scheidel, 2013). Other diseases that have been widely 
studied and recorded in Roman period skeletal samples are vitamin D deficiency (Mays et al., 
2018; Lockau et al., 2019; Peacock et al., 2019), tuberculosis and brucellosis (Capasso, 1999; 
Anderson, 2001; Lewis, 2011; Redfern et al., 2015), and trauma (Redfern and Chamberlain, 
2011; Gilmour et al., 2015; Timmins et al., 2017; Gilmour et al., 2019). Other non-specific 
markers of disease such as cribra orbitalia, porotic hyperostosis, and linear enamel hypoplasia 
are often recorded on skeletal samples though they cannot be used to determine the presence 
of specific diseases (Facchini et al., 2004; Cucina et al., 2006; Belcastro et al., 2007; Lewis, 
2010; Redfern et al., 2015). 
 Cribra orbitalia and porotic hyperostosis are often linked to parasitic infection 
(intestinal worms and other parasites such as malaria) but are also described as resulting from 
any number of conditions that can cause anaemia. However, there is no reliable experimental 
evidence linking cribra orbitalia and porotic hyperostosis to anaemia and nutritional 
deficiency in humans, except for one small study done in rats (Polo-Cerd et al., 2001). 
Rather, this discussion relies on knowledge of bone physiology and linking of 
pathophysiological processes in anaemia with the bony changes commonly visible with these 
lesions (Stuart-Macadam, 1985, 1987; Wapler et al., 2003; Walker et al., 2009). Studies 
looking at rates of cribra orbitalia and porotic hyperostosis in Roman period skeletal samples 
have noted that they are quite frequent in some skeletal samples. From Rimini and Ravenna in 
Italy cribra orbitalia was found in 56% of all skeletons analysed and porotic hyperostosis in 
40% (Facchini et al., 2004). From Vallerano, near Rome, cribra orbitalia was found in 69% of 
individuals (Cucina et al., 2006). At Lucus Feroniae in Italy 50% had cribra orbitalia 
(Salvadei et al, 2001). From Poundbury, Dorset in Britain 39% of nonadults had cribra 
orbitalia (Lewis, 2010). While some of these rates are quite high it seems unlikely that 
intestinal parasite infections are major contributors even though they are commonly 
mentioned in the list of contributing diseases. Numerous samples from Roman sites studied as 
part of this dissertation had no preserved eggs. While it has to be acknowledged that a number 
of eggs may have not survived since the Roman period it does not appear that everyone in 
these cities was infected. Furthermore, the most common parasites found, which it could be 
argued most people were exposed to, were roundworm and whipworm which do not always 
cause anaemia. Specific parasites such as hookworm, fish tapeworm, and schistosomiasis are 
known for causing anaemia but these are not the most commonly found parasites in Roman 
period sites. Roundworm and whipworm can cause anaemia but typically only in cases of 
high worm burdens and severe nutrient deficiencies. This evidence further exemplifies that 
there is no reliable skeletal evidence for parasitic infection. 
 Most of the parasites found in the Roman period samples still infect large numbers of 
people today. In fact many of them are classified as neglected tropical diseases by the World 
Health Organization. Soil-transmitted helminths (roundworm and whipworm), taeniasis, and 
foodborne trematodes including Fasciola are all classified as neglected tropical diseases. The 
goal of the list is to raise awareness and funding for these diseases that still infect large 
numbers of people but do not receive as much funding or research attention compared to 
diseases that cause high mortality like malaria and HIV, and that primarily infect people in 
poorer countries (Stolk et al., 2016). The impacts of these diseases are often quantified using 
disability adjusted life years (DALYs) rather than mortality because they cause more 
disability than mortality. DALYs are a sum of the years of life lost due to premature mortality 
and the years of life lived with disability. The negative health impacts of these diseases have 
been well studied in modern populations and this can give us an idea of what impacts these 
same diseases may have had in the Roman period.  
 It is estimated that around 1.3 billion people today are infected with roundworm or 
whipworm and this is primarily in subtropical regions of the world (Jourdan et al., 2018). In 
2010 it was estimated that roundworm and whipworm alone account for 1.9 million DALYs. 
Foodborne trematodes account for another 1.9 million and other diseases including Taenia, 
Diphyllobothrium, and protozoa account for 4.7 million (Hotez et al., 2014). What this shows 
is that even though we would not expect the parasites found in the Roman period to cause 
high mortality they would have had a measurable impact on the daily life of people infected. 
 Starting with roundworm and whipworm, the two most common parasites found in the 
Roman period, common symptoms include abdominal pain, diarrhoea, nausea/vomiting, and 
in more severe cases they can cause intestinal obstruction and anaemia from nutrient 
deficiencies. In relatively healthy and well-nourished individuals a few worms would have 
little impact. However, in childrenwho are often more likely to be infected, the disease can 
be more severe. Roundworm and whipworm can cause decreased food intake, malabsorption, 
and decreased growth in children (Crompton and Nesheim, 2002). High worm burdens in 
particular cause these nutrient deficiencies leading to impaired cognition and stunting of 
growth (Bethony et al., 2006). In modern populations this in turn results in children being less 
likely to go to school or to work which has long-term economic impacts (Crompton and 
Nesheim, 2002). Children between the ages of 5 and 15 years usually have the heaviest and 
most frequent infections (Hotez et al., 2008). This appears to be due to a combination of 
acquired immunity decreasing infections in adulthood and social practices decreasing the 
chances that an adult is infected compared to a child. This acquired immunity can work to 
prevent a worm from establishing an infection, decrease the longevity of that infection, or 
decrease the harmful effects of a prolonged immune response (Anthony et al., 2007; Artis and 
Maizels, 2011). For the reasons mentioned above, we may expect a similar pattern in the 
Roman period though the sample types currently studied do not allow us to differentiate who 
has infected within a community. 
 Based on the widescale presence of roundworm and whipworm across the Roman 
Empire we may expect that infections with these parasites were widespread. The minor 
symptoms they caused, especially in adults with good nutritional status and low worm 
burdens, may have been viewed as a regular part of everyday life. Heavier infections, 
resulting in acute symptoms may have caused more distress and possibly in some causes 
resulted in people seeking treatment. Though it is expected that a low proportion of the 
population had heavy worm burdens due to the fact that these parasites are often 
overdispersed within populations. Cato mentions that his treatment for intestinal worms is 
only necessary if the worms are troublesome (De Re Rust. 126), indicating an understanding 
that they are not always detrimental to ones health. The number of other minor 
gastrointestinal diseases present in these communities due to inadequate sanitation measures, 
that also contributed to the presence of soil-transmitted helminths, may have meant that minor 
abdominal upsets were quite common and certainly the number of herbal remedies and 
dietary suggestions for dealing with intestinal upsets by Galen, Celsus, and Pliny indicates 
they were a common complaint that may have been accepted as a normal part of everyday 
life. 
 Protozoan infections such as Entamoeba and Giardia, though less common, would 
have had larger impacts when they did occur. These protozoan parasites can cause periodic 
outbreaks, unlike the soil-transmitted helminths which remain endemic at a fairly consistent 
prevalence rate within populations. Though Giardia has only been found at one site so far, 
Entamoeba was more common. Entamoeba histolytica causes severe diarrhoea or dysentery. 
In poor sanitary and crowded conditions it can cause outbreaks especially if drinking water 
becomes contaminated. Amoebic dysentery has a much higher mortality than other intestinal 
parasitic infections, and today it is estimated to be the third leading cause of death amongst 
parasitic diseases (Fletcher et al., 2012). People can become asymptomatic carriers of 
Entamoeba while still passing infective cysts. Aside from dysentery it can also cause ulcers in 
the colon and abscesses in other tissues such as the liver, brain, or lungs. Thus, it is expected 
that a small proportion of mortality from gastrointestinal disease in the Roman period was 
from Entamoeba histolytica, especially in northern Europe where it has been found more 
commonly. 
 Other helminths found at multiple sites in the Roman period such as Taenia 
tapeworms and fish tapeworm also have varying symptoms depending on nutritional status of 
the host and intensity of infection. Fish tapeworm is more often linked to anaemia compared 
to other intestinal helminths, aside from hookworm, as it can cause B12 deficiency leading to 
fatigue and neurological symptoms such as peripheral neuropathy. It is estimated that one in 
five infections result in diarrhoea, abdominal pain, or more severe intestinal symptoms 
(Scholz et al., 2009). As in the case of roundworm and whipworm, these infections do not 
often cause death but can result in an individuals inability to work and decrease nutritional 
status potentially making them more susceptible to other diseases. This is similar for beef and 
pork tapeworm (Taenia sp.) which can lead to nutritional deficiencies in more severe cases 
and general abdominal upset. Though we do not know which species of Taenia were present 
in most cases, based on dietary preferences in the Roman period it is likely that both beef and 
pork tapeworm were present. Taenia solium (pork tapeworm) can result in another disease 
process, cysticercosis, if the human is used as the intermediate host for the worm. 
Neurocysticercosis is caused by the ingestion of T. solium eggs rather than larvae in pork, and 
then the larval form of the worm develops in cysts in neurological tissues such as the brain. 
This is often a chronic disease with symptoms showing up years after infection. As the cysts 
grow symptoms are often more severe and numerous neurological symptoms can occur 
(Garcia et al., 2005). Common clinical manifestations are seizures and cranial hypertension, 
which can result in focal neurological signs such as paralysis, vision changes, memory 
impairments, and poor coordination, all dependent on the area of the brain affected. 
 Neurocysticercosis is a common cause for of epilepsy in endemic countries today. It 
has been estimated that in endemic countries, about one third of patients with epilepsy also 
have neurocysticercosis (Gripper and Welburn, 2017). Furthermore, seizures occur in about 
80% of individuals with neurocysticercosis (Carabin et al., 2011). There is evidence for cases 
of epilepsy in the Roman period, based on descriptions in historical texts (Magiorkinis et al., 
2010). Two physicians, Galen and Soranus of Ephesus, described epilepsy symptoms and 
Galen notes that it is a disease of the brain (Magiorkinis et al., 2010). Though it is unclear 
how common the condition was, it is likely that some of these cases were a result of 
neurocysticercosis, especially in regions where Taenia sp. eggs have been recovered.  
 In general, morbidity from intestinal parasite infections is reliant on the number of 
worms an individual harbours in their intestines rather than simply the presence or absence of 
worms. In modern populations this is usually estimated using eggs per gram in faecal 
samples. This type of quantification is challenging in past populations as we are not always 
dealing with simply faeces from one individual, often we have faecal samples from multiple 
individuals mixed together and mixed with other material. Furthermore, in modern 
populations it has been noted that there is strong heterogeneity in worm burdens, caused by 
yet unknown factors. What this means is that a small proportion of the population is more 
frequently and/or heavily infected (Hotez et al., 2008). This is a potential problem for 
palaeoparasitological studies as it makes it very difficult to link egg concentrations from 
certain types of samples, especially drains and latrines, to the level of infection in a 
community. When parasite eggs within a sample from the fill of a latrine or drain are 
quantified, we cannot determine if the eggs present represent the infection of a few heavily 
infected people or many people with minor infections. We do not know how many individuals 
would have used the latrine or the quantity of other types of waste and later soil added to the 
latrines, which all affect the concentration of eggs found. Therefore, pelvic soil samples are a 
better sample type for understanding how many people may have been infected with intestinal 
parasites. That being said, pelvic soil collected from skeletons can only give us information 
about the individuals who died with parasitic infection. Thus, as with the issues of studying 
diseases using skeletal remains we have a very skewed sample not necessarily representative 
of the living population. Furthermore, interpreting negative samples is still difficult as it is not 
always clear if parasite eggs simply did not preserve or if they were diluted out or simply not 
present in the small subsample studied. As is evident by the pelvic soil samples studied here, 
many more pelvic soil samples need to be studied in order to find evidence for infection 
compared to latrine and soil samples which may contain parasite eggs from multiple 
individuals. An ideal situation is having samples from latrines or drains within a settlement 
and also having pelvic soil samples from the same community. 
In summary, quantifying the impact that these parasites may have had on the population 
is immensely difficult due to variations in clinical manifestations determined by host 
immunity, prior nutritional status, and intensity of infections. What can be said is that 
intestinal parasite infections would have had an impact on a proportion of the population, 
especially children, resulting in and exacerbating nutritional deficiencies, causing intellectual 
impairments, intestinal upset, and anaemia in fewer but more severe cases. While these 
symptoms and impacts of disease are not on the level of high mortality caused by plagues or 
malaria they would have been a constant presence in the lives of people living in the Roman 
Empire.  
7 Limitations 
It is important to note a number of limitations with the data presented and discussed here. 
Some have been mentioned throughout but will be elaborated on further now, and some 
pertain to the entirety of the research presented here. The limitations of this work will be 
discussed in a number of categories: 1) limitations as a result of the types of samples used; 2) 
limitations as a result of sample sizes and uneven geographic coverage; 3) limitations due to 
the dynamics of parasite preservation; and 4) limitations as a result of the sensitivity of 
methods used. 
7.1 Sample Types 
For this research the samples studied to find evidence for intestinal parasitic infection in the 
Roman period were varied, and similarly the samples that have been studied in previous work 
are equally varied. I analysed soil from latrines, drains, the pelvis of skeletons, and coprolites. 
Each of these sample types has unique characteristics that need to be considered when 
interpreting the presence of parasite eggs found within them. 
 First, soil from cesspits, latrines, or sewers connected to latrines give us a picture of 
parasites that may have infected anyone using those latrines or dumping waste into them. This 
is beneficial as we can study few samples to get a wider view of parasite infections within a 
community. However, it also makes it impossible to tie infection to any particular 
individual(s).  
Certain considerations that need to be made for the Roman period is that some drains 
were still functional after abandonment of the site or use of latrines in the area. In many cases 
this may be to carry rain runoff. This is a potential problem as it means that any faecal 
material present in that drain from the Roman period could be lost over time or sediment 
moved in from other areas and time periods. While we have done our best to collect only 
undisturbed samples, sometimes it is unclear how long a drain may have been channelling 
water. Furthermore, it was a common practice to dump other waste into latrines or cesspits 
making it possible to recover parasites from the offal of animals. Cesspits and drains were not 
always covered or closed meaning that small rodents could get into them and we may also 
recover a small amount of rodent faeces which could contain parasite eggs. Thus while 
finding large numbers of eggs in cesspits or latrines primarily for human use most likely 
indicates human infection, we have to acknowledge that some eggs may have come from 
animals in the area. This is more of an issue when looking at generalist parasites that can 
infect many animals beside humans, such as Capillaria sp. and Dicrocoelium sp. 
Pelvic soil samples are very valuable because when they do contain preserved eggs 
they can give us evidence for infection in a specific individual that we may have other 
demographic and pathological data about. This allows us to make links between different 
types of diseases present in a community and begin to look at frequency of infection in 
different age groups and sexes. However, yields tend to be lower when working with pelvic 
soil in comparison to latrine samples, though positive results have been found in a number of 
cases (Mitchell et al., 2013; Anastasiou et al., 2014; Yeh et al., 2016; Anastasiou et al., 2018). 
Furthermore, with pelvic soil we only have the potential of finding eggs from one individual 
and at one particular time, the time of death, whereas in latrines and sewers we can find eggs 
deposited from the faeces of multiple people which accumulate over many months or years of 
Due to the fact that the individuals sampled are those that died, our samples are not 
reflective of the living population at the time of site occupation. The most commonly infected 
age group with soil-transmitted helminths in modern populations is school-age children (515 
years) (Hotez and Kamath, 2009). In ancient populations with high infant mortality we may 
find a higher proportion of burials of infants. Infants who can make it past the age of five 
often have a higher life expectancy and may be found in cemeteries as adults. Thus, due to the 
fact that pelvic soil samples come from those who died, this sample type may result in us 
missing a number of infected individuals. This would be the case if previously infected 
individuals survived high risk ages and died later in adulthood, without an active infection. 
We will not be able to detect infections that these adults may have had earlier in life when 
they were in these higher risk groups. 
Another consideration to be made when analysing pelvic soil samples is that the eggs 
recovered would have been present in the intestines of the individual, not yet excreted into the 
environment. This means that there was likely a combination of eggs in the process of being 
formed by the female worm as well as eggs already mixed with faeces ready to be excreted in 
the stool. Morrow and colleagues (2014) noted that a number of poorly preserved eggs in the 
intestines of mummies may have been a result of the fact that the eggs had not yet fully 
formed and thus were less resistant to degradation than eggs ready to be excreted or already 
excreted into the environment, as would be found in latrine and sewer samples. The various 
potential stages of development that eggs are found in in the intestines may make recovery of 
eggs lower in pelvic soil samples, especially if the bowels were not full at the time of death. 
Compounded with this problem of poor recovery of eggs from pelvic soil samples is 
the distribution of infections within a population. As has been mentioned previously (see 
section 5.1.2), helminths are often overdispersed in a population, meaning that a small 
proportion of the population carries the majority of the worms. This means that a larger 
proportion of the population would have low worm burdens or low levels of infection. Poor 
preservation and restrictions on the amount of soil that can be feasibly studied may result in 
us missing a number of these low level infections and only detecting infection in individuals 
who had the highest worm burdens. Utilizing additional methods to recover evidence for 
parasites may improve our chances of finding individuals with low levels of infection. For 
example, ancient DNA analysis can be used to detect DNA from parasites in sediment even 
when the entire egg is not preserved (Se et al., 2018). However, only a few studies have used 
multiple methods and a good comparison of the rates of recovery of parasites using the 
different methods does not yet exist. In some cases microscopy can detect parasites that are 
not found using ancient DNA, and in others ancient DNA detects parasites that were not 
found using microscopy (Ct and Le Bailly, 2018). As ancient DNA methods become 
cheaper a widespread combination of microscopy, ELISA, and ancient DNA analysis may 
overcome some of these limitations. 
Egg concentrations have been reported for all samples studied here, however, they 
should not be taken as an indication of the intensities or prevalence of infection at these sites. 
Unlike in modern studies where direct faecal samples are analysed, in the archaeological 
setting, aside from coprolites, our samples consist of faecal material mixed with an unknown 
amount of other organic material and sediment. This can vary widely between latrines, drains, 
and even in pelvic soil samples and is dependent on a variety of factors including addition of 
other materials to these areas in antiquity, loss of eggs over time due to degradation, erosion,  
percolation of eggs in soil, and variations in concentrations in eggs between subsamples 
studied from the same sample. Furthermore, when dealing with samples from cesspits, 
latrines, or drains, the eggs found represent eggs in the faeces of multiple individuals over a 
long period of time who may have had varying intensities of infection both between 
individuals and over time.  
While incorporating a variety of samples means we need to be careful about the 
interpretation of the eggs present, this variety of samples also has benefits. One is that by 
varying the types of samples used we can get both an indication of disease throughout 
individuals lives and wider time periods, as would come from latrines, drains and coprolites, 
whereas from pelvic soil we can get an indication of disease at the time of death. Furthermore, 
analysis of pelvic soil samples from cemeteries can give us an idea of infection in the 
individuals who lived at a certain place (for an unknown period of time), while with samples 
from latrines and sewers we can also pick up infections in people who were moving around 
and possibly only present in the area for a very short period of time, long enough to deposit 
their stool in a latrine. In this way, multiple sample types from the same site become very 
valuable in understanding the intricacies of infections in a wider community. 
7.2 Sample Sizes and Uneven Geographic Coverage 
One of the main goals of this research was to determine if there were variations in parasitic 
infection in different regions of the Roman Empire. Prior to the start of this work there were 
some areas of the empire where very few previous studies or no studies had been done. Thus 
this work provided some of the first evidence for parasitic infection in the Balkans in the 
Roman period and added to the one or two sites that had been studied in Italy and Turkey. 
This has allowed for an initial discussion of the dynamics of parasitic infection in the Eastern 
Mediterranean and Italy and a comparison to regions that have seen more work, such as 
Britain and France. One pattern that became evident was the predominance of faecal-oral 
parasites in Italy and the eastern Mediterranean and the absence of other zoonotic parasites 
such as tapeworms and liver flukes that are found in the frontier provinces and Britain.  
 A consideration that needs to be taken with this is that the data are not distributed 
equally across the Roman Empire. Even with the additional samples studied here, more 
samples have been studied from Britain and France compared to the Mediterranean region. 
This means that these patterns are subject to change if more samples are studied from these 
regions. It is possible that so far I have only found the most common parasites in these regions 
and that as more samples are studied some of the less common parasites will be picked up.   
 In addition to this, the variations in latrine structures, population sizes, and building 
materials means that the sample types studied in the different regions are slightly different. In 
Britain many parasites studies have been done on soil from pits and wells. This is uncommon 
in the Mediterranean region where latrine structures are preserved in major Roman cities and 
thus samples can be taken from latrines and tile-lined drains that still have their original 
building materials present. It is possible that parasites preserve differently in simple soil pits 
compared to lined latrines or cesspits and drains. 
7.3 Dynamics of Parasite Preservation 
Many samples studied did not have any parasite eggs present them, namely the pelvic soil 
from atalhyk, Boncuklu, Winterborne, Lauriacum, and Vagnari. It is possible that none of 
these individuals were infected at the time of death. It also possible that parasite eggs in these 
areas simply did not preserve. Furthermore, in the samples that did contain some parasite eggs 
it is possible that eggs from other species did not survive the past 2,000 years and thus were 
not represented in the samples.   
 Relatively little is understood about factors that can affect parasite preservation 
compared to skeletal material and biomolecules like DNA and proteins. For skeletal material 
it is known that constant exposure to water, and fluctuating levels of water negatively impacts 
preservation. Additionally, acidic conditions result in chemical changes and destruction of the 
bone matrix (Brown and Brown, 2011:94). Typically desiccated materials are very well 
preserved, that is similar for bones, tissues, and plant remains. Waterlogged conditions result 
in good preservation of plant remains, wood, and other artefacts likely due to the anaerobic 
conditions of waterlogged environments which prevent oxidative decay. This seems to be true 
for parasite eggs as well, where waterlogged conditions have resulted in exceptional 
preservation of a range of taxa from sites such as Must Farm (see section 4.2.1) as well as at 
other lakeside settlements (Maicher et al., 2017; Maicher et al., 2019). It was notable that 
nearly all Echinostoma eggs in the Must Farm coprolites were folded and broken and none 
were present in the soil samples studied. This indicates that they may not preserve well except 
in very specific conditions achieved in the waterlogged coprolites, and these conditions were 
not even met in sediment at the site. More sites in northern Europe have waterlogged 
conditions which may be partially responsible for the higher species diversity found in this 
region. 
The impact of soil acidity in the diagenesis of parasite eggs has not been widely 
studied, though we might expect that eggs could survive a large range of acidity as they need 
to pass through the gastrointestinal tract which has pH ranging from 2 in the stomach to 7 in 
the small and large intestines. Most intestinal parasite eggs hatch in the small intestines and it 
has been shown that exposing eggs to a pH between 6 and 8.3 can induce hatching (Rogers, 
1960). However, recent studies have also shown that certain gut microbiota, such as E. coli, 
provide important cues for inducing egg hatching (Vejzagi et al., 2015a). Survival of these 
parasite species relies on hatching in the correct area of the gastrointestinal tract and thus it is 
not expected that hatching in the environment is common. Certain parasite eggs such as those 
from hookworm (Ancylostoma sp. and Necator americanus) hatch in the soil where their 
larvae then develop and can infect humans via passage through the skin. This is one possible 
reason why hookworm eggs are not commonly found in archaeological samples, as the larvae 
do not preserve and unless development is arrested before the eggs are fully embryonated the 
eggs would not be found in the soil (Bouchet et al., 2003). 
The structure of parasite egg shells generally consists of multiple layers including an 
outer vitelline layer made up of lipoproteins, then a chitinous layer with varying density and 
orientation of protein fibrils, and an inner lipid layer (Wharton, 1980). Eggs of some genera 
such as Capillaria sp. and Trichuris sp. also have polar plugs on opposing ends. The structure 
of the polar plugs is similar to the rest of the egg shell but the protein level in the chitinous 
layer is lower (Vejzagi et al., 2015b). The chitinous layer is what gives the egg shell strength 
and structure and is expected to be important for preservation of the eggs in archaeological 
samples. Chitin is a polymer found in many organisms such as the exoskeletons of arthropods 
and the walls of fungal spores (Rinaudo, 2006). The molecular organization of the chitinous 
layer of the egg shell varies in different genera of parasites, mostly in its protein content and 
orientation, as well as thickness (Wharton, 1980). Chitin is broken down in the environment 
by chitinase producing bacteria and fungi. These include many bacteria found in soil 
including genera such as Bacillus, Pseudomonas, Streptomyces, and Vibrio (Makarios-Laham 
and Lee, 1995; Beier and Bertilsson, 2013), suggesting that soil bacteria likely play a role in 
degradation of parasite eggs. This means that the composition of bacteria in various soil types, 
which can also depend on temperature and pH, may affect preservation of eggs in different 
environments. Analysis of fossil arthropods has shown that mineralization and preservation of 
chitinous tissues may actually be a result of replacement of chitin with more resistant 
molecules from the surrounding sediment (Gupta et al., 2006), also highlighting the role of 
sediment composition in potential preservation of eggs. Mineralization rates of chitin appear 
to be higher in freshwater ecosystems (Beier and Bertilsson, 2013), which may in part explain 
the high taxonomic diversity of parasites recovered from lakeside settlements in Europe. 
Other factors that may contribute to the loss of parasite eggs over time are predation 
by fungi, mites, and other insects (Morrow et al., 2016). Eggs have been shown to percolate 
through soil over time to be displaced from their original deposition, however this process is 
quicker and most problematic in particularly rainy and sandy environments (Camacho et al., 
2016), and should be less of an issue in closed contexts such as lined latrines and drains. 
In reference to the results presented here, this means that there may be a number of 
species that were not detected in the samples studied but that were present in these Roman 
communities due to egg structure or the life cycle of the parasites. For example, some eggs do 
not typically preserve very well such as those from hookworm, because it hatches in the soil 
in order for larvae to penetrate the skin. For other taxa such as Fasciola and Echinostoma 
their life cycles may in part be responsible for them not being found at certain sites. These 
parasite eggs need to hatch so that larvae can find their proper intermediate hosts in aquatic 
environments, thus we may only find hatched eggs or fewer eggs in general. On the other 
hand, eggs from pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis) may have not been preserved because 
they have thin eggshells. Based on the widespread presence of other soil-transmitted 
helminths, roundworm and whipworm, we might reasonably expect that hookworm was also 
present in some of the study sites that are in warm moist climates where the parasite can 
survive, such as in the Mediterranean. Similarly, pinworm is one of the most common 
helminths to infect children today and it is easily passed between people through unwashed 
hands and likely would have spread easily in Roman communities. However, taxa such as 
Taenia sp. that have very thick egg shells would be expected to preserve as well as Ascaris 
and Trichuris. This means that in areas where Ascaris and Trichuris were found, I would 
expect Taenia could be recovered if it was present in the samples.  
Due to indications that soil type (pH, bacterial and fungal content, presence of other 
organic material), temperature, and water content may impact chitin degradation and 
mineralization it should be noted that the higher diversity of parasites found in northern 
Europe may in part be due to waterlogged samples in these regions and lower temperatures. 
However, the dynamics of parasite egg preservation in these different regions is not well 
understood and needs to be explored further in order to separate this from the role of 
differences in anthropic factors and ecology that may result in variations in species causing 
infections in these regions. 
7.4 Sensitivity of Methods in Palaeoparasitology 
Determining the precise sensitivity of methods used in archaeological research is not possible 
as we do not have known samples that can be used to determine the sensitivity of methods. 
Rather in most cases sensitivities are determined in modern tests or estimated using 
experimental studies and results need to be reported with these limitations in mind. This is the 
same for microscopy and ELISA used in palaeoparasitology. While the sensitivity and 
specificity of the ELISA kits are known (see section 3.3), these values are reliant on the tests 
being used for their intended purpose (on modern faecal samples). When we apply the same 
tests to archaeological sediments we have to expect that the sensitivity will be much lower. 
There are likely numerous samples that have antigens present in them but do not test positive 
for a number of possible reasons. These reasons include, changes to the structure of proteins 
resulting in their inability to bind to the antibodies in the kits, low concentrations of antigens 
which are not able to trigger a positive result, and other compounds in the soil interacting with 
the reagents in the kits. While false positives can also be an issue, resulting in decreased 
specificity, these are expected to be much lower due to the use of highly specific antibodies 
that should only bind to the antigen they are targeting. 
 In the case of microscopy, sensitivity and specificity of the methods are largely 
unknown. There are certainly numerous samples that at one point had parasite eggs in them 
but these did not survive to be found or the eggs have been broken/damaged to the point 
where they are not recognized by the observer. As mentioned above, the infection dynamics 
of intestinal helminths also influences our ability to recover them in the archaeological record. 
This is particularly the case for studies using pelvic soil samples. Due to the fact that helminth 
infections are often overdispersed within a population (typically it is estimated that 20% of a 
population harbours 80% of the worm population [Hotez et al., 2006]), we would expect a 
large proportion of the population to have low worm burdens or no infection, while only a 
small proportion has high worm burdens. This in combination with the loss of parasite eggs 
over time likely results in us missing a number of infections in individuals who have these 
low worm burdens. 
One way to increase our chances of recovering evidence for all helminths and protozoa 
that were present in a sample is to augment our studies with additional methods. One such 
method that is being used in some initial studies is ancient DNA. In recent years, ancient 
DNA studies have adapted methods for analysis of environmental DNA used by ecologists. 
These methods allow for a broad characterization of plants, animals, microorganisms, and 
eukaryotic parasites present in archaeological samples (Andersen-Carpenter et al., 2011; 
Willerslev et al., 2014; Pedersen et al., 2015). Using targeted approaches (e.g. PCR 
metabarcoding or hybridization capture) a specific set of organisms can be focused on to 
decrease costs of these types of analysis, making them more accessible to 
palaeoparasitological research. There is evidence that in cases where eggs are not identified 
under the microscope, DNA from parasites can still be recovered from archaeological samples 
(Se et al., 2018; Ct and Le Bailly, 2018). However, at the same time there are also cases 
where eggs are identified under the microscope but DNA from those same parasites is not 
recovered (Se et al., 2018). This exemplifies the benefits of combining methods in order to 
increase our chances of recovering the full taxonomic profile of a sample. 
8 Future Directions 
With the completion of this research a number of avenues for future research have been 
highlighted or remain important for future research in palaeoparasitology in general, and in 
investigating parasitic infection in the Roman period. 
 First, although this research aimed to increased comparative data for parasites in 
Bronze Age and Iron Age Europe there is still a long way to go before these time periods have 
been as extensively studied as the Neolithic period and later Roman and Medieval periods. 
Especially in the Mediterranean region there is almost no information about parasitic infection 
in Bronze Age and Iron Age populations. This information is extremely valuable for tracing 
the changes in parasite infection through time in the region, and putting the Roman period 
material into context. 
In addition, focusing on transition periods can be valuable in understanding changes in 
parasitic infection through time. In particular having samples from different time periods at 
the same site can allow for a better understanding of how changing cultural practices and 
social structures may be impacting parasite transmission in ancient communities. 
As has been shown by this research, in some cases large numbers of individuals need 
to be studied in order to find positive results from pelvic soil samples. Thus, continual 
collection and analysis of samples will be needed in order to have enough data to look for 
patterns of infection at the individual level. This continual study of pelvic soil samples will 
hopefully allow us to get to the point where we can integrate information about parasite 
infections with demographic information and other pathologies recorded from skeletal 
remains. This will allow us to answer questions such as: what infections commonly co-occur 
with intestinal parasite infections?; are there differences in frequency of infection in males 
and females, or individuals of different ages?; how might burial treatment impact recovery of 
parasite eggs?; do certain parasites commonly co-occur in the same individual?; how often 
did polyparasitism occur in the past? 
Finally, in order to circumvent some of the limitations with common methods 
including microscopy and ELISA, used in palaeoparasitologyand in this research, using 
additional methods, namely ancient DNA will likely be an advantageous addition. One major 
limitation of the methods used here was that in many cases parasite eggs could only be 
taxonomically identified to the genus level, rather than the species level. Furthermore, there 
are a number of eggs which have been shown to preserve poorly and thus it seems likely that 
current methods are not detecting the full range of parasites causing disease in past 
populations. Genetic analysis of archaeological samples containing intestinal parasites 
provides us with the ability to accurately identify parasites to the species level and identify 
additional parasites present in sediment whose eggs did not preserve to be visualized. In 
addition, aDNA analysis can allow us to reconstruct genomes of ancient parasites that can be 
used to trace the evolution of these parasites alongside human beings. Initial studies analysing 
human parasites using aDNA have shown promise though parasites are still a novel pathogen 
to study using aDNA (Ct and Le Bailly, 2018; Se et al., 2018). One of the main reasons 
for this has been the lack of modern genetic sequences from parasites of interest which are 
necessary references to be able to identify ancient sequences. Ancient DNA analysis of 
samples studied here is already underway as a continuation of this project. Recent 
optimization of methods for sedimentary DNA extraction, largely used in environmental 
DNA studies, and targeted enrichment are showing some very early promising results for 
characterization of parasites in some of the samples studied as part of this research. These 
methods can allow for taxonomic identification to the species level in cases where 
microscopy only allowed for genus level identifications. In some cases, ancient DNA can also 
recover DNA from parasites in cases where eggs were not seen under the microscope, 
possibly because they were broken or not preserved. 
9 Conclusions 
This doctoral research has provided the first evidence for parasitic infection in unstudied 
regions of the Roman Empire including Serbia and Cyprus. It has also contributed evidence to 
regions where very few studies had been done previously including Turkey and Italy. 
Furthermore it has contributed to our understanding of parasitic infection in prehistoric 
communities, namely people living in the Late Bronze Age marshland of Britain, as well as 
the first evidence for parasite infection in people living in Italy in the Lombard period. 
Analysing samples from 12 Roman period sites, it has provided evidence for parasites from 
nine sites in addition to the 53 that have already provided preserved parasite remains. It has 
further ventured to discuss these data in relation to archaeological and historical evidence that 
provides the context necessary to understand environmental, cultural, and social factors 
involved in the establishment and maintenance of these pathogens in Roman communities. 
The conclusions from this research will be presented by revisiting the research 
questions that were described in section 1.2. The results obtained allow us to provide answers 
to most questions that guided this research though some can be answered more thoroughly 
than others. 
Starting with the broadest question; what taxa of parasites were present in the Roman 
Empire? A total of 11 taxa of parasites have been found in Roman period sites including 
Capillaria sp., Dicrocoelium liver fluke, Echinococcus sp., Entamoeba histolytica, Fasciola 
liver fluke, fish tapeworm, Giardia duodenalis, Macracanthorhynchus sp., pinworm, 
roundworm, Taenia tapeworms, Toxocara sp., and whipworm. These come from the newly 
studied sites and previously studied sites. Roundworm and whipworm are the most common 
parasites found across the Roman Empire. In fact, they are the dominant taxa found in regions 
focused on here including Italy and Turkey. In these two areas there is no evidence for any 
other species except for gastrointestinal protozoa and Fasciola found in a sediment core. This 
highlights a pattern that starts to become evident with the newly studied sites in the 
Mediterranean region. In these areas, predominantly and almost exclusively faecal-oral 
parasites that rely on poor sanitation and hygiene have been found. This is in conjunction with 
an absence of taxa that can be considered zoonotic, either having animals as a necessary 
intermediate host or that are commonly transmitted between humans and animals, such as 
Fasciola sp., Dicrocoelium sp., Taenia sp., and Diphyllobothrium sp. which have been found 
at sites north of the Mediterranean.  
Numerous ecosocial factors that may explain this variation in parasite presence in 
different areas of the empire have been explored. The predominance of soil-transmitted 
helminths, namely roundworm and whipworm, across the empire is likely tied to design and 
use of sanitation infrastructure and methods for collecting, disposing, and even reusing human 
excrement. Some of these may have been larger issues in heavily urbanized areas of Turkey 
and Italy, where disposal of human waste may have been harder in densely populated cities. 
Variations in diet and human-animal interactions have been explored to consider differences 
in the presence of zoonotic parasites across the empire. Preferences for certain types of meat 
and fish, as well as cooking styles likely contributed to differences in the transmission of 
tapeworms. Furthermore, wider site ecology likely has a strong influence on taxa present. 
Though it is difficult to determine the degree to which each of these numerous factors may 
have played a role in parasite transmission, they highlight ample routes that existed for the 
spread of parasitic diseases in Roman communities. Finally, the role of differential 
preservation of parasite eggs has been discussed and may also be contributing to some of the 
patterns seen so far. 
This research has also highlighted some of the difficulties in working with pelvic soil 
to track parasite infections in the past. Mainly, that many more samples need to be analysed to 
find evidence for infection, and that yields are much lower compared to working with the fill 
of latrines or drains. It is for this reason that there are still not enough data to explore 
variations in infection in age groups or between the sexes. 
 Comparing the evidence gathered for parasites in the Roman Empire to what is known 
about parasites prior to and after the fall of the Roman Empire has highlighted some trends in 
parasitic infection across these longer timescales. In general, there is a trend of decreasing 
taxonomic diversity from the Neolithic period to the Roman period, with more zoonotic 
parasites found in Neolithic, Bronze Age, and Iron Age sites. In the Roman period we start to 
see the predominance of parasites linked to poor sanitation and hygiene such as soil-
transmitted helminths with a decrease in the proportion of sites where eggs of liver flukes and 
tapeworms were found. The taxonomic diversity seen in the Roman period is similar to that in 
the Medieval period. Increased population sizes, urbanization, and a diet reliant on farmed 
animals likely has a strong influence on these patterns. It may be, that in prehistoric periods 
the presence of rare zoonotic taxa may reflect wild animals making up a larger portion of the 
diet; whereas strong ideas about thorough cooking of meats and consumption of heavily 
salted meat and fish may have decreased infections with tapeworms in parts of the Roman 
Empire. Fewer people interacting closely with animals in heavily urbanized centres may have 
further reduced infections with taxa such as liver flukes in the Roman period. 
 Intestinal parasites, especially helminths, almost certainly did not go unnoticed. 
Parasites are described by multiple writers at the time including Galen and Celsus. 
Furthermore, numerous remedies were suggested for their treatment by these physicians as 
well as other authors such as Pliny the Elder and Cato the Elder, some of which may have 
even been effective at high enough doses. The data collected from the new studied sites and 
previous publications show that parasite infections were a fairly common occurrence in 
Roman communities in the past and would have contributed to the burden of disease across 
the empire. 
10 Publications 
Below is a list of publications from the research presented here as well as publications from 
other projects I completed or contributed to during my time in the Ancient Parasites 
Laboratory at the University of Cambridge as a PhD student. These are presented in 
chronological order with the most recent first. 
10.1 Published and Accepted Articles 
Ledger, M.L. & Mitchell, P.D. Evolutionary perspectives on human parasitic infection, from 
ancient parasites to modern medicine. In: Plomp, K., Roberts, S., Elton, S. & Bentley, G. 
(eds.) Evolving health: Paleopathology and evolutionary medicine. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press, (accepted).  
Ledger, M.L., Grimshaw, E., Fairey, M. & Mitchell, P.D. Parasitological analysis of 
sediments and coprolites from the Must Farm settlement. In: Ballantyne, R. & Knight, M. 
(eds.) Excavations at Must Farm. London, English Heritage, (accepted). 
Ledger, M.L. & Mitchell, P.D. (2020) Review of: Koloski-Ostrow, A.O. The Archaeology of 
Sanitation in Roman Italy: Toilets, Sewers, and Water Systems. University of North Carolina 
Press 2015. Isis. 111(1), 156158. 
Eskew, W.H., Lloyd, L.C., Pyles, G.C., Ledger, M.L., Gosker, J. & Mitchell, P.D. (2020) 
Intestinal parasites from an Ottoman period latrine in Acre (Israel) dating to the early 1800s 
CE. Korean Journal of Parasitology. 57(6), 575580.  
Knorr, D., Smith, W., Ledger, M.L., Pea-Chocarro, L., Prez-Jord, G., Claps, R., Palma, 
M. & Mitchell, P.D. (2019) Intestinal parasites in six Islamic medieval period latrines from 
10th11th century Crdoba (Spain) and 12th13th century Mrtola (Portugal). International 
Journal of Paleopathology. 26, 7583. 
Ledger, M.L., Anastasiou, E., Shillito, L.-M., Mackay, H., Bull, I.D., Haddow, S.D., Knsel, 
C.J. & Mitchell, P.D. (2019) Parasite infection at the early farming community of atalhyk. 
Antiquity. 93 (369), 573587.  
Ledger, M.L., Grimshaw, E., Fairey, M., Whelton, H.L., Bull, I.D., Ballantyne, R., Knight, 
M. & Mitchell, P.D. (2019) Intestinal parasites at the Late Bronze Age settlement of Must 
Farm, in the fens of East Anglia, UK (9th century B.C.E.). Parasitology. 146 (12), 1583
1594. 
Ledger, M.L. & Mitchell, P.D. (2019) Tracing zoonotic parasite infections throughout human 
evolution. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology. 112, doi:10.1002/oa.2786. 
Ledger, M.L. & Mitchell, P.D. (2019) Review of: Drancourt, M., Raoult, D. (eds) 
Paleomicrobiology of Humans. American Society for Microbiology Press, 2016. American 
Journal of Human Biology. 31, e23202.  
Ledger, M.L., Stock, F., Schwaiger, H., Knipping, M., Brckner, H., Ladsttter, S. & 
Mitchell, P.D. (2018) Intestinal parasites from public and private latrines and the harbour 
canal in Roman Period Ephesus, Turkey (1st c. BCE to 6th c. CE). Journal of Archaeological 
Science: Reports. 21, 289297. 
Williams, F., Arnold-Foster, T., Yeh, H.-Y., Ledger, M.L., Baeten, J., Poblome, J. and 
Mitchell, P.D. (2017) Intestinal parasites from the 2nd-5th century AD latrine in the Roman 
Baths at Sagalassos (Turkey). International Journal of Paleopathology. 19, 3742. 
10.2 Articles Under Review and In Preparation 
Ledger, M.L., Rowan, E., Gallart Marques, F., Sigmier, J.H., arki, N., Redi, S., Cahill, 
N.D. & Mitchell, P.D. Intestinal parasitic infection in the eastern Mediterranean during the 
Roman period. American Journal of Archaeology. (under review). 
Murchie, T.J., Kuch, M., Duggan, A., Ledger, M.L., Roche, K., Klunk, J., Karpinski, E., 
Hackenberger, D., Sadoway, T., MacPhee, R., Froese, D. & Poinar, H. (2019) PalaeoChip 
Arctic1.0: An optimised eDNA targeted enrichment approach to reconstructing past 
environments [preprint]. BioRxiv. Available at: doi.org/10.1101/730440. (under review in 
Quaternary Science). 
Deforce, K., Derreumaux, M., Goffette, Q., Henrotay, D., Ledger, M.L., Mitchell, P.D. & 
Pigire, F. Diet, hygiene and health in Roman age northern Gaul. A multidisciplinary study of 
a latrine from Arlon (c. 250280 AD, S-Belgium). Journal of Archaeological Science: 
Reports. (in prep). 
References 
Adams, A.M., Murrell, K.D. & Cross, J.H. (1997) Parasites of fish and risks to public health. 
Revue Scientifique et Technique. 16 (2), 652660. 
Aldrete, G.S. (2007) Floods of the Tiber in Ancient Rome. Baltimore, The Johns Hopkins 
University Press. 
Allison, M.J., Bergman, T. & Gerszten, E. (1999) Further studies on fecal parasites in 
antiquity. American Journal of Clinical Pathology. 112, 605609. 
Al-Mathal, E.M. & Alsalem, A.M. (2012) Pomegranate (Punica granatum) peel is effective in 
a murine model of experimental Cryptosporidium parvum. Experimental Parasitology. 
131(3), 350357. 
Anastasiou, E. (2015) Parasites in European populations from prehistory to the Industrial 
Revolution. In: Mitchell, P.D. (ed.). Sanitation, latrines and intestinal parasites in past 
populations. Farnham, Ashgate. pp. 203217. 
Anastasiou, E. & Mitchell, P.D. (2013a) Human intestinal parasites from a latrine in the 12th 
century Frankish castle of Saranda Kolones in Cyprus. International Journal of 
Paleopathology. 3 (3), 218223. 
Anastasiou, E. & Mitchell, P.D. (2013b) Simplifying the process of extracting intestinal 
parasite eggs from archaeological sediment samples: A comparative study of the efficacy of 
widely-used disaggregation techniques. International Journal of Paleopathology. 3 (3), 204
Anastasiou, E., Lorentz, K.O., Stein, G.J. & Mitchell, P.D. (2014) Prehistoric schistosomiasis 
parasite found in the Middle East. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 14 (7), 553554. 
Anastasiou, E., Papathanasiou, A., Schepartz, L.A. & Mitchell, P.D. (2018) Infectious disease 
in the ancient Aegean: Intestinal parasitic worms in the Neolithic to Roman Period inhabitants 
of Kea, Greece. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. 17, 860864. 
Anderson, T. (2001) A case of skeletal tuberculosis from Roman Towcester. International 
Journal of Osteoarchaeology. 11 (6), 444446. 
Anderson-Carpenter, L.L., McLachlan, J.S., Jackson, S.T., Kuch, M., et al. (2011) Ancient 
DNA from lake sediments: bridging the gap between paleoecology and genetics. BMC 
Evolutionary Biology. 11, 30. 
Andrikopoulou, J.-N., Fiedler, M. & Hpken, C. (2018) An outhouse in the garden?  
Looking at a backyard in the vicus of Bonn. In: Hoss, S. (ed.). Latrinae: Roman toilets in the 
northwestern provinces of the Roman Empire. Oxford, Archaeopress. pp. 3542. 
Anthony, R.M., Rutitzky, L.I., Urban Jr, J.F., Stadecker, M.J., et al. (2007) Protective immune 
mechanisms in helminth infection. Nature Reviews. Immunology. 7(12), 975987. 
Antoniou, G.P. & Angelakis, N. (2015) Latrines and wastewater sanitation technologies in 
Ancient Greece. In: Mitchell, P.D. (ed.). Sanitation, latrines and intestinal parasites in past 
populations. Farnham, Ashgate. pp. 4168. 
Arajo, A., Ferreira, L.F., Confalonieri, U. & Chame, M. (1988) Hookworms and the 
peopling of America. Cadernos de Sade Pblica. 2 (4), 226233. 
Arajo, A., Reinhard, K.J., Ferreira, L.F. & Gardner, S.L. (2008) Parasites as probes for 
prehistoric human migrations? Trends in Parasitology. 24 (3), 112115. 
Arndt, A., Van Neer, W., Hellemans, B., Robben, J., et al. (2003) Roman trade relationships 
at Sagalassos (Turkey) elucidated by ancient DNA of fish remains. Journal of Archaeological 
Science. 30 (9), 10951105. 
Artis, D. & Maizels, R. (2011) Acquired immunity to helminths. In: Kaufmann, S., Rouse, B., 
and Sacks, D. (eds.). The immune response to infection. Washington, D.C., ASM Press. pp. 
313323. 
Ash, L.R. & Orihel, T.C. (2015) Atlas of Human Parasitology, 5th Edition. Chicago, 
American Society for Clinical Pathology Press. 
Aspck, H., Barth, F.E., Flamm, H. & Picher, O. (1973a) Parasitre erkrankungen des 
verdauungstraktes bei prhistorischen Bergleuten von Hallstatt und Hallein (sterreich). 
Mitteilungen der Anthropoloischen Gesellschaft in Wien. 103, 4147. 
Aspck, H., Flamm, H. & Picher, O. (1973b) Darmparasiten in men-schlichen exkrementen 
aus prhistorischen salzbergwerken der Hallstatt-Kultur (800350 v. Chr). Zentralblatt fr 
Bakteriologic und Hygiene Abt Originale A. 223, 549558. 
Aspck, H., Auer, H. & Picher, O. (1996) Trichuris trichiura eggs in the Neolithic glacier 
mummy from the Alps. Parasitology Today. 12 (7), 255256. 
Aspck, H., Auer, H. & Picher, O. (1999) Parasites and parasitic diseases in prehistoric 
human populations in Central Europe. Helminthologia. 36 (3), 139145. 
Aspck, H., Feuereis, I. & Radbauer, S. (2011) Case study: Detection of eggs of the intestinal 
parasite Ascaris lumbricoides in samples from the Roman sewers of Carnuntum. In: Jansen, 
G.C.M., Koloski-Ostrow, A.O., & Moormann, E.M. (eds.). Roman toilets: Their archaeology 
and cultural history. Leuven, Peeters. pp. 163164. 
Attwood, S.W., Faith, F.A., Mondal, M.M., Alim, M.A., et al. (2007) A DNA sequence-based 
study of the Schistosoma indicum (Trematoda: Digenea) group: population phylogeny, 
taxonomy and historical biogeography. Parasitology. 134, 20092020. 
Auer, H. & Aspck, H. (2014) Helminths and helminthoses in Central Europe: Diseases 
caused by nematodes (roundworms). Wiener Medizinische Wochenschrift . 164 (19-20), 424
Bagnall, R.S. & Frier, B.W. (1994) The Demography of Roman Egypt. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Baird, D. (2012) The Late Epipaleolithic, Neolithic and Chalcolithic of the Anatolian plateau, 
130004000 BC calibrated. In: Potts, D. (ed.) Blackwells companion to Near Eastern 
archaeology. Oxford, Blackwell Publishing Ltd. pp. 431465. 
Baird, D., Fairbairn, A., Jenkins, E., Martin, L., et al. (2018) Agricultural origins on the 
Anatolian plateau. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America. 115 (14), E3077E3086. 
Barbiera, I. (2005) Changing Lands in Changing Memories: Migration and Identity During 
the Lombard Invasions. Firenze, AllInsegna del Giglio. 
Bargues, M.D., Artigas, P., Khoubbane, M., Flores, R., et al. (2011) Lymnaea schirazensis, an 
overlooked snail distorting fascioliasis data: genotype, phenotype, ecology, worldwide spread, 
susceptibility, applicability. PloS One. 6(9), e24567. 
Bartoov, L., Ditrich, O., Bene, J., Frolk, J., et al. (2011) Paleoparasitological findings in 
medieval and early modern archaeological deposits from Hradbni Street, Chrudim, Czech 
Republic. Interdisciplinaria Archaeologica. 2 (1), 2738. 
Bateman, N. & Locker, A. (1982) The sauce of the Thames. The London Archaeologist. 4 (8), 
204207. 
Baud, C.A. & Kramar, C. (1991) Soft tissue calcifications in paleopathology. In: Ortner, D.J. 
& Aufderheide, A.C. (eds.). Human paleopathology: Current syntheses and future options. 
Washington D.C., Smithsonian Institution Press. pp. 8789. 
Bayliss, A., Brock, F., Farid, S., Hodder, I., et al. (2015) Getting to the bottom of it all: A 
Bayesian approach to dating the start of atalhyk. Journal of World Prehistory. 28 (1), 1
Beer, R.J.S. (1976) The relationship between Trichuris trichiura (Linnaeus 1758) of man and 
Trichuris suis (Schrank 1788) of the pig. Research in Veterinary Science. 20, 4754. 
Beier, S. & Bertilsson, S. (2013) Bacterial chitin degradationmechanisms and 
ecophysiological strategies. Frontiers in Microbiology. 4, 112. 
Belcastro, G., Rastelli, E., Mariotti, V., Consiglio, C., et al. (2007) Continuity or discontinuity 
of the life-style in central Italy during the Roman Imperial Age-Early Middle Ages transition: 
Diet, health, and behavior. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 132 (3), 381394. 
Beldsoe, G.E. & Oria, M.P. (2001) Potential hazards in cold-smoked fish: Parasites. Journal 
of Food Science. Suppl 66 (7), S11001103. 
Beshay, E.V.N. (2018) Therapeutic efficacy of Artemisia absinthium against Hymenolepis 
nana: in vitro and in vivo studies in comparison with the anthelmintic praziquantel. Journal of 
Helminthology. 92(3), 298308. 
Bethony, J., Brooker, S., Albonico, M., Geiger, S.M., et al. (2006) Soil-transmitted helminth 
infections: Ascariasis, trichuriasis, and hookworm. The Lancet. 367 (9521), 15211532. 
Betson, M., Nejsum, P., Bendall, R.P., Deb, R.M., et al. (2014) Molecular epidemiology of 
ascariasis: A global perspective on the transmission dynamics of Ascaris in people and pigs. 
The Journal of Infectious Diseases. 210 (6), 932941. 
Blaxter, M. & Koutsovoulos, G. (2015) The evolution of parasitism in Nematoda. 
Parasitology. 142 Suppl 1, S2639. 
Blegen, C.W. & Rawson, M. (1967) Character, date, and identification of the palace. In: 
Blegen, C.W. and Rawson, M. (eds.). The Palace of Nestor at Pylos in Western Messenia vol. 
1. Princeton, Princeton University Press. pp. 419424. 
Bloy, D., Masci, G., Farney, G.D. & Notarian, M. (2014) The Upper Sabina Tiberina Project: 
Prima campagna di scavo a Vacone (2012). Lazio e Sabina. 10, 1318. 
Bloy, D., Masci, G., Rice, C., Franconi, T., et al. (2017) The Upper Sabina Tiberina Project. I 
risultati della seconda campagna di scavo a Vacone (Rieti). Lazio e Sabina. 11, 5763. 
Boersema, J.H. & Jansen, J. (1975) Helminth infections in Medieval Utrecht. Tropical and 
Geographical Medicine. 27, 441. 
Boni, U., Lenczner, M.M. & Scott, J.W. (1977) Trichinella spiralis cyst. Canadian Medical 
Association Journal. 117, 472. 
Borba, V.H., Machado-Silva, J.R., Le Bailly, M. & Iiguez, A.M. (2019) Worldwide 
paleodistribution of capillariid parasites: Paleoparasitology, current status of phylogeny and 
taxonomic perspectives. PloS One. 14 (4), e0216150. 
Bosi, G., Mazzanti, M.B., Florenzano, A., Nsiala, I.M., et al. (2011) Seeds/fruits, pollen and 
parasite remains as evidence of site function: Piazza Garibaldi  Parma (N Italy) in Roman 
and Mediaeval times. Journal of Archaeological Science. 38 (7), 16211633. 
Bouchet, F. (1995) Recovery of helminth eggs from archeological excavations of the Grand 
Louvre (Paris, France). The Journal of Parasitology. 81 (5), 785787. 
Bouchet, F. (1997) Intestinal capillariasis in Neolithic inhabitants of Chalain (Jura, France). 
The Lancet. 349 (9047), 256. 
Bouchet, F. & Paicheler, J.C. (1995) Paloparasitologie: Prsomption dun cas de bilharziose 
au XVe sicle  Montbliard (Doubs, France). Comptes Rendus de lAcadmie des Sciences. 
318 (7), 811814. 
Bouchet, F., Audoin, F., Leger, N., Marchais, R., et al. (1989) tude parasitologique des 
coprolithes et des sdiments de trois ensembles clos mdivaux de la rue de Lutce (le de la 
Cit)  Paris. Revue Archomtrie. 13, 1321. 
Bouchet, F., Petrequin, P., Paicheler, J.C. & Dommelier, S. (1995a) Premire approche 
paloparasitogique du site nolithique de Chalain (Jura, France). Bulletin de la Socit de 
Pathologie Exotique. 88, 265268. 
Bouchet, F., Paicheler, J.C. & Bentrad, S. (1995b) Analyse paloparasitologique du contenu 
de la latrines F509 (site de Rigny). Revue Archologique du Centre de la France. 34, 246
Bouchet, F., Baffier, D., Girard, M., Morel, P., et al. (1996) Paloparasitologie en contexte 
plistocne: Premires observations  la Grande Grotte dArcy-sur-Cure (Yonne), France. 
Comptes Rendus de lAcademie de Sciences: Sciences de la Vie. 319, 147151. 
Bouchet, F., Bentrad, S. & Paicheler, J.-C. (1998) Enqute pidmiologique sur les 
helminthiases  la cour de Louis XIV. Mdecine/Sciences: Mini-Synthese. 14, 463466. 
Bouchet, F., Lavazec, C., Nattier, V., Dommelier, S., et al. (2000) tude de la parasitofaune 
du site mdival de Charavines (Lac du Paladru, Isre, France). Bulletin de la Societe 
Zoologique de France. 125 (3), 205215. 
Bouchet, F., West, D., Lefvre, C. & Corbett, D. (2001a) Identification of parasitoses in a 
child burial from Adak Island (Central Aleutian Islands, Alaska). Comptes Rendus de 
lAcademie des Aciences. Serie III, Sciences de la Vie. 324 (2), 123127. 
Bouchet, F., Bentrad, S., Martin, C. (2001b) Le quartier Gallo-romain de la rue de Venise  
Reims, tude paloparasitologique. Bulletin de la Socit Archologique Champenoise. 2/3, 
148150. 
Bouchet, F., Harter, S., Paicheler, J.C., Arujo, A., et al. (2002) First recovery of Schistosoma 
mansoni eggs from a latrine in Europe (15-16th centuries). The Journal of Parasitology. 88 
(2), 404405. 
Bouchet, F., Guidon, N., Dittmar, K., Harter, S., et al. (2003) Parasite remains in 
archaeological sites. Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz. 98 Suppl 1, 4752. 
Bouet, A. (2009) Les Latrines dans les Provinces Gauloises, Germaniques et Alpines. Paris, 
CNRS ditions. 
Boyer, P. (1999) The parasites. In: Connor, A. & Buckley, R. (eds.). Roman and medieval 
occupation of Causeway Lane, Leicester excavations 1980 and 1991. Leicester Archaeology 
Monographs. Leicester, University of Leicester Archaeological Services. pp. 344346. 
Braund, D. (1998) Cohors: The governor and his entourage in the self-image of the Roman 
Republic. In Laurence, R. & Berry, J. (eds.). Cultural identity in the Roman Empire. London, 
Routledge. pp. 1024. 
Breeze, D. (2018) The value of studying Roman frontiers. Theoretical Roman Archaeology 
Journal. 1(1), 117. 
Brown, T. & Brown, K. (2011) Biomolecular Archaeology: An Introduction. Hoboken, 
Wiley. 
Bruschi, F., Masetti, M., Locci, M.T., Ciranni, R., et al. (2006) Short report: Cysticercosis in 
an Egyptian mummy of the Late Ptolemaic period. The American Journal of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene. 74 (4), 598599. 
Buikstra, J.E. and Ubelaker, D.H. (1994) Standards for data collection from human skeletal 
remains. Fayetteville: Arkansas Archaeological Society. 
Bull, I.D., Lockheart, M.J., Elhmmali, M.M., Roberts, D.J., et al. (2002) The origin of faeces 
by means of biomarker detection. Environment International. 27(8), 647654. 
Bundy, D.A., Cooper, E.S., Thompson, D.E., Didier, J.M., et al. (1987) Epidemiology and 
population dynamics of Ascaris lumbricoides and Trichuris trichiura infection in the same 
community. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 81(6), 987
Cahill, J., Reinhard, K., Tarler, D. & Warnock, P. (1991) It had to happen: Scientists examine 
remains of ancient bathroom. Biblical Archaeology Review. 17 (3), 6469. 
Cahill, N.D. (2018) Sardis, 2016. Kaz Sonular Toplants. 39 (3), 324344. 
Cahill, N.D. (2019) Sardis, 2017. Kaz Sonuclar Toplants. 40 (3), 97116. 
Callen, E.O. & Cameron, T.W.M. (1960) A prehistoric diet revealed in coprolites. The New 
Scientist. 8, 3540. 
Calzada, F., Ypez-Mulia, L. & Aguilar, A. (2006) In vitro susceptibility of Entamoeba 
histolytica and Giardia lamblia to plants used in Mexican traditional medicine for the 
treatment of gastrointestinal disorders. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 108(3), 367370. 
Camacho, M., Leles, D., Santiago, J.D., Ramos, R.R.C., et al. (2016) Investigation of 
biodegradation in three different sediment cores from a shellmound (sambaqui) of Brazil, 
using Ascaris lumbricoides eggs as a model. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. 9, 
358365. 
Camacho, M., Arajo, A., Morrow, J., Buikstra, J., et al. (2018) Recovering parasites from 
mummies and coprolites: An epidemiological approach. Parasites & Vectors. 11 (248), 117. 
Caminade, C., van Dijk, J., Baylis, M. & Williams, S. (2015) Modelling recent and future 
climatic suitability for fasciolosis in Europe. Geospatial Health 9(2), 301308. 
Capasso, L. (1999) Brucellosis at Herculaneum (79 AD). International Journal of 
Osteoarchaeology. 9, 277288. 
Carabin, H., Ndimubanzi, P.C., Budke, C.M., Nguyen, H., et al. (2011) Clinical 
manifestations associated with neurocysticercosis: a systematic review. PLoS Neglected 
Tropical Diseases. 5(5), e1152. 
Carroll, M. (2014) Vagnari 2012: New work in the vicus by the University of Sheffield. In: 
Small, A.M. (ed.). Beyond Vagnari: New themes in the study of Roman South Italy. Bari, 
Edipuglia. pp. 7987. 
Carrott, J., Issitt, M., Kenward, H., Large, F., et al. (1995) Insect and other invertebrate 
remains from excavations at four sites in Lincoln (site codes: WN87, WNW88, WF89 and 
WO89): Technical report. Reports from the Environmental Archaeology Unit. Report 
number: 95/10. 
Chandezon, C. (2015) Animals, meat, and alimentary byproducts: Patterns of production and 
consumption. In: Wilkins, J. & Nadeau, R. (eds.). A companion to food in the ancient world. 
Chichester, Wiley. pp. 133146. 
Cheraghipour, K., Marzban, A., Ezatpour, B., Khanizadeh, S., et al. (2018) Antiparasitic 
properties of curcumin: A review. AIMS Agriculture and Food. 3 (4), 561578. 
Churcher, T.S., Ferguson, N.M. & Basez, M.G. (2005) Density dependence and 
overdispersion in the transmission of helminth parasites. Parasitology. 131, 121132. 
Cockburn, A., Barraco, R.A., Reyman, T.A. & Peck, W.H. (1975) Autopsy of an Egyptian 
mummy. Science. 187 (4182), 11551160. 
Cool, H.E.M. (2006) Eating and Drinking in Roman Britain. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press. 
Ct, N.M.-L. & Le Bailly, M. (2018) Palaeoparasitology and palaeogenetics: Review and 
perspectives for the study of ancient human parasites. Parasitology. 145 (5), 656664. 
Cox, F.E.G. (2002) History of human parasitology. Clinical Microbiology Reviews. 15 (4), 
595612. 
Craig, P.S., Macpherson, C.N. & Nelson, G.S. (1986) The identification of eggs of 
Echinococcus by immunofluorescence using a specific anti-oncospheral monoclonal 
antibody. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 35 (1), 152158. 
Craig, O.E., Biazzo, M., OConnell, T.C., Garnsey, P., et al. (2009) Stable isotopic evidence 
for diet at the Imperial Roman coastal site of Velia (1st and 2nd centuries AD) in Southern 
Italy. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 139 (4), 572583. 
Crofton, H.D. (1971) A quantitative approach to parasitism. Parasitology. 62 (2), 179193. 
Crompton, D.W.T. & Nesheim, M.C. (2002) Nutritional impact of intestinal helminthiasis 
during the human life cycle. Annual Review of Nutrition. 22, 3559. 
Crompton, D.W.T. & Savioli, L. (1993) Intestinal parasitic infections and urbanization. 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 71, 17. 
Cucina, A., Vargiu, R., Mancinelli, D., Ricci, R., et al. (2006) The necropolis of Vallerano 
(Rome, 2nd3rd century AD): An anthropological perspective on the ancient Romans in the 
Suburbium. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology. 16 (2), 104117. 
Cunha, D., Santos, A.L., Matias, A. & Sianto, L. (2017) A novel approach: Combining dental 
enamel hypoplasia and paleoparasitological analysis in medieval Islamic individuals buried in 
Santarm (Portugal). Antropologia Portuguesa. 34, 113135. 
Curtis, R.I. (1991) Garum and Salsamenta: Production and Commerce in Materia Medica. 
Leiden, Brill. 
Dark, P. (2004) New evidence for the antiquity of the intestinal parasite Trichuris 
(whipworm) in Europe. Antiquity. 78 (301), 676681.  
da Rocha, G.C., Lailheugue, S.H.-, Le Bailly, M., Arajo, A., et al. (2006) 
Paleoparasitological remains revealed by seven historic contexts from Place DArmes, 
Namur, Belgium. Memrias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz. 101, 4352. 
Davis, J.L. & Stocker, S.R. (2016) The lord of the gold rings: The Griffin Warrior of Pylos. 
Hesperia: The Journal of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens. 85 (4), 627
Deelder, A.M., Miller, R.L., De Jonge, N. & Krijger, F.W. (1990) Detection of schistosome 
antigen in mummies. The Lancet. 335, 724725. 
Defgne, A., Henrotay, D. & Collette, O. (2008) Un atelier de foulons gallo-romains  Arlon 
(province du Luxembourg, Belgique). Analyses chimiques et archobotaniques du contenu de 
cuves. Les Nouvelles de LArchologie. 114, 4752. 
Deforce, K. (2010) Pollen analysis of 15th century cesspits from the palace of the dukes of 
Burgundy in Bruges (Belgium): Evidence for the use of honey from the western 
Mediterranean. Journal of Archaeological Science. 37 (2), 337342. 
de Moulins, D. (1990) Environmental analysis. In: Maloney, C. & de Moulins, D. (eds.). The 
archaeology of Roman London volume I: The Upper Walbrook in the Roman Period. CBA 
Research Report. London, The Museum of London. pp. 85115. 
Dentzien-Dias, P.C., Poinar, G., Jr, de Figueiredo, A.E.Q., Pacheco, A.C.L., et al. (2013) 
Tapeworm eggs in a 270 million-year-old shark coprolite. PloS One. 8 (1), e55007. 
Deschler-Erb, S. (2017) Animal husbandry in Roman Switzerland: State of research and new 
perspectives. European Journal of Archaeology. 20 (3), 416430. 
Dhingra, V., Vishweshwar Rao, K., Lakshmi Narasu, M. (2000) Current status of artemisinin 
and its derivatives as antimalarial drugs. Life Sciences. 66(4), 279300. 
Dittmar, K. & Teegen, W.R. (2003) The presence of Fasciola hepatica (liver-fluke) in 
humans and cattle from a 4,500 year old archaeological site in the Saale-Unstrut Valley, 
Germany. Memrias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz. 98 (suppl 1), 141143. 
Dittmar, K., Teegen, W.-R. & Cordie-Hackenberg, R. (2002) Nachweis von 
eingeweideparasiteneiern in einem abfallschacht aus dem rmischen vicus von 
Belginum/Wederath (Rheinland-Pfalz). Archologisches Korrespondenzblatt. 32, 415425. 
Dobney, K. & Ervynck, A. (2007) To fish or not to fish? Evidence for the possible avoidance 
of fish consumption during the Iron Age around the North Sea. In: Haselgrove, C.C. & 
Moore, T. (eds.). The later Iron Age in Britain and beyond. Oxford, Oxbow. pp. 403418. 
Dodt, M. (2018) Latrines connected to bathhouses in Germania inferior  an overview. In: 
Hoss, S. (ed.). Latrinae: Roman toilets in the northwestern provinces of the Roman Empire. 
Oxford, Archaeopress. pp. 5576. 
Dommelier, S., Bentrad, S., Bouchet, F., Paicheler, J.C., et al. (1998) Parasitoses lies  
lalimentation chez les populations du site nolithique de Chalain (Jura, France). 
Anthropozoologica. 27, 4149. 
Dommelier-Espejo, S. (2001) Contribution  ltude paloparasitologique des sites 
Nolithiques en environnement lacustre dans les domaines Jurassien et Pri- Alpin. PhD 
thesis. Universit de Reims. 
Dotsika, E. & Michael, D.E. (2018) Using stable isotope technique in order to assess the 
dietary habits of a Roman population in Greece. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. 
22, 470481. 
Dufour, B. (2015) Synthse de donnes et nouvelle contribution  ltude des parasites de 
lpoque romaine, et apports mthodologiques de lextraction des marqueurs au traitement 
des rsultats. PhD thesis. Universit de Franche-Comt. 
Dufour, B. & Le Bailly, M. (2013) Testing new parasite egg extraction methods in 
paleoparasitology and an attempt at quantification. International Journal of Paleopathology. 3 
(3), 199203. 
Dufour, B., Segard, M. & Le Bailly, M. (2016) A first case of human trichuriasis from a 
Roman lead coffin in France. Korean Journal of Parasitology. 54 (5), 625629. 
Elton, H. (1996) Frontiers of the Roman Empire. London, Batsford. 
Emch, M. (1999) Diarrheal disease risk in Matlab, Bangladesh. Social Science & Medicine. 
49 (4), 519530. 
Emery, M.V., Stark, R.J., Murchie, T.J., Elford, S., et al. (2018a) Mapping the origins of 
Imperial Roman workers (1st-4th century CE) at Vagnari, Southern Italy, using 87 Sr/86 Sr 
and 18 O variability. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 166 (4), 837850. 
Emery, M.V., Duggan, A.T., Murchie, T.J., Stark, R.J., et al. (2018b) Ancient Roman 
mitochondrial genomes and isotopes reveal relationships and geographic origins at the local 
and pan-Mediterranean scales. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. 20, 200209. 
Erdkamp, P. (2015) Supplying cities. In: Wilkins, J. & Nadeau, R. (eds.). A companion to 
food in the ancient world. Chichester, Wiley. pp. 183192. 
Evershed, R.P. & Bethell, P.H. (1996) Application of multimolecular biomarker techniques to 
the identification of fecal material in archaeological soils and sediments. In: Orna, M.V. (ed.) 
Archaeological chemistry, organic, inorganic and biochemical analysis. Washington, D.C., 
American Chemical Society. pp. 157172. 
Facchini, F., Rastelli, E. & Brasili, P. (2004) Cribra orbitalia and cribra cranii in Roman 
skeletal remains from the Ravenna area and Rimini (IIV century AD). International Journal 
of Osteoarchaeology. 14 (2), 126136. 
Fernandes, A., Ferriera, L.F., Gonalves, M.L.C., Bouchet, F., et al. (2005) Intestinal parasite 
analysis in organic sediments collected from a 16th-century Belgian archeological site. 
Cadernos de Sade Pblica. 21, 329333. 
Flammer, P.G., Dellicour, S., Preston, S.G., Rieger, D., et al. (2018) Molecular 
archaeoparasitology identifies cultural changes in the Medieval Hanseatic trading centre of 
Lbeck. Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 285 (1888), 20180991. 
Fletcher, S.M., Stark, D., Harkness, J. & Ellis, J. (2012) Enteric protozoa in the developed 
world: A public health perspective. Clinical Microbiology Reviews. 25 (3), 420449. 
Flohr, M. & Wilson, A. (2011) The economy of ordure. In: Jansen, G.C.M., Koloski-Ostrow, 
A.O. & Moormann, E.M. (eds.). Roman toilets: Their archaeology and cultural history. 
Leuven, Peeters. pp. 147156. 
Florenzano, A., Mercuri, A.M., Pederzoli, A., Torri, P., et al. (2012) The significance of 
intestinal parasite remains in pollen samples from Medieval pits in the Piazza Garibaldi of 
Parma, Emilia Romagna, Northern Italy. Geoarchaeology. 27, 3447. 
Fowler, C., Harding, J. & Hofmann, D. (eds.) (2015) The Oxford Handbook of Neolithic 
Europe. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 
French, C. (2003) Geoarchaeology in Action: Studies in Soil Micromorphology and 
Landscape Evolution. London, Routledge. 
Frier, B.W. (2000) Demography. In Bowman, A.K. (ed.) The Cambridge ancient history. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. pp. 787816. 
Fugassa, M.H., Arajo, A. & Guichn, R.A. (2006) Quantitative paleoparasitology applied to 
archaeological sediments. Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz. 101 Suppl 2, 2933. 
Fugassa, M.H., Taglioretti, V., Gonalves, M.L., Arajo, A., et al. (2008) Capillaria spp. eggs 
in Patagonian archaeological sites: statistical analysis of morphometric data. Memorias do 
Instituto Oswaldo Cruz. 103(1), 104105. 
Fugassa, M.H., Beltrame, M.O., Sardella, N.H., Civalero, M.T., et al. (2010) 
Paleoparasitological results from coprolites dated at the PleistoceneHolocene transition as 
source of paleoecological evidence in Patagonia. Journal of Archaeological Science. 37 (4), 
880884. 
Fuller, B.T., De Cupere, B., Marinova, E., Van Neer, W., et al. (2012) Isotopic reconstruction 
of human diet and animal husbandry practices during the Classical-Hellenistic, Imperial, and 
Byzantine periods at Sagalassos, Turkey. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 149 
(2), 157171. 
Garcia, H.H., Del Brutto, O.H. & Cysticercosis Working Group in Peru (2005) 
Neurocysticercosis: Updated concepts about an old disease. Lancet Neurology. 4 (10), 653
Garcia, L.S. (2016) Diagnostic Medical Parasitology. Washington, DC, ASM Press. 
Gardiner, M.A. (1990) Survival of Anisakis in cold smoked salmon. Canadian Institute of 
Food Science and Technology Journal. 23(2), 143144. 
Garnsey, P. (1999a) Food and Society in Classical Antiquity. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press. 
Garnsey, P. (1999b) Otherness. In: Garnsey, P. (ed.). Food and society in Classical Antiquity. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. pp. 6281. 
Garnsey, P. & Saller, R. (2015) The Roman Empire: Economy, Society and Culture, 2nd 
Edition. Oakland, University of California Press. 
Gazda, E.K. (2014) Villas on the Bay of Naples: The ancient setting of Oplontis. In: Clarke, 
J.R. & Muntasser, N.K. (eds.). Oplontis: Villa A (Of Poppaea) at Torre Annunziata, volume 
1. The ancient setting and modern rediscovery. New York, ALCS. pp. 63116. 
Gazda, E.K. & Clarke, J.R. (eds.) (2016) Leisure and Luxury in the Age of Nero: The Villas of 
Oplontis Near Pompeii. Ann Arbor, Kelsey Museum of Archaeology. 
Geldreich, E.E. (1996) Pathogenic agents in freshwater resources. Hydrological Processes. 
10, 315333. 
Giacosa, I.G. (1992) A Taste of Ancient Rome. Chicago, The University of Chicago Press. 
Gibson, D.J., Knight, M. & Allen, M. (2010) The Must Farm Timber Alignments: An 
Archaeological and Environmental Evaluation. Post-excavation Assessment Vols 1 & 2. 
Cambridge, Cambridge Archaeological Unit. 
Gilmour, R.J., Gowland, R., Roberts, C., Bernert, Z., et al. (2015) Gendered differences in 
accidental trauma to upper and lower limb bones at Aquincum, Roman Hungary. 
International Journal of Paleopathology. 11, 7591. 
Gilmour, R.J., Brickley, M.B., Jurriaans, E. & Prowse, T.L. (2019) Maintaining mobility after 
fracture: A biomechanical analysis of fracture consequences at the Roman Sites of Ancaster 
(UK) and Vagnari (Italy). International Journal of Paleopathology. 24, 119129. 
Golubovi, S. & Mrdi, N. (2010) Territory of Roman Viminacium from Celtic to Slavic 
tribes. In: Novotn, M., Jobst, W., Dufkov, M. & Kuzmov, K. (eds.) Proceedings of the 
international conference the phenomena of cultural borders and border cultures across the 
passage of time, 2224 October 2010, Trnava, Slovakia. Trnava, Universitas Tyrnaviensis. 
pp. 117127. 
Gonalves, M.L.C., Arajo, A., Duarte, R., da Silva, J.P., et al. (2002) Detection of Giardia 
duodenalis antigen in coprolites using a commercially available enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 
96 (6), 640643. 
Gonalves, M.L.C., Arajo, A. & Ferreira, L.F. (2003) Human intestinal parasites in the past: 
New findings and a review. Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz. 98 (suppl 1), 103118. 
Goncalves, M.L.C., da Silva, V.L., de Andrade, C.M., Reinhard, K., et al. (2004) Amoebiasis 
distribution in the past: First steps using an immunoassay technique. Transactions of the 
Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 98 (2), 8891. 
Goppelsrder, A. & Sommer, C.S. (1996) Die organischen reste einer rmerzeitlichen 
latrinenverfllung und anderer befunde in Ladenburg, Merkurplatz 5. Fundberichte aus 
Baden-Wrttemberg. 21, 401412. 
Gourevitch, D., Le Bailly, M., Dufour, B., Bouchet, F., et al. (2011) Hygine, sant et 
parasites. In: Gourevitch, D. (ed.). Pour une archologie de la mdecine Romaine. Paris, De 
Boccard. pp. 6786. 
Gowers, E. (1995) The anatomy of Rome from Capitol to Cloaca. The Journal of Roman 
Studies. 85, pp. 2332. 
Gowland, R. & Redfern, R. (2010) Childhood health in the Roman World: Perspectives from 
the centre and margin of the empire. Childhood in the Past. 3 (1), 1542. 
Grainger, S. (2013) Roman fish sauce: Fish bones residues and the practicalities of supply. 
Archaeofauna. 22, 1328. 
Grainger, S. (2018) Garum and liquamen, whats in a name? Journal of Maritime 
Archaeology. 13 (3), 247261. 
Grzer, A., Hoos, S., Owens, E., Zuchtriegel, G., et al. (2011) Non-Roman forerunners. In: 
Jansen, G.C.M., Koloski-Ostrow, A.O. & Moormann, E.M. (eds.). Roman toilets: Their 
archaeology and cultural history. Leuven, Peeters. pp. 2143. 
Greenwalt Jr., C.H. (2010) Introduction. In: Cahiil, N.D. (ed). The Lydians and their world. 
Instanbul, Yap Kredi Yaynlar. pp.1-36. 
Greig, J. (1981) The investigation of a medieval barrel-latrine from Worcester. Journal of 
Archaeological Science. 8 (3), 265282. 
Gripper, L.B. & Welburn, S.C. (2017) The causal relationship between neurocysticercosis 
infection and the development of epilepsy - a systematic review. Infectious Diseases of 
Poverty. 6(1), 31. 
Groot, M. (2017) Developments in animal husbandry and food supply in Roman Germania 
Inferior. European Journal of Archaeology. 20 (3), 451471. 
Groot, M. & Deschler-Erb, S. (2017) Carnem et circenses  consumption of animals and their 
products in Roman urban and military sites in two regions in the northwestern provinces. 
Environmental Archaeology. 22 (1), 96112. 
Gupta, N.S., Michels, R., Briggs, D.E.G., Evershed, R.P., et al. (2006) The organic 
preservation of fossil arthropods: An experimental study. Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 
273 (1602), 27772783. 
Gustafson, G. & Koch, G. (1974) Age estimation up to 16 years of age based on dental 
development. Odontologisk Revy. 25, 297306. 
Hall, A. (1982) Intestinal helminths of man: The interpretation of egg counts. Parasitology. 
85 (3), 605613. 
Hall, A.R., Jones, A. & Kenward, H.K. (1983) Cereal bran and human faecal remains from 
archaeological deposits - some preliminary observations. In: Proudfoot, B. (ed.). Site, 
environment and economy. Oxford, BAR International Series 173. pp. 85104. 
Hanfmann, G.M.A., Yegl, F.K. & Crawford, J.S. (1983) The Roman and Late Antique 
Period. In: Hanfmann, G.M.A. & Mierse, W.E. (eds.) Sardis from prehistoric to Roman times: 
Results of the archaeological exploration of sardis, 1958-1975. Cambridge, Harvard 
University Press. pp. 139167. 
Hnggi, R., Zumstein, A. & Endriss, Y. (1989) Augusta rauricorum, Insula 22: Grabungs-und 
dokumentationsstand 1988. Jahresberichte aus Augst and Kaiseraugst. 10, 2972. 
Hanson, A. (2010) Roman medicine. In: Potter, D. S. (ed.) A companion to the Roman 
Empire. Chichester, Blackwell Publishing Ltd. pp. 492523. 
Hanson, J.W. (2011) The urban system of Roman Asia Minor and wider urban connectivity. 
In: Bowman, A. & Wilson, A. (eds.) Settlement, urbanization, and population. Oxford Studies 
on the Roman Economy. Oxford, Oxford University Press. pp. 229275. 
Harris, V.W. (2016) Popular medicine in the classical world. In: Harris, V.W. (ed.) Popular 
medicine in Graeco-Roman antiquity: Explorations. Leiden, Brill. pp. 164. 
Harter, S. (2003) Implication de la paloparasitologie dans ltude des populations anciennes 
de la valle du Nil et de proche-orient : tude de cas. PhD thesis. Universit de Reims 
Champagne-Ardenne. 
Harter, S., Bouchet, F., Mumcuoglu, K.Y. & Zias, J.E. (2004) Toilet practices among 
members of the Dead Sea Scrolls Sect at Qumran (100 BCE-68 CE). Revue de Qumrn. 21 
(4), 579584. 
Harter-Lailheugue, S., Le Mort, F., Vigne, J.-D., Guilaine, J., et al. (2005) Premires donnes 
parasitologiques sur les populations humaines prcramiques Chypriotes (VIII e et VII e 
millnaires av. J.-C.). Palorient. 31 (2), 4354. 
Harter-Lailheugue, S. (2006) tude paloparasitologique du site de Marseille Quai Rive 
Neuve. In: Bien, S. & Richier, A. (eds.). Rapport final dOpration, Fouilles Archologiques, 
23, Quai de Rive Neuve  Marseille (Bouches-du-Rhne). Inrap Mditerrane. pp. 9195. 
Heijnen, M., Cumming, O., Peletz, R., Chan, G.K.-S., et al. (2014) Shared sanitation versus 
individual household latrines: A systematic review of health outcomes. PloS One. 9 (4), 
e93300. 
Heirbaut, E.N.A. (2018) Roman toilets in Nijmegen, Oppidum Batavorum and Ulpia 
Noviomagus, the Netherlands. In: Hoss, S. (ed.) Latrinae: Roman toilets in the northwestern 
provinces of the Roman Empire. Oxford, Archaeopress. pp. 7788. 
Heirbaut, E., Jones, A.K.G. & Wheeler, K. (2011) Archeaeometry: Methods and analysis. In: 
Jansen, G.C.M., Koloski-Ostrow, A.O. & Moormann, E.M. (eds.) Roman toilets: Their 
archaeology and cultural history. Leuven, Peeters. pp. 720. 
Herrmann, B. (1985) Parasitologisch-epidemiologische auswertungen mittelalterlicher 
kloaken. Zeitschrift fur Archaologie des Mittelalters. 13, 131161. 
Hibbs, A.C., Secor, W.E., Van Gerven, D. & Armelagos, G. (2011) Irrigation and infection: 
The immunoepidemiology of schistosomiasis in ancient Nubia. American Journal of Physical 
Anthropology. 145 (2), 290298. 
Hidalgo-Argello, M.R., Dez Baos, N., Fregeneda Grandes, J. & Prada Marcos, E. (2003) 
Parasitological analysis of Leonese royalty from Collegiate-Basilica of St. Isidoro, Len. The 
Journal of Parasitology. 89 (4), 738743. 
Hingley, R. (2005) Globalizing Roman Culture: Unity, Diversity and Empire. Oxon, 
Routledge. 
Hobson, B. (2009) Latrinae et Foricae: Toilets in the Roman World. London, Duckworth. 
Hodder, I. (2014) atalhyk: The leopard changes its spots. A summary of recent work. 
Anatolian Studies. 64, 122. 
Hoeppli, R. (1956) The knowledge of parasites and parasitic infections from ancient times to 
the 17th century. Experimental Parasitology. 5, 398419. 
Holiday, D.M., Guillen, S. & Richardson, D.J. (2003) Diphyllobothriasis of the Chiribaya 
Culture (7001476 AD) of Southern Peru. Comparative Parasitology. 70 (2), 167171. 
Horne, P.D. (2002) First evidence of enterobiasis in ancient Egypt. The Journal of 
Parasitology. 88 (5), 10191021. 
Horne, P. & Redford, S. (1995) Aspergillosis and dracuncliasis in mummies from the Tomb 
of Parennefer. Paleopathology Newsletter. 92, 1012. 
Hoss, S. (2018) The Roman public toilet of Rottenburg am Neckar. In Hoss, S. (ed.) Latrinae: 
Roman toilets in the northwestern provinces of the Roman Empire. Oxford, Archaeopress. pp. 
4754. 
Hoss, S., Koloski-Ostrow, A.O., Merletto, A. & Moormann, E.M. (2011) Design, 
architecture, and decoration of toilets. In: Jansen, G.C.M., Koloski-Ostrow, A.O. & 
Moormann, E.M. (eds.). Roman toilets: Their archaeology and cultural history. Leuven, 
Peeters. pp. 5171. 
Hotez, P.J. & Kamath, A. (2009) Neglected tropical diseases in sub-saharan Africa: review of 
their prevalence, distribution, and disease burden. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 3(8), 
e412. 
Hotez, P.J., Bundy, D.A.P., Beegle, K., Brooker, S., et al. 2006. Helminth infections: soil-
transmitted helminth infections and schistosomiasis. In: Jamison, D. T. et al. (eds.) Disease 
control priorities in developing countries. New York, Oxford University Press. 
Hotez, P.J., Brindley, P.J., Bethony, J.M., King, C.H., et al. (2008) Helminth infections: The 
great neglected tropical diseases. The Journal of Clinical Investigation. 118 (4), 13111321. 
Hotez, P.J., Alvarado, M., Basez, M.-G., Bolliger, I., et al. (2014) The global burden of 
disease study 2010: Interpretation and implications for the neglected tropical diseases. PLoS 
Neglected Tropical Diseases. 8 (7), e2865. 
Hufschmid, T. & Stterlin, H. (1992) Zu einem lehmfachwerkbau und zwei latrinengruben 
des 1. Jahrhunderts in Augst: Ergebnisse der grabung 1991.65 im gebiet der insulae 51 und 
53. Jahresberichte aus Augst und Kaiseraugst. 13, 129176. 
Hugot, J.-P., Gardner, S.L., Borba, V., Araujo, P., et al. (2014) Discovery of a 240 million 
year old nematode parasite egg in a cynodont coprolite sheds light on the early origin of 
pinworms in vertebrates. Parasites & Vectors. 7, 486. 
Huskinson, B.Y.J. (2009) Looking for culture, identity and power. In: Huskinson, J. (ed.) 
Experiencing Rome: Culture, identity and power in the Roman Empire. Oxon, Routledge. pp. 
329. 
Izdebski, A., Pickett, J., Roberts, N. & Waliszewski, T. (2016) The environmental, 
archaeological and historical evidence for regional climatic changes and their societal impacts 
in the Eastern Mediterranean in Late Antiquity. Quaternary Science Reviews. 136, 189208. 
Jansen, G.C.M. (2000) Urban water transport. In: Wikander,  (ed.) Handbook of ancient 
water technology. Leiden, Brill. pp. 103125. 
Jansen, G. (2006) The toilets of Ephesus. A preliminary report. In: Wiplinger, G. (ed.) Cura 
aquarum in Ephesus. Leuven, Peeters. pp. 9598. 
Jansen, J., & Boersema, J.H. (1972) Helminth eggs from the latrines of the Olofskapel 
Gatehouse, Amsterdam. Paleopathology Newsletter. 2, 78. 
Jansen, J. & Over, H.J. (1966) Observations on helminth infections in a Roman army camp. 
In: Corradetti, A. (ed.) Proceedings of the 1st International Congress of Parasitology, 2126 
September 1964, Roma, Italy. Oxford, Pergamon. p. 791. 
Jauch, V. (1997) Eschenz-Tasgetium Rmische abwasserkanle und latrinen. Archologie im 
Thurgau 5. Frauenfeld, Hubert & Co. AG. 
Jauch, V. (2018) Latrine pits in the Roman vicus of Vitudurum/Oberwintherthur 
(Switzerland). In: Hoss, S. (ed.) Latrinae: Roman toilets in the northwestern provinces of the 
Roman Empire. Oxford, Archaeopress. pp. 103118. 
Jay, M. (2008) Iron Age diet at Glastonbury lake village: The isotopic evidence for negligible 
aquatic resource consumption. Oxford Journal of Archaeology. 27 (2), 201216. 
Jay, M. & Richards, M.P. (2006) Diet in the Iron Age cemetery population at Wetwang Slack, 
East Yorkshire, UK: Carbon and nitrogen stable isotope evidence. Journal of Archaeological 
Science. 33 (5), 653662. 
Jilek, S., Kuttner, E. & Schwarcz, A. (2011) Frontiers of the Roman Empire: The Danube 
Limes in Austria. Wein, Austrian Institute for Historical Research. 
Jimnez, F.A., Gardner, S.L., Arajo, A., Fugassa, M., et al. (2012) Zoonotic and human 
parasites of inhabitants of Cueva de Los Muertos Chiquitos, Rio Zape Valley, Durango, 
Mexico. The Journal of Parasitology. 98 (2), 304309. 
Jirsa, F. & Winiwarter, V. (2010) Intestinal helminths in the works of Galen. Wiener 
Klinische Wochenschrift. 122 (Suppl 3), 1418. 
Jones, A. (1985) Parasitological investigations on the Ambleside Roman pit. Historic 
England. Report number: 4600. 
Jones, A.K.G. (1987) Parasitological investigations on samples of organic material 
associated with human burials at the Roman inhumation cemetery at Poundbury, Dorset (site 
code PC72-76). York, Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England. Report 
Number: 40/87. 
Jones, A.K.G. (1990) Coprolites and faecal concretions. In: Bell, M. (ed.) Brean Down: 
Excavations 1983-1987. London, English Heritage. pp. 242245. 
Jones, A.K.G. & Hutchison, A.R. (1991) The parasitological evidence. In: McCarthy, M.R. 
(ed.) The structural sequence and environmental remains from Castle Street, Carlisle: 
Excavations 19812. 5. Kendal, Cumberland and Westmorland Antiquarian and 
Archaeological Society. 
Jones, A.K.G. & Nicholson, C. (1988) Recent finds of Trichuris and Ascaris ova from 
Britain. Paleopathology Newsletter. 62, 56. 
Jourdan, P.M., Lamberton, P.H.L., Fenwick, A. & Addiss, D.G. (2018) Soil-transmitted 
helminth infections. The Lancet. 391 (101117), 252265. 
Kan, S.P., Guyatt, H.L. & Bundy, D.A.P. (1989) Geohelminth infection of children from rural 
plantations and urban slums in Malaysia. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene. 83 (6), 817820. 
Keay, S. (2001) Introduction. In: Keay, S. & Terrenato, N. (eds.) Italy and the west: 
Comparative issues in romanization. Oxford, Oxbow. pp. 113117. 
Keay, S. (2012) Rome, Portus and the Mediterranean. London, The British School at Rome. 
Keay, S. & Terrenato, N. (eds.) (2001) Italy and the West: Comparative Issues in 
Romanization. Oxford, Oxbow. 
Keay, S., Millett, M. & Strutt, K. (2014) The canal system and Tiber delta at Portus. 
Assessing the nature of man-made waterways and their relationship with the natural 
environment. Water History. 6 (1), 1130. 
Khairat, R., Ball, M., Chang, C.-C.H., Bianucci, R., et al. (2013) First insights into the 
metagenome of Egyptian mummies using next-generation sequencing. Journal of Applied 
Genetics. 54 (3), 309325. 
Khairy, A.E., El Sebaie, O. & El Attar L., A.G.A. (1982) The sanitary condition of rural 
drinking water in a Nile Delta village. I. Parasitological assessment of zir stored and direct 
tap water. The Journal of Hygiene. 88, 5761. 
Khalil, L.F. (1969) Larval nematodes in the herring (Clupea harengus) from British coastal 
waters and adjacent territories. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United 
Kingdom. 49 (3), 641659. 
King, A. (1978) A Comparative Survey of Bone Assemblages from Roman Sites in Britain, 1st 
edition. London, The Institute of Archaeology. 
King, A. (1999) Diet in the Roman World: A regional inter-site comparison of the mammal 
bones. Journal of Roman Archaeology. 12, 168202. 
King, A. (2001) The romanization of diet in the western empire. In: Keay, S. & Terrenato, N. 
(eds.) Italy and the west: Comparative issues in romanization. Oxford, Oxbow. pp. 210223. 
Knight, M., Ballantyne, R., Zeki, I.R. & Gibson, D. (2019) The Must Farm pile-dwelling 
settlement. Antiquity. 93 (369), 645663. 
Knights, B.A., Dickson, C.A., Dickson, J.H. & Breeze, D.J. (1983) Evidence concerning the 
roman military diet at Bearsden, Scotland, in the 2nd Century AD. Journal of Archaeological 
Science. 10 (2), 139152. 
Knorr, D.A., Smith, W.P.W., Ledger, M.L., Pea-Chocarro, L., et al. (2019) Intestinal 
parasites in six Islamic medieval period latrines from 10th11th century Crdoba (Spain) and 
12th13th century Mrtola (Portugal). International Journal of Paleopathology. 26, 7583. 
Koloski-Ostrow, A.O. (2015) The Archaeology of Sanitation in Roman Italy: Toilets, Sewers, 
and Water Systems. Chapel Hill, UNC Press Books. 
Kottek, M., Grieser, J., Beck, C., Rudolf, B., et al. (2006) World map of the Kppen-Geiger 
climate classification updated. Meteorologische Zeitschrift. 15 (3), 259263. 
Krause, R.J., Koski, K.G., Pons, E., Sandoval, N., et al. (2015) Ascaris and hookworm 
transmission in preschool children from rural Panama: role of yard environment, soil 
eggs/larvae and hygiene and play behaviours. Parasitology. 142(12), 15431554. 
Kron, G. (2015) Agriculture. In: Wilkins, J. & Nadeau, R. (eds.) A companion to food in the 
ancient world. Chichester, Wiley. pp. 160172. 
Kuchta, R., Brabec, J., Kubkov, P. & Scholz, T. (2013) Tapeworm Diphyllobothrium 
dendriticum (Cestoda)--neglected or emerging human parasite? PLoS Neglected Tropical 
Diseases. 7 (12), e2535. 
Kuijper, W.J. & Turner, H. (1992) Diet of a Roman centurion at Alphen aan den Rijn, The 
Netherlands, in the first century AD. Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology. 73 (1-4), 187
Ladsttter, S. (2013) Terrace House 2 in Ephesos: An Archaeological Guide. Istanbul, Homer 
Kitabevi. 
Ladsttter, S. (2019) Ephesos  Sardis port to the Mediterranean. In: Berlin, A.M. & Kosmin, 
P.J. (eds.) Spear-won land: Sardis, from the Kings peace to the peace of Apamea. University 
of Wisconsin Press. 
Ladsttter, S., Bykkolanc, M., Topal, C. & Aktre, Z. (2016) Ephesus. Ankara, Turkish 
National Commission for UNESCO. 
Lawton, S.P., Hirai, H., Ironside, J.E., Johnston, D.A., et al. (2011) Genomes and geography: 
Genomic insights into the evolution and phylogeography of the genus Schistosoma. Parasites 
& Vectors. 4, 131. 
Le Bailly, M. (2005) volution de la relation hte/parasite dans les systmes lacustres nord 
Alpins au Nolithique (39002900 BC), et nouvelles donnes dans la dtection des 
paloantignes de protozoa. PhD thesis. Universit de Reims Champagne-Ardenne. 
Le Bailly, M. & Bouchet, F. (2006) Paloparasitologie et immunologie. Lexemple 
dEntamoeba histolytica. ArcheoSciences. Revue dArchomtrie. 30, 129135. 
Le Bailly, M. & Bouchet, F. (2010) Ancient dicrocoeliosis: Occurrence, distribution and 
migration. Acta Tropica. 115 (3), 175180. 
Le Bailly, M. & Bouchet, F. (2013) Diphyllobothrium in the past: Review and new records. 
International Journal of Paleopathology. 3 (3), 182187. 
Le Bailly, M. & Bouchet, F. (2015) A first attempt to retrace the history of dysentery caused 
by Entamoeba histolytica. In: Mitchell, P.D. (ed.) Sanitation, latrines and intestinal parasites 
in past populations. Farnham, Ashgate. pp. 219228. 
Le Bailly, M., Leuzinger, U. & Bouchet, F. (2003a) Dioctophymidae eggs in coprolites from 
Neolithic site of Arbon-Bleiche 3 (Switzerland). The Journal of Parasitology. 89 (5), 1073
1076. 
Le Bailly, M., Harter, S. & Bouchet, F. (2003b) La paloparasitologie,  linterface de 
l'archologie et de la biologie. Archopages. 11, 1217. 
Le Bailly, M., Harter, S., da Rocha, G.C. & Bouchet, F. (2003c) Compte-rendu de ltude 
paloparasitologique de Windisch-Breite 1996-1998. In: Hagendorn, A., Doppler, H.W., 
Huber, A., & Plogmann, H.H. et al. (eds.). Zur frhzeit von Vindonissa, Auswertung der 
Holzbauten der Grabung Windisch-Breite 1996-1998. Verffentlichungen der Gesellschaft 
pro Vindonissa. p. 230. 
Le Bailly, M., Leuzinger, U., Schlichtherle, H. & Bouchet, F. (2005) Diphyllobothrium: 
Neolithic parasite? The Journal of Parasitology. 91 (4), 957959. 
Le Bailly, M., Gonalves, M.L., Harter-Lailheugue, S., Prodo, F., et al. (2008) New finding 
of Giardia intestinalis (Eukaryote, Metamonad) in Old World archaeological site using 
immunofluorescence and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. Memorias do Instituto 
Oswaldo Cruz. 103 (3), 298300. 
Le Bailly, M., Mouze, S., da Rocha, G.C., Heim, J.-L., et al. (2010) Identification of Taenia 
sp. in a mummy from a Christian Necropolis in El-Deir, Oasis of Kharga, ancient Egypt. The 
Journal of Parasitology. 96 (1), 213215. 
Ledger, M.L. & Mitchell, P.D. (2019) Tracing zoonotic parasite infections throughout human 
evolution. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology. 112. doi:10.1002/oa.2786. 
Ledger, M.L., Stock, F., Schwaiger, H., Knipping, M., et al. (2018) Intestinal parasites from 
public and private latrines and the harbour canal in Roman Period Ephesus, Turkey (1st c. 
BCE to 6th c. CE). Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. 21, 289297. 
Ledger, M.L., Grimshaw, E., Fairey, M., Whelton, H.L., et al. (2019a) Intestinal parasites at 
the Late Bronze Age settlement of Must Farm, in the fens of East Anglia, UK (9th century 
B.C.E.). Parasitology. 146 (12), 15831594. 
Ledger, M.L., Anastasiou, E., Shillito, L.-M., Mackay, H., et al. (2019b) Parasite infection at 
the early farming community of atalhyk. Antiquity. 93 (369), 573587. 
Letinov, K., Soldnov, M., Scholz, T. & Kuchta, R. (2016) Eggs as a suitable tool for 
species diagnosis of causative agents of human diphyllobothriosis (Cestoda). PLoS Neglected 
Tropical Diseases. 10 (5), e0004721. 
Levinson, W. (ed.) (2016) Review of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, 14th Edition. 
San Francisco, Lange McGraw-Hill. 
Lewis, M.E. (2010) Life and death in a civitas capital: Metabolic disease and trauma in the 
children from late Roman Dorchester, Dorset. American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 
142 (3), 405416. 
Lewis, M.E. (2011) Tuberculosis in the non-adults from Romano-British Poundbury Camp, 
Dorset, England. International Journal of Paleopathology. 1 (1), 1223. 
Lightfoot, E., Slaus, M. & OConnell, T.C. (2012) Changing cultures, changing cuisines: 
Cultural transitions and dietary change in Iron Age, Roman, and Early Medieval Croatia. 
American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 148 (4), 543556. 
Ligt, L. de & Tacoma, L. E. (eds.) (2016) Migration and Mobility in the Early Roman 
Empire. Boston, Brill. 
Lindenfors, P., Nunn, C.L., Jones, K.E., Cunningham, A.A., et al. (2007) Parasite species 
richness in carnivores: Effects of host body mass, latitude, geographical range and population 
density. Global Ecology and Biogeography. 16 (4), 496509. 
Liverani, M. (2007) Historical overview. In: Snell, D.C. (ed.) A companion to the Ancient 
Near East. Oxford, Blackwell Publishing Ltd. pp. 1-19. 
Lockau, L., Atkinson, S., Mays, S., Prowse, T., et al. (2019) Vitamin D deficiency and the 
ancient city: Skeletal evidence across the life course from the Roman period site of Isola 
Sacra, Italy. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology. 55, 101069. 
Locker, A. (2007) In piscibus diversis; the bone evidence for fish consumption in Roman 
Britain. Britannia. 38, 141180. 
Lsch, S., Moghaddam, N., Grossschmidt, K., Risser, D.U., et al. (2014) Stable isotope and 
trace element studies on gladiators and contemporary Romans from Ephesus (Turkey, 2nd 
and 3rd ct. AD) - implications for differences in diet. PloS One. 9 (10), e110489. 
Lotfy, W.M., Brant, S.V., DeJong, R.J., Le, T.H., et al. (2008) Evolutionary origins, 
diversification, and biogeography of liver flukes (Digenea, Fasciolidae). The American 
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 79 (2), 248255. 
MacKinnon, M. (2011) The faunal remains. In: Small, A.M. (ed.) Vagnari: Il villaggio, 
lartigianato, la propriet imperiale. Bari, Edipuglia. pp. 305329. 
Magiorkinis, E., Sidiropoulou, K. & Diamantis, A. (2010) Hallmarks in the history of 
epilepsy: epilepsy in antiquity. Epilepsy & Behavior. 17(1), 103108. 
Maicher, C., Hoffmann, A., Ct, N.M.L., Palomo Prez, A., et al. (2017) 
Paleoparasitological investigations on the Neolithic lakeside settlement of La Draga (Lake 
Banyoles, Spain). Holocene. 27 (11), 16591668. 
Maicher, C., Bleicher, N. & Le Bailly, M. (2019) Spatializing data in paleoparasitology: 
Application to the study of the Neolithic lakeside settlement of Zrich-Parkhaus-Opra, 
Switzerland. Holocene. 29 (7), 11981205. 
Makarios-Laham, I. & Lee, T.-C. (1995) Biodegradability of chitin- and chitosan-containing 
films in soil environment. Journal of Environmental Polymer Degradation. 3(1), 3136. 
Maltby, M. (2016) The exploitation of animals in Roman Britain. In: Millett, M., Revell, L. & 
Moore, A. (eds.) The Oxford handbook of Roman Britain. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 
Marciniak, S., Prowse, T.L., Herring, D.A., Klunk, J., et al. (2016) Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria in 1st2nd century CE southern Italy. Current Biology. 26 (23), R1220R1222. 
Marzano, A. (2018) Fish and fishing in the Roman World. Journal of Maritime Archaeology. 
13 (3), 437447. 
Mascarini-Serra, L. (2011) Prevention of soil-transmitted helminth infection. Journal of 
Global Infectious Diseases. 3 (2), 175182. 
Mas-Coma, M.S., Esteban, J.G. & Bargues, M.D. (1999) Epidemiology of human fascioliasis: 
A review and proposed new classification. Bulletin of the World Health Organization. 77 (4), 
340346. 
Mas-Coma, S., Bargues, M.D. & Valero, M.A. (2018) Human fascioliasis infection sources, 
their diversity, incidence factors, analytical methods and prevention measures. Parasitology. 
145(13), 16651699. 
Mattingly, D. (2004) Being Roman: Expressing identity in a provincial setting. Journal of 
Roman Archaeology. 17, 525. 
Mays, S., Prowse, T., George, M. & Brickley, M. (2018) Latitude, urbanization, age, and sex 
as risk factors for vitamin D deficiency disease in the Roman Empire. American Journal of 
Physical Anthropology. 167 (3), 484496. 
McConnan Borstad, C., Garvie-Lok, S. & Katsonopoulou, D. (2018) Diet at ancient Helike, 
Achaea, Greece based on stable isotope analysis: From the Hellenistic to the Roman and 
Byzantine periods. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. 18, 110. 
McKern, T.W., & Stewart, T.D. (1957) Skeletal age changes in young American males: 
analysed from the standpoint of age identification. Headquarters, Quartermaster Research & 
Development Command. 
McOmish, D. (2018) Banjo Enclosures: Introduction to Heritage Assets. Swindon, Historic 
England. 
Medovi, A. (2013) Viminacium: Roman agriculture on Serbian soil? Archaeology and 
Science. 9, 9599. 
Mehlhorn, H. (2016) Animal Parasites: Diagnosis, Treatment, Prevention. Switzerland. 
Springer. 
Miller, R.L., Armelagos, G.J., Ikram, S., De Jonge, N., et al. (1992) Palaeoepidemiology of 
Schistosoma infection in mummies. BMJ. 304 (6826), 555556. 
Millett, M. (2005) Roman Britain. London, English Heritage. 
Minozzi, S., Catalano, P., di Giannantonio, S. & Fornaciari, G. (2013) Salute e malattia nella 
Roma imperiale attraverso le evidenze scheletriche. Medicina Nei Secoli Arte e Scienza. 25, 
119138. 
Mitchell, P.D. (2011) Retrospective diagnosis and the use of historical texts for investigating 
disease in the past. International Journal of Paleopathology. 1 (2), 8188. 
Mitchell, P.D. (2013) The origins of human parasites: Exploring the evidence for 
endoparasitism throughout human evolution. International Journal of Paleopathology. 3 (3), 
191198. 
Mitchell, P.D. (2015a) Human parasites in Medieval Europe: Lifestyle, sanitation and medical 
treatment. Advances in Parasitology. 90, 389420. 
Mitchell, P.D. (2017a) Sampling human remains for evidence of intestinal parasites. In: 
Mitchell, P.D. & Brickley, M. (eds.) Updated guidelines to the standards for recording 
human remains. Reading, Chartered Institute for Archaeologists/British Association for 
Biological Anthropology and Osteoarchaeology. pp. 5456. 
Mitchell, P.D. (2017b) Human parasites in the Roman World: Health consequences of 
conquering an empire. Parasitology. 144 (1), 4858. 
Mitchell, P.D. & Tepper, Y. (2007) Intestinal parasitic worm eggs from a Crusader period 
cesspool in the city of Acre (Israel). Levant. 39 (1), 9195. 
Mitchell, P.D., Stern, E. & Tepper, Y. (2008) Dysentery in the crusader kingdom of 
Jerusalem: An ELISA analysis of two medieval latrines in the City of Acre (Israel). Journal of 
Archaeological Science. 35 (7), 18491853. 
Mitchell, P.D., Anastasiou, E. & Syon, D. (2011) Human intestinal parasites in crusader Acre: 
Evidence for migration with disease in the medieval period. International Journal of 
Paleopathology. 1 (34), 132137. 
Mitchell, P.D., Yeh, H.-Y., Appleby, J. & Buckley, R. (2013) The intestinal parasites of King 
Richard III. The Lancet. 382 (9895), 888. 
Mitchell, S. (2015b) Food, culture, and environment in ancient Asia Minor. In: Wilkins, J. & 
Nadeau, R. (eds.) A companion to food in the ancient world. Chichester, Wiley. pp. 283295. 
Morand, S. (2015) (macro-) Evolutionary ecology of parasite diversity: From determinants of 
parasite species richness to host diversification. International Journal for Parasitology. 
Parasites and Wildlife. 4 (1), 8087. 
Moravec, F. (1980) Revision of nematodes of the genus Capillaria from European freshwater 
fishes. Folia Parasitologica. 27, 309324. 
Morrow, J.J., Larsen, A.S., Piombino-Mascali, D., Jankauskas, R., et al. (2014) Taphonomic 
considerations of a whipworm infection in a mummy from the Dominican Church of the Holy 
Spirit, Vilnius, Lithuania. International Journal of Paleopathology. 7, 8387. 
Morrow, J.J., Newby, J., Piombino-Mascali, D. & Reinhard, K.J. (2016) Taphonomic 
considerations for the analysis of parasites in archaeological materials. International Journal 
of Paleopathology. 13, 5664. 
Mowlavi, G., Kacki, S., Dupouy-Camet, J., Mobedi, I., et al. (2014) Probable hepatic 
capillariosis and hydatidosis in an adolescent from the late Roman period buried in Amiens 
(France). Parasite. 21, 9. 
Munyangi, J., Cornet-Vernet, L., Idumbo, M., Lu, C., et al. (2018) Effect of Artemisia annua 
and Artemisia afra tea infusions on schistosomiasis in a large clinical trial. Phytomedicine. 51, 
233240. 
Muslin, J.L. (2016) Working and living in Oplontis B: Material perspectives on trade and 
consumption. In: Gazda, E.K. & Clarke, J.R. (eds.) Leisure and luxury in the age of Nero: The 
villas of Oplontis near Pompeii. Ann Arbor, Kelsey Museum of Archaeology. pp. 166170. 
Mylona, D. (2018) Fish processing in the Mediterranean: Varying traditions, technologies and 
scales of production with particular reference to the Eastern Mediterranean. Journal of 
Maritime Archaeology. 13 (3), 419436. 
Nejsum, P., Betson, M., Bendall, R.P., Thamsborg, S.M., et al. (2012) Assessing the zoonotic 
potential of Ascaris suum and Trichuris suis: Looking to the future from an analysis of the 
past. Journal of Helminthology. 86 (2), 148155. 
Nematian, J., Gholamrezanezhad, A., & Nematian, E. (2008) Giardiasis and other intestinal 
parasitic infections in relation to anthropometric indicators of malnutrition: A large, 
population-based survey of schoolchildren in Tehran. Annals of Tropical Medicine and 
Parasitology. 102 (3), 209-214. 
Nezamabadi, M., Aali, A., Stllner, T., Mashkour, M., et al. (2013) Paleoparasitological 
analysis of samples from the Chehrabad salt mine (Northwestern Iran). International Journal 
of Paleopathology. 3 (3), 229233. 
Nunn, C.L., Altizer, S.M., Sechrest, W. & Cunningham, A.A. (2005) Latitudinal gradients of 
parasite species richness in primates. Diversity and Distributions. 11 (3), 249256. 
Nutton, V. (2004) Ancient Medicine. London, Routledge. 
Nutton, V. (2005) The fatal embrace: Galen and the history of ancient medicine. Science in 
Context. 18 (1), 111121. 
OConnell, T.C., Ballantyne, R.M., Hamilton-Dyer, S., Margaritis, E., et al. (2019) Living 
and dying at the Portus Romae. Antiquity. 93 (369), 719734. 
Ogwang, P.E., Ogwal, J.O., Kasasa, S., Olila, D., et al. (2012) Artemisia Annua L. infusion 
consumed once a week reduces risk of multiple episodes of malaria: A randomised trial in a 
Ugandan community. Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical Research. 11(3), 445453. 
Oh, K.-S., Kim, G.-T., Ahn, K.-S. & Shin, S.-S. (2016) Effects of disinfectants on larval 
development of Ascaris suum eggs. The Korean Journal of Parasitology. 54, 103107. 
Oleaga, A., Rey, O., Polack, B., Grech-Angelini, S., et al. (2019) Epidemiological 
surveillance of schistosomiasis outbreak in Corsica (France): Are animal reservoir hosts 
implicated in local transmission?. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 13(6), e0007543. 
Oliveira, D., Ferreira, F.S., Atouguia, J., Fortes, F., et al. (2015) Infection by intestinal 
parasites, stunting and anemia in school-aged children from Southern Angola. PloS One. 10 
(9), e0137327. 
Ortega, Y.R. & Bonavia, D. (2003) Cryptosporidium, Giardia, and Cyclospora in ancient 
Peruvians. The Journal of Parasitology. 89 (3), 635636. 
Oswald, W.E., Stewart, A.E.P., Kramer, M.R., Endeshaw, T., et al. (2017) Association of 
community sanitation usage with soil-transmitted helminth infections among school-aged 
children in Amhara Region, Ethiopia. Parasites & Vectors. 10 (1), 91. 
Otranto, D. & Traversa, D. (2002) A review of dicrocoeliosis of ruminants including recent 
advances in the diagnosis and treatment. Veterinary Parasitology. 107(4), 317335. 
Owens, E.J. (1983) The koprologoi at Athens in the fifth and fourth centuries B.C. Classical 
Quarterly. 33 (1), 4450. 
Pabalan, N., Singian, E., Tabangay, L., Jarjanazi, H., et al. (2018) Soil-transmitted helminth 
infection, loss of education and cognitive impairment in school-aged children: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 12(1), e0005523. 
Peacock, T., Bourbou, C., DOrtenzio, L., Kahlon, B., et al. (2019) Mobility and rickets: 
Investigating Vitamin D deficiency and regional mobility in Aventicum, Roman Switzerland 
(first to third century CE). International Journal of Osteoarchaeology. 29, 654664. 
Pedersen, M.W., Overballe-Petersen, S., Ermini, L., Der Sarkissian, C., et al. (2015) Ancient 
and modern environmental DNA. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B. 370(1660), 20130383. 
Percival, J. (2002) The villa in Italy and the provinces. In: Wacher, J. (ed.) The Roman World. 
London, Routledge. pp. 527548. 
Prez, J.A., Flohr, M., Hobson, B., Koehler, J., et al. (2011) Location and contexts of toilets. 
In: Jansen, G.C.M., Koloski-Ostrow, A.O. & Moormann, E.M. (eds.) Roman toilets: Their 
archaeology and cultural history. Leuven, Peeters. pp. 113131. 
Perri, A.R., Power, R.C., Stuijts, I., Heinrich, S., et al. (2018) Detecting hidden diets and 
disease: Zoonotic parasites and fish consumption in Mesolithic Ireland. Journal of 
Archaeological Science. 97, 137146. 
Perri, A., Widga, C., Lawler, D., Martin, T., et al. (2019) New evidence of the earliest 
domestic dogs in the Americas. American Antiquity. 84 (1), 6887. 
Perrin, P., Herbreteau, V., Hugot, J.-P. & Morand, S. (2010) Biogeography, humans, and their 
parasites. In: Morand, S. & Krasnov, B.R. (eds.). The biogeography of host-parasite 
interactions. New York, Oxford University Press. pp. 4157. 
Perring, D. (2002) The Roman House in Britain. London, Routledge. 
Petznek, B. (2018) A Roman cesspit from the mid-2nd century with lead price tags in the civil 
town of Carnuntum (Schloss Petronell/Austria). In: Hoss, S. (ed.). Latrinae: Roman toilets in 
the northwestern provinces of the Roman Empire. Oxford, Archaeopress. pp. 119126. 
Petznek, B., Radbauer, S., Sauer, R. & Wilson, A. (2011) Urination and defecation Roman-
style. In: Jansen, G.C.M., Koloski-Ostrow, A.O. & Moormann, E.M. (eds.). Roman toilets: 
Their archaeology and cultural history. Leuven, Peeters. pp. 95113. 
Phenice, T.W. (1969) A newly developed visual method of sexing the os pubis. American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology. 30(2), 297301. 
Phiri, K., Whitty, C.J., Graham, S.M. & Ssembatya-Lule, G. (2000) Urban/rural differences in 
prevalence and risk factors for intestinal helminth infection in southern Malawi. Annals of 
Tropical Medicine and Parasitology. 94 (4), 381387. 
Pigire, F. & Henrotay, D. (2012) Camels in the northern provinces of the Roman Empire. 
Journal of Archaeological Science. 39 (5), 15311539. 
Pike, A.W. (1968) Recovery of helminth eggs from archaeological excavations, and their 
possible usefulness in providing evidence for the purpose of an accupation. Nature. 219 
(5151), 303304. 
Pike, A.W. (1975) Parasite eggs. In: Platt, C. & Coleman-Smith, R. (eds.) Excavations in 
Medieval Southampton 1953-1969. Leicester, Leicester University Press. pp. 347348. 
Pike, A.W. & Biddle, M. (1966) Parasite eggs in Medieval Winchester. Antiquity. 40 (160), 
293296.  
Pitts, M. (2008) Globalizing the local in Roman Britain: An anthropological approach to 
social change. Journal of Anthropological Archaeology. 27 (4), 493506. 
Ployer, R. (2016) Archologischer befund und funde. In: Rathmayr, E. (ed.) Hanghaus 2 in 
Ephesos. Die wohneinheit 7: Baubefund, ausstattung, funde. Forschungen in Ephesos 8/10, 
Vienna, Verlag der sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. pp. 285309. 
http://hw.oeaw.ac.at/0xc1aa5576_0x0033ee17.pdf. 
Poinar, G.O. (2015) The geological record of parasitic nematode infection. In: De Baets, K. & 
Littlewood, D.T.J. (eds) Fossil parasites. London, Academic Press. pp. 53-92. 
Pollard, N. (2016) Villas. In: Cooley, A.E. (ed.) A companion to Roman Italy. Chichester, 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. pp. 330355. 
Polo-Cerd, M., Miquel-Feucht, M. & Villalan-Blanco, J.D. (2001) Experimental cribra 
orbitalia in Wistar Rats: An etiopathogenic model of porotic hyperostosis and other porotic 
phenomena. In: La Verghetta, M. & Capasso, L. (eds.). Proceedings of XIIIth European 
Meeting of the Palepathology Association,1823 September 2000, Chieti, Italy. Teramo, 
Edigrafital S.p.A. pp. 253259. 
Prowse, T. & Carroll, M. (2017) Exploring the Roman Imperial Estate at Vagnari, Puglia 
(Commune di Gravina in Puglia, Provincia di Bari, Regione Puglia). Papers of the British 
School at Rome. 85, 330334. 
Prowse, T.L., Schwarcz, H.P., Saunders, S.R., Macchiarelli, R., et al. (2005) Isotopic 
evidence for age-related variation in diet from Isola Sacra, Italy. American Journal of 
Physical Anthropology. 128 (1), 213. 
Pryor, F. (2001) The Flag Fen Basin: Archaeology and Environment of a Fenland Landscape. 
London, English Heritage. 
Pullan, R.L. & Brooker, S.J. (2012) The global limits and population at risk of soil-
transmitted helminth infections in 2010. Parasites & Vectors. 5 (81), 114. 
Pullan, R.L., Smith, J.L., Jasrasaria, R. & Brooker, S.J. (2014) Global numbers of infection 
and disease burden of soil transmitted helminth infections in 2010. Parasites & Vectors. 7, 37. 
Purcell, N. (2003) The way we used to eat: Diet, community, and history at Rome. American 
Journal of Philology. 124 (3), 329358. 
Rcz, S.E., Arajo, E.P., Jensen, E., Mostek, C., et al. (2015) Parasitology in an 
archaeological context: Analysis of medieval burials in Nivelles, Belgium. Journal of 
Archaeological Science. 53, 304315. 
Ratt, C. (2008) Reflections on the urban development of Hellenistic Sardis. In: Cahill, N.D. 
(ed.) Love for Lydia: A Sardis anniversary volume presented to Crawford H. Greenewalt, Jr. 
Cambridge, Archaeological Exploration of Sardis. pp. 125133. 
Rautman, M. (2011) Sardis in Late Antiquity. In: Dally, O. & Ratt, C. (eds.) Archaeology 
and the cities of Asia Minor in Late Antiquity. Ann Arbor, Kelsey Museum of Archaeology. 
pp. 126. 
Redfern, R.C. & Chamberlain, A.T. (2011) A demographic analysis of Maiden Castle hillfort: 
Evidence for conflict in the late Iron Age and early Roman period. International Journal of 
Paleopathology. 1 (1), 6873. 
Redfern, R. & Mikulski, R. (2009) Roman western cemetery summary. Available from: 
https://www.museumoflondon.org.uk/collections/other-collection-databases-and-
libraries/centre-human-bioarchaeology/osteological-database/roman-cemeteries/roman-
western-cemetery-data [Accessed: 29 May 2019] 
Redfern, R.C., DeWitte, S.N., Pearce, J., Hamlin, C., et al. (2015) Urban-rural differences in 
Roman Dorset, England: A bioarchaeological perspective on Roman settlements. American 
Journal of Physical Anthropology. 157 (1), 107120. 
Reinhard, K. & Urban, O. (2003) Diagnosing ancient diphyllobothriasis from Chinchorro 
mummies. Memorias do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz. 98 (Suppl 1), 191193. 
Reinhard, K.J., Confalonieri, U.E., Herrman, B., Ferreira, L.F., et al. (1986) Recovery of 
parasite remains from coprolites and latrines: Aspects of paleoparasitological technique. 
Homo. 37 (4), 217239. 
Reinhard, K.J., Geib, P.R., Callahan, M.M. & Hevly, R.H. (1992) Discovery of colon 
contents in a skeletonized burial: Soil sampling for dietary remains. Journal of 
Archaeological Science. 19 (6), 697705. 
Reinhard, K.J., Arajo, A. & Morrow, J.J. (2016) Temporal and spatial distribution of 
Enterobius vermicularis (Nematoda: Oxyuridae) in the Prehistoric Americas. The Korean 
Journal of Parasitology. 54 (5), 591603. 
Revell, L. (2007) Military bath-houses in Britain  a comment. Britannia. 38, 230237. 
Reyman, T.A., Zimmerman, M.R. & Lewin, P.K. (1977) Autopsy of an Egyptian mummy 
(Nakht-ROM I). Canadian Medical Association Journal. 117, 470471. 
Rinaldi, L., Biggeri, A., Musella, V., de Waal, T., et al. (2015) Sheep and Fasciola hepatica 
in Europe: the GLOWORM experience. Geospatial Health. 9(2), 309317. 
Rinaudo, M. (2006) Chitin and chitosan: Properties and applications. Progress in Polymer 
Science. 31 (7), 603632. 
Rivera-Guerrero, M.I., Snchez-Rueda, L. & Rodrguez-Bataz, E. (2004) Efecto de algunos 
agentes fsicos y qumicos sobre el metacstodo de Taenia solium presente en carne adobada 
y chorizo. Salud Publica de Mexico. 46, 425429. 
Roberts, C. & Cox, M. (eds.) (2003) Health and Disease in Britain: From Prehistory to the 
Present Day. Thrupp, Sutton Publishing. 
Robinson, I., Knight, M. & Murrell, K. (2015) Must Farm Palaeochannel Investigations 
2009 2012. Post-excavation Assessment. Cambridge, Cambridge Archaeological Unit. 
Robinson, M. & Rowan, E. (2015) Roman food remains in archaeology and the contents of a 
Roman sewer at Herculaneum. In: Wilkins, J. & Nadeau, R. (eds.) A companion to food in the 
ancient world. Chichester, Wiley. pp. 105115. 
Rodriguez-Canul, R., Argaez-Rodriguez, F., De, la G.D.P., Villegas-Perez, S., et al. (2002) 
Taenia solium metacestode viability in infected pork after preparation with salt pickling or 
cooking methods common in Yucatn, Mexico. Journal of Food Protection. 65 (4), 666669. 
Roever-Bonnet, H., Rijpstra, C., van Renesse, M.A. & Peen, C.H. (1979) Helminth eggs and 
gregarines from coprolites from the excavations at Swifterbant. Helinium. 19, 712. 
Rogers, D.K. (2018) Water Culture in Roman Society. Leiden, Brill Research Perspectives in 
Ancient History. 
Rogers, W.P. (1960) The physiology of infective processes of nematode parasites; the 
stimulus from the animal host. Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 152 (948), 367386. 
Roselaar, S.T. (2014) Economic developments and the integration of southern Italy in the 
Roman Republic. In: Small, A.M. (ed.) Beyond Vagnari: New themes in the study of Roman 
south Italy. Bari, Edipuglia. pp. 4351. 
Ross, J.G. 1977. A five-year study of the epidemiology of fascioliasis in the North, East and 
West of Scotland. The British Veterinary Journal. 133(3), 263272. 
Rouffignac, C. (1985) Parasite egg survival and identification from Hibernia Wharf, 
Southwark. The London Archaeologist. 5 (4), 103. 
Rousset, J.-J., Heron, C. & Metrot, P. (1996) Human helminthiasis at the Gauls. Histoire des 
Sciences Medicales. 30, 4146. 
Rowan, E. (2014) Roman diet and nutrition in the Vesuvian region: A study of the 
bioarchaeological remains from the Cardo V sewer at Herculaneum. DPhil thesis. University 
of Oxford. 
Rowan, E. (2017) Bioarchaeological preservation and non-elite diet in the Bay of Naples: An 
analysis of the food remains from the Cardo V sewer at the Roman site of Herculaneum. 
Environmental Archaeology. 22 (3), 318336. 
Ruffer, M.A. (1910) Note on the presence of Bilharzia haematobia in Egyptian mummies of 
the twentieth dynasty. British Medical Journal. 1 (2557), 16. 
Rushworth, A. (ed.) (2009) Housesteads Roman Fort - The Grandest Station: Excavation and 
Survey at Housesteads, 1954-95. London, English Heritage. 
Russell, M., Cheetham, P., Evans, D., Hambleton, E., et al. (2014) The Durotriges project, 
phase one: An interim statement. Proceedings of the Dorset Natural History & 
Archaeological Society. 135, 217221. 
Russell, M., Cheetham, P., Evans, D., Gerdau-Radonic, K., et al. (2015) The Durotriges 
project, phase two: An interim statement. Proceedings of the Dorset Natural History & 
Archaeological Society. 136, 157161. 
Sabine, E.L. (1934) Latrines and cesspools of mediaeval London. Speculum. 9(3), 303321. 
Sallares, R. (2002) Malaria and Rome: A History of Malaria in Ancient Italy. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press. 
Sallares, R. & Gomzi, S. (2001) Biomolecular archaeology of malaria. Ancient Biomolecules. 
3, 195213. 
Salvadei, L., Ricci, F. & Manzi, G. (2001) Porotic hyperostosis as a marker of health and 
nutritional conditions during childhood: studies at the transition between Imperial Rome and 
the Early Middle Ages. American Journal of Human Biology. 13 (6), 709717. 
Schaub, A. (2018) The latrines of Roman Aachen. In: Hoss, S. (ed.). Latrinae: Roman toilets 
in the northwestern provinces of the Roman Empire. Oxford, Archaeopress. pp. 2934. 
Scheidel, W. (2001) Roman age structure: Evidence and models. The Journal of Roman 
Studies. 91, 126. 
Scheidel, W. (2009) Population and demography. In Erskine, A. (ed.) A companion to ancient 
history. Oxford, Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 134145. 
Scheidel, W. (2012) Physical well-being. In: Scheidel, W. (ed.) The Cambridge companion to 
the Roman economy, 1st edition. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. pp. 169333. 
Scheidel, W. (2013) Disease and death. In: Erdkamp, P. (ed.) The Cambridge companion to 
ancient Rome. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. pp. 4559. 
Scherrer, P. (2001) The historical topography of Ephesos. Journal of Roman Archaeology. 
Suppl 45, 5787. 
Scheuer, L. & Black, S. (2000) Developmental Juvenile Osteology. San Diego, Academic 
Press. 
Schmidlin, T., Hrlimann, E., Silu, K.D., Yapi, R.B., et al. (2013) Effects of hygiene and 
defecation behavior on helminths and intestinal protozoa infections in Taabo, Cte dIvoire. 
PloS One. 8 (6), e65722. 
Scholz, T., Garcia, H.H., Kuchta, R. & Wicht, B. (2009) Update on the human broad 
tapeworm (genus Diphyllobothrium), including clinical relevance. Clinical Microbiology 
Reviews. 22 (1), 146160. 
Scobie, A. (1986) Slums, sanitation, and mortality in the Roman world. KLIO. 68, 399433. 
Searcey, N., Reinhard, K.J., Egarter-Vigl, E., Maixner, F., et al. (2013) Parasitism of the 
Zweeloo Woman: Dicrocoeliasis evidenced in a Roman period bog mummy. International 
Journal of Paleopathology. 3 (3), 224228. 
ebela, L., Vojtkova, L. & Vojtek, J. (1990) Intestinal parasites in man of Old Bronze Age. 
LAnthropologie. 28 (1), 105107. 
Sengupta, M.E., Andersen, T.J., Dalsgaard, A., Olsen, A., et al. (2012) Resuspension and 
settling of helminth eggs in water: Interactions with cohesive sediments. Water Research. 46 
(12), 39033912. 
Shillito, L.-M., Matthews, W., Almond, M.J. & Bull, I.D. (2011a) The microstratigraphy of 
middens: Capturing daily routine in rubbish at Neolithic atalhyk, Turkey. Antiquity. 85 
(329), 10241038. 
Shillito, L.-M., Bull, I.D., Matthews, W., Almond, M.J., et al. (2011b) Biomolecular and 
micromorphological analysis of suspected faecal deposits at Neolithic atalhyk, Turkey. 
Journal of Archaeological Science. 38 (8), 18691877. 
Sianto, L., Chame, M., Silva, C.S.P., Gonalves, M.L.C., et al. (2009) Animal helminths in 
human archaeological remains: A review of zoonoses in the past. Revista do Instituto de 
Medicina Tropical de Sao Paulo. 51 (3), 119130. 
Simpson, I.A., van Bergen, P.F., Perret, V., Elhmmali, M.M., et al. (1999) Lipid biomarkers 
of manuring practice in relict anthropogenic soils. The Holocene. 9, 223229. 
Sireix, C. (2008) Origine et dveloppment dun quartier suburbain antique de Burdigala. In: 
Sireix, C. (ed.) La cit judiciaire un quartier suburbain de Bordeaux antique. Aquitania 15. 
Bordeaux, Aquitania. pp. 1180. 
Small, A.M. (2011a) The kilns. In: Small, A.M. (ed.) Vagnari: Il villaggio, lartigianato, la 
propriet imperiale. Bari, Edipuglia. pp. 231279. 
Small, A.M. (2011b) Introduction. In: Small, A.M. (ed.) Vagnari: Il villaggio, lartigianato, 
la propriet imperiale. Bari, Edipuglia. pp. 1136. 
Se, M.J., Nejsum, P., Seersholm, F.V., Fredensborg, B.L., et al. (2018) Ancient DNA from 
latrines in Northern Europe and the Middle East (500 BC-1700 AD) reveals past parasites and 
diet. PLOS One. 13 (4), e0195481. 
Specht, K.W. (1963) Eine interessante erdprobe aus einer abortgrube im Rmerkastell 
Knzing. Saalburg-Jahrbuch. 21, 9094. 
Spindler, L.A. (1929) The relation of moisture to the distribution of human Trichuris and 
Ascaris. American Journal of Epidemiology. 10(2), 476496. 
Stolk, W.A., Kulik, M.C., le Rutte, E.A., Jacobson, J., et al. (2016) Between-country 
inequalities in the neglected tropical disease burden in 1990 and 2010, with projections for 
2020. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 10 (5), e0004560. 
Strunz, E.C., Addiss, D.G., Stocks, M.E., Ogden, S., et al. (2014) Water, sanitation, hygiene, 
and soil-transmitted helminth infection: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS 
Medicine. 11 (3), e1001620. 
Stuart-Macadam, P. (1985) Porotic hyperostosis: Representative of a childhood condition. 
American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 66 (4), 391398. 
Stuart-Macadam, P. (1987) Porotic hyperostosis: New evidence to support the anemia theory. 
American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 74 (4), 521526. 
Szidat, L. (1944) ber die erhaltungsfhigkeit von helmintheneiern in Vor-und 
frhgeschichtlichen moorleichen. Zeitschrift fr Parasitenkunde. 13 (3), 265274. 
Tagboto, S. & Townson, S. (2001) Antiparasitic properties of medicinal plants and other 
naturally occurring products. Advances in Parasitology. 50, 199295. 
Tapp, E. (1984) Disease and the Manchester mummies: The pathologists role. In: David, R. 
& Tapp, E. (eds.) Evidence embalmed. Manchester, Manchester University Press. pp. 7895. 
Tapp, E. & Wildsmith, K. (1992) The autopsy and endoscopy of the Leeds Mummy. In: 
David, A.R. & Tapp, E. (eds.) The mummys tale. London, Michael OMara Books Limited, 
pp. 132153. 
Taylor, E.L. (1955) Parasitic helminths in mediaeval remains. The Veterinary Record. 67, 
216218. 
Taylor, C. (2015) A tale of two cities: The efficacy of ancient and medieval sanitation 
methods. In: Mitchell, P.D. (ed.) Sanitation, latrines and intestinal parasites in past 
populations. Farnham, Ashgate. pp. 6997. 
Thomas, M.L. (2016) Oplontis B and the wine industry in the Vesuvian area. In: Gazda, E.K. 
& Clarke, J.R. (eds.) Leisure and luxury in the age of Nero: The villas of Oplontis near 
Pompeii. Ann Arbor, Kelsey Museum of Archaeology. pp. 160165. 
Tibensky, K. & Sidell, J. (2003) The parasite remains. In: Malcolm, G., Bowsher, D. & 
Cowie, R.v(eds.) Middle Saxon London: Excavations of the Royal Opera House 1989-99. 
London, Museum of London Archaeology Service. pp. 333337. 
Timmins, S., Serville-Niel, C. & Brickley, M. (2017) Childhood cranial trauma from a Late 
Roman and Merovingian context from Michelet, Lisieux, France. International Journal of 
Osteoarchaeology. 27 (4), 715722. 
Traversa, D., Di Cesare, A., Lia, R.P., Castagna, G., et al. (2011) New insights into 
morphological and biological features of Capillaria aerophila (Trichocephalida, Trichuridae). 
Parasitology Research. 109(Suppl 1), S97104. 
Trixl, S., Steidl, B. & Peters, J. (2017) Archaeology and zooarchaeology of the Late Iron Age-
Roman transition in the province of Raetia (100 BC100 AD). European Journal of 
Archaeology. 20 (3), 431450. 
Troubleyn, L., Kinnaer, F., Ervynck, A., Beeckmans, L., et al. (2009) Consumption patterns 
and living conditions inside Het Steen, the late medieval prison of Malines (Mechelen, 
Belgium). Journal of Archaeology in the Low Countries. 1-2, 547. 
Trusler, A.K. (2017) Wheres the loo? An analysis of the spatial distribution of private 
latrines in Pompeii. Water History. 9 (4), 363387. 
Trusler, A.K. & Hobson, B. (2017) Downpipes and upper story latrines in Pompeii. Journal of 
Archaeological Science: Reports. 13, 652665. 
Ubl, H. (2002) Lauriacum. Die zivilen Siedlungsrume. In: Kos, M. & Scherrer, P. (eds.) Die 
autonomen stdte in Noricum und Pannonien. Ljubljana, Narodni muzej Slovenije. pp. 257
Vai, S., Ghirotto, S., Pilli, E., Tassi, F., et al. (2015) Genealogical relationships between early 
medieval and modern inhabitants of Piedmont. PloS One. 10 (1), e0116801. 
Valenzuela-Lamas, S. & Albarella, U. (2017) Animal husbandry across the western Roman 
empire: Changes and continuities. European Journal of Archaeology. 20(3), 402415. 
van der Graaff, I., Muslin, J.L., Thomas, M.L., Wilkinson, P., et al. (2016) Preliminary notes 
on two seasons of research at Oplontis B (2014-2015). Fasti Online Documents & Research. 
van der Veen, M. (2008) Food as embodied material culture: Diversity and change in plant 
food consumption in Roman Britain. Journal of Roman Archaeology. 21, 83109. 
van Geel, B., Buurman, J., Brinkkemper, O., Schelvis, J., et al. (2003) Environmental 
reconstruction of a Roman Period settlement site in Uitgeest (The Netherlands), with special 
reference to coprophilous fungi. Journal of Archaeological Science. 30 (7), 873883. 
van Neer, W. & Lentacker, A. (1994) New archaeozoological evidence for the consumption 
of locally-produced fish sauce in the northern provinces of the Roman empire. Archaeofauna. 
3, 5362. 
van Neer, W., Wouters, W., Ervynck, A. & Maes, J. (2005) New evidence from a Roman 
context in Belgium for fish sauce locally produced in northern Gaul. Archaeofauna. 14, 171
van Neer, W., Ervynck, A. & Monsieur, P. (2010) Fish bones and amphorae: Evidence for the 
production and consumption of salted fish products outside the Mediterranean region. Journal 
of Roman Archaeology. 23, 161195. 
Vejzagi, N., Adelfio, R., Keiser, J., Kringel, H., et al. (2015a) Bacteria-induced egg hatching 
differs for Trichuris muris and Trichuris suis. Parasites & Vectors. 8 (1), 17. 
Vejzagi, N., Thamsborg, S.M., Kringel, H., Roepstorff, A., et al. (2015b) In vitro hatching of 
Trichuris suis eggs. Parasitology Research. 114 (7), 27052714. 
Vennervald, B.J. (2018) Schistosomiasis and other trematode infections. In: Jameson, J. et al. 
(eds.) Harrisons principles of internal medicine, 20e. New York, McGraw-Hill. 
Wacher, J. (2000) A Portrait of Roman Britain. London, Routledge. 
Wagner, D.M., Klunk, J., Harbeck, M., Devault, A., et al. (2014) Yersinia pestis and the 
Plague of Justinian 541543 AD: A genomic analysis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 14 (4), 
319326. 
Walker, P.L., Bathurst, R.R., Richman, R., Gjerdrum, T., et al. (2009) The causes of porotic 
hyperostosis and cribra orbitalia: A reappraisal of the iron-deficiency-anemia hypothesis. 
American Journal of Physical Anthropology. 139 (2), 109125. 
Wang, X., Zhang, L., Luo, R., Wang, G., et al. (2012) Soil-transmitted helminth infections 
and correlated risk factors in preschool and school-aged children in rural Southwest China. 
PloS One. 7(9), e45939. 
Wapler, U., Crubzy, E. & Schultz, M. (2004) Is cribra orbitalia synonymous with anemia? 
Analysis and interpretation of cranial pathology in Sudan. American Journal of Physical 
Anthropology. 123 (4), 333339. 
Ward, C.A. (2016) Luxury, adornment, and identity: The skeletons and jewelry from Oplontis 
B. In: Gazda, E.K. & Clarke, J.R. (eds.) Leisure and luxury in the age of Nero: The villas of 
Oplontis near Pompeii. Ann Arbor, Kelsey Museum of Archaeology. pp. 171177. 
Wardell, R., Clements, A.C.A., Lal, A., Summers, D. et al. (2017) An environmental 
assessment and risk map of Ascaris lumbricoides and Necator americanus distributions in 
Manufahi District, Timor-Leste. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. 11(5), e0005565. 
Warnock, P.J. & Reinhard, K.J. (1992) Methods for extracting pollen and parasite eggs from 
latrine soils. Journal of Archaeological Science. 19, 261264. 
Weller, P.F. (2018) Introduction to helminthic infections. In: Jameson, J. et al. (eds.) 
Harrisons principles of internal medicine, 20e. New York, McGraw-Hill. 
Weller, P.F. & Nutman, T.B. (2018) Intestinal nematode infections. In: Jameson, J. et al. 
(eds.) Harrisons principles of internal medicine, 20e. New York, McGraw-Hill. 
Wells, C. & Dallas, C. (1976) Romano-British pathology. Antiquity. 50, 5356. 
Wharton, D. (1980) Nematode egg-shells. Parasitology. 81 (2), 447463. 
White, G. (2018) A bath with public toilets in the vicus of Bonn. In: Hoss, S. (ed.) Latrinae: 
Roman toilets in the northwestern provinces of the Roman Empire. Oxford, Archaeopress. pp. 
4346. 
White, A.C. & Weller, P.F. (2018) Cestode infections. In: Jameson, J. et al. (eds.) Harrisons 
principles of internal medicine, 20e. New York, McGraw-Hill. 
Whittaker, C.R. (1994) Frontiers of the Roman Empire: A Social and Economic Study. 
London, The Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Wilkes, J.J. (2005) The Roman Danube: An archaeological survey. The Journal of Roman 
Studies. 95, 124225. 
Willcox, G.H. (1977) Exotic plants from Roman waterlogged sites in London. Journal of 
Archaeological Science. 4, 269282. 
Willerslev, E., Davison, J., Moora, M., Zobel, M., et al. (2014) Fifty thousand years of Arctic 
vegetation and megafaunal diet. Nature. 506(7486), 4751. 
Williams, F.S., Arnold-Foster, T., Yeh, H.-Y., Ledger, M.L., et al. (2017) Intestinal parasites 
from the 2nd-5th century AD latrine in the Roman Baths at Sagalassos (Turkey). 
International Journal of Paleopathology. 19, 3742. 
Wilson, A. (2000a) Incurring the wrath of Mars: Sanitation and hygiene in Roman North 
Africa. In: Jansen, G.C.M. (ed.) Cura aquarum in Sicilia: Proceedings of the tenth 
international congress on the history of water management and hydraulic engineering in the 
Mediterranean region, May 1998, Syracuse. Leiden, Peeters. pp. 307312. 
Wilson, A. (2000b) Drainage and sanitation. In: Wikander,  (ed.) Handbook of Ancient 
Water Technology. Leiden, Brill. pp. 151179. 
Wilson, A.I. (2009) Hydraulic engineering and water supply. In: Oleson, J. P. (ed.) The 
Oxford handbook of engineering and technology in the classical world. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press. pp. 285318. 
Wilson, A. & Rackham, D.J. (1976) Parasite eggs. In: Buckland, P.C. (ed.) The environmental 
evidence from the Church Street Roman sewer system. York, York Archaeological Trust. pp. 
3233. 
Witenberg (1961) Human parasites in archaeological findings. Bulletin of the Israel 
Exploration Society. 25, 86. 
Wittner, M., White, A.C. & Tanowitz, H.B. (2011) Taenia and other tapeworm infections. In: 
Guerrant, R.L., Walker, D.H. & Weller, P.F. (eds.). Tropical infectious diseases: Principles, 
pathogens and practice, 3rd  Edition. Edinburgh, W.B. Saunders. pp. 839847. 
World Health Organization (1994) Bench Aids for the Diagnosis of Intestinal Parasites. 
Geneva, World Health Organization. 
Woolf, G. (1997) Beyond Romans and natives. World Archaeology. 28 (3), 339350. 
Woolf, G. (1998) Becoming Roman: The origins of Provincial Civilization in Gaul. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
Worrell, C.M., Wiegand, R.E., Davis, S.M., Odero, K.O., et al. (2016) A cross-sectional study 
of water, sanitation, and hygiene-related risk factors for soil-transmitted helminth infection in 
urban school- and preschool-aged children in Kibera, Nairobi. PloS One. 11 (3), e0150744. 
Yegl, F.K. (1986) The Bath-Gymnasium Complex at Sardis. Cambridge, Harvard University 
Press. 
Yeh, H.-Y., Prag, K., Clamer, C., Humbert, J.-B., et al. (2015) Human intestinal parasites 
from a Mamluk Period cesspool in the Christian quarter of Jerusalem: Potential indicators of 
long distance travel in the 15th century AD. International Journal of Paleopathology. 9, 69
Yeh, H.-Y., Mao, R., Wang, H., Qi, W., et al. (2016) Early evidence for travel with infectious 
diseases along the Silk Road: Intestinal parasites from 2000 year-old personal hygiene sticks 
in a latrine at Xuanquanzhi Relay Station in China. Journal of Archaeological Science: 
Reports. 9, 758764. 
Zarowiecki, M. & Berriman, M. (2015) What helminth genomes have taught us about parasite 
evolution. Parasitology. 142 (Suppl 1), S8597. 
Zias, J. & Mumcuoglu, K.Y. (1991) Calcified hydatid cysts. Paleopathology Newsletter. 73, 
Zias, J.E., Tabor, J.D. & Harter-Lailheugue, S. (2006) Toilets at Qumran, the Essenes, and the 
Scrolls: New anthropological data and old theories. Revue de Qumrn. 22 (4), 631640. 
Zieling, N. (2018) Flushed with success  a Roman flushing installation in the latrines of the 
Great Bathhouse of the Colonia Ulpia Traiana near Xanten (D). In: Hoss, S. (ed.) Latrinae: 
Roman toilets in the northwestern provinces of the Roman Empire. Oxford, Archaeopress. pp. 
2328. 
Zink, A.R., Spigelman, M., Schraut, B., Greenblatt, C.L., et al. (2006) Leishmaniasis in 
ancient Egypt and upper Nubia. Emerging Infectious Diseases. 12, 16161617. 
Appendix A: Publications 
A.1 Must Farm (Parasitology) 
Ledger, M.L., Grimshaw, E., Fairey, M., Whelton, H.L., et al. (2019) Intestinal parasites at 
the Late Bronze Age settlement of Must Farm, in the fens of East Anglia, UK (9th century 
B.C.E.). Parasitology. 146 (12), 15831594. 
A.2 atalhyk (Antiquity) 
Ledger, M.L., Anastasiou, E., Shillito, L.-M., Mackay, H., et al. (2019) Parasite infection at 
the early farming community of atalhyk. Antiquity. 93 (369), 573587. 
A.3 Tracing Zoonotic Parasites Throughout Human Evolution (International Journal of 
Osteoarchaeology) 
Ledger, M.L. & Mitchell, P.D. (2019) Tracing zoonotic parasite infections throughout human 
evolution. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology. doi:10.1002/oa.2786. 
A.4 Ephesus (Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports) 
Ledger, M.L., Stock, F., Schwaiger, H., Knipping, M., et al. (2018) Intestinal parasites from 
public and private latrines and the harbour canal in Roman Period Ephesus, Turkey (1st c. 
BCE to 6th c. CE). Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. 21, 289297. 
A.5  Parasites in the Eastern Mediterranean (American Journal of Archaeology) 
Ledger, M.L., Rowan, E., Gallart Marques, F., Sigmier, J.H., arki, N., Redi, S., Cahill, 
N.D., Mitchell, P.D. (under review) Intestinal parasitic infection in the Eastern Mediterranean 
during the Roman period. American Journal of Archaeology. 
Appendix B: Raw Data and Statistical Calculations 
B.1 ELISA Absorbance Values from Must Farm 
Table B1.1: Absorbance values from Cryptosporidium ELISA (test 1) for Must Farm 
sediment samples. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control 
are in red boxes. 
Upstream 
control 
Inside str. 
1 (occ.) 
inside str. 
2 (occ.) 
inside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
4 (occ.) 
outside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
1 (post-
conf) 
inside str. 
3 (post-
conf) 
Downstream 
Control 
 1 2 3 4 5 9 10 11 12 
A 0.075 0.042 0.066 0.041 0.042 0.041 0.167 0.065 0.51 
B 0.045 0.042 0.061 0.041 0.04 0.041 0.049 0.054 0.04 
C 0.045 0.043 0.039 0.041 0.037 0.054 0.052 0.055 0.049 
D 0.052 0.038 0.038 0.039 0.04 0.041 0.056 0.044 0.037 
E 0.043 0.034 0.048 0.036 0.036 0.054 0.084 0.05 0.037 
F 0.037 0.038 0.043 0.036 0.038 0.048 0.039 0.043 0.042 
G 0.04 0.047 0.045 0.036 0.036 0.057 0.044 0.07 0.048 
H 0.044 0.197 0.043 0.035 0.037 0.043 0.052 0.039 0.119 
Table B1.2: Absorbance values from Cryptosporidium ELISA (test 2) for Must Farm 
sediment samples. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control 
are in red boxes. 
Upstream 
control 
Inside str. 
1 (occ.) 
inside str. 
2 (occ.) 
inside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
4 (occ.) 
outside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
1 (post-
conf) 
inside str. 
3 (post-
conf) 
Downstream 
Control 
 1 2 3 4 5 9 10 11 12 
A 0.037 0.035 0.04 0.037 0.042 0.034 0.035 0.037 0.352 
B 0.035 0.04 0.033 0.033 0.034 0.036 0.037 0.033 0.034 
C 0.035 0.034 0.034 0.035 0.034 0.035 0.037 0.035 0.035 
D 0.037 0.043 0.032 0.032 0.037 0.037 0.033 0.043 0.037 
E 0.034 0.035 0.034 0.033 0.034 0.04 0.035 0.037 0.044 
F 0.035 0.03 0.032 0.034 0.033 0.038 0.036 0.035 0.036 
G 0.034 0.034 0.034 0.034 0.039 0.033 0.034 0.036 0.041 
H 0.039 0.033 0.036 0.034 0.038 0.034 0.034 0.036 0.034 
Table B1.3: Absorbance values from Entamoeba ELISA (test 1) for Must Farm sediment 
samples. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red 
boxes. 
Upstream 
control 
Inside str. 
1 (occ.) 
inside str. 
2 (occ.) 
inside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
4 (occ.) 
outside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
1 (post-
conf) 
inside str. 
3 (post-
conf) 
Downstream 
Control 
 1 2 3 4 5 9 10 11 12 
A 0.044 0.033 0.045 0.037 0.032 0.06 0.063 0.065 1.572 
B 0.045 0.048 0.041 0.047 0.046 0.046 0.045 0.045 0.044 
C 0.046 0.048 0.041 0.042 0.043 0.047 0.045 0.048 0.04 
D 0.049 0.049 0.048 0.044 0.06 0.049 0.041 0.043 0.045 
E 0.214 0.052 0.043 0.052 0.048 0.046 0.055 0.043 0.04 
F 0.18 0.48 0.519 0.342 0.551 0.047 0.046 0.045 0.055 
G 0.879 1.136 0.931 0.557 0.641 0.042 0.051 0.047 0.045 
H 1.729 1.884 1.914 2.55 1.649 1.166 0.046 0.048 0.04 
Table B1.4: Absorbance values from Entamoeba ELISA (test 2) for Must Farm sediment 
samples. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red 
boxes. 
Upstream 
control 
Inside str. 
1 (occ.) 
inside str. 
2 (occ.) 
inside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
4 (occ.) 
outside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
1 (post-
conf) 
inside str. 
3 (post-
conf) 
Downstream 
Control 
 1 2 3 4 5 9 10 11 12 
A 0.035 0.053 0.05 0.063 0.045 0.043 0.043 0.04 0.501 
B 0.043 0.04 0.038 0.047 0.036 0.034 0.045 0.039 0.054 
C 0.042 0.04 0.045 0.038 0.043 0.04 0.048 0.042 0.036 
D 0.04 0.044 0.059 0.037 0.055 0.04 0.045 0.036 0.037 
E 0.039 0.037 0.043 0.039 0.036 0.035 0.041 0.037 0.038 
F 0.037 0.048 0.04 0.053 0.042 0.035 0.036 0.035 0.036 
G 0.087 0.048 0.039 0.034 0.058 0.037 0.042 0.042 0.038 
H 0.087 0.045 0.043 0.033 0.036 0.043 0.036 0.044 0.046 
Table B1.5: Absorbance values from Giardia ELISA (test 1) for Must Farm sediment 
samples. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red 
boxes. 
Upstream 
control 
Inside str. 
1 (occ.) 
inside str. 
2 (occ.) 
inside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
4 (occ.) 
outside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
1 (post-
conf) 
inside str. 
3 (post-
conf) 
Downstream 
Control 
 1 2 3 4 5 9 10 11 12 
A 1.001 1.105 0.068 1.741 1.511 2.387 0.569 0.033 0.97 
B 0.303 0.618 0.093 1.074 0.163 0.044 0.829 0.043 0.043 
C 0.052 0.341 2.014 0.674 0.307 2.049 0.045 0.047 0.045 
D 0.393 1.027 0.443 0.871 0.455 1.048 1.303 0.043 0.045 
E 0.771 0.766 0.79 0.043 0.041 0.453 0.039 0.045 0.044 
F 0.048 0.045 0.721 0.047 0.045 1.996 0.489 0.044 0.045 
G 0.047 0.035 0.08 0.045 0.044 1.413 0.112 0.045 0.046 
H 0.047 0.035 0.038 0.047 0.044 0.045 0.034 0.036 0.046 
Table B1.6: Absorbance values from Giardia ELISA (test 2) for Must Farm sediment 
samples. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red 
boxes. 
Upstream 
control 
Inside str. 
1 (occ.) 
inside str. 
2 (occ.) 
inside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
4 (occ.) 
outside str. 
3 (occ.) 
inside str. 
1 (post-
conf) 
inside str. 
3 (post-
conf) 
Downstream 
Control 
 1 2 3 4 5 9 10 11 12 
A 0.04 0.03 0.048 0.051 0.053 0.051 0.048 0.053 0.852 
B 0.048 0.052 0.039 0.04 0.049 0.052 0.069 0.048 0.048 
C 0.06 0.057 0.049 0.049 0.063 0.054 0.049 0.051 0.049 
D 0.057 0.051 0.045 0.048 0.054 0.048 0.048 0.057 0.052 
E 0.057 0.052 0.059 0.05 0.052 0.052 0.063 0.047 0.051 
F 0.064 0.062 0.084 0.052 0.058 0.051 0.046 0.049 0.043 
G 0.06 0.065 0.047 0.051 0.064 0.054 0.047 0.044 0.058 
H 0.047 0.046 0.04 0.04 0.046 0.046 0.053 0.044 0.045 
Table B1.7: Absorbance values from Cryptosporidium ELISA (test 1) for Must Farm 
coprolites. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red 
boxes. 
 Coprolite 
<3127> 
Coprolite 
<3631> 
Coprolite 
<3642> 
Coprolite 
<3082> 
Coprolite 
<4029> 
 8 9 10 11 12 
A 0.209 1.042 1.508 0.857 1.472 
B 0.28 0.252 0.696 0.34 0.048 
C 0.256 0.166 0.398 0.311 0.117 
D 0.575 0.152 0.417 1.932 0.1 
E 0.187 0.156 0.903 0.306 0.159 
F 0.196 0.138 0.183 0.915 0.702 
G 0.146 0.149 0.257 0.849 1.325 
H 0.801 0.188 0.568 1.084 1.208 
Table B1.8: Absorbance values from Cryptosporidium ELISA (test 2) for Must Farm 
coprolites. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red 
boxes. Note some coprolites are different because there was not enough to run all twice. 
 Coprolite 
<3080> 
Coprolite 
<3177> 
Coprolite 
<3642> 
Coprolite 
<3492> 
Coprolite 
<4029> 
 8 9 10 11 12 
A 0.169 0.134 0.11 0.135 1.645 
B 0.198 0.171 0.113 0.164 0.051 
C 0.175 0.226 0.109 0.153 0.096 
D 0.202 0.178 0.185 0.156 0.091 
E 0.193 0.165 0.111 0.141 0.158 
F 0.252 0.17 0.104 0.132 0.15 
G 0.299 0.157 0.105 0.168 0.169 
H 0.185 0.188 0.09 0.127 0.178 
Table B1.9: Absorbance values from Entamoeba ELISA (test 1) for Must Farm coprolites. 
Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes.  
 Coprolite 
<3127> 
Coprolite 
<3631> 
Coprolite 
<3642> 
Coprolite 
<3082> 
Coprolite 
<4029> 
 8 9 10 11 12 
A 0.761 0.348 1.757 1.295 1.731 
B 1.453 0.449 2.412 1.647 0.042 
C 1.022 0.321 2.278 1.458 0.707 
D 1.252 0.418 2.154 1.097 0.914 
E 1.145 0.714 2.382 1.14 0.708 
F 0.56 0.379 2.426 1.066 0.588 
G 0.786 0.407 1.942 0.9 0.332 
H 1.144 0.587 2.646 1.641 1.364 
Table B1.10: Absorbance values from Entamoeba ELISA (test 2) for Must Farm coprolites. 
Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes. 
Note some coprolites are different because there was not enough to run all twice. 
 Coprolite 
<3080> 
Coprolite 
<3177> 
Coprolite 
<3642> 
Coprolite 
<3492> 
Coprolite 
<4029> 
 8 9 10 11 12 
A 0.667 0.058 0.197 0.457 2.298 
B 0.858 0.821 0.126 0.085 0.033 
C 0.765 0.6 0.198 0.136 0.238 
D 0.8 0.651 0.171 0.141 0.199 
E 0.746 0.308 0.13 0.183 0.19 
F 0.838 0.508 0.119 0.209 0.23 
G 0.882 0.268 0.08 0.404 0.232 
H 1.019 0.203 0.261 0.094 0.258 
Table B1.11: Absorbance values from Giardia ELISA (test 1) for Must Farm coprolites. 
Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes.  
 Coprolite 
<3127> 
Coprolite 
<3631> 
Coprolite 
<3642> 
Coprolite 
<3082> 
Coprolite 
<4029> 
 8 9 10 11 12 
A 0.378 0.431 0.495 0.977 2.528 
B 1.072 0.359 0.54 0.998 0.053 
C 0.352 0.383 0.937 0.723 0.68 
D 0.341 0.346 0.415 0.722 0.267 
E 0.394 0.419 1.169 0.779 0.24 
F 0.269 0.392 0.467 0.817 0.206 
G 0.965 0.47 0.593 0.742 0.188 
H 0.829 0.427 1.199 0.78 0.29 
Table B1.12: Absorbance values from Giardia ELISA (test 2) for Must Farm coprolites. 
Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes. 
Note some coprolites are different because there was not enough to run all twice. 
 Coprolite 
<3080> 
Coprolite 
<3177> 
Coprolite 
<3642> 
Coprolite 
<3492> 
Coprolite 
<4029> 
 8 9 10 11 12 
A 0.108 0.064 0.046 0.056 1.476 
B 0.115 0.059 0.045 0.045 0.041 
C 0.059 0.051 0.043 0.049 0.049 
D 0.045 0.036 0.044 0.042 0.048 
E 0.071 0.044 0.043 0.049 0.045 
F 0.04 0.045 0.044 0.044 0.045 
G 0.111 0.047 0.045 0.047 0.052 
H 0.829 0.427 1.199 0.78 0.29 
B.2 ELISA Absorbance Values from Arlon 
Table B2.1: Absorbance values from Cryptosporidium ELISA (test 1 left and test 2 right) for 
the Arlon latrine sample. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative 
control are in red boxes. 
Arlon 
Other 
Sample 
Arlon 
Other 
Sample 
 5 12   5 12 
A 0.069 1.472  A 0.063 1.645 
B 0.091 0.048  B 0.06 0.051 
C 0.099   C 0.06  
D 0.141   D 0.064  
E 0.062   E 0.063  
F 0.053   F 0.06  
G 0.087   G 0.064  
H 0.064   H 0.059  
Table B2.2: Absorbance values from Entamoeba ELISA (test 1 left and test 2 right) for the 
Arlon latrine sample. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative 
control are in red boxes. 
Arlon 
Other 
Sample 
Arlon 
Other 
Sample 
 5 12   5 12 
A 0.08 1.731  A 0.047 2.298 
B 0.088 0.042  B 0.045 0.033 
C 0.059   C 0.041  
D 0.062   D 0.046  
E 0.064   E 0.04  
F 0.04   F 0.037  
G 0.055   G 0.047  
H 0.044   H 0.047  
Table B2.3: Absorbance values from Giardia ELISA (test 1 left and test 2 right) for the Arlon 
latrine sample. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in 
red boxes. 
Arlon 
Other 
Sample 
Arlon 
Other 
Sample 
 5 12   5 12 
A 0.116 2.528  A 0.042 1.476 
B 0.088 0.053  B 0.043 0.041 
C 0.069   C 0.043  
D 0.175   D 0.032  
E 0.114   E 0.033  
F 0.087   F 0.033  
G 0.084   G 0.038  
H 0.071   H 0.037  
B.3 ELISA Absorbance Values from Viminacium 
B3.1 Absorbance values from Cryptosporidium ELISA (test 1 left and test 2 right) for the 
Viminacium coprolite sample. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and 
negative control are in red boxes. 
 Viminacium 
Mortar/Pestle 
Viminacium 
  Viminacium
Mortar/Pestle 
Other 
Sample 
 11 12   11 12 
A 0.036 0.429  A 0.043 0.956 
B 0.034 0.036  B 0.031 0.036 
C 0.033 0.042  C 0.036  
D 0.033 0.035  D 0.03  
E 0.032 0.036  E 0.033  
F 0.034 0.034  F 0.032  
G 0.037 0.034  G 0.034  
H 0.034 0.033  H 0.033  
B3.2 Absorbance values from Entamoeba ELISA (test 1 left and test 2 right) for the 
Viminacium coprolite sample. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and 
negative control are in red boxes. 
 Viminacium 
Mortar/Pestle 
Viminacium 
  Viminacium
Mortar/Pestle 
Other 
Sample 
 11 12   11 12 
A 0.033 1.971  A 0.031 1.978 
B 0.03 0.035  B 0.032 0.031 
C 0.034 0.034  C 0.032  
D 0.034 0.031  D 0.035  
E 0.032 0.032  E 0.035  
F 0.033 0.034  F 0.032  
G 0.032 0.036  G 0.034  
H 0.033 0.033  H 0.029  
B3.2 Absorbance values from Giardia ELISA (test 1 left and test 2 right) for the Viminacium 
coprolite sample. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are 
in red boxes. 
 Viminacium 
Mortar/Pestle 
Viminacium 
  Viminacium
Mortar/Pestle 
Other 
Sample 
 11 12   11 12 
A 0.032 1.103  A 0.031 2.198 
B 0.032 0.032  B 0.049 0.032 
C 0.033 0.033  C 0.031  
D 0.032 0.033  D 0.032  
E 0.029 0.03  E 0.031  
F 0.032 0.04  F 0.035  
G 0.033 0.033  G 0.032  
H 0.032 0.034  H 0.033  
B.4 ELISA Absorbance Values from Ephesus 
B4.1 Absorbance values from Cryptosporidium ELISA (test 1 left and test 2 right) for the 
Ephesus public latrine samples. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and 
negative control are in red boxes. 
 Ephesus 
4-6cm 
Ephesus 
9-11cm 
Other 
Sample 
  Ephesus 
9-11cm 
Other 
Sample 
 6 7 12   9 12 
A 0.033 0.034 0.352  A 0.038 0.429 
B 0.033 0.038 0.034  B 0.033 0.036 
C 0.042 0.042   C 0.033  
D 0.043 0.043   D 0.03  
E 0.033 0.036   E 0.034  
F 0.033 0.034   F 0.042  
G 0.034 0.032   G 0.042  
H 0.033 0.037   H 0.033  
B4.2 Absorbance values from Entamoeba ELISA (test 1 left and test 2 right) for the Ephesus 
public latrine samples. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative 
control are in red boxes. 
 Ephesus 
4-6cm 
Ephesus 
9-11cm 
Other 
Sample 
  Ephesus 
9-11cm 
Other 
Sample 
 6 7 12   9 12 
A 0.038 0.034 0.501  A 0.037 1.971 
B 0.034 0.033 0.054  B 0.035 0.035 
C 0.034 0.036   C 0.034  
D 0.036 0.034   D 0.048  
E 0.033 0.038   E 0.033  
F 0.037 0.034   F 0.034  
G 0.034 0.036   G 0.033  
H 0.042 0.037   H 0.034  
B4.3 Absorbance values from Giardia ELISA (test 1 left and test 2 right) for the Ephesus 
public latrine samples. Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative 
control are in red boxes. 
 Ephesus 
4-6cm 
Ephesus 
9-11cm 
Other 
Sample 
  Ephesus 
9-11cm 
Other 
Sample 
 6 7 12   9 12 
A 0.041 0.045 0.852  A 0.033 1.103 
B 0.044 0.045 0.048  B 0.032 0.032 
C 0.046 0.048   C 0.032  
D 0.05 0.046   D 0.034  
E 0.042 0.047   E 0.034  
F 0.046 0.046   F 0.033  
G 0.046 0.047   G 0.032  
H 0.046 0.036   H 0.032  
B.5 ELISA Absorbance Values from Sardis 
B5.1 Absorbance values from Cryptosporidium ELISA (test 1) for the Sardis drain samples. 
Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes. 
 Sardis 
Basket 66 
Bottom 
Sardis 
Basket 67 
Sardis 
Basket 59 
Other 
Sample 
 7 8 10 12 
A 0.037 0.04 0.039 0.429 
B 0.034 0.035 0.036 0.036 
C 0.033 0.032 0.033  
D 0.033 0.034 0.033  
E 0.033 0.033 0.033  
F 0.033 0.044 0.039  
G 0.033 0.034 0.035  
H 0.034 0.033 0.035  
B5.2 Absorbance values from Cryptosporidium ELISA (test 2) for the Sardis drain samples. 
Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes. 
Sardis 
Basket 59 
Sardis 
Basket 66 
Bottom 
Sardis 
Basket 66 
Sardis 
Basket 67 
Other 
Sample 
 5 6 8 9 12 
A 0.041 0.036 0.032 0.032 0.956 
B 0.046 0.041 0.034 0.029 0.036 
C 0.037 0.036 0.034 0.031  
D 0.038 0.041 0.039 0.034  
E 0.039 0.032 0.032 0.032  
F 0.042 0.031 0.033 0.031  
G 0.041 0.031 0.033 0.033  
H 0.033 0.036 0.034 0.032  
B5.3 Absorbance values from Entamoeba ELISA (test 1) for the Sardis drain samples. 
Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes. 
 Sardis 
Basket 66 
Bottom 
Sardis 
Basket 67 
Sardis 
Basket 59 
Other 
Sample 
 7 8 10 12 
A 0.035 0.033 0.034 1.971 
B 0.047 0.035 0.038 0.035 
C 0.034 0.034 0.034  
D 0.037 0.038 0.035  
E 0.059 0.036 0.061  
F 0.038 0.032 0.036  
G 0.036 0.037 0.035  
H 0.044 0.032 0.035  
B5.4 Absorbance values from Entamoeba ELISA (test 2) for the Sardis drain samples. 
Positive samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes. 
Sardis 
Basket 59 
Sardis 
Basket 66 
Bottom 
Sardis 
Basket 66 
Sardis 
Basket 67 
Other 
Sample 
 5 6 8 9 12 
A 0.034 0.032 0.032 0.035 1.978 
B 0.035 0.033 0.033 0.033 0.031 
C 0.035 0.034 0.032 0.034  
D 0.038 0.035 0.033 0.036  
E 0.038 0.033 0.033 0.033  
F 0.038 0.034 0.034 0.034  
G 0.035 0.032 0.032 0.033  
H 0.037 0.033 0.035 0.028  
B5.5 Absorbance values from Giardia ELISA (test 1) for the Sardis drain samples. Positive 
samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes. 
 Sardis 
Basket 66 
Bottom 
Sardis 
Basket 67 
Sardis 
Basket 59 
Other 
Sample 
 7 8 10 12 
A 0.033 0.035 0.034 1.103 
B 0.033 0.031 0.033 0.032 
C 0.032 0.033 0.034  
D 0.032 0.033 0.034  
E 0.034 0.035 0.033  
F 0.032 0.032 0.034  
G 0.033 0.032 0.038  
H 0.033 0.034 0.034  
B5.6 Absorbance values from Giardia ELISA (test 2) for the Sardis drain samples. Positive 
samples are highlighted in yellow. Positive and negative control are in red boxes. 
Sardis 
Basket 59 
Sardis 
Basket 66 
Bottom 
Sardis 
Basket 66 
Sardis 
Basket 67 
Other 
Sample 
 5 6 8 9 12 
A 0.032 0.031 0.031 0.031 2.198 
B 0.036 0.037 0.034 0.034 0.032 
C 0.035 0.032 0.032 0.029  
D 0.034 0.033 0.034 0.031  
E 0.033 0.032 0.031 0.031  
F 0.037 0.032 0.032 0.05  
G 0.031 0.034 0.037 0.032  
H 0.063 0.033 0.032 0.033  
B.6 Palaeoparasitology in Romano-British Sites 
Table B6.1: Previous parasitological studies of Romano-British sites used for analysis in 
section 5.4. 
Parasite Species Site name Site type Sample Type Date (CE) Reference 
Ascaris sp. Ambleside Military pit 1-400 
Jones, 1985 
Trichuris sp. Ambleside Military pit 1-400 
Ascaris sp. Bearsden Military sewer/drain 142-158 Knights et 
al., 1983 Trichuris sp. Bearsden Military sewer/drain 142-158 
Ascaris sp. Carlisle Military occupation layer 1-300 Jones and 
Hutchison, 
Fasciola sp. Carlisle Military occupation layer 1-300 
Trichuris sp. Carlisle Military occupation layer 1-300 
Ascaris sp. Church Street Sewer, York Urban sewer/drain 1-500 Wilson and 
Rackham, 
1976 Trichuris sp. Church Street Sewer, York Urban sewer/drain 1-500 
Ascaris sp. Leicester Urban cesspit/latrine 1-200 
Boyer, 1999 Fasciola sp. Leicester Urban cesspit/latrine 1-200 
Trichuris sp. Leicester Urban cesspit/latrine 1-200 
Trichuris sp. Lincoln Waterside NW Urban occupation layer 301-400 
Carrott et al., 
Dicrocoelium sp. London, 15-35 Copthall Ave Urban ditch 101-400 De Moulins, 
1990 Trichuris sp. London, 15-35 Copthall Ave Urban ditch 101-400 
Ascaris sp. London, Hibernia Wharf Urban well 1-200 
Rouffignac, 
Diphyllobothrium sp. London, Hibernia Wharf Urban well 1-200 
Taenia sp. London, Hibernia Wharf Urban well 1-200 
Trichuris sp. London, Hibernia Wharf Urban well 1-200 
Ascaris sp. Owslebury, Winchester Rural pit Roman 
Pike, 1968 Dicrocoelium sp. Owslebury, Winchester Rural pit Roman 
Trichuris sp. Owslebury, Winchester Rural pit Roman 
Ascaris sp. Poundbury, Dorset Military burial Roman Jones, 1987 
Trichuris sp. Poundbury, Dorset Military burial Roman 
Ascaris sp. Westsmithfield, London Urban burial Roman New data 
B.7 Statistics for Temporal Changes 
These are the statistical tests used for section 6.1. 
To determine if the proportions of positive sites in different time periods are independent of 
time period a Chi-square test for independence was used. For this statistic the expected values 
are calculated using the total number of sites and the X2 statistic is calculated as per the 
formula    =  (#$%)
%  , where O = observed value and E = expected value. The expected 
value is calculated as 
('(')*	,(-	'./0	10-.(2)	3	('(')*	,(-	4(*5/6)
'(')*	65/70-	(,	8.'08	.6	40** . The function chi2_contingency 
in the statistics module of SciPy running with Python3 was used and the for the calculations 
and screen shots of each script are provided. 
B7.1. Trichuris sp. 
 Positive Sites Negative Sites Total 
Pre-Roman 25 21 46 
Roman 38 24 62 
Medieval 37 18 55 
Total 100 63 163 
For comparison between Pre-Roman and Roman proportions, X2=0.5237, p=0.4693, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	accept H0 because X2=0.5237 < 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
whipworm are independent. 
For comparison between Roman and Medieval proportions, X2=0.4533, p=0.5008, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	accept H0 because X2=0.4533 < 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
whipworm are independent. 
B7.2. Ascaris sp. 
 Positive Sites Negative Sites Total 
Pre-Roman 14 32 46 
Roman 40 22 62 
Medieval 41 14 55 
Total 95 68 163 
*For comparison between Pre-Roman and Roman proportions, X2=12.2693, p=0.0005, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	reject H0 because X2=12.2693 > 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
roundworm are not independent. 
For comparison between Roman and Medieval proportions, X2=1.3762, p=0.2407, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	accept H0 because X2=1.3762 < 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
roundworm are independent. 
B7.3. Dicrocoelium sp. 
 Positive Sites Negative Sites Total 
Pre-Roman 13 33 46 
Roman 8 54 62 
Medieval 12 43 55 
Total 33 130 163 
*For comparison between Pre-Roman and Roman proportions, X2=3.9763, p=0.0461, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	reject H0 because X2=3.9763 > 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Dicrocoelium sp. are not independent. 
For comparison between Roman and Medieval proportions, X2=1.6345, p=0.2011, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	accept H0 because X2=1.6345 < 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Dicrocoelium sp. are independent. 
B7.4. Fasciola sp. 
 Positive Sites Negative Sites Total 
Pre-Roman 18 28 46 
Roman 8 54 62 
Medieval 6 49 55 
Total 32 131 163 
*For comparison between Pre-Roman and Roman proportions, X2=9.9378, p=0.0016, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	reject H0 because X2=9.9378 > 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Fasciola sp. are not independent. 
For comparison between Roman and Medieval proportions, X2=0.1100, p=0.7401, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	accept H0 because X2=0.1100 < 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Fasciola sp. are independent. 
B7.5. Taenia sp. 
 Positive Sites Negative Sites Total 
Pre-Roman 14 32 46 
Roman 7 55 62 
Medieval 11 44 55 
Total 32 131 163 
*For comparison between Pre-Roman and Roman proportions, X2=6.1790, p=0.0129, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	reject H0 because X2=6.1790 > 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Taenia sp. are not independent. 
For comparison between Roman and Medieval proportions, X2=1.6984, p=0.1925, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	accept H0 because X2=1.6984 < 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Taenia sp. are independent. 
B7.6. Diphyllobothrium sp. 
 Positive Sites Negative Sites Total 
Pre-Roman 16 30 46 
Roman 6 56 62 
Medieval 9 46 55 
Total 31 132 163 
*For comparison between Pre-Roman and Roman proportions, X2=10.2608, p=0.0014, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	reject H0 because X2=10.2608 > 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Diphyllobothrium sp. are not independent. 
For comparison between Roman and Medieval proportions, X2=1.1658 p=0.2803, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	accept H0 because X2=1.1658 < 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Diphyllobothrium sp. are independent. 
B7.7. Capillaria sp. 
 Positive Sites Negative Sites Total 
Pre-Roman 9 37 46 
Roman 6 56 62 
Medieval 2 53 55 
Total 17 146 163 
For comparison between Pre-Roman and Roman proportions, X2=2.1587, p=0.1418, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	accept H0 because X2=2.1587 < 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Capillaria sp. are independent. 
For comparison between Roman and Medieval proportions, X2=1.6697 p=0.1963, dof=1 
With $ = 0.05;	accept H0 because X2=1.6697 < 3.841. Time period and number of sites with 
Capillaria sp. are independent. 
