Durham E-Theses
Treatment of quark masses in b-associated production at
the LHC
NAPOLETANO, DAVIDE
How to cite:
NAPOLETANO, DAVIDE (2017) Treatment of quark masses in b-associated production at the LHC,
Durham theses, Durham University. Available at Durham E-Theses Online:
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/12409/
Use policy
The full-text may be used and/or reproduced, and given to third parties in any format or medium, without prior permission or
charge, for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-prot purposes provided that:
 a full bibliographic reference is made to the original source
 a link is made to the metadata record in Durham E-Theses
 the full-text is not changed in any way
The full-text must not be sold in any format or medium without the formal permission of the copyright holders.
Please consult the full Durham E-Theses policy for further details.
http://www.dur.ac.uk
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/12409/
 http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/12409/ 
htt://etheses.dur.ac.uk/policies/
Academic Support Oce, Durham University, University Oce, Old Elvet, Durham DH1 3HP
e-mail: e-theses.admin@dur.ac.uk Tel: +44 0191 334 6107
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk
Treatment of quark masses in
b-associated production at the LHC
Davide Napoletano
A Thesis presented for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Department of Physics
Institute for Particle Physics Phenomenology
University of Durham
United Kingdom
16th August 2017
Treatment of quark masses in b-associated
production at the LHC
Davide Napoletano
Submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
16th August 2017
Abstract
With the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), and no
signs of new physics to current date, precise theoretical predictions are of increasing
importance. It is now essential to study in details the properties of the newly found
boson, in particular its coupling to other particles and itself, as this unveils further
the mechanism of symmetry breaking.
In this thesis, we extend the currently used methods to deal with heavy quarks
in hadron collision processes, the four-flavour and the five-flavour scheme, to con-
sistently include mass effects as well as resummation of collinear logarithms. This
is done using two complementary approaches. At the inclusive level, we extend a
method used to include mass effects in parton densities evolution, known as FONLL.
At the differential level, we devise a five-flavour scheme that includes mass effects
consistently and systematically up to MC@NLO accuracy.
We study the impact of such schemes on two phenomenologically relevant pro-
cesses at the LHC: the production of a heavy boson, a Z or a Higgs, in association
with heavy quarks. For these processes, in fact, the two standard schemes, have been
known to largely disagree. In both new schemes, mass effects are found to have a
few percent effect, with the bulk of the difference between a completely massless and
a completely massive picture, residing in the resummation of collinear logarithms.
Declaration
This thesis is based collaborative research and the corresponding publications, preprints,
and proceedings contributions are listed below. No part of this thesis has been sub-
mitted elsewhere for any other degree or qualification.
Chapter 3 is based on joint research conducted with Prof. Dr. Stefano Forte
and Dr. Maria Ubiali. The content of this chapter appears in reference [1], refer-
ence [2] and section IV.2.2 of reference [3].
Chapter 4 is based on joint research conducted with Prof. Dr. Frank Krauss
and Jun. Prof. Dr. Steffen Schumann. The content of this chapter appears in
reference [4], section IV.2.3 of reference [3] and section IV.6 of reference [5].
Chapter 5 is based on joint research conducted with Prof. Dr. Frank Krauss,
Dr. Marek Schnherr and Dr. Stefan Hche. The content of this chapter is, as of
today, in preparation for publication.
Copyright c 2017 Davide Napoletano.
The copyright of this thesis rests with the author. No quotations from it should be
published without the authors prior written consent and information derived from
it should be acknowledged.
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank my supervisor, Frank Krauss, for his guidance and support, and
especially for his help in starting many successful collaborations I have been part of.
I am also grateful for the chance he has given me to develop as a researcher, giving
me the chance to carry on my own projects and interests, still helping me when in
need.
I would also like to thank Stefano Forte and Maria Ubiali, for the work done
together.
I am grateful to my colleagues from the SHERPA Collaboration whom have pro-
vide invaluable help time and time again. In particular I wish to thank Marek
Schnherr, Steffen Schumann and Stefan Hche for their hospitality in Zrich, Gt-
tingen and SLAC, as well as for their help with many problems I have encountered.
A very special thanks goes to the whole of the HiggsTools network, and, in
particular the ESRs.
This work has received financial support from the EU research networks funded
by the Research Executive Agency (REA) of the European Union under Grant
Agreement PITN-GA2012-316704 (HiggsTools). I also acknowledge financial sup-
port for travels and collaborative work from the Research Executive Agency (REA)
of the European Union under Grant Agreement PITN-GA-2012-315877 (MCnetITN)
and the ERC Advanced Grant MC@NNLO (340983).
Finally I would like to thank Alessia, without whom I would not probably even
be here writing this thesis. I am really grateful for everything you have done, and
continuously, do.
Contents
Abstract ii
Declaration iii
Acknowledgments iv
1 Motivation and outline 1
2 Theoretical tools 5
2.1 Factorisation of QCD cross sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2 Monte Carlo methods in brief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.3 Fixed order expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3.1 Catani-Seymour subtraction in brief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.3.2 The dipole factorisation formula . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.3.3 Dipole terms construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4 Parton Shower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.4.1 MC@NLO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.5 Merging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.6 Higher order merging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3 Matching the 4F and the 5F schemes 20
3.1 Need for a matched calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2 The FONLL scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.1 The 4F scheme cross section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.2 The massless limit of the massive cross section . . . . . . . . . 24
3.3 Properties of the matched cross section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Contents vi
3.4 The bb H FONLL cross section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4 Comparing the 4F and the 5F scheme: heavy boson production 35
4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2 Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2.1 Details of the simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2.2 Parton shower mass corrections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.2.3 Measurements at LHC Run I  the reference data . . . . . . . 43
4.2.4 Comparison with LHC data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.3 Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5 Towards a massive 5F scheme 59
5.1 Massive Subtraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.1.1 Initial state splitter with initial state spectator . . . . . . . . . 60
5.1.2 The case of initial state hadrons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
5.2 Massive dipole formulae for other configurations . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
5.3 Validation: bottom quark fusion with massive quarks . . . . . . . . . 65
5.3.1 Factorisation of collinear singularities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5.4 Simulations for bb H with massive quarks, fixed-order . . . . . . . 71
5.5 Massive initial state shower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
6 Conclusions and outlook 81
A Mathematical Tools 84
A.1 Colour Algebra of SU (3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
A.2 ddimensional spherical coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.3 Altarelli-Parisi splitting functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
B Matching coefficients for massive quarks 87
C Initial state massive subtraction 90
C.1 Initial massive quarks kinematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
C.2 Initial-Initial massive subtraction integral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
C.2.1 The integral in v . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Contents vii
C.2.2 The integral in x . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
List of Figures
2.1 Diagrammatic representation of Eq. (2.20) for an initial state emission
with an initial state spectator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.1 Representative examples of contributions to the 5FS computation
which are subtracted and get replaced by massive 4FS contributions.
The diagrams circled with a dashed line become massive in FONLL-
A, while those circled with a solid pink line are those that must be
additionally subtracted in the FONLL-B scheme. . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2 Comparison of the FONLL matched result and its 4FS and 5FS compo-
nents, Eq. (3.3). Results are shown as a function of the renormalisa-
tion scale, with the factorisation scale fixed at a high value F = mH
(top) or a low value F =
(mH+2mb)
(bottom). . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.3 Same as Fig. 3.2, but now with the factorisation scale varied with the
renormalisation scale kept fixed at a high value R = mH (top) or a
low value R =
(mH+2mb)
(bottom) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.4 The cross-section using the most accurate results in the 4FS (NLO),
5FS (NNLO) and matched (FONLL-B) schemes, as a function of the
Higgs mass, with r = F =
(mH+2mb)
. The bottom panel shows the
result as a ratio to the 5FS computation. The uncertainty band is
obtained by standard seven-point scale variation (see text). . . . . . . 33
4.1 Pictorial representation of V + bb processes contributing to the 4F
MC@NLO calculation. Here V = (Z,H) and by  we just mean that
it is not a simple product, and P.S. is the parton shower contribution.
V refers to the one-loop virtual contributions to the born. . . . . . . . 39
List of Figures ix
4.2 Same as Fig. 4.1 but for the 5F MEPS@LO. The  symbol represents
the merging, i.e. a sum with the overlapping part removed. Note
that in the five flavour scheme the bottom contribution is included in q. 40
4.3 Comparison of total production cross section predictions with ATLAS
data [57]. The error bars on the theoretical results are calculated
from variations of the hard-process scales R/F and the parton-shower
starting scale Q. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.4 Inclusive transverse-momentum and rapidity distribution of all b-jets
in events with at least one b-jet. Data taken from Ref. [57]. . . . . . . 46
4.5 Transverse-momentum distribution of the Z boson (left) and the az-
imuthal separation between the Z boson and the b-jet (right) in events
with at least one b-jet. For the (Z, b) measurement the additional
constraint pT,ll > 20 GeV is imposed. Data taken from Ref. [57]. . . 47
4.6 Difference in rapidity and R separation between tne Z boson and
the first b-jet in events with at least one b-jet, with the additional
constraint pT,ll > 20 GeV. Data taken from Ref. [57]. . . . . . . . . . 48
4.7 The R separation (left) and invariant-mass distribution (right) for
the leading two b-jets. Data taken from Ref. [57]. . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.8 Transverse-momentum distribution of the dilepton system for events
with at least two b-jets. Comparison against various calculational
schemes. Data taken from Ref. [57]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.9 RBB distribution for two selections of the transverse momentum of
the Z boson. Data taken from Ref. [58]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.10 BB distribution for two selections of the transverse momentum of
the Z boson. Data taken from Ref. [58]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.11 Predictions for the transverse-momentum distribution of the Higgs
boson (left panel) and the leading b-jet (right panel) in inclusiveH+b-
jet production at the 13 TeV LHC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.12 The transverse-momentum distribution of the Higgs boson in inclusive
H + 2b-jets production at the 13 TeV LHC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
4.13 Predictions for the R separation of the two leading b-jets (left panel)
and their invariant-mass distribution (right panel) in inclusive H+2b-
jets production at the 13 TeV LHC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.1 Contributions to the born phase space of bb H. . . . . . . . . . . . 67
5.2 Contributions to the real emission phase space of bb Hg Eq. (5.37)
and bg  Hb. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
5.3 The pT and  spectrum of the Higgs boson at NLO. We compare the
vanilla 5FS, and the 5FMS matched with three different PDF sets.
More details in the text. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
5.4 The pT and  spectrum of the b-jet. We compare the vanilla 5FS,
and the 5FMS matched with three different PDF sets. More details
in the text. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
5.5 Inclusive transverse-momentum and rapidity distribution of all b-jets
in events with at least one b-jet. Data taken from Ref. [57]. . . . . . . 78
5.6 Angular and R separation between the reconstructed Z boson and
b-jets in events with at least one b-jet. Data taken from Ref. [57]. . . 79
List of Tables
4.1 13 TeV total cross sections and the corresponding F/R and Q un-
certainties for H+  1b and H+  2bs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Chapter 1
Motivation and outline
In order to study the fundamental laws of nature, particles are smashed together
at a speed very marginally lower than that of light with an incredible amount of
energy. Nowadays this happens at the Large Hadron Collider, LHC, at CERN,
where a record energy of 6.5 TeV per beam particle is given to protons, which are
made colliding inside the four detectors ATLAS, CMS, LHCB and ALICE. Thanks
to these collider experiments we have discovered the Higgs boson, which was the
most important missing piece of the Standard Model of interactions [6, 7], as its
properties determine how particles have acquired their mass through electroweak
symmetry breaking.
The need for experiments, especially in the process of discovering new particles, is
clear, but a fundamental part of information in understanding experimental results
comes from theoretical predictions. These theory inputs are, in fact, extensively
used in experiments for many reasons. For example they are used to predict how we
expect a certain collection of events to look like, and are thus used to extract the
background, that we now how to model, from what we expect to highlight, or sig-
nal. As the precision of experimental results increases, thus theoretical predictions
precision and accuracy must be increased accordingly. For many years the main
way this has been achieved is through the inclusion of higher-order corrections. The
calculation of higher orders alone, however, has not proved to be enough.
The way the proton momentum is distributed amongst its partons, parametrised
by parton distribution functions (PDFs), the way particles produced at the hard
Chapter 1. Motivation and outline 2
scale of the core process then evolve and emit other particles, as well as how they
then combine to produce the observable hadrons, all concur to the final precision
of the theory prediction. Monte Carlo event generators are tools that allow to
predict this whole chain, thus giving results that can be directly compared with
experimental measurements. It is clear that each of the previous pieces must come
as precise and accurate as possible. For this reason, aspects of calculations that
were always considered to be negligible are now becoming increasingly important.
For historical and practical reasons, for example, a parton, that is a particle that
is allowed to be found inside a proton and thus participate in a reaction, has always
been considered to be massless. This is clearly a good a approximation for those
quarks whose mass is so small that we are never able to resolve at hadron colliders,
or have a mass so large that they are extremely unlikely to be found inside a proton.
The reason behind this idea is that we are only able to define, in a universal way, the
partonic content of the proton up to power corrections of the mass of the given quark
over the characteristic scale of Quantum Chromodynamics, mQ/QCD. For quarks
that have a very small mass, like the up, down or strange quarks, or an extremely
large mass, like the top, this description is clearly enough.
There is, however, a class of quarks, the charm and the bottom, whose masses
are small enough to be negligible for some of the energy scales at hadron colliders,
but still much larger than QCD. As such, the proper inclusion of mass corrections
for these quarks can have important effects in regions of phase space, where their
suppression is not so large. In this work, we study how to extend the standard
massless parton description to include systematically quark masses and retain full
mass effects.
In the context of this thesis we focus on b-quarks, and in particular, we focus
on the associated production of such heavy quarks with a heavy boson (a Z or a
Higgs boson). These processes are interesting for a variety of reasons, and as such
demand a good theoretical control. Firstly, processes like bg  Zb, which are a
subprocesses of the ones considered here, are used to determine the bottom content
of the proton. The precise determination of the bottom quark density, in turn, can
be used to make precise predictions for processes like Higgs production in bottom
Chapter 1. Motivation and outline 3
quark fusion. This latter process is then used to precisely determine the bottom
Yukawa coupling to the Higgs boson. The reason why the precise determination of
this coupling is important is that it can help discriminating between various beyond
the Standard Model scenarios. Many of these models, in fact, allow for Higgs boson
multiplets and the mixing among these Higgs bosons can modify the coupling to
heavy quarks with respect to that the Standard Models.
In addition, from the experimental point of view, the difference between a scheme,
in which b-quarks are treated as massive, decoupled particles, and one, in which
they are treated on the same footing as the other partons, is often taken as a theory
uncertainty inputs. It is thus necessary to understand the origin of this difference
in order to be able to provide with reliable simulations of processes involving heavy
flavours. This case is of particular relevance for observables like the pT spectrum
of a Z boson in Drell-Yan, where the partonic channel bb  Z play an important
role. This process is in fact measured with outstanding precision, and is used as
input to measure the W boson mass. It thus require theoretical predictions at the
sub-percent accuracy level. At this level of accuracy mass effects must be taken into
account, in particular in the low pT region.
Lastly, contrary to the charm quarks that has a mass close to that of the proton,
and is in general safe to consider massless, the mass of the bottom quark lies within
the region of interest at hadron colliders. Its inclusion is thus thought to yield
larger effects than that of the charm quark in general, and in particular in the
case of Higgs boson production, where the Yukawa coupling is proportional to the
mass of the interacting particles. Furthermore, events with identified b-jets and
a significant missing transverse momentum constitute a possible signature of Dark
Matter production. For this signal invisibly decaying Z-bosons associated with b-jets
pose a severe irreducible background.
The outline of this work is the following. We start by reviewing some fundamental
methods by which it is possible to obtain theoretical predictions. This serves to
introduce the notation we use throughout. As this project is carried out in the
context of the SHERPA Monte Carlo collaboration, we focus only on those methods
that are implemented there, when discussing event generation, unless otherwise
Chapter 1. Motivation and outline 4
stated.
We discuss how the two schemes generally used to obtain prediction for processes
involving bottom quarks, the four and the five flavour scheme, can lead to substantial
differences in predictions for the inclusive production of a Higgs boson. We then show
how to match these two predictions to obtain a reliable estimate of the importance
of mass effects for this process.
Further, we study how these two different approaches describe experimental data
for the associated production of a Z boson. We use the conclusions in this case to
understand differential predictions for the similar case of the associated production
of a Higgs boson.
Lastly we introduce the ingredients that are needed to promote the standard
five flavour scheme to a scheme in which full mass effects are systematically re-
tained. This requires to extend some of the standard techniques presented in this
first chapter to accommodate for the introduction of massive quarks in the initial
state. We conclude this part by presenting an explicit example of this scheme in
Higgs production in bottom quark fusion.
Chapter 2
Theoretical tools
2.1 Factorisation of QCD cross sections
Every Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) calculation at the LHC is based on a
collinear factorisation theorem which states that the low-energy (long-distance) and
the high-energy (short-distance or partonic) part of an observable factorise. Ad-
ditionally, the long-distance part is process independent and encodes how the lon-
gitudinal momentum of the proton is shared among its partons and is commonly
known as Parton Distribution Function (PDF). However, this factorisation theo-
rem can only be exactly derived in Deeply Inelastic Scattering processes using an
Operator Product Expansion. In this expansion, only the leading term is really be-
lieved to be universal and thus put in the definition of PDF, while power-suppressed
(higher-twist) terms are neglected [8, 9].
Although a formal theorem/proof does not exist for general LHC processes, it is
widely believed that a factorisation theorem holds for the most important produc-
tion modes, in non-pathological observables, with higher-twist contributions being
suppressed by powers of QCD/Q, where Q is some energy scale in the hard process,
while QCD represents the energy at which the s(QCD)  1, QCD  0.3 GeV.
Including such power suppressed contributions would require to calculate higher-
twist corrections to the parton densities, which, as we said, are non-universal. For
this reason the common practice is to consider massless, or active, all the quarks
for which corrections of the type mq/QCD are small, while all massive quarks, for
2.1. Factorisation of QCD cross sections 6
which mq/QCD is not small are treated as decoupled from QCD evolution.
This picture, however, is extremely simplistic for two reasons. First, it really
only works if there is only one scale in the process. As soon as another energy scale,
t, appears, ratios of mQ/t follow and the hierarchy is no longer straightforward.
Second, when we perform a factorisation we need to define what is regarded as high-
or low-energy. We thus need to introduce an energy reference scale for factorisation,
commonly called factorisation scale, or F . In practice, PDFs and partonic cross-
sections are a function of this scale. As this scales runs, collinear logarithms like
log F/mQ appear and might dominate over power-suppressed terms.
In formulae, the factorised differential cross section can be written as
d(Q2) =
a,b(q,g)
dx2 fa(x1, 
F ) fb(x2, 
F )dab
x1, x2,
2QCD
. (2.1)
Here and in the following, unless differently stated, hatted letters represent the
partonic version of that object, such that dab stands for the partonic differential
cross section for incoming partons (a, b). At leading order, for example,
d = dN(p1, . . . , pN)B(pa, pb; p1, . . . , pN)
(pa, pb)
|M(pa, pb; p1, . . . , pN)|2 (2 )4(4)(pa + pb 
(2 )32Ei
, (2.2)
where we denote by B the born matrix element squared, and , the initial state flux,
is usually included in the definition of dN unless otherwise explicitated.
We indicate with fa(x1, 2F ) the PDF for parton a with momentum fraction x1
at the factorisation scale F . These functions are subject to the DGLAP equations
[1012]:
dfa(x, 
d log F
b(q,g)
Pab(z) fb
, 2F
+O(2s) (2.3)
The functions Pab(z) are the Altarelli-Parisi splitting function and they are reported
in Appendix A for reference. Further the partonic cross section can be written as
an expansion in s, with R being the renormalisation scale
dab
x1, x2,
ks(R) d
x1, x2,
, (2.4)
2.1. Factorisation of QCD cross sections 7
ds(
d log R
= b02s  b13s +O(4s) (2.5)
11CA  4nf TR
; b1 =
34C2A  20nf TR CA  12nf TR Cf
. (2.6)
Equations of the form of Eq. (2.3) and Eq. (2.5) are generically referred to as evolu-
tion equations. In particular Eq. (2.3) describes how parton distribution functions
evolve with energy. The idea is that a parton a has a given differential probability to
split into a parton b, which is proportional to the Altarelli-Parisi splitting function
Pab. As these splittings happen, the distributions of both parton a and b inside the
proton, change consequently.
Note that the introduction of scales like R,F is an artifact of the theory, and,
as such, physical observables are independent of those scales. Although theoretical
predictions are instead dependent on those scales at any given order, Eq. (2.3) and
Eq. (2.5) make sure that the structure of any additional order cancel the dependence
on those scales at each order. Thus, higher-order predictions depend less on the
additional scales R,F , the variation of which is commonly used as an estimate of
missing higher order contributions.
It is important to notice at this point that both the running of the coupling
constant, and the evolution of the parton densities, as they depend on b0, depend
on how many flavour are active (= massless) at the a given energy scale flavour
through nf . There are, traditionally, two approaches in deciding how many flavours
are active. One approach, consists in taking QCD as a reference scale. In this
way, every quark that has a mass greater than QCD, is considered a massive, or
heavy, quark, while every other parton is considered massless and, as a consequence,
contributes to nf . This approach is generally called Fixed Flavour Number Scheme
(FFNS). In this case, in fact, nf remains a fixed number at all energy scales. In
the FFNS, heavy quarks do not contribute to either the running of the coupling
constant or the evolution of PDFs. In this way, heavy quarks can never appear as
initial state particles in the calculation of hard scattering matrix elements, but they
can only be produced in them. Thus the partonic cross section can retain the exact
2.2. Monte Carlo methods in brief 8
mass dependence.
In an opposed approach, one could argue that some other scales, like R or
F , is taken as the reference scale, as in practice one gets logarithms of R,F/mQ
and not of QCD/mQ, when solving Eqs. (2.3,2.5). Then the heavy quark will start
contributing to both the running of the coupling constant and the evolution of PDFs,
only when R,F & mQ. This is called a Variable Flavour Number Scheme (VFNS) 1.
In a VFNS, the mass of the heavy quark mass parametrise whether the particle is a
heavy quark or an active parton, thus acting like a threshold. Threshold effects that
appear through terms like log R,F/mQ are resummed to all orders by Eqs. (2.3,2.5),
and all mass effects are consistently neglected in the calculation of hard matrix
elements.
2.2 Monte Carlo methods in brief
The goal of phenomenology studies, like this one, is to ultimately compare against
experimental data. There are a very limited set of cases in which this can be done by
means of analytical calculations alone. The problem is that experiments have to deal
many more particles and many more phase space constraints than we can handle
with a simple enough description. To this end, Monte Carlo event generators, like
PYTHIA, HERWIG, or SHERPA, play an important role in providing a theory prediction
that is the closest possible to what experiments measure.
To get a general idea of how such programs work, imagine an experiment has
measured some physical observable, O. In general, we can identify an observable as
a function of all final state particles, f , and their momenta {pi}inf ,
O  O(f ; p1, . . . , pnf ) . (2.7)
Having to deal with quantum mechanical processes, however, means that we cannot
determine exactly the final state for any one specific collision. We can, however,
1There are various ways of defining a VFNS. In particular the choice of threshold and the
inclusion of some mass suppressed terms play a role. All different choices, however, are equal up
to mass, power-suppressed terms.
2.2. Monte Carlo methods in brief 9
predict the differential probability, which in turn is proportional to the differential
cross section for producing a specific final state configuration,
dP(f ; p1, . . . , pnf ) 
d(f ; p1, . . . , pnf )
d3p1 . . . d3pnf
. (2.8)
Repeating the experiment over many times gives us access to the expectation value
of O,
O = L
d(f ; p1, . . . , pnf )
d3p1 . . . d3pnf
O(f ; p1, . . . , pnf ) d
3p1 . . . d
3pnf . (2.9)
The quantity L is called integrated luminosity, and is a measure of the number of
particles expected to collide over the time of the experiment.
There are two main complications. Firstly, the larger the number of final state
particles, the more complicated the integrals. To deal with this issue the Monte
Carlo integration method is used. The idea is to generate a very large number, N ,
of randomly distributed copies of the final state momenta, we label each copy with
superscript j. Calling the total volume of integration V , we have that
O = lim
d(f ; p
1, . . . , p
1 . . . d
O(f ; p
1, . . . , p
) , (2.10)
which follows from the fundamental theorem of calculus and the central value theo-
rem. The main advantage of such an approach is that we can compute the differential
cross section for a given configuration and treat that as a weight, wjf . We can then
just store these weights and attach them to any observable we wish to compute. In
contrast, an analytical calculation would only be valid for the specific observable we
performed the calculation for.
The second problem comes from the theoretical prediction of d. To make mean-
ingful comparison to experimental data, we need to predict the differential proba-
bility with the highest possible accuracy. The main way to achieve such accuracy
is to calculate higher orders in the series expansion in Eq. (2.4), in what is called a
fixed order expansion.
2.3. Fixed order expansion 10
2.3 Fixed order expansion
In a fixed-order expansion, one keeps all matrix elements that contribute to a specific
order in the expansion. As the parameter of the expansion is a coupling constant,
s in the case of QCD, we can view calculating an extra order in the expansion
parameter as adding an extra vertex, and thus an extra particle, in all allowed ways.
In practice, we can classify such particle only in two ways. We can either resolve
this particle, which case is called a real correction, or R, or this particle is virtual
and thus is not resolved, which case is called a virtual correction, or V .
In principle this idea can be iterated as many times as one wishes, giving rise
to a factorial growth of matrix elements to be considered at each extra order. In
practice there is a complication arising when one adds one extra particle. When
considering higher order corrections to Eq. (2.2), as we said, we can either have the
extra particle being unresolved, in which case the phase space integral is the same
as the born cross section, and the integral over internal momenta is carried over in
the calculation of the matrix elements, or the extra particle is resolved, thus the
phase over which the integration is performed is different.
Each of these two integrals can give singular contributions in the case in which
the extra particle, resolved or not, becomes either soft, or collinear to one of the
other particle in process. These divergences get canceled when every contribution is
added up together [13,14]. The problem is that these contributions live in different
phase-spaces, and Monte Carlo integrators can only deal with one phase-space at
a time. We need then to subtract divergences at the integrand level to have finite
integral, these methods are generally called subtraction methods.
Subtraction methods are now completely automated in Monte Carlo generators
for next-to-leading order calculations, that is calculations that only involve one extra
particle in the final state with respect to the leading order. Efforts are being made to
promote such methods for next-to-next-to-leading order corrections, although so far
this has only been possible for selected processes and in no automatised way. The
most widely used of such methods are the Catani-Seymour dipole formalism [15,
16] and the Frixione-Kunszt-Signer subtraction [17]. In the context of this study
we focus on the former method. This algorithm was first developed for massless-
2.3. Fixed order expansion 11
particles (including QCD partons) [15], extended to massive fermions [18] in QED,
and to massive final state QCD partons [16].
These methods make use of two important properties of QCD radiation. First,
the divergent structure of QCD amplitudes factorises, in both the soft and the
collinear limit, in a well-know universal structure. Second, the N +1 particles phase
space factorises into a N and 1 particle phase space, when one of the particles
becomes soft, or collinear to any other particle in the event [19, 20]. We can thus
make use of these facts to construct subtraction terms that mimic the infrared
and collinear behaviour of next-to-leading order QCD amplitudes to render next-to-
leading order observables not only finite at an integral level, but also at an integrand
level. In this way integration over the full phase-space by means of any Monte Carlo
method can be performed. We briefly report in the following section, the main
ingredients needed to construct Catani-Seymour subtraction.
2.3.1 Catani-Seymour subtraction in brief
Consider some hard scattering process involving N particles in the final state at its
leading order. The NLO cross section is given by
NLON =
dN [B + V ] +
dN+1R, (2.11)
where B corresponds to the born contribution, V is the one-loop, or virtual contri-
bution, and R is the real emission contribution term.
As denoted by the N + 1, in the real emission process, one additional particle
is emitted. As this particle can get infinitively soft or collinear to any of the other
N final state particles, or the beam direction, R becomes divergent. The main idea
behind the Catani-Seymour method is to make use of universal properties of QCD
amplitudes in these limits, to construct subtraction terms S. To better define, we
want to perform the integral of |MN+1|2  R(N+1) over the N + 1 particle phase
space, N+1, which is both soft and collinear divergent. We thus need to construct
2.3. Fixed order expansion 12
a set of functions S(N  1), such that in
dN+1R(N+1) =
dN+1 [R(N+1) S(N  1)]
dN 
d1S(N  1) (2.12)
the first term of the right hand side is finite. The functions S(N  1) depend on
the additional property that phase space factorises in the soft and collinear limits.
We require in particular that the subtraction terms S(N  1) respect some
properties. First, in the limit in which a particle k, of momentum pk becomes soft, or
collinear to a particle i of momentum pi, if we parametrise the degree of divergence
with , by having pk, pi  pk   for  0, we have to have:
pk, pipk0
[R(N+1) S(N  1)] = O(0) . (2.13)
Second, the functions S(N 1) are constructed in such a way that their integral
over the extra emission phase space can be calculated analytically. Note that these
integrals are soft and collinear divergent. However, their divergent part can be
computed and extracted and used to subtract 1/2 and 1/ divergences that appear
in the one loop contributions to the next to leading order cross section.
If we make use of Eq. (2.12) we then get
NLON =
B + V +
d1 S
dN+1
, (2.14)
which is now completely free of divergences.
2.3.2 The dipole factorisation formula
The form of the functions S, can be extracted from matrix elements, where diver-
gences appear as poles in the denominator of propagators of intermediate particles.
We can thus partial fraction all denominators, which separates all contributions that
are divergent only in a specific configuration. When doing this partial fractioning
one realises that QCD radiation terms have the form of colour dipoles, D, that can
be identified with an emitter particle and a spectator. It turns out that only four
configurations are possible:
2.3. Fixed order expansion 13
FF : the particle going soft or collinear is emitted from a final state particle, and
the spectator is also in the final state,
FI : the particle going soft or collinear is emitted from a final state particle, and
the spectator is in the final state,
IF : the particle going soft or collinear is emitted from an initial state particle, and
the spectator is in the final state,
II : the particle going soft or collinear is emitted from an initial state particle, and
the spectator is also in the initial state.
As a consequence, we can write the real emission matrix element as a sum of all
dipoles, plus terms that are non divergent. The former part equals the function S,
such that:
i=FF,FI,IF,II
Di. (2.15)
Further, each dipole contribution is given by the sum of all possible emitter-spectator
pair in a given state,
DFF =
(i,j) 6=k
Dij,k ; DFI =
(i,j)6=k
Dij,k + Daij (2.16)
DIF =
i 6=k
Daik ; DII = Dak;b + Dbk;a (2.17)
(2.18)
In the context of this study we primarily focus on II configurations, so that in
practice we only have
S = Dak;b(p1, . . . , pk, . . . , pN+1; pa, pb) + Dbk;a(p1, . . . , pk, . . . , pN+1; pa, pb) . (2.19)
The term Dak;b represents a dipole contribution where the emitter is an initial state
particle, a and the spectator is another initial state particle b, and can be further
express as
Dak;b(p1, . . . , pk, . . . , pN+1; pa, pb) = 
2xab pa  pk
Ta Tb
Vak,b(pa, pb, pk)
MN (p1, . . . , pN+1; pa, pb)2 (2.20)
2.3. Fixed order expansion 14
2  Ta TbT2a V
ak,b(pa, pb, pk)
2xab pa  pk
2
Figure 2.1: Diagrammatic representation of Eq. (2.20) for an initial state emission
with an initial state spectator.
where by pi we mean a momentum pi that has been transformed such to re-establish
momentum conservation in the projected matrix element. Note also that the symbol
 in this context simply hides possible summation in color and helicity space. The
functions 1
2 pipj
Vij,k(pi, pk, pj) are generically called splitting kernels, or dipole split-
ting functions. The sum of all these functions is referred to as K in the remainder
of this work2.
2.3.3 Dipole terms construction
The construction of the dipole subtraction terms comes from the universal structure
of soft and collinear singularities. To see how this work in practice, take for example
the matrix element for the production of a Higgs in bottom-quark fusion, with
massless b. The matrix element for the emission of an additional gluon can be
written as
|MbbHg|2 = 8 CF s
2 pa  pk
2 pb  pk
1 + x2
1 x |MbbH |
2 , (2.21)
if we make the replacement in |MbbH |2 that
s = 2pa  pb  x s = 2x pa  pb . (2.22)
2A special case of splitting kernels is given by the Altarelli-Parisi splitting functions, Pij .
2.3. Fixed order expansion 15
This, in turn, can be achieved by the variable transformation
pa = x pa ; pb = pb . (2.23)
Making use of Eq. (2.20) we can easily isolate the splitting function,
Vak,b = 8 CF s
1 + x2
1 x , (2.24)
and the corresponding dipole term
Dak;b = 1
2 pa  pk
Vak,b |MbbH |2 . (2.25)
We can play the same exercise in the case of e+e  qq. The next-to-leading
order real emission process in this case, can be written as
|Me+eqqg|2 = 8 CF s
x21 + x
(1 x1)(1 x2)
|Me+eqq|2 , (2.26)
with x1,2 = 2E1,2/
s are the energy fraction of the final state quarks. Performing
a partial fractioning on
x21 + x
(1 x1)(1 x2)
1 x2
2 x1  x2
 (1 + x1)
+ (x1  x2) , (2.27)
we get
Vij,k = 8 CF s
2 xi  xk
 (1 + xi)
, (2.28)
Dij;k =
2 pi  pj
Vij,k |Me+eqq|2. (2.29)
Note that now we have employed a different phase space mapping
pk =
pk ; pij = Q pk , (2.30)
where Q is the total momentum minus that of the gluon.
The exact form for the dipole functions, as well as for the corresponding phase-
space mappings in the general case, are reported in [15]. It is important to notice
that, when considering massive quarks [16], mass effects appear, in the construction
of the dipole functions, only as power suppressed modifications of Vij,k, as well as
of the phase space mappings.
2.4. Parton Shower 16
2.4 Parton Shower
Another way of increasing the accuracy of a calculation can be achieved by including
part of the leading contributions that appear at each extra order. This can be done
using the knowledge of the singular structure of matrix elements, in the same fashion
as the PDF factorisation works. Each extra emission, in fact, in the soft or collinear
limit factorises off of the born matrix element, in the way described in Eq. (2.20).
The m-th emission gives a contribution proportional to
s(t) log
, (2.31)
with K being splitting kernels. Neglecting color correlations, this series can be
summed to all orders in s(t) log t
. The result of this operation is called Sudakov
form factor [2123],
N(t0, t) = exp
d1 KN(1)
(2.32)
where KN(1) represents a generalised splitting kernel that depends on the phase
space of the extra emission,
d1 = dt dz dJ (t, z, ) , (2.33)
with J being the Jacobian transformation coming from the relevant phase-space
mappings. The Sudakov form factor, N(t0, t), represents the unconditional dif-
ferential probability that parton a has not undergone a branching between t0 and
t. Further, the evolution of the Sudakov form factor is, in the same way of PDFs,
determined by DGLAP equations.
A reasonable approximation is to identify the splitting kernels with the Altarelli-
Parisi splitting function appearing in Eq. (2.3). Another possibility, is to use instead
Catani-Seymour dipoles, such that
KN(1) =
(i,j)6=k
Dij,k
. (2.34)
Particles emitted from the fixed order matrix element with an initial scale Q
undergo a backward evolution towards a lower cutoff scale t0  1 GeV. At each stage
an extra branching occurs, or not, depending on the relative probability, or weight,
2.4. Parton Shower 17
of the Sudakov at that given scale. As the splitting kernels are derived in the soft
and collinear limit of matrix elements, this procedure then retains and resum, the
leading logarithmic term of each branching.
At the leading order, the showered differential cross section Eq. (2.2) becomes
dLOPS  dN BN(N)  PS
= dN BN(N)
N(t0, 
t[t0,2Q]
d1 KN(1) N(t(1), 
. (2.35)
An important feature of the parton shower, that comes from its probabilistic inter-
pretation, is that it is unitary. That means that
dLOPS =
dLO (2.36)
2.4.1 MC@NLO
Having used Catani-Seymour dipole as splitting kernels, we can extend the picture
presented to next-to-leading order matrix elements. For convenience, we define
d1 S(N+1) = I(N) . (2.37)
The MC@NLO matching, is most conveniently expressed in terms of a NLO-weighted
Born cross section,
B(N) = B(N) + V(N) + I(N) 
d1S(N+1) (t 2Q) , (2.38)
and a hard remainder,
H(N+1) = RN(N+1)  S(N+1) (2Q  t) . (2.39)
Note that the ordering variable t is defined differently for each dipole as it depends
on the various phase space mappings. Using the same definition of the Sudakov
form factor given in Eq. (2.34), we have that
dMC@NLO  dN B(N)  PS + dN+1H(N+1)
= dN B(N)
N(t0, 
t[t0,2Q]
d1 KN(1) N(t(1), 
+ dN+1H(N+1) . (2.40)
2.5. Merging 18
As in the leading order case, it can be shown that
dMC@NLO =
dNLO . (2.41)
Note that this last relation implies that a MC@NLO observable has the same fixed
order accuracy as a NLO one.
2.5 Merging
Parton showers are, broadly speaking, very precise in regions of phase space where
soft and collinear radiation dominates. On the other hand, they are not reliable
in describing hard radiation, for which the calculation of hard matrix elements is
needed. As described in the previous section we can match these two description.
In doing so we retain the fixed order accuracy of the matrix element for the first N
emission, while any additional emission has the parton shower accuracy.
Merging techniques are used to extend the accuracy of fixed order matrix element
to higher multiplicity, N+1 . . . , in case any of this emission is hard, and to retain the
parton shower picture when these extra emission are soft or collinear. The method
we will focus here is the CKKW [24], as implemented in SHERPA [25].
To see how this works, consider one extra emission. We start by defining a
parameter, Qcut, that separates between a regime in which a parton is hard, which
we call jet production, and a regime in which the parton is soft and collinear, called
jet evolution. In the former we wish to retain the matrix element description, while
in the latter we leave the production of the extra parton to the parton shower. In
formulae, assigning a scale QN+1 to the extra emission phase space, in the same way
as Qcut,
dMEPS@LO 
dLOPSN 
dLOPSN+1
dN BN(N)
N(t0, 
t[t0,2Q]
d1 KN(1) N(tN+1, 
Q) (Qcut QN+1)
+ dN+1 BN+1(N+1) N(t0, 2Q) (QN+1 Qcut) . (2.42)
This method can be extended to as high a multiplicity as desired.
2.6. Higher order merging 19
2.6 Higher order merging
As well as to higher multiplicity, the method outlined above can be extend to higher
accuracy [26]. In particular, using the same techniques, we can merge MC@NLO
accurate calculations together, and together with leading order calculation for very
high multiplicity where a NLO calculation becomes too expensive. This method is
called MEPS@NLO and is developed in [27]. Schematically for one extra emission,
dMEPS@NLO = dMC@NLON  dMC@NLON+1
= dN BN(N)
N(t0, 
t[t0,2Q]
d1 KN(1) N(tN+1, 
Q) (Qcut QN+1)
+ dN+1HN(N+1) N(tN+1, 2Q) (Qcut QN+1)
+ dN+1 BN+1(N+1)
BN+1(N+1)
BN+1(N+1)
t[tN+1,2Q]
d1 KN(1)
(QN+1Qcut)
N+1(t0, tN+1) +
t[t0,tN+1]
d1 KN+1(1) N+1(tN+2, tN+1)
+ dN+2HN+1(N+2) N(tN+1, 2Q) N+1(tN+2, tN+1) (QN+1 Qcut) . (2.43)
The meaning of this equation can be summarised as follows. For Qcut < QN+1
Eq. (2.43) reduces to Eq. (5.50). The case of Qcut > QN+1, on the other hand, is
structurally more complicated. The last three lines of Eq. (2.43) have, in fact, two
parts. The first one, corresponds to Eq. (5.50) for a N + 1-particle process. The
second one have to account for the second additional radiation either coming from
showered N + 1 differential cross section or from the hard reminder, without double
counting.
Chapter 3
Matching the 4F and the 5F schemes
3.1 Need for a matched calculation
This chapter is devoted on how to obtain predictions in a matched scheme, namely
the FONLL [28, 29] scheme. In particular, we focus on the production of a Higgs
boson in bottom quark fusion [1, 2].
Higgs production in bottom fusion, like any process involving bottom quarks at
the matrix-element level, may be computed using two different factorisation schemes.
In the four-flavour scheme, the bottom quark is treated as a massive object, which is
not endowed with a parton distribution (PDF). It decouples from QCD perturbative
evolution, which is performed only including the four lightest flavours and the gluon
in the DGLAP equations, and likewise it decouples from the running of s so that
nf = 4 in the computation of the QCD  function. In the five-flavour scheme (5FS),
instead, the bottom quark is treated on the same footing as other quark flavours,
there is a b PDF, and nf = 5 in both the DGLAP and renormalisation-group
equations.
As the total inclusive cross section for a Drell-Yan-like process depends only on
one hard scale, the virtuality of the produced boson Q, we can predict what the
role of mass effects is. For high enough scales, Q2  m2b , mass effects become
negligible, collinear logarithms related to b-quark radiation are large and must be
resummed, and the 5FS is always more accurate. On the other hand, very close to
the production threshold, Q2  m2b , mass effects are important while collinear logs
3.1. Need for a matched calculation 21
are not large, and the 4FS is more accurate. In principle, a computation performed
at high enough perturbative order in the 4FS will reproduce the 5FS result, while
this is not the case for a 5FS computation, in which b-mass effects are never included.
In practice, however, for Higgs production in bottom fusion the leading-order
production diagram, which is O(0s) (parton model) in the 5FS, is O(2s) in the
4FS, so one must go to very high order indeed in the 5FS computation in order
to reproduce 4FS results. In fact, in the 5FS, the cross section is known up to
NNLO [30] and in the 4FS up to NLO [31,32]. Furthermore, the characteristic scale
for this process is necessarily higher than the b production threshold, but perhaps
rather lower than the Higgs mass itself [33, 34]. In a wide range the 4FS and 5FS
computations at the highest available accuracy disagree by a sizeable amount, with
the 5FS result being significantly larger than the 4FS one, though they can be
brought to a better agreement with a very low factorisation scale choices, F .
mH/4. All this suggests that a reliable computation of this process requires the use
of a matched scheme which combines the accuracy of the 4FS and 5FS results.
Historically, a matching scheme was devised to interpolate phenomenologically
between these the two schemes, the so-called Santander matching [35]. In this
scheme, the 4FS and 5FS results are interpolated using a weighted average of the
two. The idea is to define the weight as a function of the Higgs boson mass, mH
such that
w = log
 2 ; (3.1)
the combined cross section is then given by
Santander-Matched(m2H) =
(4F ) + w (5F )
1 + w
. (3.2)
An extensive discussion on how this type of matched prediction compares with
theoretically motivated ones, like the one presented in this work can be found in [3].
In the next sections we work out the necessary formulae to construct such a matched
scheme, focusing on the bottom quark fusion process.
3.2. The FONLL scheme 22
3.2 The FONLL scheme
The basic idea of the FONLL method is to expand out the 5FS computation, in which
logarithms of Q2/m2b are resummed to all orders, in powers of the strong coupling
s, and replace them with their massive-scheme counterparts, up to the same order
at which the massive-scheme result is known. The combination then retains the
logarithmic accuracy of the 5FS result one starts from (with the b quark treated as
massless), but now also has the fixed-order accuracy of the massive result, up to the
order which has been included. Henceforth, we consistently use the notation NkLL
to refer to the resummed accuracy of the 5FS computation (i.e. by LL we mean a
computation in which
s ln
is treated as order one), and by NkLO to the fixed
order at which the massive 4FS is performed. These two calculations can thus be
matched at any preferred order, in practice however we concentrate on two possible
orders. The FONLL-A [1] scheme which is NNLL+LO accurate, and the FONLL-B [2]
combination which is NNLL+NLO accurate.
The only technical complication of the FONLL method is that the two compu-
tations, which are being combined, are performed in different renormalisation and
factorisation schemes. This difficulty is overcome by re-expressing s and PDFs in
the 4FS computation in terms of their 5FS counterparts, so that one single s and
set of PDFs is used everywhere. Once this is done, the 4FS and 5FS computations
can be simply added, with overlapping terms subtracted in order to avoid double
counting: the result has the structure
FONLL = (4) + (5)  (4),(0), (3.3)
in which (4) and (5) are respectively the 4FS and 5FS results, and (4),(0) is their
overlap. The contributions to (4),(0) can be viewed and obtained either from ex-
pansion of the 5FS computation up to finite order or as the massless limit of the
massive computation - with the caveat that the 4FS result in the massive limit
acquires collinear singularities which in the 5FS are factorized in the PDFs.
We must now work out the necessary ingredients to construct Eq. (3.3). In the
following we make extensive use of Eqs. (2.1),(2.3),(2.5). We name objects by adding
a (nf ) whenever neccessary to avoid confusion.
3.2. The FONLL scheme 23
3.2.1 The 4F scheme cross section
In order to compute a total cross section in the four flavour scheme we need to use
Eq. (2.1) with 4F scheme ingredients. Namely,
(4) =
ij=q,g
i (x,Q
y, (4)s (Q
, (3.4)
y, (4)s (Q
. (3.5)
Note that here and in the following discussion on the 4FS, (p)ij refer to the partonic
cross sections computed in the 4FS, as highlighted by their explicit dependence on
the ratio Q2/m2b .
In practice, we can transform Eq. (3.4) by expressing PDFs and s in the 4F
scheme to those calculated in the 5F scheme. In this way, we obtain
(4) =
ij=q,g
i (x,Q
y, (5)s (Q
, (3.6)
where f (5)i and 
s are 5FS PDFs and s, and the coefficients
y, (5)s (Q
(5)s (Q
(3.7)
are such that if f (5)i and 
s are re-expressed in terms of f
i and 
s , then the
expression of (4) in the 4FS, Eq. (3.4), is recovered.
In order to obtain the coefficients Bij, we thus need to match Eq. (3.6) onto
Eq. (3.4) at the order in s we wish to perform the matching at. The coupling
constant and the PDFs are related in the two schemes by equations of the form
(5)s (Q
2) = (4)s (Q
(4)s (m
, (3.8)
i (x,Q
y, log
, (4)s (Q
, (3.9)
where the sum runs over the eight lightest flavours, antiflavours, and the gluon,
while the index i takes value over all ten quarks and antiquarks and the gluon.
The coefficients ci(L) are polynomials in L  log Q
, and the functions Kij can be
3.2. The FONLL scheme 24
expressed as an expansion in powers of s, with coefficients that are polynomials in
The first nine equations, Eq. (3.9), relate the eight lightest quarks and the gluon
in the two schemes and can be inverted to express the four-flavour-scheme PDFs in
terms of the five-flavour-scheme ones. The last two equations, assuming that the
bottom quark is generated by radiation from the gluon (i.e. no intrinsic [36] bottom
component) express the bottom and anti-bottom PDFs in terms of the other ones.
In particular, this assumption implies that the b quark and antiquark PDFs are
equal to each other, f (5)b = f
+ O(2s). Inverting Eqs. (3.8-3.9) and substituting
in Eq. (3.4) one can obtain an expression of (4) in terms of Bij and 5FS objects.
The solution of Eq. (3.8) are explicitly reported in Appendix B up to order 2s.
Making use of Eqs. (3.8),(3.9) expression we get the non-vanishing B(k)ij coefficients
at O(2s)
B(2)gg
= (2)gg
, (3.10)
; (3.11)
while at O(3s) we get:
B(3)gg
= (3)gg
 2TR
(2)gg
, (3.12)
 2TR
, (3.13)
B(3)gq
= (3)gq
, (3.14)
B(3)qg
= (3)qg
. (3.15)
Note that we suppress the obvious R,F dependence in 
3.2.2 The massless limit of the massive cross section
As we said, the overlap term corresponds to the massless limit of the massive cross
section. This contribution is equivalent to a 4FS calculation where all logarithms and
constant terms retained, and all terms suppressed by powers of mb/Q are dropped.
3.2. The FONLL scheme 25
This can be written as
(4F ),(0)
2), L
ij=q,g
fi(x,Q
y, L, s(Q
(3.16)
where
y, L, s(Q
(0),(p)
ij (y, L) , (3.17)
and the coefficients B(0),(p)ij satisfy
B(0),(p)ij
= 0 . (3.18)
Extracting the coefficients B(0),(p)ij from the massive limit can only be done in cases
bb
O(0s) O(1s) O(2s)
Figure 3.1: Representative examples of contributions to the 5FS computation which
are subtracted and get replaced by massive 4FS contributions. The diagrams circled
with a dashed line become massive in FONLL-A, while those circled with a solid pink
line are those that must be additionally subtracted in the FONLL-B scheme.
in which there exist a simple closed-form expression for the massive coefficients
3.2. The FONLL scheme 26
ij . In most cases, however, this is not doable. All B
(0),(p)
ij terms in Eq. (3.16) may
be equivalently viewed as contributions to the 5FS computation, as schematically
summarized in Fig. 3.1 (for real emission terms). This must clearly be true as they
account for double counting contributions. To obtain these terms from the 5FS
expression we need to express the b-PDF in terms of light quarks and gluon PDFs,
Eq. (3.9). At order 2s, the result has the following structure:
b (x,Q
2) = (5)s (Q
A(1)gb (z, L) f (5)g
+ s(Q
A(2)gb (z, L) f (5)g
+A(2)b (z, L) f
, (3.19)
where f (5)b , f
 and f
g are respectively the 5FS b quark, singlet, and gluon PDFs,
A(1)gb = a
(1,1)
gb (z)L,
A(2)gb = a
(2,2)
gb (z)L
2 + a
(2,1)
gb (z)L+ a
(2,0)
gb (z), (3.20)
A(2)b = a
(2,2)
b (z)L
2 + a
(2,1)
b (z)L+ a
(2,0)
b (z)
Note that, as well known, toO(2s) the expression of the 5FS f
b in terms of the light
quarks and gluon receives constant (i.e. non-logarithmic) contributions a(2,0)gb (z) and
(2,0)
b (z), and thus it is discontinuous at threshold Q
2 = m2b in the massless scheme,
as a consequence of it being continuous in the fully massive calculation. The explicit
expressions of the coefficients Eq. (3.20) are given in Appendix B for completeness.
We can now collect all contributions to (4),(0). The O(2s) terms, already given
in Ref. [1], are
B(0)(2)gg (y, L) = y
2A(1)gb (z, L)A
(z) + 4A(1)gb
gb (z)
+ (2)gg (y), (3.21)
(0)(2)
qq (y, L) = 
qq (y); (3.22)
3.3. Properties of the matched cross section 27
while the O(3s) are [2]
B(0)(3)gg (y, L) = y
4A(2)gb (z, L)A
+ 2A(1)gb (z, L)A
(z) + 4A(2)gb
gb (z) + 4A
gb (z)
(3.23)
B(0)(3)gq (y, L) = y
2A(2)b (z, L)A
(z) + 2A(2)b
gb (z)
+2A(1)gb
qb (z)
, (3.24)
which completes our result. Note that in Eqs. (3.21)-(3.24) (p)ij (x) denotes the
partonic cross-section in the 5FS, as indicated by the fact that it only depends on
the momentum fraction and does not have any dependence on mb1.
3.3 Properties of the matched cross section
Using Eqs. (3.19,3.20) we can express the five flavour scheme cross section in terms
of only light quarks and gluons. If we do, we see that the five flavour scheme cross
section can be written as
(5) =
ij=q,g
i (x,Q
(p,k)
ij (y) (s L)
(3.25)
In the same spirit, the massless limit of the massive cross section, Eq. (3.16) is given
(4F ),(0) =
ij=q,g
i (x,Q
(pk,k)
ij (y)L
(3.26)
Let us now define (d), called difference term,
(d) = (5)  (4F ),(0) , (3.27)
1unlike the 4FS partonic cross sections (p)ij
of Eq. (3.5)
3.4. The bb H FONLL cross section 28
such that
FONLL = (4) + (d) . (3.28)
This term is then expressed as:
(d) =
ij=q,g
i (x,Q
(p,k)
ij (y) (s L)
(pk,k)
ij (y)L
. (3.29)
In the region in which mb  Q, we have that L  0. In this limit, mass effects
dominates over resummation effects and we thus expect the FONLL prediction to
match the four flavour one. As a confirmation we see the the two terms in the
second line of Eq. (3.29) have the same asymptotic behaviour in this limit, making
(d) vanish.
On the other hand, in the limit in which mb  Q2, by definition of the massless
limit of the massive calculation, we have that the four flavour scheme calculation
and the massless limit cancel. This leaves the FONLL prediction equal to the five
flavour one in this limit, as expected. In any intermediate regime, the first p terms
present in the second line of Eq. (3.29) coming from the massless limit, cancel the
first p terms coming from the massless calculation, leaving the remaining   p
tower of logs resummed in the five flavour scheme. The first p terms, on the other
hand are then added back in the four flavour scheme, and thus include mass effects
exactly up the p-th order.
3.4 The bb H FONLL cross section
We now have all the ingredients to construct the matched result. As everything in
Eq. (3.3) is now expressed in terms of the same perturbative objects we can perform
an s expansion on the final result,
FONLL = 2s(Q
2)(2) + 3s(Q
2)(3) + O(4s) . (3.30)
In the rest of this work, following the notation set in [29], we identify with FONLL-A
the order 2s [1] term of Eq. (3.30), while we call FONLL-B the contribution to order
3.4. The bb H FONLL cross section 29
3s [2]. The accuracy of these two schemes is given by the two matched calculations.
In the FONLL-A matching, the 5F NNLL cross section (which is order 2s) to the
4FS LO (O(2s)) cross section thus having NNLL+LO accuracy. In the FONLL-B
matching, mass effects are included up to NLO (O(3s)) which then corresponds to
a NNLL+NLO matched scheme.
We have implemented our final FONLL-B expression by combining, according to
Eq. (3.3) 4FS predictions up to NLO obtained using MG5_aMC@NLO [37,38], 5FS
computations up to NNLL obtained using the bbh@nnlo code [30], and our own
implementation of the subtraction term Eq. (3.16).
In Figs. 3.2-3.4 we compare the 4FS, 5FS and matched FONLL results. Specif-
ically, in Figs. 3.2-3.3 we show for the physical Higgs mass value mH = 125 GeV,
varying the renormalisation and factorisation scale both the LO and NLO 4FS pre-
dictions, and the FONLL-A and FONLL-B matched results in which they are respec-
tively combined with the NNLL 5FS result, also shown. In Fig. 3.4 we show the most
accurate results obtained in the 4FS (NLO), 5FS (NNLO) and matched (FONLL-B)
schemes, as a function of the Higgs mass, with R = F =
mH+4mB
, and the uncer-
tainty band obtained by taking the envelope of the variations of the renormalisation
and factorisation scales by a factor two about the central value with the two outer
points R = 4F and F = 4R omitted. Note that for the lowest (unphysical)
Higgs mass values this uncertainty blows up because the lower edge of the scale
variation range extends in the nonperturbative region.
The 4FS results shown are those which enter the FONLL combination, namely,
the form Eq. (3.6) of the 4FS result is used, in which this is expressed in terms of 5FS
PDFs and s. All results are computed using a PDF set presented and discussed
in [39]. This PDF set is based on the PDF4LHC15 combined sets [4046], with
which it is taken to coincide below the b mass, but from which it is then evolved
up in the 5FS from Q = mb, with the results below and above threshold matched
exactly as in Eq. (3.19). This is not quite the same as the original PDF4LHC15
combination, which is obtained by combining sets which adopt different values ofmb,
and also incorporate subleading differences in the way the 4FS and 5FS are matched
at threshold: it thus has the advantage of being fully consistent. We use pole-mass
3.4. The bb H FONLL cross section 30
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
R/mH
F = mH
R = mH
FONLLB
FONLLA
5FNNLO
4FNLO
4FLO
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
R/mH
F = (mH + 2mb)/4
R = (mH + 2mb)/4
FONLLB
FONLLA
5FNNLO
4FNLO
4FLO
Figure 3.2: Comparison of the FONLL matched result and its 4FS and 5FS com-
ponents, Eq. (3.3). Results are shown as a function of the renormalisation scale,
with the factorisation scale fixed at a high value F = mH (top) or a low value
(mH+2mb)
(bottom).
3.4. The bb H FONLL cross section 31
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
F /mH
R = mH
F = mH
FONLLB
FONLLA
5FNNLO
4FNLO
4FLO
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
F /mH
R = (mH + 2mb)/4
F = (mH + 2mb)/4
FONLLB
FONLLA
5FNNLO
4FNLO
4FLO
Figure 3.3: Same as Fig. 3.2, but now with the factorisation scale varied with the
renormalisation scale kept fixed at a high value R = mH (top) or a low value
(mH+2mb)
(bottom) .
3.4. The bb H FONLL cross section 32
expressions and take a b pole-mass value mb = 4.58 GeV; the strong coupling is
s(mZ) = 0.118.
From Fig. 3.2 we see that the strong renormalisation scale dependence of the
LO 4FS result is reduced at NLO, and also, that at NLO the big gap between
the 4FS and 5FS results gets compensated for by the inclusion of higher order
terms in the 4FS. This, together with the fact that the 5FS shows very little scale
dependence, and that differences are significantly smaller for smaller values of F ,
strongly suggests that the bulk of the difference between the 4FS and the 5FS is due
to large logs of 2F/m
b which are resummed into the PDF in the latter case. This is
in agreement with the conclusion of [34], in which it was shown that resummation
increases the cross section in most cases by up to 30% at the LHC, leading to a
better precision. On the other hand, the 4FS predictions at NLO also displays a
consistent perturbative behaviour only when evaluated at a suitably low scale.
The massive corrections which the 4FS result contains turn out to be much
smaller, though not entirely negligible. Indeed, whereas the FONLL-A result essen-
tially coincides with the 5FS, the FONLL-B, which only differs from it because of
the inclusion of massive terms at one extra perturbative order, departs somewhat
from it. The factorisation scheme dependence shown in Fig. 3.3 is very mild in all
schemes when R is high, but for low R, where the perturbative expansion of the
4FS result is more reliable, both the 5FS and the FONLL-A results show a contained
scale dependence, comparable in size to the mass effects, which is reduced in the
FONLL-B result.
These results suggest that the main difference between the FONLL-A and the
FONLL-B schemes is the inclusion of a higher order contribution from the 4FS com-
putation which reduces the the scale dependence of the FONLL-A result; because
the latter is essentially the same as that of the 5FS computation this contribution is
likely to be dominated by a constant, i.e., mass-independent term. This conclusion
is supported by Fig. 3.4, in which results are shown as a function of the Higgs mass:
the difference between the FONLL-B and 5FS results decreases slightly as the mass
grows until mH  200 GeV, but then remains constant up to the highest values of
the Higgs mass.
3.4. The bb H FONLL cross section 33
5FNNLO
FONLLB
4FNLO
200 400 600 800 1000
mH [GeV]
Figure 3.4: The cross-section using the most accurate results in the 4FS (NLO),
5FS (NNLO) and matched (FONLL-B) schemes, as a function of the Higgs mass,
with r = F =
(mH+2mb)
. The bottom panel shows the result as a ratio to the
5FS computation. The uncertainty band is obtained by standard seven-point scale
variation (see text).
3.4. The bb H FONLL cross section 34
We conclude that the FONLL-B result is the most reliable, and a low choice of
renormalisation and factorisation scheme seems to lead to a more reliable perturba-
tive expansion. All in all mass corrections are very moderate, so the usage of the
5FS result at all scales would be adequate in most cases. This rather disfavours phe-
nomenological combinations such as the so-called Santander matching [35] in which
the 4FS and 5FS results are combined through an interpolation that gives each of
them comparable weight. The difference between the FONLL-B and 5FS is almost
entirely due to a constant O(3s) mass-independent contribution which appears in
the 4FS at NLO but would only enter the 5FS at N3LO; the FONLL-B computation,
which includes it, is accordingly more accurate, even for very high vales of the Higgs
mass.
In conclusion, we find that mass corrections are very small while collinear logs
are substantial, so that in practice the fully matched result is very close to the 5FS
one. The fully matched result receives a small correction from mass effects and it
is very stable upon renormalisation and factorisation scheme variation, suggesting
that it is adequate for precision phenomenology at the LHC.
Chapter 4
Comparing the 4F and the 5F
scheme: heavy boson production
4.1 Introduction
Processes involving heavy flavours at the LHC, like the production of a heavy boson
(V = W,Z,H) in association with bottom (b) quarks present an interesting study
case of heavy flavour modeling and have recently attracted renewed interest for a
number of old and new reasons [33,34,38,4749]. Firstly, the associated production
of a vector boson with b-tagged jets points to born level processes like gb  V b
which is sensitive to the b-quark Parton Distribution Function (PDF), the precise
determination of which is fundamental for phenomenologically relevant processes like
the production of a Higgs boson in bottom-quark fusion [1,2,39,50]. This sensitivity
also helps disentangle the relative effects of resummation to fixed order mass effects.
Secondly, and complementary to this purely Standard-Model reasoning, many
models for physics beyond the Standard Model come with extended Higgs sectors,
quite often in the form of a second Higgs doublet. The mixing among the Higgs
doublets often amplifies the couplings of the Higgs bosons to the b-quarks. As a
consequence, bH and bbH production provide important search grounds for new
physics. Furthermore, events with identified b-jets and a significant missing trans-
verse momentum constitute a possible signature of Dark Matter [5153] production.
For this signal invisibly decaying Z-bosons associated with b-jets pose a severe irre-
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 36
ducible background.
In general, these processes have always been approached in either of two schemes,
commonly known as the four or five-flavour scheme (4FS and 5FS). In the 4FS, bot-
tom quarks are completely decoupled from both the running of the strong coupling
constant (s) and the evolution of PDFs. In addition all mass effects are retained
everywhere in the calculation. In the 5FS, on the other hand, mass effects are
completely neglected, and b-quarks are treated on the same footing as any other
light-quark. In particular, they contribute to both s and PDFs evolution. A more
detailed description of these two approaches is carried on in Sec. (2.1).
We can make use of a simple argument to see where problems can arise. From
dimensional analysis in fact, we now that mass effects must appear as ratio of scales,
namely the mass of the heavy quarks (mQ in general, mb in particular) and some
other scale (Q) in the process. When looking at inclusive observables, we typically
have to deal with only one scale, like the invariant mass of the final state. In such
cases, it is easy to argue if mass effects will play an important role or not.
However, experimental analyses often consider differential distributions, like the
transverse-momentum (pT ) or the invariant mass of a subset of particles in the final
state. This introduces additional scales that are not a fixed number, but vary event
by event, making the ratio mb/Q a number that can be both small and large in the
same observable.
In the rest of this chapter, we study differences between the 4FS and the 5FS.
In particular we compare the two schemes in the context of the production of heavy
quarks in association with a Z boson, where we further compare with LHC data.
We then use the comparison with data to extend our discussion to the case of H
associated production.
4.2 Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production
The production of a Z boson in association with QCD jets provides the ideal test bed
for the theoretical approaches outlined above. Through the decay of the Z boson
to leptons these processes yield a rather simple and clean signature with sizeable
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 37
rates even for higher jet counts. Precise measurements of the production rates and
differential distributions of both the Z-boson decay products and the accompanying
jets offer discriminating power for miscellaneous theoretical approaches. In fact,
measurements of Z+jets production served as key inputs for the validation of matrix-
element parton-shower simulation techniques, cf. [5456], and impressively underpin
the enormous success of these calculational methods.
Here we focus on the production of Z bosons accompanied by identified b-jets.
Comparison with data from both the ATLAS and CMS collaborations at 7 TeV [57,
58] provides the benchmark for the accuracy and quality of four and fiveflavour
simulations with SHERPA. Similar measurements at 8 and 13 TeV LHC collision
energies are under way [59].
4.2.1 Details of the simulations
Efficient routines for the required QCD matrix-element calculations and a well un-
derstood QCD parton-shower are the key ingredients to all matching and merging
calculations. Within SHERPA LO matrix elements are provided by the built-in gener-
ators AMEGIC++ [60] and COMIX [61]. While virtual matrix elements contributing to
QCD NLO corrections can be invoked through interfaces to a number of specialised
tools, e.g. BLACKHAT [62], GOSAM [63], NJET [64], OPENLOOPS [65] or through the
BLHA interface [66], we employ in this study the OPENLOOPS generator [67] in con-
junction with the COLLIER library [68, 69]. Infrared divergences are treated by the
CataniSeymour dipole method [15, 16] which has been automated in SHERPA [70].
In this implementation mass effects are included for final-state splitter and spectator
partons but massless initial-state particles are assumed throughout. SHERPAs de-
fault parton-shower model [71,72] is based on CataniSeymour factorisation [73]. In
order to arrive at meaningful fragmentation functions for heavy quarks, all modern
parton showers take full account of their finite masses in the final state, although in
algorithmically different ways. In SHERPA, the transition from massless to massive
kinematics is achieved by rescaling four-momenta at the beginning of the parton
shower. In the initial-state parton shower in SHERPA, the g  bb and b  bg
splitting functions do not contain b-quark mass effects in their functional form and
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 38
account for mass effects in the kinematics only.
In the following we briefly define the methods available in SHERPA for simulating
b-associated production processes, that will then be validated and applied for LHC
predictions:
4F NLO (4F MC@NLO): In the fourflavour scheme, b-quarks are consistently
treated as massive particles, only appearing in the final state. As a conse-
quence, b-associated Z- and H-boson production proceeds through the parton-
level processes gg  Z/H + bb, and qq  Z/H + bb at Born level. MC@NLO
matching is obtained by consistently combining fully differential NLO QCD
calculations with the parton shower, cf. [74,75]. Due to the finite b-quark mass
these processes do not exhibit infrared divergences and the corresponding in-
clusive cross sections can thus be evaluated without any cuts on the b-partons.
5F LO (5F MEPS@LO): In the fiveflavour scheme b-quarks are massless parti-
cles in the hard matrix element, while they are treated as massive particles in
both the initial- and final-state parton shower.
In the MEPS@LO [25] samples we merge pp  H/Z plus up to three jets at
leading order; this includes, for instance, the partonlevel processes bb Z/H,
gb  Z/Hb, gg  Z/Hbb, . . . . To separate the various matrix-element
multiplicities, independent of the jet flavour, a jet cut of Qcut = 10 GeV is
used in the Z case while Qcut = 20 GeV is employed in H-boson production.
5F NLO (5F MEPS@NLO): In the 5FS MEPS@NLO scheme [27,76], we account
for quark masses in complete analogy to the LO case: the quarks are treated as
massless in the hard matrix elements, but as massive in the initial- and final-
state parton showering. Again, partonic processes of different multiplicity are
merged similarly to the MEPS@LO albeit retaining their next-to-leading-order
accuracy. In particular, we consider the merging of the processes pp  H/Z
plus up to two jets each calculated with MC@NLO accuracy further merged
with pp H/Z + 3j calculated at MEPS@LO.
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 39
d4F MC@NLO = d3
 + V
2  PS
+ d4
2  PS
Figure 4.1: Pictorial representation of V + bb processes contributing to the 4F
MC@NLO calculation. Here V = (Z,H) and by  we just mean that it is not a
simple product, and P.S. is the parton shower contribution. V refers to the one-loop
virtual contributions to the born.
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 40
d5F MEPS@LO = d1
2 PS  d2
2 PS
 d3
2  PS  d4
2  PS
Figure 4.2: Same as Fig. 4.1 but for the 5F MEPS@LO. The  symbol represents
the merging, i.e. a sum with the overlapping part removed. Note that in the five
flavour scheme the bottom contribution is included in q.
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 41
We consistently use fourflavour PDFs in the 4F scheme, i.e. the dedicated four
flavour NNPDF3.0 set [41] with the strong coupling given by s(mZ) = 0.118 and
running at NLO. For the simulations in the fiveflavour schemes the fiveflavour
NNLO PDFs from NNPDF3.0 are used, with s(mZ) = 0.118 and running at
NNLO. We assume all quarks apart from the b to be massless, with a pole mass of
mb = 4.92 GeV which enters the hard matrix-element calculation, where appropri-
ate, and the parton shower.
Results in the 4F and 5F schemes have been obtained with the default scale-
setting prescription for parton-shower matched calculations in SHERPA [25,77]. They
are calculated using a backward-clustering algorithm, and for each emission from the
shower, couplings are evaluated at either the kT of the corresponding emitted par-
ticle (in the case of gluon emission), or at the invariant mass of the emitted pair
(in the case of gluon splitting into quarks). The clustering stops at a core 2  2
process, with all scales set to F = R = Q = mT (V )/2, where mT (V ) corresponds
to the transverse mass of the boson. This scale is thus used to evaluate couplings in
the hard matrix element and PDFs. The corresponding central values are supple-
mented with uncertainty bands reflecting the dependence on the unphysical scales.
Renormalisation and factorisation scales are varied around their central value by a
factor of two up and down, with a standard 7-point variation. The scale variations
use the SHERPA internal reweighting procedure [78] and result in envelopes around
the central value. Furthermore, we consider explicit variations of the parton-shower
starting scale, i.e. Q, by a factor of two up and down.
4.2.2 Parton shower mass corrections
When producing predictions involving heavy quarks there are a number of subleading
effects that can be turned on or off. This happens in particular in the parton shower
part. As we discuss in Section 2.4, in fact, the Shower evolution is determined by
the exact definition of the Sudakov form factor,
N(t0, t) = exp
d1 KN(1)
(4.1)
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 42
with KN(1) some splitting kernels. As we are using a dipole shower, in the con-
text of this study, we can identify KN(1) with Catani-Seymour dipoles splitting
functions. As long as the correct limits are recovered by the splitting functions,
and one knows all the phase-space mappings needed to define the projected phase
space, one can use any splitting function. This imply that any non-divergent, mass
proportional, addition to the splitting kernels is subleading. In the simulations we
present here we do not include any additional mass effects, other than the ones that
are already present and described in [71].
Another subtlety stems when looking at the definition of KN(1),
KN(1) =
(i,j) 6=k
Dij,k
. (4.2)
The point at which s should be evaluated in this formula, is the evolution variable.
In dipole based shower, like the one we discuss here, this parameter is calculated
as the transverse momentum of the splitting kT . Imagine now the splitting of a
gluon into a bb pair. As the b quarks, in the shower, are always treated as massive
particles, it is unlikely that they are produced very collinear. On the other hand
kT can, in principle, be very small. Now s is a decreasing function of kT . This
means that lower kT splitting have a higher weight, and thus a larger probability.
This issue can be fixed by evaluating s in the context of g  bb splittings at the
invariant mass of the splitted pair, mbb. This setting is the default setting we use in
this study.
As a last comment, let us underline how, however, the setup used here, and
presented in the previous section, makes most of these effects less important, at
least in the two five falvour scheme samples. The idea is that we exploit the merging
scale, Qcut, to reduce the influence of the parton shower in many regions of phase
space. To do that we choose Qcut such that
mb < Qcut < p
T , (4.3)
where pcutT is the cut on pT applied to jets in the analysis. This low value makes then
sure that most of the samples are populated by matrix elements, with the parton
shower dominating only in the regions of very soft jets.
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 43
4.2.3 Measurements at LHC Run I  the reference data
Based on a data set of 4.6 fb1 integrated luminosity the ATLAS collaboration
studied the production of b-jets associated with Z/ that decay to electrons or
muons [57]. The dilepton invariant mass ranges between 76 GeV < m`` < 106 GeV.
Jets are reconstructed using the anti-kt algorithm [79] with a radius parameter
of R = 0.4, a minimal transverse momentum of pT,j > 20 GeV and a rapidity of
|yj| < 2.4. Furthermore, each jet candidate needs to be separated from the leptons by
Rj` > 0.5. Jets containing b-hadrons are identified using a multi-variate technique.
To match the outcome of the experimental analysis, simulated jets are identified as
b-jets, when there is one or more weakly decaying b-hadron with pT > 5 GeV within
a cone of R = 0.3 around the jet axis. The sample of selected events is further
subdivided into a class containing events with at least one b-jet (1-tag) and a class
with at least two b-jets (2-tag).
A similar analysis was performed by CMS [58]. There, electrons and muons
are required to have a transverse momentum of pT,` > 20 GeV, a pseudorapidity
|`| < 2.4, and a dilepton invariant mass within 81 GeV < m`` < 101 GeV. Only
events with exactly two additional b-hadrons were selected. The analysis focuses on
the measurement of angular correlations amongst the b-hadrons and with respect
to the Z boson. This includes in particular variables sensitive to rather collinear
b-hadron pairs. In addition, the total production cross section as a function of the
vector bosons transverse momentum was measured.
Both analyses are implemented and publicly available in the RIVET analysis
software [80] that, together with the FASTJET package [81], is employed for all
particle, i.e. hadron, level analyses.
4.2.4 Comparison with LHC data
In this section the theoretical predictions from SHERPA are compared to the experi-
mental measurements from LHC Run I. We begin the discussion with the comparison
with the measurements presented by the ATLAS collaboration in Ref. [57]. The to-
tal cross sections for Z+  1 and Z+  2 b jets are collected in Fig. 4.3. Already
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 44
there we see a pattern emerging that will further establish itself in the differential
cross sections: While the 5F MEPS@NLO results agree very well with data, the cen-
tral values of the 5F MEPS@LO cross sections tend to be around 10-20% lower than
the central values of data, but with theory uncertainties clearly overlapping them.
For all the runs the uncertainty estimates include both, 7-point variations of the
perturbative scales R/F , as well as Q variations by a factor of two up and down.
In contrast to the 5F case, the 4F MC@NLO cross sections tend to be significantly
below the experimental values for the Z+  1 b-jets cross section, without over-
lap of uncertainties. In the Z+  2 b-jets cross section the agreement between 4F
MC@NLO results and data is better, with the theoretical uncertainties including the
central value of the measured cross section.
In Fig. 4.4 the differential cross sections with respect to the transverse momen-
tum and rapidity of the b-jets, normalised to the number of b-jets, are presented
for events with at least one b-tagged jet. The shapes of both distributions are well
modelled both by the 4F and the two 5F calculations. However, clear differences
in the predicted production cross sections are observed. While the 5F NLO results
are in excellent agreement with data - both in shape and normalisation - the cen-
tral values of the 5F LO cross sections tend to be around 10% below data, at the
lower edge of the data uncertainty bands, and the 4F results are consistently out-
side data, about 25% too low. In the lower panels of Fig. 4.4 and all the following
plots in this section we show the uncertainty bands of the theoretical predictions,
corresponding to the above described R/F and Q variations. For the 5FS calcu-
lations the scale uncertainties clearly dominate, while for the 4F MC@NLO scheme
the shower-resummation uncertainty dominates.
This pattern is repeated in Fig. 4.5, where we show the differential (Zb) cross
section with respect to the dilepton transverse momentum and, rescaled to 1/Nbjets,
as a function of the azimuthal separation between the reconstructed Z boson and
the b-jets. Again, both distributions are very well modelled by both 5F calculations.
The 4F MC@NLO prediction again underestimates data by a largely flat 20-25%.
Lastly for the one b-jet inclusive sample, we look at the rapidity and R sepa-
ration between the Z boson and the leading b-jet, Fig. 4.6. In these two plots the
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 45
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
 [pb]
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
(Zb), Z+  1 bjets
ATLAS
s = 7 TeV 4.6 fb1 (stat.)
ATLAS
s = 7 TeV 4.6 fb1 (stat.  syst.)
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
 [pb]
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
(Zbb), Z+  2 bjets
ATLAS
s = 7 TeV 4.6 fb1 (stat.)
ATLAS
s = 7 TeV 4.6 fb1 (stat.  syst.)
Figure 4.3: Comparison of total production cross section predictions with ATLAS
data [57]. The error bars on the theoretical results are calculated from variations of
the hard-process scales R/F and the parton-shower starting scale Q.
additional constraint that pT,ll > 20 GeV is imposed. This case too highlight how
the three schemes differ from one another by a constant factor. In particular the
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 46
pT(b), Z+  1b-jets
pT(b) [GeV]
ATLAS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
b-jet |y|, Z+  1b-jets
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
b-jet |y|
ATLAS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
Figure 4.4: Inclusive transverse-momentum and rapidity distribution of all b-jets in
events with at least one b-jet. Data taken from Ref. [57].
MEPS@NLO 5FS provide once again with the most accurate prediction, while the
4F MC@NLO undeshoot data by a roughly 20% factor. Somehow more interesting
is the R separation between the Z boson and the leading b-jet. In this case in
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 47
pT(Z), Z+  1b-jets
0 100 200 300 400 500
pT(Z) [GeV]
ATLAS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
(Z, b), Z+  1b-jets, pT(``) > 20 GeV
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
(Z, b)
ATLAS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
Figure 4.5: Transverse-momentum distribution of the Z boson (left) and the az-
imuthal separation between the Z boson and the b-jet (right) in events with at least
one b-jet. For the (Z, b) measurement the additional constraint pT,ll > 20 GeV is
imposed. Data taken from Ref. [57].
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 48
y(Z, b), Z+  1b-jets, pT(Z) > 20 GeV
ATLAS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
0 1 2 3 4 5
y(Z, b)
R(Z, b), Z+  1b-jets, pT(Z) > 20 GeV
ATLAS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
R(Z, b)
Figure 4.6: Difference in rapidity and R separation between tne Z boson and the
first b-jet in events with at least one b-jet, with the additional constraint pT,ll >
20 GeV. Data taken from Ref. [57].
fact we notice some shape distortion in the R  4 region. In this region the two
5FS predictions somehow depart from being a constant factor with respect to the
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 49
4FS MC@NLO. This is due to the low merging scale that has been used in this case,
which moves the transition region to lower R values, thus affecting this plot.
Moving on to final states exhibiting at least two identified b-jets, the role of
the 5F LO and 4F NLO predictions are somewhat reversed: As can be inferred
from Fig. 4.3, the 4F and 5F NLO samples provide good estimates for the inclusive
Zbb cross section, while the 5F LO calculation undershoots data by about 20%. In
Fig. 4.7 the R separation of the two highest transverse-momentum b-jets along with
their invariant-mass distribution is presented. Both the 4F and the 5F approaches
yield a good description of the shape of the distributions. It is worth stressing that
this includes the regions of low invariant mass and low R, corresponding to a
pair of rather collinear b-jets. This is a region that is usually riddled by potentially
large logarithms, where the parton shower starts taking effect. Note that in the
comparison presented in [57] this region showed some disagreement between data
and other theoretical predictions based on NLO QCD (dressed with parton showers).
In Fig. 4.8 the resulting transverse-momentum distribution of the dilepton system
when selecting for events with at least two associated b-jets is shown. The shape of
the data is very well reproduced by the 4F MC@NLO and 5F MEPS@NLO samples.
Also the 5F MEPS@LO prediction describes the data well despite of the overall rate
being 20% lower than observed in data.
The measurements presented by the CMS collaboration in Ref. [58] focus on
angular correlations between b-hadrons rather than b-jets. Two selections with re-
spect to the dilepton transverse momentum have been considered, a sample requiring
pT (Z) > 50 GeV and an inclusive one considering the whole range of pT (Z). The
R and  separation of the b-hadrons obviously prove to be most sensitive to the
theoretical modelling of the b-hadron production mechanism and the interplay of
the fixed-order components and the parton showers. They are presented in Figs. 4.9
and 4.10. In general, a good agreement in the shapes of simulation results and data
is found, with the same pattern of total cross sections as before: the 5F MEPS@NLO
sample describes data very well, while the 4F MC@NLO results tend to be a little bit,
about 10%, below data, with data and theory uncertainty bands well overlapping,
while the central values of the 5F MEPS@LO results undershoot data by typically
4.2. Bottom-jet associated Z-boson production 50
R(b, b), Z+  2b-jets
1 2 3 4 5
R(b, b)
ATLAS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
m(b, b), Z+  2b-jets
50 100 150 200 250 300 350
m(b, b) [GeV]
ATLAS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
Figure 4.7: The R separation (left) and invariant-mass distribution (right) for the
leading two b-jets. Data taken from Ref. [57].
20-25%.
Overall it can be concluded that the 5F MEPS@NLO calculation yields the best
description of the existing measurements, regarding both the production rates and
4.3. Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production 51
pT(Z), Z+  2b-jets
0 50 100 150 200 250
pT(Z) [GeV]
ATLAS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
Figure 4.8: Transverse-momentum distribution of the dilepton system for events
with at least two b-jets. Comparison against various calculational schemes. Data
taken from Ref. [57].
shapes. The 4F MC@NLO and 5F MEPS@LO schemes succesfully model the shape
of the differential distributions but consistently underestimate the production rates.
4.3 Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production
In this section we present predictions for b-jet(s) associated production of the Standard-
Model Higgs boson in pp collisions at the 13 TeV LHC obtained in the four and
fiveflavour schemes. As standard when dealing with this process, we do not in-
clude contributions from the gluon-fusion channel. However, in the 4F MC@NLO
we do include terms proportional to the top-quark Yukawa coupling, contributing
to order ybyt as an interference effect at NLO QCD [3, 31, 32]. Although associated
Z+ b-jet(s) production serves as a good proxy for the Higgs-boson case, there are
important differences between both processes, mainly due to the different impact of
initial-state light quarks, which couple to Z bosons but not to the Higgs boson.
4.3. Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production 52
R(B, B), Z+  2B-Hadrons
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
R(B, B)
CMS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
R(B, B), Z+  2B-Hadrons,pT(Z) > 50 GeV
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
R(B, B)
CMS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
Figure 4.9: RBB distribution for two selections of the transverse momentum of the
Z boson. Data taken from Ref. [58].
As before, QCD jets are defined through the anti-kt algorithm using a radius
parameter of R = 0.4, a minimal transverse momentum pT,j > 25 GeV, and a
rapidity cut of |yj| < 2.5. In this case, we consider results that are at the parton
4.3. Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production 53
(B, B), Z+  2B-Hadrons
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
(B, B)
CMS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
(B, B), Z+  2B-Hadrons,pT(Z) > 50 GeV
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
(B, B)
CMS 7 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
Figure 4.10: BB distribution for two selections of the transverse momentum of
the Z boson. Data taken from Ref. [58].
level only, disregarding hadronisation and underlying-event effects, which may blur
the picture. We consider single b-tagged jets only, thus excluding jets with intra-jet
g  bb splittings from the parton shower which would be the same for all flavour
4.3. Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production 54
schemes we investigate. As for Z-boson production, we separate the event samples
into categories with at least one b-jet, i.e. H+  1b-jet events, and at least two
tagged b-jets, i.e. H+  2b-jets events.
LHC 13 TeV H+  1b-jets [fb] H+  2b-jets [fb]
4FMC@NLO 45.2
+15.5%
18.4% 4.5
+25.1%
26.3%
5FMEPS@LO 79.3
+34.0%
25.4% 3.8
+34.3%
30.3%
5FMEPS@NLO 110.5
+14.2%
16.0% 6.9
+27.3%
27.1%
Table 4.1: 13 TeV total cross sections and the corresponding F/R and Q uncer-
tainties for H+  1b and H+  2bs.
In Tab. 4.1 cross sections for the three calculations are reported. Historically,
inclusive results have largely disagreed between the 4F and the 5F scheme. This
feature is observed for the case at hand, too, and especially so for the case of one
tagged b-jet. There the 4F MC@NLO prediction is smaller than the 5F results by
factors of about 1.75 (5F LO) and of 2.44 (5F NLO). The relative differences are
reduced when a second tagged b-jet is demanded. In this case we find that the 4F
result lies between the two 5F results, about 20% higher than the LO predictions, and
a factor of about 1.5 lower than the 5F NLO predictions. In both cases, inclusive
H + b and H + bb production, the uncertainty bands of the two 5F predictions,
corresponding to 7-point R/F variations and Q variations by a factor of two up
and down, do overlap. While for the two b-jet final states this includes the 4F result,
for the one b-jet case the 4F result is not compatible with the 5F predictions, taking
into account the considered scale uncertainties. It is worth noting that a milder
form of this relative scaling of the cross sections was already observed in the Z case.
In the case of the total inclusive cross section, this very large difference can
be mitigated by including higher-order corrections, on the one hand, and a better
assessment of which choice of the unphysical scales yields the better agreement [3,
34, 38, 49]. However, only a recent effort to match the two schemes [1, 2, 39, 50] has
clearly assessed the relative importance of mass corrections (appearing in the 4F
scheme) and large log resummation (as achieved in a 5F scheme). In particular it
has been found that the difference between these two schemes is mostly given by
4.3. Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production 55
pT(H), H+  1b-jets
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
pT(H) [GeV]
LHC @ 13 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
pT(b), H+  1b-jets
pT(b) [GeV]
LHC @ 13 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
Figure 4.11: Predictions for the transverse-momentum distribution of the Higgs
boson (left panel) and the leading b-jet (right panel) in inclusive H+b-jet production
at the 13 TeV LHC.
the resummation of large logarithms, thus suggesting that for an inclusive enough
calculation either a 5F scheme or a matched scheme should be employed. This is
4.3. Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production 56
pT(H), H+  2b-jets
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
pT(H) [GeV]
LHC @ 13 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
Figure 4.12: The transverse-momentum distribution of the Higgs boson in inclusive
H + 2b-jets production at the 13 TeV LHC.
the same situation that one faces, albeit milder, in the Z case, where, in terms of
normalisation the 5F scheme performed better in all cases and especially in inclusive
calculations. We therefore recommend that in terms of overall normalisation, the
5F MEPS@NLO scheme should be used to obtain reliable predictions.
Let us now turn to the discussion of the relative differences in the shapes of
characteristic and important distributions. To better appreciate shape differences,
all differential distribution are normalised to the respective cross section, i.e. the
inclusive rates (Hb) and (Hbb). In all cases we obtain agreement at the 15%-
level or better between the 5F MEPS@NLO and 4F MC@NLO samples, the only
exception, not surprisingly, being the region of phase space where the two bs come
close to each other and resummation effects start playing a role. Typically, the
5F MEPS@LO predictions are also in fair agreement with the other two results,
however, they exhibit a tendency for harder tails in the pT distributions, mainly in
the inclusive Higgs-boson pT and in the transverse momentum of the second b jet.
Starting with Fig. 4.11, the transverse-momentum distributions of the Higgs
4.3. Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production 57
R(b, b), H+  2b-jets
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
R(b, b)
LHC @ 13 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
m(b, b), H+  2b-jets
100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
m(b, b) [GeV]
LHC @ 13 TeV
SHERPA 4F MC@NLO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@LO
SHERPA 5F MEPS@NLO
Figure 4.13: Predictions for the R separation of the two leading b-jets (left panel)
and their invariant-mass distribution (right panel) in inclusiveH+2b-jets production
at the 13 TeV LHC.
boson and the leading b-jet in the case of at least one b-jet tagged is displayed.
Similarly to the Z example, this is the region where one would expect the 5F scheme
4.3. Bottom-jet associated Higgs-boson production 58
to perform better. However, again similarly to the Z case, the three schemes largely
agree in terms of shapes, being well within scale uncertainties. Notably, this turns
out to be particularly true for the low ( 20100 GeV) pT region where one could
have expected deviations to be the largest.
In Figs. 4.12 and 4.13 we present differential distributions for the selection of
events with at least two tagged b-jets. While Fig. 4.12 shows the resulting Higgs-
boson transverse-momentum distribution, Fig. 4.13 compiles results for the R
separation of the two leading b-jets and their invariant-mass distribution. For such
two b-jets observables the 4F scheme is expected to work best, especially when
the two b are well separated to suppress potentially large logarithms. However,
in agreement with the Z-boson case, no significant differences between the various
scheme arise when taking into account R/F and Q scale-variation uncertainties.
Once again the region of low pT in Fig. 4.12 and the region of lowm(b, b) in Fig. (4.13)
show excellent agreement amongst the various descriptions. As anticipated, larger
differences can be seen between the two 5FS and the 4F MC@NLO calculations, in
the very low R(b, b) and m(b, b) regions, Fig. (4.13), where the two b-jets become
collinear. This feature is however most likely due to the fact that we are dealing
with partonic b-jets as opposed to hadronic ones. Taking as a reference the Z-boson
case once again, in fact, where this difference is not present at all, suggests that a
realistic simulation, that accounts for hadronisation effects, should largely suppress
this difference.
Chapter 5
Towards a massive 5F scheme
5.1 Massive Subtraction
In previous chapters we saw how different choices in the treatment of mass effects
in processes involving heavy flavours can affect theoretical predictions. While for
totally inclusive predictions we can obtain matched result, for differential results
we need to resort to some other methods to discriminate. In the example of a Z
boson produced in association with heavy quarks, we showed how we can make use
of data for this purpose. However in general this is not always possible, and to
extend matching method in the context of Monte Carlo event generators is not a
straightforward task.
We can start from the observation made in the two examples we studied, Z/H
associated production, where we showed that the five flavour scheme generally per-
forms better. There are, however, regions in which this might not hold true and we
still need to include mass effects to properly account for those. The most natural
thing to do, is to extend the 5FS to allow for massive quarks in both the initial and
final state. The idea then is that this 5F Massive Scheme (5FMS), will have massive
b-quarks that contribute both to the running of the coupling constant and to the
evolution of PDFs.
To extend the 5F scheme to account for massive bs in the final state is concep-
tually easy, although practically difficult, as we would end up having two different
type of b quarks, which might lead to inconsistencies. Therefore we need to extend
5.1. Massive Subtraction 60
the methods and techniques developed for the massless five flavour scheme to allow
for massive initial state particles. Further we wish to retain the current fixed order
accuracy of the 5F scheme in Monte Carlo, namely the next to leading order.
In order to extend Catani-Seymour formalism to massive initial state particle,
it is necessary to work out the correspondent form of Vak,b(pa, pb, pk) in the case
particles a, b are both massive. This has been performed in [18] in the context of
fermions in QED in four dimensions, so we can make use of results reported there
and promote them to QCD and d = 4  2 dimensions, by performing a simple
replacement:
e2Qa aQb b  4 S 2Ta Tb . (5.1)
We further have to define the phase space mapping that defines pi in Eq. (2.20), and
which is further needed to compute the one particle phase space, 1.
5.1.1 Initial state splitter with initial state spectator
We start by reporting some useful definitions that are used throughout,
s = (pa + pb)
2; sab = s  m2a  m2b ; (5.2)
Q2 = (pa + pb  pk)2 = s  2 (pa + pb)  pk ; (5.3)
xab = 1 2
(pa + pb)  pk
; (5.4)
ya = 2
pa  pk
; (5.5)
ab = (s,m
b) ; (a, b, c) = a
2 + b2 + c2  2 (ab+ bc) 2 ac . (5.6)
We define the contribution to the subtraction term, Vak,b(pa, pb, pk):
Vqagk,b(pa, pb, pk) = 8 
2sCF
1 xab
 (1 + xab) (1  xab)
pa  pk
(5.7)
in the case where the splitting is b  gb. In any other case we do not have any
singular contribution, so we do not need any subtraction term1. The necessary
1Although strictly speaking this is true, these additional contributions will still be proportional
to logm2b/Q
2, where Q is some scale. For the example we discuss in this chapter, we checked that
this contribution are stable under variations of the parameter mb.
5.1. Massive Subtraction 61
phase space mappings have to preserve the mass shell, and it is customary to keep
the momentum pb fixed. As a result all other momenta pj are shifted as well as the
total momentum Q =
j pj. The transformations are given by,
pa =
 (Q2,m2a,m
pa 
Q2 m2a m2b
b ; Q
 = pa + p
b . (5.8)
It is straightforward to check that these relations fulfill the mass-shell conditions,
such that p2a = m
a and Q
2 = Q2, and that they possess the right infra-red and
collinear asymptotic limits. All other momenta, including those of non coloured
particles, transform as pi = 
i where
 = g
(Q+ Q)(Q+ Q)
Q2 +Q  Q
2 QQ
(5.9)
We further need to calculate the extra-emission phase space. In particular, we
have
dN+1(pk, Q; pa + pb) =
dN(Q(x); pa(x) + pb)
dd1pk(s, x, ya)
(5.10)
where x dependent momenta can be obtained from pa and Q upon replacing Q2 
sab x+m
The explicit calculation of
dd1pk(s, x, ya)
can be found in Appendix C. the
final result yields [
dd1pk(s, x, ya)
16 2
(4)
(1 )
)12
(1 x)12 sab s v1
dv[(v1  v) (v  v2)] , (5.11)
where we performed a change of variable ya = v (1 x), and
v1,2 =
sab + 2m
a  ab
. (5.12)
We can thus define the integral of the splitting function Vak,b, which defines the
x-distribution Va,b. We start by expressing Eq. (5.7) in terms of the new variable v
and the splitting variable x,
Va,b(x; ) =
dd1pk(s, x, ya)
2pa  pk
Vak,b . (5.13)
5.1. Massive Subtraction 62
where, collecting an overall factor of (1  x)2 from Vak,b, and putting everything
together with Eq. (C.10), we get
Va,b(x; ) = 1
(1 )
)12
(1 x)12 v1
[(v1  v) (v  v2)]
1 + x2   (1 x)2  2xm
sab v
. (5.14)
The distribution (1 x)12 is divergent in the double limit x,   0. To make it
regular at this end-point, we introduce the plus prescription, such that:
(1 x)12 = (1 x)
(1 x)+
+O() . (5.15)
As a consequence, we can re-express Va,b(x; ) as
Va,b(x; ) = (1 x)Va,b() +
Ka,b(x)
. (5.16)
The function Ka,b(x) corresponds to the v integral, finite part, of the  expansion
of Eq. (5.14), and is given by
Ka,b(x) =  sab
1 + x2
log 0  2x ; (5.17)
while the end-point contribution
Va,b() =
1 + sab
log 0
+ log
2 ab
log 0 + 2 Li2(0) +
log2 0 
(5.18)
where
sab + 2m
a  ab
sab + 2m2a + ab
. (5.19)
The contribution to the partonic differential cross section is thus given by
d1 S =
Va,b() dN(sab)
dxKa,b(x)
(x sab)
x(sab)
dN BN(x sab) dN BN(sab)
, (5.20)
where we make explicit the dependence on the is the initial state flux, .
5.1. Massive Subtraction 63
5.1.2 The case of initial state hadrons
So far we have only dealt with partonic observables, we now investigate the case of
initial state hadrons. Firstly, in the hadronic centre of mass, the hadrons momenta
are parametrised as
P1,2 =
(1, 0, 0, 1) , (5.21)
where
S is the hadronic centre of mass energy. While the partons momenta in
this frame are given by
pa,b = 1,2 P1,2 +
m2a,b
1,2 S
P2,1 ; (5.22)
where
1,2 
1 4m
1 4m
(5.23)
The partonic centre of mass energy can be written as
s = (pa + pb)
2 = sab +m
b ; sab = 2 1 2 S +
1 2 S
, (5.24)
and the initial state flux
(sab) = 4
(s,m2a,m
b) . (5.25)
We can thus write the hadronic correspondent of Eq. (5.20),
I = sCF
d1 d2 fa(1) fb(2)
Va,b() dN(sab)
dxKa,b(x)
(x sab)
x(sab)
dN BN(x sab) dN BN(sab)
. (5.26)
The problem with this formula, as it is, is that it requires to evaluate the partonic
cross section with many different momenta configuration, for each value of x, as well
as at x = 1. This is not only inconvenient but inefficient, too, and can be solved by
means of a change of variable.
Consider the integral
d1 d2 fa(1) fb(2)
dxKa,b(x)
(x sab)
x(sab)
dN BN(x sab) , (5.27)
5.2. Massive dipole formulae for other configurations 64
we start by defining a change of variable such that:
x sab(1, 2) = sab(
1(x), 
2), (5.28)
2 = 2 . (5.29)
This transformation defines a Jacobian, J (1(x), 2), such that
d1d2dx = d
1d2dxJ (1(x), 2) . (5.30)
More details on this transformation are resported in Appendix C. After reversing
the integration order, and performing the change of variable, Eq. (5.27) becomes
d1 d2 fa(
1) fb(2)dN BN(sab)
dxKa,b(x)
J (1, 2)
(sab)
x(sab(1))
fa(1)
(5.31)
where 1 = 1(1, x), is the old variable expressed in terms of the new ones. Note
also the sab is now expressed in terms of the new variables, where not explicitly
stated. We can now re-name 1  1 in Eq. (5.31) and combine it with Eq. (5.26),
I = sCF
d1 d2 fa(1) fb(2) dN BN(sab)
Va,b()
dxKa,b(x)
J (1, 2)
(sab)
x(sab(
fa(1)
dxKa,b(x)
, (5.32)
which is our final formula2. The main advantage of having performed this transfor-
mation is that now the whole curly bracket in Eq. (5.32) acts as a local K-factor on
top of the partonic cross section, which is now evaluated only once per phase-space
point.
5.2 Massive dipole formulae for other configurations
The steps presented in the previous sections can be straightforwardly applied to the
case of initial-final configuration. Any other case is already covered by the original
extension to massive particles of the Catani-Seymour method [16]. The idea is to
2In the term
dxKa,b(x) we use a shorthand notation. The upper integration bound, in
fact, is not exactly 1, although that is its massless limits. The correct value is that obtained by
inverting Eq. (C.25) with respect to 1 and evaluating it for 1 = 0.
5.3. Validation: bottom quark fusion with massive quarks 65
take the relevant formulae from [18] and to transform them in the same way as it is
shown for initial-initial case. As all the relevant equations are presented there, and
we do not use these cases in the examples presented in this work, we do not repeat
them here.
We conclude this part presenting the modifications to [18] that are needed in
order to perform the extension. As we already mentioned, the first, overall, replace-
ment is given by
e2Qa aQb b  4 S 2Ta Tb . (5.33)
The only other necessary modification to obtain the corresponding version of Eq. (5.18),
is replacing, in Eq.(4.34) of [18], the mass of the photon, m, with
logm2 =
+ log 2R +O() . (5.34)
With these modifications and the method described in the previous section, we
obtain the relevant IF contributions in the case of massive initial state quarks.
5.3 Validation: bottom quark fusion with massive
quarks
To see how the 5F massive scheme (or 5FSM) works we now present an explicit
example: the production of a Higgs boson through bottom quark fusion. There are
two important features about this example. Firstly, as we discuss in Chapter 3, we
know how to include exact mass effects up to order 3s through matching. From
that calculation we get that mass corrections to the total inclusive cross section are
quite small. Consequently we expect the 5FSM too to yield a marginally different
total cross section. Secondly, this example has a easy enough structure that most
formulae can be reported in closed analytic form.
We start by showing how the massive subtraction removes all divergences at the
integrand level, and we compare results obtained in the vanilla 5FS against the fully
massive 5FSM. The leading order colour summed, helicity averaged and squared
matrix element for Higgs production in bottom fusion is given by
|MbbH |2 =
m2H  4m2b
, (5.35)
5.3. Validation: bottom quark fusion with massive quarks 66
where ghbb is the bottom Yukawa coupling, such that
ghbb =
, (5.36)
and v is the electroweak vacuum expectation value.
The matrix element corresponding to the emission of an extra gluon from the
initial state b has the form
R = |MbbHg|2 =
sCF 8  g
m2H  4m2b
) [ 2(s 2m2b)
(m2b  t)(m2b  u)
(m2b  t)2
(m2b  u)2
+ (sm2h)
m2b  t
m2b  u
. (5.37)
We firstly show that indeed |MbbHg|2  Dak,b  Dak,b gives a finite number.
Putting everything together and expressing R in Eq. (5.37) in terms of splitting
kinematics variables x, y and Q2 we get
RDak,b Dak,b = 8 
sCF g
x y (1 x y) , (5.38)
where we make use of
m2h  2m2b(1 x)
t =  m
h(1  x  y)  2m2b(2  x  2 y)
u =  y m
h  2m2b(x + 2 y)
. (5.39)
The soft limit is approached for x 1, and it is straight forward to check that,
in this limit, Eq. (5.38) is not only finite, but exactly zero.
Although the collinear limit, strictly speaking, does not exist if the mass of the
parton remains non zero, we can check that the quasi-collinear is finite. To phrase
this slightly differently we need to check that when pa  pk (or y) approaches zero as
mb, Eq. (5.38) remains finite. Again this is quite straightforward to see, and in this
limit we get exactly zero.
We now turn to the one loop contribution. At order s, we have that
V = 2 Re(g) |MbbH |2 (5.40)
5.3. Validation: bottom quark fusion with massive quarks 67
B + V =
 +
2 =
2 
1 + 2 Re(g)
Figure 5.1: Contributions to the born phase space of bb H.
5.3. Validation: bottom quark fusion with massive quarks 68
 
2
2
Figure 5.2: Contributions to the real emission phase space of bb  Hg Eq. (5.37)
and bg  Hb.
5.3. Validation: bottom quark fusion with massive quarks 69
where
Re(g) = 
1 + sab
log 0
+ 1 + log
1 2
log 0
 sab
 log 
log 0  2 Li2 (1 0)
log2 0 + 
, (5.41)
1  4m
; 0 =
1 + 
. (5.42)
Using Eq. (5.20) it is straightforward to see that indeed
d1 S = O(0) , (5.43)
which in turn, combined with Eq. (5.38), yields that Eq. (2.14) is completely free of
singularities.
5.3.1 Factorisation of collinear singularities
We now turn to how the inclusion of mass effects affects the collinear limit, and,
therefore, the definition of PDFs. Our goal here is not a precise and consistent
discussion about the factorisation of collinear singularities in the presence of massive
initial state quarks, as this is beyond the scope of this work. Nevertheless it is
interesting to highlight the structure of mass correction, especially in the presence
of parton densities that have been obtained in a matched scheme.
In the standard case of massless initial state partons, Eq. (5.38) would be exactly
zero. This is due to the fact the only term appearing in the real emission matrix
element is also the leading log that gets factorised into the b-pdf and resummed
through Altarelli-Parisi equations, Eq. (2.3). The reason is that, in the massless
case, this process has only two scales mH and some dimensional regulator that
introduces a scale F that separates the divergent and finite part. This means that
we can symbolically write
d2R(mb = 0)  A log
. (5.44)
In the case of massive initial state particle we have an additional physical scale,
mb. This scale now regulates collinear divergences, we no longer need to introduce a
5.3. Validation: bottom quark fusion with massive quarks 70
collinear regulator related to the scale F . However we can in practice still introduce
the scale F , such that
d2R(mb 6= 0)  A
(5.45)
where we define A and B, such that
= A , (5.46)
= 0 , (5.47)
and by O
, we mean terms that are only given by powers of the two ratios.
In this way we separate terms that appears also in the massless case, and get modified
by power suppressed terms in the massive case, and new terms that arise only when
the massive case is considered.
As in the massless case the function A is proportional to the Altarelli-Parisi
splitting function Pqq, by extension we can define the massive A function to be
proportional to the massive Pqq, which in turn is proportional to Vqg,q of Eq. (5.7).
This means that this term corresponds to the term that would be absorbed into the
parton densities in the massive case at leading twist. However, PDFs are generally
given in schemes that account for some mass effects at fixed-order by means of some
matching method, like FONLL [29], ACOT [82], or TR [83,84]. Mass effects included
in these schemes coincide up to higher order effects and it is easy to see that the
order considered in this work they have the same functional form of the function A.
The B function appearing in Eq. (5.45) is just made up of terms that are pro-
portional to m2b . These terms are clearly non divergent, and in principle it is not
necessary to absorb them into an initial state radiation term. However, some of
these terms might be universal and could definitely be accounted for by higher twist
contributions to the QCD factorisation formulae as well as with the introduction
of an intrinsic (or static) bottom-quark component in the proton. Although these
terms might in principle spoil factorisation, we can make sure that they are indeed
suppressed, as we expect from Eq. (2.1).
5.4. Simulations for bb H with massive quarks, fixed-order 71
Subtracting the A part of Eq. (5.45), corresponds to Eq. (5.38)
R(mb 6= 0) S
, (5.48)
which we know from the previous section being exactly zero in the soft and collinear
limit. Further, when it is not zero, it is proportional to m2b/sab  1  103 which
makes it very suppressed 3. We conclude that we can safely make use of standard
PDF sets that have been matched to include mass effects to obtain reliable predic-
tions at the NLO in the five flavour massive scheme.
5.4 Simulations for bb  H with massive quarks,
fixed-order
We now show results obtained for bb  H in the five-flavour massive scheme at
next-to-leading fixed-order accuracy. Predictions with massive initial state quarks
are obtained by implementing the massive subtraction as presented in Section 5.1
within the SHERPA event generator [85].
Leading order matrix elements, including those of real radiation processes, are
calculated using the AMEGIC++ [60] matrix element generator. The differential sub-
traction follows closely that presented in [70] with the ingredients reported in Sec-
tion 5.1. Integrated subtraction terms are implemented in SHERPA using Eq. (5.26),
and this implementation will be made public in a future SHERPA release. Virtual
corrections are obtained from the OPENLOOPS generator [67].
While no cuts at the generation level are applied, in the following results we
define b-jet any jet with pT  25 GeV that has at least one b-flavoured parton in
it. We further require any particle in the final state to have ||  2.5. We generate
only fixed-order events at this stage, i.e. no parton shower effects are accounted.
In order to study the impact of the inclusion of mass effects, we compare the
five flavour massive scheme (5FMS) with the vanilla five flavour scheme, where b are
massless,
3Numerically we see that at the level of total cross section, Eq. (5.38) corresponds to roughly
0.001% of the Born cross section, which is comparable with the error from Monte Carlo integration.
5.4. Simulations for bb H with massive quarks, fixed-order 72
0.00000
0.00025
0.00050
0.00075
0.00100
0.00125
0.00150
0.00175
] 5FMS, NNPDF30_NNLO
5FMS, Massive Pqq
5FMS, NNPDF30_NNLO Zero-Mass
5FS, mb = 0
100 200 300 400 500
pT(H) [GeV]
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
0.016
5FMS, NNPDF30_NNLO
5FMS, Massive Pqq
5FMS, NNPDF30_NNLO Zero-Mass
5FS, mb = 0
2 1 0 1 2
Figure 5.3: The pT and  spectrum of the Higgs boson at NLO. We compare the
vanilla 5FS, and the 5FMS matched with three different PDF sets. More details in
the text.
5.4. Simulations for bb H with massive quarks, fixed-order 73
0.00000
0.00025
0.00050
0.00075
0.00100
0.00125
0.00150
0.00175
] 5FMS, NNPDF30_NNLO
5FMS, Massive Pqq
5FMS, NNPDF30_NNLO Zero-Mass
5FS, mb = 0
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
pT(b) [GeV]
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
0.016
5FMS, NNPDF30_NNLO
5FMS, Massive Pqq
5FMS, NNPDF30_NNLO Zero-Mass
5FS, mb = 0
2 1 0 1 2
Figure 5.4: The pT and  spectrum of the b-jet. We compare the vanilla 5FS, and
the 5FMS matched with three different PDF sets. More details in the text.
5.4. Simulations for bb H with massive quarks, fixed-order 74
We further consider matching the 5FMS partonic cross section to three different
PDF sets. The first choice is, as we discuss in the previous section, to use a standard
GM-VFNS evolved PDF set. As these sets include mass effects at a fixed order
accuracy, higher than the one considered in this example, we claim that they provide
a consistent result, up to a negligible effect. In particular, we choose the default
PDF set in SHERPA, namely the NNPDF30 set evolved at NNLO with s(mZ) =
0.118 [41]. Mass corrections in this PDF set are obtained through FONLL-C [29]
matching and are included up to O(2s). To show the importance of such mass
effects in PDFs, we compare against the same PDF set re-evolved at NNLO, but in
a ZM-VFNS. This means that no mass effects are accounted other than threshold
effects, and massless splitting kernels are used to determine the evolution operator.
The last set we compare against, is a PDF set where the evolution of the b PDF
is obtained solving Eq. (2.3) at leading order, and replacing the standard Altarelli-
Parisi splitting function, Pqq, with the splitting kernel of Eq. (5.7),
Massive Pqq
b (x,Q
1 + z
1 z 
2 z m2b
Q2 (1 z)
+ P (0)qg (z) fg
+ O(2s) . (5.49)
These PDF sets are obtained using the APFEL [86] evolution library.
We report results in Figs. 5.3, 5.4 for the pT and  spectra of the Higgs boson
and the b-jet respectively.
By definition, and by the conclusions laid out in the previous chapters, we expect
mass effects to play a marginal, order  1  5%, effects at the level of total cross
sections. Further, as they are power suppressed, we expect them to be less important
at large pT , while having the largest impact in the lower bins of the distribution.
This is due to the fact that the difference in the mass treatment between the two
scheme is only in the hard matrix elements. Consequently, as pictured in Fig. 5.3,
for example, we see that the 5FMS obtained with the standard PDF set, blue solid
line, somehow starts a few percent off of the massless 5FS, black dashed line, while
they consistently overlap for pT (H, b) & 50 GeV.
We now turn to the comparison with the PDF set evolved in the zero mass
variable flavour number scheme (ZM-VFNS). The difference between the 5FMS in
5.4. Simulations for bb H with massive quarks, fixed-order 75
this set up, green solid line, and the massless 5FS, is that in the former mass effects
are included in the hard matrix elements, while some are included in the PDF in
the latter. Therefore, on top of the power suppressed terms there are other terms
coming from the matching. These terms include constant terms, i.e. independent of
mb, as it can be seen in Figs. 5.3, 5.4, where the difference between the ZM-VFNS
and the standard 5FMS result in a constant shift of a few percent.
Our final reference is a five flavour massive scheme obtained with a PDF set
evolved with a massive splitting function at the leading order, red solid line. We
firstly notice that a direct comparison with a standard parton density set is somehow
bugged by the fact the mass effects are included at different orders in the two
PDF sets. In addition the evolution operator is used at two different orders. As
a consequence the size of mass effects is not necessarily truthful. However it is
interesting to see that this scheme behaves with respect to the ZM-VFNS 5FMS, in
roughly the same way as the 5FMS with standard PDFs behaves with respect to the
vanilla 5FS. The only difference is that we see an overall constant factor of about
10-15%, which is due to the different evolution and mass effects accuracy.
We now briefly discuss the pseudo rapidity spectrum. In this case all schemes
differ by one another by a somehow constant amount. This follows from the fact
that pseudo rapidity is a dimensionless variable, and as such does not introduce any
scale to make mass effects less or more important in any region. We thus naturally
expect mass effects to be roughly of the same order as that seen in the case of the
total cross section. This fact can be seen explicitly in Figs. 5.3, 5.4.
We conclude that fixed order mass effects for this process are generally quite
small, both at the inclusive and differential level. We find that when they are
important they generally do not exceed a few percent. On the other hand, this
might not hold true for all processes involving heavy quarks. As such, the five
flavour massive scheme provides a useful and consistent scheme to produce fully
differential results including mass effects.
5.5. Massive initial state shower 76
5.5 Massive initial state shower
In this last section we provide the necessary ingredients to promote the five flavour
massive scheme we presented in previous sections to MC@NLO accuracy.
The MC@NLO matching combines the fixed order accuracy given by matrix ele-
ments, in this case the next to leading order, with the resummation performed by
the parton shower. The main formula for a MC@NLO matched observable is given
dMC@NLO = dN B(N)
N(t0, 
t[t0,2Q]
d1 KN(1) N(t(1), 
+ dN+1H(N+1) . (5.50)
The only modifications needed in the case of the 5FMS, compared to what is
described in section 2.4, are in which splitting kernels are taken in the Sudakov form
factor, the extra emission phase space, and the relevant phase space mappings. All of
these ingredients can be read off from section ??, with the additional semplification
that in this case we only need the d  4 limit of the expressions presented there.
We start by taking the phase-space formula for one extra emission, [
d3pk(s, x, ya)
s2ab
)  y1(x)
y2(x)
dy , (5.51)
where
y1,2(x) = (1 x)
sab + 2m
a  ab
. (5.52)
This would in principle be enough, however the actual variable the shower al-
gorithm generates is the k of the emission. We thus need to perform a change of
variable,
k2 =
2 y (1 x y) pa  pb  (1 x y)2m2a  y2m2b
1  m
(papb)2
(5.53)
which yields the jacobian
1 x 2 y + (1 x y) m
papb
 y m
papb
1 x y  (1xy)2
papb
papb
. (5.54)
The Sudakov form factor is then given by
II(k
,max,k
,0) = exp
b6=ak
Nspec
 k,max
k2,0
dxJ (x, y; k2)Vak,b(pa, pb, pk)
(5.55)
5.5. Massive initial state shower 77
where
J (x, y; k2) =
1 x y  (1xy)
papb
papb
1 x 2 y + (1 x y) m2a
papb
 y m
papb
fa(/x)
fa()
, (5.56)
Vak,b(pa, pb, pk) =
1 xab
 (1 + xab)
pa  pk
. (5.57)
The last things needed to perform the extension are the phase-space mappings
and their inverted form. This is because we need to keep track of both the trans-
formed phase-space, as well as the original one. The forward transformations can
be read off from Eq. C.25 and read
pa =
 (Q2,m2a,m
pa 
Q2 m2a m2b
b ; Q
 = pa+p
b . (5.58)
The inverted transformations are easilly obtained then,
pa =
(2 pa  pb)2  4m2am2b x2
 ((pa + pb)2,m2a,m
pa 
pa  pb
pa  pb
 , (5.59)
b = p
b , (5.60)
1 x y  y m2b
1  m
(papb)2
pa +
y  (1 x y) m
papb
1  m
(papb)2
b + k
 . (5.61)
With all the necessary formulae, we can now test this scheme on a simple exam-
ple. We chose here to replicate the set-up of section 4.2 and check with data taken
from ATLAS. Matrix elements are generated in SHERPA with the built-in generators
AMEGIC++ [60] and COMIX [61]. While virtual matrix elements contributing to QCD
NLO corrections are taken from OPENLOOPS [65].
In this case we chose only to compare against the 1 b-jet selection, this is because
we can test both the matrix element corrections presented in the previous section
as well as the shower. For more particles the accuracy would only be that of the
shower, i.e. leading-log.
In Figs. 5.5,5.6 we show a multijet merged prediction based on pp  Z+ up
tp 3 jets. where the zero jet component of this sample is evaluated with MC@NLO
accuracy, while the rest of the samples are leading order. We thus have the same
fixed-order accuracy on the 5F MEPS@LO of section 4.2. Indeed this set-up, as
5.5. Massive initial state shower 78
Datab
zbb mcatnlo
Z+  1 b-jet
b-jet pT
Datab
zbb mcatnlo
Z+  1 b-jet
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
b-jet |y|
Figure 5.5: Inclusive transverse-momentum and rapidity distribution of all b-jets in
events with at least one b-jet. Data taken from Ref. [57].
5.5. Massive initial state shower 79
Datab
zbb mcatnlo
Z+  1 b-jet, pT(Z) > 20 GeV
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
(Z, b)
Datab
zbb mcatnlo
Z+  1 b-jet, pT(Z) > 20 GeV
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
R(Z, b)
Figure 5.6: Angular and R separation between the reconstructed Z boson and
b-jets in events with at least one b-jet. Data taken from Ref. [57].
5.5. Massive initial state shower 80
well as the ones presented in section 4.2 show good agreement with data points for
all curves, which is reassuring of the implementation. A more detailed study of
processes for which this scheme is of interest is currently on going.
Chapter 6
Conclusions and outlook
In this work we present theoretically consistent methods to estimate, and include,
quark mass effects in theoretical predictions in a systematic way. We show, in par-
ticular, what is the interplay, using the FONLL matching technique together with
comparison with LHC data, between the resummation of collinear logarithms and
power suppressed mass corrections, for the production of a heavy boson in associa-
tion with bottom quarks.
As the dominant contribution stems from the resummation of collinear loga-
rithms, that are consistently included in a completely massless picture, or five-flavour
scheme, we provide a method to extend such scheme to accommodate for the inclu-
sion of mass effects. This is done in the context of the SHERPA Monte Carlo event
generator, at MC@NLO accuracy.
In Chapter 2, we show how to consistently match a completely massless picture
for handling bottom quarks, or five-flavour scheme, with a completely massive one,
or four-flavour scheme. This matched prediction, then includes the resummation
of collinear logarithms, to the accuracy of the five-flavour scheme, and mass effects
at the fixed order accuracy of the four-flavour scheme. We perform this matching
in the context of the production of a Higgs boson in association with heavy quarks
at the LHC at the NNLL+NLO accuracy. We find that mass corrections account
for a  5% effects on top of the five-flavour scheme. These contributions, however,
are non negligible, as we find they are roughly of the same size of scale variations,
and therefore are a non negligible source of uncertainty. An implementation for the
Chapter 6. Conclusions and outlook 82
production of a Higgs boson in bottom quark fusion in the FONLL scheme, has been
made publicly available and can be found in [87] .
In Chapter 3, we compare Monte Carlo predictions for the five-flavour and the
four-flavour scheme with LHC data, gathered at the centre of mass energy of 7 TeV,
for the production of a Z boson in association with at least one or at least to
bottom quark jets. We find that the MEPS@LO five-flavour scheme prediction and
the MC@NLO four-flavour one, disagree with data by a largely flat factor of about
10-20%. In particular the former agrees better for the one b jet inclusive sample with
the latter undershooting, while their role is essentially reversed for the two b jets
inclusive sample. On top of these two predictions a MEPS@NLO five-flavour scheme
calculation is also provided. This sample agrees well with data for all observables
provided. We find, in addition, that the three sample agree among themselves up to
a, roughly constant, normalisation factor. We then test this argument in the case of
Higgs boson production, where we confirm our finding in the case of the Z boson.
In Chapter 4, we start from a standard five-flavour scheme to construct five-
flavour massive scheme that can be used in Monte Carlo predictions, at the next-
to-leading order accuracy. Firstly we extend the currently used subtraction method
in SHERPA, the Catani-Seymour dipole method, to include massive quarks in the
initial state. We focus in particular on the initial-initial configuration as it is the
most relevant for the examples considered in this work. We describe how to obtain
the initial-final configuration from results present in the literature. In this chap-
ter we show how to construct efficient subtraction terms in the presence of massive
initial state quarks, in hadron-hadron collisions. These contribution have been im-
plemented in SHERPA and will be made public in a future release. We then show
how the inclusion of mass effects impact the fixed-order prediction for the produc-
tion of a Higgs boson in bottom quark fusion, in this scheme. In addition we show
how including, or not, mass effects in the parton densities evolution can affect the
consistency of this massive scheme. We find, as expected, that mass effects play a
few percent role in the low pT region of the Higgs boson spectrum while reconciling
with the standard five-flavour scheme for high pT .
It is important to underline how the studies performed in the context of this work
Chapter 6. Conclusions and outlook 83
help having reliable predictions for processes involving heavy quarks at the LHC,
and, as such, heavily reducing their theoretical uncertainties. When feeding theory
predictions in experimental analysis, in fact, the difference between the four- and the
five-flavour scheme is usually taken as input of additional theory uncertainties. In
addition, as these two schemes largely disagree for most processes, this extra source
of uncertainty is generally quite large and definitely non negligible. This work, on
the other hand, aims at showing consistent methods of including both aspects of
these schemes consistently, at all energies. This eliminates the need of having the
additional theory uncertainty coming from the difference between the two schemes.
There are a couple of interesting points that are worth expanding in a continua-
tion of this work. Firstly, once the validation of the MC@NLO method is completed
we plan to produce a comparison between a five-flavour massive scheme next-to-
leading order, merged sample with the FONLL matched cross section in the cases
where this is possible. Secondly, it is interesting to investigate to what extent higher
twist corrections are suppressed as expected. In particular we are in the process of
testing our newly developed scheme for more complicated processes where we can
test our hypothesis. Lastly we are in the process of extending the FONLL method
for other phenomenologically relevant processes, like the production of a Z boson
in bottom quark fusion, single top production and the next-to-next-to-leading log
resummed pT spectrum in Drell-Yan.
Appendix A
Mathematical Tools
A.1 Colour Algebra of SU (3)
Here we report some useful relations for the colour algebra of SU (3).
For the case with two partons, using colour conservation, we have:
T1 T2 |1, 2 >= T1 T1 |1, 2 >= T21 |1, 2 >= T22 |1, 2 > , (A.1)
so that all the charge operators {T21,T22, T1 T2} are factorizable in terms of the
(scalar) Casimir operator C1 = C2.
Using colour conservation for the three-parton case we have:
|1, 2, 3 >
T21 + T
2 + T
3 + 2T1 T2 + 2T1 T3 + 2T2 T3
|1, 2, 3 > , (A.2)
(T1 T2 + T1 T3) |1, 2, 3 >= T21 |1, 2, 3 > . (A.3)
Combining these two equations we get:
2T2 T3 |1, 2, 3 >=
T21 T22 T23
|1, 2, 3 > (A.4)
and similarly for T1  T3 and T1  T2. Therefore, all the charge operators are
factorizable in terms of linear combinations of the Casimir invariants C1, C2, C3
of the three partons.
A.1. Colour Algebra of SU (3) 85
When the total number n of partons is n  4 the colour algebra does not factorize
any longer. For instance, if n = 4 we have four trivial relations, namely
T2i |1, 2, 3, 4 >= Ci|1, 2, 3, 4 > , i = 1, ..., 4 . (A.5)
As for the remaining six charge operators Ti  Tj(i 6= j), we can use the following
four identities (due to charge conservation)
Tj|1, 2, 3, 4 >= 0 , i = 1, ..., 4 , (A.6)
in order to single out two independent charge operators. For instance we can write:
T3 T4|1, 2, 3, 4 > =
(C1 + C2  C3  C4) + T1 T2
|1, 2, 3, 4 > ,
T2 T4|1, 2, 3, 4 > =
(C1 + C3  C2  C4) + T1 T3
|1, 2, 3, 4 > ,
T2 T3|1, 2, 3, 4 > =
(C4  C1  C2  C3)T1 T2 T1 T3
|1, 2, 3, 4 > ,
T1 T4|1, 2, 3, 4 > =  (C1 + T1 T2 + T1 T3) |1, 2, 3, 4 > , (A.7)
and express all the charge operators in terms of Casimir invariants andT1T2,T1T3.
A.2. ddimensional spherical coordinates 86
A.2 ddimensional spherical coordinates
Leaving out the 0th component, we have d  1 euclidean dimensions that we can
parametrise by means of one length, , and d 2 angles. Let us further split them
in d 3 angles, i  [0, ] and   [0, 2].

p1 =  cos 1
p2 =  sin 1 cos 2
p3 =  sin 1 sin 2 cos 3
p4 =  sin 1 sin 2 sin 3 cos 4
. . .
. . .
pd2 =  sin 1 sin 2 sin 3 . . . cos
pd1 =  sin 1 sin 2 sin 3 . . . sin

(A.8)
The d 1 dimensional phasespace can thus be written as
dd1p = d d2d1 sin
d3 1d2 sin
d4 2 . . . dd3 sin d3d . (A.9)
A.3 Altarelli-Parisi splitting functions
Here we report the unpolarised A-P splitting functions for reference.
Pqq(x) = CF
1 + x2
(1  x)+
(1  x)
, (A.10)
Pqg(x) = TR
x2 + (1  x)2
, (A.11)
Pgq(x) = CF
1 + (1  x)2
, (A.12)
Pgg(x) = CA
(1  x)+
1  x
+ x (1  x)
+ 0(1  x), (A.13)
Appendix B
Matching coefficients for massive
quarks
We give for completeness the expressions of the coefficients Eq. (3.20). These were
computed in Ref. [88]. There are a few differences compared to what is presented
there. Firstly we separate contributions from b and b. Secondly our expansion is
done in powers of s rather than in powers of s4 . Lastly we have re-expressed the
gluon and singlet PDFs in the 4FS in terms of those computed in the 5FS.
A(2)b (z, L) =
8(1 + z) ln z  16
 4 + 4z + 16
8(1 + z) ln2 z 
8 + 40z +
ln z  160
+ 16 48z + 448
+ (1 + z)
32S1,2(1 z) + 16 ln zLi2(1 z) 16(2) ln z 
ln3 z
+ 8 8z  32
Li2(1 z) +
 8 + 8z + 32
2+10z+
ln2 z
ln z 448
 124
(B.1)
A(1)gb (z, L) =
(z2 + (1 z)2)L
, (B.2)
Chapter B. Matching coefficients for massive quarks 88
A(2)bg (z, L) =
CFTf [(816z+16z2) ln(1z)(48z+16z2) ln z(28z)]
+ CATf
(8 16z + 16z2) ln(1 z) (8 + 32z) ln z  16
 4 32z + 124
+ T 2f
(z2 + (1 z)2)
(z2 + (1 z)2)
(8 16z + 16z2)[2 ln z ln(1 z) ln2(1 z) + 2(2)]
(48z+16z2) ln2 z32z(1z) ln(1z)(1216z+32z2) ln z56+116z80z2
+ CATf
(16 + 32z + 32z2)[Li2(z) + ln z ln(1 + z)] + (8 16z + 16z2) ln2(1 z)
+ (8 + 16z) ln2 z + 32z(2) + 32z(1 z) ln(1 z)
8 + 64z +
 160
+ 16 200z + 1744
+ CFTf
(1 2z + 2z2)[8(3) + 4
ln3(1 z) 8 ln(1 z)Li2(1 z) + 8(2) ln z
 4 ln z ln2(1 z) + 2
ln3 z  8 ln zLi2(1 z) + 8Li3(1 z) 24S1,2(1 z)]
16(2) ln z + 4
ln3 z + 16 ln zLi2(1 z) + 32S1,2(1 z)
 (4 + 96z  64z2)Li2(1 z) (4 48z + 40z2)(2)
 (8 + 48z  24z2) ln z ln(1 z) + (4 + 8z  12z2) ln2(1 z)
(1+12z20z2) ln2 z(52z48z2) ln(1z)(16+18z+48z2) ln z+2682z+80z2
+CATf
(12z+2z2)[4
ln3(1z)+8 ln(1z)Li2(1z)8Li3(1z)]+(1+2z+2z2)
 [8(2) ln(1 + z) 16 ln(1 + z)Li2(z) 8 ln z ln2(1 + z)
+ 4 ln2 z ln(1 + z) + 8 ln zLi2(z) 8Li3(z) 16S1,2(z)]
+ (16 + 64z)[2S1,2(1 z) + ln zLi2(1 z)]
ln3 z
+ (8 32z + 16z2)(3) (16 + 64z)(2) ln z + (16 + 16z2)
Chapter B. Matching coefficients for massive quarks 89
 [Li2(z) + ln z ln(1 + z)] +
+ 12 + 64z  272
Li2(1 z)
12 + 48z  260
(2) 4z2 ln z ln(1 z)
 (2 + 8z  10z2) ln2(1 z) +
2 + 8z +
ln2 z
+ (4 + 16z  16z2) ln(1 z)
 448
 628
. (B.3)
Appendix C
Initial state massive subtraction
C.1 Initial massive quarks kinematics
Initial quarks momenta are parametrised, in the partonic centre of mass frame as
m2a m2b
, (C.1)
s, 0, 0,
(s,m2a,m
, (C.2)
(1 x)
s, 0, 0,
(s,m2a,m
. (C.3)
In the hadronic centre of mass we get instead
pa,b = 1,2 P1,2 +
m2a,b
1,2 S
P2,1 ; 1,2  (0, 1] , (C.4)
where P1,2 are the hadronic momenta and are given by
P1,2 =
(1, 0, 0, 1) . (C.5)
C.2 Initial-Initial massive subtraction integral
In this appendix we present the explicit ingredients used to derive the massive
subtraction integrated terms.
The integrated subtraction term, I, is given by the d-dimensional phase space
integral of the unpolarised splitting function Eq.(5.7). The phase space can be
C.2. Initial-Initial massive subtraction integral 91
obtained from
dN+1(pk, Q; pa + pb) =
dN(Q(x); pa(x) + pb)
dd1pk(s, x, ya)
(C.6)
expanding both sides,
((1 x) sab)d3
(2 )d2 2d1 s
d d3  (x ) =
(x xab) [d k(s, x, yab)]) , (C.7)
d d3 = 
41
(1 )
ab (1 x)
(sin )
 [(y1  yab) (yab  y2)] d yab ,
(C.8)
y1,2(x) =
(1 x)
sab + 2m
. (C.9)
Finally we get
dd1pk(s, x, ya)
16 2
(4)
(1 )
)12
(1 x)12 sab s v1
dv[(v1  v) (v  v2)] , (C.10)
where, to further simplify the expression, we perform the change of variable yab 
vab (1 x),
C.2.1 The integral in v
We start by re-writing the dipole function in terms of the splitting variables x, v, s,
Vqagk,b(x, v; s) =
sab (1 x) v x
1 x  1 x  (1 x)
2xm2a
sab v (1 x)
(C.11)
In order to simplify the following expressions we take for any function f :
f(x, ) =
if (i)(x); (C.12)
further, we write
Vqagk,b(x, v; s) =
x sab
h1(x, )
h2(x; s)
(C.13)
C.2. Initial-Initial massive subtraction integral 92
h1(x, ) =
1 + x2
(1 x)2  , h2(x; s) = 
2xm2a
sab (1 x)2
(C.14)
further, calling h = h1 + h2 we have:
h(0)(x; s) =
1 + x2  2xm
(1 x)2
; and h(1) = 1. (C.15)
The result of the first integral can be written as follows
V(x) = x sab
d vab [(v1  vab) (vab  v2)] Vqagk,b(x, v; s) =
(1 x)2
(a+  b) (1 + x2) 2xm
(c+  d)
. (C.16)
When plugging in the full phase space we get a term like
(1 x)12 V(x) = (1 x)12
(a+  b) (1 + x2) 2xm
(c+  d)
, (C.17)
which diverges in the limit x 1 when  0. To solve this problem we introduce
a plus distribution
Va,b(x; ) = (1 x)Va,b(;) +
Ka,b(x)
. (C.18)
with[ 1
dxKa,b(x)
2 cm2a
3 a+ 2 b
(2 c+ d)
+O() . (C.19)
The term Va,b(;) is then given by
Va,b(;) =
dxKa,b(x)(1 ) ()
dxKa,b(x) (C.20)
which yield
Va,b(;) =
1 + sab
log 0
+ log
2 ab
log 0 + 2 Li2(0) +
log2 0 
log 0
+  + 2 log (1 )
 2 ( + log (1 )) , (C.21)
which corresponds to Eq. (5.18) for  = 0.
C.2. Initial-Initial massive subtraction integral 93
C.2.2 The integral in x
In order to compute the integrated subtraction term for hadron-hadron collisions
we need to convolve the K functions with partonic matrix elements. As we dis-
cuss in the chapter, this is far from being efficient and it is customary perform a
change of variable that allows to evaluate matrix elements only for one momentum
configuration per event. We start from Eq. (5.26)
I = sCF
d1 d2 fa(1) fb(2)
Va,b() dN(sab)
dxKa,b(x)
(x sab)
x(sab)
dN(x sab) dN(sab)
. (C.22)
The idea is, then, to find a variable transformation such that
x sab(1, 2) = sab(
1(x), 
2), (C.23)
2 = 2 . (C.24)
We find that this is achieved by defining
(x, 2; 
S2 2
+ 1
1 4m2a m2bS2 2 12x2(
m2a m
S2 2
)2 + 1
2 1x
, (C.25)
which yields the Jacobian
J (1, 2, x) =
2  m
S2 2
S2 2
) 1 4m2a m2bS2 2 12x2(
m2a m
S2 2
(x, 2; 
1) . (C.26)
With this definitions and Eq. (5.31) the integral in Eq. (5.32) is completely defined.
Bibliography
[1] Stefano Forte, Davide Napoletano, and Maria Ubiali. Higgs production in
bottom-quark fusion in a matched scheme. Phys. Lett., B751:331337, 2015.
[2] Stefano Forte, Davide Napoletano, and Maria Ubiali. Higgs production in
bottom-quark fusion: matching beyond leading order. Phys. Lett., B763:190
196, 2016.
[3] D. de Florian et al. Handbook of LHC Higgs Cross Sections: 4. Deciphering
the Nature of the Higgs Sector. 2016.
[4] Frank Krauss, Davide Napoletano, and Steffen Schumann. Simulating b-
associated production of Z and Higgs bosons with the SHERPA event gen-
erator. Phys. Rev., D95(3):036012, 2017.
[5] J. R. Andersen et al. Les Houches 2015: Physics at TeV Colliders Standard
Model Working Group Report. In 9th Les Houches Workshop on Physics at
TeV Colliders (PhysTeV 2015) Les Houches, France, June 1-19, 2015, 2016.
[6] Georges Aad et al. Observation of a new particle in the search for the Standard
Model Higgs boson with the ATLAS detector at the LHC. Phys.Lett., B716:1
29, 2012.
[7] Serguei Chatrchyan et al. Observation of a new boson at a mass of 125 GeV
with the CMS experiment at the LHC. Phys.Lett., B716:3061, 2012.
[8] John C. Collins, Davison E. Soper, and George F. Sterman. Factorization for
shortdistance hadronhadron scattering. Nucl.Phys., B261:104, 1985.
Bibliography 95
[9] John C. Collins, Davison E. Soper, and George Sterman. Factorization of hard
processes in QCD. Adv. Ser. Direct. High Energy Phys., 5:191, 1988.
[10] Guido Altarelli and G. Parisi. Asymptotic freedom in parton language. Nucl.
Phys., B126:298318, 1977.
[11] V. N. Gribov and L. N. Lipatov. Deepinelastic e-p scattering in perturbation
theory. Sov. J. Nucl. Phys., 15:438450, 1972.
[12] Y. L. Dokshitzer. Calculation of the structure functions for deepinelastic scat-
tering and e+e annihilation by perturbation theory in quantum chromody-
namics. Sov. Phys. JETP, 46:641653, 1977.
[13] T. Kinoshita. Mass singularities of Feynman amplitudes. J.Math.Phys., 3:650
677, 1962.
[14] T.D. Lee and M. Nauenberg. Degenerate systems and mass singularities.
Phys.Rev., 133:B1549B1562, 1964.
[15] S. Catani and M. H. Seymour. A general algorithm for calculating jet cross
sections in NLO QCD. Nucl. Phys., B485:291419, 1997.
[16] Stefano Catani, Stefan Dittmaier, Michael H. Seymour, and Zoltan Trocsanyi.
The dipole formalism for nexttoleading order QCD calculations with massive
partons. Nucl. Phys., B627:189265, 2002.
[17] S. Frixione, Z. Kunszt, and A. Signer. Three-jet cross-sections to nextto
leading order. Nucl. Phys., B467:399442, 1996.
[18] Stefan Dittmaier. A general approach to photon radiation off fermions. Nucl.
Phys., B565:69122, 2000.
[19] W. T. Giele and E. W. Nigel Glover. Higher-order corrections to jet cross
sections in e+e annihilation. Phys. Rev., D46:19802010, 1992.
[20] W.T. Giele, E.W. Nigel Glover, and David A. Kosower. Higher order corrections
to jet cross-sections in hadron colliders. Nucl.Phys., B403:633670, 1993.
Bibliography 96
[21] S. Catani, B. R. Webber, and G. Marchesini. QCD coherent branching and
semiinclusive processes at large x. Nucl. Phys., B349:635654, 1991.
[22] R. Keith Ellis, Howard Georgi, Marie Machacek, H. David Politzer, and Gra-
ham G. Ross. Factorization and the Parton Model in QCD. Phys.Lett., B78:281,
1978.
[23] D. Amati, R. Petronzio, and G. Veneziano. Relating hard QCD processes
through universality of mass singularities. 2. Nucl. Phys., B146:2949, 1978.
[24] Stefano Catani, Frank Krauss, Ralf Kuhn, and Brian R. Webber. QCD matrix
elements + parton showers. JHEP, 11:063, 2001.
[25] Stefan Hche, Frank Krauss, Steffen Schumann, and Frank Siegert. QCDmatrix
elements and truncated showers. JHEP, 05:053, 2009.
[26] Stefan Hche, Frank Krauss, Marek Schnherr, and Frank Siegert. NLO matrix
elements and truncated showers. JHEP, 1108:123, 2011.
[27] Thomas Gehrmann, Stefan Hche, Frank Krauss, Marek Schnherr, and Frank
Siegert. NLO QCD matrix elements + parton showers in e+e  hadrons.
2012.
[28] Matteo Cacciari, Mario Greco, and Paolo Nason. The P(T) spectrum in heavy
flavor hadroproduction. JHEP, 9805:007, 1998.
[29] Stefano Forte, Eric Laenen, Paolo Nason, and Juan Rojo. Heavy quarks in
deep-inelastic scattering. Nucl.Phys., B834:116162, 2010.
[30] Robert V. Harlander andWilliam B. Kilgore. Higgs boson production in bottom
quark fusion at next-to-next-to leading order. Phys. Rev., D68:013001, 2003.
[31] Stefan Dittmaier, Michael Kramer, 1, and Michael Spira. Higgs radiation off
bottom quarks at the Tevatron and the CERN LHC. Phys. Rev., D70:074010,
2004.
Bibliography 97
[32] S. Dawson, C. B. Jackson, L. Reina, and D. Wackeroth. Exclusive Higgs boson
production with bottom quarks at hadron colliders. Phys. Rev., D69:074027,
2004.
[33] Fabio Maltoni, Giovanni Ridolfi, and Maria Ubiali. b-initiated processes at the
LHC: a reappraisal. JHEP, 07:022, 2012. [Erratum: JHEP04,095(2013)].
[34] Matthew Lim, Fabio Maltoni, Giovanni Ridolfi, and Maria Ubiali. Anatomy of
double heavy-quark initiated processes. JHEP, 09:132, 2016.
[35] Robert Harlander, Michael Krmer, and Markus Schumacher. Bottom-quark
associated Higgs-boson production: reconciling the four- and five-flavour
scheme approach. 2011.
[36] S. J. Brodsky, P. Hoyer, C. Peterson, and N. Sakai. The Intrinsic Charm of the
Proton. Phys. Lett., 93B:451455, 1980.
[37] J. Alwall, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, F. Maltoni, O. Mattelaer, H.-S.
Shao, T. Stelzer, P. Torrielli, and M. Zaro. The automated computation of tree-
level and next-to-leading order differential cross sections, and their matching
to parton shower simulations. JHEP, 1407:079, 2014.
[38] M. Wiesemann, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, F. Maltoni, and P. Torrielli.
Higgs production in association with bottom quarks. JHEP, 02:132, 2015.
[39] Marco Bonvini, Andrew S. Papanastasiou, and Frank J. Tackmann. Matched
predictions for the bbH cross section at the 13 TeV LHC. JHEP, 10:053, 2016.
[40] Jon Butterworth et al. PDF4LHC recommendations for LHC Run II. J. Phys.,
G43:023001, 2016.
[41] Richard D. Ball et al. Parton distributions for the LHC Run II. 2014.
[42] L.A. Harland-Lang, A.D. Martin, P. Motylinski, and R.S. Thorne. Parton
distributions in the LHC era: MMHT 2014 PDFs. 2014.
[43] Sayipjamal Dulat, Tie Jiun Hou, Jun Gao, Marco Guzzi, Joey Huston, et al.
The CT14 Global Analysis of Quantum Chromodynamics. 2015.
Bibliography 98
[44] Stefano Carrazza, Stefano Forte, Zahari Kassabov, Jose Ignacio Latorre, and
Juan Rojo. An Unbiased Hessian Representation for Monte Carlo PDFs. 2015.
[45] Jun Gao and Pavel Nadolsky. A meta-analysis of parton distribution functions.
JHEP, 07:035, 2014.
[46] G. Watt and R. S. Thorne. Study of Monte Carlo approach to experimental
uncertainty propagation with MSTW 2008 PDFs. JHEP, 08:052, 2012.
[47] F. Febres Cordero, L. Reina, and D. Wackeroth. NLO QCD corrections to W
boson production with a massive b-quark jet pair at the Tevatron pp collider.
Phys.Rev., D74:034007, 2006.
[48] Fernando Febres Cordero, L. Reina, and D. Wackeroth. W - and Z-boson pro-
duction with a massive bottom-quark pair at the Large Hadron Collider. Phys.
Rev., D80:034015, 2009.
[49] Rikkert Frederix, Stefano Frixione, Valentin Hirschi, Fabio Maltoni, Roberto
Pittau, and Paolo Torrielli. W and Z/ boson production in association with
a bottom-antibottom pair. JHEP, 09:061, 2011.
[50] Marco Bonvini, Andrew S. Papanastasiou, and Frank J. Tackmann. Resumma-
tion and matching of b-quark mass effects in bbH production. JHEP, 11:196,
2015.
[51] Tongyan Lin, Edward W. Kolb, and Lian-Tao Wang. Probing dark matter
couplings to top and bottom quarks at the LHC. Phys. Rev., D88(6):063510,
2013.
[52] Georges Aad et al. Search for dark matter in events with heavy quarks and
missing transverse momentum in pp collisions with the ATLAS detector. Eur.
Phys. J., C75(2):92, 2015.
[53] Ning Chen, Zhaofeng Kang, and Jinmian Li. Missing particle associated with
two bottom quarks at the LHC: Mono-b versus 2b with razor variables. 2016.
Bibliography 99
[54] Georges Aad et al. Measurement of the production cross section of jets in
association with a Z boson in pp collisions at
s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS
detector. JHEP, 1307:032, 2013.
[55] V. Khachatryan et al. Measurements of jet multiplicity and differential pro-
duction cross sections of Z+ jets events in proton-proton collisions at
s = 7
TeV. Phys. Rev., D91(5):052008, 2015.
[56] Vardan Khachatryan et al. Measurements of the differential production cross
sections for a Z boson in association with jets in pp collisions at sqrt(s) = 8
TeV. 2016.
[57] Georges Aad et al. Measurement of differential production cross-sections for a
Z boson in association with b-jets in 7 TeV proton-proton collisions with the
ATLAS detector. JHEP, 1410:141, 2014.
[58] Serguei Chatrchyan et al. Measurement of the cross section and angular corre-
lations for associated production of a Z boson with b hadrons in pp collisions
s = 7 TeV. JHEP, 1312:039, 2013.
[59] Vardan Khachatryan et al. Measurements of the associated production of a Z
boson and b jets in pp collisions at sqrt(s) = 8 TeV. 2016.
[60] Frank Krauss, Ralf Kuhn, and Gerhard Soff. AMEGIC++ 1.0: A Matrix
Element Generator In C++. JHEP, 02:044, 2002.
[61] Tanju Gleisberg and Stefan Hche. Comix, a new matrix element generator.
JHEP, 12:039, 2008.
[62] C. F. Berger et al. Automated implementation of on-shell methods for one-loop
amplitudes. Phys.Rev., D78:036003, 2008.
[63] Gavin Cullen et al. GOSAM -2.0: a tool for automated one-loop calculations
within the Standard Model and beyond. Eur. Phys. J., C74(8):3001, 2014.
Bibliography 100
[64] Simon Badger, Benedikt Biedermann, Peter Uwer, and Valery Yundin. Numer-
ical evaluation of virtual corrections to multi-jet production in massless QCD.
2012.
[65] Fabio Cascioli, Philipp Maierhfer, and Stefano Pozzorini. Scattering Ampli-
tudes with Open Loops. Phys.Rev.Lett., 108:111601, 2012.
[66] T. Binoth et al. A proposal for a standard interface between Monte Carlo tools
and one-loop programs. Comput. Phys. Commun., 181:16121622, 2010.
[67] The OpenLoops one-loop generator by F. Cascioli, J. Lindert, P. Maierhfer
and S. Pozzorini is publicly available at http://openloops.hepforge.org.
[68] Ansgar Denner, Stefan Dittmaier, and Lars Hofer. Collier: a fortran-based
Complex One-Loop LIbrary in Extended Regularizations. 2016.
[69] Ansgar Denner, Stefan Dittmaier, and Lars Hofer. COLLIER - A fortran-library
for one-loop integrals. PoS, LL2014:071, 2014.
[70] Tanju Gleisberg and Frank Krauss. Automating dipole subtraction for QCD
NLO calculations. Eur. Phys. J., C53:501523, 2008.
[71] Steffen Schumann and Frank Krauss. A parton shower algorithm based on
Catani-Seymour dipole factorisation. JHEP, 03:038, 2008.
[72] Stefan Hche, Steffen Schumann, and Frank Siegert. Hard photon production
and matrix-element parton-shower merging. Phys. Rev., D81:034026, 2010.
[73] Zoltan Nagy and Davison E. Soper. A new parton shower algorithm: Shower
evolution, matching at leading and nexttoleading order level.
[74] Stefano Frixione and Bryan R. Webber. Matching NLO QCD computations
and parton shower simulations. JHEP, 06:029, 2002.
[75] Stefan Hche, Frank Krauss, Marek Schnherr, and Frank Siegert. A critical
appraisal of NLO+PS matching methods. JHEP, 09:049, 2012.
Bibliography 101
[76] Stefan Hche, Frank Krauss, Marek Schnherr, and Frank Siegert. QCD matrix
elements + parton showers: The NLO case. JHEP, 1304:027, 2013.
[77] Stefan Hche, Frank Krauss, Marek Schnherr, and Frank Siegert. Next-to-
leading order matrix elements and truncated showers. 2010.
[78] Enrico Bothmann, Marek Schnherr, and Steffen Schumann. Reweighting QCD
matrix-element and parton-shower calculations. Eur. Phys. J., C76:590, 2016.
[79] Matteo Cacciari, Gavin P. Salam, and Gregory Soyez. The Anti-k(t) jet clus-
tering algorithm. JHEP, 0804:063, 2008.
[80] Andy Buckley, Jonathan Butterworth, Leif Lnnblad, David Grellscheid, Hen-
drik Hoeth, James Monk, Holger Schulz, and Frank Siegert. Rivet user manual.
Comput. Phys. Commun., 184:28032819, 2013.
[81] Matteo Cacciari, Gavin P. Salam, and Gregory Soyez. FastJet user manual.
Eur.Phys.J., C72:1896, 2012.
[82] M. A. G. Aivazis, John C. Collins, Fredrick I. Olness, and Wu-Ki Tung. Lep-
toproduction of heavy quarks. II. A unified QCD formulation of charged and
neutral current processes from fixed-target to collider energies. Phys. Rev.,
D50:31023118, 1994.
[83] R.S. Thorne and R.G. Roberts. An Ordered analysis of heavy flavor production
in deep inelastic scattering. Phys.Rev., D57:68716898, 1998.
[84] R.S. Thorne and R.G. Roberts. A Practical procedure for evolving heavy flavor
structure functions. Phys.Lett., B421:303311, 1998.
[85] T. Gleisberg, S. Hche, F. Krauss, M. Schnherr, S. Schumann, F Siegert, and
J. Winter. Event generation with SHERPA 1.1. JHEP, 02:007, 2009.
[86] Valerio Bertone, Stefano Carrazza, and Juan Rojo. APFEL: A PDF Evolution
Library with QED corrections. Comput. Phys. Commun., 185:16471668, 2014.
[87] The bbHFONLL code by S. Forte, D. Napoletano and M. Ubiali is publicly
available at http://bbhfonll.hepforge.org.
Bibliography 102
[88] M. Buza, Y. Matiounine, J. Smith, and W. L. van Neerven. Charm elec-
troproduction viewed in the variable flavor number scheme versus fixed order
perturbation theory. Eur. Phys. J., C1:301320, 1998.
