Stalinism and the Soviet-Finnish War of 1939-40:  
Crisis management, Censorship and Control 
Malcolm L. G. Spencer 
St Catherines College 
Thesis submitted in fulfilment of the degree of DPhil in History 
University of Oxford, Hilary Term 2015 
Stalinism and the Soviet-Finnish War of 1939-40: Crisis management,
Censorship and Control
Malcolm L. G. Spencer
St Catherines College
Thesis submitted in fulfilment of the degree of DPhil in History
University of Oxford, Hilary Term 2015
Short Abstract
In both western and Russian historiography the Soviet-Finnish War of 1939-
40 enjoys, at best, only a passing reference in any narrative of the period and is poorly
integrated into existing scholarly analyses of the Soviet regime under Stalin. It is my
contention that this conflict offers an invaluable opportunity to test for continuity and
change in the form and function of the Stalinist system. Between the disastrous efforts
of its forces and the condemnation of the international community, the Kremlin was
confronted with the serious challenge of how to portray the events of the war in the
media, while managing domestic and international opinion over the course of the
fighting.
This thesis examines the extent to which the Soviet regime under Stalin had
the institutions and agents in place at the close of the 1930s to cope with the crisis of
war in Finland; to be in command of the military campaign, while simultaneously
controlling the direction of the official narrative about the fighting; and to censor
conflicting interpretations, experiences and information channels, which might expose
the Red Armys woeful performance on Finnish territory. This mobilisation of press,
propaganda and censorship organs in the face of widespread international
condemnation and domestic disquiet constituted a significant challenge for a regime
still dealing with the sudden reorientation of the Communist International, required
after the Soviet Unions conclusion of a non-aggression treat with Nazi Germany in
August 1939. An international perspective is central to this thesis, with a view
towards assessing the strengths and weaknesses of the public face and private practice
of Soviet information controls.
Stalinism and the Soviet-Finnish War of 1939-40: Crisis management,
Censorship and Control
Malcolm L. G. Spencer
St Catherines College
Thesis submitted in fulfilment of the degree of DPhil in History
University of Oxford, Hilary Term 2015
Long Abstract
In both western and Russian historiography the Soviet-Finnish War of 1939-
40 enjoys, at best, only a passing reference in any narrative of the period and is poorly
integrated into existing scholarly analyses of the Soviet regime under Stalin. It is my
contention that this conflict offers an invaluable opportunity to test for continuity and
change in the form and function of the Stalinist system. Between the disastrous efforts
of its forces and the condemnation of the international community, the Kremlin was
confronted with the serious challenge of how to portray the events of the war in the
media, while managing domestic and international opinion over the course of the
fighting.
This thesis examines the extent to which the Soviet regime under Stalin had
the institutions and agents in place at the close of the 1930s to cope with the crisis of
war in Finland; to be in command of the military campaign, while simultaneously
controlling the direction of the official narrative about the fighting; and to censor
conflicting interpretations, experiences and information channels, which might
expose the Red Armys woeful performance on Finnish territory. This mobilisation of
press, propaganda and censorship organs in the face of widespread international
condemnation and domestic disquiet constituted a significant challenge for a regime
still dealing with the sudden reorientation of the Communist International, required
after the Soviet Unions conclusion of a non-aggression treat with Nazi Germany in
August 1939. An international perspective is central to this thesis, with a view
towards assessing the strengths and weaknesses of the public face and private practice
of Soviet information controls.
Although it is not my intention to provide an exhaustive account of the
military dimensions of the conflict, or a blow-by-blow description of the success and
failures of Soviet, Finnish and other international forces embroiled in the conflict,
these developments will form a backdrop to the wider events, institutions and actors
with which this study is occupied. I will attempt to trace how these various elements
collectively operated and interacted in the context of the escalating crisis, drawing on
a wide range of Soviet and non-Soviet sources. Party speeches, press materials,
surveillance reports and other internal state documents will be triangulated against the
available evidence from memoirs, interviews and contemporary correspondence to
build a more complete picture of this turbulent period. The use of new and previously
unexploited evidence from this understudied episode will offer the opportunity to
challenge existing assumptions about the Soviet system and shed new light on the
aspirations and actual achievements of Stalinist control.
This remains a localised view in temporal scope alone. A case study with
blurred edges; the goal of this thesis throughout is to focus a spotlight on the
international dimensions of Soviet history in order to better illuminate the foreign and
domestic concerns of Stalinist regime in this period. The interplay between domestic
politics and international diplomacy will be considered by the first chapter, as it aims
to introduce Stalin as the principal actor in our narrative, dominating both the
decision-making process and public presentation of Soviet policy. This chapter will
set the scene for the rupture in relations between Moscow and Helsinki, while
attempting to incorporate the Finnish debacle into broader trends in the Kremlins
foreign affairs in these decisive months of 1939. The importance of the Stalins Baltic
concerns has traditionally been overlooked within the literature, with attention instead
focused on Moscows protracted negotiations with Paris and London, and the sudden,
unexpected understanding it reached with Berlin in the summer of 1939. These major
shifts in the Kremlins diplomatic relations with the western powers had a dramatic
impact on the ability of foreign communist parties and their Soviet counterparts to
adjust effectively to the official line. It was an unresolved situation that would be
further tested by the unexpected deterioration in Soviet-Finnish relations, which
spilled out into open conflict on 30 November 1939.
Chapters two and three will continue to follow the chronological contours of
the Soviet-Finnish War, though each will be equally thematic in approach. Looking
beyond the Vozhds direct influence (or lack thereof) on events, we will consider three
essential elements of Stalinist control in this period: the supporting cast among the
leadership, the official script, and the stage direction provided by the centre. The
second chapter will introduce the first of these elements, bringing other principal
characters onto the stage, before exploring the part played by Stalins inner circle.
The second chapters attention to the activities of Andrei Zhdanov and Otto Kuusinen
will then allow the introduction of a second key element of control  the importance
of language and ideology at the outbreak and escalation of the fighting. The chapter
provides a close study of the official script for the war  circulated by the Kremlin
through the domestic and international communist press  while giving due attention
to that scripts many shifting priorities and rhetorical twists and turns. In particular,
the chapter will seek to demonstrate a persistent failure by the existing scholarship to
acknowledge the importance of an established terminology of terror in the
presentation of opponents by communists at home and abroad.
Chapter three focuses on the third element of Stalinist control via its treatment
of lower level functionaries and the more indirect stage direction from the Kremlin to
which they responded. Tracing this process, the chapter will concentrate, above all, on
the activities of the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union (TASS) and the interaction
between its offices in Moscow, London and New York. Signals relayed from the
centre in Moscow played a crucial but inconsistent role in mobilising this key
institution of state during what proved to be a period of significant change in the
Telegraph Agencys role and responsibilities within the propaganda machinery. This
thesis will trace how, from the early stages of the relationship between the Telegraph
Agency leadership and Stalin, the responsibilities of TASS became broader and more
rigorously exploited. Eventually emerging as a global mouthpiece, pseudo-espionage
network, tool of foreign policy, and versatile propaganda weapon for the Soviet
Union, it was employed by a regime desperate to limit the damage caused by global
condemnation of the invasion and the faltering position of the Communist
International.
Turning our gaze inwards, chapter four will offer a view of proceedings from
the Leningrad region and seek to understand the extent to which the crisis impacted
on the daily life and outlook of Soviet citizens close to the front-line. It will
demonstrate that the engagement of the population with Soviet press campaigns and
the official portrayal of the war was often selective, with many people responding as
much to familial connections and a sense of civic duty, as to an explicit loyalty (or
disloyalty) to the regime, or any credence given to the official line. The complexity of
individual responses to the war is preserved in the abundance of surviving letters and
gifts gathered for Soviet troops, and the attention paid to public commentary, gossip
and rumours in the records of party and state surveillance organs. The chapter
questions whether the failure of the regime to produce a consistent line on the conflict
had a discernable impact on popular attitudes to the fighting. In addition, unofficial
sources of information that permeated amongst the population continued to operate in
parallel to the official channels of information about the fighting. Taken together,
popular engagement with these sources indicates how a critical awareness about
developments at home and abroad persisted for many Soviet citizens, something that
had not been quashed by the high point of repressions witnessed at the end of the
1930s.
The final chapter will reflect on the closing stages of the war and the concerted
effort made by the Party to rewrite its history, going to great lengths to silence any
conflicting voices that might undermine the new narrative. It was a narrative that
focused, principally, on the myth of the Mannerheim Line and the Red Armys
overcoming of a seemingly impenetrable set of defences built with the guidance and
material support of Finlands European partners. While the public face of the conflict
was uniformly positive, privately, Stalin and his subordinates pored over the mistakes
made and the lessons learned in a striking interplay that reveals the military capacity,
leadership tactics and political preoccupations of the General Secretary. The relative
candour with which those present could speak in this context is contrasted with the
general uniformity and orthodoxy on display in regional discussions and public
displays of popular support for the Soviet victory and a widespread failure to come
to terms with the (actual) human costs of war. The chapter closes with a look at the
treatment of Soviet prisoners of war, incorporating new archival and memoir evidence
gathered in the course of my research. It remains a particularly sensitive aspect of a
conflict, which, more generally, fails to maintain a prominent place in contemporary
understanding and acknowledgement of this difficult period.
Acknowledgements
My interest in the Soviet-Finnish War and its impact on the international
communist movement initially grew from my own perceived ignorance and the
nagging itch of intellectual curiosity. As an undergraduate, my first forays into the
archives of the Communist Party of Great Britain uncovered references to a war of
which I maintained no prior knowledge. I soon realised that I was not alone in that
regard. It is a topic that continued to fascinate the more I delved into its history.
Almost a decade later, while I still make no claims to be an authority on every facet of
the war, I have at least satiated my own scholarly interest. I hope, too, that I can offer
some perspective on the conflict for the reader, whatever their previous experience of
this turbulent period.
This current thesis is the culmination of many years of hard graft. Though it is
intended to be the product of individual endeavour, its completion would not have
been possible without the generous support, academic insight and guiding hand of
family, friends and comrades-in-arms. Throughout my research, I have been
incredibly fortunate to be able to draw on the knowledge and experience of my
supervisor, Bob Service. It is to Bob that I credit, first and foremost, with the planting
of a seed, which promptly bloomed into a passion for historical research and a desire
to delve into the Soviet archives. He remains a great teacher, mentor and friend.
Jon Waterlow, as both a friend and colleague at Oxford, has been a regular
source of direction in my efforts to navigate the many challenges of historical
research and a fledgling academic career. His sharp wit, scholarly eye and
sympathetic ear have been much appreciated in recent years, and his commentary and
critique have contributed immensely to this thesis.
My thanks to David Brandenberger, Arch Getty, Colin Gregory-Moores,
James Harris, David Priestland, James Ryan and Christopher Stolarski for their
willingness to read sections while still in progress, and for the helpful advice and
encouragement they offered so unreservedly. The attendees of the regular DPhil
Writers Workshops, organised by the Humanities Division at Oxford, provided first-
rate feedback and important lessons on how to effectively shape my academic prose.
Special mention is reserved for the workshops co-ordinator, John Miles, for
introducing me to life and career of Bertolt Brecht. Stephen Wand has patiently and
expertly managed the unenviable task of proofing my work (any outstanding errors, of
course, remain my own responsibility). Additionally, this thesis has benefited hugely
from the final shaping and polishing facilitated by my examiners, Dan Healey and
Matthew Lenoe. Their critical feedback, comprehensive commentary and professional
perspective have helped bring this project to a fitting close.
Many scholars that I have met along the way have immeasurably enhanced my
time in the Russian archives. Their insights into the workings and records of the
former-Soviet Union have contributed enormously to this project. In particular, my
thanks go to the cohort of British and North American researchers who provided
welcome comradeship during my first period of research in Moscow. Furthermore,
my ability to overcome the challenge of learning the Russian language at such a
frenetic pace would have been insurmountable were it not for Bart Leenhouts,
Katerina Polyakova and the rest of the staff and students of the Petrion Language
School in St. Petersburg.
Finally, and most significantly, it is the unwavering love and support offered
by my family that has allowed me to selfishly pursue my desire to, one day, become a
proper historian. For this reason and countless others, I dedicate this work to my
parents.
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements 1
Introduction 5
Chapter 1: Politics and Diplomacy 49
Chapter 2: Crisis-management, Censorship, Control 85
Chapter 3: Signals from Stalin 126
Chapter 4: Life in Leningrad 161
Chapter 5: Silencing the Past 201
Conclusion 235
Bibliography 244
Introduction
So much the worse for him who took the comedy seriously, who only saw
what happened on the stage, and not the machinery behind it.
Arthur Koestler, Darkness At Noon
On the whole the English intelligentsia have opposed Hitler, but only at
the price of accepting Stalin. Most of them are perfectly ready for
dictatorial methods, secret police, systematic falsification of history etc. so
long as they feel that it is on our side.
George Orwell, Letter to Noel Willmett
Setting the Scene
On the 25 May 1940, a handwritten memo left the personnel department of the
General Post Office, destined for the desk of Roger Hollis of the British Secret
Services. The author, G. A. Harlow, attached to the note a specimen copy drawn from
private correspondence recently intercepted on their way to William (Willie)
Gallacher. Harlows expressed aim was to direct MI5s attention to a sudden increase
in the volume of mail directed to Gallacher, a prominent member of the Communist
Party of Great Britain (CPGB).
An important element of scene setting takes place at points throughout my thesis. For my
introduction, I first seek to situate the Soviet-Finnish War within its international context via two
parallel and interwoven narratives, which together offer a view of the complex and interrelated nature
of events during this turbulent period. For readers seeking the discussion of research aims, a review of
the existing literature, an outline of sources used, and a summary of chapters, see pp. 11-47.
A. Koestler (trans. D. Hardy), Darkness At Noon (London, 2005), p. 144.
P. Davison (ed.), George Orwell: A Life in Letters (New York, N.Y., 2013), Letter to Noel Willmett,
18 May 1944, pp. 232-233.
National Archives (NA), KV2/1753 (Gallagher) 164b.
He was not acting entirely on his own initiative. In collaboration with the
postal service, warrants to seize and search Gallachers mail had been routinely issued
by the state throughout the first half of the 1930s, citing the interesting and useful
information they had yielded about the communist revolutionary movement.
Unfortunately for MI5, on the 14 November 1935, a marked shift in his position
within both the revolutionary movement and the political landscape of the country
occurred; Gallachers election as Member of Parliament for West Fife secured the
CPGBs first parliamentary seat in over ten years.
This unexpected improvement in the CPGBs political fortunes immediately
raised the question of whether such invasive surveillance could be justified now that
its target was an elected government official. Willie Gallacher was no longer a
political agitator on the fringes of British politics, lacking the legitimacy and platform
of a seat in the House of Commons. The dilemma moved MI5 to cancel their official
supervision of the Gallacher households correspondence  earlier warrants had
sanctioned the postal service to include the mail of his wife Jean and other close
associates in their checks  though an unofficial monitoring of the volume of mail was
tacitly encouraged. Even after this was ostensibly ordered to stop the following year,
Harlows actions demonstrate that he understood the importance of keeping the state
well informed of any sudden shifts in the activities of such a high-profile communist.
By the spring of 1940 this need was reaffirmed due to the rapid deterioration of
relations between London and Moscow since the previous summer.
See, for example, NA, KV2/1753 105a.
NA, KV2/1753 126a, 126b, 134c.
A frosty state of affairs between Westminster and the Kremlin had continued
to cool after the inexplicable reconciliation of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union
under the provisos of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. Their carving up of Central and
Eastern Europe at the diplomatic table in the late summer of 1939 eventually sparked
war on the continent, as international audiences witnessed the division of Poland
between German and Soviet troops in September. While Allied forces settled into a
state of phoney war with the Axis powers, the often overlooked advances of Soviet
influence across Moscows neighbours to the west and north suddenly spilled out into
open conflict.
The invasion of Finland on 30 November 1939 ignited a further
flashpoint in the Kremlins foreign relations. Contemporaries perceived the
subsequent match-up as a David and Goliath struggle for survival for little Finland,
which at once drew forth the sympathies of much of the international community.
Despite the public outcry, Britain and France proved reluctant to intercede militarily.
However, by the conflicts conclusion, both countries were on the brink of direct
intervention against the Soviet Union; a scenario not envisioned since the Russian
civil war twenty years earlier.
Even as Moscow faced a rapid deterioration in its relations with the Allied
powers, the Kremlin could rely on at least one source of vocal support within the
E. Hobsbawm, The Ages of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century, 1914-1991 (London, 2013), p.
Parallels with foreign intervention during the civil war do not end there. Former Russian migrs,
members of the White Armies that battled with Bolshevism after the October Revolution, saw the war
as an ideal chance to reopen the armed struggle against the Soviets. Mannerheim, as Commander-in-
Chief of the Finnish defence efforts, initially declined the offer, preferring the wars portrayal as one of
a small, beleaguered nation defending itself against Russian imperialist aims. However, with the
reversal of Finnish fortunes in February 1940 he consented to the formation of a Russian National
Army from Soviet prisoners of war. Under the command of migr officers, the first detachment went
into battle in March 1940, working behind the Soviet front and inciting Red Army soldiers to desert.
Though the war came to an end shortly afterwards, they had, in the short time available, encouraged
three hundred men to defect. P. Robinson, The White Russian Army in Exile 1920-1941 (Oxford, 2002),
pp. 226-227.
British government. For the duration of the war with Finland, Willie Gallacher was
belligerent in his defence of the Soviet Union, attracting in return the frequent and
biting criticism of his peers in Westminster.
His contentious stance put MI5 on surer
footing. Monitoring of his movements throughout the war revealed an increasingly
untenable position for Gallacher and the CPGB, with the war inspiring vehement
protest among even his own constituency of West Fife:
It is reported that the love for Willie Gallagher has cooled a great deal
among his [constituents] in Fife. That the Fife Miners Executive had
passed a resolution sympathising with Finland, and declared both Stalin
and his pal Gallagher Hypocritical Humbugs.
The Red Armys actions in Finland, though limited and indecisive, had a far from
negligible impact on the entire revolutionary movement.
Behind the front lines of the fighting the British Secret Services had a further
role to play. The opportunity to interrogate Soviet prisoners of war under Finnish
custody elicited recorded testimony and evidence of widespread disaffection towards
Soviet power. This was carefully scrutinised in the event of Britain and the Soviet
Union coming to blows.
Though privately neither the Foreign Office, nor chiefs of
staff anticipated this possibility for much of the conflict, it became impossible to
discount the outcome entirely, especially in view of the speed with which events were
unfolding and the growing impetus given to preparations by their French allies.
His ability to draw forth ridicule and overt hostility from his fellow MPs is visible even from the
relatively clinical parliamentary reports of the day: Will this spouter of stale sedition go and join the
Moscow forces? No reaction to this attack is recorded from Gallacher, the transcript instead abruptly
moves on to the next matter of business. Hansard, Vol. 357, 6 February 1940, p. 11.
NA, KV2/1038 (Pollitt) 407c.
N. Tolstoy, Stalins Secret War (London, 1981), pp. 150-155. For the original report, delivered to the
Foreign Office on 7 March 1940, see NA, FO371/24850 (Foreign Office) 185-208.
P. Doerr, Frigid but Unprovocative: British Policy towards the USSR from the Nazi-Soviet Pact
to the Winter War, 1939, Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 36, No. 3 (2001). So invested were
the French in the Finnish cause that Prime Minister douard Daladier resigned following his
Following the cessation of hostilities on 14 March 1940, these former Red
Army prisoners would go on to attract the same close attention of the Soviet
authorities as their British counterparts. The Kremlin opted to immediately repress
any potentially infectious individuals on their return to Soviet custody, determined
that their testimony and experiences of the Finnish front would remain quarantined
from the rest of the population.
Silencing men and media alike, the Soviet regime did its best to limit the
damage caused by the debacle. Shortly after agent Hollis received word on the recent
surge in postal traffic directed to Willie Gallacher, two thousand kilometres away in
Leningrad, Communist Party boss Andrei Zhdanov received a classified report from
the Soviet Unions respective ministry of internal affairs, the NKVD. As with the
British example above, the report arrived with an enclosed attachment. Unlike the
copied specimen intercepted on behalf of MI5, the handwritten letter it contained was
being delivered to its intended recipient. It included no postmark and had bypassed
the domestic postal service entirely. However, its arrival in the hands of Zhdanov was
no less dependent on a pervasive network of state surveillance and an apparent degree
of individual initiative.
The letter contained a plea for clemency from a former Red Army officer.
Captured by the Finns, imprisoned for the remainder of the war and then returned
shortly after hostilities were halted, the author, Ivan Andreevich Gromov, was placed
governments failure to come to Helsinkis aid. For a review of recent doctoral research on French
involvement completed by Finnish historian Henrik Tala, see Edouard Daladier and the Winter War
(1939-1940), accessed on 20 February 2014 at
http://theogreofthetale.wordpress.com/2012/05/29/edouard-daladier-and-the-winter-war-1939-1940/.
Tolstoy, Stalins Secret War, pp. 149-150.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 3, d. 121, ll. 42-44. The only insight into the rather unorthodox manner through
which this appeal began its journey to Leningrad is the small postscript added by the author: I hope
that this letter will reach you, it was thrown from my window.
directly into the custody of the NKVD. Gromovs subsequent sentencing to five years
hard labour in the Soviet penal colonies of the NKVD-Gulag system was a bitter blow
after his service to the state. His last-ditch appeal to Zhdanov, head of the Leningrad
party apparatus and a leading figure in the citys mobilisation for war, arrived after
many months of his not knowing the likely fate of himself and his men.
In light of
the desperate manner by which the author sought to send his appeal, it is not
immediately clear why either the guards of Pechlag Camp or the NKVD determined it
prudent to forward this particular piece of correspondence.
It is a source that raises
more questions than it answers.
Though the Soviet-Finnish War of 1939-40 occupied a relatively narrow space
both geographically and chronologically, it impacted, if only briefly, on the hearts,
minds and activities of millions of people. A tragicomedy that unfolded on the world
stage, the conflict elicited a huge range of responses from audiences, whether
opponents or advocates of the international communist movement. Yet its
prominence, like the fighting, was short-lived and the war has not remained in the
wider public consciousness. As a result, the machinery operating behind the scenes of
this theatre of war has also elicited scant attention from scholars.
Originating on opposite sides of the acute political divide that persisted
between Westminster and the Kremlin in these months, the cases of Gallacher and
Gromov together take a small step towards addressing that shortfall. Furthermore,
The handwritten appeal was delivered with a typed copy provided alongside the original. The details
it contains indicate the fate awaiting the many Soviet POWs returned from Finnish captivity. See
Chapter 5: Silencing the Past, pp. 226-230.
This letter was discovered among the personal files of Andrei Zhdanov. It was held within a loose
collection of civilian applications for change of sentence and rehabilitation, filed together for the period
4 November 1939 to 18 September 1947. The tight chronological confines of the Soviet-Finnish War
regularly guided my exploration of more ambiguous descriptions within the opisi of party officials and
state institutions.
notwithstanding the distance between London and Leningrad (or, indeed, the penal
camps of Pechlag), their stories still share a number of important points of
comparison. Each emerges from the shadows of a system of surveillance and
information-gathering operating in defence of the state.
Even as preliminary
sketches within an interwoven narrative, they offer rather striking examples of
government subterfuge and extra-legal activity that  contrary to Orwells claims of
widespread approval of such methods amongst the English intelligentsia  were still
intended to operate under conditions of absolute secrecy, masked from the public eye.
It is a telling reminder that current anxieties over personal privacy and the threat of a
big-brother state are somewhat nave. Though the technology may be different, the
penetration of the private sphere in defence of the public is not a new phenomenon.
*****
This opening panorama has been pieced together from disparate sources found
within the state archives of Britain and the former Soviet Union. As evidence of the
bureaucratic procedures and extra-legal activity of their respective regimes during the
interwar period, these sources signal the importance of understanding the form and
function of institutions in both an official and unofficial capacity. The linkages
between institutions and their agents rely on well-defined hierarchies and lines of
communication in order to function. However, one should not discount the potential
for individual initiative to be displayed by those agents, or a readiness to anticipate
The comparison is not without precedent. For example, Peter Holquist has demonstrated the
importance of the Great War for establishing these practices as common across many of the belligerent
nations. See P. Holquist, Information is the Alpha and Omega of Our Work: Bolshevik Surveillance
in its Pan European Context, Journal of Modern History, Vol. 69, No. 3 (September 1997), pp. 443-
46. Furthermore, many of the features closely associated with the Stalinist system of rule first appeared
during the formative experience of the Russian civil war. See D. J. Raleigh, Experiencing Russias
Civil War: Politics, Society and Revolutionary Culture in Saratov, 1917-1922 (Princeton, N.J., 2002),
p. 2.
shifts in the priorities of the state, even in the context of a regimes unspoken aims. In
the specific context of a crisis on the scale of the Soviet-Finnish War, those priorities
are liable to change rapidly and run counter to past practices.
Additionally, the episodes presented above exemplify the international
dimension of the communist movement and its ability to impact upon both the foreign
and domestic priorities of the wider political community.
The influence of the
Soviet Union extended beyond its borders. It had long pushed the governments of the
capitalist west to battle against its forces in an atmosphere of cold war, well before
any unravelling of the Grand Alliance that followed the defeat of Nazi Germany in the
spring of 1945.
It is essential that we acknowledge the shared and overlapping historical
context from which both Gallachers and Gromovs stories emerge, not to mention the
rapid turn of events to which all the actors involved were forced to react. More
generally, focusing on a relatively confined episode in terms of its chronology and
geographical locus will allow proper consideration of how it was not merely a
question of historical contingency influencing developments, but the speed of change
that had a dramatic impact on the Soviet regimes ability (or inability) to respond to
and manage the crisis. A central theme of this study is a consideration of how much
the Soviet Union suffered from the impact of time-lag in its attempts to establish a
degree of institutional normality and a coherent narrative after the upheaval of the
1930s and outbreak of war in Europe.
In the case of our introductory scene setting, it
Russian history cannot be written satisfactorily on the basis of Russian archives alone. See R.
Service, Spies and Commissars: Bolshevik Russia and the West (London, 2012), p. 3.
The concept of time-lag is taken from evolutionary biology. It is concerned with the extended time
required for any organism to evolve and adapt to its environment via natural selection. It is possible
becomes clear that decisions have to be made and actions taken that might undermine
official practice. This was especially true in the context of a post-war settlement that
returned Britain and the Soviet Union to a state of uneasy dtente, neither side able to
anticipate the drastic rearrangement of alliances that would take place after Hitlers
commitment of his forces to the invasion of the USSR in the summer of 1941.
Crisis becomes a lens through which to study a number of important
dimensions of Soviet history. Centred upon the years 1939-40, one of the aims of this
thesis is to shift attention away from the established narrative of the Great Patriotic
War and encourage the incorporation of earlier events into a broader history of the
Soviet Unions participation in the Second World War. That history should seek a
continuous, unbroken view, from the signing of the Nazi-Soviet Non-Aggression
treaty, through the division and assimilation of eastern and central Europe between
these two former foes, before the subsequent shattering of peace with Hitlers
initiation of Operation Barbarossa on the 22 June 1941. The centrepiece of this brief
interlude before all-out war was the short and militarily indecisive conflict between
the USSR and Finland, lasting a hundred and five days from November 1939 to
March 1940. It was a war never officially declared, facilitated by secret protocols and
backroom deals between Moscow and Berlin and ignited by subterfuge and false cries
of indignation. The forces on the Soviet side were poorly trained and dependent on
inconsistent and ill-defined lines of communication. Away from the front lines, the
official presentation of the war was delivered in an equally contradictory and
surreptitious manner.
that the environment may itself have experienced dramatic changes by the time the evolutionary
process has responded to initial conditions, thus leaving the organism poorly adapted to its present
surroundings. See R. Dawkins, The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the Gene (Oxford, 1999),
pp. 35-38.
Research Aims
The focus of this study is not upon the military dynamics of the war. Instead,
it is the wars ability to influence events, interpretations and interactions between
agents and institutions within the Soviet Union and the wider international communist
movement that is my primary concern. In particular, this thesis will consider to what
extent the conflict rapidly changed the environment in which the Soviet system was
operating. It relies on understanding both the pre-existing nature of the Soviet state,
alongside innovations that were swiftly brought into play during a crisis operating
well outside the complete control of the Kremlin. This will provide a window into the
Stalinist system, which was undoubtedly totalitarian in its aspirations, if not in its
achievement.
This thesis examines the extent to which the Soviet regime under Stalin had
the institutions and agents in place at the close of the 1930s to cope with the crisis of
war in Finland; to be in command of the military campaign, while simultaneously
controlling the direction of the official narrative about the fighting; and to censor
conflicting interpretations, experiences and information channels, which might
expose the Red Armys woeful performance on Finnish territory. This mobilisation of
press, propaganda and censorship organs in the face of widespread international
condemnation and domestic disquiet constituted a significant challenge for a regime
still dealing with the sudden reorientation of the Communist International, required
after the Soviet Unions conclusion of a non-aggression treat with Nazi Germany in
August 1939. An international perspective is central to this thesis, with a view
towards assessing the strengths and weaknesses of the public face and private practice
of Soviet information controls.
The Kremlin was not alone in struggling with the challenge of how to present
the war publicly, with initial assumptions about the ideological implications for the
invasion proving lamentably misguided for many on the extreme political left. So
powerful was the impact of the crisis that bitter enemies found common ground over
the question of the spread of international revolution anticipated by the conflict. Even
as Leon Trotskys great rival, Joseph Stalin, secretly manoeuvred to have him
silenced once and for all, the exiled former Peoples Commissar expressed public
approval of the Red Army advance into Finland from his home in Mexico.
result, Trotsky faced criticism within his own movement and outright mutiny amongst
his US followers, many of who preferred to break from the Fourth International than
be seen to condone the conflict on ideological grounds.
Trotsky struggled to
reconcile his political and ideological preconceptions with the rapidly unfolding
events in Finland: We cannot forsee (sic) all the military episodes, the ups and downs
of purely tactical interest, but they dont change the general strategical line of
events.
British communists loyal to Stalin, already reeling from the news of the
Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, grappled with the realities of civilian casualties and the
bombing of Helsinki. The public faade of the Party remained orientated to Moscow
A. O. Chubaryan and H. Shukman (eds.), Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War 1939-40 (London,
2002), p. xxi.
A measured criticism of the invasion only came after the conclusion of peace, when he finally
conceded to pressure from the Fourth International. Robert Alexander, International Trotskyism, 1929-
1985: A Documented Analysis of the Movement (Durham and London, 1991), pp. 286-287.
Hoover Institution (HI), TC 10/88, (5 January 1940).
as best it could in the context of the unravelling situation. Privately, its leaders
tentatively acknowledged the unfortunate outcome of Soviet air raids and advised that
the broader question of Finland was best avoided in public debate.
Thus, besides
offering a perspective on the international dimensions of this conflict, this thesis will
also pay careful attention to how the complimentary role of ideology  operating not
as a fixed view of the world, but allowing for a shifting and adaptive response to
events  at times produced a relatively pragmatic approach to the war amongst
communists loyal to Moscow. Such pragmatism was not a new phenomenon, but
relied on rhetorical tropes and evocative imagery with changing points of emphasis. It
was an ideology that was not solely shaped by the tenets of Marxism-Leninism, but
drew on a collective history stretching back to the revolutions of 1917 and the civil
war struggles between Reds and Whites.
Regardless of ones political orientation, class or occupation, the war was
many things to many men.
Even within the borders of the Soviet Union the war
drew condemnation and celebration alike. It could be a chance of redemption for the
politically compromised, or a final straw for those who had experienced the
repressions of friends and family earlier in the decade. Some sought personal gain and
professional advancement; some preferred to bury their heads in the sand or dismissed
The circular Speakers Notes on Finland, issued by the Propaganda Committee shortly after the
outbreak of the hostilities, reveals an immediate awareness of the potential damage the war could have
on the British Partys position. Labour History Archive (LHA), CP/IND/MONT/18/01 (Montague).
James Ryan (Cardiff University) has recently contributed important research in this area for the years
of revolution and civil war in Russia. His insistence on the complex and shifting nature of ideology,
visible in the Bolshevik struggle for power, is one that I share. James Ryan, Lenins Terror: The
Ideological Origins of Early Soviet State Violence (London, 2012), p. 186. My thanks go to James for
providing a copy of a forthcoming article, The Sacralization of Violence: Bolshevik Justifications for
Violence and Terror during the Civil War, which helped inform this thesiss treatment of the early
relationship of the Bolsheviks to state-sponsored violence.
For a range of contemporary sources reacting to events in Finland, see The Winter War.
Contemporary publications, press reports, comments and news, 1939-1940, accessed on 3 April 2015
at http://www.histdoc.net/history/press.html. A more satirical view of proceedings in the Baltic is
offered via contemporary cartoons of the period. See R. Douglas, The World War 1939-1945: The
Cartoonists Vision (London and New York, N.Y., 1990), pp. 20-29.
the war as Moscows concern alone. Many more maintained wild theories and
desperately tuned their ears to the rumours that spread through unofficial channels of
communication, subverting state censorship of correspondence and media alike. Yet
for all these nuances of ideas and experiences, challenges to notions of state in its
operations and offices, insights into the political and ideological precepts of the actors
involved, the war, and this interim period in general, remain very much on the fringes
of academic study and popular understanding. This thesis, therefore, aims to fill that
gap in our knowledge and to use this case study as a means to advance our
understanding of the information controls at the disposal of the Kremlin, the
responsiveness of central and regional institutions to signals from Moscow, and the
circulation of alternative narratives and unofficial information amongst low level
actors in response to hesitation, prevarication, backtracking and even silence on the
part of the ruling regime.
Interacting with the many dimensions of this thesis  the international, the
ideological, the concern with information control and interplay between actors at each
level of the political and social hierarchy  will be the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet
Union (TASS). Its story, like that of the Soviet-Finnish War, is underdeveloped and
its importance often overlooked entirely in the scholarly literature. Why this has
occurred requires an assessment of the current state of the historiography,
acknowledging the limited presence that this key institution of state and the war more
generally have maintained within the literature.
Literature Review
Historians, according to Eric Hobsbawm, are the professional remembrancers
of what their fellow-citizens wish to forget.
Regrettably, where the Soviet-Finnish
War is concerned, its place in the public consciousness has been maintained by
neither popular engagement nor persistent and rigorous professional interrogation of
the past. For both western and Russian scholars alike, it emerges from a period of
history that largely remains a dead spot of scholarly inquiry.
The reasons for this are
determined by particular aspects of the war and its lasting impact on the histories of
both these groups. The underdeveloped nature of this topic also points to broader
trends within the historiography that deserve to be addressed.
In Russia, there is a strong cultural element that still guides the literature and
the countrys present understanding and engagement with its recent past. Any sense of
the Second World War beginning with Germanys invasion of Poland on 1 September
1939  or the Soviet invasion, which followed on 17 September  is overshadowed by
popular commemoration of the Great Patriotic (or Fatherland) War. Commencing
Hobsbawm, Age of Extremes, p. 103.This concise definition recently appeared in a discussion of
ongoing attempts to interrogate central and eastern Europes recent past and explore the problem of
remembering communism. M. Todorova (ed.), Remembering Communism: Genres of Representation
(New York, N.Y., 2010), p. 15. This study surveys the methodologies and findings of numerous
disciplines within the spectrum of humanities and social sciences. Its central concern remains one of
how scholars contribute to and understand this process of remembering  conveniently sidestepping
the more loaded terminology of memory  a question equally pertinent to our present study.
The obvious exception is Finland, for whom the war remains an important part of their national
history. However, the historiography and popular understanding of Finlands experience of the broader
Second World War is not without its own points of contention. See V. Kivimki, Between Defeat and
Victory: Finnish Memory Culture of the Second World War, Scandinavian Journal of History, Vol.
37, No. 4 (September 2012). Although this thesis is concerned primarily with Moscows side of the
story, Finnish works in translation will be referenced where appropriate and when they help clarify
many of the myths and distortions offered by Soviet sources.
with the Nazi invasion on 22 June 1941, it remains a distinct and far more loaded
notion of the Second World War.
Those few works specifically related to the Finnish War have typically centred
on archival collections and other primary source material. One of the most important
contributions to the topic to appear from Russia in the last two decades is the verbatim
transcript of Stalins post-conflict meeting with his military leadership to assess the
lessons of the war and the inadequacies of the Red Army. Appearing in Russian,
Finnish and English editions, as a source, it still remains poorly integrated into either
western or Russian historiography. Though admittedly published after the last major
study of the war to appear in English  Carl Van Dykes monograph on the military
developments of the campaign
 the full transcript of the meeting deserves wider
recognition as a revealing source for specialists in military history and for its
contribution to our understanding of Stalins military capacity, leadership style and
political preoccupations.
The seventieth anniversary of the wars conclusion provided further
revelations in the form of documentary evidence held within the former archives of
the NKVD in Moscow and Leningrad. These collections offer precious insights into
the channels of information that, bypassing much of the military leadership, informed
the political centre of developments at the front and among the civilian population,
A. Applebaum, Gulag: A History of the Soviet Camps (London, 2003), p. 373.
C. Van Dyke, The Soviet Invasion of Finland, 1939-40 (London and Portland, Oregon, 1997).
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War. For the Russian edition, published with
accompanying analysis of war across two volumes, see O. A. Rzheshevskii, O. Vehvilinen and E. N.
Kulkov, Zimniaia Voina, 1939-1940 (2 vols., Moscow, 1999).
who remained under constant surveillance.
Despite the invaluable contribution these
sources could make to our understanding of high politics and popular opinion in this
period, they too have not been exposed to rigorous analysis. Furthermore, astute
interrogation, both of the archives from which they are drawn, and the broader
materials available to us, reveal additional shortcomings and challenges to the
investigation of the Soviet-Finnish War on the basis of official documents.
Western writing has not escaped the influence of this sharp demarcation point
for the Soviet Unions entry into the Second World War. As a synthesis of post-Soviet
scholarship, the Cambridge History of Russias third volume is typical of the kind of
periodisation that has taken place. The books chapter progression jumps from David
Shearers treatment of Stalinism  up to and including the end of the Great Terror
 through to John Barber and Mark Harrisons study of the Patriotic War. The
events following the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact (including the
occupation of territories of eastern Europe and the war with Finland) are reduced to a
few passing remarks. The Finnish campaign is initially summarised as a mere attack
and there is little sense of a prolonged expenditure of manpower or military
capacity.
S. K. Bernyev and A. I. Ruspasov (eds.), Zimniaia Voina 1939-1940 gg. v Dokumentakh NKVD (St.
Petersburg, 2010); A. V. Sakharov, V. S. Khristoforov and T.Vikhavainen (eds.), Zimniaia Voina:
Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii (Moscow, 2009).
See below, pp. 32-42.
R. Suny (ed.), The Cambridge History of Russia, Vol. III: The Twentieth Century (Cambridge, 2006).
Though the chapter goes on to recognise the impact of incompetent military leadership on army losses
during the Finnish War, this limited commentary is still overshadowed by the authors primary concern
with the disastrous consequences of the Patriotic War.
Too often the chronological demarcation points of the Stalin era rigidly adhere
to this pre and post-1941 structure.
This is further exacerbated by an obsession with
the highpoint of mass repressions witnessed in the 1930s, now forever laden with the
language and framework of Robert Conquests pioneering study, The Great Terror.
Thus, the Soviet-Finnish War sits awkwardly between these two defining episodes in
the Soviet experience under Stalin; mass repression and total war, topics that continue
to dominate both the professional scholarship and popular responses to the history of
this complex and contentious epoch.
A further conscious desire to whitewash this period from memory has its
roots, too, in the events and implications of the conflict. From an earlier Soviet
perspective, it is an episode that proved a disaster in public relations. It tarnished the
prestige of the leadership, with Stalin by now firmly established as the dominant
figure at the centre of power (this power dynamic would prove both a help and
hindrance to the regimes ability to effectively manage the war with Finland).
results of the Soviet Unions rapid militarisation risked being brought into question
given the rush and rupture of society caused by industrial expansion in the 1920s and
1930s. The conclusions drawn by the Kremlin on the state of military preparations up
to that point have demonstrated how the war provided a wake-up call. The subsequent
efforts to combat the deficiencies of the Red Army would prove vital to the defence of
the USSR against Hitlers invading forces in the summer of 1941. An often-neglected
point, the very timing of Barbarossa, was seemingly justified in Hitlers eyes by the
For a recent exception, see T. Johnston, Being Soviet: Identity, Rumour, and Everyday Life Under
Stalin, 1939-1953 (Oxford, 2011).
Originally published as R. Conquest, The Great Terror: Stalins Purge of the Thirties (London,
1968). This study will hereafter reference the most up to date edition. See R. Conquest, The Great
Terror: A Reassessment (London, 2008).
Though Stalins pre-eminent position is established within Oleg Khlevniuks study of the pre-war
Stalinist regime, he does not extend his analysis to the war years. O. V. Khlevniuk, Master of the
House: Stalin and His Inner Circle (New Haven, Connecticut and London, 2008).
realities of Soviet military preparations revealed in the midst of the Finnish
campaign.
Equally undermined was the position of the Soviet Unions numerous
supporters abroad, including those satellite parties that formed the network of the
Communist International (Comintern). Among the Cominterns loyal followers, a
young Eric Hobsbawm, as a member of the CPGB while a student at Cambridge, was
tasked with producing pro-Soviet propaganda to defend the invasion of Finland from
critics. The aim was to circulate a Moscow friendly line among British communists
and the working classes they professed to represent.
The resulting pamphlet
probably had only a very limited role to play in the course of events and their
reception by British audiences.
Hobsbawms guarded admission of this episode in
his own history implies a preference to forget it all together. His insistence that the
pamphlet was now long lost reflects a failure to pursue the same aims with which he
defines the historians craft.
His case is an interesting if atypical one, but this
Nothing did more to convince him in 1941 that he was justified in gambling on defeating the
Russians in a single campaign than their performance against the Finns. See A. Bullock, Hitler and
Stalin: Parallel Lives (London, 1998), p. 722.
The pamphlet was co-written with Raymond Williams, who provides insights into the process that
went into its production and the scarcity of information available to the pair when writing: An
example of the sort of task one was given was the pamphlet Eric Hobsbawm and I were assigned to
write on the Russo-Finnish War, which argued that it was really a resumption of the Finnish civil war
of 1918, which had been won by Mannerheim and the Whites. We were given the job as people who
could write quickly, from historical materials supplied for us. You were often in there writing about
topics you did not know very much about, as a professional with words. R. Williams, Politics and
Letters: Interviews with New Left Review (London, 1979), pp. 42-43.
The former General Secretary of the Communist Party of Great Britain, Harry Pollitt, had recently
fallen from grace after failing to anticipate a shift in the party line required by Moscows negotiations
with Nazi Germany. Isolated from the Central Committee and desperate to salvage his political career,
he was still well placed to report on the inconsistent availability of party literature and imperfect uptake
of the official line on Finland offered by the CPGB to workers in Manchester. LHA,
CP/IND/DUTT/15/12 (Dutt).
E. Hobsbawm, Interesting Times: A Twentieth Century Life (London, 2002), pp. 153-154. I was
alerted to a surviving copy of this pamphlet via online commentary made in response to an article by
Oliver Kamm, It takes an intellectual to find excuses for Stalinism, accessed on 4 March 2008 at
http://oliverkamm.typepad.com/blog/2004/07/it_takes_an_int.html. Kamm secured a scanned copy
from Paul Anderson, who posted a comment advertising his ownership of the pamphlet on the above
general tendency, to either consciously forget the events in Finland or ignore them for
the convenience of ones narrative, is something that must be addressed within Soviet
historiography and of Stalinism in particular.
Further whitewashing was a matter of urgency once a dramatic reshuffling of
alliances took place amongst the Western European powers less than eighteen months
after the signing of peace between Moscow and Helsinki. On 22 June 1941, the Soviet
Union was dragged abruptly and unexpectedly into a second world war on the side of
Britain and France. Any prevailing tensions and unresolved questions regarding the
Red Armys activities in Finland  not to mention the Baltic states, Poland, Ukraine
and Romania  could be conveniently swept to one side. This was as true for the
Kremlin as its new allies. By the time Soviet forces finally swept into Berlin and the
Nazis dominance over Europe was crushed once and for all, the slate had been
essentially wiped clean and past indiscretions relegated in favour of present political
priorities.
This whitewashing does not discount the fact that failure to acknowledge the
impact of earlier developments in Finland risks overlooking potential insights into the
dynamics of Soviet foreign policy and domestic priorities, which could, in turn, help
inform pre- and post-war analysis. For example, Alfred Rieber has offered a detailed
picture of the relationship between Finland and the USSR in the aftermath of the
Continuation War.
It is a relationship that can only be understood in the context of
website on 24 July 2004. Thanks to the efforts of my supervisor, Robert Service, a copy was then
secured for me from Kamm.
During the years of the Second World War, Finland fought in three separate conflicts. The first, the
Winter War against the invading Red Army, lasted from November 1939 to March 1940. The second
was conceived of as a Continuation War from June 1941 to September 1944, fought along with Nazi
Germany as an officially unallied brother-in-arms against the Soviet Union. The third and final
the previous three decades of fractious interaction that followed Lenins granting of
Finnish independence from the former Russian Empire.
Yet, even a recent attempt
to offer a more comprehensive history of Russias Cold War, beyond the traditional
assumption that it was generated and sustained by Washington and Moscow alone,
fails to find a place in its narrative for the Soviet-Finnish War.
In contrast, this thesis
will give due attention to Finlands place in Soviet security concerns at the end of the
1930s, thus providing a more complete picture of Moscows fractious efforts to
achieve its diplomatic aims with both the western powers and its Baltic neighbours.
From the perspective of domestic concerns, Terry Martins study of
nationalities and the Kremlins fluctuating treatment of the national question
throughout the interwar period offers an important reminder of the complicated issue
of ethnicities in the region bordering Finland. Home to groups of minority
communities that were all viewed with suspicion by the regime, their subsequent
persecution in the 1930s  both predating and outlasting parallel campaigns from the
height of the Stalinist repressions  would contribute to Finlands position as perhaps
the best informed, within the European community, of the excesses of its Soviet
neighbour.
In the spring of 1940, Soviet prisoners of war returned from Finnish
captivity would experience at first hand the states undiminished capacity for
wholesale repression of undesirable elements. Therefore, a more general need to deal
with mass repression and state terror beyond the chronological confines of 1937-38
Lapland War sought to drive German troops out of Northern Finland between September 1944 and
April 1945, following Helsinkis signing of a separate peace with the Soviet Union. See Kivimki,
Between Defeat and Victory, p. 483.
Where archival evidence informs much of this study, earlier events touching on the period of the
Soviet-Finnish War are by no means as well informed by primary material. A. J. Rieber, Zhdanov in
Finland (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 1995).
J. Haslam, Russia's Cold War: From the October Revolution to the Fall of the Wall (London, 2011),
p. xi.
T. Martin, The Affirmative Action Empire: Nations and Nationalism in the Soviet Union, 1923-1939
(Ithaca, N.Y. and London, 2001).
begins to emerge from this attention to the Finland interwar experiences.
This study
will offer an important perspective on essential elements of continuity in the Soviet
regimes relationship to its own coercive activity and its capacity to exploit the
language and terminology of terror to justify its own invasion of Finland.
The general objective of addressing these various shortfalls in the literature is
not merely a question of resurrecting an inconvenient truth. It represents an
opportunity for developing our understanding of different dimensions of the Soviet
state. Free of extensive analytical baggage and the kind of pervasive censorship that
often hinders research of both the Great Terror and Great Patriotic War, one can
still draw on and consider how numerous existing studies fit into, support or
contradict the nature of the system as it operated through, and subsequently emerged
from the crisis, before its ultimate test in driving back the fascist advance on Moscow.
The focus of this project is on tracing the Soviet states ability to react to
events and external responses to the conflict, while it simultaneously sought to
construct an official presentation of the war and manage the proliferation of
alternative and contradictory interpretations that existed. The thesis will offer a more
complete and complex picture of the inter-related nature of Soviet politics,
propaganda and mass media. The totalising aims of the regime did not achieve total
results.
Public opinion has been shown to be more varied, dynamic and independent
The kind of periodisation that separates pre and post-Patriotic War Soviet history also creates an
enduring failure to properly draw together the expansion of key aspects of the Stalinist state into
eastern Europe  Show Trials and all  at the assumption of communist control in the region. See K.
McDermott and M. Stibbe (eds.), Stalinist Terror in Eastern Europe: Elite Purges and Mass
Repression (Manchester, 2010).
K. Petrone, Life Has Become More Joyous, Comrades: Celebrations in the Time of Stalin
(Bloomington, Indiana, 2000), pp. 1-3.
in thought than the Party desired.
The propaganda state struggled through crises
that were both self-inflicted and the result of historical contingency.
There is more work to be done. Our attention to the closing moments in the
1930s offers the opportunity to trace developments beyond the earlier work of Peter
Kenez and Matthew Lenoe.
Consideration of the shifting official line, those within
the leadership responsible for its formulation, and the key institutions tasked with its
dissemination will follow the manner in which David Brandenberger and Karel
Berkhoff have helped illuminate the activities of the propaganda state for the years
with which our present study is also engaged (though a continuity of narrative is
absent as a result of the chronological confines each chooses for their respective
works).
Since even Jeffrey Brooks attempt at a more complete overview of Soviet
public culture from revolution to Cold War suffered from a noticeable absence of
extensive archival sources, this thesis offers a fertile ground for further research into
the mechanics of the propaganda state.
The abundant evidence available to us from
the Soviet-Finnish War includes archival sources illuminating every level of the state
machinery and encompasses a view of both the domestic and international: from
S. Davies, Popular Opinion in Stalin's Russia: Terror, Propaganda and Dissent, 1934-1941
(Cambridge, 1997), p. 183.
M. Lenoe, NEP Newspapers and the Origins of Soviet Information Rationing, Russian Review,
Vol. 62, No. 4 (October 2003), pp. 614-636. Brandenberger characterises the latter part of the 1930s as
beset by crises after the Terrors undermining of the Partys useable past. From a perpetual position of
weakness, it was forced to seek ad-hoc responses to events rather than allowing long-term ideological
aims to be fulfilled. D. Brandenberger, Propaganda State in Crisis: Soviet Ideology, Indoctrination and
Terror Under Stalin, 1927-1941 (London, 2011).
P. Kenez, The Birth of the Propaganda State: Soviet Methods of Mass Mobilization, 1917-1929
(Cambridge, 1985); M. Lenoe, Closer to the Masses: Stalinist Culture, Social Revolution, and Soviet
Newspapers (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2004).
While Brandenberger does not entirely neglect the events of the Soviet-Finnish war, they are
sidelined somewhat by his concern with the lasting impact of the Terror on the propaganda state.
Furthermore, his generalisation of the shape of public opinion at the start of the conflict needs to be
reconsidered in relation to the abundance of evidence now available. Brandenberger, Propaganda State
in Crisis, pp. 239-248; K. Berkhoff, Motherland in Danger: Soviet Propaganda During World War II
(Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, 2012).
Jeffrey Brooks outline of public culture from revolution to Cold War draws its evidence primarily
from mass media produced by the regime. See J. Brooks, Thank You, Comrade Stalin: Soviet Public
Culture From Revolution to Cold War (Princeton, N.J., 2000), pp. xviii-xx.
Stalins inner circle to the Oblast Committee of the Leningrad Party; from the
exclusive channels of NKVD communications to the political centre, to the city
militia reports collated on behalf of local government; from the Moscow offices of the
Telegraph Agency, to the editors of Communist newspapers abroad, desperately
trying to orientate themselves to the official line.
Earlier treatments of the propaganda machinery have tended to draw attention
to the ideological form and function of literature and the narrowing of its content over
time to target an audience of receptive, literate party functionaries and loyal cadres.
The masses, those outside party membership and the tenets of orthodox Marxism-
Leninism, have fallen by the wayside of scholarly concern. Instead, the preoccupation
is with the Partys attempt to motivate and inculcate the faithful, over a broader mass
appeal likely to fall on deaf or indifferent ears.
However, the regimes desperate
attempts to manage the media during the course of the Soviet-Finnish War reveal
broader concerns with popular opinion as a whole. It brings to light an institution
central to the propaganda machinery that was far more interested in the successful
orientation of the party line on a day-to-day basis than the production of cultural
content. The Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union (TASS), long neglected in the
literature, was a central component of the propaganda state. That its role and
responsibilities increased significantly at the same time as its leading apparatchik
found himself face-to-face with Joseph Stalin, points to a yet incomplete map of the
interaction between politics, propaganda and popular opinion in this period.
See, for example, Lenoe, Closer to the Masses; Brandenberger, Propaganda State in Crisis.
This idea of looking more closely at the relationship between state and society,
including the leaderships willingness to respond to public opinion and adapt policy
and propaganda accordingly, requires a move beyond the kind of interrogation of
NKVD and Party sources initiated by Sarah Davies.
In a more recent study by Olga
Velikanova, her attempts to follow trends in the political centres response to events
in the 1920s, as well as across the wider population, go some way to responding to
this need. Unfortunately, the available material does not facilitate tracing this link
directly.
In contrast, the speed of unfolding events and the scale of the upheaval in
Finland  a tangible threat to the Soviet order as opposed to the debate over the
validity of the war-scares of the 1920s  allows us to track more closely the shifting
language, narrative and propaganda produced by the state both in response to and
contrary to expressions of public opinion.
Our knowledge of public opinion has been heavily dependent on the invasive
surveillance state that permeated Soviet society via the various manifestations of the
Cheka. Studying Soviet expansion into the newly acquired Baltic territories has
further illuminated the methods and scale of its operation. This followed their
peaceful annexation, facilitated by the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
Stalins
In the case of Sarah Davies treatment of public opinion in Stalinist Russia, the fact that the majority
of her archival research was completed in St Petersburg has resulted in relatively high instance of the
war appearing within the cited evidence of the book. Whether this allows us to assume the conflict
touched on the mass conscience of the population of the USSR in general is not considered but offers
an avenue of research for this study. An important area in which this thesis responds to outstanding
questions at the close of Davies work will be our ability to better trace the regimes response to public
opinion in its adjustment of propaganda and policy during the Soviet-Finnish War. Close scrutiny of a
localised and highly contentious episode for the regime, as recorded in its official documents, has
elicited more concrete evidence of these shifts in message and approach than the broader, more
thematic study of surveillance reports undertaken in Davies work. See Davies, Popular Opinion, pp.
186-187.
O. Velikanova, Popular Perceptions of Soviet Politics in the 1920s: Disenchantment of the
Dreamers (Basingstoke, 2013).
A. Weiner and A. Rahi-Tamm, Getting to Know You: The Soviet Surveillance System, 193957,
Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History, Vol. 13, No. 1 (2012), pp. 5-45.
satisfaction at this spread of Soviet influence would presumably have continued into
Finland were it not for Helsinkis stubborn refusal to bend to Moscows demands.
Once established in these new territories, the channels of communication that
ran through the NKVD  being directed at all times to Stalin at the centre  mirror a
flow of, and fetishism for, information in any and every form that dominated the
regimes thinking and operation. This cult of information, it will be shown, was a
fundamental tenet of the Soviet state and was both a positive and negative pressure on
its ability to respond to crisis.
The NKVD was not alone in its responsibility for
gathering that information, but one of a number of major institutions of state tasked
with its accumulation:
We had abundant information [about the situation in the country]. We
received information devoted to the same question from various agencies
 from the KGB, GRU [intelligence], MID [foreign affairs], TASS
[media]. We had the opportunity to compare and balance it. I spent about
two hours reading these documents. However, there was a mass of such
information, that you could see without glasses, that primarily [the
authors] wanted to please the first persons, rather than submit truthful
information.
This account of the abundance and (questionable) validity of official sources
demonstrates how TASS remains one of the glaring omissions from the scholarship. It
is a significant one too. The Telegraph Agency not only constituted a huge proportion
of the states official output in the press but was also heavily involved in the central
direction of the media, its well-established system of censorship and other rigorously
enforced checks and balances.
S. Pons, Stalin and the Inevitable War, 1936-1941 (London, 2002), p. 193. See comments by Stalin
in the diary entry for the 25 October 1939 in I. Banac (ed.), The Diary of Georgi Dimitrov, 1933-1949
(New Haven, Connecticut and London, 2003), p. 120.
M. L. G. Spencer, Signals from Stalin The Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union in the Midst of
the Soviet-Finnish War, 1939-40', Slovo, Vol. 25, No. 1 (2013), p. 62.
Cited in Velikanova, Popular Perceptions, p. 20.
The Many Faces of TASS
The last major study of the Telegraph Agency to appear in English was
Theodor Kruglaks The Two Faces of TASS.
Published in the 1960s, it benefited
from the insights provided by journalists and pressmen with direct experience of
western interactions with TASS and its personnel during the first few decades of
Soviet power. However, as Kruglak acknowledges, TASS operations have always
been surrounded with the trappings of Soviet bureaucratic mystery, marked by a
reluctance to discuss its workings, silence on the subject of personnel, methods of
news gathering, and how the service is financed.
Although the prospect of greater
transparency in the operation of Soviet news media emerged after the death of Stalin 
as a raise in the status of journalism as an academic pursuit in the USSR coincided
with Nikita Khrushchevs own daughter and son-in-laws graduation from the
Moscow Faculty of Journalism  insights into the inner workings of the Telegraph
Agency remained limited to the public lectures of its then director, N. G. Pulgunov.
Furthermore, Kruglak is much less interested in the period with which this study is
most concerned. Dismissive of the agencys Stalinist director, Joseph (Yakov)
Khavinson, the author insists that the status of TASS within the Soviet media
apparatus was temporarily downgraded after his appointment at the end of the
1930s.
This terse summary overlooks a period when TASS witnessed a significant
adjustment in its role, alongside a definite expansion of its responsibilities and
personnel in the months surrounding the Soviet-Finnish War. The current thesis will
pay similar attention to those key activities described by Kruglak as TASSs twin
T. Kruglak, The Two Faces of TASS (Minneapolis, 1962).
Kruglak, Two Faces of TASS, p. 4.
Kruglak, Two Faces of TASS, p. 5.
Kruglak, Two Faces of TASS, p. 34.
faces  the first, its public role as official Soviet news agency; its second, more
covert role, as a tool of espionage. Beyond this basic duality, we will seek to present a
multifaceted picture of the agencys many different faces. Since these faces were
mostly masked from the general public, our knowledge of their importance for the
Soviet system emerges from the archival access now available to scholars and
contemporary recollections provided by those that worked within the Soviet media
apparatus.
In developing our understanding of press and propaganda in Stalins Soviet
Union since the archives first opened, scholars have acknowledged the Telegraph
Agencys importance within the state machinery.
However, the extent of its
contribution to the co-ordination and control of information, both domestically and
internationally, is still largely overlooked in the literature. For example, references to
its broader role in publicly signaling the Kremlins expectations on the international
stage, and the impact this could have on the diplomatic efforts of its foreign ministry,
are often only noted in passing.
Its mobilization by Joseph Stalin, to deal with the
careful management of press coverage of the Moscow Show Trials, demonstrates its
crucial role in public relations.
It was closely incorporated into Stalins role as
See, for example, M. Lenoe, Closer to the Masses: Stalinist Culture, Social Revolution, and Soviet
Newspapers (Cambridge, Massachusetts: 2004); K. Berkhoff, Motherland in Danger: Soviet
Propaganda During World War II (Cambridge, Massachusetts; London: 2012).
P. Doerr, Frigid but Unprovocative: British Policy towards the USSR from the Nazi-Soviet Pact
to the Winter War, 1939, Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 36, No. 3 (2001), p. 428. For
evidence of the deployment of TASS by the Kremlin in an effort to influence its diplomatic relations
with Japan in the 1930s, see R. W. Davies, O. V. Khlevniuk, E. A. Rees (eds.), The Stalin-Kaganovich
Correspondence, 1931-36 (London: 2003), pp. 258-261 (hereafter Stalin-Kaganovich
Correspondence).
Two of Stalins closest confidents in this period, Lazar Kaganovich and Nikolai Yezhov, were tasked
with organising press coverage of the Moscow Show Trials. Private correspondence between the three
of them reveals the carefully co-ordinated publicity campaign, including the attention paid to domestic
and foreign audiences alike. Strict vetting of reports was to be maintained by the Party and overall
supervision is to be entrusted to Comrade Yezhov. Distribution was to be taken care of by the
Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union, which is equipped for this. See Stalin-Kaganovich
Correspondence, Letter 129 (17 August 1936), p. 325.
both the arbiter of policy and its public presentation. The information that TASS
collected, how the Kremlin exploited that information, and the way the Soviet public
engaged with the agencys output, allows us to study history from above, below, and
especially the interconnections between.
Official news of events at the Finnish front  collected and co-ordinated by
TASS  versus popular understanding of them, reiterates the fact that the Soviet
Union was by no means closed to the outside world. Consideration of how TASS
formed part of the regimes response to this disparity allows a view of the mechanics
of the Soviet regime from the Kremlin offices of Joseph Stalin, to the copy desk of
Pravda, via a global information network experiencing a dramatic expansion of its
role and responsibilities. Through this studys aims of both filling in the gaps and
developing our understanding of this complex machinery of state, one can produce a
narrative that draws together disparate treatments and seeks to move away from our
current rigid periodisation, re-establishing the wars significance and potential to
impact on the Soviet Unions subsequent ability to respond to the rapid advance of
German forces into the Motherland.
Sources
While the ability to trace these new developments is, in part, thanks to the
archival revolution that has taken place since the collapse of the Soviet Union, it is
This recognition of earlier formative experiences of conflict having a tangible influence on the Soviet
Unions treatment of war in its propaganda has been demonstrated by Brooks in relation to clashes with
the Japanese at Lake Khasan on 14 and 23 July 1939. It was during these battles in the East that the
slogan For Stalin, for the Homeland originated, later erroneously attributed to the Second World War.
See Brooks, Thank You, Comrade Stalin, p. 155.
equally dependent on exploiting materials that have long been available to
researchers. The Telegraph Agency is an excellent case in point. The insights offered
by the Harvard Project on the Soviet Social System (HPSSS)  an ambitious state-
sponsored initiative carried out between 1950 and 1953, which produced transcribed
interviews of several hundred Soviet refugees
 are invaluable given the number of
candidates with direct experience of working in the press apparatus and the offices of
the Telegraph Agency. Interviewees were routinely guided towards recalling events
and policy decisions that fall within the chronological scope of this study, and often
specifically asked to describe their response to the Soviet-Finnish War. Additionally,
since many candidates were requested to reflect directly on their experiences of the
year 1940, in order to direct their recollections of daily life and routine to before the
upheaval of the Patriotic War, these interviews are particularly pertinent for this
thesis.
The necessary process of verifying the validity of these recollections is, of
course, made easier by the abundance of archival materials that are now available to
historians of the Soviet Union. The triangulation of personal accounts and
professional reminiscences from the Harvard interviews can be done against the
official records of the Telegraph Agency, which are preserved in the State Archive of
the Russian Federation (GARF).
Here one finds further evidence of an institution
For an introduction to the history of the project and contemporary efforts to draw conclusions on the
nature of Soviet society from its data, see A. Inkeles and R. A. Bauer, The Soviet Citizen: Daily Life in
a Totalitarian Society (Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: 1959).
The interaction between the provincial offices of TASS in Leningrad and local organs of the press
are also accessible within the former regional party archive, the Central State Archive of Historico-
Political Records of St. Petersburg (TsGAIPD SPb). This archive holds the local records of all organs
and organizations of the Communist Party and Young Communist League for Leningrad from 1917 to
1991. Although the process of declassification of documents does not appear to be either as systematic
or at the same pace as the central state and party archives in Moscow (no doubt a result of its
comparatively limited availability of money and man power), it has proven an invaluable depository for
materials that show the interaction between the Soviet capital and its regional representatives in
tasked with the coordination of a huge network of agents at home and abroad,
gathering, processing and distributing an enormous quantity of news material in the
process. It is clear from the careful alignment of both contemporary accounts and
official records that ordinary citizens paid attention to the news TASS provided
(notwithstanding the sceptical eye that was often passed over it
). Likewise, the
acknowledgement amongst the agencys employees and other Soviet newsmen that
the process of sorting, censoring and creatively editing these materials before they
reached the public was a key component of the agencys intervention in the media
apparatus is confirmed by both the accounts of HPSSS interviewees and
contemporary archival records. Furthermore, the integration of these kinds of sources
 standing as they do both within and without the official hierarchy of information for
which our earlier commentary is so dismissive - tempers the claim that the channels of
information TASS offered the Party elites were entirely void of truthful
information.
On the contrary, materials uncovered in Stalins personal fond and
among the regional party leadership in Leningrad illuminate the value placed by the
Party, at all levels, on the communication of information (both explicitly and
implicitly) by TASS. Essentially, the agency ensured loyal communists were able to
remain informed of the (shifting) official line on Soviet-Finnish affairs in a prompt
and uniform fashion.
Leningrad, as well as evidence of popular responses to the conflict among the latters urban and rural
population.
See Chapter 1: Politics and Diplomacy, pp. 68-70.
The Harvard Project on the Soviet Social System (HPSSS) is now available online. See D.
Brandenberger, A Background Guide to Working with the HPSSS Online accessed on 20 February
2014 at http://hcl.harvard.edu/collections/hpsss/working_with_hpsss.pdf. Sheila Fitzpatrick has
acknowledged the general failure amongst revisionist scholars to properly engage with the Harvard
Project since the 1970s. See S. Fitzpatrick, Revisionism in Soviet History, History and Theory, Vol.
46, No. 4 (December 2007), p. 79. Robert Thurston is one of the few exceptions and has made
imaginative use of its materials to question how we understand popular perceptions of life in Stalinist
Russia. See, for example, R. Thurston, Fear and Belief in the USSR's Great Terror: Response to
Arrest, 1935-1939, Slavic Review, Vol. 45, No. 2 (1986); R. Thurston, Social Dimensions of Stalinist
Rule: Humor and Terror in the USSR, 1935-1941, Journal of Social History, Vol. 24, No. 3 (1991).
More generally, by focusing on a narrow window of events and a topic that is
easily identifiable in contemporary discourse, letters, memoirs, rumours, jokes and
oral reminiscences, a more accurate picture of how people responded to and
remembered the Soviet-Finnish War becomes possible. The variety and complexity of
public opinion that emerges from such a profusion of evidence is more reflective of
reality than any scholarly concern with patterns in modes and content of speech. It
allows a certain reflection that, in cases where the evidence is still in short supply (as
throughout the years of the Great Patriotic War
), one should anticipate great
diversity in peoples reactions to war, rather than a tangible and over-arching
collective response to such a complex and life-impacting phenomenon.
Unfortunately, for Soviet history, revelations from the Russian archives have
become a dominant trend in the discipline that merely reasserts the prevailing
historiographical framework of this fascinating epoch.
There are exceptions of
course. The acknowledgment of Stalins role in all aspects of the regimes
management traditionally considered foreign policy beyond even his scope of
concern. That view has been overturned by subsequent material, appearing now in
English translation: the Politburo protocols, and correspondence such as that between
Stalin and Kaganovich, reveal, however, that even in the early 1930s Stalin followed
and took decisions on Soviet foreign relations, on matters both large and small.
Extending that work into an investigation of Stalins involvement in the diplomacy
and decision-making surrounding Soviet foreign relations at the end of the 1930s not
only reiterates his central position but brings to light the integration of press and
Berkhoff, Motherland in Danger, pp. 65-67.
D. J. Raleigh, Doing Soviet History: The Impact of the Archival Revolution, Russian Review,
Vol. 61, No. 1 (January 2002), pp. 16-24.
Stalin-Kaganovich Correspondence, p. 14.
propaganda  yes, including that omnipresent institution, TASS  into his direction of
policy. The picture that emerges is one of much greater depth and complexity, with
layers of decision-making, institutional interaction, and public presentation of (and
response to) policy, all of which demonstrate important elements of continuity and
subtle change over time. Our opening chapter, in particular, will offer an instructive
view of this process, drawing on a combination of contemporary press reports, official
speeches, Stalins private musings and the archival documents upon which they are
preserved. As with this thesis as a whole, it does not seek to privilege one source over
another, but attempts to integrate an abundance of materials that can help the reader
navigate a window of time that is narrow in focus, but wide in its ability to impact
subsequent events.
Though they too often remain poorly exploited, the research for this thesis has
established the abundance of sources available to researchers. Deposits in the UK, US
and Russia have all contributed to this study, allowing for a truly transnational
perspective on the wars impact on global and domestic affairs. As noted above, the
main archives of TASS for the Soviet period are currently held in Moscow and are
accessible to scholars.
In addition, regional deposits in St Petersburg (formerly
Leningrad) have also provided the means to trace the agencys work across the Soviet
state, considering broader questions of the distribution of information, communication
and political control, between centre and periphery. The highly centralised control
pursued by Moscow over the international communist movement ensures regional
(and non-Russian) archival research can still elicit illuminating evidence about the
One notable exception appears to be those files containing correspondence between the Moscow
offices of TASS and the Central Committee, A sensitivity surrounding decision making by leadership
during the months of the conflict is mirrored in the still limited classification of files within the regional
party archives in St Petersburg.
Soviet system as a whole. Communications, orders and instructions were distributed
across TASSs network of agents. Any replication of this material within that network
allows the researcher to overcome potential limits of access at central deposits in
Moscow (something I am familiar with from my doctoral research), or the loss and
damage of records at any one archive.
Research into activities of the TASS bureaus in London and New York will
extend our focus onto the international and domestic role of the agency, and its impact
on foreign affairs. In the UK, TASSs agents remained under constant surveillance by
the British Secret Services, providing a unique window into their activity independent
of Soviet sources. Besides offering an alternative angle on Soviet affairs, the British
perspective also facilitates comparative study into the wider efforts to mobilize the
media by governments in the twentieth century, raising the question of its relative
objectivity in both democratic countries and more dictatorial regimes. This has
allowed the incorporation of national studies, such as those completed by Philip Bell
on British public opinion, foreign policy and the Soviet Union, and George Kerr on
wartime press censorship and politics in Canada, while emulating the methodological
approach so successfully deployed by Peter Holquist in his work on revolutionary
Russia and the lasting legacy of the First World War in Europe.
Even current concerns over surveillance, foreign intelligence and the
dissemination of state secrets, through both official and unofficial channels, resemble
prominent facets of the activity of TASS throughout the 1930s and 40s. Amir Weiner
and Aigi Rahi-Tamm recently explored the expansion of the Soviet surveillance
See Chapter 4: Life in Leningrad, pp. 161-167.
apparatus into the Baltic region, following Latvia, Estonia and Lithuanias annexation
in 1939-40.
Their exploitation of newly accessible sources transferred to US
deposits in the Hoover Institution will assist my own efforts to understand Moscows
mobilisation of its media apparatus in this same period.
Much has been made in certain circles of the methodological debates
surrounding the subjective nature of archival materials. However, given the already
incredibly lengthy and politically charged debates surrounding the totalitarian
paradigm and its suitability for describing the effective levels of control administered
by the Soviet system upon society, there seems a danger in now crediting the party
and state apparatus with enjoying an unparalleled ability to manipulate its records in a
manner entirely geared towards the construction of a singular, official narrative.
Entering the archives today and exploring their abundant resources does not give this
impression. One of the greatest challenges faced during any research in the holdings
of the former Soviet state is the glut of material that is preserved, giving the
impression that, rather than attempting a process of selective conservation, the
archives, in fact, became storehouses for every scrap of paper to cross a state or party
officials desk.
Those faced with the mammoth task of preserving this material must have felt
it a far safer and more manageable process to simply save everything, than consider
the risky and time-consuming option of vetting and sorting every individual item.
Furthermore, the Soviet system operated with an all-encompassing series of checks
and hierarchies when it came to sensitive and secret material (of which almost
See Weiner and Rahi-Tamm, Getting to Know You
everything was designated). Mark Harrisons attempts to unravel the paper trail that
emerges from the NKVDs careful monitoring of this system  via the creation of
classified documents for monitoring the movement of classified documents 
indicates the absurd levels to which this was taken.
However, except for the case of
personal fonds and the attempts of high-level party functionaries to self-manage their
own records, a singular, state-sponsored history by no means dominates the archives.
Nor do the many central and regional archives show a consistency across the board
regarding what was preserved, how it was ordered and in what form it reaches us
today. This is as true for material related to the Finnish War as any other subject of
which I have experience from my time in the archives.
Individual initiative, though it surely existed, came at a premium few within
this system had the appropriate status  or absence of self-preservation  to risk
deploying. This is reflected best in the relative scarcity of documents authored by the
Party that explicitly contradict official presentations of the conflict. There was a
widespread hesitancy to even acknowledge the conflict as it unfolded, beyond the
strict adherence to accepted terminology and implicit reference to the international
situation. This was exacerbated by the absence of a consistent line on the war from
the centre. There was disparity between any positive spin the regime insisted on
perpetuating, with persistent unofficial rumours and disquiet at home, and public
condemnation from abroad. In general, silence was safer.
Censorship of conflicting views and sources is not a problem confined to the
Soviet era in which they were created, catalogued and preserved. Beyond the
M. Harrison, Accounting for Secrets: Evidence of  from the Archive of the Lithuania KGB, paper
presented to the Russian and Eurasian Studies Seminar at St Anthonys College, University of Oxford,
22 October 2012.
reticence to consider the events of the Great Patriotic War within the context of the
much broader Second World War, there remains uneasiness within Russia to engage
with this preliminary episode and a degree of second-guessing is taking place as
material continues to come to light. While the growing body of archival evidence
related to the Finnish War was enriched even further on the seventieth anniversary of
the conflict, here the danger of retroactive censorship or selective presentation of
material remains a major concern. Given that these published materials were drawn
primarily from the archives of the NKVD, it seems astounding that the collection
should end so prematurely with only a handful of documents detailing the return of
Soviet prisoners of war by train from Finland. No further files follow this suspiciously
weighted presentation of events, and no indication is offered that many of these
former prisoners were eventually destination for the Gulag.
This is not the only instance where an apparent sensitivity to the realities of
the war is still detectable in relation to archival evidence today. The published
transcript of the post-conflict meeting between Stalin and his generals offers a fairly
candid view of the lessons drawn by the leadership for the disastrous performance of
its troops. Yet Stalins closing remarks, included in the published editions, have
seemingly been expunged once more from the records, as held within the copy
available for consultation in the Russian State Archive of Social and Political History
(RGASPI).
Within Stalins personal fond  listed among the same opis that contains
documents testifying to Stalins utilisation of TASS  other files that are helpfully
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, pp. 613-615.
RGASPI, f. 17, op. 165, d. 77-78.
grouped according to country have nevertheless remained classified where sources
explicitly related to Finland are concerned.
It remains to be seen whether these
materials will become declassified now the purchase and digitisation of the Stalin
fond has begun.
While a project of this nature is undoubtedly beneficial for the
discipline in the long run, its dependence on private deals and the extensive time to
replicate and catalogue documents can leave the researcher on the ground somewhat
in the dark.
There is, in addition, an abundance of freely accessible online materials that have
contributed to this project. Besides increased access to the upper echelons of party and
state decision-making made possible by the Stalin Digital Archive, a growing number
of Russian and Finnish state-sponsored and private archive deposits have also aided
my research. The output of the central Soviet press is now preserved through an
almost complete database of Pravda and Izvestiia offered by East View Online.
Though attention has been paid throughout to the individual and institutional agenda
behind the digitisation and publication of more disparate archival deposits, they
remain an invaluable resource for the researcher and should not be dismissed out of
hand for fear of a temporary shelf-life or inaccurate representation of the original
source material.
Ultimately, any attempts to uncover all aspects of the war must rely
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 389-395. The opis includes a table of contents at the front, listing page
references for a series of dela containing materials grouped by the country they concern. Included is a
page reference for those documents related to Finland. However, these apparently sit somewhere
among a series of blanked out entries when the corresponding page reference is consulted within the
opis. Unsurprisingly, attempts to request the missing dela met without success.
The Stalin Digital Archive, accessed on 20 February 2014 at
http://www.stalindigitalarchive.com/frontend/node/1.
Raleigh, Doing Soviet History, p. 17.
In the case of published speeches by Stalin and Molotov, references to online transcripts in English
translation are provided for the benefit of the reader. When the original Russian is preferred, priority
should be given to their contemporary publication in the central Soviet press (referenced in each case
with the corresponding edition of Pravda in which they appeared). The rapid distribution of party
speeches to the domestic and international press formed an essential component of the Telegraph
on a wide combination of evidence. This is something that continues to be stressed
despite its routine acknowledgement in countless introductions to Soviet history
published since the archives first opened. Our knowledge of events in such a shadowy
and self-contained society has always been dependent on the contribution of a diverse
mixture of unofficial personal accounts, memoirs and anecdotes. These function in
collaboration with the records and documentation that carry an official stamp or air of
archival objectivity.
Naturally, checks and balances of one against the other are
essential, but this is the case for any source, whatever its content, wherever it is
discovered and whoever created it. This is the real task of the historian. History, at its
core, remains a discipline that strives to engage with and interrogate as many different
sources as can be unearthed, in response to professional apathy and public ignorance
alike.
Structure
History had a slow pulse; man counted in years, history in generations.
Contrary to Rubashovs assertion of historys slow pulse, the recent past is
no longer concerned merely with the passing of successive generations. The Soviet-
Finnish War lasted a matter of months; its progress must therefore be measured in
weeks and days. It is a narrowing of the spotlight that not only provides a strategy for
traversing the archives but also anticipates a looming challenge for our discipline. The
Agencys responsibilities in this period. In the interest of avoiding the possibility of retroactive editing,
these more immediate versions have been given priority over later printed collections.
Velikanova, Popular Perceptions, p. 21.
Koestler, Darkness At Noon, p. 206.
present rapid proliferation of information on a global scale necessitates the tracking of
historical change in an even shorter time frame; one of hours, minutes and seconds.
However, unlike the digital age we currently occupy, where records exist in an often
ethereal, temporary existence, the Soviet Union is an interesting case of a modern
state that embraced certain key technological innovations at a slower pace than the
western powers it wished to emulate and, eventually, to eclipse.
This process of chronicling its existence, and hording vast records, was on a
scale never before seen in the modern age. The result is that, excepting Stalins
frustrating brevity of word and preference for conducting business face-to-face behind
closed doors, much of its history survives on paper.
Access to this material has come
almost en-masse in relative terms  after decades of conjecture and scholarship
dependent on careful detective work and rigorous interrogation of often fragmentary,
intermittent and second-hand sources  and demands a willingness to approach the
past with an open mind and fresh sense of inquisitiveness (not to mention unrelenting
patience and stamina).
Two examples are instructive for explaining the persistence of an exhaustive paper trail within Soviet
archives. First, stenographic recording of meetings and speeches remained a prominent feature of the
interwar years, in contrast to the advances in tape-recording technology seen in the West in this same
period. For example, Nikita Khrushchevs memoir provides an account of how the Kremlin
inadvertently learned of this technological disparity between Germany and the USSR in the months
following the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. See S. Khrushchev (ed.), Memoirs of Nikita
Khrushchev: Vol. 1. Commissar [1918-1945] (University Park, Pennsylvania, 2005), pp. 255-256
(hereafter Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev). Second, a reticence among the Soviet leadership to
embrace photocopying as a viable means of duplicating official documents reflects their acute concern
with secrecy and control of information. This naturally stagnated Soviet archival practices within a
system that gave great stock to the proper distribution and storage of official documents, combined
with a well developed system of cataloguing and cross-checking of those documents as they travelled
within the machinery of state. See J. Arch Getty, Stalinist Secrecy, paper presented at the Association
for Slavic, East European and Eurasian Studies (ASEEES) Convention, San Antonio, Texas, 21
November 2014.
Even if that face-to-face dialogue is only partly preserved in second-hand accounts, we at least know
with whom and for how long Stalin met with visitors to the Kremlin. A. A. Chernobaev (ed.), Na
Priyomye u Stalina: Tetradi (Zhurnali) Zapiseii Lits Prinyatikh I.V. Stalinim, 19241953 gg. (Moscow,
2010).
Although it is not my intention to provide an exhaustive account of the
military dimensions of the conflict or a blow-by-blow description of the success and
failures of Soviet, Finnish and other international forces embroiled in the conflict,
these developments will form a backdrop to the wider events, institutions and actors
with which this study is occupied. I will attempt to trace how these various elements
collectively operated and interacted in the context of the escalating crisis, drawing on
a wide range of Soviet and non-Soviet sources. This remains a localised view in
temporal scope alone, a case study with blurred edges that admittedly cannot hope to
incorporate every shift in events across such a huge empire with global influence.
goal, nevertheless, is to continually focus that spotlight on the international
dimensions of Soviet history.
The interplay between domestic politics and international diplomacy will be
considered by the first chapter, as it aims to introduce Stalin as the principal actor in
our narrative, dominating both the decision-making process and public presentation of
Soviet policy. This chapter will set the scene for the rupture in relations between
Moscow and Helsinki, while attempting to incorporate the Finnish debacle into
broader trends in the Kremlins foreign affairs in these decisive months of 1939. The
importance of the Stalins Baltic concerns has traditionally been overlooked within
the literature, with attention instead focused on Moscows protracted negotiations
with Paris and London, and the sudden, unexpected understanding it reached with
Berlin in the summer of 1939. These major shifts in the Kremlins foreign relations
with the western powers had a dramatic impact on the ability of foreign communist
For example, in early March 1940, the order to execute thousands of Polish officers in Katyn was
signed by four members of the Soviet Politburo. The signatures of Stalin, Vyacheslav Molotov,
Kliment Voroshilov, and Anastas Mikoyan are recorded. All involved were acutely aware of the
unresolved situation in Finland. A. Brown, The Rise and Fall of Communism (London, 2009), p. 140.
parties and their Soviet counterparts to adjust effectively to the official line. It was an
unresolved situation that would be further tested by the unexpected deterioration in
Soviet-Finnish relations, which spilled out into open conflict on 30 November 1939.
Chapters two and three will continue to follow the chronological contours of
the war though each will be equally thematic in approach. Looking beyond the
Vozhds direct influence (or lack thereof) on events, we will consider three essential
elements of Stalinist control in this period: the supporting cast among the leadership,
the official script, and the stage direction provided by the centre. The second chapter
will introduce the first of these elements, bringing other principle characters onto the
stage, while exploring the part played by Stalins inner circle. The second chapters
attention to the activities of Andrei Zhdanov and Otto Kuusinen will then allow the
introduction of a second element of control  the importance of language and
ideology at the outbreak and escalation of the fighting. The chapter provides a close
study of the official script for the war  circulated by the Kremlin through the
domestic and international press  while giving due attention to that scripts many
shifting priorities and rhetorical twists and turns. In particular, the chapter will seek to
demonstrate a persistent failure by the existing scholarship to acknowledge the
importance of an established terminology of terror in the presentation of opponents by
communists at home and abroad.
Chapter three focuses on the third element of Stalinist control via its treatment
of lower level functionaries and the more indirect stage direction from the Kremlin to
which they responded. Tracing this process, the chapter will concentrate, above all, on
the activities of TASS and the interaction between its offices in Moscow, London and
New York. Signals relayed from the centre played a crucial though inconsistent role
in mobilising this key institution of state during what proved to be a period of
significant change in the Telegraph Agencys role and responsibilities within the
propaganda machinery. This thesis will trace how, from the early stages of the
relationship between the Telegraph Agency leadership and Stalin, the responsibilities
of TASS became broader and more rigorously exploited. Eventually emerging as a
global mouthpiece, pseudo-espionage network, tool of foreign policy, and versatile
propaganda weapon for the Soviet Union, it was employed by a regime desperate to
limit the damage caused by global condemnation of the invasion and the faltering
position of the Communist International.
Turning our gaze inwards, chapter four will offer a view of proceedings from
the Leningrad region and seek to understand the extent to which the crisis impacted
on the daily life and outlook of Soviet citizens close to the front-line. It will
demonstrate that the engagement of the population with Soviet press campaigns and
the official portrayal of the war was often selective, with many people responding as
much to familial connections and a sense of civic duty, as to an explicit loyalty (or
disloyalty) to the regime, or any credence given to the official line. The complexity of
individual responses to the war is preserved in the abundance of surviving letters and
gifts gathered for Soviet troops, and the attention paid to public commentary, gossip
and rumours in the records of party and state surveillance organs. The chapter
questions whether the failure of the regime to produce a consistent line on the conflict
had a discernable impact on popular attitudes to the fighting. In addition, unofficial
sources of information that permeated amongst the population continued to operate in
parallel to the official channels of information about the fighting. Taken together,
popular engagement with these sources indicate how a critical awareness about
developments at home and abroad persisted for many Soviet citizens, something that
had not been quashed by the high point of repressions witnessed at the end of the
1930s.
The final chapter will reflect on the closing stages of the war and the concerted
effort made by the Party to rewrite its history, going to great lengths to silence any
conflicting voices that might undermine the new narrative. It was a narrative that
centred, above all, on the myth of the Mannerheim Line and the Red Armys
overcoming of a seemingly impenetrable set of defences built with the guidance and
material support of Finlands European partners. While the public face of the conflict
was uniformly positive, privately, Stalin and his subordinates pored over the mistakes
made and the lessons learned in a striking interplay that reveals the military capacity,
leadership tactics and political preoccupations of the General Secretary. The relative
candour with which those present could speak in this context is contrasted with the
general uniformity and orthodoxy on display in regional discussions and public
displays of popular support for the Soviet victory and a widespread failure to come
to terms with the (actual) human costs of war. The chapter closes with a look at the
treatment of Soviet prisoners of war, among them Ivan Andreevich Gromov,
incorporating new archival and memoir evidence gathered in the course of this
research. It remains a particularly sensitive aspect of a conflict, which, more
generally, fails to maintain a prominent place in contemporary understanding and
acknowledgement of this difficult period.
Note on Transliteration
The importance of language and terminology is inherent to my work. Where it
has been necessary to draw attention to terms in the original Russian, I have
endeavoured for consistency and clarity in the romanisation of the Cyrillic alphabet.
In the case of names and other proper nouns, I have, however, tended towards more
recognisable and widely adopted constructions, for example, Trotsky (not Trotskii)
and Yezhov (rather than Ezhov). An exception to this rule is in the referencing of
primary and secondary sources, where authors names, the titles of their work and any
citations from their text closely adhere to their original formulation.
Chapter 1
Politics and Diplomacy
What was real  really real, and not theatre? Who really took decisions 
and did not merely appear to take them?
Vasily Grossman, Everything Flows
On the evening of 14 April 1940, the first session of a four-day meeting to
discuss the war against the White Finns was officially opened by the designated
chair, Kliment Efremovich Voroshilov. His opening preamble acknowledged the
gathering was initiated by the collective membership of the Chief Military Council,
who were seeking a summing up of results and taking account of the experience
gained. Suddenly, a curt remark from the room put these aims in much starker terms:
Point out the shortcomings. Joseph Stalins characteristically direct and concise
rejoinder momentarily silenced the chair and checked any sense this was to become a
forum for empty praise and ebullient Party speeches.
Amongst this assembly, now cleared for airing measured criticism, Stalin
would continue to operate as an astute observer, sporadic critic and all-round shrewd
political operator. It is an incredibly valuable source for illuminating the tactics Stalin
employed to portray himself as both the impartial witness and undoubted master of
ceremonies. He would go on to remind those present of his lack of military credentials
and his status as a mere civilian, while also speaking of government decision-
In the closing quarter of his unfinished novel, Vasily Grossman suddenly veers away from the central
narrative, turning instead to a discussion of the Soviet system under Lenin and Stalin. His essay on
Stalin offers an impressively wide-ranging and nuanced treatise on the nature of Stalins dictatorship.
See V. Grossman (trans: R. Chandler, E. Chandler and A. Aslanyan), Everything Flows (London,
2010), pp. 203-213.
making in passive, non-committal terms.
All this was mere theatrics from an adept
political actor; the goal was to expose the shortcomings of the Soviet war effort,
without tarnishing his reputation or accepting any personal responsibility.
If our ultimate aim with this study is to reveal the machinery behind the
stage, it is imperative we find a place, too, for the production team involved in its
operation. To describe Stalin as simply an actor would be grossly under-estimating his
role. He stood at the epicentre, the shows director, producer and head of publicity. He
also showed a persistent willingness to intercede in the official script  the language
and terminology of party discourse  employed in both public pronouncements and
private discussion. Though the ongoing and protracted nature of the fighting against
the White Finns would see that script adopt a bloody and violent language, couched
in civil war imagery and a terminology of terror, this rhetoric stands in direct contrast
to the pragmatic and often diplomatically sensitive dialogue on display before
hostilities broke out.
Any change was predetermined, above all, by Stalins role as both the arbiter
of policy and its public presentation. Tracing these earlier diplomatic manoeuvres will
highlight his corresponding intervention in questions of public relations  operating
as a master of the media circus. Stalin proved as preoccupied with the often subtle and
implicit signalling of shifts in the line, as the changes in policy that necessitated them.
These signals were not only essential for outside witnesses, but also provided a
mechanism for party cadres on the periphery, at home and abroad, to orientate to the
line provided by the centre. These interrelated elements were on display in the months
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 268.
before hostilities broke out. In this chapter, after sketching the shape of Soviet foreign
policy from the beginning of 1939, we will trace the diplomatic efforts to reach
agreement with Helsinki and the essential role that the direction of press and
propaganda would continue to have for Stalin during this process.
Of course, things did not always go Stalins way. Though he aspired to
absolute control, ensuring his subordinates were totally dependent on his decision-
making, key fault lines within the system emerged in the course of the Finnish
conflict.
The dictators curse became a particularly acute challenge for the regime
in moments of crisis. Events that were highly contentious and the subject of bitter
criticism, from both within and beyond the borders of the Soviet Union, required swift
and wide-ranging decisions from the head of state.
The Finnish conflict offers a
unique opportunity to trace the impact of a rapidly developing and unexpected crisis,
at all levels of decision-making, essential to the effective mobilisation of the
propaganda machinery. An important test case, it permits consideration of both the
strengths and weaknesses of a regime that was totalitarian in aspiration, if not in the
level of control and influence it could truly attain.
A failure to provide clear, coherent and, above all, consistent direction for the
Party on the proper line to take on Finland in these early months had wider
implications for its members relationship with the society it claimed to represent. As
the diplomatic efforts stalled and news faded (or was withheld) from the front page,
Khlevniuk, Master of the House, p. 223. Although Khlevniuks treatment of the Stalinist system
ostensibly follows its development through to the outbreak of the war with Nazi Germany, events in
Finland are almost entirely overlooked.
For recognition of the inherent challenge of the dictators curse facing the Stalinist system of rule,
see P. Gregory and M. Harrison, Allocation under Dictatorship: Research in Stalins Archives,
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 43, No. 3 (September 2005), pp. 721-761.
elements of a politically engaged and inquisitive society began to draw their own
conclusions. The comments and criticism of state policy aired in this early period
indicate both the healthy state of unofficial channels of communication as well as the
proliferation of rumours and hearsay they fostered. In response, the regime oscillated
between a strategy of prosaic and self-righteous transparency or selective and
unexplained silence.
Surveying the International Stage
Stalins domestic and international security concerns had not diminished with
the NKVDs widespread repression of enemies in 1937-8. The preoccupation with
any foreign intervention of White Guard forces and the hostile regimes that
encircled and threatened to derail the building of socialism both predated these years
and persisted beyond them. Yet, even with an outlook influenced by this pervasive
ideology, pragmatism could still prevail in foreign relations. The economic and
strategic needs of the Soviet state went hand-in-hand with its Marxist-Leninist make-
up. In Khlevniuks assessment of the repressive policies pursued by Stalin throughout
his primacy, the dictator proved perfectly capable of vacillating between the more
moderate and the more brutal, refuting the claims of historians who have mistakenly
tracked these changes as indicative of rival camps in the leadership apparatus.
Arguably, his reconciliation with Nazi Germany in the summer of 1939 was
an even more drastic shift in approach to international and domestic politics. This is
Khlevniuk, Master of the House, pp. 246-262.
particularly true given the immediate impact the reconciliation of these rival regimes
and ideologies had on the press, propaganda and even cultural output of the Soviet
state.
Nevertheless, it represented one of many adjustments in policy over the course
of the year that point to Stalins willingness to pursue both long-term strategic aims
and adapt to unfolding events in a more short-term capacity. Throughout this he
maintained his overriding faith in the tenets of Leninism and its insistence upon the
inevitability of war.
Stalins direct intervention in foreign policy did not begin in 1939.
correspondence with his close associates, his intervention in matters of trade and
foreign diplomacy are evidenced throughout the 1920s and 30s. His willingness to
pursue trade relations with even the most embittered and persistent enemies of the
Bolsheviks is conspicuous.
Despite the revolutionary tenets of Bolshevism, a
readiness to come to terms with the capitalist powers of Britain and France, who had
collectively conspired to strangle the new Soviet state at birth, belies the economic
and strategic concerns that remained an enduring element in the relations between
these powers. When the advance of Soviet forces into Poland shortly followed the
German invasion of 1 September 1939 (the existence of any secret protocols between
these two powers as yet unknown to the outside world), the War Cabinets
acknowledgment of the desperate need for Russian softwood for its own defence
efforts stayed the hand of Westminster from an immediate break with the Kremlin.
J. V. Geldern, Culture, 1900-1945, in Suny, Cambridge History of Russia, pp. 600-601.
A. J. Rieber, Stalin as Foreign Policy-maker: Avoiding War, 1927-1953, in S. Davies and J. Harris
(eds.), Stalin: A New History (Cambridge, 2005), p. 143.
Though this outdated impression still emerges from a recent study of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
See R. Moorhouse, The Devils' Alliance: Hitler's Pact with Stalin, 1939-1941 (London, 2014).
See, for example, letters attesting to Stalins personal intervention in the question of trade
agreements with Japan (1931) and the signing of a non-aggression treaty with Poland (1931-1932).
Stalin-Kaganovich Correspondence, Letters 15-16, 19-20, pp. 83-98.
Doerr, Frigid but Unprovocative, p. 425.
It is a telling reminder of the disparity between public posturing on the international
stage, and the machinations and diplomacy that go on behind the scenes.
In order to manage any discrepancy between the public face and private
practice of power, Stalin depended on a commitment to secrecy intrinsic to the Soviet
system and on his own ability to present policy in the recognisable rhetoric of the
official party lexicon, endorsed by the principles of its Marxist-Leninist ideology.
Although often dismissed as a poor orator
, the importance placed on the textual
distribution of speeches diminishes the significance of this criticism. On paper, it is
easier to appreciate his ability to speak to a much broader audience, beyond the
limited circle of high-minded intelligentsia.
Stalin could articulate an idea and
hammer it home as though there were no possible alternative interpretation. He turned
opinions into fact and ridiculed those who entertained divergent views. Decisively,
when change came, he could side-step any insinuation that mistakes were his
responsibility alone, by grasping how to present policy decisions as the collective will
of the government and the Party.
The Eighteenth Party Congress
On 10 March 1939, the current face of Soviet policy was laid out in Stalins
progress report to the Eighteenth Party Congress. For the unprivileged masses that
S. Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilisation (Berkeley and Los Angeles, California;
London, 1997), pp. 17-18. In line with these guiding principles, the impetus for keeping the secret
protocols between Moscow and Berlin out of the public eye apparently came from the Soviet side.
Similarly, any rhetorical embellishment of the published agreement was kept to a minimum on Stalins
insistence, such was his awareness of the difficulties their respective propaganda boys would have re-
orientating public opinion. Stalin quoted in Moorhouse, Devils Alliance, p. 39.
R. Service, Stalin: A Biography (London, 2005), p. 132.
Service, Stalin, p. 245.
had not lined the great halls of the Kremlin Palace, the text of the speech appeared the
following day, occupying much of the available print space in Pravda.
Here Stalin
reasserted the economic priorities of the Soviet state in its international relations,
making this the first point in his clear and explicit outline of Soviet foreign policy:
We stand for peace and the strengthening of business relations with all
countries. That is our position; and we shall adhere to this position as long
as these countries maintain like relations with the Soviet Union, and as
long as they make no attempt to trespass on the interests of our country.
In the course of his speech, the domestic and international elements of Stalins
outlook were closely intertwined. The economic and territorial integrity of the Soviet
state went hand-in-hand with an ideological thread, centred on his long-standing
adherence to the tenets of socialism in one country. The drive towards socialism was
still dependent on both domestic productivity and security from external threat. This
outlook was also expressed in the same language that aimed to denigrate and dismiss
former enemies. His sights extended beyond a strictly Soviet audience, responding to
some people in the western media who sought to depict the purge of spies,
murderers and wreckers from Soviet institutions as having had a destabilising effect
on the Soviet system. This he dismissed out of hand, citing the near unanimous
support of party candidates in recent elections to the Supreme Soviet, held in the
aftermath of the executions of high-profile enemies in 1937 and the beginning of
1938.
Despite this success, he implored his audience:
Pravda, 11 March 1939, pp. 2-6.
J. V. Stalin, Report to the Eighteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U.(B.) on the Work of the Central
Committee (10 March 1939), p. 889, accessed on 17 March 2015 at
http://www.marx2mao.com/Stalin/REC39.html (hereafter Report to Eighteenth Congress).
Quoted in D. Volkogonov (trans: H. Shukman), Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy (London, 1991), p.
344. My preference was for Shukmans translation over the use of certain foreign pressmen in
Report to Eighteenth Congress, p. 914.
Never to forget that we are surrounded by a capitalist world; to remember
that the foreign espionage services will smuggle spies, assassins and
wreckers into our country; and, remembering this, to strengthen our
socialist intelligence service and systematically help it to defeat and
eradicate the enemies of the people.
Continuity was an important theme, much more so than any suggestion of a
major break with the events of the preceding two years. The state was not yet about to
wither away. The justification for this was, again, in the need to acknowledge the
shifting international situation and persistence of hostile forces abroad. Stalin
criticised those communists who settled for slavishly adhering to the classical tenets
of Marxism without realising their inability to provide real, contemporary direction in
the context of present-day international conditions, having overlooked the capitalist
encirclement and the dangers it entails for the socialist country.
A balancing act
was required, somewhere between vigilance and scare-mongering; one that Stalin not
only pursued in these public pronouncements but also in his private labours.
Earlier that year, as Stalin undertook preparations for the congress, news from
abroad joined the multitude of papers on his desk.
Skimming the pages of a routine
bulletin sent by the Moscow offices of TASS, his attention was suddenly caught by a
press report on Germanys strategic efforts to secure bases along the Gulf of Finland.
With thick pencil strokes he began to cut down the article to its salient points,
earmarking it for print in the Izvestiia two days later.
His swift editing excised any
reference to the Finns possession of potential bridgeheads for assault on Soviet
territory, deflating any popular fears this news might have generated, while
Report to Eighteenth Congress, p. 916.
Report to Eighteenth Congress, pp. 927-928.
Volkogonov, Stalin, p. 343.
Standard practice was to recycle TASS material of this kind throughout the Soviet press network.
For example, this article also appeared in Pravda, 18 January 1939, p. 5.
maintaining attention on Germany and Finland as potential bedfellows.
This desire
to manage popular fears of the Soviet Union becoming embroiled in the second
imperialist war is consistent with his earlier editing of the History of the All-Union
Communist Party (Bolsheviks): Short Course the previous year. Huge sections of text
were removed from preceding drafts, with references to the Communist International
(Comintern) cut and the domestic situation in Germany and Spain downplayed. Taken
together, these edits had the effect of stifling the contention that there was a
worldwide assault underway against socialism.
This is just one of many examples of Stalin utilising the press to manipulate
public opinion via its back pages, where the publication of foreign TASS reports on
the international stage were concentrated. By the end of the 1930s, he repeatedly
resorted to micro-managing the dissemination of news articles on sensitive areas of
global and Soviet foreign affairs, blocking those he considered detrimental to public
opinion and carefully controlling this window into the outside world. A key reason for
this direct intervention was the growing importance of the press for the states
propaganda efforts. Though it had long been recognised as a major channel for the
Party, by the late 1930s and early 1940s, the press became the primary means of
propaganda in the Soviet Union.
On 14 November 1938, the Partys Central
Committee issued a directive that declared:
In Marxist-Leninist propaganda, the decisive weapon is the press:
magazines, newspapers, and pamphlets. Oral propaganda can only play a
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 207, ll. 24-25. Although the original report from Swedish sources in
Stockholm was explicit in anticipating a German invasion force utilising Finland as a launch pad for
attacking Leningrad, it was this section that Stalin opted to remove before the articles publication in
Izvestiia on 18 January 1939.
Brandenberger, Propaganda State in Crisis, pp. 204-205.
E. M. Thompson, Nationalist Propaganda in the Soviet Russian Press, 1939-1941, Slavic Review,
Vol. 50, No. 2 (1991), p. 387.
secondary role in this struggle. The press offers an opportunity to make
this or that truth into an immediate possession of all people in society, and
it is therefore stronger than oral propaganda.
In contrast, Stalins complaints to close associates about the inadequacies of
the Pravda editorial board earlier in the decade reflected certain limits to his reach.
This frustration at the newsrooms failure to anticipate the correct line may have
contributed to the apparent absence of an editor-in-chief with overall responsibility
for the newspaper between 1938 and 1940. Instead, the collection, censorship and
circulation of information co-ordinated by TASS were of paramount significance to
the dissemination of truths in this period. The distribution of party speeches, foreign
and domestic press and official statements all fell within the remit of this prominent
state institution.
By the time Stalin stood before the Party in March 1939 he was in a confident
mood. He announced with satisfaction that domestic productivity was up and
international capitalism was facing yet another crisis. This was not, however, mere
public posturing. Politically, his position was seen as unassailable. The system he had
fashioned over the preceding decade was celebrated as supremely democratic. Upon
the basis of these claims stood the stability of the Soviet system and the source of the
inexhaustible strength of Soviet government.
However false those claims were,
they indicate a self-belief in his domestic outlook that carried through to his
preoccupation with international concerns. Ideologically, he was on an equally firm
footing. The second imperialist war, long predicted by the Bolsheviks, was, in Stalins
Thompson, Nationalist Propaganda, p. 387.
L. Lih, O. V. Naumov, O. V. Khlevniuk (eds.), Stalins Letters to Molotov 1925-1936 (New Haven,
Connecticut and London, 1995), Letter 66 (13 September 1930), p. 215. See, also, Stalin-Kaganovich
Correspondence, Letter 158 (6 September 1936), pp. 349-350.
Report to Eighteenth Congress, p. 912.
interpretation, already in full swing.
The priority now was to keep the Soviet Union
out of the conflict until it had achieved a level of parity with the capitalist world.
His anti-war tone carried through to the back pages of Pravda, with TASS
reports from Stockholm now exposing the popular protest of local residents to the
remilitarisation of the Finnish land Islands, referenced earlier in the year.
It was a
small footnote, but a significant one in the context of recent discussions between
Peoples Commissar for Foreign Affairs, Maxim Litvinov and the Finnish envoy to
the USSR, Yrj-Koskinen. On 5 March 1939, Litvinov reported that their recent
exchange had focused on two main concerns: the economic relations between the two
states and the land Islands. The latter was clearly a more pressing issue for the
Kremlin, though Litvinov sought to downplay the islands significance for both the
Finnish and Soviet governments during the meeting. Litvinov, instead, drew attention
to a number of islands in the Gulf of Finland that did not appear to be of great value
to Helsinki, proposing a thirty-year lease to allow their use as observation points by
the USSR, since control of sea access to Leningrad was an important consideration for
the Kremlin. The Soviet Union would not seek to fortify the islands  another signal
to Helsinki that its own efforts in this direction were not appreciated by Moscow  but
promised such a display of trust on the part of the Finnish government would have a
positive influence on any economic talks between the two countries.
Three days
later, Koskinen had his governments answer ready for Litvinov. These islands were
an integral part of Finnish territory. Helsinki was unwilling to conflate political and
As Brandenberger points out, Stalins confidence in this outcome was manifest in his editing of the
Short Course, several months before the Munich accords of September 1938. See Brandenberger,
Propaganda State in Crisis, p. 331 (Note 19).
Rieber, Stalin as Foreign Policy-maker, pp. 146-147.
Pravda, 11 March 1939, p. 5.
Dmitrii Antonovich Volkogonov Papers, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington,
D.C., Reel 1, Box 1, Folder 1, Document 166a (hereafter Volkogonov Papers).
economic questions of this nature and ultimately undermine its neutrality through
even a discussion of possible agreements. Finlands own ability to protect these
islands should be enough of a guarantee for the Kremlin. Litvinov could only reply
that his government would be very disappointed with this answer.
Although Stalins intervention in foreign policy was not new, the present
situation in Europe demanded an even firmer hand. His wish to keep his options open
 to maintain the peace while strengthening (business) relations with all countries
 would require flexibility in the public presentation of the official line. Any
adjustments needed to be on point and made with immediate effect. Freedom of
movement in policy decisions was essential. This proviso was central when both
Maxim Litvinov and his successor Vyacheslav Molotov were tasked with securing
political and military agreements with Britain and France in the following months.
Stalin made it clear he was only willing to conclude appropriate pacts on the basis of
reciprocity with the stipulation that we are conducting and will conduct our own
independent line.
His rejection of Litvinovs suggestions for reaching a settlement
with London and Paris rested, in part, on his foreign ministers inability to recognise
those concessions that would tie the Kremlins hands.
The increasing prominence
of Finland (and the Baltic states) in Stalins security concerns would also play a major
part in the failure of these talks to satisfy Soviet defensive priorities in the region.
Although the existing literature typically prioritises attention on the parallel
Volkogonov Papers, Reel 1, Box 1, Folder 1, Document 169.
Albert Resis draws a straight line in his analysis from this statement to the agreement reached with
Nazi Germany. See A. Resis, The Fall of Litvinov: Harbinger of the German-Soviet Non-aggression
Pact, Europe-Asia Studies, Vol. 52, No. 1 (January 2000), p. 36. Likely reading ahead, it rather
signalled the possibility of coming to terms with any foreign power (of which Germany was not alone
in the Stalinist formulation of capitalist encirclement). The ongoing negotiations with Finland sought
similar trade agreements before broader political discussions were opened, though the strategic and
military overtones of their preoccupation with the land Islands were a consistent thread in these talks.
Banac, Diary of Georgi Dimitrov, p. 111 (28 May 1939).
Resis, Fall of Litvinov, p. 47.
negotiations between Moscow, London and Paris, and Moscow and Berlin, talks with
Helsinki were an ongoing element that would provide a far more frustrating limit on
the achievement of Stalins strategic aims.
Channels of Information
The recent publication of Soviet files, relating to the Soviet-Finnish War and
its preceding months of diplomatic talks, reiterates the primacy given to independent
lines of communication to and from the Kremlin, over a more integrated intelligence
network.
Based on Sabine Dullins summary of the apparatus tasked with
information gathering on Moscows behalf, not only can we now begin to analyse
the role played by Lavrenty Beria and the NKVD, but we must also add the
significance of TASS. The latter offers an important perspective on international
developments and the intelligence gathering with which it was increasingly tasked.
Stalin would continue to track the presentation of the Soviet governments diplomatic
negotiations with Britain and France in the foreign press, interceding in the
publication and censorship of these reports in the domestic news.
These channels of
information operated through a very limited circle and were directed, above all, to
Stalin at the centre. From here the onus was on him to distribute relevant information
to his subordinates; an inherent challenge for a system predicated on secrecy,
Dmitri Volkogonovs earlier privileged access to the archives elicited numerous copies of
documents now residing amongst his papers in the Library of Congress. They contain a number of files
that subsequently appeared in the collected edition produced for the seventieth anniversary of Soviet-
Finnish War.
S. Dullin (trans: R. Veasey), Men of Influence: Stalin's Diplomats in Europe, 1930-1939
(Edinburgh, 2008), p. 158. On the growing importance of TASS, for the perspective on international
developments it offered and the intelligence gathering to which it was increasingly tasked, see Chapter
3: Signals from Stalin, pp. 126-160.
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 207, ll. 42-46, 51.
operating in a rapidly shifting environment and headed by a leader whose preference
was for their operating on a need to know basis.
The asymmetry of this system was already causing disquiet among the
diplomatic corps of the Soviet foreign ministry before the major personnel shake-up
that saw its head, Litvinov, replaced by Molotov in May 1939. Litvinov, writing to
Stalin during his final months in office, complained of personnel shortages that
hampered embassies around the world. Even those that had avoided falling under the
shadow of suspicion could find their access to secret documents suspended. He
acknowledged a general ignorance on the part of the commissariat about the
Mongolian Peoples Republic, in which successive ambassadors were recruited from
the NKVD and reported exclusively through its own channels.
This undermining of
the role and responsibilities of the Narkomindel had begun in 1937, when the full
force of Stalinist repressions began to tear through its personnel.
Litvinov was thus
guarded in his complaints and knew better than to connect the difficulties facing the
ministry with an overzealous pursuit of enemies.
Despite these frustrations, where foreign affairs were concerned, the change in
the face of the foreign ministry that Molotovs ascendancy represented did not
produce a fundamental change in decision-making. While in conversation with British
Foreign Secretary Halifax, Ivan Maisky, the Soviet representative in London, was
quite accurate in his characterisation of individual ministers as executing the policy of
the government  even without acknowledging the primacy of Stalin in its
Khrushchevs insistence that by the end of the 1930s, if you werent told something, you didnt
ask, is discussed in Thurston, Fear and Belief, p. 215 (Note 9).
Resis, Fall of Litvinov, p. 34.
Dullin, Men of Influence, pp. 212-215.
formulation.
The legalisation of this practical reality of power had taken place two
years earlier, when the Politburo rubber-stamped the hegemony given to Stalin and
his inner circle in resolving problems of a secret nature, including questions of
foreign policy. It is worth noting that, in Stalins justification for this move, he
placed particular stress on how it was self-evident that secret foreign-policy
questions absolutely cannot be dealt with without the participation of Comrades
Molotov and Voroshilov.
From the available evidence, the exact scope of the
decision-making and consultation that took place by the two original commissions
named in this Politburo resolution remains unclear. However, by 1939, an exclusive
governing group of five people had largely supplanted the Politburo.
The reasons for Litvinovs replacement are still debated.
He was summoned
to the Kremlin for his final consultation with Stalin on 3 May 1939. Telegramming
the official explanation to Soviet ambassadors that same day, Stalin presented it as a
matter of questionable loyalty on the part of the former foreign minister, though
such a vague assessment is in line with Stalins guarded nature.
Although Litvinov
had failed in his endeavours to broker agreements with Britain and France throughout
the spring and summer of 1939  not to mention the disappointing reply of the Finnish
government to Soviet overtures  he was never operating of his own volition, but was
receiving direction from the Kremlin each step of the way. Stalin later acknowledged
D. Watson, Molotov's Apprenticeship in Foreign Policy: The Triple Alliance Negotiations in
1939, Europe-Asia Studies, Vol. 52, No. 4 (June 2000), p. 699.
Cited in Khlevniuk, Master of the House, pp. 229-230.
Khlevniuk, Master of the House, p. 231. In the run up to the outbreak of war in Finland, the names
of Stalin, Molotov, Voroshilov and Beria predominate. Zhdanov, in his capacity as head of the
Leningrad Party, participated in the mobilisation of the regions military, industrial and human
resources and will also be a figure central to our story, providing a connecting thread between
Leningrad and Moscow. For a summary of Zhdanovs rise to prominence, see Khlevniuk, Master of the
House, p. 224. For his role in press, propaganda and foreign affairs, see Dullin, Men of Influence, p.
See Resis; Watson; Dullin, Op. Cit.
Dullin, in contrast, takes Stalins statement at face-value. See Dullin, Men of Influence, p. 241.
that his preference had been to reach agreement with the Allies, an actuality reflected
in Molotovs immediate efforts to pick up where Litvinov left off. Thus, no
immediate turn to Nazi Germany was made, though the protracted negotiations and
foot-dragging on the part of Paris and London continued to frustrate Moscow.
Once those talks began to operate in parallel with the diplomatic channels
opened with Nazi Germany, Stalin was forced to keep his hand even closer to his
chest. The effort required, when responding quickly to alternative proposals and
changing circumstances between two rival camps, suggests it was carried out through
the standard practice of reliance upon his tightly restricted inner circle. This placed
Molotov in a position of direct responsibility for both relaying Stalins orders and
reporting back to the centre. It is worth recognising, therefore, that this personnel
change between Molotov and Litvinov arose not purely because of doubts in the
ability of the latter. Stalin also felt greater confidence in Molotov for the task ahead.
Promoting Molotov to the head of the foreign ministry held further benefits. It
significantly shortened the communication gap between Narkomindel and the
Kremlin.
It also brought to the role an official spokesman who Stalin had long held
in high regard for his speech writing and ability to convey the party line. Though there
was a recent blemish on Molotovs record in this regard, when Stalin mobilised the
Politburo apparatus to chasten his close comrade for his report to the Eighteenth Party
Watson, Molotovs Apprenticeship, pp. 715-716.
Molotovs status  and the access to Stalin it afforded away from the Kremlin, within the more
intimate surroundings of his dacha  is reflected in the brief notes he made before his diplomatic
mission to Berlin in November 1940: If they ask about our relations with the English, reply in
accordance with the exchange of opinions at St[alins] dacha. Cited in Khlevniuk, Master of the
House, p. 232.
Congress, it was not an episode that indicates any long-term loss of confidence.
Just a few months later the new Commissar for Foreign Affairs would be tasked with
publicly responding to the drastic reorientation of policy that the announcement of the
Treaty of Non-aggression between Germany and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics represented. This would be but one of many significant statements on the
shifting international stage that Molotov would be required to communicate in the
subsequent months.
The Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact
A major sticking point in the negotiations between Moscow, Paris and London
had been the question of reciprocal guarantees of security for the independent nations
of Europe. Though the threat of a German advance into Poland and Romania was of
the utmost priority for all parties involved in the talks, these states proved as
suspicious of Soviet intentions in the region as they were desperate to stem the
advance of Nazi forces across their territory. From Moscows perspective, any
defence of these nations sovereignty needed to go hand-in-hand with their own desire
for the creation of a more complete security-zone, encompassing protection against
indirect aggression  namely the threat of a German sponsored coup  across the
Baltic region and their Finnish neighbours to the north.
Even over the course of the
ongoing negotiations, members of the British cabinet still harboured misgivings about
the sincerity of Soviet aims. According to Molotov, a statement in the House of
Commons delivered by the Conservative MP and member of the Foreign Office, R. A.
Khlevniuk, Master of the House, pp. 221-222.
London and Paris, in turn, repeatedly sought Moscows guarantee of protection for Netherlands,
Switzerland and Belgium as part of the deal. See Watson, Molotovs Apprenticeship, pp. 704-707.
Butler, had given the impression that the Soviet Union intended to undermine the
independence of the Baltic states. The text of this speech had reached the Soviet
foreign minister via TASS and was published in Izvestiia on 2 August 1939.
willingness of both sides to influence and often undermine diplomatic talks via the
mobilisation of their respective media is an elucidative point of comparison. Stalin
undoubtedly maintained a firmer hand on the direction of the form and content of
material that was inserted into the Soviet press. However, confronted by Molotovs
bitter criticism of Westminsters leaking of details of the negotiations to the western
press, the latter could offer only lame excuses of their inability to deny every false
report that appeared.
Negotiations with London and Paris finally broke down later that month. The
eventual arrival of a military delegation to Moscow failed to belie Soviet suspicions
that the British were insincere in their efforts to come to an agreement. Those sent to
represent Allied interests lacked the authority to resolve the key question of Soviet
troop movements across Poland and Romania in the event of German aggression.
Molotov was to conclude that the British and French were merely playing with the
Soviet Union and turned his attention to Germany instead.
On 14 August, Moscow
received confirmation from the German ambassador in residence that all its demands
would be met in return for a free hand in Poland.
The process of negotiation could
begin in earnest.
Watson, Molotovs Apprenticeship, p. 713.
Watson, Molotovs Apprenticeship, p. 711.
Contrast this with the positive response to Ribbentrops willingness to conduct talks on behalf of the
German government in person and with a direct line to the Fhrer. See Moorhouse, Devils Alliance,
pp. 33-34.
Watson, Molotovs Apprenticeship, pp. 715-716.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 9; Moorhouse, Devils Alliance, p. 33.
As with the burgeoning ties between Helsinki and Berlin, Stalin was
increasingly concerned with the latters successful overtures to the Baltic states in
recent months.
Bringing Germany to the diplomatic table had the advantage of
securing agreements with a rival power that had already proven to have far more
influence (and interest) in the region than Britain and France. Readjustment of the
Soviets public position, the first hint of which appeared in Stalins speech in March,
also facilitated this reorientation of policy. When the decision was reached to signal
Soviet openness to negotiations with Nazi Germany in the summer, Stalin once again
turned to TASS. Besides Stalins hands-on role there is also a subtlety to his tactics
that needs to be emphasised. Rather than concern himself with constructing an
immediate truth, he instead sought to have shifts in policy and the orientation of the
party line diffuse more gradually among the Soviet readership. First, selecting a fairly
innocuous article on French iron ore exports to Germany, it was then heavily edited
down to the salient points by his hand before its placement in Pravda on 28 June
1939. Appearing alongside a report on foreign spies operating in France, the
impression one gets is of a shift towards a more neutral view of countries willing to
deal with Nazi Germany, while simultaneously undermining the position of France in
the public eye. The timing of these articles anticipated the move towards an eventual
accord with Hitler that took on increasing significance after the continued failure to
reach agreement with both Britain and France.
To the question of how important this kind of micro-management was and
whether the readers of Soviet newspapers were even engaged with the kind of stories
that Stalin took to editing, the evidence available does indeed suggest this material
For more detail see Watson, Molotovs Apprenticeship, p. 697.
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 207, l. 61. See also Pravda, 28 June 1939, p. 5.
played an important role, not only for the diplomatic corps of rival powers,
but also
for faithful adherents of the party line and among the more general readership of
Soviet news, at home and abroad. A precedent was well established before this period.
In 1928, a TASS bulletin detailing the movements of the exiled Leon Trotsky
appeared in the central and regional press and elicited angry responses from a number
of readers. The implication was that references to his personal wealth reflected a
generally elevated standard of living amongst the party leadership. As one respondent
suggested, from a political standpoint it would be best not to publish such
telegrams...or, if you must, not to give Communist Party members such fat
stipends.
By the end of the 1930s, a fairly routine presentation of news from abroad had
been incorporated into the back pages of the Soviet newspapers; the model established
by the central press also emulated by their regional counter-parts. A typical six-page
edition of Pravda in 1939 would concentrate its international coverage on the
penultimate page of the newspaper, providing a digest of recent TASS bulletins and
their loosely credited foreign news sources. Likewise, Leningradskaya Pravda can be
found following a similar format, though on a slightly smaller scale given the papers
shorter total page count. Duplication of news frequently took place between central
and regional newspapers, a product of the central control enjoyed by the Telegraph
Agency over the distribution of all foreign press reports. Thus the Soviet press,
Irrespective of the failure of recent diplomatic talks, trade relations with Britain persisted even after
the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. However, on 10 September 1939, the Kremlin again
mobilised TASS to issue a statement in Pravda, complaining about disruptions in Anglo-Soviet trade.
These concerns were addressed in a subsequent meeting between Maisky and Halifax on 24 September.
See Doerr, Frigid but Unprovocative, p. 428.
Example taken from M. Lenoe, Reader Response To the Soviet Press Campaign Against the
Trotskii-Zinov'ev Opposition, 1926-1928, Russian History, Vol. 24, Nos. 1-2 (1997), p. 107.
notwithstanding the partisan coverage the regime might have fostered, offered a
regular window into the outside world for the Soviet readership.
Although there was a healthy degree of scepticism regarding the validity of
reports from TASS, a genuine interest in the world outside Soviet borders ensured that
many tuned in regardless.
With its (at times) less ideologically charged language
(the more sensationalist bulletin headings often distinct from the dry delivery of their
actual content) and sourcing of foreign press reports  conveniently failing to
acknowledge many of those newspapers were the official organs of foreign
communist parties
 the regime was seeking to maintain an air of objectivity that
may have also appealed to readers with less overt political interests. Attuned to the
potential for shifts in policy, some even went so far as to claim an ability to read
between the lines, though their ignorance of Stalins active role in the process
reasserts a sense of the regimes ability to influence opinion through even these
peripheral channels:
When I read news of international events, I read between the lines. I
suppose I could say that I liked to read international news most of all,
especially the articles that were buried at the bottoms of the pages. I liked
to read what they called telegrams from abroad, which were the latest
communications from the branches of TASS in foreign countriesWhen
I read these articles, I could see in what light the government regarded
foreign events, and from that I could judge for myself what was the
matter.
See, for example, Harvard Project on the Soviet Social System (hereafter HPSSS), Widener
Library, Harvard University, Schedule A, Vol. 31, Case 415/(NY)1035, p. 28; Schedule A, Vol. 15,
Case 305, p. 55; Schedule A, Vol. 35, Case 96/(NY)1493, p. 36; Schedule A, Vol. 35, Case
386/(NY)1495, p. 51, accessed on 22 April 2012 at http://hcl.harvard.edu/collections/hpsss/index.html.
During the Finnish War the Daily Worker in London and New York were regularly cited
newspapers, the official organs of the CPGB and the Communist Part of the USA (CPUSA)
respectively. The Scandinavian communist press also provided an important source of Soviet friendly
print via Norwegian, Danish and Swedish newspapers.
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 15, Case 305, p. 58.
The importance of TASS and the channels of information it administered
would continue to grow after the securing of new diplomatic ties with Germany. The
Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact proved a significant shock for the international communist
movement and its constituents amongst the many satellite parties who were tuned to
the Moscow line.
Stalins cautious stage-direction at the negotiations with the
German delegation on 23 August 1939, insisting that evidence of the cordial toasts
raised to the pacts conclusion be cleared from the cameras viewfinder, ultimately
proved mere window-dressing for the unfolding crisis.
The abject failure of the
Comintern to lead the reorientation of these parties further marginalised its apparatus
in Stalins eyes.
The Communist Internationals decline would facilitate the rise of
the Telegraph Agency as an official mouthpiece for Soviet policy through the
turbulent months to come.
In spite of these concerns over the public reception of the line, the Molotov-
Ribbentrop Pact seemingly checked the increasing penetration of Germany into the
Baltic. The potential for certain misunderstandings would still be manifest in the
relations between these former rivals.
The spheres of influence that Moscow and
Berlin secretly agreed upon provided breathing space that Stalin had failed to achieve
from proposed agreements with London and Paris. However, in order to secure those
The cases of the British and French parties are the most notable. See D. Priestland, The Red Flag:
Communism and the Making of the Modern World (London, 2010), p. 203.
Moorhouse, Devils Alliance, pp. 39-40.
Litvinovs guarded complaints of the difficulties facing the administration of the foreign ministry
after the widespread repressions suffered by its staff is mirrored by a letter sent to Stalin by the head of
the Comintern, Georgi Dimitrov, on 25 November 1938. See Banac, Diary of Georgi Dimitrov, pp. 90-
91. Dimitrov insisted that the burden placed on him by the recent arrest of a member of the ECCI
secretariat, will be beyond my capacity to sustain for any prolonged period. Stalin was unsympathetic
to any damage caused; the priority given to rooting out enemies had seen him personally sign one list
for execution that included three hundred Comintern operatives during the wave of repressions that hit
the organisation in 1937. With those amongst the arrested including the heads of the Propaganda
Department, the Organization Department and the Press Section, one has to wonder whether the
Comintern was in any fit state to respond to the unfolding crisis in the Autumn of 1939. See Conquest,
Great Terror, p. 408.
See Chapter 3: Signals from Stalin, pp. 130-131.
gains, these commitments in principle would have to be realised by concrete action.
Time was an essential factor in integrating the new acquisitions. The governments
that bordered Soviet territory also had to concede to their incorporation into the
Kremlins system of forward defence. As Van Dyke points out, neither of these
requirements was guaranteed by the secret protocols.
During the Soviet Unions on-going negotiations with the Finnish government
and the incorporation of its new territorial interests in Eastern Europe, the party press
was careful not to undermine these diplomatic efforts with unnecessary polemics
against the Finns. Any impatience over the protracted nature of negotiations was kept
in check. Stalin was now personally involved in the diplomatic talks and he still saw
the potential for reaching a similar agreement as those achieved with Latvia,
Lithuania and Estonia. All three Baltic states had capitulated within a fortnight of
each other, bending to the overt threat of reprisals that Molotov had delivered at the
negotiating table.
Estonias signature of a mutual assistance treaty was secured
on the 28 September, Latvia on the 5 October and Lithuania followed on the 10
October 1939. Again, after the relative success of the Polish campaign and the
apparent ease with which Stalins strategic aims were once more being realised, his
self-confidence was tangible:
We believe that in our pacts of mutual assistance we have found the right
form to allow us to bring a number of countries into the Soviet Unions
sphere of influence. But for that we will have to maintain a consistent
posture, strictly observing their internal regimes and independence. We
For a complete translation of the secret protocols and discussion of the subsequent request to extend
Soviet interests into Lithuania, see E. Acton and T. Stableford (eds.), The Soviet Union: A
Documentary History, Vol. II 1939-1991 (Exeter, 2007), pp. 8-9.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 10.
For a more detailed overview of the strong-arming employed by Moscow to secure these
agreements, see Moorhouse, Devils Alliance, pp. 74-79.
are not going to seek their sovietization. The time will come when they do
that themselves.
His comments also indicate a continued recognition of the importance of a well-
managed public relations campaign in achieving his strategic goals. While the
activities of the Comintern were increasingly kept in check over the coming months,
the floor was given to Molotov to address the Supreme Soviet on the direction of
Soviet policy.
Molotovs speech to the Extraordinary Fifth Session of the Supreme Soviet on
31 October 1939  published in its entirety across the central Party press the following
day  spoke of the special character of relations with Finland and gave an optimistic
overview of the negotiations thus far. Its commentary was neither coloured by
ideological polemics nor gave the impression of belligerence on the part of either
country at the diplomatic table. Notwithstanding its positive spin, Molotov could not
resist a veiled threat of repercussions if Soviet demands were not satisfied:
In view of all this we do not think that Finland will seek a pretext to
frustrate the proposed agreement. This would not be in line with the
policy of friendly Soviet-Finnish relations, and would, of course, work to
the serious detriment of Finland. We are certain that Finnish leading
circles will properly understand the importance of consolidating friendly
Soviet  Finnish relations, and that Finnish public men will not yield to
anti-Soviet influence, or to instigation from any quarter.
Molotovs response to the interference of the US government and negative
foreign press on the progress of negotiations reiterates Soviet determination to
monitor the perceptions of the international community. The Soviet leadership were
not operating in a bubble and public statements of this nature were carefully
Banac, Diary of Georgi Dimitrov, p. 120.
Soviet Peace Policy  Speech Delivered on 31 October 1939, accessed on 7 April 2011 at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/molotov/1940/peace.htm. See Pravda, 1 November 1939, pp. 1-2.
monitored by the Telegraph Agency for their reception outside the USSR.
In its
haste to present the Soviet line on the state of its foreign affairs, the Moscow office,
headed by Yakov Semyonovich Khavinson, had relayed the entire speech by
telegraph to Reuters in London. The response was a polite reminder of the need for
brevity and clarity in such global transmissions.
The priorities of these two
organisations were not aligned. Moscows concern that its voice was heard in the face
of widespread anti-Soviet sentiment would continue to take priority over any respect
for proper protocol in the dissemination of worldwide news.
In July 1924, the need for effective control over the distribution of Soviet
news had led the Politburo to establish the central all-Union wire service. TASS was
expected to maintain strict adherence to the official party line through the
achievement of the necessarycontrol over and concentration of all information in
one general direction. By the end of the decade it held a monopoly over the
circulation of foreign news within the USSR, which was confirmed by both the
Orgburo and Politburo in January 1928. At the same time the agency was given
responsibility for the production of all international and all-Union news.
Nevertheless, study of the dialogue between TASSs headquarters in Moscow and its
offices in London and New York reveals both the agencys limitations and the
increasing pressures its operatives abroad would be placed under by the end of the
1930s.
See, for example, GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1079, l. 76; d. 1212, ll. 48-49.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1185, l. 37.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1185, ll. 15, 18, 19.
Lenoe points out that, despite TASSs leading role, in practice the major central newspapers had
their own correspondents in the provinces and abroad. Lenoe, Closer to the Masses, p. 20. This shared
responsibility for news production is still visible at the end of the 1930s, resulting in conflicting stories
from the Finnish front being propagated by at least one Soviet correspondent reporting for both foreign
and domestic news outlets. See, Chapter 3: Signals from Stalin, pp. 114-115.
See Chapter 3: Signals from Stalin, pp. 126-160.
Meanwhile, contrary to Molotovs public affirmation of the peaceful aims of
Soviet foreign affairs, Stalins preoccupation with the inevitability of the USSRs
embroilment in the second imperialist war continued to drive state policy and military
mobilisation.
With the benefit of hindsight, Stalin would later justify the
breakdown of Soviet-Finnish relations as equally unavoidable.
In reality, the
foreign ministrys persistent overtures to reach agreement with Finland were a
reflection of uncertainty surrounding the decision to open hostilities, rather than an
indication of any concrete consensus about the plan. Regardless of the opportunities
afforded by the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, there was a clear disparity between the
readiness of Moscow and Berlin to take the next step. When the governments of
Britain and France declared war on Nazi Germany after the latters invasion of Poland
on 1 September 1939, Stalin and the Red Army command found themselves
unprepared militarily or diplomatically to enact the terms of the secret protocols. A
scramble ensued to mobilise the necessary troops for the occupation of eastern Poland
and western Belorussia by mid-September.
The negotiated settlements with the
Baltic states offered a more practical means through which to increase Soviet
hegemony over the region without the immediate need for full-blown occupation and
the associated manpower that this would entail.
Attempts were made to carefully control news of these developments within
the public sphere. The General Directorate for the Protection of State Secrets in the
Press (Glavlit) ordered a media blackout of plans to expand military conscription
when the Peoples Commissar for Defence Voroshilov revealed details to the
Pons, Stalin and the Inevitable War, pp. 186-191.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 263.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, pp. 10-11.
Supreme Soviet in September.
The only significant break with Molotovs measured
review of diplomatic relations with Finland was an aggressive warning shot fired by
Pravda on 3 November 1939. Appearing on the newspapers front page, the article
remained an isolated incident, coinciding with Molotovs patience wearing thin as the
opening day of the third round of negotiations ended without agreement.
ambiguous comment about leaving matters to the military was disregarded by the
Finnish delegation and Stalins return to the negotiating table the following day soon
checked such talk.
Notwithstanding the fact that the Kremlin was caught off guard by the speed
of events in Eastern Europe, Stalins continued buoyancy is understandable given the
relative ease with which the newly acquired territories in Poland had fallen into the
Soviet fold. Furthermore, even if negotiations with Helsinki were to break down, it
was presumed that the Red Army would be well equipped to bring Finland in line.
Any reports to the contrary had been overshadowed by the ebullience of Voroshilov at
his chairing of the Chief Military Council in June 1939.
For the moment,
newspapers were full of stories lauding the contribution of the Red Army to the lives
of those newly liberated peoples of Eastern Europe. Road repairs were photographed
in western Belorussia, as were eager crowds gathered in the cities for news from
Moscow, while a ragged peasantry was portrayed greeting soldiers with open arms.
An overriding sense of victory predominated. Alongside these scenes, the public
campaign at home and abroad stressed the peace-loving role of the Soviet Union,
GARF, f. 9425, op. 1, d. 10, l. 113.
D. Spring, The Soviet Decision for War against Finland, 30 November 1939, Soviet Studies, Vol.
38, No. 2. (April 1986), p. 225. Both Spring and Van Dyke assume Zhdanov was responsible for the
article. See also Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 22.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 20.
Spring, The Decision for War, p. 212.
voiced by Molotov and exemplified in the re-uniting of the peoples of Ukraine and
Belorussia.
There was no sense in derailing such an outwardly positive mood, while
ongoing talks sought to pacify the perceived threat to Leningrad owing to its
proximity to the Finnish border. The pact with Germany afforded a reprieve from
those concerns; it did not dispel the need to provide a more permanent solution to the
Finnish problem. After all, as Maisky quite openly conceded to the British, no
friendship was very secure these days, requiring that the Soviets prepare for any
eventuality.
All Eyes on Finland
In the summer of 1939, with overtures between Berlin and Moscow beginning
in earnest, Beria continued to forward key intelligence to Stalin about the
strengthening of German-Finnish relations. Sergo Beria later asserted that his father
remained opposed to any pact between the USSR and Nazi Germany and saw to it
that all intelligence tending to show that one should not trust Germany duly came to
the attention of Stalin.
However, given the intransigence of Helsinki in its relations
with Moscow, information of this type also had the potential to push the General
Secretary towards agreement with Hitler, as the best defence against Germanys
dominance in the region. News of German interest in a non-aggression pact with
See, for example, Komsomolskaya Pravda, 2 October and 17 October 1939. See, also, Pravda, 2
November 1939.  Foreign Press on the Report of Comrade V. M. Molotov to the Fifth Extraordinary
Session of the USSR Supreme Soviet.
Cited in Doerr, Frigid but Unprovocative, p. 433.
S. Beria (trans: B. Pearce), Beria, My Father: Life Inside Stalin's Kremlin (London, 2001), p. 50.
Finland arrived on 10 July, alongside reports of Berlins efforts to establish close
contact with Sweden.
After the de-facto alliance between Moscow and Berlin removed any prospect
of Germany providing a block to Soviet interests in the Baltic, the Finns looked
elsewhere for support.
Helsinkis stubbornness in negotiations was motivated in
part by a persistent hope of either their Scandinavian neighbours or the forces of
Britain and France coming to their aid in the event of war with the Soviet Union.
International commentary was also influential, with few voices amongst the foreign
press expecting negotiations to break down completely.
Nevertheless, throughout
October, Beria forwarded intelligence to Stalin, Molotov and Voroshilov that showed
Finland was finding itself increasingly isolated. The interception of telegrams to
London from the English envoy in Finland revealed that Swedish promises to
Helsinki amounted to nothing more than moral support.
TASS continued to keep a watchful eye over developments in Finland. Its
back page bulletins on Helsinkis foreign relations were by no means a new
phenomenon in 1939.
This was just one aspect of a much larger process in which
TASS channelled a constant feed of press reports from outside the Soviet Union into
the propaganda machinery. While Stalins direct receipt of the information channels
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, Document 4 (10 July 1939), pp. 150-151.
Although the Finns would not have known the nature of the secret protocols, from October the
Germans now insisted they would hardly be in a positionto intervene in the Russian-Finnish
conversations. A note circulated amongst its diplomats by the German Foreign Office ordered that
conversations express sympathy for the Russian point of view and refrain from expressing any
sympathy for the Finnish point of view. Tolstoy, Stalins Secret War, pp. 131-132.
O. Vehvilinen, Finland in the Second World War: Between Germany and Russia (Basingstoke,
2002), p. 41.
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, Document 15-16, pp. 165-167.
TASS bulletins throughout 1937-38 kept Soviet readers abreast of relations between Finland and
Germany. See, for example, German Propaganda in Finland, Pravda, 31 January 1938, p. 5.
provided by TASS was also not a recent innovation at the end of 1930s  in 1926 the
New York office sent him American news reports of his interview as the new leader
of the USSR
 the value of the Telegraph Agency for Stalin and the scope of its
operations would grow exponentially with the outbreak of war in Europe and eventual
breakdown of relations with Finland.
In this changeable political climate, and particularly with regards to Finland,
the public face of friendly relations with Germany also had to be handled with new
sensitivity. Again, Stalins use of the TASS network offers a crucial window into his
responsibility for managing relations between Berlin and Moscow in the press. While
privately, Hitler and Stalin divided up Eastern Europe and the Kremlin worked
towards a negotiated settlement with the Finns, publicly, it made an about turn.
Explicit articulation of a link between the interests of the Finnish and German
governments was carefully avoided in the press. The Party was expected to
immediately adjust itself to the new line. Molotovs address to the Supreme Soviet,
for instance, referred only to an increase in the amount of outside influence on the
part of third powers over Finland, neglecting to name Germany among them.
In general, the international community were unable to keep pace with rapidly
moving events during this period. Their attempts to untangle the diplomatic web
between Hitler and Stalin only strengthened the latters confidence. He privately
ridiculed the naivety of foreign reporters, amused by their inability to effectively
trace the course Eastern Europe was heading under the direction of its two new
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 726, ll. 137-138. The accompanying letter was written by the head of the
New York bureau, Kenneth Durant, who had joined the agency in 1922. He continued to hold this post
at the outbreak of the Soviet-Finnish War and through the duration of hostilities. See GARF, f. 4459,
op. 38, d. 104, l. 233.
Soviet Peace Policy  Speech Delivered on 31 October 1939.
masters.
Stalin was privy to a huge information network via TASSs collection of
material on domestic and international developments. The number of archived articles
that related to Finland alone during this period covered nearly one hundred and fifty
pages of newsprint between January and March 1940.
We are now in a far better
position to appreciate the nature of those foreign reports that had passed directly
through to Stalins office, indicating how well informed he was of the international
stage and of global perceptions of the USSR. Stalins careful management of the
public dissemination of information served to support his policy decisions.
Consequently, this does much to correct past assessments of him as somewhat
disengaged from foreign affairs.
Unfortunately for Stalin, the peaceful path of diplomacy did not prove
effective where the Finnish government was concerned. By mid-October, the progress
of diplomatic talks, or lack thereof, was already increasingly absent from the press.
Limiting output to those back page clippings from TASS, one finds Stalins hand
responsible for the restriction of foreign reports on the negotiations, despite a
relatively optimistic treatment of events.
The third round of talks the following
month again failed to produce a compromise that suited both parties. Stalins personal
involvement in the negotiation process made him reluctant to draw unnecessary
attention to the ongoing failure to reach an agreement with the Finnish government.
This mirrored a more general aversion on his part to issue public statements in the
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 207, ll. 63-66, 75. This commentary is found written by hand in the
marginalia of TASS bulletins forwarded to Stalin. Reports of this kind were at times both informative
and amusing for the General Secretary as the occasions where he simply scrawled Ha, ha in pencil
testify. Rumours of Hitlers impending visit to Moscow after the ratification of the Molotov-
Ribbentrop pact were one such example.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 28, d. 395, ll. 1-147.
Stalin himself appears, at least from the documents now available, to have only rarely taken a direct
hand in the day-to-day running of diplomacy; it was simply not his forte. J. Haslam, Soviet Foreign
Policy, 1930-33: The Impact of the Depression (London and Basingstoke, 1983), p. 18.
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 207, 1. 75.
context of such a turbulent theatre of war on the continent. Beyond the more dramatic
upheaval caused in the British and French Communist Parties, from his conversations
with Georgi Dimitrov, it is clear that the shift from an anti-fascist to anti-
imperialist line had not been a smooth transition among communists abroad.
The official newspaper of the Communist Party of the United States of
America (CPUSA), sharing the title Daily Worker with its counterpart in Britain,
offers a prime example of the confused and uneasy shift that took place. Ever reliant
on official sources from Moscow, the editors would be in compliance with much of
their coverage of Finnish affairs. The wider content of the newspaper displayed a
willingness to embrace the new anti-imperialist line while still relying on explicitly
anti-fascist and anti-German content to describe European events for its American
readership.
It points to the often delayed and inconsistent channels of
communication that persisted between Moscow and its satellite parties abroad. This
challenge would continue to exacerbate attempts to orientate themselves to the party
line through the months of fighting in Finland.
Knowledge of the breakdown in communication between Finland and the
USSR would eventually filter through to the Soviet public, intensifying fears of war.
A new aggressive tone became evident shortly after the first Soviet troops moved into
Lithuania in mid-November.
The watershed revelation followed just a couple of
days later. With talks reaching a standstill on the same day as the arrival to the
A. Dallin and F. Firsov (eds.), Dimitrov and Stalin, 1934-1943: Letters from the Soviet Archives
(New Haven, Connecticut and London, 2000), pp. 163-165.
See, for example, Daily Worker (New York), 6 November 1939, p. 6. Includes a cartoon of a worker
depicted sweeping away imperialists, one of whom clearly represents Hitler; Daily Worker (New
York), 7 November 1939, p. 6, Polish Refugees Kiss Soviet Troops As The Enter USSR Fleeing
Nazis.
New York Times, 14 November 1939.
Kremlin on 10 November of Otto Kuusinen  a Finnish communist in exile and
leading figure in the Comintern  the threat of war increasingly brought Finland
sharply into focus.
A report provided by the TASS office in Helsinki quietly signalled the
announcement of an Anti-Soviet Campaign in Finland, published simultaneously in
both Pravda and Komsomolskaya Pravda on 16 November. The choice of this report,
among a series sourced from the Finnish offices of TASS since 3 November, sought a
degree of objectivity while distancing the regime from any shift in relations between
the two countries. As Spring asserts:
They are not evidence that the Soviet public was being prepared for the
war between the failure of the negotiations and the Mainila frontier
incident on 26 November. If the substance of these short reports were to
be believed, Finland would shortly find itself bankrupt as a result of the
burden of mobilisation and would be forced to come to some kind of
modus vivendi with the Soviet Union. The corollary of this was that
military action would not be required: it was only the Finnish government
which was trying to provoke it.
The change in tone that became evident from 16 November coincided with
Stalins order to the Leningrad Military District (LMD) to mobilise along the border
just the day before. The press, however, opted to deflect public attention away from
this deployment of force. The first of a series of cartoons appeared in the back pages
of Komsomolskaya Pravda on 18 November, ridiculing Finnish preparations for war
and the backward nature of their troops.
Moscow was treading carefully. Any shift
in mood that is evident in the press was still limited to the back pages. After all, a
See Spring, Decision for War, p. 218.
Spring, Decision for War, p. 218. Van Dyke oversimplifies this shift, dating its beginning on the 3
November with the assumed publication of Zhdanovs front-page polemics in Pravda. Van Dyke,
Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 22.
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 18 November 1939.
commitment to peace was still an integral part of the self-constructed faade the
foreign ministry presented. Despite the claims duplicity, Stalins priority was in
maintaining the Soviet Unions neutrality. Otto Kuusinens presence at this stage was
therefore likely to have been in a consultative role. Dimitrovs diary acknowledged
the initial meeting with Jos V. on 10 November in vague terms and, according to
Stalins own meeting register, it lasted little over half an hour.
Any scheme for
Kuusinen to head the puppet Peoples Government of Finland (established
immediately after the outbreak of war) could not emerge until after the negative
response of the General Secretary of the Finnish Communist Party (SKP) Arvo
Tuominen was received from his residence in Stockholm.
Over the course of the next two weeks, Stalin and Kuusinen would meet at the
Kremlin an additional five times. Various members of his inner circle and the military
leadership would be present at each point, while on Stalins instruction, strategic plans
were drawn up by the army and navy.
It is unclear when exactly the decision to
open hostilities was made. However, throughout the evening of the 22 November,
Stalin met with his general staff before a final audience with Kuusinen that concluded
well after midnight.
Publicly, the Finns continued to be portrayed as the aggressors by the Soviet
press. Komsomolskaya Pravdas humorous, ramshackle depiction of its troops  a
cartoon depicting a battered train cart, hauled by a donkey, as three simple-looking
drivers attempt to decipher the plan of action upon reaching the Soviet border  still
Banac, Diary of Georgi Dimitrov, p. 121; Chernobaev, Na Priyomye u Stalina, p. 279.
K. Rentola, The Finnish Communists and the Winter War, Journal of Contemporary History
Vol. 33, No. 4 (October, 1998), p. 598.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, pp. 22-24.
Chernobaev, Na Priyomye u Stalina, p. 281.
came with the ominous caption: They have arrived. The threat of war was now
perilously close.
In more sober terms, a published letter (of questionable origin)
credited to a young Finnish worker and friend of the Soviet people supported this
imagery. The letter also signalled the beginning of a concerted effort to distinguish
between the people and the political administration of Finland, which would later be
integral to a carefully engineered image of a polarised Finnish society, perpetuated
throughout the war. The authors anti-imperialist language was notable, as was his
insinuation of lengthy Finnish preparations and provocation of war, with earlier
diplomatic efforts between the two sides whitewashed by the claims of the Finnish
bourgeoisie being in the pocket of the French. What is perhaps most striking is the
assumed persecution this young Finn anticipated from his own government in
response to such a public display of support for the USSR:
Young Finnish workers have always been a friend of the Soviet Union.
No police ban, no savage repression (nikakie svirepye repressii), no terror
(nikakoi terror) will be able to destroy the hearts of the Finnish youth or
their love of the great socialist country...
The explicit language of repression and terror, the idea of an invasive police state,
smacks as being the height of hypocrisy in light of the Soviet regimes own violent re-
ordering of society having recently reached a crescendo at the end of 1930s.
Nevertheless, this language would continue to shape the Soviet presentation of
Finnish society at war, stamping the military and political situation in the region with
Stalinist rhetoric and echoing the recent Soviet occupation of Poland and Pravdas
condemnation of the bloody terror practiced by the Polish gentry.
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 24 November 1939.
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 24 November 1939, p. 4.
Thompson, Nationalist Propaganda, p. 392. The Soviet medias recourse to a terminology of terror
in the treatment of opposition elements is an important element of longstanding continuity that will be
discussed in more detail in the next chapter.
In the final few days before hostilities erupted, a carefully co-ordinated
campaign to further discredit the Finnish government and the treatment of its
population also emerged from the daily TASS bulletins, printed in Soviet newspapers
and their communist counter-parts abroad. In Leningrad, with its proximity to the
border ensuring the city would remain centre stage throughout the fighting, local party
leaders began to pay close attention to the signals these bulletins provided. Though
they were most probably unaware of the decision for war, their frantic efforts to
engage with the new conception of a divided Finnish society reflected a keen
awareness of the need to speak on point and according to the precepts of the political
centre.
Yet whatever noise the press made, and however much it insinuated a Finnish
hunger for war, it could not rely upon its opponents to fire the first shot. Once the
decision for military action had been reached, a new challenge presented itself to the
regime: How to start a war with Finland, a tiny nation whose total population was
barely more than that of Leningrad, without being cast as the aggressor?
See Chapter 4: Life in Leningrad, pp. 169-171.
Chapter 2
Crisis-management, Censorship, Control
The greatest triumphs of propaganda have been accomplished, not by
doing something, but by refraining from doing. Great is the truth, but still
greater, from a practical point of view is silence about the truth.
Aldous Huxley, Forward to Brave New World
So a prince has of necessity to be so prudent that he knows how to escape
the evil reputation attached to those vices which could lose him his state,
and how to avoid those vices which are not so dangerous, if he possibly
can; but, if he cannot, he need not worry so much about the latter.
Niccol Machiavelli, The Prince
The preceding chapter established Stalin at the centre of our narrative. It also
began to construct a picture of the various strands of information and intelligence
gathering that were directed to that nexus of power. Stalin constructed policy and the
public presentation of the official line on the basis of these carefully controlled
channels of communication, further shaped and internalised through the complexities
of his ideology and instinctive response to world events. The failure to reach a
diplomatic agreement with Finland in the autumn of 1939 meant navigating uncharted
waters in the days ahead. Opening hostilities with a small, independent nation risked
further undermining a widely declared policy of peace, already tarnished by the
advance of Soviet forces into Eastern Poland.
A. Huxley, Brave New World (London, 2007), p. xlviii.
N. Machiavelli (trans: George Bull), The Prince (London, 2003), p. 51.
The memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev offer an important window into how the
Kremlin attempted to solve this problem. While Khrushchevs assertion of Stalins
culpability for ordering the opening of hostilities with the Finns might smack of being
a self-serving manoeuvre on the future General Secretarys part, key elements of his
story are corroborated by available archival sources. Following this narrative thread
reveals how small the circle remained that were privy to the decision for war. Even if
Khrushchev was not yet at the apex of power, he certainly moved in those circles in
this period:
When I came to Moscow from Kiev in those days, I rarely had any time to
spare. More often Stalin would call me and tell me to come see him.
Sometimes I would find Stalin alone. It was easier then to have an
exchange of opinions and for me to lay out my views and express the
needs that I always had to talk about when I came from Ukraine. More
often when I ended up in Stalins presence, Molotov, Voroshilov, and
Kaganovich were also there. More rarely Zhdanov, who was usually in
Leningrad. Also Beria and Mikoyan on occasion. That was the circle of
people I encountered in Stalins presence more often than others.
These were the names that regularly occupied the meeting register for Stalins
Kremlin office.
Taken together, their attendance constituted some ninety percent of
the time given to state business during the daily entries recorded in 1939.
By the
end of the 1930s, Stalin had gathered a select group of close comrades that were
unwavering in loyalty and shared the same uncompromising political outlook of their
boss. Their role in the unfolding drama is the focus of our attention in the next
chapter. In the course of the hostilities with Finland, the men responsible for the
mobilisation of the states military capacity and media apparatus would also join their
number. Both groups would have an essential part to play in the impending crisis.
Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev, p. 249.
Chernobaev, Na Priyomye u Stalina, pp. 278-296; Khlevniuk, Master of the House, pp. 266-271
(Appendix 2). As Khlevniuk notes, Stalin also regularly conducted meetings in his dacha.
Khrushchev, by contrast, is recorded as having spent just under eighty hours in meetings, a mere
three percent of the total for 1939. Khlevniuk, Master of the House, p. 270.
Stalin and the Inner Circle
Though Khrushchev is vague in dating a return to Moscow during the autumn
of 1939, he describes an initial call to Stalins apartment in the presence of both
Molotov and Kuusinen, who had already established an agenda for the Finnish
question in advance of his arrival. Following Kuusinens appearance earlier in the
month, Khrushchevs first entry on the register is 22 November 1939. It was a
particularly busy day for the boss, with Molotov, Voroshilov, Beria and Kuusinen
attending a short briefing in the early hours of the morning before business was
resumed again later that same day.
It was only during that afternoons session that
Khrushchev joined larger gatherings, of the political leadership initially, followed by
broader sections of the military general staff. They, too, had departed shortly before a
late night consultation between Stalin and Kuusinen ended the day.
Continuing to track these movements in and out of the Kremlin, we can
pinpoint Khrushchevs following reference to their first collective encounter on the 23
November 1939:
One day in late autumn 1939 when I came to Moscow, Stalin invited me
to visit him at his apartment: Come on over and well have something to
eat. Molotov and Kuusinen will be there. Kuusinen was then working for
the Comintern. I went to the Kremlin, to Stalins apartment. A
conversation began, and from the direction it was taking I sensed that it
was a continuation of a previous conversation that I knew nothing
about.
Both Molotov and Kuusinen had arrived earlier that evening. Kuusinen departed
shortly before Khrushchevs entrance, only to rejoin proceedings shortly after half
The date therefore appears twice in the register. Chernobaev, Na Priyomye u Stalina, p. 281.
Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev, p. 249.
past nine.
Continuing the discussion from the previous days meetings, they were
preoccupied with the question of Kuusinens anticipated role in Finland.
Stalins
insistence on introducing policy face-to-face, with only those members of his inner
circle concerned with carrying it out, naturally limits our knowledge of that dialogue.
Khrushchevs ignorance of how events had proceeded in his absence reiterates the
need to know basis of these plans. Stalin held a significant monopoly over the
information channels that travelled through to the centre; his careful guarding of that
control would have serious consequences for the development of the war and the
blockages in communication his generals would complain of following its
conclusion.
The Shelling of Mainila
Despite Khrushchevs absence at the actual decision for war, he was privy to
who was given the task of establishing a suitable precedent for initiating hostilities 
Grigory Ivanovich Kulik, head of the Main Artillery Directorate.
This version of
events is corroborated by the arrival of both Khrushchev and Kulik to the Kremlin on
25 November 1939.
More importantly, consultation of the register for Zhdanovs
offices in Leningrad places Kulik in the city on the day of the artillery bombardment
that formed the central episode of the Shelling of Mainila.
This would provide the
Chernobaev, Na Priyomye u Stalina, p. 281.
K. Boterbloem, The Life and Times of Andrei Zhdanov, 1896-1948 (Montral and Ithaca, 2004), p.
201. Boterbloem dates this earlier meeting as 15 November, after Zhdanovs return to Moscow on the
overnight train from Leningrad. A seven-hour meeting ensued with Stalin, Molotov, Voroshilov and
Kuusinen present.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. xvii.
Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev, p. 249.
Chernobaev, Na Priyomye u Stalina, p. 281.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 77, l. 15.
pretext the Kremlin needed for cutting diplomatic ties with the Finns and opening
hostilities at the close of the month. Without a hint of shame, the Soviets laid the
blame for the apparent death of Red Army troops, caused by this pre-emptive strike,
squarely at the feet of the Finnish forces amassed on the border.
According to the Soviet version of events, troops of the Leningrad Military
District were stationed on the border with Finland within a kilometre of the village of
Mainila. On the 26 November 1939, at 3:45pm, the Soviet position reportedly came
under fire from Finnish artillery. A total of seven shots were fired, resulting in
casualties among whom three privates and one non-commissioned officer were killed,
and seven privates and two men belonging to the military command were
wounded.
The Finns immediately completed their own investigation in response to
these claims. The next day, replying to Molotovs condemnation of the incident, their
preliminary findings revealed the source of the shots had been Soviet territory. They
suggested both sides withdraw from the border and establish a joint commission to
further investigate the nature of events.
The significance of this episode is not purely in revealing the mechanisms of
decision making within the Kremlin. It provides an opportunity to study how the
regime then controlled the spread of public knowledge about the events at the Finnish
border, paid close attention to popular reactions and ultimately questioned its own
ability to construct a believable narrative for the public to digest. There is hesitancy in
Note of Molotov to Yrj-Koskinen, 26 November 1939, accessed on 10 April 2011 at
http://www.histdoc.net/history/molotov261139.html. The original Russian is reproduced in a collected
edition of documents related to the Soviet-Finnish War. See E. A. Balashov (ed.), Prinimai Nas,
Suomi-krasavitsa: Osvoboditelnyi pokhod v Finliandiiu 1939-1940 gg. (St. Petersburg, 2010), p.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 24.
the manner in which the Party and press operated over the next few days that would
seriously undermine their ability to effectively control domestic perceptions of the
Zhdanov was called back to Moscow the day after the incident; over the
course of the previous month he had supervised military preparations in Leningrad as
head of the regional military council. He was not new to such work, having taken an
active interest in naval affairs as he ascended to the top of the Leningrad apparatus,
and proved instrumental in pushing for the improvement of the regions defences in
the spring of 1939. His world-view was closely aligned to the prevailing mood of
suspicion about the threat of invasion through the Baltic region, and he insisted on an
uncompromising line during Finnish negotiations over the territorial concessions
that were seen as essential in meeting the defensive needs of the country.
important, however, in the course of the conflict, would be Zhdanovs role as the
Partys political advisor to the front and mouthpiece for the Soviet forces in
Finland.
He provides a key bridge between the centre of power in Moscow and its
Unfortunately, there is almost no accessible archival evidence related to the episode from Soviet
sources. One would anticipate some reference to the shelling amongst NKVD files from the seventieth
anniversary edition. However, the only vague reference made by any document in this collected edition
is in the form of an undated report offering Finnish responses to past events (proisshedshimi
sobytiyami) at the Finnish-Soviet border recorded on 27 November 1939. See Zimniaia Voina:
Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, Document 40, pp. 200-201. The Volkogonov papers include a
copy of a report forwarded to Stalin, Moloto (sic) and Voroshilov that is dated 26 November. It
includes little identifying information, beyond being credited to K. Meretskov (Commander of the
Leningrad Military District and in overall charge at the start of the Finnish campaign) and a
subordinate, Melnikov. As an official contemporary source, it seems rather suspect, misspelling
Mainila and offering no information beyond that published the following day through TASS. Since
Meretskov was not in Moscow in the days leading up to the shelling, he may have been ignorant of the
Kremlins plans and hastily produced this note to inform the centre of the version of events he received
in Leningrad. Alternatively, this may have been a draft prepared to give weight to the published reports
of the shelling that were quickly dismissed outright by the Finns. See Volkogonov Papers, Reel 1, Box
1, Folder 5, Document 9.
Rieber, Zhdanov in Finland, pp. 4-14.
Boterbloem, Life and Times, p. 202.
expression at the limits  both geographically and figuratively  of Soviet control
during this crisis.
In the meantime, the act of provocation that would be so vehemently
advocated by Molotov as the precedent for breaking diplomatic relations with Finland
had failed to even make the front page of the three main newspapers of the central
party press.
It is very difficult to square this low-key announcement of the events of
26 November the following day, with the sheer scale of the response the Party
generated to fill its pages over the next few editions. Each newspaper began painting
an image of collective anger felt across the Union, incorporating sound bites from
every corner of the country:
The brazen provocation of Finlands military has caused a huge
perturbation among the workers of our country. Rallies at night shifts in
Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev works unanimously adopted a resolution
strongly approving the note of the Soviet government.
Meetings were prepared in factories and among regional party organisations to spread
the word of this provocation by Finland and generate support for the Soviet Unions
diplomatic response. Photographs showed the attentive faces of citizens undergoing
their collective education about the events that had brought the country to the brink of
war. This was a well-coordinated affair, with party activists on the ground responding
immediately to the official news as it appeared in print and over the airwaves.
Attempts were made across the Leningrad region to host meetings in key
establishments in the urban centres, gathering thousands of people to hear the official
line and reassure the Party of the united will of the Soviet people.
Reports from the
See Pravda; Komsomolskaya Pravda; Isvestiia, 27 November 1939.
Pravda, 27 November 1939, p. 2.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3633, ll. 167-171.
countryside were slower to appear, by which time dangerous rumours were already
starting to circulate about the validity of the official order of events. Some clearly
wondered whether it was the Finns, or Soviets, that had fired the first shot.
There was no place for these doubts in the press. In Pravda, the announcement
of the shelling was published side by side with only those public responses that
expressed healthy understanding of the official line, taken from meetings held
throughout the previous night in the factories of Leningrad, Moscow and Kiev. In
contrast, within the pages of Komsomolskaya Pravda, any response to the news of the
shelling was delayed until the following day. It was an early sign of the Partys
inability to mobilise the entire propaganda machinery to react in unison to such a
controversial episode. Not that it was particularly tolerant of these failures. The editor
of Smena, the regional paper of the Leningrad Komsomol, was required by the city
committee to explain the five-hour delay of the 27 November edition. In their
defence, the papers staff pointed to the difficulties involved in mobilising the
workforce late into the night, fuel shortages and the breakdown of transport that
further delayed getting the copy to print.
The over-all impression is of the limited facts being overshadowed by a
groundswell of popular outrage and hurriedly organised shows of support in
anticipation of the official reaction from Moscow. The reliance on a fairly generic
response from citizens willing to voice their outrage at the Finns were guided through
careful management by those party delegates heading the meetings and quickest to
organise support. This began in the centres of Moscow, Leningrad and Kiev where
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3633, ll. 172-175.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3394, ll. 191-192.
any rapid mobilisation of the Party was easiest, but later spread as far a field as Alma-
Ata, Minsk and Lvov.
Reporting on these scenes, Pravda offered the following
view from the fringes of Soviet power:
Today crowded meetings took place in the cities, villages and towns of
Kazakhstan in connection with the brazen onslaught of the Finnish
militaryComrade Bukurov spoke at a rally of miners from the Kirov
mine in Karaganda. He said: The provocation failed. Soviet troops have
displayed necessary composure on the Finnish border. When needed, the
Red Army, and with it the entire Soviet people will be able to answer a
devastating blow to the cowardly provocateur soldiers.
The limited evidence of any informed, articulate responses beyond sound bites
of Soviet rhetoric emphasises the lack of information provided by the regime over the
course of negotiations and in the immediate aftermath of the Mainila incident. Even
those who genuinely took the Kremlins version of events at face value could offer
little to the conversation. This was a knee-jerk response, the precedence for which
was well established in the course of the 1930s, when the penetration of Stalinist
culture into the press was solidified. The result was the political centre becoming
more and more disengaged with the wider public. Instead, newspapers were
increasingly geared towards sustaining the legitimacy of the party among its
members.
This was clearly not the end of the story. The expectation remained that,
once this information was in the hands of the party membership, it should then be
distributed orally amongst the wider population, through gatherings, reading circles
and organised lecture cycles. That the regime struggled to develop a coherent strategy
for achieving this will become clear by the wars ever diminishing profile in the press
and the negative reports of public opinion that would continue to flood into the centre
from a huge variety of sources.
Pravda; Komsomolskaya Pravda, 28 November 1939.
Pravda, 28 November 1939, p. 2.
Lenoe, Closer to the Masses, p. 254.
Without any firm or consistent channels of information (and direction) via the
press, the more zealous-minded agitators could still be inclined to fill in the gaps. The
recollections from one contemporary suggest this was a definite risk in these opening
days of uncertainty:
For example, before the Soviet-Finnish war our politruks [political
commissars
] began an open campaign against Finland. They spoke about
the Finnish threat to Leningrad and the necessity of protecting the
peaceful Soviet population from the Fascist invaders. Listening to such
talks we were sure that very soon Finnish territory will be attacked. The
Army newspaper Red Star wrote only about the Soviet-Finnish
negotiations concerning the Karelian Isthmus. It did not contain such juicy
phrases as we heard from our politruks. One day we were informed that
Finnish troops had bombarded the Soviet border and had openly attacked
Soviet army units. Therefore, the Soviet army was forced to counter-
attack. Personally I accepted that information as a big lie because for two
months before the attack, day after day, we heard nothing but slander
about Finland.
Even at the risk of this recollection being delivered with the benefit of hindsight, there
was clearly a huge gap between the press coverage of Finnish events and the palpable
sense of impending war that is detectable among the rumours and hearsay being
circulated in the Leningrad region during the preceding weeks.
On 3 November
1939, with heightened surveillance in play during the festivities for the twenty-second
anniversary of the October Revolution, one overzealous housewife was overheard
announcing that Finland had already declared war on the USSR. Defeat for the
Soviets was also anticipated, thanks to the expectation of support for the Finns from
Britain, France and Sweden.
This battle between official and unofficial channels of
A supervising political officer, responsible for the ideological education and organisation of military
forces.
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 36, Case 333/(NY)1582, p. 32.
See, for example, reports of rumours circulating in the town of Pushkin that suggested there was no
prospect of an agreement being reached between the USSR and Finland. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v,
d. 3569, l. 105.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3569, l. 126. Four related svodki from the regional apparatus of the
NKVD are included in this file. All focus on popular responses to the anniversary celebrations of the
information, further distorted by their dissemination across factory floors and
collective farms, would continue through the conflict.
The diplomatic exchanges that followed this opening salvo was merely a
smoke screen to mask the deployment of Soviet troops and rebuff claims that the Red
Army was now intent on seizing Finnish territory by force. Molotov made hollow
promises that the Kremlin would not blow the episode out of proportion:
The Government of the U.S.S.R. have no intention of exaggerating the
importance of this revolting act committed by troops belonging to the
Finnish Army  owing perhaps to a lack of proper guidance on the part of
their superiors  but they desire that revolting acts of this nature shall not
be committed in future.
The Kremlin continued to pay careful attention to the international theatre. As the
Baltic fleet monitored Swedish manoeuvres in the Gulf of Finland, still fearing
intervention on behalf of the Finns, Moscows interest was also on how much weight
Molotovs words carried amongst foreign public opinion.
The TASS offices in New
York received a telegram, in the aftermath of the Foreign Ministers radio address on
29 November, requesting word on the American press response and extent of the
texts exposure among its readers.
The American Daily Worker fought a valiant
battle on the Soviet regimes behalf. It was aided in no small part by the advantage
afforded to its editors by the time-difference between Moscow and the East Coast.
There is none of the hesitancy visible in the Soviet press treatment of events on the
October Revolution and the mood of the local population recorded during the festive period. See
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3569, ll. 100-140.
Note of Molotov to Yrj-Koskinen.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 26.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1079, l. 76.
Finnish border. News of the Mainilia incident and the casualties involved dominated
the front page on the 27 November, cabled in from Moscow.
Back in the Soviet capital, the regime was increasingly aware of the
inadequacy of its treatment of these events. Molotovs commentary offered little
beyond vitriolic hyperbole at the actions of Finland over the last few months.
Decidedly vague about the shelling of Mainila, it was a further sign of the regimes
caution over how effectively it had engineered this smoking gun.
In the past few days outrageous provocations by the military of Finland
began on the Soviet-Finnish frontier, including even artillery firing on our
troops near Leningrad, which caused grave losses in Red Army
unitsthey replied to our proposals by a hostile refusal and brazen denial
of facts, by a derisive attitude toward the victims we have lost, by
undisguised striving to keep Leningrad under the direct threat of their
troops.
Not risking the explicit mention of an impending state of war between the two sides,
the reaction to hostile foreign press was one of blanket refusal that the Soviet Union
had any intention of seizure or annexation of Finland or interference in her internal
and external affairs. The blame was instead laid squarely at Finlands door.
Although, in words at least, the breakdown in diplomatic relations was not yet being
equated with further hostilities, the visual imagery that Pravda adopted portrayed both
sides with weapons clearly drawn. In a cartoon that would establish a striking visual
language later recycled by the same artists after Nazi Germanys invasion of the
USSR, the clawed hand of the former tsarist general, Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim 
Daily Worker (New York), 27 November 1939.
Radio Speech of comrade V. M. Molotov, Chairman of Council of People's Commissars of USSR
at November 29, 1939, accessed on 11 April 2011 at http://heninen.net/sopimus/molotov1939_e.htm.
The full text of the speech was published in Izvestiia, 30 November 1939. For a complete transcript
see, also, Balashov, Prinimai Nas, pp. 241-242.
eagerly grasping at Leningrad  was about to be dealt a blow by the butt of a Red
Army rifle (See Fig.1 and Fig. 2 below).
Fig. 1. Fig. 2.
While the defence of the Soviet Unions peaceful intentions filled column
inches in the aftermath of the incident, the NKVD was on hand to report to the centre
their efforts to gauge workers reactions to Molotovs speech. Here the regime was
privy to just how ineffective its manipulation of the truth had been. Davies treatment
of public opinion under Stalin has considered evidence of this nature primarily from
the position of Leningrad, where the majority of her research was concentrated.
Recently released documents from the Moscow archives of the former-NKVD allow
similar work to be done in relation to the capital. At the centre of her earlier thesis
was the assertion that whatever questions exist over the objectivity of these sources,
(Fig. 1.) Pravda, 30 November 1939, p. 5; (Fig. 2.) Graphic Witness: Visual Arts and Social
Commentary  World War II Soviet Posters, accessed on 28 October 2014 at
http://www.graphicwitness.org/undone/rp01.jpg.
given their particularly formulaic structure and the culture of misinformation endemic
among Soviet society, they typically insisted that negative responses to policy were in
the minority.
This is not borne out by a report compiled on the 30 November 1939.
Among the commentary recorded by the NKVD, twelve positive, politically correct
responses were over-shadowed by fifteen negative, counter-revolutionary
comments. These ranged in severity from defeatism, anticipating the threat Finlands
bombers posed to the Kremlin, to the appearance of a number of voices that either
questioned the validity of the Soviets order of events or went so far as to place the
blame for the incident squarely on the shoulders of its own forces.
Our government needs these incidents. Is it not possible that our scouts
gave a Finnish officer 1000 roubles and suggested a shot be fired on the
USSR. Thus, the incident was created.
Although surveillance reports of this type were principally reactive to changes in
policy or public statements that had already been implemented, the regime could not
fail to respond to such negative commentary. Indeed, there was a palpable sense in
Leningrad that events were spiralling out of control. Their failure to provide an
official and believable view of events on the Finnish border, motivated the Party
apparatus to provide increasingly frequent summaries of the popular mood, marking
not only the day but also the hour of their collection. With multiple copies distributed
to the regional leadership, Zhdanovs hastily scribbled markings testify to the fact
these were being read  and reacted to  by the political centre.
Davies, Popular Opinion, pp. 9-19.
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, pp. 207-210.
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, p. 209.
See Chapter 4: Life in Leningrad, pp. 178-180.
Molotovs rhetoric had already begun to waver over the strength of the Soviet
Unions presentation of events. Away from public scrutiny, that same hesitancy had
an impact on the narrative adopted by the Leningrad Military District on the eve of
preparing its troops for war. This was less to do with an established orthodoxy
emerging on how to treat the Finnish affair, and more a result of the Party ensuring it
maintained tight control over how its general staff rallied the troops for the upcoming
campaign. The task of supervising this was given to Zhdanov, the local political
advisor to the Leningrad Military District under the command of Kirill Afanasievich
Meretskov.
It was Zhdanov who made extensive corrections to Meretskovs final
communiqu issued to the forces of the LMD on the eve of the invasion, setting the
tone for the upcoming war.
The most noteworthy change was the wholesale removal of any reference to
the numbers or rank of those casualties reported at Mainila. If the regime was
showing concern about its ability to convince the general public about the validity of
this story, then this was equally the case in relation to its own troops. To continue to
perpetuate the myth of these losses would have left too many unanswered questions
about just who had died at the hands of Finnish artillery. Rumours travel fast. Even
through the upheavals of war, word could soon return from the front line via the
military hospital bed.
The regime took the political education of its troops very
seriously, extending the same surveillance endured by the civilian population to the
Red Army.
Boterbloem, Life and Times, p. 202.
Davies, Popular Opinion, p. 100. For corroborating evidence that this was a particular problem
during the Finnish campaign, see comments recorded by the Harvard Project interviews. HPSSS,
Schedule A, Vol. 15, Case 301, p. 51; Schedule A, Vol. 32, Case 398/(NY)1204, p. 33.
The original author of this communiqu  whether or not it was left initially to
Meretskov is unclear from the draft in Zhdanovs archive
 was confident of the
ability of his troops to see through the lies perpetrated by the international press about
the Soviet Unions aims in Finland (also acknowledged and passionately refuted by
Molotov in his radio address):
Every soldier of the Red Army understands the libellous, provocative
nature of those statements against the national Finnish government that
the USSR wants to sovietize and annex Finland.
Zhdanov did not share this optimism and the section quoted above was removed.
There was little sense in further advertising anti-Soviet sentiment when the regime
was struggling to effectively formulate its own line. For now, its strongest suit seemed
to be the role the Bolsheviks had played in first recognising the independence of
Finland after centuries of Tsarist rule. This became the historical keynote of the
Soviet position. If that freedom and independence was a gift of Soviet power then
logic dictated it was up to them to defend it from the interference of bourgeois,
imperialist influence.
After such a shaky start, the regime was quick to push its own interpretation of
the history of Soviet-Finnish relations, drawing a straight line from the foreign
intervention of the civil war era, to the imperialist sponsorship of the current
bourgeois oppressors of the Finnish people.
The aim of these vile anti-Soviet escapades stretches to the present day.
Finland has become a nest of intrigue, subversion and military
provocations against the Soviet Union.
Though this edited version is undated, its language matches the passage, cited by Van Dyke, from
the final communiqu issued by Meretskov on 30 November 1939. See Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of
Finland, p. 27.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 45, ll. 1-7.
While any explicit connection to Lenins role in granting Finland independence risked
tarnishing his legacy with the ignominious progress of current events, it remained an
important dimension of the Soviet media campaign. However, references to the
positive expression of Finnish state-hood were increasingly overshadowed by an
equally backward-looking rhetoric that sought to paint the Finnish enemy as the
eternal White Guard.
This was a conscious attempt to resurrect the old terminology of the civil war
period via the manipulation of official statements on the Finnish question. Zhdanov
first toyed with the idea during his editing of the opening speech to the Leningrad
Military District. Initially reluctant to rely on the label of White-Finnish forces
(belofinskoye voyska) he returned to the passage crossing out white (belo) by
hand.
In contrast, a later address to the troops  undated but among papers from
December 1939  demonstrates how that distinction would eventually be applied to
differentiate between the Finnish people (narod) and the white bandits
(belobandity) of the enemy forces: Rid the rightful land of the Finnish people of
white bandits
This was an artificial distinction, one that ignored the Finnish populations
collective resistance the advance of Soviet forces would inspire. The construction of
class difference and reliance on the blunt weapon of revolutionary rhetoric was a
hastily prepared response to the sudden emergence of war. It depended on a long-
standing and widely understood terminology that was couched in the history and
ideology of the Party. Once it was re-established as the official vocabulary of the
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 45, l. 5.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 45, l. 6.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 45, l. 82.
Party and press, it would quickly permeate through Soviet society and find eager
adherents wary of the ambiguity surrounding the USSRs entry into conflict with its
northern neighbour.
Crossing the Threshold
As the invasion began, in the early hours of 30 November 1939, the Kremlin
even stumbled over the problem of how to publicly announce war. The following day,
overshadowed by a front page dedicated to the memory of Sergei Kirov (on this the
anniversary of his assassination in 1934), TASS reports of skirmishes along the
border between the two sides strongly insinuated hostilities had been instigated by
Finnish troops.
Without precedent for the absence of a Friday edition,
Komsomolskaya Pravda simply failed to emerge from the printers on 1 December,
opting to recycle much of Pravdas material the next day. It was a war started without
declaration and, by the time hostilities were properly acknowledged, the press were
already lauding the establishment of Kuusinens Peoples Government of Finland.
Worse was to come when an apparent miscommunication among the Baltic
fleets force of long-range bombers resulted in the release of six hundred bombs on
Helsinki. This incident had an immediate impact on foreign perceptions of the conflict
in Finland, galvanising domestic support for the war effort, and elicited widespread
condemnation of the Soviet Union among international audiences. Though Meretskov
For evidence that this terminology was used in correspondence between Stalin and his inner circle
during the conflict, see the examples cited in S. Sebag Montefiore, Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar
(London, 2004), p. 292.
Pravda, 1 December 1939.
Tolstoy, Stalins Secret War, p. 137.
would subsequently order any air operations in the Finnish theatre to avoid the
bombing of population centres, Molotov and the foreign ministry had no strategy for
dealing with the backlash and resorted to nothing more than barefaced lies.
Mr. Roosevelts suggestion that air bombardment of the population of
Finlands towns should not be permitted, insofar as it is addressed to the
Soviet Government, is caused by a misunderstanding. Soviet airplanes
have bombed airdromes (sic.), but they have not bombed towns and do not
intend doing so, because our Government values the interest of the
Finnish population no less than any other Government does. Certainly one
may fail to see this from America, which is over 8,000 kilometers away
from Finland. Nevertheless, facts are facts. In view of this, Mr.
Roosevelts statement is, as can be seen, pointless.
It is a credit to the strength of the Partys appeal among loyal communists abroad that
the Communist Party of Great Britain would publicly propagate these facts, despite
the leadership privately acknowledging that it may be true that some people have
been killed and some buildings bombed.
This rapid turn of events thus had implications, not only for the Soviet press,
but also among loyal cells of the Communist International. The CPGBs Daily
Worker performed editorial somersaults to avoid alienating itself from Moscows
official line on events. Headlines were changed between morning and evening
editions to avoid any insinuation of Soviet aggression or Moscows engineering the
sudden emergence of Otto Kuusinens Peoples Government.
Indeed, the problem
of how to present the deterioration in Soviet-Finnish relations had already posed
problems for the paper before the invasion. On 4 November 1939, the Daily Workers
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, pp. 55-56, 96.
Molotovs Denial of Civilian Bombings, accessed on 11 April 2011 at
http://www.histdoc.net/history/bombard1939.html. See, also, Balashov, Prinimai Nas, p. 39.
LHA, CP/IND/MONT/18/01.
The bound copies of Daily Worker (London) held by the Marx Memorial Library contain multiple
print runs for each day. The discrepancies between morning and evening editions are thus visible when
consulted side by side. See, for example, Daily Worker (London), 1 November 1939; 4 November
1939; 28 November 1939; 29 November 1939; 4 December 1939.
front page led with the ominous headline, Soviet Warning to Finland and Her
Masters. In subsequent prints that day, the editors offered a far less aggressive line,
Soviet Wants Treaty, Finland War, Says Pravda, with a rewriting of its attached
article.
There was to be no indication of the initiation of hostilities by Moscow.
Blame was saved for the Finns and, eventually, the Finnish government alone,
portrayed as an unrepresentative body opposed to the appeals of the Finnish people
for peace. By November 29, the evening editions headline made this explicit 
Finnish People Ask For Pact  pointing to the hardship suffered by its workers as a
result of their governments misguided actions.
The situation became almost farcical following the outbreak of hostilities on
30 November. Two days later, in a quick succession of leading stories, the paper leapt
at the chance to celebrate uprising in Finland and the foundation of the Peoples
Government, only to withdraw this view with the late edition. Having concluded that
such a development needed a more popular spin, its place was taken by the
declaration of a call for popular government expressed by the Finnish
communists.
With no Sunday edition, the papers writers returned on Monday 4
December with news of the weekends events and once more joyfully acknowledged
the new Peoples Government, formed in Terojoki on Friday night
emphasis].
Having failed to respond in a timely fashion to the shift in line that followed
the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact  an error that had forced Harry Pollitt to
Daily Worker (London), 4 November 1939.
Daily Worker (London), 29 November 1939.
Daily Worker (London), 29 November 1939.
Daily Worker (London), 4 December 1939.
step down as General Secretary  the CPGB were eager to prove their political
credentials. Since the Daily Worker remained a valuable source of Soviet-friendly
print harvested by TASS, Moscow would maintain pressure on its agents in London to
provide a constant stream of material from the newspaper.
Unfortunately, with
much of Europe mobilising for war, over the course of the next few months there
emerged significant breakdowns, both in available channels of communication, and
the alignment of the CPGBs political priorities with that of Moscow. Furthermore,
the recourse to outdated and politically naive calls to an anticipated communist-
friendly society in Finland would fail to generate the revolutionary upsurge hoped for
by Stalin and his subordinates.
For the time being, with the relatively simplistic formulation of civil war
imagery projected onto Finnish state and society that had taken root in the official
language of the Kremlin, blind recital of the new gospel suited the CPGBs committed
Stalinist and politically unimaginative chief, Rajan Palme Dutt. Happy to ape the
official line  drawing particular attention to White Finnish terror perpetrated during
the Finnish civil war  his orthodoxy was rewarded with the publication of one of the
first clear statements on the war from the foreign press by Komsomolskaya Pravda.
This offered a signal that the new rhetoric was intended to spread beyond the limits of
the Soviet Union and among the Communist International as a whole. Yet it was
supported by little concrete direction from the centre. This was epitomised by the
genuine challenges faced by the CPGB in its attempts to respond to the escalating
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1166, l. 76.
Rieber points to Zhdanov as a key advocate of the Terijoki government. See Rieber, Zhdanov in
Finland, pp. 8-9. Funds for the Peoples Government were channelled through the Leningrad
apparatus and Zhdanov continued to work closely with Kuusinen throughout the war. The pair would,
however, fail miserably in their endeavours to foment revolution amongst the Finnish population or on
their front lines.
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 4 December 1939. Originally printed in Daily Worker (London), 1
December 1939.
anti-Soviet opinion that undermined both its political aspirations during this period,
and its relationship with the working classes it claimed to represent.
Their counterparts in New York followed suit. Further from the action, the
editors of the American Daily Worker persisted in a rather confused presentation of
European events, both couched in anti-German sentiment and the explicit
condemnation of the Finns incitement of war with the Soviet Union. Sensationalist
headlines were increasingly joined by a conscious mobilisation of civil war
experience to resurrect the spectre of terror in Finland. Mannerheims prominence
among the Finnish defence efforts played squarely into Soviet hands. He was the
archetypal class enemy, a former Tsarist officer who had commanded White forces in
Finlands efforts to secure its newfound independence in a bloody civil war that saw
atrocities committed on both sides.
Interviews with Finnish migrs in New York
recalled these dark times and the butcher Mannerheim, responsible for the death of
30,000 Finns slaughtered by the Whites. It painted a picture of an oppressive,
dictatorial regime in which murder was carried out by numbers.
Although, publicly, communist parties abroad were still actively orientating
themselves to Moscow, behind the scenes the prominence of the Comintern had
rapidly diminished since the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. Dimitrov later
revealed to Milovan Djilas the idea of dissolving the Comintern had first arisen
following the Baltic states annexation, though this was postponed to avoid giving the
M. L. G. Spencer, British Communism and its Reaction to the Soviet-Finnish Conflict of 1939-40
(University of Oxford, BA Thesis, 2008).
For a short biography detailing the lives and careers of the two Finns with supporting roles in our
narrative of the Soviet-Finnish War, see M. Rintala and J. H. Hodgson, Gustaf Mannerheim and Otto
W. Kuusinen in Russia, The Slavonic and East European Review, Vol. 56, No. 3 (July 1978), pp. 371-
Daily Worker (New York), 2 December 1939, pp. 1-2.
impression it resulted from German pressure.
Stalin certainly no longer felt duty-
bound to respond to the telephone calls of Dimitrov and took care to maintain a tight
leash over the Executive Committees insistence on publishing official statements on
the war in Europe.
He was far more cautious of solidifying any line on the war after
the about-turn required to reach a consensus with Hitler over the division of Eastern
Europe. Further commentary was kept to a minimum. Dimitrov even ordered the
retraction of public comments made by Mao Tse-tung in support of the recently
ratified treaty with Nazi Germany, and the precedent it set for Soviet intervention in
China. Mao learnt his lesson and would later keep any statement of support for the
war with Finland to a secret directive.
If the Cominterns star was in decline, then the Telegraph Agencys was
almost certainly on the rise. The importance of TASS and the increasing profile of
Yakov Semyonovich Khavinson, operating under Stalins watchful gaze over foreign
affairs, were solidified in the aftermath of the Red Armys advance into Finland.
On 1 December 1939, Khavinson was called to a five-minute audience with the
General Secretary. The following day he returned to Stalins office during the staged
signing of a treaty on mutual assistance and friendship between the Soviet Union and
the new established Finnish Democratic Republic.
Though not present in the
M. Djilas (trans: M. B. Petrovich), Conversations with Stalin (Harmondsworth, 1963), pp. 34-35.
Banac, Diary of Georgi Dimitrov, pp. 119-121.
J. Chang and J. Halliday, Mao: The Unknown Story (New York, N.Y., 2006), pp. 216-217.
In spite of its recent sidelining, the Comintern would continue to demonstrate a servile deference to
Stalins foreign policy throughout the Soviet-Finnish War. Through coded communication, its
members were encouraged to express solidarity with the Finnish Democratic Republic and emphasise
the liberating aims of the Red Army. Later directives would closely follow adjustments in Moscows
public presentation of the war, including the condemnation of international assistance to the White
Finns and the laudation of a new victory of the S.U. peace policy at the conclusion of hostilities.
According to Fridrikh Firsov, these tactics did nothing but further discredit the Comintern and
Communist parties in the eyes international audiences. See F. I. Firsov, H. Klehr and J. E. Haynes,
Secret Cables of the Comintern 1933-1943 (New Haven, Connecticut and London, 2014), pp. 174-177.
Chernobaev, Na Priyomye u Stalina, p. 283. Although the editors of this edition point out the name
entered in the register differs slightly between these two dates, from Stalins notes to Khavinson it is
photograph that would adorn the front page of the following days newspapers, his
attendance, however briefly, at the epicentre of Stalins unfolding propaganda
campaign saw him ideally placed to anticipate the importance Stalin would now place
on international perceptions of the war.
The backlash was almost immediate. Khavinson was now on hand to report
directly to the General Secretary. In a hastily forwarded memo to Stalin and Molotov,
an article by the Russian migr communist  and staunch anti-Stalinist  Boris
Souvarine provided a detailed portrait of Otto Kuusinen and his relations with the
Kremlin. Published in Paris just two days after the signing of the mutual assistance
treaty with Kuusinens government, it shattered any hopes Stalin might have
harboured for a positive reception to this thinly-veiled publicity stunt.
From this
point on, the profile of Finlands new Peoples Government rapidly diminished
within the pages of the Soviet press. It certainly made no effort to share in the Daily
Workers attempts in New York to put on a brave face and disregard the supposed
discovery of Kuusinens close ties to Moscow made by the international press:
What can be more natural than the fact that as the head of the first real
peoples government of Finland, a government which sets itself the task of
liberating the Finnish people from a hand full of ill-starred rulers who
have driven their country to war, stands the representative of a party [the
Communist Party of Finland] which throughout its whole existence has
defended the independence and liberty of its people?
Instead, as quickly as Kuusinen appeared in the public eye, he swiftly returned
to obscurity. His governments commendation of Stalin on the arrival of the General
Secretarys sixtieth birthday celebrations, which would dominate the media at the end
clear he was guilty of misspelling the latters name on other occasions. See, for example, RGASPI, f.
558, op. 11, d. 207, l. 61.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 38, d. 97, ll. 10-12.
Daily Worker (New York), 4 December 1939, p. 1.
of the month, was lost in a sea of carefully managed dedications, biographical notes
and congratulatory remarks. As the war progressed, periodic shows of support from
workers and Soviet-friendly organisations abroad may have paid lip service to the
Terijoki government, but these remained token references among the back page news
clippings collected by TASS.
The general impression is of a regime averse to perpetuating negative press
though ill equipped to find an alternative solution in this new and hostile environment.
Rather than fabricate a positive spin, its default response was a media blackout. It
mobilised the propaganda machinery according to past practices, though, so sudden
was this shift, it proved ill-equipped to respond to the changes outside its control. As a
consequence, it left many unanswered questions among the Soviet population
regarding the fate of Kuusinen and his colleagues. Following the end of hostilities, the
Leningrad district continued to monitor public remarks regarding the war and collated
a summary of those issues left unresolved since the signing of peace was announced
publicly: What will be done now with the Peoples Government of Finland? Why is
the agreement concluded without terminating the Peoples Government? Where is
Kuusinen now? were among those highlighted by Zhdanov on receiving the report.
Otto Kuusinens importance to Moscow did not diminish completely with his
sudden drop in press attention. On 4 December 1939, Molotov authorised the payment
of three million roubles to Kuusinen. His account shows a healthy bank-balance even
at the close of fighting, though the Kremlins investment of money and manpower
into this endeavour required some return.
He now joined in a collaborative
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4040, ll. 125-128.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 47, ll. 53, 60, 61.
partnership with Zhdanov that would work towards the ongoing production of
propaganda material for the war effort. Funds continued to be channelled through the
Leningrad apparatus.
Written correspondence between the two  limited though it
was by the availability of telephone communication and intermittent meetings in
Zhdanovs Leningrad offices  reveals they endeavoured to produce material for
audiences on both sides of the conflict.
Surviving examples of agitational material
delivered to Finnish forces shows little divergence from the message presented to
Soviet audiences at home and those loyal communists abroad.
This is hardly
surprising. Kuusinen and the apparatus of the Communist Party of Finland (Suomen
kommunistinen puolue; SKP) had lived and operated in Soviet exile since the defeat
of the reds in Finland, following the newly independent nations bitter experience of
civil war. Communist activity in the Finland was banned outright in 1930. Its
remaining adherents, forced underground, continued to pursue a political agenda that
relied as much on traditions of the Finnish labour movement as direct instruction from
the Comintern and SKP.
The recent decimation of the SKP leadership at the hands
of the Stalinist security apparatus meant just five native Finns were available to form
the cabinet of the Peoples Government. It was an impotent organisation, of an
assumed temporary nature, which proved largely disconnected from the realities of
Finnish life.
The claims of impoverishment amongst the local population, and the
forced mobilisation of Finnish forces by the bandits Mannerheim and Tanner, failed
miserably to resonate with the local population. Similarly ineffective were efforts to
switch their propaganda campaign to one stressing the Soviet Unions intent to reunite
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 143, ll. 2-3.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 47, ll. 26, 35, 37-41.
For a collection of these materials, see Bernev and Rupasov, Zimniaia Voina 1939-1940 gg. v
Dokumentakh NKVD, pp. 281-291.
T. Saarela, Finnish Communism, Bolshevization and Stalinization in N. Laporte, K. Morgan, M.
Worley (eds.), Bolshevism, Stalinism and the Comintern: Perspectives on Stalinization, 1917-53
(Basingstoke, 2008), pp. 118-205.
Rentola, The Finnish Communists, pp. 599-600.
the Karelian people with the rest of Finland. Kuusinen proved unable to dissuade fears
that the Peoples Government would be of a soviet type, as opposed to a
commitment to the parliamentary principles professed as the official moniker of the
Finnish Democratic Republic. This pledge to uphold democratic practices was hardly
expressed in the actions of its activists on the ground, who sought to secure the
acquiescence of any remaining residents within recently occupied territories.
For Soviet audiences, Kuusinen showed the same attention to detail that
Zhdanov undertook in the perpetuation of an artificial distinction between the Finnish
people and the White Finnish enemy.
His mastery of both Russian and his native
Finnish made him ideally suited as a translator. By the New Year, he wrote to
Zhdanov requesting additional manpower to support the propaganda work in Soviet
occupied Finland.
This is where the bulk of his energies would be spent for the
duration of the fighting.
Reaction to war across the Soviet Union  beyond the entirely positive
response presented by the press  was decidedly mixed. The central and regional party
apparatus, the NKVD and local militia, and the press and propaganda machinery were
all on hand to measure the range of feedback from the Soviet population. It is hard
though not to be drawn to the explicitly anti-Soviet sentiments the conflict incited:
The war has begun. It would be good to see the Finns take Leningrad and
this discourage the Bolsheviks to fight. In Leningrad, it would produce
great bitterness. Then the end of Soviet power is inevitable.
See Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, pp. 57-59.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 47, ll. 27-31.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 47, l. 36.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, pp. 58-59.
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, pp. 251-252.
For the time being, the Kremlin was confident of its ability to keep such sentiments in
check and, consequently, its war machine rolled on. However, from the very opening
stages of the invasion, the Soviet leadership soon came to recognise the woeful
performance of its forces. As the fighting dragged on beyond the optimistic
projections of Voroshilov, the next challenge facing the regime was how to justify the
continued presence of Red Army forces in Finland.
Terminology of Terror
No matter what your ideology may be, once you believe that you are in
the possession of some infallible truth, you become a combatant in a
religious war. There is nothing to prevent you from robbing, burning and
slaughtering in the name of your truth, for you are doing it with a
perfectly clear conscience  indeed the truth in your possession makes it
your duty to pursue it with an iron logic and unwavering will.
Milovan Djilas, Christ and the Commissar
The justification of the Red Armys advance into Finland had shaken, though
not shattered, the resolve of the Party and its leaders. Their ability to defend the
perpetuation of hostilities required further mental gymnastics on the part of loyal
communists at home and abroad. There is no reason to overstate the difficulty with
which many of the most committed adherents of Marxism-Leninism achieved this. In
1941, Milovan Djilas persisted in defending the Soviet invasion on the basis of the
liberation of the Finnish people: We accepted, without reservation, the explanations
put forth by Soviet propaganda, not because we had to, but because we wanted to and
G. R. Urban (ed.), Stalinism: Its Impact on Russia and the World (London, 1982), p. 207.
because we genuinely believed in them. Forty years later, still convinced of the
strength of his convictions at the time, Djilas nevertheless acknowledged that seeds of
doubt had been sown amongst some communists by reports of the Finnish peoples
disregard for socialism, and the Red Armys military record that, to put it mildly,
wasnt spectacularly successful.
A commitment to the self-evident truths of class
warfare and the promise of socialist utopia were powerful allies in the defence of
Soviet interests. As shown previously, it was a trait shared among a diverse group of
adherents, from the young Eric Hobsbawm, to the outspoken Willie Gallacher, and
proved strong enough to momentarily overcome even the trenchant rivalry between
Stalin and Trotsky. Evidently, this was not a static world-view, but could undergo
adjustment and realignment to the priorities of this turbulent period.
The reappearance of a terminology of terror provided a degree of continuity
with the past and offered an important ideological (and emotionally resonant) thread
familiar to communists from the preceding decades of Soviet power. The first hints of
this strategy have been seen in the enthusiastic defiance of young Finnish workers to
the threat of terror and repression at the hands of their own government.
self-conscious deployment of civil war labels was also central to Zhdanovs editing of
public statements in the early stages of the fighting. This official script was routinely
deployed among domestic and international audiences, through newspapers, radio and
the public discourse of the Party. Although directed from above, it was also widely
perpetuated from below.
Urban, Stalinism, pp. 197-199.
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 24 November 1939, p. 4.
Moving beyond the men who shaped, and responded to, the unfolding events in Finland, we now
turn our attention to the language they knowingly applied and instinctively embraced to describe the
conflict. Exploring the background of this essential component of the Bolshevik ideology will seek to
challenge the way the literature currently deploys the same language of terror to describe the assertion
Terror by Mannerheim's Gangs
On 5 December 1939, both American and Soviet readers of the communist
press could open the days papers to reports from the Finnish front, credited to Pravda
correspondent Nikolai Virta. An established novelist and playwright, Virta was
already a prominent figure in Soviet literary circles. Awarded the Order of Lenin in
1939, he would continue to receive official recognition with the first of four Stalin
Prizes in 1941.
A product and proponent of a system that insisted all artistic and
cultural output be subservient to the political and ideological priorities of the state, his
writing from Soviet-occupied territory embraced the prescribed rhetoric and official
presentation of events. In these early days of the conflict that presentation was far
from fixed, but offered the opportunity for the ambitious Virta to project conflicting
views of Finnish experiences to international and domestic audiences.
For readers of the Daily Worker in the US, the demonising of Mannerheims
forces and their terrorizing of the local population was at the centre of Virtas
narrative. Widespread burning of homes by retreating Finnish officers, and the forced
evacuation of their inhabitants had left towns and villages deserted. Red Army troops
of Soviet control over its subjects. The persistent exploitation of this shorthand to describe the actions 
and, by implication, motivation  of the Soviet state is flawed. While it is not my intention to diminish
the enormity of the crimes for which the Soviet regime was responsible, in order to properly understand
the manner in which the regime operated, and to judge the impact of its actions on society, I consider it
necessary to adopt a more sober reflection of events from the perspective of the Party. A central,
though often-overlooked point remains; the language and terminology of terror and repression, of mass
arrests and the violent subjugation of peoples, of despotic governments and bloody executioners, was a
vocabulary monopolised by the Party and employed against its opponents. Furthermore, its habitual use
in the interwar period reveals that Stalin and his ruling circle approached challenges to their authority
(both real and imagined) in much the same way, whether they were problems of a social, political or
even international flavour. While it is beyond the scope of this thesis to provide a full exposition of the
evolution of this strategy, incorporating a view of Soviet propaganda from the October Revolution
through to our present concern with the Soviet-Finnish War, it is a topic that I have explored in depth
during my doctoral research. I hope, therefore, to develop this parallel research into a standalone article
in the near future.
N. N. Skatov, Russkaia Literatura XX Veka: Prozaiki, Poety, Dramaturgi: Biobibliograficheskii
Slovar v 3 tomakh, Tom. 1, A-Zh (3 vols., Moscow, 2005), pp. 390-393.
faced the dangers of British mines and booby traps as they pursued the Finnish
White-Guard bandits.
And yet, on the same day he wrote of the desolation and
desertion of the rural and urban centres occupied by Soviet forces, in Pravda, the
story was very different. Here life was slowly returning to normal. Terijoki, the
capital of the newly established Finnish Democratic Republic was calm, with shops
and the local post-office already reopening.
So blatant was his freedom with the
truth that even Virtas contemporaries amongst the cultural set couldnt fail to spot the
contradictions in his portrayal of Finnish society:
In the same issue of a newspaper there were reports that the Finns were
driving out every last resident from the cities and villages and a brisk little
article by Virta about a rally in TerijokiHe did not try to explain how a
rally of residents could be held in a city from which the people are gone.
This fact did not concern him.
In publishing these lurid reports, imbued with a common language, the editors
of foreign and domestic newspapers were not blindly following the lead of
correspondents on the ground. As indicated above, these kinds of stories, which
presented a strictly partisan view of the world, were the regular fare of the communist
press. Any victimisation of its membership abroad, any unfair treatment of the
labouring classes, any arrest or persecution of figures sympathetic to the cause was
lambasted in the same choice rhetoric and with casual disregard for the facts. Thus,
the Daily Worker in New York was no different from Pravda when it focused
attention on: Protests in Caroline Answer KKK Terror; French Communists Stand
Firm Under Daladiers Regime of Terror; Peoples World Reporter Tells of Terror
in Madera Cotton Strike.
These examples are also demonstrative of the strategy
Daily Worker (New York), 5 December 1939, pp. 1, 4.
Pravda, 5 December 1939, p. 2.
E. Shvarts, Pozvonki Minuvshikh Dnei (Moscow, 2008), p. 254.
Daily Worker (New York), 5 October 1939, p. 5; 31 October 1939, pp. 1-2; 8 November 1939, p. 5.
among the international communist press of circulating and recycling news amongst
its many affiliated organs. This was particularly important for domestic Soviet
newspapers, where the gathering of foreign, Moscow-friendly print contributed
enormously to their regular content. Almost without exception, any reports taken from
sources abroad would be published without explicit reference to their official
affiliation with the local communist party apparatus. The illusion of truth and
objectivity were powerful allies in Soviet journalistic practice.
Although the Kremlin remained invested in the portrayal of its peace-loving
intentions abroad, the vicious and bloody portrayal of its enemies took an increasingly
central place in Soviet newspapers. On 3 December 1939, a gaunt and bestial
Mannerheim was depicted in Pravda, rounding up the hapless Finnish population by
force. His smoking gun alluded to the threat of reprisals facing those who refused
Helsinkis order to evacuate in the face of the Red Army advance (see Fig. 3.).
following day this threat was placed in even starker terms. Mannerheim, now reduced
to a walking set of gallows, was presented to readers as the executioner of the
Finnish people (see Fig. 4.).
The accompanying article sought to establish once
again the historical precedent with which the regime blasted the Helsinki government
as a band of White Guards, historically indebted to international imperialists.
(Fig. 3) Pravda, 3 December 1939, p. 5.
(Fig. 4) Pravda, 4 December 1939, p. 4.
Pravda, 4 December 1939, p. 4.
Fig. 3. Fig. 4.
If editors were somewhat blas about the inconsistencies in the depiction of
Finnish experiences, they were as keenly aware as the political centre of rival versions
of events appearing abroad. To merely denounce the enemy was not deemed enough
in the face of widespread international criticism levelled against Soviet intervention in
Finland. Moscows position was not aided by the perpetuation of a state of phoney
war on the continent. As a result, over three hundred foreign correspondents were
operating in the country, producing a huge amount of newsprint in support of the
Finnish defence effort. The effects were felt keenly by Soviet representatives abroad.
Maisky, in London, wrote of a freezing void surrounding the Soviet Embassy.
Cited in Vehvilinen, Finland in the Second World War, p. 55.
The communist press was unrepentant in the face of this criticism. Unable or
unwilling to acknowledge their own medias widespread exploitation of similar
tactics, graphic artists on the Partys payroll were mobilised to satirise the
international press recycling of anti-Soviet propaganda.
On the same day
Mannerheim the executioner appeared in Pravda, the real source of anti-Soviet
information was revealed (see Fig. 5.).
The Daily Worker in London and New York
also spent a significant amount of time counteracting the fabrications of western
commentators. Jumping on discrepancies in their narrative  be it the confused
movement of troops on the front line or the unverified reports of Soviet losses  these
type-writer generals were portrayed as waging a bogus campaign on behalf of
Finland.
The defence of Soviet intentions in the country continued, while any
claims of civilian casualties resulting from Red Army activity were still vehemently
denied.
However, the increasing decline of contemporary reports of atrocities by
Finnish forces from the front page suggests a growing uncertainty among foreign
communists of the validity or value of these reports for the Soviet cause. The efforts
of the international communist press were increasingly transferred to the nit-picking
of western medias coverage of the war.
So closely controlled was the circulation of foreign news collected by TASS that the extent of its
recycling of communist produced print may have remained concealed from those responsible for its
redeployment in the Soviet media.
(Fig. 5.) Pravda, 4 December 1939, p. 5.
See, for example, Daily Worker (New York), 22 January 1939, p. 1; 29 January 1939, p. 1.
Daily Worker (New York), 12 January 1939, p. 2. U.S. Press Spreads British  Faked Pictures of
Bombing of Helsinki. Originally reported by their counterparts in London, this expos showed two
superimposed images used by a British tabloid, Daily Mirror, to create a fabricated image of Soviet
bombers flying over the Finnish capital.
Fig. 5.
In contrast, the explicit reference to terror in Finland only took root in
Pravda after the failed campaign of Kuusinens Peoples Government and the
international outcry that manifested in the expulsion of the Soviet Union from the
League of Nations. On 16 December 1939, a signal of the shift was introduced via the
back pages of central and regional newspapers under the heading: Orgy of white
terror in Mannerheims Finland. After TASSs mobilisation during the Moscow
Show Trials, the Telegraph Agency remained well equipped for facilitating this kind
of publicity campaign.
Scouring the foreign press for pro-Soviet reports  or at the
very least, treatments that could be heavily edited and quoted out of context if
necessary  TASS continued collating and re-circulating news from communist
newspapers. It formed a self-perpetuating narrative of terror by Mannerheims
See above, p. 31 (note 64).
White Finnish forces and vehement popular protest against aid to the Helsinki
government (sic.) operating under the influence of imperialist powers.
The impetus for this move was not solely dependent on direct intervention by
the political centre. Although an essential degree of continuity was aimed for across
the central and regional Party press by the Kremlin, studying the deployment of TASS
bulletins in Pravda and Leningradskaya Pravda reiterates the complementary role
played by the copy-desk in this process. Editors could indulge in a certain
embellishment of report headings that accompanied what were, at times, rather bland,
a-political snippets of information. For example, the following January, Pravdas
publication of a report sourced from Stockholm was presented under the title, Terror
in White-Finland. For readers of Leningradskaya Pravda, the same source merited
cries of Bloody Terror.
Later that month, Pravdas claims of Mass Arrests and
Shootings in White Finland, was escalated to include reference to the Peaceful
Inhabitants as the targets of these atrocities.
They were not being given a free
hand; when, where and in what format these bulletins were to be published was,
generally, heavily prescribed by TASS.
In instances where Leningradskaya Pravda
failed to follow these instructions closely, its editors could face a stern reprimand
from the regional offices of the Telegraph Agency.
These may seem like small,
inconsequential elements of a much broader publicity campaign, but they do show an
active engagement at all levels of the propaganda machinery with the exploitation and
perpetuation of this terminology of terror. TASS played a key role in this process and
its gathering of viable reports extended beyond even the printed word. Radio reports
Pravda, 12 January 1940, p. 5. Leningradskaya Pravda, 12 January 1940, p. 4.
Pravda, 30 January 1940, p. 5. Leningradskaya Pravda, 20 January 1940, p. 4.
HPSSS, Schedule B, Vol. 6, Case 359, p. 4. See, also, Spencer, Signals from Stalin, p. 50.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4385, l. 17.
circulated to domestic and international audiences also routinely quoted the days
bulletins from the Telegraph Agency.
Evidence from Leningrad makes it clear that
stories of Terror in Finland and White-Finns Killing Peaceful Inhabitants were not
limited to the back pages of newspapers but rang out over the airwaves.
Conclusion
Events in Finland took centre stage less than eighteen months after an apparent
reining-in of the highpoint of Soviet repressions. The question could be asked,
therefore, of how the native population understood and responded to these caricatures
of a violent and repressive government and class-divided society? Could the regime
be so confident in adopting this language because the terminology of terror was
always explicitly allied with the activities of enemies, both real and imagined, at
home and abroad?
A further possibility is that, due to the threat of repression remaining such a
persistent part of life under Soviet rule, there was less reason to distinguish a
highpoint of activity. True, in literature and memoir accounts, an awareness of the
extreme levels reached in 1937 is visible - as public show trials and operational orders
coincided  though the victim count continued to rise from one decade to the next.
The lingering memory of 1937 also plays heavily on the minds of two key
characters in Vasily Grossmans Life and Fate. Both the former commissar, Krymov,
P. Kingston, Broadcasts in French from Moscow, February 1940- August 1941: An Evaluation of
the Reorientation of Radio Propaganda, Cahiers du monde russe et sovitique, Vol. 25, No. 2-3
(1984), pp. 201-218.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4598, ll. 17-19.
now languishing in Lubyanka Prison, and the increasingly disillusioned physicist,
Victor Shtrum, recall the year. References to the year throughout the book are
shorthand for its impact on the world and people these characters knew, as the
repressions struck Party and public alike.
Away from fictional retellings, the case of
one Red Army soldier offers an extreme but poignant example of harsh realities of the
states coercive control. Nevertheless, the impact earlier repressions had on his family
are framed in language that references neither a sense of terror, nor a particular
chronological focus: I will not shoot at the Finns, because the Soviet powers
repressed my relative.
Indeed, subsequent years did not see an end to the terror or its effects.
machinery of state control persisted. The NKVD was purged of Yezhovs patronage
group and close associates but it did not lose its ability to maintain close watch over
the Soviet population under his successor, Lavrenty Beria. The Gulag system survived
and camp numbers increased  notwithstanding periodic fluctuation  through to the
death of Stalin.
Even as war raged on in Finland, the execution of thousands of
Polish prisoners of war in March 1940 necessitated a reestablishment of a special
troika and the apparent pursuit of death by quotas once more.
V. Grossman (trans: Robert Chandler), Life and Fate (London, 2006), pp. 510-512, 807. For a close
study of Bulgakovs Master and Margherita, as a further literary response to the mysterious nature of
the year 1937, see K. Schlgel, Moscow, 1937 (Cambridge, 2012), pp. 10-32.
NKVD Surveillance Report, 5 January 1940. RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 46, ll. 12-24. Though this
appears to be an extreme position to take with little regard for ones self-preservation, a similar
expression of pacifism is recalled by one of the Harvard Project interviewees: My son used to tell me
in the Soviet-Finnish War literally: Mother, I wont fire a single bullet against the enemy. HPSSS,
Schedule A, Vol. 8, Case 107, p. 22.
Getty and Naumov, Road to Terror: Abridged, p. 215.
Getty and Naumov, Road to Terror: Abridged, p. 216.
T. Snyder, Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin (London, 2011), pp. 135-141.
In the aftermath of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, the division of central and
eastern Europe between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union provided ample
opportunity for the NKVD to flex its muscles. The machinery of state surveillance
and repression extended its operations to the newly occupied territories. The
systematic unveiling and neutralisation of potential enemies of the Soviet regime were
achieved via the penetration of society by the state security services and their growing
body of agents and informants in the region.
When the numbers involved are
considered for the post-Terror years of 1939-40, it seems ridiculous to consider this
as a period in which mass repressions can realistically be considered as any less
significant.
Continuity in the recourse to repression of the population was a fundamental
component of the Soviet state. Many of its methods  and of course its language 
remained the same in the 1920s, 30s and even outside its borders during the post-war
reordering of the Soviet bloc by national communist parties loyal to Moscow.
too, was the Soviet medias exploitation and portrayal of terror to describe those
opposition elements, made scapegoats by the state. This was possible thanks to the
Kremlins commitment to absolute secrecy when carrying out its own coercive
activity, and a willingness to censor all conflicting voices, be they in print or in
person.
See Weiner and Rahi-Tamm, Getting to Know You, pp. 5-45.
For example, during campaigns of ethnic cleansing around the border regions, figures of nearly
300,000 deportees between 1935-1937 pales in comparison to over 700,000 victims in 1939-41 as
Soviet forces moved to occupy territory in Central and Eastern Europe. See C. A. Frierson and S. S.
Vilensky, Children of the Gulag (New Haven, Connecticut and London, 2010), p. 236 (Table 6).
See, for example, McDermott and Stibbe, Stalinist Terror in Eastern Europe. When in 1952 the
deputy prime minister and secretary general of the Czechoslovakian Communist Party, Rudolf Slansky,
was accused, alongside thirteen co-defendants, of being Trotskyist-zionist-titoist-bourgeois-nationalist
traitors, spies and saboteurs, enemies of the Czechoslovakian nation, of its peoples democratic order,
and of socialism, the only feature of this label particularly unique to the period was the tacking on of
titoism to pre-existing Soviet rhetoric of the Moscow Show Trials. Cited in R. J. Crampton, Eastern
Europe in the Twentieth Century - and After (London and New York, N.Y., 1997), p. 262.
Among those silenced voices, one Konstantin Andreevich Rotman, a party
member whose file of compromising materials crossed the desk of the Leningrad
NKVD in the summer of 1940, had reportedly lamented the wrong course taken by
the Bolsheviks after the death of Lenin. In the destruction of the old cadres that
followed, during the waves of arrests and repressions, he saw through the smoke-
screen of the official line: In reality, there are no enemies of the people, and the
Partys policy  this Machiavellian policy, is characterised by its hypocrisy and
cunning.
Where this Machiavellian approach proved inadequate, in contrast to past
practice, was in the Finns stiff and unified resistance to Soviet influence and military
advance. Time and again, efforts by the propaganda machinery to reply to the realities
of war would be in vain. Their default strategy for selling the conflict to domestic and
international audiences was woefully inadequate.
The Soviet animal was facing
competition in a new, hostile and rapidly changing environment  one in which it
would have to adapt equally quickly to survive.
In the absence of alternatives, the Party initially exploited the well-established
terminology of terror in its treatment of events. It went hand-in-hand with the
deployment of the moral force of self-justification and attempts to clearly delineate
between the righteous and the abhorrent aims of the enemy. That this enemy  despite
its tangible and unswerving unity  was increasingly turned into a faceless myth,
offers another revealing example of the limits of the leaderships ability to manage the
rapid turn of events. In the face of public scepticism at home and abroad, a certain
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4300, ll. 388-392.
Spencer, Signals from Stalin, pp. 61-62.
degree of pragmatism was essential for the Party to evade that evil reputation that
could destabilise the relative acquiescence of the people and, ultimately, risk losing
them the state.
Chapter 3
Signals from Stalin
The principle of the State without freedom did, in fact, require exactly
this: that Stalin should take every decision himself, without exception.
This, however, was physically impossible, and so questions of secondary
importance were decided by Stalins trusted agents. And they always
decided them in the same way  in the spirit of Stalin.
Vasily Grossman, Everything Flows
The demonising of the Finnish defence forces serving under Mannerheim is a
significant and neglected dimension of the propaganda war waged by the Soviet
Union on both the domestic and international stage. It suggests a regime that was
supremely confident in its capacity to manage popular perceptions of its own coercive
activity, aided by a rigidly controlled, rigorously applied and widely accepted
language and terminology. This approach relied on an ability to keep audiences, at
home and abroad, ignorant of the realities of combat (and treatment of non-
combatants) across the Finnish border. However, as the fighting dragged on and Red
Army casualties mounted, it would become abundantly clear that this level of control
was unrealistic. Conflicting stories travelled from the front line via both official and
unofficial channels and the proliferation of rumours and hearsay was an ever-present
test for the regime. The Soviet people had not been cowed into submission by their
experiences of the previous two decades but remained engaged with the world of their
direct experience and willing to challenge the official narrative.
Grossman, Everything Flows, p. 209.
Still, it would be wrong to characterise the Soviet portrayal of the war as
entirely fictitious. As the fighting progressed, a more significant characterisation of
the wars role in the media was its conspicuous absence. Nonetheless, the Kremlin did
at least initially continue to react to events on the ground and amongst the
international community. This required the deployment of another facet of its broader
propaganda campaign that was similarly dependent on drawing a line of continuity
with established custom and its ideologically driven world-view.
This thesis has already outlined instances where the Party attempted a more
direct reaction to external events. This chapter will now seek to offer an explanation
for why the war gradually faded from the pages of the Soviet press. It will continue to
take account of both global and domestic activities and the intersections between
them. At the centre of our narrative will be the sudden and pervasive change
experienced by the agents of TASS and the increasing role they played in the
Kremlins attempts to propagate a Soviet-friendly view of events. This required the
Telegraph Agency to react to both the explicit orders and the more tacit signals
emblematic of Stalins wider ability to dictate the shape of policy outside his inner
circle of subordinates. Conversely, an important sense of continuity will persist in the
contributory role played by the Soviet medias commitment to business as usual
where much of its content was concerned. Even a crisis on the scale of the war in
Finland was not enough to derail many tried and tested tropes of the propaganda
machinery.
Understanding the part played by these elements of incomplete adaptation and
established practice on the part of the propaganda machinery requires careful
appreciation of the speed of unfolding events. Any reaction to developments in a
timely fashion with a uniform and consistent line represented an insurmountable
challenge for the regime in the short term. The longer the war progressed, the more
detached the pre-existing form and function of the Soviet system appeared from the
needs of present day circumstances. The propaganda machinery was able to evolve in
the face of these shortcomings only after the wars conclusion.
The day-to-day operations of the Soviet forces have already been well covered
by Van Dykes study of the war.
Acknowledgement of the general downward
trajectory of their performance against the Finns for much of the conflict will suffice
for this study. Of more interest to this thesis are the limited means at the Kremlins
disposal for distracting public attention away from a campaign that was increasingly
in danger of becoming an outright military disaster at the hands of a tiny Finnish force
of largely conscripted, civilian reservists.
What Moscows story needed was an antagonist that could justify the
expenditure of men and machines that were increasing every day. The skirmishing
tactics of the Finnish defence forces, difficult terrain and particularly harsh climate,
offered no opportunity for pitched battles where the sheer weight of numbers enjoyed
by the Red Army could be wielded effectively. The operational reports issued by the
Leningrad Military District gradually took up less and less front-page space while
offering little to the public in terms of decisive military manoeuvres. Instead, the
recourse to reports from the front that simply stated nothing occurred of any
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, pp. 35-187.
Tolstoy, Stalins Secret War, p. 141.
significance (ne proizoshlo nichego sushchestvennogo) became ever more
frequent.
It was not enough that the Soviet Union was facing off against the forces of
one tiny nation, however aggressive their intentions and outrageous the provocation
that had triggered hostilities. The core of the argument for seeking to resolve the
Finnish question in the first place had been the threat of third power influence over
its territory. Though the danger of German aggression had been quickly brushed to
one side with the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, Moscow continued to
justify its involvement in the Finnish conflict in terms of the proxy war being fought
by imperialist forces bent on the socialist states destruction.
Two significant developments are worth acknowledging in this respect  the
testing of Berlins patience over Moscowss insinuations of German support for the
Finnish War effort, and the Soviet Unions expulsion from the international security
agency, the League of Nations. Study of both episodes reveals the assumptions and
outlook of Stalin as he surveyed the European theatre of war and, once again,
reinforces the significance of his role in foreign affairs. The first episode resulted
from Stalins personal intervention in the press presentation of developments in the
Finnish war effort and would continue to form a key thread of his own private self-
justification for the conflict. The second, though outside the hands of the General
Secretary, was nevertheless embraced by Stalin and speaks of his particular scorn for
the League of Nations.
See, for example, Pravda, 28, 31 December 1939. London and New Yorks Daily Worker would
faithfully adopt this line when reporting events at the front from their Moscow sources.
On 8 December 1939, a press report, detailing German and Italian arms
supplies to Finland, reached TASS from their offices in Stockholm. Forwarded
directly to Stalin, his manipulation of the original text is marked by its simplicity:
[Original] German and Italian arms deliveries to Finland (Germanskiye i
ital'yanskiye postavki oruzhiya dlya Finlyandii)
[Edited] Germany and Italy supplying arms to Finland? (Germaniya i
Italiya postavlyayut oruzhiye dlya Finlyandii?)
Rather than make an explicit statement linking the Axis powers to Finland, a subtle
question mark hangs over the rumours of trade relations supporting the Finnish
defence forces. Its purpose was to strengthen the vision of Finland as a mere puppet
for the anti-Soviet aspirations of European nations, without making explicit
accusations that could alienate Moscow from Berlin and Rome.
The article appeared in Pravda two days later, published alongside an
ambiguous reference to the British governments failure to confirm reports from
Stockholm that Finland had placed an order for one hundred airplanes.
Unfortunately for Stalin, the Germans took immediate offence and Hitlers foreign
minister Ribbentrop issued a prompt rebuff to any insinuations the piece made:
I asked the Russian Ambassador to see me today at 5 p.m. At the
beginning of our conversation, I indicated to Herr Shkvartsev the
inappropriateness of the report given out by the TASS agency yesterday,
dealing with alleged armament supplies by Germany to Finland. I stressed
the fact that this report had been denied yesterday by German sources. All
the more did I regret that this report, apparently launched from English
sources via Sweden and only designed to create discord between Germany
and the Soviet Union, has been taken up in so striking a fashion by the
official Russian agencyI should be grateful if the Russian Government
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 207, l. 84.
Pravda, 10 December 1939, p. 5. Stalins formulation of the bulletins title was clearly intended for
circulation across the wider domestic press network. See, for example, Leningradskaya Pravda, 10
December 1939, p. 4.
would cause the TASS agency, before releasing such reports in the future,
first to get in touch either with the German Embassy in Moscow or with
Berlin, in order that such unpleasant incidents might be avoided.
An abrupt retraction the following day guardedly conceded to Germanys
riposte. Credited to the German news agency Transocean, reliable sources now
reported Germany had stopped the direct or indirect supply of military materials to
Finland.
Moscow was facing the prospect of its growing isolation in global
politics. This was obviously not the first time it had experienced such a state of affairs
in its chequered history of foreign relations, and with the Kremlins primary interest
in avoiding being drawn into another world war, it did not run counter to such an aim.
The need to respond to widespread condemnation from the international
community had pushed Molotov to unashamed dismissal of the truth in the face of
evidence where the bombing of Helsinki was concerned. In terms of the civilian
population at home, it was the Partys word against everyone elses. Foreign displays
of protest were not an immediate concern if the Kremlin alone determined which
voices from outside of the Soviet Union reached domestic audiences. This, however,
is an oversimplified analysis. The regimes monitoring of public opinion makes it
clear that the official line from Moscow did not hold a monopoly over the
populations understanding of events. Thus, the propaganda machinery was forced to
periodically respond to the threat of misinformation and smear campaigns on the
part of foreign press and politicians. The Soviet press output followed much the same
Memorandum by the Reich Foreign Minister, 11 December 1939, accessed on 12 April 2011 at
http://www.histdoc.net/history/NaSo1939-12-11.html.
Pravda, 11 December 1939, p. 5; Leningradskaya Pravda, 11 December 1939, p. 4. Casual readers
of these back page bulletins could be forgiven for overlooking the retraction. Both newspapers
published the rather terse message with a vague title that gave away little of the reports content:
Message of the German Agency Transocean (Soobshcheniye germanskogo agentstvo Transokean).
pattern as those already witnessed amongst the international communist press and
their battle against an army of type-writer generals marshalled by western media.
The following repudiation by the headquarters of the Leningrad Military
District, published in Pravda on 14 January 1940, exemplifies this approach and
reiterates the limited information the regime was willing to divulge on front line
operations:
During the second three weeks period of military operations in Finland
there has been no significant changes on the frontthe foreign press,
especially the French, first of all the French agency Havas, had during this
set-up a large operation and steam up slanderous fabrications against the
Soviet troops. This staff has no time to refute every day, every slanderous
allegation by the representatives of foreign agencies. But the staff believes
that it wouldn't be useless from time to time to take stock of the smear
campaign of these gentlemen, and reveal their true facesWe are aware
that foreign agencies are charged with their owners to engage in
propaganda against the Soviet troops. They also lead this propaganda,
piling up a heap of lies, to justify their existence. But what to think about
propaganda that is not based on facts but on deception? Is it to
systematically deceive the public opinion by this propaganda defending
civilization? We did not anticipate that the representatives of the foreign
press could sink so low.
In response, the Party sought to engineer a more Soviet-friendly sector of
foreign opinion via selective publication of communist press material from abroad.
These insights into international affairs, for example, underlined civil protest at the
intervention of foreign powers in Finland and, on a daily basis, quietly ignored the
vast majority of anti-Soviet sentiment reported by the worlds media. With increasing
frequency the back pages of the central and regional press circulated TASS bulletins
See, for example, Leningradskaya Pravda, 8 December 1939, p. 1. Three front-page refutations
responding to foreign reports of Soviet losses appear from the headquarters of the Leningrad Military
District.
Repudiation by the Headquarters of the Leningrad Military District, 14
January 1940, accessed on 12 April 2011 at http://www.histdoc.net/history/NKID1940-01-14.html.
Published in Pravda, 14 January 1940.
detailing the growing protest movement building amongst the international
community against support for White Finland and the Mannerheim band.
Together these bulletins fostered a palpable sense that people around the world were
united in their condemnation of the war. This was undoubtedly true in some respects,
but that international condemnation, according to the Soviet version of events, was
never directed at Moscow. The Kremlin was aided in this regard by the
uncharacteristically decisive step taken by the League of Nations within weeks of the
Red Armys invasion.
The importance the regime placed on shaping the war as a conflict involving
widespread foreign intervention, makes the Soviet press decision to publicly
announce the USSRs expulsion from the League of Nations seem like less of a
misnomer. Though this second key development was out of the Kremlins control, it
allowed Stalin to continue to construct an image of the conflict with Finland, whose
tendrils extended far beyond the borders of the two nations. In doing so he strove to
re-ignite the sense of global conspiracy driven by the imperialist aspirations of Britain
and France, and deflect criticism from Germany regarding Moscows earlier
willingness to stir the pot over Berlins rumoured trade links with Helsinki.
That the League of Nations took the bold step of expelling the Soviet Union
may have actually surprised Moscow. The advance of the Red Army across half of
Poland had failed to generate any real response, and the Kremlins establishment of a
military presence in the Baltic was engineered after a dubious diplomatic exercise in
See, for example, a series of TASS bulletins in Pravda and Leningradskaya Pravda, 17-30 January
1940. On 22 January 1940, the Daily Worker in New York led with a front-page story focusing on
American protests against war loans to Mannerheim. The more general anti-war feeling in the country
could be easily skewed to give the sense of anti-Finnish sentiment.
strong-arming the respective governments of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania into
submission. Therefore, there was still prevarication on the Soviet medias part when it
came to announcing the news. In the resolution of the League of Nations, the
international body had reached a firm decision on 14 December 1939, condemning
the actions of the Soviet government in Finland. The following day Pravda only
referenced the fact that a meeting on whether to expel the USSR had taken place,
without publishing its final verdict.
This was carefully buried at the bottom of an
article titled, The League of Nations is in the service of Anglo-French Military Bloc,
in which accusations were made against the two nations perceived to be leading the
campaign against the Soviet Union.
Whatever debate existed in the interim, the League of Nations decision finally
made the headlines on the 16 December, both Voroshilov and Molotov having
remained with Stalin till 5am that morning.
Of the TASS authorised
pronouncement, distributed the same day, Volkogonov credits Stalin with having the
final word, his voice ringing clearly through the text: In the opinion of Soviet circles
this absurd decision by the League of Nations provokes an ironic smile and will
scandalize only its pathetic authors.
It is unlikely Stalin expressed any genuine
concern over any long-term implications of the expulsion. It served his aims in terms
of the general presentation of the war, and the League had been proven an impotent
force in global diplomacy when it failed to halt Hitlers expansionist aims and the
outbreak of war in Europe.
Pravda, 15 December 1939, p. 5.
Chernobaev, Na Priyomye u Stalina, p. 285.
Volkogonov, Stalin, p. 364.
Komsomolskaya Pravda caricatured the exploits of England and France and
their assumed influence over the League with its usual brand of comic imagery. The
Leagues delegates, seated so as to form the keys of a human typewriter, were
depicted being eagerly pressed by two figures representing the allied powers and their
fabrication of the resolution on Finland.
In the final weeks of the war, Stalins
own self-confidence and caustic sense of humour would shine through in the private
marginalia of a memo notifying TASS of a further petition to the League by Finland.
No longer interested in giving such news print space, he merely scrawled Ha-ha
alongside the text and returned to his work.
Any kind of public response to developments on the international stage, as in
the case of the USSRs expulsion from the League of Nations, was still the exception
and not the rule where the exploits of the Soviet military in Finland were concerned.
Stalins personal intervention in the medias portrayal of the war was not an effective
way to manage coverage of its day-to-day progress. His primary focus was on
improving results at the front, as the Kremlin increasingly bypassed its own general
staff and directed the strategic concerns of the war from the capital.
Voroshilov
would later paint a picture of the mechanics at the centre once hostilities were at a
close: The Headquarters, or more accurately its active member Comrade Stalin,
virtually conducted all operations and all the organizational work of the front. His
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 16 December 1939, p. 4.
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 207, 1. 93.
On 9 December 1939, a reshuffle of the military command was ordered in an effort to strengthen
the leadership of land and naval forces. Stalin immediately took on a more prominent role in the
signing of orders in his capacity as member of the military council. Volkogonov Papers, Reel 1, Box 1,
Folder 5, Documents 17-18.
report drifts toward pure sycophancy in its latter stages, crediting Stalin, above all,
with victory.
Without overstating the point, it is fair to conclude that Stalins privileged role
in decision-making was at least a contributing factor to the medias inability to
provide a regular, detailed window on the events in Finland. With his direct
intervention in both the floundering front line operations and their patchy portrayal in
the press, all involved were now operating under the shadow of the General Secretary.
The dictators curse was a natural manifestation of the centralised control the Vozhd
aspired to  and his subordinates willingly defaulted to  in the context of a crisis that
undermined the established norms of the regime.
After their sudden appearance in the Kremlin spotlight, Yakov Semyonovich
Khavinson and the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union exemplify this uneasy
dynamic between the political centre and institutions of state. With the increased
responsibility enjoyed by Khavinson and the Moscow offices of TASS came pressure
to provide a regular stream of content from its agents abroad. This content was
expected to offer widespread coverage of events, both domestically and around the
globe, with insights into the politics, people and progress of the capitalist and
developing world alike. The Telegraph Agencys offices in London and New York
were not prepared for this increase in workload. Both suffered from limited resources
and a host of communication breakdowns that emanated from their attempts to
maintain a line to Moscow through the European theatre of war.
Volkogonov, Stalin, p. 365.
Establishing A Media Monopoly
The information TASS provided dominated newspapers at the central and
provincial level. Those that worked within its network and the press acknowledged
the extent to which content was dependent on its news distribution. This could include
detailed instructions about the format it should appear in print and even which page it
should occupy.
Not all the information collected was intended for public
consumption however:
Only a small part of the material gathered by TASS is given to the press.
Most of the material goes to the CC [Central Committee] or the NKVD.
Twice a month the foreign section of TASS prepares an information
bulletin on the international situation. Those pages of the bulletin which
are printed on red paper go only to the Politburo and the others, printed on
blue, go to members of the CC and to top officials. About half the material
in the newspapers comes from TASS.
Such an important institution, handling highly sensitive material, required
management by a figure that could be trusted to maintain strict adherence to the party
line. At the height of the Stalinist repressions of the 1930s, Khavinson rose to take
charge of the Telegraph Agency. He remains an elusive figure within the archives,
and details of his early career are scant. Yet it is clear he profited from, if not
engineered, the demise of his predecessor Yakov Genrikhovich Doletsky, who was
purged in 1937.
Khavinson had already shown the mark of a loyal Stalinist,
blasting Doletskys management as providing a hotbed of fascist intrigue and
HPSSS, Schedule B, Vol. 6, Case 359, p. 4. A number of interviews conducted by the Harvard
Project were with migrs who could draw on direct experience of work in the press apparatus and
Telegraph Agency. They offer an invaluable degree of detail regarding the domestic activities of TASS
throughout the 1930s and 1940s and the supervisory role it played in the Soviet media.
HPSSS, Schedule B, Vol. 6, Case 359, p. 7.
With thanks to Christopher Stolarski (University of Toronto) for the following reference: RGASPI,
f.82, op. 2, d. 907, ll. 13-15.
influence.
He aimed to further prove his credentials by weeding out suspect
elements within the organisation. Providing a systematic overview of all agents
operating abroad within the TASS network, the relative ambivalence shown by Stalin
in his delegation of responsibility to Malenkov suggests that, at this stage, TASS was
still only operating on the periphery of his radar.
Khavinson persevered and sought to cement his position through diligent work
and careful attention to signals he received from the Kremlin. From the archives,
Stalins notes and correspondence testify that the General Secretary was often a man
of few words. With the sheer volume of material he processed on a daily basis the
need for brevity is understandable. Khavinsons skill was in anticipating those topics
in the foreign press that caught Stalins attention. When any such signal was
forthcoming, Khavinson pressed hard on his subordinates abroad to deliver further
material. Studying the interplay between both Khavinson and Stalin, and Khavinson
with his agents abroad, is essential to understanding how TASSs role developed at
the end of the 1930s.
Crisis in the Comintern
The decline of the Comintern witnessed in this period is also an important
factor in the increasing reliance on TASS for dissemination of the party line that
followed. Any shift in responsibility between the two organisations would prove itself
a far from complete transition, with Moscow continuing to operate on an ad hoc basis
RGASPI, f. 82, op.2, d. 907, l. 15.
RGASPI, f. 83, op. 1, d. 89, ll. 8-10. Online transcript, accessed on 22 April 2012 at
http://www.alexanderyakovlev.org/fond/issues-doc/1015846.
throughout the crisis period. The experience of the Communist Party of Great Britain
provides an indication of just how challenging a scenario the ambiguity surrounding
lines of communication produced for satellite parties loyal to the USSR. In Britain,
the inadequacy of direction from the centre, vis--vis Moscow, undermined the
CPGBs attempts to present the Kremlins official line to audiences at home and
counteract widespread criticism of the Red Armys invasion of Finland.
Even prior to the war, the disparity between TASS and Comintern direction
was likely a contributory factor in the turmoil the switch to an anti-imperialist stance
caused amongst the CPGB leadership. Stalin first signalled the new anti-imperialist
line to Dimitrov at a meeting on 7 September 1939, with the Comintern secretaries
approving the directive, before instructing all communist parties to immediately
correct their political standpoint just two days later.
However, the delay in
receiving this directive meant that General Secretary Harry Pollitts first signal of the
change arrived via a press telegram on 14 September. The conflict was now described
as a robber war kindled from all sides by the hands of two imperialist groups of
powers.
This he opted to suppress, given its wholesale contradiction of the anti-
Fascist stance maintained by the British Communist Party.
Pollitts commitment to
the old line proved an error of judgement for those members of the party leadership
that sided with him. Rajani Palme Dutt, quicker to anticipate the change, interpreted
the telegram as an indication of the new mood in Moscow. When the CPGBs
representative in Moscow, Dave Springhall, returned from the Soviet capital on 25
M. Johnstone, The CPGB, The Comintern And The War, 1939-1941: Filling In The Blank Spots,
Science & Society, Vol. 61, No. 1 (1997), p. 29.
Johnstone, The CPGB, The Comintern And The War, p. 29. Unfortunately only a typed copy of
this telegram (with no indication of its original source) remains in Harry Pollitts papers at the Labour
History Archive, Manchester.
F. King and G. Matthews (eds.), About Turn: The British Communist Party and the Second World
War (London, 1990), p. 24.
September, carrying the same instructions from the Comintern, Pollitts mistake was
clear.
Both Pollitt and James Campbell, editor of the CPBG newspaper, Daily
Worker, were forced to step down and publicly recant their mistakes to the Party.
With the Comintern seemingly under gagging orders, signals from TASS
communiqus became the best hope for satellite parties to anticipate the Moscow line.
Unfortunately, this was an imperfect solution due to the rapidly changing nature of
events in Finland. Editors had to hope a telegram would not later be retracted or
information withdrawn after transmission. Such practices had evidently existed earlier
in the decade:
During the Yezhoshchina, the only news printed about the purges came
from TASS. At the big trials only TASS and Pravda journalists were
present. Sometimes TASS sends foreign news on the teletype and two
hours later sends instructions to pull the news out.
Moscow, London and New York
The global circulation of TASS materials was co-ordinated by a network of
agents facing their own challenges. New York, in particular, had been ordered to
transform its operation from a nine-hour day to twenty-four hour rolling news service
in September 1939.
Moscow showed little sympathy for the strain this put on
Kenneth Durant and the tiny staff under his management before the changeover.
Johnstone, The CPGB, The Comintern And The War, p. 30.
A. Thorpe, The British Communist Party and Moscow, 1920-43 (Manchester, 2000), pp. 258-261.
These comments come from a former journalist and party member with extensive experience of the
Soviet press apparatus. HPSSS, Schedule B, Vol. 6, Case 606, p. 13.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1079, ll. 130-131.
Durants correspondence with Khavinson gives some indication of the pressure they
were under:
You will understand that this cannot be done with our present staffIt
may be several days, perhaps even two weeks, before we can begin to
give you an efficient service. The emergency service which we sent you
during the first half of September was only done by extraordinary efforts
on the part of every member of our staff, which left the personnel
somewhat exhausted and unable to continue at such a pace.
Khavinson, on finding himself increasingly under the shadow of the Kremlin, was
unlikely to accept anything short of a stakhanovite approach to targets. It is clear from
later correspondence that there existed fundamental differences in the outlook of both
managers in relation to what constituted normal, humane work-conditions in the west
versus those acceptable to the Soviet regime.
Both London and New York experienced periodic disruptions in
communication throughout the period. The first significant obstacle was the
establishment of a British blockade on Germany that interfered with efforts to ship
mail to the Soviet Union. Never a particularly quick means of contact, it put further
strain on telegraph operators to provide daily updates, and issue appeals to the centre
from London and New York, requesting further guidance.
The war conditions compelled us to turn at once to the use of radio (RCA)
for all urgent and important news messages requiring the fastest
transmission. Cables via London run through London and are subject to
interruption and censorship. (In actual practice most of our cables via
Northern since the war seem to have reached you without interruption.)
We are using radio exclusively except when unfavourable atmospheric
conditions prevent direct circuit between United States and Moscow.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1079, ll. 130-131 (22 September 1939).
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1212, ll. 147-148 (17 April 1940).
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1079, ll. 157-161.
By the time war with Finland had broken out, events were moving too fast to
anticipate the Moscow line. Primacy was instead given to channels of information
travelling to the centre, over distribution of regular communiqus from Moscow for
its agents abroad:
Regarding the preparation of mailers, it is necessary to raise the question
of the long time in transmission. Many of the subjects mentioned in your
letter (example: reaction of workers to committee of aid to White Finland)
seem proper subjects for radio and cable report, rather than the present
slow mail. Events move too rapidly. The ordinary mails take from three to
six weeks from New York to Moscow.
Rather than giving them free rein to switch to transmission over radio and cable,
Khavinson repeatedly chastised the exceeding of Londons telegram quota, attentive
to the additional costs this incurred for the agency (the operating budget of TASSs
foreign bureaus evidently under the same close control by Moscow as their daily
working hours).
There is a notable drop in communication between London and
Moscow that followed the outbreak of war with Finland. Not all of it can be
accounted for by the limitations imposed by the British Navys blockade, and
intermittent problems with weather and geography affecting radio channels are
alluded to in the correspondence above. TASS was facing the same problem as the
Soviet media in general; needing to limit the negative press the war in Finland
received, whilst hesitating over the best way to achieve this. Both London and New
York suffered a lack of guidance as a result.
Khavinsons earlier audiences with Stalin were not repeated and he knew
better than to risk speaking out of turn. Signals continued to come through from the
General Secretary via Stalins scribbled instructions in the marginalia of TASS
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1212, ll. 210-211.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1166, ll. 90, 100.
bulletins, indicating what the offices abroad should prioritise in global news and
intelligence gathering. For New York, the penetration of South America by the
Telegraph Agency, in an effort to increase coverage of the region, became a task that
bore little relation to the realities of the resources available to Durant and his people.
The impetus undoubtedly came from Stalin, who revealed to Khavinson his interest in
news of German radio broadcasts in Latin America and the potential extension of
Berlins influence across the Atlantic when he authorised the publication of a TASS
bulletin received from New York in February 1939.
Durant did his best to explain
to Moscow the realities of the North American news service and the limits of his
bureaus reach:
The New York TASS Bureau has never given an adequate service
regarding internal developments in the countries of Latin America,
because information about these countries is not available in New York.
The press of the United States inadequately reports events and conditions
in South AmericaYou will never have an adequate Latin American
service from New York alone. This must depend upon the establishment
of TASS Bureaus in the important centres of Latin America
That Khavinson pushed the issue more than once suggests this might have been
considered a better use of New Yorks time than repeating the English-speaking
worlds condemnation of the Soviet Unions activity in Finland. It was also a clear
indication of the global coverage Moscow expected TASS to develop.
Finland became the elephant in the room. Moscow was reluctant to draw
attention to such a sensitive area of Soviet policy, and its agents abroad avoided
tackling the subject without the Kremlins official line for guidance. It is noticeable
how little the topic was touched upon during the war in the few instances of extended
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 207, l. 30.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1212, ll. 40-42 (24 January 1940).
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1212, ll. 66-72.
dialogue between Khavinson and London and New York that took place. When
direction from the centre eventually began to permeate through, it was broad in
subject matter without recourse to specific mention of events in Europe, or Finland in
particular:
The struggle in connection with the American policy vis--vis the USSR
requires at the present time your closest attention. We should ask you to
sum up the pronouncements in this connection and give a general
characterisation of the various groups from this angle. We request you to
record carefully and to keep us informed on all utterances of the various
leaders and groups, both in favour of the USSR and against it
The importance Moscow now placed on these channels of information was revealed
during those instances when they broke down. Frantic telegrams were issued to the
London bureau and directly to Reuters when its feed was lost.
The disruption of
Moscows regular subscription to Daily Worker and other English news sources
resulted in a similar response.
The New York and London bureaus of TASS
contributed to something of a pseudo-intelligence network, instructed to provide
information on industry, war-production and even the propaganda initiatives of their
respective governments hoping to generate popular support for the war effort.
problems the Soviet Union faced in the engendering of uniform public support for its
campaign in Finland encouraged Moscow to explore techniques from abroad that
might help shape policy at home.
Finally, with the Cominterns decline in prominence there was also an interest
in TASS taking on more of a role as the official mouthpiece for the regime. However,
the legal and logistical limitations of its offices abroad were not recognised by the
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1212, ll. 240-242 (27 February 1940).
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1166, l. 96; d. 1185, l. 33.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1166, ll. 76, 87.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1212, ll. 66-72, 83-84, 90-91, 116-118.
centre when pushing for this additional responsibility. New Yorks operation as a
collector of news for publication in the Soviet Union was legally defined by US law
and did not allow them to operate as a distributor of Soviet news independently of the
established American news agencies.
As you know, this Bureau is registered with the Department of State 
under the law for registration of foreign agencies  as engaged solely in
the collection and transmission of news for publication in the Soviet
UnionThe American press is strongly hostile to the Soviet Union;
nevertheless it has much interest in news from and about the Soviet
Union. For this reason the agencies include a large amount of Soviet news
 mostly from TASS  in their daily reports. This situation can not be
improved at present by the direct intervention of this Bureau.
The fact that Khavinson made the request in spite of his knowledge of the bureaus
hands being tied reflects the primary concern for the Kremlin in having its voice (and
particular presentation of the truth) heard. On 22 February 1940, the Moscow office
received a letter from Reuters regarding a message, delivered to its rival, United
Press, which quoted the Official Soviet Agency as its source. The message
contained a statement from Moscow that the most decisive battle of the war was
imminent round Viipuri the result of which was Soviet correspondents with the Red
Army are predicting success for the Russian troops on or before next Friday. Reuters
expressed concern over why they had not received such a statement, which had
appeared in the mornings papers before their offices in London received word.
Khavinson dismissed the allegations that this statement was issued by TASS and
blamed delays in communication between Moscow and London for any disruption to
the service.
Whether this was simply a bluff on Khavinsons part is unclear.
Nevertheless, it raises issues about the lengths Moscow was willing to go to engineer
a positive spin of events in Finland. By this stage in the conflict it was still an
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1212, ll. 48-49.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 11, d. 1185, ll. 7, 15, 18, 19.
imperfect set-up. Nor would the political climate or pressures of war permit the time
or resources needed to rectify these problems until after the conclusion of hostilities
with Finland.
In the meantime, Moscow could continue to utilise all available channels of
communication to get its message across. Andrew Rothstein, the Telegraph Agencys
leading representative in London, spent his career operating under the covert
surveillance of the British Secret Services.
Irrespective of the apparent drop in his
direct communication with Khavinson in Moscow, as the war in Finland reached its
closing stages, MI5 observed Rothstein making regular visits to the Soviet Embassy
throughout the month of March. Spending several hours every evening in the
company of Soviet diplomats, he also enjoyed a direct audience with Ivan Maisky at
least once a week. As a parallel channel through which the Kremlin could exert its
influence, it is again revealing. The same report noted Rothsteins insistence that the
Moscow Government was now extremely anxious that the trial of Paris
Communists should be given as much publicity as possible in the British Press, thus
relaying instruction to all English Communist journalists who have influence with
their papers to feature the trial as much as possible. Such a strategy is in-line with
the practice, explored in our previous chapter, of exploiting any instances of the
subjugation of communists abroad, in order to deflect criticism of the Soviet Unions
own suppression of opposition.
That it offered an alternative news story to its own
disastrous record in Finland was no doubt a further motivation for Moscow.
The files of Andrew Rothstein (held together with those of his father Theodore, who left Britain for
Soviet Russia in 1920) offer a unique window on the history and development of the Telegraph Agency
within the international communist movement. See NA KV2/1575-1584 (Andrey Fedorovich
ROTSHTEYN / Teodor Aronovich ROTSHTEYN, alias Andrew and Theodore ROTHSTEIN).
NA KV2/1581 3.
The Elephant in the Room
It was not just in correspondence with its agents outside the USSR that the
topic of Finland was carefully avoided. The war was by now proving, quite simply,
too troublesome to portray in a pro-Soviet light. Whatever brave face was put on over
the most recent blow from Geneva should not disguise the fact the war was quickly
slipping from the front pages of the central Soviet press. Among the party
bureaucracy in the capital, most notably the Department for Propaganda and
Agitation, dialogue from the period shows a striking absence of discussion, not to
mention even token references to the war.
The same is true of the censorship
offices of Glavlit. Incredibly, it was not until 22 February 1940 when any official
limit on the publication of material related to the war was issued to all sections of the
media:
Until further notice the placement in print and broadcasting of all kinds of
materials - including reprints  related to the fighting units of the
Leningrad Military District in their struggle with the White Finns (po
bor'be s belofinnami) is PROHIBITED.
TASSs dominant role was reiterated by the stipulation that only material issued by
their offices and those of the Leningrad Military District were authorised for
distribution. Such an order seems like an after thought in the context of the self-
censorship that was already beginning to limit the wars presence in the press. It
rather reflects the relative weakness of the party machinery to react quickly in this
period of intense crisis, resulting in an extended period of time taken to formulate and
distribute orders by the centre. When those signals were overly reliant on Stalins
RGASPI, f. 17, op. 125, d. 1-8.
GARF, f. 9425, op. 1, d. 16, l. 19.
personal intervention, delays were inevitable. More long-term burdens faced by the
bureaucracy further undermined their ability to cope with the demands of the war.
Glavlits concern with the censorship and control of state secrets from the
public sphere was a broad remit that in recent years had been dominated by the task of
tidying up the mess created by the most recent cycle of repressions. If one views the
operation and aftermath of the recent highpoint of Stalinist repressions within this
bureaucratic framework, the chronological confines of 1937-38 again seem wholly
inadequate for understanding its impact on how the state ran in this period. Given how
all-pervasive was the campaign against enemies of the people, the clean-up
operation required to erase mistakes, names and deeds by those deemed culpable was
huge. Glavlits records show an unbroken continuity in the operations of the
department through to the end of the decade. This was dominated by a concern with
the erasing of all traces of anti-soviet elements and vast swathes of literature and party
publications in the process. Major campaigns swept through every museum, gallery
and library within the cities of Leningrad and Moscow at the end of 1938 to verify
and regulate their collections.
Even the arrest of Nikolai Yezhov loses significance
among the issuing of formulaic orders, including the request that his name be erased
from any cartographic references in June 1939 and from the pages of the Short Course
the following year.
In the context of this ongoing logistical burden, the delayed,
often hesitant and contradictory approach to coverage of the Soviet-Finnish war in the
public sphere becomes easier to understand.
GARF, f. 9425, op. 1, d. 1, ll. 29-32.
GARF, f. 9425, op. 1, d. 8, l. 50; d. 16, l. 230.
As a result of this process, a culture of hyper-sensitivity to censorship emerged
and was cited by the general staff of the Red Army for their woeful access to basic
levels of military expertise, intelligence and educational material during debates in the
aftermath of the war. As one anonymous voice attested: Everything is classified.
Monitoring of sensitive works had been extended to the very top levels of the Party,
with records of Zhdanovs own acquisitions in the period preserved among his
personal archive, carefully catalogued alongside their classification of secrecy.
Stalins preoccupation with keeping a tight grip on the direction of the war effort
merely exacerbated this problem. Intelligence reports and the vital communication
channels through which they travelled were being monopolised by the NKVD and
funnelled straight up to Stalin and his inner circle of Molotov and Voroshilov. Given
Stalins predilection for direct intervention in the press too, the overall impression is
of a Party increasingly reluctant to voice its members opinions on matters being
managed so exclusively by the Kremlin.
At the regional level, the Leningrad leadership was also shouldering a great
deal of the burden. Zhdanovs archive reveals his input in everything from military
intelligence  again operating by default through the offices of the NKVD  the
military industrial complex, propaganda and agitation (in his collaboration with
Kuusinen) and even the appeals of Soviet prisoners of war in the aftermath of
hostilities.
Such a strong personal presence in the city of Lenin was essential. By
mid-December Leningrad was showing dangerous signs of popular unrest. The
NKVD had been carefully monitoring reports of rising crime levels and the spread of
Stalin continued to play innocent, remarking: This is the way of the people who do not want our
Red Army to know too much. This is probably the reason why everything here is kept secret.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 195.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 45, ll. 11-12.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 3, d. 121, ll. 42-44.
disorder since the beginning of the war. Tougher measures were put in place by the
citys authorities with show trials to be staged of those arrested for hooliganism, a
curfew for children and additional patrols at railroad stops.
Since Zhdanov continued to make periodic return trips to Moscow, and
telephone communication was well established, it is unclear how much individual
responsibility he was given. After the war he would be second only to Stalin in
receiving praise from the Party, credited with leading the massive effort required from
Leningrad.
It is telling, however, that in the background, although he was present
for the post-conflict meetings orchestrated by the Vozhd  seated alongside Stalin and
Molotov whilst the Red Army general staff sought to dissect the lessons of the war 
he made just one comment throughout proceedings, contributing nothing to the
debate.
While Leningrad concerned itself with maintaining order at the home front, by
mid-December a new priority was fast approaching the Soviet media: the upcoming
birthday of Comrade Stalin. In acknowledgement of the sheer scale of the press
coverage surrounding this date, with page after page dedicated to the great leader and
friend of the Soviet people, ones first instinct might be that this campaign was
engineered to provide a useful diversion from the events of the war.
In reality, execution of this celebratory campaign required such a lengthy
planning process that most of the material predated the outbreak of the conflict. Plans
for content to be featured in Pravda on the 21 December 1939 were finalised and
Boterbloem, Life and Times, p. 203.
Boterbloem, Life and Times, pp. 205-206.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 156.
forwarded to Zhdanov and Andreev for approval on 27 November.
The unfolding
press coverage over the course of a weeks daily editions, appearing across all major
organs of the press, is testament to the magnitude of its subject matter and the
lumbering nature of the propaganda machine. Something as trivial as the conflict in
Finland was not about to derail the festivities; the regime was unwilling and unable to
alter its course, once established. Even orders from Glavlit in anticipation of the
birthday celebrations had to be issued well in advance:
In view of the execution in December of the sixtieth birthday of Comrade
Stalin, publishers and editorial boards of journals and newspapers are
preparing to print books, pamphlets, articles, memoirs and other materials,
dedicated to this important date.
In order to prevent errors it is required that all commemorative materials,
after careful review, are forwarded to the administration for propaganda
and agitation of the regional and territorial committees of the Communist
Party and Soviet republics, and only upon receipt of their consent will
they be authorised for the press.
It can only be assumed that the addition of such an extended vetting process further
hampered the bureaucracy during its efforts to respond to the new challenge of
managing coverage of the Soviet-Finnish War. The propaganda state was
unaccustomed to bad press and ill equipped to deal with it when it was still burdened
with the hangover from past repressions and the present headache of Stalins birthday.
The festivities began in earnest on 20 December 1940, when Pravda devoted
nearly its entire edition to publishing a short biography of Stalin. The biography was
a dense text, unbroken by images, providing the historical preamble for the upcoming
fanfare that was due to be unleashed on his official birthday. Although official, in
reality he had already reached this landmark anniversary the year before, his actual
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 3, d. 118, ll. 70-71.
GARF, f. 9425, op. 1, d. 9, l. 157 (20 November 1939).
date of birth occurring on 6 December 1878.
While this disparity in dates could
hardly have been foreseen as having future significance, the celebrations could not
have come at a more inopportune moment for the regime. For nearly a month, Soviet
forces had failed to penetrate the main line of Finnish defences on the Karelian
Isthmus. Despite an unsuccessful counter-attack by the Finns on the 23 December,
just two days later they would secure their first major victory at the battle of
Tolvajrvi. The Soviet press opted to focus its attention on the unreserved praise of
every facet of Stalins leadership. Articles assigned to various members of the Central
Committee, who had drafted pieces related to Stalins contribution to their own
spheres of influence, appeared in print. Newspapers were awash with the virtues of
Stalin as the builder of the Red Army, the driver of the locomotive of history, the
Lenin of today and the greatest man of our time.
Current affairs were put on
hold as page after page of newsprint was taken up by this build-up of zealous
discourse. In its eagerness to surpass the celebration of Stalins fiftieth birthday, the
Party had even pushed to expand Pravda for a special twelve-page edition.
These
preparations were clearly a massive undertaking and dependent upon their initiation
before the war with Finland had even begun. Now, with the present state of affairs at
the front, space was not about to be wasted on reporting the meagre progress of the
Red Army or the defiant resolve of the Finns.
This was not lost on commentators outside the USSR. Time Magazines
awarding of Stalin its Person of the Year for 1939 included a review of the weeks
press attention, where the limited discussion of Finland did not escape notice:
Service, Stalin, pp. 13-14.
Pravda, 21 December 1939.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 3, d. 118, ll. 70-71.
In all this wordage over Comrade Stalin's 60 years of life only six-line
communiqus on the progress of the Red Army in Finland were printed in
the U.S.S.R. Obviously, the hammer-sickle propaganda machine preferred
that Soviet citizens pay as little attention as possible to a scarcely
encouraging military campaign.
Though there was clearly indecision over how to approach the issue of the war and
avoid tarnishing Stalins big day, Finland would eventually touch on the festivities.
On 28 December, Otto Kuusinen made a brief return to the pages of Pravda with a
note of thanks forwarded from his government to Stalin the great friend of the
Finnish people. Originally sent to Zhdanov on 24 December for review following its
translation from Finnish, Pravda would only find space for the note the following
week, tucked away on page three.
If one avoids treating the birthday celebrations as purely a diversionary
campaign in the milieu of bad press, its great value was the important reference point
it offered the regime for gauging the political and ideological orthodoxy of its people.
Soldiers and citizens alike were expected to engage in the process; newspapers were
filled with letters and telegrams from the public. Even the articles appearing from the
very top echelons of the Party were a public display of their political credentials and
formed part of this collective expression of loyalty and thanks to Comrade Stalin.
At the front line, the NKVD paid careful attention to the soldiers political
education. Their schooling in the life and revolutionary career of Stalin was dutifully
reported to Zhdanov in the course of the celebrations. This was not a passive process.
TIME Person of the Year, Joseph Stalin, 1939, accessed on 15 April 2011 at
http://www.time.com/time/subscriber/personoftheyear/archive/stories/1939.html.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 47, ll. 26-31. Again Zhdanov paid careful attention to distinguishing
between friend and foe among the Finnish population in his final edit. Adjusting Finnish white-
bandits to White-Finnish hirelings (naymitov) further alienated the enemy forces from the civilian
population that was (apparently) so indebted to Stalin.
As with the images of workers and party meetings in the press, soldiers were engaged
with through reading groups and meetings, and were encouraged to write to the
newspapers and the Party. Inevitably, there were problems. Distribution of printed
material, particularly newspapers, was difficult in the throes of the fighting.
Nevertheless, the fact that the command would concern themselves so readily with
these tasks, when troops were lacking in other, far more vital equipment and
provisions, highlights the weight placed by the regime in the proper schooling of its
soldiers. It was considered equal to training in the operation of firearms and the
maintenance of discipline among troops, and was later one of the first matters raised
at the post-conflict meetings called to discuss the lessons of the war.
Stalin
remained sympathetic to this need, though by the wars end, he was forced to
acknowledge the parallel importance of developing military knowledge amongst the
armys cadres of political workers:
For contemporary war we need political workers, staunch politically and
well versed in military matters. It is not enough for a political worker to
pay lip service to the Party of Lenin and Stalin, never mind all the
hallelujahs. This is not enough, today, this is not all we need. He should
be politically staunch, politically educated and cultured, he should know
military matters. Without that shall never have a good soldier, well-oiled
logistics, and well-organised replacements in the army.
The troops, for their part, had other more pressing issues given the woeful conditions
at the front and losses they experienced at the hands of the Finnish forces. Among
concerns voiced privately to friends and family at home (but intercepted by the
NKVD), their letters still show a striking lack of political engagement or adoption of
any of the civil war-inspired terminology pushed by the media.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 45, ll. 53-55, 60-67.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, pp. 9-10.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 217.
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, pp. 338-344.
To be fair to the regime, there were attempts to engage with the troops in a
less politically-sterile manner towards the end of the conflict. A more populist
approach is visible in the serial of cartoons that began to appear in the newspaper Na
Strazhe Rodiny, which featured the character Vasia Trkin. His first appearance was
on 31 December 1939 and, throughout the rest of the war, his antics were designed to
portray the role model of a combat-ready soldier who combined cheerful, quick-
witted but unpretentious humour with resourcefulness under fire without
undermining the sacred principles of military discipline.
A similar degree of flexibility was not visible in the wider public sphere. After
the festivities surrounding Stalins birthday had died down and the New Year had
been welcomed with an emphatic salutation to all comrades of the Union, press
coverage of the war continued to be limited at best. The only real exception was the
announcement of a mass of medals and honours that would periodically fill the front
pages of newspapers, containing list after list of officers, political workers and
soldiers.
They offered little indication of the specific acts of heroic endeavour that
merited their award. As has already been mentioned, there was a woefully limited
amount of day-to-day coverage of front line activity; operational reports often
claiming no significant activity had taken place at all. Yet the numerous medal and
honour announcements continued unabated.
It provided the regime with an
opportunity to raise public morale. Fresh-faced recruits were portrayed on the cover
of daily editions. A celebration of their heroics hinted at a return to a dominant policy
of the 1930s that had been toned down significantly since Stalins careful redrafting
of the Short Course. His insistence then that the time for heroes was at an end clearly
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 121.
Pravda, 20, 27 January 1940; 5 February 1940; 22 March 1940.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 120.
came too soon; the need for a positive spin and individual victories in the face of
general stagnation and defeat eventually over-rode this desire. It was a policy never
taken too far, however, as a plan to produce a book chronicling the stories of these
individuals was eventually shelved.
Despite this aversion to glorifying individual heroics, Soviet achievements
away from the military sphere did provide an opportunity to fill the press with a vivid
account of recent activities in the Arctic. The successful return of the icebreakers
Sedov and Joseph Stalin  the former having been stranded since 1938, and forced to
establish itself as a scientific polar station  resulted in a heros welcome on their
arrival home. Their story provided ample opportunity to deflect attention away from
the realities of war.
An endless stream of party anniversaries, birthdays and public
holidays acknowledged in the press also supported this endeavour. Among those
commemorated were the anniversary of Lenins death and the foundation of the Red
Army, the New Year festivities and the birthday of Comrade Molotov. Through these
public occasions the press was well served by a constant supply of formulaic material
that could fill print-space and draw readers from thoughts of the Finnish front.
TASS had, by now, become the only significant source of news on the war,
well before any official guidelines Glavlit circulated regarding censorship. Stalin
continued to keep a watchful eye over incoming foreign press reports, though
instances of his direct intervention in their publication fell. The regime was running
out of options until, at last, after nearly two and half months of fighting, it achieved
the military breakthrough it was desperate for. It had required a serious shake-up of
D. Brandenberger, Propaganda State in Crisis: Stalinism in the 1930s, paper presented to the Faculty
of History at University of Oxford, 16 February 2011.
See, for example, Pravda and Komsomolskaya Pravda, 14 January 1939.
the military high-command, placing Semyon Konstantinovich Timoshenko in overall
charge of the final offensive on Finnish defences, and by throwing a collective weight
of men, machines and firepower that, according to Finnish estimates, gave the Red
Army a four-to-one superiority in infantry, a 20- or 30- to one superiority in artillery,
and an absolute advantage in tanks and aviation.
The everlasting glory
anticipated with victory in this campaign was illusionary.
The scale of casualties
and the protracted nature of fighting that continued until peace was eventually signed
a month later meant there could be little salvaged from the war that might present the
Red Army in a positive light.
Conclusion
Without an optimistic spin to offer the reader, TASS had emerged as a viable
channel of material to counter the prevalence of bad news from the front. The
scouring of foreign newspapers for Soviet-friendly print whilst censoring negative
press proved to be an imperfect fix. For TASS, this was a result of limited resources
and the breaks in communication Moscow and its offices abroad suffered. It was
exacerbated by an inherent weakness in the propaganda states position, and its
limited available strategies for responding to such rapidly changing events.
Stalins personal intervention in everything  from the opening diplomatic
talks, to managing the war effort, and the manipulation of foreign news in the pages
of Pravda  was not an effective strategy for controlling the day-to-day presentation
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 137.
Volkogonov, Stalin, p. 365.
of the war to the public. Face-to-face consultation with his subordinates unfortunately
limits our insights into the dialogue surrounding this process. It is at least clear that
early attempts at fabricating the truth  such as Molotovs denial of civilian bombing
causalities in Helsinki  only bred hesitancy when the facts could not be backed up
with evidence and foreign condemnation of the Soviet position remained so
widespread. Surprisingly, the regime occasionally felt compelled to air this negative
press, perhaps in an attempt to appear objective, but more importantly, as it was
acutely aware of the range of opinions within Soviet society  both healthy and
unhealthy  concerning Finnish affairs. Thus, it publicly renounced the lies and
slander of the foreign press, whilst at the same time engaging in its own freedom with
the truth.
Study of this period has also proven invaluable for revealing the prominence
of TASS in Soviet affairs. The need for a suitable replacement for the dwindling role
of the Comintern suggests a proper history of the Telegraph Agency should be
incorporated into our understanding of the Soviet system, both before and after the
war. Though this research continues, the value the regime placed on TASSs collation
and strict channelling of information mirrors a recent study of the Stalinist
surveillance system. There are clear parallels in how both of these institutions formed
part of a cult of information for Stalin and his inner circle. They strove to monopolise
information, in all forms, from both inside and outside the borders of the Soviet
Union. It was driven by an overarching principle that guided the entire system:
working toward the Vozhd (Leader), or to borrow Grossmans conception once
more, of acting in the spirit of Stalin.
Weiner and Rahi-Tamm, Getting to Know You, p. 39; Grossman, Everything Flows, p. 209.
Khavinson and his staff found themselves rapidly integrated into that system
during the war. After the conflict with Finland, three key developments can be traced.
Firstly, the expansion of the number and localities of its agents abroad increased
exponentially from 1939-40. This included the increase of staff at London and New
York alongside newly established correspondents in major capitals around the world.
The new intake included the penetration of new and established bureaus with native
Soviet operatives, reminiscent of Khavinsons earlier calls for change in 1937.
Secondly, the expansion was carefully monitored by the state security services of the
NKVD. Its entire nomenklatura now operated under the watchful eye of Lavrenty
Beria. Careful attention was paid to the sensitive and potentially counter-
revolutionary information that passed through its offices, which now included a
carefully defined secret section.
Finally, in May 1940, the task of reorganising
TASS and the channels through which its information network operated was given to
one of Stalins closest associates, Andrei Zhdanov. As Leningrad Party Chief, he had
been responsible for mobilising the citys military and industrial capacity for war with
Finland. He was well positioned to recognise the value of TASS in the regimes future
propaganda efforts. His reforms were geared towards streamlining of the distribution
of foreign intelligence via the creation of a new Bureau of Internal Information.
In November 1940, the Head of the Telegraph Agencys Secret Department,
Pashenko, forwarded to Zhdanov a copy of instructions (following their approval by
the NKVD) outlining the proper handling of the highly sensitive materials gathered by
TASS.
This document offers conclusive proof that the agency was explicitly tasked
GARF, f. 4459, op. 38, d. 104, ll. 231-233.
GARF, f. 4459, op. 38, d. 104, ll. 1-5, 235-239.
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 13, ll. 84-104.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4385, ll. 82-83.
with the collection of foreign military and technical information in this period.
Stalins concern with maintaining a strict monopoly over all such conduits of
knowledge suggests the post-war restructuring of the Telegraph Agency was focused
on ensuring tight control of that information and its continued exploitation for the
benefit of the Party.
Through the widespread surveillance of both Soviet troops and the civilian
population, obvious breaks with the official line had been prominent in popular
opinion related to Soviet-Finnish affairs.
Lessons had to be learned in not only how
to wage war but also how to portray it. Khavinson wrote to Durant in New York,
seeking to draw ideas from the efforts of foreign powers to manipulate public support
for the wider conflict in Europe. There is potential for future research exploring to
what extent lessons learned from this conflict were applied in time for Hitlers
invasion on 22 June 1941.
With the stakes even higher, Khavinson would be once
again called upon; this time to ensure the Soviet propaganda machine was armed with
ammunition to repel the Fascist advance bearing down on the capital:
19 October 1941. Khavinson called from Moscow tonight. Reported on
the situation, the order by the State Committee for Defence and so on.
Moscow is mobilized for defense.
It was a task that would catch the attention of MI5. Andrew Rothstein, while dining with an
informant for the department, began making suspicious inquiries as to the whereabouts of Bomber
Command. In May 1940, he was promptly added to a list of journalists barred from entry to parliament.
NA KV2/1581 3.
See, for example, Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, pp. 207-210; RGASPI,
f. 77, op. 4, d. 46, ll. 12-24.
See, for example, A. Y. Livshin and I. B. Orlov, Sovetskaya Propaganda v Gody Velikoi
Otechestvennoi Voiny: Kommunikaciia Ubezhdeniia i Mobilizacionnye Mehanizmy (Moscow, 2007).
Banac, Diary of Georgi Dimitrov, p. 201.
Chapter 4
Life in Leningrad
Freedom of speech must be curtailed when the nation is at war. What use
of fighting an enemy without if the enemies within are given a free
hand?
Globe and Mail, 23 September 1939
The concession to limits on a free press cited above is not taken from a Soviet
source, but from Canadas leading daily newspaper at the outbreak of the Second
World War. George Kerr offers the quote in the introduction to his assessment of
press censorship and politics in French Canada in 1940. It is indicative of a broader
consensus among the countrys newspapers that censorship was accepted as an
unpleasant, but unavoidable necessity.
The system of state control that emerged
proved ad hoc and poorly defined in practice. It was only the curtailment of civil
liberties evidenced in the arrest of Montreals mayor, Camillien Houde, after his
outspoken criticism of the policy of national registration, which forced a clearer
definition of the role and responsibilities of the censors. Issues over the control of
foreign media  in particular a neutral United States that offered an open point of
access for Canadian audiences  were alleviated somewhat by the near-monopoly
enjoyed by the Canadian Press wire service over news from abroad. This was still not
a system of control that operated anything like the level of the Kremlins micro-
management of press output, but the parallels in attitude and limitations on the ability
of the state to guarantee absolute authority over the press in wartime conditions is
illuminating for both cases.
G. Kerr, Skirting the Minefield: Press Censorship, Politics and French Canada, 1940, Canadian
Journal of Communication, Vol. 8, No. 2 (1982), p. 46.
Kerr, Skirting the Minefield, p. 46.
Throughout the Second World War, the British government also strove to
influence the popular mood through wartime propaganda. Co-ordinated by the offices
of the Ministry of Information, they were, however, realistic when it came to
recognising the imperfect ability of official propaganda to exclusively shape public
opinion.
Voices within the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) also
understood that, whilst one could produce and distribute the official line, the actual
capacity of the state to force the population to engage and agree with it was limited:
The State can require the BBC to broadcast, or abstain from broadcasting, anything it
likes. What it cannot do is to require listeners in this country or abroad either to listen
to or believe the BBC.
The relationship between propaganda and popular responses by no means
follows a clear trajectory, traceable from official dissemination to active engagement,
nor can it be judged by its pervasiveness and a tangible effect on public (or private)
discourse alone. Attempts by Khavinson and the Telegraph Agency to illuminate the
strategies western powers adopted to raise support for the wider war in Europe
indicate the Kremlin also recognised that challenges persisted in getting its message
across. The shifting and contradictory nature of the Soviet Unions official
presentation of events in Finland suggests the regime continued to grapple with what
exactly that message needed to be. The lessons learned by the Soviet leadership
during the Finnish crisis, the adaptations to the official line they made and the
institutional adjustments that emerged all had implications beyond the limits of this
period. While the defence of Finnish democracy may not have offered a final point of
P. Bell, Government Strategies on Influencing Public Opinion: Assessment, Censorship,
Propaganda, Mlanges de l'Ecole franaise de Rome, Vol. 108, No. 1 (1996), p. 69.
Cited in Bell, Government Strategies, p. 69.
rupture in global relations, it was a key flashpoint in what would prove to be years of
political strife to come.
For many Soviet citizens, the war in Finland was not experienced through
newspaper headlines and government pronouncements alone. The official channels
with which we have largely concerned ourselves thus far, tackled the public face of
the conflict for audiences (at home and abroad), displaying equal parts truth, fiction
and measured self-censorship. The end result was a significant dearth of information
about the realities of the fighting that did not escape the notice of contemporaries,
both real and imagined:
Yes, comrades, said Madyarov suddenly, can you imagine what its like
to have freedom of the press? One quiet morning after the war you open
your newspaper, and instead of some exultant editorials, instead of a letter
addressed by some workers to the great Stalin, instead of articles about a
brigade of steel-workers who have done an extra days work in honour of
the elections to the Supreme Soviet, instead of stories about workers in the
United States who are beginning the New Year in a state of despondency,
poverty and growing unemployment, guess what you find Information
Can you imagine a newspaper like that? A newspaper that provides
information
In Grossmans Life and Fate, Madyarovs passionate critique of the absence of
freedom in the press, while set during the violent upheaval of the battle for Stalingrad,
offers a pertinent summary of the state of the Soviet media by the end of the 1930s. It
is also in the course of this brief moment of seditious talk that acknowledgment of
certain strengths and weaknesses of the Soviet system appears, with allusion to the
poor performance of the Red Army against their Finnish neighbours offered as a
counter to Sokolovs insistence on the evident collapse of the bourgeois democracies.
The implication is that, even in the context of this acknowledged absence of
Grossman, Life and Fate, p. 260.
information in the press, the realities of events abroad could still reach civilian
circles.
Popular responses to developments in Finland that are preserved in the
archives are comparably diverse and by no means consistent with the official
portrayal of the war, or in step with the shifting propaganda campaigns pursued by the
Kremlin.
Similarly, the reasons for this are varied. Those closest to the fighting
could, instead, access a variety of reports from the front line, carried by wounded and
returning personnel (or even over the airwaves of foreign broadcasts
). Rumours and
less direct testimony also spread fast, while the arrival of illicit goods and war booty
offered tangible evidence of life in the near abroad that often ran contrary to the
picture presented by the Soviet media. The regime was acutely aware of these
unofficial channels and actively worked to limit the damage they caused.
Of course, there were also those for whom the war simply failed to register as
a point of focus in their daily lives. Amongst the recollections of respondents to the
Harvard Project, gathered in the decade after the Second World War, this was
Moscows affair and not one worth concerning themselves with:
Grossman, Life and Fate, pp. 259-260.
This chapter will continue to draw on a variety of Russian and non-Russian sources, with the bulk of
my evidence drawn from research completed in St Petersburg at the former-party archive (TsGAIPD
SPb). Additional, corroborating sources from Moscow (GARF and RGAPSI), London (National
Archives) and the records of the Harvard Project on the Soviet Social System (HPSSS) will help
develop a more complete picture of life in this period and suggest where evidence from the Leningrad
region might offer insights into the wider experiences of Soviet citizens throughout the war.
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 11, Case 136, p. 65. The respondent claimed that access to foreign
broadcasts was possible if done in secret. He reported learning of the occupation of the Baltic countries
in 1939 from German radio.
This war did not affect us; this war was a local affair of the Leningrad
Military District. Nobody was mobilized in our region, except perhaps
some technical personnel.
Their perspective offers an important reminder of the size and diversity of peoples
that constituted the Soviet Empire. Whatever unity of voice and purpose the press
attempted to portray, it was a poor reflection of the realities of living under Moscow
rule, especially when Moscow was so far away:
(And how did the Soviet-Finnish War affect you people in the South?) It
was too far away, the general impression was: Let them fight. If the
action had been closer to us, perhaps we would have attempted to use it to
escape. (Was there any shame felt for the Soviet actions?) How? In what
way? This was a Soviet business, not Russian. No one asked us for our
opinion in the matter, how could we be expected to feel that it concerned
As with these more retrospective descriptions, the numerous and assorted
range of official sources, upon which contemporary responses to significant events
and state policy are recorded still require careful reading. Often used as a measure of
public opinion since their emergence from the archives, these sources offer a
valuable, though limited (and sometimes distorted), window into the relationship
between state and society, particular to the period and political system in which they
were produced.
When dealing with contemporary testimony on the Soviet-Finnish War, it is
worth stressing that our goal is not to simply try and measure public opinion in
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 37, Case 395/(NY)1706, p. 47. Details offered over the course of the
interview indicate the respondent likely came from the North Caucasus.
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 25, Case 493, p. 85. Later in the interview it is revealed that the
respondent also lived in the North Caucasus in the 1930s.
Surveillance materialsshould serve not only to answer questions posed prior to open archival
access and formulated in the context of the Cold War; they also provide an opportunity for
reconceptualizing the nature of the regime in general and the meaning of such surveillance materials in
particular. Otherwise we will merely be appending new footnotes to old paradigms. Holquist,
Information is the Alpha and Omega of Our Work, p. 416.
direct relation to the conflict. Indeed, it would be an impossible task to gauge the
reaction of every contemporary that formed an opinion (or opinions) on this now
often overlooked crisis. The challenge of measuring any collective response among
Soviet citizens is hard enough, even with their testimony now accessible to a much
greater degree than before the opening of the archives.
Instead, this chapter will aim for a broader view of popular experiences of
daily life and interaction with the state. Throughout we seek to avoid a dichotomy
between opposition and support, or communist versus non-believer. Our goal is
to offer a reminder that life in all its colour, variety and absurdity persisted under the
Soviet regime, before, during and after the war.
More appropriate questions to ask,
therefore, are to what extent was that way of life threatened by the Finnish crisis 
from the perspective of both the regime and the general public  and what steps were
taken by both sides to adjust?
Although in our previous chapter we demonstrated there was a reticence to
speak about the war amongst those working more directly under the shadow of the
Kremlin, it would be wrong to categorise Soviet society as cowering in fear and
involuntarily mute where the subject of Finland was concerned. Any difficulty in
finding voices unmediated by official surveillance of the population is mitigated by a
focus on such a narrow case study and a crisis that genuinely shook institutions of
state out of their typical routine. Leningrad is the centre of our attention, as it was for
the Kremlin, in the justification it perpetuated for initiating the conflict and the
For a useful introduction to developments in the study of popular attitudes to the state and daily life
under Stalinism, since the opening of the archives, see J. Hellbeck, Speaking Out: Languages of
Affirmation and Dissent in Stalinist Russia, in A. Kocho-Williams, The Twentieth Century Russian
Reader (London, 2012), pp. 156-173.
resources it mobilised to fight it. The region represents an atypical case in this regard,
though hopefully not in a negation of its ability to provide evidence from which one
can draw broader conclusions about Soviet societys response to the war.
Even as
our view turns from the international to the local, and even the parochial perspectives,
the same cannot be said for many contemporaries who maintained a keen sense of the
wider domestic and global significance of the Finnish campaign. They remained
aware of the potential sources of conflicting news it could elicit, contrary to a strictly
(and orthodox) Soviet viewpoint.
The Official Line
The trajectory of the war, as sketched in previous chapters, and the official
responses it elicited, followed much the same pattern in Leningrad and its surrounding
areas. Regional newspapers were even more dependent on the output of the Telegraph
Agency for their content, alongside the recycling of central party press articles
published in preceding editions. This meant that, despite Leningrad's proximity to the
border, as diplomatic efforts failed and an increasingly aggressive tone manifested
itself in central party press, readers of Leningradskaya Pravda were offered only
subtle hints of the impending conflict between the two countries.
It was in the
The value of Leningrad as a case study of the experiences of Soviet society in this period echo those
outlined by Robert Dale in his treatment of post-war demobilisation of veterans in the region.
Incorporating a view of the wider Leningrad oblast offers the perspective of both rural and urban
communities, not to mention a major industrial centre second only to Moscow in its political and
economic importance. See R. Dale, Demobilized Veterans in Late Stalinist Leningrad: Soldiers to
Civilians (London, 2015), pp. 17-21.
Of course, we have noted those Leningraders who already sensed a growing threat of conflict with
Finland in the weeks preceding the invasion. The anniversary of the October Revolution offered an
opportunity for the regime to complete an extensive survey of local attitudes in the region. The
possibility of war with Finland was raised as a viable scenario by a number of voices recorded by the
NKVD. See Chapter 2: Crisis-management, Censorship, Control, pp. 94-95.
second half of November 1939 that the newspaper made a concerted effort to adjust
readers' perceptions of Finland and its people. Following an expos of an anti-Soviet
campaign in Finland, appearing in a back-page bulletin on 16 November 1939, a
series of carefully co-ordinated TASS reports revealed the impoverished position of
workers in the country (18 November) and the plight of the families of reservists in
Finland (21 November).
This campaign culminated in four separate articles
appearing on the eve of the Mainila crisis, all portraying a negative vision of life
across the border. Among them, a reference to the repression of the domestic press
in Finland may have aimed at explaining away the dearth of corroborating evidence
outside Soviet sources.
The need to discredit any positive image of life in Finland and report the
poverty among soldiers families  left wanting while the male breadwinners were
stationed on the Soviet border  responded to a more localised problem for the Party
in Leningrad. The parallel mobilisation of the regions forces was putting pressure on
its own inhabitants. Concerned voices were being raised among soldiers and their
wives about the levels of care afforded to their families. Their complaints were
directed to the editors of the Leningradskaya Pravda who, in turn, passed them to the
regional party leadership via well-established channels.
These appeals express a
palpable sense of increased material hardship, and a general failure to meet the duty
of care for military families, explicitly promised by the Party.
Leningradskaya Pravda, 16, 18, 21 November 1939, p. 4.
Leningradskaya Pravda, 26 November 1939, p. 4.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3393, ll. 68-72. For an introduction to the production and
conventions surrounding reader correspondence to newspapers in the early Soviet period, see M.
Lenoe, Letter-writing and the State: Reader Correspondence with Newspapers as a Source for Early
Soviet History, Cahiers du monde russe, Vol. 40, No. 1-2 (1999), pp. 139-169.
The Soviet government cares about families drafted into the Red Army,
and Soviet institutions, faithfully observing the precepts of Comrade
Stalin about taking care of people, particularly the children, vie with each
other, trying to express their love to the citizens of our socialist
motherland.
The shortfall in support offered by the state would, however, remain a contentious
issue during and after the fighting though no print space was offered by the editors of
the central and regional press to air such popular concerns.
It remained a further
point of disconnect between the official presentation of the war, which stuck to the
press suggestion of universal support among Soviet citizens, and the harsh reality of
the fightings impact on those close to the front line.
Though the regional party leadership were similarly close to developments on
the Soviet-Finnish border, they do not appear to have been in a privileged position
where the circulation of information was concerned. The local party apparatus were
also tracking signals from the centre via TASS in the run up to the invasion. The
preservation of newspaper cuttings in the files of the Oblast Committee unfortunately
offer little additional context about what they were used for in this particular instance.
The declining condition of the Finnish population, reported by the Telegraph Agency
in November, was evidently of interest and, thus, highlighted in pencil by the
reader.
Gathering information from TASS in this way may have been a response to
a shortage of more direct instruction. Much like in Moscow, information was
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3393, l. 72.
For example, letters to Leningradskaya Pravda in March and April include a number of appeals for
intervention on the behalf of individuals and their families affected by the war. One demobilised
soldier, wounded during the fighting, returned to his former place of work to find his position taken and
no need of his services. A widow and dependent of a soldier, killed during military actions against the
White Finns, was left to care for a three year old child and the deaf father of her deceased husband. No
response to pleas for support had been forthcoming from the military committee. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24,
op. 2v, d. 4380, ll. 14, 84.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3942, ll. 21-25. The clippings were of TASS bulletins taken from
Pravda, 13-25 November 1939.
circulated amongst a very narrow group of key actors within the region, with the
names of Andrei Zhdanov and Alexey Alexandrovich Kuznetsov (second secretary to
the Leningrad CPSU city and oblast committees) generally prioritised by the
administrative and party organs of local government when directing material to the
regional centre at the Smolny Institute.
Besides official communiqus, telegrams and telephone communication, co-
ordination between Moscow and Leningrad was also maintained through Zhdanovs
regular excursions between the two urban centres. However, with the need for secrecy
in the final days before the invasion, it is unlikely that much information was shared
beyond the tight confines of Stalins inner circle. It is not even clear the extent to
which Zhdanov was in the loop when the final preparations for war were being
discussed in the Kremlin.
Whatever he did know was unlikely to be shared amongst
the wider Leningrad apparatus. A municipal meeting of key propagandists in the
city, scheduled for 22 November 1939, may well have touched upon the topic of
Finland. However, Zhdanov was not listed among the attendees and his right hand
man in the region, Kuznetsov, led proceedings instead.
If it was also Kuznetsov
who, out of ignorance, had felt it necessary to preserve the latest cues from TASS on
the treatment of the Finnish question, then, apparently, both the regional leadership
and general public could only rely on their best intuitions regarding the Kremlins
plans for its northern neighbours. Those operating even further down the power
vertical could still sense the winds of change and were keen to prove their worth to
their superiors. Just two days before the invasion, Makhanov, of the Leningrad city
Zhdanov is absent from the meeting register of Stalins Kremlin apartment in the week before the
invasion. He only appears again on 27 November 1939, immediately after the shelling of Mainila.
Chernobaev, Na Priyomye u Stalina, pp. 280-282.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3931, ll. 41-42.
committee, sought permission from Zhdanov for the broadcast in Finnish of recent
statements drawn from the press. Hot on the heels of the invasion, Makhanov again
followed with a rousing collection of patriotic songs, once more in Finnish, which
were intended to ring out over the airwaves and accompany the victorious march of
the Red Army into Helsinki.
Irrespective of any recent shortfalls in more concrete direction, the channel of
communication between centre and periphery remained an important one, not only for
directing the shape of local media, but also in educating state officials and party
members on the language of policy and any shifts in direction it assumed. Much of it
was of a fairly mundane and repetitive character. The outlines of monthly press
campaigns prescribed by Moscow were generally weighted towards the same reliance
on ideological pronouncements and the latest anniversary of one kind or another,
which so often dominated the available print-space in the central newspapers.
contrast, evidence of the kind of direction given explicitly about the war and how it
should appear in the press is in short supply. When it was requested, the Party was
slow to respond and adapted poorly to opportunities afforded by more grass-roots
initiatives that emerged within the region. For example, a request for clarification
about whether regional newspapers could make use of the abundance of letters
received by Red Army soldiers required over two weeks for any official response to
be issued. Control over reports of front line activities was given the utmost priority,
even at this early stage in the war:
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3322, ll. 51-83.
For example, the Central Committee sent a list of recommended dates of note intended for
inclusion in the December editions of regions newspapers, before the outbreak of war with Finland.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3942, l. 35.
Letters only of a general character by Red Army troops on active duty
may be published in regional newspapers, without descriptions of concrete
military episodes.
Again, a heavy reliance on an embedded culture of self-censorship within the
media contributed to the progressive limiting of references to the war in the press. By
the closing month of the conflict, a selection of surviving summaries from the
regional offices of the state censorship apparatus record very little retroactive excision
of relevant material from literary productions and the press.
Much like the
resurgent language of the civil war  prescribed by the centre to portray a divided
Finnish society, then instinctive adoption by contemporaries within and without the
Party  established practices and a natural aversion to contentious topics undoubtedly
helped the media apparatus navigate the controversy of the conflict.
Not that we should entirely discount the potential for more local initiative. By
late February 1940, when developments on the Finnish front were increasingly absent
from the pages of the central party press, Leningradskaya Pravda opted to focus its
efforts on mobilising the local population through drives to increase production for
the war effort: By the selfless, heroic work of equipping the Red Army with first-
class weapons, the workers of Leningrad help smash the White Finns.
After its
first appearance on 22 February 1940, this slogan was emblazoned across the front
page of the regions main paper throughout the following weeks. It was a campaign
On 5 January 1940, the Leningrad Oblast Committee received an initial letter requesting
clarification; an official response followed only on 17 January 1940. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 10, d.
513, ll. 40-41.
Summaries of censorship activity for 15 February 1940 to 15 March 1940 are included in the files of
the Oblast Committee. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4393, ll. 23-25, 29-32.
Even so, the important work of the Leningrad censors during the war was recognised by the
Moscow offices of Glavlit. After the conclusion of hostilities, a letter praising their efforts  under the
leadership of the Party  was sent to Zhdanov. It outlined four hundred and two cases where the
censors had intervened to ensure military and state secrets were not leaked via the press and radio.
GARF, f. 9425, op. 1, d. 18, l. 59.
Leningradskaya Pravda, 22 February 1940, p. 1.
that seems to have first taken root amongst the citys numerous factory newspapers,
which sought to keep their workforce closely invested in the efforts of the Red
Army.
The proclivity among the Party and public to gauge the changing winds of
Soviet policy and propaganda via media output from the centre offered an avenue for
both groups to influence the official line. We have already demonstrated a fondness
among some contemporaries for reading between the lines when bulletins from
TASS offered Soviet citizens a window onto the outside world. From letters sent to
the editors of Leningradskaya Pravda, it is also clear the same examples of political
engagement, opportunistic self-aggrandisement or personal appeals that were taking
place in the early 1920s and 30s appeared in the course of the war with Finland.
Furthermore, the rapid adoption of a distinct vocabulary associated with the
ideologically orthodox portrayal of the conflict reiterates how engaged many citizens
were and how quickly they could anticipate the new line.
The official script dictated by Moscow continued to dominate public dialogue
about the war and in instances of popular interaction with the state apparatus. This
new language immediately found its way into the discourse of state officials behind
the scenes, with civilian personnel quick to adopt the new terminology. Even the local
militia, though falteringly to begin with, consciously adopted the designation of
White-Finns when referencing the Red Armys latest opponents in reports.
A. B. Lazarev, Sovetsko-finlyandskaya voyna 1939- 1940-kh godov i zavodskiye mnogotirazhnyye
gazety Leningrada, in A. V. Gogolevskii, Obshchestvo I Vlast: Materialy Vserossiiskoi Nauchnoi 
Konferentsii (St. Petersburg, 2003), pp. 306-316.
Evidence of this attention to detail is preserved in a handwritten correction made to a typed report
summarising police activity on 9-10 December 1939. The incorrect spelling of white (bello)-Finn,
Likewise, in the opening weeks of the fighting, the editors of Leningradskaya Pravda
dutifully reported to Zhdanov and Kuznetsov that every day they were receiving
patriotic letters in connection with military actions against the White-Finnish
bandits.
Speed was of the essence and had been a consistent philosophy of the press
throughout the 1930s. Operativnost', the need for newspapers to appear on time and
communicate as rapidly as possible to the populace was insisted upon by the Central
Committee. Its aim, alongside the expansion of newspaper distribution in rural areas,
was about making the press a more rapid, effective communicator of central
directives and the Party version of the news to the countryside, thus short-circuiting
the radios in skirts, the village rumour-monger.
An emphasis on the rapid dissemination of the line was just as visible in the
Leningrad region at the end of the decade. From the party speeches circulated over the
radio and printed in the press, to the agitators responsible for spreading the word to
urban and rural areas, the insistence on quick and effective communication is
regularly seen, predating the outbreak of the conflict. An internal Leningrad Obkom
report for the Department of Propaganda and Agitation detailed local efforts to ensure
proper circulation of a radio speech, delivered by Molotov, on 17 September 1939.
The report described how the desire to provide the rural population with adequate
access to Molotovs speech resulted in a special conveying of newspapers in cars to
village councils and collective farms, thus ensuring the workforce would have access
was felt by the author to warrant amendment before the report could be forward to Zhdanov and
Kuznetsov (as was standard procedure). TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3589, ll. 90-91.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3393, ll. 133-138.
Lenoe, Reader Response, p. 114.
that same morning.
These more proactive efforts provide an important counter-
point to those instances where one sees delays or disruption resulting from the crisis
of war.
More generally, many of the formulaic patterns and practices of Soviet media,
traced by Lenoe at the end of the 1920s and into the early 1930s, persisted at the end
of the interwar period. Indeed, they formed much of the initial response to the fighting
that we have illuminated in previous chapters. Collective letters were one such
strategy, as journalists toured factories with pre-written resolutions in an effort to
gather workers signatures.
In Leningrad, the Party even sought to secure the
endorsement of the cultural elite, with Dmitri Shostakovich among the signatures
appended to an early show of support for any potential Soviet reaction to Finnish
provocations at the end of November: Destroy the enemy, if he does not see
reason.
Shostakovich was figure who enjoyed a complicated and often contentious
relationship with the ruling regime, his true feelings about the war are better
expressed in the silence he maintained after its conclusion, particularly in relation to
his composition of a celebratory piece commissioned to accompany the troops
anticipated march on Helsinki. The work, Seven Arrangements of Finnish Folk Songs
(Suite on Finnish Themes), would not be performed publicly until 2001, with the
composer never laying claim to the work in his own lifetime.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 10, d. 447, ll. 83-85.
Lenoe, Agitation, p. 69.
Leningradskaya Pravda, 28 November 1939, p. 2.
R. Edwards, White Death: Russia's War on Finland 1939-40 (London, 2006), p. 98.
Amongst the wider workforce of the region, the opening stage of the conflict
was an exhausting experience for many. Meetings were gathered quicker than usual
and held at all hours, in response to the rapid turn-around of events.
Updates on the
Finnish provocations were blared out late at night over the radio.
We have already
seen the burden this placed on those employed within the local press apparatus, tasked
with reporting (and perpetuating) the sanctioned view of events.
The war produced
a period of heightened activity across the Union, affecting young and old, party and
non-party members alike:
The meetings would last two or three hours; sometimes they would even
interrupt a lecture in order to hold a meeting. At the meetings they would
read resolutions, send telegrams to Stalin and do that sort of thing.
Especially during the war with Finland we had a great many of these
meetings. They lectured to us on how the front was going and agitated us
to support the soldiers in Finland.
On the Home Front
Away from the headlines and carefully co-ordinated press campaign, a rather
inauspicious start to the Red Armys advance on Finland was witnessed before some
of its forces had even left the confines of the city. At 17:15, on 2 December 1939, a
Soviet tank was sighted manoeuvring through the streets of Leningrad. Suddenly, a
young boy stepped into the path of the vehicle, forcing the driver to take evasive
manoeuvres, resulting in its collision with a municipal tram.
Fortunately, no
casualties were reported on this occasion, though it would not be the only instance of
For the public response to the Mainila shellings, see Leningradskaya Pravda, 27 November 1939.
Leningradskaya Pravda, 28 November 1939, p. 1.
See Chapter 2: Crisis-management, Censorship, Control, p. 92.
The respondent, a non-party member, was a student in a technical school (pedagogical institute) at
the outbreak of the war. HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 1, Case 9, p. 30.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3589, l. 47.
military vehicles causing havoc on civilian thoroughfares during the war. Both the
local party leadership and central command of the Leningrad Military District
received numerous complaints from the civilian section of the militia regarding the
refusal of Red Army personnel to adhere to the blackout conditions, established in the
immediate aftermath of the invasion.
There was widespread flouting of the rules
regarding vehicle registration, and a cavalier attitude to driving on civilian roads. A
lengthy report, forwarded by the Leningrad Oblasts NKVD chief to Kuznetsov after
peaceful relations with Finland were restored, outlines the tragic results of this clash
between military and civilian life. In the first quarter of 1940, there was a three-fold
increase in traffic deaths and injuries, compared to the equivalent period the previous
year. What is striking, however, is that the report was preoccupied with the fact that
these numbers were still rising through the month of April, as demobilised troops
continued to wreak havoc on the citys streets.
It was not just the roads that proved
a more treacherous prospect for local inhabitants during the war, contemporary militia
reports offer numerous examples of military and civilian life clashing with
unexpected results during the course of the fighting in Finland.
The war persisted as a backdrop to daily life. For those directly affected by the
fighting, whether as a result of the departure of loved ones to front, or food and goods
shortages amongst the civilian population, it could elicit a mixture of frustration, loss,
anger and political fervour.
Though many were quick to discern the proper manner
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3589, l. 40; d. 4320, ll. 35-38.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4300, ll. 216-218.
For example, a report was submitted detailing the discovery of weapons, left by an unknown soldier,
sometime between 20 and 21 December. The weapons were spotted outside a local cinema, though
there was no sight of the owner or explanation of how the weapons got there. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op.
2v, d. 3589, ll. 134-135.
There is at least one recorded instance of someone refusing to vote in elections to the Supreme
Soviet, after their three nephews were wounded while serving with the Red Army. TsGAIPD SPb, f.
24, op. 2v, d. 3634, l. 111.
in which to speak publicly about the subject, any initial outpourings of patriotic
sentiment received by the press did not remain the focus of these letters for long.
Many people had more pressing concerns as stores depleted and growing levels of
crime emerged.
Furthermore, as astute as some people were about the accepted
terminology, correspondence of this kind did not provide a suitable forum for raising
the more contentious views about the war (or the Red Armys performance within it),
which were becoming increasingly widespread as the fighting progressed. The spectre
of official censorship was constant and widely acknowledged. Public recognition that
letters were often subject to interception by the state security services is evident from
the late-imperial period and earliest years of the Soviet republic.
It is therefore
unlikely that a general sense of popular support for the war, expressed in the opening
days of the fighting, reflects the diversity of opinions held privately by the
population.
The evidence now available from NKVD and party surveillance also runs
counter to any suggestion that the invasion was universally celebrated.
There was
clearly a broad spectrum of responses. Furthermore, due to the range of official
sources reporting to the centre  local militia
, the party apparatus
, or military
After the initial outpouring of support for the invasion recorded by the editors of Leningradskaya
Pravda, the war noticeably dropped in focus from letters sent to the newspaper. Compare, for example,
the editors summaries covering either end of the conflict. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3393, 4380.
Holquist, Information is the Alpha and Omega of Our Work, p. 430; Velikanova, Popular
Perceptions of Soviet Politics, p. 74.
Brandenbergers assumption that initial reactions to the war, appear to have been generally
positive, is reliant on personal correspondence that probably contain a healthy degree of self-
censorship. See Brandenberger, Propaganda State in Crisis, p. 241-242.
See, Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, pp. 207-210.
The militia recorded a large selection of anti-Soviet comments and rumours related to developments
in Finland, western Ukraine and Belorussia, which were circulating between 30 November and 1
December 1939. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3589, ll. 32-33.
A rapid proliferation of reports by the local party apparatus appeared at the end of November 1939,
tracking popular responses to the Moscows breaking off of diplomatic ties with Helsinki after the
shelling of Mainila. Reactions to Molotovs speeches in the run up the invasion, alongside those
channels
 as well as less contemporary recollections from the Harvard Project,
which often corroborate their assertions, it is safe to assume that they collectively
offer a true to life account. The formulaic nature of many of these official sources, as
well as their tendency to pander to the particular preoccupations of the ruling regime,
has often raised questions as to their validity and value for scholars. However, much
like Stalins marginalia on the TASS bulletins he received, an additional layer of
engagement (and the implicit response from the Party nomenklatura it implies) offer
further opportunities to draw evidence from these documents about the nature of
Soviet surveillance and the ability of external voices to impact policy.
Any engagement was not universal, but often conformed to the rigid power
vertical of party control, with the direction of information, in the first instance, to the
most senior figures  typically Zhdanov and Kuznetsov  with peripheral characters
only receiving copies of important reports and circulars should they fall within the
remit of their role. It was generally Zhdanov and Kuznetsov who showed the greatest
inclination for engaging with these materials, drawing attention with marks and
commentary to the aspects of those documents that caught their eye and might have
elicited a more direct response.
Some of this marginalia may well represent the idiosyncrasies of the
individual, passing notes of interest (much like Stalins sardonic commentary
responding to military developments after the outbreak of war, suggest the Party saw definite value in
collecting this information. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3633-3634.
Zhdanov, in his capacity as member of Military Soviet of the 7
Army, also received updates on the
political mood of Red Army forces during the war. See, for example, RGASPI, f. 77, op. 4, d. 45, ll.
49-57; d. 46, ll. 12-24.
For example, a series of duplicate copies of svodki sent to Zhdanov, Shtikov, Bumagin and Nikitin
by the regional party apparatus were each highlighted by the recipient with a pencil line under their
name. Zhdanov can be typically found adorning his copies with further markings, indicating those
aspects of the reports that caught his attention in particular. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3633.
scrawled alongside daily news digests from TASS), or mental markers to be followed
up when time allowed. A habit of acknowledging suicides of young men and
members of the armed forces is one possible instance of this practice. Though a
number of examples can be drawn out from reports at the end of 1939, far more
research would be required to determine whether the attention paid to these cases of
premature death, offered with only cursory details by the local militia, suggested a
wider concern for the Party or a deviation from the norms of Soviet life.
A more significant example to emerge from these sources is the development
of an officially sponsored and publicly driven gift-drive for soldiers on active duty at
the Finnish front. This campaign became a focal point for the Party at a number of
stages in the fighting, coinciding with the traditional holiday season at New Years and
the anniversary of the Red Armys formation, celebrated on 23 February 1940. It was
the result of both grass roots initiative and active sponsorship by the military and
civilian authorities.
The Soviet medias earlier reports of the impoverished condition of Finnish
troops and the families they left behind, while potentially deflecting criticism at the
poor care afforded to Soviet forces and their families, were quickly undermined once
the Red Army learned for themselves the realities of civilian life in Finland:
Once we had taken the first Finnish farmstead, our [men] immediately
climbed into attics and cellars to poke around... And there  sour cream,
mushrooms and ham, pickles, all sortsWe turn to the political instructor
In a series of summaries sent to Kuznetsov, the reader notes five separate cases, highlighted in
pencil. Other instances of suicide, reported between 15 November and 15 December 1939, appear to
have been overlooked if they did not include members of the same demographic. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24,
op. 2v, d. 3589, ll. 5, 20, 43, 89, 122. For a close study of the Bolshevik regimes attempts to come to
terms with suicide in the 1920s, see K. Pinnow, Lost to the Collective: Suicide and the Promise of
Soviet Socialism, 1921-1929 (Ithaca, N.Y., 2010).
and say, How is it that you told us that the Finnish peasants are dying of
hunger, begging?
Irrespective of any disenchantment caused on the front line by the official
presentation of the war, these men also had families at home who naturally
maintained concern for their welfare, whatever their personal feelings about the
conflict. This inspired the kind of local efforts acknowledged by a militia report on 3
December 1939. A group of local women, on their own initiative, were observed
working with several activists to organise a fundraiser to provide gifts for wounded
Red Army soldiers. Two hundred roubles were collected and passed to the district
authorities for distribution. This rallying of support for the war effort caught the
attention of the leadership, the reader of the report dutifully marking the details in red
pencil.
It is unclear where the decision came from to expand this small-scale effort
into a much broader campaign. However, instructions eventually followed from the
LMD to regional representatives of the Party and Komsomol, which proposed that the
sending of gifts and letters be more systematically organised via the establishment of
dedicated commissions. Specific guidelines were provided about the type of gifts that
would be suitable, including food, tobacco, winter accessories and other non-
essentials. It was to be a significant undertaking, with one regional commission
expected to operate from 10am to 8pm.
Cited in K. Aleksandrov, Antistalinskii Protest v Period Sovietsko-Finlyandskoi Voini 1939-1940,
in K. Aleksandrov, Russkie Soldaty Vermakhta: Geroi ili Predateli (Moscow, 2005), pp. 10-11.
The typed report was originally addressed to Kuznetsov. A copy was also forwarded to Shtikov, his
name added by hand to the top of the page. It is unclear, therefore, whose copy now resides in the
archive. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3589, ll. 48-49.
Though this particular order was addressed to the party and state apparatus of a single district,
documents from after the war attest to the fact this campaign was pursued across the whole oblast (see
below, note 462). TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 12, l. 15.
The campaign was given good traction in the regional press, with
Leningradskaya Pravda offering profiles of the military-wives involved in the
collection of gifts and other essentials, alongside reports of the enthusiastic response
from the local population contributing to the drive.
Despite the Party appropriating
the initiative to score points, the preservation of letters from a diverse cross-section of
the population who contributed reiterates popular investment in the campaign was not
purely the result of pressure from above. For all the examples of carefully drafted
collective messages from workers in factories, expressing politically sound language
and patriotic fervour, the handwritten notes of individuals, young and old, with loved
ones fighting at the front, reflect the personal care and genuine concern that was
invested in these packages.
To take one example: a note adorned with a small sketch of a Red Army
soldier and a Soviet plane flying overhead was received by the LMD. The author, a
young boy named Nikolai (presently studying in the fourth class), was eager to elicit a
response from any soldier that might read his appeal. He innocently stressed that he
was never the recipient of poor marks (only good or excellent grades) and hoped any
reply would provide both a name and age of his new found comrade. Adopting the
official designation of the enemy  the White Finns  his letter offers an insight into
how this language penetrated his speech when he describes reading about the progress
Leningradskaya Pravda, 18 December 1939, p. 2. Further updates would appear later that month,
after the excitement surrounding Stalins sixtieth birthday had died down. See, for example,
Leningradskaya Pravda, 26-31 December 1939.
For a large collection of these letters, which include those sent from outside the limits of the
Leningrad region, see TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 48-50.
of military actions in the newspapers.
It is, above all, the product of a complex
mixture of external and internal motives.
The soldiers who received these gifts and notes from the civilian population
were grateful of this outpouring of human kindness.
Even those receiving notes
from strangers took time to pen their thanks, either directly, or with the hope of
expressing their gratitude more publicly in the pages of Leningradskaya Pravda.
They responded enthusiastically to eager school children and their idealisation of
front line troops, and dutifully acknowledged the contribution to the war effort made
by workers.
Numerous examples survive of the collective letters that were drafted
by units under the watchful eyes and guiding hand of political workers at the front,
but these should not negate the important levels of human interaction on display.
The war belies an easy categorisation as either one that was universally popular or
unanimously condemned.
Beyond a simple gauge of public opinion, the sponsorship and direction of this
campaign, after the initial snowballing of local efforts, reiterates the scope for ground
level initiatives that were not reliant on the Partys intervention alone.
In fact, the
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 12, ll. 11-12.
In another example, a small collective note written by a group of young pioneers included a personal
amendment by one of the children. Irrespective of any guiding hand of teachers or party affiliates in the
production of this letter, the author simply wished to acknowledge that their father was also a soldier,
living in Leningrad. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 48, l. 85.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 47.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 47, l. 18. For a summery acknowleding letters sent by Red Army
troops to the editors of Leningradskaya Pravda, see TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3393, ll. 210-212.
In December, the newspaper provided an official treatment of this correspondence between military
and civilian personal. See Leningradskaya Pravda, 17 December 1939, p. 1.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 47, l. 16.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 47, ll. 5-6, 8.
A report reviewing the work of the commission responsible for the gift campaign was sent to
Zhdanov and other representatives of the Oblast Committee on 23 March 1940. Credit is once again
given to the initiative of urban and rural workers, intelligentsia and students. The report also
centre often proved an impediment to the effective exploitation of this expression of
popular engagement. Not only have we seen how the editors of regional newspapers
were unsure of the limits within which they were operating when publicising soldiers
letters from the front  many, as we have noted, preoccupied with expressing thanks
for the moral and material support they received  but the regime arguably missed a
further opportunity in its failure to make more of this outpouring of goodwill
following the restoration of peace.
A letter, drafted in March 1940 by the Deputy
Head of the Military Department of the Leningrad Obkom (and Deputy Chairman of
the Commission for Gifts) Alekseev, suggested something be done with the large
surplus of donations collected during the war. The intention was for articles and
brochures to be produced, drawing on the valuable experience of the commission.
There is no evidence that these recommendations were acted upon. Further attempts
by LenTASS to put together exhibitions after the war to educate the population about
the expansion of Soviet influence in Finland and the Baltic states also failed to gather
momentum.
None of these proposed projects were in line with the regimes more
pressing desire to draw attention away from the disastrous performance of its forces.
Though the spectre of official censorship was a hindrance to troops and
civilians communicating the negative aspects of life at the front line, Leningraders
were unlikely to have been ignorant of the harsh realities of conditions on the
Karelian Isthmus. Whilst official reports of the fighting were sparse and carefully
censored, with press photos of troops limited to smiling faces of eager young recruits,
acknowledges that the campaign was afforded widespread coverage in newspapers and radio.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4071, ll. 45-50.
By mid-February, even the editors of Leningradskaya Pravda began to complain to Zhdanov about
the limits placed on them by the censors in comparison to the central party newspapers in Moscow.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4379, l. 129.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 52, ll.1-3.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4385, ll. 54, 61-62.
temperatures that winter were bitterly cold and shortages of essential goods impacted
civilian life in equal measure.
As one of the protagonists of Grossmans Life and
Fate would recall, it wasnt Finland, but the Finnish winter that was responsible for
disastrous results of the war.
Indeed, in a rather shocking revelation of the ill
prepared state of the Red Army for these winter conditions, the post-conflict meetings
in Moscow between Stalin and his general staff later acknowledged that standard
practice for recruits before the war was to entirely avoid training in temperatures
below minus fifteen degrees centigrade.
More troubling still for the regime, as the fighting progressed, was the steady
flow of casualties returning from combat. Davies has acknowledged how quickly
reports could spread from the medical ward to civilian circles.
By mid-December,
word of Red Army losses were already being picked up by the militia, via rumours
circulated in hospital.
The problem was exacerbated by the need to recruit
volunteers from the Party and Komsomol to meet the growing demand for medical
personnel:
During the first Soviet Finnish War, all members of Komsomol, we were
mobilized for hospital work, because weren't enough nurses and medical
personnel. Dat how I met people who were wounded and all dose people,
they were telling us dat it was all false, dat Finland didn't begun war
against Soviet Union, dat it was Stalin who give orders to Red Army to
enter Finland (sic.).
Numerous letters of complaint received by the editors of Leningradskaya Pravda in January 1940
highlight the poor winter preparations made for housing in the region and attest to the impact of the
cold on the regions inhabitants. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4379, ll. 103-105.
Grossman, Life and Fate, p. 261.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 20.
Davies, Popular Opinion, p. 100.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3589, l. 122.
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 15, Case 301, p. 51.
Even civilians not in direct contact with the wounded were eager to seek out
news. They were responding, to some extent, to the complete failure on the part of the
regime to offer any kind of transparency about the human cost of war while the
fighting raged on. Contemporaries recognised the speed with which rumours travelled
in this period and how strongly they contradicted the official presentation of events,
preoccupied as it was with stories of valour and victory.
The regime took steps to limit this channel of unofficial information. Reports
from foreign observers in Moscow and Leningrad reveal that the removal of wounded
from these major urban centres was a standard policy.
This strategy may have
limited some access to the stories shared by returning solders from the front line, but
as already noted, the task of stocking medical facilities with personnel and essential
equipment drew manpower and materials from across the region, perpetuating contact
between military and civilian personnel.
Soldiers removed from active duty and no longer under direct care would also
carry reports home about the realities of the fighting and the material condition of
their Finnish foes. This provided more tangible evidence of the disparity between
official reports of Finnish experiences of hardship and exploitation, versus the
experiences of Soviet troops across the border:
After outbreak of Soviet-Finnish war spoke widely about this since two of
her fellow villagers wounded and sent home from front: At home they
told their mothers what they saw in Finland. They said that in Finland
everybody had a watch on his hand, a nice suit and plenty of food -
exactly as it was in Russia during Tsar Nicholas.
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 4, Case 30, p. 28.
NA FO371/24850 162; FO371/24856 34.
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 34, Case 109/(NY)1462, p. 25.
For the residents of Leningrad, more concrete evidence of the home comforts
and material wealth of the Finnish people arrived with the accumulation of war booty
that started to appear in the city. The militia began to make note of more extreme
cases, including a healthy supply of Finnish built bicycles discovered just a week after
the invasion, stored in the apartments of the father and neighbour of one enterprising
Red Army officer.
The huge numbers of appropriated goods recorded by the
Leningrad Military District after the war evidence the potential scope of the problem
facing the regime. On 4 July 1940, Zhdanov was sent a report from the trophy
commission responsible for cataloguing the diverse range of items gathered by Soviet
forces. Among its pages were listed thousands of items of clothing, furniture,
electrical goods and household wares.
If only a fraction of their number was
crossing the border during the war, it must have offered Leningraders another startling
contrast to the Partys routine reports of poverty and hardship experienced by the
Finns.
The state, for its part, was also not averse to exploiting the war for its own
material benefit. One of the few territorial gains made during the fighting offered a
welcome coup for the Soviet cultural set. Ilya Repin, a renowned painter in pre-
revolutionary Russia and celebrated precursor of the Partys own prescription for
socialist realism, had spent much of his later life in Kuokkala, living on the grounds
of his Penates estate. When Helsinki declared its independence from the former
Russian Empire after the October Revolution, Kuokkala was incorporated into the
new Finnish republic, though Repin continued to live and work on the estate until his
The guilty party was one Lieutenant Yevmenov, who had reportedly crossed the Finnish border with
six bikes in early December 1939. A further report submitted later that month revealed the discovery of
clothes and household goods among the possessions of two military wives whose husbands were on
active duty on the Finnish front. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3589, ll. 63, 115.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4328, ll. 135-153.
death in 1930.
The military occupation of Kuokkala during the Finnish campaign
returned control of the estate to Moscow. The Soviets discovered numerous works by
the artist, together with his personal correspondence, which included letters to notable
figures, among them the Partys very own Kliment Voroshilov. Two representatives
from the Academy of Arts were assigned to secure control of this important archive,
transferring its holdings to Leningrad.
The more systematic appropriation of
Finnish goods and industrial capacity by the USSR would begin in earnest after the
signing of peace in March 1940.
This influx of illicit goods from Finland was not enough to overcome the
general shortages and widespread hardship many credited the war with causing.
Foreign observers noted the problem and tracked Soviet efforts in the local and
regional press to explain away the temporary shortfall in bread and fuel.
The local
apparatus evidently began to grow concerned. When reporting on the parallel shortage
of personnel caused by the recruitment of civilian members of the security apparatus
for military service, Chief of the Militia, Colonel Grushko, feared the consequences of
being left shorthanded: This situation poses a threat to security in the oblasts
districts of a revolutionary order (revolyutsionnogo poryadka), especially in
wartime.
This spurred on police and state security services to closely track the
availability of goods in stores and to ramp-up surveillance of the popular mood.
For a short biography of Repins life and major works, see G. Sternin and J. Kirillina, Ilya Repin
(New York, N.Y., 2011), pp. 181-191.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4377, ll. 13-17.
See Chapter 5: Silencing the Past, pp. 210-211.
NA FO371/24850 136-146.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4320, l. 31 (24 January 1940).
Proactive, rather than simply a retrospective assessment of developments, this was the
regime seeking to respond to the rapid escalation of a problem beyond its immediate
ability to resolve. While instances of speculation were clamped down upon with
vigour, and attempts were made to redirect goods in the region, there is little evidence
to suggest the regional apparatus made any kind of headway before the end of the
The local militia were already overstretched by more pressing security
concerns brought on by the fighting in Finland. Fears of an aerial bombardment of
Leningrads industrial capacity led to the enforcement of a blackout in urban centres.
This exacerbated concerns among the local and state security services of growing
instances of hooliganism.
This was a topic upon which the Party evidently felt it
was on a surer footing, and some attempts to engage with the problem were given
limited publicity during the war.
The state opted to tread carefully. Any proactive
steps to deal with select instances of anti-social behaviour were given limited print
space in the local press, but nowhere was a direct line drawn connecting these
concerns with the results of war with Finland. An example was made, however, to
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4300.
Reports received by the British Embassy in Moscow indicate precautionary measures were also
taken in the Soviet capital, with the dimming of lights and use of blue lamps inside buildings. This was
presented by the Soviet press as an economic move, though, according to the Embassys sources, there
may have also been some truth to this explanation. NA FO371/24850 81-88. On 16 December 1939, a
report was sent to Kuznetsov, outlining the impact of the blackout on Kronstadt and attempts to
respond to rising levels of hooliganism in the city. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3589, l. 127.
Evidence of public concern over the levels of hooliganism in the region is not limited to the
months of fighting in Finland. For example, complaints forwarded to Leningradskaya Pravda about the
actions of a group disrupting cinemagoers in mid-November were published in the Letters to the
Editor section later that month. An additional follow-up report detailing the response of the militia in
this instance was published in December. See Leningradskaya Pravda, 24 Nov. 1939, p. 3; 14
December 1939, p. 3. A more general effort to deflect public concerns over the issue was published
under the title For a perfect order on 9 December 1939. It included an interview with the city public
prosecutor and elicited further responses from the public, addressed to the newspapers editors. See
Leningradskaya Pravda, 9 December 1939, p. 4; TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3393, ll. 142-144.
dissuade any that might hope to take advantage of the difficult night time conditions
on the home front.
Behind the scenes, the task of enforcing the precautionary measures taken in
wartime fell on the state militia, who, in turn, sought to draft-in support from the Party
and Komsomol for the task of patrolling the streets of Leningrad at night. Regular
police summaries testify to the growing numbers this required as the war progressed,
though it apparently fell short of the hastily drawn up targets made by the Partys city
committee.
Orders issued on the 30 December 1939 earmarked a further thousand
Party and Komsomol members to assist the militia. Nevertheless, a report sent to
Kuznetsov by the regional apparatus of the NKVD, more than a month after the wars
conclusion, complained bitterly of the failure to properly co-ordinate these efforts
between state and party apparatus, highlighting instances where its members
explicitly refused to fulfil this role.
The regime was being made to look
increasingly vulnerable; the war stretched its resources and drastically undermined
public morale. Its workforce continued to circulate anti-soviet provocationary
rumours about the progress of the Red Army in Finland, apparently undeterred by the
threat of reprisals.
None of the negative ways in which the Finnish crisis directly affected civilian
life in the region was given coverage in the press. The Party Department for
Propaganda and Agitation, with whom much of the responsibility rested for
On 20 December 1939, William Seeds, the British Ambassador to the Soviet Union, acknowledged
at least two recent cases of hooliganism in Leningrad that had elicited the death sentence. NA
FO371/24850 82.
Under the heading, Measures to protect social order, routine summaries regularly included figures
for representatives from the militia, Party and Komsomol, participating in nightly patrols. See, for
example, TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3589, ll. 115-116.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4300, ll. 294-295.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4300, ll. 165-166.
orientating people to the proper line, seemed as equally ill equipped as their
counterparts in the militia to respond to the challenges the war posed them. The same
has already been acknowledged of the propaganda departments efforts in Moscow.
Narrowing our attention to Leningrad allows a more focused study of this issue. One
can illuminate basic institutional (and ideological) failings and the general limitations
of the party faithful to reconcile their position with a naturally inquisitive (and often
sceptical) public.
The International Situation
At the end of 1938 the regime was in a celebratory mood. With publication of
the Short Course, the history and ideology of the Party was at last canonised for
domestic and international audiences alike.
The new Soviet bible was a text
deemed to hold the key to a fresh campaign of enlightenment for the Party rank-and-
file and broader sections of society.
And yet, by the end of the following year, the
Department of Propaganda and Agitation in Leningrad, whose network of agents were
akin to a secular priesthood tasked with spreading the gospel of Bolshevism, were
already concerned with the problems they faced in getting people to properly engage
with the book. Compounded by the persistence of problems with basic literacy in the
region, in many districts candidate members of the Party struggled to penetrate the
dense text beyond its opening few chapters.
In spite of the evident desire to
prioritise responding to this shortfall, events on the international stage were about to
R. Service, Comrades: Communism: A World History (London, 2007), p. 180.
For a detailed study of the introduction, dissemination and reception of the Short Course in the
Soviet Union, see Brandenberger, Propaganda State in Crisis, pp. 216-228.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 10, d. 447, ll. 86-90; d. 473, ll. 68-71.
seriously undermine any such efforts.
As a collective failure to counter Hitlers expansionist aims pushed the rest of
Europe closer and closer to war, the Soviet Union suddenly opted to engage with its
political and ideological rival. After years of vitriolic opposition, both sides sought to
reconcile their differences over freshly inked treaties on trade and geo-political
relations. With developments in the east also witnessing Japans encroachment on
Soviet interests in Asia, enemies still abounded for the regime, irrespective of the
essential breathing room afforded by the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
The international situation  as the central and regional apparatus of the
Department for Propaganda and Agitation officially alluded to events abroad
began to change too rapidly to allow those responsible to elaborate a clear general
line. The shift to an anti-imperialist war required the same adjustment in policy and
discourse already seen imperfectly implemented amongst the Comintern and with
more immediacy by the central party press. The inconsistent adaptation seen across
the international communist movement was equally evident in the regional case of
Leningrad. For example, the need to know basis of Kremlin rule meant plans for the
coming Autumn's lecture cycles in the region still allowed for discussion of the
aggression of Fascist governments and an assessment of the united front among
communist parties abroad as late as 19 August 1939.
The difficulty in
implementing the new line is implied in the castigation the department received the
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 10, d. 473.
Not only was this term used exhaustively throughout internal documents and communication within
the department, but it was also adopted in its members day-to-day expression of public deeds and
private reflections. On 8 February 1940, extracts from the diary of a district party propagandist were
published alongside a profile of a day in the life of a local partkabinet (party study). Nowhere was
explicit reference made to events in Finland, though the international situation remained acceptable
shorthand throughout. Leningradskaya Pravda, 8 February 1940, p. 2. See, also, below, note 496.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3376, ll. 70-73.
following month, for its failure to maintain close control over lectures and discussions
on the international situation. The new situation demanded party members within
the department to alone co-ordinate lectures and talks, with better preparation of
materials expected by their superiors.
For their part, the departments personnel preferred to bury themselves in the
official past, whilst the civilian population, in contrast, showed a clear desire to keep
up with current events abroad.
In the face of prevailing unofficial channels of
information, the Party did not (and could not) simply repress all news of international
developments, despite its best efforts to limit their impact. It sought instead to inform
and enlighten its people via press, radio, lectures, film and the daily grind of meetings,
group discussions and collective resolutions that appear to have taken up an inordinate
amount of the workforces time in this unsettled period.
The Party undoubtedly painted a particular view of the world for its people,
one that sought, in many ways, to make the lands outside the borders, laws and
liberties of the Soviet Union a dangerous, violent and oppressive place.
The regular
deployment of the terminology of terror against rival powers abroad was one
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3376, ll. 149-150.
On 17 February 1940, a report on the work of district partkabinets was forwarded to the Leningrad
ObKom. Despite the ardent desire to focus efforts on providing guidance in the study of the Short
Course and assist in the direction mass-political agitation in the countryside, party activists could not
escape popular preoccupation with the international situation and, in particular, Finland. TsGAIPD
SPb, f. 24, op. 10, d. 473, ll. 37-47.
Jeffrey Brooks has traced the growing prominence of official xenophobia in the Soviet press
through the 1920s. This demonising of rival foreign powers was intended to counter the prevailing
cosmopolitanism in Russia evident from the late-imperial period and into the early years of the
Bolshevik regime. During the war scare of 1927, it was also deployed as a strategy for undermining the
position of the opposition by Stalin and his allies, and was subsequently retained as a dominant trope of
the press during the first Five Year Plan and drive for collectivisation. See J. Brooks, Official
Xenophobia and Popular Cosmopolitanism in Early Soviet Russia, The American Historical Review,
Vol. 97, No. 5 (December 1992), pp. 1431-1448.
important strategy for achieving this.
As we have seen with the Finnish example,
there still remained an abundance of legitimate targets for the Party to rail against,
even if the readjustment of Nazi-Soviet relations removed Germany from the firing
line.
The persistence of this language and other strategies seen in the regional press
coverage of the conflict in the region align with Lenoe's assertion that Soviet
journalism in the era of the New Economic Policy (NEP) and early 1930s did not
witness dramatic changes in approach.
What does need to be adjusted, however, is
the preoccupation with newspapers growing specialisation as a mouthpiece for the
party faithful alone. The sense that wider engagement with the lay population was of
lesser importance might have reflected an official attitude, though it does not echo the
outlook of every non-Party voice:
I read [newspapers] for two reasons. First to be informed on political
events, secondly, to know how to react externally to events with other
people. I think that many Soviet citizens do the same thing.
Even the layout of newspapers prescribed by the Party did not, necessarily, reflect the
manner they were read, or the relative weight given to their content. In
acknowledging the persistent attention this thesis has paid to the back-page bulletins
of TASS, it is rewarding to discover at least one respondent of the Harvard Project
who shared much the same focus on international affairs:
Although Brooks points to stories of repressions abroad as a common tactic of the Soviet press
when it sought to paint a picture of the nastiness of life under capitalism, he neglects to attach any
significance to the language of terror and terrorism being used in the press delivery of these reports
to its own citizens (even when citing Stalins own commentary on the persistent threat of terrorists and
arsonists operating against the Soviet Union). Brooks, Official Xenophobia, pp. 1442-1442, 1445.
Lenoe, Agitation, pp. 76-79.
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 11, Case 136, p. 68.
Everybody starts reading the paper from the back page. But it varies. I
personally understood the meaning of [international news], but some
people, the young ones, those who have never been abroad, or the Party
people, they look differently at things.
Beyond the printed word, the publication of the Short Course also brought
with it a fresh impetus for spreading the Partys message through oral channels.
Although the Short Course was originally intended for independent study, the press
and party apparatus were soon inundated with requests for assistance with the text.
The result was the organisation of consultations and lectures to support private
attempts by the rank-and-file to master Bolshevism.
By the outbreak of war with
Finland, a whole cycle of public lectures operated on a routine basis in Leningrad,
organised by the Department for Propaganda and Agitation under the watchful eye of
the regional authorities.
Attendance of lectures dedicated to the international
situation dwarfed that of any other category of public talk on offer. The history of the
Party, classical Marxism-Leninism, theoretical questions and even those of a more
popular nature simply couldn't boast anything like the numbers clamouring for news
of the world around them. Oblast figures covering the whole of 1939 echo a similar
picture seen at the district level for specific months of the war. For example, of the
comparable 311 lectures on the Eighteenth Party Congress, the 310 on the individual
works of Lenin and Stalin, and 371 related to the international situation, attendance
is recorded of 33,866, 26,082 and 62,219 persons respectively. Although lectures on
My thanks must go to Jon Waterlow for highlighting this illuminating case. HPSSS, Schedule A,
Vol. 10, Case 133, p. 49.
Brandenberger, Propaganda State in Crisis, pp. 217-219.
For examples of the kinds of lectures this incorporated, see TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, o. 2v, d. 3931, ll.
58-60. Similar guidelines were distributed to coincide with Stalins sixtieth birthday. TsGAIPD SPb, f.
24, o. 2v, d. 3931, l. 61.
the outside world constituted fewer than twenty percent of the total for that year, their
audience accounted for more than a quarter of all attendees to these official forums.
Regardless of Stalin's direct intervention, or the official pronouncements of
Molotov (the public voice of the Party's international orientation since May 1939), the
speed with which the external environment saw drastic change, both east and west of
the Soviet borders, was beyond the Partys abilities to react to the new international
situation. In contrast, the party faithful in the Department for Propaganda and
Agitation busied themselves with the sacraments of Marxism-Leninism while poring
over the Short Course. They preferred to isolate themselves from a world of sin and
ever shifting political (and ideological) orthodoxies that risked severing them from
their anointed roles of guiding the cadres to the promise of eternal salvation in the
paradise of communism.
Amongst their private and public discourse, in references to the real world, the
term international situation operated as safe shorthand for events not yet written into
the official history of the Party. Even internal party communication between Moscow
and Leningrad necessitated this oblique language. Inter-department reports within the
oblast were scarce in detail and tended to avoid direct reference to Finland.
Behind
this institutional obfuscation, we can still catch a glimpse of the situation on the
For the 1939 oblast figures for attendance at lectures divided by category, see TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24,
op. 10, d. 473, l. 15. For a selection of tables providing figures at the district level for February  April
1940, see TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 10, d. 491, ll. 1-3.
Jan Plamper provides a useful discussion of the category of sacral versus ideological texts (or
canons). He points out that in the context of the violent and traumatic upheaval of the Stalinist era, its
ideological canons required constant reinforcement and articulation of their significance to embed
them in collective memory. When the official narrative was being repeatedly rewritten, as in the case
of the Finnish War, its canonisation was, ostensibly, a task beyond these bastions of Bolshevik
ideology. J. Plamper, Abolishing Ambiguity: Soviet Censorship Practices in the 1930s, Russian
Review, Vol. 60, No. 4. (October 2001), pp. 526-544.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 10, d. 473.
ground. Handwritten lecture reports, funnelled to the regional centre, were generally
limited in detail when offered up to the first layer of the party hierarchy. They
continued to reinforce the dominant theme of the international situation and external
[foreign] policy of the USSR (to use its full title), in addition to reporting attendance
details of the public meetings dedicated to this topic. Nevertheless, preserved in their
roughly scribbled notes is evidence of the difficult questions these gatherings
provoked for the lecturers. Attendees were not afraid to draw attention to flaws in
official policy or gaps in the narrative: Why is the military activity in Finland
dragging on?; Whether it is possible to consider or examine the situation in Finland,
in connection with the help of England and Mannerheims bands, as intervention
against the USSR?; Why, if we have a population of 180 million, cant we cope with
Finland, where the population is 3.5 million people?; [What is] the fate of the
Peoples Government of Finland?.
This level of detail was obscured in the process
of collating, summarising and sending these reports through the power vertical, and,
thus, was clearly considered to be an inconvenient truth better ignored by the more
zealous members of the party apparatus.
Although the social background of lecture attendees is unclear from the raw
data available, these gatherings were not directed at party members alone. Listings for
public lectures (alongside those of the theatre and cinema) were published regularly
on the back page of Leningradskaya Pravda. Here, the provision of historically
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 10, d. 490, ll. 17-18, 64-65.
The failure to report these more benign expressions of popular confusion and scepticism about the
war may have meant the leadership in Moscow and Leningrad was generally limited to instances of
anti-Soviet commentary recorded by both the party apparatus and punitive organs of state. One
wonders if this merely reinforced the siege mentality of Stalin and his inner circle, associating heretical
thoughts with primarily the criminal elements of society and the more extreme expressions of anti-state
ideas. Any need to reconcile themselves to more mundane instances of popular dissatisfaction within
the Party's version of events may not have been deemed a priority, especially when their subordinates,
at every level of the power vertical, were unwilling to report the truth to those above them.
grounded talks responding to the interest in international events, together with regular
round-ups of recent developments on the world stage, indicates the Partys concern
with meeting an evident demand. Much as in the rest of the media, there were limits
on the regimes ability (or desire) to maintain the flow of information about Finnish
events. A sharp fall-off of related lectures is seen in the middle of January, with only
sporadic talks specifically discussing Finland (whether from a historical or
contemporary perspective) persisting through the remainder of the war.
There was also need to adapt to the shifting presentation of the war. Early
signs of a new narrative centred on the Mannerheim Line are visible by February
1940, with topically themed lectures on the history and development of modern
fortifications scheduled.
The Party remained on its strongest footing when
revisiting its sacrosanct past. The spectre of foreign intervention during the Russian
civil war was a regularly recurring theme. Current targets of the Soviet rancour were
highlighted through instances of their past animosity to socialism, with particular
vitriol reserved for England through successive lectures on 26 and 27 February
1940.
Speakers used the lectern as a platform to draw the same parallels pursued by
the Soviet press, between current events and the condemnation of the imperialist aims
of England and France in Finland.
The success or failure of this co-ordinated campaign is harder to gauge. By the
summer of 1940, after the wars conclusion and a degree of normality returned to the
region, assessments of the state of party-political work in the LMD reveal that the
For an example of these listings, including reference to both talks on international events and a
historical treatment of Finlands relationship to imperial intervention during the civil war in the
USSR, see Leningradskaya Pravda, 4 January 1940.
Leningradskaya Pravda, 6 February 1940. See Chapter 5: Silencing the Past, pp. 210-234.
Leningradskaya Pravda, 26-27 February 1940.
serious shortfalls in the ideological work of the civilian sector mirrored those in the
military.
We have already seen how, for Stalin, there was a clear and present need
to resolve these failings.
Conversely, active engagement by the population with these official attempts
at presenting an ideologically orthodox and politically sound view of global events
need not be viewed exclusively as an endorsement of the party line or an indication
that it resonated with every audience. As with peoples perceived ability to read
between the lines of the days news, a more selective reception of the oral
dissemination of the Party's message could still offer different information for both
the party faithful and curious outside observer (two categories that are by no means
mutually exclusive).
Thus, the figures for attendance at lectures dedicated to the international
situation are still not representative of a regional population that numbered in the
millions. Neither these statistics nor the numerous examples of state surveillance and
surveys of popular opinion have preserved the voices of the politically disengaged and
passively disinterested. Again, it would be futile to attempt a sweeping survey of the
regions inhabitants that somehow captures every facet of popular opinion. Rather,
what we have tried to show with this chapter is that any attempts to divide Soviet
society between these extremes of opposition and support, of believer and non-
believer, is an impediment to recognising the great diversity of life and experiences
that persisted under the Soviet system. Selective engagement with that system, the
information it offered (and withheld) about the wider world, and the resources it
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4328, ll. 43-54.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 271.
provided, was navigated by groups and individuals often making the best of what life
threw at them.
Emerging from the archives, the sense of disorder and chaos that grew out of
the crisis is often palpable, as are moments of farce and extreme tragedy inherent in
life. Popular attitudes include both a passive disregard of the war or an enthusiastic
embrace of the patriotic feeling the state was keen to project in support of the conflict.
Some were opportunistic, others objected vocally to the burden it placed on their lives
and those of their families. Throughout, one should regard neither the state, nor the
society it claimed to represent to be acting entirely independently of one other; each
was forced to react to changing circumstances and demonstrated a mutual willingness
to adapt to the crisis.
It would also be wrong to present the regions inhabitants as a passive, non-
critical audience. They deserve, instead, to be seen as actors in their own right. Many
showed a capacity to engage with the official script and unfolding narrative while
simultaneously reacting to external cues and ad-libbing as appropriate. This, in turn,
forced a more collaborative response from the state at a local level than has been
traditionally acknowledged. While the centre undoubtedly resisted this initiative from
below, there were clear limits on its ability to do so.
Chapter 5
Silencing the Past
The past, he reflected, had not merely been altered, it had been actually
destroyed. For how could you establish even the most obvious fact when
there existed no record outside your own memory?
George Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four
How could the people in power give free rein to somebody who knows the
truth, even if it concerns the remotest stars? Do you imagine the Pope will
hear the truth when you tell him hes wrong, and not merely just hear that
hes wrong?
Bertolt Brecht, Life of Galileo
In this final chapter, our focus broadens once more to incorporate the
Kremlins response to the closing stages of the conflict, considering how the regime
sought to shape the public presentation of events for domestic and international
audiences in both the press and film media (the latter incorporating a hastily prepared
documentary film on the Soviet-Finnish War released shortly after hostilities were at
an end). Although evidence of any discussion surrounding this process within the
propaganda machinery is limited, the new narrative that would come to dominate the
official presentation of a victory for the Red Army can be traced directly from
Stalins preoccupation with the defeat of Finlands European teachers. His view of
the war is preserved in the post-conflict meetings held with his general staff to dissect
the shortcomings of the campaign. The relatively candid assessments of the conflict
these meetings provided were not publicly aired and are not essential to our narrative.
P. Davison (ed.), The Complete Works of George Orwell, Vol. 9: Nineteen Eighty-Four (London,
1987), p. 38.
B. Brecht (trans: John Willet), Life of Galileo (London, 2014), p. 33.
In contrast, the regimes public welcoming of peace went hand-in-hand with only a
piecemeal (and inconsistent) recognition of the costs of the fighting, something which
did not escape the notice of contemporaries. Furthermore, given the evidence we have
already produced of Moscows failure to curtail conflicting perspectives on the war
from proliferating both at home and abroad, we will reflect on the willingness of the
Kremlin to silence voices that had the potential to undermine the official narrative in
the months after the fighting. In doing so, we will consider the uneasiness with which
Russia continues to treat these victims of the punitive organs of the Soviet state (and
the war more generally) today.
*****
The media silence ordered by Moscow on 17 February 1940 was a prerequisite
for rewriting the narrative of war. This formed a strategy of damage limitation where
public perceptions of the fighting were concerned, having already left numerous
unanswered questions since the outbreak of hostilities. The regime would eventually
have to account for the huge number of casualties incurred during the fighting, if not
the wider expenditure of resources required to secure the relatively meagre territorial
rewards. Earlier attempts to portray the war as a conflict driven by the imperial
aspirations of the west had not been realised through any meaningful action on the
part of foreign powers. The League of Nations decision to expel the USSR from its
membership was an ineffectual diplomatic manoeuvre, free of any significant punitive
action. Although the Finns did benefit from a limited number of volunteer forces sent
from abroad, this was a token effort, often begrudgingly supported by their
governments at home and by no means decisive for the war effort.
Nevertheless,
whatever their public posturing, behind closed doors the Soviet Union did not
welcome the intervention of Britain and France, and diplomatic channels with the
Finns were tentatively restored at the end of January.
There remained, however,
many weeks of protracted struggle at the negotiation table (and on the front line)
before any end to the fighting would finally emerge.
In the interim, with little indication that audiences were being swayed by the
public presentation of the conflict thus far, the Soviet media adapted the narrative
once more, seeking the perpetuation of yet another myth. It was one that further
moved the focus away from the limited manpower at the Finns disposal. Instead, an
image was developed of an impenetrable line of defences that, paradoxically, were
designed with the same aggressive philosophy that had triggered war in the first place.
This was the Mannerheim Line, named after the same former Tsarist general, Baron
Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim, who had been openly vilified in the Soviet press for
his purported campaign of terror against the innocent Finnish people. His moniker
would now stand as a bastion of Finnish defensive efforts. There would be no
reflection of this inherent contradiction in the Soviet medias about-turn.
Within the official version of events, this myth would eventually become a
principal focus of the war effort; almost an enemy in its own right  a dormant
monster that had posed as much a threat to Leningrad as the men that manned its
defensive line. Mannerheim, having been persuaded out of retirement by the Helsinki
See, for example, French Aid to Finland: Daladiers Statement, Paris, March 12, 1940, accessed
on 18 April 2011 at http://www.histdoc.net/history/BRFO1940-03-12.html; Comprehensive figures for
foreign troops involved in the fighting, gathered by Finnish sources, are cited in Aleksandrov,
Antistalinskii Protest, pp. 17-18.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, pp. 135-136.
government to lead the war effort at the ripe age of seventy-two, would freely admit
the ludicrous nature of this self-delusion:
The impression made by the poor performance of the Russian armed
forces was calculated to undermine the authority of the Soviet regime and
had therefore to be counteracted by means of propaganda, for which
reason the Russians at the time of war of position launched the myth of
the Mannerheim Line. Our defence of the Karelian Isthmus was to rest
upon an exceptionally strong defensive barrier, built up, according to the
latest technique, of reinforced concrete, which could be compared with the
Maginot and Siegfried Lines, and the like of which no army had ever
forced. Accordingly, the Russian break-through was, to quote an official
Russian utterance, a deed without parallel in the history of war. This was
complete nonsense. The facts were quite different. As has already been
mentioned, the defence line consisted of a small number of permanent
machine-gun nests connected by means of trenches  field fortification
completely lacking in any depth. This line had been christened the
Mannerheim Line by the people. That it was held was entirely due to the
tenacity and courage of our soldiers, and not to the strength of the
position. As to Russian defeats on the Eastern front, it was evident that
Russian propaganda was unable to find any plausible explanation for
them.
The Finns played up to this idea of an exceptionally strong defensive barrier
during the course of the ensuing peace negotiations. Pandering to Soviet egos, they
stressed the fact that the Red Armys martial prestige had been recovered with the
breakthrough of the Mannerheim Line, a feat unsurpassed by the armies of France and
Germany fighting in Western Europe.
The reality was probably somewhere in-
between these two extremes; the failure to effectively co-ordinate and disseminate
Soviet intelligence among the general staff was a far more significant factor in the
disastrous military performance of the Red Army.
For this, the guilt must be placed
squarely on the shoulders of Stalin and the system of rule he fostered. He resolutely
refused to acknowledge the breakdown in communications that were facilitated by his
C. Mannerheim (trans: E. Lewenhaupt), The Memoirs of Marshal Mannerheim (London, 1953), p.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 175.
W. Trotter, The Winter War: The Russo-Finnish War of 1939-40 (London, 2002), pp. 62-66.
insistence on holding a monopoly over all key information channels to the centre (or
indeed, that he even held such a monopoly):
Oborin (Brigade Commander, Chief of Artillery of the 19th Corps): As
for the intelligence service, I am somewhat dissatisfied. Its a fact that we
had no secret intelligence service.
Stalin: We didnt, isnt there one? Does it exist? Should it exist?
Oborin: I think it should. What did we have? Finland was within easy
reach, but we didnt know what it was doing. And Im sure money was
allocated for this purpose. Right?
Stalin: Send three or four tourists there and they will do the job.
Oborin: Even though Im no good at spying, if Id been sent there, Id
have pried into every corner [laughter]. We shed much blood unjustly
because we did not have intelligence information.
The weight of western involvement was not abandoned by the press
altogether. Shortly after the ban on press coverage of the front, the pages of
Komsomolskaya Pravda would conveniently provide its younger readership with a
concise review of the official line regarding the international character of the Finnish
events.
Indeed, the regime was finally beginning to coordinate its efforts to portray
these events, as the sheer weight of its forces finally broke through the defences of
the Karelian Isthmus and forced the Finns to sue for peace.
Though this change in
fortunes was achieved as early as February, the media kept the Soviet public in the
dark a further month before reporting on Helsinkis attempts to reach agreement with
Moscow. The Kremlin were not about to repeat the same mistakes that were created
by the fiasco surrounding the outbreak of hostilities.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 28.
Komsomolskaya Pravda, 24 Feb. 1940, pp. 3-4. The same review was recycled two days later in
Leningrads regional Komsomol organ, Smena. See Smena, 26 February 1940, pp. 2-3.
The Kremlin remained ever reluctant to grant the conflict the status of a full-blown war given an
official declaration had never been signed.
At the introduction of the Mannerheim Line as the latest attempt by Moscow
to present the conflict to the Soviet readership, TASS was again important in
distributing the key terminology and official narrative. By virtue of the blanket
censorship ordered by Glavlit, Soviet newspapers found their hands tied where details
of front line activity were concerned. The prominence of the Finnish defensive works
and their eventual breaching by Red Army forces was instead introduced through the
daily digests of foreign newspapers provided by the Telegraph Agency.
Although
these second-hand accounts might have been concurrent with efforts to maintain a
degree of objectivity in the presentation of events, one can imagine it might have
appeared rather strange to the Soviet readership that reports of major breakthroughs
and military successes on the Karelian Isthmus were not being reported first-hand by
Soviet correspondents.
A change in mood also conveniently coincided with the twenty-second
anniversary of the Red Armys formation, celebrated on 23 February 1940.
appeared to re-ignite popular expressions of support for those fighting on the front
line, as shown by the further flurry of letters and gifts gathered by the Leningrad
Military District explicitly acknowledging the collective pride felt across the
Union.
Irrespective of any sponsorship of these efforts by the party apparatus, in
contrast to earlier stages of the war, they were afforded little print-space in the central
For an example of these early references to the Mannerheim Line, see Pravda, 1 March 1940, p. 5.
Foreign Press About the Successes of the Red Army on the Karelian Isthmus. Once again, these
TASS bulletins were often published concurrently between the central and regional press. See, also,
Leningradskaya Pravda, 1 March 1940, p. 4.
Mekhlis desperate hopes of bringing the war to a conclusion by Stalins sixtieth birthday had, of
course, not been realised. See Sebag Montefiore, Stalin, p. 292.
See, for example, TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 49, ll. 13, 34, 40. In one instance, the desire to join
in these celebrations with appropriate displays of political fervour apparently overtook the logistical
impediments facing the authors. The letter was seemingly typed without a working m key, though
repeated references to _annerhei_s bands (sic.) were felt a necessary marker of the authors correct
understanding of the official presentations of the war.
or regional press. Instead, the potential for an end to hostilities was finally alluded to
in a striking visual statement on the back page of the anniversary edition of
Leningradskaya Pravda. The mood of the macabre scene was barely lifted by the
black humour of its pun on White Finland: belo-final (see Fig. 6.).
Fig. 6.
Still somewhat premature, it would be another two weeks before peace was
officially announced on 13 March 1940. Only at this point did the sudden news of the
end of the fighting appear blazoned across the front page of Pravda.
The absence of
corresponding editions of Komsomolskaya Pravda and Izvestiia the same day
reiterates the Partys concern with carefully managing dissemination of the news
through the regimes primary organ, before further distribution could be coordinated
across the media as whole. Away from the capital, readers of Leningradskaya Pravda
(Fig. 6.) Leningradskaya Pravda, 23 February 1940, p. 4.
Pravda, 13 March 1940, p. 1.
also found no edition that day. The full text of the announcement and corresponding
treaty was, however, distributed through the Telegraph Agency, providing regional
party leaders in Leningrad (and their counterparts throughout the USSR) with the
means to swiftly adjust to the sudden reconciliation between Moscow and Helsinki.
More explicit direction from the centre about how to handle the immediate coverage
of the new, peaceful relations appears to have been in short supply. When the news
was printed in Leningradskaya Pravda the following day, their editors now openly
acknowledged peace talks had taken place from 7-12 March 1940, though there had
been no prior warning in the press before the official announcement in Pravda.
To combat these disparities, the Soviet media avoided anything original with
its presentation of events. A full-page spread of the treaty was offered to the readers
of Pravda, dated 12 March 1940, with supporting commentary lauding the promise of
security its ratification would guarantee for Leningrad and the USSR. An opportunity
to review the diplomatic and military efforts of the last three months coincided with a
blasting of Anglo-French efforts to incite the war, and the questionable antics of the
League of Nations during the course of the fighting.
Communists abroad dutifully
picked up this line in their own presentation of peace; news of the treaty delivered in
Londons Daily Worker on 14 March was offered as a blow to British and French
plans to extend the area of bloodshed. The newspaper quoted heavily from their
Moscow counterparts. Front-page commentary from a defiant Willie Gallacher was
also on point, insisting this bloodshed might have been avoided in November, had it
not been for the influence of outside pressure.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4385, ll. 23-32.
Leningradskaya Pravda, 14 March 1940, p. 1.
Pravda, 13 March 1940.
Daily Worker (London), 14 March 1940, p. 1.
Gone for the moment was the revolutionary rhetoric of the civil war. With
normal diplomatic relations restored, any polemics against Mannerheim and the
Finnish government in Helsinki served little purpose and were dropped from this
relatively measured response to the end of fighting. Crucially, the days summary of
front line activity from the Leningrad Military District took care to ignore the massive
bombardment the Finnish forces had been subjected to in the run up to the agreed
ceasefire at noon that day. Orders to troops stationed on the north-western front had
been issued as soon as peace was signed on the evening of 12 March 1940, explicit in
their instruction to keep fighting until the cease-fire hour.
In spite of the Red Armys insistence on maintaining pressure on Finnish
defence efforts till the final hour, over the page from Pravdas celebration of peace,
the meagre gains of the war were clear for all to see.
The redrawing of the Soviet-
Finnish border did not result in massive territorial acquisitions. Leningrads relative
position to the border was improved but little had been achieved beyond the aims of
the pre-war diplomatic negotiations. That did not stop the regime putting on a brave
face. Two days later, Pravda was ready to conclude that the Soviet people on the
whole approve the peaceful policy of their government. Led by an article describing
the voices of support from the newly acquired city of Vyborg, popular responses from
across the Union were again offered in unison.
Compared to the speed and scale with which the Party had collated widespread
ground-level support at the beginning of the fighting, the regime struggled to obtain
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, p. 178.
Pravda, 13 March 1940, p. 2. The map was also swiftly distributed among international audiences,
appearing on the front page of Londons Daily Worker on 14 March 1940.
Pravda, 15 February 1940.
an equally ebullient response to the abrupt announcement of peace.
It could,
however, continue to rely on a degree of flexibility with the truth. The view from
Vyborg offered by the Leningrad Military Department gave the impression of a city
conquered in the crucible of war.
In reality, Red Army troops had only managed to
hold the city under siege in the final stages of the fighting and never reached beyond
its suburbs.
In the final version of the story, this poetic licence would soon become
a full-blown fabrication, reordering the events reported within the hastily prepared
documentary Mannerheim Line (Liniia Mannergeima), released at the end of April
1940.
Vyborgs official incorporation into the territory of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics was secured under the provisions of the Moscow Peace Treaty.
The city became a further centrepiece of post-war publicity, its pre-existing
infrastructure rapidly assimilated by its new masters, both publicly and under the
auspices of the NKVDs covert control.
As Finlands second largest urban centre, it
was admittedly still a significant prize for the Soviets, though its Finnish population
was hastily evacuated, according to the terms of the recently inked treaty. The Soviet
press made much of how quickly transport and communication links were established
with their new acquisition, and many forward thinking citizens were swift to offer
Leningradskaya Pravda did endeavour to portray a more substantial and enthusiastic response from
local inhabitants. Meetings held at night to circulate the news; mention of thousands of congratulatory
telegrams sent to soldiers by their families; radio announcements and telephone calls; all these channels
testified to the speed that information travelled through the region. Amazingly, in all the excitement, an
immediate adjustment to the language of peaceful diplomacy had taken place and any references to
White Guards and Mannerheims Gangs were entirely absent from the newspapers coverage. See
Leningradskaya Pravda, 14-15 March, 1940.
See successive LMD summary reports for the closing days of the fighting published in Pravda.
Van Dyke, Soviet Invasion of Finland, pp. 176-178.
Pravda, 23 April 1940.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4605, ll. 1-21.
their services to the regime in the hope of a chance to live and work in the newly
occupied territories.
Concurrent with the press attempts to publicly perpetuate this celebratory
mood, in the days immediately following the announcement of peace, many
Leningraders were clearly puzzled by the absence of Kuusinen and his Peoples
Government from discussion of diplomatic affairs with Finland. This sentiment was
not only picked up by the Party through covert surveillance but also expressed in
letters sent to the editors of Leningradskaya Pravda.
Notwithstanding Moscows
refusal to recognise the legitimacy of the Helsinki administration at the start of the
war, as it openly embraced the formation of an independent Peoples Government,
all this had apparently been forgotten in an effort to bring hostilities to a close. Some
explanation was needed. None was forthcoming.
The Lessons of War
At the same time as the Kremlin attempted to come to terms with the results of
the war on the public stage, the foreign expertise and equipment provided to Finland
were to remain paramount in the leaderships own private preoccupations. Stalin was
particularly fixated with portraying the breakthrough of Finnish defences to his own
general staff as a victory over the Finns European teachers. This was carefully
censored from the public, however, in view of the fact that his analysis explicitly
credited Germany with providing the expertise required for half of the fortified line
The editors of Leningradskaya Pravda noted in their summary that many of these appeals stressed
the shortage of suitable living space in Leningrad. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4380, ll. 46-49.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4380, ll. 22-24.
in Finland. As his closing remarks on the matter, they nevertheless permeated
through the Party and the Red Army leadership, being seen to offer suitable
justification for the losses incurred:
We have defeated not only the Finns: that is not a great deal. The main
thing in our victory is that we have destroyed the equipment, tactics and
strategy of the advanced states of Europe, who were the Finns teachers.
This is the main thing about our victory.
These same sentiments were echoed at a meeting of local civil and military
functionaries in Leningrad on 4 April 1940.
Ostensibly called to review the
performance of volunteer ski-troops mobilised for the Finnish front, the gathering also
provided a perfect platform for ebullient Party praise:
The war with the White Finns was not only a war with Finland, but it was
a war against the united forces of capitalismThe war with the White
Finns showed the greatness of the Soviet Union [and] the patriotism of its
people.
Stalins tacit acknowledgement of Germanys role in the Finnish defensive
works was again absent. Participants instead recognised that the official conception of
an ongoing struggle with the capitalist world remained paramount to the Soviet
version of events, incorporating into this interpretation the medias new preoccupation
with Finnish physical defensive works.
The destruction of these defensive works
in a short period of time, was a testament to the strength and power of the Red
Armys forces and the evident strength (sic.) of the capitalist world.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 274.
For the full transcript of the meeting, see TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 30.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 30, ll. 59-61.
Molotovs recent speech to the Supreme Soviet was explicitly acknowledged during the closing
remarks of Leningrad Obkom Secretary Bumagin.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 30, l. 60.
In contrast to Stalins explicit desire to hear shortcomings of the Soviet war
effort in Moscow, the Leningrad meeting would not provide a significant forum for
open discussion and critical debate. Attendees preferred to turn the event into a stage
show driven by inflated patriotic pomp and ceremony. As with the reticence shown
amongst local representatives of the Department of Propaganda and Agitation for
reporting the realities of popular contestation of the official narrative in the region,
Stalins position at the epicentre of information gathering and control undermined the
free flow of open and critical dialogue about such a contentious issue (except where
he could personally set the agenda).
What both the core elements of the official narrative shared was their inability to deal
with the human aspect of the story. The artificial distinction between White-guard,
belo-bandit forces and the people of Finland bore little resemblance to the reality of
collective resistance the country had displayed in the face of the Soviet advance. Not
a single Finnish citizen had been arrested for anti-state activity during the course of
the conflict.
Worse still, Stalin was acutely aware, via his sources in the NKVD, of
his own troops willingness to desert and leave behind the promised future paradise of
the Soviet Union.
An evident point of concern, Stalin was quick to raise the
question of Russian-speaking troops fighting on the side of the Finns during the post-
conflict meetings with his general staff.
Rentola, The Finnish Communists, p. 602.
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, p. 537.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, p. 85.
The Narrative Re-written
The enemy then, as it stood, could not be presented to the Soviet people. Not
in its human form, as the faces of Finnish soldiers, which were much like those of the
husbands, fathers, sons and brothers who had fought in Red Army uniform. The
solution was to turn the enemy into the brick, mortar and barbed wire of the Finnish
defences. Its ruptured concrete bunkers, reportedly built to rival those of the Maginot
Line in France, marked a victory for Soviet ingenuity in the face of capitalist
collaboration. The war was now portrayed as the defeat of the Mannerheim Line, to
which newspaper images and the propaganda of the documentary film that shares its
name attested. Having been constructed with aggressive, not defensive intentions, in
order to provide a bridgehead for assault, its fortified works demanded the ingenuity
and courage of Red Army troops to overcome them. When the Soviet media was
finally able to exploit photographic images from the front line, the Red Army victors
were now shown proudly standing atop these shattered beasts.
By the time film footage chronicling the exploits of these Red Army dragon-
slayers appeared, released to Soviet audiences as Liniia Mannergeima in April 1940,
the overall narrative of the war had been stripped down to its basic elements. Gone
were the diplomatic efforts that preceded the hostilities. Absent, too, was any
reference to the strike on Red Army troops in Mainila. In the films opening shots of
Leningrad, its emphasis remained on the vulnerability of this revolutionary centre as
the citys people went about their daily business, unaware of the shadow cast over
them by the Finnish guns just thirty-two kilometres away. Helpful animations went on
Pravda, 30 April 1940, p. 3.
to reveal the extent of the defences  something of a misnomer given the particularly
aggressive intentions the film projects  with lines of earthworks, tank traps and
barbed wire illustrating the challenges that faced the Red Army forces before the
central character of the Mannerheim Line was introduced to the audience.
According to the Soviet regimes re-imagined version of events, the advance
of its forces had been an unmitigated success. Those defeats, which Mannerheims
memoirs flagged as posing such a challenge for the propagandists to explain, are
erased altogether from the films account of the war. Now the focus of the narrative
was on the destruction of roads, rail and telecommunication lines skilfully repaired by
Red Army engineers, with armoured units crossing ice and snow as the Soviet guns
pounded the Finnish lines. The faces of the enemy are never seen in combat. One
token scene offered a glimpse of prisoners of war, sharing stories and cigarettes with
their captors. In contrast, on the battlefield, in the captured towns and villages and
within the ruptured defence works along the Karelian Isthmus, native faces were
conspicuous in their absence  a faceless enemy, invisible in combat. The reality of
those White-Finnish bandits was never revealed to the audience, beyond the few
blackened and snow-covered corpses that periodically interrupted the footage of
troops and tanks pressing forward with the advance.
That advance was now reduced to two key stages, presented in the
documentary as the breakthrough of the Mannerheim Line and the capture of the city
Mannerheim Line (Liniia Mannergeima) 1940, Documentary Film, Leningrad Studio Newsreel.
From information sent to Khavinson by a representative of the Telegraph Agency in German occupied
Belgium, it appears the documentary was intended for both domestic and international audiences. On
18 September 1940, Yefimov wrote to the Khavison, attaching a report that indicated the film was to be
shown as part of a screening held in Brussels of three Soviet productions: At present, the Soviet trade
mission is seeking permission from the German High Command to screen these films. GARF, f. 4459,
op. 11, l. 1214, ll. 73-74.
of Vyborg. No stagnation of Soviet forces or counter-attacks by Finnish troops
interrupted the progress of the Red Army. As one sceptical viewer recalled after
watching the film: I wasn't there. But one person of our village was there. And he
told how the Finns beat the Russians. But in the film, all victories.
Untarnished by military setbacks, the film could now proudly paraphrase
Stalin with the immortal line: There are no fortresses that Bolsheviks cannot storm.
This slogan of Soviet industry is borne out by the footage of captured defence works,
revealing their inner workings and stressing the scope of the challenge that,
ultimately, proved no match for the tenacity and courage of the Red Army. More
creative commentary was still required with some of the footage. As the film depicted
troops beginning the march on Vyborg, the filmmakers cameras could not help
exposing the ruined city before them. Its blackened and broken buildings were
carefully explained away as the result of Finlands own forces having set the city
ablaze. In line with Stalins own predilection for the exploits of Soviet aviators, the air
force enjoyed a high profile in the film.
Yet any incidents of civilian bombardment
were also carefully purged from the records: In early March parts of the Red Army
finished completely surrounding Vyborg. The enemy sets fire to the city.
Soon the red banner was seen flying over the rooftops, while beneath lines of
troops and armour paraded through an apparently deserted city. Though the
commentary failed to acknowledge as much, there were no crowds of Finns
welcoming their liberation by the Red Army, the local population long since
evacuated. In contrast, a warmer welcome was guaranteed in the streets of Leningrad,
HPSSS, Schedule A, Vol. 8, Case 103, p. 44.
On aviators special attraction for Stalin, see Service, Stalin, pp. 358-359.
the victorious troops portrayed receiving a final heros welcome along the banks of
the Neva.
Behind the carefully edited footage of military pageantry and prestige, these
festive closing scenes of popular support need not be dismissed as solely the result of
the Partys manipulation. Surviving commentary from eye-witnesses often speaks of
the human cost of war and offers a reminder of the family ties that were just as
important to these crowds, now seeing loved ones return from the front. These were
the same loved ones whose wartime correspondence with their civilian counterparts is
preserved in the archives. Notes expressing pride, affection and concern for their
safety accompanied their earlier receipt of gifts and packages. These men were now
welcomed home with open arms:
I have three sons who fought on the Finnish front, and now thanks to the
wise policy of our government they return home. We have achieved this;
Leningrad is now safe, the lives of our husbands and sons are saved.
The politically orthodox language and jovial praise of the Party may have been for the
benefit of official ears, but relief that ones husband and sons were not among the lost
or wounded must have elicited great relief for those left at home during the fighting.
According to NKVD figures, almost one and a half million Leningraders lined the
streets to greet parades led by local forces, during the annual May Day celebrations
that same year. The local security services reported no issues. A collective sense of
relief that the fighting was over offered some reason to be cheerful, especially after
the hardship and shortages suffered by the regions inhabitants in recent months.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4020, ll. 156-159.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4404, l. 17.
Notwithstanding this sense of relief, the regime could not afford to ignore the
vast numbers who didnt return home.
Such was the human cost of those few
months of war that a public acknowledgement of the casualties suffered was
eventually made by the Party. At the end of March 1940, within Molotovs speech to
the Supreme Soviet, the figures were cautiously manipulated to appear a fraction of
the Finnish losses:
The war in Finland has exacted heavy sacrifices both from us and from
the Finns. According to the estimates of our General Staff, on our side the
number killed and those who died of wounds was 48,745, or somewhat
less than 49,000 men, and the number wounded 158,863. Attempts are
being made on the part of the Finns to minimise their losses, but their
casualties were considerably bigger than ours. Our General Staff places
the number of Finnish killed at not less than 60,000, without counting
those who died of wounds, and the number of wounded at not less than
250,000. Thus, considering that the strength of the Finnish Army was not
less than 600,000 men, one must admit that the Finnish Army lost in
killed and wounded over one-half of its total strength. Such are the
facts.
Davies has described this as amounting to political glasnost on the part of the Party.
This is giving more credit to Molotov than is due. Those Leningraders who bore
witness to these facts were not blind to the realities of war:
The victims of our Red Army are not 48,000 but about one million. Did as
many return from the front as went? And the soldiers themselves say that
According to figures gathered by Grigori Krivosheev in the early 1990s, the number of dead and
missing for the Soviet Union can be estimated at 126,875, with total casualties at 391,783. The Finnish
sources he cites give totals of 48,243 Finns killed and 43,000 wounded, though these appear to be
inflated in comparison to data gathered by Pekka Kurenmaa and Riitta Lentil in 2005. Their research,
by comparison, gives a total of 25,904 dead or missing among the Finnish forces. See G. Krivosheev
(ed.), Soviet Casualties and Combat Losses in the Twentieth Century (London, 1997); P. Kurenmaa and
R. Lentil, Sodan tappiot, in J. Leskinen and A. Juutilainen (eds.), Jatkosodan pikkujttilinen
(Helsinki, 2005). These respective totals for Soviet and Finnish loses during the Soviet-Finnish War are
taken as the best available estimates by Pasi Tuunainen in a recent collation of Finnish military
casualties incurred between 1939-45. See P. Tuunainen, The Finnish Army at War: Operations and
Soldiers, 1939-45, in T. Kinnunen and V. Kivimki (eds.), Finland in World War II: History, Memory,
Interpretations (Leiden, 2012), p. 172.
Soviet Peace Policy  Speech Delivered on 29 March 1940, accessed on 26 April 2011 at
http://www.marxists.org/archive/molotov/1940/peace.htm. See, also, Balashov, Prinimai Nas, pp. 281-
Davies, Popular Opinion, p. 101.
the Finns mowed them down like a scythe. No one tells the truth about
these losses, they will long be kept secret.
So committed to the lie was the Party that when Finland attempted to offer more
reserved numbers of its own casualties, Izvestiia quickly published a rebuttal to this
attempt to manufacture laughable lies. The regime either had a very short memory,
or was struggling to keep track of the liberties it took with the truth. In responding to
official Finnish figures of 19,576 men, the newspaper now inflated their own
estimates to 70,000, higher even than Molotovs earlier claims.
Besides this rare concession to the human cost of war, there were no other
great revelations to be found in the words of Stalins foreign minister. The focus of
his diatribe was reserved for those foreign powers that interfered in relations between
Finland and the USSR:
It may safely be said that had Finland not been subjected to foreign
influences, had Finland been less incited by certain third states to adopt a
hostile policy towards the USSR, the Soviet Union and Finland would
have arrived at a peaceful understanding last autumn, and matters would
have been settled without war.
The material contribution made by these powers was expounded in some detail.
Italys contribution was included alongside those of the Allied powers, while
Germanys was carefully avoided (Ribbentrops earlier displeasure over the
insinuations made by TASS about German supply of arms to Finland still fresh in the
Kremlins mind). A somewhat surprising result of Italys eager desire to exploit the
war for financial gain was its status as the one of the two largest providers of supplies
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4020, ll. 196-198.
Thompson, Nationalist Propaganda, p. 397.
Soviet Peace Policy  Speech Delivered on 29 March 1940.
to Finland, second only to the material support offered by Sweden.
One should
keep in mind that the broader shape of the European theatre of war was yet to emerge
in these messy months of shifting loyalties and strategic priorities. Italy would only
officially join the war on the side of Germany in June 1940.
The myth of the Mannerheim Line remained equally prominent in Molotovs
assessment of the campaign, closely following the script endorsed by Stalin behind
closed doors:
These fortifications, especially the ferro-concrete structures, attaining a
high degree of military strength, connected by underground thoroughfares,
surrounded by anti-tank trenches and granite anti-tank obstacles and
supported by countless minefields, together constituted what was known
as the Mannerheim Line which was built under the supervision of
foreign experts on the model of the Maginot Line and the Siegfried
Line. It should be mentioned that until recently these fortifications were
considered impregnable, that is, such as no army had ever broken through
before. It should also be mentioned that the Finnish military authorities
had endeavoured beforehand to convert every little village in this area into
a fortified position supplied with arms, radio antenna and fuel stations,
etc. In many parts of the south and east of Finland, strategic railways and
highways of no economic importance whatever had been built leading
right up to our frontier. In short, hostilities in Finland have shown that
already by 1939 Finland, and especially the Karelian Isthmus, had been
converted into a place darmes ready for an attack by third powers on the
Soviet Union, for an attack on Leningrad.
In the face of damning criticism from the foreign press  again, criticism the regime
felt pressed to respond to publicly  the best strategy the Kremlin could formulate was
the perpetuation of much the same rhetoric witnessed during the war. The
acknowledgement of Soviet casualties was one minor concession to the losses of the
war, though there was little room for widespread transparency in the aftermath of such
a disastrous campaign. Privately, the local party leadership in Leningrad did at least
Vehvilinen, Finland in the Second World War, p. 71.
Pons, Stalin and the Inevitable War, p. 200.
Soviet Peace Policy  Speech Delivered on 29 March 1940
recognise the invaluable contribution made by countless medical personnel that
responded to the crisis with compassion and kindness. Amongst civilian recipients of
awards and honours drawn up after the conclusion of hostilities were a significant
number of doctors, nurses and hospital administrators, who were commended for the
levels of care they offered and the resources they were able to mobilise. Credit was
also given to the men and women involved in the organisation of the gift gathering for
front line troops.
The presence of both party members and the non-affiliated amongst the
recipients of these awards suggests participation in the war effort went beyond mere
politics or a sense of military duty. For some, especially those serving in non-
combatant roles, it represented a more basic expression of human kindness and due
diligence in their work. Mikhail Polyakov, a hospital cook stationed across the border
in Finland, received recognition for his provision of good quality nourishment for the
troops.
A senior nurse, Elizaveta Makarova, was praised as the best of the best
among the nursing staff of hospital No. 1868, for her professionalism and the
affectionate way with which she related to wounded soldiers.
These efforts were not afforded the same kind of public acclaim that the armed
forces received in the press. Here, the need for precise control over the distribution of
awards by the centre was expressed in the itemised instructions sent by Mikhail
Kalinin to Zhdanov at the end of January 1940.
Close attention was paid to the
positive publicity the granting of military honours afforded the Party. The supervisory
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 43a, 44.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 43a, l. 7.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 43a, l. 1.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4227, ll. 2-3.
role played by TASS in the regional press resulted in its chastising of the editors of
Leningradskaya Pravda and their wrong attitude towards the prompt publication of
the materials it circulated. A stern reprimand pointed to the editors failure to find
print-space for a report detailing second secretary, Alexey Kuznetsovs attendance at
an award ceremony, held in Peterhof, on 22 February 1940. Leningradskaya Pravda
was evidently neglecting to follow the example set by Smena and the central party
press.
A consistent and timely adherence to the official line was of paramount
importance to the regime.
Speed and uniformity in the delivery of the official line could be better
expected now that the crisis in Finland was at an end. That Molotovs public
commentary echoes, so closely, the interpretation of the war expressed by Stalin in
the presence of his general staff, reiterates the importance those signals from the
Vozhd were to the public line taken by the Party and its propaganda machine.
Carefully calculated, the regime finally offered a relatively coherent and collective
response to a dearth of information that had been the most consistent element of the
wars treatment. This earlier failing on the part of the press was even quietly
acknowledged by the Party, though dressed, as ever, in a positive light. Coinciding
with its announcement of the public release of the Mannerheim Line documentary,
Pravda included a short profile of the film. It ended with the profoundly ironic line,
credited to the Soviet people: Yes, now we understand that this is how it was
It is still questionable how successful the Party was in shaping public
perceptions of the war overall. The pace with which the political and military arena
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4385, l. 17.
Chubaryan and Shukman, Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War, pp. 263-274.
Pravda, 23 April 1940, p. 4.
had begun to change by the end of the 1930s had caught out the Kremlin. With
Stalins sporadic intervention, the ability of the press to respond effectively to these
shifts had decreased. His presence merely amplified the risk of misinterpreting the
official line, causing indecision when input was not immediately forthcoming. When
no alternative to past precedent was available, the result was sterile, repetitive
commentary that was perpetuated by the political centre and slavishly imitated by
domestic and foreign communists alike. The reliance on continuity over any concerted
effort to change the strategies of the propaganda machinery was tangible in this
period. It would be worth exploring whether any significant reappraisal took place
before the summer of 1941. This thesis has already provided one instance where the
visual imagery of broken treaties and clawing hands was recycled in the portrayal of
the expansionist aims of first Mannerheim and then Hitler.
Our acknowledgment of
Yakov Khavisons involvement in the Kremlins propaganda efforts during the war
on the eastern front in 1941 also suggests elements of continuity in the personnel
involved.
In the interim between the Soviet invasion of Finland and the German invasion
of the USSR, both of which should be considered from the perspective of the Red
Armys participation in the broader Second World War, the situation was not going to
get any easier for the Soviet media. Following the failure of the Finnish campaign, a
shake-up was required. As a result, throughout 1940, articles concerned with how to
manage the press appeared virtually every month within the Central Committees
official organ, Partiinoe stroitelstvo. This new direction reflected the party leaders
seriousness about the issue of press interpretations of the rapidly changing political
See Chapter 2: Crisis-management, Censorship, Control, pp. 96-97.
See Chapter 3: Signals from Stalin, p. 160.
and military scene.
Furthermore, in an effort to counter the apparent ambiguity
over the leadership of the Partys primary press organ, Petr Nikolaevich Pospelov was
promoted to editor-in-chief of Pravda.
Some, if not all, of these changes might have still taken place had the Soviet
Union not gone to war with little Finland. Hitlers expansionist aims had already
triggered war in Europe; the pressure was on the regime to effectively manage
popular opinion in the context of Moscows sudden shift in orientation towards
conciliation with Nazi Germany. The subsequent division of Eastern Europe through a
combination of veiled diplomacy and Red Army bayonet undermined its self-
professed role of peacekeeper and forced the press to produce commentary that set a
template, which was later replicated for the Finnish War.
Nevertheless, the woeful performance of Soviet forces in Finland  in contrast
to the relative ease with which the Red Army had crossed half of Poland  meant that,
for the first time since the end of the Russian civil war, the Kremlin had to deal with
the prospect of defeat by a foreign power and the overt rejection of a communist
hegemony by its proletarian community. That the Soviet regime opted largely for a
policy of media blackout at the highpoint of the fighting indicates the limits of the
propaganda machine during crisis, combined with a lack of confidence over its ability
to curb negative popular opinion at home and abroad.
Even Finnish communists
began to question where their loyalties should lie. Following Arvo Tuominens refusal
Thompson, Nationalist Propaganda, p. 388.
See biographical note, RGASPI, f. 629, op. 1.
For evidence of how that same hesitancy amongst Soviet film-makers resulted in the shelving of a
number of scripts based on the war, see B. Raiklin, Soviet Cinema in the Wake of the Terror:
The Artistic Council at Mosfilm, 1939-41, Studies in Russian and Soviet Cinema, Vol. 3, No. 3
(2009), p. 283.
to take part in the government of the Finnish Democratic Republic, he eventually
severed his links with the Comintern entirely. Writing to Dimitrov in June 1940,
Tuominen condemned the Soviet governments failure to ask the people of
Finlandwhether they wanted such a Peoples Government and the Red Army for
their liberation. He now implored the Communist International and its members to
declare that Moscow peace is not peace, but rather the typical diktat of an imperialist
aggressor whose hands have stripped the people of Finland of more than 10% of their
lands and national property.
Even the tried and tested terminology of terror had failed to undermine public
perceptions of Helsinki during the war. It was unable to stand up to scrutiny when
contemporary cases of Finnish atrocities were fabricated alongside the excesses of the
civil war period. Neither party newspapers at home, nor their counterparts abroad
perpetuated the idea for long that Helsinki was violently repressing its own people in
the face of the Soviet advance. In the end, if the Kremlin had not faced the challenge
of portraying such a contentious conflict, it may well have proved even less prepared
for the onslaught of Hitlers blitzkrieg in both a military capacity and the
mobilisation of public support essential to the Soviet Unions survival.
Cited in Firsov, Klehr and Haynes, Secret Cables of the Comintern, p. 177.
Out of the Frying Pan, Into the Fire
Contrary to Pravdas expression of relief from the civilian population, who
were now reportedly able, at last, to understand how it was that the Soviet Union
became embroiled in war with Finland, the reality of the conflict remained a long way
away from the newspapers official presentation of the facts. Taking into account
the censorship of front line activity demanded by Glavlit in the closing stages of the
conflict, shortly followed by the rewriting of the narrative that formed the centre of
the public presentation of events, there is still one aspect of the regimes efforts to
control perceptions of the war that helps explain why sensitivity to this war continues
to exist in Russia even today.
The evidence available concerning the fate of Soviet prisoners of war returned
from Finnish captivity is fragmentary at best. While the contribution my own doctoral
research can offer is limited, acknowledgement of these men and their story is
intended to provide a further challenge to the continued reliance on a dominant
framework of Great Terror and Great Patriotic War when studying the Soviet past.
As I argued in my introduction, this rigid periodisation has allowed elements of
continuity in the repressive apparatus of state (beyond the years 1937-38), propaganda
machinery, and military dynamics of the interwar period to be long overlooked by the
scholars of Stalins Soviet Union.
This subheading shares the title of Alexander Churakovs more detailed treatment of the fate of
Soviet prisoners of war, tracing their return from Finnish captivity. As Churakov acknowledges, this
subject remained closed for a long time in [Russias] national historiography and jurisprudence. The
evidence that has emerged from my own research is intended to compliment the still incomplete story
of the shared experiences of these men. See A. V. Churakov, Iz ognya da v polymya..., Voyenno-
istoricheskiy arkhiv, Vol. 43, No. 7 (2003), pp. 60-99, accessed on 14 April 2015 at
http://www.proza.ru/2010/06/23/586.
Among the collected documents drawn from the archives of the former NKVD
in Moscow, a final report relates to the fate of those Red Army troops captured by
Finnish forces during the course of the war. Though never acknowledged publicly in
the Soviet media, the return of one hundred and eight prisoners of war was co-
ordinated through the offices of the security apparatus in April 1940.
This was just
a fraction of over five thousand officially listed within Finnish and Soviet sources and
whose release was agreed within the Moscow peace treaty.
According to a report
by British intelligence forces, who conducted intensive interrogations of some two
thousand prisoners while still in Finnish captivity, with only a few exceptions, all
ranks refuse to return to the Soviet as exchanged Prisoners of War. They are confident
of being instantly shot.
This pessimism was well placed. Their collective return
undoubtedly posed a serious problem for the Soviet regime in light of their
experiences of the fighting  contrary to the official presentation of events  and
exposure to Finnish society and standards of living. Their very existence refuted the
propaganda myth of the invincibility of the Red Army.
Details of the fate of those previously mentioned one hundred and eight
prisoners are limited to a list of their names, divided among three wagonloads of
troops transported across the border to the USSR. The lists are provided without any
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, pp. 613-615.
A recent collaborative project between Russian, Finnish, German and Norwegian scholars, which
provides figures for POWs held by Finland for the entire Second World War, puts the total number of
Red Army captives for the Soviet-Finnish War at 5700. Among those held for the duration of the
conflict, a death rate of 2.4% reduced the total population by one hundred and thirty-five by the close
of the fighting. See L. Westerlund, Prisoners of War in Finland in WW II: An Introduction, in L.
Westerlund (ed.), Sotavangit ja Internoidut: Kansallisarkiston Artikkelikirja [Prisoners of War and
Internees: A Book of Articles by the National Archives] (Helsinki, 2008), p. 8.
Tolstoy, Stalins Secret War, pp. 150-154.
Churakov, Iz ognya da v polymya.
additional commentary as to the mens treatment once they returned to Soviet soil.
NKVD reports sent from the Finnish side of the repatriate process indicate the
persistent sense of suspicion to which these men were subjected. Widely questioned,
with their personal effects searched, evidence of counter-revolutionary white-guard
literature and other contraband was duly reported to Moscow.
Unfortunately, no
documents are preserved in the collection that indicate what the future held for those
returning soldiers that were compromised by items found on their person, or the
unsatisfactory responses to interrogation they offered. Rather, the next destination for
any who were deemed suspect is illuminated by a document preserved in the personal
fond of Andrei Zhdanov.
On 2 November 1940, Zhdanov received a letter from the NKVD containing
details of a prisoner of war, Ivan Andreevich Gromov, held since his return to the
Soviet Union at the end of the fighting. Attached was an appeal thrown from the
window of his cell in the hope of it reaching Zhdanov in his Leningrad offices. That
handwritten appeal was recovered and a typed copy provided alongside the original.
The contents indicate the fate awaiting a number of these Soviet POWs, though it is
unclear why the NKVD took the trouble to forward this particular appeal or whether
any action was taken by Zhdanov as a result.
Wounded and frostbitten, Gromovs capture occurred after his unit failed to
break through a Finnish encirclement in mid-February. According to the NKVDs
interpretation of these events, no resistance was offered to the White-Finns  despite
reference to his incapacitation  and he was thus deemed to have breached his military
Whether the editors of this book were privy to any further classified sources, omitted from the
published collection of documents, is unclear.
Zimniaia Voina: Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii, Document 231, pp. 608-610.
oath on his return to Soviet soil. Subject to interrogation, before his case was
reviewed by a special conference of the NKVD in September 1940, he was eventually
condemned to five years in the Pechlag labour camp. Writing to Zhdanov, Gromovs
petition was on behalf of, not only himself, but also those members of his squad
assigned to the same fate. It is still unclear exactly how many of the thousands that
returned from Finnish captivity followed the same route as these men. Gromov is
certainly not listed among the names given in the published source above.
Nor does Fyodor Vasilevich Mochulsky offer any personal details of the
prisoners he encountered in his time as an NKVD-GULAG worker in the Pechorlag
forced labour camp, described in his posthumously published memoir.
Mochulskys testimony does, however, corroborate the account given by Gromov:
As a witness of this reality, I cannot defend my beliefs or provide any
good explanations about what went on. I have to ask the following
questions. Question: Why were honest Soviet patriots who volunteered on
the Finnish front in the ski battalions for the campaign at the rear of the
enemy accused in the name of the motherland of being political criminals
and given long prison sentences? This was after the Finns (who were
superior fighters in many ways) had routed them, encircled them, and
taken them prisoner (many of them injured). The reality is that these
Soviet soldiers had been volunteers and they had battled desperately, as
long as they could.
Mochulskys reflective questioning comes from his memoirs closing pages, an
attempt to reconcile his experiences of the harsh realities of the Soviet system with his
own beliefs and convictions. After a long and successful career, this remained one of
RGASPI, f. 77, op. 3, d. 121, ll. 42-44.
Correspondence with Deborah Kaple confirmed that this designation was one of a number of
variations by which the camp went by, including the abbreviated Pechlag used in relation to Ivan
Gromovs case.
F. V. Mochulsky and D. Kaple, Gulag Boss: A Soviet Memoir (Oxford, 2012), p. 169. Note that in
the original hardcover edition this passage was mistranslated.
many questions he found impossible to answer.
The fate of these young men
appeared to resonate in particular with Mochulsky. He recounts their arrival at the
Gulag, which occurred early in his career as a camp attendant:
In November 1940, these men still did not know their ultimate fates, since
they had not been officially sentenced. In the meantime, they were being
kept as convicts, and treated as such. Several of these former soldiers were
students, many of them my age. There are no words that could convey
their suffering. When any of these unfortunate young people complained
about their fate, I looked at them and could not find any way to comfort
them.
Surviving letters to the Leningrad Military District testify to the youth and enthusiasm
of some of these fledgling fighters. An expressed wish to defend ones homeland to
the last drop of blood was a very real prospect in the killing fields of the Karelian
Isthmus. The desire to protect the freedom of the Finnish people from the White-
Finnish yolk was a more nave endeavour altogether.
The creation of these units was a hastily drawn up response to a complete
absence of qualified ski-troops, desperately needed to fight on the Karelian Isthmus.
Assessment of their formation and performance during the war offers no indication
the general staff paid much heed to the question of their disproportional combat losses
or the fate of any men unfortunate enough to find themselves in Finnish captivity.
With the sudden cessation of hostilities, they became just another facet of official
propaganda efforts to draw some dregs of success from the war.
Mochulsky and Kaple, Gulag Boss, p. 172.
Mochulsky and Kaple, Gulag Boss, p. 36.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 50, ll. 1, 10.
TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 12, d. 32.
The return to Leningrad of those heroic-skiers fortunate enough to survive the war was given a
front-page treatment in Leningradskaya Pravda. See Leningradskaya Pravda, 21 March 1940, p. 1.
One of the unexpected consequences resulting from their experiences in Finland (aside from the need
to make these mobile ski battalions a permanent fixture of the Red Army) was a drive to improve sport
and physical culture in the region. There are a number of documents that testify to attempts by the
Lost in the Archives
The treatment of returning POWs is not the only instance where an apparent
sensitivity to the realities of the Soviet-Finnish War is still detectable in relation to
archival evidence today. The published transcript of the post-conflict meeting
between Stalin and his generals offers a fairly candid view of the lessons the
leadership were able to draw from the disastrous performance of its troops. Yet
Stalins closing remarks, included in the published editions, have seemingly been
expunged once more from the accessible records held in RGASPI.
Likewise, within
the same opis that contains many examples of Stalins utilisation of TASS bulletins in
this period, other documents that are helpfully grouped according to country have,
nevertheless, remained classified where sources explicitly related to Finland are
concerned.
Regional archives in Leningrad also fall short of offering a complete window
on events during the war. Important channels of communication with Moscow remain
classified; later files now open to researchers testifying to the potential significance of
these closed documents.
Nor are the citys archives alone in displaying something
of an ongoing aversion to the realities of the conflict. A visit to modern day St.
authorities to draw impetus from the lessons of the Finnish War and encourage a development of
athletic pursuits in the Leningrad Oblast. See TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 4404.
RGASPI, f. 17, op. 165, d. 77-78.
RGASPI, f. 558, op. 11, d. 389-395. The opis includes a table of contents, which lists page
references for each dela, grouped by country. Included are those related to Finland, which
unfortunately sit somewhere among a series of blanked out entries at the corresponding pages of the
opis. Unsurprisingly, attempts to request these files met without success.
For example, files related to correspondence with the Central Committee in Moscow remain
inaccessible for the key period of the war. See TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3988. Frustratingly,
declassified documents from the months immediately following the culmination of hostilities merely
confirm their potential value for illuminating the directions on the war offered by the Kremlin. See, for
example, a telegram from Stalin to Zhdanov, Bumagin and Nikitin indicating his displeasure at the
publication of an article in Izvestiia. TsGAIPD SPb, f. 24, op. 2v, d. 3989. l. 60.
Petersburg offers little evidence of its central place in the war. The only surviving,
permanent exhibit in the Military-Historical Museum of Artillery, Engineering and
Communications Forces remains couched in the same Soviet rhetoric that emerged to
praise the efforts of its engineers and their successful conquest of the Mannerheim
Line defences. Scale models of the concrete fortifications appear alongside black and
white photos showing the aftermath of the breakthrough (See Fig. 7.).
Even more
conspicuous are the exhibition halls of the State Museum of Russian Political History,
which do not contain a single reference to the war within its chronological coverage
of the entire sweep of Soviet history, from Lenin to Gorbachev.
Fig. 7.
(Fig. 7) Authors own photo.
Is this then, perhaps, a reflection of the success with which the Party proved
able to re-write the history of its war with Finland? Does a shared sense of amnesia
amongst the official presentation and preservation of its past reveal the strength of the
Soviet propaganda machine or more current political priorities?
Does a popular
disengagement with the events of 1939-40 indicate the past was not merely forgotten,
but actively destroyed by the Party? These are questions that are probably
impossible to answer conclusively, given the rupture and upheaval that was to follow
the outbreak of the Great Patriotic War in June 1941.
The evidence of proactive efforts by the Party to control the spread of
information about events in Finland through official and unofficial channels,
including Stalins personal intervention in this process, does indicate the priority the
regime placed on managing the impact of the crisis for domestic and international
audiences. The subsequent rewriting of the recent past after the end of the fighting
further conjures up an Orwellian vision of totalitarian control, with the co-ordinated
efforts of the propaganda machinery bent on establishing a new version of history,
while the coercive arms of the state sought to silence any conflicting voices that could
contradict it.
In reality, things are not so bleak. As recently as 2010, Russian audiences were
given the opportunity to revisit the history of the Soviet-Finnish War as part of a live
televised debate.
Some seventy years later, a desire to critically assess Russias past
Russian History Receives a Makeover That Starts With Ivan the Terrible, accessed on 12 April
2015 at http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/31/world/europe/russian-museum-seeks-a-warmer-adjective-
for-ivan-the-terrible.html?emc=edit_th_20150331&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67449098&_r=1.
Stenogrammy Suda Vremeni. 26. Sovetsko-finskaya voyna, accessed on 12 April 2015 at
http://www.kurginyan.ru/publ.shtml?cmd=add&cat=3&id=136. The episode was broadcast as part of a
series of historical programmes first shown between June and December 2010.
remained, as did a select few of those voices that bore witness to the realities of
This, necessarily, puts paid to a more extreme assessment of the Partys
success in monopolising popular memory of the conflict.
Understanding the strategies adopted by Moscow and the pervasive power of
the state-sponsored media to present a Kremlin-friendly version of events elicit
certain parallels between current expressions of Russian power in the near abroad and
those explored during the Soviet period in this thesis. Following the Soviet Unions
dissolution, the Telegraph Agency was re-named ITAR-TASS, though it continued to
function as the central government news agency in Russia. Most recently, in
September 2014, its former title was restored, lauded as a bid to preserve and develop
its best traditions.
As the Kremlin continues to exert its influence both within and
outside its borders, TASS persists as an institution closely aligned to the political
priorities of Russia and its ruling regime.
In 1939, empty posturing and diplomatic
efforts, enacted by the League of Nations and other developed nations, played into the
hands of a regime whose self-image was dependent on a position of polar opposition
to the western world. Moscow strove to convince its people that permanent and
invasive internal and external threats existed. Current governments would do well to
remember little has changed in the way modern Russia defines, for its own people, its
relations with Europe and the west, and also the means at its disposal for projecting
that image at home and abroad.
Reference to contemporary documents and speeches takes place throughout the shows proceedings,
including the published transcript of Stalins closing commentary at the post-war meetings held in
April.
TASS Russian News Agency, TASS History, accessed on 25 October 2014 at http://en.itar-
tass.com/history.
Russia's Foreign Ministry: Threats of US Secretary of State against Russia unacceptable, accessed
on 24 March 2014 at http://en.itar-tass.com/russia/721831. The same spectre of foreign intervention,
seen so consistently in interwar Soviet propaganda, still has a role to play in the Russian media today.
Conclusion
How can the theatre be entertaining and at the same time instructive? How
can it be taken out of the traffic in intellectual drugs and transformed from
a place of illusion to a place of insight?
Bertolt Brecht, On Experimental Theatre
On 17 April 1940, the Marxist playwright, poet and theatre director Bertolt
Brecht set sail for Finland. Brecht and his family had fled their native Germany on the
ascendancy of the National Socialists in 1933. Settling in Denmark the following
year, the immanency of war in the spring of 1939 motivated a further move to
Sweden. Then, in early 1940, coinciding with Hitlers invasion of Denmark and
Norway, the family made yet another hasty exit, leaving books and other worldly
goods behind as they crossed the Baltic Sea.
Landing in Helsinki, Brecht avoided
overt criticism of the Soviet Unions recent treatment of its northern neighbour, but
noted in his journal the difficult situation still facing the country after the conclusion
of hostilities, and the apparent dismay in Scandinavia over Englands failure to
act.
Brecht, though a Marxist, was not slavish in his adherence to the vision of
socialism projected by the Kremlin. Critical of those for whom socialism is whatever
Quoted in Life of Galileo, p.xxxv. The full quote appears in translation: How can the theatre be
both entertaining and instructive at the same time? How can it be drawn away from this intellectual
narcotics traffic and be changed from a place of illusion to a place of practical experience? How can
the shackled, ignorant, freedom and knowledge seeking human being of our century, the tormented and
heroic, abused and ingenious, the changeable and the world-changing human being of this frightful and
important century achieve his own theatre which will help him to master not only himself but also the
world? B. Brecht (trans: C. Mueller), On the Experimental Theatre, The Tulane Drama Review, Vol.
6, No. 1 (September 1961), pp. 16-17.
B. Brecht, J. Willett (ed.) (trans: H. Rorrison), Bertolt Brecht: Journals (London, 1993), p. 53
(hereafter Brecht, Journals).
Brecht, Journals, p. 55.
the USSR does, his earlier recognition of Moscows motivations for the attack on
Finland was coupled with commentary containing a healthy degree of scepticism over
the Kremlins championing of liberty for the Finnish proletariat: The treaty with the
Russian-installed Finnish peoples regime runs counter to the notion that the Finnish
workers and peasants are having to exchange their national freedom for their social
freedom, it serves as a pretext and as such it is weak.
Although Brecht did not
express outright condemnation of the conflict in his private observations, a certain
difficulty in reconciling the actions of the Soviet state with his sympathetically
coloured world-view and staunch anti-fascism is apparent. Indeed, the editors of his
journal note the strange absence of any observations regarding the end of hostilities
and signing of peace in March 1940.
Throughout these many months of personal and political turmoil, Brechts
creative output continued unabated, eliciting some of his most celebrated works in
this period. Influenced by his vision of theatre as a revolutionary medium capable of
inspiring audiences to act and engage with the world around them, his ideas also
found form and expression in a lecture delivered to a Stockholm audience in May
1939.
Here, he spoke of experimental theatres potential to alienate an event or
character from the viewer, to shake them out of a sense of empathy with the actors on
stage and the events to which they bore witness.
Brechts epic theatre was a
Brecht, Journals, 10 December 1940, p. 41. For his critical assessment of the state of socialism in
the USSR, see the entry on 26 January 1940, p. 45.
Brecht, Journals, p. 470 (Editorial Notes). There is also no evidence of more public engagement
with the topic of the Soviet-Finland War in his surviving letters from the period. See B. Brecht, J.
Willett (ed.) (trans: R. Mannheim), Bertolt Brecht Letters, 1913-1956 (London, 1990).
Brecht, Journals, p. 29.
Brecht, Experimental Theatre, p. 14. More recent translations of the original German term
Verfremdungseffekt have often opted for estrangement to better capture the close connection the term
shares with the Russian Formalist Viktor Shklovskys notion of making strange (priyom
otstraneniya). For a summary of this debate and the associated problems of translation, see D.
reaction against the dramatic tradition, exposing the mechanics and make-up of the
stage, interjecting actors dialogue with external commentary, and forcing the audience
to respond critically to the episodes played out before them. The aim was to correct a
growing sense of social impotence in the modern world, one he may well have shared
in the context of the rapidly unfolding crisis of the Soviet-Finnish War:
Man today, living in a rapidly changing world and himself rapidly
changing, lacks an image of the world which agrees with him and on the
basis of which he can act with a view to success. His conceptions of the
social life of human beings are false, inaccurate, and contradictory, his
image is what one might call impracticable, that is, with his image of the
world, the world of human beings, he cannot control the world.
Stalinism and the Soviet-Finnish War
From our reflections on Stalins own attempts to control the world around
him, it is clear that the Vozhd was dependent on far more than direct stage
management and the cues he offered his closest political allies. Stalins mastery of the
political stage went beyond a tightly controlled and well-rehearsed script, which drew
on long established and sparingly adapted tropes. Indeed, notwithstanding their shared
Marxist ideology, Stalin was the antithesis of Brechts directorial practice. He strove,
above all, for the concealment of all the makings of the play, of the mechanics of the
stage and any construction of official policy and party line. His intent stood in direct
opposition to epic theatre, seeking not to inspire change and the awakening of
human agency, but to perpetuate a fixed and authoritarian system of rule, where the
machinery operating behind the scenes was masked from audiences and actors alike.
Robinson, Estrangement and the Somatics of Literature: Tolstoy, Shklovsky, Brecht (Baltimore,
Maryland, 2008), pp. 173-175.
Brecht, Experimental Theatre, p. 10.
By focusing attention on an under exploited period of Soviet history,
incorporating a case study relating to an episode of intense domestic and international
crisis for the regime, I have managed to illuminate some of that machinery concealed
from contemporaries. This thesis has considered both the form and function of the
Stalinist system and its attempts to manipulate public opinion at home and abroad. My
intention has been to challenge popular perceptions of the Soviet Union as
maintaining an all-pervasive propaganda machinery; one that was able to effectively
manage public understanding of the world within and without its own borders, and in
accordance with the official narrative dictated up by Stalin and his inner circle.
Not only has my research revealed the limits of the propaganda machinerys
capacity to respond effectively to the rapidly changing political and military events of
the period (incorporating the official organs of the international and domestic press,
censorship bodies and central and regional party apparatus), but that the responsibility
for this lies, to a large extent, with Stalin, who strove to maintain a personal monopoly
over both the decision making process and the flow of information into the public
sphere. My findings support Davies earlier conclusion that the Stalinist propaganda
machine failed to extinguish an autonomous current of popular opinion, whilst
offering insights into the upper echelons of the leadership and their responses to
potential breakdowns of the party line that were absent from her study.
Beyond Stalin, other key actors were involved in this unfolding drama.
Zhdanov and Kuusinen are among the most prominent, for their role in developing
and perpetuating a particular language and terminology that was applied to the war. It
Davies, Public Opinion, p. 183.
was a strategy that still relied heavily on the recycling of old rhetoric. In the absence
of an alternative conception of Finnish society that might help justify the conflict, this
was to prove an outdated and wholly inaccurate portrayal. Nevertheless, it provided
an important marker for the regime in its monitoring of public and private discourse,
especially where any ambiguity surrounding the progress of events on the front line
necessitated more concrete ways of expressing ones views in an ideologically sound
and politically healthy manner. Clearly, adoption was neither uniform nor
widespread across all sections of society. Many preferred to avoid discussion
altogether as the struggle with the White Finns became the elephant in the room. This
was particularly true for those working within the party and state apparatus.
Other factors, both long and short term, played a role in undermining the
Partys ability to portray the war in a coherent manner or even navigate the shifting
events at the front with a degree of immediacy. This period must, above all, be placed
in the context of the culture of hyper-sensitivity to censorship that emerged over the
course of the 1930s. Of note, too, is how the burden of any bureaucratic clean-up that
supported the repressions of 1937-38 inevitably stretched beyond these traditional
chronological confines. Added to this were the particularly time consuming
preparations required for Stalins birthday, demanding meticulous vetting of the vast
range of material that was to emerge during the celebrations. It was not that the Party
specifically utilised these celebrations  and others like it  as a pretext for
misdirecting attention away from the war. It is more a reflection of how ill-equipped
the press and propaganda machinery was to display initiative or move outside the
well-established norms within which it functioned on a more routine basis.
Stalins personal intervention in everything from the opening diplomatic talks,
to managing the war effort and channelling foreign reports on the fighting into the
pages of Pravda was not an effective strategy for controlling the day-to-day
presentation of the war to the public. Face-to-face consultation with his subordinates
unfortunately limits our insights into the dialogue surrounding this process. It is clear,
at least, that those earlier attempts at fabricating the truth only bred hesitancy when
the facts could not be backed up with evidence and foreign condemnation of the
Soviet position was so widespread. Surprisingly, the regime felt compelled to air this
negative press, out of a wish to appear somewhat objective, perhaps, but more
importantly, as it was acutely aware of the range of opinions within Soviet society 
both healthy and unhealthy - concerning its affairs in Finland. Accordingly, the Soviet
media publicly renounced the lies and slander of the foreign press, while at the same
time playing fast and loose with the truth. Eventually, by the wars conclusion, the
regime preferred a strategy of no news, to bad, or manufactured material. This was to
allow the propaganda machinery ample time to rally itself and develop a more
coherent narrative to challenge the notions of the conflict as a defeat for the Red
Army.
In view of these shortcomings, proper consideration of the solutions available
to the regime has also brought TASS into the spotlight, as its newfound significance
placed Khavinson and his growing network of agents under the direct gaze of Stalin.
In light of the decline of the Comintern and corresponding rise of the Telegraph
Agency as both an informal intelligence network and official mouth-piece for the
regime, the latters diverse range of responsibilities needs to be better incorporated
into our understanding of the Soviet system both sides of the Finnish crisis.
Above all, a return of the Soviet-Finnish War into a more coherent narrative of
the Stalinist system, through the 1930s and into the next decade, allows an
appreciation of both aspects of continuity and change witnessed in this period.
Although more work needs to be done, this thesis has offered glimpses of the all-
pervasive nature of the NKVD and  irrespective of any winding-down of repressions
that took place in 1938  has asserted the need to consider the ongoing impact of its
coercive apparatus, on both victims and popular perceptions of the regime,
particularly in light of the Soviet medias exploitation of a carefully managed
terminology of terror. As our understanding of the Stalinist system increases, thanks
to improved access to its archives and more time to explore them, the neat
compartmentalisation of key episodes in its history become less and less suited to
current research. I strongly believe that while the Great Terror and Great Patriotic
War continue to fascinate students and specialists of the field, attention needs to
given to those gaps that have developed where formerly evidence was scarce and
our understanding underdeveloped by comparison. A proper appreciation of the social
dimensions of our period reminds us that those who lived through these epochs of
history did not always share an equally compartmentalised awareness of their impact,
or the chronological limits by which they are defined by scholars.
As one of the more prominent and contested theoretical frameworks that have
emerged over the years, the evidence presented here also offers a check on certain
assumptions about the nature of the totalitarian state. It is a conception that I believe
still holds some value based on the range, if not perhaps the effectiveness, of Stalins
reach highlighted by this study.
It has also shown what lay beyond the Kremlins
In this manner, I share the view of Robert Service that the term suitably redesigned as involving
insubordination and chaos as well as harshly imposed hierarchy is the most suitable concept to
control and uncovered instances of hesitancy and caution, concealed behind the public
bravado of the regime.
Old theories die hard; the cultural associations invoked by notions of
totalitarianism maintain a significant hold on popular understandings of the period
and the actors involved. It is the job of case studies to test the limits of these
generalisations, whilst also providing evidence to support the assumptions made.
Where evidence is lacking, where we simply dont have the pieces to complete the
picture, these concepts can help us continue the narrative thread in a plausible
direction. What they should not do, however, is influence ones interpretation of the
evidence and force that narrative thread along a particular path, via the perils of
selection bias, or the reading of events with the benefit of hindsight in an over
deterministic manner.
Naturally, all this is achieved from a privileged position. We have produced a
relatively static view of an ever-changing world. Our ability to track continuity and
contradictions is on the understanding that few contemporaries would have been able
(or perhaps willing) to comprehend much beyond a fairly narrow view. Although the
party line might not have been consistent, it didnt necessarily need to be. This was
not a one-act play, with a limited cast. It was a sprawling series of conflicting
storylines and sub-plots, covering huge swathes of territory and temporal space. One
characterize the USSR. The emphasis must remain on the aspiration for total control demonstrated by
Stalin and the regime, rather than their actual achievements, which naturally fell short of a perfect
monopoly over the thoughts and actions of Soviet citizens. Stalins willingness to micro-manage the
minutiae of TASS bulletins appearing in Pravda has offered fresh evidence of the lengths he was
willing to go to achieve absolute authority. There may still be many more such instances to emerge
from the archives. See Service, History Of Modern Russia, pp. xxix.
can present a sense of beginning, middle and end; what is harder, is understanding
how events played out with an ever-present sense of the unknown.
The actors that have appeared, both centre stage and in the wings, at various
points in our production, have shown the complexity of outlook, ideology and
engagement with the events in Finland that belie any one-dimensional
characterisation. How long these events stayed pertinent to them is impossible to
generalise but, given the turbulent years ahead, one must acknowledge that their over-
shadowing need not be credited alone to the machinations of the Kremlin. Instead, the
words of Brecht, writing in exile in Helsinki in the shadow of the crisis, evoke the fate
of this war for many, if not least, the author himself:
This is the year which people will talk about.
This is the year which people will be silent about.
B. Brecht, J. Willett, R. Manheim and E. Fried (eds.), Bertolt Brecht Poems, 1913-1956 (London,
1976), pp. 349-350.
Bibliography
Primary Sources
Archive Material
Widener Library, Harvard University
Harvard Project on the Soviet Social System (HPSSS)
Accessed on 22 April 2012 at http://hcl.harvard.edu/collections/hpsss/index.html.
Hoover Institution, California
Trotsky Material
TC 10/88 Correspondence.
Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
Dmitrii Antonovich Volkogonov Papers, Manuscript Division
Microfilmed copy deposited at Bodleian Library, University of Oxford.
Labour History Archive, Manchester
Archives of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB)
CP/IND/DUTT/15/12 Papers of Rajani Palme Dutt.
CP/IND/MONT/18/01 Papers of Ivor Montague.
http://hcl.harvard.edu/collections/hpsss/index.html
National Archives, Kew, London
The Security Service: Personal (PF Series) Files
Communists and Suspected Communists
KV2/1038 Harry Pollitt.
KV2/1575-1584 Theodore / Andrew Rothstein.
KV2/1753 William Gallagher.
KV2/1807 Rajani Palme Dutt.
Foreign Office Papers
FO371/24850
FO371/24856
Russian State Archive of Social and Political History (RGASPI), Moscow
Fond 17. Opis 165. Meeting of the Central Committee of the CPSU
Command Staff collecting experience of fighting
against Finland, 14-17 April 1940 (Stenogram).
Fond 17. Opis 125. Central Committee, Department of Agitation and
Propaganda, 1938-48.
Fond 77. Opis 3-4. Andrei Aleksandrovich Zhdanov.
Fond 82. Opis 2. Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov.
Fond 558. Opis 11. Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin.
Fond 629. Opis 1. Pyotr Nikolayevich Pospelov.
State Archive of the Russian Federation (GARF), Moscow
Fond 4459. Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union (TASS).
Fond 9425. General Directorate for the Protection of State Secrets
in the Press (Glavlit).
Central State Archive of Historico-Political Records of St. Petersburg
(TsGAIPD SPb), St. Petersburg
Fond 24. Opis 2v. Leningrad Oblast Committee.
Fond 24. Opis 10. Party Propaganda and Agitation (1935-1942).
Fond 24. Opis 12. Military Department (1938-1948).
Hansard Parliamentary Debates
Fifth Series (1939-40)
Vol. 355, 28 Nov. 1939  14 Dec. 1939.
Vol. 356, 16 Jan. 1940  1 Feb. 1940.
Vol. 357, 6 Feb. 1940  1 Mar. 1940.
Vol. 358, 4 Mar. 1940.  21 Mar. 1940.
Vol. 359, 2 Apr. 1940.  18 Apr. 1940.
Contemporary Publications
Marx Memorial Library, London
The Daily Worker (London)
Bound Editions
Oct.  Dec. 1939
Jan.  Mar. 1940
Note: These bound series of the newspaper provide copies from multiple prints each
day  As this has proved relevant to my thesis, those editions that show discrepancies
between these prints have been highlighted in the main section of my thesis.
The National Library of Russia, St Petersburg
The Daily Worker (New York)
Bound Editions
Oct.  Dec. 1939
Jan.  Mar. 1940 (Incomplete)
Leningradskaya Pravda
Bound Editions
Oct.  Dec. 1939
Jan.  Apr. 1940
Smena
Bound Editions
Oct.  Dec. 1939
Jan.  Apr. 1940
State Public Historical Library, Moscow
Komsomolskaya Pravda
Bound Editions
Sep.  Oct. 1939 (vol. ix-x)
Nov.  Dec. 1939 (vol. xi-xii)
Jan.  Mar. 1940 (vol. i-iii)
Pravda
Bound Editions
Oct.  Dec. 1939
Jan. 1940 (vol. i)
Feb. 1940 (vol. ii)
Mar. 1940 (vol. iii)
Apr. 1940 (vol. iv)
East View, Online Database
Izvestiia Digital Archive (DA-IZV)
Access to Individual Issues
Sept. 1939  Apr. 1940.
Accessed on 4 May 2011 at http://dlib.eastview.com/browse/publication/11265.
Pravda Digital Archive (DA-PRA)
Access to Individual Issues
Sept. 1939  Apr. 1940.
Accessed on 4 May 2011 at http://dlib.eastview.com/browse/publication/9305.
Hobsbawm-Williams Pamphlet
War on the USSR?
Produced by the University Socialist Club, Cambridge.
Published by the University Labour Federation,
58 Theobolds Road, W.C.1
Published Sources
Acton, E. and T. Stableford, The Soviet Union: A Documentary History, Volume I,
1917-1940 (Exeter, 2005).
http://dlib.eastview.com/browse/publication/11265
http://dlib.eastview.com/browse/publication/9305
Acton, E. and T. Stableford (eds.), The Soviet Union: A Documentary History, Vol. II
1939-1991 (Exeter, 2007).
Alexander, R., International Trotskyism, 1929-1985: A Documented Analysis of the
Movement (Durham and London, 1991).
Arch Getty, J. and O. V. Naumov, The Road to Terror: Stalin and the Self-
Destruction of the Bolsheviks, 1932-1939 (New Haven, Connecticut and London,
1999).
Arch Getty, J. and O. V. Naumov, The Road to Terror: Stalin and the Self-
Destruction of the Bolsheviks, 1932-1939, Updated and Abridged Edition (New
Haven, Connecticut and London, 2010).
Balashov, E. A. (ed.), Prinimai Nas, Suomi-krasavitsa: Osvoboditelnyi pokhod v
Finliandiiu 1939-1940 gg. (St. Petersburg, 2010).
Banac, I. (ed.), The Diary of Georgi Dimitrov, 1933-1949 (New Haven, Connecticut
and London, 2003).
Beria, S. (trans: B. Pearce), Beria, My Father: Life Inside Stalin's Kremlin (London,
2001).
Bernev, S. K. and A. Rupasov (comps.), Zimniaia Voina 1939-1940 gg. v
Dokumentakh NKVD: Po Materialam Arkhiva Upravleniia Federalnoi Sluzhby
Bezopasnosti Rossiiskoi Federatsii Po Gorodu Sankt-Peterburgu i Leningradskoi
Oblasti (St. Petersburg, 2010).
Brecht, B. (trans: C. Mueller), On the Experimental Theatre, The Tulane Drama
Review, Vol. 6, No. 1 (September 1961), pp. 2-17.
Brecht, B., J. Willett (ed.) (trans: R. Mannheim), Bertolt Brecht Letters, 1913-1956
(London, 1990).
Brecht, B., J. Willett (ed.) (trans: H. Rorrison), Bertolt Brecht: Journals (London,
1993).
Chernobaev, A. A. (ed.), Na Priyomye u Stalina: Tetradi (Zhurnali) Zapiseii Lits
Prinyatikh I.V. Stalinim, 19241953 gg. (Moscow, 2010).
Chubaryan, A. O. and H. Shukman (eds.), Stalin and the Soviet-Finnish War 1939-40
(London, 2002).
Colville, J., The Fringes of Power: Downing Street Diaries, 1939-1955 (London,
1985).
Dallin, A. and F. I. Firsov (eds.), Dimitrov and Stalin, 1934-1943: Letters from the
Soviet Archives (New Haven, Connecticut and London, 2000).
Davies, R. W., O. V. Khlevniuk, E. A. Rees (eds.), The Stalin-Kaganovich
Correspondence, 1931-36 (New Haven, Connecticut and London, 2003).
Davison, P. (ed.), George Orwell: A Life in Letters (New York, N.Y., 2013).
Degras, J. (ed.), The Communist International 1919-1943: Documents, Vol. III, 1929-
1943 (London, 2005).
Djilas, M. (trans: M. B. Petrovich), Conversations with Stalin (Harmondsworth,
1963).
Firsov, F. I., H. Klehr, J. E. Haynes, Secret Cables of the Comintern 1933-1943 (New
Haven, Connecticut and London, 2014).
Frierson, C. A. and S. S. Vilensky, Children of the Gulag (New Haven, Connecticut
and London, 2010).
Hobsbawm, E., Interesting Times: A Twentieth Century Life (London, 2002).
Khrushchev, S. (ed.), Memoirs of Nikita Khrushchev: Vol. 1. Commissar [1918-1945]
(University Park, Pennsylvania, 2005).
King, F. and G. Matthews (eds.), About Turn: The British Communist Party and the
Second World War (London, 1990).
Lih, L., O. V. Naumov, O. V. Khlevniuk (eds.), Stalins Letters to Molotov 1925-1936
(New Haven, Connecticut and London, 1995).
Khlevniuk, O. V. (trans: V. A. Staklo), The History of the Gulag: From
Collectivization to the Great Terror (New Haven, Connecticut and London, 2004).
Livshin, A. Y. and I. B. Orlov (eds.), Sovetskaya Propaganda v Gody Velikoi
Otechestvennoi Voiny: Kommunikaciia Ubezhdeniia i Mobilizacionnye Mehanizmy
(Moscow, 2007).
Mannerheim, C. (trans: E. Lewenhaupt), The Memoirs of Marshal Mannerheim
(London, 1953).
Mochulsky, F. V. and D. Kaple, Gulag Boss: A Soviet Memoir (Oxford, 2012).
Peoples Commissariat of Justice of the USSR, Report of Court Proceedings in the
Case of the Anti-Soviet Bloc of Rights and Trotskyites (Moscow, 1938).
Resis, A. (ed.), Molotov Remembers: Inside Kremlin Politics: Conversations with
Felix Chuev (Chicago, 1993).
Rzheshevskii, O. A., O. Vehvilinen and E. N. Kulkov, Zimniaia Voina, 1939-1940 (2
vols., Moscow, 1999).
Sakharov, A. N., V. S. Khristoforov and T. Vikhavainen (eds.), Zimniaia Voina:
Issledovaniia, Dokumenti, Kommentarii (Moscow, 2009).
Shvarts, E., Pozvonki Minuvshikh Dnei (Moscow, 2008).
Smith, A., I Was A Soviet Worker (London, 1937).
Tuominen, A., P. Heiskanen (ed.) (trans: L. Leino), The Bells of the Kremlin: An
Experience in Communism (Hanover, 1983).
Williams, R., Politics and Letters: Interviews with New Left Review (London, 1979).
Literary Works
Brecht, B., J. Willett, R. Manheim and E. Fried (eds.), Bertolt Brecht Poems, 1913-
1956 (London, 1976).
Brecht, B. (trans: John Willet), Life of Galileo (London, 2014).
Bulgakov, M. (trans: M. Glenny), The Heart of a Dog (London, 2009).
Davison, P. (ed.), The Complete Works of George Orwell, Vol. 9: Nineteen Eighty-
Four (London, 1987).
Grossman, V. (trans: Robert Chandler), Life and Fate (London, 2006).
Grossman, V. (trans: R. Chandler, E. Chandler and A. Aslanyan), Everything Flows
(London, 2010).
Huxley, A., Brave New World (London, 2007).
Koestler, A. (trans. D. Hardy), Darkness At Noon (London, 2005).
Machiavelli, N. (trans: George Bull), The Prince (London, 2003).
Tolstoy, L. (trans: L. Maude and A. Maude), War and Peace (Ware, 2001).
Online
Fond Aleksandra N. Yakovleva, accessed on 22 April 2012 at
http://www.alexanderyakovlev.org/fond/issues-doc/1015846.
TASS Russian News Agency, TASS History, accessed on 25 October 2014 at
http://en.itar-tass.com/history.
Russias Foreign Ministry: Threats of US Secretary of State against Russia
unacceptable, accessed on 24 March 2014 at http://en.itar-tass.com/russia/721831.
http://www.alexanderyakovlev.org/fond/issues-doc/1015846
http://en.itar-tass.com/history
http://en.itar-tass.com/russia/721831
Graphic Witness: Visual Arts and Social Commentary  World War II Soviet
Posters, accessed on 28 October 2014 at
http://www.graphicwitness.org/undone/rp01.jpg.
Radio Speech of comrade V. M. Molotov, Chairman of Council of Peoples
Commissars of USSR at November 29, 1939, accessed on 11 April 2011 at
http://heninen.net/sopimus/molotov1939_e.htm.
French Aid to Finland: Daladiers Statement, Paris, March 12, 1940, accessed on 18
April 2011 at http://www.histdoc.net/history/BRFO1940-03-12.html.
Memorandum by the Reich Foreign Minister, 11 December 1939, accessed on 12
April 2011 at http://www.histdoc.net/history/NaSo1939-12-11.html.
Molotovs Denial of Civilian Bombings, accessed on 11 April 2011 at
http://www.histdoc.net/history/bombard1939.html.
Note of Molotov to Yrj-Koskinen, 26 November 1939, accessed on 10 April 2011
at http://www.histdoc.net/history/molotov261139.html.
On the Foreign Policy of the Soviet Union, accessed on 4 March 2008 at
http://www.histdoc.net/history/molotov_31101939.html.
Radio Speech of Molotov, accessed on 4 March 2008 at
http://www.histdoc.net/history/molotov_radio_29111939.html.
http://www.graphicwitness.org/undone/rp01.jpg
http://heninen.net/sopimus/molotov1939_e.htm
http://www.histdoc.net/history/BRFO1940-03-12.html
http://www.histdoc.net/history/NaSo1939-12-11.html
http://www.histdoc.net/history/bombard1939.html
http://www.histdoc.net/history/molotov261139.html
http://www.histdoc.net/history/molotov_31101939.html
http://www.histdoc.net/history/molotov_radio_29111939.html
Repudiation by the Headquarters of the Leningrad Military District, 14
January 1940, accessed on 12 April 2011 at
http://www.histdoc.net/history/NKID1940-01-14.html.
The Winter War. Contemporary publications, press reports, comments and news,
1939-1940, accessed on 3 April 2015 at http://www.histdoc.net/history/press.html.
Stenogrammy Suda Vremeni. 26. Sovetsko-finskaya voyna, accessed on 12 April
2015 at http://www.kurginyan.ru/publ.shtml?cmd=add&cat=3&id=136.
Soviet Peace Policy  Speech Delivered on 31 October 1939, accessed on 7 April
2011 at http://www.marxists.org/archive/molotov/1940/peace.htm.
Soviet Peace Policy  Speech Delivered on 29 March 1940, accessed on 26 April
2011 at http://www.marxists.org/archive/molotov/1940/peace.htm.
History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Short Course
(1939). Online Edition, accessed on 23 January 2014 at
http://www.marx2mao.com/Other/HCPSU39NB.html.
Stalin, J. V., Report to the Eighteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U.(B.) on the Work of
the Central Committee (10 March 1939), accessed on 17 March 2015 at
http://www.marx2mao.com/Stalin/REC39.html.
http://www.histdoc.net/history/NKID1940-01-14.html
http://www.histdoc.net/history/press.html
http://www.kurginyan.ru/publ.shtml?cmd=add&cat=3&id=136
http://www.marxists.org/archive/molotov/1940/peace.htm
http://www.marxists.org/archive/molotov/1940/peace.htm
http://www.marx2mao.com/Other/HCPSU39NB.html
http://www.marx2mao.com/Stalin/REC39.html
Russian History Receives a Makeover That Starts With Ivan the Terrible, accessed
on 12 April 2015 at http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/31/world/europe/russian-
museum-seeks-a-warmer-adjective-for-ivan-the-
terrible.html?emc=edit_th_20150331&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67449098&_r=1.
The Stalin Digital Archive, accessed on 20 February 2014 at
http://www.stalindigitalarchive.com/frontend/node/1.
TIME Person of the Year, Joseph Stalin, 1939, accessed on 15 April 2011 at
http://www.time.com/time/subscriber/personoftheyear/archive/stories/1939.html.
The Casualties in the Winter War  The Question About Soviet POWs, accessed on
26 April 2011 at http://www.winterwar.com/War%27sEnd/casualti.htm#pows.
Mannerheim Line (Liniia Mannergeima) 1940, Documentary Film, Leningrad Studio
Newsreel.
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/31/world/europe/russian-museum-seeks-a-warmer-adjective-for-ivan-the-terrible.html?emc=edit_th_20150331&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67449098&_r=1
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/31/world/europe/russian-museum-seeks-a-warmer-adjective-for-ivan-the-terrible.html?emc=edit_th_20150331&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67449098&_r=1
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/31/world/europe/russian-museum-seeks-a-warmer-adjective-for-ivan-the-terrible.html?emc=edit_th_20150331&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=67449098&_r=1
http://www.stalindigitalarchive.com/frontend/node/1
http://www.time.com/time/subscriber/personoftheyear/archive/stories/1939.html
http://www.winterwar.com/War%27sEnd/casualti.htm#pows
Secondary Sources
Aleksandrov, K., Antistalinskii Protest v Period Sovietsko-Finlyandskoi Voini 1939-
1940, in K. Aleksandrov, Russkie Soldaty Vermakhta: Geroi ili Predateli (Moscow,
2005), pp. 8-60.
Applebaum, A., Gulag: A History of the Soviet Camps (London, 2003).
Arch Getty, J., Origins of the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist Party
Reconsidered, 1933-1938 (Cambridge, 1987).
Arch Getty, J., Stalinist Secrecy, paper presented at the Association for Slavic, East
European and Eurasian Studies (ASEEES) Convention, San Antonio, Texas, 21
November 2014.
Bell, P., Government Strategies on Influencing Public Opinion: Assessment,
Censorship, Propaganda, Mlanges de l'Ecole franaise de Rome, Vol. 108, No. 1
(1996), pp. 65-71.
Berkhoff, K., Motherland in Danger: Soviet Propaganda During World War II
(Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, 2012).
Boterbloem, K., The Life and Times of Andrei Zhdanov, 1896-1948 (Montral and
Ithaca, 2004).
Brandenberger, D., Propaganda State in Crisis: Stalinism in the 1930s, paper
presented to the Faculty of History at University of Oxford, 16 February 2011.
Brandenberger, D., Propaganda State in Crisis: Soviet Ideology, Indoctrination and
Terror Under Stalin, 1927-1941 (London, 2011).
Brooks, J., Official Xenophobia and Popular Cosmopolitanism in Early Soviet
Russia, The American Historical Review, Vol. 97, No. 5 (December 1992), pp. 1431-
1448.
Brooks, J., Thank You, Comrade Stalin: Soviet Public Culture From Revolution to
Cold War (Princeton, N.J., 2000).
Brown, A., The Rise and Fall of Communism (London, 2009).
Bullock, A., Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (London, 1998).
Chang, J. and J. Halliday, Mao: The Unknown Story (New York, N.Y., 2006).
Churakov, A. V., Iz ognya da v polymya..., Voyenno-istoricheskiy arkhiv, Vol. 43,
No. 7 (2003), pp. 60-99, accessed on 14 April 2015 at
http://www.proza.ru/2010/06/23/586.
Conquest, R., The Great Terror: Stalins Purge of the Thirties (London, 1968).
http://www.proza.ru/2010/06/23/586
Conquest, R., The Great Terror: A Reassessment (London, 2008).
Crampton, R. J., Eastern Europe in the Twentieth Century - and After (London and
New York, N.Y., 1997).
Dale, R., Demobilized Veterans in Late Stalinist Leningrad: Soldiers to Civilians
(London, 2015).
Davies, S., Popular Opinion in Stalin's Russia: Terror, Propaganda and Dissent,
1934-1941 (Cambridge, 1997).
Davies, S. and J. Harris (eds.), Stalin: A New History (Cambridge, 2005).
Dawkins, R., The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the Gene (Oxford, 1999).
Doerr, P., Frigid but Unprovocative: British Policy towards the USSR from the
Nazi-Soviet Pact to the Winter War, 1939, Journal of Contemporary History, Vol.
36, No. 3 (2001), pp. 423-439.
Douglas, R., The World War 1939-1945: The Cartoonists Vision (London and New
York, N.Y., 1990).
Dullin, S. (trans: R. Veasey), Men of Influence: Stalins Diplomats in Europe, 1930-
1939 (Edinburgh, 2008).
Edwards, R., White Death: Russia's War on Finland 1939-40 (London, 2006).
Ellis, F., Vasilii Grossman: The Genesis of Heresy 1937-41, The Modern Language
Review, Vol. 85, No. 3 (July 1990), pp. 653-666.
Fitzpatrick, S., Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary Times: Soviet
Russia in the 1930s (Oxford, 1999).
Fitzpatrick, S., Revisionism in Soviet History, History and Theory, Vol. 46, No. 4
(December 2007), pp. 77-91.
Gorlizki, Y. and O. V. Khlevniuk, Cold Peace: Stalin and the Soviet Ruling Circle,
1945-1953 (New York, N.Y., 2005).
Gregory, P. and V. Lazarev (eds.), The Economics of Forced Labor: The Soviet Gulag
(Stanford, California, 2003).
Gregory, P. and M. Harrison, Allocation under Dictatorship: Research in Stalins
Archives, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 43, No. 3 (September 2005), pp.
721-761.
Harris, J. (ed.), The Anatomy of Terror: Political Violence Under Stalin (Oxford,
2013).
Harrison, M., Accounting for Secrets: Evidence of  from the Archive of the
Lithuania KGB, paper presented to the Russian and Eurasian Studies Seminar at St
Anthonys College, University of Oxford, 22 October 2012.
Haslam, J., Soviet Foreign Policy, 1930-33: The Impact of the Depression (London
and Basingstoke, 1983).
Haslam, J., The Soviet Union and the Struggle for Collective Security in Europe,
1933-39 (London, 1984).
Haslam, J., Russia's Cold War: From the October Revolution to the Fall of the Wall
(London, 2011).
Hellbeck, J., Speaking Out: Languages of Affirmation and Dissent in Stalinist
Russia, in A. Kocho-Williams, The Twentieth Century Russian Reader (London,
2012), pp. 156-173.
Hobsbawm, E., The Ages of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century, 1914-1991
(London, 2013).
Holquist, P., Information is the Alpha and Omega of Our Work: Bolshevik
Surveillance in its Pan European Context, Journal of Modern History, Vol. 69, No. 3
(September 1997), pp. 415-450.
Holquist, P., Violent Russia, Deadly Marxism? Russia in the Epoch of Violence,
190521, Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History, Vol. 4, No. 3
(2003), pp. 62752.
Hosking, G., Russia and the Russians: A History (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2001).
Inkeles, A. and R. A. Bauer, The Soviet Citizen: Daily Life in a Totalitarian Society
(Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, 1959).
Johnstone, M., The CPGB, The Comintern And The War, 1939-1941: Filling In The
Blank Spots, Science & Society, Vol. 61, No. 1 (1997), pp. 27-45.
Johnston, T., Being Soviet: Identity, Rumour, and Everyday Life Under Stalin, 1939-
1953 (Oxford, 2011).
Kahneman, D., Thinking, Fast and Slow (London, 2012).
Kang-Bohr, Y., Appeals and Complaints: Popular Reactions to the Party Purges and
the Great Terror in the Voronezh Region, 1935-1939, Europe-Asia Studies, Vol. 57,
No. 1 (January 2005), pp. 135-154.
Kenez, P., The Birth of the Propaganda State: Soviet Methods of Mass Mobilization,
1917-1929 (Cambridge, 1985).
Kerr, G., Skirting the Minefield: Press Censorship, Politics and French Canada,
1940, Canadian Journal of Communication, Vol. 8, No. 2 (1982), pp. 46-64.
Khlevniuk, O. V., The Objectives of the Great Terror, 1937-1938, in J. Cooper, M.
Perrie, E. A. Rees (eds.), Soviet History 1917-53: Essays in Honour of R. W. Davies
(Basingstoke and New York, N.Y., 1995).
Khlevniuk, O. V., Master of the House: Stalin and His Inner Circle (New Haven,
Connecticut and London, 2008).
Kingston, P., Broadcasts in French from Moscow, February 1940- August 1941: An
Evaluation of the Reorientation of Radio Propaganda, Cahiers du monde russe et
sovitique, Vol. 25, No. 2-3 (1984), pp. 201-218.
Kinnunen, T. and V. Kivimki (eds.), Finland in World War II: History, Memory,
Interpretations (Leiden, 2012).
Kivimki, V., Between Defeat and Victory: Finnish Memory Culture of the Second
World War, Scandinavian Journal of History, Vol. 37, No. 4 (September 2012), pp.
482-504.
Kotkin, S., Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilisation (Berkeley and Los
Angeles, California; London, 1997).
Krivosheev, G. (ed.), Soviet Casualties and Combat Losses in the Twentieth Century
(London, 1997).
Kruglak, T., The Two Faces of TASS (Minneapolis, 1962).
Lazarev, A. B., Sovetsko-finlyandskaya voyna 1939- 1940-kh godov i zavodskiye
mnogotirazhnyye gazety Leningrada, in A. V. Gogolevskii, Obshchestvo I Vlast:
Materialy Vserossiiskoi Nauchnoi Konferentsii (St. Petersburg, 2003), pp. 306-316.
Lenoe, M., Reader Response To the Soviet Press Campaign Against the Trotskii-
Zinovev Opposition, 1926-1928, Russian History, Vol. 24, Nos. 1-2 (1997), pp. 89-
Lenoe, M., Letter-writing and the State: Reader Correspondence with Newspapers as
a Source for Early Soviet History, Cahiers du monde russe, Vol. 40, No. 1-2 (1999),
pp. 139-169.
Lenoe, M., Agitation, Propaganda, and the Stalinization of the Soviet Press, 1922-
1930 (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 1998).
Lenoe, M., NEP Newspapers and the Origins of Soviet Information Rationing,
Russian Review, Vol. 62, No. 4 (October 2003), pp. 614-636.
Lenoe, M., Closer to the Masses: Stalinist Culture, Social Revolution, and Soviet
Newspapers (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 2004).
Lenoe, M., The Kirov Murder and Soviet History (New Haven, Connecticut and
London, 2010).
Leskinen J. and A. Juutilainen (eds.), Jatkosodan pikkujttilinen (Helsinki, 2005).
Martin, T., The Affirmative Action Empire: Nations and Nationalism in the Soviet
Union, 1923-1939 (Ithaca, N.Y. and London, 2001).
McDermott, K. and J. Agnew, The Comintern: A History of International
Communism from Lenin to Stalin (London, 1996).
McDermott, K. and M. Stibbe (eds.), Stalinist Terror in Eastern Europe: Elite Purges
and Mass Repression (Manchester, 2010).
Moorhouse, R., The Devils' Alliance: Hitler's Pact with Stalin, 1939-1941 (London,
2014).
Morgan, K., Archival Report: The Archives of the British Communist Party: A
Historical Overview, Twentieth Century British History, Vol. 7, No. 3. (1996), pp.
404-442.
Morgan, K., G. Cohen, A. Flinn (eds.), Communists and British Society 1920-1991
(London, 2007).
Nordling, C. O., Stalins Insistent Endeavours at Conquering Finland, The Journal
of Slavic Military Studies, Vol. 16, No. 1. (March 2003), pp. 137-157.
Petrone, K., Life Has Become More Joyous, Comrades: Celebrations in the Time of
Stalin (Bloomington, Indiana, 2000).
Pinnow, K., Lost to the Collective: Suicide and the Promise of Soviet Socialism, 1921-
1929 (Ithaca, N.Y., 2010).
Plamper, J., Abolishing Ambiguity: Soviet Censorship Practices in the 1930s,
Russian Review, Vol. 60, No. 4. (October 2001), pp. 526-544.
Pons, S., Stalin and the Inevitable War 1936-1941 (London, 2002).
Priestland, D., Stalinism and the Politics of Mobilization: Ideas, Power, and Terror in
Inter-war Russia (Oxford, 2007).
Priestland, D., The Red Flag: Communism and the Making of the Modern World
(London, 2010).
Raiklin, B., Soviet Cinema in the Wake of the Terror: The Artistic Council at
Mosfilm, 1939-41, Studies in Russian and Soviet Cinema, Vol. 3, No. 3 (2009), pp.
267-288.
Raleigh, D. J., Experiencing Russias Civil War: Politics, Society and Revolutionary
Culture in Saratov, 1917-1922 (Princeton, N.J., 2002).
Raleigh, D. J., Doing Soviet History: The Impact of the Archival Revolution,
Russian Review, Vol. 61, No. 1 (January 2002), pp. 16-24.
Rees, E. A., Political Thought from Machiavelli to Stalin: Revolutionary
Machiavellism (Basingstoke, 2004).
Rees, E. A., Iron Lazar: A Political Biography of Lazar Kaganovich (London, 2012).
Rentola, K., The Finnish Communists and the Winter War, Journal of
Contemporary History, Vol. 33, No. 4. (October 1998), pp. 591-607.
Resis, A., The Fall of Litvinov: Harbinger of the German-Soviet Non-aggression
Pact, Europe-Asia Studies, Vol. 52, No. 1 (January 2000), pp. 33-56.
Rieber, A. J., Zhdanov in Finland (Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 1995).
Rintala, M. and J. H. Hodgson, Gustaf Mannerheim and Otto W. Kuusinen in
Russia, The Slavonic and East European Review, Vol. 56, No. 3 (July 1978), pp.
371-386.
Robinson, D., Estrangement and the Somatics of Literature: Tolstoy, Shklovsky,
Brecht (Baltimore, Maryland, 2008).
Robinson, P., The White Russian Army in Exile 1920-1941 (Oxford, 2002).
Rosenfeldt, N. E., B. Jensen and E. Kulavig (eds.), Mechanisms of Power in the Soviet
Union (Basingstoke, 2000).
Ryan, J., Lenins Terror: The Ideological Origins of Early Soviet State Violence
(London, 2012).
Ryan, J., The Sacralization of Violence: Bolshevik Justifications for Violence and
Terror during the Civil War, Slavic Review (Forthcoming).
Saarela, T., Finnish Communism, Bolshevization and Stalinization in N. Laporte, K.
Morgan, M. Worley (eds.), Bolshevism, Stalinism and the Comintern: Perspectives on
Stalinization, 1917-53 (Basingstoke, 2008), pp. 118-205.
Schlgel, K., Moscow, 1937 (Cambridge, 2012).
Sebag Montefiore, S., Stalin: The Court of the Red Tsar (London, 2004).
Service, R., Lenin: A Political Life: Volume 3: The Iron Ring (Basingstoke, 1995).
Service, R., A History Of Modern Russia: From Nicholas II to Putin (London, 2003).
Service, R., Stalin: A Biography (London, 2004).
Service, R., Comrades: Communism: A World History (London, 2007).
Service, R., Spies and Commissars: Bolshevik Russia and the West (London, 2012).
Shearer, D., Crime and Social Disorder in Stalins Russia: A Reassessment of the
Great Retreat and the Origins of Mass Repression, Cahiers du monde russe, Vol. 39,
No. 1-2, (1998), pp. 119-148.
Shearer, D., Social Disorder, Mass Repression, and the NKVD during the 1930s,
Cahiers du monde russe, Vol. 42, No. 2-3-4, (2001), pp. 505-534.
Shearer, D., Policing Stalins Socialism: Repression and Social Order in the Soviet
Union, 1924-1953 (New Haven, Connecticut and London, 2009).
Skatov, N. N. (ed.), Russkaia Literatura XX Veka: Prozaiki, Poety, Dramaturgi:
Biobibliograficheskii Slovar v 3 tomakh (3 vols., Moscow, 2005).
Snyder, T., Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin (London, 2011).
Spencer, M. L. G., Signals from Stalin The Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union in
the Midst of the Soviet-Finnish War, 1939-40', Slovo, Vol. 25, No. 1 (2013), pp. 48-
Spring, D. W., The Soviet Decision for War against Finland, 30 November 1939,
Soviet Studies, Vol. 38, No. 2. (April 1986), pp. 207-226.
Sternin, G. and J. Kirillina, Ilya Repin (New York, N.Y., 2011).
Suny, R., The Cambridge History of Russia, Vol. III: The Twentieth Century
(Cambridge, 2006).
Thompson, E. M., Nationalist Propaganda in the Soviet Russian Press, 1939-1941,
Slavic Review, Vol. 50, No. 2 (1991), pp. 385-399.
Thorpe, A., The British Communist Party and Moscow, 1920-43 (Manchester, 2000).
Thurston, R., Fear and Belief in the USSR's Great Terror: Response to Arrest,
1935-1939, Slavic Review, Vol. 45, No. 2 (1986), pp. 213-234.
Thurston, R., Social Dimensions of Stalinist Rule: Humor and Terror in the USSR,
1935-1941, Journal of Social History, Vol. 24, No. 3 (1991), pp. 541-562.
Todorova, M. (ed.), Remembering Communism: Genres of Representation (New
York, N.Y., 2010).
Tolstoy, N., Stalins Secret War (London, 1981).
Trotter, W., The Winter War: The Russo-Finnish War of 1939-40 (London, 2002).
Van Dyke, C., The Soviet Invasion of Finland, 1939-40 (London and Portland,
Oregon, 1997).
Urban, G. R. (ed.), Stalinism: Its Impact on Russia and the World (London, 1982).
Vehvilinen, O., Finland in the Second World War: Between Germany and Russia
(Basingstoke, 2002).
Velikanova, O., Popular Perceptions of Soviet Politics in the 1920s: Disenchantment
of the Dreamers (Basingstoke, 2013).
Vihavainen, T., The Soviet Decision for War against Finland, November 1939: A
Comment, Soviet Studies, Vol. 39, No. 2. (April 1987), pp. 314-317.
Volkogonov, D. (trans: H. Shukman), Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy (New York,
1991).
Watson, D., Molotov's Apprenticeship in Foreign Policy: The Triple Alliance
Negotiations in 1939, Europe-Asia Studies, Vol. 52, No. 4 (June 2000), pp. 695-722.
Watson, D., Molotov: A Biography (Basingstoke, 2005).
Weiner, A., Nature, Nurture, and Memory in a Socialist Utopia: Delineating the
Soviet Socio-Ethnic Body in the Age of Socialism, The American Historical Review,
Vol. 104, No. 4 (October 1999), pp. 1114-1155.
Weiner, A. and A. Rahi-Tamm, Getting to Know You: The Soviet Surveillance
System, 193957, Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History, Vol. 13,
No. 1 (2012), pp. 5-45.
Westerlund, L. (ed.), Sotavangit ja Internoidut: Kansallisarkiston Artikkelikirja
[Prisoners of War and Internees: A Book of Articles by the National Archives]
(Helsinki, 2008).
Unpublished
Brandenberger, D., A Background Guide to Working with the HPSSS Online,
accessed on 20 February 2014 at
http://hcl.harvard.edu/collections/hpsss/working_with_hpsss.pdf.
Edouard Daladier and the Winter War (1939-1940), accessed on 20 February 2014
at http://theogreofthetale.wordpress.com/2012/05/29/edouard-daladier-and-the-
winter-war-1939-1940/.
Spencer, M. L. G., British Communism and its Reaction to the Soviet-Finnish
Conflict of 1939-40 (University of Oxford, BA Thesis, 2008).
http://hcl.harvard.edu/collections/hpsss/working_with_hpsss.pdf
http://theogreofthetale.wordpress.com/2012/05/29/edouard-daladier-and-the-winter-war-1939-1940/
http://theogreofthetale.wordpress.com/2012/05/29/edouard-daladier-and-the-winter-war-1939-1940/
