Money in the Roman Empire from Hadrian to the Severi:  
A study of attitudes and practice 
Merav Haklai 
University College 
Oxford 
A Thesis Submitted to the University of Oxford  
for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Michaelmas Term 2013
In memoriam Zeev Rubin  
(1942-2009)
- i - 
Abstract 
The present study offers an in-depth examination of the institutional framework 
within which money operated as an economic agent in the Roman empire. Analyses focus 
on Classical Roman Law as reflected in the writings of Roman jurists from the second 
and early-third centuries CE. The legal sources are augmented by documentary materials, 
which give independent, albeit sporadic, evidence for actual practice. The thesis follows 
current trends in economic history to adopt approaches advanced by New Institutional 
Economics (NIE), while generally accepting Keynesian claims for the endogenous nature 
of money. Its innovative contribution is in suggesting a complexity-oriented approach to 
modelling the behaviour of money in the Roman empire; seeing money as a complex 
economic phenomenon, i.e. as a diverse and manifold apparatus which allows for new 
patterns of activity to be created by individuals, who self-adjust their use of it to the 
continuously evolving system in which they operate.   
The thesis is divided into four parts. The first is introductory. The second 
concerns the legal institutional framework for economic interaction; with discussions 
generally organised according to Roman legal categorisation, and considers 
developments in the role allocated to money in legal definitions for exchange transaction. 
The third part examines two study-cases of money-related institutions, namely, the 
instrument of interest, and interest-bearing deposits, demonstrating how money 
stimulated the interconnected dynamics within and between legal traditions operating 
under Roman regime. The fourth and last part is dedicated to a more general analysis of 
the complex nature of Roman money, attempting to model the historical example of 
Roman money with the help of complexity-oriented visualisations. 
- ii - 
Acknowledgements 
It was Zeev Rubin
 who guided my first steps into the Roman world, and under 
his careful supervision I found the path leading to the study of its economic history. His 
untimely death prevented him from seeing this project completed, and this thesis is 
dedicated to his memory. He is greatly missed.  
I would like to thank my supervisor Alan Bowman for his scholarly guidance and 
advice, and for unceasing support and patience, for which I am forever grateful. I would 
also like to thank those who examined this project during its earlier stages, Christopher 
Howgego, Nicholas Purcell and Tobias Reinhardt, for their helpful comments, and the 
final examiners of this thesis, William Harris and Boudewijn Sirks, for their valuable 
observations and much appreciated insights. Further thanks go to my College Advisor, 
Lisa Kallet, for her encouragement and support. I owe gratitude to Renan Baker, Rachel 
Feig-Vishnia, Jack Kroll, Avshalom Laniado, Jo Quinn, Peter Temin and Andrew 
Wilson, for conversation, help and advice, as well as to Boris Chrubasik, Mor Cohen-
Raz, Angela Davis, Ayelet Even-Ezra, Andy Eyre, Elizabeth Ferguson, Ido Israelowich, 
Avital Licht-Murava, Michal Molcho, Katia Schrle, Henning Urban and Kari 
Williamson, for their assistance in various ways, as well as for their support and 
friendship. 
This thesis has been made possible thanks to the generous financial support of the 
Clarendon Fund at the University of Oxford, financed by Oxford University Press, and 
the Overseas Research Students Awards Scheme (ORSAS), funded by the British 
Government. Without their support this project could not have been undertaken. I would 
also like to thank University College, which provided me with accommodation 
- iii - 
throughout my years in Oxford, and to the Classics Faculty and the Craven Committee, 
who supported my research. 
I am forever indebted to my parents, Ziona and Ran, for their everlasting love, 
continuous encouragement, and devoted support and assistance, especially throughout the 
difficulties and hazards of the last years, and without which this project would not have 
been completed. Special thanks go to my sisters, Yaara, Chen and Orr, and to my 
brothers-in-law, Liad and Udi, for all of their help, friendship and love. Last but not 
least, I would like to thank Nimrod, who always brings joy into my heart. 
- iv - 
Table of Contents 
Abstract         Page  i 
Acknowledgements         ii 
Table of Contents         iv 
List of Abbreviations         vi 
A Note on Editions of Primary Sources and Translations   vii 
A Note on Dates          vii 
Part I: introduction       Page 1 
Chapter 1.  Methods and Approaches      2 
1.1. Introduction        2 
1.2. Methodology       6 
1.2.1.  Ancient Economic History    6 
1.2.2. Economics      22 
1.2.3.  The Problem of the Evidence    34 
Chapter 2.  Concepts and Definitions      50 
2.1.  Definitions       50 
2.2.  Terminology and Meanings     60 
2.3.  The Properties of Money     78 
Part II: Institutional Framework      82 
Chapter 3.  Money in Exchange: An Introduction    83 
3.1.  Introduction       83 
3.2.  Money as an Institution     85 
3.3.  Approaching Exchange     89 
Chapter 4.  Emptio Venditio       96 
4.1.  Introduction        96 
4.2.  The Schools       97 
4.3.  Components of the Roman Contract of Sale    102 
4.4.  The pretium in numerata pecunia controversy  107 
4.5.  Interpretations of the Controversy     116 
4.6.  The implications of pretium in numerata pecunia   126 
Chapter 5.  Locatio Conductio       133 
5.1.  Introduction         133 
5.2.  Components of the Roman Contract of Lease and Hire 139 
- v - 
5.3.  Uti frui as merces? Exchanging res utendae fruendae  145 
5.3.1.  Gaius and Africanus      146 
5.3.2.  Ulpian        155 
5.3.3.  Paul        161 
5.4.  The nature of merces: res, pecunia, and pecunia numerate  164 
Chapter 6.  Loans         179 
6.1.  Introduction        179 
6.2.  Some Formal Practicalities      180 
6.3.  Credit Money        186 
Part III: Study-Cases         193 
Chapter 7.  The Roman Instrument of Interest     194 
7.1.  Introduction        194 
7.2.  Terminology and Vocabulary     196 
7.3.  Interest as a Fee Charged on a Loan     201 
7.4.  Practicalities of Contracting and Charging Interest   212 
7.5.  Other Usages of the Roman Instrument of Interest   218 
7.6.  Profit, Wealth, and the Complexity of Roman Interest  227 
Chapter 8.  Interest-bearing Deposits      240 
8.1.  Introduction        240 
8.2.  Moral Aspects of Deposits      242 
8.3.  Roman Law        245 
8.4.  Greek-Hellenistic Practice      254 
8.5.  Jewish Practice       260 
8.6.  Back to Roman Law       266 
Part IV: Conclusion         277 
Chapter 9.  The Complexity of Money     278 
 9.1.  Introduction       278 
 9.2. Visualisation        280 
 9.3.  Roman Money and Complexity     297 
 9.4.  Conclusions        313 
Bibliography          318 
- vi - 
List of Abbreviations  
Abbreviations of Latin texts follow P. G. W. Glare, (ed.), Oxford Lain Dictionary, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, (1982). 
Abbreviations of Greek texts follow H. G. Liddell and R. Scott, Greek Lexicon, 9
with a Revised Supplement, P. G. W. Glare and A. A. Thompson (eds.), Oxford: Oxford 
University Press (1996).  
Deviations from these are as follows: 
CJ   Codex Justinianus 
CTh  Codex Theodosianus 
Demos. Timocr. Demosthenes, Against Timocrates 
Dio  Dio Cassius 
Dio Chrys. Dio Chrysostomus 
Gai. Dig.  Gaius, Digest 
Gai. Inst.  Gaius, Institutiones 
Herm. Dig.  Hermogenian, Digest 
Plat. Rep.   Plato, Respublica 
Plin. NH  Pliny the Elder, Naturalis Historia 
Var. LL  Varro, de Lingua Latina 
Var. RR  Varro, Res Rusticae 
Xen. Anab. Xenophon, Anabasis  
Abbreviations of documentary evidence follow the Checklist of editions of Greek, Latin, 
Demotic and Coptic papyri, ostraca and tablets, fifth edition, J. F. Oates, R. S. Bagnall, 
et. al. (eds.), Oxford: The American Society of Papyrologists; available online at 
http://library.duke.edu/rubenstein/scriptorium/papyrus/texts/clist.html.  
Abbreviations of inscriptions follow The American Journal of Archaeology, and 
otherwise Der Neue Pauly (reprinted in Brills Neu Pauly). 
Abbreviations of Journals follow Lanne philologique, and otherwise The American 
Journal of Archaeology. 
http://library.duke.edu/rubenstein/scriptorium/papyrus/texts/clist.html
- vii - 
Abbreviations of dictionaries, catalogues, and encyclopaedias are as follows: 
BMCRE  Coins of the Roman Empire in the British Museum (London 1923 ). 
LSJ H. G. Liddell and R. Scott, Greek Lexicon, 9
 ed.; with a Revised 
Supplement, P. G. W. Glare and A. A. Thompson (eds.), Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, (1996). 
Lewis and Short  C. T. Lewis and C. Short, A Latin Dictionary: founded on 
Andrews' edition of Freund's Latin dictionary, Oxford: Clarendon Press; New 
York: Oxford University Press, (1984). 
OED Oxford English Dictionary, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
OLD  P. G. W. Glare, (ed.), Oxford Latin Dictionary, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, (1982). 
RPC  Roman Provincial Coinage (1992- ). Website: http://rpc.ashmus.ox.ac.uk/  
RE  Paulys Realencyclopdie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft. 
TLL   Thesaurus Linguae Latinae. editus auctoritate et consilio academiarum 
quinque Germanicarum Berolinensis, Gottingensis, Lipsiensis, Monacensis, 
Vindobonensis, Leipzig: Teubner, (1900- ). 
A Note on Editions of Primary Sources and Translations 
The text edition of Justinians Digest is that of Mommsen and Kruger. 
The text edition of Gaiuss Institutiones is that of Nelson and Manthe (1999), and 
otherwise that of De Zulueta (1953). 
Unless otherwise indicated all English translations of Gaius Institutiones follow Gordon 
and Robinsom (1988); and those of Justinians Digest follow Watson (1985). 
A Note on Dates 
Unless otherwise stated, all dates are CE. 
http://rpc.ashmus.ox.ac.uk/
- 1 - 
Part I: Introduction 
- 2 - 
Chapter 1: Methods and Approaches 
Natura enim rerum conditum est ut plura sint negotia quam vocabula. 
      Ulp. Dig. 19.5.4 (30 ad sab.)
1.1. Introduction 
When I began my investigation of Roman attitudes towards money I started with 
a rather traditional approach. Guided by a need to bring order to the vast amount of 
relevant material I turned to the helpful tool of categorisation. Categorisation seemed not 
only the proper but actually the only possible way to deal with the abundance of 
evidence, ideas, perspectives and explanations concerning the nature, characteristics and 
operation of Roman money. I tackled the subject following two lines of categorisation. 
The first studied various monetary instruments used in the Roman empire; that is, objects 
and obligations used as money. Yet, the benefits of this categorisationnamely, the 
appreciation of the role of non-coined money in the Roman economy, and the 
significance of monetary credit in the Roman worldalready have been recognised by 
scholars for some years now.
 Hence, important and helpful as this categorisation is, it 
did not offer an innovative approach to monetary practices in the Roman empire, nor to 
Roman attitudes towards money. The second line of categorisation divided discussion 
according to the types of economic activities, in which Romans used money. This turned 
Ulp. Dig. 19.5.4 (30 ad sab.): For it is implicit in the nature of reality that there are more types of 
transactions than names for them.
 Mrozek (1985); Harris (2006); (2008c); Hollander (2007). On imperial expenditure made in non-coined 
payments, see Howgego (1990) 11-15. On the role of credit money in rural Roman Egypt, see Rathbone 
(1991). 
- 3 - 
out as generally following Roman juristic categorisation into legal contracts, which 
dictates the institutional framework within which economic interaction occurs.
 These 
include straightforward exchange transactions, such as sale (emptio venditio), lease/hire 
(locatio conductio), or loan (mainly mutuum and stipulatio creating pecunia credita), as 
well as other interactions in which money carries economic significance,
 such as, 
safekeeping (depositum), gift-giving (donatio), or inheritance (hereditas). 
This manual approachlisting monetary instruments and categorising evidence 
according to economic activities based on types of legal contractsdid not prove 
satisfactory. As the body of evidence progressed I found the same money-related 
institutions being used across the spectrum of economic activity. Traditional categories
such as sale, hire, etc.often interacted with one another, and furthermore, overlapped. 
The same pecuniary devices appear in various types of transactions. For example, paying 
monetary arrai.e. earnest money given ahead as guarantee or first instalmentmay be 
found in both emptio venditio contracts and locatio conductio ones; credit is relevant not 
only for lending operations but also for Sale on Delivery transactions;
 interest rates 
(faenus/usura) are referred to and used in a much wider spectrum of activities than just 
narrowly defined loans. The same concepts and terminology were applied in describing 
the apparatus of transactions whether these were facilitated via money or conducted in 
kind (both arra and usura serve as good examples). Patterns of thought, which directed 
sophisticated credit apparatus, and which can be detected in banking operations as well as 
 North (1990); (1991).  
 As opposed to interactions in which monetary instruments carry religious significance (as in votive 
offerings, or dedications), or aesthetic one (as in jewellery, or other decorative ornaments). 
On which, see pp. 185-6.
- 4 - 
in elite finance,
 can also be traced in the agricultural management village-based 
economic environment, where credit facilitated transactions which were conceptualised 
in monetary units though often conducted in kind.
I was looking for an economic model which could accommodate all of these 
phenomena and would help to bring order to the immense corpora of legal and 
documentary evidence. For this purpose I focused on identifying basic (as well as more 
nuanced) concepts used in the texts, hoping that these would provide building blocks to 
construct a configuration of the amorphous notion of money as conceptualised by the 
Romans. Yet, new connections repeatedly sprang up, throwing my definitions back into a 
semi-chaotic state, where everything was connected to everything. Determined to find 
models, hypothetical yet not irrelevant to the historical example of Rome, which could 
point out patterns within the evidence, I turned to network and complexity theories. At 
the start I was somewhat reluctant to take this path, which seemed to be leading to 
uncertainty. I found it difficult to leave the safe waters of traditional neoclassical 
economics, with its unrealistic yet so-helpful-for-model-construction assumptions, the 
easily read graphs (usually in two or three dimensions), the reassuring totems of 
economics.
 Being somewhat sceptical toward buzz-words, and somewhat conservative 
as to the simplifying role of models,
 complexity economics was my last resort; at which 
I arrived not so much thanks to systematic study of economic theory, but rather via 
 Andreau (1987); (1999); Rathbone and Temin (2008). 
 Rathbone (1991); Kehoe (1997); (2007). 
 To use the metaphor of Leijonhufvud (1981), who wrote a spoof anthropological article about the two 
castes within the tribe of the Econ, the Micro-caste and the Macro-caste, each with its own totem, which 
look remarkably similar to each other, i.e. the supply-demand and the LM-IS curves crossing one another 
in the point of equilibrium. 
As put by Snowdon and Vane (2005) 4: Theories, by definition, are simplifications of reality. This must 
be so given the complexity of the real world. 
- 5 - 
attempts to create a visualisation based on the historical evidence.
 At the end of the 
process I do not adopt a specific economic model to explain the example of Roman 
money; rather, I rely on the complexity perspective in economics
 in order to analyse 
Roman monetary practices, and through it, hopefully, Roman attitudes towards money. 
The thesis is divided into four parts. The first is introductory: explaining the 
methodology applied, defining concepts used in modern discussions as well as in ancient 
texts, and discussing problems arising from the evidence (Chs. 1-2). The second part 
concerns the institutional framework within which Roman money operated. It considers 
the role of money in defining economic interaction, illustrating how essential it was for 
determining the nature of exchange transaction, and the status of the parties involved. It 
starts with some underlying observations concerning the institutionalisation of money and 
Roman legal classification of exchange (Ch. 3); then more detailed discussions are 
dedicated to three major formats of exchange: sale (Ch. 4), lease and hire (Ch. 5), and 
loans (Ch. 6). Part Three discusses two study-cases of money-related institutions, the 
analyses of which illuminate fundamental features in Roman attitudes towards money. 
Ch. 7 examines the instrument of interest and its multifarious applications in Roman law; 
while Ch. 8 discusses interest-bearing deposits, as reflected in evidence for three different 
legal systems operating under Roman regime, showing interconnected dynamics within 
and between legal traditions. The fourth and last part is dedicated to a more general 
analysis of the complexity-oriented nature of Roman money (Ch. 9), proposing to model 
it graphically with the help of complexity inspired visualisations. 
 Davies (2005), who offers a survey of visualisations of ancient economies. 
On which see pp. 31-4, and Ch. 9, below.
- 6 - 
1.2. Methodology 
This section has three parts. The first concerns ancient economic history. It briefly 
surveys the state of research on ancient money, and gives some clarifications concerning 
the study of ancient economic history and its relation to the social sciences. The second 
part considers economics. It begins with New Institutional Economics, continues with 
monetary theories, and ends with the complexity perspective in economics. By no means 
is it a survey of the history of economic thought. Rather, discussions concern the 
methodologies applied by different economic schools of thought, especially with regard 
to money, examining how these may, or may not, support an analysis of the historical 
example of Roman money. The third and last part of this section deals with the problem 
of the evidence, clarifying which types of evidence are used, in what way, and why. 
1.2.1. Ancient economic history  
The Romans were well familiar with the use of money. Ancient texts contain 
numerous references to money and its economic usages, and combined with the 
abundance of numismatic evidence leave no doubt that money was widely used in the 
Roman world.
 For many years the study of Roman moneyand of ancient money in 
generalfocused on numismatic evidence; with the underlying assumption that coins 
represented the main (if not the sole) monetary instrument.
 This assumption placed 
numismatic evidence at the centre of enquiry in the study of ancient money, and has 
Howgego (1992).
 Harris (2006) 1-2; (2008b) 1; Williams (2009), who admits that studies of money in the Republican 
period (including those of the present author) have been dominated by a numismatic perspective which 
has tended to stress the 'hard money' aspects of the Republican monetary system, and to ignore evidence 
for the pecuniary exploitation of other kinds of asset. 
- 7 - 
guided, even as recently as the 1990s, prominent works published on the topic.
 The last 
three decades have witnessed a growing tendency in the scholarship to depart from this 
approach. No longer is numismatics considered the sole, or even main, source for our 
knowledge on ancient money.
 Discussions are widened to include a whole spectrum of 
textual evidence, from laws and statutes,
 through personal documents and letters,
tragedy and philosophy.
 While some of these texts provide numerical economic data 
(prices, wages, taxes, interest rates, etc.),
 others give indication of less quantifiable 
economic conditions; for example, the financial advantages gained from social networks 
(such as amicitia or collegia),
 the ways in which money influenced attitudes towards 
the divine,
 or how it affected conventions concerning personal relationships within the 
public sphere.
When looking at the study of Roman money, three developments in particular 
should be stressed. First, new technologies and testing methods are allowing coin analysis 
as never before, and support the claim that Roman coins contained fiduciary features.
Second, analyses of price evidence, heavily based on papyrological material, provide 
 E.g. Duncan-Jones (1994); Howgego (1995); Wolters (1999); to which should be added also Crawford 
(1975); (1985). By contrast, Kurke (1999), who in many respects is an early bird of the attitudes later 
manifested in (some of the) studies published in the past decade. For a survey of the relevant literature 
published prior to 2000, see von Reden (2002). 
 Though there are scholars who think otherwise; e.g. Katsari (2011). 
 E.g. Duncan-Jones (1990); (1994); Mrozek (2001). 
 E.g. Rathbone (1991); Harris (2006); Hollander (2007). 
 E.g. Kurke (1999); Seaford (2004); (2008); Hollander (2007); Kay (2009). 
Though see Duncan-Jones (1997), who points to numerical distortions in literary evidence.
 Andreau (1999); Verboven (2002); Hollander (2007); Liu (2008); Stelzenberger (2008). 
 Dignas (2002); Seaford (2004), whose part two called the making of metaphysics deals, among other 
topics, also with mystery cults.  
 Kurke (1999); Schaps (2004); Seaford (1994); (2004); Eckhardt (2011).  
 Meaning that the purchasing power of coins was higher than the (intrinsic) value of their metallic 
content; Butcher and Ponting (1995); (1997); (2005a); (2005b), with further results yet to be published; 
Woytek et al. (2007a); (2007b); Ponting (2009). Also, Seaford (2004) 136-46, who argues that from their 
start ancient coins were in essence fiduciary. 
- 8 - 
proxies for long-term tendencies in the purchasing power of Roman money, and support a 
general trend of price stability, which appears inconsistent with evidence of coin 
debasement.
 Third, comprehensive studies of ancient banking operations relying on 
documentary and legal evidence enable better understanding of credit mechanisms within 
Romes monetary economy,
 and provide the evidential basis which supports the recent 
emphasis given to credit and its importance in the Roman world, as well as to the use of 
monetary instruments other than coinage, sometimes referred to as negotiable paper 
money.
The last decade has witnessed an increasing interest among historians concerning 
money in antiquity: what money was, how it functioned, and in what ways it influenced 
life and society; for which the following paragraphs offer a short survey.
David Schaps
 studied the beginning of coinage, the spread of its use, and the 
process of monetisation in ancient Greece.
 His study follows the methodological 
guidelines offered by mainstream neoclassical economics,
 and classical economic 
anthropologists.
 He bases his investigation on the assumption that money is normally a 
 Strobel (1989); Drexhage (1991); Wassink (1991); Rathbone (1996); (1997); Szaivert and Wolters 
(2005). 
 Andreau (1987); (1999); Bogeart (1968); (1994); (2000); (2001); Brge (1987); Camodeca (1992); 
(1999); (2003). 
 Andreau (2000) 785, who states that banks created additional purchasing power; Rathbone (2003) 226, 
who states that paper transactions free monetised exchange from the heavy constraint of the supply of 
coinage; Harris (2006); (2008c); Hollander (2007). On credit money in ancient Greece, see Cohen 
(1992); (2008). 
For a survey of earlier scholarship, see von Reden (2002).
Schaps (2004).
 Idem 2, who says that his intention is to trace the invention of coinage and its introduction to ancient 
Greece, to demonstrate how it differed from its predecessors, and to show how its influence proceeded 
through the society that adopted it until most areas of that society had been fundamentally altered. 
What Figueira (2006) 467, termed conventional investigation from an economic historical perspective.
E.g. Bernhard Laum, Paul Einzig, Karl Polanyi, and Paul Bohannon; Schaps (2004) 8-14, 194. 
- 9 - 
physical object whose value is widely recognised,
 adopting a preliminary definition 
of money as anything that is widely used for making payments and accounting for debts 
and credits.
 One of his central propositions, as he puts it, is that when we speak 
historically, the invention of coinage was the invention of money: that is, the concept that 
we understand as money did not exist before the seventh century BCE, when coins 
were first minted.
 According to Schaps, ancient Greeks were the first to develop all-
purpose money, i.e. money which performs the following four usages: medium of 
exchange, means of payment, unit of account, and store of wealth.
 The latter, he claims, 
is the most distinctive novelty of the Greeks abstraction of money, accomplished via the 
invention of coinage and its wide economic and social spread.
Richard Seaford investigated the impact which the introduction of coined money 
had on ancient Greek thought, as reflected in tragedy, poetry and philosophical writing;
with the conclusion that the rapid monetisation of the Greek city-states of the sixth 
century BC was an important factor in the genesis and form of the earliest philosophy 
and of tragedy.
 Unlike Schaps, Seaford emphasises the abstractness of money as an 
idea, stating at the start of his investigation that 'Money is, puzzlingly, both a thing and a 
relation. And the relationbecause it is one of power that is interpersonal and 
Schaps (2004) 4.
Schaps (2004) 3-4; after Davies (1994) 29.
Schaps (2004) 15 (emphasis is Schaps).
Idem 12-14. However, economists usually consider the former two categories as one, listing only three 
main usages of money: medium of exchange, unit of account, and store of value; Wallace (2008).
Idem 16: money was wealth; 175: the conceptual revolution that identified coins with wealth turned 
money into an item of which one could never have too much, or, indeed, enough; 196: a Greek could 
identify wealth itself with plenty of coins. For objections to Schaps prepositions, see Kroll (2005).
Seaford (2004).
 Idem 315. 
- 10 - 
unspecifictends to be mystified, to be disguised as a thing'.
 His approach is one of 
complexity and abstractness, offering a sophisticated treatment of the cultural, 
psychological, and philosophical ramifications of monetisation in archaic Greece.
While conducting an in-depth discussion on the nature of value and the consequences of 
its abstraction for ancient Greek society,
 Seaford boldly argues that a mentality 
conditioned by the usage of coins and by monetary calculations shaped major insights of 
archaic metaphysics,
 pre-Socratic philosophy,
 and tragedy.
Sitta von Reden
 studied the introduction of coinage in early Ptolemaic Egypt 
relying on New Institutionalism and approaches developed in Anthropology.
examines how coined money was institutionalised through taxation, how this influenced 
exchange, and how it altered banking operations, debt and credit relationships. 
Monetisation is seen as a comprehensive process, which involved the introduction of 
coinage as well as the development of formal (legal) and informal (social) institutions 
that regulated monetary exchange and the use of coins.
 Von Reden describes Egypts 
monetisation as mainly a top-down process arguing that money was part of the incentive 
 Idem 1. 
Figueira (2006) 467.
Blanshard (2006) 169.
Figueira (2006) 468.
Thereby reducing the importance traditionally placed on political change, arguing that it was the 
economy which was radical in Ionia, not its politics; Blanshard (2006) 169. Similarly, but with a rather 
negative tone, see Figueira (2006) 468: experts in ancient philosophy will protest against the priority 
given to economic circumstances. 
Seaford (2004) 308: Tragedy developed out of the Dionysiac mysteries, but was shaped also by 
experience of the recently monetised polis, and in particular of tyranny.
Von Reden (2007).
 In particular, Fernando Coronils Magical State (1997), who deals with twentieth-century Venezuela and 
the connection between its natural resource (petroleum) and its state-issued money; and David 
Woodruffs Money Unmade (1999), who describes how barter was employed by local authorities in 
Russia in the 1990s; von Reden (2007) 13-16. 
Von Reden (2007) 5.
- 11 - 
structure of the Ptolemaic regime.
 Nevertheless, she emphasises that monetisation drew 
on communication, negotiation and regional politics; and that the Ptolemaic economy as 
a whole can be characterised as having a binary nature: alongside economic activities 
based on coined money, there was the large cereal producing sector dominated by 
monetary media other than coinage. 
David Hollander produced a systematic summary of the monetary instruments 
used in Late Republican Rome.
 He openly employs modern economicsin particular 
the famous Quantity Theory of Money,
 and neoclassical as well as Keynesian theories 
of demand for money
while constructing discussion around four main usages of 
money:
 unit of account, store of wealth, means of payment, and media of exchange.
Following classical Roman jurists,
 Hollander advances a widening interpretation of the 
Latin word pecunia, seeing it as referring first and foremost to wealth;
 hence, as 
embracing a wide array of assets and monetary instruments, including together with 
coinage also perishable goods, livestock, bullion, and paper-based financial instruments 
(under which category he lists permutationes, syngraphae, partes, and nomina).
Hollander proposes to divide the use of money in Republican Rome according to four 
monetary zones: governmental, which largely dealt with payments and taxes made in 
coins; urban, where demand for coined money increased during the late Republic; rural, 
Monson (2009).
 Hollander (2007).  
On which, see M. Friedman (2008); and pp. 25-26, below.
Hollander (2007) 137-44.
 Idem 59-86; similar list appears in Schaps (2004) 12-14.  
 And, see n. 35 above, on the main usages of money.
Namely, Gai. Inst. 3.124; Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178 (49 ad sab.); Herm. Dig. 50.16.222 (2 iur. epit.); all 
discussed in Ch. 2, below.
Hollander (2007) 1-14.
 Idem 15-30, on coinage; 31-9, on bullion; 39-52, on paper-based financial instruments.  
- 12 - 
where coin usage was of relatively limited importance, with exchange often conducted in 
kind; and commercial, where long-distance trade encouraged the use of paper-based 
financial instruments to overcome a need to transport large quantities of coins.
William Harris
 offered an overview of the importance of non-coined money in 
the Roman empire, arguing that, alongside commodities used as money,
 it was credit 
money that had added very significantly to the Roman Empire's money supply,
 mainly 
through the use of what he calls negotiable paper money, i.e. obligations recorded in 
writing which later serve as financial instruments applied in economic transactions.
Harris openly relies on Keynesian and post-Keynesian economics,
 claiming that credit 
money enabled the Romans to extend their money supply far beyond the limits of their 
monetized metal;
 with the potential of accommodating an expansion in economic 
activity.
 As for the relation between money supply and economic growth in the Roman 
world, Harris claims that shortage of money was not to any important extent a brake on 
growth. What impeded sustained economic growth in Roman antiquity was not a 
shortage of money, but mainly the failure to adopt technologies that would have 
allowed the Romans to escape from the Malthusian impasse.
Harris also edited a collection of articles on Greek and Roman money, most of 
which were presented at a conference at Columbia University in 2005.
 There is no need 
 Hollander (2007) 87-136; Williams (2009).  
 Harris (2006); (2008c). 
Harris (2006) 17.
Idem 24.
Harris (2006) 2-3, 8-17; (2008c) 182-95.
Harris (2006) 7, 15; (2008c) 180-1.
Harris (2006) 24.
Idem 18.
Idem 24.
 Harris (2008a). 
- 13 - 
here to review each of the thirteen articles of the volume;
 suffice it to state that it offers 
a diverse and thought-provoking assemblage of current views and approaches in the study 
of Greek and Roman monetary systems. The meta-questions at the background of the 
collection concern non-coined money: to what extent was it used in the Greek and Roman 
worlds after the introduction of coinage, and whether it had a continuing and/or 
significant impact on economic activity.
 While some of the contributors stress the 
uniqueness of coined money,
 or rely more heavily on numismatic evidence;
 others 
stress the importance of non-coined money, both precious metals,
 and credit money.
In addition to these meta-questions the articles in this volume deal with a variety of 
issues (Harris lists ten
), which affect the ways in which money may be historicised: the 
relation between bullion and coined money, the spread of coinage, the cultural and 
economic institutions which supported its use, the extent to which large transactions were 
based on non-cash money and how it affected economic performance, the elasticity of 
ancient (i.e. Greek and Roman) money supply with regard to both coinage and other 
monetary assets, the relation between money supply and prices, and how to measure 
monetisation and monetary integration in different parts of the ancient Mediterranean. 
Barbara Stelzenberger published a book on Roman finance and capital 
management in the western provinces, based on her doctoral thesis submitted to the 
Freien Universitt Hamburg,
 in which she argues in favour of the sophistication of the 
For reviews, see Ireland (2009); von Reden (2009).
Harris (2008b) 2.
E.g. Schaps (2008).
Andreau (2008b); Katsari (2008).
Kroll (2008); Andreau (2008b).
Cohen (2008); Harris (2008c); van Minnen (2008); Lo Cscio (2011).
Harris (2008b) 3-10; von Reden (2009) 495.
Stelzenberger (2008).
- 14 - 
Roman monetary credit system. Her analysis focuses on social networks and how these 
enabled the creation of credit money in the Roman empire. Great emphasis is given to the 
Roman household (the familia, especially the familia urbana), and in particular to the 
role allocated to dispensatores in the administratio pecuniae of the dominus in a system 
of law which did not know direct representation. Apart from social networks within the 
Roman household, the study also stresses the importance of friendship networks 
(amicitia) in transferring money between branches of the same household. Where such 
networks were inaccessible, the intermediary role in supplying credit was taken by 
bankersin particular argentarii, and when the parties did not hold accounts with the 
same argentarius, also societas argentariorumwhich allowed creating a clearance 
mechanism in which sums of money could be transferred via an accounting system of 
written obligations (rationes and nomina) without the transfer of actual cash money (i.e. 
coinage).
More recently, Andreas M. Fleckner published a thorough and detailed study of 
ancient capital associations, subtitled a contribution to the conceptual and historical 
foundations of the corporation.
 This regrettably was not available to me while writing 
the thesis,
 but must be closely consulted if the present dissertation is to appear in 
print.
 Sitta von Reden published, as part of the Cambridge series of Key Themes in 
Ancient History, a short book dedicated to money in antiquity,
 which generally 
summarises the state of research, while emphasising mainly Greek and Hellenistic 
See review by Fleckner (2011).
Fleckner (2010).
I would like to thank my examiner, Prof. A. J. B. Sirks, for bringing this study to my attention.
For reviews, see Sirks (2012); Meissel (2013).
 Von Reden (2010). 
- 15 - 
monetary history. In the following year a number of studies, all relevant the current topic 
of research, have been published. Constantina Katsari published a book, based on her 
doctoral thesis, dedicated to Roman money in the eastern provinces, focusing on 
numismatic evidence from Greece and Asia Minor.
 However, even discounting 
problems which arise from the books presentation and interpretation of hoard finds,
economic questions which it raises often do not find satisfactory answers,
 while the 
economic theories applied in the analysis (Greshams Law, Metallism) offer no novelty.
In the same year a collection was published dedicated to the theme of quantifying 
monetary supplies in Greco-Roman times, edited by Franois de Callata, which includes 
eighteen articles based on papers presented in 2008 in Rome, in a conference hosted by 
the Academia Belgica and the Istituto Italiano di Numismatica.
 However, apart from the 
paper of Elio Lo Cascio dedicated to the role of credit in Roman money supply,
 articles 
in this volume generally concentrate on coinage and coin production. Lastly, as far as I 
am aware, Benedikt Eckhardt and Katherina Martin edited a collection of five articles, 
based on a conference which took place at the start of 2010.
 This collection advances 
approaches developed in sociology and communication science, looking at the role of 
ancient money as a mediator of normative values, and an active medium of 
communication (what the editors call Handlungsorientierung).
 However, discussions 
 Katsari (2011). 
 See review by Rowan (2011). 
 See review by Temin (2011); Metcalf (2012). 
 Much work on Roman coinage relying on Metallism and Greshams Law was published in the 1950s, 
e.g. Grant (1954); Bolin (1958).  
De Callata (2011).
Lo Cascio (2011).
 Eckhardt and Martin (2011a). 
 Eckhardt and Martin (2011b) 8. 
- 16 - 
focus heavily on numismatic evidence, analysing mainly coined money, rather than 
money as an abstract concept independent of its eventual materialisation.
Though much work has recently been published on ancient money, I believe an 
analysis of Roman attitudes towards money in imperial times is still lacking. The current 
work offers such an analysis. It studies the institutional environment of Roman monetary 
practices as reflected in legal and documentary evidence, with the help of methodologies 
offered by various economic schools of thought. Emphasis is on the general public; 
hence, governmental use of moneydespite its great influence on money supply
largely is left outside the frame of discussion. It should be made clear that the present 
study does not aim to create a database of numerical or literal values,
 but rather it offers 
an in-depth examination of the institutional conditions affecting the economic use of 
money in the Roman empire, and how these may have reflected, as well as have been 
influenced by, Roman attitudes towards money.  
The chronological constraints of the study are determined by political events, 
beginning with Hadrians accession to power in 117 CE and ending with Severus 
Alexanders murder and the end of the Severan dynasty in 235. The closing date is 
chosen mainly due to limitations imposed by the historical evidence, which become 
patchier for the period following the Severan emperors;
 however, the choice is also 
See review by Filippo (2012).
Duncan-Jones (1994), who makes substantial effort to produce a numerical quantification of Romes 
monetary economy; Andreau (1999) 125-31, who offers an overview. On quantification and the Roman 
economy, see Bowman and Wilson (2009). On quantifying monetary (namely, coin) supply in the Greek 
and Roman world, see De Callata (2011). 
Additionally, numismatic studies currently conducted are likely to shed new light on monetary conditions 
in the third century; Butcher and Ponting (1995); (1997); (2005a); (2005b); with further metallurgical 
results yet to be published; and The Roman Provincial Coinage Project (http://rpc.ashmus.ox.ac.uk/), 
which already produced a number of catalogues: Burnett, Amandry and Ripolls (1992), on the Julio-
http://rpc.ashmus.ox.ac.uk/
- 17 - 
justified by the general tendency in the scholarship of the last decades to view the 
Severan emperors as being more continuators of the Antonines than precursors of 
Diocletian.
 The starting date is not chosen due to evidential constraints, but rather for 
its importance in Roman legal history. In many respects Hadrians legislation provided 
the legal framework for Roman economic and social conditions in the century and a half 
that followed it. All in all, the period here under research covers most of the second 
century and the first three decades of the third; with the aim of contributing to the 
understanding of the Roman economy in an era of relatively continuing political stability.  
The shift of focus regarding the historical materials used in the study of ancient 
money, and the greater emphasis given to the use of monetary instruments other than 
coinage, should be attributed to a number of factors: first, the publication of huge 
numbers of papyri and inscriptions; second, the use of new technologies applied in the 
analyses of papyri, coinage, and archaeological evidence; and third, the spread of 
computerised data technologies. Yet, it is also, undoubtedly, an outcome of our Zeitgeist. 
While the monetary system with which scholars were familiarised throughout the 
nineteenth century and the first three-quarters of the twentieth century was in its essence 
a metallist one, in the sense that precious metals were seen as the commodity underlying 
the basis and value of the currency; since 1971 and the breakdown of the Bretton Woods 
system, which brought to its end the direct convertibility of the US dollar to gold (and, 
following it, also that of other national currencies), modern money users have rapidly 
Claudian period; Burnett, Amandry and Carradice (1999), on the Flavian period; Spoerri and Butcher 
(2006), on the Gordianic period.  
Carri (2005) 270.
- 18 - 
adjusted to monetary systems which openly declare their reliance on fiat money.
new official monetary state of affairs, which advocates and promotes money as being 
intrinsically fiat, affected not only modern financial procedures and operations, it also 
greatly influenced perceptions of money, both within scholarly communities and among 
the wider public. Clearly, changes in common attitudes towards money have contributed 
to the shift of focus in the work of ancient economic historians regarding money. The 
importance of credit, the acceptance of the consensual nature of money, and the 
assumption hidden in the notion of the purchasing power of moneynamely, that the 
value of money is essentially flexible, are all inherent ingredients of the post-1971 
monetary reality; and, as such, inevitably affect the conceptual framework of ancient 
historians.  
To contemporary monetary reality, and the historians enlarged evidential and 
technological tool-kit, should be added also the gradually increasing readiness of ancient 
historians consciously to accommodate within their studies theories and concepts taken 
from the social sciences; especially contributions coming from economic anthropology, 
political economics, and, more recently, what came to be known as New Institutional 
Economics (NIE).
 This readiness reflects a more profound shift in the generally 
polarised debate on ancient economic history. After decadessome would argue 
centuries
during which the field had been dominated by the primitivism-
Wallace (2008), who states that Fiat money is an intrinsically useless object that serves as a medium of 
exchange; Von Mises (1953) 62, who defines fiat money as money for which the deciding factor is the 
stamp, and it is not the material bearing the stamp that constitutes the money, but the stamp itself. 
Lo Cascio (2006);
Scheidel, Morris and Saller (2007a). On NIE, see pp. 22-5, below.
 Cohen (2001). 
- 19 - 
modernism dispute,
 discussions have now been stimulated beyond old controversies.
It is not so much that one approach had triumphed over the other; rather, lessons from 
both approaches have been integrated into a new perspective common to many of the 
scholars studying ancient economies. On the one hand, the claim advanced by Moses 
Finley and his supportersnamely, that antiquity differed from modernity not only 
quantitatively but also, more importantly, qualitatively
is by now more or less widely 
accepted.
 This has encouraged scholars to refine textual analyses,
 to include in their 
studies economic related interactions such as gift-giving,
 and to investigate economic 
conditions with terminology which gained its economic significance via social sciences 
other than economics (economic anthropology, in particular).
 On the other hand, 
significant increase in the amount and nature of evidence allows for a collection of 
economic information concerning antiquity as never before, and has put the centre of 
discussion back on economic performance.
 Thus, new studies have concentrated on 
questions of nutrition and standards of living,
 the effects of technological change on 
 The primitivism-modernism controversy can be traced back to the nineteenth century, and since the 
1970s was elaborated under the substantivism-formalism debate with argumentation taken from 
economic anthropology. For current views on this notorious debate, see Davies (1998) 228-33; Morley 
(2004) 33-50; Manning and Morris (2005) 8-18, 42-3; Bang, Ikeguchi and Ziche (2006); Bang (2009); 
Silver (2009). 
 Andreau, Briant and Descat (1997); Morley (2004); Manning and Morris (2005); Scheidel, Morris and 
Saller (2007b). 
 Morley (2004) 39-42. 
 Scheidel, Morris and Saller (2007b). 
 E.g. Seaford (2004), who introduces a refreshing perspective in interpreting old texts; Eckhardt (2011). 
 E.g. Morris (1986); Kurke (1999) 101-29.  
 From Finley (1973), and the employment of Karl Polanyis term of embedded economy; to Morris 
(1986), and the use of Marcel Mausss work on gift-giving; to Bang (2008), and the use of Clifford 
Geertzs notion of bazaar. 
 Andreau, Briant and Descat (1997); Scheidel, Morris and Saller (2007a) 1-6; Bowman and Wilson 
(2009). 
 E.g. Jongman (2007); (2009); Scheidel (2010b); (2012). 
- 20 - 
ancient productivity,
 and price behaviour.
 Comparative history, too, has been called 
in to improve our understanding of ancient economic conditions; and while the pre-
modern European experience has not been overlooked,
 scholars have globalised their 
use of comparative history to take account also of non-European historical examples,
as well as to parallel and associate various societies and civilisations categorised as 
ancient (e.g. Greek, Roman, Phoenicians, Egyptian, Mesopotamian, and Near-Eastern), 
thereby aiming at a more interacted analysis of economic conditions in antiquity.
primitivism-modernism debate, followed by the so-called substantivism-formalism 
one, have sharpened the awareness as to the historians own beliefs and perceptions 
concerning society and the economy, and the projection these have on her or his subject 
of research. It has opened a door for a more conscious use of theories in the analyses of 
economic related interactions, urging historians deliberately, yet mindfully, to employ 
models taken from economics, anthropology, and sociology.
 Consequently, the 
reluctance to rely on modern economic theories for the analysis of ancient economic 
 E.g. Wilson (2002); Schneider (2007). 
 Strobel (1989); (2002); Drexhage (1991); Rathbone (1996); (1997); Rosenfeld and Menirav (2005), on 
prices in Roman Palestine deduced from Jewish legal sources. 
 E.g. Temin (2004); (2006); Rathbone and Temin (2008), who compare the Roman evidence with that of 
eighteenth-century England. 
 Ancient Mesopotamia, in Morris and Scheidel (2008); the Mughal empire in seventeenth-century India, 
in Bang (2008); China, in Scheidel (2008); (2009); (2010a).  
 Parkins and Smith (1998); Manning and Morris (2004); Morris and Scheidel (2008). 
 To follow Morley (2004), rendering evidence for models is no longer considered as replacing 
good, sensible, fact-based analysis with hypothetic modelling.  
- 21 - 
conditions
 has largely been replaced by controversies as to which models best fit the 
evidence.
It is within the scope of this debatei.e. which models best fit the evidencethat 
the present study offers some contribution. As has been implied so far, and is further 
detailed and elaborated below, the present study follows the current trend in ancient 
economic history to adopt New Institutional Economics (NIE) as a methodological 
framework. To this approach another, somewhat less common, methodological layer is 
added; namely, that of the complexity perspective in economics. Relying on complexity 
theoriesand in particular complexity-oriented visualisationfor the analysis of ancient 
economic conditions has been promulgated by John K. Davies.
 Davies has offered a 
complexity-oriented approach for analysing the economies of classical Greek city-states, 
constructing nonlinear flow models that assist in conceptualising both internal and 
external economic dynamics for a variety of fifth- and fourth-century BCE Greek 
polities. The current study attempts to respond to Davies call for visualisations that allow 
modelling the silent characteristics of the economic behaviour of antiquity in terms of 
process and of the flow of resources and return on a single surface within topological 
space.
 By no means does it attempt the colossal task of modelling the Roman 
 Which had been attributed to both Primitivists, who were accused of ignoring or manipulating 
historical data, and Modernisers, who were accused of unconsciously using neoclassical economic 
modelling, which is unfit for describing the ancient experience, because it is based on modern capitalist 
economies; Morley (2004). 
 E.g. should neoclassical economics provide guidelines for historical analysis, as suggested for example 
by De Neeve (1985); Temin (2001); (2004); Kessler and Temin (2008)? Or, does New Institutional 
Economics (NIE) offer a better alternative, as advanced by Kehoe (1997); (2007); Lo Cascio (2006);
Scheidel, Morris and Saller (2007b)? 
Davies (1998); (2005).
Davies (2005) 155.
- 22 - 
economy. What it does is offer an attempt to apply such a methodology for 
conceptualising one crucial institution of the Roman economy: money. 
1.2.2. Economics 
It is not only discourse within the field of ancient economic history that has 
changed, economics itself has also experienced developments which has made it more 
acceptable in the eyes of ancient historians. During much of the twentieth century 
neoclassical economics, together with its descendants, Monetarism and Real Business 
Cycle Theory,
 has been the dominant mainstream economic approach,
 certainly in 
the West, and especially in the English-speaking world. From the 1980s heterodox 
approaches, which have been developing since the early twentieth century, started to 
receive wider approval among economists. Unlike Marxist economics,
 these 
approaches do not reject the capitalist principles of neoclassical economics altogether; 
rather, they call for an easing, in one way or another, of its strict assumptions, thereby 
increasing sensitivity to culturally based influences, and allowing more room for 
consideration of historical developments. Many of these approaches have been 
incorporated within what came to be known as New Institutional Economics (NIE).
Monetarismoften associated with the work of the economist Milton Friedman; e.g. Friedman (1969)
emphasises the ruling authorities role in controlling the money supply, and gained popularity with 
political circles since the 1970s. Real Business Cycle Theory (RBC) takes fluctuations in productivity to 
be an outcome of real, rather than nominal, shocks; Kydland and Prescott (1982).
 On mainstream, orthodox, and heterodox economics, see Colander, Holt and Rosser (2004b); on 
heterodox economics, see Lee (2009). 
 On Marxist economics, see Mandel (1970); Roemer (1981); Lee (2009). 
 The name introduced by Williamson (1975), and has been widely accepted; Schotter (1981); Langlois 
(1986); Furubotn and Richter (1991). And, see Lo Cascio (2006);
Scheidel, Morris and Saller (2007a); 
(2007b), who openly advocate the use of NIE in the study of economic history of antiquity.  
- 23 - 
Institutional economics has long been the subject of economic inquiry, with 
economists concentrating much on the effects of asymmetric information,
transaction costs.
 From the 1980s it gained growing acceptability, with studies 
dedicated to behavioural economics,
 the limited knowledge of economic actors 
(imperfect information, asymmetric information, and adverse selection),
 and their 
bounded rationality.
 Since the 1990s NIEs acceptability accelerated, with two of its 
prominent advocators receiving Nobel Prizes,
 and the founding of the International 
Society for New Institutional Economics in 1997.  
NIE puts institutions at the centre of economic inquiry. It takes institutions as 
consisting of both informal constraints (sanctions, taboos, customs, traditions, and codes 
of conduct), and formal rules (constitutions, laws, property rights).
 It defines 
institutions as the rules of the game, without which economic action is unthinkable.
The term institution is understood in its wider meaning, as including at least three 
senses: as the rules themselves (for example, bankruptcy laws); as the entities endowed 
with the social and political power to promulgate rules (for example, governments and 
courts); and as the socially legitimized constructions that instantiate rules and through 
which economic agents act (for example, fiat money and markets).
 According to NIE, 
 Stigler (1961); Akerlof (1970). 
 Coase (1937); (1960); Williamson (1975); (1979). 
 Kahneman and Tversky (1979); (1986); Heiner (1986). 
 Schotter (1981); Greenwald (1986), to cite only one of the dozens of articles published in the 1980s and 
1990s on adverse selection. 
 Simon (1983); Langlois (1986); Rubinstein (1998), who studies bounded rationality with the help of 
game theory. 
 Ronald Coase in 1991; Douglass North in 1993. In 2009 the economists Elinor Ostrom and Oliver E. 
Williamson, whose work is associated with NIE, shared a Nobel Prize. 
 North (1991) 97. 
Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997) 11.
 Ibid.  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oliver_E._Williamson
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oliver_E._Williamson
- 24 - 
institutions provide the incentive structure of an economy.
 Furthermore, they tend to 
reduce transaction and production costs,
 since their existence diminishes some of the 
unknowns with which agents are faced. Another feature of NIE, which makes it so 
attractive to historians, is its stress on the role of history,
 through both evolutionary 
economics and path-dependency.
There is no doubt that NIE has had great influence on the way historians analyse 
ancient economies.
 Ancient historians have long studied economic institutions, in 
particular money-related institutions (e.g. banks),
 though not necessarily with the help 
of economic terminology. In recent years, however, historians willingly apply NIE 
terminology in their studies, implementing concepts taken from (what used to be 
considered) heterodox economics, such as bounded rationality,
 and constructing 
their work in terms of an inquiry into ancient institutional economic environment.
few recent studies on ancient money, too, have put greater emphasis on its 
institutionalised nature, investigating the economic conditions created by business and 
banking establishments and their potential influence on economic growth,
 explaining 
monetary history with the help of path-dependency,
 or considering money itself as an 
 North (1991) 97. 
 Idem 98. 
 North (1990); (1991). 
 On evolutionary economics, see Nelson and Winter (1982); on path-dependency, see David (1985); 
(2001); Garrouste and Ioannides (2001); Frier and Kehoe (2007) 138-42, who show how this approach 
can be implemented in studying ancient economies. 
 Bang, Ikeguchi and Ziche (2006); Scheidel, Morris and Saller (2007b); Bang (2009). 
 Noticeable works include Andreau (1987); (1999); Bogaert (1968); (1994); (2000); (2001); Camodeca 
(1992); (1999); (2003). 
Kehoe (1997) 20.
Studying the legal and organisational settings of ancient (agrarian) environment in search for patterns of 
profit-seeking behaviour; Rathbone (1991); Kehoe (1992); (1997); (2007).
 Andreau (2006); Rathbone and Temin (2008), who compare Roman evidence with that of Early Modern 
Europe. 
Scheidel (2008).
- 25 - 
institution which affected other structures of ancient culture.
 The present study offers a 
contribution which fits within the general approach of NIE. It incorporates the influence 
of some of the specifics described above in analysing legal structures that create the 
framework within which transactions occur, especially those conducted in money. 
NIE is one of three economic methodological foundations of this study; the other 
two being: (1) monetary theory (more precisely, theories), and (2) the complexity 
perspective in economics. I start by addressing the former, as its development generally 
predates that of the latter, and in some respects offers a historical background to it.  
Economic theories disagree regarding the role allocated to money within the 
economic analysis. In classical economics, and following it also neoclassical economics, 
money is generally viewed as a commodity involved in the exchange of one good for 
another, with the outcome of envisioning economic activity in terms of barter 
exchange;
 hence, in these traditions of thought money plays only a superficial role, as 
a neutral lubricant of economic activity.
 This approach, known as the doctrine of the 
Neutrality of Money, was refined by Irving Fisher in his formulation of the Quantity 
Theory of Money.
 According to it, changes in the money supply ceteris paribus have 
only nominal implications (i.e. on the level of prices, wages, and exchange rates), with no 
effect, surely not in the long term, on real economic activity (i.e. consumption, 
 Seaford (2004); (2008); von Reden (2007). 
 Heinsohn and Steiger (2006) 490. 
 Smithin (2006) 273-4. 
Best summarised in the equation: M*V=Q*P ; with M representing the total quantity of money, V the 
velocity of its circulation, Q the total volume of goods and services transacted for money, and P the 
average level of prices; Fisher (1922). 
- 26 - 
employment, GDP, etc.).
 Classical and neoclassical economics support the neutrality 
of money in the long term.
 For the short term, neoclassical and monetarist economists 
accept the non-neutrality of money, arguing that due to uneven and incomplete 
information, economic agents, acting on the basis of rational expectations, fail to 
accurately predict future reality; therefore, changes in money supply may affect real 
variables, such as employment and production. However, these effects last only over the 
short term; in the long term, as information is revealed to all, markets should clear and 
return to their initial equilibrium, with price level modified in accordance with the 
alteration in money supply.
An alternative approach is offered by Keynesian and post-Keynesian economics, 
and by the Austrian school in economics. These schools argue that the existence of risks 
and the fact that choices are always made under conditions of uncertainty prevent money 
from ever being neutral. Economists belonging to the Keynesian tradition of thought 
recognize that a monetary economy operates quite differently from a non-monetary 
system, so that, in the short as well as the long run, money is never neutral,
 in the 
sense that it affects real economic activity. According to Keynesian and post-Keynesian 
economics, money plays an active role in determining real variables since price rigidities 
(known as sticky prices), and market imperfections, prevent monetary shocks from 
resulting in an even price adjustment, i.e. a price adjustment which is uniform throughout 
the different markets that comprise an economy; henceforth, part of a monetary shock is 
 Patinkin (2008); M. Friedman (2008). 
Giraldo Palomino (2005) 88-9. 
RBC theory follows classical economics in considering money has no real effect also in the short term; 
Giraldo Palomino (2005) 81-4, 87-8; Snowdon and Vane (2005) 235-41. For support of the neoclassical 
monetarist view, especially when compared with that of the Austrian school, see Humphrey (1984).
 Davidson (2006) 141, when interpreting Keynes (1936). 
- 27 - 
absorbed by real GDP.
Austrian economics, with its emphasis on disequilibrium-analysis of the economy 
at the disaggregated (or micro) level, holds money to be a dynamic agent, which affects 
relative prices and the time structure of production. Economists affiliated with the 
Austrian school claim that the use of the term price level is misleading, for there are 
never any constant ratios among economic magnitudes. A monetary shock does not alter 
all prices, certainly not simultaneously, and those prices which do alter do not change to 
the same degree. When all price consequences of a monetary shock are consummated, a 
transfer of wealth between social groups occurs, resulting in a new dispersion of wealth 
and income within an economic system. In this new social order the desires of 
individualshence, also their revealed preferencesare satisfied to different relative 
degrees than formerly. Therefore, the new state of prices cannot simply be a multiple of 
previous prices. That is, changes in the purchasing power of money are not proportional 
to changes in the relation between the supply of and the demand for money; hence, 
money is not neutral.
Numismatists and ancient historians studying Roman money generally tend to 
accept the orthodox neoclassical economic approach, which has dominated monetary 
discussions in the English-speaking world throughout most of the twentieth century. As a 
result, the idea of moneys neutralitybest summarised in Fishers equation of the 
Quantity Theory of Moneyhas often been referred to, treated as a guiding principle, 
Giraldo Palomino (2005); Snowdon and Vane (2005) 366, 549-51.
Von Mises (1953); Giraldo Palomino (2005) 88-90; Garrison (2005); Ravier (2011).
- 28 - 
or set at the background of discussion of Roman money.
 Even where ancient historians 
do not rely on the doctrine of moneys neutrality, they never (as far as I am aware) reject 
its validity altogether; rather, they prefer stressing other aspects of the evidence as a more 
plausible course of explanation.
The difference of opinion regarding the neutrality or non-neutrality of money has 
to do with views regarding how money comes into existence. The underlying assumption 
of classical economics is that money is exogenous to the economy; i.e. money is 
something formed externally to economic dynamics, imposed on a system from outside. 
Where commodity money is concerned this is achieved through the natural restraints of 
an economy, in the form of fixed or slowly varying resources of metals, shells, etc.. 
Where commodity money is an outcome of agriculture productivity (e.g. oxen or other 
livestock, wheat, tea, coffee beans, etc.), its stock is constrained by exogenous factors 
which diminish or enhance fertility. Alternatively, the exogeneity of money could be 
achieved via the actions of the ruling authorities accountable for the creation of money 
(i.e. minting authorities, central banks, etc.). Orthodox neoclassical economics generally 
holds monetary mechanisms of the ruling authorities responsible for the control over the 
E.g. Bolin (1958) 12-14, 36; Howgego (1992) 12-16, who refers to the velocity of money; (1995) 122-5; 
(2009) 289, who states that For the Roman economy the Fisher equation is certainly a good tool to think 
with, but it is very uncertain what numbers should be plugged into it; Hollander (2007); von Reden 
(2010) 139-40; Katsari (2011).
E.g. instead of viewing the so-called third-century inflation as a decline in the purchasing power of 
Roman money due to coin debasement and the increase in the money supply which it allowed, scholars 
have offered explanations which downplay the role of the Quantity Theory of Money and stress that of 
Aurelians monetary reform (274/5), seeing the latter as a turning point in the monetary history of the 
Roman empire; e.g. Rathbone (1996); (1997); Harris (2006) 22-3, who, when talking about the sharp 
acceleration in prices in the 270s, says that A conventional Fisher explanation would link the event to an 
abrupt increase in the money supply. But the two phenomena seem so vastly disproportionate - in fact we 
do not know that money supply in the Roman Empire increased at all in the period directly prior to the 
rise in prices; Carri (2007); Haklai-Rotenberg (2011).
- 29 - 
money supply. 
A different approach is advocated by adherents of the Keynesian and Austrian 
traditions of economic thought, who perceive money as an endogenous variable of the 
economy; that is, as arising from the working of the economic system itself. In Austrian 
tradition endogenous money theories date back to late nineteenth century,
 and were 
elaborated especially by Ludwig von Mises in his Theory of Money and Credit, first 
published in 1912.
 According to Mises, money is part of a self-adjusting, self-
correcting system of dual sanctions: profit and loss. It is a product of the free markets 
ability to establish, through voluntary transactions of individuals, a market-clearing 
mechanism in the form of prices, operating apart from any governmental agency.
 Thus, 
in Austrian economics money is both market-generated and market-regulated.  
Also Keynesian and post-Keynesian economics give endogenous money an 
important role,
 arguing that under certain conditionsnamely, of the banking sector
money can be created by agents operating within the economy. Money supply is viewed 
as determined, at least partly if not entirely, by the demand for credit and the liquidity 
preferences of economic actors (firms and individuals alike). Banking operations 
influence the supply of money in accord with the demand for it in the non-banking sector, 
as manifested in aggregate preferences regarding loans and deposits.
 In recent decades 
 Wicksell (1898); Schumpeter (1911).  
 Von Mises (1953). 
Von Mises (1953); North (2012) 118-140.
Moore (1988); (2006); Wray (1990); Rochon (2003); Fontana (2004); Dow (2006); Lavoie (2006); Gnos 
and Rochon (2008).
 According to Keynesian liquidity preference theory, money supply is endogenous in the sense that it is 
credit-demand-driven; Bibow (2006) 331-2. Post-Keynesian economists also regard money supply as 
demand-determined and credit-driven; Fontana (2004); Lavoie (2006); and so does the circuitist approach 
in economics (both French and its Italian descendant); Rochon (2003); Cavalieri (2004); Gnos (2006); 
Realfonzo (2006). 
- 30 - 
the notion of moneys endogeneity receives growing recognition also within mainstream 
neoclassical economics;
economists widely (although not universally) accept the 
notion that the money supply is not under full control of the monetary authorities and that 
it is, at least in part, endogenous to real (private sector) economic processes.
In the scholarship on ancient economic history the exogenous nature of Roman 
money has been unquestioned for decades. Since coinage was perceived as the main 
monetary instrument, and its creation in the Roman world was largely under the 
supervision of the ruling authorities, scholars tended to consider monetary shocks as 
exogenous to economic activity: imperial authorities expanded coinhence, money
supply thanks to conquests, which increased Romes precious metal resources;
provided easy credit so as to facilitate shortage in cash supply and maintain public 
order;
 and they extended coin production via debasement in order to answer the needs 
of imperial expenditure.
 In recent years, with endogenous money becoming an inherent 
part of mainstream economic discussions, and with the rise of the post-Keynesian 
approach, ancient historians, too, have begun to take more account of the endogeneity of 
Roman money. Thus, scholars include endogenous money in their analyses, stressing the 
Goodhart (1984); McCallum (1986); Giraldo Palomino (2005); Snowdon and Vane (2005) 298. 
Dow (2006) 35. For neoclassical vs. post-Keynesian economics, see Howells (2006).
E.g. the effects of Trajans conquest of Dacia and its gold mines; Bolin (1958) 47-50, 97-8, 180-95; 
Burnett (1987) 48-50; Harl (1996) 94; Howgego (1990) 4-5; (1995) 119; Woytek et al. (2007a); (2007b). 
More generally on the role of imperial authorities in influencing money supply, see Howgego (1992).
E.g. Tiberius actions during the 33 EC credit crisis; Tac. Ann. 6.16-17; Dio 58.21; Suet. Tib. 48; Frank 
(1940) 32-9; Sutherland (1987) 62-3; Wolters (1987); Andreau (1999) 104-7; Tchernia (2003); Gaia 
(2009), non vidi.
E.g. Trajans coin debasement, which is dated to 100 CE in Woytek et al. (2007a) 151-3; (2007b); 
thereby establishing it as part of his preparations towards the first campaign against the Dacians (101-102 
CE) rather thanas suggested in Walker (1978) 122an outcome of the Dacian wars. Another example 
is the coin debasement under the Severans; Crawford (1975) 561-3; Howgego (1990) 7-11; (1992); 
(1995) 117-9; Carri (2007); Haklai-Rotenberg (2011) 6, with further bibliography. Yet, as stressd in 
Howgego (1990) 15-25, by no means should we view imperial expenditure as the sole reason for striking 
coinage.
- 31 - 
importance of credit and the significance of the banking sector in transforming deposits 
into credit money, and in so doing contributing to the Roman money supply.
The third economic methodology foundation of this study is the complexity 
perspective in economics. Complexity economics relies on chaos, network, and 
complexity theories developed in the natural and physical sciences; theories which by 
now have become an integral part of the contemporary intellectual landscape,
extending their influence also to the social sciences.
Complexity theories understand 
the world as composed of many systems rather than one, which operate side by side in 
different levels of structures.
 Complex systems are defined as self-organising systems, 
in which new patterns of activity are created by the entities operating within the 
system.
 They are dynamic, self-adjusting systems, which endure and evolve over time, 
hence tend to be structured in a sustained non-equilibrium pattern of evolution.
economics, complexity is a relatively new approach that began to emerge in the 1980s 
and to a greater extent during the 1990s,
 promoted especially by the Santa Fe Institute 
(SFI).
 It incorporates heterodox economic approaches,
 e.g. evolutionary 
Mrozek (1985); Harris (2006); (2008c); Hollander (2007); Cohen (2008); Rathbone and Temin (2008); 
Kay (2009).
Weaver (1948), who offers a good starting point.
 Wible (2000) 15-9; Prasch (2000); Montgomery (2000). 
 Nicolis and Prigogine (1989) 2-6. 
 Nicolis and Prigogine (1989) 25-7; Wible (2000) 17-8. 
 Wible (2000) 18-9. 
 On features of complexity advocated by Austrian economics, see below. 
 http://www.santafe.edu. Anderson, Arrow and Pines (1988); Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997); Wible 
(2000).  
What Colander, Holt and Rosser (2004a), label The changing face of Economics.
http://www.santafe.edu/
- 32 - 
economics,
 path dependency,
 and dynamic economics,
 within a broader 
complexity perspective.
The complexity perspective in economics challenges some of the cornerstones of 
mainstream neoclassical economics. It rejects the latters dependency on equilibrium 
analysis, replacing it with multi-equilibrium or disequilibrium analyses.
 It casts off the 
linear structure of mainstream economic model building, stressing the essential non-
linearity of economic phenomena,
 and applying adaptive and dynamic nonlinear 
mathematics in economic model building.
 Rather than attributing the decision-making 
mechanism to rational expectations, complexity economics emphasises the induction 
process of expectations formation, arguing that agents keep adjusting their expectations 
to an ever evolving economic environment, and stressing the network based process by 
which agents acquire information and make choices.
 Instead of considering an 
aggregate outcome to be a multiplication of the average agent, whose behaviour is 
perceived as representative of all other agents, complexity economics views an aggregate 
outcome as more than the sum of the factors which comprise it; that is, aggregate 
performance involves a behavioural change, which is an outcome of the significant 
interactions occurring between economic agents.
Lindgren (1997); Metcalfe and Foster (2007).
 North (1997); Prasch (2000) 220-2. 
Brock (1997); Kirman (1997).
Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997b). 
Arthur (1990); Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997b) 4-6.
Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997b) 2-5.
Day (1992) 14; Montgomery (2000); Shapiro (2000); Velupialli (2011).
Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997a); Lane (1997); Prasch (2000).
Day (1992); Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997b) 5-11; Krugman (1997) 241-3.
- 33 - 
Features of complexity have been advocated in economics prior to the 1980s 
within the Austrian tradition of economic thought,
 and especially by the Austrian 
economist and philosopher Friedrich von Hayek.
 Hayek held the formation of a market 
economy to be an outcome of spontaneous order, a self-organising, constantly evolving 
process in which structures are formed by the combination of self-interested individuals, 
each pursuing her or his own wants, without intentionally trying to achieve order.
Consequently, exchange, production, and distribution are incorporated within an 
economic system in ways which no individual mind could ever plan.
 Thus, 
institutionswhether these refer to The Market, Law, Culture, or Languageare the 
result of human actions, but not the execution of human design.
Hayeks views did not achieve wide acceptance among mainstream economics of 
his time, but nowadays, and with the rise of complexity economics, they have become an 
integral part of economic discussion.
 However, there are distinctions between Austrian 
economics and the new complexity approach in economics.
 Unlike the Austrian 
school, which supports a verbal, non-mathematical approach to economic analysis, most 
of the economists advocating complexity economics do not reject mathematics as a 
Vaughn (1999); Koppl (2009), who even attributes a proto-complexity approach to the founding father 
of the Austrian economic school, Carl Menger, seeing him as a predecessor of the spontaneous order 
idea; Rosser (2010). Coming from outside the social sciences, Weaver (1948) 539, offered to view 
economic phenomena as organised complexity: On what does the price of wheat depend? This too is a 
problem of organized complexity. A very substantial number of relevant variables is involved here, and 
they are all interrelated in a complicated, but nevertheless not in helter-skelter, fashion.
 Hayek (1948); (1960); (1967). On Hayeks complexity ideas, see Chaumont-Chancelier (1999); Vaughn 
(1999); Wible (2000) 19-23; Caldwell (2004) 323-82; Gaus (2006). 
Vaughn (1999); Montgomery (2000) 228-9; Rosser (2010).
Hayek (1967); Wible (2000) 19-23; Montgomery (2000); Rosser (2010).
Adam Ferguson (1767) The History of Economic Thought, quoted in Hayek (1960) 57.
E.g. Krugman (1996). 
Contra Koppl (2009). On Austrian vs. Complexity economics, see Montgomery (2000); Rosser (2010).
- 34 - 
methodological tool;
 far from it. Rather, they point out difficulties arising from the 
linear mathematics traditionally applied in mainstream neoclassical economics,
instead habitually apply dynamic nonlinear mathematics as a method of modelling.
The current historical study is not one which aims to produce numerical 
databases. Hence, in analysing the historical evidence it does not apply mathematics, be it 
traditional, dynamic, or nonlinear. Thus, one of the chief barriers, which separate the new 
complexity approach in economics as promulgated by the Santa Fe Institute, and the 
Austrian complexity-oriented approach as advocated by Hayek, is removed. What the 
present study attempts at its culmination, is to apply complexity-oriented visualisation as 
a method of analysis. Such an approach had been advocated in the context of ancient 
economic history by John K. Davies, who applied it in analysing the economy of ancient 
Greek polities.
 The present study follows Davies. It relies on modern database-driven 
complexity visualisations as inspiration to portray a qualitative analysis of Roman 
money; using complex schemata to depict the interrelations and multi-linkages which 
arise from the evidence.
1.2.3. The Problem of the Evidence 
Last to be addressed is the issue of the historical evidence used in this research. 
As a general rule, numismatics offers material evidence for both the physical and the 
Montgomery (2000).
 Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997b) 3. 
 Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997b) 3-4; Prasch (2000) 216. There is another prominent distinction: while 
economists affiliated with the new complexity perspective tend to advocate market-intervention policies, 
Austrian economics usually strongly rejects government intervention.  
Davies (1998); (2005).
See Ch. 9, below.
- 35 - 
conceptual structure of Roman money, i.e. the numerical division of money, expressed in 
denominations. Hence, it provides the framework for any discussion on Roman money. 
The current study, however, is not a numismatic one; albeit numismatic evidence is 
present at its background. Rather, the study is conducted mainly on the basis of legal 
evidence, with documentary, and to a lesser extent literary, evidence acting as auxiliary 
pillars, in the sense that they offer test-cases to check trends in actual practice, and the 
reliability of the regulations preserved in legal sources.
A range of difficulties arise when using Roman legal sources as evidence for real 
behaviour, be it economic or other. To begin with, there was more than one system of law 
in force in the Roman empire, and in some regions of the empire Roman law was not 
even the dominant legal system by which transactions were contracted. Roman law itself 
considered several different legal statuses: apart from Roman citizenship, there were also 
the Italian allies (ius Italicum), a status which could be granted also to communities 
outside of Italy, people with Latin rights (ius Latii), and the general category of the 
provinces, which included, alongside various types of privileged legal statuses (that 
could grant immunity from certain taxes), also provincial communities more gravely 
subordinated to Roman imperial rule (sometimes called socii, provinciales, or 
peregrini).
Despite similarities in local administration of Roman and non-Roman 
communities,
 when it came to jurisdiction Roman citizens had to comply with the ius 
As put by Bagnall (1995) 65: the papyri provide the means to test hypotheses developed on the basis of 
the codes and to examine the abstractions of imperial legislation to see how far they operated in reality.
Sherwin-White (1973) 291-379; Lavan (2013) 25-72.
For a comparison between western and eastern local constitutions and civic organisation, see Lintott 
(1993) 129-53; Eck (2000) 278-81; Galsterer (2000); Carri (2005). For criticism on the tendency to 
- 36 - 
civile, i.e. those laws which come in the form of statutes, plebiscites, senatus consulta, 
imperial decrees, or authoritative juristic statements;
 while peregrini, i.e. people of 
neither Roman nor Latin status,
 were generally left to their own laws.
 Thus, 
affiliation to a legal system was normally a question of personal status, rather than one of 
locality;
 though when it came to jurisprudence procedures in the provinces, it was not 
infrequent for Roman imperial administrators (the chief one being the governor himself) 
to have sat as high-judges in provincial courts. 
The relationship between Roman and indigenous law has been the subject of 
much scholarly research. Since Ludwig Mitteis monumental Reichsrecht und Volksrecht 
(1891), which emphasised the importance of local non-Roman law, the general tendency 
in the scholarship has been to view the empires legal pluralism in terms of the degree to 
which Roman law managed to supersede local law.
 Following this line of reasoning the 
traditional Romanist approach regarding the constitutio AntoninianaCaracallas 
imperial decree of 212 CE which granted Roman citizenship to all free inhabitants of the 
empire
has been to view it as a triumph. That is, the constitutio is seen as evidence 
for Romes success in subordinating indigenous laws to its own; thereby making the 
observe law in the Roman empire (as well as legal status and identity) in binary terms, citizens vs. non-
citizens, i.e. peregrini, see Lavan (2013) 27-32.
Papin. Dig. 1.1.7.pr. (2 defin.): Ius autem civile est, quod ex legibus, plebis scitis, senatus consultis, 
decretis principum, auctoritate prudentium venit. On the ius civile, see Berger (1953) 527; Fiori (1998-
1999), who reconsiders the relation between ius civile, ius gentium, and ius honorarium.
On peregrini, see Berger (1953) 626-7; Lavan (2013) 32-5. On late-Republican and imperial Latin 
terminology in referring to non-Roman-citizens, namely peregrini, socii, and provinciales, and the 
relation between these terms, see Lavan (2013) 25-72.
Galsterer (2000) 349; Lavan (2013) 31.
Sherwin-White (1973) 291-331; Montevecchi (1988) 194; but, see Lavan (2013) 28, who remarks on the 
ius Italicum.
Carri (2005) 274; Tuori (2007), who offers a condensed overview.
P.Giss.Lit. 6.1 (=P.Giss. 40 col. I); Dio 78.9; Ulp. Dig. 1.5.17 (22 ad ed.). On the constitutio 
Antoniniana see, Sasse (1958); Sherwin-White (1973) 380-394; Hartmut (1976); Mlze-Modrzejewski 
(1990) X; Grant (1996) 30-1; Carri (2005) esp. 271-5; Tuori (2007).
- 37 - 
division between ius civile and ius gentium (the law of nations) insignificant, since all 
free inhabitants became subject to Roman civil law.
In the last decades such an image of the relation between local and Roman laws 
undergones a change.
 Rather than phrasing the discussion in terms of a battle of 
laws,
 scholars prefer to view it in terms of creative tension between differing systems 
of law.
 According to this approach Rome recognised local traditions and displayed 
initial tolerance towards indigenous legal systems as well as continuity in the 
administration of law,
 while nevertheless demonstrating readiness to advance legal 
uniformity.
 Even though civitates peregrinae, in the East as well as in the West, 
largely had maintained local lawand although peregrine legal systems were not, as a 
principle, overridden by Roman jurisdictionnevertheless local laws were put under 
Roman influence.
 With the introduction of the constitutio Antoniniana and the 
extension of Roman citizenship a compulsory adaptation of local laws to Roman 
juridical principles was entailed.
 However, by no means was it an immediate clear-cut 
transfer. Legal syncretism was a slow and continuous process, which started way before 
Caracallas constitutio and continued well after it.
 In some regions of the empire local 
Kaser (1975) 53: So verliert der Gegensatz zwischen ius civile und ius gentium seine praktische 
Bedeutung, seitdem die const. Antoniniana alle freien Reichsuntertanen zu rmischen Brgern gemacht 
und damit auch dem ius civile unterworfen hat.
Tuori (2007) 39.
Idem 42-5.
Lintott (1993) 160; also, Galsterer (1986).
Galsterer (1986); Cotton (2007) 236-7. 
Lintott (1993) 158-60.
Lintott (1993) 129-60, esp. 150, 154-7; Carri (2005) 274. 
Carri (2005) 274. However, with regard to the constitutios implications on municipal statuses, see 
idem 272, who remarks that public opinion would therefore not have regarded the Edict of Caracalla as a 
revolutionary measure.
Generally, local legal practice continued so long as it did not contradict Roman law; Carri (2005) 274.
- 38 - 
legal practice prevailed for several decades after 212;
 while in others the process of 
legal syncretism appears not to have been significantly affected by Caracallas grant of 
citizenship.
Legal assimilation was a combination of a top-down process, derived from 
Roman aspirations for centralisation and uniformity;
 as well as a bottom-up one, 
motivated by local desire to imitate and implement Roman norms.
 As a top-down 
process the diffusion of Roman law was in many respects a direct outcome of Roman 
rule:
 Roman governors were entrusted with keeping peace and administrating justice, 
and in doing so relied on Roman jurisdiction and Roman legal principles.
 One notion 
which facilitated the spread of Roman lawat least from the Roman end of the 
relationshipwas the ius gentium. In its procedural aspect the ius gentium enable 
establishing a mechanism by which commercial relations with non-Romans could have 
had legal enforceability through actions (i.e. the jurisdictional activity of the praetor 
E.g. P.Dura 26 (Sachare, near Dura-Europos, 227) [=FIRA III 138], which includes a stipulatio within a 
deed of sale in an otherwise Greek contract; Lintott (1993) 156-60. Also, see the comments of 
Menander of Laodicea, writing in the second-half of the third century CE, on the relation between local 
and Roman law; Mlze-Modrzejewski (1990) XII, with the Greek text, its French translation, and a 
detailed discussion of the relation between local and Roman law in third-century Hellenised cities; Carri 
(2005) 274-5.
As put by Carri (2005) 274, juridical papyrology indicates that, after 212, the Roman power preserved 
for local laws the same place that they occupied previously within provincial law. in Egypt, in the 
drafting of juridical acts, we see appearing after the constitutio Antoniniana a formula of stipulatio 
which confers a value in Roman law upon a contract drawn up in accordance with local customs. The 
extension of citizenship did not, therefore, ipso facto entail generalized application of Roman private law 
in the provinces, nor did it debase Roman law by provincializing it. Also, see Galsterer (1987); Lintott 
(1993) 156-8, who refers to the Romano-Syrian Law Book of the fifth century.
Tuori (2007), with further references.  
Lintott (1993) 154-60; Cotton (2007) esp. 244-5; Meyer (2007), for difference between Arabia and 
Judaea in the provincial preferences regarding legal procedures and corpora.
Carri (2005) 274, who states that it was the Roman conquest itself, which ended the juridical 
independence of the Hellenic cities and subjected what remained of their legislative activity to approval 
by the provincial governors; Kehoe (2012).
Galsterer (2000); Carri (2005); Kehoe (2012) 189-91, on the role of Roman imperial administration in 
imposing a more uniform system of law across the empire (p. 190).
- 39 - 
peregrinus).
 In addition, the ius gentium represented a more general concept, in the 
sense of emphasising sociologically similar institutions, i.e. those aspects of law which 
were perceived as universal and observed by all peoples.
 Such were religious duties 
toward God, or the duty to be obedient to ones parents and fatherland,
 or the right to 
repel violent injuries,
 or the tripartition of personal status into free, slave, and 
freedman.
 Commerce, too, and in particular buying and selling and letting and hiring, 
derived its enforcement according to Roman jurists from ius gentium (except for certain 
contractual elements established through ius civile);
 hence could be perceived as 
universally valid. This last point is of special relevance to the present study. Not only that 
commercial peregrine law can be compared with that of Roman civil law, but also the 
former in fact may be analysed and interpreted with the latter in mind.  
Looking at Roman legal pluralism from the other end of the centre-periphery/ 
universalism-particularism dichotomy, our evidence is mainly documentary.
 Whether 
preserved on papyri, tabulae, or inscriptions,
 documentary evidence records 
Berger (1953) 528-9; Fiori (1998-1999), who argues that ius gentium and iudicia bonae fidei have been 
part of ius civile from the very beginning.  
Ulp. Dig. 1.1.4 (1 inst.); Gai. Inst. 1.1 (=Dig. 1.1.9). On ius gentium as a measure to ease, or even to 
erase, tensions between local and Roman law, see Cotton (2007) 235-6.
Pompon. Dig. 1.1.2 (enchir.): Veluti erga deum religio: ut parentibus et patriae pareamus.
Flor. Dig. 1.1.3 (1 inst.): Ut vim atque iniuriam propulsemus.
Ulp. Dig. 1.1.4 (1 inst.); but, see Gai. Inst. 1.86, for difference between ius gentium and ius civile 
regarding the status of a child born to a free woman from a slave father.
Herm. Dig. 1.1.5 (1 iur. epit.): Ex hoc iure gentium introducta bella, discretae gentes, regna condita, 
dominia distincta, agris termini positi, aedificia collocata, commercium, emptiones venditiones, 
locationes conductiones, obligationes institutae: exceptis quibusdam quae iure civili introductae sunt.
 There are also non-Roman legal corpora, e.g. the Jewish one, dealt with, to some extent, in Chs. 3 and 8, 
below.
For general notes on using documentary papyri in writing history, see Bagnall (1995). On tabulae in the 
Roman world, see Meyer (2004). As to inscriptions, much has been written on what can and cannot be 
inferred from its preservation, to use the words of Woolf (1990) 199: We have no way of knowing the 
proportions of all Roman inscriptions ever set up that have survived, and it probably varied considerably 
from area to area, but a figure of 5% gives an order of magnitude. Also, see MacMullen (1982); Duncan-
Jones (1982) appendix 13.
- 40 - 
transactions of private individuals, whose affairs have come down to us as a matter of 
chance, preserved by way of accident. As such it allows a peek into actual legal 
practice, both Roman and peregrine. It often exhibits a mixture of legal systems in use; 
indicating that provincials and Romans operated within a jigsaw of legal corpora, 
choosing their course of action in accordance with the legal path that would best serve 
their interests.
 Thus, for example, a tablet from the Murecine archive of the Sulpicii, a 
family of bankers from Puteoli near Pompeii, records a sea-freight contract which 
involves both Roman stipulationes and a Greek written contract called syngraphe 
().
 Perhaps one of the most celebrated examples for such mixed use of legal 
corpora is the Babatha archive,
 a group of papyri found in the so-called Cave of 
Letters near the Dead Sea, containing, among many other papyri, the legal documents of 
a Jewish lady named Babatha, who lived in the Roman province of Arabia and had fled to 
the region near Ein-Gedi in Judaea at the time of the Bar-Kochba revolt.
 The Babatha 
archiveas well as other archives from the same period and region
displays a 
mixture of legal systems and languages;
 it shows the same individuals to have used a 
variety of juridical procedures taken from Jewish, Roman and Hellenised Greek law,
moving between and within legal systems in pursuit of their wants, and choosing between 
Or, alternatively, suit their cultural inclinations; Cotton (2007); Meyer (2007), with further references.
TPSulp. 78 (Puteoli, 38) (=TPN 13); Camodeca (1999) 177f., with further references; Jakab (2000); 
Hollander (2007) 44-7, who gives some general notes on syngraphae. 
Meyer (2007) 53-4, who comments on using the label archive.
For the Greek documents, see Lewis (1989); for the Hebrew and Aramaic documents, see Cotton (2002). 
Literature on the Babatha archive is vast; here I refer only to relatively recent publications, which offer 
detailed bibliographies; Katzoff and Schaps (2005); Meyer (2007); Oudshoorn (2007).
Such as the archive of Babathas neighbour, Salome Komase daughter of Levi, and that of Shelomzion, 
Babathas step-daughter; Cotton (1995); Satlow (2005); Oudshoorn (2007); Meyer (2007) 54-6.
Cotton (1999).
The legal documents differ in various aspects, from the type of legal-instances approached, to the 
physical form of the documents, to their legal format, to technical formalities such as fashion of dating; 
Meyer (2007), who offers detailed discussion. 
- 41 - 
laws and jurisdictions in accordance with their estimations as to which legal path would 
best suit their particular needs.
Albeit a considerable portion of economic interaction was conducted in 
accordance with endogenous laws, the present study focuses on Roman law with the 
following primary justifications. Roman law was the legal system of the conquering elite. 
As such, not only was its enforcement empire-wide, and not only was it the legal system 
under which many members of the empires elite groups conducted their affairs, 
provincials, too, could and did appeal to Roman jurisdiction whenever it was possible and 
they thought it more advantageous.
 Furthermore, although local courts and 
administrators were given right of jurisdiction in private disputes, this was often 
restricted to cases which did not exceed certain amounts, above which (as well as in cases 
of capital punishment) jurisdiction was directed to Roman authorities.
 Lastly, since 
much of the Roman empires wealth was concentrated in the hands of elite Roman 
citizensfirst and foremost the emperor and his extended household (freedmen 
included), and the senatorial and equestrian ordersRoman legal sources enlighten us on 
the principles which directed the manner in which much of the empires wealth was 
administered. This last statement deserves further elaboration. 
Lintott (1993) 156-8; Cotton (2007); Meyer (2007); Oudshoorn (2007). 
Galsterer (1986); (2000); Carri (2005); Cotton (2007); Meyer (2007); Tuori (2007).
E.g. the Lex de Gallia Cisalpina (49-42 BCE), which indicates that cases with damages worth up to a 
certain fixed sum10,000 sestertii in a fragment from Ateste (FIRA I 20), 15,000 in a fragment from 
Veleia near Piacenza (FIRA I 19)were brought before local courts, while above that sum cases were 
directed to Roman jurisdiction; Bruna (1972); Laffi (1986); Lintott (1993) 135-7; Crawford 
(1996) no. 28, pp. 461-77. Or, the Lex Irnitana (91 CE)an inscription containing the laws of a small 
municipium in Baetica in the Iberian peninsula named IrniChs. 84 and 89, which limit the cases subject 
to the iuris dictio of local administrators up to 1,000 sestertii; Gonzlez (1986); Galsterer (2000) 351; 
Lavan (2013) 31. 
- 42 - 
While population and technology govern the limits within which economies 
develop;
 law and legal institutions determine the form within which economic activity 
is organised.
 Legal institutions shape and preserve the distribution of wealth in a 
society, and as such affect the manner in which economic resources are exploited. Legal 
sources perhaps do not always accurately reflect actual historical economic conditions, 
yet lawbeing a system of wealth preservation that enables the maintenance of social 
privilegesoffers a fertile ground for a historical inquiry into the principles that guide 
legislators and legal practitioners in seeking how to uphold or influence social order.
To use the carefully phrased words of Dennis Kehoe, Roman jurists frequently made 
assumptions about the economic interests of the groups affected by their rulings, and 
these assumptions, based on the jurists understanding of the economic world around 
them, offer a broad and reliable framework in which to analyse the individual pieces of 
evidence.
 Questions of property, its ownership, use and misuse, and compensation for 
its loss, are often the subject of Roman juristic examination. Consequently, one finds 
Roman jurists regularly mentioning money and referring, directly and indirectly, to 
monetary issues and money-related questions. 
In analysing legal evidence the current study follows the guidelines formulated by 
Dennis Kehoe in his Investment, Profit, and Tenancy (1997). These are as follows. Since 
a substantial portion of the Roman empires wealth was concentrated in the hands of elite 
groups; since Roman jurists were affiliated with these groups, and were very much 
Scheidel (2007), on demography; Schneider (2007), on technology.
Frier and Kehoe (2007) 113.
On the importance of law in preserving income-bearing wealth to maintain social class and privileges, 
see Kehoe (1997).
Kehoe (1997) 3.
- 43 - 
concerned with the interests of the well-to-do members of society;
 and since the rules 
which jurists formulated and the verdicts which they gave influenced not only the 
wealthiesthence, the manner in which much of the empires wealth was administered
but also any owner of property, be it movables or immovables, bound under Roman law; 
therefore, the assumptions made by Roman legal authorities concerning the economic 
reality around them, not only set the basis for the formulation of rules and verdicts, but 
also directed the institutionalised framework within which actual economic practice took 
place.
 The legal authorities suppositions concerning their contemporaneous economic 
reality consist of traditional as well as more educated Roman ideas about economic 
activities;
 and, as such, conceal conventional Roman attitudes towards economic 
themes and concepts, one of which is the indisputably important institution of money.  
Up till now, the description above is in accord with that of Dennis Kehoe. 
Kehoes analysis focuses on tutorship and legacy laws, with the stated assumption that 
these represent two areas of the law where we could expect the jurists to have displayed 
a concern for contemporary social and economic practices,
 since via these areas of 
law upper-class Romans aimed to maintain financial security and social status not only 
for themselves but for future generations.
 While the emphasis on tutorship and legacy 
laws is certainly justified in the case of an inquiry into the investment patterns of Roman 
landowners; when considering monetary practices the matter is somewhat more elusive. 
Frier (1980) 48-55; De Neeve (1984) 26.
During the second and early-third century CE Roman jurists came to play an increasing role within the 
empires administration, holding public office while continuing to practise law. More often than not 
jurists worked individually; yet, although each jurist promoted his own legal interpretations, the outcome 
of their collective efforts directed Roman law towards coherency; Jolowicz and Nicholas (1972) 6, 374-8, 
406-8; Ibbetson (2005) 184-6, 191-8; Robinson (1997). 
On the economic thinking of Roman jurists, see Nicolet (1988), with references to earlier bibliography. 
Kehoe (1997) 12.
Idem 14.
- 44 - 
Money is relevant to a wide range of economic activities; many of which are every-day, 
often transitory, transactions, and do not necessarily concern the preservation of wealth 
over time or inter generations (which is precisely the role of legacy and tutorship laws). 
Therefore, concentrating on legacy or tutorship would emphasise the use of money in 
enduring activities, aimed at a cautious safeguarding against potential future malpractice, 
while neglecting its role in facilitating more ordinary transactions, be these transitory or 
long-termed, occasional or recurring. Thus, when it comes to an inquiry of a fundamental 
economic institution such as money, it is better not to focus on one theme or category of 
law alone. Because money is applied in a variety of transactions, because it is such an 
essential institution for society, in searching for Roman attitudes towards money, one 
ought to look for the presuppositions made by Roman legal authorities regarding the 
economic reality around them it. That is, their preliminary hypotheses, the concepts 
which they seem to have taken for granted, the ideas assumed at the basis of their more 
juristically compounded designs of contractual relation.  
Roman legal evidencewhether used for writing economic, legal, social, or other 
historiespresents to the historian a set of more specific difficulties. This is particularly 
true for two of the richest, most detailed legal sources preserved: the Codex Justinianus 
(529 CE), a collection of imperial rescripts;
 and Justinians Digest (533 CE), a 
selection from the vast, and now mainly lost, literature of classical Roman jurists.
purpose of the sixth-century compilers of these two monumental legal corpora was not to 
Earlier collections of imperial rescripts include the late third- or early fourth-century Codex 
Hermogenianus, the fourth-century Codex Gregorianus, and the Codex Theodosianus (439 CE). On 
imperial rescripts, see Honor (1994).
Long (1875); Kaser (1972). 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codex_Gregorianus
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Codex_Theodosianus
- 45 - 
preserve classical Roman law; rather, they were commissioned with the task of selecting 
and extracting from classical legal literature those materials which could best serve as a 
basis for their contemporary legislation.
 They were quite clearly not interested in the 
disputes of three centuries earlier but in establishing a firm rule for their own time.
Thus, it might have been that specific classical legal interpretation they chose to cite was 
not the most acceptable interpretation of its time, rather one which had received 
authoritative status by the sixth century. Additionally, in both Justinians Digest and 
Codex, excerpts are preserved detached from their original, now lost, context, with the 
possible result of altering their original meaning. The transposition and relocation of 
classical texts into a new and often widening context, surely in some cases, had given it a 
novel and generalising meaning, not necessarily intended by classical jurists.
Furthermore, the compilers were deliberately required to eliminate contradictions;
hence, should be expected to have often reduced, perhaps even omitted, classical 
discussions of legal controversies. 
Another much debated difficulty is the extent to which Justinians compilers were 
loyal to the original wording of the classical texts.
 Changes in wording of classical 
texts could be attributed to unintentional modifications, on the part of Justinians 
compilers or earlier jurists.
 Errors of copy could be due to misreading, hurry in writing, 
writing from memory, or simply a lack of textual criticism and repeated checking 
Kehoe (1997) 9; Levy (1951) 12-14, who describes Justinians codification in terms of restoration and 
revival of the classical system; but, see Thomson (1970) 183-4.
 Johnston (1989) 157. 
 Johnston (1989) 152-7. 
Dig. Const. Deo auctore, esp. 7-10.
 Long (1875) 859-60; Johnston (1989). 
 Wieacker (1974); Johnston (1989) 155, 159, 161. 
- 46 - 
techniques so often applied by modern writers.
 Alternatively, changes could be an 
outcome of an intentional editorial interpolation. For example, abridgements of original 
texts, which sometimes result in lacunae, misinterpretation, or misunderstanding (by 
either post-classical jurists, modern readers, or both);
 or, slight adjustment in the 
classical texts so as to fit them to a later reality.
 Adjusting texts to contemporary legal 
reality was a common, acceptable, even desirable, practice on the part of Justinians 
compilers, who were specifically instructed to do so.
The phenomenon of textual interpolation has received overwhelming attention in 
Romanistic literature, with studious debates on the extent to which Justinians compilers 
had substantially altered the classical excerpts.
 In recent decades the long enduring 
Romanistic hypothesis, according to which excerpts in the Digest have been so 
thoroughly interpolated that opinions of classical jurists can be recovered only after 
exhaustive reconstruction of the texts,
 has been replaced with the view that, even 
though interpolation was common, it did not utterly distort the original texts of classical 
legal authorities.
 The possibility that the compilers remained loyal to original wording 
should not be rejected without cause.
 In the present study, although the possibility of 
 Thomson (1970); for inconsistencies in wording due to the use of several manuscripts, see idem 181-2. 
 Arangio-Ruiz (1956) 146f.; Klami (1987) 51. 
 E.g. monetary units of account: since by Justinians time denominations used in the first three centuries 
CE were no long a legal tenure, their names were often replaced by aureus/-ei, or, more frequently, 
simply omitted all together. Interpolations tend to be more frequent in texts which fall under the 
religious, social, or economic fields; Kaser (1972) 88-90.  
 Justinians instructions were to remove as far as possible any multiplications, contradictions, or 
inconsistencies; and to rewrite that which was non bene positum, or superfluum vel minus perfectum, or 
non recte scriptum; see, Dig. Const. Deo auctore, esp. 7-10.  
Wieacker (1960); (1974); Watson (1994).
Kehoe (1997) 9.
 Buckland (1941); Kaser (1971) 7-10; Kaser (1972) 98, 104-8; Wieacker (1974); (1988) 154-82; De 
Neeve (1984) 27-9; Martin (1989) 13; Watson (1994); Kehoe (1997) 9.  
 Johnston (1989) 156-7, who gives examples of occasions where Justinians compilers followed original 
wording (though not avoiding omissions). 
- 47 - 
interpolation of particular texts is not denied, still, the underlying assumption is that 
interpolation, when it occurred, did not always necessarily alter the spirit of the 
classical texts. That is, interpolation did not distort classical texts so severely as to 
prevent an extraction of the preliminary assumptions of classical legal authorities.
On top of problems which stem from the use of collections composed centuries 
after the original texts were formulated, there are difficulties which arise from the nature 
ascribed to the writings of the classical Roman jurists themselves. Namely, the degree to 
which these reflect actual historical conditions, and the extent to which the examples 
brought forth by classical jurists represent actual real cases. As to the genuineness of the 
examples cited by Roman jurists, the present study takes on a rather permissive approach. 
Roman classical legal texts are characterised by their primarily casuistic nature, i.e. by 
extensive discussions of specific cases.
 It is not impossible that some of these may 
have been hypothetical, used to elaborate an argument or advance a juridical discourse; 
thus, having little to do with real everyday transactions.
 Nonetheless, in composing 
rescripts and answering petitions and inquiries, it is not unreasonable to assume that 
Roman jurists had often had a specific case in mind, which had generated their concern 
on the issue to begin with.
 Even though jurists usually aimed to formulate their 
response as generally as possible,
 their interest in actual individual cases was not 
Kehoe (1997) 9-10.
Kaser (1971) 32-9; (1972); De Neeve (1984) 27.
 Though some examples perhaps were not real responses to real problems, the mere fact of their 
appearance suggests that such cases were considered possible; Johnston (1999) 22-6; Aubert (2002) 184-
5; Peachin (2002) 3-4. 
Martin (1989) 13; Kehoe (1997) 10-13, who also remarks on the jurists tendency towards abstraction in 
formulating their responses.
Kehoe (1997) 11.
- 48 - 
completely eliminated in favour of generalisations and abstract legal principles.
 It was 
often later, post-classical jurists who, by taking classical texts which deal with specific 
case and relocating it in a new context, had stressed, perhaps even invented, a general 
principle that appears to be inferred from it.
As to the first question, regarding the degree to which classical legal texts reflect 
actual historical conditions, opinions tend to divide between those who observe the work 
of Roman jurists as conducted within a rigid, inward-looking, legal tradition, that was 
only little influenced by changes in actual social and economic conditions;
 and those 
who hold Roman jurists to have been consciously concerned with the actual interests and 
affairs of their contemporaries.
 Yet, even scholars who think that legal sources echo, 
albeit incompletely, real economic conditions, usually accept the claim that classical legal 
authorities often based their rulings on an abstract, simplified account of reality; however, 
this simplified reality, they argue, was not detached from the practical world around 
them.
 Within the debate on the relation between law and society in the Roman world, 
the current study follows the second approach, as was cautiouslyand convincingly, in 
my viewadvocated by David Johnston in his 2007 publication on the authority of the 
paterfamilias.
 In this article Johnston chose to stress those themes in which Roman 
jurists reveal a departure, even though a careful one, from legal principles, in order to 
 But, see Zimmermann (1996) 340, who claims that the jurists approach to the individual cases brought 
before them was guided by pragmatic differentiation and careful analysis of typical conflicts of interest 
rather than by conceptual rigidity. they themselves were quite uninterested in abstract categorisation, 
which, according to Zimmermann, was a later development in order to prevent the modern lawyer 
from drowning in the flood of Roman case law. 
 Daube (1953) 190-1, who argues that original statements could have been abbreviated not simply with 
a view of saving space, but with a view to producing a general principal.  
E.g. Watson (1995); (2007).
E.g. Crook (1967); Frier (1980); (1989-90).
Crook (1967) 7; De Neeve (1984) 25; Martin (1989) 11-17; Kehoe (1997) 11-3.
Johnston (2007).
- 49 - 
serve the interests of their contemporaries according to present-day economic conditions. 
It is these departures, i.e. the flexibility displayed by Roman jurists in contrast to the 
rigidness of law, which the present study aims to trace. While the jurists inclination 
towards simplification helps to extract their underlying assumptions about money and the 
way in which it was thought to have operated in an economic context; their careful 
deviations from legal principlesi.e. their easing of formalities and moderation of 
doctrines, where it took placemay suggest fluctuations in actual monetary practices, 
hence also in common attitudes towards money. Thus, by favouring a Law and Society 
approach, i.e. by contextualising legal sources with reference to Roman society, 
historians may substantiate larger claims about issues such as labour and commerce.
Du Plessis (2012a) 5.
- 50 - 
Chapter 2: Concepts and Definitions 
Pecuniae verbum non solum numeratam pecuniam complectitur, verum 
omnem omnino pecuniam, hoc est omnia corpora: nam corpora quoque 
pecuniae appellatione contineri nemo est qui ambiget. 
Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178.pr. (49 ad sab.)
2.1. Definitions 
Much ink has been spilt trying to establish a definition for money; what money is, 
what it does, and which qualities characterise it. In western tradition, for more than two 
millennia, money has been associated with coinage and precious metals; the latter 
perceived as underlying the basis and value of the currency. Yet, both anthropology and 
modern economic practice clearly demonstrate that coinage is only one, very specific, 
form for representing money.
 Different societies use various articles as money, and even 
within the same society often various monetary instruments are in use.
 Money can take 
the form of consumable goods, such as corn, tea, coffee, or livestock; long-lasting 
artefacts, such as metals, gems, or shells; or records of obligation, such as marked 
pebbles, or bills of credit. The variety of choice regarding the things which can be, and 
indeed have been, used as money often defies generalizations about the intrinsic 
Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178.pr. (49 ad sab.): The designation money does not only include coinage but 
absolutely every kind of money, that is, every substance; for there is no one who doubts that substances 
are also included in the designation of money.
 Malinowski (1922); Mauss (1925); Einzig (1949); Polanyi (1944); (1957); (1966); Bohannan (1955); 
(1959); to name only a few of the cornerstones of economic anthropology. Contra the general assumption 
of Schaps (2004). 
 Weber (1927). 
- 51 - 
properties of moneys.
This variety of choice derives from the fact that although money is often 
represented by physical objects, money itself is an abstract concept, as it is, above all, a 
social convention. As put by the Nobel laureate economist, James Tobin: Somehow the 
members of a society agree on what will be acceptable tender in making payments and 
settling debts among themselves. General agreement to the convention, not the particular 
media agreed upon, is the source of money's immense value to the society. In this respect 
money is similar to language [and] standard time.
 Social convention plays a role of both 
cause and effect: it is that which makes a society's money generally acceptable within it, 
and the practice of general acceptability reinforces the convention.
Recent decades have seen growing agreement across disciplines (economics, 
sociology, anthropology, and history) to view money as a social convention. Approaches 
which can be reconciled with this contract theory of money can be traced back to 
seventeenth-century Enlightenment,
 and, in fact, as early as the ancient Greeks.
 Already 
in Pseudo-Platos Eryxias money is recognised as a social convention, pointing out that 
no form of money is valid everywhere, and that articles used as money in one society 
may be rendered useless in another.
 Plato describes  (money, currency, or 
coinage) as being first and foremost a symbol;
 and Aristotle presents  as 
etymologically derived from  (law, convention), stating that it is in our power 
 Tobin (2008). 
 Tobin (2008). Similar statements are made in von Mises (1953) 61-2. 
 Tobin (2008). Seaford (2004) 134-5, who expresses a similar view. 
 Lagerspetz (1984), who offers a brief survey; Hart (2007), who may also be helpful.  
 Seaford (2004) 142-4. 
Ps. Plat. Erx. 399e-400c. And, see Eichholz (1935).
Plat. Rep. 371b. 
- 52 - 
to change it and make it useless.
 This approach is echoed also in Roman tradition. 
Cicero says that inheritance is money (pecunia), for there are many kinds of money 
(multa enim genera pecunia).
 Pliny the Elder describes an evolution from archaic 
exchange to that of his own days: in the former cattle provided the unit of account with 
which to reckon value, exchange goods, and pay fines; in the latter it is coinage and 
precious metals which are used as money.
 In an excerpt from Pauls Ad Edictum, the 
celebrated third-century jurist makes the point that in creating money a material needs to 
be selected (electa materia est);
 thereby postulating some process of social acceptance 
of the selection.  
Since what is universal and important [about money] is that something is chosen, 
not what is chosen, how exactly do members of a society agree on what will be 
acceptable tender
? Opinions tend to diverge between those who see money as an 
outcome of directed centralised effort, and those who perceive it as the outcome of 
spontaneous order, arising unintentionally out of the mutual interests of the members of 
a society.
 In the scholarship on ancient money historians and numismatists lately tend to 
attribute the Greek invention of coinageand specifically its fast diffusion in the Greek 
worldto the centralised authority of the state;
 with the term state understood in 
Arist. EN 1133ab; Scott (1994); Seaford (2004) 8.
 Cic. Top. 29; translation is that of Reinhardt (2003). 
Plin. NH 33.6-7.
 Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.pr. (33 ad ed.), who emphasises the role of the state in this process. 
 Tobin (2008).  
Hart (1986), who puts forward an analysis of moneys (i.e. coinage) two sides, heads and tails: the former 
symbolises the creation of value as a top-down process, the latter as a bottom-up one, i.e. as marking 
value by the market. For Game-Theory analyses of money as the outcome of spontaneous order, see 
Schotter (1981); Lagerspetz (1984).   
 Howgego (1995) 3-4, 14-8, with references to earlier scholarship; Schaps (2004) 93-110, esp. 108: it 
was Greece that was searching for new forms of government and administration to manage the new 
complexity of the poleis and new ways of organisation to maintain its people, and coins made that 
- 53 - 
the broader sense of a polity, as the ruling authorities endowed with the power to create 
laws and enforce tax collection. However, ancient Greek texts preserve also other views. 
Demosthenes, for example, although he has Solon associating  with  via the 
authority of the ,
 attributed to Solon the saying that money ( ) 
had been invented by private persons for private transactions,
 ascribing the emergence 
of coinage to a non-centralised process of exchange; an approach which has found 
supporters also among modern scholars.
In the scholarship on Roman monetary history, from the days of the great Theodor 
Mommsen up to recent decades, most scholars have been guided by a view which holds 
central authorities as responsible for the creation of money.
 As far as the creation of 
coined money is concerned, and the units of account it represents, this view is 
undoubtedly correct. It was acknowledged already by the Severan jurist Paul,
depicted the polity (res publica) as having both the power to strike value-signs on metal, 
andwhat is of greater importancethe legitimacy to enforce this value. As to the 
motivation of the Roman authorities in striking coins, this topic is somewhat beyond the 
scope of the present study. Suffice it to echo Christopher Howgego, who, in his 1990 
administration and organisation simpler and more manageable; Seaford (2004) 131-6, esp. 135: coinage 
was almost always issued by a state. 
 Demos. Timocr. 213:        .  
 Demos. Timocr. 213:            
    
 E.g. Figueira (1984), who advocates the Greek invention of coinage as one which was created generally 
in order to facilitate exchange; Cohen (2008), who discusses the non-centralised manner in which credit 
money had been introduced into, and created by, Athenian economic activity; Davies (1998) 235-6, who 
offers a short overview of scholarly debate; Seaford (2004) 134-5, who, although stating that coinage 
was almost always issued by a state, nevertheless stresses the self-generating dynamic unleashed by 
coinage, according to which because something reaches a degree of acceptability as payment it 
becomes more and more generally acceptable; contra Schaps (2004) 97, who argues that it is not, on the 
face of it, likely that coins were designed merely to facilitate retail trade.
Mommsen (1860) vii; Howgego (1992); Duncan-Jones (1994); Wolters (1999).
Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.pr. (33 ad ed.).
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=no%2Fmisma&la=greek&can=no%2Fmisma0&prior=h(goi=to
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=no%2Fmous&la=greek&can=no%2Fmous0&prior=de/
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=po%2Flews&la=greek&can=po%2Flews0&prior=th=s
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=a%29rgu%2Frion&la=greek&can=a%29rgu%2Frion0&prior=h(gei=tai
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=no%2Fmism%27&la=greek&can=no%2Fmism%270&prior=me/n
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=tou%5Cs&la=greek&can=tou%5Cs1&prior=eu(rhme/non
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=de%5C&la=greek&can=de%5C0&prior=tou/s
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=no%2Fmous&la=greek&can=no%2Fmous0&prior=de/
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=h%28goi%3Dto&la=greek&can=h%28goi%3Dto0&prior=no/mous
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=no%2Fmisma&la=greek&can=no%2Fmisma0&prior=h(goi=to
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=th%3Ds&la=greek&can=th%3Ds0&prior=no/misma
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=po%2Flews&la=greek&can=po%2Flews0&prior=th=s
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=ei%29%3Dnai&la=greek&can=ei%29%3Dnai1&prior=po/lews
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=ei%29pei%3Dn&la=greek&can=ei%29pei%3Dn0&prior=dikasta/s
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=o%28%2Fti&la=greek&can=o%28%2Fti0&prior=ei)pei=n
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=au%29to%5Cs&la=greek&can=au%29to%5Cs0&prior=o(/ti
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=h%28gei%3Dtai&la=greek&can=h%28gei%3Dtai0&prior=au)to/s
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=a%29rgu%2Frion&la=greek&can=a%29rgu%2Frion0&prior=h(gei=tai
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=me%5Cn&la=greek&can=me%5Cn0&prior=a)rgu/rion
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=no%2Fmism%27&la=greek&can=no%2Fmism%270&prior=me/n
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=ei%29%3Dnai&la=greek&can=ei%29%3Dnai0&prior=no/mism'
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=tw%3Dn&la=greek&can=tw%3Dn0&prior=ei)=nai
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=i%29di%2Fwn&la=greek&can=i%29di%2Fwn0&prior=tw=n
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=sunallagma%2Ftwn&la=greek&can=sunallagma%2Ftwn0&prior=i)di/wn
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=ei%28%2Fneka&la=greek&can=ei%28%2Fneka0&prior=sunallagma/twn
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=toi%3Ds&la=greek&can=toi%3Ds0&prior=ei(/neka
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=i%29diw%2Ftais&la=greek&can=i%29diw%2Ftais0&prior=toi=s
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=eu%28rhme%2Fnon&la=greek&can=eu%28rhme%2Fnon0&prior=i)diw/tais
- 54 - 
article Why did ancient states strike coins?, lists alongside state expenditure, 
affirmation of status, personal and collective pride, and quest for prestige, also the ruling 
authorities aspiration to meet the publics need for coinage, thereby perhaps also to 
facilitate private trade.
Many of the definitions of money tend to focus on its usages, i.e. what roles does 
money perform, for what functions or purposes it is used. These are usually divided into 
three principal categories: medium of exchange (=means of payment),
 store of wealth, 
and unit of account (=measure of value).
 While orthodox neoclassical economics 
emphasises the use of money as a medium of exchange, with the underlying assumption 
that money originated as a cost-reducing innovation to replace barter;
 Keynesian 
economics stresses the role of money as a store of wealth.
 As put by John Maynard 
Keynes, in a world of uncertainty our desire to hold Money as a store of wealth is a 
barometer of the degree of our distrust of our own calculations and conventions 
concerning the future;
 thus, money is above all a subtle device for linking the present 
to the future.
 Other approaches emphasise the role of money as a unit of account,
Howgego (1990) 21-4, with references to ancient texts.
 Schaps (2004) 12-13; Seaford (2004) 95-101; Hollander (2007) 59-85; all consider the role of money as a 
medium of exchange as separate from that of means of payment. I see no real economic difference 
between the two, except when payments signify compulsory recruit of resources enforced by a polity. 
From an anthropological perspective, however, there is a difference, for payments may refer also to 
transfer of resources which occur not within a strict context of exchange, e.g. bride-price or wergild (on 
the latter see, n. 32 in this chapter, below).  
 Tobin (2008); Krugman and Wells (2009) 383. 
 Tymoigne and Wray (2006) 1.  
Davidson (1972) 102-3.
Keynes (1937) 216.
Keynes (1936) 293-4.
Grierson (1978); Tymoigne and Wray (2006) 1.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_multiplier#CITEREFKrugmanWells2009
- 55 - 
stress the importance of credit and debt relations.
 The latter twocredit and debt 
relationsare seen not as initially originating from economic transaction; rather, their 
cradle is perceived to nestle in a world of tribal wergild,
 communal relations, and social 
commitments; all of which gave rise to the need for a numeraire in which value could be 
measured.
The view that sees moneyand in particular coinage, its most familiar physical 
representationas an invention triggered by a need to facilitate exchange is evident 
already in Classical Greece.
 Plato described  as a symbol for the sake of 
exchange.
 Aristotle described a gradual process by which money developed from 
barter in order to facilitate selling and buying, first by using some substance of useful 
commodity, then by using metals, then marked metals with signs () indicating 
its value (  ).
 And Demosthenes (cited above) attributed to Solon a 
saying that coinage was invented to facilitate private transactions (  
).
 Centuries later, Pliny the Elder described how money had developed 
from the use of cattle to that of precious metal, associating this process with trade and the 
replacement of a barter system by a buying-and-selling one.
 And the third-century jurist 
Paul expressed a similar opinion, stating that money was invented to facilitate trade and 
 Innes (1913); (1914); though hardly referred to before the 1990s; Tymoigne and Wray (2006).  
OED has wergild as the price set upon a man according to his rank, paid by way of compensation or 
fine in cases of homicide and certain other crimes to free the offender from further obligation or 
punishment.
 Innes (1913); (1914); Polanyi (1968); Grierson (1978); Tymoigne and Wray (2006).  
Schaps (2004) 12; Seaford (2004) 131-2.
Plat. Rep. 371b. 
Arist. Pol. 1257a-1258b, esp. 1257a (40); Scott (1994).
Demos. Timocr. 213.
 Plin. NH 33.3.6-7. On the Roman jurists need to differentiate barter from sale, see Ch. 4, below. 
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=tou%3D&la=greek&can=tou%3D3&prior=e)te/qh
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=posou%3D&la=greek&can=posou%3D0&prior=tou=
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=shmei%3Don&la=greek&can=shmei%3Don0&prior=posou=
- 56 - 
avoid the problems of barter by providing a constant medium of exchange.
In recent decades other approaches for explaining the invention of money have 
been advocated by scholars. Basing his argument on anthropological models, Richard 
Seaford has suggested that Greek money originated not solely from the practice of gift 
giving, but also from that of giving dowries and imposing fines.
 He then elaborated this 
approach; listing as preconditions for the invention of coinage seal-marks and writing, 
and its application in administration and sacrificial customs; while stressing the role of 
(re)distribution of booty, communal sacrifice, and ritual offerings, in creating the 
conceptual and mental conditions for the emergence and wide diffusion of coinage.
Sitta von Reden has contrasted commodity exchange with civic exchange in a discussion 
of what she refers to as the Commodification of Symbols embedded in ancient Greek 
reciprocity;
 and (elsewhere) has proposed to consider coinage within a wider context of 
studying Greek conceptions of value.
 And David Schaps has emphasised the innovative 
contribution of coinage in transforming money into an abstract form of wealth, thereby 
echoing Keynesian approaches, although not explicitly referring to Keynes writings.
Accepting that money is a social convention which measures value, how, then, 
can the value of money be assessed? Economists measure the value of money in terms of 
its purchasing power, that is, which goods and services can be acquired with it. This is 
Paul.
Dig. 18.1.1.pr. (33 ad ed.). And in so doing, money allows for a clear distinction between barter and 
sale; on which, see Ch. 4, below.  
 Seaford (1994). 
 Seaford (2004). 
 Von Reden (1998). 
Von Reden (1995) 171-94.
Schaps (2004).
- 57 - 
evident through aggregate price behaviour, as manifested in the general level of prices. 
While disagreement may endure as to the technicalities of calculating this variable (i.e. 
which goods and services are to be included and at what weights), there is general 
agreementthough not throughout all economic schools of thought
that, while price 
behaviour of individual goods or services may indicate changes in the relation between 
the demand for it and its supply, as a principle, fluctuations in the aggregate level of 
prices provide observable indication of changes in the value of money. In the scholarship 
on ancient economic history for a long period the value of money, and in particular that 
of Roman money, was seen as generally represented by the metallic content of the 
coinage.
  From the 1990s scholars studying Roman history have implemented in their 
studies the economic concept of the purchasing power of money, investigating how much 
money was worth in terms of real goods and services. Several studies dedicated to price 
evidence draw conclusions from it concerning tendencies in the purchasing power of 
Roman money.
 On the whole, price evidence from the first three centuries CE indicates 
a general long-term stability in the purchasing power of Roman money up to the mid-
second century, followed by two periods of instability: one during the second half of the 
second century, which has been attributed to the effects of the Antonine Plague;
other starting approximately from 274/5, usually ascribed to instabilities in the currency 
system.
 E.g. the Austrian school, see Ch. 1, p. 27 above. 
On the existence of some premium, which takes nominal value above metallic value in order to account 
at least partially for minting costs, see p. 81, n. 205 in this chapter, below.
 Wassink (1991); Drexhage (1991); Rathbone (1996); (1997); Strobel (1993); (2003). Early traces of this 
approach may be found in Strobel (1989); and, to a lesser extent, Crawford (1975) 567, 571, who 
hypothesised a relative stability of prices more or less up until Aurelians reign. 
 Scheidel (2002); (2012). 
 Howgego (1995) 133; Carri (2007) 144-5; Haklai-Rotenberg (2011). 
- 58 - 
Oscillation in prices is acknowledged also by Roman writers.
 Generally, price 
increase was considered a bad thing, and was perceived as an outcome of human 
action, stimulated by their avarice.
 An excerpt from the second-century jurist Gaius 
suggests that price fluctuations were simply accepted as the natural order of things;
money itself considered as having potestas, that is power, or, in fact, value,
 which
as pointed out by Gaiusin itself could also oscillate.
As stressed above, various things can be used as money, and different species of 
money exist side by side, not only across cultures, but also within the same society.
Different monetary devices may be used for different activities, each limited to its own 
sphere of human interaction.
 This recognition gave rise to the anthropological 
distinction between modern and primitive monies,
 and all-purpose and special-
purpose monies.
 Under the category of modern or all-purpose money are found 
those monies which, like our own, could be used to buy anything, and which 
E.g. Plin. Ep. 3.19.8.
 Plin. NH 33.4. A similar approach arises also from Diocletians 301 Price Edict; Lauffer (1971); 
Crawford and Reynolds (1979). 
 Gai. Dig. 13.4.3 (9 ad ed. prov.). 
 Gai. Inst. 1.122, who talks of the vis et potestas of nummi.  
 Gai. Dig. 13.4.3 (9 ad ed. prov.): pecuniarum quoque licet uideatur una et eadem potestas ubique esse. 
Watson (1985) translated potestas as purchasing power, but, as this term is charged with modern 
significances alien to ancient thought, I prefer simply power; and see Ch. 7, pp. 194-5, below. 
 Weber (1927) 237. 
 Bohannan (1955); (1959); who analysed the monetary system of the Tiv in central Nigeria. Polanyi 
(1957); (1966); who analysed the monetary system of the historical West African kingdom of Dahomey. 
Bohannans idea of separate spheres of exchange continues to influence anthropological research; see, 
Maurer (2006) 17-8, with further references; and, although Bohannan is not openly cited, his ideas are 
more than echoed in the division offered by Hollander (2007), into different monetary zones in late 
Republican Rome.  
 Einzig (1949); Dalton (1965). 
 Bohannan (1959); Zelizer (1989); (1997); Maurer (2006), who offers a short summary. Against the 
traditional modern/ all-purpose vs. primitive/ special-purpose parallels, see Bloch and Parry 
(1989); Maurer (2006). 
- 59 - 
simultaneously serve as medium of exchange, store of wealth, and unit of account. Under 
the category of primitive or special-purpose money are found those monetary devices 
which could be used only for one or two of the three main usages (unit of account, store 
of wealth, and medium of exchange); or, alternatively, can be used in exchange only for a 
limited range of goods, or in specific circumstances.
 While most economists agree that 
money is that which performs all of the three functions mentioned above, anthropologists 
argue that money can be understood independently of neither the society which created it, 
nor the kind of transaction in which it is used.
These anthropological distinctionsmodern/ all-purpose vs. primitive/ 
special-purposehave stimulated also the study of ancient monies. To cite just a few 
recent examples: Richard Seaford has the dichotomy primitive vs. modern money at 
the background of his analysis, and, in fact, as his point of departure;
 David Schaps 
often speaks of modern vs. primitive, seeing money as being mainly all-purpose 
and coming into being only with the invention of coinage;
 Sitta von Reden argues that 
the monetisation of Ptolemaic Egyptby which she means the wider introduction of 
coinage and the development of legal and social institutions that regulate its usewas the 
first to familiarise Egypt with an all-purpose money;
 and David Hollander argues that 
the inclination towards all-purpose money seems to limit Roman money to coinage, 
and therefore to risk overlooking important aspects of the Roman economy.
Polanyi (1957); (1968) 189-90; (1977); Bohannan (1959); Maurer (2006) 20.
 Polanyi (1957); Dalton (1965); (1971) 167-92; Zelizer (1989); (1997); Bloch and Parry (1989).  
 Seaford (2004) 1-9, who starts the book with a brief summary of some of the most known examples in 
anthropology for primitive money used as special purpose money. 
Schaps (2004) 12-16.
 Von Reden (2007) 1, 31-3. 
 Hollander (2007) 3. 
- 60 - 
current study takes after those approaches in economic anthropology which aim at 
breaking down the traditional dichotomy of modern/ all-purpose vs. primitive/ 
special-purpose monies.
 As such, it abandons these terms as categorising definitions 
on which to base discussion, in favour of an analysis which operates as if in a hall of 
mirrors,
 where qualities assumed for, or ascribed to, each type of money
modern, primitive, all-purpose, and special-purposeexist in an awkward 
relationship of interchanging and interacting with each other.  
2.2. Terminology and Meanings  
Money is a social convention; as such, it is an abstract concept, a symbol which 
represents value. In addition to its nonfigurative nature, money also has physical 
manifestations, in the form of specific objects, be these certain goods (e.g. metal, 
livestock, agricultural yield, etc.),
 tokens (e.g. shells, coins,
 etc.), or records of 
obligations (e.g. modern paper money, bills of credit, pebbles with markings on them, 
etc.).
 This duality of money
being an abstract concept, therefore incorporeal; and 
being manifested by specific objects, therefore corporealis probably a key reason for 
 Melitz (1970); Bloch and Parry (1989); Maurer (2006);  
 Maurer (2006) 16. 
As pointed by Mises (1953) 62, it is a matter of complete indifference what particular commodity is 
chosen to act as commodity money. 
 On the inherent fiduciary nature of coinage, already from its early appearances in the sixth century BCE, 
see Seaford (2004) 136-46. 
 Yet, as noted by Tobin (2008): Some moneys have been commodities valued independently of their 
monetary role, intrinsically useful in production or consumption. Others have been tokens of no intrinsic 
utility and negligible cost of production, coins or pieces of paper. Commodity moneys derive their value 
partly, and token moneys wholly, from the social convention that designates them as money. 
 Gilbert (2005) 361, who argues for drawing out the paradoxes of money as always a symbolic referent, a 
social system, and a material practice. 
- 61 - 
both the difficulty of defining money, which was dealt with in the previous section, and 
the confusing terminology associated with it, dealt with in this section.  
The English word money encapsulates within it a variety of meanings. It can 
refer to cash (I have no money on me), currency (moneychanger), or wealth in general 
(she has a lot of money).
 Similarly, ancient terminology referring to money is not 
lacking ambiguities. As noted by Richard Seaford, The Greeks have several words 
which can mean money (as well as other things) but no word precisely equivalent to 
money.
  may mean coins, currency, or broadly speaking money;  
can refer to a small piece of silver, a small silver coin, cash, or money in general; 
 is things used or needed,
 but also, more generally, goods, property, 
wealth, or money; and both  (wealth) and  (silver) may be used 
with money in mind.
 Similar multiplicity of terms and meanings is apparent also in 
Latin: pecunia, nummi, argentum, aes, and nomina, are only several of the words which 
could signify money, as well as other things. As the theme of this work is Roman 
attitudes to money, I elaborate on the Latin vocabulary commonly used to designate 
money, intertwining the discussion with a listing of the pecuniary instruments used in 
the Roman world.
 Some modern languages may have different words for each of these meanings; e.g. in Italian currency 
is valuta, (cash) money is soldi, and moneychanger is cambiavalute; while in other languages the 
word for money may hold additional meanings; e.g. in French, Irish, and Modern Hebrew, the same 
word is used to designate both money and silver (largent, airgead, kesef (), respectively). 
 Seaford (2004) 16. 
 Seaford (2004) 16. 
In the following paragraphs profound use has been made of the TLL and the OLD.
- 62 - 
I start with coinage, probably the most renowned physical manifestation of 
money, nowadays as well as in the Roman empire.
 Numismatic evidence leaves no 
doubt that coinage was widely used in the Roman world, but the terminology used to 
describe it is as multifarious as the currencies and denominations in use. Coinage largely 
was put under the provision of the state, in the broader sense of a polity endowed with 
the power to enforce laws and collect taxes.
 A central imperial government enabled 
Rome gradually to enforce a method of compatibility and of growing coherence between 
the different currencies used in its territories;
 however, this was achieved in a centuries-
long process, which came to its completion only with Diocletians coinage reforms at the 
end of the third century, a reform which brought an end to the Alexandrian provincial 
coinage.
 During the period here under investigation there were many local 
denominations used in the Roman empire, especially in its eastern provinces, habitually 
applied in both private transactions and dealings with the authorities. Some of these were 
prominent currencies whose chief denominations are known to us by name, such as 
drachmae and tetradrachmae; for others we have no knowledge of their names, their 
value, or their classification into denominations, such as is the case with many base-metal 
small-change Roman provincial coins.
 To take it from Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178 (49 ad sab.); Herm. Dig. 50.16.222 (2 iur. epit.), both discussed on 
pp. 73-7, below. 
 Coins were legally issued only by the ruling authorities, either imperial or local ones receiving imperial 
permission to mint; Bolin (1958) 47-50; Crawford (1985) 256-8; Butcher (1988); Burnett, Amandry and 
Ripolls (1992) Intro.; Howgego (1995) 2-3, 56-9; Harl (1996) 75-7, 88-90. 
 Crawford (1985) 267-79; Burnett (1987) 46-7; Sutherland (1987) 30-32; Burnett, Amandry and Ripolls 
(1992) 1-6, 36-7, 52-4; Howgego (1992) 2; (1995) 56-9. Even as late as the third century CE regional 
differences in the distribution of newly minted coins were, more often than not, substantial; Carri (2007) 
142-3.  
The reform, which brought with it the end of provincial coinage in Egypt, was probably initiated after 
defeating the revolt of the usurper Domitius Domitianus; Schwartz (1975); Bowman (2005) 316.  
 On which, see RPC; Burnett, Amandry and Ripolls (1992). 
- 63 - 
A good example which demonstrates the problems of naming local denominations 
is the so-called blacks (/ ) of the Babatha Archive.
 These are mentioned 
in official documents dated to the beginning of the period here under investigation,
where quotas are given for a Roman tax to be collected in coins named blacks. A 
hypothesis has been put forward, based on inconsistencies in the gender of this unit of 
account as it appears in the Babatha Archive, that in using /  the focus was 
put on the consonantal group mln, which represents a local variant or corruption of the 
word for mina.
 However, the commoner and more persuasive view holds  to 
stand for the colour black, given to a type of billon coins due to their darker colour, and 
that these coins were in fact Nabataean.
 The peculiarity of an official Roman document 
composed more than twenty years after the annexation of the Nabataean kingdom, which 
states that a tax due to the Roman government is to be paid in a pre-Roman denomination 
of lesser metallic quality, has not escaped scholars.
 Yet, this does not prevent the 
possibility that these blacks were indeed Nabataean coins. Thus, this example well-
illustrates not only the problem of naming denominations, but also the on-going gradual 
process by which Roman monetary standards came to be the dominant units of account. 
There is no need hereand surely neither the capacityto list all names known 
to have represented currencies and denominations used in the Roman empire. That would 
produce no additional benefit for advancing our understanding of Roman attitudes 
towards money, for these all refer to the same pecuniary instrument: coinage. However, 
On the Babatha Archive, see Ch. 1, p. 40, above.
 P.Yadin 5a (Maoza near Petra, Arabia, 110); 16 (Rabbath Moab, Arabia, 127); 21 (Maoza, Arabia, 130); 
22 (Maoza, Arabia, 130); P.Hever. 60 (Maoza, Arabia, 125); 62 (Rabbath Moab, Arabia, 127).  
 Lewis (1989) 36; (1996); contra Meshorer (1992). 
 Weiser and Cotton (1996); Cotton and Yardeni (1997) 171, 192. 
 Weiser and Cotton (1996). 
- 64 - 
one specific Latin word which refers to a type of a coinnamely, nummusdeserves 
special attention, as this word encapsulated a capacity to signify a specific coin, coinage 
in general, and money at large. Before the second century BCE the Latin word nummus, 
most probably related to the Greek word , was used to designate a silver didrachm 
coin,
 or, alternatively, a gold coin of an equivalent weight, the stater.
 After the 
Second Punic War one finds nummus referring to some type of coin of small value,
the Roman sestertius,
 and perhaps even to the Roman denarius.
 From the late 
Republic till after the period here under investigation, in addition to being identified with 
a certain type (or types) of coin, as well as with one denomination or another, nummus 
was used also to signify coins in general.
 Thus, it came to be used in the sense of money 
in the form of coinage;
 cash money, as in the phrases in nummis,
 or quia ad manum 
nummos non habebam;
 or, simply money at large.
 Furthermore, nummus also gave 
rise to the name of one of the types of Roman bankers, the nummularii, who were mainly 
money-changers
and coin-assayers.
 E.g. Pl. Ps. 809; Trin. 848; Truc. 561. Also, see Kay (2009). 
 E.g. Pl. Poen. 732; Cic. Phil. 12.20. 
 E.g. Pl. As. 458; Cic. Ver. 5.135; Att. 6.1.21; Var. hist. Ann. 1. 
 E.g. Quint. Inst. 7.6.11; Suet. Dom. 4.5; Plin. NH 14.56; Apul. Apol. 92; Gai. Inst. 3.102. 
 E.g. Liv. 8.11.16; however, this phrase denari nummi is perhaps due to a copyists error. 
 E.g. Cic. Phil. 3.16; Off. 3.91; Suet. Tib. 58; Gai. Inst. 1.122; 2.252. 
 E.g. Cic. Off. 3.80 (on the monetary measures of Gratidianus, see Hollander (2007) 28-9); Plin. NH 
35.92, in nummo aureo; Gel. 3.17.3; Pompon. Dig. 12.1.8 (6 ex plaut.); Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.pr. (33 ad ed.). 
 E.g. Cic. Att. 6.9.2; Plin. Ep. 9.37.3; Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.24 (5 de omnib. tribun.). 
 Afric. Dig. 16.1.19.5 (4 quaest.). 
 E.g. Cic. Att. 7.8.5; Ulp. Dig. 47.2.48.7 (42 ad sab.); Paul. Dig. 12.1.2.4 (28 ad ed.), where nummi and 
pecunia are used as synonyms. 
The nummularii are first attested in the second half of the second century BCE, and from the first half of 
the second century CE, they seem to have taken also a role of deposit-bankers (somewhat similar to the 
argentarii), though they probably never participated in auctions; Brge (1987) 467-76; Andreau (1987) 
177-219, 359-60, 387-96; (1999) 31-7, 84-7. 
- 65 - 
The association coinage-currency-money, which arises from the various meanings 
attributed to nummus/ nummi, appears also in the trio coinage-metal-money.
 Metal in 
the form of bullionbe it gold, silver, or base metalacted as a store of wealth,
 and in 
some exceptional circumstances also as means of payment,
 though, as a general rule, it 
seems not to have preformed the role of a unit of account.
 The words aurum and 
argentum mean the metals gold,
 and silver,
 respectively; but also valuable or 
precious possessions (res pretiosa) which could store wealth,
 and act as means of 
payment.
 Where supplemented by the adjective signatum they indicate coined money, 
as in argentum signatum,
 and aurum signatum;
 and, likewise, aes signatum.
also finds the more general terms nummi signati,
 and pecunia signata,
 which can 
E.g. Cic. Top. 13. The association is as follows: Coinage is money; coinage is made of metal; hence, 
metal is money. Both trifold connectionscoinage-currency-money and coinage-metal-moneyare 
found also in modern languages; e.g. the USA dollar can mean a coin (or bill), the currency, and money 
at large; alternatively, the French largent means both money and silver.
E.g. Plin. HN 33.55-6; Ulp. Dig. 48.13.1 (44 ad sab.), where metals are a type of pecuniary instrument 
included within pecunia sacra religiosa publicave. See Hollander (2007) 34-5, who gives references to 
Republican hoard evidence from Italy, Spain, and Romania, where bullion and jewellery were concealed 
together with coinage; Haupt (2001), who gives coin hoards from third-century Gaul and the German 
provinces, which also contain bullion.
Plin. NH 33.1, where metals are considered as rerum pretia; 33.14; 34.1; Hollander (2007) 31-3.
Although metals were often measured by weighte.g. Scaev. Dig. 40.5.41.3 (4 respon.);
Hollander 
(2007) 33-4weighed bullion usually did not act as unit of account to assess the value of other things. 
Where the value of possessions of small worth was to be limited, this limit was given in number of coins, 
rather than pounds of metal; Ulp. Dig. 48.20.6 (10 off. procons.).
 E.g. Plin. NH 2.159; 33.126; Gai. Dig. 3.4.1.pr. (3 ad ed.), on gold-mines (aurifodinarum); Ulp. Dig. 
34.2.19.pr. (20 ad sab.); 27.4 (44 ad sab.), where gold sive factum sive infectum is distinguished from 
pecunia signata, i.e. coined gold. Aurum did not represent a gold coin, the name for which was aureus; 
but, see Ulp. Dig. 48.10.9.pr. (8 off. procons.). 
E.g. Plin. NH 33.95; 126.
E.g. Cic. Flac. 69; Rep. 1.27; Top. 16; Proc. Dig. 34.2.11 (5 epist.); Pompon. Dig. 34.2.34 (9 ad quint. 
muc.); Paul. Dig. 34.2.32.7 (2 ad vitel.); 35 (11 respon.).
Especially for the authorities; e.g. Cic. Pis. 90; Plin. NH 33.51; Dio 42.49.
E.g. Cic. Fam. 13.29.4; Var. LL 5.169; Plin. NH 33.42; Paul. Dig. 16.3.29.pr. (2 sent.); Ulp. Dig. 
34.2.27.4 (44 ad sab.); 47.2.19.3 (40 ad sab.). 
E.g. Plin. NH 33.42; Ulp. Dig. 34.2.27.4 (44 ad sab.). 
E.g. Var. LL 5.169.
Wolters (1999).
 Cic. Top. 53, on which, see discussion below on numerata pecunia; Var. LL 5.169; Lex de Gallia 
Cisalpina (49-42 BCE), Chs. XXI-XXII, in Crawford (1996) no. 28, pp. 461-77. 
javascript:ExternLink('217-14','T1e1l1b1s1s3s3c2x1217-14')
javascript:ExternLink('217-14','T1e1l1b1s1s3s3c2x1217-14')
- 66 - 
refer to both silver and gold coins.
 Argentum, besides signifying silver as coin, also 
designated silver as currency,
 as well as money in general;
 and the word gave rise to 
the name of at least one type of Roman bankers, the argentarius.
Aes likewise presents manifold meanings. It signified the base metals bronze, 
copper, or brass.
 It also referred to these metals used as currency; whether struck into 
coins, as in the expression in aere,
 i.e. in [bronze] money; or used as commodity 
money, as in the case of aes grave,
 or the symbolical use of aes et libra in ceremonies 
for concluding transactions where ownership changed hands.
 Aes, whether or not 
supplemented by signatum, was also a general name for copper and bronze coins.
could take the meaning of pecuniary payment,
 or allowance,
 whether privately or via 
the central authorities, as in aes militare,
 or aera stipendiaque.
 Also, aes could 
 Ulp. Dig. 34.2.19.pr. (20 ad sab.). 
 E.g. Plu. Ant. 1.2-3; Afric. Dig. 40.4.22 (9 quaest.), who has argenti treated as pecunia; 47.2.62.7 (8 
quaest.), who has argenti and nummorum as two separate things. 
E.g. Paul. Dig. 45.1.140.1 (3 ad nerat.); Pompon. Dig. 34.2.1.1 (6 ad sab.), where certum pondus 
argenti is considered equivalent to pecunia numerata of the same value; Mod. Dig. 34.2.9 (9 regul.), who 
demonstrates a similar approach in legacies of both gold and silver. For the term omne argentum quod 
meum as referring to all of ones money, see Cic. Top. 13; 16; Reinhardt (2003) 218-20, 224-5; and 
discussion on pp. 74-5, n. 172, below.
The argentarii were professional bankers, similar to the Greek trapezitai, who acted as deposit-bankers, 
money-changers, and coin-assayers. They first appear in the Roman Forum between 318 and 310 BCE, 
and in the second half of the second century BCE they started attending auctions and advancing credit to 
buyers. The argentariis presence in documentation declines in the course of the second century CE, and 
they seem to have disappeared by the time of the Tetrarchy; Brge (1987) 476-86; Andreau (1987) 61-
137, 333-56, 401-38; (1999) 30-49. 
Cic. Ver. 2.83; Plin. NH 7.125.
Var. LL 9.81; 10.38. 
E.g. Liv. 4.60; 32.26.
E.g. Var. LL 9.79.83; Gai. Inst. 1.119; 1.122, where Gaius explains aes et libra by reconstructing an 
archaic past quia olim aereis tantum nummis utebantur; 2.102-4; 3.167.
E.g. Cic. Fam. 7.13.2; Plin. NH 18.12; Var. LL 9.83.
E.g. Plin. NH 34.1. 
E.g. Gai. Inst. 4.27. 
E.g. Var. LL 5.181. 
CIL 1.583.77.
- 67 - 
signify money in general,
 as in the common expression aes alienum, which signifies 
borrowed money, i.e. debts.
While the abundance of literary, numismatic, and archaeological evidence shows 
that Romans widely used coinage and rough metals as pecuniary instruments, their use of 
other monetary devices is often less apparent. However, non-coined money was a 
widespread phenomenon. As recent scholarship stresses,
 Romans made extensive use 
of credit money (pecunia credita, aes alienum), using records of debts, as well as of other 
possessions, as financial instruments;
 these recently have been labelled as paper 
transactions, or negotiable paper money.
 These types of records usually were 
designated by words which had also had other, more general, meanings; hence, our 
acknowledgement of them as financial instruments may at times be elusive, and derives 
mainly from the context in which they appear. Under this category one finds partes, 
generally parts or portions, but perhaps also shares in businesses and commercial 
companies;
 permutationes, reciprocal giving and receiving, but also a sort of bill-of-
E.g. Var. LL 5.44, who takes aes to mean either money or coined money; 5.183, who explains the 
name for the Treasury as derived from aes, presumably because the latter designated money; 9.81-2; Cic. 
Fam. 13.62; 15.14.1.
E.g. Cic. Att. 6.2.4; Top. 5, who uses aeris alieni metaphorically to signify the social meaning of debt, 
which had to do with neither money, nor corporeal possessions; Tac. Ann. 3.40, who speaks of 
magnitudo aeris alieni; Ulp. Dig. 27.9.5.9 (35 ad ed.).
 Howgego (1992) 14-16; Rathbone (2003); Harris (2006); (2008c); Hollander (2007); Stelzenberger 
(2008). 
 Litteris obligation, as called by Gai. Inst. 3.128-34. 
 Harris (2006); (2008c); Hollander (2007); Rathbone and Temin (2008); Stelzenberger (2008); contra 
Andreau (1999) 132; Lo Cascio (2011), who, although not rejecting the significance of credit money, 
nevertheless stresses the importance of coined money in balancing the relation between Roman supply of 
and demand for money.
Plu. Cat. Ma. 21.6. For the view that these company shares were tradable, see Malmendier (2005); 
Hollander (2007) 48-51; but, see Fleckner (2010), esp. 450-98, non vidi, who refutes the existence of a 
market of tradable company shares in the Roman world; Sirks (2012) 212, who supports Fleckners view 
and, in n. 1, gives references to further bibliography supporting the opposite view.
- 68 - 
exchange, which allows for the transfer of funds over long distances without carrying 
cash;
 and syngraphae, financial contracts with no clear modern equivalent, signed by 
both parties, where one side made a commitment to pay the other a specific sum of 
money, and which were probably used especially by negotiatores,
 or for large 
transactions.
Perhaps the most renowned and recognisable instances of Roman negotiable- or 
paper money were nomina; originally records of debt entered in book-keeping under 
the name of the debtor,
 and consequently also a general word for loans.
 Already by 
the late Republic nomen/nomina came to designate an abstract form of money, used for 
both storage of wealth and means of payment.
 Although Cicero differentiates between 
argentum which was in arcano (i.e. in a strongbox) from that which was in nominibus 
(i.e. owed, recorded in tabulis),
 in the period here under research this differentiation 
seems not to have been in force, as is pointed out by Ulpians inclusion within eius omne 
aurum also gold which, although not at that moment in the strongbox, can nevertheless be 
claimed as owned.
 Nomina were a prominent form of wealth: the second-century jurist 
Scaevola tells of a banker almost all of whose assets (totam fortunam) were in 
Andreau (1999) 132; Verboven (2002) 132-40; Harris (2006) 15; Hollander (2007) 40-44.
On negotiationes, especially in the context of seafaring and transport to Rome, see Sirks (1991) 395-402.
 Suet. Jul. 23.2; Gai. Inst. 3.134; Andreau (1999) 137; Hollander (2007) 44-8. 
 Ulp. Dig. 50.16.6.pr. (3 ad ed.).  
 E.g. Cic. Top. 16; Pompon. Dig. 29.2.37 (5 ad sab.); Scaev. Dig. 26.7.58.3 (11 dig.), who tells of tutors 
who neglected to place a pupillas money on loan (in nomina collocare); Ulp. Dig. 27.9.5.9 (35 ad ed.), 
who says that a pupils pecunia included in nominibus, quae conveniri possunt; Paul. Dig. 35.2.1.7 (ad 
leg. falc.), who talks of an inheritance which includes also debts (quod in nominibus est); Harris (2006); 
(2008c); Hollander (2007) 51-3; Stelzenberger (2008). 
 E.g. Cic. Off. 3.59: Nomina facit, negotium conficit; Verr. 5.17; Harris (2006); Hollander (2007) 51-2. 
For the period here under investigation, see Pompon. Dig. 46.6.9 (15 ad sab.), who says that all which 
belonged to a pupil includes non solum quae in patrimonio habet, sed etiam quae in nominibus sunt; 
Ulp. Dig. 15.1.7.4 (29 ad ed.), who plainly says that a peculium can contain nomina debitorum; Paul. 
Dig. 2.14.9.pr. (62 ad ed.), who treats nomina as equivalent to monetary debts. 
 Cic. Top. 16, where hypothetically argentum could refer to silver, but see Rinhardt (2003) 224-5. 
 Ulp. Dig. 34.2.27.4 (44 ad sab.). 
- 69 - 
nominibus;
 his contemporary Julian mentions a peculium which sed in nominibus erit 
concession;
 and the third-century jurist Paul holds argentum and nomina debitorum as 
two different pecuniary instruments for storing wealth,
 and tells of an inheritance that 
contained nihil in corporibus, sed omnia in nominibus.
 Nomina could also be used for 
making payments, as is demonstrated in an excerpt from Scaevola, where a share of an 
inheritance is bought ex qua aliquam summam in nominibus ex kalendario uti daret.
an excerpt from his contemporary, Pomponius, it looks as if nomina were habitually used 
as payment in sale transactions.
 The third-century jurist Ulpian says that nomina 
themselves could be, and often were, the object of a sale;
 and that just as one can sell a 
debt by selling a nomen, so can one sell a chirographum,
 that is, a written record for an 
undertaking or a promise, often concerned with pecuniary sums.
There is no need to cite all references collected by scholars for the existence of 
Roman paper transactions.
 Gaius clearly states that records of debts (litteris obligatio) 
could be traded in and transacted via what he refers to as nomina transscripticia,
book-keeping entries that allowed substituting an earlier obligation with a new one, 
thereby converting a pre-existing debt into a literal contract, which relieved the creditor 
 Scaev. Dig. 40.7.40.8 (24 dig.). 
 Julian. Dig. 15.1.16 (12 dig.), ad finem. 
 Paul. Dig. 31.86.pr. (13 respon.). 
 Paul. Dig. 10.2.25.1 (23 ad ed.); 36.1.37 (13 ad ed.). 
 Scaev. Dig. 44.4.17.2 (27 dig.). On kalendarii, see Giliberti (1984), non vidi; (1999); Sirks (1998). 
 Pompon. Dig. 18.1.19 (31 ad quint. muc.). 
 Ulp. Dig. 18.4.17 (43 ad ed.). 
 Ulp. Dig. 30.44.5 (22 ad sab.). 
 Gai. Inst. 3.134, who notes that both chirographum and syngrapha were genus obligationis proprium 
peregrinorum; Ulp. Dig. 48.20.6 (10 off. procons.), who speaks of chirographum magnae pecuniae. 
 Brge (1987); Rathbone (2001); (2003); Harris (2006); (2008c); Rathbone and Temin (2008); 
Stelzenberger (2008); Fleckner (2010), non vidi. 
 Gai. Inst. 3.128. 
- 70 - 
from the burden of proving the origin of the debt.
 Gaius even goes further to 
differentiate between transscriptiones a re in personam, where a receipt for an old debt is 
entered and the same debtor is charged with a new entry, and transscriptiones a persona 
in personam, where a debt registered under the name of one debtor is transferred to the 
name of another.
All the terms mentioned so far signified money in general, but also specific 
monetary instruments, as well as other things. The multiplicity of meanings, which the 
various verbal signifiers of money in the Roman world exhibit, indicate how 
interconnected the Romans perception of money was. Money was certainly not merely 
coinage, nor currency. Nor was it strictly speaking an abstract concept; rather, its verbal 
signifiers seem to have been inherently connected with its various physical 
manifestations, keeping in force the tensed duality between abstract and concrete.   
We have yet to deal with pecunia, probably the Latin word which best correlates 
with the modern notion of money. Pecunia has a variety of meanings, ranging from 
coinage, to money,
 to property, to wealth.
 Roman etymologies of the word 
tend to connect it with pecus, cattle, or livestock,
 an important manifestation of 
wealth in traditional agricultural societies.
 Whether or not this etymology is 
 Berger (1953) 597. Also, Brge (1987) 509-36. 
 Gai. Inst. 3.128-34; Crook (1967) 213-4; Thilo (1980) 290-5, 305-18; Meyer (2004) 108-10. 
 E.g. Cic. Leg. 3.6, who has pecunia publica in the sense of the Treasury or public funds. 
 Hollander (2007) 5-7, who argues that pecunia was primarily related with wealth rather than cash. 
 Var. RR 2.1.11; LL 5.92; Cic. Rep. 2.9; Plin. NH 18.3.12; 33.43, who says that the name pecunia 
originated from the fact that Romans had first stamped aes with a sign of an ox. 
 Plin. NH 33.7, who mentions an archaic past in which cattle was used to estimate value, make payments, 
and settle fines. 
- 71 - 
historically accurate is of little relevance here;
 what matters is that it was valid in the 
eyes of educated Romans. Though for the period here under investigation livestock 
hardly played the role of a pecuniary instrument, this role was assumed, at least partially, 
by other consumable goods (as well as by providing services).
 Grain, slaves, land, or 
rights of residence or usage, had actedat least in some occasionsas pecuniary 
instruments, even where their pecuniary role was partial (i.e. restricted-, or special-
purpose money; certainly in the case of land and slaves, which probably were not 
alienable).
Roman legal evidence preserves three definitions for pecunia;
 all of which take 
a broadening interpretation of the word, understanding it as signifying property, hence 
as including a variety of things. The earliest derives from Gaius Institutiones, a 
comprehensive composition intended for students of law, completed probably by 160/1 
 It appears within the context of sureties and the legal obligations of guarantors, in 
a discussion on the Lex Cornelia and the restrictions it sets on pecunia credita, i.e. 
pecunia given on credit.
 After stating that pecunia credita does not refer solely to 
On which, see Kaufmann (1964) 140-2. 
 E.g. Rathbone (1991) 112-4, 318-30, who shows that in the third-century Appianus estate in Roman 
Egypt payments were frequently made in kind though conceptualised and calculated in monetary units. 
As he puts it (p. 318): the economy of the [Appianus] estate was essentially monetised, even if in many 
transactions ... no cash actually changed hands. It was often not necessary for cash to change hands 
because the estate used a quite sophisticated internal system of credit both for transactions between 
different units of the estate and for transactions between phrontistai [i.e. managers] and their employees. 
 Hollander (2007) 59-86. 
Gai. Inst. 3.124; Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178 (49 ad sab.); Herm. Dig. 50.16.222 (2 iur. epit.). Also see Harris 
(2006) 7; (2008c); Hollander (2007) 5-6.
 Gaius was probably not renowned amongst his contemporaries, yet during the four succeeding centuries 
his work was continuously used and copied by students of law. By the time of Justinian Gaius 
authoritative status became unquestionable and he is cited throughout the Corpus Iuris Civilis; De 
Zulueta (1953) 1-11; Jolowicz and Nicholas (1972)
412-3; Robinson (1997) 62-3; Ibbetson (2005) 188; 
Johnston (2005).
 The lex Cornelia was passed probably under Sullas dictatorship in 82/1 BCE; Weiss (1925); De Zulutea 
(1946) 192. 
- 72 - 
money which had already been advanced on a loan, but also to all which is certain to be 
owed at the time when the obligation is contracted,
 Gaius proceeds to define pecunia, 
stressing that the definition is valid in the context of this specific law (in ea lege):  
appellatione autem pecuniae omnes res in ea lege significantur; itaque et si 
uinum uel frumentum aut si fundum uel hominem stipulemur, haec lex 
obseruanda est.
This broadening definition is quite remarkable. According to Gaius the term 
pecunia covers every kind of thing, and the jurist lists as examples movable goods, real-
estate, and possession of persons; all of which fall under his own classification of 
corporeal things,
 and better fit the modern concept of wealth than that of money.  
The other two legal definitions present a similar attitude. Both are preserved in 
Justinians Digest 50.16,
 detached from their original now-lost context.
 The earlier 
 Gai. Inst. 3.124: pecuniam autem creditam dicimus non solum eam, quam credendi causa damus, sed 
omnem, quam tum, cum contrahitur obligatio, certum est debitum iri, id est, quae sine ulla condicione 
deducitur in obligationem. The emphasis is on what is owed in the first place; since in theory all 
obligations may be perceived in terms of monetary claims, as the condemnatio, the judges decision 
whether or not to convict the defended, is phrased in monetary terms. On condemnatio, see pp. 86-8, 
below. 
 Gai. Inst. 3.124: Note that the term money in this Act means everything; and so if we stipulate for 
wine or corn or a farm or a slave, this Act must be adhered to.  
 Gai. Inst. 2.1-14, esp. 12-14, offers a systematic legal categorisation of the world, dividing all things into 
those which could be in private ownership (in nostro patrimonio) and those which could not (extra 
nostrum patrimonium). The latter are divided between res sacrae et religiosae and res publicae; while 
the former are categorised into corporeal and incorporeal, with pecunia appearing as one of the examples 
for res corporales. Many historians would agree that by the mid-second century CE Roman juridical 
thought had shifted towards more structural characteristics; but from where did Gaius derive his 
analytical framework? Perhaps his inspiration was Ciceros suggestion for a more convenient 
organisation of ius civile; Cic. Orat. 1.185-92; Nelson (1985) 37-8. Gaius distinction between corporeal 
and incorporeal could have been inspired by Cic. Top. 27; if so, then his classification perhaps was not an 
outcome of actual legal practice; Reinhardt (2003) 241-65. Alternatively, scholars have connected Gaius 
approach with the attempt made by Mucius Scaevola to arrange Roman private law generatim; Scaev. 
Dig. 1.2.2.41 (enchir); Watson (1974) 143-57; Wieacker (1988) 596-600.  
 Titled verborum significatione, a collection of clarifications of specific phrases or words scattered 
throughout classical legal literature. 
 Some reconstruction of which can be achieved thanks to Lenels monumental Palingenesia (1889); 
though corrections have been suggested on specific issues, it remains of utmost usefulness; Johnston 
(1999) 15-6. Ulpians definition (Dig. 50.16.178.pr.) is excerpted from book 49 of his ad Sabinum, a 
commentary on the work of the early first-century CE Roman jurist Masurius Sabinus. According to 
- 73 - 
of the two is attributed to the early third-century jurist Ulpian, acknowledged as an 
authority in his own lifetime,
 and reads:  
Pecuniae uerbum non solum numeratam pecuniam complectitur, uerum 
omnem omnino pecuniam, hoc est omnia corpora; nam corpora quoque 
pecuniae appellatione contineri nemo est qui ambiget.
The later definition is ascribed to the early fourth-century jurist Hermogenian, and reads: 
Pecuniae nomine non solum numerata pecunia, sed omnes res tam soli 
quam mobiles et tam corpora quam iura continentur.
Similarities between the two definitions cannot be overlooked. Resemblances in 
wording may be an outcome of a direct link between the two works. Hypothetically, 
Hermogenian could have relied on his predecessor, Ulpian, perhaps even possessing a 
copy of his work. But unless some extraordinary evidence shows up, it is doubtful 
whether such a straightforward connection could ever be established. Alternatively, 
similarities could be an outcome of the work of the Digests sixth-century compilers. 
Lenel (1889) vol. 2, 1180-90, books 45-50 of this work by Ulpian dealt with formulae of obligations (de 
verborum obligatione), with book 49 concentrating on stipulations required for buying and selling 
inheritance (de stipulationibus emptae et venditae hereditatis). Fragments from other commentaries on 
Sabinus now-lost work, a reconstruction of which is offered in Lenel (1889) vol. 2, 1257-60, suggest 
that pecunia was commonly used in this context: e.g. Pompon. Dig. 18.4.3 (27 ad sab.), who deals with 
the loss of pecunia in the course of a sale of an inheritance; Paul. Dig. 45.1.4.1 (12 ad sab.), who 
mentions poena certae pecuniae as part of a discussion concerning complications of inheritance. 
Hermogenians definition (Dig. 50.16.222) is excerpted from his now-lost Epitome of Law, for which 
unfortunately there is no parallel text. According to Lenel (1889) vol. 1, 269-270, this excerpt originally 
appeared in a discussion on sale. Lenel places it after an excerpt concerning the rights of sellers; Herm. 
Dig. 18.4.23.1 (2 iur. epit.); and just before a section on contracts of lease and hire (locatio conductio). 
That a definition for pecunia appeared somewhere within a discussion dealing with purchase, sale, hire, 
or lease, is most plausible. 
 Ulpian, one of the eminent jurists to have worked under the Severans, had served in various public 
offices, reaching the high office of Praetorian Prefect in the reign of Alexander Severus (222-3/4); 
Honor (2002) 1-36, esp. n. 1, with further references.   
 Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178.pr. (49 ad sab.): The designation money does not only include coinage but 
absolutely every kind of money, that is, every substance; for there is no one who doubts that substances 
are also included in the designation of money. 
 Herm. Dig. 50.16.222 (2 iur. epit.): In the designation of money is included not only coinage but 
everything whether immobile or mobile and whether it is an object or a claim. 
- 74 - 
However, if the compilers had indeed introduced interpolations, one would expect the 
two definitions to have had more in common; and considering how closely located within 
the Digests structure the two definitions arein the same chapter only 44 citations 
apartperhaps even to have been united into a single definition. A closer comparison 
reveals that the two definitions are far from identical. Where Ulpian uses uerum as 
contrasting participle, Hermogenian uses sed; and where Ulpian reads omnia corpora 
(all bodily/ concrete objects), Hermogenian reads omnes res (all things) (a difference 
which is further discussed below). In view of these differences, it seems reasonable to 
postulate that the two definitions derive from independent works. 
The fact that both open by emphasising that money is non solum numerata 
pecunia, hints that in Roman perception this was the best-known representation of 
money. The term numerata pecunia deserves elaboration.
 Numerata pecunia, literally 
money (or wealth) counted out, is usually used in the sense of coined money.
Additionally, it can refer to cash, and also to money in general.
 The first-century BCE 
jurist Alfenus Varus uses the phrase as referring to a specific sum, i.e. an amount of 
money which can be counted, presumably in the form of coinage.
 Cicero states that 
numerata pecunia, too, should be included within a legacy of omne argentum, for the 
Also, see discussion in Chs. 4 and 5, below.
 E.g. Papin. Dig. 30.51 (4 quaest.), who, in the context of bequeaths, distinguishes between certain 
coins (certi nummi), which acted as specific artefacts (corpora), and coins in general (numerata 
pecunia), which acted as a sum of money, hence could be replaced by any coins representing an 
equivalent sum. 
 OLD; Berger (1953) 602, who holds numerare pecuniam to mean to repay a debt in cash (hence, 
numerare pretium is to pay a purchase-price in cash); Hollander (2007) 6. In Just. Inst. 2.4.2, the term 
numerata pecunia seems to refer to both coinage and money in general.  
 Alf. Dig. 19.2.31 (5 a paul. epit.). 
- 75 - 
species is never dissociated from the genus (forma enim a genere).
 In a famous 
inscription from Ephesus, titled by scholars The Customs Law of Asia, appears the 
phrase    (l. 61), no doubt a Greek translation for the Latin 
pecunia numerata, and, as it is preceded by       
(i.e. pro aere argentoque signato), it likely denoted coined money, or cash.
 Gaius, 
when considering types of generic goods which could be given within a type of a loan 
called mutuum, that is goods for which a substitute may be given, lists also pecunia 
numerata, here meaning either cash money or coinage.
 And in an excerpt from Ulpian 
concerning the senatus consultum Macedonianum, which states that a person who has 
lent money to a son-in-power (qui filio familias mutuam pecuniam dedisset) is to have no 
claim or action even after the death of the father,
 the celebrated jurist states that even 
though the wording of the SC (i.e. mutuam pecuniam dedisset) seem to him as referring 
to numerata pecunia, still it should be understood as including non solum numeratae 
pecuniae, but also loans (mutui) of corn or wine or oil (frumento vel vino vel oleo). In 
which case, numerata pecunia appears to have been understood in the narrower sense of 
coinage or cash, as opposed to money at large; that is, pecunia in the wider sense of 
property or wealth.
 Cic. Top. 13; 53. While argentum could mean silver, here it probably referred to money, with 
numerata pecunia to be understood as coined money; Reinhardt (2003) 122-3, for English translation. 
Ciceros observation, however, stands in contradiction to later juridical procedures: Ulp. Dig. 34.2.19.pr. 
(20 ad sab.), who explicitly excluded pecunia signata (i.e. coinage) from aurum vel argentum legatum 
est; 34.2.27.1 (44 ad sab.), who holds coins as not included (nummos non contineri) within argentum 
omne legatum est. For a fuller discussion, see Watson (1971) 147-51; Reinhardt (2003) 217-20, 225. 
 Cottier, Crawford, et al. (2008) 50-1, 122-3. On Latinisims present in Greek texts, see Meyer (2007) 62. 
 Gai. Dig. 44.7.1.2 (2 aure.). Unlike the case with depositum, where the things given remained the 
property of the depositor, a mutuum may be returned with a substitute. 
Ulp. Dig. 14.6.1.pr. (29 ad ed.).
 Ulp. Dig. 14.6.7.3 (29 ad ed.); and see discussions on Ch. 4, pp. 122-3, and Ch. 5, p. 176, below. This is 
because mutuum concerns generic goods, for which a substitute may be given. 
- 76 - 
Coming back to the definitions of pecunia offered by Ulpian and Hermogenian, 
the general claim of both is similar: that all things could be considered as money. Yet, 
while Ulpians definition briefly states omnia corpora, all bodily or concrete objects, 
with no further elaboration; Hermogenians definition is more detailed. He starts by 
saying that pecunia is omnes res with the word res in itself having a wide meaning (and 
see n. 179 below), and then details that it includes both real-estate (soli) and movables 
(mobiles), as well as concrete objects (corpora) and claims/rights (iura). Should it 
be inferred from it that only in a later period was the meaning of pecunia widened to 
include also iura, i.e. legal claims openly defined by Gaius as incorporeals (Gai. Inst. 
2.14)? The answer, I believe, is probably not.
 An excerpt from Ulpians contemporary, 
Paul,
 which considers the difference between money (pecunia) and a thing (res), 
states that pecunia relates to those things that form part of our patrimony,
 which is 
the sum of possessions inherited through generations; whether or not these are corporeal, 
receives no mention. That a patrimony (hence, also an inheritance) included also 
incorporeals, i.e. obligations, and quae sub condicione sunt promissa,
unquestionable.
 Should it be understood that all which was in patrimonio could be 
considered as pecunia? Pauls excerpt neither contradicts nor confirms this suggestion, 
but from Ciceros writingswhere it is stated that hereditas est pecuniait is clear that 
this could indeed be so.
 This view was valid also in the third century CE, as can be 
Harris (2006) 7.
 Paul, too, served as Praetorian Prefect under Alexander Severus. 
 Paul, Dig. 50.16.5.pr. (2 ad ed.): Rei appellatio latior est quam pecuniae, quia etiam ea, quae extra 
computationem patrimonii nostri sunt, continet, cum pecuniae significatio ad ea referatur, quae in 
patrimonio sunt. 
 Marcel. Dig. 36.1.46.1 (15 dig.). 
 Gai. Inst. 2.2-14, who states that our patrimony can include both corporeals and incorporeals. 
 Cic. Inv. 2.148; Top. 29, who defines an inheritance as pecunia. 
- 77 - 
extracted from an excerpt from Ulpian, who, where discussing the sale of a pupils land 
in order to settle a debt, says that the praetor needs first to investigate whether the money 
(pecunia) could be raised in some other way, listing coins (in numerato), debts (in 
nominibus), yields (in fructibus), or rents (in redituum).
 The analogy made by Ulpian 
between pecunia and property, be the latter manifested in corporeals or in legal 
obligations, arises also from all three legal definitions of pecunia mentioned above; and it 
is echoed also in evidence postdating the period here under investigation. The fourth-
century grammarian Marius Servius Honoratus offers an etymology for pecunia which 
relates the word to peculium, that portion of the paterfamilias property given to a son-in-
power or a slave for their own use.
To summarise, pecunia simultaneously meant money as well as wealth,
the sense of ones possessions.
 It included, alongside coinage and cash, also goods, 
real-estate, obligations (i.e. legal claims), and possession of persons. This approach fits 
with Aristotles observation that money becomes a universal form of wealth, because 
everything can be expressed () in money;
 and is to be contrasted with the 
prominent position which coined money had occupied up until recently in modern 
research on Roman money.
 Yet, even though certain things were regarded as money 
in some circumstances, these were not considered as such in any circumstances.
 Ulp. Dig. 27.9.5.9 (35 ad ed.). 
 Serv. Ecl. 1.32. 
 OED defines wealth as Abundance of possessions or of valuable products; A collective term for those 
things the abundant possession of which (by a person or a community) constitutes riches. 
 Cic. Inv. 2.148; Top. 29. 
 Arist. EN 1133b l4-5; Scott (1994) 34; Seaford (2004) 100-1. 
 Harris (2006) 1-2, esp. nn. 3-9; (2008b) 1-2; (2008c); Hollander (2007) 1-2, esp. n. 3. 
Pompon. Dig. 46.4.10 (26 ad sab.), who demonstrates how laws could, and did, differ when different 
forms of wealth were considered. Although under certain circumstances numerata pecunia and slaves 
- 78 - 
everything could be money, does not prove that it always was so;
 and things usually 
not perceived as monetary instruments could nevertheless, under certain circumstances, 
act as manifestations of money. 
2.3. The Properties of Money 
The previous section commenced by stressing the inherent duality of money: 
money is a social convention, hence an abstract notion; and at the same time it has 
physical manifestations, which are, by their nature, corporeal and concrete. These two 
aspects of moneythe abstract and the tangibleare inseparably intertwined. In tracing 
the properties of money it is difficult not to mix characteristics of moneys materiality on 
the one hand, i.e. the physiognomies of things chosen to manifest money, and 
characteristics of moneys abstraction on the other, i.e. those properties which derive 
from the fact that money is a social relation, an idea which receives its significance from 
social consent.
As far as the materiality of money is concerned, its properties have received 
immense attention from anthropologists, sociologists, and philosophers, and traditionally 
have been defined with western experience in mind. Objects or things chosen to be used 
as money are conventionally expected to manifest the following properties: 1) Durability, 
be it a lasting one, as in the case of metals or shells, or a shorter one, as in the case of 
consumable goods such as tea or grain. Even things whose existence is more short-lived, 
could both be considered as pecuniaas in the definitions of pecunia cited above, these did not 
automatically receive the same legal treatment in all circumstances. 
Seaford (2004) 148: all money is wealth, but wealth is money only to the extent that it is envisaged as 
capable of money-functions; similarly, Hollander (2007) 12.  
 Gilbert (2005); Maurer (2006). 
- 79 - 
e.g. livestock, can fulfil monetary roles and have done so. 2) Portability, which allows 
monetary artefacts to be carried by individuals with little or no effort, as well as easily to 
change ownership. 3) Divisibility, i.e. the substance chosen to be used as money is 
expected to be capable of being divided into smaller parts. However, some artefacts 
which clearly acted as moneysuch as shells, livestock, or cigarettescannot be divided 
into smaller units; in which case, non-divisibility is compensated by an ability to 
accumulate money, an accumulation which later becomes divisible. 4) Money is expected 
to be homogeneous.
 That is, things chosen to be used as physical manifestations of 
money are selected thanks to their inherited or ascribed uniformity. Each pecuniary 
artefactbe it a shell, a cigarette, a piece of metal, or otheris considered as equivalent 
to, hence as replaceable by, any of the other similar artefacts. This gives rise to 5) the 
randomness characteristic of money;
 i.e. because objects which represent money are 
expected to be identical, or more precisely are perceived as such, money encompasses the 
ability randomly to replace any one piece of it with an equivalent other.  
Next to be considered are properties which derive from moneys abstractness; 
mainly, from its most distinctive abstract feature: being a numeraire. Money allows the 
transformation of physical object(s) into numerical units, thereby creating a conceptual 
framework that enables the use of mathematical figures for evaluating (all) other 
things.
 Because money is a sign which takes the form of a mathematical figure,
enables enumeration as well as commensuration of things which otherwise are conceived 
 Seaford (2004) 149-52, on ancient Greek money.  
Zimmermann (1996) 279.
 Seaford (2004) 169; Cuomo (2007). 
 Cuomo (2007), for a detailed discussion of the relation between money, sign, and mathematics in 
second-century CE Roman empire. 
- 80 - 
as belonging to different spheres of life.
 The practical implication of this abstraction is 
that money is to be counted rather than weighed.
 Roman legal texts often include 
pecunia within a category of things which can be weighed, numbered or measured;
however, as stated by Gaius, weighing coined metal, rather than counting it, was an 
archaic practice, which should be contrasted with that of his own time.
In this respect, the Greek invention of coinage can rightly be seen as an opening 
salvo for a shift from intrinsic to socially conferred value of money.
 Richard Seaford 
had argued for ancient Greece that it is in coinage that this homogeneity of money 
acquires perfection, for the stamp of a coin renders all small variations of quality and 
quantity irrelevant.
 His observation, however, does not apply to all cases of coined 
money; coins could, and did, act as ingots of precious metals.
 Hoard evidence 
demonstrates that the intrinsic metallic value of Roman coins clearly did matter.
Though Roman coins were generally treated as homogeneous artefacts, in certain 
circumstances they could also act as specific objects (corpora), therefore could not be 
replaced by equivalent coins.
 Be that as it may, by striking metal into coinage the raw 
 Maurer (2006). 
 Seaford (2004) 144, for Greek coinage. 
 Paul. Dig. 12.1.2.1 (28 ad ed.); Pompon. Dig. 12.1.3 (27 ad sab.); Gai. Inst. 3.90, who explicitly 
includes money (numerata pecunia); Just. Inst. 3.14.pr. 
 Gai. Inst. 1.122. 
Seaford (2004) 142. 
 Idem 149, 171. 
 One example, relatively close in time to the period here under investigation, is early fourth-century gold 
coins; according to the Aezani copy of Diocletians Price Edict their value as coinage equaled their value 
as gold ingots; Crawford and Reynolds (1979). 
 Hoarding patterns strongly suggest that the coins metallic value did assume a role of guarantee for 
hedging purposes; Bolin (1958) 336-57; Schubert (1992); Haupt (2001); to name only a few studies. 
 E.g. Papin. Dig. 30.51 (4 quaest.); on which, see Ch. 8, p. 248, below. 
- 81 - 
material had been given an additional value, which exceeded that of its metallic value;
and this is acknowledged already in the first-century CE by Pliny the Elder, who says that 
by adding pictures to gold and silver it became more valuable.
Last to be considered is moneys impersonality. Unlike specific precious artefacts, 
e.g. gold rings or talismanic objects,
 money is not unique. It is impersonal in the sense 
that it is available in random quantity, i.e. any one piece of it may randomly be replaced 
with an equivalent other. Its impersonality is evident in the ability to exchange money 
with anyone and for anything. In this sense money is universal; it can serve as a means to 
any purpose,
 hence may become an aim in itself.
 As put forth by the anthropologist 
Keith Hart: Money was traditionally impersonal so that it could retain its value when it 
moved between people who might not even know each other.  Money in this form is an 
instrument detached from the person who uses it.
 Thus, money is impersonal also in 
the sense that it is not associated with any specific individual as such, but only with those 
individualsrulers and their family, in the case of Hellenistic and Roman coins; public 
officials and benefactors, in the case of Greek and Hellenistic coins, who represent the 
collectiveness of the community, the authoritative power of a polity, the essence of 
communal identity (e.g. Romanitas), or the legitimacy of the supremacy (e.g. Imperium).  
 Some margin must have existed between the coins metallic value and the value at which these were 
issued, which accounted for (at least part of) the minting costs; Howgego (1990) 18-9; Aubert (2003) 
246; Haklai-Rotenberg (2011). 
 Plin. NH 33.4. 
On value as a mythical idea in ancient Greece, see Gernet (1981) 73-111, esp. 105-6, for contribution to 
the invention of money.
 Seaford (2004) 162-5, who considers the role of money in ancient Greece in acquiring divine favour, 
political power, and human skills. 
 Arist. EN 1133b l4-5. Also, see Seaford (2004) 159-62, who speaks of the transcendent nature of money. 
 Hart (2007) 12. 
- 82 - 
Part II: Institutional Framework 
- 83 - 
Chapter 3: Money in Exchange: An Introduction 
Institutions are the structure that humans impose on human interaction 
and therefore define the incentives that, together with the other constraints 
(budget, technology, etc.), determine the choices that individuals make that 
shape the performance of societies and economies over time.
3.1. Introduction 
As regards methodology Part Two, as its title suggests, looks at the 
institutionalised role of money in exchange transaction as reflected in Roman law. It 
relies on approaches advanced by New Institutionalism, and in particular New 
Institutional Economics (NIE), promoting a widening interpretation of the term 
institution, seeing it as composed of three pillars of institutional framework: 
regulative, normative and cognitive. The regulative pillar sets the ground rules for 
interaction as reflected in laws, and the extent to which these are effectively monitored 
and enforced. The normative pillar consists of beliefs, values, and norms that define 
expected behaviour in a society. The cognitive pillar is comprised of the mental structures 
embedded in a society, i.e. the widely shared social knowledge and cognitive categories 
which determine the course of action chosen by individuals.
 NIE follows this approach 
seeing institutions as including both formal rules and informal constrains; that is, 
conventions, norms of behaviour, and self-imposed codes of conduct, as well as their 
North (1993) 35.
Scott (2001) 34-51.
- 84 - 
enforcement characteristics.
 These constitute the regulative and the normative 
institutional frameworks. Under the cognitive institutional framework fall those socially 
legitimised structures of thought with which individuals grasp reality, construct their 
choices and form their actions.
 In other words, the cognitive framework is made of the 
belief-systems which sustain and determine economic interaction. It includes those 
formations of cognitive dimension that direct human affairs in the aggregate level. Both 
market and money serve as good examples, since both are abstract notionsalbeit 
with physical manifestationswhich dictate patterns of behaviour.  
NIE understands institutions as setting the rules of the game by which economic 
performance occurs. It focuses on the simultaneously causal links between institutions 
and economic performance, analysing them with the help of conceptual formations such 
as property rights, credible commitments, and transaction costs.
 As put forth by Bruce 
Frier and Dennis Kehoe, whether through evolution or conscious design, institutions 
provide rich information upon which actors can develop expectations regarding the future 
behaviour of other actors.
 In doing so, institutions provide the structure that humans 
impose on human interaction in order to reduce uncertainty,
 and serve to diminish some 
of the unknowns with which agents are faced.
Part Two adopts this approach as guidelines. Chapter 3 lays out several 
underlying observations regarding money as an institution, and Roman legal 
classification of exchange transaction. Subsequent chapters discuss the institutionalised 
To paraphrase on North (1997) 225.
 North (1990); (1991); Arthur, Durlauf and Lane (1997).  
North (1990); Eggertsson (1996).
Frier and Kehoe (2007) 118; relying on Schotter (1981).
North (1997) 225.
North (1990); (1991).
- 85 - 
role of money in exchange generally following Roman legal categorisation into contracts: 
Chapter 4 concerns the Roman contract of sale (emptio venditio); Chapter 5 that of 
leasing and hiring (locatio conductio); and Chapter 6 considers legal procedures for 
contracting monetary loans. By no means does it offers an attempt at the colossal task of 
systematically covering every aspect of every legal format relevant for contracting 
exchange; that would be beyond the volume of this study or the capacity of its author. 
Instead discussions focus on several specific issues most crucial for institutionalising the 
use of money in exchange. Since exchange is defined as a reciprocal process,
 transfer of 
resources which occurred under legal formations that do not include a strictly speaking 
reciprocal componentsuch as gifts, dowries, taxes, and tributesare not addressed 
here. 
3.2. Money as an Institution 
To begin with, money itself is an institution based on social convention.
 Viewed 
in terms of a normative institutional formation, money, in the sense of a durable means to 
store wealth, allows individuals to better face future uncertainties, hence plan their course 
of action in accordance with their ability to reserve resources over time and between 
generations.
 In this respect, money is a risk-reducing institution, allowing individuals to 
secure themselves against (some of) the futures unknowns. Money is also a cognitive 
institutional formation. Being a unit of account, a numeraire, a standard through which 
See section 3.3, below.
See Ch. 2, above; Schotter (1981) 35-8, who applies Game Theory to explain how money evolved to 
resolve a coordination problem.  
This role of money is stressed in Keynesian tradition of economic thought; Keynes (1937) 215-8; (1936) 
esp. 293-4; Davidson (1972) 102-3. 
- 86 - 
individuals grasp reality, money is in fact a mental structure with which individuals 
comprehend their (social) reality;
 hence also it affects how they determine their choice 
of action. From an economic perspective money, in the sense of a unit of account, allows 
calculating and comparing things of different nature. As such money can be viewed as an 
institution which reduces the cost of exchange,
 as it provides parties with a mechanism 
easier than barter to satisfy their wants.
 This mechanism is condensed into the notion of 
a price; that is, a certain amount fixed in monetary units of account.
 Economics takes 
this notion one step further. It argues that the existence of moneyin the sense of a 
universal abstract numeraire, through which value is quantified and comparedallows 
the creation of a flexible price mechanism, which, in turn, encapsulates market 
information in the aggregate level regarding production costs and tendencies of demand 
and supply. Since market prices conceal this otherwise costly-to-obtain information, the 
existence of money holds the potential of reducing transaction costs,
 with the latter 
defined at the most general level as the costs which arise beyond the point of production 
to affect the allocation of goods and services.
Perhaps one of the most straightforward indicators for Roman institutionalisation 
of money as a numeraire is its application within condemnatio. I certainly do not attempt 
Also, Seaford (2004), who argues that using abstract, homogeneous money in the form of coinage, was a 
catalyser for new patterns of thought in areas such as cosmology, philosophy, and tragedy. 
 The neoclassical approach, Tymoigne and Wray (2006) 1.  
A similar view was expressed in Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.pr. (33 ad ed.).
On how this notion came to be formulated by classical Roman jurists, see the following chapter.
North (1991).
Neoclassical economics traditionally understood transaction costs in a narrow price-based sense, as the 
direct costs that an economic agent incurs when engaging in a market transaction, e.g. transport costs or 
acquiring services of middlemen; Klaes (2008). Since the 1960s more relational interpretations of 
transaction costs have gained acceptance among economists, who include under this term the costs of 
pre-sale inspection, contracting, fulfilment, policing, and enforcement; Coase (1937); (1960); (1974); 
Calabresi (1968); Alston (2008);
Klaes (2008). Relational transaction costs have received a seminal role 
within NIE, which sees social and legal institutions as mechanisms that reduce uncertainty and provide 
means to mitigate transaction costs; North (1991); Alston (2008).
- 87 - 
to offer an overview of this essential topic to Roman jurisprudence; suffice it to cite 
Gaius general notes on condemnatio, which demonstrate the centrality of money as a 
cognitive institutional formation that enables conceptualising value. According to Gaius, 
as a general rule, condemnatio may be expressed in the formula in terms of a fixed sum 
(certa pecunia) or an indefinite sum.
 In the former, a suit could be brought forth for 
certae pecuniae, or for certae rei.
 In both instances the condemnatio would be 
conceptualised in monetary terms (ad pecuniariam aestimationem); i.e. the judge does 
not condemn the defender to hand over the actual property, as was the custom in former 
times, but its estimated value in money (pecunia).
 In the latter case, where 
condemnatio was for an indefinite sum, the suit could either set a numerical cap in 
advance (i.e. to pay no more than so and so), or no cap was set at all and the judge was 
asked to condemn the defender to pay the value of the matter.
 At any rate, if the judge 
decided to condemn a defender, he also had to fix the pecuniary sum (certa pecunia) 
which the latter was to pay.
 Thus, money was the official quantifier of value of the 
Roman state. Plaintiffs were to state their demands in monetary terms, and where they 
failed to do so, it was left to the official representative of the state (the iudex)if indeed 
Gai. Inst. 4.49: Condemnatio autem uel certae pecuniae in formula proponitur uel incertae.
Kaser (1971) 492-3.
Gai. Inst. 4.48: Omnium autem formularum, quae condemnationem habent, ad pecuniariam 
aestimationem condemnatio concepta est. itaque et si corpus aliquod petamus, uelut fundum, hominem, 
uestem, aurum, argentum, iudex non ipsam rem condemnat eum, cum quo actum est, sicut olim fieri 
solebat, sed aestimata re pecuniam eum condemnat.
Gai. Inst. 4.51: Incertae uero condemnatio pecuniae duplicem significationem habet. est enim una cum 
aliqua praefinitione, quae uulgo dicitur cum taxatione, uelut si incertum aliquid petamus; nam illic ima 
parte formulae ita est: EIVS, IVDEX, NVMERIVM NEGIDIVM AVLO AGERIO DVMTAXAT 
SESTERTIVM X MILIA CONDEMNA. SI NON PARET, ABSOLVE. uel incerta est et infinita, uelut si 
rem aliquam a possidente nostram esse petamus, id est, si in rem agamus uel ad exhibendum. nam illic 
ita est: QVANTI EA RES ERIT, TANTAM PECVNIAM, IVDEX, NVMERIVM NEGIDIVM AVLO 
AGERIO CONDEMNA. SI NON PARET, ABSOLVITO.
Gai. Inst. 4.51, ad finem: iudex, si condemnet, certam pecuniam condemnare debet, etsi certa pecunia in 
condemnatione posita non sit.
- 88 - 
he had condemned the defenderto set the pecuniary value that, in his view, would offer 
sufficient compensation.
Although the source of moneys immense value to society lies in the general 
agreement to money as a social convention,
 more often than not money is not 
established solely on voluntary social consent. Rather, it is institutionalised as well as 
regulated by the ruling authorities of a polity, and from the sixth century BCE this was 
accomplished first and foremost in the form of coinage.
 In the Roman world imperial 
authorities were responsible, both directly and indirectly, for coin production, as well as 
for its distribution.
 This meant that Roman authorities were responsible also for 
organising the structure of the monetary system by setting the magnitude and scale of 
denominations, which, in turn, form a configuration of money. To this should be added 
the Roman authorities intervention in regulating the relation between the different 
currencies used within the empires borders.
 Some of these currencies predated Roman 
conquest, and, once subordinated to Roman rule, were put with gradually increasing 
vigour under the supervision of central authorities.
Roman money was not exclusively coinage; it consisted of both cash and credit, 
and was represented by both commodities and tokens.
 Nevertheless, the units of 
account, which formed its structure and determined the numerical standards with which 
value was conceptualised, were regulated by Romes ruling authorities. These units of 
Gai. Inst. 4.52-60, who details how to fix a sum so that it would be not too large or too small.
Tobin (2008); and see previous chapter.
Similarly, Seaford (2004) 135. 
Scholarship on the topit is vast; here I cite only Hopkins (1980); Howgego (1992); (1994); (1990) 19-20, 
who considers the possibility of private individuals striking coins in official (i.e. state) mints.
E.g. OGIS 484 (Pergamum, second century CE); on which, see Macro (1976).
Crawford (1985) 267-79; Burnett (1987) 46-7; Sutherland (1987) 30-32; Burnett et al. (1992) 1-6, 36-7, 
52-4; Howgego (1992) 2.
Harris (2006); (2008c); Hollander (2007).
- 89 - 
account were represented by denominations, which, like the notion of money itself, 
display a Janus-faced oddity. Denominations are abstract mathematical ideas, i.e. 
fractions and multiples, which often, though certainly not always, obtain physical 
manifestation in the form of coins,
 which are in turn regulated by the ruling authorities. 
By affirming the scale and magnitude of the numerical construction of money Roman 
central authorities were indeed responsible for the creation of the structural framework of 
money,
 though not its aggregate supply.
3.3. Approaching Exchange 
Broadly speaking, exchange is a reciprocal act of giving and receiving of things in 
general.
 It is a process, by which parties transfer between them control over resources 
and commodities in order to gain from bilateral bargaining and contracting.
 It includes 
transactions in which a complete transfer of ownership takes place (as in modern sale), as 
well as transactions in which only a temporal or restricted transfer of rights occurs; that 
is, when one party or more obtain permission to use resources which are not their own, as 
is the case in lease, tenancy, hire, employment, or loan. The view adopted here is that 
gift-giving, though sometimes attaining a position of an institutionalised reciprocal 
transfer of goods, does not qualify as exchange transaction par excellence.
Cuomo (2007).
Howgego (1990); (1992); Duncan-Jones (1994); Wolters (1999).
Harris (2006); (2008c); Howgego (2009) 288; and Ch. 6, below.
Wilson (2008), at the beginning. 
 Polanyi (1944); (1957), who divides transfer of goods into three categories: exchange, reciprocity, and 
redistribution; Figueira (1984), who applies it in the context of ancient Greek trade. On gift-giving as a 
form of exchange, see Mauss (1925); Morris (1986), who applies it in the study of the economic history 
of archaic Greece.
- 90 - 
 Exchange activities are institutionalised in laws and conventions. Different 
societies develop different legal formations, and may construct exchange on different 
lines of reasoning. These could coexist within the same economic sphere, as was the case 
in the Roman empire, where different legal systems existed side by side, their 
enforceability conditioned by the identity and social status of the parties involved, rather 
than by geographic location.
 Thus, for example, in Jewish law of the period exchange 
transactions were categorised according to the rights granted to the party which gained 
hold of the object of the transaction, ranging from a complete transfer of ownership (as 
in sale), to having no rights of usage whatsoever (as in the case of finding lost belongings 
of another).
 In Classical Roman law, however, exchange transaction was organised 
based on different criteria and legal reasoning. 
The vital and complex topic of Roman legal classification is beyond the scope of 
the present study.
 Here suffice it to state that classical Roman jurists approached the 
various commercial transactions which formed exchange by focusing on the obligations 
(obligationes) it created; with the term obligatio holding an inherently reciprocal 
Touri (2007); and Ch. 1, section 1.2.3 above.
In the Mishnaha redaction of Jewish oral legal traditions concluded circa 220 CE, tractate Bava 
Metzia, the first three chapters deal with persons holding property which is not their own (aes alienum, 
to use Roman terminology), and in which they have no rights whatsoever; starting with finding a loss of 
another (Bava Metzia 1-2), and moving to depositaries (Bava Metzia 3; on which see Ch. 8, below). The 
tractates following chapters are concerned with persons who have come to hold property of another in 
ways which permit them (certain) rights in the said property. These include: sale, where full transfer of 
ownership occurs (Bava Metzia 4);
loan for consumption, which gives right of usage ( ... ; Bava Metzia 
5), and may be paralleled with the Roman mutuum; a depositee who safeguards a deposit for payment 
(Somer Sakhar,  ; Bava Metzia 6), which Daube (1944) 380-1, parallels with the so-called locatio 
conductio operarum (on the latter, see Ch. 5, p. 135, below); loan for use ( ... ; Bava Metzia 8), which 
can be paralleled with commodatum; and rent and hire (...; Bava Metzia 7, 9-10), paralleled with the 
Roman locatio conductio. Also, see Daube (1944) esp. 379-83, 405-7; Henshke (1997) 28. 
The topic has received a great deal of scholarly attention. Here I refer only to Zimmermann (1996); 
McGinn (2012); both offer extensive bibliographies.
- 91 - 
meaning of both duties and rights.
 Reciprocitystressed above as an essential 
component of exchangeis embedded also in the Roman legal notions of conventio 
(agreement) and contractus (contract),
 as well as in the corresponding Greek concept of 
synallagma ().
 Yet, it was not contracts which stood at the centre of Roman 
legal categorisation; rather, Roman jurists constructed their discussions around 
obligations and the different ways by which these arose.
 Thus, for example, the first-
century BCE jurist Labeo, cited by Ulpian, lists four such methods: re and verbis, both 
falling under his category of things that agantur; consensu, which falls under his things 
that contrahantur, i.e. obligations characterised by reciprocity (ultro citroque 
obligationem); and the somewhat vague sine verbis factam, referring to things that 
gerantur.
 Gaius, too, constructs his discussion around methods by which obligations 
are created, offering an initial twofold division into obligationes ex contractu, and ex 
delicto (i.e. from an offence);
 with the former further subdivided into four
 procedural 
methods by which obligations can legally be contracted: re, verbis, litteris,
consensu.
 Dividing exchange according to types of reciprocal obligations guids also the 
Watson (1965), in general; Zimmermann (1996) 1; Fiori (2012).
Most recently, Pelloso (2007); Dalla Massara (2011); McGinn (2012); Fiori (2012) 48-56.
Gallo (1992), non vidi; Pelloso (2007); Fiori (2012). 
Fiori (2012) 61.
Ulp. Dig. 50.16.19 (11 ad ed.): Labeo libro primo praetoris urbani definit, quod quaedam "agantur", 
quaedam "gerantur", quaedam "contrahantur": et actum quidem generale verbum esse, sive verbis sive 
re quid agatur, ut in stipulatione vel numeratione: contractum autem ultro citroque obligationem, quod 
Graeci sunallagma vocant, veluti emptionem venditionem, locationem conductionem, societatem: gestum 
rem significare sine verbis factam. See Fiori (2012) 45-8, with reference to earlier publications, and p. 
67 for English translation.
Gai. Inst. 3.88: Nunc transeamus ad obligationes, quarum summa diuisio in duas species diducitur: 
omnis enim obligatio uel ex contractu nascitur uel ex delicto. See Zimmermann (1996) 10-13, and 14-
18, for Justinians development of the system. 
On the centrality of the number four in Justinians subdivisions, see Zimmermann (1996) 14-15.
On the contract litteris, see Watson (1965) 18-39.
Gai. Inst. 3.89: Et prius uideamus de his, quae ex contractu nascuntur. harum autem quattuor genera 
sunt: aut enim re contrahitur obligatio aut uerbis aut litteris aut consensu.
- 92 - 
third-century jurist Paul, who builds his description of exchange on a general fourfold
classification: Either I give to you in order that you give, or I give that you do, or I do 
that you give, or I do that you do;
 which is then further subdivided following the 
manner by which obligations in each of the categories can be created.
Two notions, namely bona fide and consensus, are especially fundamental to 
Roman legal institutionalisation of exchange, hence deserve some clarification.
development of bona fide into a legal institution, in addition to it being a moral one, dates 
back to the early Republic.
 It was probably during the second half of the second century 
BCE that the bonae fidei iudicia emerged and were incorporated into the praetorian law 
(what is known as the ius honorarium).
 Its significance was in setting new flexible 
guidelines by which judges can give rulings. In bonae fidei iudicia judges were instructed 
to resolve disputes in accordance with the principle of good faith; i.e. to regulate justice 
in accordance with what a bonus vir may deem as right and fair, thereby subordinating 
law to custom.
 Differences between ancient catalogues of bonae fidei iudicia shed light 
See n. 45 above.
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.pr. (5 quaest.): In hac quaestione totius ob rem dati tractatus inspici potest. Qui in 
his competit speciebus: aut enim do tibi ut des, aut do ut facias, aut facio ut des, aut facio ut facias. 
For a recent account, see Kremer (2000), non vidi. For discussion of Paul. Dig. 19.5.5 (5 quaest.), see Ch. 
5, pp. 161-3, below.
Kermer (2000), non vidi; Zhang (2007); Pelloso (2011). 
Recently bona fide has received tremendous scholarly attention; Schermaier (2000); Talamanca (2003); 
Fiori (2006); (2008); (2011), with reference to earlier bibliography.
On morality, fides, and bona fide, see Schermaier (2000) 77-83; Fiori (2008); (2011) 101-6.
De Zulueta (1957) 5-6, who argues that it was part of a general movement which led to the reception of 
principles and institutes of the ius gentium into the ius civile; Wieacker (1963); Watson (1964); 
Schermaier (2000) esp. 71-4. But, see Lombardi (1961) 179-81, who dates the process to the end of the 
Republic; Fiori (2011) 112-39, who dates the end of this process as late as the first century CE.
Schermaier (2000) 63-6, 72-6; Fiori (2011) 208-9, 216-9. For a general overview of bona fide in the 
longue dure, see Fiori (2006) 127-36. 
- 93 - 
on the historical process by which contractual relationships of exchange were included 
under this category.
From its earliest stages bonae fidei iudicia included a more concise group of 
obligationes consensu contractae, i.e. obligations contracted by consent;
 namely, sale 
and purchase (emptio venditio
), lease and hire (locatio conductio
), partnership 
(societas
), and mandate (mandatum
). The development of these four consensual 
contracts during the third and second centuries BCE established key definitions for 
Roman economic relations,
 and provided the legal framework for much of Roman 
commerce.
 It based interaction on a notion of good faith (bona fide); it established 
mutual agreement as the basis for creating obligations between parties;
 it freed the 
contracting of transactions from rigid formulae,
 enabling transactions to be concluded 
also between absent persons;
 and it detached the moment of contracting a transaction 
from that of transferring the objects which it concerned, with the potential of enabling 
wider use of credit. All of these have tremendous implications for the institutionalised 
environment of economic interaction, whether or not the latter was conducted in money. 
In the next two chapters discussion focuses on the role of money within the context of 
two of these consensual contracts most vital for conducting exchange, namely sale 
(emptio venditio) and lease/ hire (locatio conductio). 
Cic. Off. 3.70; Gai. Inst. 4.62; Just. Inst. 4.6.28. And, see Schermaier (2000) 66-7; Fiori (2011) 108-9.
Gai. Inst. 3.135 (=Dig. 44.7.2.pr.).
The starting point for which continues to be, De Zulueta (1957); Daube (1959). And, see Ch. 4, below. 
For recent accounts, see Fiori (1999); Du Plessis (2012a). And, see Ch. 5, below.
For recent account, see Meissel (2004). 
 Arangio-Ruiz (1949); Watson (1961); both remain indispensable.
On consensual contracts, see Cancelli (1963); Watson (1964). 
Du Plessis (2012a) 1.
Gai. Dig. 44.7.2.1 (3 inst.).
Gai. Inst. 3.136 (=Dig. 44.7.2.1).
Gai. Inst. 3.136 (=Dig. 44.7.2.2).
- 94 - 
Lastly, a general comment ought to be made regarding the enforceability of 
contracts in the Roman world. While enforceable contracts no doubt facilitate exchange, 
high levels of enforceabilityoften assumed by economic theoryare not essential for 
the existence of exchange.
 It is reasonable to assume that levels of enforceability in the 
Roman world were lower than the ones one may axpect to find in modern Western 
countries. Yet, the involvement of the Roman ruling authorities in enforcing legal 
arrangementsthat is, the existence of a legal system, with its jurisprudential procedures, 
courts, judges, and petitions to officials, governors, and emperorsindicates that the 
Roman regime certainly contributed to the enforceability of commercial agreements, 
whether or not these took the legal form of a contract. To official legal enforcement of 
contracts should be added the social pressure for keeping ones word. This was embodied 
in the form of infamia, both a legal term and a cultural institution that inflicted shame (as 
well as legal restrictions) on persons who had acted dishonestly in conducting business; 
i.e. infamia could be a consequence of unpaid debts or bankryptcy, or be inflicted on 
persons whose behaviour appeared as deliberate violation of the confidence expected in 
contractual relations, such as depositum, mandatum, tutelage, or partmership (societas).
Both infamia and the states jurisprudential mechanisms for keeping the law had the 
outcome of better defining property rights, thereby reducing uncertainties and potentially 
lowering transaction costs.
 In this respect law was not merely the privilege of the elite; 
Wilson (2008). Low level of enforceability increases uncertainty, and encourages parties to aim for 
simultaneous reciprocal exchange, rather than for long-lasting or continuous transactions.
On infamia, see Dig. 3.2, titled De his qui notantur infamia; Greenidge (1894); Berger (1953) 500; 
Fleckner (2010) 341-2, on infamia of members of a partnership (socii).
Lo Cascio (2006) 218-9, 222;
Frier and Kehoe (2007) 128; Harris (2007) 519; Kehoe (2012). However, 
the casuistic nature of Roman law, and tendencies towards sophistication, had often had the effect of 
making economic interactioncommunicated via contractual formulaemore complicated, forcing one 
or both parties to turn to the aid of professional middlemene.g. scribes, lawyers, official recorders of 
- 95 - 
petitions to the emperors a libellis, as well as to officials of lower rank, both imperial 
and local, had been sent by people all across the empire representing a variety of social 
statuses, thereby indicating, at least to some degree, an effectiveness of the Romans in 
establishing authoritative legal institutions to resolve disputes.
contracts, coin-assayers, or bankersin order to protect their interest; thereby accumulating additional 
costs to the transaction. 
Kehoe (2012) 190-3, with further bibliography in n. 3, citations taken from pp. 190, 191, respectively.
- 96 - 
Chapter 4: Emptio venditio 
4.1. Introduction 
The first economic interaction involving money which comes to the modern mind 
is that of buying and selling. This to a great extent is due to developments in the Roman 
contract of sale (emptio venditio) which took place during the first two centuries CE. At 
the end of this process emptio venditio had emerged as a contract in which one party 
offered something for sale, while the other provided remuneration in the form of a 
purchase-price (pretium), defined in monetary terms (in numerata pecunia).  
The issue of pretium in numerata pecunia stood at the centre of one of the most 
celebrated controversies between the two schools of Classical Roman Law: the Sabinians, 
also known as the Cassians, and the Proculians. The debate was not merely theoretical; a 
requirement that a purchase-price be defined in money has crucial implications for sale 
transactions as well as the use of money, hence also the attitudes towards it. Thus, this 
school controversy reveals the subtext, the hidden suppositions, which dictated the 
attitudes of Roman jurists towards money; and its outcomei.e. the view which 
eventually prevailedinfluenced the way in which sale transactions took place, hence set 
the tone for the attitudes of the general public towards money. Therefore, this 
controversyits nature, how it came to be formed, and later resolvedis of great 
relevance to the present topic of study.  
In what follows I briefly list the components of the Roman contract of sale; then 
describe the controversy, and the opinions in the scholarship to explain it, in particular 
the reasons why the pecuniary requirement was formulated to begin with; and, finally, the 
- 97 - 
implications of making it obligatory. However, first a number of preliminary notes ought 
to be made about the schools themselves, the Sabinians and the Proculians.
4.2. The Schools 
Most of our information about the two legal schools derives from Gaius 
Institutiones, which mentions two scholae;
 and from a long excerpt of Sextus 
Pomponius Enchiridion, composed probably under the emperor Hadrian,
 and preserved 
in Justinians Digest,
 which mentions two sectae.
 The representatives of the two 
schools, we are informed, differed on a number of issues, which came to be known as the 
school controversies. Gaius discusses twenty-two such controversies,
 and some are 
mentioned also in Justinians Corpus Iuris Civilis; mainly in the Digest, to a lesser extent 
in Justinians Institutiones, with the Codex providing an important source for knowing 
when and how some of the controversies were eventually decided.
According to Pomponius, the schools originated from a difference of opinion 
between the two prominent jurists of the Augustan era, C. Ateius Capito and M. Antistius 
Labeo.
 Yet, it was later juristsMassurius Sabinus, a pupil of Capito, and Proculus, a 
The existence of the two legal schools has received vast scholarly attention; e.g. Schanz (1884); 
Sokolowski (1896); Baviera (1898); Betti (1915); Wenger (1953) 498-504; De Zulueta (1957) 16-8; 
Honor (1962) 18-45; Jolowicz and Nicholas (1972) 378-9; Stein (1972); (1977); Kodrebski (1976); 
Liebs (1976); Falchi (1981); Brge (1982) 142f.; Behrends (1983-1984); Scacchetti (1984); Tellegen 
(1988); Zimmermann (1996) 250-2; Stolfi (1997); Leesen (2008); (2010). 
 E.g. Gai. Inst. 2.15; 4.79. 
Lenel (1889) vol. 2, 1246.
 Pompon. Dig. 1.2.2 (enchir.). 
 Pompon. Dig. 1.2.2.47 (enchir.). 
Gai. Inst. 1.196; 2.15; 2.78; 2.79; 2.123; 2.195; 2.200; 2.216-222; 2.231; 2.244; 3.85-87; 3.98; 3.103; 
3.133; 3.140; 3.141; 3.161; 3.167a; 3.168; 3.177-178; 4.78; 4.79. The controversies are systematically 
dealt with and analyses in Falchi (1981); Leesen (2010), with a summarised list of the relevant references 
to Gaius Institutiones in p. 42. 
Leesen (2010) 4.
 Pompon. Dig. 1.2.2.47; 52 (enchir.); Tac. Ann. 3.75, who also mentions the two Augustan jurists. 
- 98 - 
pupil of a pupil of Labeowho gave the schools their names;
 supporting the claim that a 
clear division into scholae was established only after the time of Augustus. Pomponius 
also informs us that the Sabinians were first called the Cassiana schola, named after the 
jurist C. Cassius Longinus,
 and this name also appears in a letter of Pliny the Younger 
to his friend Geminius.
 On the basis of this information Honor concluded that the 
schools originated with Cassius and Proculus, probably in the second half of the first 
century CE, and only later, in the quest for prestige, were traced back to earlier, more 
distinguished founders.
The division of Roman jurists into two schools, which began under the Julio-
Claudians, was still very much alive in the mid-second century.
 For this period we have 
Gaius self-testimony for being a Sabinian,
 and the contemporaneous self-testimony of 
Venuleius Saturninus for being a Proculian.
 It is a matter of debate whether or not the 
celebrated Antoninian jurist Sextus Pomponius belonged to one of the two schools;
while some scholars hold Pomponius to have been an adherent of the Sabinians,
 others 
 Pompon. Dig. 1.2.2.48; 52 (enchir.). 
 Pompon. Dig. 1.2.2.52 (enchir.). 
Plin. Ep. 7.24.8; on which, see Tellegen (1988).
 Honor (1962) 18-39, esp. 19-21. 
Leesen (2010) 2-4. Contra Honor (1962) 35-6, who argues that the schools ceased to exist already in the 
160s; Tellegen (1988), who argues that it is not clear whether the schools continued to exist after Hadrian 
abolished the position of the ius publice respondendi ex auctoritate principis, on which, see pp. 100-101, 
below.
E.g. Gai. Inst. 3.141. Although Gaius affiliates himself with the Sabinians, he uses not this name, nor that 
of the Cassians, but rather talks of nostri auctores or nostri praeceptores, as opposed to the diversa 
schola; Honor (1962) 19, who lists the relevant references in Gaius Institutiones.
Ven. Dig. 45.1.138.pr. (4 stip.). 
Stolfi (1997) 7-16; Leesen (2010) 4, n. 3. The view adopted here is that the evidence seems not to allow 
for a definite conclusion on the matter.
Thomas (1959) 167-70, who points out that in Pompon. Dig. 40.7.29.1 (18 ad quint. muc.), Pomponius 
supports Aristos view against that of Celsus and Labeo; Behrends (1983-1984) 204; Leesen (2010) 3, n. 
3, with reference to further bibliography.
- 99 - 
argue that he sided with the Proculians;
 or, that throughout his career he was affiliated 
with both.
 Opinions also differ on the question of when the schools ceased to exist. 
While some scholars argue that the schools were of little importance already by the 
second half of the second century,
 most scholars agree that the schools did not 
disappear before the end of the second century, and some even argue that they 
disappeared perhaps only during the course of the third,
 with some of the controversies 
decided as late as the sixth century by the emperor Justinian.
The existence of the two legal schools is generally undisputed; yet, the reasons for 
their appearance, as well as the nature of the division between them, remain open to 
interpretation. In the scholarship a dogmatic approach often has been adopted in 
analysing the school controversies, looking for general principle(s) that would explain the 
existence of the schools following some consistent internal criterion.
 It has been 
suggested that the division into Sabinians and Proculians was based on a difference in 
philosophical inclination, with the adherents of the former school following the Stoic 
tradition, and those of the latter school that of the Peripatetics.
 Another approach 
offered by Romanists regards the schools as originating from a difference in legal 
Baviera (1898) 27-30, cited in Leesen (2010) 3, n. 3.
Honor (1962) 21-6.
Honor (1962) 35-6; Tellegen (1988), who sees the schools as a direct outcome of the jurisprudential 
power of the ius respondendi, and believes that this institution was abolished already by Hadrian.
Falchi (1981); Leesen (2010) 1-4, 25. 
Leesen (2010) 327, n. 48, who cites six such controversies: CJ 5.60.3 (529); 4.38.15.1-3 (530); 
4.27.2(3).2 (530); Just. Inst. 1.22.pr.; 2.1.25; 2.20.34; 3.19.4; 3.23.pr.-1; 3.17.3; 3.28.3.
Lesen (2010) 312-6. In what follows, I rely on the summary offered in Lesen (2010) 5-20.
Sokolowski (1896); more recently, see Nelson and Manthe (1999) 525-31, who suggested that while the 
Sabinians followed the Stoics, the Proculians were influenced by Aristotle; Fiori (1999) 200-1, who 
ascribes to the Sabinians a Stoic philosophical stand, while the Proculians are perceived as advocating a 
doctrine of specificatio. Contra a philosophical explanation for the division into schools, see Stein (1972) 
8-9; Leesen (2010) 5-7; Vander Waerdt (1990), who argues that although many Roman jurists were 
highly educated in philosophy, especially in Stoics, this dictated neither their legal doctrine, nor Roman 
jurisprudence at large.
- 100 - 
methodology, i.e. as having different approaches to law and its interpretation. Thus, the 
Proculians have been labelled analogists and the Sabinians anomalists, following the 
subdivision of Greek grammarians. According to this view, the Proculians believed that 
law, similar to language, is governed by general principles; hence in problems of 
interpretatio verborum they tended to prefer strict literary interpretations. The Sabinians, 
on the other hand, perceived law as a product of usage and practice; hence tended to 
favour the subjective intentions of the parties over methodological formalities.
 Other 
Romanists have pursued a somewhat more socially-oriented explanation for the existence 
of the schools, seeing the opposition between them in terms of progressive vs. 
conservative.
 However, while some scholars argue that the Sabinians were progressive 
and the Proculians conservative,
 others argue that it was the other way around.
A somewhat different line of explanationwhich is more socially-oriented than 
the philosophical or methodological explanations, yet is based on an inward-looking 
perception of the legal professionsees the existence of the schools as originating from 
traditions of law teaching institutions.
 According to this approach, there was no 
fundamental difference between the Sabinians and the Proculians. Rather, the schools 
were created due to the introduction of the institution of the ius respondendi,
 granted by 
Schanz (1884); Betti (1915) esp. 26-7; Stein (1972) esp. 19-26; (1977); Liebs (1976) 275-82; Scacchetti 
(1984) esp. 386-390, 401. Contra Leesen (2010) 8-9, who claims that the majority of the controvercies 
did not concern the interpretation of a text, but of unwritten law.
Leesen (2010) 7-11.
Karlowa (1885) 661-6; Falchi (1981) esp. 252-4.
Voigt (1889) 222-41; Honor (1962) 35-9; Kodrebski (1976) 190-6. 
Baviera (1898); Honor (1962) 18-45; Jolowicz and Nicholas (1972) 379-80. This approach is 
summarised in Leesen (2010) 14-16. Also, see Honor (1962) 35-9, who argues that the separation into 
schools was enhanced by political inclinations; though, a strictly political explanation for the emergence 
of the schools is regarded as generally outdated; Jolowicz and Nicholas (1972) 379; Leesen (2010) 14. 
 The terminology in full is ius publice respondendi ex auctoritate principis; translated in Leesen (2010) 
25, n. 61, as to respond under the public authority of the emperor. The two main texts on this position 
- 101 - 
the emperor, which encouraged students of law to gather publicly around certain 
distinguished jurists, with the schools emerging as a result of personal rivalry and 
competition for prestige.  
This line of interpretationwhich stresses the role of the ius respondendi in the 
emergence of the schoolshas recently been taken one step further by Tessa Leesen, 
who claims that the schools were created owing to practical aspects of Roman 
jurisprudence.
 Both Sabinians and Proculians, she argues, were Roman jurists and 
therefore were first and foremost legal practitioners whose main activity was to give 
advice (responsa) in court.
 Since the heads of the schools were vested with the ius 
publice respondendi ex auctoritate principis, their responsa carried special authority, 
namely, that of the emperor,
 making it binding on the judge. Thus, when opposing 
parties in a trail had each approached the head of a different school for advice, a school 
controversy arose.
 According to Leesen, the controversies cannot be explained in terms 
of the schools adhering to opposed legal conceptions,
 but rather problems underlying 
the controversies arose in legal practice,
 since each jurist was expected to construct 
argumentation in support of the party which approached him for advice.
As stated in the introduction above, within the debate on the relation between law 
and society, the present study follows the approach which sees Roman law as integrally 
are, Pompon. Dig. 1.2.2.48-50 (enchir.); Gai. Inst. 1.7. On the ius respondendi, see Tellegen (1988); Frier 
(1996) 962-3; Tuori (2004), with reference to earlier bibliography; Ibbetson (2005) 185-6, with some 
general comments; Leesen (2010) 22-9, who offers a summary of the arguments in Tellegen (1988). 
Leesen (2010) 20-9.
Idem 1.
Idem 328.
Idem 22.
Idem 312.
Idem 328.
Idem 32.
- 102 - 
connected with society, and as indicative of actual practice. The casuistic nature of 
Roman legal sources is seen as supportive of the view that Roman jurisprudence itself 
was case driven. That is, more than being an inward-looking internally consistent system, 
Roman law was a case law, deeply rooted in real situations.
 Therefore, it should not 
come as a surprise that the present study favours more socially oriented interpretations 
for the existence of the two legal schools. It sees Roman jurists primarily as legal 
practitioners,
 who were bound to elite social codes of behaviour that encouraged 
competition on the basis of prestige. It assumes that juristic disputes were more often 
than not connected with, or based on, real legal problems; hence, stem from actual cases, 
either directly or by way of stimulating discussion on potential situations.  
4.3. Components of the Roman Contract of Sale  
Let us turn to the Roman contract of sale, emptio venditio. By the second century 
BCE emptio venditio had emerged as a consensual contract; that is, a contract based on 
the consensus of both seller and buyer, enforceable on the ground of mere agreement.
It created bilateral obligations between the parties, who werein order for a sale to be 
completereciprocally liable to one another (alter alteri obligatur).
 Being a consensual 
contract, Roman sale was conditioned by neither conveyance,
 nor arra, i.e. the transfer 
Though not every case reported by jurists necessarily was identical with a real situation.
Leesen (2010) 20-9, 328.
 Gai. Inst. 3.135; Ulp. Dig. 18.1.2.1 (1 ad sab.); 9.1 (28 ad sab.); Paul. Dig. 19.4.1.2 (32 ad ed.); De 
Zulueta (1957) 7, 20-2; Watson (1964); Kaser (1971) 547-8; Zimmermann (1996) 230, 239. 
 Gai. Inst. 3.137; Justin. Inst. 3.22.3. Unlike stipulatio or expensilatio, where obligations were imposed 
mainly on one of the parties; De Zulueta (1957) 7-8. 
 Ulp. Dig. 18.1.2.1 (1 ad sab.); De Zulueta (1957) 2; Kaser (1971) 547-8; Zimmermann (1996) 230-1.  
- 103 - 
of earnest-money.
 This meant detaching the moment of concluding a sale from that of 
the delivery, potentially enabling a widespread emergence of sale on credit.
institutional implications which this detachment had on Roman economic activity can 
hardly be overestimated. For the purpose of the present study what is important is that it 
established credit as an integral component of Roman economic environment.
 Another 
feature of the Roman contract of sale, which no doubt facilitated economic activity, was 
its independence from any compulsory formulae, either orally or in writing;
 thereby 
allowing sale to be conducted at a distance without the physical presence of the parties 
involved.
In order for a Roman contract of sale to be valid, the parties had to agree on two 
issues: the thing sold, i.e. merx; and its price, i.e. pretium. The former, merx, could be 
anything which one may have, possess, or sue for,
 both corporeal (e.g. land, chattels, 
slaves, or objects), and incorporeal (e.g. rights, claims). This included sale of inheritance, 
even before the latter was received by the vendor (sale of spes hereditiae);
 and sale of 
 Gai. Inst. 3.139. Unlike the Greek law of sale; Pringsheim (1950) 333-7. On the Roman novelty of 
consensual sale compared to other ancient sale contractsnamely, being enforceable on the basis of 
mere agreement, rather than on that of real actions such as transfer of objects, given as payment or 
security for future payment, see Pringsheim (1950) 87-92. On the origins of consensual sale, see 
Watson (1964). 
Pompon. Dig. 18.1.19 (31 ad quint. muc.); Kaser (1971) 545-8; Jrdens (1993). Unlike Greek law of sale; 
Pringsheim (1950); Cohen (2005); Maffi (2005). 
Pompon. Dig. 18.1.19 (31 ad quint. muc.), who states that sale on credit was a valid sale; also, see Harris 
(2006) 15.
 Gai. Inst. 3.136; Just. Inst. 3.22.1-2. 
 Gai. Inst. 3.136; Dig. 44.7.2.2 (3 inst.); Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.2 (33 ad ed.); De Zulueta (1957) 3-7; 
Zimmermann (1996) 237-9. 
 Paul. Dig. 18.1.34.1 (33 ad ed.): Omnium rerum, quas quis habere vel possidere vel persequi potest, 
venditio recte fit. 
Javol. Dig. 18.4.8; 10 (2 ex plaut.); Ulp. Dig. 18.4.11 (32 ad ed.). This could take place only after the 
testator had passed away, as can be concluded from Papin. Dig. 39.5.29.2 (10 respon.), who speaks of the 
donation of a future inheritance. Also, see Kaser (1971) 548-9; Zimmermann (1996) 248-9.
- 104 - 
debts or other conditional obligations,
 which supports arguments in favour of the 
significance of Roman credit money.
 Whether merx was corporeal or incorporeal, it had 
to exist; that is, it had to be a thing which one could perceive,
 including rei futurae, 
future possessions, both rei speratae, expected things, such as offspring or produce,
and rei spei, things hoped for, such as future earnings whose acquisition involved an 
element of chance.
 Technically, a sale had to be of a specific good.
 However, generic 
goods could also be sold if identified as certain mass;
 alternatively, they could be sold 
by using a legal device of two stipulations.
The second component to be agreed within the contract of sale itself was the 
purchase-price, pretium.
 Failing to reach an agreement on a price rendered the contract 
void.
 Altering the original price agreed upon via a subsequent agreement, meant 
diminishing the first contract and creating a new one.
 As a principle, the purchase-price 
 Paul. Dig. 18.4.6 (5 quaest.); Ulp. Dig. 18.4.17 (43 ad ed.); Julian. Dig. 18.4.19 (25 dig.).  
 On which, see Harris (2006); (2008c); Hollander (2007); and Ch. 6, below.  
 Pompon. Dig. 18.1.8.pr. (9 ad sab.): Nec emptio nec venditio sine re quae veneat potest intellegi. 
Pompon. Dig. 18.1.8.pr. (9 ad sab.). Sale of future agricultural yield is attested already in Cato Agr. 146, 
who mentions sale of olives on trees; 147, of grapes on vines; 150, of the increase of a flock. Also, see 
Ernst (1997) 274-5. On Sale on Delivery, see Ch. 6, pp. 185-6, below.
 Pompon. Dig. 18.1.8.1 (9 ad sab.), who considers the gains from both the catching of fish or birds, and 
the collection of largesse (missilium)usually coinage thrown to the public by an emperor or his 
representativesas possible future property, which once obtained may be sold. On the difference 
between rei speratae and rei spei, see De Zulueta (1957) 14; Daube (1959) 12-4; Kaser (1971) 549; 
Paling (1973), though one may doubt whether his inclusion within emptio spei also emptio rei speratae 
finds reassurance in the evidence; Zimmermann (1996) 245-9. 
Kaser (1971) 548.
Gai. Dig. 18.1.35.5; 7 (10 ad ed. prov.); Paul. Dig. 18.6.5 (5 ad sab.).  
 De Zulueta (1957) 16; Kaser (1971) 548, n. 31; Zimmermann (1996) 236-40; Ernst (1997) 276-7; 
Johnston (1999) 80-2. Adding a clause which sets a penalty to be paid in the case of non-delivery could 
also facilitate generic sale; Paul. Dig. 19.1.47 (6 respon.). 
 Gai. Inst. 3.139; Papin. Dig. 18.1.72.pr. (10 quaest.); Ulp. Dig. 18.1.9.pr. (28 ad sab.); 2.1 (1 ad sab.), 
and see Watson (1981) 188-9, for the possibility that this excerpt was interpolated at its end; Varro LL 
5.177, who in the first century BCE defined pretium as a thing fixed for the purpose of purchase. For the 
nature of price in Greek law of sale, see Pringsheim (1950) 190-205. 
Ulp. Dig. 18.1.37 (3 disput.).
Papin. (Paul.) Dig. 18.1.72.pr. (10 quaest.) ad finem.
- 105 - 
could be whatever the parties agreed on.
 However, several restrictions were imposed on 
it. First, it had to be verum, i.e. real and not symbolic (more than nummus unus);
otherwise the transaction would be a donatio rather than a sale.
 Second, it had to be 
certum,
i.e. definite;
 though a contract need not necessarily provide a figure, or a final 
figure for that matter,
 as long as it described the conditions leading to a definite price.
Thus, it could be that at the time of concluding the contract one or both parties did not 
(yet) know the purchase-price; for example, when the agreed price was for what you 
paid for it, or for what I have in my cash box.
 In such cases, although there was 
ignorance of the amount, the price itself was not uncertain.
 The purchase-price could 
not be left to a future decision of the purchaser alone;
 however, the question whether or 
not it could be left to that of a third party was a matter of dispute between Roman 
jurists.
 Some scholars describe this dispute in terms of a school controversy;
 others do 
Ulp. (Pompon.) Dig. 4.4.16.4 (11 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 19.2.22.3 (34 ad ed.).
 Ulp. Dig. 19.2.46 (69 ad ed.), in the case of locatio conductio. 
 Paul. Dig. 19.2.20.1 (34 ad ed.); Ulp. Dig. 18.1.36 (43 ad ed.); but, see Daube (1953) 192-9, esp. 194-5, 
for a reconstruction of the original context in which this statement appeared, and 198, stating that the 
classics had taken it for granted that a man selling an object for no price was not selling.  
Gai. Inst. 3.140; Paul. Dig. 19.2.20.pr. (34 ad ed.); Ulp. Dig. 18.1.37 (3 disput.), on the invalidity of a 
sale due to a lacking price.
 Ulp. Dig. 18.1.7.2 (28 ad sab.), who provides a definite price which could be increased under certain 
conditions; similarly, 19.1.13.24 (32 ad ed.); also, see Daube (1959) 27. 
Daube (1959); Zimmermann (1996) 253-4.
Ulp. Dig. 18.1.7.1 (28 ad sab.): Huiusmodi emptio "quanti tu eum emisti", "quantum pretii in arca 
habeo", valet.
Ulp. Dig. 18.1.7.1 (28 ad sab.); De Zulueta (1957) 18-9; Daube (1959) 9-17; Zimmermann (1996) 254-5; 
Leesen (2010) 207.
Gai. Dig. 18.1.35.1. (10 ad ed. prov.); Zimmermann (1996) 254-5; Leesen (2010) 207; but, see Daube 
(1959) 21; Nelson and Manthe (1999) 261-2, who hold that imperfectum here stands for conditional sale. 
 Gai. Inst. 3.140: Pretium autem certum esse debet. nam alioquin si ita inter nos conuenerit, ut quanti 
Titius rem aestimauerit, tanti sit empta, Labeo negauit ullam uim hoc negotium habere; cuius opinionem 
Cassius probat. Ofilius et eam emptionem et uenditionem esse putauit; cuius opinionem Proculus secutus 
est. [However, the price must be certain. For otherwise if we thus have agreed that the thing is bought 
for as much as Titus will estimate, Labeo denied that this transaction had any effect whatsoever. Cassius 
approves his view. Ofilius thought that even this was emptio venditio and Proculus has followed his 
opinion. Translation is that of Leesen (2010) 205]. 
- 106 - 
not consider it as such, since the difference of opinion did not follow regular division into 
schools.
 The dispute eventually was settled in the sixth century by the emperor 
Justinian, who labelled a contract of sale where the purchase-price was to be determined 
by a third party as conditional sale, the condition being that the said third person would 
indeed set a price.
In later periods another requirement was added, according to which a price should 
also be iustum, i.e. just. This is known in the scholarship as the doctrine of laesio 
enormis, literally enormous loss.
 It originally refers to two imperial rescripts of 
Diocletian,
 which allow a seller of land to rescind the sale if the purchase-price is less 
than half that of a just price, or, alternatively, give the buyer the option of paying the 
difference. The question whether a just price should be an absolute figure applicable in 
every circumstance, or, alternatively, be whatever the parties perceive as just,
 does not 
Voigt (1899) 240-1; Liebs (1976) 264; Fiori (1999) 244-9, who holds Ofilius and Proculius to be 
representatives of the Proculian view, according to which payment can be determined by a third party, 
while Labeo and Cassius represent the Sabinian stance, which presumably preferred applying in such 
cases the actio in factum.
According to Gai. Inst. 3.140, Cassius (=C. Cassius Longinus), a Sabinian, had supported the view of 
Labeo, a Proculian; while Proculus himself opposed Labeo, preferring the view of the first-century BCE 
jurist Ofilius, a teacher of Capito (=C. Ateius Capito), whose name is given by Pompon. Dig. 1.2.2.47-52 
(enchir.), as the founder of the Sabinian school. Also, see Baviera (1898), who does not list Gai. Inst. 
3.140, among the school controversies; neither does Falchi (1981) 263-7; Leesen (2010) 205-14, who, 
although not holding the dispute to have been a school controversy, nevertheless discusses it at length.
CJ 4.38.15.1-2 (Just., 530); Just. Inst. 3.23.pr.-1; Daube (1959) 9-12, 20-1; Johnston (1989) 156-7; 
Zimmermann (1996) 254-5; Fiori (1999) 242-4; Leesen (2010) 205-14.
On laesio enormis, see De Zulueta (1957) 19-20; Sperber (1973); Watson (1981); (1994) 124-5; Visky 
(1983) 24-66; Sirks (1985); (1992); (1995); (2007); Klami (1987); Mayer-Maly (1991); Zimmermann 
(1996) 255-70; Pennitz (2002); Harke (2005); Westbrook (2008); Platschek (2011).
CJ 4.44.2 (Diocl., 285); 8 (Diocl., 293); contra, CTh 3.1.1 (319); 4 (383); 7 (396). 
Ulp. (Pompon.) Dig. 4.4.16.4 (11 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 19.2.22.3 (34 ad ed.); both allow a purchase-price to 
be whatever the parties agreed. In the first century CE Seneca (Ben. 6.15.3-5) argued that a just price is 
that which the parties have agreed, and not an objective value depended on the qualities of the thing sold. 
For two different interpretations of this text, see Pennitz (2002) 578-81; Sirks (2007) 463-4. The lex 
Irnitana (91 CE), Ch. 75, bans any speculation or activities that distort prices and make things dearer 
(carius), thereby presumably assuming that there is such a thing as an unjust, or at least unjustified, price; 
Gonzlez (1986) 172, 193, 224. In the second century the (Sabinian) jurist Javolenus, Dig. 18.1.79 (5 ex 
post. lab.), argued that a commitment to contract locatio conductio could be part of pretium in emptio 
- 107 - 
concern us here, as it is independent of the use of money.
 Since the doctrine of laesio 
enormis, as a general rule, emerged only after the period here under investigation,
attributed at the earliest to the emperor Diocletian,
 it will not be further discussed.  
The last characteristic of pretium to be considered is the most significant for the 
current research, as it concerns the pecuniary nature of pretium. In what follows the 
school controversy concerning the requirement of pretium in numerata pecunia, i.e. that a 
purchase-price be (stated?) in money, is detailed and discussed.  
4.4. The pretium in numerata pecunia controversy  
The controversy regarding the pecuniary nature of a purchase-price is known 
mainly from a paragraph in Gaius Institutiones, and two fragments of Pauls Ad Edictum 
preserved in Justinians Digest. Therefore, the three texts are cited here in full.  
venditio, ifand here is the interesting pointthe seller had agreed to a lower price to begin with in 
order to guarantee the lease. Also, see Sirks (1995), who analyses Scaev. Dig. 18.5.9 (4 dig.), which 
concerns the resolution of fiscal sales, with laesio enormis in mind.
Though money, being a unit of account, facilitates quantification by simplifying calculation of what a 
price ought to be. 
It had been suggested that the doctrine of laesio enormis might have been influenced by Jewish Rabbinic 
tradition; Jolowicz (1937), with reference to earlier bibliography; Sperber (1973); a thesis rejected by 
Watson (1981) 189. Recently this view was revived by Westbrook (2008), who sees the doctrine of 
laesio enormis as an eastern influence, tracing its origin back to legal traditions, widespread from the 
third millennium up to the third century BCE throughout the ancient Near-East, which gave the seller of 
landed property the right of redemption.  
CJ 4.44.2 (Diocl., 285); 8 (Diocl., 293). As to the controversy whether or not the earlier rescript was 
interpolated, by either Justinians compilers or earlier jurists, see Watson (1981) 187-9, who rejects 
neither the possibility that the laesio enormis doctrine was introduced under Diocletian, nor a Justinian 
interpolation; but, Idem (1994), who argues that the substance of the rescripts is genuine, and that the 
doctrine was indeed a novelty of Diocletian, later to be refuted by succeeding emperors; Visky (1983) 24-
66, esp. 35-44, who generally supports the authenticity of the rescript as being Diocletians; Sirks (1985) 
esp. 307; (1992) esp. 44, who thinks that the text was interpolated, though before Justinians time; Klami 
(1987), who supports Sirks view that the text was interpolated, though does not exclude the possibility 
that this was done by Justinians compilers; Pennitz (2002), who takes the texts of the rescripts to be 
genuinely Diocletians, and to have been interpolated by neither Justinians compilers, nor earlier jurists.
- 108 - 
Gai. Inst. 3.141: 
Item pretium in numerata pecunia con||sistere debet. Nam in ceteris rebus 
an pretium esse possit, veluti homo aut toga aut fundus alterius rei 
<pretium esse possit>, valde quaeritur. Nostri praeceptores putant etiam in 
alia re posse consistere pretium; unde illud est, quod vulgo putant per 
permutationem rerum emptionem et venditionem contrahi, eamque 
speciem emptionis venditionisque vetustissimam esse; argumentoque 
utuntur Graeco poeta Homero, qui aliqua parte sic ait:    
  , /   ,    , / 
  ,    , /  . et 
reliqua. Diversae scholae auctores dissentiunt aliudque esse existimant 
permutationem rerum, aliud emptionem et venditionem; alioquin non 
posse rem expediri permutatis rebus, quae videatur res venisse et quae 
pretii nomine data esse, sed rursus utramque rem videri et venisse et 
utramque pretii nomine datam esse absurdum videri. Sed ait Caelius 
Sabinus, si rem tibi venalem habenti, veluti fundum, [acceperim et] pretii 
nomine hominem forte dederim, fundum quidem videri venisse, hominem 
autem pretii nomine datum esse, ut fundus acciperetur.
Gaius starts by stating that pretium should be in numerata pecunia. However, he 
then continues to report that is it questionable (quaeritur) whether pretium can consist 
also of other things. Thus, according to Gaius, the controversy revolved around the 
question whether or not a purchase-price always must be stated in monetary terms, i.e. in 
numerata pecunia, as the Proculians claimed (diversae scholae auctores); or, could it also 
be comprised of other things, such as a slave, a toga, or a piece of land, as maintained by 
Gai. Inst. 3.141: Likewise, the price must be in money. There is, however, much question whether the 
price can consist of other things, for example, whether a slave, or a toga, or a piece of land can serve as a 
price for another thing. Our teachers think that the price can also consist of another thing. Hence they 
commonly think that by bartering things a contract of sale is concluded and that this is the most ancient 
form of sale. And by way of argument they bring forward the Greek poet Homer, who has said 
somewhere: Thence the long-haired Achaeans procured wine, some in exchange for bronze, others in 
exchange for gleaming steel, some for hides and others for the live cattle, and some for slaves and so on. 
The authorities of the other school disagree and hold that bartering things is one thing and that sale is 
another. Otherwise, when things are exchanged one cannot determine which thing is considered as 
having been sold and which as having been given by way of price. But, on the other hand, it seems 
absurd that both things are considered as sold and as given by way of price at the same time. Caelius 
Sabinus, however, has said that, if I have given to you, who offers a thing for sale  e.g., a piece of land  
a slave by way of price, then the piece of land is considered as having been sold and the slave as having 
been given by way of price in order to acquire the piece of land. Translation is that of Leesen (2008) 
285-6.
- 109 - 
the Sabinians (nostri praeceptores). Gaius also reports the arguments of each side. 
According to the Sabinians, because barter (permutatio) was the most ancient form of 
sale,
 any exchange was in fact a sale.
 That is, barter (permutatio) was a species of 
sale (emptio venditio). The Proculians, on the other hand, believed the two actions
permutatio and emptio venditioto be separate, independent legal procedures. If barter 
(permutatio) was a species of sale (emptio venditio), argued the Proculians, it would be 
impossible to discern between the object of the sale (merx), and the price received on it 
(pretium). To answer this claim Caelius Sabinus, a prominent Sabinian jurist who 
operated in the second-half of the first century CE, offered a media sententia, according 
to which a purchase-price could be paid in natura, since it was the order of the exchange 
which determined which party offered the merchandise (merx), and which the purchase-
price (pretium).
The arguments of the Proculians are further detailed in two excerpts from Paul. 
Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.1 (33 ad ed.): 
Sed an sine nummis venditio dici hodieque possit, dubitatur, veluti si ego 
togam dedi, ut tunicam acciperem. Sabinus et Cassius esse emptionem et 
venditionem putant: Nerva et Proculus permutationem, non emptionem 
hoc esse. Sabinus Homero teste utitur, qui exercitum Graecorum aere ferro 
hominibusque vinum emere refert, illis versibus:     
 , /   ,    , /   
,    , /  . Sed hi versus 
permutationem significare videntur, non emptionem, sicuti illi:   
    ,      
. Magis autem pro hac sententia illud diceretur, quod alias idem 
poeta dicit:   . Sed verior est Nervae et Proculi 
sententia: nam ut aliud est vendere, aliud emere, alius emptor, alius 
Gai. Inst. 3.141: speciem emptionis venditionisque vetustissimam esse. 
 Gai. Inst. 3.141; Paul. Dig. 19.4.2 (5 ad plaut.), citing the first-century jurist Titius Aristo, a Sabinian; 
Jolowicz and Nicholas (1972) 383-4. 
Leesen (2008) 288.
- 110 - 
venditor, sic aliud est pretium, aliud merx: quod in permutatione discerni 
non potest, uter emptor, uter venditor sit.
From this excerpt it appears as if at the centre of the controversy stood the issue of 
distinguishing barter (permutatio) from sale (emptio venditio). While the Sabinians held 
the former to be a type of the latter, the Proculians argued that the two were separate legal 
actions. Both sides called on Homer in support of their opinion.
 Yet, a reliance on 
Homeric verses proves neither conservatism nor progressiveness on the part of either 
side;
 rather, it should be interpreted mainly as a demonstration of good (i.e. 
aristocratic) education, and should be seen as a rhetorical feature, a topos of testimonium 
based on auctoritas.
At the end of this excerpt Paul sides with the Proculian view. He stresses the 
importance of differentiating barter from sale, since the latter requires a distinction 
between vendor and buyer, which can only be achieved via a clear distinction between 
merchandise and price, a task impossible in barter. Against the Sabinian argument that 
Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.1 (33 ad ed.): And today it is a matter for doubt whether one can talk of sale when no 
money passes, as when I give an outer garment to receive a tunic; Sabinus and Cassius hold such an 
exchange to be a sale, but Nerva and Proculus maintain that it is barter, not sale. Sabinus invokes as 
authority Homer who, in the lines which follow, relates that the army of the Greeks bought wine with 
copper, iron, and slaves: Then the longhaired Achaeans bought themselves wine, some with copper, 
others with splendorous iron, ox-hides, oxen themselves, or slaves. These lines, however, suggest barter 
not purchase, as also do the following: And now Jupiter, son of Saturn, so deranged the mind of Glaucus 
that he exchanged his armour with Diomedes, son of Tydeus. Sabinus would have found more support 
for his view in what this poet says elsewhere: They bought with their possessions. Still the view of 
Nerva and Proculus is the sounder one; for it is one thing to sell, another to buy; one person again is 
vendor and the other, purchaser; and, in the same way, the price is one thing, the object of sale, another; 
but, in exchange, one cannot discern which party is vendor and which, purchaser.
The Sabinians cited Il. 7.472, to which the Proculians replied with Il. 6.234, and Od. 1.430. For analysis 
of these Homeric quotes, see Daube (1949); Mayer-Maly (2004); Blaho (2008).
Contra, e.g., Karlowa (1885) 662-5, who sees the Sabinians as novelists who preferred foreign Greek 
attitudes over old republican Roman ideals; Behrends (1983-1984), who claims that the Proculians were 
progressives, and the Sabinians conservatives; (2002) 245-7, who argues that the Proculians Homeric 
citation (Il. 6.234) indicates that their insistence on differentiating sale from barter was due to a new (i.e. 
progressive) attitude which viewed barter as inferior.
Leesen (2008) 289-90, 295-8; (2010) 226-32; Blaho (2008) esp. 60, who argues that Proculians and 
Sabinians relied on the same Homeric verses to support two opposite views.
- 111 - 
barter was a species of sale, Paul suggests that it was, in fact, the other way around.
Origo emendi vendendique a permutationibus coepit,
 states Paul at the start of the 
paragraph which precedes the one quoted above; thereby reconstructing an archaic, 
moneyless Roman past dictated by barter. The truthfulness of Pauls observation is of 
little relevance; what is important is the fact that he makes it. It is rooted in a centuries-
long tradition, which can be traced back to Aristotle,
 and which distinguishes sale 
from barter, seeing the latter as a less developed form of transaction.
 A similar attitude 
is expressed also by Polybius.
 Pliny the Elder describes an idealised archaic past in 
which, in contrast to the reality of his own days, exchange was conducted via barter.
The first-century BCE Roman historian, Sallust, has sale and barter (emundi aut 
mutandi) as two separate modes of operation.
 And Tacitus, probably echoing opinions 
which support the Proculian line of argumentation, says that the more distant Germanic 
tribes practise barter (permutatione mercium) since they have no precious metals 
(argentum et aurum) and do not use money (pecunia).
The Proculians insistence on differentiating sale from barter did not derive solely 
from a wish to depict the former as a more advanced form of exchange than the latter. 
Rather, according to the Proculian view, the need to distinguish sale from barter was 
dictated by internal formalities of Roman jurisprudence. 
Falchi (1981) 85-99; Nelson and Manthe (1999) 525-30; both rely in their analyses on Paul. Dig. 
18.1.1.pr. (33 ad ed.). However, see Leesen (2010) 226, who argues that this excerpt should not be 
included in the Proculian argumentation in favour of a pecuniary purchase-price.
 Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.pr. (33 ad ed.).  
Arist. Pol. 1257a. 
Nelson and Manthe (1999) 525-31.
Plb. 34.8.4-10, esp. 10; as preserved in the Deipnosophistae of the late second-century grammarian 
Athenaeus of Naucratis; Ath. VIII 330e.
 Plin. NH 33.6. 
Sall. Iug. 18.
Tac. Ger. 5.
- 112 - 
Paul. Dig. 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.):  
Sicut aliud est vendere, aliud emere, alius emptor, alius venditor, ita 
pretium aliud, aliud merx. At in permutatione discerni non potest, uter 
emptor vel uter venditor sit, multumque differunt praestationes. Emptor 
enim, nisi nummos accipientis fecerit, tenetur ex vendito, venditori sufficit 
ob evictionem se obligare possessionem tradere et purgari dolo malo, 
itaque, si evicta res non sit, nihil debet: in permutatione vero si utrumque 
pretium est, utriusque rem fieri oportet, si merx, neutrius. Sed cum debeat 
et res et pretium esse, non potest permutatio emptio venditio esse, quoniam 
non potest inveniri, quid eorum merx et quid pretium sit, nec ratio patitur, 
ut una eademque res et veneat et pretium sit emptionis.
According to Paul, the Proculians argued that a sale required a clear distinction 
between the parties, since each party was bound under a different set of obligations 
(multumque differunt praestationes).
 While the buyer was obliged to pay the agreed 
purchase-price and transfer ownership over it,
 the sellers obligations included to care 
for the thing sold until its transfer,
 to deliver (tradere) it to the buyers possession and 
enjoyment (habere licet),
 and to remain free of fraud (dolus malus). The seller was also 
Paul. Dig. 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.): Just as selling is distinct from buying and the buyer from the seller, so 
too the price is distinct from merchandise. But in barter it is impossible to distinguish who is buyer and 
who is seller, their duties being very different. The buyer is liable on sale if he does not make the 
recipient the owner of the money, whereas the seller need only obligate himself in the event of an 
eviction, deliver the possession, and remain free of bad faith, and thus he owes nothing if there is no 
eviction from the object. But in barter, if both things are price, then they must become the property of 
each party, and if merchandise, then they need not become the property either. But since there should be 
both an object and a price, [barter] cannot [be sale and purchase, for there is no way] of knowing which 
thing is merchandise and which price, nor does common sense allow that one and the same thing be both 
the object sold and the price of purchase.
Hence the double name for the transaction, emptio venditio; De Zulueta (1957) 3. In later Byzantine law 
the double name often was abandoned, replaced by venditio alone.
Ulp. Dig. 19.1.11.2 (32 ad ed.), who speaks of nummi and pretium numeratum. Pretium numeratum 
appears also in 19.1.11.6, referring to a purchase-price already paid, which consequently required the 
return of a ring given by way of earnest.
 Gai. Dig. 18.1.35.4 (10 ad ed. prov.). On liability for latent defects, see Zimmermann (1996) 305-26. 
 Paul. Sent. 1.13a.4; Ulp. Dig. 19.1.11.2 (32 ad ed.); De Zulueta (1957) 35-50; Kaser (1971) 550-4; 
Zimmermann (1996) 278-80. In a sale of landed property the vendors obligations included its transfer 
vacua possessio; Labeo Dig. 18.1.78.1 (4 post. a javol. epit.); De Zullueta (1957) 36-40; Kaser (1971) 
550, 553; Zimmermann (1996) 293-9. 
- 113 - 
liable for eviction,
 i.e. held responsible in case a buyer would be evicted from the thing 
sold by someone with sounder claims. Unlike the buyer, the seller was not obliged to 
transfer ownership, as it was not always the case that she or he was the owner.
 For the 
transfer of ownership a separate legal act of formal conveyance was required:
mancipatio in the case of res mancipi,
 and traditio in the case of res nec mancipi.
Having a separate act for the transfer of ownershipindependent of the consensual 
nature of Roman sale, in which the moment of payment was detached from that of the 
deliverypresumably further stimulated sale on credit, and consequently perhaps also 
economic activity.
Ulp. Dig. 19.1.11.2 (32 ad ed.).
 Paul. Sent. 2.17.1; Ulp. Dig. 18.1.25.1 (34 ad sab.); 28 (41 ad sab.), who explicitly says that sale of a 
third partys property is valid; Afric. Dig. 19.1.30.1 (8 quaest.); Paul. Dig. 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.); Daube 
(1953) 191; De Zulueta (1957) 36-7; Kaser (1971) 550-1; Zimmermann (1996) 278-9. 
 FIRA III 88, concerning a sale of a boy; Ulp. Dig. 45.1.38.3; 8 (49 ad sab.), who discusses the 
distinction between possidere (to possess) and tenere (to hold); 9, who states that habere does not imply 
possession but rather a holding. Also, see Zimmermann (1996) 239-40, 271; Daube (1953) 187, for the 
use of the verb distrahere as meaning to sell and to transfer. 
 Mancipatio was the formal act of transferring ownership over certain possessions, restricted to cases 
where both parties were Roman citizens, and the thing changing ownership was Italian land, slaves, or 
certain animals of draught and burden, such as oxen, horses, asses, or mules; chattel and provincial land 
were excluded. The importance of mancipatio declined already in the late Republic, after the praetor had 
granted praetorian ownership rights over res mancipi that were delivered by traditio. Gai. Inst. 1.119-
122; 4.131; Paul. Sent. 1.13a.4; Pringsheim (1950) 199; De Zulueta (1957) 37; Kaser (1971) 131-4, 545-
6; Stein (1972) 27-8; van den Brink (1974) 85-7; Falchi (1981) 99-113; Zimmermann (1996) 271-2; 
Leesen (2010) 60-1, 66-7; and discussion on pp. 118-21, below. By the time of Justinian the use of 
mancipatio in actio ex empto was no longer in practice. 
 Gai. Inst. 2.19-20. Ownership over both res mancipi and res nec mancipi could be transferred also in 
iure cession. Ownership over res nec mancipi (and from the late Republic, also praetorian ownership 
over res mancipi) could pass by traditio, literally a handing over, via the act of the sale itself, in which 
case the sale provides the iusta causa traditionis. This could be achieved by the passing of the object of 
the sale from hand to hand; Paul. Dig. 41.2.1.21 (54 ad ed.); Javol. Dig. 41.2.51 (5 ex post. lab.); or, by 
already having it in the possession of the purchaser before the sale took place (traditio longa/ brevi 
manu); Cels. Dig. 21.2.62.pr. (27 dig.); 41.2.18.2 (23 dig.); Gai. Dig. 41.1.9.3-7 (2 cott.), esp. 5-6; Ulp. 
Dig. 6.2.9.2 (16 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 41.2.3.1 (54 ad ed.). Also, see Daube (1953); De Zulueta (1957) 39; 
Kaser (1971) 416-8, 546-7; Zimmermann (1996) 239-40; Pringsheim (1950) 91, for comparison with 
Greek law.  
By contrast, in contemporary Greek-Hellenistic practice as reflected in Egyptian papyri, ownership was 
acquired by full payment of the price; Pringsheim (1950) 88. Declarations of transfer of ownership were 
public acknowledgement of the transfer (), rather than the act of transfer itself; e.g. P.Oxy. 
LII 3691 (Oxyrhynchos, 139), which attests a sale of landed property, where the price of 200 drachmae 
- 114 - 
It is the difference in the obligations of the parties, so argued the Proculians, 
which demanded a clear distinction between seller and buyer.
 This, they claimed, was 
made possible only when differentiating merx, the object of sale, from pretium, the price 
received for it; a differentiation impossible in barter. A well-defined division between 
merx and pretium, their argumentation continued, can only be accomplished via a 
universal means of payment, applicable in all transactions, i.e. money.
 It is the use of 
money which allowed it always to be determined which party provided the price, and was 
therefore the buyer, liable under the actio venditi; and which the merchandise, and was 
therefore the seller, liable under the actio empti.
 Thus, according to the Proculian line 
of reasoning, the pecuniary requirement was not a goal in itself, but rather an outcome of 
a procedural jurisprudential need.  
According to the Proculian view, as long as part of the remuneration was given in 
numerata pecunia there was no difficulty in distinguishing buyer from seller, hence a 
purchase-price need not consist entirely of money. Therefore, the actiones empti et 
venditi could be made available also when a purchase-price included, in addition to a 
certain sum of money, the performance of services,
 or the rendering of property.
However, if a purchaser agreed that in addition to paying a certain sum of money she or 
had already been paid and the buyers obligation to pay the sale-tax () agreed. For further 
references to papyri, see Pringsheim (1950) 197-9, 204-5.
 A point stressed also by Leesen (2010) 220-1, who, however, certainly is not the first to notice it.
Javol. Dig. 19.2.21 (11 epist.), who uses both pecunia and pecunia numerata with regard to a purchase-
price. A price given in metal was insufficient for contracting a sale, since metal per se was not money. 
Also, see Daube (1949) 213, who argues that the Homeric quotation mentioning payment , should 
not be understood to mean in money, as might be implied from the Latin translation aere, but rather in 
bronze; on aes is the sense of money, see Ch. 2, p. 66, above.
 Zimmermann (1996) 277; Ulp. Dig. 14.3.5.12 (28 ad ed.), who distinguishes between the two actions 
when an agent is instructed to perform sale or purchase.  
Pompon. Dig. 19.1.6.1 (9 ad sab.), where the additional service rendered is repairing a building owned 
by the seller. 
Pompon. Dig. 19.1.6.2 (9 ad sab.), where the buyer agreed also to transfer to the seller ownership over 
part of the building(s) which he was to construct on the parcel of land sold. 
- 115 - 
he would also entre an additional contract, the Proculian viewcontrary to the Sabinian 
onewas that the actio ex vendito cannot be used to enforce this commitment.
The difference of opinion between the two schools concerning the pecuniary 
nature of a purchase-price continued throughout the second century, and perhaps also the 
third. The Severan jurist Paul felt confident enough in the predominance of the Proculian 
view to state that in the prevailing view the barter of objects is not sale.
 However, at 
least according to one scholar,
 a rescript of the emperor Gordian (238-244), which 
concerns an exchange of landed property and regards it as a kind of a sale,
 may be 
interpreted as evidence for the prevailing acceptability of the media sententia offered by 
Caelius Sabinus, according to which a purchase-price can be given in natura. One may 
doubt this interpretation. Even if it is accepted, by the second half of the third century 
legal opinion in the imperial court promoted the Proculian stance, and before the end of 
the third century the controversy was decided in favour of the Proculian view.
rescript dated to 294,
 the emperors Diocletian and Maximian explicitly state that 
exchanging grain for oil does not fall under the category of a sale, and that this decision 
 The Proculian stance is reported in Javol. Dig. 18.1.79 (5 ex post. lab.), where half a parcel of land is 
sold with a proviso that the purchaser would lease the other half, kept at the sellers possession.
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.1 (5 quaest.): Et si quidem pecuniam dem, ut rem accipiam, emptio et venditio est: sin 
autem rem do, ut rem accipiam, quia non placet permutationem rerum emptionem esse.
 Leesen (2010) 232-3.
4.64.1 (Gord., 238).
This is also the legal stance of Justinian; Just. Inst. 3.23.2, who follows Gai. Inst. 3.141, in reporting the 
school controversy, but states that previous emperors (anteriores divi principes) had already settled it in 
favor of the Proculians. 
CJ 4.64.7 (Diocl. et Maxim., 294). Though elsewhere the same emperors recognised the resemblance of 
barter (permutatio) to sale (emptio); CJ 4.64.2.
- 116 - 
had already been taken before their constitution;
 thereby declaring the requirement of 
pretium in numerata pecunia to be legally binding.
4.5. Interpretations of the Controversy  
The key to understanding the nature of the school controversy described in Gai. 
Inst. 3.141, Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.1 (33 ad ed.), and 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.), lies in extracting 
the question around which opinions had divided. Did the controversy primarily revolve 
around the question of the form in which a purchase-price ought to be paid, i.e. in natura 
or in numerata pecunia? Or, was it a theoretical dispute concerning the distinction 
between barter (permutatio) and sale (emptio venditio)? What were the reasons which 
sparked this controversy to begin with? Was it initiated by an inward-looking legal need 
to clarify procedural jurisprudence; or, by actual economic practice? Opinions in 
scholarship differ according to the interpretations offered for the existence of the two 
schools.
In the long and established Romanist tradition that looks for consistent criteria to 
distinguish Sabinians from Proculians, there has been a tendency to pose at the heart of 
this controversy the legal issue of separating sale from barter; thereby stressing the 
dogmatic reasoning embedded in the argumentation of each school. The distinction 
between the two forms of exchange, sale and barter, is seen as an outcome of contrasting 
legal conceptions held by the adherents of each of the schools. Thus, according to this 
line of reasoning, the controversy was mainly a matter of juristic definitions: was barter a 
Kaser (1971) 550, n. 43; (1975) 277, n.25.
 Leesen (2010) 233-6. 
For a summary, see Leesen (2010) 221-6.
- 117 - 
species of sale, as maintained by the Sabinians; or, did the two belong to two separate 
legal categories, as argued by the Proculians.
 This theoretical legal issue also had 
important jurisprudence implications; namely, establishing when the actiones empti et 
venditi could be applied.
 As pointed out by Mayer-Maly,
 neither Sabinians nor 
Proculians recognised permutatio as an independent contractus, in the sense that a failure 
in fulfilling a permutatio obligation was not met with a specific actio; rather, it was first 
met with a condictio,
 then with an in factum actio, and finally with an actio 
praescriptis verbis.
 Seeing the controversy as revolving around the question of a clear 
distinction between sale and barter, that stemmed from a legal procedural need, 
establishes it mainly as an internal legal matter. 
Phrasing the controversy in dogmatic terms, i.e. as emerging from a need to 
discern sale from barter, conceals within it the triumph of the Proculian view, which 
argued that the pecuniary requirement was a direct outcome of jurisprudential formalities. 
Emptio venditio created two sets of obligations: one for the seller, another for the 
buyer.
 While the seller had to transfer possession over the merchandise (merx), but not 
ownership; the buyer was obliged to transfer ownership over the agreed purchase-price 
Stein (1972), followed by Scacchetti (1984) 386-90, who phrases this question in terms of the 
anomalists Sabinians vs. the analogists Proculians; Falchi (1981) 85-99, who sees it as a dispute 
between the progressive Sabinians, who relied on the consensual nature of emptio venditio to broaden 
the spectrum of cases that can be regarded as sale, and the conservative Proculians, who remained loyal 
to archaic Roman conceptions, where sale, according to Falchi, originally was a real contract (i.e. 
mancipatio); Behrends (1983-1984), who sees the Sabinians as conservatives, who clang to traditional 
system of exchange, and the Proculians as progressives, who preferred a market-oriented sale over 
primitive barter.
Betti (1915) 27-9; Stern (1972); Scacchetti (1984) 386-90; Zimmermann (1996) 250-2. 
Mayer-Maly (1991) esp. 222.
On condictio see, Watson (1965) 10-17.
On the actio praescriptis verbis and protection of innominate contracts, see Ch. 5, pp. 154-5-8, below.
Consequently each party was liable under a different legal action: the actio empti made available to the 
purchaser against the vendor, and the actio venditi to the vendor against the purchaser. 
- 118 - 
(the legal texts often speak of nummi).
 The asymmetry in the parties obligations, 
argued the Proculians, demanded a clear distinction between them, which could only be 
achieved via the pecuniary requirement from pretium. A circular argument may explain 
the asymmetry in the parties obligationsonly the buyer was to transfer ownershipas 
one affected by the nature of money itself. While the object of a sale had to be 
specifically defined, the purchase-priceprecisely because it was reckoned in money
was, as a principle, restricted to neither specific objects nor particular coins.
 It is the 
uniformity of moneybeing both homogeneous and available in random quantity,
i.e. that any one piece of it can randomly be replaced by any equivalent otherwhich 
allowed for this, and which made money so attractive for facilitating exchange in the first 
place.
One of the interpretations which see the controversy as revolving around the 
distinction between sale and barternamely, that of Gian Luigi Falchideserves further 
attention. Falchi connects the pecuniary requirement with the ceremonial act of 
mancipatio.
 As mentioned above, mancipatio was the traditional Roman act for a 
formal conveyance of ownership over res mancipi; with res mancipi including Italian 
land, slaves, and certain domesticated animals of draught and burden, such as oxen, 
 Ulp. Dig. 19.1.11.2 (32 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.); both hold the emptors obligation to be 
the transfer of nummi to the venditor. CJ 4.49.7 (Diocl., 293), for the sale of slaves; De Zulueta (1957) 
51; Kaser (1971) 551; Zimmermann (1996) 277.  
 Ulp. Dig. 30.34.3 (21 ad sab.); unlike cases where certi nummi (contra a general sum of money) are 
bequeathed or stipulated for; Ulp. Dig. 30.34.4 (21 ad sab.); Paul. Dig. 45.1.37 (12 ad sab.); Daube 
(1959) 17; and discussion on Ch. 8, below. 
 Zimmermann (1996) 279, who adds that for this reason a buyer could reasonably be expected to pay the 
price with coins of which he is able to make the vendor owner. These criteria are fulfilled not only by 
coinage, but also by any material which can be both easily divided and given a uniform quality. 
 Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.pr. (33 ad ed.); Daube (1959) 17, who is surely right in concluding that it is very 
doubtful whether, once it is established that there must be a money price, the price may consist in specific 
coins, corpora, for such cases, Daube continues, should be permutatio. 
Falchi (1981) 85-99.
- 119 - 
horses, mules, and asses.
 In mancipatio the party gaining possession had to strike a 
brazen scale (libra aenea) with a piece of bronze whilst uttering certain formulae in the 
presence of six witnesses (the libripens, the scales holder, included).
 The ceremony 
contains traces of an archaic Roman past, when bronze bullion was the accepted 
monetary instrument.
 Similar to barter (permutatio),
 in mancipatio it was the 
transfer of objects which created the obligation; hence, mancipatio may be regarded as a 
kind of real contract. However, mancipatio, more than resembling permutatio, echoes an 
archaic sale: the party gaining possession always rendered bronze in return,
 with the 
latter providing the causa for the conveyance. Thus, Falchi is probably right when 
terming mancipatio as Barkauf;
 and Gaius even says that in mancipatio aes is given 
quasi pretii.
 In this respect the ceremony of mancipatio demonstrates how entrenched 
the notion of money was in the Roman conceptualisation of sale.
However, Falchi takes his argumentation one step further. He claims that it was 
the conservatism on the part of the Proculians which stimulated their requirement that a 
purchase-price be defined in money. According to Falchi, the archaic mancipatio was in 
fact an archaic form of sale, which existed prior to the emergence of Roman consensual 
sale. In mancipatio the conveyance was dependent on the scaling and transfer of bronze, 
 Gai. Inst. 1.120; 2.16-17; Ulp. Ep. 19.1. On the school controversy concerning the question whether 
animals that are mancipi can be regarded as such from birth (the Sabinian view), or only after reaching 
the age of domestication (the Proculian view), see Gai. Inst. 2.15; Stein (1972) 27-8; Liebs (1976) 251; 
Falchi (1981) 99-113; Scacchetti (1984) 378-81; Stolfi (1997) 53; Leesen (2010) 58-69. 
Gai. Inst. 1.119. A similar ceremony (i.e. per aes et libra) took place also for a release from obligation; 
Gai. Inst. 3.173-4.
Gai. Inst. 1.122; Crawford (1985) 1-24, for bronze being the monetary instrument of archaic Rome.
Paul. Dig. 19.4.1.2 (32 ad ed.).
 Van den Brink (1974) 86, who suggests that, similar to the case of permutatio, in sale originally the 
point of departure was simultaneous exchange.
Gai. Inst. 1.119, who explicitly makes this comparison.
Gai. Inst. 1.119, ad finem.
 As put by De Zulueta (1957) 3, the ceremony of mancipatio shows sale in its earliest form, transacted 
donnant donnant. Also, see van den Brink (1974) 85-7; Brge (1982). 
- 120 - 
which Falchi parallels with a pecuniary purchase-price. The conservative Proculians, 
argues Falchi, realised this comparison, therefore inferred that just as aes in mancipatio 
was the causa for the conveyance, so should pretium in emptio venditio be regarded as 
the causa for the sale transaction. The progressive Sabinians, however, so argues Falchi, 
preferred the novelty of consensual sale, therefore considered a sale to be valid merely on 
the basis of the voluntas of the parties,
 independent of the transfer of either merx or 
pretium.  
Falchis analysis is influenced by his interpretation of the existence of the schools 
in general, seeing the division between Sabinians and Proculians in terms of progressives 
vs. conservatives, respectively.
 Yet, several points may be raised against it. First, 
neither Gaius nor Paul mention mancipatio in their description of this controversy, let 
alone parallel it with sale.
 Second, Falchi underestimates the significance of the 
praetors decision in the late Republican period to grant praetorian rights of ownership 
over res mancipi delivered by mere traditio. Consequently, the importance of the 
ceremony of mancipatio had probably declined.
 It is perhaps a bit presumptuous to 
assume that in the second half of the first centurymore than a century after the praetor 
made traditio available for transferring ownership over res mancipi, and more than two 
and a half centuries after the establishment of Roman consensual salemancipatio was 
so firmly associated with sale that it could by itself stir a school controversy regarding the 
Falchi (1981) 252-4; summarised in Leesen (2010) 9-10. On voluntas and its relation with consensus, 
see Just. Inst. 3.29.4; Berger (1953) 408, on consensus, 770-1, on voluntas; Du Plessis (2012a) 16-8.
This attitude is expressed throughout his book; e.g. Falchi (1981) 246, 252.
Leesen (2010) 224.
Though the distinction between res mancipi and res nec mancipi was relevant enough to cause 
disagreement between the schools regarding the question whether an animal was res mancipi from birth 
or only after domestication; Gai. Inst. 2.15; Falchi (1981) 99-113; Leesen (2010) 58-69, with Falchis 
analysis criticised in pp. 65-6.
- 121 - 
nature of a purchase-price. Third, even if one accepts Falchis general line of 
argumentation, explaining the existence of the schools in terms of progressives 
(Sabinians) vs. conservatives (Proculians), there is no basis for his hidden proposition as 
if the requirement for a pecuniary purchase-price somehow had contradicted the 
consensual essence of emptio venditio, and that this was the reason why it was rejected by 
the Sabinians.  
Fourth and last, from Falchis analysis it appears as if an analogy between aes 
libra on the one hand, and numerata pecunia on the other, was a trivial one to make on 
the part of first- and second-century CE Roman jurists. However, there is no convincing 
basis for the assumption that jurists associated with the Proculian school necessarily had 
perceived bronze bullion as equivalent to numerata pecunia. It is true that metals could 
and did act as means of payment also in imperial time.
 However, not only were Roman 
jurists well aware of the variation in the fineness of metals, hence also in its value,
also recognised that metals in themselves could be the object of a sale.
The Proculians did not simply require that a purchase-price be in money, i.e. in 
pecunia; rather, their requirement was that it ought to be in numerata pecunia.
 As seen 
in Chapter 2 above, both Ulpian and Hermogenian explicitly state that pecunia is non 
Plin. NH 33.1, where metals are considered as rerum pretia. On metals as commodity money, see Ch. 2, 
above.
 Paul. Dig. 18.1.10 (5 ad sab.). 
 Ulp. Dig. 18.1.9.2 (28 ad ed.). 
However, see Cels. Dig. 12.4.16 (3 dig.), where Celsus, the head of the Proculian school in the time of 
Hadrian, thinks that when one party gives pecunia in order that the other party will give a slave, the 
obligation which arises, rather than being emptio venditio, is, in fact, such which arises from a thing 
given for a purpose which fails to materialise (quam ob rem dati re non secuta). See Cristaldi (2007) 
77-117, for a detailed discussion of this excerpt; esp. 89-95, for possible interpolations; and 114-6, for the 
view that pecunia stands for cash money (Cristaldi uses in denaro), and that in this case Celsus did not 
qualify the transaction as emptio venditio because the pecunia was delivered before the parties reached an 
agreement on the particular amount to be paid, hence without convenire de pretio. 
- 122 - 
solum numerata pecunia, but includes omnia corpora or omnes res;
 and also Gaius, 
who associates himself with the Sabinian school, defines pecunia as omnes res, including 
under this term also wine, grain, land, and a slave.
 A Proculian requirement that 
pretium be in pecuniaassuming that this word was understood by jurists in the general 
meaning of wealthwould have rendered such a requirement irrelevant for their line of 
argumentation, according to which sale needs to be differentiated from barter. Yet, the 
requirement of pretium in numerata pecunia should not be understood simply as 
demanding that a purchase-price be paid in cash money, i.e. coinage.
 Rather, the 
phrase numerata pecunia probably should be understood more literally, in the sense of 
pecunia counted out; in which case it was not used necessarily to designate coinage 
alone. Instead, the Proculian requirement referred to a more abstract notion of money in 
the sense of a uniform measurer of value, i.e. a unit of account. If this view is accepted, 
than the requirement of pretium in numerata pecunia meant that a purchase-price must be 
stated, though not necessarily paid, in monetary terms, i.e. in pecuniary units of account. 
Yet, two excerptsone from Paul,
 the other from Ulpian
show that 
Ulpians and Hermogenians definitions,
 according to which the originally broad 
meaning of pecunia was specified by adding numerata so that it would mean coinage, 
was in fact more of an internal legal matter. As shown below, these two excerpts indicate 
how far reaching the common (i.e. laymans) understanding of the word pecunia
Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178 (49 ad sab.); Herm. Dig. 50.16.222 (2 iur. epit.); and, see Ch. 2, pp. 73-7, above, 
and esp. n, 164, on the context in which these definitions were placed. 
Gai. Inst. 3.124, who explicitely says that he is talking of pecunia in ea lege, i.e. in the context of the Lex 
Cornelia, that might also have referred to inheritance, which is probably why the definition is so wide. 
On numerata pecunia, also see Ch. 2, pp. 76-7, above.
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.1 (5 quaest.).
Ulp. Dig. 14.6.7.3 (29 ad ed.). 
Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178.pr. (49 ad sab.); Herm. Dig. 50.16. 222 (2 iur. epit.).
- 123 - 
which associated it first and foremost with numerata pecunia in the sense of coinage or 
cash moneyreally was.  
Paul in his two reports of this controversy,
 which support the Proculian stance, 
mentions neither pecunia nor numerata pecunia; instead he speaks of nummi. Elsewhere, 
in a long excerpt which contains a legal categorisation of exchange transactions,
repeats the Proculian stance concerning the nature of a purchase-price in emptio venditio. 
However, in that excerpt his wording is somewhat different. While a situation in which a 
thing (res) was given for another thing (again, res) is categorised as barter (permutatio); a 
sale (emptio venditio), according to Paul, occurs only if one party offers res while the 
other party offers money, and Paul uses here the word pecunia.
 When combined with 
Pauls description of the pretium in numerata pecunia controversy, there is no doubt that 
here when Paul says pecunia he has in mind nummi, i.e. numerata pecunia in the sense of 
cash money.  
No less intriguing is the following excerpt from Ulpian: 
Mutui dationem non solum numeratae pecuniae, verum omnium, quae 
mutua dari possunt, an accipere debeamus, videndum. Sed verba videntur 
mihi ad numeratam pecuniam referri: ait enim senatus "mutuam pecuniam 
dedisset". Sed si fraus sit senatus consulto adhibita, puta frumento vel vino 
vel oleo mutuo dato, ut his distractis fructibus uteretur pecunia, 
subveniendum est filio familias.
Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.1 (33 ad ed.); 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.).
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5 (5 quaest.); mentioned in Ch. 3, p. 92, above, and further discussed on Ch. 5, pp. 161-
3, below.
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.1 (5 quaest.): Et si quidem pecuniam dem, ut rem accipiam, emptio et venditio est: sin 
autem rem do, ut rem accipiam, quia non placet permutationem rerum emptionem esse, dubium non est 
nasci civilem obligationem, in qua actione id veniet, non ut reddas quod acceperis, sed ut damneris mihi, 
quanti interest mea illud de quo convenit accipere.
Ulp. Dig. 14.6.7.3 (29 ad ed.): Should the making of a loan be taken to cover the loan of anything that 
may be lent, or only the loan of money? The words themselves seem to me to refer to money, since the 
expression used by the senate is has lent money. But if a loan of, say, corn or wine or oil is made so 
that the son-in-power may sell it and use the proceeds, this is a fraud on the senatus consultum and he 
should be given relief. 
- 124 - 
The excerpt concerns the senatus consultum Macedonianum, a Senate decision 
passed under Vespasian (69-79), which stated that a person who gave a loan of the type 
of mutuum to a son-in-power (qui filio familias mutuam pecuniam dedisset) could not 
pursue any legal action for collecting the debt, either during the life time of the pater 
familias, or after his death.
 Ulpian, wishing to clarify which loans were included under 
this SC, says that although the wording of the SCwhich reads mutuam pecuniam 
dedissetseems to him to refer to numerata pecunia, still the SC should be understood in 
a broadening sense, as referring also to mutuum of goods, such as corn, wine, or oil. What 
is interesting for the current discussion is that Ulpian seems to assume that in this SC the 
word pecunia had originally been used in the narrow sense of numerata pecunia, 
presumably referring to cash money or coins, and not in the general sense of omnia 
corpora, which Ulpian gives pecunia elsewhere, in his definition of pecunia cited 
above.
 If it was so trivial that pecunia had indeed meant omnia corpora, there would 
have been no need for Ulpian to clarify that mutua pecunia was non solum numeratae 
pecuniae, but that it included also frumento vel vino vel oleo mutuo dato. His elaboration 
on this point indicates just how entrenched the notion of pecunia as cash or coinage
signified by the phrase numerata pecuniaactually was. It was so rooted in normative 
conceptualisation that numerata pecunia was in fact the first and chief association which 
accompanied the word pecunia even in the mind of Ulpian. 
Ulp. Dig. 14.6.1 (29 ad ed.). For the dating of this SC, see Daube (1947); Berger (1953) 698; Kaser 
(1971) 248, 532; (1975) 369-70.
Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178.pr. (49 ad sab.).
- 125 - 
Lastly, a somewhat different line of explanation for the pretium in numerata 
pecunia controversy has recently been offered by Tessa Leesen.
 Leesen sees this 
school controversy as revolving around the question of the form in which a purchase-
price ought to be paid.
 According to her, the division into schools was mainly an 
outcome of legal practice. The schools were not created due to formalities of Roman 
jurisprudence, but rather derived from the real working of the Roman legal system, and 
the casuistic nature of Roman law. Leesen suggests that the controversy arose from an 
actual case, where the buyer fulfilled his obligation by paying the price in kind, whilst the 
seller was interested in receiving it in money. Since a price was paid the seller could not 
simply bring an actio venditi against the buyer. Instead she or he claimed that what was 
given by way of price was insufficient. While one party in the dispute, the seller, asked 
for legal advice from a jurist associated with the Proculian school; the other party, the 
buyer, approached a jurist associated with the opposite school. The Sabinian jurist, 
arguing in favour of his client the buyer, claimed that since barter was a species of sale, 
the price could consist of other things besides money. The Proculian jurist, arguing in 
favour of his client the seller, claimed that because barter and sale were two distinct 
contracts, a price had to consist of money.
 Thus, according to this interpretation, the 
discussion concerning the distinction between sale and barter was sparked due to its 
argumentative value: the Sabinian jurist built the case of the buyer by using the topos of 
Leesen (2008); (2010) 215-36, esp. 222-3, 226-32.
Leesen (2010) 222, who argues that the scholarly focus on the distinction between sale and barter 
derives from the fact that the legal problem had not been correctly defined; and claims that only the 
question of whether the price had to consist of money was at issue, while the question whether barter 
was a species of sale was only an argumentative route to justify a legal reply.
Leesen (2008) 292-3. 
- 126 - 
locus a specie;
 the Proculian jurist built the case of the seller by means of the locus a 
differentia.
If Leesens interpretation is accepted, than the interesting question for the present 
discussion would be, why was it so important for the seller to receive the purchase-price 
in numerata pecunia; and furthermore, why was the buyer so reluctant to do so, that she 
or he was willing to go to court on this issue. These questions are difficult to answer. If 
indeed this school controversy was sparked by one specific case, we do not know its 
details, apart from the assumption that the buyer paid the price in natura. There is no way 
of assessing the sums involved; we have no way of knowing what the object of the sale 
was, nor the merchandise given in return by way of a price. The insistence on numerata 
pecuniaon the part of both the seller for receiving it, and the buyer for not rendering 
itmay suggest that large sums were at stake. In any event, if this controversy was 
indeed initiated by a particular dispute concerning the form in which a purchase-price 
ought to be paid, in natura or in numerata pecunia, it indicates that receiving/paying in 
coinage (assuming that this is what numerata pecunia stood for) did make a difference; 
with both seller and buyer preferring to possess cash money, instead of some other form 
of wealth.  
4.6. The implications of pretium in numerata pecunia 
From the school controversy reported in Gaius Institutiones 3.141, Paul. Dig. 
18.1.1.1 (33 ad ed.), and 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.), it appears that during the period here 
under investigation a lively legal debate was taking place concerning the pecuniary nature 
Leesen (2010) 228.
Idem 231-2.
- 127 - 
of a purchase-price in sale transactions. The implications of this legal debate on the 
present topic of study depend on how one chooses to interpret this specific controversy 
and the separation into legal schools in general. 
One possibility is to see the controversy as revolving mainly around the issue of 
the pecuniary nature of a purchase-price. According to Leesen,
 the controversy 
emerged from the practical working of the Roman legal system. It was initiated by an 
actual case, where the buyer had paid a price in some form other than cash money, but 
the seller insisted on receiving it in numerata pecunia (=nummi). Both parties went 
through considerable efforts to defend their preferred method of payment, consulting 
leading jurists in order to produce legal argumentation that would favour their interests. 
According to this line of interpretation, both parties considered themselves subject to loss 
by not having in their possession numerata pecunia, presumably cash or coinage. A 
preference for holding cash money tells us nothing in addition to the usual postulations; 
namely, that cash is easier to measure, store, transfer, apply in future transactions, and 
fulfil with it commitments to ruling authorities. 
A different, more conventional, line of interpretation is that which sees this school 
controversy as a purely internal legal matter which concerned juristic definitions. 
According to this line of reasoning the controversy was set off by jurisprudential 
procedures, i.e. by a need to decide which contract was at hand in order to know which 
legal action can be applied.
 Whether the difference of opinion between the schools was 
initiated by a difference in legal methodology, i.e. a wish to avoid modification of legal 
Leesen (2010) 215-36.
De Zulueta (1957) 16-8; Zimmermann (1996) 250-1.
- 128 - 
formulae in contrast to a willingness to recognise new categories;
 or, whether it was a 
matter of traditional Roman ways vs. legal innovation;
 interpretations which adhere 
to this approach place at the centre of the controversy the question of distinguishing sale 
(emptio venditio) from barter (permutatio). The pecuniary nature of a purchase-price is 
perceived as derived from, hence subordinated to, more theoretical issues of legal 
definitions. Thus, though a pecuniary requirement had surely had implications for the 
economic use of money, according to this line of interpretation actual practice was not 
what instigated the controversy to begin with.  
If we assume that Roman jurists did take into their consideration the economic 
interests of the groups affected by their rulings,
 then we need to assume that they 
realised the practical implications of a binding pecuniary requirement. If so, than two 
possibilities emerge. One is that jurists affiliated with the Proculian school had foreseen 
no real problem in making the pecuniary requirement binding in all sale transactions, 
either because most sales were already conducted in coined money, or since they 
expected no cash shortage that would avert it. To this may be added the assumption that a 
pecuniary requirement was generally perceived as benefiting the majority of the eliteto 
which most jurists presumably belongedsince it was members of the elite who 
controlled most of the empires resources, hence potentially had more possessions to 
offer for sale. If indeed jurists had included in their considerations the consequence of 
According to this view, the anomalist Sabinians tried to subordinate new facts to old categories, while 
the analogist Proculians were ready to recognise new legal categories;  Betti (1915) 26-9; Stain (1972); 
Scacchetti (1984) 401. 
Karlowa (1885) 662-5; Falchi (1981) esp. 85-99; both of which perceive the Sabinians as progressives 
and the Proculians as conservatives; Behrends (2002), who has it the other way around, the progressive 
Proculians vs. the conservative Sabinians.
Kehoe (1997) 3.
- 129 - 
their decision on the well-to-do segments of society, it would mean that upper-class 
Roman citizens gained more from receiving remuneration in numerata pecunia rather 
than in kind; presumably due to the general advantages of holding cash money already 
listed above.  
There is, however, another possibility. According to it the Proculian requirement 
of pretium in numerata pecunia was not based on an understanding of the term numerata 
pecunia as necessarily referring to coinage alone. Instead numerata pecunia was 
perceived more literally as pecunia which can be counted out. The reason why jurists 
had foreseen no real problem in making the pecuniary requirement binding in all sale 
transactions was that pretium in numerata pecunia meant that a purchase-price was to be 
stated in monetary terms; rather than paid, whether partially or entirely, in actual coins. A 
similar approach was already seen above in punitive Roman law, where monetary units of 
account were the official quantifier of value of the Roman state for the procedure of 
condemnatio.
 Such a reading of the phrase numerata pecunia places the discussion on 
the pecuniary requirement of a purchase-price on a more theoretical level. It shifts our 
interpretation of the Roman understanding of money into a more abstract sphere, seeing 
money first and foremost as a unit of account. And, it gives further emphasis to the claim 
that the controversy revolved around abstract legal definitions; since one may raise the 
question, then, what difference did it make to any particular party how pretium was 
conceptualised and stated, if it had no immediate implications on the form in which it was 
materialised. 
Gai. Inst. 4.48-60; and Ch. 3, pp. 84-5, above.
- 130 - 
Having said all of the above, one ought to keep in mind that all of these 
hypotheses are just that  simply postulations. Furthermore, if this school controversy had 
indeed revolved around the legal issue of differentiating sale from barter, then 
presumably the practical implications of a pecuniary purchase-price for actual economic 
practice were of lesser importance.  
To conclude the discussion on the phrase numerata pecunia, if, as proposed by 
Leesen, the controversy arose from a real case in which the seller was unsatisfied with 
receiving the price in kind, than the requirement of pretium in numerata pecunia ought to 
be seen as referring to cash money, most probably coinage. If, however, the controversy 
was initiated by an inner legal dispute concerning juristic definitions and procedures, than 
maybe there is room to view the pecuniary requirement not necessarily as demanding that 
a purchase-price be paid in cash money, but rather that it ought to be agreed and stated in 
monetary terms; thereby suggesting that monetary units of account were perceived as the 
only stable form for expressing value.
 Thus, we are left with two possibilities 
concerning the meaning of the phrase numerata pecunia: either it stood for cash money in 
the form of coinage, as supported by Pauls wording (i.e. nummi); or that it stood for 
money in the abstract sense of pecunia which can be counted, i.e. a numeraire, a unit of 
account. 
This interpretation is affected by neither Ulp. Dig. 14.6.7.3 (29 ad ed.), nor the combination of Paul. 
Dig. 18.1.1.1 (33 ad ed.); 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.); 19.5.5.1 (5 quaest.). The flexibility exhibited by Ulpian 
and Paul in giving the same meaning, of either cash or a numeraire, to both pecunia and numerata 
pecunia (and, at least in the case of Paul, also nummi), does not preclude the Proculian use of money as a 
institutionalised instrument which assists in diffretiating seller from buyer, hence sale from barter.
- 131 - 
Lastly, barter did not vanish from Roman economic life, or from that of any other 
civilisation for that matter. Rather, following the Proculian triumph in this controversy 
the two forms of exchange coexisted, with Roman law recognising each as a separate 
legal agreement, distinct in nature and procedure. While in permutatio the parties 
operated under the same set of rules, the double name of emptio venditio signifies that 
two different sets of regulation were in force, one for the buyer, another for the seller.
While permutatio was a real contract, in which obligations were created only after the 
delivery of object(s),
 emptio venditio was a consensual contract, based on the parties 
agreement.
 And while permutatio concerned the exchange of goods whatever form 
these might take, by the end of the period here under investigation emptio venditio was 
already emerging as a contract in which one party (the seller) provided goods while the 
other (the buyer) provided remuneration in the form of a purchase-price, which had to be 
stated, and perhaps also given, in numerata pecunia, presumably cash money or coinage, 
and at any rate a unit of account. 
Surely not all exchange transactions were conducted in money; not even all sale 
transactions. Parties could and did contract sales in which the purchase-price was only 
partially paid in money, and partially in some other form. The second-century jurist 
Javolenus, for example, was of the opinion that a purchase-price could comprised partly 
of money and partly of an obligation to enter some other contracted transaction.
contemporary, Pomponius, records a case of selling a building (insula) where the agreed 
Paul. Dig. 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.). 
Paul. Dig. 19.4.1.2 (32 ad ed.).
Gai. Inst. 3.135; Ulp. Dig. 18.1.2.1 (1 ad sab.); 9.1 (28 ad sab.); Paul. Dig. 19.4.1.2 (32 ad ed.).
Javol. Dig. 18.1.79 (5 ex post. lab.), who reports that the Proculiansrefused to acknowledge such a 
commitment as one which can be enforced with the actio ex venditi. 
- 132 - 
purchase-price included, in addition to a fixed sum of money (certa pecunia), also an 
obligation to renovate another insula belonging to the seller.
 Pomponius also records 
another case, in which the purchase-price for a plot of land included, in addition to certa 
pecunia, also an obligation to construct a building on the sold land, and to transfer to the 
seller ownership over a portion (half, in this case) of that building.
 Potentially there 
was also the possibility that although a purchase-price was stated in monetary terms in 
the contract itself, in practice it was entirely given in kind, or, alternatively, by rendering 
certain rights; however, the nature of such a transaction makes it difficult to produce 
evidence for it.  
Once the requirement of pretium in numerata pecunia became unquestionable for 
emptio venditio contracts, it established the centrality of money in exchange transactions. 
Although the ceremony of mancipatio suggests that from archaic times the notion of 
moneyin the sense of a generic means of payment, and probably also an abstract 
measurement of valuewas central to Roman exchange transactions; establishing that in 
consensual sale a purchase-price must consist of, or be conceptualised in, numerata 
pecunia indicates a further step towards the institutionalisation of money as an abstract 
formation of thought. Requiring that a purchase-price be stated in numerata pecunia 
encompasses within it the prominence of money as a reckoning device, and signifies that 
in Roman perception money was in its very essence both a measurer of value (unit of 
account) and a means of payment (medium of exchange). 
Pompon. Dig. 19.1.6.1 (9 ad sab.). 
Pompon. Dig. 19.1.6.2 (9 ad sab.).  
- 133 - 
Chapter 5: Locatio conductio 
Of no lesser importance to Roman economic activity is the contract for letting and 
hiring: locatio conductio. While the previous contract examined, emptio venditio, can be 
paralleled to only one modern type of exchange transaction, namely sale, locatio 
conductio encapsulates within it several modern transactions, including employment 
together with lease and hire.
 The aim of this chapter, similar to that of the previous one, 
is not to view every aspect, or even most aspects, of this contract which is central to 
Roman economic activity;
 that would be beyond the capacity of this study or its author. 
Rather, the chapter focuses on the institutionalised role of money within the context of 
locatio conductio. Yet, such a discussion requires some general notes to be made on both 
the contract of locatio conductio and the scholarship relevant to it. 
5.1. Introduction  
As a general rule, letting and hiring are governed by laws like those of purchase 
and sale.
 By the mid-second century BCE both contractslocatio conductio and emptio 
venditiohad emerged as consensual contracts, based on the joint agreement (consensus) 
of the parties.
 Locatio conductio, like emptio venditio, was independent of ceremonial 
In hire (Miete, in German) a right to use the belongings of another is granted, while a lease (Pacht, in 
German) also gives right to exploit it; Zimmermann (1996) 351. 
Any list of the major publications on this contract should include Costa (1915); Mayer-Maly (1956); 
Kaufmann (1964); Fiori (1999); Du Plessis (2012a). For a bibliographical survey, see Impallomeni 
(1996) 651-2; Fiori (1999) 1-10; Du Plessis (2012a) 1-8.
 Gai. Dig. 19.2.2.pr. (2 cott.): locatio et conductio proxima est emptioni et venditioni isdemque iuris 
regulis constitit. Also Gai. Inst. 3.142. 
 Gai. Inst. 3.135; Epit. 2.9.13; Paul. Dig. 19.2.1 (34 ad ed.); Just. Inst. 3.22; 29.4. On the centrality of 
consensus in emptio venditio and its effects also on consensus in locatio conductio, especially in post-
classical Roman law, see Fiori (1999) 305-55, esp. 335-47, 363. On the continuous nature of consensus 
- 134 - 
acts of transfer, and was conditioned by no compulsory formulae, either spoken or 
written.
 As implied by its dual name, it gave rise to two different (bonae fidei) actions: 
actiones locati et conducti.
 It created bilateral, reciprocal obligations;
 with one party 
receiving rights of usage and enjoyment (uti frui),
 while the other received remuneration 
in the form of merces, i.e. payment, be it rent or wages.
Unlike emptio venditio, however, in locatio conductio the position of the parties 
varied according to the particularities of each specific contract. As a general rule, the 
locator was the party who placed something with the other party, while the conductor 
was the party who took along that which was made available to her or him.
 When the 
contract was one of lease or hire, the locator was the one in whose possession was the 
propertybe it real estate, movables, livestock, or slavesplacing it with the conductor, 
in locatio conductio, as well as the tacit renewal of the contract, see Ulp. Dig. 19.2.14 (71 ad ed.); Du 
Plessis (2012a) 17-18. 
Gai. Inst. 3.137; Dig. 44.7.2.pr.-1 (3 inst.); Paul. Dig. 44.7.48 (16 ad plaut.); 45.1.35.2 (12 ad sab.); CJ 
4.65.9 (Alex. Sev., 234). Written contracts, however, were a common phenomenon, as evident in 
documentary, legal, and literal sources; De Neeve (1984) 5-6, with reference to both ancient text and 
modern scholarship; Du Plessis (2012a) 18-21.
Mayer-Maly (1956) 81-9; Kaser (1971) 562-3; Du Plessis (2012a) 22-4. On the lex locationis/ 
conductionis, see Du Plessis (2006); (2012a) 19-21.
Gai. Inst. 3.137. Roberto Fiori has emphasised the synallagmatic connection merces-uti frui as the base on 
which locatio conductio contracts were created; Fiori (1999) 291-7, 361-2; Du Plessis (2006) 81. Almost 
two decades earlier, Bruce Frier had pointed out that to some extent urban leasehold might better be 
thought of as the exchange of money for certain services from the landlord, and not just for a place (res); 
Frier (1980) 215. 
On the right of enjoyment (frui), see Ulp. Dig. 19.2.9.pr. (32 ad ed.); 19.2.15.pr.-2 (32 ad ed.), who 
concerns the system of mutual obligations under the lease of a fondo, discussed in detail in Fiori (1999) 
80-109; Paul. Dig. 19.2.24.4 (34 ad ed.); Afric. Dig. 19.2.33 (8 quaest.); also, see De Neeve (1984) 8-12. 
On the word merces as signifying remuneration in transactions which involved the use of anothers 
property also in archaic times, see Kaufmann (1964) 136-60; De Neeve (1984) 62-5. For merces as 
signifying interest, see Andreau (2008) 205-6, who cites examples for interest referred to as merces in 
cases where loans could be perceived as a service which the lender provided the borrower (a sort of 
locatio conductio operarum, on which, see p. 135, below); as Andreau puts it, idem 209: cest plutt 
la contrepartie dun certain service rendu par le prteur. merces voque aussi une rtribution 
(comme cest le cas quand il sagit dun loyer ou dun salaire). On interest, see Ch. 7, below. 
Mayer-Maly (1956) 16-17; Kaufmann (1964) 297-8; Kaser (1971) 563; Zimmermann (1996) 339; Fiori 
(1999) 11-23, who also points to problems which arise when wishing to use these terms, locare and 
conducere, as evidence in reconstructing an archaic locatio conductio contract; Du Plessis (2012a) 9. For 
a survey of the scholarship on the emergence of the Roman consensual locatio conductio, see Du Plessis 
(2012a) 10-12.
- 135 - 
the lessee, who in return provided a payment of some sort, i.e. the merces. When the 
contract was one of employment, the locator was the employee, who placed her or his 
work capacity at the disposal of the contractor, the employer, who in return provided the 
merces.
However, when locatio conductio was used for contracting a specific task or 
jobsuch as transporting the property of another,
 or performing some craftwork on 
materials provided by the other party
the party bound to do the job was the conductor, 
who carried along the belongings with regard to which the task was to be performed, 
while the party commissioning the task and paying the merces was in fact the locator 
(contrary to the two previous cases, where the conductor rendered the merces).
These differences led scholars to consider three types of letting and hiring, each 
with its own characteristics:
 locatio conductio rei, referring to the letting and hiring 
of things, be it objects, livestock, places, or rights;
 locatio conductio operarum, 
referring to the letting and hiring of services, i.e. a sort of an employment contract; and 
locatio conductio operis (faciendi), a contract to perform and complete a certain work, 
job, or task. Although this schematic trichotomya legacy of nineteenth-century 
Labeo Dig. 19.2.60.8 (5 post. a javol. epit.), where a muleteer with a carriage is hired to transport freight 
over land; on land transportation, see Martin (1990); (2002); Du Plessis (2012a) 82-4. Ulp. Dig. 19.2.13.1 
(32 ad ed.), where a ship owner is hired to transfer goods over river; Paul. Dig. 14.2.2.pr.-2 (34 ad ed.), 
which mentions a ships captain hired to transfer cargo by sea (and, see Watson (1965) 121-2); on water 
transportation, see Rathbone (2003); Gaurier (2004), non vidi; Aubert (2007); Du Plessis (2012a) 84-92.
Pompon. Dig. 18.1.20 (9 ad sab.); on which, see Fiori (1999) 191-206. For other specific examples, see 
Gai. Dig. 4.9.5.pr. (5 ad ed. prov.); Inst. 3.143; both with regard to the tasks given to fullers and tailors 
(cleaning and sewing, respectively); on which, see Du Plessis (2012a) 55-67; Alf. Dig. 19.2.31 (5 a paul. 
epit.), with regard to craftsmen who receive either silver to make vessels, or gold to make rings; Gai. Inst. 
3.147, with regard to a goldsmith who received gold to make rings; on which, see Fiori (1999) 206-14. 
De Neeve (1984) 4-5; Zimmermann (1996) 338-9.
 Mayer-Maly (1956) 22-41; Kaser (1971) 563-70; Zimmermann (1996) 338-408; Fiori (1999) 3-7; Du 
Plessis (2012a) 2.  
This type of locatio conductio is probably the one to have received the most attention by both Roman 
juristsas acknowledged also by Du Plessis (2012a) 2, as well as modern scholars; e.g. Costa (1915); 
Frier (1980); Martin (1989); Kehoe (1997); Du Plessis (2012a) 121-89.
- 136 - 
dogmatic legal thinking
is well established in modern discussion,
 a clear tripartition 
is probably a development later to Classical Roman Law.
 Roman jurists appear to have 
regarded all different species of locatio conductio under one and the same contract; 
applying to all of them the same jurisprudential procedures and the same legal aid of 
either the actio conducti or the actio locati.
 This gapbetween the unitary nature of 
Roman jurisprudential procedure on the one hand, and scholars ability identify types 
of locatio conductio on the other handset modern discussion on this contract on a 
polarising route. For more than a century Romanistic tradition has been engaged with the 
question of the nature of locatio conductio; with some scholars stressing the unity of the 
Roman contract,
 others advocating its trichotomous nature.
 The division between the 
two approaches, however, is not a straightforward one. Scholars who stress the unitary 
nature of the classical locatio conductio often recognise some awareness on the part of 
Roman jurists to the existence of various types of locatio conductio;
 while advocates 
Du Plessis (2012a) 1-3, 5; Fiori (1999) 305-52, who details the proceedings of this development from the 
seventeenth century onwards, tracing its origin back to the Middle Ages.
Advocated already in Mommsen (1885) 264-8. Mayer-Maly (1956), which is one of the most influential 
works on locatio conductio in the twentieth century, follows a trichotomous thematic outline. The 
trichotomy of locatio conductio is most clearly advocated in Alzon (1963); (1966); Lewis (1973). For a 
short overview of how the notion of the contracts trichotomy developed, see Fiori (1999) 5-7. 
Fiori (1999) 2; Du Plessis (2012a) 12-3. Contra Lewis (1973); followed by Zimmermann (1996) 338-42, 
who argues that the trichotomy implicitly existed in the minds of classical Roman jurists. However, since 
no classical Roman legal text questions the procedural unity of locatio conductio, most scholars agree 
that there is no explicit recognition on the part of Roman jurists in the contracts trichotomous nature; a 
point stressed also by Mayer-Maly (1956) 17.
De Zulueta (1953) 170-2; Mayer-Maly (1956) 17-19; Kaser (1971) 563-4, with reference to bibliography 
in n. 2; De Neeve (1984) 4-5; Fiori (1999) 1-10; Du Plessis (2012a) 12-3. 
E.g. Amirante (1959).
E.g. Mayer-Maly (1956); Alzon (1963); (1966); Kaufmann (1964) 179-232; Lewis (1973); Zimmermann 
(1996) 338-412.
E.g. Kaser (1971) 563-71, esp. 564; Molnr (1982) 127.
- 137 - 
of the trichotomy often acknowledge the basically unifying approach of classical Roman 
Ground-breaking work on this topic was published a decade and a half ago by 
Roberto Fiori,
 who proposed to abandon the long enduring polarisation of unity vs. 
trichotomy, in favour of a model which stresses (what he refers to as) the synallagmatic 
connection between merces and uti frui embedded within the contract of locatio 
conductio.
 Modern concentration on the three types of locatio conductio, argues 
Fiori, should be attributed to a displacement of the centre of attention in discussions on 
this contract. According to Fiori, in a centuries-long process,
 attention had shifted from 
the Roman chief focus, namely the synallagmatic obligation created by locatio conductio, 
i.e. the merces-uti frui connection,
 to concentrating on the object of the contract (i.e. 
res, opera, opus). Fiori depicts a process by which the Roman concepts of persona and 
res were transformed in scholarly discussion on this contract into abstract geometric 
notions of subject and object, respectively;
 with the consequence of dedicating 
much scholarly effort to pinning down differences in the duties and responsibilities of the 
parties, as well as the relation between them, in each of the three types of locatio 
conductio. Roman jurists, Fiori claims, were less interested in divisions based on 
differences in the practical details of each individual transaction. Instead, their treatment 
E.g. Mayer-Maly (1956) 17-9; Impallomeni (1996) 652-4.
Fiori (1999), who follows a chronological outline, looks at the concerns of lawyers from Republican 
times to post-classical Roman law, up to the Romanistic tradition. For reviews, see Guarino (1999); Piro 
(2001); Mayer-Maly (2002). 
Fiori (1999) 361-6.
Idem 315-29.
Idem 286-97.
Idem 329-35, 362-4.
- 138 - 
of this contract placed at the centre of attention the essential reciprocal obligation created 
by locatio conductio, namely the synallagmatic connection between merces and uti frui. 
Fioris publication, to use Du Plessis words, has destabilised much of the 
traditional narrative surrounding the contract.
 This chapter follows Fioris lead, which 
emphasises the merces-uti frui relation innate in the Roman contract of locatio conductio. 
Therefore, discussion is not divided into the different types of locatio conductio; that 
is, texts concerning lease and hire (locatio conductio rei) are considered alongside those 
on employment, be it hire of services (locatio conductio operarum) or a contract to 
perform specific task (locatio conductio operis). Such a unifying approach fits well with 
the classical Roman jurists treatment of this contract. It also reconciles with the wider 
complexity-oriented perspective advertised in this study; a perspective which stresses the 
multi-casual links created within systems, and the ability of the entities operating within 
it to generate new patterns of activity, self-adjusting both themselves and the system(s) in 
an enduring process of evolvement. Defining the Roman locatio conductio as a contract 
which in its essence created a synallagmatic connection between uti frui and merces 
emphasises both the flexibility of this contract, in the sense of enabling individuals to 
self-adjust it to their own needs, and the multiformity of the reciprocal relations 
established by locatio conductio; a multiformity which contains a potential for generating 
new patterns of activity. Lastly, stressing the centrality of the merces-uti frui connection 
gives further support to the focus given below to the definition of merces, and, in 
particular, the question of its pecuniary nature.  
Du Plessis (2012a) 5. 
- 139 - 
5.2. Components of the Roman Contract of Lease and Hire  
In Roman consensual sale (emptio venditio) the contractual obligation was created 
by the parties joint agreement (consensus) on two issues: merx and pretium, i.e. what 
and for how much. In principle, locatio conductio presents a similar situation, in which 
a bilateral contractual obligation is created by the consensus of the parties regarding two 
issues: what and for how much. The what, as stressed by Fiori, is the rendering of 
rights of use and enjoyment, i.e. the uti frui given with regard to the object of the 
contract; the for how much is the merces, the remuneration given in return.
 Thus, 
within the reciprocal obligation created by locatio conductio, uti frui may be paralleled to 
merx in emptio venditio, while merces may be paralleled to pretium. Having stated this 
analogy, let us look at the details of locatio conductio more closely. 
The what, the so-called object of the contract, that is the thing with respect to 
which uti frui was granted, had to be fixed in the contract itself; and could refer to both 
tangibles (e.g. real estate, movable merchandise, livestock,
or slaves) and intangibles (e.g. 
rights, services, or a task to be performed).
 As the focus of this study is money, the 
different things which could be and were given by way of locatio conductio to be used 
and enjoyed are of less interest to the present discussion.
 Suffice it here to state that as a 
But see Frier (1980) 60-3, who states that in locatio conductio (of urban dwellings) consensus had to be 
reached on four issues: (1) a fixed merces; (2) the term of lease, i.e. the period of time for which rights of 
use (habitation, in this case) were given; (3) the dwelling to be leased; and (4) payment periods and 
conditions of payment. Du Plessis (2012b) 134-5, who follows Frier (1980), and argues for an agreement 
on three issues: the object of the lease, the term, and the amount of rent. However, Friers (2) and (3), i.e. 
the object and the term of the lease, are in fact two aspects of defining the what; while Friers (4) could 
be viewed as an operational clause within (1), both of which relate to for how much.
 E.g. Lab Dig. 19.2.60.6; 9 (5 post. a javol. epit.); Paul Dig. 19.2.55.pr. (2 sent.); all referring to a lease of 
horrea (barns and storage space); Gai. Inst. 3.145, on leasing land belonging to municipalities (praediis 
municipum); Alf. Dig. 19.2.30.2 (3 a paul. epit.), on hiring livestock; Gai. Inst. 3.146, on hiring slaves.  
On the different objects given by way of locatio conductio to be used and enjoyed, see Mayer-Maly 
(1956) 113-27; Molnr (1982); Du Plessis (2012a).
- 140 - 
general rule money (be it pecunia, numerata pecunia, or nummi) was not one of them. 
Giving money to another for her or his use and enjoyment usually rendered the 
transaction to be a loan of some sort.
 More significant for the current discussion is the 
counter-obligation of paying merces.
 This had to be specified and agreed in order for 
locatio conductio to come into existence.
 Paying merces distinguished locatio 
conductio transactions from commodatum,
 mandatum,
 and depositum.
 Generally, 
merces could be whatever the parties agreed upon;
 however, like pretium in contracts of 
sale, it had several restrictions.  
First, although the contract of locatio conductio may be agreed under condition,
merces itself had to be certain (certa).
 Whether or not merces could be left to the 
decision of a third party seems still to have been under debate in the mid-second century 
On which, see Chs. 6 and 7 below.
On merces before the second century BCE, see Kaufmann (1964) 136-60; De Neeve (1984) 63-5.
Gai. Inst. 3.142; 162, who states that if merces is fixed for a certain task, the contract is locatio conductio, 
and not mandatum (also, see Du Plessis (2012a) 56); Gai. Dig. 19.2.2.pr. (2 cott.); Ulp. Dig. 19.5.19.1 
(31 ad ed.); Pompon. Dig. 19.2.52 (31 ad quint. muc.), who states that when the locator (a lessor, in this 
case) understood the agreed merces to be higher than that understood by the conductor (the lessee), the 
contract was void; but when it was the other way around, the conductor agreeing to a higher merces than 
that understood by the locator, the contract was valid. Also, Just. Inst. 3.24.pr..
Ulp. Dig. 13.6.5.12 (28 ad ed.); on which, see Fiori (1999) 276-7. On commodatum, see Ch. 6, pp. 181-2, 
below.
Gai. Inst. 3.162; Dig. 19.5.22 (10 ad ed. prov.); Paul. Dig. 17.1.1.4 (32 ad ed.); Ulp. Dig. 14.1.1.18 (28 
ad ed.), who says that a ship-owner may sue a captain (magister navis) ex locato si mercede operam ei 
exhibet, aut si gratuitam mandati agere potest; and similarly, Paul. Dig. 14.1.5.pr. (29 ad ed.).  Also, see 
Fiori (1999) 263-9.
Papin. Dig. 24.1.52.pr. (10 quaest.); Ulp. Dig. 16.3.1.8 (30 ad ed.); 4.9.3.1 (14 ad ed.). Also, see Fiori 
(1999) 270-5; and Ch. 8, below.
We have seen this principle for pretium in emptio venditio; Ulp. (Pompon.) Dig. 4.4.16.4 (11 ad ed.). 
Paul. Dig. 19.2.22.3 (34 ad ed.), who gives this principle for both emptio venditio and locatio conductio; 
and, several decades after the period here under investigation, also Herm. Dig. 19.2.23 (2 iur. epit.).
Paul. Dig. 19.2.20.pr.; 2 (34 ad ed.).
Gai. Inst. 3.142; 205; Labeo Dig. 19.2.60.4 (5 post. a javol. epit.); Papin. Dig. 24.1.52.pr. (10 quaest.); 
Scaev. Dig. 19.2.61.1 (7 dig.), who speaks of certa merces in a case of a lease to transport cargo by sea; 
Javol. Dig. 19.2.21 (11 epist.); 19.2.51.1 (11 epist.); both Javolenus excerptsplaced by Lenel (1889) 
vol. 1, 294, only three section appartrefer to certa merces; on the latter exerpt, see Martin (1989) 106-
8; and discussion on p. 166, below. On using certo pretio when dealing with locatio conductio, see Afric. 
Dig. 19.2.35.1 (8 quaest.); Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.); and discussion on these two excerpts on pp. 
153-4, below. 
- 141 - 
CE. Gaius raises this question in his Institutiones, but leaves it unanswered.
 In an 
excerpt from his Ad Edictum Provinciale it is stated that only when the identity of a third 
party is specified can locatio conductio be created, albeit conditionally; the condition 
being that the said person would indeed set a value.
 This excerpt, however, is widely 
believed to be a sixth-century interpolation,
 especially in view of Justinians rescript 
from 530,
 whichwhile recalling disagreement among cultores antiquae prudentiae, 
though not specifying its detailsattributes to Justinian a ruling precisely the same as the 
one allegedly offered by Gaius in Dig. 19.2.25.pr. (10 ad ed. prov.). Since in Gaius time 
the issue of leaving the value of remuneration to the decision of a third party was still 
under debate for pretium in contracts of sale,
 it is doubtful whether a resolution could 
have been reached on this matter in the case of merces, but not in that of pretium. The 
dispute, so it seems, was settled eventually in the sixth century by Justinian, who gave the 
same ruling for both pretium in contracts of sale,
 and merces in contracts of lease,
established that when the value of remuneration (be it pretium or merces) was left to the 
decision of a specified third party, a valid albeit conditional contract (emptio venditio and 
locatio conductio, respectively) was created.  
Gai. Inst. 3.143; Fiori (1999) 241-8. 
Gai. Dig. 19.2.25.pr. (10 ad ed. prov.).
De Zulueta (1953) 173; Mayer-Maly (1956) 63-69, 84-8; Kaser (1971) 490, n. 23; (1975) 338; Johnston 
(1989) 156-7; Fiori (1999) 189-90, 242-4; Leesen (2010) 208.
CJ 4.38.15 (Just., 530); Just. Inst. 3.23.1. 
Gai. Inst. 3.140, where it is said that opinions divided; though, interestingly enough, the division 
described does not follow that of the legal schools (Sabinians and Proculians); and, see Leesen (2010) 
205-11, for why this dispute was not a school controversy, but a disagreement between individual jurists.
CJ 4.38.15.2 (Just., 530); Just. Inst. 3.23.pr.-1; Leesen (2010) 211-4. 
Just. Inst. 3.23.1 ad finem; 3.24.1.
- 142 - 
Second, similarly to pretium in contract of sale, merces, too, had to be real 
(vera);
 that is, not symbolic, to consist of more than nummus unus, as this would have 
rendered the transaction a donatio rather than a lease.
 Following it, gratis habitare, the 
granting of free habitation, did not properly fall under locatio conductio since no merces 
was given.
 However, documentary evidence suggests that this constraint was not 
strictly upheld. In a papyrus from Tebtunis dated to 145/6,
 which records a hypomnema 
() containing an application for leasing two arouras of state land, presumably 
of inferior quality,
 previously cultivated by the applicants father (ll. 6-9),
 the rent 
quoted for the lease is only 1 drachma (ll. 15-16). The extremely low rent, however, did 
not render the contract as void. At the end of the document appear the instructions of the 
imperial official, the royal scribe (basilikogrammateus), to the village scribe 
(komogrammateus) of Tebtunis authorising the request (ll. 19-25). The wording of the 
request, as well as that of the basilikogrammateus, suggest that the document deals with a 
common procedure.
 The reason for the extremely low rent may be found in the title 
given to the land leased by both the applicant (l. 5, ] [-), and the imperial 
official (l. 20, ]   ()  ). Presumably, [- signified an 
Ulp. Dig. 41.2.10.2 (69 ad ed.), who, while dealing with locatio conductio, speaks of vero pretio and not 
merces; Gai. Dig. 19.5.22 (10 ad ed. prov.), who speaks of vero mercede; Fiori (1999) 177-9, 277-9.
Paul. Dig. 19.2.20.1 (34 ad ed.); Ulp. Dig. 19.2.46 (69 ad ed.); 41.2.10.2 (69 ad ed.); Mayer-Maly (1956) 
128-9; Fiori (1999) 279-81. 
Pompon. Dig. 39.5.9.pr. (33 ad sab.); Papin. Dig. 39.5.27 (29 quaest.); Fiori (1999) 280-1. On the 
question whether gratis habitare could be considered commodatum, see Ulp. Dig. 13.6.1.1 (28 ad ed.); 
Zimmermann (1996) 191.
P.Tebt. II 325 (Tebtunis, 145/6)
The lands category is unspecified; Johnson (1936) 111; Kruse (2002) 384-7.
Suggesting it was a case of renewing an expired lease; Kruse (2002) 384-5.
Kruse (2002) 387-8.
- 143 - 
official category of land ( ) of very low quality, hence low profitability.
The low sum quoted was perceived as real rent perhaps because the state was in a 
position slightly to bend legal requirements. Alternatively, it could be that symbolic rent 
was accepted as real simply because it was perceived as consistent with an economic 
logic. That is, the extremely low rent suited the inferior quality of the land, thereby 
enabling the lessor (i.e. the state) to find tenants which would keep the land cultivated, 
while indicating that it was still a lease, hence keeping in force taxes and other 
obligations inflicted on tenants, which augmented the low rent agreed, hence led to 
higher reicipts.  
While the example of P.Tebt. II 325 concerns land owned by the state outside of 
Italy, where leases may be subject to laws which were not strictly speaking Roman, 
another document from Italy shows that symbolic rents were agreed also within the 
context of Roman civil law. The document predates the period here under investigation, 
but there is no reason to assume that similar transactions did not occur also in the second 
century. It records a lease with a symbolic rent, in which the involvement of official 
authorities is considerably of less significance.
 It concerns a lease of space in a 
warehouse (horreum)
 recorded on a tablet from the Murecine archive of the Sulpicii, a 
This was suggested already by the editors of the papyrus; Grenfell and Hunt (1907) 134. Kruse (2002) 
582-97, who convincingly argued that   was an official land cateogory. 
In this case, although the municipality was the owner of the space leased, it was not an active party in the 
network of transactions described below; both first and second lessees (the debtor and the creditor, 
respectively) entered contracts with a horrearius, which had rented the entire complex from the 
municipality and then sublet it.
On horrea and their lease, see Labeo Dig. 19.2.60.6; 9 (5 post. a javol. epit.); Scaev. Dig. 20.4.21.1 (27 
dig.); Paul. Dig. 14.5.8. (1 decr.); 19.2.56 (1 off. praef. vig.), and see Frier (1980) 133, for the possibility 
of interpolation; Ulp. Dig. 5.1.19.2 (60 ad ed.); 9.3.5.3 (24 ad ed.); 10.4.5.pr. (23 ad ed.); 20.2.3 (73 ad 
ed.); 36.4.5.22 (52 ad ed.); FIRA III 145 (found in Porta Salaria in the north of Rome, 96-98), recording 
the so-called lex horreorum Caesarius; FIRA III 146 (found in Rome on the Aventine). Also, see 
Rickman (1971) esp. 194-210; Du Plessis (2006) 90-92; (2012a) 173-89; (2012b) 145-9.
- 144 - 
family of bankers from Puteoli near Pompeii.
 The details of the transaction are as 
follows.
 A horrearius, Gaius Novius Cypaerus, who rented an entire warehouse from 
the city of Puteoli, had sublet space in it to a certain Gaius Novius Eunus, who stored 
grain there. The said Eunus borrowed money from Tiberius Iulius Evenus,
requested real security to guarantee the repayment of the loan.
 This was given in the 
form of the grain stored in the public granary. The moneylender then entered a contract of 
locatio conductio to lease the space in the warehouse where the grain was stored, in order 
to ensure possession of the pledged grain, more precisely, in order to avoid the tacit 
hypothec of the lessor if the debtor did not pay.
 What is interesting for the current 
discussion is that the sum stated as rent to be paid by the moneylender is only sestertiis 
singulis nummis per month.
 Though such low rent legally should have rendered the 
contract as void,
 the text explicitly speaks of scripsi me locasse, suggesting thatto 
use the words of Du Plessislegal practice may well have diverged from legal 
On the Murecine archive see, Camodeca (1992); (1999); (2003); Jones (2006); Terpstra (2013), non vidi.
TPSul. 45 (Puteoli, 37) (=TPN 86); Camodeca (1999) 122: C(aio) Caesare Germanico Augusto Ti(berio) 
Claudio Nerone Germanico co(n)s(ulibus), sextum Nonas Iulias. Diognetus C(aii) Novi Cypaeri servus 
scripsi iussu Cypaeri domini mei coram ipso me locasse Hesycho Ti(berii) Iuli Augusti l(iberti) Eueni 
ser(vo) horreum duodecimum in horreis Bassianis publicis Puteolanorum mediis, in quo repositum est 
triticum Alexandrinum, quod pignori accepit hac die a C(aio) Novio Euno, item in iisdem horreis imis 
intercolumnia, ubi repositos habet saccos leguminum ducentos, quos pignori accepit ab eodem Euno. Ex 
Kal(endis) Iuliis in menses singulos sestertiis singulis n[u]m(mis). Act(um) P[u]t(eolis). 
Perhaps his patron; Lintott (2002) 557; Jones (2006) 96. 
TPSul. 51-52 (Puteoli, 37).
The whole network of transactions of which this contract was part, is analysed in Lintott (2002) 556-8. A 
similar formation of transactionswhich includes a horrearius tacit hypothec over goods stored in a 
warehouse, and a loan given by a third party to the owner of these goods subject to rendering it as 
pledgeis reported in Scaev. Dig. 20.4.21.1 (27 dig.), where the goods in question are marble slabs; Du 
Plessis (2012a) 183-4, who postulates that in this case, too, the lender entred a locatio conductio to secure 
his possession over the pledged marble. On a landlords hypothec over the tenants goods, see Du Plessis 
(2012b), esp. 144-7, on implied hypothec.
To be contrasted with the hundred HS a month (in mensibus singulis sestetis centenis nummis), reported 
in another lease of a warehouse preserved in the same archive; TPSul. 46 (Puteoli, 40).
Jones (2006) 95-6.
- 145 - 
doctrine.
 Keeping this statement in mind, we move now to consider the pecuniary 
nature of merces. 
5.3. Uti frui as merces? Exchanging res utendae fruendae 
Concerning the pecuniary requirement, which by the end of the third century 
became binding for pretium in contracts of sale, there is a debate as to when precisely it 
became compulsory also for merces in locatio conductio.
 Clearly by the time of 
Justinian merces () in locatio conductio was paralleled to pretium in emptio 
venditio; hence, by analogy, exchanging rights of use and enjoyment did not fall under 
the category of a lease,
 with the underlying supposition that merces was expected to 
consist of a pecuniary element. But what precisely does a pecuniary element refer to? 
In Justinians Institutiones, where the analogy is made between pretium and merces, the 
text simply states that exchanging rights of use and enjoyment was not a lease. Neither 
pecunia nor numerata pecunia are mentioned. In fact, the text does not even consider 
remuneration in kind, but speaks only of remuneration in the form of giving res to be 
used and enjoyed (uti frui). Yet, Theophilus, one of the co-authors of Justinians 
Institutiones, distinctly states in his Paraphrasis Institutionum that merces is to be in 
Du Plessis (2012a) 178-83, esp. 182.
Mayer-Maly (1956) 129-135; Zimmermann (1996) 354-5.  
Just. Inst. 3.24.2: Praeterea sicut vulgo quaerebatur, an permutatis rebus emptio et venditio 
contrahitur:  ita quaeri solebat de locatione et conductione, si forte rem aliquam tibi utendam sive 
fruendam quis dederit et invicem a te aliam utendam sive fruendam acceperit.  et placuit, non esse 
locationem et conductionem, sed proprium genus esse contractus.  veluti si, cum unum quis bovem 
haberet et vicinus eius unum, placuerit inter eos, ut per denos dies invicem boves commodarent, ut opus 
facerent, et apud alterum bos periit:  neque locati vel conducti neque commodati competit actio, quia non 
fuit gratuitum commodatum, verum praescriptis verbis agendum est. See Mayer-Maly (1956) 129-30. 
- 146 - 
money ();
 and in later Byzantine law it is explicitly required that merces 
(like pretium) be in numerata pecunia ().
 Was it a post-classical 
requirement,
 or was it already obligatory in Classical Roman Law?
The discussion below encompasses two queries. One refers to the question of 
interchanging res utendae fruendae, trying to establish when it was decided that 
reciprocal exchange of rights of use and enjoyment could not fall under the category of 
locatio conductio. The other issue concerns the connection drawn by classical Roman 
jurists between merces on the one hand, and pecunia and numerata pecunia on the other 
hand; and the implications it may hold for our understanding of the Romans notion of 
money. 
5.3.1. Gaius and Africanus 
Again, we start the discussion with Gaiuss Institutiones, which states: 
Item si rem tibi utendam dederim et inuicem aliam rem utendam 
acceperim, quaeritur, an locatio et conductio contrahatur.
According to Gaius, it is questionable (quaeritur) whether there is a contract of 
lease when an object is lent for another (res utendae fruendae); however, Gaius provides 
Theoph. Paraphr. 3.24.2:    crton    ; (the Latin transcription 
appears in Ferrini (1897) 358.
A scholion on the late ninth-century Basilica states explicitly that merces is to be in numerata pecunia; 
Sch. ad Bas. 20.1.2.1:  ,      ,   
,     ,                        
. Also, see Mayer-Maly (1956) 129-30.
As argued by Ferrini (1929, [1893]); followed by Cuq (1928) 483-4; and later supported by Longo 
(1953); also, see Misera (1977) 271-3, who argues that merces in money was made obligatory by the end 
of the classical period of Roman law.
As argued by Longo (1912); later supported by Thomas (1958); also, see Kaser (1971) 566.
Gai. Inst. 3.144: Again, if I lend you something for your use and receive in turn another thing for my 
use, it is a question whether a contract of hire is formed. Translation is that of De Zulueta (1946) 199, 
who I find more appropriate here than that of Gordon and Robinson (1988) 347.
- 147 - 
neither the details of the debate, nor his own opinion.
 Centuries later Justinian confirms 
that this issue had previously been the cause of disagreement among jurists.
 What were 
the sides in the debate? It is likely that the quaeritur in Gai. Inst. 3.144 should be put on 
the same level as the quaeritur in Gai. Inst. 3.141.
 The latter, as seen in the previous 
chapter, refers to the school controversy revolving around the issue of the pecuniary 
nature of pretium in contracts of sale (and the division between emptio venditio and 
permutatio); hence, it is not unjustified to look at the former also in terms of the 
Sabinian-Proculian rivalry.
 Seen in this light, one may reconstruct the opinions which 
made this issue quaeritur by paralleling it to the pretium in numerata pecunia 
controversy. In the latter the Sabinians were of the opinion that a mutual exchange of 
goods can be classified under emptio venditio, while the Proculians rejected this view. 
Thus, by analogy, the Sabinians presumably allowed for a mutual exchange of res 
utendae fruendae to be classified under locatio conductio, while the Proculians 
presumably did not.
The fact that Gaius mentions a dispute, but offers no verdict, fits his self-
ascription to the Sabinian school. Gaius, an eminent exponent of clear legal 
categorisations, can be expected to have imposed the same teaching concerning a 
pecuniary remuneration for both pretium in emptio venditio, and merces in locatio 
coductio. Hypothetically, it could be that he intentionally evaded an explicit answer, to 
Contra Thomas (1958), who believes that Gaius implicit answer to this question, was negative.
Just. Inst. 3.24.2.
Thomas (1958); Misera (1977) 271; Fiori (1999) 229. This parallel is made also by the emperor Justinian; 
Just. Inst. 3.24.2. 
Fiori (1999) 183-249.
Misera (1977) 271; Fiori (1999) 228-30. However, note that also Fiori stresses that while the Proculians 
(presumably) affermavano potesse aversi locatio conductio solo quando vi fosse stata una merces, this 
forse, non necessariamente in pecunia numerata; idem 229.
- 148 - 
avoid possible contradiction with the views of his Sabinian teachers.
 However, the fact 
that he poses the question to begin with suggests that in his days the issue of exchanging 
res utendae fruendaelike that of pretium in numerata pecuniawas still under legal 
debate; therefore leading to the postulation that pecuniary merces, though perhaps 
customary in his time, was not yet compulsory.
From the writings of Gaius contemporary, Apuleius of Madaura, it appears that 
in second-century North Africa the interchange of services, such as slaves labour, was an 
ordinary practice.
 Could such an interchange be classified under locatio conductio? 
More generally, could any interchange in which rights of use and enjoyment were 
rendered in return for (some) other rights of use and enjoyment, rather than for a 
payment, either pecuniary or in kind, be classified as a lease?  
Precisely this question is asked by the second-century jurist Africanus: 
Cum fundum communem habuimus et inter nos convenit, ut alternis annis 
certo pretio eum conductum haberemus, tu, cum tuus annus exiturus esset, 
consulto fructum insequentis anni corrupisti. Agam tecum duabus 
actionibus, una ex conducto, altera ex locato: locati enim iudicio mea pars 
propria, conducti autem actione tua dumtaxat propria in iudicium venient. 
Deinde ita notat: nonne quod ad meam partem attinebit, communi 
dividundo praestabitur a te mihi damnum? Recte quidem notat, sed tamen 
etiam servi sententiam veram esse puto, cum eo scilicet, ut, cum alterutra 
actione rem servaverim, altera perematur. Quod ipsum simplicius ita 
quaeremus, si proponatur inter duos, qui singulos proprios fundos 
haberent, convenisse, ut alter alterius ita conductum haberent, ut fructus 
mercedis nomine pensaretur.
As argued by Thomas (1958), who analyses the whole section of Gai. Inst. 3.139-47, and argues that the 
overall analogy made between emptio venditio and locatio conductio should suffice to conclude that the 
monetary requirement of pretium ought to be applied also to merces.
Mayer-Maly (1956) 130; Misera (1977) 271, who argues that Die strenge Auffassung [i.e. that both 
pretium and merces had to be stated in pecuniary terms] hat sich am Ende der Klassik anscheinend 
durchgesetzt, thereby allowing this issue to still be under debate in the time of Gaius.
Apul. Apol. 17.1: Ego adeo seruosne tu habeas ad agrum colendum an ipse mutuarias operas cum 
uicinis tuis cambies, neque scio neque laboro. Also, see Mayer-Maly (1956) 131.
Afric. Dig. 19.2.35.1 (8 quaest.): We were co-owners of a farm, and we agreed to hold it under hire in 
alternate years for a fixed price; when your year was about to end, you deliberately destroyed the crops 
- 149 - 
The excerpt presents a case in which co-owners separately cultivate their land in 
rotation for a fixed rent (certo pretio).
 Africanus starts by giving the opinion of the first-
century BCE jurist Servius (agam tecum  venient), which considered it to be a locatio 
conductio, granting the offended party the actio locati in respect of his own share of the 
land, and the actio conducti in respect of the share belonging to the offender. Africanus 
then reports the opinion of his teacher Julian (deinde ita notat damnum),
 according to 
which in this case the actio communi dividundo could also be applied. Africanus himself 
accepts the validity of Julians view, but holds Servius solution to be more appropriate 
(recte quidem perematur). At any rate, the offended party needs to choose one course 
of action, either the actio communi dividundo, or the actiones loacti et conducti.
 At the 
end of the excerpt a second case is reported (quod ipsum pensaretur), in which separate 
owners agree to cultivate each others land in rotation with the yield acting as rent (ut 
fructus mercedis nomine pensaretur), and for which Africanus applies similar logic. 
for the next year. I may sue you through two actions, one on lease and one on hire; in the action on lease, 
my own share will be given judicial consideration; in the action on hire, your own share. He [Julian] then 
remarks: In an action for dividing common property, will you not be held responsible to me for the loss 
as far as my share is concerned? His remark is apt, but I think the opinion of Servius is also correct, 
namely that when I preserve my property by one of these actions, the other action with him is obviously 
extinguished. We ask the same question in simpler form if the hypothetical involves two men, both 
owning their own farms, who agree that each take the farm of the other on hire with the crops to be 
counted as rent. This excerpt received considerable attention in modern scholarship; Mayer-Maly 
(1956) 132-5; Thomas (1971); Misera (1977) esp. 277-8; Fiori (1999) 230-6.
The principle of using or enjoying property in rotation (alternis annis) appears also elsewhere; Ulp. Dig. 
10.2.16.2 (19 ad ed.), concerning ususfructus; 10.3.7.10 (20 ad ed.), concerning the actio communi 
dividundo; both of which are discussed in Misera (1977) 268-9; also, Ulp. Dig. 10.3.23 (32 ad ed.), 
discussed on pp. 152-3, below.
 Berger (1953) 522.
Mayer-Maly (1956) 133; Thomas (1971) 85-6.
- 150 - 
Although claims for interpolations are not lacking,
 the view adopted here is that 
of Roberto Fiori, who arguesrelying on Lenels reconstruction
that this excerpt 
consists of actual responsa given by Africanus on two concrete cases.
 Fiori points out 
two issues in which the two cases differed. One concerns the question of ownership: 
while the first case deals with co-owners, in the second case ownership is held separately 
by the parties. The other concerns the issue of remuneration: while in the first case the 
parties agreed to a certum pretium, in the second case agricultural yield is to be accounted 
for merces.
 Only the latter dissimilarity is of interest to the present topic of study; and it 
requires clarification concerning two phrases: certo pretio which appears in the first 
case, and ut fructus mercedis nomine pensaretur which appears in the second case; I 
start by considering the former. 
Fiori, and before him Karl-Heinz Misera, convincingly reject claims that certo 
pretio is an interpolation.
 Fiori understands this phrase as indicating that the 
remuneration agreed between the co-owners was necessarily one given in money;
basing his argument on the view that throughout classical Roman law pretium, unlike 
Concerning Africanus own view (recte quidem notat altera perematur), see Mayer-Maly (1956) 132, 
who accepts this sentence as genuinely Africanus; contra Thomas (1971) 86, who argues otherwise. 
Concerning the last part of this excerpt (quod ipsum simplicius pensaretur), see Mayer-Maly (1956) 
132, who attributes it to a Bearbeiter; Thomas (1958) 194; (1971) 86, who believes it to be a later 
addition, because the text moves from first and second bodies (eo, tu, puto) to the plural (quaeremus) and 
then an objective posing of the case (proponatur). See Fiori (1999) 233, n. 163, with referenced to further 
bibliography. 
As pointed out by
Fiori, this excerpt should be seen within the wider context of Dig. 19.2.33-35.1, in 
which Africanus refers to the first-century BCE jurist Servius and discusses different aspects of locatio 
conductio of insulae and fondi; Fiori (1999) 230-1, esp. n. 156 with references to Lenel (1889); and 
(1931) 43, non vidi.
Fiori (1999) 233-4; also Misera (1977) 273-282, who rejects claims for interpolation, but, unlike Fiori, 
prefers viewing these cases as Schulbeispiel (p. 277).
Fiori (1999) 232.
Fiori (1999) 233-4; Misera (1977) 281-2.
Fiori (1999) 233-4, who uses in denaro and in pecunia.
- 151 - 
merces, exclusively referred to a pecuniary value.
 His analysis stresses the pretium 
component of certo pretio and contrasts it with merces, with the underlying assumption 
that both were technical terms which exclusively referred to emptio venditio and locatio 
conductio, respectively. However, Roman jurists perhaps were not so strict in separating 
merces from pretium; Africanus is not the only one to use pretium in the context of 
locatio conductio;
 and, together with pretium and merces, Roman jurists signified 
remuneration in locatio conductio also by using the word pensio.
 Additionally, the 
assumption that pretium had necessarily referred to pecuniary remuneration,
 does not 
reconcile with a lively school controversy revolving around the issue of pretium in 
numerata pecunia;
 or, at least renders it a theoretical debate concerning terminological 
definitions, i.e. as a debate which mainly concentrated on the difference between 
numerata pecunia on the one hand, and pecunia allegedly embedded in pretium on the 
other hand.  
Fiori (1999) 233: pretium, infatti, a differenza di merces, ha nelle fonti di ogni epoca esclusivamente 
valore di pecunia.  
Var. LL 5.178, who gives both merces and manupretium as signifying payment given for services or 
labour; and, see Kaufmann (1964) 138-45, for earlier period. Labeo Dig. 19.2.28.2 (4 post. a javol. epit.): 
uti pretium conductionis praestaret; 19.2.58.pr. (4 post. a javol.epit.): quamvis eam conductor 
maiore pretio locaret; Alf. Dig. 19.2.30.3 (3 a paul. epit.), who speaks of manupretium; Ulp. Dig. 
19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.), who speaks of certo pretio; 41.2.10. 2 (69 ad ed.), who speaks of vero pretio; 
Javol. Dig. 19.2.51.1 (11 epist.), who speaks of certa mercedis, certa pecunia, and pretio opus, all 
referring to paying remuneration in locatio conductio opus faciendum. But, see Ulp. Dig. 19.5.20.1 (32 
ad ed.), which discussed a border-line case between emptio venditio and locatio conductio, where 
pretium is used for payment in the case a sale occurred, and merces in case it was a lease.
Paul Dig. 19.2.54.1 (5 respon.); 19.2.55.2 (2 sent.); Ulp. Dig. 50.8.3.2 (3 opin.); 13.7.11.5 (28 ad ed.); 
Molnr (1983-1984) 170-1.
Var. LL 5.177: Pretium, quod emptionis aestimationisve causa constituitur, dictum a peritis, quod hi soli 
facere possunt recte id; assuming that money is not the only thing which enables evaluation, this citation 
offers no proof that pretium was to have an explicitly pecuniary nature.
Gai. Inst. 3.141; Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.1 (33 ad ed.); 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.); and Ch. 4, pp. 107-26, above.
- 152 - 
Hence, I think that here the view presented by Karl-Heinz Misera should be 
preferred.
 According to Misera, when Africanus speaks of certo pretio his intention is 
to stress the certum element of this phrase; that is, to emphasise that a fee was indeed 
agreed, thereby establishing the transaction as locatio conductio. There is no reason to 
assume that this fee (Misera speaks of Entgelt) was necessarily paid in money, or that 
it could not have been the mutual assignment of rights of use and enjoyment.
 If we 
accept that in the time of Gaius the issue of pretium in numerata pecunia was still the 
subject of a lively school controversy, then perhaps Africanusa student of Julian, the 
head of the Sabinian schoolwhen using the term certo pretio had in mind a Sabinian 
notion of pretium, according to which remuneration could consist also of other things (i.e. 
pretium in ceteris rebus) apart from numerata pecunia. In such case, other things could 
also refer to granting uti frui; and at any rate there is no reason to assume that Africanus 
necessarily perceived certo pretio as referring to payment in money.  
The end of the excerpt further clarifies this point. There, Africanus reports a 
second case, in which separate owners cultivated each others land in rotation, with the 
yield extracted (fructus) being reckoned as the merces (...ut fructus mercedis nomine 
pensaretur). Again, the present discussion follows Fiori, which rejects claims of post-
classical interpolation, and sees this sentence as ultimately deriving from Africanus 
Quaestiones.
 Because the description of the case starts with quod ipsum simplicius ita 
quaeremus... it should be understood that all three jurists (Servius, Julian, and Africanus) 
Misera (1977).
Idem 281-2.
Fiori (1999) 230-6; Misera (1977) 274, who, although willing to accept post-classical interpolations, 
argues that the details of this case derive from Africanus himself; contra Mayer-Maly (1956) 132-3; 
Thomas (1971).
- 153 - 
allowed the use of the actiones locati et conducti also in this situation. That is, they all 
perceived the mutual granting of rights of use and enjoyment to be a lease. Such an 
interpretation suits the reconstruction of the Sabinian view detailed above; according to 
which, just as an exchange of goods could be considered emptio venditio, so can an 
exchange of res utendae fruendae be considered locatio conductio.
It should be stressed that the transaction here was classified as locatio conductio 
not because merces was given in fructus; rather, fructus mercedis nomine pensaretur, that 
is, fructus was to be considered as, or paid by way of, merces. Post-classical 
commentators understood mercedis nomine to mean that a pecuniary merces was agreed 
and was later converted into payment in kind.
 Precisely such a practice is reported in 
an excerpt from Ulpian, in which the parties to a contract of lease agreed that merces be 
paid with a fixed amount of grain at a fixed price.
 Ulpian categorises the transaction 
under locatio conductio, allowing merces to be paid in kind, but only under the condition 
that it was first calculated and agreed in money (pecunia). However, as pointed out by 
Fiori,
 there is no reason to assume that this was also the intention of Africanus. Such 
an interpretation represents the view of the victorious side in the debate, presumably the 
Fiori (1999) 236; Misera (1977) 271.
Fiori (1999) 234-5, esp. n. 171 with refernces to post-classical legal texts.
Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.): Si dominus exceperit in locatione, ut frumenti certum modum certo 
pretio acciperet, et dominus nolit frumentum accipere neque pecuniam ex mercede deducere, potest 
quidem totam summam ex locato petere, sed utique consequens est existimare officio iudicis hoc 
convenire, haberi rationem, quanto conductoris intererat in frumento potius quam in pecunia solvere 
pensionis exceptam portionem. Simili modo et si ex conducto agatur, idem erit dicendum. As pointed out 
in Honsell (1969) 139: Nur die Form, nicht der Inhalt des Fragments mutet nachklssisch an.
Fiori (1999) 234-5.
- 154 - 
Proculians, according to which because merces was to be given, or at least stated and 
agreed, in money,
 an exchange of res utendae fruendae could not qualify as a lease.  
The phrase mercedis nomine appears also in an excerpt from Gaius, which deals 
with giving clothes for cleaning or mending.
 Gaius states that if the work was 
undertaken freely, the case was one of mandatum; if merces was given or agreed, it was a 
locatio conductio; but if the value of payment was agreed only after the task was 
completed, Gaius labels such payment mercedis nomine, and states that the transaction 
was not locatio conductio, since remuneration was not agreed in advance; hence, was not 
certa. Because the contract could not qualify as locatio conductio, but the causa for 
making payment (presumably in money) was similar to that for giving remuneration in 
locatio conductio, Gaius offers to advance an actio in factum or actio praescriptis verbis 
in order to claim, on the basis of the agreement as a iusta causa, that which could be 
regarded as merces (mercedis nomine).
 It follows that in this case mercedis nomine 
should be understood to mean that money was given as if it was merces.
 Such an 
interpretation suits also the use of mercedis nomine in Afric. Dig. 19.2.35.1 (8 quaest.). 
Here, too, the phrase signifies that something (i.e. fructus) was given as if it was 
merces; however, in this case the jurist categorised the transaction under locatio 
conductio. Subsequently, mercedis nomine should be understood to signify not that 
I.e. in pecunia, though perhaps not in numerata pecunia, as repeatedly pointed out by Fiori (1999) 234-
Gai. Dig. 19.5.22 (10 ad ed. prov.). On giving clothes for cleaning or mending, see Du Plessis (2012a) 
55-67. 
On the actio praescriptis verbis and the protection of innominate contracts, see pp. 155-8, below.
However, see
Gai. Inst. 3.162, who uses the phrase quo nomine mercedem statuissem, with nomine 
indicating not that something was given as if it was merces; but that the existence of any type of 
remuneration, pecuniary or other, should be questioned, contrasting the contract with a gratuitous 
agreement; i.e. nomine stresses that had merces been fixed, the transaction would be a locatio 
conductio. 
- 155 - 
Africanus considered the fructus itself to be merces, but that fructus was the tangible 
representative of the actual merces; with the latter somehow being conceptualised in 
monetary terms, or, to go one step further, perhaps even perceived as the reciprocal 
exchange of rights of use and enjoyment.
So far it has been shown that Africanus, Julian, Servius, and perhaps also Gaius, 
were of the opinionwhich Fiori labels Sabinianthat an exchange of rights of use 
and enjoyment fell under the category of locatio conductio. Yet, as indicated by Gaius 
quaeritur,
 it was certainly not the only legal stand existing at the time. In the first 
decades of the third century leading Roman juristsnamely, Ulpian and Paulwere of 
the opposite opinion, according to which an exchange of res utendae fruendae, as a 
general rule, could not be classified under locatio conductio.  
5.3.2. Ulpian 
We start with an excerpt from Ulpian which discusses a situation comparable with 
the second case reported in Afric. Dig. 19.2.35.1 (8 quaest.):  
Si, cum unum bovem haberem et vicinus unum, placuerit inter nos, ut per 
denos dies ego ei et ille mihi bovem commodaremus, ut opus faceret, et 
apud alterum bos periit, commodati non competit actio, quia non fuit 
gratuitum commodatum, verum praescriptis verbis agendum est.
Misera (1977) 269: ...das Entgelt besteht darin, da jeder seinerseits die Sache des anderen zur Nutzung 
erhlt. In the terminology offered by Fiori (1999), who stresses the synallagmatic merces-uti frui 
connection created by locatio conductio, by exchanging rights of use and enjoyment the merces provided 
by party A for receiving uti frui from party B was granting party B uti frui in property belonging to party 
Gai. Inst. 3.144.
Ulp. Dig. 19.5.17.3 (28 ad ed.): My neighbour and I each have an ox. We decide that for ten days 
apiece we will lend our oxen to each other to do a job. An ox died in the hands of the other person. 
Because the loan was not gratuitous, the action on loan for use does not lie, and action must be brought 
praescriptis verbis. Translation is that of Watson (1985), albeit here bovem is translated as ox instead 
of Watsons cow. 
- 156 - 
Here the case concerns neighbours, each owning an ox, who agree to interchange 
in rotation the work-force of their oxen.
 As in the situation reported at the end of Afric. 
Dig. 19.2.35.1 (8 quaest.), this case, too, deals with separate owners who agreed to allow 
one another uti frui in each others property. While Africanus considered a transaction of 
similar outline to be locatio conductio, Ulpian did not qualify it as such. Ulpian uses 
neither the verb locare nor conducere. Instead, he examines whether the case could be 
classified under commodatum (loan for use), but concludes that, since the use of oxen 
was not granted gratuitously, this course of action should be rejected; with the outcome 
of offering as legal aid the actio praescriptis verbis. 
The actio praescriptis verbis was a development of need.
 Both second-century 
jurists, Celsus (a Proculian) and Julian (a Sabinian), state that whenever contracts arise 
whose names were not instituted in civil law, the actio praescriptis verbis could be 
applied.
 The reasoning for this is articulated in an excerpt from Ulpian: It is implicit in 
the nature of reality that there are more types of transactions than names for them.
This was the logic behind the actio praescriptis verbis. It gave remedy to offended parties 
in bilateral reciprocal transactions which did not fall under any specific contract, when 
one party performed while the other did not reciprocate, yet the case was not one of 
fraud. It serves as a good example for the creativity displayed on the part of Roman 
A similar case is reported in Just. Inst. 3.24.2, where the opinion given is the same as Ulpians; Mayer-
Maly (1956) 131-2; Misera (1977) 270, 272. 
Dig. 19.5; CJ 4.64.1 (Gord., 238); CJ 4.64.2-8 (Diocl. et Maxim., 286-305); CJ 4.54.2 (Alex. Severus, 
222). Also Berger (1953) 344; Kaser (1971) 419f.; Zimmermann (1996) 532-5. On legal protection 
granted to innominate contracts, see Kremer (2000), non vidi; Zhang (2007).
 Cels. Dig. 19.5.2 (8 dig.); Julian. Dig. 19.5.3 (14 dig.). 
 Ulp. Dig. 19.5.4 (30 ad Sab.): Natura enim rerum conditum est, ut plura sint negotia quam vocabula. 
- 157 - 
jurists in their quest to address the economic interests of their contemporaries on the one 
hand, while preserving juristic definitions and the strictness of law on the other hand.  
Another excerpt from Ulpian considers a case of co-owners who agreed to 
cultivate their land in rotation, collecting the yield in alternate years: 
Si convenerit inter te et socium tuum, ut alternis annis fructum 
perciperetis, et non patiatur te socius tui anni fructum percipere, videndum, 
utrum ex conducto sit actio an vero communi dividundo. Eadem quaestio 
est et si socius, qui convenerat, ut alternis annis frueretur, pecus immisit et 
effecit, ut futuri anni fructus, quos socium percipere oportuit, 
corrumperentur. Et puto magis communi dividundo iudicium quam ex 
conducto locum habere (quae enim locatio est, cum merces non 
intercesserit?) aut certe actionem incerti civilem reddendam.
The case reported in this excerpt mixes components from both situations reported 
in Afric. Dig. 19.2.35.1 (8 quaest.): it concerns co-owners (Ulpian speaks of socii), as in 
the first situation considered by Africanus; and remuneration is given in fructus, as in 
Africanus second situation.
 Unlike in Ulp. Dig. 19.5.17.3 (28 ad ed.), here Ulpian 
considers the possibility of locatio conductio. However, contra Africanus and Servius, he 
argues that in this case it is not the actio ex conducto which should be pursued,
rather the actio communi dividundo, suggested by Julian and accepted as valid also by 
Ulp. Dig. 10.3.23 (32 ad ed.): If you and your partner have agreed to take the fruits in alternate years 
and the partner will not let you take the fruits in your year, let us consider whether there should be an 
action on hire or an action for dividing common property. The same question also arises if the partner 
who agreed to take the fruits in alternate years has let his livestock onto the land with the result that the 
next years fruits, which his partner ought to have received, are spoiled. I think the action for dividing 
common property applies better than the action on hire (for what sort of hire is this, when no payment is 
involved?), or at any rate a civil action for an uncertain amount should be granted. For a discussion of 
this excerpt, see Mayer-Maly (1956) 133-5; Misera (1977) 273-8; Fiori (1999) 236-8.
Fiori (1999) 236-8; Misera (1977) 277, who prefers seeing this case, combined with Afric. Dig. 
19.2.35.1 (8 quaest.), as ein Schulbeispiel.
Misera (1977) 279-80; Fiori (1999) 237, esp. n. 180. 
- 158 - 
Africanus; alternatively, says Ulpian, also the actio civilis incerti may be advanced.
His justification is most interesting for the present topic. For how can one speak of a 
lease, asks Ulpian rhetorically, if no merces is involved? In order for a lease to exist 
there needs to be an identifiable merces. Clearly, in Ulpians view, the fructus collected 
by each of the co-owners did not qualify as such; but why?  
The reason is found earlier in the same treatise; namely in Ulp. Dig. 16.3.1.9 (30 
ad ed.): 
Si quis servum custodiendum coniecerit forte in pistrinum, si quidem 
merces intervenit custodiae, puto esse actionem adversus pistrinarium ex 
conducto: si vero mercedem accipiebam ego pro hoc servo, quem in 
pistrinum accipiebat, ex locato me agere posse: quod si operae eius servi 
cum custodia pensabantur, quasi genus locati et conducti intervenit, sed 
quia pecunia non datur, praescriptis verbis datur actio: si vero nihil aliud 
quam cibaria praestabat nec de operis quicquam convenit, depositi actio 
Here a different scenario for exchanging res utendae fruendae is considered. In 
this case a slave given for safekeeping was put to work by the safe-keeper. According to 
Ulpian, only if the latter received payment (merces) for the custody he provided, can the 
actio locati be brought against him. But if the slave was given for safekeeping with the 
understanding that his labour was payment for the expenses of his custody, Ulpian says 
that although a kind of a lease occurred (quasi genus locati et conducti intervenit), 
because no money was given (sed quia pecunia non datur), the transaction was not a 
For suspicions for interpolation, see Mayer-Maly (1956) 134; Fiori (1999) 237, n. 181, with further 
references.
Ulp. Dig. 16.3.1.9 (30 ad ed.): If anyone compels a slave held for safekeeping to work in a mill, I think 
that there is an action on hire against him if he received payment for the safekeeping. However, if it was I 
who received payment for this slave whom he took into the mill, I can bring the action on leasing. But if 
the work of the slave was payment for the safekeeping, this is as if it were a kind of leasing and hiring 
but, because money is not paid, an action praescriptis verbis is given. Indeed, if nothing other than food 
was supplied and nothing was agreed concerning the work, the action is on deposit. 
- 159 - 
locatio conductio; instead, he offers to advance the actio praescriptis verbis. His 
verdictaccording to which safekeeping services in exchange for custody expenses is 
not a leaseleads to the conclusion that Ulpian did not qualify an exchange of res 
utendae fruendae as locatio conductio.  
What is interesting for the present discussion is the clear equivalence drawn by 
Ulpian between merces and pecunia. Ulpian seems to assume that the evidence for the 
existence of merces is the giving of pecunia, without which there is no merces, hence 
neither a locatio conductio. It appears that in Ulpians opinion merces was a payment 
given in monetary form.
 This is the reason why neither this case,
 nor the two cases 
previously discussedi.e. the neighbours who interchanged in rotation the work-force of 
their oxen,
 and the co-owners who individually collected fructus in alternate years
are classified by Ulpian as locatio conductio.  
Yet, Ulpian did not entirely reject the possibility of receiving merces in kind. As 
seen above, he allowed for merces to be given in kind when the goods offered were of a 
fixed amount and were given a fixed price (frumenti certum modum certo pretio), both of 
which had been agreed in advance at the time of contracting the lease.
 This way 
merces was calculated, hence conceptualised, in monetary terms, albeit in practice 
delivered in kind.
 Such an agreement allowed the lessee to minimise risk against very 
low prices at the time of the harvest. As pointed out by Dennis Kehoe, the tenant clearly 
Also, Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.2 (5 quaest.), discussed on p. 162, below.
Ulp. Dig. 16.3.1.9 (30 ad ed.).
Ulp. Dig. 19.5.17.3 (28 ad ed.).
Ulp. Dig. 10.3.23 (32 ad ed.).
Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.), discussed on pp. 153-4, above. Ulpians requirement for a monetary 
merces did not renounce the legality of locatio partiaria, on which see pp. 171-2, below.
Rathbone (1991) 318-30, who argues that this was how merces was regularly treated in the agricultural 
context of third-century Egypt.
- 160 - 
was settling for a lower price for his grain than he might have been able to obtain had he 
waited to sell it, but he was protecting himself against the risk that grain prices might 
collapse and leave him in no position to pay his rent.
 From this excerpt
 it appears 
that eventually the dominus (i.e. the lessor) insisted on receiving the rent in money 
(pecunia); hence, he advanced an actio ex locato. Presumably this was because at the 
time of paying the rent the market price of grain was extremely low, making it more 
beneficial for the lessor to demand remuneration in pecunia.
 The jurist does not reject 
the lessors right to demand merces in pecunia, but rules that in such a case the pecuniary 
sum set by the judge should take into consideration the interesse of the conductor. In 
other words, the tenant should not suffer any loss by paying merces in pecunia rather than 
in the quantity of grain agreed; meaning that the sum set by the judge should follow that 
calculated and agreed at the time of contracting the lease, while seeing to it that the tenant 
will not suffer grave loss due to actual (low) prices of grain.
 No matter which method 
of payment was eventually followed, in natura or in pecunia, merces was determined by 
the amount initially agreed, calculated and conceptualised in monetary units of account.  
Thus, two points can be established concerning Ulpians stand. One is that Ulpian 
did not classify an exchange of res utendae fruendae under locatio conductio; the other is 
that, according to Ulpian, merces was to be paid, and if not paid then conceptualised, in 
pecunia.
Kehoe (1997) 216-7. 
I.e. Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.).
Honsell (1969) 139-40.
As pointed out in Medicus (1962) 160: Quanto intererat ist also hier die Differenz zwischen zwei leicht 
festzustellenden Preisen, the fixed price agreed in the lease contract, and the price at which the tenant 
eventually managed to sell the gain in order to pay merces in pecunia. Also Honsell (1969) 138-40.
Though, as pointed out by Fiori (1999) 238-9, perhaps not in numerata pecunia.
- 161 - 
5.3.3. Paul 
This position is stated more straightforwardly by Ulpians contemporary, Paul. As 
shown in the previous chapter, in the school controversy revolving around the issue of 
pretium in numerata pecunia in contracts of sale Paul took sides with the eventually 
triumphant Proculian approach.
 As is shown below, he remains consistent with the 
Proculian line of argumentation also in the case of locatio conductio. Just as he did not 
allow for an exchange of goods to be classified as emptio venditio, similarly he denied 
that an exchange of rights of use and enjoyment can be classified as locatio conductio. 
Furthermore, just as money was that which defined pretium in contracts of emptio 
venditio, equally it was money which defined merces in contracts of locatio conductio.  
In a well-known excerpt from his Quaestionum, preserved in Justinians Digest 
under the title De praescriptis verbis et in factum actionibus, Paul divides exchange 
transactions into four categories:
 Either [1] I give to you in order that you give or [2] I 
give that you do or [3] I do that you give or [4] I do that you do.
 Within this famous 
fourfold categorisation Paul lists various legal remedies which can be granted to different 
obligations, whether these arise from specific contracts (e.g. emptio venditio, locatio 
conductio, mandatum), or are created by what is known as innominate contracts.
Under Pauls first category,
I give to you in order that you give, if both parties give res, 
Paul classifies the transaction as barter (permutatio); only if one party gives res while the 
See the previous chapter.
Cristaldi (2007) 108-12, esp. 109, n. 109, with further references to scholars who argue in favour of 
post-classical interpolation, and those who argue that the substance is genuinely Pauls. Also, see Kremer 
(2000), non vidi; Dalla Massara (2004), non vidi. 
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.pr. (5 quaest.): In hac quaestione totius ob rem dati tractatus inspici potest. Qui in 
his competit speciebus: aut enim do tibi ut des, aut do ut facias, aut facio ut des, aut facio ut facias
On legal protection granted to innominate contracts, see Kremer (2000), non vidi; Zhang (2007); Pelesso 
(2007); (2011); Dalla Massara (2011); Fiori (2012).
- 162 - 
other gives pecunia, Paulin accordance with the Proculian viewclassifies the 
transaction as a sale (emptio venditio).
The second category, I give so that you do, is further divided by Paul as 
follows.
 If the task agreed to be done was such which cannot be leased out (Paul gives 
the example of manumitting a slave), then the action available against the party who did 
not perform is either a condictio for reclaiming that which was given, or the actio 
praescriptis verbis for compelling performance.
 If, on the other hand, the task agreed 
to be done was of a kind such as is normally leased out (tale sit factum, quod locari 
solet), then only when what was given in return was pecunia, was the transaction a 
lease.
 If what was given in return was not pecunia but some other res, then the 
transaction, according to Paul, did not qualify as locatio conductio; instead, what should 
be advanced is either an actio civilis for claiming the res, or a condictio for reclaiming it.  
Pauls third category, I do so that you give, is similar to the second in the sense 
that it consists of two parties, one which gives and one which does. However, here Paul 
makes no reference to locatio conductio; neither does he comment on the nature of the 
thing given, i.e. whether it was pecunia or some other res.
 It can be concluded that it 
made no difference. This is because Paul resorts here to a principle, already observed in 
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.1 (5 quaest.).
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.2 (5 quaest.): At cum do ut facias, si tale sit factum, quod locari solet, puta ut tabulam 
pingas, pecunia data locatio erit, sicut superiore casu emptio: si rem do, non erit locatio, sed nascetur 
vel civilis actio in hoc quod mea interest vel ad repetendum condictio. See Cuq (1928) 502 n.9, for the 
possibility of interpolation.
If the party who performed (i.e. did) was later evicted from that which was given to him, the action 
available against the giver was either one on fraud, or, when truly ignorant of claims for eviction, an actio 
in factum.
Also Paul. Dig. 17.1.1.4 (32 ad ed.), who states the rule that giving money disqualifies a transaction 
from being a mandatum, rendering it a locatio conductio. However, see Longo (1953) 690.
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.3 (5 quaest.).
- 163 - 
Caelius Sabinus media sententia concerning pretium in emptio venditio,
 according to 
which the order of actions did make a difference. Therefore, X gives so that Y does, 
differs from Y does so that X gives. While Paul granted an actio civilis in the former 
situation, it was not made available in the latter. The party which performed but received 
nothing in return was allowed only an action on fraud.
Pauls fourth and last category, I do so that you do (facio ut facias),
 could 
potentially include an exchange of res utendae fruendae; as in Pauls own example of 
two owners who agreed that each would build on the others land.
 However, the only 
legal aid provided by Paul for such cases is the actio praescriptis verbis; that is, the actio 
available for agreements regarding reciprocal exchange of either goods or services, where 
one party performed while the other did not reciprocate, and in which, according to Paul, 
none of the parties was remunerated in money. It appears that Paul took the Proculian 
requirement of a monetary remuneration in emptio venditio and applied it by way of 
analogy also in locatio conductio, automatically rendering any exchange of rights of use 
and enjoyment to be a transaction which cannot be qualified as locatio conductio.  
To conclude the discussion so far, two opposing views have been detected. On the 
one hand, Servius, Julian, Africanus, and perhaps also Gaiusrepresenting what was 
presumably a Sabinian standwere of the opinion that an exchange of res utendae 
fruendae qualified as locatio conductio. On the other hand, Paul and Ulpian
Gai. Inst. 3.141, who reports that Caelius Sabinus argued that it was the order of events that determined 
which party offered the merchandise (merx), and which the purchase-price (pretium); and Ch. 4, pp. 103-
5, above.
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.4 (5 quaest.).
One could perhaps perceive this case in terms of two parties hiring each others services to construct a 
building; however, the distinguished jurist considers only the possibility of mandatum.
- 164 - 
representing what was probably a Proculian standrejected this view, arguing that an 
exchange of res utendae fruendae did not fall under any specified contract.
 We move 
now to consider the implications of this debate on the pecuniary nature of merces. 
5.4. The nature of merces: res, pecunia, and pecunia numerata 
Seeing an exchange of res utendae fruendae as a valid locatio conductio (the 
presumably Sabinian stand) meant perceiving the synallagmatic obligation created by the 
contract, i.e. the merces-uti frui connection, in circular terms; that is, one partys merces 
is another partys uti frui, and vice versa. If granting uti frui may in itself act as merces, 
there is no reason to assume that giving some sort of res could not equally qualify as 
merces. Therefore, jurists who held an exchange of res utendae fruendae to be a valid 
locatio conductio should be expected not to have required that merces be paid solely in 
money.  
Jurists who held the opposing (presumably Proculian) stand, according to which 
an exchange of res utendae fruendae was not locatio conductio, were more explicit in 
stating their view regarding the pecuniary nature of merces. As seen above, both Ulpian 
and Paul expected merces to be in pecunia. Ulpian seems to have postulated that the 
existence of merces meant the involvement of pecunia;
 and that merces was to be 
given, or at least calculated and agreed, in monetary terms.
 Paulexpressing what was 
clearly a Proculian standopenly required merces to be in pecunia;
 probably drawing 
Hence, in case of a breach they offered as legal remedy the actio praescriptis verbis. For interpreting 
this dispute in terms of the Sabinian-Proculian rivalry, see Misera (1977) 271; Fiori (1999) 236-49.
Ulp. Dig. 10.3.23 (32 ad ed.); 16.3.1.9 (30 ad ed.).
Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.).
Paul. Dig. 17.1.1.4 (32 ad ed.); 19.5.5.2 (5 quaest.).
- 165 - 
an analogy from the Proculian stance in the school controversy revolving around the 
issue of pretium in numerata pecunia in contracts of sale.  
However, with regard to that famous controversy, this specific phrase, numerata 
pecunia, appears in neither Pauls excerpts,
 nor Ulpians; in fact, the requirement of a 
pecuniary merces is articulated in terms of numerata pecunia only in post-classical 
 This presumably is the reason why Roberto Fiori emphasised that the (Proculian) 
requirement of a pecuniary merces did not necessarily mean that merces was to be in 
numerata pecunia, as required from pretium in emptio venditio; with the phrase numerata 
pecunia understood by Fiori to mean cash money or coinage (Fiori uses in denaro).
Thus, two questions arise. Could merces legally be given in res which was not pecunia? 
And, why is it that the eventually triumphant (presumably Proculian) view, according to 
which merces should be in money, was articulated by classical Roman jurists in terms of 
pecunia and not numerata pecunia, as was the case for pretium in emptio venditio
At the start of the discussion it should be stated that many scholars hold Classical 
Roman Law to have required that merces be paid in cash money.
 While cash merces 
was probably common practice
and keeping in mind that legal practice may diverge 
Paul. Dig. 47.2.26.1 (9 ad sab.), who speaks of a tenant qui nummis colat.
Sch. ad Bas. 20.1.2.1; see p. 146, n. 70 above.
Fiori (1999) 234-41, esp. 238-9; but, see Misera (1977) 272, who argues that merces was required to be 
in cash money already at the end of the classical period of Roman law.
As seen in the previous chapter, it is only Gai. Inst. 3.141, who uses the phrase numerata pecunia; Paul 
when reporting this school controversy speaks of pretium in nummi; Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.1 (33 ad ed.); 
19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.); or, talks of pecunia; 17.1.1.4 (32 ad ed.); 19.5.5.2 (5 quaest.). 
Thomas (1958); Kaser (1971) 566; Martin (1989) 31, 122; Kehoe (1997) 148; Du Plessis (2012a) 179; to 
cite only a few. Contra, Longo (1953); Misera (1977) 271-3, who argues that monetary merces became 
obligatory only by the end of the classical period of Roman law; De Neeve (1984) 15, who states that 
Tenancy proper only exists if remuneration, the merces, consists of a fixed amount, either in money or in 
kind; Fiori (1999) 238-9, who says that merces in pecunia was a Proculian requirement, not necessarily 
approved by Sabinian jurists, and that at any rate it did not mean that merces was to be in numerata 
pecunia, understood by Fiori to mean cash money (in denaro).
What Kehoe (1997) 148-50, labels a normative lease.
- 166 - 
from legal doctrine,
 as seen above in cases of non-symbolic mercesstill, as 
demonstrated below, cash money was not the only form in which merces could legally be 
given.
The particularities of calculating and paying merces were subject to agreements 
between parties.
 Legally it made no difference for the validity of the contract whether 
merces was agreed as a lump sum or as a payment per certain unit.
 Merces could be 
agreed in advance, fixed at a lump sum;
 in which case, regardless of method of 
payment (i.e. cash, credit, or in kind), or number of instalments,
 it seems that merces 
was stated in monetary units of account. Alternatively, it could be agreed that merces be 
paid per certain unit of measure (per pedes mensurasve),
 in which case the total 
amount to be paid was determined only after the task was performed, evaluated, and 
approved.
 Examples in Justinians Digest for merces calculated per certain unit include 
payment per jar to be transported,
 per one days work,
 or per number of days for 
With the potential of rendering instances of non pecuniary merces as illegal deviations.
A point realised also by Kehoe (1997) 148-9.
Paul. Dig. 19.2.22.3 (34 ad ed.); Herm. Dig. 19.2.23 (2 iur. epit.).
Javol. Dig. 19.2.51.1 (11 epist.); Martin (1989) 106-7. However, it certainly mattered to the parties 
involved, as it affected the level of provision; Martin (1989) 31-2, 103-22.
E.g. Javol. Dig. 19.2.51.1 (11 epist.); Labeo Dig. 19.2.60.4 (5 post. a javol. epit.); 14.2.10.2 (1 pith. a 
paul. epit.), who states that if a ship was hired for a lump sum (aversio), that sum regarded the maximum 
amount of cargo the ship could hold. Aversio in the sense of a lump sum appears also in Ulp. Dig. 
14.1.1.15 (28 ad ed.); 18.6.4.1 (28 ad ed.); Flor. Dig. 19.2.36 (7 inst.).
Paul. Dig. 19.2.24.2 (34 ad ed.); Lab. Dig. 19.2.58.2 (5 post. a javol. epit.); 19.2.60.4 (5 post. a javol. 
epit.); FIRA III 153, where the payment for the construction of a wall around the precinct of the temple of 
Serapis in Puteoli was given in two instalments, at the beginning of the job, and after its culmination and 
approval; Martin (1989) 31-2, 114.
Flor. Dig. 19.2.36 (7 Inst.); Martin (1989) 105-6, 115-7, 140-4.
On probatio, the final approval of the work, especially in construction, see Martin (1989) 103-16; and 
117-20, who points that in construction additional expense above the original merces agreed was 
probably commonplace.
Labeo Dig. 14.2.10.2 (1 pith. a paul. epit.).
Javol. Dig. 19.2.51.1 (11 epist.), who speaks of certa pecunia to be given in singulos dies. For possible 
interpolation at the end of this excerpt, see Molnr (1982) 655-6; but, see Martin (1989) 106-8, who, 
while not rejecting the possibility that the text was abbreviated, argues that its substance is probably 
- 167 - 
which the conductor received uti frui.
 Although in these instances the texts contain no 
obvious reference as to whether the agreed merces per unit was calculated in monetary 
terms or in kind, Justinians Digest also preserves an example for merces per unit which 
was explicitly reckoned in monetary terms, that is, merces per number of stones used in 
construction, with the monetary sum of seven monetary units of account stated per 
stone.
We have seen above that merces could legally be given in the form of a fixed 
amount of goods at a fixed price, in which case, though paid in kind, it was calculated in 
monetary units of account.
 Leasing land for a fixed rent in kind appears also in an 
imperial rescript of Alexander Severus, referring to a lease of an estate for certis annuis 
quantitatibus;
 and a rescript of Diocletian and Maximian (somewhat after the period 
here under investigation), referring to a lease for a fixed amount of olive oil.
Furthermore, it could be agreed that on top of a fixed pecuniary merces other things 
would also be rendered;
 be these tangibles,
 or some task or service to be 
classical. However, see the preceding excerpt, Javol. Dig. 19.2.51.pr. (11 epist.), which explicitely speaks 
of merces in pecunia.
Ulp. Dig. 19.5.20.1 (32 ad ed.), where mules are given in a kind of a conditional sale, the condition 
being that if the receiver is unsatisfied with the mules he would not be obliged to buy them, but would 
pay an amount for each day he had used them.
Alf. Dig. 19.2.30.3 (3 a paul. epit.); on the authenticity of the wording of this excerpt, see Du Plessis 
(2006) 88-9.
Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.), discussed on pp. 153-4, above.
CJ 4.65.8 (Alex. Sev., 231).
CJ 4.65.21 (Diocl. 293); both imperial rescripts mentioned in Kehoe (1997) 148; Fiori (1999) 240. 
Ulp. Dig. 24.3.7.8 (31 ad ed.).
A method presumably not uncommon in cases of employment; e.g. P.Oxy. X 1275 (Oxyrhynchos, third 
century CE), a contract hiring musicians for a five-day village celebration, for which wages were 140 
drachmae a day, 40 pairs of loaves, and 8 cotylae of raphanus oil a day, as well as one jar of wine and 
one of vinegar for the whole 5 days (ll. 15-20); P.Oxy. LXXIV 5014 (Thosbis; Oxyrhynchite Nome, third 
century CE), a contract hiring a company of aulos-players and dancers (krotalistriai) for 5 days for a 
similar wage of 120 drachmae a day and 40 pairs of loaves, 8(?) kotylai of radish-oil, and (for all of the 
days?) one keramion of wine and one of vinegar (ll. 11-16).
- 168 - 
performed.
 Though this may result in an uncertain total value of remunerationeither 
due to price fluctuation of the additional res, or because it was difficult to tag a price to 
the supplementary services, it seems not to have affected the validity of the contract. 
Apparently, it sufficed that part of the remuneration was fixed in monetary terms 
(regardless of method of payment, i.e. cash money or in kind); thereby allowing it to be 
clearly determined which party was conductor and which locator.
Other evidence which indicates that merces could consist of tangibles 
supplementing a monetary sum derives from juridical discussions on the legal definition 
of locatio conductio. In certain borderline situations, where there was need to determine 
whether the contract was locatio conductio or emptio venditio, what tipped the scales in 
favour of locatio conductio was the fact that other non-pecuniary tangibles were rendered 
in addition to money. Thus, Pomponius
 attributes to Sabinus a responsum which states 
that when money (pecunia) was given in order that something be made (e.g. a statue, a 
vessel, or a garment), there can be no question of letting and hiring where there is no 
provision of the materials from which the thing is to be made.
 That is, if pecunia alone 
E.g. Colum. RR 1.7.2, for earlier period; Paul. Dig. 19.2.24.3 (34 ad ed.), referring to further obligations 
of the tenant, appart from paying the rent, such as do the planting or perform some other task (velut opus  
aliquod efficerent); P.Tebt. II 363 (Tebtunis, early second century), which records an account of paying 
in kind taxes and transport charges on leased temple land.
To borrow the Proculian argumentation used for justifying the necessity of monetary remuneration in 
contracts of sale; on which see the previous chapter.
As stated in the previous chapter, it is a matter of scholarly debate whether Pomponius was affiliated 
with the Sabinians or the Proculians; Baviera (1898) 27-30, who argues that Pomponius was a Proculian; 
Thomas (1959) 167-70, who argues that he was a Sabinian; also, see Honor (1962) 21-26; Stolfi (1997) 
7-16; Leesen (2010) 3-4. 
Pompon. Dig. 18.1.20 (9 ad sab.): Sabinus respondit, si quam rem nobis fieri velimus etiam, veluti 
statuam vel vas aliquod seu vestem, ut nihil aliud quam pecuniam daremus, emptionem videri, nec posse 
ullam locationem esse, ubi corpus ipsum non detur ab eo cui id fieret: aliter atque si aream darem, ubi 
insulam aedificares, quoniam tunc a me substantia proficiscitur. For an indepth discussion of this 
excerpt, especially on the juridical notions of substantia and materia and how these affect the meaning of 
ubi corpus ipsum non detur ab eo cui id fieret, see Fiori (1999) 190-206. On the remark on construction 
at the end of this excerpt, see Martin (1989) 34-6, 142-3; Du Plessis (2012a) 65-6, 76-7.
- 169 - 
was given, the case was one of sale; in order for the transaction to be locatio conductio 
the party commissioning the job was to supply the materials on which it was to be 
performed. In other words, for locatio conductio to come into existence, the party paying 
pecunia needed also to hand over non-pecuniary things, be they merchandise or real 
estate. From Sabinus reply it appears that these, however, were not part of the 
remuneration per se.
A passage from Gaius Institutiones reveals that Sabinus reply represents a 
triumphant position in a legal debate:  
Item quaeritur, si cum aurifice mihi conuenerit, ut is ex auro suo certi 
ponderis certaeque formae anulos mihi faceret et acciperet uerbi gratia 
denarios CC, utrum emptio et uenditio an locatio et conductio contrahatur. 
Cassius ait materiae quidem emptionem uenditionemque contrahi, 
operarum autem locationem et conductionem; sed plerisque placuit 
emptionem et uenditionem contrahi. atqui si meum aurum ei dedero 
mercede pro opera constituta, conuenit locationem conductionem 
contrahi.
It was suggested above that the quaeritur in Gai. Inst. 3.144, be put on the same 
level as the quaeritur in Gai. Inst. 3.141, thereby interpreting that disagreement in terms 
of school rivalry. The quaeritur in this passage, Gai. Inst. 3.147, is of a different 
character. The passage concerns the question whether a transaction, in this case a 
goldsmith instructed to prepare gold rings, should be classified as locatio conductio or as 
emptio venditio. Gaius reports the opinion of Cassius, according to which the transaction 
 Furthermore, dominium over the non-pecuniary thing(s) was never transferred, either from customer to 
artisan, or from artisan to customer; Fiori (1999) 201-3. 
Gai. Inst. 3.147: Likewise, if a goldsmith agrees with me that he shall make me rings of a given weight 
and design out of his own gold, and shall receive, say, two hundred denarii, it is questionable whether 
purchase and sale or lease and hire is contracted. Cassius says that the contract is one of purchase and 
sale of the material, but lease and hire of the work. But most [jurists] hold that the contract is one of sale. 
But if I bring my own gold and remuneration is fixed for the work, it is agreed that the contract is one of 
lease and hire. Translation is my own, based on both De Zulueta (1946) 199-201; and Gordon and 
Robinson (1988) 349.
- 170 - 
was emptio venditio in respect of the materiae, and locatio conductio in respect of the 
operarum. This Gaius contrasts with what he labels the majoritys opinion, according to 
which the transaction was solely a sale. It is somewhat unlikely that Gaius would label a 
Proculian stance as the view of most jurists (plerisque). Combined with the responsa of 
Sabinus reported by Pomponius,
 it appears that the disagreement was, in fact, an 
internal Sabinian matter,
 and concerned those cases in which artisans provided the 
materiae. However, when the latter were provided by the party commissioning the job, it 
seems there was no question that the contract was one of locatio conductio.  
Roberto Fiori had convinsingly shown that this internal Sabinian disagreement, 
between Sabinus and Cassius, sprang from a discussion on the problem of transferring 
dominium in locatio conductio, and was due to a shift of views which occurred in the 
transformation from older late-republican notions to newer early-imperial ones.
 There 
is no need here to enter the details of this process, as it offers little relevance to the 
present topic of study, which is the role of money in defining merces in Classical Roman 
Law. What matters is that it demonstrates that in classical Roman legal discourseeven 
one taking place within the Sabinian schoolthe basic presupposition was that 
remuneration was to be in pecunia; indicating how customary pecuniary merces actually 
 However, in certain borderline cases it was required that other things apart from 
money be rendered in order for the transaction to be defined as locatio conductio. These 
Pompon. Dig. 18.1.20 (9 ad sab.); Fiori (1999) 190-207.
Fiori (1999) 206; Leesen (2010), who does not list it in her account of school controversies.
Fiori (1999) 183-228; 50-63, on late-republican views and their falsehood in the eyes of Pomponius; 
177-81, on Labeos view regarding the transfer of dominium in locatio conductio.
What Kehoe (1997) 148-9, refers to as a normative lease for a fixed rent in cash. 
- 171 - 
things, though supplementing a (pecuniary?) merces, were not included as part of it; 
hence, in early imperial Roman law no transfer of the dominium over them occurred.
Regardless of school controversies or other juridical disagreements, in one 
common form of lease monetary remuneration was certainly not obligatory: in a lease of 
agricultural land. In such leases parties could agree that remuneration be paid with a 
share of the crop, what is known as colonia partiaria or locatio partiaria.
Sharecropping is evident for both the republican and the imperial periods;
practised alongside cash rent throughout the period here under investigation;
 and was 
applied in leases of state,
 temple,
 or privately owned land.
 Not every agricultural 
lease in which merces was given in kind was sharecropping. Colonia partiaria referred to 
those leases in which remuneration consisted of a percentage of the yield;
 hence did 
not affect leases in which merces was fixed at a certain amount, even when the latter was 
Fiori (1999) 183-228.
 This form of lease allowed tenants and landlords to share the risk of crop failure. Ferrini (1929); Mayer-
Maly (1956) 135-8; Thomas (1958) 197-9; Kaufmann (1964) 239-44, 303-19; Watson (1965) 101-4; 
Kaser (1971) 566; De Neeve (1984) 15-18, 68-9, 88-90; Kehoe (1993) 60-66; (1997) 11-12, 142-8; 
Zimmermann (1996) 354-5; Fiori (1999) 239-41. Also pestoring cattle was refreed to in terms of locatio 
partiaria; CJ 2.3.9 (Alex. Sev., 222). 
 Republic: e.g. Cato Agr. 136-7; Var. RR 3.16.10; Cic. Ver. III.32.75, 33.77. Empire: e.g. Plin. Ep. 
9.37.2-4; CIL VIII 10570. 
E.g. Gai. Dig. 19.2.25.6 (10 ad ed. prov.), discussed on pp. 172-4, below. For the Severan period see, 
Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 47.2.83(82).1 (2 sent.), who recognises that stealing crops 
harmed both tenant and landlord; CJ 4.65.8 (Alex. Sev., 231). The practice was acknowledged also by 
Diocletian; CJ 4.65.21 (Diocl., 293). 
E.g. P.Tebt. II 374 (131 CE), rent for one aroura being one artaba of barley a year; on the low rent, 
see Kruse (2002) 582-97, esp. 582-5. 
E.g. P.Tebt. II 363 (early second century); Dignas (2002) 95-106, on lease of temple property in 
Hellenistic Asia Minor; idem 110-222, on the Roman period, esp. 123-5, 176-7, with references to 
inscriptions. 
E.g. Plin. Ep. 9.37.2.
De Neeve (1984) 15.
- 172 - 
given entirely in kind.
 Furthermore, in colonia partiaria the fructus was in itself the 
merces; unlike cases of exchanging res utendae fruendae, where, as argued above, 
fructus was the tangible representative of the actual merces, i.e. the reciprocal exchange 
of rights of use and enjoyment.
An excerpt from Gaius, which mentions colonia partiaria and contrasts it with 
other types of leasing agricultural land, is of special significance for the present 
discussion. As far as I am aware, it preserves the only explicit reference in Justinians 
Digest to merces being in numerata pecunia. The wording of the excerpt is as follows: 
Vis maior, quam Graeci   appellant, non debet conductori 
damnosa esse, si plus, quam tolerabile est, laesi fuerint fructus: alioquin 
modicum damnum aequo animo ferre debet colonus, cui immodicum 
lucrum non aufertur. Apparet autem de eo nos colono dicere, qui ad 
pecuniam numeratam conduxit: alioquin partiarius colonus quasi societatis 
iure et damnum et lucrum cum domino fundi partitur.
The excerpt concerns the issue of remissio mercedis, a remission of rent granted 
when crops were destroyed due to vis maior.
 Gaius gives the opinion that in such a 
case the loss should not be bore entirely by the tenant, nor entirely by the landowner. At 
Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.), where fructus was not in itself merces, rather merces was a fixed sum of 
money converted into agricultural yield according to a fixed ratio (certum modum certo pretio).
E.g. Afric. Dig. 19.2.35.1 (8 quaest.) ad finem, where separate owners agreed to cultivate each others 
land in rotation with the yield acting as rent; i.e. X granted Y uti frui, and in return Y granted X some 
other uti frui; Fiori (1999) 235, who claims that this excerpt cannot have referred to colonia partiaria; 
Misera (1977) 269-70, who differentiates sharecropping (Teilpacht) from exchanging rights of usage 
(Nutzungstausch). 
Gai. Dig. 19.2.25.6 (10 ad ed. prov.): Higher force, which the Greeks term the force of god, should 
not be a source of loss to the lessee if his crops are damaged more than is bearable; on the other hand if 
the tenant farmer does not lose his considerable profit, he should bear with equanimity a slight loss. 
Clearly, I am speaking about a tenant farmer who hires for a fixed sum of money; on the other hand, a 
mtayer bears both profit and loss in common with the farms owner, much like the law in partnership. 
On remissio mercedis, i.e. rent abatement due to vis major, see Mayer-Maly (1956) 140-7; Kaser (1971) 
563, who focuses on the emperors benevolence in granting it; idem 567, who sees the Severi as legally 
establishing remissio mercedis; De Neeve (1983); Frier (1980) 163-4; (1989-1990), with reference to 
earlier bibliography; Kehoe (1997) 202-6, 214-7, 221-34; Capogrossi Colognesi (1998); (2005), non vidi; 
Du Plessis (2003), non vidi.
- 173 - 
the end of the excerpt Gaius adds a clarification which distinguishes between two 
scenarios. The rule he makes applies only to a tenant (colonus) who hired (conduxit) the 
land for pecunia numerata; it does not apply to a partiarius colonus, with whom the 
landowner already shares the risk as if they were partners (socii).  
What is interesting here is Gaius division of agricultural lease into two 
categories. Land tenure could be based on sharecropping, with rent paid in kind, its 
quantities altering according to level of agricultural productivity. In such cases merces 
cannot be certa, since the level of productivityhence, the amount of fructus rendered, 
as well as its valueare unknown at the time of concluding the contract. The other 
category is that of a regular lease, i.e. not colonia partiaria. The text labels this 
category as a lease in which the tenant leases the land ad pecuniam numeratam.
Assuming this phrase is not an interpolation,
 the excerptespecially since it comes 
from the writings of a jurist associated with the Sabinian schoolindicates, again, how 
customary pecuniary merces actually was. However, this interpretation, based on an 
understanding of numerata pecunia in the sense of cash money, offers only one way of 
understanding this phrase. When considering it more closely, another, more abstract, 
intention may be ascribed to numerata pecunialiterally pecunia counted outthat of 
a monetary unit of account. The division between partiarius colonus and colonus should 
be seen as a division between leases in which merces was uncertain, i.e. colonia 
partiaria, where tenant and landowner shared risk quasi societatis; and leases in which 
merces was in numerata pecunia, i.e. its value fixed in advance at the time of contracting 
Similar distinction regarding a colonus qui nummis colat appeas in Paul. Dig. 47.2.26.1 (9 ad sab.); 
also, see Kehoe (1997) 148.
Contra Longo (1953) 689-90, who argues for post-classical interpolation. On numerata pecunia as a 
stylistic preference of Gaius, see pp. 175-6, below. 
- 174 - 
the lease, hence was certain. If this explanation is accepted then numerata pecunia should 
be understood as denoting the fact that merces was indeed certa.  
To understand why certa merces meant terming it in numerata pecunia, let us 
examine an excerpt from another second-century Sabinian jurist, Javolenus: 
Si ita fideiussorem accepero: "Quod ego decem credidi, de ea pecunia 
mille modios tritici fide tua esse iubes?", non obligatur fideiussor, quia in 
aliam rem, quam quae credita est, fideiussor obligari non potest, quia non, 
ut aestimatio rerum quae mercis numero habentur in pecunia numerata 
fieri potest, ita pecunia quoque merce aestimanda est.
The excerpt deals with advancing a surety (fideiussio) and gives the principle 
according to which the obligation of a fideiussor applies only to the res she or he 
advanced (credere). Therefore, when surety is given in money (here, pecunia of the sum 
of ten) it cannot be redeemed in merchandise (here, a thousand modii of wheat). 
Javolenus then explains the logic behind his ruling: while merchandise (merx), i.e. things 
which can be quantified by number, can be estimated or assessed in numerata pecunia, 
money (pecunia) cannot be estimated in merchandise (merx).
 While a thousand modii 
of wheat may be estimated at ten monetary units of account, the same ten cannot be 
assessed in terms of modii of wheat. This, no doubt, is because prices of wheat, or of any 
other merchandise (merx) for that matter, were subject to fluctuations;
 while money, at 
least according to Javolenus, was considered as having a more stable value.  
Javol. Dig. 46.1.42 (10 epist.): Put the case that I accept a surety on the following terms: Since I 
advanced ten, do you, on your honor, promise in respect of that money a thousand modii of grain? The 
surety incurs no obligation since a surety cannot be committed for something other than what was 
advanced; money cannot be quantified in terms of merchandise in the way that merchandise, measured 
by quantity of number, may be assessed in money.
Javolenus shifts from pecunia to pecunia numerata, presumably without giving it much attention or 
significance.
Gai. Dig. 13.4.3 (9 ad ed. prov.), discussed on Ch. 7, pp. 194-5, below.
- 175 - 
Keeping in mind this principle, i.e. that merchandise can be estimated in money 
but not the other way around, let us return to Gaius division between colonus and 
partiarius colonus. While in both cases, that of land tenure for a fixed rent and that of 
sharecropping, merces could be given in fructus, it is only in the latter that paying in 
fructus meant an uncertain merces. In the former case, even when merces was given 
entirely in kind its value was fixed in advance, estimated and agreed in monetary units of 
account;
 therefore, making the merces certain. 
We are left with the question, why is it that the pecuniary prerequisite in locatio 
conductio was articulated by classical Roman jurists in terms of pecunia, and not 
numerata pecunia as was the case with pretium in emptio venditio. To recall, in 
contemporaneous reports of the school controversy revolving around the issue of the 
pecuniary nature of pretium in contracts of sale, the phrase numerata pecunia appears 
only in Gaius Institutiones, which opens the description of the controversy with the 
words Item pretium in numerata pecunia consistere debet.
 Paul in his reports of that 
famous controversy does not use numerata pecunia, but instead talks of nummi.
discussing locatio conductio both jurists display similar choice of wording: Paul talks of 
merces paid in nummi,
 or in pecunia;
 while Gaius, again, is the one to use the phrase 
numerata pecunia when speaking of the remuneration. In the school controversy 
revolving around the nature of pretium it seems that Gaius numerata pecunia and Pauls 
E.g. Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.), discussed on pp. 153-4, above.
Gai. Inst. 3.141.
Paul. Dig. 18.1.1.1 (33 ad ed.); 19.4.1.pr. (32 ad ed.).
Paul. Dig. 47.2.26.1 (9 ad sab.).
Paul. Dig. 17.1.1.4 (32 ad ed.); 19.5.5.2 (5 quaest.).
- 176 - 
nummi referred to the same thing. Could the same be said of legal discussions on locatio 
conductio? That is, were pecunia, nummi, and numerata pecunia used by Roman jurists 
as synonyms?  
We have seen that juristic definitions differentiated, at least on the theoretical 
level, between various verbal signifiers of the idea of money, with Ulpian, and later 
Hermogenian, clearly stating that pecunia was non solum numerata pecunia. However, 
we have also seen Javolenus use of pecunia and numerata pecunia as synonyms;
more strikingly, Ulpians somewhat obscure statement regarding pecunia and numerata 
pecunia in the context of his discussion of the senatus consultum Macedonianum.
There, the SC spoke of pecunia; however, Ulpian found it necessary to state that although 
the words seem to him as referring to numerata pecunia, still the SC should be 
understood in the broadest sense possible for pecunia, i.e. as referring to any kind of loan, 
also a non-pecuniary one. Thus, even a jurist of such calibre and eloquence as Ulpian 
seems to display some ambiguities regarding the conceptualisation of money; offering no 
clear distinctions between moneys physical manifestations (e.g. coinage, nummi), its 
abstract nature as a quantifier of value, i.e. as a numeraire (numerata pecunia), and the 
fact that money is the ultimate manifestation of wealth (i.e. pecunia in the sense of omnia 
corpora).
Javol. Dig. 46.1.42. (10 epist.).
Ulp. Dig. 14.6.7.3 (29 ad ed.).
Ulp. Dig. 50.16.178.pr. (49 ad sab.).
- 177 - 
To conclude, although pecuniary merces was probably common practice,
 at no 
point throughout the period here under investigation was it obligatory for merces to be 
paid in cash money. As to the question whether it was required that merces be 
conceptualised in monetary terms, during the second century this requirement was still 
under legal debate.
 On the one hand, the Sabinian stance that an exchange of res 
utendae fruendae qualified as a valid locatio conductio meant that in such cases, even 
though merces could be represented by tangibles, it was in its essence incorporeal, i.e. the 
granting of uti frui;
 hence, it was not necessary for such a merces to be quantified in 
monetary terms. On the other hand, the Proculian stance, which argued that an exchange 
of res utendae fruendae did not qualify as locatio conductio, meant thatleaving aside 
the exception of colonia partiariamerces had to be termed in pecunia,
 albeit in 
practice it could be paid in kind.
 By the early decades of the third century the Proculian 
position gained the upper hand,
 and in late-classical Roman law pecuniary merces 
probably had become a juristic prerequisite.
 That is, it became obligatory for merces in 
locatio conductio to be stated in monetary terms, just as pretium was in emptio venditio.  
Again, this certainly does not imply that all exchange was conducted with money. 
The existence of colonia partiaria, the development of the actio praescriptis verbis, and 
the Sabinian-Proculian disagreement regarding the exchange of res utendae fruendae, all 
Frier (1980) 60, who says that we do not know of any urban lease where this [i.e. merces in money] was 
not the case; Zimmermann (1996) 353-4; Kehoe (1997) 148-9.
Mayer-Maly (1956) 130-1; Frier (1980) 60.
Fiori (1999).
Paul. Dig. 19.5.5.2 (5 quaest.).
Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.).
Buckland (1932) 499, who suggests that the pecuniary requirement of merces was of late classical law; 
Misera (1977) 271-3.
That later in the third century monetary payment was associated with locatio conductio is evident in CJ 
4.65.14 (Valer. et Gall., 259).
- 178 - 
indicate not only that reciprocal exchange with no pecuniary remuneration surely did take 
place, but also that it was perceived as an integral part of exchange activity. While during 
the period here under investigation legal practitioners developed strict definitions for the 
two Roman contracts most dominant for exchange, namely emptio venditio and locatio 
conductio, with the outcome of eventually allocating to money a pivotal role in both, real 
economic activity continued to take place in all forms, pecuniary as well as in kind. 
Exchange could occur without money changing hands, or necessarily being involved in 
the conceptualisation of the transaction, as in colonia partiaria. However, the latter 
seems to have been the exception. Money was more often than not present at the minds of 
the parties, allowing individuals to estimate and compare the goods and services which 
they traded.  
This chapter and the previous one have examined the institutionalised role of 
money in Roman exchange, observing how central it was in defining the legal procedures 
for trading goods and services. Money was a focal component in the legal definition of 
exchange transaction; therefore, in defining the status of the parties involved, and the 
nature of the interaction between them. Be it sale, hire, or employment; whether the 
transaction regarded movables or immovables; objects, livestock, or slaves; rights, 
services or labour; by the end of the period here under investigation money had become 
an essential component for defining the requital, the charge, the proceeds, i.e. the 
manifestation of the counter obligation, what one of the parties was to receive/render in 
return.  
- 179 - 
Chapter 6: Loans 
Nomina eorum, qui sub condicione vel in diem debent, et emere et vendere 
solemus: ea enim res est, quae emi et venire potest.  
Ulp. Dig. 18.4.17 (43 ad ed.)
6.1. Introduction 
As in the two previous chapters, the aim of this chapter is certainly not to observe 
every aspect of Roman lending there is; that would be quite impossible. Rather, it centres 
on loans of money; and more specifically, on the Roman legal institutional framework 
under which money was lent.
 Within this discussion attention is given to the potential of 
creating credit money, and the attitudes towards money which may be inferred from it. 
The focus of the chapter, as that of the entire thesis, is on private monetary operations. As 
such, it centres on economic interactions where one or both parties were private 
individuals, conducting their affairs with or without the intervention of middlemen or 
intermediating institutions, such as banks,
 municipalities,
 temples,
 or others.
Ulp. Dig. 18.4.17 (43 ad ed.): We are in the habit of selling and buying conditional debts and those not 
yet due; for there is something to be bought and sold. 
The theme of charging interest on monetary loans is further investigated in Ch. 7, below.
In the Greco-Roman world banks generally had operated as private enterprises, with the exception of 
temple- or state-banks; on which, see Bogeart (1968) 279-304, 401-8, respectively; Dignas (2002), for 
the former; von Reden (2007) 253-79, for the latter. 
E.g. Plin. Ep. 10.54-5; Ulp. Dig. 50.4.6.1 (4 off. prov.). On loans advanced by municipalities, see Bogaert 
(1968) 397-400; (1992); Sirks (1998). On loans advanced by the city of Rome, see Andreau (1999) 112-
Howgego (1992) 14, n. 125, who refers to Bogaert (1968). Also, see Dignas (2002).
Howgego (1992) 14.
- 180 - 
Lending organisations as such are not the subject here under inquiry; on these, 
during the last three decades profound and scholarly studies have been carried out by 
distinguished scholars, investigating the organisation and regulation of banks, temples 
which made loans, and loan associations, as well as the social standing of bankers and 
other creditors.
 However, a general note ought to be made on the implication which the 
existence of banks as money-based businesses had on money-handling in general, hence 
also on attitudes towards it. Though certainly not all money-lending was conducted with 
the help of bankers, and in respect of volume perhaps not even most of it,
 still, banking 
institutions were a common phenomenon, and bankers were approached on various 
occasions by different strands of society.
 The existence of bankers indicates that money-
handling was considered as a profession which required specialisation.
 They represent a 
more institutionalised form of money-handling, which specialised in making profit by 
developing and elaborating the ability to recover financial yields on monetary 
investments, namely via the instrument of interest.
6.2. Some Formal Practicalities 
Under Roman law there were various types of loans subject to different 
regulations. Loans could be, and often were, contracted via a stipulatio, arising verbally 
 Andreau (1987); (1999); Bogaert (1968); (1994); (1995); (2000); (2001); Brge (1987); Camodeca 
(1992); (1999); (2003); Dignas (2002); Verboven, Vandorpe and Chankowski (2008). 
The commonplace understanding that no one lends to poor men did not evade Romans; Plu. De vitando 
aere alieno, Moralia, 830D,    .
On elite Roman money-lending, see Andreau 
(1999) 9-29; Harris (2006); Hollander (2007), who focuses on the late Republic; Rathbone and Temin 
(2008) 384, who argue that much or most [of the money lent] passed through brokers and bankers.
Howgego (1992) 14; Harris (2006) 14, who writes of credit among more modest people, those with 
enough assets to survive, but not much if anything in the way of surplus.
 As recognised already by Cicero; Cic. Off. 2.87. Also, see Rathbone and Temin (2008) 338-406; 
Verboven (2008). 
Interest in the Roman world is discussed in detail in the following chapter. 
- 181 - 
from question-and-answer formulae.
 Stipulatiothe cornerstone of the Roman 
contractual system
enabled tailoring an agreement to the specific needs of the parties, 
hence was commonly applied for contracting loans.
 Alternatively, loans could be 
contracted via specific legal formats; namely, mutuum,
 commodatum,
depositum.
 All three created real obligations; that is, obligations which came into 
existence only after object(s) were transferred from lender to borrower.
 There is no 
need here to detail every characteristic of these contracts;
 suffice it to make several 
remarks regarding their applicability in loans of money. 
Mutuum was a loan advanced for the purpose of consumption,
 where an 
equivalent in kind, quantity, and value was to be repaid,
 and in which the borrower was 
 Paul. Dig. 12.1.2.5 (28 ad ed.). On stipulatio, see Gai. Dig. 44.7.1.7 (2 aur.); Pompon. Dig. 45.1.5.1 (26 
ad sab.); Kaser (1971) 168-70, 538-43; Zimmermann (1996) 68-75, 82-94. On documenting stipulations, 
see Zimmermann (1996) 78-82; Meyer (2004) 115-50, 253-65. On stipulating penalty clauses (stipulatio 
poena), see Zimmermann (1996) 95-107. 
Zimmermann (1996) 89.
Idem 90.
 Buckland (1963) 462-4; Kaser (1971) 530-3; 170-1, for mutuum in archaic Roman law; Zimmermann 
(1996) 153-4. 
 Buckland (1963) 470-72; Kaser (1971) 533-4; Zimmermann (1996) 188-203.  
 Buckland (1963) 467-70; Kaser (1971) 534-6; Zimmermann (1996) 205-19; and Ch. 8, below. 
 In the case of mutuum such a transfer was called a datio, and included the passing of ownership rights 
from lender to borrower; Ulp. Dig. 6.1.9 (16 ad ed.); unlike the case with commodatum; Ulp. Dig. 13.6.9 
(2 ad ed.); and depositum; Flor. Dig. 16.3.17.1 (7 inst.). On earlier evolution of mutuum from an 
immediate exchange of goods to an exchange in which there was a delay before one of the parties was 
reciprocated, see Kelly (1970); van den Brink (1974) 86. As pointed out by Kaser (1971) 531, n. 9, a 
promise for future lending was actionable only if it was issued in the form of a stipulatio; Paul. Dig. 
45.1.68 (2 ad ed.). 
E.g. the passing of ownership (dominium), or the rendering of rights of usage (uti frui).
English has no vocabulary for immediately differentiating mutuum from commodatum, with both 
contracts signified by the same word, loan; Mathiowetz (2007). Following the French phrase prt  
usage, commodatum usually is translated as loan for use, while mutuum is translated as loan for 
consumption. In German, the distinction is maintained by translating commodatum as Leihe and 
mutuum as Darlehen; Kaser (1971) 530-4; Zimmermann (1996) 188-9. In Jewish legal texts of the 
period a similar distinction exists, with the root ...  used for loans where an equivalent is to be repaid, 
while the root ...  is used for loans where the same object is to be returned. In ancient Greek a 
distinction cannot clearly be detected between loans advanced for use and those in which the borrower 
may also consume the things loaned. On different loan agreements in Greek-Hellenistic law, namely, 
, , , and other typeless loans, i.e. loans which cannot clearly be identified as 
falling under these three categories, see Finckh (1962); Khnert (1965); Roth (1970); Tenger (1993). 
- 182 - 
considered as if she or he became owners of the object(s) lent.
 As such, mutuum was a 
most suitable form for lending money;
 with one disadvantage, it did not account for 
interest payments. Any interest agreed had to be contracted separately, via either 
stipulatio or pactum, which augmented the mutuum.
 In cases of default in repaying a 
mutuum the creditor could bring an actio certae creditae pecuniae (or a condictio certae 
pecuniae) against the borrower;
 in which case the judge was to decide whether to 
condemn or to acquit the borrower from paying a fixed sum of money.
In commodatum and depositum, however, the very same object(s) lent had to be 
returned; a requirement which raised difficulties for money lending, as it deprived 
borrowers of the benefits of moneys randomness,
 i.e. the ability to randomly replace 
any one piece of it with an equivalent other. In the case of depositumofficially, a loan 
advanced for the sake of safekeeping
this requirement did not prevent pecuniary 
objects from performing one of moneys essential usages: storage of wealth. However, it 
, , or  applied to loans regardless of their purpose, be it for use or consumption, i.e. 
whether the same object lent was to be returned or only its equivalent. , , or  
denote loans, especially of money, where the borrower may consume the loan, though consumption 
seems not to have been obligatory; Simon (1965) 40-44; Roth (1970) 11-15. For a more detailed 
discussion of , see Ch. 8, below. On the diminishing differentiation between  and , 
i.e. the process by which, starting from the late first century CE onwards, the distinction between these 
two formulae had gradually became blurred, see Khnert (1965) 162; Roth (1970) 50-3, 97-99; Tenger 
(1993) 30-31, 50.
 Paul. Dig. 12.1.2.pr. (28 ad ed.); Pompon. Dig. 12.1.3 (27 ad sab.); Just. Inst. 3.14.pr.;
Kaser (1971) 530-
On account of a datio; Zimmermann (1996) 153.
Paul. Dig. 12.1.2.1 (28 ad ed.); Gai. Inst. 3.90, who specifically includes money (pecunia numerata); 
Just. Inst. 3.14.pr., who lists pecunia numerate, aere, argento, auro among things given in mutuum. 
Kaser (1971) 530, who states that Das Darlehen (mutuum) ist der Grundtypus des Kreditgeschfts, bei 
dem jemand ein Kapital einem anderen anvertraut (credere), damit dieser es nutze; Zimmermann (1996) 
153-4.  
On interest, see Ch. 7, below; on practicalities of contracting interest payments, see pp. 212f., below. 
Kaser (1971) 170-1, 531-2, 592-4.
Rather than to estimate the sum to be paid; as in cases of condemnatio incertae pecuniae; Gai. Inst. 4.49-
52; Kaser (1971) 492; and Ch. 3, p. 84, above. 
Money is usually represented by objects which are either identical or perceived as such; see Ch. 2, pp. 
75-6, above.
Ulp. Dig. 16.3.1.pr. (30 ad ed.); and Ch. 8, p. 247, below.
- 183 - 
certainly set obstacles to depositaries who wished to make use of a deposit,
 and to the 
depositors prospects of gaining interest on it.
 In the case of commodatuma loan 
advanced for the sake of use, though not for consumption
money (especially coinage) 
could be given for a specific purpose, such as examination,
 or display;
 and Gaius says 
that pecunia is often the subject of commodatum, for the purpose of being counted out to 
comply with legal form.
 One could easily envision instances where coins were given in 
commodatum to be assessed, or displayed by bankers.
 In such cases coins would 
perform only a restricted monetary role. They did not facilitate exchange, nor did they, 
strictly speaking, measure value; rather, value was to be given to them. Neither did they 
straightforwardly store wealth; instead they acted as ornaments whose display manifested 
wealth. They were treated as corpora
as specific objects given for the purpose of 
decoration, appearance, or calculationand as such were deprived of moneys essential 
characteristics of homogeneity and randomness.
As long as depositaries did not use deposited money in exchange transaction, there was no real difficulty 
to return the very same objects deposited.
 Eventually regulations were slightly eased to accommodate some aspects of using money deposits; see 
Ch. 8, below. 
 However, see Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.), who speaks of a hundred nummi given in commodatum for 
safekeeping, where eventually Papinian holds the transaction to be a depositum; see Ch. 8, pp. 248-9, 
below. 
Ulp. Dig. 13.6.5.3 (28 ad ed.); 10.1 (29 ad sab.).
Ulp. Dig. 13.6.3.6 (28 ad ed.).
Gai. Dig. 13.6.4 (1 de verb. oblig.): Saepe etiam ad hoc commodantur pecuniae, ut dicis gratia 
numerationis loco intercedant.
Zimmermann (1996) 188.
One may recall the remark made in Daube (1959) 17, concerning the unlikelihood of coins being treated 
as corpora in the case of sale; see Ch. 4, p. 118, n. 130, above. More on coins treated as corpora in Ch. 8, 
below.
On which, see Ch. 2, pp. 75-6, above.
- 184 - 
Another distinct type of monetary lending was maritime loans,
 i.e. money 
advanced for the purpose of financing commerce by sea.
 In both Roman and Greek-
Hellenistic law maritime loans were subject to special regulations.
 They were 
complicated transactions, in which different rules were applied for the period of the 
voyage, and the periods preceding and exceeding it, when the ship was in safe harbour.
The corpus on maritime legislation and the vast scholarship on it are beyond the scope of 
the present work; here suffice it to note that Roman maritime loans generally had 
complied with Greek-Hellenistic practice.
 Though neither the institutional environment 
in which maritime lending occurred, nor the apparatus which enabled its financing,
remained constant; nevertheless, maritime loans probably enjoyed an enduring continuity 
in their legal formation, with two renowned peculiarities remaining fairly consistent. 
Namely, repayment of bottomry loans was conditioned by the safe arrival of the ship and 
its cargo;
 and, no limit was imposed on maritime interest rate,
 unlike on other types of 
These several names in ancient texts, e.g. pecunia traiecticia, faenus nauticum, mutua pecunia nautical, 
 .
 Mod. Dig. 22.2.1 (10 pandec.). Coined money per se probably had not regularly travelled over sea; 
Harris (2006) 4, with remarks on the findings of A. J. Parkers catalogue of ancient shipwrecks in the 
Mediterranean. Monetary loans usually financed cargo and voyage expenses [rather than obtaining a 
ship; Rathbone (2003)], with merchandise transported from one harbour to another, where it would then 
be sold and new merchandise bought with the sale money, as described in Scaev. Dig. 45.1.122.1 (28 
dig.). Also, see Buckland (1963) 566-7; Kaser (1971) 532-3; Zimmermann (1996) 183-4; Sirks (2002); 
Rathbone (2001); (2003); Aubert (2007). Contra Litewski (1973) 120f., who postulates that originally 
coinage was exported by sea in order to import merchandise. 
Dig. 14.2 (De lege Rodia de iactu); Dig. 22.2 (De nautico faenore); Dig. 47.9 (De incendio ruina 
naufragio rate nave expugnata).
 Mod. Dig. 22.2.1 (10 pandec.); 3 (4 reg.); Papin. Dig. 22.2.4.pr. (3 respon.); Paul. Sent. 2.14.3; Scaev. 
Dig. 45.1.122.1 (28 dig.); on which, see Sirks (2002); Rathbone (2003) 215-6. Also, see Billeter (1898) 
242-54; Buckland (1963) 466-7, n. 19. 
 Pringsheim (1916) 143-5; Buckland (1963) 466-7; Kaser (1971) 532-3; Litewski (1973); Sirks (1991), 
who analyses contracts with navicularii for transporting food supply to Rome; Zimmermann (1996) 181-
5; Rathbone (2003) 212; Guarier (2004). 
On the role of societas and agents (institores) in maritime commerce, see Aubert (1999); Giliberti (1999); 
Sirks (2002); Rathbone (2003) 212-6.
 The borrower was not liable for shipwreck or loss of cargo in sea, with the risk falling on the creditor; 
Rathbone (2003) 212-3. 
- 185 - 
interest-bearing loans;
 with both these characteristics motivated by the same logic: 
allowing creditors to better face the unexpected risks involved in seafaring. 
Lastly, some notes ought to be made concerning a type of agrarian loan known in 
the scholarship as Sale on Delivery or Sale on Credit.
 This was a sort of a purchase 
contract, in which the seller/borrower had received a pecuniary sum, which was later to 
be reciprocated in kind; i.e. the sale was completedor, more precisely, the loan 
repaidwith agricultural product only after harvest time.
 Evidence for such 
transactions, though quite abundant, derives mainly from Roman Egypt,
 where the 
Greek formulae used are considered as a late Hellenistic or early Roman development;
with similar practice echoed also in Talmudic sources.
 In Roman legal sources, as far as 
I am aware, a transaction which may perhaps be perceived of a somewhat similar nature 
is attested only once; however, this is not formulated in terms of a sale, but rather in those 
of a locatio conductio, with the reciprocated party receiving a fixed amount of goods 
offered at a fixed price, both of which agreed in advance at the time of contracting the 
transaction.
 A similar combinationof granting rights of use as rent () given on 
 Scaev. Dig. 22.2.5.pr. (6 respon.); Paul. Sent. 2.14.3; CJ 4.33.2 (Diocl., 286). Justinian was the first to 
limit maritime interest rate of twelve per cent per annum; CJ 4.32.26.2 (Just., 528).  
On which, see Ch. 7, below.
Pringsheim (1950) 266-86, who speaks of sales with deferred delivery; Bagnall (1977); Foraboschi and 
Gara (1981); Jrdens (1990); Kruit (1992); Erdkamp (2005) 120-3, 131-4; Kehoe (2007) 149.
Bagnall (1977) 85, who says that in many of the documents labelled Sale on Delivery, their language 
and terminology is closely similar to that of loan contracts, not of sales.
Bagnall (1977); Foraboschi and Gara (1981); Jrdens (1990) 296-301, who offers a list of wine sales for 
future delivery; Rathbone (1991) 210-11, 239, who refers to sale in anticipation of delivery; Kruit 
(1992), who gives a survey of relevant papyri, with p. 167, n. 1, offering further bibliography.
Pringsheim (1950) 265-7, 285, who calls such a transaction a new type of contract which is neither sale 
nor loan; Rupprecht (2005) 331. 
Rosenfeld and Minrav (2001) 255-62; referred to in Erdkamp (2005) 131; their argument further 
elaborated in Rosenfeld and Minrav (2005).
Ulp. Dig. 19.2.19.3 (32 ad ed.); and see Ch. 5, pp. 153-4, above. Erdkamp (2005) 131-2, who considers 
this transaction within a discussion on advanced sale, interpreting it as a form of credit. 
- 186 - 
credit, later to be paid in kindappears also in Egyptian papyri,
 and should be seen as a 
phenomenon similar to the so-called Sale on Delivery.
6.3. Credit Money 
I start this section by recalling comments made in Chapters 1 and 2 above 
regarding the possibility that money initially emerged from credit and debt relations,
both deeply embedded in social commitments, rather than originating from strictly 
speaking economic interaction.
 Whether or not money had indeed developed from 
credit, remains in the sphere of belief and hypothetical postulations regarding pre-historic 
times; regardless of the stand one takes on such matters, since the nineteenth century 
economists have been occupied with the close relation between money and credit. 
Advocators of the endogeneity of money promulgate intertwined connection between the 
two, arguing that credit may enable increase of the amount of money, mainly via a 
mechanism which economists call the money multiplier. This multiplier is a ratio 
between deposits, bank reserves, and the currency available in the hands of the public, 
which allows the banking sector to react to the non-banking sectors demand for money 
by producing credit which increases the supply of money in the economy.
 Within 
Pringsheim (1950) 262-5.
Rupprecht (2005) 331.
Tymoigne and Wray (2006). 
Innes (1913); (1914); Polanyi (1968); Grierson (1978).
Friedman M. (2008) section (c) equation (9), who offers a mathematical representation of the money 
multiplier; Friedman B. (2008), who states that the money multiplier is the relationship between the 
total liabilities supplied by the central bankoften called the monetary baseand the resulting amount 
of money, including bank deposits as well as currency. Purely as a matter of arithmetic, specifying the 
ratio of reserves to deposits that the banks choose to hold (influenced in part by whatever reserve 
requirements and other institutional strictures banks face), and the ratio of currency to deposits that the 
public chooses within its holdings of money, is sufficient to determine the quantity of money that goes 
along with any given monetary base set by the central bank. 
- 187 - 
Austrian tradition of economic thought Ludwig von Mises advanced an approach which 
sees money as a market-generated and market-regulated mechanism, in which credit, and 
more specifically banking credit, constitutes a central role in enabling the systems 
elasticity in reacting to the demand for money.
 Also Keynesian and post-Keynesian 
economists perceive money as endogenous to economic activity, allocating to the 
banking sector a pivotal role in determining the supply of money in accord with the 
demand for it by the non-banking sector; that is, money is assumed to be created by 
economic actors, depending on their liquidity preferences and demand for credit, as 
manifested in the aggregate outcome of their choices regarding loans and deposits.
Clearly, not all credit is money. Credit money, to follow William Harris in 
evoking Ludwig von Mises definition,
 is that sort of money which constitutes a claim 
against any physical or legal person. Yet, Mises constrains this definition by adding that 
these claims must not be both payable on demand and absolutely secure; if they were, 
there could be no difference between their value and that of the sum of money to which 
they referred, and they could not be subjected to an independent process of valuation on 
the part of those who dealt with them. In some way or other the maturity of these claims 
must be postponed to some future time.
 This means that credit money conceals some 
element of risk, in the sense that the claimant may default, [or that] the value upon 
fulfilment will differ from the value at the time of [contracting the commitment].
 Still, 
in order for records of debts to be used as money there needs to be some certainty 
Von Mises (1953) 261-338.
Moore (1988); (2006); Wray (1990); Fontana (2004); Bibow (2006); Dow (2006); Lavoie (2006); Gnos 
and Rochon (2008).
Harris (2006) 6, n. 43.
Von Mises (1953) 61.
Kababji (2011).
- 188 - 
regarding their value, which is often accomplished, legally as well as physically, via 
different formats for providing securities. 
In recent years, scholarly discourse on ancient economic history has turned its 
attention to the role of credit in the Roman world, emphasising the significance of credit, 
and especially of credit money, in facilitating economic activity, via what is sometimes 
labelled negotiable paper money; that is, the use of records of debts, and of other 
commitments, as monetary instruments to store wealth and make payments.
 If one 
accepts a definition of credit money as a claim falling due in the future that is used as a 
general medium of exchange,
 then Romans were certainly familiar with it. That is, in 
the Roman world records of debt were regularly used as money in the sense of means of 
payment.
 For example, an excerpt from Scaevola tells of an heir who had paid for a 
share of an inheritance with debts from his account books (ex qua aliquam summam in 
nominibus ex kalendario uti daret).
 In addition, records of debts in themselves were 
often the object of sale, as openly stated by Ulpian regarding both chirographa,
nomina.
 From Ulpians words it seems that Romans recognised uncertainties which 
accompany future fulfilment of debts; however, this recognition did not prevent them 
from buying and selling debts. Records of debt acted as money also in the sense of a 
means to store wealth;
 Scaevola mentions a banker who held most of his assets in the 
Mrozek (1985); Howgego (1992) 14-16; Rathbone (2001) 49; (2003); Temin (2004); Hollander (2007); 
Harris (2006); (2008c); Rathbone and Temin (2008); Kay (2009); Lo Cascio (2011).
Von Mises (1953) 62.
Harris (2006); (2008c), with references to ancient evidence; Kay (2009) 147-79, with references to the 
early Republic.
 Scaev. Dig. 44.4.17.2 (27 dig.). 
 Ulp. Dig. 30.44.5 (22 ad sab.): Eum, qui chirographum legat, debitum legare, non solum tabulas 
argumento est venditio: nam cum chirographa veneunt, nomen venisse videtur. 
Ulp. Dig. 18.4.17 (43 ad ed.), cited at the start of this chapter. 
 Harris (2006) 7-10; Hollander (2007) 40-52; both with references to ancient evidence.
- 189 - 
form of such records (i.e. in nominibus);
 Pomponius says that all possessions of a pupil 
also included quae in nominibus sunt;
 and Ulpian states that peculium may also contain 
records of debts (nomina debitorum).
It remains to ask whether such records of commitments had indeed increased 
Romes money supply, as decisively argued by William Harris.
 In modern economies 
credit money is considered to be created thanks to a developed banking sector, regulated 
by a central bank, which enables the operation of a money multiplier; that is, a 
mechanism by which, via the existence of bank deposits and clearing-banks, money 
supply increases in accord with the demand for credit.
 Neither a central bank nor a 
clearing system as such had existed in the Roman empire. Harris, while recognising these 
obstacles, relies on the example of early modern England,
 and claims that a system 
with partial-reserve banking and an extensive system of legally recoverable loans can 
bring into existence assets that can be used for making payments;
 that is, such a system 
could accommodate a mechanism that creates credit money. What matters here, says 
Harris, is not whether there were clearing centres, but whether lenders had more 
recoverable debt than they had state-issued money, i.e. coin, in reserve.
 A prerequisite 
for credit money, he argues, is in fact the legal capacity of the lender to recover [the 
loan] from the debtor; a requirement which was fulfilled in Rome since Roman law 
 Scaev. Dig. 40.7.40.8 (24 dig.). 
Pompon. Dig. 46.6.9 (15 ad sab.).
Ulp. Dig. 15.1.7.4 (29 ad ed.); similarly, Julian. Dig. 15.1.16 (12 dig.), ad finem.
Harris (2006); (2008c).
Friedman B. (2008); Friedman M. (2008).
As analysed by Muldrew (1998).
Harris (2006) 10.
Idem 21. 
- 190 - 
provided creditors with robust means of protecting themselves.
 However, evidence 
which suggests that economic interaction was facilitated by, or even profoundly 
depended on, credit arrangements,
 does not necessarily indicate that records of debt 
were indeed credit money. Such records, even when they were legally recoverable, if the 
costs of recovering them would have been prohibitive they could not possibly be used 
for making payments.
What transforms records of debt into monetary instruments is the ability to trade 
with, or/and in, it. That is, that an obligation created between X and Y could be used by Y 
in his transaction with a third person Z, so that X becomes liable to Z instead of to Y. A 
mechanism by which legal obligations are transferred from one debtor to another clearly 
existed in Roman law; it is called delegatio.
 To delegate, as stated by Ulpian, is to give 
to the creditor or other person to whom he is directed a different debtor in ones own 
place.
 That is, a delegatio is an order given by one person (is qui delegat) to another 
(is qui delegatur) to pay a debt to, or to assume an obligation towards, a third person (is 
cui delegatur).
 According to Harris not only that records of debt (i.e. nomina) were 
transferable, there was in fact a market in nomina,
 facilitated via the Roman legal 
institution of delegatio.  
In practice this was regularly achieved by writing entries in book-keeping 
accounts. Precisely such a process is described by Gaius when he talks of obligations 
Idem 6.
As argued by Rathbone (1991) 227-30, for rural third-century Roman Egypt.
Harris (2006) 14.
 Dig. 26.2 (De novationibus et delegationibus).
Ulp. Dig. 46.2.11.pr. (11 ad sab.): Delegare est vice sua alium reum dare creditori vel cui iusserit.
Berger (1953) 429.
Harris (2006) 15. 
- 191 - 
created by writing (litteris obligatio) which are in nominibus transscripticiis.
 Where 
such a transscriptio was in the form of a persona in personam, this meant that a debt 
registered under the name of one debtor was transferred to the name of another.
 These 
so-called paper transactions were anything but fictitious.
 So much so that material 
representations of such obligations, i.e. the documents on which debts were recorded, 
were perceived as money-equivalents, i.e. as physical manifestation of money.
 This is 
why Ulpian says that if someone had stolen tabulae or cautiones
on which debts 
regularly were recordedthe thief would be held liable not only for the value of the 
writing materials, but also for what is in them (quod interfuit),
 which means the 
amount of the sum contained in the document.
 The same view is expressed also by 
Ulpians contemporary, Paul.
 However, elsewhere Paul displays a more complex 
stance, arguing that there are those who think that only an estimate of the debt could be 
made, although sometimes a plaintiff could perhaps recover the accounts, so as to 
 Gai. Inst. 3.128: Litteris obligatio fit ueluti in nominibus transscripticiis. fit autem nomen 
transscripticium duplici modo, uel a re in personam uel a persona in personam. And, see Ch. 2, pp. 67-
70, above. 
 Gai. Inst. 3.130: persona in personam transscriptio fit, ueluti si id, quod mihi Titius debet, tibi id 
expensum tulero, id est si Titius te pro se delegauerit mihi. And, see Thilo (1980) 290-5, 305-18; Meyer 
(2004) 108-10. 
Meyer (2004) 109.
Harris (2006) 15, who refers to two documentsP.Fouad 45 (Alexandria, 153) (=FIRA III 121 =ChLA 
XLII 1207); CIL III no. 5, pp. 934-5 (Albumus; Dacia, 162) (=FIRA III 122 =IDR 35), arguing that 
they show that paying with records of debt which originated in transactions made by other third persons 
was entirely standard.
Ulp. Dig. 47.2.27.pr. (41 ad sab.): Qui tabulas vel cautiones amovet, furti tenetur non tantum pretii 
ipsarum tabularum, verum eius quod interfuit: quod ad aestimationem refertur eius summae, quae in his 
tabulis continetur, scilicet si tanti interfuit, ut puta si chirographa aureorum decem tabulae fuerint, 
dicimus hoc duplicari. On which, see Medicus (1962) 233-4.
Translation is that of Meyer (2004) 109.
Translation is that of Watson (1985).
Paul. Dig. 47.2.83(82).3 (2 sent.): Qui tabulas cautionesve subripuit, in adscriptam summam furti 
actione tenebitur: nec refert, cancellatae nec ne sint, quia ex his debitum magis solutum esse comprobari 
potest.
- 192 - 
quantify the damage he would have sustained had he not recovered them.
 This means 
that the value of records of debt was in fact that of the debts themselves;94 not just 
because without a record creditors would find it hard to collect their investment,
also because writing down such records on relatively durable yet transportable media, 
made the debts themselves transportable. To use the words of Elizabeth Meyer: The 
reality of debts and credits was for centuries determined by their being written into 
tablets, and travelled with those tablets wherever they went and into whosoevers hands 
they fell.
Paul. Dig. 47.2.32 (9 ad sab.). And, see Medicus (1962) 234-6.
It is worth making the point that generally debts were not traded at discount, as in modern markets.
As may be inferred from Paul. Dig. 47.2.32 (9 ad sab.), they probably sometimes could.
Meyer (2004) 110. 
- 193 - 
Part III: Study-Cases 
- 194 - 
Chapter 7: The Roman Instrument of Interest 
Ideo in arbitrium iudicis refertur haec actio, quia scimus, quam uaria sint 
pretia rerum per singulas civitates regionisque, maxime uini olei frumenti: 
pecuniarum quoque licet uideatur una et eadem potestas ubique esse, 
tamen aliis locis facilius et leuibus usuris inueniuntur, aliis difficilius et 
grauibus usuris.  
Gai. Dig. 13.4.3 (9 ad ed. prov.)
7.1. Introduction  
Prices of things, says Gaius in this often cited
 excerpt,
 vary from one city and 
region to another Even in the case of money, though it is supposed to have one and the 
same power everywhere,
 in reality it does not. Money, Gaius explains, can be quite 
easily raised and at low interest in some places, with difficulty and at steep interest in 
others. Four interesting points emerge from this excerpt. First, interest rates were not 
universal, but altered according to locality; though this alteration, as detailed below, was 
normally restrained by law up to a legal maximum. Second, just as consumable 
 Gai. Dig. 13.4.3 (9 ad ed. prov.): The reason this action rests on the discretion of the judge is that we 
know how prices of things vary from one city and region to another, especially of wine, oil, and corn. 
Even in the case of money, though it is supposed to have one and the same power everywhere, yet it can 
be quit easily raised and at low interest in some places, with difficulty and at steep interest in others. 
Watson (1985) translates potestas as purchasing power; to avoid using such a modern concept, I 
translate it simply as power. 
 The excerpt is cited by scholars who tend to favour a market-oriented approach in analysing the Roman 
economy; e.g. Andreau (2000) 775; Harris (2008c) 192; as well as by those who dispute it; e.g. Bang 
(2008) 174, who takes it as confirming endemic and erratic price fluctuations and strong local and 
regional vatiations. 
 The excerpt appears in discussion on actiones utiles available for obligations which are to be given in a 
fixed place, and this is also the original context within which Lenels Palingenesia places the text; Lenel 
(1889) vol. 1, 209-10. And, perhaps the text originally appeared, like in the Digest, in a discussion on 
instances where a judge was to fix the sum paid as compensation. 
Potestas translated here as power, not purchasing power as in Watson (1985).
- 195 - 
commoditieswine, oil, or cornhave their price, so does money.
 Third, interestingly 
enough for the current discussion, interest is considered to be the price of money. That is, 
where money was the focus of a transaction, such as with loans, from the creditors 
perspective interest was its charge, and from that of the debtor, its cost. A connection 
between interest and price is attested also elsewhere in Roman legal sources. Scaevola 
justifies a high interest rate in maritime loans calling it periculi pretium, the price of 
risk;
 and Ulpian, when discussing a claim for inheritance, parallels a thing and its 
fruits with its price and the interest raised on it.
 The fourth point which arises from 
this excerpt is the connection drawn by Gaius between the scarcity of money and the rate 
of interest. The implied supposition is that interest functioned in a similar manner to 
prices of commodities:
 dropping when money was in abundance and rising when it was 
scarce.9 Such reasoning fits well with the neoclassical tradition of economic thought, 
which generally views money as a commodity involved in the exchange of one good for 
another, expecting it to function as other commodities do.
Be that as it may, this chapter argues that Roman interest did not always reflect 
the relations between the demand for and the supply of money. Interest was a 
complicated and complex instrument. It was used in a variety of contexts, its rate dictated 
 Money is frequently categorised by jurists together with commodities which can be measured, counted or 
weighed.
Scaev. Dig. 22.2.5.pr. (6 respon.).
Ulp. Dig. 5.3.20.12 (15 ad ed.): utrum ipsius rei et fructuum an pretii et usurarum. 
 Price oscillation is acknowledged also in Sen. Ben. 6.15.3-5, who explicitly says that the price non ex usu 
effectuve, sed ex consuetudine et annona aestimetur; Plin. NH 33.4, who takes human action as 
responsible for price increase. Roman prices have been the subject of much scholarly work, see Strobel 
(1989); Drexhage (1991); Wassink (1991); Rathbone (1996); (1997); Andreau, Briant and Descat (1997), 
reviewed in Cohen (2001); Svaivert and Wolters (2005).  
On interest rates and the credit crisis of 33 CE, see Wolters (1987); Tchernia (2003); Gaia (2009), non 
vidi; Lo Cascio (2011).
 See Ch. 1 above. 
- 196 - 
not solely by economic forces of supply and demand, but also influenced by law, custom, 
and social convention. As demonstrated below, when used as a penalising instrument, 
interest was restricted by law; when used as a tool to create perpetual income, it was 
often moulded by custom;
 and when used to provide compensation for loss, it 
accounted for the potential profit which could have been gained from an alternative mode 
of operation.  
7.2. Terminology and Vocabulary 
Interest is an instrument which is an outcome of obligations, as it accounts for an 
increase in debts. It rests on the general understanding that favours and services need to 
be reimbursed.
 In modern common understanding interest, in its financial meaning,
is a fee charged on loans,
 be these monetary or commodity loans.
 This operational 
description, quite intuitive to the modern reader,
 refers to an abstract mathematical ratio 
that connects what originally had been loaned, i.e. the principal, with a sum to be repaid 
E.g. in the context of alimenta interest was set at a rate which was in accord with acceptable monthly 
allowance; an allowance below a certain sum, as put by Woolf (1990) 220, would simply look mean; 
and see discussion on pp. 225-7, below. 
 I have no intention to hypothesise here on the origin of the practice of charging interest. See, Homer and 
Sylla (2005) 18, who suggest that the practice arose from increase in the amount of certain (agricultural) 
goods via natural production; contra Hudson (2000), who argues that ancient interest did not arise from 
agricultural production, and explains the existence of normal interest rates as based on numerical 
simplicity of calculation. 
The multiple meanings of the English word interest gave rise to considerable literature in political 
theory, philosophy, and the history of ideas; Mathiowetz (2007), with bibliography in nn. 2-4, 12-5.
Black (2002) 242, who defines interest as payment for a loan additional to repayment of the amount 
borrowed. Einzig (1949) 373f.; Herskovitz (1952) 288; Foraboschi and Gara (1981); Homer and Sylla 
(2005) 18-24. 
 Pecuniary and commodity loans coexist, nowadays, in the Roman period, and as early as the Codex 
Hammurabi, where interest on loans in kind (grain) was set at a higher rate than on monetary loans (silver 
by weight); Renger (2005); Homer and Sylla (2005) 3, 25-31. 
E.g. Homer and Sylla (2005), in their 710-page book entitled A History of Interest Rates, dedicate no 
section to defining interest. They simply assume that it is clear to their readers that what is under 
investigation is the fee charged on loans; as they put it, their book is concerned with just one type of 
variable  the rate of interest on loans (idem 11).
- 197 - 
in addition to the original loan, i.e. the interest.
 The equation producing this ratio may at 
times be an easily computed one; yet, its outcome encapsulates multifarious factors. The 
duration of a loan,
 the time and place of granting and repaying it, the availability of the 
thing(s) loaned, the identities of both debtor and creditor, the relations between them, the 
purpose of the loan, and the situation in which it is granted, all influence the rate of 
interest. Thus, somewhat similarly to Gaius view cited above, interest can be thought of 
as a tool which tags an aggregate price to the components defining the conditions of a 
loan. These include: 1) the element of time in the sense of capitalisation, i.e. calculating 
current value of future earnings; 2) the availability of the thing(s) loaned;
 3) the element 
of risk, i.e. the probability of not retrieving the loan advanced; 4) the opportunity cost, i.e. 
the benefits which could have been received from an alternative investment; and 5) 
indexation, whether a general one, or one according to a specific good. Apart from 
indexation, whose influence on Roman interest rates may be questioned,
 all other 
factors were encapsulated, in one way or another, within the Roman instrument of 
interest.
This is true for all types of interest: nominal, real (i.e. adjusted to inflation), simple or compound. Owen 
and Law (2005) 218, who state that the interest rate is the charge made, expressed as the percentage of 
the total sum loaned, for a stated period of time; Homer and Sylla (2005) 10, who argue that because 
interest is a mathematical ratio, it suits long-term comparisons, regardless of differences in credit forms 
or legal systems.
I.e. the maturity of the loan; Homer and Sylla (2005) 7-8.
I.e. the degree of accessibility, how close at hand an object is. In monetary loans this refers to both 
liquidity and the relation between demand for and supply of money. (Not to be confused with modern 
banking terminology, in which availability stands for the time period, expressed in days, from the day 
of deposit until funds are credited to an accounts collected balance and are made available for spending 
or investment.) 
Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.7 (35 ad ed.), where depositing money for the purpose of buying land is performed via a 
non-interest-bearing deposit, perhaps implying that the assumption had been that the value of money 
would not (/could not?) depreciate. 
 This is well acknowledged by scholars, though not always defined in such terminology; e.g. Howgego 
(1992); Andreau (1999); Harris (2006).
http://www.answers.com/topic/collected-balance
- 198 - 
In the Roman world charging interest on loans was a common practice, andas 
detailed belowa fairly regulated one. As well as being a fee charged on a loan, Roman 
interest was applied also in penalties, punishments, and compensation for damages; it was 
a device for creating a permanent stream of revenue; and a tool for assessing alternative 
modes of operation. It could take a pecuniary form, or be given in kind; yet, also in the 
latter casewhether received in goods or in servicesinterest was often computed in 
monetary terms, since money allows an easier format for making numerical calculations 
necessary for conceptualising interest as a ratio of a principal.  
This chapter investigates the Roman instrument of interest in order to reveal its 
complex nature; complex in the sense of both a diverse and manifold apparatus and a 
device which allows for new patterns of activity to be created by individuals who self-
adjust their use of it to the continuously evolving system in which they operate. The 
chapter first gives a general survey of Roman interest rates, to be followed by a more 
detailed description of the legal practicalities of contracting and charging interest. It then 
addresses other usages of Roman interest apart from a fee charged on loans. Lastly, some 
general observations are made on the complexity of Roman interest and its implications 
regarding Roman attitudes towards money. But first, a brief description of the Latin (and 
Greek) terminology ought to be given.
The notion of interest as described above is denoted in Latin by several words. 
First, and probably the earliest,
 there is faenus/fenus, literally what is produced;
In what follows profound use has been made of the TLL, OLD, and LSJ.
Andreau (2008) 201-3.
According to the second-century grammarian Aulus Gellius, Varro had proposed an etymology for fenus 
seeing it as derived from fetus, pregnant, having recently given birth, fruitful; Gel. 16.12.7; 
- 199 - 
word which could refer to gain, profit or advantage in general, and was regularly 
used to signify interest as in the proceeds of a money loan. Following faenus, there are 
the conjugations of the verb faenerare, to lend at interest.
 Towards the end of the 
second century BCE, and surely by the time of Cicero,
 the word usura, literally a 
using or enjoyment, had come to be habitually applied to designate interest, in the 
sense of interest paid for the use of a sum of money.
 Subsequently to these two words, 
faenus and usura, one often finds the expressions pecunia faenebris, money lent at 
interest; usura pecuniae, interest on money;
 and pro usuris, by way of-, or in lieu 
of interest.
 Additionally, the verb exercere, too, may refer to interest in the expressions 
exercere pecunia,
 meaning to put money into use, hence to lend money at interest; 
and faenus exercere,
 i.e. to lend money at interest. Less common expressions include 
the word incrementum, literally increase, growth, or addition. Incrementum can refer 
to any increase of ones possessions, peculium, etc.,
 or specifically to interest, i.e. the 
increase of a sum of money,
 as in the expressions: usurarum incrementum,
 meaning 
Zehnacker (1989) 362, who explains fenus as originating in a rural economic reality; Andreau (2008) 
207; contra Hudson (2000).
Lewis and Short.
 Andreau (2008) 201-3, who claims that it was not used in this meaning prior to the second century BCE.
Zehnacker (1989) 362; Andreau (2008) 207-8.
Berger (1953).
Scaev. Dig. 29.2.98 (26 dig.); Pompon. Dig. 45.1.90 (3 ex plaut.); Mod. Dig. 22.1.44 (10 pandec.). On 
pro usuris in the late Republic, see Andreau (2008) 208-9.
Ulp. Dig. 16.3.7.2 (30 ad ed.), who parallels placing money at interest with bankers (nummularii), with 
allowing them to make use of it (per ipsos exercebant), and see Ch. 8, pp. 250-1, below; 17.1.10.3 (31 ad 
ed.), where exercere pecunia is applied to lending money at interest and contrasted with putting it to 
ones own use (quod si non exercuit pecuniam, sed ad usus suos convertit); but, see 28.5.35.4 (4 disput.), 
where de pecuniis quas in Italia exercebat does not seem to refer especially to lending at interest. 
Mod. Dig. 12.1.33 (10 pandec.); Paul. Dig. 26.7.49 (2 sent.); Paul. Dig. 50.1.22.7 (1 sent.); Arcad. 
Charis. Dig. 50.4.18.23 (de mun. civil.).
Tryph. Dig. 15.1.57.1 (8 disput.); Mod. Dig. 22.1.39 (9 differ.); Ulp. Dig. 33.8.8.8 (25 ad sab.).
Scaev. Dig. 32.34.pr. (16 dig.), where interest due on a principal sum (sorti usuris) is called incrementum. 
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.).
- 200 - 
an increase by way of interest; cum incremento,
 literally with the increase, but can 
also mean together with interest;
 and ex incremento,
 i.e. from the increase/interest. 
The word impendium, meaning expenses, or layout, was used with interest in mind 
during the late Republic;
 however, I was not able to detect impendium in the strict sense 
of interestin classical Roman legal texts.
In Greek documents of the period interest is denoted most commonly by the 
word ,
 which stands for offspring, of either men or animals, but also the 
produce of money lent, hence, interest;
 and, accordingly, , signifying bearing-
interest.
  is a name of a special type of interest at a rate of fifty per cent, often 
used as a penalty.
 And , literally a difference, is also used in the sense of 
interest,
 i.e. the difference between what the borrower receives and what he repays.
Lastly, in later periods, starting probably from the fourth century,  was also 
Ulp. Dig. 50.8.2.2 (3 opin.).
But, see Scaev. Dig. 26.7.58.pr. (11 dig.), who differentiates usura, interest, from incrementum, an 
increase of profits, since interest can be computed without calculating profits, i.e. without taking 
expenses into account; see p. 235,  n. 281, below.
Papin. Dig. 34.1.9.pr. (8 respon.).
Var. LL 5.183; Andreau (2008) 203-4.
Examples for impedium/impensa in the general sense of expenses are abundant; e.g. Gai. Dig. 3.3.46.6 (3 
ad ed. prov.); 13.6.18.2 (9 ad ed. prov.); Ulp. Dig. 25.1.14 (5 regul.); 43.8.2.40 (68 ad ed.). The closest I 
could find for the use of impedium with interest in mind is Marcel. Dig. 36.1.46.1 (15 dig.), where 
impedium seems to reffer to the efforts/expenses which occur due to puting money out at interest; 
however, also here, impedium does not refer, strictly speaking, solely to interest. 
 Paul. Dig. 16.3.26.1 (4 respon.); Mod. Dig. 50.12.10 (1 respon.).  is widely attested in papyri; e.g. 
P.Oxy. XLVII 3351 (Oxyrhynchos, 34); P.Harr. I 85 (Oxyrhynchos, 117); BGU I 301 (Artisonite Nome, 
157); BGU V 1210 (Arsinoite Nome, 150-161); P.Oxy. VIII 1132 (Oxyrhynchos, after 162); to name 
only several examples. Also, see Montevecchi (1988) 226-9.  
LSJ,  II.2. However, see Hudson (2000) 132, who claims that the birth or calf/kid metaphor for 
interest thus referred to baby fractions, not literally baby animals. 
Often appearing together with ; e.g. P.Corn. 7 (Karanis, 126) ll. 6-7; P.Col. X 259 (Ptolemais 
Euergetis, 146) l. 10; P.Ryl. II 175 (Theadelphia, 168) ll. 16-17; Roth (1970) 35-55; Tenger (1993) 43-7. 
See pp. 206-7, below.
LSJ,  II.4.b., which gives as possible meanings ready money, cash; sum of money; price; 
and interest, with P.Oxy. VII 1040 (Oxyrhynchos, 225), as an example for the latter. Lewis (1945), who 
cites further papyri in which  means interest.
E.g. P.Oxy. XXII 2350 (Oxyrhynchos, 223), col. I, l. 21; Lewis (1945) 128, who observes that it is used 
only of interest in kind on loans in kind, and gives references to more papyri.
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=e%29pike%2Frdeia&la=greek&prior=e)pi/pemptos
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=to%2Fkos&la=greek&prior=to/kion
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=to%2Fkos&la=greek&prior=to/kion
- 201 - 
used to denote interest;
 however, as far as I am aware, this use is unattested for the 
period here under investigation. 
7.3. Interest as a Fee charged on a Loan 
Interest-bearing loans were known in Rome since early Republican times,
were at the heart of several of the Republics fiercest social and political struggles.
Under the empire, charging interest on monetary loans was a common financial practice, 
subject to some degree of regulation.
 The decision whether to charge interest,
 and if 
 in the sense of interest derives from the verb , to gain additionally, or gain 
besides; e.g. P.Oxy. XLV 3266 (Oxyrhynchos, 337); P.Giss. 53.4 (unknown origin, fourth century); 
P.Stras. VII 620 (unknown origin, fifth century); P.Mich. XI 607 (Antinoopolis, 569).
Billeter (1898) 116-33; Barlow (1978) 13-46. 
 Billeter (1898) 115-77; Barlow (1978).
 References in the legal sources are discussed below. Egipgraphy, too, gives evidence for the regulated 
environment of Roman money-lending; e.g. Lex de Gallia Cisalpina (49-42 BCE), Chs. XXI-XXII on 
pecunia certa credita, in Crawford (1996) no. 28, pp. 461-77. 
Interest-free loans were far from unheard of in the Roman world; e.g. Tryph. Dig. 3.5.37(38) (2 disput.); 
SB VI 9190 (Talao, 131), although here perhaps an additional contract (a ), which did not survive, 
included interest. Pestman (1971), who argues that, even though some loans which appear as bearing no 
interest were indeed interest-free, still, in some casesand Pestman argues that in manyinterest was 
paid, either in kind, or included within the sum stated in the contract, which comprised of both principal 
and interest; e.g. P.Oxy. XLVII 3351 (Oxyrhynchos, 34). Andreau (1999) 140-3, who attributes a 
significant role to interest-free monetary loans, though lessens their importance in imperial Rome in 
comparison with their centrality in classical Athens, at least according to Millett (1991). Although 
interest-free loans may have been of lesser political importance during the empire than under the 
Republic (especially the later Republic), it does not reduce their economic significance.Tenger (1993) 24-
5, 28-31, who argues that for the first two centuries CE interest-free , as well as , were 
largely rare, nevertheless hypothesises that  originally was a form of interest-free credit. Interest-
free loans were advanced by individuals to communities or friends; e.g. the well-cited example of Cicero 
providing funds to his son durring the latters stay in Athens, Cic. Att. 12.24.1; 12.27.2; 12.32.2; 13.37.1; 
14.7.2; 14.16.4; 14.20.3; 15.15.4; 15.17.1; 15.20.4; 16.1.5; Andreau (1999) 20-1; to family members; e.g. 
Plin. Ep. 3.19.8; BGU I 70 (Arsinoite Nome, 131) (=Chrest. Mitt. 175), which records an interest-free 
loan () between daughter and mother; and occasionally by emperors to their subjects; e.g. Suet. 
Aug. 41.2; HA Al. Sev. 21.2; 26.2; 40.2 (not to overlook the problematic nature of the HA, but just to 
demonstrate that the notion of interest-free loans advanced by an emperor was acceptable also in later 
periods). 
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=e%29pike%2Frdeia&la=greek&prior=e)pi/pemptos
http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/morph?l=e%29pike%2Frdeia&la=greek&prior=e)pi/pemptos
- 202 - 
so at what rate, as well as the repayment settlements of both principal and interest, varied 
according to the type of loan in question and the specific arrangement of the agreement.
Unlike nowadays, where state intervention tends to influence a minimum rate of 
interest, in Rome the state intervened to set a maximum rate; and this can be traced back 
as early as the Twelve Tables.
 During the Republic, the interest rate was restricted by 
law several times and for some periods was banned altogether.
 In the late Republic a 
maximum legal rate was re-enforced by Sullas Lex Cornelia Pompeia of 88 BCE,
again in 51 BCE, setting it at a rate of one per cent per month, or twelve per cent per 
annum, known as centesimae usurae.
 This yearly rate of twelve per cent continued to be 
the maximum legal rate on normal loans throughout the first three centuries CE.
Interest on bottomry loans was a different matter. In both Roman and Greek-
Hellenistic law maritime loans were subject to special regulations.
 Due to the 
unexpected dangers inherent in seafaring, not only was repayment conditioned by the 
safe arrival of the ship and its cargo;
 but also no limit was imposed on maritime interest 
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.), with lex contractus referring to the conditions of the contract in question, 
here either commodatum or depositum, decided by Papinian to be a depositum combined with an 
agreement on interest payments; this excerpt is discussed on Ch. 8, pp. 248-9, below. 
Tac. Ann. 6.16. The question which rate is implied by fenus unciarium lies beyond the chronological 
scope of the current research. In favour of a rate of eight and a third per cent per annum, see Billeter 
(1898) 115-33, 157-62; Frank (1933-40) vol. I, 17; Barlow (1978) 13-54. In favour of a rate of a hundred 
per cent per annum, see Zehnacker (1980); Andreau (1999) 90-1. 
 Interest was banned in the lex Genucia (342 BCE) and perhaps again during the second century BCE; 
Billeter (1898) 134-57, esp. 144-53; Frank (1933-40) vol. I, 28-32; Barlow (1978) 55-60.
 Billeter (1898) 163-77; Barlow (1978) 145-231; Andreau (1999) 91-2. The question whether this lex set 
the maximum rate at eight and a third, or twelve per cent per annum lies beyond the chronological scope 
of this study; Billeter (1898) 157-62; Frank (1933-40) vol. I, 268-70; Barlow (1978) 122-4. 
Cic. Att. 5.21.13; Billeter (1898) 169-77; Barlow (1978) 172-3, 186-7; Zehnacker (1980); Visky (1983) 
 Paul. Sent. 2.14.2; 4; CJ 4.2.8 (Diocl., 293); Billeter (1898) 169-74, 179-81, 267-75; Frank (1933-40) 
vol. I, 352; Kaser (1971) 496-7; Visky (1983) 74-6; Andreau (1999) 92.
 Dig. 14.2 (De lege Rodia de iactu); Dig. 22.2 (De nautico faenore); Dig. 47.9 (De incendio ruina 
naufragio rate nave expugnata); and Ch. 6, pp. 184-5, above. 
 Rathbone (2003) 212-3. 
- 203 - 
rates. The reason for this is openly ascribed to the arbitrariness of the risk involved in 
seafaring.
 To make hazardous maritime ventures attractive to lenders, the latter were 
permitted to collect higher returns on their investment,
 the high interest rates 
compensating for the risk they bore.
 The conclusion is trivial: interest acted as a risk 
management instrument, with the possibility of not retrieving a loan embedded in the rate 
of interest.
Interest was intertwined with risk assessment, i.e. the prospect of default in 
repayment, also in other respects. A creditor was entitled to benefit from interest 
payments, because it was her or his property which was put at risk.
 One of the criteria 
for determining when interest was to be paid was whether or not the non-owner made use 
of the sum in question, thereby taking a risk on it. As a general rule, the one using the 
money (qui in usus suos convertit) was obliged to pay interest on it; and this applied to 
debtors,
 tutors,
 and business partners.
 In cases of agency (mandatum), as a general 
 Paul. Sent. 2.14.3; Scaev. Dig. 22.2.5.pr. (6 respon.), who makes a clear connection between maritime 
interest and periculum; CJ 4.33.2 (Diocl., 286). Only in the sixth century did Justinian impose a 
limitation on maritime interest setting it at twelve per cent per annum; CJ 4.32.26.2 (Just., 528).  
On measures taken by Roman imperial authorities to encourage maritime commerce, especially affecting 
the annona, see Suet. Cl. 18.2-19; Ulp. Dig. 14.1.1.18 (28 ad ed.); Sirks (1991), 40-4, 61-7; (2002) 139; 
Rathbone (2003) 207; Aubert (2007).
 Scaev. Dig. 22.2.5.pr. (6 respon.). 
 Managing risks is not expressed solely via interest rates; guaranteesadvanced by either debtors or 
guarantorsare also an important tool for risk management. For a recent discussion on risk management 
in the Roman empire, see Jakab (2009). There were also other remedies for managing risk, e.g. remissio 
mercedis; on which, see Ch. 5, p. 172, n. 191, above. 
Papin. Dig. 6.1.62.pr. (6 quaest.); Marcel. Dig. 36.1.46.1 (15 dig.). And, Mod. Dig. 22.2.1 (10 pandec.); 
Papin. Dig. 22.2.4.pr.-1 (3 respon.), on maritime loans.
Paul. Dig. 20.2.8 (2 sent.).
Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.4; 10 (35 ad ed.); Scaev. Dig. 26.7.58.1 (11 dig.). However, a tutor who lent his wards 
money under his name is not considered to have put it into his own use; Paul. Dig. 26.7.46.2 (9 respon.).
Pompon. Dig. 17.2.60.pr. (13 ad sab.). However, a member of a partnership (societas) who lent out 
money from the common fund under his own name bore the risk himself, hence was eligible to collect the 
interest; Paul. Dig. 17.2.67.1 (32 ad ed.). 
- 204 - 
rule, it was the owner who bore the risk, hence was the one to enjoy interest payments.
Accordingly, any interest collected by a procurator,
 whether or not he was given a 
mandate to do so, was to be rendered to the owner.
 Only if an owner directed a 
procurator to lend money at a certain interest, and the procurator had managed to receive 
a higher interest rate at his own risk (faenerare periculo suo ita), could he (i.e. the 
procurator) enjoy the additional profit.
 Since the procurator was considered to have 
received the money as if it was a loan (in creditam pecuniam videtur accepisse
), it 
became his property, and he was entitled to keep the surplus interest. A procurator who 
was instructed to advance an interest-free loan and had then lent the money at interest, 
acted in conflict with his mandate, and any interest collected on the sums loaned was to 
be rendered to the (risk-bearing) owner. If, however, the procurator lent at his own 
riskacting as owner, as if he was given the money as a loanhe might keep for himself 
the profits from interest.
Cels. Dig. 17.1.48.1 (7 dig.). Where an owner explicitly agreed to take on the risk while rendering 
interest profits to another, the agreement lay beyond the scope of a mandate; Cels. Dig. 17.1.48.2 (7 dig.).
In private Roman law a procurator was a person who was authorised to administer the affairs of another; 
Ulp. Dig. 3.3.1.pr. (9 ad ed.). Normally such an agent was a freedman (sometimes even a slave). 
Procuratorship was distinguished from MANDATUM (in a technical sense) which referred to an 
authorization to perform a certain act whereas the procurator omnium bonorum acted either under a 
general authorization or, at times, as a negotiorum gestor and for an absent principal; Berger (1953) 654. 
Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.3 (31 ad ed.), where sive ei mandavi sive non seems to refer to lending; but lending 
without a mandate is easily furtum; thus, mandavi here should be understood as relating to the interest. 
The procurator who collected interestwith or without a mandatehad to turn it over to the owner. The 
bonae fidei nature of the mandate underlying the procura requires this, since a procurator was expected 
not to profit from the property of another; Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.3 (31 ad ed.). A procurator could not one-
sidedly convert a sum recieved under a mandate to his own use, as if it was a loan; Afric. Dig. 17.1.34.pr. 
(8 quaest.).
Ulp. Dig. 17.1.6.6 (31 ad ed.). 
Ulp. Dig. 17.1.6.6 (31 ad ed.), ad finem.
 Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.8 (31 ad ed.). 
- 205 - 
Roman jurists often refer to the notion of a legal maximum interest rate;
 talking 
of a legitimum modum of interest,
 a licitum or illicitum interest,
 or simply legitima 
usura,
 i.e. the legal interest. This interest was restricted not only percentage-wise, but 
also in absolute terms; as it could not have produced a yield higher than twofold the 
amount of the principal,
 regardless of the agreed upon interest rate or the duration of the 
loan.
 Detaching the total amount due as interest from the duration of the loan has to do 
with moral aspects intertwined in the Roman notion of interest-bearing. Not all interest-
profits were considered morally appropriate, as is demonstrated by setting a legal upper-
cap for interest rate. That restriction, however, was insufficient in maintaining interest-
profits at levels which Romans deemed reasonable. A need was felt to further restrain 
interest-profits by fixing a stable ratio between principal and interest, restricting the total 
amount paid as interest to be a multiple, twofold, of the principal.
 Following similar 
In the Digest the centesima is rarely given as the maximum legal rate; Papin. Dig. 22.2.4.pr.-1 (3 
respon.); on which, see Billeter (1898) 267, who holds legitima usura in 22.2.4.pr., as parallel with 
centesima in 22.2.4.1. This is easily explained away by the fact that the legal maximum under Justinian 
varied from the centesima; therefore, the compilers preferred referring to a general term rather than to a 
specific rate no longer in use; Billeter (1898) 267-8. 
 Ulp. Dig. 12.6.26.pr. (26 ad ed.); 13.4.2.8 (27 ad ed.); Paul Dig. 20.2.8 (2 sent.). 
 Ulp. Dig. 13.7.11.3 (28 ad ed.); Ulp. (Papin.) Dig. 19.1.13.26 (32 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 22.1.20 (12 ad 
sab.); Mod. Dig. 22.1.44 (10 pandec.). 
 Ulp. (Papin.) Dig. 19.1.13.26 (32 ad ed.); Papin. Dig. 20.1.1.3 (11 respon.); 22.2.4.pr.-1 (3 respon.); Ulp. 
Dig. 26.7.7.4; 10 (35 ad ed.); Pompon. Dig. 45.1.90 (3 ex plaut.). 
That the total sum paid as interest should not surpass the amount of the capital seems to have been the 
case also in Ptolemaic Egypt; Tenger (1993) 25-6. A notion of double the original amount appears also 
in Greek documents of the period in the context of both the   , where a duplum-
penalty doubled the principal amount in cases of default in repayment; see Ch. 8, pp. 257-9, below; and 
the   , where a seller breaching a contract had to pay the buyer double the amount of 
the arra, i.e. earnest-money, a payment made at the time of contracting a transaction given as first 
instalment on the price or wages; Pringsheim (1950) 333-429; Thomson (1970); Visky (1974); (1975).
 Ulp. Dig. 12.6.26.1 (26 ad ed.); Ulp. (Papin.) Dig. 19.1.13.26 (32 ad ed.); Papin. Dig. 22.2.4.1 (3 
respon.). On the duration of loans in Roman Egypt in the first and second centuries CE, see Tenger 
(1993) 19-23, 37-43, 55-9, 73-4; on the relation between the total sum paid as interest and the duration of 
loans, idem 25-6, esp. n. 85. 
This was a well-known limit; e.g. SB XX 14401 (Arsinoite Nome, 147), which records a petition of a 
certain Ptolemaeus to the epistrategos P. Marcius Crispus, complaining against a moneylender who had 
taken usurious interest so that in a few years Ptolemaeus got eight times the capital although it is 
- 206 - 
logic, compound interest (usura usurarum) was also prohibited,
 being considered 
contra leges et sacras constitutiones.
Setting a legal maximum did not prevent higher rates from being charged;
though legally these were largely unenforceable in court, even as a penalty.
 Legal 
sources tend to produce skewed data in the sense that higher illegal ratesperhaps 
commoner in real economic lifefail to enter juristic literature on account of their 
illicitness.
 Such rates were certainly charged, as is evident from both the repeated 
strictures against them,
 and their presence in documentary evidence.
Two categories of interest higher than twelve per cent should be regarded as more 
institutionalised. First, there is the Hellenistic practice of , a penalty-interest at a 
rate of fifty per cent the original sum,
 which continuously appears in documentation, 
forbidden for anyone to exact more interest than the sum of the capital over the whole period of the loan 
(ll. 18-20). 
 Marcian. Dig. 22.1.29 (14 inst.); Ulp. Dig. 12.6.26.1 (26 ad ed.); 50.8.2.5 (3 opin.).
 Mod. Dig. 42.1.27 (1 respon.).
E.g. Ulp. Dig. 12.6.26.pr. (26 ad ed.); SB XX 14401 (Arsinoite Nome, 147).
 Mod. Dig. 22.1.44 (10 pandec.). Debtors could only be sued up to the legal maximum; Papin. Dig. 
22.1.9.pr. (11 respon.); Marcian. Dig. 22.1.29 (14 inst.); Scaev. Dig. 3.5.34(35).3 (1 quaest.), who takes 
an illegal interest rate as a reason which may exempt from payment. But see Ulp. Dig. 13.4.2.8 (27 ad 
ed.), discussed on p. 221, n. 186, and p. 236, below.  
According to the famous Gnomon of the Idios Logos, BGU V 1210 (Theadelphia, second half of the 
second century) ll. 235-6, in Roman Egypt not only creditors of usurious loans were penalised, debtors 
too were punished by confiscation of a quarter of their possessions; on the Idios Logos, see Swarney 
(1970); Amelotti (2007/8). Such a regulation is likely to have reduced the motivation of debtors to bring 
to court cases where illegal interest rates were imposed; Roth (1970) 48; Tenger (1993) 24-6; though it 
did not prevent such complaints; e.g. SB XX 14401 (Arsinoite Nome, 147); P.Fouad 26 (Arsinoite 
Nome, 158/9). 
Papin. Dig. 22.1.9.pr. (11 respon.); Mod. Dig. 22.1.44 (10 pandec.); Billeter (1898) 257-8.
E.g. CIL V 5134 (Bergomum, second or third century), 15%; Stud. Pal. XXII 4 (unknown origin, 127/8), 
Col. 3 l. 12, [][  ][]  []  [], i.e. 13%; SB XX 14401 (Arsinoite 
Nome, 147), ll. 9-11,  , interest of a stater per mina per month, i.e. 48% [see 
Whitehorne (1991)]; P.Fouad 26 (Arsinoite Nome, 158/9), l. 46,  , i.e. 48%; P.Mert. I 
23 (Oxyrhynchos(?), late second century), ll. 10-11,        / , 
i.e. 48%. Also, see Billeter (1898) 227, 2354-5, 285-6; Roth (1970) 96-8, who claims that usurious 
interest rates were achieved by stating in the document an amount which accounted for both principal and 
interest; Pestman (1971), who offers similar logic; Tenger (1993) 60.
Where  does not stand for a penalty or interest, it can mean one and a half; but, see Billeter 
(1898) 260-5, who had shown that where referring to a penalty-payment  should be read half as 
- 207 - 
before, throughout, and after the period here under investigation.
 Penalties set at a rate 
of fifty per cent appear not only in loans, but also in contracts of sale,
 lease,
 Sale on 
Delivery,
 and cession of land.
 In monetary loans  generally acted as a 
penalty at the rate of fifty per cent of the original loan, and was usually agreed upon in 
addition to interest.
 In loans in kind, however,  often was no penalty, but rather 
the agreed upon interest at a rate of fifty per cent,
 where a third part of the repayment 
(i.e. half the principal) was to be accounted for the interest.
Second to be considered as somewhat institutionalized, are Egyptian interest rates. 
In Ptolemaic Egypt the maximum legal interest was set at two obols per mina per month, 
much (i.e. fifty per cent, rather than one hundred and fifty per cent). A penalty of half the original 
amount is attested in the Tabula Heracleensis, l. 43: pecuniam et eius dimidiumknown as the Lex 
Iulia Municipalis, traditionally attributed to Julius Caesar, but see Giovannini (2004), in favour of the 
eighteenth-century dating to the 90s BCE; Crawford (1996) no. 24, pp. 355-91; Giovannini (2004); 
(2008). Roth (1970) 98, who argues that during the second century loans were contracted more via the 
 formula and less via , with the  as a penalising clause replaced by that of the 
duplum; on the duplum and the   , see Ch. 8, pp. 257-9, below. On the unclear 
relation between   and the duplum ; see Klami (1989) 90.
E.g. P.Oxy. XLVII 3351 (Oxyrhynchos, 34), ll. 9-12 (with  appearing in l. 10); P.Mich. IX 566 
(Hiera Nesos, Arsinoite Nome, 89), ll. 10-11, the loan is of the type of ; P.Ups.Frid 3 
(Oxyrhynchos, 122/3), l. 9; P.Vind.Worp. 10 (Soknopaiu Nesos(?), 143/4), ll. 4-5; P.Oxy.Hels. 36 
(Oxyrhynchos, 167); PSI XII 1253 (Oxyrhynchos, 186), ll. 14-15; SB XVI 13030 (Alabastrine, 
Hermopolite Nome, 205), l. 9; P.Oxy. LXX 4772 (Oxyrhynchos, 213/4), l. 20; Billeter (1898) 258-266. 
E.g. BGU II 542 (Athenas Kome, 165); SB VIII 9906 (Ptolemais Euergetis, 193/4).
E.g. SB XX 14338 (Oxyrhynchos, 120); P.Oxy. III 502 (Oxyrhynchos, 164).
Bagnall (1977), with references to papyri mainly from the fourth century; Foraboschi and Gara (1981); 
Kruit (1992). On Sale on Delivery, also see pp. 185-6, above.
E.g. SB XVIII 13764 (Arsinoite Nome, 143-161); P.Stras. IX 831 (Tebtunis, 162/3); SB XXII 15326 
(Karanis, 223-235).
Both terms appear side by side in loan documents; BGU I 339 (Karanis, 128), l. 20,   []  
  ; P.Oxy. XLIV 3198 (Oxyrhynchos, 145/6 or 170/1), ll. 14-15,  ]  [ ] / [] 
; BGU I 238 (Arsinoite Nome, second or third century), l. 3, []   ; PSI XII 1253 
(Oxyrhynchos, 186), l. 15,   ; P.Oxy. LXXI 4828 (Oxyrhynchos, 195) col. I, ll. 19-20, 
(and again in col. II, ll. 15-19); P.Mert. 1 25 (Oxyrhynchite Nome, 214), l. 13,  [ ]  ; and 
perhaps SB XVI 13030 (Alabastrine, Hermopolite Nome, 205), ll. 9-10,      
 / [   ]. Also, see P.Oxy. XXII 2350 (Oxyrhynchos, 223), recording a loan in 
kind with no interest charged, which states  penalty to be paid in the case of default.
P.Oxy. VII 1040 (Oxyrhynchos, 225), a loan of wheat with an agreed interest of fifty per cent,  
  (l. 10). Also, see Roth (1970) 14-15, 96-7, who argues that  was applied as a 
fifty per cent interest rate mainly in in-kind  contracts and only rarely in ; Bagnall (1977) 94, 
who says that the hemiolia  on loans in kind, was very common in Egypt through the centuries. 
CTh 2.33.1 (Const., 325).
http://explore.bl.uk/primo_library/libweb/action/search.do?vl(freeText0)=Giovannini%2c+A.&vl(174399379UI0)=creator&vl(472047189UI1)=all_items&fn=search&tab=local_tab&mode=Basic&vid=BLVU1&scp.scps=scope%3a(BLCONTENT)
http://explore.bl.uk/primo_library/libweb/action/search.do?vl(freeText0)=Giovannini%2c+A.&vl(174399379UI0)=creator&vl(472047189UI1)=all_items&fn=search&tab=local_tab&mode=Basic&vid=BLVU1&scp.scps=scope%3a(BLCONTENT)
- 208 - 
i.e. twenty-four per cent per annum.
 Shortly after the beginning of Roman rule in Egypt 
the Roman maximumhalf that of the Ptolemaicwas introduced; however, it was only 
gradually enforced.
 Even as late as the second century CE one finds interest at the rate 
of twenty-four per cent.
 Both the  and the Egyptian adherence to the Ptolemaic 
maximum indicate how deeply rooted Hellenistic monetary practices were. They also 
serve as a reminder that Roman law provided only part of the framework within which 
economic interaction occurred. Roman legal sources may represent some of the actual 
practices taking place, but certainly not all of them. Hence, they ought to be constantly 
checked against other historical records produced at lower levels of the bureaucracy 
preserved in documentary evidence. 
Although rates higher than the legal maximum of twelve per cent were certainly 
imposed, evidence shows that rates notably lower were quite common.
 In papyri from 
Roman Egypt one finds loans at twelve per cent interest,
 but also many loans at lower 
rates, often ranging between six and eight per cent.
 In epigraphic evidence, mainly 
E.g. P.Kln V 218 (unknown origin, 215/4 BCE), l. 9,       . See 
Roth (1970) 31; Montevecchi (1988) 226; but, see Tenger (1993) 24, n. 78, for twenty-five per cent (i.e. a 
quarter).
Tenger (1993) 24-5, esp. n. 82, with reference to relevant papyri.
P.Fouad 51 (Tebtunis, 126), 24%; P.Oxy. VIII 1132 (Oxyrhynchos, shortly after 162), ll. 14-15, 24%; 
Roth (1970) 45-7. 
Obviously twelve per cent interest was also in use; e.g. Paul. Dig. 12.1.40 (3 quaest.); Plin. Ep. 10.54, for 
private loans in Bithynia (prior to the period here under investigation); P.Oslo II 40 B (Oxyrhynchos, 
150), l. 32; SB XVI 13030 (Alabastrine, Hermopolite Nome, 205), l. 6; CIL III p. 930-1 (Deusara, 162) 
(=IDR 33) and CIL III pp. 934-5 (Albumus, 162) (=IDR 35), both from Dacia. 
 E.g. P.Kron. 11 (Tebtunis, 120); SB VIII 9923 (Ptolemais Euergetis, 175/6); P.Giss. I 33 (Hermopolis, 
222). In some papyri  is mentioned without stating a specific rate; e.g. P.Kron. 11 (Tebtunis, 121); 
in others  without specifying a rate; e.g. P.Corn. 7 (Karanis, 126); P.Col. X 259 (Ptolemais 
Euergetis, 146). Some scholars assumed that in such cases a twelve per cent interest rate should be 
understood; Finckh (1962) 36; Schreiner (1963); Khnert (1965) 97; but, see Roth (1970) 46-7, for the 
possibility that reference to interest with no specified rate was used to conceal usurious rates; also 
Pestman (1971); Bagnall (1977); Tenger (1993) 43-7, who, although refuting some of Roths examples, 
does not deny the possibility of concealing usury, e.g. BGU XI 2043 (Soknopaiu Nesos, 150). 
P.Oxy. XXXVI 2774 (Oxyrhynchos, 129), ll. 8-9, 6%; P.Oxy. I 98 (Oxyrhynchos, 141/2), 1.71%; P.Oxy. 
III 506 (Oxyrhynchos, 143), 6%; P.Stras. I 52 (Hermopolis, 151), 8 %; P.Harr. I 66 (unknown origin, 
- 209 - 
from the western provinces, interest raised on perpetual foundationseither private or 
imperialwas often set at a rate of six or five per cent per annum.
 In legal sources, we 
find Papinians testimony of a loan agreement with an interest rate lower than the legal 
maximum, where twelve per cent would apply only where a default in repayment 
occurred.
 Although jurists often refer to an upper-cap on interest rate, the few rates 
which are actually preserved are often significantly lower than twelve per cent.
 Out of 
twenty-three Digest excerpts explicitly stating rates of interest,
 nine give a rate of six 
per cent per annum (usura semissis),
 five give a rate of five per cent (usura 
155), 8%; SB X 10492 (unknown origin, 163), ll. 3-4, 8%; P.Oxy. XVII 2134 (Oxyrhynchos, 170), 6%; 
P.Flor. I 46 (Hermoupolis Magna, 182/3) (=M.Chr. 185), ll. 12-13, 6%; P.Giss. I 32 (Hermopolis, 
184-189), ll. 5-6, 8%;  P.Oxy. XIV 1648 (Oxyrhynchos, late second century), 7.2%; P.Giss. I 33 
(Hermopolis, 222), ll. 7-8, 6%; SB VIII 9923 (Ptolemais Euergetis, 175/6), which records a principal 
sum of 1,700 drachmae and a repayment made at 1,800 drachmae, and, see Schreiner (1963) 44, who 
notes that 100 drachmae is a remarkably low amount for interest, and suggests that interest was set at 
the legal rate of twelve per cent and that a discharge from the remainder of the interest sum was granted 
due to some sort of antichresis, or service performed by the debtor. Montevecchi (1988) 226, who gives 
a list of papyri which record loans (mutua, ) in which interest rates are lower than twelve per cent.
Though twelve per cent is not unattested, the exception of four and a third per cent is also found, CIL X 
6328 (=ILS 6278); and fifteen per cent, CIL V 5134 (Bergomum, second or third century). Also, see 
Billeter (1898) 187-228; Duncan-Jones (1982) 33, 102-3, 131-6, 171-84; Woolf (1990).
Papin. Dig. 20.1.1.3 (11 respon.). A similar approach is attested in Plin. Ep. 9.28.5; CJ 4.32.8 
(Caracalla).
 Papin. Dig. 20.1.1.3 (11 respon.), who demonstrates that rates lower than the legal maximum where not 
uncommon; Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.10 (35 ad ed.), who speaks of five per cent or four per cent or any other 
lesser rates which are frequently used in the province.  
Papin. Dig. 22.2.4.1 (3 respon.), who mentions a very high daily maximum rate for maritime loan, is not 
included in these twenty-three; on maritime interest rates, see Billeter (1898) 242-54; Visky (1983) 85-
108; Mrozek (2001); and Ch. 6, pp. 184-5, above.
Three of the twenty-three
excerpts do not give an 
explicit rate, but a rate can be computed from them; Billeter (1898) 106-7, 255: Paul. Dig. 45.1.126.2 (3 
quaest.), who refers to eight denarii per thousand paid due to arrears (usurarum nomine denarios octo 
praestari), if the time-frame is indeed a month, than the interest rate was 9.6 per cent per annum; 
16.3.26.1 (4 respon.), who states an interest of four obols per mina per month, on which see Ch. 8, pp. 
252-4, below; 12.1.40 (3 quaest.), who records interest on arrears following the same formula: poenae 
nomine in dies triginta inque denarios centos denarios singulos dari. The formula so-and-so drachmae 
per mina per month is customary in Greek documents; e.g. P.Harr. I 85 (Oxyrhynchos, 117) ll. 10-11, 
   /    ; BGU I.301 (Arsinoite Nome, 157) l. 8,    
  ; though, Greek documents may also state the interest as a sum to be paid in addition to 
that of the principal; e.g. P.Stras. I 52 (Hermopolis, 151); P.Flor. I 1 (Hermopolis. 153), where an 
additional sum is specified together with the usual formula of     .
 Afric. Dig. 17.1.34.pr. (8 quaest.); 19.5.24 (8 quaest.); Scaev. Dig. 22.1.13.pr. (1 respon.); 34.4.30.pr. 
(20 dig.); Ulp. Dig. 15.4.3 (2 respon.); 50.10.5.pr. (off. curat. rei pub.); Paul. Dig. 22.1.17.6 (1 de usur.); 
- 210 - 
quincunces),
 and four a rate of four per cent.
 In itself this is no sufficient proof that 
these rates were the commonest.
 However, two excerpts may suggest that six per cent 
was a usually acceptable rate. First, the second-century jurist Scaevola reports a loan 
agreement of five per cent interest, where the careless debtor had mistakenly paid six per 
cent.
 Such a mistake could reasonably occur only if six per cent was a habitually paid 
rate. Second, there is the testimony of the third-century jurist Paul, who states that 
debtors whose obligations were transferred to the Treasury were compelled to pay six per 
cent interest even where their initial obligation was of a lower rate.
 Interest at six and 
five per cent per annum has long been recognised by scholars as the common interest rate 
45.1.134.2 (15 respon.); Mod. Dig. 50.12.10 (1 respon.), who uses the term usurae semissales (and is the 
only exemplum given in the OLD for the use of semissalis). 
 Paul. Dig. 22.1.17.pr. (1 de usur.); Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.10 (35 ad ed.); Scaev. Dig. 34.1.15.pr. (17 dig.); 
34.1.16.2 (18 dig.); 46.3.102.3 (5 respon.).
Paul. Dig. 22.1.17.8 (1 de usur.); Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.10 (35 ad ed.); 27.4.3.1 (36 ad ed.); Papin. Dig. 
36.2.26.1 (9 respon.). There is also Paul. Dig. 35.2.3.2 (ad leg. falc.): Marcellus putat tantum videri 
legatum, quantum sufficiat sorti ad usuras trientes eius summae, quae legata est, colligendas; but 
although usuras trientes often stands for four per cent interest (a third of a per cent per month), here 
Watsons translation reading ...the amount sufficient for the collection of interest amounting to one third 
of the sum bequeathed, should be accepted.
Lower rates attested in the Digest are taken from alimentary arrangements: Scaev. Dig. 33.1.21.4 (22 
dig.), who mentions three per cent interest (usuras quadrantes) as the rate set by a testator to be the 
yields of a fideicommissum given as aliment to his foster-child; 26.7.47.4 (2 respon.), who mentions a 
testator which instructed the future tutors of his son to enter in the accounts one per cent of this sum by 
way of interest, and Scaevola thinks that higher rates could be obtained, thus the low rate accommodates 
the testators desire to encourage tutors and fidei-commissaries to accept responsibility by affording them 
a margin for gain; Brge (1987) 541. On interest in alimentary arrangements, see pp. 221-7, below.
 Scaev. Dig. 46.3.102.3 (5 respon.). 
 Paul. Dig. 22.1.17.6 (1 de usur.). 
- 211 - 
in the Roman empire,
 and has been argued to have correlated with levels of 
agricultural profit.
Nonetheless, interest rates were clearly not homogeneous throughout the empire. 
On top of fluctuating in accordance with the exact circumstances of each individual 
transaction, interest rates also varied according to locality and the mos regionis.
have already seen the Egyptian adherence to the Ptolemaic maximum, twice that of the 
Roman, as well as the long lasting Hellenistic practice of a penalising -interest. 
Roman jurists often acknowledged regional variation in interest rate,
 and entrusted 
local judges with the responsibility to set the rate according to custom.
 A general 
notion of a common interest rate is deduced not only from the numerical evidence. 
Ulpian talks of a modum probabilem usurarum, the acceptable rate of interest;
contemporary Paul tells of an administrator who was in the habit of lending public money 
at the usura solita, the usual or ordinary rate of interest;
 and his student Modestinus 
 Billeter (1898) 211-9, who argues in favour of a general decline in interest rates by the time of Severus 
Alexander, though the figures he cites are usually of six, five or four per cent; Duncan-Jones (1982) 135; 
Andreau (1999) 90-9; Mrozek (2001). Five and six per cent are attested also for the first century; e.g. 
Colum. RR 3.3.9; Plin. NH 14.56. This trend is also evident in epigraphic evidence; see Billeter (1898); 
Duncan-Jones (1982) 132-5; Mrozek (2001) 76-90, 98-105. The numerical evidence supporting stability 
of interest rates, both regionally and empire wide, received profound scholarly attention. Billeter (1898) 
esp. 182-228, who continues to be the best starting point; Duncan-Jones (1982); Andreau (1987); Tenger 
(1993) esp. 23-7, 43-6, 59-60, 79-83, 92-3; Mrozek (2001).
Duncan-Jones (1982) 33-59, 132-5; De Neeve (1985) esp. 82-5, who views the price of land as primarily 
determined by what it yielded, i.e. the average reditus or fructus reckoned over a number of years. That 
the level of productivity influenced the price of land, is attested also in a rescript of Severus and 
Caracalla; Paul. Dig. 27.9.13.pr. (ad orat. div. sev.). On the relation between usura and fructus, see 
discussion on pp. 223f., below.
 Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.3 (31 ad ed.); 22.1.37 (10 ad ed.); 30.39.1 (21 ad sab.); Scaev. Dig. 33.1.21.pr. (22 
dig.); Gai. Dig. 13.4.3 (9 ad ed. prov.); Billeter (1898) 179-80. 
 Gai. Dig. 13.4.3 (9 ad ed. prov.); Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.3 (31 ad ed.); 22.1.37 (10 ad ed.); 26.7.7.10 (35 ad 
ed.); 27.4.3.1 (36 ad ed.); Papin. Dig. 33.1.21.pr. (22 dig.); Billeter (1898) 179-81. 
 Papin. Dig. 22.1.1.pr. (2 quaest.); Ulp. Dig. 30.39.1 (21 ad sab.). 
Ulp. Dig. 33.1.3.6 (24 ad ed.).
 Paul. Dig. 22.1.11.pr. (25 quaest.).
- 212 - 
cites a woman who talks of    , the usual rate.
 Though using different 
wording, these examples all refer to the same phenomenon of an ordinary interest rate, 
suggesting that it was well-known and, at least locally, probably quite stable. 
7.4. Practicalities of Contracting and Charging Interest 
As noted above, decisions concerning interest varied from one loan to another in 
accordance with the specific arrangement of the agreement. Some loan agreements stated 
that principal plus interest were to be repaid when and where the creditor demanded;
some specified where the repayment was to be performed,
 others specified when.
Technically this was regularly achieved via stipulatio,
 with the interest stipulated in an 
additional stipulation to that of the loan itself.
 The need for multiple stipulations lies in 
the fact that while the principal (sors) is a fixed sum, hence certum, interest (usura) 
depends on how long a loan lasts, hence was perceived as incertum.
 Sors and usura 
were distinctive items (res) of diverse character, hence ought to have been stipulated for 
 Mod. Dig. 50.12.10 (1 respon.), who adds that that common rate was six per cent (usuras semissales); 
Billeter (1898) 217-8. 
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.). The obligation to repay upon demand was common in Greek ; 
see Ch. 8, pp. 254-6, below.
In Capua: Afric. Dig. 13.4.8 (3 quaest.); in Ephesus: Ulp. Dig. 13.4.2.7-8 (27 ad ed.).
Paul. Dig. 12.1.40 (3 quaest.); 22.1.12 (4 respon.); Mod. Dig. 22.1.41.2 (3 respon.); Paul. Dig. 
45.1.126.2 (3 quaest.); Scaev. Dig. 45.1.122.pr. (28 dig.), where a mutuum contract is supplemented by a 
stipulatio specifying where and when repayment was to be made.
That this was common practice is implied in Ulp. Dig. 12.6.26.1 (26 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 22.1.12 (4 
respon.); Scaev. Dig. 22.2.5.1 (6 respon.); Litewski (1975) 304-5.
 As stated by the second-century jurist Sextus Caecilius Africanus; Afric. Dig. 13.4.8 (3 quaest.); 19.5.24 
(8 quaest.). This is also attested for the third century; CJ 4.32.3 (Severus and Caracalla, 200); Papin. Dig. 
22.1.9.1 (11 respon.); 22.2.4.11 (3 respon.), with regard to maritime loan; Paul. Sent. 2.14.1. That the 
agreement on interest need not be a written was decreed by Antoninus Pius; CJ 4.32.1 (Ant. Pius., 138-
61). Also, see Michel (1962) 113-5; Buckland (1963) 464-5, 549; Kaser (1971) 497; Zimmermann 
(1996) 154-5.
Ulp. Dig. 45.1.75.9 (22 ad ed.): qui sortem stipulatur et usuras quascumque, certum et incertum 
stipulatus videtur et tot stipulationes sunt, quot res sunt.
- 213 - 
separately,
 each stipulation carrying its own legal action. Where a stipulation stated a 
sum which comprised both principal and interest, a claim for reimbursement applied to 
both,
 with the disadvantage of fixing the amount paid as interest although the loan 
might be repaid later than agreed upon. Such practice was probably commoner where 
wishing to conceal an interest rate higher than the legal maximum.
 This could easily be 
achieved if the actual amount provided by the lender was lower than the sum stated in the 
contract, which in fact accounted for both principal and interest.
There are three types of real contracts which ought to be considered in this 
context: mutuum, commodatum, and depositum. Theoretically, none of these obligations 
could be done for interest; however, sometimes interest could be settled in an agreement 
augmenting the main contract. In the case of mutuum, a loan in which an equivalent in 
kind and quantity was to be returned, such an agreement presented no essential 
problem.
 Interest was usually contracted via stipulatio,
 the stipulation then receiving 
 Because stipulatio needs to specify quale quantumque due, certum sors and incertum usuara could not 
be stipulated together; Ulp. Dig. 45.1.75.pr. (22 ad ed.). On the relation between sors and faenus/usura, 
see Mrozek (2001) 70-1.
Since it ought to be for something certain; Ulp. Dig. 22.1.31 (1 respon.); 45.1.75.pr. (22 ad ed.); Scaev. 
Dig. 45.1.122.pr. (28 dig.), who reports a case of mutua pecunia with an additional stipulation that set the 
time and place (a province) for repayment, where the lender offered to repay immediately and at Rome 
(where the loan was originally contracted) with a deduction of the amount to be paid as usura, probably 
due to the shortening of the duration of the loan, thus here the sum stipulated for seems to have accounted 
for both interest and principal. See, Buckland (1963) 465, who argues that in loans of money (mutua 
pecunia) advanced by civitates it is to be supposed that the interest due was added to the amount of the 
loan in the intentio of the action; Visky (1983) 80-81. The picture which arises from the papyri is not 
always clear; see, Roth (1970) 46-8, who argues that sums stated in  usually combine principal and 
interest, to veil usurious rates; e.g. P.Lugd.Bat. VI 22 (Tebtunis, 122); P.Fouad 51 (Tebtunis, 126); but, 
see Tenger (1993) 42-6, for partial confutation of Roths claim.
Paul. Dig. 22.1.20 (12 ad sab.); Ulp. Dig. 13.5.11.1 (27 ad ed.), where illegal interest (usuras quae non 
debebantur) does not exempt from repayment of the principal; Pestman (1971); Bagnall (1977) 94, who 
says that the absolute avoidance of any statement that one party is paying so much interest is owed to 
the fact that the rate being charged was illegal in a loan of money.
Plu. De vitando aere alieno, Moralia 829D. For papyrological evidence, see Roth (1970) 21-5, 96-7; 
Pestman (1971); Bagnall (1977) 92-5.
Paul. Dig. 12.1.2.1 (28 ad ed.); Kaser (1971) 530-1.
- 214 - 
legal precedence.
 Interest on commodatum was less straightforward, as this was a loan 
for use, where the very same thing lent had to be returned. Under these conditions, 
accepting remuneration would have rendered the transaction a locatio conductio rather 
than a loan.
 However, where a commodatum produced causa, i.e. an outcome, a 
borrower could be obliged to render more than was initially given in commodatum.
This referred first of all to natural produce, as in the case of fructus,
 or fetus;
reasserting once more the fundamentally agricultural nature of the economy. Causa could 
also refer to profits collected due to an unauthorised use of the commodatum.
 Thus, 
although interest could not be charged on money given in commodatum, any interest 
gained through an unauthorised use of that money had to be rendered back together with 
the commodatum itself. However, in such a case interest was not raised on the 
commodatum per se, but was more of a penalty aimed at preventing malpractice of 
commodatum.
 The case of depositum is uniquely complex, and is discussed at length in 
the next chapter. 
Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.4 (31 ad ed.), who, when considering a case of a borrower of mutua pecunia who 
happened also to be employed by his creditor under a mandate, ruled that unless interest was separately 
stipulated for the borrower could not be sued for interest on the ground of the mandate; Paul. Dig. 
12.1.40 (3 quaest.), who reports a case brought before Papinian where mutua numerata and interest were 
separately agreed and stipulated for, though the agreement cited in this excerpt mentions neither usura 
nor faenus, but talks of a penalty to be paid in the case of default (poenae nomine), an obligation which 
the distinguished jurist names obligatio usurarum (on penalising interest see discussion on pp. 218-21 
below); 45.1.126.2 (3 quaest.), who presents similar wording; Buckland (1963) 463-5; Kaser (1971) 497, 
531; Zimmermann (1996) 154-6; Klami (1986) 98, who claims that interest-free mutuum was so rare that 
it was treated as depositum; contra Pestman (1971), who claims that many loans which appear as interest-
free had in fact included interest, concealed within the sum stated as principal; Bagnall (1977).
Pompon. Dig. 46.2.7 (24 ad sab.); Zimmermann (1996) 154-6.
Ulp. Dig. 13.6.5.12 (28 ad ed.); Just. Inst. 3.14.2; Fiori (1999) 276-81; and, see comment on gratis 
habitare on Ch. 5, pp. 142-3, above.
Buckland (1963) 471-2; Kaser (1971) 533-4.   
Paul. Dig. 22.1.38.10 (6 ad plaut.). On fructus and usura, see pp. 227f., below.
Ulp. Dig. 13.6.5.9 (28 ad ed.), here, a mare bearing a foal.
Pompon. Dig. 13.6.13.1 (11 ad sab.), who mentions working animals given in commodatum to be tried 
out before being hired. 
 On penalising interest, see pp. 218-21, below. 
- 215 - 
Interest could also be agreed upon without being stipulated for via a pactum 
adiectum, an additional agreement. A rescript of Severus and Caracalla mentions two 
possible types of interest, one arising from a stipulation, hence enforceable through a 
legal action (debita), the other not legally enforceable (indebita), as, for example, when 
arising from a pact (ex pacto naturaliter).
 In both cases interest was agreed upon; but 
in the latter the parties apparently neglected to take precautions which would enable them 
to claim interest in court via legal action.
 Interest agreed in a mere pact (nudum 
pactum) gradually had received the status of obligatio naturalis, meaning that once paid 
it could not be reclaimed as unjustifiably paid.
 Yet, no legal action was available to a 
lender against a debtor who was in default in paying interest agreed upon in a pactum.  
This rule had exceptions. The strictness of law was eased to facilitate creditors in 
collecting interest agreed upon in a supplementary pact in loans advanced by 
municipalities (civitates),
 and in maritime loans (faenus nauticum).
 In the former 
case, extending legal aid provided to municipalities reduced the risks to which public 
funds were exposed; so that even where municipal officials neglected to secure interest 
payment via a stipulation, the civitasin the sense of both the community, and the 
municipal ruling authoritywould not suffer loss.
 In the latter case, it was the 
appreciation of the risks involved in seafaring which furnished both the legitimacy of 
Ulp. Dig. 46.3.5.2 (43 ad sab.). Perhaps Ulpian is referring here to the same ruling preserved in CJ 
4.32.3 (Severus and Caracalla, 200).
Kaser (1971) 497-8; Litewski (1975) 304-5.
Buckland (1963) 464-5, 549, 552-3; Kaser (1971) 480-1, 496-8; Zimmermann (1996) 7-10. This 
received imperial recognition under the Severi; CJ 4.32.3 (Severus and Caracalla, 200).
Paul. Dig. 22.1.30 (1 regul.). On loans advanced by municipalities, see Sirks (1998). 
Paul. Dig. 22.2.7 (3 ad ed.); Kaser (1971) 498, n. 37 (and 532-3, on faenus nauticum in general).
It is likely that the municipalities gained priority over other creditors in recovering debts (protopraxia); 
Plin. Ep. 10.108; and the Roman fiscus had priority over any civitas; Paul. Sent. 5.12.10; Marcian. Dig. 
50.1.10 (delat.); Lintott (1993) 150-1, with further reference in nn. 94-5. 
- 216 - 
high interest rates,
 and the easing of the legal procedures required for collecting it. 
Extending legal aid provided to (private) creditors created more favourable conditions for 
them to have collected profits, thereby encouraging investment in maritime trade.
These two exceptions, as far as I am aware, date long before the period here under 
investigation; towards its end a third exception was added. A constitutio of Alexander 
Severus, dated to the start of his reign (223), widened the legal enforceability of interest 
contracted via a mere pact:  
Frumenti vel hordei mutuo dati accessio etiam ex nudo pacto praestanda 
Since the relative abundance of imperial rescripts preserved from Alexanders 
reign tends to record or choose between standard legal opinions,
 probably this 
constitutio was not revolutionary. That is, it did not introduce an entirely new practice; 
rather, it re-affirmed an already existing custom, where courts tended to accept interest 
contracted via pacts as legally enforceable. Legalising such a custom would have eased 
juridical procedures, and fits well with both the prominence of jurists in Alexanders 
court,
 and the general inclination of his administration to strive for stability.
 On which see Ch. 6, pp. 184-5, above. 
 Such government intervention via legislation should be seen as connected with Roman imperial efforts 
for securing food supply. Easing legal procedures to favour creditors encouraged lenders to invest in 
seafaring, hypothetically enlarging the supply of maritime loans. This, in turn, had the potential of 
creating more favourable conditions for traders and ship-owners; thereby increasing the number of people 
who were willingand could affordto take on state contracts for maritime transfer of food supplies, 
especially to the city of Rome; on which, see Sirks (1991). 
CJ 4.32.11 (Alex. Sev., 223). 
 Honor (1979) 54-5. 
The constitutio might even had been an initiative of Ulpian acting as praetorian prefect (222-223), 
perhaps not yet murdered by the troops; Zos. 1.11.2-3; Zonar. 12.15.4-6; a murder which occurred before 
May/June 224; P.Oxy. XXXI 2565 (Alexandria, 224); Honor (1979) 56. On Alexander Severus reign as 
reflected in the HA Al. Sev., see Bertrand-Dagenbach (1990), and pp. 125-38, on his reign in sources 
other than the HA.
De Blois (2006); Bertrand-Dagenbach (1990) 165-77. 
- 217 - 
Alexanders constitutio extended legal aid to creditors in collecting profits on their 
investment, though not any type of investment. Only mutuum is referred to, and only such 
as concerned corn; money-lending is excluded. Had the intention been to facilitate profit 
collection in general, one would expect the constitutio not to have been restricted to 
agricultural consumables.
 This restriction makes the regulation beneficial only to 
creditors advancing loans of corn, i.e. creditors whose wealth rested in landed-property. 
By discounting monetary loans the constitutio not only reaffirms the centrality of 
agriculture in Roman economic activity, it also indicates that imperial intervention to 
ease legal procedures for economic actors was more easily advanced when it served 
imperial interests.
 The need to aid creditors in collecting interest on financial 
investments was perhaps of a lesser significance from an imperial perspective; either 
because it was not perceived as an essential activity which required imperial protection, 
or since it did not represent a considerable source of imperial revenue.  
Whatever procedure was used for agreeing upon interest, its payment had to be 
delivered. Ideally, from the lenders point of view, principal plus interest would be paid 
together in full and at the time due. It could be agreed in advance that a loan would be 
repaid in several installments, in which case payments would first account for the 
interest.
 When the sum owed was only partially repaid, payments received first 
Frumenti vel hordei, literally wheat or barley. Buckland (1963) 549, understands frumenti vel hordei 
mutuo dati as referring to loans of fungibles other than money.
As in seeing to the supply of foods to Rome; Sirks (1991) esp. 40-4, 51-3, 595-7. 
Paul. Dig. 12.1.40 (3 quaest.); 22.1.12 (4 respon.); Pompon. Dig. 13.7.8.3 (35 ad sab.); Mod. Dig. 
22.1.41.1 (3 respon.), who considered the possibility that the initial agreement specified whether or not 
the debtor was permitted to repay the loan in instalments. However, P.Harr. I 66 (unknown origin, 155), 
records a receipt for repaying the interest and a portion of the principal. 
- 218 - 
accounted for the interest and only afterwards could the principal be reduced.
 Where 
disputes arose, it was left to a judge to decide how much of the payment accounted for 
the interest and how much was still left to be paid of the principal.
 Where it was ruled 
that interest was not due, payments already received were to be accounted towards the 
principal.
 Where interest was collected above the legal rate (and the case was brought 
before a judge), the extra sums paid were to be credited against the principal.
 After the 
principal was fully repaid, interest could no longer be claimed.
 In any case, it seems to 
have been the obligation of the plaintiff and not of the court to ensure that interest was 
indeed paid.
7.5. Other Usages of the Roman Instrument of Interest 
Besides being the fee charged on a loan, Roman interest also operated as a 
penalty, imposed due to a default in repayment, or in completing some other 
comitment.
 It could be charged due to a delay in all sorts of obligations: in repaying a 
loan,
 paying rent,
 completing a sale,
 returning money entrusted for safe keeping 
or fideicommissa,
 depositing money,
 or fulfilling any other obligation.
 It could 
Ulp. Dig. 36.4.5.21 (52 ad ed.); 46.3.5.2; 3 (43 ad sab.). This was so also when a surety was sold to 
cover a debt; Paul. Dig. 46.1.68.1 (3 decret.).
Afric. Dig. 13.4.8 (3 quaest.), where the judge also had to consider where the payment was received, if it 
differed from what originally was stipulated.
Ulp. Dig. 12.6.26.pr. (26 ad ed.); Scaev. Dig. 46.3.102.1 (5 respon.).
Ulp. Dig. 12.6.26.pr. (26 ad ed.); Paul. Sent. 2.14.2; SB XX 14401 (Arsinoite Nome, 147).
Herm. Dig. 19.1.49.1 (2 iur. epit.), writing after the period here under investigation.
Papin. Dig. 22.1.1.2 (2 quaest.).
Billeter (1898) 254-60; Visky (1983) 74-85.
 Paul. Dig. 22.1.11.pr. (25 quaest.); 31.87.1 (14 respon.); Pompon. Dig. 45.1.90 (3 ex plaut.).
Paul. Dig. 19.2.54.pr. (5 respon.); Herm. Dig. 39.4.10.1 (5 epit.), writing after the period here under 
investigation.
Ulp. Dig. 19.1.13.20 (32 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 19.1.47 (6 respon.).
Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.3 (31 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 31.87.1 (14 respon.); Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.); 31.78.2 
(9 respon.); 34.1.10.1 (9 respon.).
- 219 - 
have been imposed on the initial takers of the obligation or on their guarantors;
Papinian says that even the res publica should be charged with interest when in default of 
executing a fideicommissum.
 In all of these cases interest was in fact a fine on arrears; 
and also a form of compensation for any offence or loss the entitled party may have 
suffered due to the delay.
 Where interest was initially agreed upon at a rate lower than 
the legal maximum, parties could agree in advance that in the case of a default a higher 
rate would be due.
 Interest on arrears could be agreed upon in a clause in the original 
contract,
 via either a pactum,
 or a stipulatio,
 or be set by a judge after the default 
occurred and a claim was brought before a court.
 Even where contracts did not 
explicitly state interest on arrears, this seems to have been common practice, certainly in 
Paul. Dig. 13.7.7 (2 sent.); Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.10 (35 ad ed.).
Scaev. Dig. 32.35.pr. (17 dig.); Ulp. Dig. 35.1.92 (5 fideicom.); Paul. Dig. 22.1.17.5 (1 de usur.), when 
in default in paying the fiscus.
 Paul. Dig. 19.2.54.pr. (5 respon.).
Papin. Dig. 31.78.2 (9 respon.); Paul. Dig. 22.1.17.5 (1 de usur.). However, default in giving a promised 
donation did not carry a penalising interest; Mod. Dig. 39.5.22 (8 diff.). Though this did not apply to 
donations given for the purpose of constructing public work; Ulp. Dig. 50.12.1.pr. (off. curat. rei pub.).
 The second-century jurist Pomponius says so explicitly, Pompon. Dig. 17.2.60.pr. (13 ad sab.). Visky 
(1983) 67-77, esp. 67-9, 76-7, who argues that interest was used as both a penalty (Konventionalstrafe) 
and a payment due to arrears (Verzugszinsen), suggesting that these were separate legal institutions 
(Rechtsinstitutionen), interchangeable in Roman law since the mid-second century. Yet, I see no reason 
why the twoKonventionalstrafe and Verzugszinsenshould be treated as separate institutions; rather, 
the latter is a sub-category of the former.
Papin. Dig. 20.1.1.3 (11 respon.); 22.1.9.1 (11 respon.). This, however, was not to surpass the legal 
maximum; Ulp. (Papin.) Dig. 19.1.13.26 (32 ad ed.); Mod. Dig. 22.1.44 (10 pandec.); Papin. Dig. 
22.1.9.pr. (11 respon.). In maritime loans, in addition to the already high interest rate, a penalty-clause 
for a delay in repayment could be added; Ulp. Dig. 22.2.8 (77 ad ed.); Labeo Dig. 22.2.9 (5 pith. a paul. 
epit.); Afric. Dig. 44.7.23 (7 quaest.). 
Afric. Dig. 13.5.24 (1 respon.); Paul. Dig. 12.1.40 (3 quaest.); 19.1.47 (6 respon.); 22.1.17.pr. (1 de 
usur.); 45.1.126.2 (3 quaest.), where the contract states not the rate of interest, but the sum to be paid by 
way of interest.
Papin. Dig. 20.1.1.3 (11 respon.).
Pompon. Dig. 45.1.90 (3 ex plaut.); Paul. Dig. 22.1.12 (4 respon.), who refers to a stipulation for paying 
a higher rate in the case of a delay; 22.1.17.pr. (1 de usur.), who states that an increased penalising 
interest is due only from the date of the delay.
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.); Paul. Dig. 19.2.54.pr. (5 respon.), who says that interest payments could 
arise from a decision of a judge, rather than from an obligation. 
- 220 - 
the early third century.
 Lastly, interest could also be demanded retrospectively, starting 
from the date of the default.
Interest was not only a penalty in the case of a delay or non-fulfilment of an 
obligation; it was also used as a disciplinary punishment.
 For example, giving a false 
declaration concerning ones wealth was punished with a heavy interest (graviores 
usuras) on all possessions exceeding the false sum declared.
 A similar rule applied to 
tutors who denied having the maintenance of their wards; they could be charged by the 
praetor so that a very heavy interest is paid on whatever is shown to be in their 
possession.
 In these cases, interest is charged not because of a delay, but rather as a 
punishment for malpractice. Together with providing compensation to the entitled party, 
it acted as a measure for preventing potential misconduct, and as an assurance for the 
fulfilment of commitments.
 As such, it tended to be set at the highest legal rate.
Tryphoninus, writing under Severus and Caracalla, distinguished between penalising 
interest due to malpractice, such as an unauthorised use of someone elses money, and 
that due on account of a delay in repaying a debt; the former was at the highest legal rate, 
whilst the latter was not necessarily so;
 perhaps because in the former case the 
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.); Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.3 (31 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 19.1.47 (6 respon.); 
19.2.54.pr. (5 respon.); 22.1.11.pr. (25 quaest.); Marcian. Dig. 22.1.32.2 (4 regul.).
As decreed by Marcus Aurelius; Paul. Dig. 22.1.17.pr. (1 de usur.).
 This duality, i.e. interest being both a fine and a punishment, is attested also for the Latin word poena, 
used in Roman legal texts as both a pecuniary penalty (i.e. a fine), and punishment in general; Visky 
(1983) 70-1.
 Ulp. Dig. 27.2.3.4 (1 de omn. trib.).
Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.8 (35 ad ed.): ut quidquid constiterit penes eos esse, eius gravissima usura pendatur; 
similarly, 26.7.7.10 (35 ad ed.). Interest could be accounted for also when penalising ill-behaved 
guardians; e.g. Ulp. Dig. 27.5.1.8 (36 ad ed.), though here interest probably was no penalty or 
punishment, but part of the property to be returned to the ward.
 Visky (1983) 70-72, who regards the Romans blurred distinction between punishment and fine; and 
108-9, 120-1, on the fifty per cent  used as a deterring punishment.
Tryph. Dig. 3.5.37(38) (2 disput.); CJ 7.54.1 (Caracalla); Billeter (1898) 255-8, 281-3.
Tryph. Dig. 3.5.37(38) (2 disput.).
- 221 - 
penalising interest was also to serve as punishment for immoral behavior. A judgment to 
pay interest had to specify its rate,
 and this was often left to the decision of a judge,
setting it at either the common rate or the maximum legal rate, according to the 
particulars of the case.
 However, in exceptional circumstances, where a default or 
malpractice inflicted greater losses on the plaintiff, a judge could rule for a compensating 
interest at a rate higher than the legal maximum.
A different use of the instrument of interest was its employment in guaranteeing a 
permanent stream of future payments, to either individuals or communities.
 This had 
been achieved through legacies and within the framework of legal formats such as 
donatio (donation), dotatio (endowment), and above all fideicommissum.
 Roman 
testators who wished to guarantee the maintenance of their offspring, or that of other 
dependents, could assign part of their legacy for this purpose.
 This share was then 
Ulp. Dig. 42.1.59.2 (4 de omn. trib.). This rule follows similar logic as the obligation to set a specific 
price for conducting a sale or for making any other obligation; Ulp. Dig. 18.1.7.1 (28 ad sab.); Gai. Dig. 
18.1.35.5 (10 ad ed. prov.).
Ulp. Dig. 30.39.1 (21 ad sab.).
Billeter (1898) 281-8.
Ulp. Dig. 13.4.2.8 (27 ad ed.), who, when discussing the actio utilis provided for obligations that were to 
be given in a fixed place, gives several possible cases where a judge might inflict interest at a rate higher 
than the legal maximum, including pecunia traiecticia, which was anyway subject to higher rates, and a 
case where on account of a default pledges given to the fiscus were cheaply sold. Another punitive 
interest at a rate higher than twelve per cent was the above-mentioned fifty per cent , commonly 
used in the east as a form of penalty; Billeter (1898) 258-66, 284-6; Vinsky (1983) 108-120.
Mrozek (2001) 70-71, who argues that a significant change in the use of Roman interest occurred at the 
turn of the second century CE; as he puts it: Mit der Entwicklung des Stiftungssystems  trat das 
Positive an den Zinsen deutlicher in den Vordergrung, zumal ein groer Teil der Stiftungen und 
besonders die Alimentarstiftungen auf Wohlfahrt bedacht waren. On perpetual management of collective 
monetary sums of communities, especially kalendaria, i.e. public capital loaned out at interest, see Sirks 
(1998). On the kalendarii, see also Giliberti (1984), non vidi; (1999). 
On fideicommissum, see Johnston (1988); Manthe (1989), who focuses on procedure and the senatus 
consultum Pegasianum passed under Vespesian (69-79); Giodice-Sabbatelli (1993), on fideicommissa in 
the first century CE.
This could have been in the form of either real-estate or money; Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.5 (5 de omn. trib.); or, 
be given for the purpose of housing, clothing, or feeding; Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.1 (5 de omn. trib.). Digest 34.1 
(De alimentis vel cibariis legatis), and all of Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8 (5 de omn. trib.), are dedicated to this topic.
- 222 - 
treated as a sort of a trust,
 the yields from which were allocated to provide for 
subsistence allowance to the said dependants.
 Where money was legated for such a 
purpose,
 either as a fideicommissum,
 or as a deposit later to be returned,
 it was the 
instrument of interest which created the yield to fund the allowance or stipend.
principal was given with instructions that the interest received on it would provide for the 
needs of foster-children (alumni),
 freedmen,
 or slaves.
 There are several examples 
in the Digest where an interest, which was to be received on a monetary sum specified in 
coins,
 precious metal,
 or just labelled pecunia,
 is specifically allocated for the 
purpose of supplying daily, monthly, or annual aliments.
 In such cases interest is 
indicated by the word usura;
 less explicitly by a mention of an increase of the sum 
from which aliments were to be paid (ex incremento);
 or inferred from the phrase 
For a comparison of the Roman fideicommissum with the English term trust, see Johnston (1988) 1-2, 
283-8. A testator may regard fideicommissum as a trust in the sense that an heir or a legatee are entrusted 
to execute the testators wishes; yet, this so-called trust did not come into existence until the death of 
the testator.
These could be minors or adults; Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.10 (5 de omn. trib.). The stipends could be given for 
life or for a designated period of time; Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.3-4 (5 de omn. trib.). Any alteration of the sums 
in question required the interference of the praetor; Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.pr. (5 de omn. trib.).
 Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.4 (5 de omn. trib.); Scaev. Dig. 34.1.13.pr. (4 respon.). 
Scaev. Dig. 34.1.13.pr. (4 respon.); 34.1.15.pr. (17 dig.); and this practice is evident also in an imperial 
rescript of Antoninus Pius; Ulp. Dig. 34.1.3 (2 off. cons.). On fideicommissum as a tool to guarantee the 
exercise of a testators will, see Johnston (1988).
Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.4 (5 de omn. trib.), where the principal was to be returned at the time of the death of the 
dependent. On deposits see Ch. 8, below.
Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.4 (5 de omn. trib.), who explicitly explains that this was the role of interest.
Papin. Dig. 34.1.9.pr. (8 respon.); Scaev. Dig. 33.1.21.4 (22 dig.); 34.1.15.pr. (17 dig.); 34.4.30.pr. (20 
dig.).
 Ulp. Dig. 34.1.3 (2 off. cons.); Papin. Dig. 34.1.8 (7 respon.); Scaev. Dig. 34.1.13.pr. (4 respon.); 
34.1.16.2 (18 dig.).
Papin. Dig. 34.1.10.1 (9 respon.), in this case the slave was later to be manumitted; Fro. Amic. I.14; ILS 
2927; ILS 8978.
Scaev. Dig. 34.1.13.pr. (4 respon.), three hundred aurei; Papin. Dig. 34.1.9.pr. (8 respon.), ten aurei.
Scaev. Dig. 34.4.30.pr. (20 dig.), twenty pounds of gold.
Scaev. Dig. 33.1.21.4 (22 dig.).
Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.3 (5 de omn. trib.).
 Ulp. Dig. 34.1.3 (2 off. cons.); Scaev. Dig. 34.1.13.pr. (4 respon.).
Papin. Dig. 34.1.9.pr. (8 respon.). Both Scott (1932), and Watson (1985), translate this expression to 
mean interest.
- 223 - 
pecuniae sortem, sors here in the meaning of principal as opposed to interest.
rate of interest was usually fixed by the testator,
 did not exceed the legal maximum and 
was often set at the common interest rate.
 Thus, the instrument of interest was 
regularly used to produce a perpetual stream of income to support dependants.  
Already in the first century we find individuals bequeathing money or income-
bearing property also to communities,
 with the aim that it would be used for specified 
public purposes;
 and this practice continued throughout the second and third 
centuries.
 The concern of benefactors was that the operations for which they had 
allocated contributions would linger on after their life-time. This concern gave rise to all 
sorts of expedients, the majority of which involved landed property, in the hope of 
preventing malpractice and securing the aim intended by the contributors.
 Where 
monetary sums were given to municipalities, it was with the aim that the money would be 
 Papin. Dig. 34.1.8 (7 respon.): pecuniae sortem alimentis libertorum destinatam. Watson (1985) 
translated this as capital money destined for the provision of aliment for freedmen. Since a similar 
meaning would have been achieved by the simpler pecuniam destinatam, the use of the word sors here 
seems intentional and probably indicates that this should be read as a designated principal sum of 
money, on which interest could be collected.
Five per cent interest rate (usuras quincunces): Scaev. Dig. 34.1.15.pr. (17 dig.); 16.2 (18 dig.); six per 
cent (usuras semisses): 34.4.30.pr. (20 dig.); three per cent (usuras quadrantes): 33.1.21.4 (22 dig.). 
Also, Papin. Dig. 34.1.9.pr. (8 respon.), who mentions an aliment-interest without indicating a rate. 
Ulp. Dig. 33.1.3.6 (24 ad ed.).
On the capacity of municipalities to administer such contributions, see Johnston (1985), esp. 116-7, who 
argues that the decision whether or not to accept contributions was not driven by economic rationalism, 
rather criteria of appropriateness were given higher weight than those of affordability; Sirks (1998).
Plin. Ep. 10.75.2; Papin. Dig. 31.77.33 (8 respon.);
Mod. Dig. 33.2.16 (9 respon.); Scaev. Dig. 33.2.17 
(3 respon.), on which see Johnston (1985) 119-20. For cases where the purpose was not indicated, see 
Johnston (1985) 105-6.
E.g. CIL XIV 2795 (Gabii, 140); P.Oxy. IV 705 (Oxyrhynchos, 200/2), which records two private 
endowments made by Aurelius Horion, a wealthy landowner in the Oxyrhynchite Nome, one of ten 
thousand Attic drachmae for the athletic contests at Oxyrhynchos, another of a sum of money for the 
purchase of land, the income from which should be devoted to relieving the burden of liturgies in certain 
villages in the nome. For both foundations the consent of the Emperor was necessary; Johnson (1936) 
695-6, n. 426. Also, see Duncan-Jones (1982) 80-1, 132-47; Mrozek (2001) 72-90, 98-105.
E.g. Plin. Ep. 7.18.2; on which, see Johnston (1985) 117-8; Woolf (1990) 209. Also, see Johnston 
(1985), who discusses more generally the tension between the wishes of benefactors and those of 
municipalities; (1988) 117-54, on fideicommissa and other measures (i.e. codicils) applied in the face of 
intestacy.
- 224 - 
lent out and the interest received on it (ex usuris) would finance public celebrations,
the construction and maintenance of public buildings.
 Such public benefactions were 
usually cast in the form of legacies sub modo,
 or fideicommissa,
 and could acquire 
permanent character if formulated as perpetual fideicommissa.
Perhaps the most celebrated, as well as most expensive,
 type of such public 
foundations, were the alimenta, municipally administered alimentary schemes intended to 
support Roman children and youth.
 This institution takes its template from private 
allowance schemes and applies it in the public sphere. From the second half of the first 
century CE wealthy individuals are attested to have legated funds to communities in Italy 
in order that the interest received on them would finance public child allowance.
the turn of that century the emperor, too, set up alimenta foundations;
 financing from 
Scaev. Dig. 33.1.21.3 (22 dig.); on which, see Johnston (1985) 118-9; Marcian. Dig. 33.1.24 (8 inst.); 
Mod. Dig. 33.1.6 (11 respon.); 50.12.10 (1 respon.), where a matron legated money to her municipality 
so that the interest received on it would pay for the celebration of public games; AE 1979, 147; CIL XI 
5745; CIL XIII 4132 (Trier, 198); on which, see Johnston (1985) 116; CIL XIV 2827 (Zagarolo); on 
which, see Mrozek (2001) 45.  
CIL V 2864 (Patavium), on the date of which see Liu (2007); CIL X 3851. For maintenance of baths: 
Scaev. Dig. 32.35.3 (17 dig.); CIL XI 720 (Bologna). For paving public roads: Cels. Dig. 31.30 (37 dig.). 
For construction of an aqueduct: Paul. Dig. 22.6.9.5 (de iur. et fac. Ignor.). Also, see Johnston (1985) 
106; Mrozek (2001) 46.
Johnston (1985) 118-21.
Papin. Dig. 31.77.33 (8 respon.). On fideicommissa hereditatis, see Johnston (1985); (1988) 245-8, for 
public purposes.
On perpetual fideicommissa, see Johnston (1988) 6-7, 76-116. Marcian. Dig. 33.1.24 (8 inst.), who cites 
an imperial rescript of Severus and Caracalla, where a legacy dedicated to games is referred to as 
perpetuam pensitationem.
Duncan-Jones (1982) 136-7.
 Alimenta are known largely from epigraphic evidence and are attested in about fifty Italian towns; Eck 
(1979) 146-89; Duncan-Jones (1982) 337-340. On imperially funded alimenta, see Kubitschek (1894); 
Veyne (1965); Duncan-Jones (1982) 132-6, 289-319, 333-46; De Neeve (1984) 167-73, 224-30, who 
analyses two of the most detailed alimeta schemes, from Ligures Baebiani and Veleia (CIL IX 1455, and 
XI 1147, respectively), as evidence for fragmentation of land ownership in Italy in the second century; 
Patterson (1987); Woolf (1990); Jongman (2002). 
CIL X 5056 (Atina Latii), a legacy providing aliments in both kind and cash; CIL X 1602 (Florentina); 
Mrozek (1973); Mrozek (1988) 155-6; Woolf (1990) 208-9; Mrozek (2001) 46.
 Perhaps already under Nerva (96-98); Epi. de Caes. 12.4; also, see Eck (1979) 146-56; Duncan-Jones 
(1982) 291-3. Certainly under Trajan (98-117); Dio 68.5.4; HA Had. 7.8; HA Pert. 9.3; CIL IX 1455 
(Ligures Baebiani); CIL XI 1147 (Veleia); CIL VI 1492 (Ferentinum Latii, found in Rome); CIL IX 5825 
- 225 - 
his private fortune loans given to local landowners against landed securities, providing 
that the interest received on it was paid to municipalities, so that it would finance 
monthly child allowance.
 Throughout the second and third centuries alimenta schemes 
were funded by emperors, as well as though the generosity of private individuals, mainly 
in Italy, but also outside it.
 Questions regarding the identity and social status of 
donators and recipients, as well as the incentives in initiating alimenta, are beyond the 
scope of the present discussion.
 What is important here is the financial apparatus which 
enabled alimenta schemes;
 namely, the use of interest as a financial tool, which 
produced a continuous stream of revenue out of a one-off contribution, without 
diminishing the original amount devoted to this purpose. 
Three points ought to be made. First, as pointed out by Greg Woolf, alimenta 
were first of all, as their name shows, gifts of food, albeit commuted into cash.
phenomenon, of substituting gifts or payments of consumable goods, with those of 
money, is detectable also in other cases, as for example in sportulae, municipal 
(Auximum); CIL X 6310 (Tarracina); Eck (1979) 156-66, who discusses Trajans contribution to 
regulating alimenta. For Trajans coins which refer to alimenta, see BMCRE III 82, and pp. xxviii, lii; 
Woolf (1990) 223-5, who also refers to other figurative media for representing alimenta and other 
benefactions.  
 The practical operation of alimenta are described in the famous bronze tablets from Ligures Baebiani 
and Veleia; CIL IX 1455; XI 1147, respectively. According to the latter, the monthly allowance to boys 
was 16 HS, to girls and illegitimate boys 12 HS, and to illegitimate girls 10 HS. Also, see Eck (1979) 
147-9, 157-65; Duncan-Jones (1982) 333-8, 341-7; De Neeve (1984) 224-30. 
 In Italy, Plin. Ep. 7.18.1-3; CIL X 6328 (Tarracina); CIL XIV 4450 (Ostia, dated to the Antonines). 
Outside Italy, IGRR III 800-3 (Sillyon); CIL II 1174 (Hispalis); CIL VIII 980 (Kurba); CIL VIII 1641 
(Sicca); CIL VIII 22904 (Leptis Minor); Mrozek (1973); (1988); Duncan-Jones (1982) 340-1; De Neeve 
(1984) 224-30; Woolf (1990) 208-9. 
 For the social standing of some of the landowners mentioned in CIL IX 1455, and XI 1147, see De 
Neeve (1984) 224-30. In support of the view that imperially funded alimenta were initiated to fight rural 
poverty in Italy, depopulation, or a decrease in military recruitments, see Eck (1979) 177-82; Duncan-
Jones (1982) 306; Patterson (1987) 129-33; Woolf (1990) 197-200, who offers a summary of the debate. 
Alternatively, Woolf (1990), who stresses the role of alimenta in supporting the emperors status as a 
patron and benefactor.  
On imperial administration monitoring alimenta, see Eck (1979) 146-89, esp. 166-81.
Woolf (1990) 212. Aliments were also given in kind; Ulp. Dig. 2.15.8.24 (5 de omn. trib.). Some 
alimenta provided recipients with both cash and food; CIL X 5056 (Atina Latii).
- 226 - 
distributions by wealthy individuals.
 Second, at least for imperially funded alimenta, 
the funds allocated for this purpose were usually lent out against landed property. Thus, 
the basis of wealth against which loans were given, and which secured the whole 
operation of alimenta, was an agricultural one: land.
 Third, there is the issue of interest 
rates. In many alimenta schemes interest was collected at a rate of six or five per cent,
sometimes even lower;
 but there were certainly alimenta with twelve per cent 
interest,
 and at least one case is attested of a fifteen per cent alimenta interest rate.
Thus, although alimenta interest rates had usually operated within the institutional 
framework of the maximum legal rate and tended towards lower, common rates, interest 
was determined by neither law, nor market-oriented demand-and-supply forces. What 
presumably affected alimenta interest rates most was the combination of (1) the amount 
of the principal allocated for the alimenta, (2) the number of recipients at any given time, 
and (3) the cost of living. The interest received on the principal had to produce funds in a 
sufficient amount to provide for allowance to all the recipients.
 What is more, taking 
into account the patronage motive generating alimenta schemes, it seems reasonable to 
assume that what mattered most was that the sums given to each individual would not 
Sportulae, once given in the form of food contributions, later substituted by money-payments; Duncan-
Jones (1982) 137-44; Woolf (1990) 202-15.
On the value of agricultural land in Italy, see De Neeve (1985). 
E.g. CIL XI 1147 (Veleia); Billeter (1898) 187-193; Duncan-Jones (1982) 133-7.
E.g. CIL IX 1455 (Ligures Baebiani), with probably only two and a half per cent; Billeter (1898) 189-
CIL X 6328 (Tarracina); Billeter (1898) 223-4.
CIL V 5134 (Bergomum, second or third century); Billeter (1898) 227.
This in private alimenta; e.g. Ulp. Dig. 34.1.3 (2 off. cons.), who states that in order to prevent freedmen 
from having to apply for small measures of aliment from individual heirs, either the recipients be 
distributed between heirs, or all heirs pay one of them who would be responsible for distributing the 
aliment to all freedmen. What mattered was finding a way in which all heirs pay equally, yet the 
recipients receive reasonable amounts.
- 227 - 
only be sufficient, but also a mark of status.
 This binds alimenta to the real economy, 
not only in terms of the cost of necessities, but also in those of standards of living. 
Thus, monetary sums were legated or donated, to either individuals or 
communities, for either private or public purposes, to provide for allowances or to 
finance public operations. All these activities were achieved thanks to the instrument of 
interest, a financial tool which allowed the creation of a continuous stream of revenue out 
of a single contribution. In all of these cases interest was used not so much for the sake of 
creating a profit, as for the purpose of financing other, long-lasting undertakings.
this respect interest had allowed for a leverage mechanism, while the activities which it 
financed, as well as the apparatus which secured it, were often underpinned in 
agricultural activity.   
7.6. Profit, Wealth, and the Complexity of Roman Interest 
How deeply rooted the notion of interest was in the conceptual world of 
agriculture, is demonstrated by its relation to the notion of fructus, an output or profit 
of any kind which arises naturally.
 The term fructus originated in a rustic world 
signifying the outcome of natural reproduction.
 During the high empire jurists 
customarily used it to indicate profit in general.
 The two terms, fructus and usurathe 
former in essence an agricultural yield, the latter a financial oneare frequently 
Woolf (1990) 220.
With some imperial alimenta schemes continuing for decades; e.g. HA Pertinax 9.3, where Pertinax 
(193) is said to have paid the arrears accumulated under Commodus reign (180-192) of an alimenta 
scheme initiated by Trajan (98-117).
On repaying monetary loans with agricultural goods, see discussion on Sale on Delivery in Ch. 6, pp. 
185-6, above.
On ususfructus, see Kaser (1971) 447-454, esp. 447-9, on its origin in a rustic society.
Ulp. Dig. 22.1.34 (15 ad ed.), who considers usura to be a yield in the same way that fructus, or any 
other revenue (obuentio), is; Mrozek (2001) 95-6.
- 228 - 
mentioned together,
 often explicitly stating that the same rule applied to both.
early third-century jurist Aelius Marcianus, writing under Caracalla and perhaps also 
under Alexander Severus, stated that fructus could substitute for usura through either 
direct consumption or an indirect one, for example, via rent payment.
 This is quite the 
opposite process to what we have seen in alimenta and sportulae, where monetary 
outflows had replaced payments in kind intended for consumption. Papyri give evidence 
as to how this was achieved in practice, i.e. how monetary payments due on account of 
interest could have been replaced by the right to enjoy fructus:
 agricultural yield could 
be used to secure interest payments on a monetary loan;
 alternatively, it could be 
agreed to begin with that interest on a monetary loan would be paid in kind, either by 
giving the right to collect the yield from assets belonging to the borrower,
 or rendering 
the right of residence in the property of the borrower.
 Afric. Dig. 46.6.10 (3 quaest.); Gai. Dig. 35.2.73.4 (18 ad ed. prov.); Ulp. Dig. 30.39.1 (21 ad sab.); 
40.5.24.14 (5 fideicom.); Papin. Dig. 22.1.3.2 (20 quaest.); 36.1.60.5 (9 respon.); Paul. Dig. 22.1.15 (16 
respon.); 16.1 (1 decret.). 
Gai. Dig. 35.2.73.4 (18 ad ed. prov.); Marcel. Dig. 36.1.46.1 (15 dig.); Ulp. Dig. 5.3.20.12 (15 ad ed.); 
24.1.17.pr. (32 ad sab.); 36.3.1.13 (79 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 12.1.40 (3 quaest.); 46.1.59 (4 respon.).
Marcian. Dig. 20.1.11.1 (ad form. hypothec.).
Taking into account that the pre-Caracallan papyri cited in the three notes below do not preserve 
agreements conducted under Roman law, but such which were conducted in accord with Hellenised 
Egyptian law; nevertheless, what these papyri certainly do preserve is Roman practice, in the sense of the 
commercial practice acceptable under Roman rule.
E.g. SB XIV 12017 (Tebtunis, 156), which records a loan () of the principal sum () of 
176 drachmae, in which the lender is given permission to collect the yield from agricultural land 
belonging to the borrower in case the latter fails to pay interest on time (ll. 15-21). That this was a 
common practice is strengthened by its mention in Plu. De vitando aere alieno, Moralia 832.
E.g. P.Corn. 7 (Karanis, 126), which records a loan agreement, in which the borrower (Tapetheus) 
acknowledged that she has received from the lender (Sambathius) an interest-bearing loan () of 
982 drachmae of silver; and in lieu of the interest upon this loan she concedes that the fruits of a quarter 
aroura of an olive grove which be gathered for Sambathius until she shall have paid back the capital 
sum above mentioned (ll. 3-11).
E.g. P.Mich. XI 605 (Bakchias, Arsinoite Nome, 117), here in place of interest the lender is to have the 
right of habitation in the 4/27 share of a house owned in common by him and the debtors (the remainder 
of which also belongs to the lender);
P.Mich. III 189 (Bakchias, Arsinoite Nome, 123), a loan contract for 
60 drachmae, where it was agreed that instead of interest the borrower gave the lender, her heirs and 
whomsoever she may wish, permission to reside for such time as the borrower owed her the aforesaid 
- 229 - 
The relation between money and fructus, whether the latter refers to natural or 
civil (i.e. due to legal obligations) produce, arises also within the context of the Roman 
legal institution of ususfructus.
 Ususfructus could be created through either pactum or 
stipulatio,
 augmenting the initial agreement of the loan. It could also be created by 
bequest, its subject being landed property,
 slaves or animals,
 and even things 
consumed or diminished by use,
 such as food,
 or perishable luxury goods.
 In the 
latter category the usufructuary was to furnish some sort of security for the return of 
goods of the same quality once the usufruct ended; alternatively, the goods should be 
valued and security given for a payment of a certain sum of money (certae pecuniae);
the latter method, Gaius notes, was the more convenient one. Thus, again, we find money 
acting as a unit of account, the ultimate numeraire, the evaluator of all things. 
money, in the ninth and twenty-seventh common and undivided share of roomed dwellings which 
belonged to the borrower (ll. 10-13, and 25-27); P.Princ. III 144 (Ptolemais Euergetis, 219/20 or 239/40), 
which, if indeed correctly restored, may give example for a loan of 200 drachmae (l. 8  
) for which interest is given in the form of the right to inhabit the half part of a house (ll. 9-10). 
This in fact is a somewhat more complicated transaction, as the said house also provides a security for the 
repayment of the loan. Such practice is evident also before the period here under investigation; e.g. 
P.Mich. XII 635 (Bakchias, Arsinoite Nome, 71) (=SB XII 10779), which records a contract in which 
three sisters agree to furnish lodging to their lender instead of paying interest on a debt of 200 drachmae; 
P.Mich. IX 570 (Karanis, 105/6), though fragmented, this papyri seems to be dealing with a money loan, 
the interest on which was given in the form of a right to occupy certain premises for five years.
On ususfructus, see Kaser (1971) 447-54.
Gai. Dig. 7.1.3.pr. (2 cott.), ad finem.
Gai. Dig. 7.1.3.pr. (2 cott.); Ulp. Dig. 7.1.9 (17 ad sab.).
Gai. Dig. 7.1.3.1 (2 cott.);
Just. Inst. 2.4.2.
Dig. 7.5 (De usu fructu earum rerum, quae usu consumuntur vel minuuntur). 
 Gai. Dig. 7.5.7 (7 ad ed. prov.): vini olei frumenti.
 Ulp. Dig. 7.5.11 (18 ad sab.): lanae  vel odorum vel aromatum.
Gai. Dig. 7.5.7 (7 ad ed. prov.): Si vini olei frumenti usus fructus legatus erit, proprietas ad legatarium 
transferri debet et ab eo cautio desideranda est, ut, quandoque is mortuus aut capite deminutus sit, 
eiusdem qualitatis res restituatur, aut aestimatis rebus certae pecuniae nomine cavendum est, quod et 
commodius est. Also Ulp. Dig. 7.5.11 (18 ad sab.), ad finem: quod de cautione eorum loquitur.
- 230 - 
Money itself could also be the subject of ususfructus,
 providing that security of 
some sort (cautio, satisdare) would be supplied by the usufructuary,
 or on her or his 
behalf.
 Whether or not this security was to take a pecuniary form, is not specified by 
the jurists. However, the fact that Gaius labelled such a transaction as quasi usus 
fructus,
 indicates that it established de facto credit relation.
 Not just cash money, 
regardless of the physical manifestation it took (coinage, bullion, corn, or other), debts, 
too, could be the subject of ususfructus. In such cases the usufructuary was given a right 
to enjoy the interest payments;
 and where the usufructuary was the debtor this meant 
that she or he was exempted from paying interest.
 Thus, again we find interest 
conceptualised as equivalent to fructus.
Calculating interest against fructus and vice versa is evident in cases other than 
loans.
 Marcellus, when faced with a case of an heiress who was charged to transfer 
half of an inheritance to a third party, ruled that the interest received from obligations 
which were included in the inheritance was also to be transferred, as it was part of the 
fructus derived from that inheritance.
 Here interest was included in the term fructus 
Gai. Dig. 7.5.2 (7 ad ed. prov.); Ulp. Dig. 7.5.5 (18 ad sab.); 10 (79 ad ed.); Julian. Dig. 7.5.6 (35 dig.); 
Papin. Dig. 7.5.8 (17 quaest.); Paul. Dig. 7.5.9 (1 ad nerat.); Kaser (1971) 453-4.
Gai. Dig. 7.5.2 (7 ad ed. prov.); Julian. Dig. 7.5.6 (35 dig.).
Papin. Dig. 7.5.8 (17 quaest.).
Gai. Dig. 7.5.2 (7 ad ed. prov.); followed by Just. Inst. 2.4.2. However, Ulp. Dig. 43.18.1.6 (70 ad ed.), 
who uses quasi ususfructus in a somewhat different context. 
Kaser (1971) 454. These cases resemble a loan since the usufructuary received ownership rights over the 
money given as ususfructus; Just. Inst. 2.4.2. 
Ulp. Dig. 7.5.3 (18 ad sab.); Papin. Dig. 33.2.24.pr. (7 respon.), where part of the profits of a property 
legated included interest (faenus) on loans advanced by the deceased, the acceptance of which by the 
legatee, the deceaseds wife, was conditioned by her providing security (cautio); Pompon. Dig. 35.2.69 
(5 ad sab.), who states that debts (aes alienum) can also be part of a ususfructus.
Ulp. Dig. 7.5.3 (18 ad sab.).
Ulp. Dig. 7.5.10.1 (79 ad ed.).
Ulp. Dig. 22.1.34 (15 ad ed.), who says so plainly. 
Marcel. Dig. 36.1.46.1 (15 dig.). A similar logic is applied by Pompon. Dig. 35.2.69 (5 ad sab.).
- 231 - 
when the latter signified revenue or income.
 In a different case concerning legacies 
Gaius tells of an heir who was instructed by the testator to render an inheritance to a third 
party on receiving from him a certain sum, and that that sum was to be paid without 
interest even when paid in late.
 The reason given for the discharge from a 
compensating interest is that during the delay the heir enjoyed fructus from the property; 
that is, collecting fructus was equivalent to receiving interest.
 In a case brought before 
Ulpian of reversing a defective purchase a purchaser had to transfer back ownership in 
order to restore the price paid.
 According to Ulpian, in order to undo the entire 
transaction, the purchaser was also to render any fructus collected from the purchase, so 
that he would be given the right to recover any interest, if collected, on the purchase 
money. Rendering back fructus made the purchaser eligible to receive the interest 
precisely because the two were interchangeable forms of profit. 
However, since the value of fructus rarely, if ever, corresponded to that of the 
interest, where a substitution between the two occurred a cap was set on the fructus 
collected, limiting it to the value of the legal maximum interest (legitima usura).
was relatively easily achieved where landed property was mortgaged (hypotheca),
given to a creditor as security (pignus),
 from which fructus could be collected up to the 
value of the interest. Fructus could be collected instead of interest also in cases of 
Obuentio in Ulp. Dig. 22.1.34 (15 ad ed.).
Gai. Dig. 36.1.65.5 (2 fideicom.).
Also, Paul. Dig. 22.1.16.1 (1 decret.): iniquum esse usuras ab eo exigi, qui fructus non percepisset. In 
a similar way, if not otherwise agreed upon, fructus was the property of the purchaser, and not the seller, 
from the day of the sale, even before the day of payment and even when it was ripe; Frag. Vat. 15.
Ulp. Dig. 21.1.29.2 (1 ad ed. aedil. cur.).
Papin. Dig. 20.1.1.3 (11 respon.): Pacto placuit, ut ad diem usuris non solutis fructus hypothecarum 
usuris compensarentur fini legitimae usurae.
Papin. Dig. 20.1.1.3 (11 respon.).
 Paul. Dig. 20.2.8 (2 sent.).
- 232 - 
fideicommissa; where, in a similar way to that applied in cases of securities, if the value 
of the fructus collected from a property exceeded that of the interest, the increase was to 
be counted against the principal.
 Another example is found in a somewhat more 
complicated transaction described by Papinian; where a creditor who was given land 
(praedium) as security (pignus) had sold it to a third party, without the latter knowing that 
he was buying from a non-owner.
 The deceived buyer would be compelled to return 
the property to its rightful owner, only on receiving back from the creditor the purchase 
money plus the balance of interest for the intervening period; assuming, Papinian adds, 
that such an interest exceeded the amount of fructus collected from the land prior to the 
trial.
Yet, not in every circumstance could interest substitute fructus as income. For 
example, where a portion of the revenues (reditus) from a property (praedium) have been 
legated, and the property later sold by the heir, Scaevola ruled that these could not be 
replaced by the interest raised on the money obtained from the sale of the estate (pretii 
usurae).
 The fact that such a claim was brought before a jurist supports the prevalence 
of using the instrument of interest for creating an enduring source of revenue; a norm 
already established in cases of aliments. Scaevolas negative reply, however, points to a 
Ulp. Dig. 36.4.5.21 (52 ad ed.). Some indication of the low value which the yields of landed property 
amounted to is provided in Ulp. Dig. 23.4.4 (31 ad sab.), where Ulpian cites Marcellus in stating that an 
agreement which allocates fructus as dowry is invalid for a pact like this gives a woman hardly any 
dowry at all.
Papin. Dig. 6.1.65.pr. (2 respon.): Emptor praedium, quod a non domino emit, exceptione doli posita 
non aliter restituere domino cogetur, quam si pecuniam creditori eius solutam, qui pignori datum 
praedium habuit, usurarumque medii temporis superfluum reciperaverit, scilicet si minus in fructibus 
ante litem perceptis fuit: nam eos usuris novis dumtaxat compensari sumptuum in praedium factorum 
exemplo aequum est.
Similar logic is given in Gai. Dig. 4.4.27.1 (4 ad ed. prov.). 
Scaev. Dig. 33.1.21.pr. (22 dig.).
- 233 - 
legal recognition which differentiated property and revenues on the one hand, from 
money and interest on the other hand.  
Pomponius, too, recognises a fundamental difference between the two forms of 
yield, fructus and usura. While fructus accrues naturally (natura pervenit) and arises by 
itself (ex ipso corpore) by a process of reproduction,
 interest is the outcome of 
obligations, of legal agreements. This point is significant. Money does not produce a 
profit by itself;
 it is the obligations taken by individuals which do so. The right of 
enjoyment, ususfructus, may refer to both natural fruits (fructus) and civil fruits (i.e. 
profits or revenues which arise from legally contracted obligations); and under the 
latter category interest (usura), too, could be part of an estates revenues in the same way 
that rent (pensio) could.
 However, interest was believed to be of somewhat different 
character from other civil fruits. Thus, for example, the distinguished Ulpian applied one 
rule to fructus, the work of slaves, transport by draft animals, carriage by ship, and rents 
from buildings (namely, that fruits to be deduced in claiming the legacy are not those 
which the heir has collected, but those which the legatee has been able to collect); and 
another rule to interest, namely that the interest which should be accounted for is not that 
which the heir could have collected, but that which is in accord with the mos regionis, as 
 Pompon. Dig. 50.16.121 (6 ad quint. muc.): Usura pecuniae, quam percipimus, in fructu non est, quia 
non ex ipso corpore, sed ex alia causa est, id est nova obligatione. That interest derives from a legal 
condition, is stated also in Papin. Dig. 6.1.62.pr. (6 quaest.): nam etsi maxime vectura sicut usura non 
natura pervenit, sed iure percipitur. 
Despite
Plutarchs accusations against money-lenders, that they make a laughing-stock forsooth of the 
scientists, who say that nothing arises out of nothing (    ,  
                ); 
Plu. De vitando aere alieno, Moralia, 829C. Plutarch does not reject the fact that it is the obligations 
taken by debtors that produce profit, but he labels it as an immoral activity, as a profit which is not 
created by production but rather by destruction (of debtors).
Marcel. Dig. 36.1.46.1 (15 dig.); Pompon. Dig. 35.2.69 (5 ad sab.). 
- 234 - 
estimated and fixed by a judge.
 Thus, not all that could be obtained via interest-
payments should indeed be collected. Rather, interest was regulated and restricted in 
ways which other types of income were not. Where gains from interest are concerned, 
Ulpian informs us, the authorities were to be involved in setting the level of profit.  
In modern perceptions money may be considered to be a general case of wealth, 
i.e. it is the ultimate quantifier for all other manifestations of wealth. This recognition, 
however, cannot be attributed to the Romans without restrictions. While all physical 
representations of money signified wealth, not every type of wealth could be 
expressed, manifested, or transformed into money. The abstract nature of money made it 
a unique case of wealth; and we have already noted Javolenus remark that money 
cannot be quantified in terms of merchandise in the way that merchandise, measured by 
quantity of number, may be assessed in money.
 Accordingly, interest, in the sense of 
the yield raised on money, was considered a unique case of profit. Interchanging usura 
and fructus may suggest that the notion of interestas well as that of moneywas 
perhaps still, at least partially, connected with (and dependent on) an agrarian 
conceptualisation of the world, in which value, profit and return were intrinsically 
associated with natural or agricultural productivity.
 Thus, although money could 
Ulp. Dig. 30.39. 1 (21 ad sab.): Fructus autem hi deducuntur in petitionem, non quos heres percepit, 
sed quos legatarius percipere potuit: et id in operis servorum vel vecturis iumentorum vel naulis navium 
dicendum. Quod in fructibus dicitur, hoc et in pensionibus urbanorum aedificiorum intellegendum erit. In 
usurarum autem quantitate mos regionis erit sequendus: iudex igitur usurarum modum aestimabit et 
statuet. Ipsius quoque rei interitum post moram debet, sicut in stipulatione, si post moram res interieret, 
aestimatio eius praestatur. Item partus ancillarum et, si servus fuerit legatus, et hereditas vel legatum vel 
quid per eum adquisitum sit heres praestare debet.
Javol. Dig. 46.1.42 (10 epist.): ut aestimatio rerum quae mercis numero habentur in pecunia numerata 
fieri potest, ita pecunia quoque merce aestimanda est. And, see Ch. 5, pp. 174-6, above.
 Severus and Caracalla recognised that the price (pretium) of land (fundus) depended on its agricultural 
productivity (i.e. fructus); Paul. Dig. 27.9.13.pr. (ad orat. div. sev.); De Neeve (1985) 82-3.
- 235 - 
substitute payments which originally were to be made in kind, it could not do so in every 
circumstance.
It is precisely the role of obligations combined with the appreciation of interest as 
a source of income which made interest relevant not only in cases of actual profit,
also in cases of potential profit. To guarantee that rightful possessors would regain all of 
their rights,
 Romans were guided by a somewhat nebulous notion of potential profit, 
that is, profit which could have been gained, though in practice was never realised. 
Scaevola considers as potential profit benefits which could have been derived from a 
certain status that was never obtained;
 Ulpian argues that legacies should take into 
account profits which could have derived from fructus that was never collected;
that money raised as the price of a thing sold refers not only to money already exacted 
but also to money which could have been exacted but was not.
 This approach fits well 
with the guiding principle of prevention of losses, which arises from the evidence for 
E.g. Scaev. Dig. 33.1.21.pr. (22 dig.), discussed on pp. 232-3, above.
Interest could produce a profit, in the sense of an increase in possessions or acquisition of wealth, only 
where revenues exceed expenses, and this appreciation did not elude the Romans; e.g. Scaev. Dig. 
26.7.58.pr. (11 dig.), who reports a testator who left two of his freedmen as his sons tutors, instructing 
them to continue managing his affairs (negotiatio) in the same manner as they did while he was alive; 
while one tutor presented accounts showing the increase in business, the other presented accounts of 
the computation of interest, as was customary in the action on tutelage. Scaevola ruled that in 
accordance with the deceaseds wish the accounts should be rendered in the former manner, since a tutor 
lucrum facere ex tutela non debet. Also, see De Neeve (1985) 82-3, with references to ancient texts 
(mainly dating to the late Republic and early empire).
As Papinian puts it, Papin. Dig. 6.1.62.1 (6 quaest.), as a general rule, in any question concerning the 
valuation of profits (fructus) the plaintiff ought to regain all of his property including those things that 
he would have been able to enjoy, if he had been allowed to possess the property (Generaliter autem 
cum de fructibus aestimandis quaeritur, constat animadverti debere, non an malae fidei possessor fruitus 
sit, sed an petitor frui potuerit, si ei possidere licuisset. Quam sententiam Iulianus quoque probat). 
Scaev. Dig. 32.35.pr. (17 dig.), where an heir who was instructed by a testator to purchase a place in a 
tribe for a freedman failed to do so, and was therefore liable to the heir of that freedman not only for the 
price of the place never purchased and the interest on that sum, but also for the benefits which the 
freedman would have obtained if that place in the tribe had been acquired for him.
Ulp. Dig. 30.39.1 (21 ad sab.).
Ulp. Dig. 5.3.20.15 (15 ad ed.). Also 9.2.7.pr. (18 ad ed.), where a calculation of lost future earnings 
may be taken into account when claiming damages. 
- 236 - 
agricultural management.
 This principle is further stressed by Ulpian, whowhere 
discussing the actio utilis provided for obligations which were to be performed in a fixed 
placesays that a judge setting a compensating penalty is allowed to fix sums which 
exceed the legal interest, since he ought to take account not only of damage (damnus), 
but also of gain (lucrum).
The notion of potential profit affected the way Romans used the instrument of 
interest. Gaius talks of an interest which a seller has, or could have, obtained from the 
purchase money;
 Paul argues that what is due under unauthorised administration 
(negotiorum gestorum) consists not only of the capital and the interest received on it, but 
also of the interest which could have been received;
 and both Scaevola and Paul hold 
that tutors can be sued for the interest which could have been received on their wards 
money had they not neglected to invest it.
In Roman aristocratic views there were two principal alternatives for investing 
money: buying land, the preferable Roman mode of investment,
 and lending at 
interest.
 Not buying land with a wards money, nor lending it out at interest, made 
tutors liable to pay interest on it,
 unless the funds were deposited while waiting for an 
 Rathbone (1991); Kehoe (1997).
Ulp. Dig. 13.4.2.8 (27 ad ed.): In hanc arbitrariam quod interfuit veniet et quidem ultra legitimum 
modum usurarum. Quid si merces solebat comparare: an et lucri ratio habeatur, non solius damni? Puto 
et lucri habendam rationem.
 Gai. Dig. 4.4.27.1 (4 ad ed. prov.): etiam usuras, quas ex ea pecunia perceperit aut percipere potuit.
Paul. Dig. 3.5.18(19).4 (2 ad nerat.).
Scaev. Dig. 26.7.58.3 (11 dig.): in nomina collocare neglexerint, usurarum nomine pupillae tutelae 
iudicio teneantur. Paul. Dig. 26.7.15 (2 sent.): ipse in debitam pecuniam et in usuras eius pecuniae 
quam non faeneravit convenitur.
Ulp. Dig. 26.7.3.2 (35 ad ed.).
 Gai. Dig. 17.1.2.6 (2 cott.), who gives the two alternatives in an example which distinguishes a mandate 
(mandatum) from an advice (consilium); Paul. Dig. 26.7.49 (2 sent.). And, see Duncan-Jones (1982) 33-
59, on the correlation of possible levels of profit for each line of investment. 
 Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.3; 7 (35 ad ed.); 27.4.3.6 (36 ad ed.). 
- 237 - 
opportunity to purchase land.
 In any case, whether the money in question was the 
wards or the tutors, as a general rule money should not be left idle.
 This is an 
important point, which is further discussed in the following chapter.
 Here suffice it to 
stress that failing to invest money prevented a potential profit, hence was seen as 
analogous to accruing a loss. Requiring compensation to be paid for a potential profit in 
the form of un-collected interest indicates a realisation of the role interest played in 
accounting for the opportunity cost, that is, the benefits which could have been received 
from an alternative investment. Thus, interest embodied the alternative return on money. 
Did accounting for an alternative mode of operation also include capitalisation, 
i.e. calculating the current value of future earnings? Roman interest did take some 
account of the element of time. Papinian, for example, when deciding the amount to be 
paid as penalty, set it in accordance with the length of time exceeding that of the due-date 
of the obligation.
 Some acknowledgement of the implication which time has for 
payments appears in the famous life expectancy table provided by Aemilius Macer (citing 
Ulpian) for the reckoning of aliment payments.
 An excerpt from Africanus regarding 
legacies, and in particular the lex Falcidia, offers support to an understanding that money 
transfers of the same sum, which occur at different time intervals, should, in fact, be 
given different weights.
 According to Africanus, an unconditional legacy was 
somewhat more lucrative (est aliquanto uberius esse) than a conditional one; for in the 
Ulp. Dig. 26.10.3.16 (35 ad ed.); 27.4.3.6 (36 ad ed.). On the possibility of raising interest on deposits, 
see the next chapter.
 Ulp. Dig. 27.4.3.4 (36 ad ed.), who says when referring to the tutors money advanced on his wards 
affairs that ei sterilis esse pecunia.  
See Ch. 8, pp. 263-7. 
 Papin. Dig. 22.1.9.pr. (11 respon.). 
Macer. Dig. 35.2.68 (2 ad leg. vices. hered.).
Afric. Dig. 35.2.88.3 (5 quaest.).
- 238 - 
former funds are transferred to the legatee earlier than in the latter. In an excerpt from 
Pomponius, where two purchase offers are compared in search for the higher valued one, 
Pomponius says that if a longer period for payment of the price be granted; the amount 
of interest that the vendor could get for that period must be investigated.
 In this case 
interest may appear as if it was tagging a price to a time interval, in order to compute it as 
part of the purchase offer. It may look like a means for capitalisation, allowing a 
calculation of the current value of future earnings; but, in practice its aim was to account 
for the alternative mode of investment which a vendor could have taken had he received 
the purchase money earlier. At any rate, perhaps the most revealing evidence for Roman 
interest not being a tool for capitalisation is the fact that regardless of length of time for 
which interest was due the total sum that a legal interest could yield was restricted by 
fixing it to a ratio of twice the principal.
To conclude, the Roman instrument of interest was used in a variety of situations 
and with quite diverse aims in mind. It operated as a fee charged on a loan, hence as an 
instrument to produce a profit. It was a penalty on arrears, hence functioned as a fine. It 
was a form of punishment, and as such its aim was to deter those taking on obligations 
from neglecting their commitments, and to discourage mismanagement or malpractice of 
some other sort. It was a tool for creating a permanent stream of revenues, on which 
Pompon. Dig. 18.2.15.1 (9 ad sab.): si dies longior pretii solvendi data fuerit, ut quaeratur, quantum ex 
usura eius temporis capi potuerit.
 A legal interest could not produce more than twofold of the principal. Ulp. Dig. 12.6.26.1 (26 ad ed.); 
Ulp. (Papin.) Dig. 19.1.13.26 (32 ad ed.); Papin. Dig. 22.2.4.1 (3 respon.). Another support for the claim 
that capitalisation was foreign to Roman thinking may be found in Ulp. Dig. 35.2.62.1 (1 ad leg. iul. et 
papin.), who states that a true value (veritatem aestimanda) of a thing is considered as its present price 
(praesens pretium), and not the value which it could take under certain conditions (nec quicquam eorum 
formali pretio aestimandum esse sciendum est). 
- 239 - 
public operations and private income had relied. And it was a compensatory instrument 
for any loss or damage a lawful possessor might have suffered. As such, it was used in 
connection with either actual or potential gains or losses, enabling the calculation and 
evaluation of an alternative modus operandi.  
Roman interest was a complex instrument in the sense that the technicalities of 
contracting it were intricate and diverse; and its aimthen, as well as nowadayswas to 
account for (even if partially) risks concealed in future unknowns. It was complex in the 
sense that it was a flexible mechanism, its numerical values modified by the individuals 
using it, according the details of each transaction and the circumstances in which it 
occurred. It was complex in the sense of being a multifarious apparatus applied in a wide 
scale of transactions, ranging from loans and credit, to sale and rent, to legacies and 
tutelage. It was complex in the sense of being a device which allowed for new patterns of 
activity to be created; such as the use of interest for producing perpetual alimentary 
schemes, or for calculating an alternative mode of operation. And it was complex in the 
sense that it allowed individuals to self-adjust their use of the instrument of interest itself, 
altering and widening its application according to their own needs and the continuously 
evolving system in which they operated. 
- 240 - 
Chapter 8: Interest-Bearing Deposits 
Sed contra bonam fidem et depositi naturam est usuras ab eo desiderare 
temporis ante moram, qui beneficium in suscipienda pecunia dedit. 
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.)
8.1. Introduction 
The question of interest-bearing deposits is highly relevant for a societys 
attitudes towards money. Whether or not pecuniary deposits may yield a profitto either 
the depositor by way of interest, or the depositary through usage of the deposit, or charge 
of custody-feesis persistently connected to how a society and the individuals within it 
perceive money. Where money deposits cannot yield interest,
 the primary reason and 
outcome of a deposit being its safekeeping, one may expect the role of money as a store 
of wealth to dominate its other roles. Where money deposits regularly yield interest, 
suggesting that depositing money is seen as an investment track, deposits may allow for a 
leverage mechanism. The existence of interest-bearing deposits of monetary sums 
suggests that money is treated more freely as a financial instrument, with the potential of 
capitalising other economic activities.   
Any discussion on interest-bearing deposits in the Roman empire conceals a 
difficulty. The modern term deposit often refers to a financial practice, and, as is shown 
below, this financial sense also is found in Roman contexts. At the same time, deposit 
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.): But it is contrary to good faith and to the nature of deposit to expect 
interest before delay [in the return of the money] from the man who conferred a kindness by taking it into 
safekeeping.
And even more where its acceptance is conditioned by custody-fees.
- 241 - 
also carries the meaning of a social institution, which often has a wider connotation 
associating it with trust and moral obligations. To these should be added the Roman legal 
meaning of deposit, which refers to a strictly defined legal contract, depositum; a 
contract that had clear restrictions regulating its application, theoretically making the 
charging of interest on a deposit impossible.  
The present chapter offers an analysis of the practice of interest-bearing deposits 
in the Roman empire as it arises from evidence for three legal systems operating under 
Roman regime: Roman law as preserved in Roman legal sources, mainly in Justinians 
Digest and Codex; Greek-Hellenistic practice as preserved in papyri from Roman Egypt; 
and Jewish law as preserved in the Mishnah, a redaction of Jewish oral traditions dated to 
the Pharisaic period (536 BCE  70 CE), written down during the Tannaim period 
(approx. 10220 CE), and concluded according to tradition by Rabbi Yehuda haNasi (c. 
220 CE).
 Though each system followed its own internal logic, which dictated its 
procedures and development; and though in each system the legal technicalities regarding 
both deposits and charging interest were somewhat different; this chapter argues that all 
three legal systems give evidence for the same phenomenon. Namely, that during the 
period here under investigation financial deposits which could bear interest had become 
common practice, and an integral part of the financial tool-kit of the empires better off 
inhabitants. As detailed below, each of the three legal systems faced this change 
somewhat differently; yet, what united all was an initial starting point of perceiving the 
 Jewish legal sources for the Amoraim period (approx. 220-500), i.e. the Babylonian and the Jerusalem 
Talmud, generally stand beyond the period here under research, hence have not been consulted. 
- 242 - 
legal institution of deposits as an agreement which was initially established on a moral 
obligation. 
8.2. Moral Aspects of Deposits 
In the ancient world deposits were first and foremost a morally-oriented 
institution. As a general rule, deposits were given for the sake of safekeeping, rather than 
for profit making. The depositor, for one reason or another, was (or felt as one) incapable 
of guarding her or his possessions, be these objects or living things,
 therefore, 
approached another for assistance in safekeeping it. The depositary took on the 
obligation, which was essentially a moral one, to hold the deposit, guard it, and return it 
intact to the depositor upon demand.
From archaic times deposits were entrusted to the divine. In the Hellenistic East 
for centuries valuables, including sums of money, were deposited at sanctuaries and 
temples for safekeeping.
 In Xenophons Anabasis, Xenophon is reported to have 
deposited his money before his departure to the east with Artemis of Ephesus for 
safekeeping, with the instructions that the deposit () be transferred to the 
Goddess had he not returned from his anabasis.
 Centuries later, Caesar in his Civil War 
mentions the money which from ancient times had been deposited in the Ephesian temple 
of Artemis/Diana.
 Entrusting money with the divine was not a practice unique to the 
Greeks. In Maccabees, Book Two, we are told of Heliodoros, a minister under Seleucus 
On depositing immovables, see Michel (1962) 71-2; Zimmermann (1996) 214-5. 
Glck (1813) 137- 44; Bogaert (1968) 332; Kaser (1971) 534-5.
 Dignas (2002) 24. 
 Xen. Anab. 5.3.5-7. 
 Caes. Civ. 3.33. 
- 243 - 
IV (187-175 BCE), who wished to confiscate the treasures of the Temple at Jerusalem, 
where deposits () of widowers and orphans were entrusted;
 but the priests at 
Jerusalem prayed to their God, who had given them the Laws of Deposits ( 
),
 and so, with divine interference, the Temples treasures were saved 
from plunder, deposits included.
Money was entrusted to the divine not solely for the sake of safekeeping per se. 
For example, the Mishnah preserves a verdict of Hillel the Elder,
 the head of the Great 
Sanhedrin (the highest Jewish assembly and High Court) at the turn of the first century 
CE, who ruled that when a seller of a house wished to enjoy his right according to Jewish 
law to abolish the transaction within a years time from the date the sale took place,
the buyer avoided accepting back the purchase money, the sale could be revoked ifand 
this is the interesting point for the current discussionthe indecisive seller entrusted the 
purchase money at the Temple at Jerusalem for the buyer to come and collect it whenever 
he pleased.
 Here, money is entrusted with the divine for safekeeping where the temple 
acts as a neutral trustee and a negotiator for the conclusion of an economic interaction 
between parties. From the date the purchase money was entrusted at the temple, the only 
one allowed to make use of it was its true owner, i.e. the buyer. 
Greek and Hellenistic temples were often economically more active, engaging in 
banking operations as both debtors and creditors.
 It should be stressed that even though 
 Maccabees 2.3.10. 
 Maccabees 2.3.15. 
 Maccabees 2.3.10-30. 
 Masechet Arakhin 9.4. 
 Exodus 25.29-30. 
 Masechet Arakhin 9.4. 
 The economic role of cults is beyond the scope of the present research; on which, see Dignas (2002). On 
the banking operations of temples, see Bogaert (1966); (1968). 
- 244 - 
Greek and Hellenistic temples were certainly involved in banking activities, sums which 
they received as depositsfrom citizens, foreigners, rulers, or communitiesseem not to 
have been used, or to have been borrowed from.
 Dio Chrysostom, for example, just 
before the start of the period here under investigation, says that the Ephesians would have 
preferred to use Artemis own jewellery before taking from deposits entrusted with the 
Goddess.
 Hence it may logically be concluded that money deposited with the divine 
was presumably kept separate from the deities own resources.
Also deposits which occurred within the mortal sphere, between individuals or 
communities, were considered a moral obligation which enjoyed divine protection. In 
Biblical law a depositary (guardian, shomer, ) is cleared from suspicion of 
pilfering an unfound deposit, if he takes an oath under the name of God that he was not 
the thief.
 Similarly, a depositary is exempt from compensating a depositor whose 
deposit had been destroyed or injured, if the former takes an oath under the name of God 
that he was not responsible for the default.
 Herodotus puts in the mouth of the Spartan 
Leotychides addressing the Athenians the tale of the righteous Glaukos son of Epikydes, 
who, after he was entrusted by a Milesian with a deposit () of half his 
money ( ), refused to return it to the depositors descendants on demand ( 
 ); for which crime the gods have punished Glaukos by utterly 
 As Dignas (2002) 146, puts it: the citys institutionswithin which Dignas includes also temples
showed respect for private property when it was handed over to their protection. 
 Dio Chrys. 31.54-6; discussed in Dignas (2002) 146-8, 197-8, also 24.  
 Bogaert (1968) 279-304, on temple-banks, esp. 281-8, on deposits, 249, on deposits in the temple of 
Artemis in Ephesus. 
 Exodus 22.7.  
 Exodus 22.9-12. 
- 245 - 
removing his house and name from the ranks of the Lacedaemonians.
 Thus, 
safeguarding a deposit was a duty which was believed to have been overseen by the Gods 
themselvesPhilo of Alexandria even calls it  
, with divine 
forces protecting depositors by supervising the righteousness of depositaries. 
8.3. Roman Law 
In Roman law depositum was a contract for safekeeping, based on good faith,
where neither depositor nor depositary was to receive interest, or other remuneration. 
Yet, documentary evidence and the writings of the Roman jurists themselves indicate that 
some pecuniary deposits certainly did yield an interest. In the scholarship such interest-
bearing deposit came to be known as depositum irregulare;
 though this term is not 
Roman, and appears in the sources of neither classical nor post-classical Roman law.
Most of the imperial rescripts which relate to the topic belong to a period later 
than the one here under investigation; while the relevant Digest excerpts give rise to 
much suspicion of interpolation,
 with some excerpts containing internal 
 Hdt. 6.86. Though this tale should be understood within the context of the political struggles between 
Sparta, Athens, and Aegina, it does not reduce the status of deposits as a divinely protected institution. 
 Ph. Special. Leg. 4.30. 
Gai. Inst. 4.62.
Probably the first modern monograph published on the topic is that of Theodor Niemeyer, Depositum 
irregulare (1889), non vidi. For more recent discussions, see Geiger (1962); Michel (1962) 74-94; Simon 
(1965); Buckland (1963) 469-70; Klami (1969); (1986); Kaser (1971) 536; Gandolfi (1976); Maschi 
(1973) 381-407; Litewski (1974); (1975); Gordon (1982); Vigneron (1984), with reference to earlier 
bibliography; Brge (1987) 536-55; Zimmermann (1996) 215-9.
For centuries the phrase depositum irregulare has been used by scholars; Glck (1813) 150-2. It signifies 
either a deposit which can yield interest, or one where equivalent but not the same object(s) entrusted are 
to be returned; Litewski (1974) 216-7. The mid sixth-century antecessor Stephanus, commentating on 
Paul. Dig. 16.3.26.1 (4 respon.), uses the phrase depositum impurum (  ); Stephan. 
Schol. 4 [6] ad Bas. 13.2.26.1; Heimbach. 2.54; Maschi (1973) 381-2. For Stephanus' commentary on 
Justinians Digest, see Scheltema (2004) 75-9, 122-3, 331-7 (I would like to thank Dr. Avshalom 
Laniado for bringing this publication to my attention).  
Discussed in detail in Klami (1969); (1986).
- 246 - 
inconsistencies.
 The interpretation of the documentary material in line with Roman 
legal evidence is anything but straightforward. Opinions are divided as to the dating of a 
Roman custom of the so-called depositum irregulare, with the range of dates suggested 
starting from the late Republic,
 to Justinians time.
 However, nowadays many 
scholars accept the view that no such unified doctrine of depositum irregulare had ever 
existed.
 It is also generally accepted that the inclination of Roman jurists towards a 
relaxation of the legal formalities of depositum, which allowed for the so-called 
depositum irregulare, should be dated towards the end of the classical period of Roman 
 The nature of influence between Roman and Greco-Hellenistic practices has also 
been a source of scholarly disputes. While many scholars hold the view that the Roman 
practice originated from, or at least was influenced by, the Greek-Hellenistic one,
 there 
are also arguments in favour of mutual influence,
 and for the claim that the late 
Hellenistic practice was in fact influenced by its exposure to the Roman imperial one.
In what follows, I argue that the case is not one of cultural or legal assimilation, but 
rather of a change in economic reality, due to shifts in the cognitive institutional 
framework within which individuals operated. Interest-bearing deposits became a 
E.g. Paul. Dig. 16.3.26.1 (4 respon.), on which, see discussion on pp. 252-4, below.
 Arangio-Ruiz (1928) 59f., non vidi; Bonifacio (1947) 80-3; Vigneron (1984) 308, with further reference. 
Schulz (1949) 257, who talks of a Byzantine origin of the depositum irregulare; Maschi (1973) 381-
407. For a summary of the various opinions, see Gandolfi (1976) 149-53; Vigneron (1984) 307-8; Michel 
(1962) 93-4, who suggests that the practice was introduced during the third century, later to be confirmed 
by Justinians legislators; Klami (1969) 227-8, who rejects the assumption that Justinian introduced a 
formulised legal institution of depositum irregulare.
 Gordon (1982); Brge (1987) 536-7, 554; Zimmermann (1996) 217. 
 Kaser (1971) 536; Gandolfi (1976) 148-84; Vigneron (1984) 307; Brge (1987) 536-55. 
 Schulz (1949) 255; Geiger (1962) 17-9; Simon (1965) 61, n. 93; Khnert (1965) 135-8; Kaser (1971) 
536; Litewski (1974) 224-5; Vigneron (1984), who talks of the resistance of Roman law to Hellenistic 
influences; Zimmermann (1996) 217. 
 Klami (1969); Simon (1965) esp. 66, who claims that what is termed depositum irregulare is in many 
respects the outcome of an attempt to force various instances of  under Roman legal 
categorisation, which was alien to the Greek-Hellenistic way of thinking. 
 Klami (1986). 
- 247 - 
common phenomenon, regardless of the legal system to which people were subject, be it 
Roman, Egyptian-Greek-Hellenistic, or Jewish; and each system had its own dynamics in 
facing these changes. 
In Roman law deposits were entrusted via a contractual procedure called 
depositum, which was a real obligation, coming into existence only after the deposit was 
given. Originally depositum was advanced for the sake of safekeeping, a sort of a 
gratuitous loan.
 Hence, the depositary was supposed to neither make use of the 
deposit,
 for this could render the transaction a mutuum;
 nor be remunerated for 
accepting it,
 for this hypothetically could render it a locatio conductio (operarum) for 
hiring a guard. Depositaries could expect to receive compensation for any expenses or 
damages caused by accepting the deposit,
 but not to be rewarded for the acceptance 
itself. Unlike other real obligationsmutuum, commodatum, and pignusdepositum was 
intended primarily to benefit the giver rather than the receiver.
 Thus, the latter was not 
expected to recompense the former for advancing it, as the depositary had already 
benefited the depositor by accepting the deposit to begin with.
Ulp. Dig. 16.3.1.pr. (30 ad ed.). On the responsibilities of the depositary, see Michel (1961) 61-6.
Gai. Inst. 3.196; Kaser (1971) 535. Unless the depositor gave explicit authorisation to the depositary to 
use the deposit; Ulp. Dig. 12.1.9.9 (26 ad ed.).
Ulp. Dig. 12.1.10 (2 ad ed.), on treating this sort of transaction as mutuum.
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.); Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.3 (31 ad ed.); Michel (1962) 56-73, 83-4, 103-27; 
Kaser (1971) 535; Andreau (1987) 533-44; (1999) 40-2, 141-2.
 Mod. Dig. 16.3.23 (2 diff.); Kaser (1971) 535. 
Zimmermann (1996) 217.
Papin. Dig. 16.3.25.1 (3 respon.); Paul. Dig. 22.1.18.1 (3 respon.); Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.7 (35 ad ed.); Michel 
(1962) 56-73; Andreau (1987) 529-30; Zimmermann (1996) 205-14.
- 248 - 
As a general rule, the very same thing given in depositum had to be returned.
This restriction, at the face of things, seems to have applied also to financial pecuniary 
deposits given in the form of the legal contract of depositum; in such a case, according to 
Papinian, ut corpora nummorum eadem redderentur.
 This requirementto return the 
very same coins depositedmeant that instead of treating the coins deposited as 
quantitas, i.e. as a sum (tantundem) to be repaid with any equivalent coins,
 the coins 
were treated as specified artefacts, i.e. as corpora.
 This had directly affected the 
prospects of retrieving interest on deposits. For how could a depositary attain the funds 
needed for interest payment if the deposit cannot be used to make a profit? And how 
could a depositary use the money and still return corpora nummorum eadem? Thus, for 
reasons which were both ethical and practical, officially Roman deposits were not 
supposed to yield any interest.
The very same coins deposited could be returned without much difficulty when 
money was deposited sealed,
 or marked in some way.
 Otherwise, difficulties would 
Paul. Dig. 12.1.2.pr. (28 ad ed.); Ulp. Dig. 42.5.24.2 (63 ad ed.); Paul. Coll. 10.7.9; Just. Inst. 3.14.3; 
Klami (1969) 5-7.
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.). For possible interpolation, see Michel (1962) 81-4; Klami (1969) 46-58; 
Gordon (1982).
 Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.). On tantundem as signalling that the deposit was of a quantitas, see Glck 
(1813) 157-63; Zimmermann (1996) 216. 
Coins could be treated as corpora also in the context of an inheritance; Papin. Dig. 30.51 (4 quaest.). On 
coins in sale transactions treated as quantitas, rather than corpora, see Daube (1959) 17; and Ch. 4, p. 
118, above.
Papin. Dig. 16.3.24 (9 quaest.), the verb used is commendo, therefore the case ought to have concerned a 
depositum: quid est enim aliud "commendare" quam "deponere"?; Ulp. Dig. 50.16.186 (30 ad ed.): 
"Commendare" nihil aliud est quam deponere; Ulp. Dig. 42.5.24.2 (63 ad ed.); Michel (1962) 82; 
Buckland (1963) 467-8; Klami (1969) 32, for a summary of preceding scholarship; Kaser (1971) 536; 
Klami (1986) 92. However, a depositary in default of returning a deposit could be charged with a 
penalising interest; Papin. Dig. 16.3.25.1 (3 respon.); CJ 4.34.2 (Gord., 238); Klami (1986) 99-100.
Papin. Dig. 22.1.7 (2 respon.). On the distinction between sealed and unsealed money deposits in Jewish 
law of the period, see pp. 264-5, below.
Afric. Dig. 46.3.39 (8 quaest.), pecunia signata. On tesserae nummulariae, see Herzog (1919); Klami 
(1969) 23-4; Andreau (1999) 80-89.
- 249 - 
arise when wishing to distinguish specific coins deposited out of a larger group of coins 
of similar appearance and value. According to the late Republican jurist Publius Alfenus 
Varus, in such cases monetary deposits could in fact be treated as quantitas, the deposit 
then repaid not by the same coins but by an equal sum.
 Unsealed money deposits could 
be repaid with an equal sum (tantundem) also according to Papinian.
 And a similar 
approach emerges from a ruling of Paul in a case where a deposit of viginti nummorum 
saccum was mistakenly switched with that of thirty.  In this case Paul not only regarded 
the depositor as one who had regained his deposit, but also held him responsible for 
pilfering the additional ten.
 No matter which sack of coins the depositor accepted, his 
own or anothers, he is considered to have recovered his deposit. Thus, deposited money 
was not exclusively treated as corpora, but could in practice also be perceived as 
quantitas; thereby, acknowledging the randomness characteristic of money, i.e. the ability 
to replace any one piece of it with an equivalent other without diminishing its value.  
This recognition allowed for a phenomenon known in the literature as open 
deposits,
 where the depositor gave explicit permission to the depositary to make use of 
the deposit. Giving depositaries legal authorisation to employ deposited money meant 
allowing them to profit from it.
 Why then should not depositors, too, profit from the use 
of their own property?
 Such a line of thought had surely existed in Rome, as can be 
Alf. Dig. 19.2.31 (5 a paul. epit.); on which, see Michel (1962) 75-7; Litewski (1974) 229-34; Brge 
(1987) 538. Also, see Ulp. Dig. 27.4.3.2-3 (36 ad ed.), who, when considering a wards money used by a 
tutor, allowed for a substitution of it by an equal sum.
Papin. Dig. 16.3.25.1 (3 respon.).
Paul. Dig. 47.2.21.1 (40 ad sab.).
A common term in the scholarship; e.g. Klami (1969); (1986) 97-9; Brge (1987) 536f.
Ulp. Dig. 12.1.9.9 (26 ad ed.); 12.1.10 (2 ad ed.), where the situation may be regarded as mutua or 
credita pecunia.
 Kaser (1971) 536, who argues that interest collected on deposit should be seen as a compensation for the 
use of the principal: Unter diesem Einflu hat wohl schon das sptklassische Recht einen gleichartigen 
- 250 - 
concluded from an imperial rescript of the emperor Gordian (238-44), where a direct link 
is made between using deposited money and paying interest on it.
It appears that a tension existed between official procedure and actual practice, 
which also applied to the interest-bearing potential of deposits. Deposits could be 
entrusted under a condition that if certain terms occurred, the receiver would turn the 
deposit into a loan, in which case interest would be due from the date the condition 
became operative.
 This way the strictness of law was observed, while interest could still 
be collected. However, despite legal formalities, explicit statements of testators that no 
interest is to be charged on deposits suggest that interest-free deposits were not the only 
custom.
 Some deposits did yield interest;
 for example, deposits entrusted by testators 
with a third party for custodial purposes.
Further evidence for interest-bearing deposits derives from rulings concerning the 
distribution of assets in the case of bankruptcy. Where bankers reached insolvency, 
depositors would receive priority over other creditors in recovering their possessions, but 
only under the condition that no interest had been received.
 According to Roman jurists, 
depositors who had accepted interest on their deposits no longer gained precedence over 
other creditors in retrieving their property, since legally they would be considered to 
have renounced their deposits.
 Hence, in cases of interest-bearing bank deposits not 
Verwahrungsvertrag anerkannt, bei dem der Verwahrer nach Magabe der bona fides zur Zinszahlung als 
Entgelt fr die Kapitalnutzung verpflichtet ist.
 CJ 4.34.4 (Gord., 238-244). 
Ulp. Dig. 12.1.4.pr. (34 ad sab.); on which, see Michel (1962) 84-5; Afric. Dig. 17.1.34.pr. (8 quaest.).
Scaev. Dig. 34.3.28.8 (16 dig.); 36.1.80.1 (21 dig.); Michel (1962) 78-9.
Brge (1987) 536-48; Andreau (1999) 40-1.
Scaev. Dig. 26.7.47.4 (2 respon.); 32.37.5 (18 dig.); Brge (1987) 539-41.
Ulp. Dig. 16.3.7.2 (30 ad ed.); 42.5.24.2 (63 ad ed.); Papin. Dig. 16.3.8 (9 quaest.); Klami (1969) 196-
218; (1986) 97-9; Michel (1962) 85-91; Litewski (1975) 287-91.
Ulp. Dig. 16.3.7.2 (30 ad ed.). 
- 251 - 
only was the actio depositi not available for recovering interest, but furthermore the 
acceptance of interest prevented depositors from using the actio depositi also for 
retrieving the principal. Instead their deposits were treated as instances of advancing 
credit,
 with the right to employ the relevant legal actions.  
Yet, despite the jurists reluctance to consider interest-bearing bank deposits as 
true deposits, such deposits were certainly not unheard of.
 Interest-bearing bank 
deposits seem not to have presented any fundamental difficulties to either bankers or 
depositors. As long as economic undertakings developed more or less satisfactorily, the 
arrangement which allowed deposits to bear interest benefited both parties. Problems 
arose when one party, the banker, was incapable of meeting commitments; forcing the 
other party, the depositor, to seek legal aid in order to protect her or his interests. Moving 
the banker-depositor relationship from the economic sphere to the legal one, confronted 
the parties with the rigidity of Roman law, which did not allow for interest-bearing 
deposits. Roman jurists, reluctant to loosen juristic definitions, faced this problem with a 
realistic approach.
 In giving their verdict they gave priority to what actually had 
occurred over the arrangement agreed upon between the parties. That is, what mattered 
Bogaert (1968) 307, who, while distinguishing between active banks operations (credit) and passive 
ones (deposits), recognises operations which stand between these two categories: ou entre oprations 
principales et accessoires ou entre oprations portant uniquement sur des espces montaires (dpt-
crdit) et celles qui portent sur des effets, marchandises, devises etc.
Gordon (1982) 367, who sayson the basis of Ulp. Dig. 16.3.7.2-3 (30 ad ed.); 42.5.24.2 (63 ad ed.) 
that interest-bearing bank deposits were quite usual, though, in p. 364, he states that it does not appear 
that [the question of depositum irregulare] arose solely in relation to deposits with bankers; Klami 
(1986) 92-3, who stresses the lack of evidence in the literary sources for interest-bearing bank deposits; 
Bogaert (1968) 333-51, who considers interest-bearing bank deposits in the Greek-Hellenistic banking 
system; Tenger (1993) 66, who says that the majority of  contracts from the first three centuries 
CE seem not to have been conducted via bankers, and argues that many private individuals acted as 
depositaries listing (in n. 245) only fifteen cases indicating the participation of bankers. Thus, it is better 
to be cautious before considering interest-bearing bank deposits as the commonest practice.
The relevant legal evidence had been analysed in Klami (1969); Michel (1962) 75-94; Litewski (1974); 
(1975).
- 252 - 
from a juristic perspective was whether or not interest had been collected. If so, the 
matter exceeded the limit of a deposit; if not, the case could be accommodated within the 
actio depositi. Yet, even if jurists were reluctant to permit the use of the actio depositi 
where interest had been collected, at the same time they did not forbid the practice 
altogether. They simply evaded providing it with legal aid. Their scholastic, at times 
almost casuistic, replies should be interpreted as a desire to avoid a direct confrontation 
between law and actual practice. Their sometimes confusing answers should be seen as 
an attempt to reconcile, if only to a certain degree, juristic ideals with the practice of de 
facto interest-bearing deposits.  
Next to be considered is a much debated excerpt from Pauls Responsa: 
Lucius Titius ita cavit:        
    ,    
  ,       
         
   . Quaero, an usurae peti possunt. Paulus 
respondit eum contractum de quo quaeritur depositae pecuniae modum 
excedere, et ideo secundum conventionem usurae quoque actione depositi 
peti possunt.
Here Paul cites a Greek document in which the writer acknowledged receiving a 
sum of ten thousand denarii, had promised to repay it, and agreed to pay interest on it. 
The document, presumably cited in its original language, names the contract as 
. Paul takes it to be a case of depositum supplemented by an agreement for 
 Paul. Dig. 16.3.26.1 (4 respon.): Lucius Titius made a declaration as follows: I have received and have 
on deposit the above-mentioned ten thousand denarii; and I shall do everything and agree and have 
promised as has been set out above; and I have bound myself to pay you as interest for each mina, four 
oboli every month, until the whole sum is paid off; I ask whether interest can be claimed. Paul replied 
that that contract about which inquiry is made exceeds the limit of a deposit of money, and, therefore, in 
accordance with the agreement, interest can also be claimed in an action on deposit. 
- 253 - 
the interest.
 The question arises whether with the actio depositi, which theoretically 
does not allow for interest, nevertheless, interest may be claimed on account of the 
secundum conventionem (which was probably a pactum adiectum
). Pauls reply, as we 
have it, states that the agreement is more than a depositum, i.e. it is not restricted by the 
nature of this contract, and therefore (et ideo) interest may be claimed with the actio 
depositi; whichif indeed this had been the casehad probably acted here as a legal 
carrier.  
The text has long been thought to be interpolated.
 It was likely abbreviated in 
order to focus discussion on the question of interest, which was probably less central in 
Pauls original reply.
 On a grammatical basis and the seemingly illogical et ideo clause, 
it was argued that Paul answered the question regarding the interest negatively; the 
negation later omitted by the compilers in order to fit the answer to the so-called doctrine 
of the depositum irregulare, allegedly customary under Justinian.
 Today it is accepted 
that no such formulised legal institution named depositum irregulare can be detected in 
However, see Gordon (1982) 366, who argues that we do not know the whole arrangement between the 
parties and the acknowledgement of the deposit should not be taken out of its context and explained as if 
it stood on its own.
Klami (1969) 91-3; Litewski (1975) 300. Theoretically, if secundum conventionem is to be read as 
parallel to the contractum, then we might be looking at two stipulations, one for the loan and the other for 
the interest; however, the Greek appears not to imply that several stipulations took place; but, see Gordon 
(1982) 370-1, who explains why the additional agreement could not have been a stipulatio.
Lenel (1889) vol. 1228, n. 1; Geiger (1962) 40-2; Michel (1962) 91-2; Klami (1969) 90-5; Litewski 
(1975) 299; Gordon (1982) 369; Brge (1987) 548.
According to Lenel (1889) vol. 1, 1227, n. 2, this excerpt could not have derived from a section in Pauls 
Responsa which dealt with deposits. Therefore, other, probably more essential, issues with which Paul 
was concerned must have been omitted by Justinians compilers (or their predecessors), so as to fit the 
excerpt under the Digest 16.3; Gordon (1982) 369-72.
Schulz (1949) 259-60; Geiger (1962) 40-2; Michel (1962) 91-2, who thinks that Paul allowed the use of 
the actio depositi for retrieving the principal, but not the interest; Klami (1969) 90-3, with further 
references to the different suggestions brought forth of reconstructing the omitted negation; Litewski 
(1975) 298-300; Brge (1987) 547-8; Zimmermann (1996) 218.
- 254 - 
Roman law at any given time.
 This appreciation, however, does not necessarily refute 
arguments in favour of a missing negation.
 Nevertheless, even if one assumes an 
interpolation which reversed Pauls original verdict, the fact that the actio depositi was 
considered as an option for claiming interest should not be underestimated. Whether or 
not Paul accepted using the actio depositi for suing for interest on deposits, he certainly 
considered it a possibility. Had interest-bearing deposits been alien to normal custom, 
there would have been neither reason nor motive to consider this actio to begin with. 
This excerptin which the Greek formula of  is understood by a 
prominent jurist as Paul to be equivalent to the Roman contract of depositumis a good 
stimulus to turn to the eastern provinces and the Greek-Hellenistic practice as it came to 
be formulated under Roman rule. 
8.4. Greek-Hellenistic Practice 
The Latin word depositum could be translated into the Greek word , which in 
the Hellenistic period had often signified deposits. However, in documentary evidence 
from the Roman period  is rarely used in this sense.
 Instead, starting from the first 
century CE the terms  and which should be understood as 
referring to the same type of contractual formula
frequently appear in Roman 
Klami (1969) 227-8, who showed that inconsistencies and self-contradictions detected in the alleged 
Justinian interpolations indicate that Justinian did not introduced a uniform Rechtsinstitution of 
depositum irregulare. His view is now generally accepted; Gordon (1982); Brge (1987) 536-7; 
Zimmermann (1996) 217.
Klami (1969) 94, who himself attributes an omission of a negation to a mistake of a scribe, which 
occurred sometime in the line of transmission.
 Bogaert (1968) 331, n. 153; Klami (1969) 22-3. 
Kastner (1962) 70-82, who argues for a difference between the two terms,  and , 
which had to do with an emphasis on the loyalty relation between the parties. However, his view is 
refuted by Simon (1965) 39-66, esp. 44, n. 19, who claims that the two terms were interchangeable; 
- 255 - 
Egyptian papyri.
 () contracts were normally used for the restoration of 
deposited property, whether or not banks were involved.
 Roman jurists seem to have 
understood both  and  as equivalents of the Latin depositum.
However, whereas depositum was a contractus, and is attested to have been perceived as 
such even in non-legal texts,
 () was a contractual formula, rather than a 
specific type of transaction.
 This meant that while depositum mainly referred to 
safekeeping, the range of transactions contracted via () was potentially 
wider.
 It included, in addition to safekeeping,
 also financial transactions carried out 
through bankers,
 participation in business ventures,
 and concealment of dowry 
contracts in de facto marriages of soldiers.
followed by Roth (1970) 6; Tenger (1993) 61, n. 216, who accepts that no substantial difference existed 
between the two terms, and ascribes the difference in spelling to the habit of the writer:  
appears in the contracts themselves, while  appears in petitions and court transcripts. It 
should be noted that the verb of the more ornamented form , , already 
appears in the sense of to entrust in deposit in inscriptions from the fourth century BCE; Lazzarini 
(1998). On  in Greek law in its pre-Hellenistic manifestations, see Ehrhardt (1958).
 E.g. the grapheion-register from Tebtunis; P.Mich. II 121; 123; 124; 125; 128 (Tebtunis, 42-49); on 
which, see Roth (1970) 2-3; Tenger (1993) 61-2. 
 Ehrhardt (1958); Simon (1965); Bogaert (1968) 331, n. 153; Maschi (1973) 404. 
Paul. Dig. 16.3.26.1 (4 respon.); Scaev. Dig. 32.37.5 (18 dig.). 
Already at the eve of the period here under investigation; Quint. Decl. 278.1.1. 
Roth (1970) 2; Klami (1986) 91-2.
Kaser (1971) 534, n. 1: Flle der hellenistischen , die umfassender ist als das rmische 
depositum, haben die Klassiker bald diesem, bald der donatio, bald dem fideicommissum zugerechnet. 
On the range of agreements contracted via  in the pre-Roman period, see Simon (1965) 44-6; 
Roth (1970) 5-7; Tenger (1993) 61-3. On the wider range of meanings of the verb  
compared with deponere, see Klami (1969) 23.
 E.g. BGU XV 2458 (Arsinoite Nome, 177), which tells of a veteran who during his tenure had deposited 
800 drachmae with his former comrader. On Domitians so-called depositum militare, see FIRA III 126  
(unknown origin, 117) (=PSI IX 1063), which preserves acknowledgement of deposits by soldiers written 
in Greek, which uses   (l. 5) and  [] (l. 13); Schulz (1949) 255-6; Litewski 
(1974) 223-4; Maschi (1973) 403-5. 
E.g. PSI VIII 921 (Arsinoite Nome, 143/4), ll. 10-23, a  settled through bankers; P.Oxy. XLI 
2975 (Oxyrhynchos, 198), an acknowledgement of a return of a deposit, where the depositor, probably 
frightened of travelling with a large sum of money over the Western Desert, had deposited 360 drachmae 
at a bank at the Ammonias oasis (known as Siwa), and two or three years later had re-collected his 
deposit through the agency of an Oxyrhynchite (banker?), most probably at Oxyrhynchos. Also, see 
Bogaert (1968) 331-51. 
- 256 - 
Despite the fact that () contracts were used in a range of situations, 
starting from the first century CE typical features of this contractual formula can clearly 
be identified.
 These include: (1) A lack of information concerning interest payment,
which fits well with the Roman legal restriction for collecting interest on deposits. (2) 
The right of the giver to recall her or his belongings at any given time,
 which also 
reconciles with Roman practice.
 And (3) a -clause, doubling the amount owed in 
cases where the contract had not been completed.
 A penalty which doubles the original 
sum is known from other ancient legal systems;
 and, specifically, the -clause may 
be paralleled with the duplum punishment known already from early Republican Rome,
though no longer in use by the time Rome took over Egypt.
E.g. P.Brem. 51 (Apollonopolite Nome, first half of the second century), the author of the letter asked the 
recipient to deposit for him by a  3,000 drachmae with a third party, with which he wished to 
make some sort of purchase. 
E.g. BGU I 114 (Arsinoite Nome, 98) (=M.Chr. 372, Coll. I-II); BGU III 729 (unknown origin, 144). 
Also, see Geiger (1962) 12; Simon (1965) 58-9; Roth (1970) 11; Tenger (1993) 10-11. 
For the claim that the origin of the -formula lies in the Ptolemaic period, see Kastner (1962) 2-
3; Khnert (1965) 118-9; followed by Tenger (1993) 62; but, see Roth (1970) 4-5, for the view that the 
formula was established only in the Roman period.
Simon (1965); Klami (1986) 95; Tenger (1993) 62.
 The formula often contains a promise of the depositary to return the deposit whenever [the depositor] 
chooses without any delay (or excuse); e.g. P.Athen. 28 (Theadelphia, 86), ll. 18-19,    
  /    (); P.Lond. II 310 (Pelusion, Arsinoite Nome, 
146), ll. 14-15, []  [  ]  [ ] /    [ ]  
(); CPR I 29 (Ptolemais Euergetis, 184), ll. 16-18,      /   
  []  /   [] ; P.Mich.Inv. 175 (Heracleopolis, 180-188), 
published in Youtie (1978), l. 5,     ; P.Warr. 6 (Ptolemais Euergetis, 198/9) 
(=SB V 7535), ll. 18-19, [] []  [   ] /   .
Kaser (1971) 534-5.
E.g. P.Lond. II 298 (Ptolemais Euergetis, 124), ll. 18-19,  / ; P.Mich.Inv. 829 
(Theadelphia, 129), published in Youtie (1977), l. 21,    ; P.Prag. I 31 (Herakleia, 
148), ll. 15-16,  () . For the view that the /duplum penalty in  
contracts did not derive from Ptolemaic law, see Roth (1970) 99-100; Klami (1986); Tenger (1993) 61-2. 
 For the Hammurabi Law, see Klami (1986) 94-5, with reference to further bibliography. A penalty 
doubling the original sum with regard to deposits appears also in Biblical law; Exodus 22.6-8; a text 
which both Philo of Alexandria (Ph. Special. Leg. 4.30-8), and Josephus (J. AJ 4.8.38.285f.), understand 
as referring to the  ; Ehrhardt (1958) 33-7. 
E.g. The Twelve Tables I.21 (=Gai. Inst. 3.190); VI.2 (=Cic. Off. 3.65); VIII.5 (=Plin. NH 18.3.12); VIII.9 
(=FIRA III 20); Paul. Coll. 10.7.11; Crawford (1996) no. 40, pp. 555-721. Also the Lex Coloniae 
- 257 - 
From the first century onwards one finds in the papyri also references to a  
 , which seems to have included all of the three components mentioned 
above.
 What is more, towards the end of the second century the components of this 
 were known well enough, so as to sometimes be neglected or dropped all together; 
presumably, because it sufficed to mention the phrase   , which 
implied these three characteristics.
 Opinions vary widely as to the nature and origin of 
this . Even if its origin lies in older practices,
 the appearance of this phrase in 
documentation does not predate the Roman period. It has been suggested that it was an 
outcome of a now-lost Roman imperial constitution advanced sometime in the 30s or 
 However, as argued by Dieter Simon and later accepted by Hannu Klami, the use 
of the word  speaks against this proposal.
 The available evidence suggests that it 
sprang directly from neither Ptolemaic nor Roman law.
 Rather, it was a practice which 
gained new popular acceptance during the Roman period. Whether the  was a 
formulised convention, which developed under Roman rule,
 or whether it was a fiction, 
Genetivae Iuliae seu Ursonensis (47-44 BCE), Ch. LXI ll. 6-7, mentions duplum punishment, FIRA I 21 
LXI; Crawford (1996) no. 25, pp. 393-454.
Klami (1986) 94-5.
The earliest evidence is perhaps P.Tebt.Wall 9 (Tebtunis, 33), l. 17,    [, which 
mentions repayment upon demand; Tenger (1993) 62. The earliest complete example of a  
contract which mentions the  is P.Athen. 28 (Theadelphia, 86). 
 E.g. P.Mich.Inv. 175 (Herakleopolis, 180-188), ll. 5-7, published in Youtie (1978), where the -
clause is not specified. 
Geiger (1962) 17-9; Simon (1965) 61, n. 93; Khnert (1965) 135-8, and 119, who argues (somewhat 
unconvincingly) that  contracts, though unattested for Ptolemaic Egypt, were indeed used at 
that period, however solely in an illiterate form.
 Kastner (1962) 42-5; Simon (1965) 61, n. 93. 
For reasons why the word  suggests that the    should not be attributed to an 
imperial constitution, see Simon (1965) 61, n. 93; Klami (1986) 95.
Roth (1970) 99-100; Klami (1986).
Simon (1965) 61-2; Roth (1970) 35, who suggests that using  and  as credit formulae 
developed in connection with the lowering by half of the maximum legal interest rate that followed 
Roman conquest of Egypt, and encouraged individuals to find new ways to conceal interest rates higher 
than the new maximum of twelve per cent; Klami (1986) 95-6, who suggestes that the formation of the 
- 258 - 
advanced to allow a penalising -clause to appear as an outcome of ancestral law, 
thereby gaining recognition in Roman courts,
 the fact stands that it appears in papyri 
only from the Roman period.  
The appearance of the   , as well as the emerging dominance 
of () contracts,
 is to be explained against the alternatives offered by the 
available legal formulae used in Egypt at that time. Both are manifestations of a change 
in the institutional environment, which followed the Roman creation of the province of 
Egypt. This change was stimulated, among other factors, by the introduction of the 
Roman maximum legal interest rate, which was half that of the Ptolemaic one.
 A desire 
to continue old habitsmore importantly, to retain former levels of profitencouraged 
creditors to shift their use from one juristic formula, namely ,
 to others, namely 
 and , which presumably allowed (an easier) concealment of interest rates 
higher than twelve per cent.
 This shift sometimes led to confusion in the use of credit-
related terminology. A mixture of terms is evident for  and  already from 
the last decades of the first century,
 and for  and  in the second 
   should be attributed, among other factors, to possible influences of Roman law on 
local Egyptian-Hellenistic practices, which had predated the Roman takeover of Egypt.
Roth (1970) 91-5, 100. 
E.g. its appearances in the grapheion-register of Tebtunis; P.Mich. II 121; 123; 124; 125; 128 (Tebtunis, 
42-49); Tenger (1993) 62.
What follows is guided by Roth (1970). 
 was the commonest formula used for business credit in Ptolemaic Egypt and usually involved a 
clause stating the rate of interest; Khnert (1965) 12; Roth (1970) 12; Tenger (1993) 9.  contracts 
are considered those contracts which contain either the noun , or a form of the verb ; 
Tenger (1993) 10. On  , see Roth (1970) 22-34. 
Roth (1970) 35; Bagnall (1977) 92, who, relying on Pestman (1971), argues that  referring to a 
loan does not indicate that no interest was charged, but rather that no interest was charged on the amount 
stated, i.e. interest was included in the amount of the loan. On the replacement of   by 
 , see Roth (1970) 35-53.
SB VI 9512 (Theadelphia, 87/88), where one finds  [ on the recto l. 10, and  on 
the verso l. 20. In several papyri the verb / is used together with the noun : 
PSI V 470 (Hermopolis, 102/103), l. 3; P.Col.Inv. 17 (Arsino, 146), published in Sheridan (1986), l. 10 
- 259 - 
century.
 It indicates a blurring of the once clear distinction between different formats 
of credit. As part of this process, available legal formats were adjusted to accommodate 
for somewhat different activities, casting new content into existing formulae. The 
increasing use of () contracts in de facto loans forged a new reality, in 
which this contractual formula contained new applications.
 It had now customarily 
accommodated deposits as well as loans, the latter often bearing interest. Since the same 
legal format was applied for both interactions, it is likely that the division between the 
two was becoming less clear. Thus, came to be deposits which at the same time could 
function as interest-bearing loans. One may assume that this had increased the 
attractiveness of deposits, gradually creating, de facto though not de jure, interest-bearing 
deposits. This was not an intentional legal innovation; rather, it was a novelty which 
sprang from a change of habits in the use of available legal formulae.  
But could it not be that this change of practice was restricted to Roman-Egypt 
alone? Hypothetically, it could. However, the appearances of the so-called depositum 
irregularethat is, the occurrences of legal cases in which Roman jurists seem to have 
considered easing legal formalities to allow for the existence of interest-bearing 
( ) and l. 15 (); P.Flor. I 1 (Hermopolis, 153) (=M.Chr. 243), Frag. B, ll. 29-31; 
BGU I 301 (Arsinoite Nome, 157), l. 5 () and l. 16 (the transaction labelled ); P.Lips. I 
12 (third or fourth century), ll. 13-14. Also, see Roth (1970) 52-3, 87-8; Tenger (1993) 9, 28-30.  
Simon (1965) 60, 63-5; Roth (1970) 11, who points out two papyri in which the terms  and 
 are used for the same artefacts: P.Mil.Vogl. I 25 (Tebtunis, 127), col. III, l. 37  col. IV, l. 2; 
P.Oxy. II 237, (Oxyrhynchos, 186), col. V, l. 21; to which Roth adds Grenfell and Hunt (1906) 61 
(unknown origin, 136), col. VI, l. 19 (), and l. 22 (). To these may be added 
perhaps P.Laur. I 2 (Arsinoite Nome, 148), where  appears in l. 3 and ]   in l. 4. 
However, the papyrus is fragmentary and the full context is missing; the middle participial of  
may have referred here to some sort of proof ( ), i.e. providing or showing evidence, rather 
than to a deposit of a sum of money. 
 Roth (1970) 11, 21-2, 53-6, who suggests that  contracts were commonly used not solely for 
safekeeping, but also as a type of loan, hypothesising that in the latter case not mentioning an interest rate 
meant that the  was used to conceal a usurious rate; but, see Tenger (1993) 64-7, for objections 
to Roths analysis.  
- 260 - 
depositsmay suggest that the phenomenon was common enough also outside of Egypt. 
This hypothesis is next examined within the context of another, third, legal system 
practiced within Roman regime, namely that of Jewish law. 
8.5. Jewish Practice 
I wish first to state that by no means is this section a general review of the Jewish 
Laws of Deposits,
 nor of the Jewish laws for charging interest in the Roman period.
Rather, its aim is to view Jewish legal sources for the periodmainly, the Mishnah
with regard to deposits, and to do so with Roman law in mind. The present examination 
looks for changes in practice, and especially evidence for the possibility of it 
accommodating interest-bearing deposits. Thus, it aims to broaden our understanding of 
the context within which interest-bearing deposits had presumably become a habitual 
phenomenon in the Roman empire. 
There are some aspects of the Jewish Laws of Deposits which resemble those 
attested in Greek-Hellenistic and Roman laws.
 Obviously there was the issue of 
safekeeping the deposit,
 and returning it unharmed to the depositor upon demand.
As a general rule, the depositary was to compensate the depositor for a loss or injury of 
the deposit; but only if the damages were not an outcome of vis major.
compensation for loss of or damage to a deposit was a penalty, which doubled the 
 On the Laws of Deposits (Dinei Shomrim,  ; literally Laws of Guardians) in the Tannaim 
period, see Henshke (1997), with further bibliography. 
 For which the starting point remains, Weingort (1979). 
 For a comparison of Greek and Jewish laws, see Ehrhardt (1958). 
 The origin of the Jewish Laws of Deposits is Biblical; Exodus 22.6-12. 
 Ph. Migr. 91, who gives such return (  ) as one of the tasks which are not to be 
performed on the seventh day (the Shabbat). 
 Exodus 22.9-12. 
- 261 - 
original sum, similarly to the Greek-Hellenistic -clause attested in () 
contracts. This twofold penalty appears already in Biblical law on deposits,
 and is later 
repeated in the Mishnah.
 Both Philo of Alexandria,
 and Josephus
our most 
prominent Jewish sources from the first century CE, whose writings have survived 
independent of Rabbinic literature, hence not influenced by later Jewish traditionstake 
the Biblical text in Exodus as referring to the   known to them from their 
own time.
The Mishnah, and following it also the Talmud, include under the Laws of 
Deposits (literally, the Laws of Guardians) four categories of depositaries/guardians, 
each with his own liabilities:
 a borrower (Shoel, ), who was obliged to return the 
same object given to him, and which entered a contract that can be paralleled to the 
Roman contract for commodatum; a lessee, or a tenant (Sokher, ), who can be 
paralleled with the conductor in the Roman locatio conductio (rei);
 a depositary 
(Shomer Hinam,  ), who was expected not to receive payment for safeguarding a 
deposit, and who entered a contract that can be paralleled to the Roman depositum; and a 
trustee (Nosse Sakhar,  ; elsewhere in this Mishnah tractate, Bava Metzia, which 
deals with the Laws of Guardians, this type of guardian is referred to also as Shomer 
Sakhar,   
), who was hired to safeguard a depositbe it a thing, place, or 
 Exodus 22.6-8. 
 Masechet Bava Metzia 3.1. 
 Ph. Special. Leg. 4.30-8, esp. 33. 
 J. AJ 4.8.38.285f. 
 Ehrhardt (1958) 33-7. 
 Masechet Bava Metzia 7.8:  , ,  , .  ,   ; --  
.      ,     --,   .     
 On the trichotomy of locatio conductio into rei, operarum, and operis, see Ch. 5, pp. 135-6, above. 
 On the transition from the name Nosse Sakhar to that of Shomer Sakhar, see Henshke (1997) 44-7. 
- 262 - 
person, and whose liabilities may be paralleled with those of a conductor hired to 
perform the task of a guard under the so-called locatio conductio operarum.  
The first two types of guardians (Shomrim, ) are irrelevant to the present 
topic of inquiry; unlike the distinction between the latter two, Shomer Hinam ( ) 
and Shomer Sakhar ( ).
 Owing to the nature of Jewish legal sources, in which 
excerpts are preserved often with no regard to chronological boundaries, it is hard to say 
when precisely this legal distinction was first created. By the time of concluding the 
redaction of the Mishnah (c. 220 CE) it had already been an integral and binding part of 
Jewish law; but in Biblical law neither Shomer Hinam nor Shomer Sakhar is 
mentioned.
 When was the distinction between the two made?
 Philo of Alexandria, 
writing in the first half of the first century, when considering the Laws of Deposits does 
not mention the two types of guardians, neither Hinam nor Sakhar; rather, he builds his 
discussion on the Biblical categorisation of deposits according to the subject of the 
deposit, i.e. objects or living things.
 A few decades afterwards, Josephus, too, makes 
no use of the expressions Shomer Hinam and Shomer Sakhar, and does not imply that 
such a distinction was known to him.
Turning to the Mishnah, the first issue to arouse suspicion as to the fact that the 
distinction between Shomer Hinam and Shomer Sakhar was not a binding one, and 
perhaps not even in existence, when the written structure of the Mishnah was first 
formulated, is the location of the categorisation into the four type of guardians within 
 While the former (Shomer Sachar,  ) was bound to compensate the depositor in cases of theft or 
loss of the deposit, the latters (Shomer Hinam,  ) liability was more restricted. 
 Exodus 22. 6-12; also Henshke (1997) 12-3. 
 What follows relies on Henshke (1997) 8-23. 
 Ph. Special. Leg. 4.35-6; and Henshke (1997) 22-3. 
 J. AJ 4.8.38. 
- 263 - 
the tractate Bava Metzia.
 One would expect that such clear categorisation would open 
the discussion on the Laws of Deposits, which appears in the third chapter of the tractate. 
However, that chapter opens with a verse which echoes and elaborates on the Biblical 
text,
 while the categorisation into four types of guardians appears only four chapters 
later, within a discussion of the obligations and liabilities of tenants (Sokherim, ).
The explanation for this, advanced by David Henshke, whose view on this matter 
is here largely accepted, is that the categorisation into four types of guardians was 
invented, or at least had become legally binding, only after the structure of the Mishnah 
was already formulated, but while the process of its redaction was still taking place.
Henshke talks of a first Halakha, which did not know a categorisation into two types of 
guardians, Hinam and Sakhar, but only one, a depositary, i.e. that person to whom a 
deposit is entrusted (tzeh hamafkidin etzlo,    ; mi shehapikadon etzlo,  
;( 
 and a later, second Halakha, which not only acknowledged the 
distinction between the two guardians (Hinam and Sakhar), but also saw the 
categorisation into four types of guardians as mandatory.
 Henshke is cautious not to 
give strict chronological lines as to when the second system was invented;
 instead he 
prefers concentrating on when it became the accepted view of the Sages of the Mishnah. 
According to Henshke, even though a later text
 may potentially suggest that the four 
 Masechet Bava Metzia 7.8. 
Masechet Bava Metzia 3.1, whose focus is on the distinction between a missing deposit and one which 
had been damaged; Henshke (1997) 1-16.
 This obscurity is noted in Daube (1944) 379-81; followed by Henshke (1997) 28. 
 Henshke (1997) 27-8. 
Idem 24-5.
 Idem 34. 
 Idem 21, n. 84, who suggests that the two systems, one with a distinction between Shomer Hinam and 
Shomer Sakhar, the other without, could have co-existed in Jewish practice for some time.  
 Mekhilta de-Rabbi Ishmael, Nezikin Order, 17. 
- 264 - 
guardians system was already known to Rabbis Akiva and Jose the Galilean, at the first 
decades of the second century;
 there is no straightforward evidence for it to have been 
the accepted (i.e. dominant) Halakha prior to the period of the students of Rabbi Akiva 
(c. 40-137),
 i.e. the four guardians system became binding only after the start of the 
period here under research.  
If Henshkes view is accepted, then this means that sometime during the first half 
of the second century actual practice of entrusting deposits had seen such changes that the 
Sages felt a need to make a mandatory legal distinction between depositaries who had not 
accepted charge for safekeeping a deposit (Shomer Hinam), and those who had (Shomer 
Sakhar).
 One possible explanation is that by the time a distinction between Shomer 
Hinam and Shomer Sakhar became binding, some deposits regularly had become an 
investment track, while at the same time depositing solely for the sake of safekeeping 
was still a widespread phenomenon. The Sages of the Mishnahperhaps like Roman 
jurists of the same period
wished to distinguish between the two types, so as to offer 
depositors legal protection which was in accord with the actual transactions taking place.   
The last point to be considered is the Mishnahs specific consideration of 
depositing coined money. For the entrusting of coins the Sages of the Mishnah 
considered three types of potential depositaries: a private individual (baal habait,  
 ,(which is a literal translation of the Greek  ; ,a banker (shulhani ,(
and a shop-owner (henvani, ). And for each type of depositary they considered two 
 Henshke (1997) 19-21. 
 Idem 21, esp. n. 84, also pp. 32, 117-31. 
 In Bava Metzia chapter three (on deposits), only Shomer Hinam is mentioned; while Shomer Sakhar and 
Nosse Sakhar both appear in the tractate, but not in the chapter on deposits. 
 As in the rulings on the bankruptcy of bankers, discussed on pp. 250-1, above. 
- 265 - 
instances, either the coins were deposited sealed (tzrurin, ), or unsealed (mutarin, 
.(
 In the former case, where coins are deposited sealed, or tied together in some 
other form, no matter who the depositary wasa banker, a shop-owner, or a private 
individualthe depositary was forbidden to use the deposit. In the latter case, where 
coins are deposited unsealed, i.e. dispersed, Jewish law gave different observations for 
the different types of depositaries. Where the depositary was a private individual, whether 
or not the coins were deposited sealed, the depositary was not allowed to use them; and 
therefore, if he kept safe the deposit as guardians should, the depositary was not liable 
for its loss. Where the depositary was a banker, and the coins were deposited with him 
not sealed or closed in some other way, he was permitted to make use of them; 
therefore, was liable for their loss. Where the depositary was a shop-owner and coins 
were deposited with him dispersed, opinions divided whether he was to be treated as a 
banker, or as a private individual. There is no mention in the Mishnah verse concerning 
these distinctions to either Shomer Hinam or Shomer Sakhar. Thus, it is quite possible 
that the verse was formulated before the authoritative acceptance of the distinction 
between these two types of guardians.
 Yet, what is clear from this verse is that 
bankers were certainly allowed to make use of money deposited with them; a ruling, one 
may presume, which was influenced by contemporaneous Greek-Hellenistic practice. 
Whether or not depositors who rendered bankers the right to make use of the money they 
 Masechet Bava Metzia 3.10-11: (01 )  ,    ,  --   
 --(    00,    ;    , . )--  
;   ,  .  ,   ;   ,   .  ,  
   ,   ;   ,   .   ,   ;  --   
.,   
 Henshke (1997) 37-8. According to the logic of the later Halakha, that of the four types of guardians, 
where a banker accepted sealed coins this was a case of Shomer Hinam, and where dispatched that of 
Shomer Sakhar. 
- 266 - 
deposited were rewarded in the form of recieving interest on their deposits, is not referred 
to in the tractate. One may assume that they very well may have been; yet this 
observation stays in the realm of an educated guess and no more. 
8.6. Back to Roman Law
That by the early third century de facto interest-bearing deposits had become an 
empire-wide phenomenon may be suggested by an excerpt from Ulpian, where it is stated 
that tutors who converted their wards money to their own use were liable to pay interest 
on it, but someone who has not lent it at interest, or has not deposited it, has certainly not 
turned the money into his own use.
 It follows that using money meant either lending it 
at interest or depositing it. In both cases a tutor was to pay interest to the ward; and it can 
logically be concluded that this was so, because in both cases the tutor had benefited from 
the wards money, i.e. had himself received interest on it. If this was indeed the case, than 
interest-bearing deposits became a rather widespread convention. In fact, from an excerpt 
from Scaevola it appears that as early as the second century, at least within the context of 
providing care for the property of minors, interest-bearing deposits were common 
practice.
 In this excerpt a codicil is cited in Greek, in which a testator acknowledged 
receiving as deposit () a sum of five thousand denarii which were to be 
paid with interest ( ) to a certain Maximus on his reaching puberty, by which 
 Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.4 (35 ad ed.): ceterum non utique qui non faeneravit vel non deposuit, in suos usus 
vertit  
 Scaev. Dig. 32.37.5 (18 dig.): Codicillis ita scripsit: "       
     ,        
 ,    ,      ,   
      "  Quaesitum est, an ad depositam pecuniam petendam 
sufficiant verba codicillorum, cum hanc solam nec aliam ullam probationem habeat. respondi: ex his 
quae proponerentur, scilicet cum iusiurandum dedisse super hoc testator adfirmavit, credenda est 
scriptura  
- 267 - 
time the total sum will amount to thirty thousand denarii. In the excerpt as we have it 
Scaevolas only concern regards the question whether or not on account of this codicil it 
could be concluded that the testator had indeed bound himself by an oath to pay these 
sums. Scaevola makes no reference to the issue of interest-bearing deposits, and it seems 
as if heand presumably also the partiesaccepted without dispute the fact the 
, which Scaevola takes to be a depositum, could be done for interest. 
Once de facto interest-bearing deposits entered common practice, this was prone 
to have had economic consequences. Allowing depositors to collect interest on their 
deposits meant, first of all, that depositing with others had become more attractive, as it 
was now generally accepted as an investment track. It also meant that at least some of the 
money, which in the past was deposited only for the sake of safekeeping, could now be 
employed in economic activity.
 As de facto interest-bearing deposits became more 
acceptable it permitted deposited money to be treated more freely as a financial 
investment, with depositaries further employing it in other economic activities, thereby 
potentially allowing for a leverage mechanism, whose outcome might have been a 
widening of the money supply. 
The conceptual consequences are also significant. Accepting the right of 
depositors to gain interest on their deposits corresponds with a wider approach detectable 
also elsewhere in Roman law, according to which wealth, no matter which form it took, 
was not to be left idle.
 This precise terminology is attested in an excerpt from 
Scaevolas Responsa, where Quintus Caecilius Candidus acknowledged in a letter to 
 Rathbone and Temin (2008) 397-8, who interpret the Sulpicii archive as evidence for interest-bearing 
bank deposits. 
 Ulp. Dig. 27.4.3.4 (36 ad ed.): ei sterilis esse pecunia, regarding a tutors money advanced on his 
wards affairs; discussed on p. 271, below.  
- 268 - 
Paccius Rogatianus that he had received the latters money and entered it into his account 
(ad ratiunculam meam), and that he would see to it that this money should not be kept 
idle, that is to say, as Caecilius Candidus elaborated, I shall make it my business that 
you get interest on it.
 The transaction attested here includes the transfer or entrustment 
of a sum of money (presumably coinage), its record in the account-books, and the 
promise of the receiver to make best efforts to employ the sum so that it would yield 
interest. Although the transaction is not named depositum, its first part certainly fits such 
a contract, and the fact that it appears in the Digest under section 16.3, which deals with 
deposits, suggests that it was indeed a depositum.
The question which is raised for the second-century jurist is whether or not on the 
strength of this letter interest can be collected. Scaevola answers affirmatively, justifying 
his answer with the somewhat vague explanation that this was a bona fide action. In the 
text, as we have it,
 Scaevola does not specify which bona fide action is in question. It 
could have been a mandatum;
 or, alternatively, it may very well have been a 
depositum, a view supported by the fact that the text appears under Digest 16.3.
indeed Scaevola had considered this a depositum, the bona fide action referred to being 
the actio depositi, this is quite a remarkable ruling. The jurists positive answer regarding 
the collection of interest meant that he acknowledged the letter as the documentation for 
Scaev. Dig. 16.3.28 (1 respon.): quibus ut primum prospiciam, ne vacua tibi sint: id est ut usuras eorum 
accipias, curae habebo.
Geiger (1962) 31-3; Klami (1969) 36-9; Litewski (1974) 239; Gordon (1982) 365.
Even if one assumes that the wording of the excerpt had not been interpolated, it was surely abbreviated; 
Klami (1969) 36-9; Litewski (1974) 237-8.
Segr (1907) 232, n. 3; Michel (1962) 80-1. But see Klami (1969) 36-7, for a structured analysis of the 
various views concerning the bona fide action in question (plus bibliography), as well as convincingly 
rejecting the possibilities that it was mutuum, condictio, or receptum argentarii; Litewski (1974) 240-1, 
who explains why the possibility of mandatum should be refuted.
Geiger (1962) 31-3; Klami (1969) 36-9; Litewski (1974) 239; Gordon (1982) 365. This text is often 
considered in discussions of the so-called depositum irregulare.
- 269 - 
an additional agreement augmenting the depositum, which could have been enforced with 
the actio depositi acting as a legal carrier. We have already seen a similar approach in a 
reply given by the third-century jurist Paul, who accepted a letter recording an obligation 
to pay interest as a binding commitment agreed in a secundum conventionem.
Furthermore, the jurists positive answer meant an implicit recognition of the right of 
depositors to collect interest on their deposits, and therefore, also, of the right of 
depositaries to employ, i.e. invest, deposited money.
Could such relaxation of Roman legal formalitiesaccording to which the actio 
depositi can only be used to recover that which was deposited, interest excluded
reasonably be assumed to have come from a second-century jurist? The second part of 
Scaevolas answer conditions the depositors right to collect interest on the strength of 
the letter by either the collection of interest by the letters author himself, or by the fact 
that the latter had employed the money for his own use.
 This condition brings the 
discussion back to the connection made above
 between interest payment on the one 
hand, and the use (or enjoyment) of a monetary sum on the other hand. As seen in the 
previous chapter, as a general rule, one who had used anothers money (qui in usus suos 
convertit) had to pay interest on it.
 Such connection, between using money and paying 
interest on it, appears in the context of deposits in the ruling of the emperor Gordian 
mentioned above;
 but could it be accommodated within the context of depositum also 
Paul. Dig. 16.3.26.1 (4 respon.), on which, see discussion on pp. 252-4, above.
Michel (1962) 80; Litewski (1974) 242.
Scaev. Dig. 16.3.28 (1 respon.): Respondi deberi ex bonae fidei iudicio usuras, sive percepit sive 
pecunia in re sua usus est.
In Ch. 7, pp. 203-4, above. 
Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.3 (31 ad ed.); 26.7.10 (49 ad ed.); and see the previous chapter for further references.
 CJ 4.34.4 (Gord., 238-244). 
- 270 - 
by a second-century jurist? The jurists justification for his positive reply suggests that he 
permitted the depositor to collect interest not so much on account of a secundum 
conventionem (or a pactum adiectum), but rather due to the bona fide nature of the 
transaction, presumably a deposit. Scaevola ruled in favour of interest payment not due to 
the mere use of anothers money, but rather due to the implications which derived from 
the legal situation. Because in bona fide actions one should not profit from anothers 
property,
 any interest collected on a deposit had in fact belonged to the rightful owner 
of the money.  
Theoretically, interest paid to the depositor could have been a penalty inflicted on 
the depositary on account of misusing a deposit. Such an interpretation could have well 
reconciled Scaevolas positive reply with the standards of classical Roman law 
concerning interest-bearing deposits. However, here it seems not to have been the case, 
since the author of the letter writes as if he knew that his correspondent (i.e. the 
depositor, Paccius Rogatianus) expected him to employ the money is such a way so that it 
would yield interest. Thus, explaining Scaevolas reply as if it concerned a penalty 
interest does not account for the terminology of the letter itself. The letter does not 
represent juristic authority; rather, it preserves terminology used between business 
associates or (perhaps) friends. The wording of the letter, as we have it,
 clearly 
indicates that the money was given (deposited?) with the intention that, if possible, it 
would be employed to raise interest-profits.  
Ulp. Dig. 17.1.10.3 (31 ad ed.): quia bonae fidei hoc congruit, ne de alieno lucrum sentiat.
The original letter may have been abbreviated, but no reason to assume its wording was significantly 
interpolated.
- 271 - 
In view of all of the sources examined so far, it is not unlikely that this excerpt
gives evidence for de facto interest-bearing deposit. Paccius Rogatianus had indeed 
entrusted money with Quintus Caecilius Candidus. This was given as a deposit with the 
understanding that it would not be left idle (ne vacua sint), and, if possible, would yield 
interest. That it was not always possible to find borrowers is attested elsewhere, in an 
excerpt from Paul, where the distinguished jurist states that tutors that could not lend out 
their pupils money since quod non erat cui crederet, were freed from the obligation to 
do so.
 The obligation of tutors to invest their wards moneynegligence of which 
carried with it a penalising interest payment to compensate the ward
may be seen as 
prompted by the appreciation that money should not be left idle. Even when a tutor 
advanced his own money on the property of a ward, this sum could be recovered together 
with interest for his money ought not to be unprofitable (ei sterilis esse pecunia).
Seen within this wider context, the hypothesis advanced herenamely, that the right of 
depositors to gain interest on their deposits became acceptable, and was considered 
reasonable, perhaps even justifiedappears even more convincing.  
What impact, if any, did these agendas in common practice have on Roman law? 
The Hellenistic practice, which used () contracts as a legal framework to 
enable the operation of deposit-banking,
 was first accommodated in Rome by applying 
 Scaev. Dig. 16.3.28 (1 respon.). 
 Paul. Dig. 26.7.12.4 (38 ad ed.). 
Gai. Dig. 17.1.2.6 (2 cott.); Ulp. Dig. 26.7.7.3; 6-7 (35 ad ed.); Paul. Dig. 26.7.49 (2 sent.).
Ulp. Dig. 27.4.3.4 (36 ad ed.).
On the importance of deposits for the operation of banks, see Geiger (1962) 44-54; Bogaert (1968) 331-
51, who stresses that Les dpts sont essentiels pour la banque. Sans dpts, un commence bancaire 
n'est pas possible (p. 331); Klami (1986); Brge (1987); Zimmermann (1996) 217; but see, Tenger 
- 272 - 
to it the regulations of mutuum.
 Treating such an agreement as mutuum was in accord 
with Roman law and probably suited bankers, whose motivation for accepting money 
was business-oriented rather than one based on friendship or favour.
 However, while 
mutuum was advanced primarily to benefit the receiver, depositswhether or not through 
banks, and whether or not interest was involvedwere advanced primarily to benefit the 
giver.
 It appears that a mismatch based on motivation is embedded in the choice to 
treat this type of agreement as mutuum.  
With the growing acceptability of de facto interest-bearing deposits, the actio 
depositi had increasingly offered a more suitable alternative. Although Roman jurists 
were reluctant to consider interest-bearing bank deposits as true deposits, nevertheless, 
they never prohibited the practice, which presumably had become a widespread 
phenomenon,
 with their verdicts aimed at the extreme event of insolvency.
 We have 
already seen Pauls reply in the face of an interest-bearing (), which 
allowed the use of the actio depositi for recovering the principal,
 though probably not 
for the collecting interest, which was contracted in an additional agreement. Similar 
perplexity arises also from a rescript of the emperor Gordian (238-244), promulgated 
(1993) 66, who argues that in most () contracts from the first three centuries CE private 
individuals, rather than bankers, are the ones acting as depositaries. 
Ulp. Dig. 12.1.9.9 (26 ad ed.); 12.1.10 (2 ad ed.); Paul. Coll. X.7.9 (2 Sent.): Si pecuniam deposuero 
eaque uti tibi permisero, mutua magis videtur quam deposita, ac per hoc periculo tuo erit; to be 
compared with Paul. Dig. 16.3.29.1 (2 sent.); on which, see Schulz (1949) 258-9. Also, see Schulz (1949) 
255-6; Klami (1969) 227-9; Maschi (1973) 383-5; Litewski (1974) 216-23; (1975) 280-7; Vigneron 
(1984) 321-2; Brge (1987) 548-9. On the reluctance of Roman jurists to incorporate Hellenistic legal 
institutions, see Simon (1965); Kaser (1971) 178-9; Vigneron (1984). 
Brge (1987); Bogaert (1968) 307-63.
This distinction has been used to explain the emergence of the so-called depositum irregulare; Gordon 
(1982) 368-9; Zimmermann (1996) 216-7.
 As believed by Rathbone and Temin (2008). 
Ulp. Dig. 16.3.7.2 (30 ad ed.); 42.5.24.2 (63 ad ed.); Papin. Dig. 16.3.8 (9 quaest.).
Paul. Dig. 16.3.26.1 (4 respon.).
- 273 - 
only several years after the period here under investigation,
 which assumed that using  
a deposit involved an obligation to pay interest to the depositor, though the use of the 
actio depositi was allowed for recovering only the principal and not the interest. Perhaps 
under Justinian the actio depositi was extended to be made available also for 
compensating depositors for rendering the right to use money they had deposited.
As for the period here under investigation, from the second century onwards, time 
and again the question was raised whether interest on deposits could legally be imposed. 
Had interest-bearing deposits not been a widespread phenomenon, this issue would not 
have become a legal dilemma. Though this possibility repeatedly came up, it was 
continuously rejected by jurists. Roman jurists were reluctant to alter fundamental legal 
definitions; hence, refused to allow using the actio depositi for collecting interest. Yet, 
their scholastic, sometimes even confused, answers should not be attributed to 
interpolation alone. Rather, they preserve traces of a real confrontation between practice 
and law. As often happens, law adjusts slower than persons to a new reality. Individuals 
spot opportunities and alter their behaviour accordingly. By doing so they may create the 
conditions for a conceptual shift.
 They use available legal formats for their own 
purposes, sometimes bestowing on them new meaning, which more traditional legal 
interpretation may find hard to reconcile. In the case of interest-bearing deposits, it is 
argued here that after long endured tension between law and custom, actual practice 
CJ 4.34.4 (Gord., 238-244). Also, see Michel (1962) 93; Klami (1969) 112-7; Klami (1986) 93.
 Kaser (1971) 536; Zimmermann (1996) 218. Previously scholars argued that Justinian had legally 
established the so-called depositum irregulare; Maschi (1973) 381-407; Litewski (1974) 215: Dans le 
droit de Justinien, lexistence du dpt irrgulier est clairement confirme par quelques textes; (1975) 
311: Sous Justinien, le dpt irrgulier tait admis sans aucune restriction. However, see Gordon (1982) 
363-4; Klami (1986); Brge (1987) 536-7,554; for the view that no coherent doctrine of depositum 
irregulare had ever existed at any period of Roman law.
 Rathbone and Temin (2008) 416, who talk of conceptual adjustments to banking practices manifested 
by the so-called depositum irregulare. 
- 274 - 
prevailed and legal formalities were eased to accommodate, at least partially, the practice 
of collecting interest on deposits. 
It is doubtful whether a practice common in Egypt alone would have had such 
repeated and influential presence in Roman law. It is more likely that interest was 
habitually collected on deposits also elsewhere in the empireas may also be inferred 
from developments in the Jewish Laws of Deposits, repeatedly confronting Roman 
courts with this practice. A wider appreciation of the right of individuals to profit from 
their possessions, especially where others were given an opportunity to benefit from it as 
well; the advantages which de facto interest-bearing deposits offered to both parties, 
depositors/lenders and depositaries/borrowers; and the approach according to which 
money should not be left idle; all contributed to the attractiveness and the growing 
acceptability of de facto interest-bearing deposits. Following Klamis observations, made 
almost three decades ago,
 I am somewhat reluctant to consider this purely in terms of 
Hellenistic influence on Roman law.
 Rather than thinking in dichotomous terms, 
contrasting the Greek () with the Roman depositum (and the alleged 
depositum irregulare), the approach advanced here advocates an integration of the two 
corpora of evidence, the legal and the documentary.
 Instead of considering the various 
contractual formats for interest-bearing deposits as belonging to parallel legal systems 
(Roman, Greek, Jewish), discussions should be incorporated within same the analysis; 
thereby allowing a better appreciation of the institutional environment within which 
individuals had managed their economic operations.   
Klami (1986).
Which is a common view in the scholarship; e.g. Vigneron (1984); Zimmermann (1996) 217-8.
Simon (1965); Klami (1986); who both also follow such an approach.
- 275 - 
Perhaps it is impossible to pin down the origins of the practice which allowed de 
facto interest-bearing deposits. At no time during the period here under investigation was 
it legally accepted by Roman jurists so that permission would be granted to use the actio 
depositi for retrieving interest. Be that as it may, from the first century onwards this 
practice became commoner, certainly in Egypt, and presumably also elsewhere. The 
stimuli behind this shift should not be attributed to an official modification of law (a top-
down alteration), but rather to a tendency of individuals to shift their use from one legal 
institution to others (a bottom-up process); thereby casting new meaning into existing 
legal formats, with the effect of creating a new institutional, therefore also economic, 
environment.  
The acceptability of de facto interest-bearing deposits had probably accelerated 
during the second century. For how else are we to explain the inclination of Roman 
jurists towards a relaxation of legal formalities, if not by a change in reality, which 
persistently urged them to consider the actio depositi in cases where interest was raised 
on deposits? By the early third century, de facto interest-bearing deposits became 
common enough so that the practice was considered not only reasonable, but also right. 
Surely there were still deposits entrusted solely for the sake of safekeeping (as inferred 
also from the Jewish legal distinction between Shomer Sakhar and Shomer Hinam), but 
there were also those given for investment purposes, and the latters share, so it seems, 
was increasingly growing.
 Since money was now being deposited not merely for the 
sake of safekeeping, but also as a channel of investment, this meant that it was perceived 
not only as a store of wealth, but also as a financial instrument. Interest-bearing deposits 
 As argued also by Rathbone and Temin (2008). 
- 276 - 
had widened the opportunities available to wealthier Romans; they allowed for a possible 
increase in the amount of money in circulation; and, enabled one to profit from the 
participation of her or his depositary in economic operations, in which the true owner of 
the money was never directly involved, and perhaps not even aware of. In doing so, 
interest-bearing deposits had the potential of accommodating a leverage mechanism, 
which may have allowed for an increase in the supply of money; with the result of 
transforming money into a much more omnipresent phenomenon. 
- 277 - 
Part IV: Conclusion 
- 278 - 
Chapter 9: The Complexity of Roman Money 
9.1. Introduction 
Money is a symbol which represents value. As such, it is an abstract notion based 
on social convention. It is a formation of thought with which individuals comprehend 
their social reality, construct their choices, and form their actions. Yet, more often than 
not money has physical manifestations, such as certain commodities, tokens, or records of 
obligation. Thus, money displays a Janus-faced oddity: it is both amorphous (i.e. abstract) 
and concrete (i.e. tangible); the two characteristics inseparably intertwined, making 
money difficult to define, scrutinise, and model.
 These general observations are as true 
for modern times as they are for antiquity, and play a part in many of the discussions 
regarding money, as well as explain some of the ambiguities that arise from it.  
The present study looked at the institutional framework within which money 
operated in the Roman empire in the second and early-third centuries CE. It follows the 
current trend in economic history to adopt approaches advanced by New Institutional 
Economics (NIE),
 while generally accepting Keynesian claims for moneys endogenous 
nature.
 As stated at the beginning of this study, its initial starting point was rather 
traditional: viewing models, and especially their visual representations, as aimed at 
providing clear (hence, often simplified) explanations of the complexity of the real 
world.
 However, as my search for possible models progressed, I came to realise that 
 Similarly, Seaford (2004) 1. 
E.g. Scheidel, Morris and Saller (2007a).
On endogenous money, see Moore (1988); (2006); Wray (1990); Rochon (2003); Fontana (2004); Dow 
(2006); Lavoie (2006); Gnos and Rochon (2008).
Snowdon and Vane (2005) 4. 
- 279 - 
traditional economic visualisationsbased on relatively straightforward diagrams, which 
tend to oversimplify reality, usually in order to stress certain aspects of itdo not provide 
a satisfactory format to visually represent the historical evidence. That is, models which 
only account for price inflation, or metal shortage, or over-taxation, or imbalance 
between production and consumption, often fail to account for interactions between such 
phenomena. They do not provide sufficient explanation of what was going on in the 
Roman economy, because they tend to oversimplify reality, or to focus only on one-
dimension of it. Whilst attempting to create some sort of abstract visualisationi.e. one 
which is not a projection of a database, but rather offers a conceptual frameworkI came 
across complexity-oriented visualisations. These offer a wider spectrum of possibilities to 
represent multi-linkages, repetition, emergence, and loop and quasi-loop formations; 
which, if later are translated back into a narrative format, can improve our understanding 
of the historical evidence. Thus, it is via graphical representation that I first appreciated 
the advantages of analysing economic phenomena as complex structures.  
It is with these advantages in mind that I wish to turn to visualisation in order to 
advance a complexity-oriented approach for graphically modelling the historical example 
of Roman money. Such an approach stresses the ability of money to allow new patterns 
of activity to be created by individuals who self-adjust their use of it, altering and 
widening its application in accord with their own needs, and the continuously evolving 
system in which they operate; thereby allowing the system to become more than the sum 
of its components. Since the visual product of such a modelling is somewhat 
counterintuitive to mainstream economic linear model-building, in what follows I give 
- 280 - 
some clarifications and discuss several examples of visual complexity, in order to then 
turn to analysing Roman money with the help of complexity-oriented visualisations.  
9.2. Visualisation 
Visualisation is the process of forming a mental picture of something not actually 
present to the sight.
 Yet, it is not only an internal construct of the mind; visualisation 
refers also to the graphical representation of concepts or data. As such it becomes an 
external artefact which functions as a cognitive tool. By producing a visual imagethat 
condenses massive amounts of data, or communicates a message, whether abstract or 
concretevisualisation supports the comprehension of complex ideas, hence may also 
assists in forming hypotheses.
One of the oldest formats for displaying information graphically is tree-structured 
models (e.g. Fig. 1).
 Tree models are very helpful in displaying hierarchical and chrono-
logical connections, but have little, if any, flexibility for accommodating recurrence, 
duplication, repetition, reciprocity, or any other circulatory-natured phenomenon. In such 
representations the explanatory narrative is generally that of one thing which leads to 
another, i.e. a kind of descriptive mechanical causality,
 with very little room for circular 
occurrences.
 Similar observations can be made regarding many of the standard graphs 
used today: bar charts, pie charts, scatter plots, line charts, etc.; all derive from 
nineteenth-century techniques for graphic representation, which fit the scientific 
Ware (2013) 2-4.
Lima (2011) 21-41, who offers a short history of Tree-Models.
Van der Leeuw and McGlade (1997b) 13.
 For criticism on Tree-Models, see Lima (2011) 43-69. 
- 281 - 
paradigm of reduction,
 i.e. breaking nature down into the simplest possible elements 
and defining rules on how these elements interact.
Fig. 1.
 Arbor naturalis et logicalis, 
(Tree of nature and logic), 
in Ramon Llulls Ars Magna 
(=Ars Generalis Ultima) (1305) 
By contrast, much of the new network- and complexity-oriented methods of 
visualisation, which became ever more frequent in the last two decades, possess better 
capacity for displaying circular or overlapping formations that characterise complex 
phenomena. These methods tend to produce complex graphical designs, which nestle on 
On nineteenth-century scientific paradigm of thought as one which concerns simple problems, see 
Weaver (1948).
 Manovich (2011) 11-13, citation taken from p. 13. 
This diagram, appearing in a sixteenth-century publication of Logica nova (1512), is comprised of the 
tree of Porphyry (centre), with ten leaves representing types of questions (right), and ten representing 
keys to principles for generating answers (left). On the work of the thirteen-century philosopher Ramon 
Llull, see Bonner (2007) esp. 27-31, on Llulls use of visualisations and graphs.
- 282 - 
network theory; they are often based on computerisation, statistics, and huge amounts of 
data; and can depict an astonishing range of interconnectedness expressed by an intense 
arrangement of nodes and links, which produce compound, often condensed, visual 
formations.
 This new type of visualisation may imitate molecular constructions, either 
centralised or circular;
 may depict flows, visually assimilating either waves
 or arcs
or reproduce visual patterns which resemble those apparent in the natural, i.e. biological, 
world, such as cell and bacteria formations.
When it comes to visualisation of complexity-oriented economic analyses, in 
particular those which concern money and financial markets, as far as I am aware, 
econophysics represents the forefront of research.
 Econophysics is a newly emerging 
field,
 which applies mathematical methods used in physics, and especially statistical 
physics, for the analysis of socioeconomic complex systems.
 It aims at describing 
socioeconomic systems as complex systems suggesting the unavoidable result of 
bringing together numerous components in a non-simple manner;
 while avoiding a 
priori assumptions concerning agents such as are usually used in mainstream economics, 
namely, rationality and personal characteristics such as utility function and risk 
aversion.
 It bases its methodology on empirical verification,
 with the main objective 
Lima (2011) 97, 158, who offers a sort of a manual for possible schemata.
Idem 98-157, who gives examples for network-based visualisations. 
Idem 188-91.
Idem 160-3.
Idem 164-6; Davies (2005) 152-3, who considers also cellular structures for analysing ancient economies.
It is often concerned with financial markets; but, see Casti (2002), for criticism.
Rosser (2008); Jovanovic and Schinckus (2013).
Schinckus (2013); Jovanovic and Schinckus (2013).
Schinckus (2013) 3655.
Rosser (2008); Schinckus (2013) 3655.
Schinckus (2013); Jovanovic and Schinckus (2013) section III.2, pp. 19-20 in the online version.
- 283 - 
of describing past phenomena through models based on historical analyses of empirical 
data, and speculating about probability of future events.
Although econophysics rests on mathematics which is beyond the scope of the 
present study (and the existing capacity of its author); and although the volume of 
detailed data which econophysic studies rely on can only be dreamt of by ancient 
historians; still the visual product of econophysic modelling may serve as a helpful 
methodological tool for the purpose of the current discussion.
 I wish to turn attention to 
one specific research technique, which offers a tool for filtering information in complex 
systems, and applies it in an analysis of the one-hundred most capitalised stocks traded in 
the U.S. equity markets during the years 1995-1998.
 Again, it is neither the 
mathematics, nor the database which should concern us here. Rather, I wish to focus on 
the graphical representation of the model (Fig. 2); what its authors call the Planar 
Maximally Filtered Graph, obtained from the fully connected graph associated with the 
correlation coefficient matrix of the data
With the stationary hypothesis according to which future data will be a statistical reflection of past data; 
Schinckus (2013) 3656, 3660, 3661 n. 26.
Casti (2002), with criticism.
Tumminello, Aste, Di Matteo, et. al. (2005).
Idem 10423.
- 284 - 
Fig. 2.
The graph displays cross-correlation computed by using daily returns of stocks, 
which are indicated with their Ticker Symbol, i.e. an abbreviation used to identify 
publicly traded stocks. The correlation provides a similarity measure among the behavior 
of different elements in the system,
 although the link lengths do not reflect the value of 
the similarity measure between vertices.
 This computation of cross-correlation is 
displayed on a topological planar, i.e. one which can be drawn on a plane without edge-
Idem 10423, Fig. 2.
Idem 10421.
Idem 10423.
- 285 - 
crossings. Such a type of visualisation has been labelled Organic Rhizome,
 relying on 
the philosophical concept of a rhizome as developed by the French philosophers Gilles 
Deleuze and Flix Guattari.
 According to Deleuze and Guattari: 
the rhizome connects any point to any other point It has neither 
beginning nor end, but always a middle (milieu) from which it grows and 
which it overspills. the rhizome is an acentered, nonhierarchical, 
nonsignifying system without a General and without an organizing 
memory or central automaton, defined solely by a circulation of states.
Though the authors of the econophysic study cited above do not mention 
Deleuzes and Guattaris notion of a rhizome, the visualisation which they advance 
displays precisely such a formation. The same can be said also with regard to other 
complexity-oriented visualisations. For example, let us consider the visual product of a 
recent research on obesity funded by the UK government, which offers a qualitative study 
for mapping the complex systemic structure of obesity (Figs. 3).
 Unlike the stocks-
equity-market econophysic model, which creates a graphic projection of detailed data 
(Fig. 2), the obesity model is less database-oriented, in the sense that it is not statistically 
driven. Its authors chose the visualised format of a causal loop diagram,
 which is a 
model based on system dynamics methodology developed for strategic decision 
making.
 Causal loop diagrams are not predictive models; their essential contribution is 
Lima (2011) 158, 192-5.
Deleuze and Guattari (1987); cited in Lima (2011) 44.
Deleuze and Guattari (1987) 21; and they continue: Unlike a structure, which is defined by a set of 
points and positions, with binary relations between the points and biunivocal relationships between the 
positions, the rhizome is made only of lines: lines of segmentarity and stratification as its dimensions, 
and the line of flight or deterritorialization as the maximum dimension after which the multiplicity 
undergoes metamorphosis, changes in nature.
Vandenbroeck, Goossens, and Clemens (2007); Lima (2011) 194.
Lima (2011) 158, 194, who categorises this model as organic rhizome.
Vennix (1996) 3-7, on the assumptions of system dynamics methodology; pp. 52-60, on casual loop 
models. 
- 286 - 
in summarising and communicating trends, relationships and constraints that influence 
the behaviour of complex systems, by displaying interdependencies within a set of 
relevant, causally linked variables, which can be scaled at various levels of aggregation 
(e.g. individual, group, society).
 Again, what is of interest to the present discussion is 
not the research on obesity per se, but rather its graphical product: 
Fig. 3a.
Vandenbroeck, Goossens, and Clemens (2007) 3-6.
Idem 76, Fig. 12.
- 287 - 
Fig. 3b.
In this example (Fig. 3a) nine groups of factors have been identified as 
contributing to the obesity epidemic.
 These are organised according to Thematic 
Clusters displayed via a causal loop diagram (Fig. 3b). In causal loop models, the 
systems elements (i.e. variables) are represented by boxes, and the causal relationships 
between variables are represented by arrows. Any two variables may be connected by 
Available at http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/foresight/docs/obesity/11.pdf .
With an interactive map which allows separately to view each of these nine groups produced by shiftN:
http://www.shiftn.com/obesity/Full-Map.html.
http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/foresight/docs/obesity/11.pdf
http://www.shiftn.com/obesity/Full-Map.html
- 288 - 
either linear or circular causalities. In linear causalities the variable at the tail of the arrow 
affects the variable at the point, in either a positive manner, i.e. both variables change in 
the same direction (displayed in the diagram with arrowed lines); or, a negative one, i.e. 
variables change in opposite directions (displayed with lines that end with a square); and 
causalities may differ also in strength and the time delay to which they are subject. 
Circular causalities (from A to B to A) produce feedback-loops and are an important 
feature of causal loop modelling since they help to explain the dynamic behaviour of the 
system. Lastly, the essential aim of causal loop models is explanatory rather than 
predictive; i.e. to gain insight concerning the underlying structure of a complex situation, 
with the system map showing how variables interrelate.
 Thus, for example, we may 
consider linkages between psychological elements and Food Environment (Fig. 3c), or 
the role of Education in influencing obesity (Fig. 3d); while these visualisations can later 
be verbalised (as detailed in the footnotes for each Figure). 
Vandenbroeck, Goossens, and Clemens (2007) 4-6.
- 289 - 
Fig. 3c.
Vandenbroeck, Goossens, and Clemens (2007) 29: Map 22  Leverage point: Education  shows how 
the education variable exerts its influence via several mechanisms, thereby activating most of the 
critical parts of the map: (*) Via the media complex, it links to psychological/cognitive variables 'self-
esteem' and 'food literacy', which connect directly to the core engine via 'psychological ambivalence' and 
'conscious control of accumulation'. (*) Via 'demand for health', it activates the food production cluster 
and so onwards to the physiology cluster (over 'nutritional quality of food'). Ultimately, this hits the core 
engine at 'strength of lock-in' and 'level of available energy'. (*) Via 'social valuation of activity', it has a 
fairly direct impact on the level of physical activity. 
- 290 - 
Fig. 3d.
Idem 25: Map 15  Full generic map: linkages between the psychology and food environment areas  
Linkages between these two areas are predictably dense, with 14 arrows going from psychology to the 
food environment and nine arrows in the other direction: (*) Key tail variables in the psychology area are 
education, media availability, socio-cultural valuation of food, perceived lack of time, stress and food 
literacy. They link into demand-side factors such as demand for health and the social pressure to 
consume. But supply-side variables are also triggered: the food industry's business model is grafted onto 
what people want. (*) Tail variables in the food environment area are dispersed, with one arrow only 
leaving each of the variables. They include food exposure, food abundance, social pressure to consume, 
and industry's desire to maximise volume. They drive three variables in the psychology area: exposure to 
food advertising, perceived lack of time, and psychological ambivalence. 
- 291 - 
Keeping in mind these two examplesthat of the stocks-equity-market 
econophysic model and that of the obesity causal loop model, let us turn to ancient 
history. Within the field of ancient economic history scholars have tended to prefer verbal 
descriptions rather than graphical ones.
 Yet, visualisation is an inherent, though at times 
implicit, component of their analyses. Historians often map trade-routes, envision 
economic space,
 or portray an image such as a cellular economy
 all of which are 
metaphors based on an intuition that vision and artful images are an alternate and 
seemingly direct route to insight.
 A survey of graphic modelling of Greek and Roman 
economies was offered almost a decade ago by John K. Davies, who pointed out that 
visualisations of ancient economies tend to concentrate on the sort(s) of space which 
economic interactions occupy.
 Thus, models are often concerned with boundaries, both 
physical and conceptual, and are frequently aimed at tracing flows within a spatial 
structure, either a geographic or a mental one; flows which usually signify the exchange 
of goods and services.  
Keith Hopkins monumental Taxes and Trade model for taxation and coinage 
flows in the Roman empire remains one of the most insightful and influential examples of 
modelling of this sort.
 A simplified diagram of three circles, one within the other, 
symbolises geographic space divided into regions, which derive their significance from 
the political sphere: centre, middle zone, and periphery (or frontier) (Fig. 4). 
Obviously. History is a verbal profession, which is why historians need to have visualisations that can be 
turned back into verbal format. 
E.g. Finley (1985) 177-8, who speaks of a large unified economic space. 
Duncan-Jones (1990) 44. Also, Hopkins (1980) 104, who mentions cellular autarky of individual peasant 
farmers; Davies (2005) 152-3, who offers also cellular-structured visualisation for ancient economies.
Davies (2005) 152, who cites further examples.
Ware (2013) xvii.
Davies (2005) 130-41, who offers a survey of the relevant literature. 
Hopkins (1980).
- 292 - 
Fig. 4. Taxation flow in the Roman empire, after Hopkins (1980),  
as portrayed in Davies (2005) 140, Fig. 6.6 
This simplified representation highlights an important generalising understanding 
concerning the role of the Roman state in generating economic relationship(s) between 
different regions of the empire, as well as encouraging monetisation. Its influential 
contribution lies in its powerful simplicity: it manages to display in a nutshell 
complicated political, economic, and social dynamics, that were going on in the Roman 
empire for decades. However, as pointed out by Davies, the simplified diagram also has 
its drawbacks, as it leaves an important part of the model visually unexpressed, hence 
unexplained; namely, the process by which money trickles down from the frontiers 
- 293 - 
back to the middle zone,
 as well as the economic and monetary relations between and 
within provinces.
 So, how shall we model a process? 
Davies himself innovatively adopts a dynamic, complexity-oriented, approach for 
modelling ancient economies, and in particular that of a large and socially-complex 
Greek polis (Kleinstaat).
 Non-linear dynamics has been advanced as a modelling 
approach in archaeology since the late 1990s,
 however, hardly ever applied as a prime 
methodological tool by ancient economic historians. Davies promotes complex 
visualisation for modelling the salient characteristics of the economic behaviour of 
antiquity when we have no quantitative data worth the name.
 He chooses to portray a 
processual or topological space,
 rather than a geographical one, trying to trace flows, 
including nonphysical ones, and the structure within which they occurred.
 His first 
attempt at such a visualisation was published in 1998 with regard to classical Athens (Fig. 
 and in 2005 was elaborated and expanded to include other formations of ancient 
Greek polities (Fig. 6).
What Davies (2005) 139, calls the return (real or symbolic, full or inadequate) from the centre and 
periphery to the middle zone. 
As stressed by Andreau (1999) 135.
Davies (1998); (2005).
Van der Leeuw and McGlade (1997a). 
Davies (2005) 155.
Idem 142.
Idem 140-2.
Davies (1998).
Davies (2005).
- 294 - 
Fig. 5. Flow chart of resource movement: Interactions with the public economy, 
after Davies (1998) 245, Fig. 11.3, appears in Davies (2005) 145, Fig. 6.10 
Fig. 6. Flow chart of resource movement: Modified to incorporate bandwidths, motors, gates, and 
reservoirs, appears in Davies (2005) 150, Fig. 6.14 
- 295 - 
The visual product of Davies analysis is intense diagrams composed of multi-
directional connections and counter-linkages, in which conceptual formats are 
represented by four major schemata: 1) bandwidth, which represent the relative sizes of 
flows; 2) motors, which indicated the driving forces, i.e. the internal incentives that 
drive resources and exchange; 3) gates, which denote impediments to flows and exchange 
of resources, goods, and services (e.g. the level of technology, social values, or constrains 
imposed by the polity); and 4) reservoirs, that is reserves, the accumulation of 
resources by the polity and in private or cultic contexts.
 The visual products of Davies 
analysis display organised complexity, i.e. one which aims at tracing how large 
numbers of variables are interconnected with and interdependent on one another.
While the visual products of the stocks-equity-market econophysic model (Fig. 2) 
and the obesity causal loop model (Figs. 3) cited above portray multiple nodes connected 
by flexible curves, which give an impression of a semi-chaotic pattern, and may trigger 
an association of multi-tentacle octopi randomly interacting with one another; the mental 
connotation which Davies visualisations (Figs. 5 and 6) trigger is one of a complex 
mechanical apparatus. Yet, the difference is due mainly to a choice of graphics; i.e. it is 
mostly aesthetic, rather than essential. Where Davies chose to display various factors (i.e. 
nodes) and the relations between them (i.e. arrows) with different types of graphical 
schemata (circles, ellipses, and squares, for the former; strait, dotted, and thick lines, for 
the latter), the former two visualisations (Figs. 2 and 3) rely more heavily on using a 
variety of colours, rather than schemata. As regards methodology, there is no essential 
difference; all visualisations (Figs. 2, 3, 5, and 6) use an abstract topological planar to 
Davies (2005) 142-52.
On organised complexity, see Weaver (1948).
- 296 - 
display rhizomatic patterns of complex non-centralised phenomena, where the systems 
elements interrelate with one another in non-simple manners which allow emergence; 
with emergence here referring to the capacity of a fundamentally chaotic, or complex, 
system to produce patterns that are seemingly non-chaotic and predictable in behavior 
(i.e. although the precise initial conditions that trigger individual patterns within the 
system cannot be identified, or used to predict the detail of an outcome, the system as a 
whole does produce some emergent patterns, which include recognisable formations that 
can be used to predict the overall behaviour of the system).
The two graphical elementsi.e. a multiplicity of colours, and a variety of 
schematacan be combined; as, for example, in a visualisation of a network model for 
Systems Biology of Human Aging offered by John D. Furber (Fig. 7).
representation is both extremely colourful and intensely detailed, whilst nevertheless 
creating an impression of a mechanical apparatus, probably due to the use of quadrangles 
and other polygons. Again, regardless of graphical techniques, all of these visualisations 
display rhizomatic properties, namely, nonlinearity, diversity, decentralisation, and 
emergence.  
Holland (1998); but see Corning (2002).
John D. Furber, Systems Biology of Human Aging - Network Model Wall Chart (Rev 29 May 2013), 
available online: http://www.LegendaryPharma.com/chartbg.html; Lima (2011) online electronic 
database: http://www.visualcomplexity.com/vc/project_details.cfm?id=521&index=40&domain=Biology 
http://www.legendarypharma.com/chartbg.html
http://www.visualcomplexity.com/vc/project_details.cfm?id=521&index=40&domain=Biology
- 297 - 
9.3. Roman Money and Complexity 
Huge amounts of detailed information, which could provide a basis for 
statistically-driven visualisations of economic phenomena, as the one created by the 
stocks-equity-market econophysic model (Fig. 2), do not exist for ancient economies in 
the same way as they do for modern ones. However, complexity-oriented visualisations 
Fig. 7. 
- 298 - 
of economic phenomena need not rely on huge databases. Though numerical data are 
perceived as the building blocks of good economic models, they are not a requirement 
of economic modelling. In fact, basic economic models are seldom built on databases,
though data at times could be poured into them. Such models are helpful not because they 
accurately mirror reality, i.e. they are not a graphical projection of detailed information; 
rather, they are considered helpful because they create conceptual tools with which 
economic phenomena can be categorised, described, or explained. Once information, in 
the sense of factual data, is cast into modelscreated not by the data, but for the data
trends, tendencies, and patterns may appear that help to assess changes. These 
observations are valid also for complexity-oriented models. As stressed by Davies,
intense visualisations, which display organised complexity and portray non-simple 
relations on an abstract topological planar, provide a helpful tool for qualitative analyses 
of ancient economic phenomena. Thus, I follow Davies lead and attempt to offer such a 
visualisation for analysing the historical example of Roman money. 
First, it should be made clear that complicated is not necessarily complex. The fact 
that a system is comprised of many variables, or that it displays complications, does not 
by itself makes it a case of complexity. Rather, the principal distinguishing feature of 
any complex system is that it is fundamentally irreducible  it is more than the sum of its 
component parts.
 It is not enough that the elements of a system be interconnected in a 
non-simple manner; they need also display a capacity for self-adjustment. In complex 
systems it is not only the elements comprising a system, but also the system as a whole, 
E.g. the supply-demand or LM-IS curves, crossing one another at the point of equilibrium.
Davies (2005).
Van der Leeuw and McGlade (1997b) 14.
- 299 - 
which is capable of dynamic self-organising diversity; it is the nonlinearity which defines 
the systems development, and which encourages, in fact determines, the systems 
capacity for emergence.
When wishing to create a complexity-oriented model for Roman money the first 
difficulty one tackles, regardless of graphical choices, is to decide what shall be displayed 
as nodes, i.e. as the factors, the elements which comprise a system; and what shall be 
displayed as arrows, i.e. as the causal relations, the connections and boundaries 
imposed on the systems elements. This difficulty derives first and foremost from the 
Janus-faced nature of money, being both abstract and concrete; and we have seen the 
confused (hence confusing) terminology used by Roman jurists in the face of moneys 
duality,
 and the multiplicity of things which acted as physical manifestations of money. 
Are these to be displayed as factors (i.e. nodes), or as flows (i.e. arrows)? And, more 
generally, what shall be categorised as money? Is money only coinage (surely not), or 
should records of obligations also be classified as money (surely yes); and if so, which 
records fall under such a category? Do metals qualify as money only when struck into 
coins, or also when casted in the form of bullion? Is the former, i.e. coined metal, a case 
of commodity-money or of token-money? And, assuming we have established which 
objects represent physical manifestations of money, how shall a model depict the 
difference between cash and credit? All of these questions, complicated as they may be, 
comprise just one level of difficulty.  
On emergence, see p. 296, above.
Because money is the ultimate quantifier of value every form of wealth may be considered as money 
(pecunia est omnia corpora); be that as it may, more often than not when Romans talked of pecunia they 
had more physical manifestations of money in mind, especially coinage.
- 300 - 
Second, there is need to decide which legal formations that dictate economic 
interaction should provide the systems terminology. It is not only that modern 
institutional categorisation of exchange essentially differs from that of antiquity (e.g. the 
Roman locatio conductio encompasses several modern institutions including lease, hire, 
and employment); but also, within the Roman empire there were various active legal 
traditions, each following its own internal logic, hence resulting in a somewhat different 
institutionalised organisation of exchange. Thus, for example, under the general modern 
category of loans fall various ancient legal institutions: in Roman law there was pecunia 
credita created via stipulatio, as well as the Roman contracts of mutuum, commodatum, 
and probably also depositum; in Greek-Hellenistic tradition several formulae 
accommodated lending relations including , , , and contracts 
which came to be known in the scholarship as Sale on Delivery, which created de facto 
loans to be repaid in kind; and in Jewish law one finds loans given by a creditor (malveh, 
... the root for both is ; ,to a debtor (loveh ( ), alongside loans-for-use (given 
by a mashiil, , to a shoel, ; the root for both is ... ), which resemble the 
Roman contract of commodatum, and which Jewish legal categorisation places under the 
Laws of Deposits/Guardians (Dinei Shomrim,  ). Which of these, if any at all, 
should be displayed as factors (i.e. nodes)? Moreover, how should connections between 
all of these legal formations is to be displayed? 
At the end of his 2005 publication John Davies suggested that economic analyses 
of antiquity should emphasise the following questions: What institutions, practices, and 
values comprised the environmental framework within which economic activity took 
place? How did systems evolve that assisted the creation, movement, and delivery of 
- 301 - 
goods and services in a landscape? How did they interact with forms of behaviour that 
had different objectives?
 In many respects the present study followed this general 
injunction. It examined the institutional framework within which money operated 
economically, it analysed specific money-related instruments and how these evolved over 
time, and it observed how Roman legal institutions interacted with non-Roman legal 
formations which operated under Roman regime. 
In what follows I offer a complexity-oriented visualisation, portrayed on an 
abstract topological planar (Fig. 8). It generally follows the outline offered by John 
Furber in his Systems Biology of Human Aging model (Fig. 7), whilst concentrating on 
Roman law, which has been the main focus of this study. In this symbolic diagram the 
nodes, i.e. the factors which construct the model, represent the various legal contracts and 
agreements which dictated Roman economic interaction: the square boxes represent 
Roman contracts and other legal formats for creating obligations (e.g. emptio venditio, 
mutuum, stipulatio, etc.); the round-edges boxes represent generalising categorisations 
(e.g. credit [=pecunia credita], consensual contracts, real contracts); and the arrowed-
boxes represent formats or instruments which increase the connection, commitment, or 
obligation of the parties (e.g. penalties, interest, earnest payments). The arrows in the 
model are of two kinds: thinner lines represent causal sequence of events, and thicker 
lines represent flows, movement, or transport of things. Additionally, colours also have 
meaning, as indicated in the colour key, representing: cash, credit (including records of 
obligations used as money), coinage, metals and perishable goods used as money, and 
things (goods and services) not conceptualised in monetary terms.  
Davies (2005) 155.
- 302 - 
The diagram (Fig. 8) is not a complete representation of all that is relevant to 
Roman economic use of money. After further analyses other contracts as well as legal 
and economic institutions may be added (e.g. securities, societas, mandatum); while some 
of the institutions which are included have not been sufficiently analysed in this study 
and deserve more research (e.g. penalties, arra). Furthermore, the colour key does not 
accurately display the complicated relation between the various physical manifestations 
of money on the one hand, and the essentially abstract division into cash and credit on the 
other hand (thus, for example, coins and consumable goods can be used as physical 
manifestations of money in both cash and credit transactions). Yet, even in its current 
state this diagram reflects the diversity, interconnectedness, decentralisation, and 
nonlinearity, which characterised Roman money. 
- 303 - 
Fig. 8. 
- 304 - 
This intense diagram (Fig. 8) has several advantages. It takes into account the 
abstract nature of money, whilst accommodating a spectrum of physical manifestations; it 
demonstrates connections between Roman legal institutions that enabled self-adjustment 
and emergence of new formats; and it displays just how central and omnipresent credit 
was in Roman economic life. The diagram shows the outcome of the Sabinian-Proculian 
controversies regarding the pecuniary nature of both pretium (price) in emptio venditio 
(sale), and merces (rent/wages) in locatio conductio (lease/hire). Therefore the clear 
division between permutatio (barter) and emptio venditio (sale); the former placed in the 
sphere of real contracts, coloured in grey to indicate things not conceptualised in 
monetary terms; the latter placed in the sphere of consensual contracts, its colours 
indicating that whether performed in coinage (purple), metals (yellow), or perishable 
goods (green), and whether conducted in cash (red) or credit (blue), it was conceptualised 
in monetary terms. Additionally, the thick arrowed-line from emptio venditio to 
permutatio indicates that any permanent transfer of goods (hence the arrows green 
colour) not conceptualised in money (hence its grey frame) no longer could qualify as 
emptio venditio, but fell under the category of permutatio. 
To illustrate how the diagram condenses the analyses conducted in this study, let 
us consider the example of depositum. As it is a contract, depositum is represented by a 
square box, which is placed within the sphere of a round-edged box, representing the 
generalising category of real contracts. Since in its very essence depositum created credit 
relationswith one party, the depositary, indebted to the other party, the depositor; 
namely, to return the deposit intactthis box is coloured in blue. Since depositum could 
concern coinage, metals, perishable goods, or things not conceptualised in monetary 
- 305 - 
terms, the box is also marked with purple, yellow, green, and grey, respectively. Metals, 
perishable goods, coinage, and other forms of cash given by way of depositum create 
credit; hence the yellow, green, purple, and red lines (respectively) representing the 
causal sequence of events between depositum and pecunia credita. The latter, pecunia 
credita, is represented by a round-edges box, as it is a generalising categorisation, rather 
than a type of contract or a format that enhanced connection between parties. 
Additional obligations may augment a depositum via stipulatio (the latter being a 
legal format that created obligations, hence is also displayed by a square box); therefore, 
the two institutions, depositum and stipulatio, are connected with lines representing 
causal sequence of events, coloured in either red (representing cash) or blue 
(representing credit). A stipulatio could create commitments to pay penalties or interest; 
both being instruments that enhance the connection between parties, hence are displayed 
by arrowed-boxes. As regards penalties, it is causally linked with stipulatio via purple, 
yellow, green and red lines, representing the offending partys obligation to render 
coinage, metals, perishable goods, or cash in general, respectively; all of which 
conceptualised in monetary terms. As regards interest, except for penalising interest, it 
was relevant only in cases of interest-bearing deposits. It is in such cases that the thicker 
arrowed-linesgenerally representing flows, movement, or transport of thingsbecome 
relevant. The purple thick arrowed-line from locatio conductio to depositum indicates 
that safekeeping in return for remuneration was no longer conducted solely under locatio 
conductio,
 but could also be accommodated under interest-bearing deposits. The blue 
(=credit), red-framed (=cash), thick arrowed-lines connecting depositum with both 
 No matter whether regarded as the so-called locatio conductio operis (contracting a task), or locatio 
conductio operarum (employing a guard).
- 306 - 
mutuum and pecunia credita represent the interchangeability with which parties actually 
used these legal formats. That is, the flexibility with which parties switched from loans to 
deposits and back, creating de facto interest-bearing deposits. Lastly, the yellow and 
purple thick arrowed-lines connecting depositum to pecunia credita represent the 
potential of interest-bearing deposits of durable pecuniary instruments such as coinage or 
metals to contribute to the supply of money by allowing a mechanism which might create 
credit money.  
One crucial defect of this visualisation is that it concentrates on Roman law as if it 
was a closed system; hence, it does not accurately reflect how ubiquitous and boundary-
crossing phenomenon money actually was. How can a model depict the institutionalised 
role of money in monetary economic interactions carried out under simultaneously 
coexisting legal systems? For this purpose I offer to create an experimental visualisation 
by adopting as an inspiration a Circular Hierarchical Edge Bundles model (Figs. 9). This 
model is a computerised method developed for software engineering for visualising 
massive sequence and adjacency relations in hierarchical data.
 It enables visualisation 
of enormous amounts of data in a condensed, scalable, and interactive manner, while 
advancing a dynamic approach for representing information pertaining relationships, and 
the chronological order in which interactions take place. Neither the technical details of 
this tool, nor its authors original intentions in applying it, should concern us here. 
Cornelissen, Holten, Zaidman,et al. (2007); (2008); Holten (2006) 741: Hierarchical edge bundling 
reduces visual clutter when dealing with large numbers of adjacency edges; it is based on the principle 
of visually bundling adjacency edges together analogous to the way electrical wires and network cables 
are merged into bundles along their joint paths and fanned out again at the end, in order to make an 
otherwise tangled web of wires and cables more manageable. 
- 307 - 
Rather, attention should be focused on its visual product. This is a diagram comprised of 
two synchronised views: (1) a circular bundle view that projects the systems structure 
on a circle in terms of hierarchical elements (and the relationships and interactions 
between them); and (2) a massive sequence view that provides a global overview of the 
trace, i.e. the consecutive connections between the systems elements in a chronological 
order, or in some other hierarchical way.  
    Fig. 9a.       Fig. 9b. 
Fig. 9c.
Holten (2006) Fig. 14, who states the following: Using the bundling strength b to provide a trade-off 
between low-level and high-level views of the adjacency relations. The value of b increases from left-to-
- 308 - 
A circular bundle view offers a detailed visualisation of a systems structural 
entities and their interrelationships, and has a capacity to accommodate multiplicity of 
systems operating within the same sphere. This is precisely the situation we have 
observed for money in the Roman empire: money was an omnipresent institution, 
extremely significant for economic interaction carried out through simultaneously 
coexisting legal systems. Individuals used money in economic contexts while moving 
within and between legal institutions, and (sometimes) also legal systems, in accord with 
what they perceived as most beneficial. I now go on to explain why the visual model 
helps in ways that this verbal statement does not. 
To depict this dynamic economic and legal sphere, let us imagine a circular 
diagram similar to the one displayed in Fig. 9a, where the outer circle represents different 
legal systems operating under Roman regime (Roman, Greek-Hellenistic as developed in 
Asia Minor, Greek-Hellenistic as developed in Roman Egypt, Jewish, etc.). An inner 
circle gives further specification and is divided according to the internal categorisations 
of each legal tradition. (E.g. in the case of Roman law categorisation should include 
subdivisions into ius gentium and ius civile, ius honorarium and bonae fidei iudicia, 
consensual contract and real contracts, etc.; and we can imagine several such diagrams 
representing chronological developments in Roman legal categorisation). The next level 
of classification, i.e. another circle inwards, further details each systems structural 
entities, i.e. the contracts and legal formulae which it contains (e.g. mutuum, 
commodatum, depositum; , , ; etc.). Thus, a visual image is 
right; low values mainly provide low-level, node-to-node connectivity information, whereas high values 
provide high-level information as well by implicit visualization of adjacency edges between parent nodes 
that are the result of explicit adjacency edges between their respective child nodes. 
- 309 - 
created which topologically displays the institutionalised legal environment within which 
economic interaction occurred in the Roman empire.  
The next phase is to display the interrelationships between money and these 
structural entities. For this purpose I rely on the notion of a massive sequence view as 
developed in the Circular Hierarchical Edge Bundles model. In that model sequences 
indicate relations between two elements which generally display a parent-child relation, 
i.e. it depicts a flow from source to destination (in Figs. 9 the former is denoted in green, 
the latter in red). Because what matters for economic analysis is flows of goods and 
servicesand in the case of the present study, the relation of money to these flowsit is 
not only the relations between legal institutions which concern us, but also the economic 
interaction of persons. For this purpose, I offer to add to the circular diagram verbally 
depicted above another level of specification, which details the parties involved in each 
legal format. (Thus, under emptio venditio we find emptor and vendor; under 
fideicommissum, we find testator (the benefactor), fideicommissarius (the benefited), and 
fiduciarius (the person on whom the obligation was laid); under  we find creditor 
and debtor; etc.).  
The sequences which connect the hierarchical entities in this formation are of two 
sorts: (1) solid lines represent movement of goods and services; and (2) tripled-lines 
represent connection between structural entities. Colouring also has two levels of 
significance: (1) different colours indicate the form in which transactions took place, 
according to the colour key offered in Fig. 8; and (2) an interpolated colour gradient 
shows the direction of the exchange, the edge running from source (bright) to destination 
(dark). Thus, for example, Fig. 10 shows the possible interactions between emptor and 
- 310 - 
vendor: the emptor gives the vendor perishable goods (green) or other non-pecuniary 
things (grey), in return for which the vendor renders coinage (purple) or other form of 
cash money (red), while both parties may act under credit conditions (hence the non-
gradient blue line). In case other contractual formats augment a transaction, e.g. securities 
or penalties, additional lines could be drawn to connect parties in the main contract to the 
auxiliary agreements. 
Relations between legal institutions are depicted with triple-lines, which represent 
sequences that connect the different structural entities of the Roman empires legal 
sphere, comprised of several legal traditions. Let us consider for example the case of 
interest-bearing deposits, shown in Fig. 11. In this diagram  is connected to 
both depositum and Shomer Hinam with solid blue tripled-lines, indicating that these are 
parallel formats in which credit is created by rendering a deposit for the sake of 
Fig. 10. 
- 311 - 
safekeeping.  connects also to mutuum, showing that the two institutions could 
be treated as parallels, i.e. as formats for contracting monetary loans (with red and blue 
representing the cash and credit elements of such transactions, respectively). Shomer 
Hinam and Shomer Sakhar came to be two separate legal institutions, with the former 
based solely on credit (blue), while the latter required pecuniary remuneration (hence, the 
red representing cash money). Shomer Sakhar, the Jewish legal format for a paid 
safekeeping, is connected also with the Roman locatio conductio; the colouring of this 
sequence indicating that while Shomer Sakhar belonged to the sphere of deposits, i.e. 
created credit relation (=blue), the so-called locatio conductio operis enabled contracting 
a service, i.e. safekeeping (=grey), rendered for a pecuniary payment (hence, the purple 
representing coinage). 
Fig. 11. 
- 312 - 
A combination of the two types of sequences on the same topological circular 
planarthe solid lines representing movement of goods and services, and the tripled-
lines representing connections between the systems structural entitieswould look 
something like the diagram shown in Fig. 12. In this example, the solid lines follow the 
explanation given for Fig. 10, while the tripled-line shows the triumphant Proculian 
stance as to the separation between barter and sale. In the former transfer of goods and 
services was conducted in a non-pecuniary manner, hence the lines grey colour; in the 
latter transaction was to be in numerata pecunia, hence its purple colour. 
Fig. 12. 
- 313 - 
These visual examples, given in Figs. 10-12, may provide some sense as to how a 
compound image may be created, which (1) topologically presents the institutionalised 
legal sphere within which monetary economic interaction occurred in the Roman empire; 
(2) shows the institutional connections between the structural entities of the different 
legal traditions in operation under Roman rule; and (3) displays in a condensed manner 
the direction of the various types of monetised (and non-pecuniary) movements of goods 
and services, which could take place within the Roman regime. Thus, for example, an 
explanation of the supposed economic crises of the empire would consist in seeing how 
the entities and the behavioural relations depicted in these models differed in the early 
third and the early fourth centuries. The models would be similarly visualised but the 
narrative would describe the difference-of-fit shown in the data. 
9.4. Conclusions 
The aim of this study has been to analyse the institutional framework within 
which money operated as an economic agent in the Roman empire, with its main focus 
being Classical Roman Law as reflected in the writings of Roman jurists in the second 
and early-third centuries CE. We have seen that Roman jurists took a broadening view as 
regards what qualified as money, while nevertheless displaying somewhat ambiguous 
terminology in conceptualising money; offering no clear distinction between moneys 
physical manifestations on the one hand, and its abstract nature as a quantifier of value, 
hence as the ultimate manifestation of wealth, on the other. When it comes to juridical 
procedures and definitions, during the period here under investigation legal debates took 
place that had significant effect on the role allocated to money in exchange transaction. 
- 314 - 
By the third century CE money emerged as a pivotal component in defining some of the 
most central Roman legal formats for economic activity. It became a focal component in 
legal definitions of exchange, the status of the parties involved, and the nature of the 
interaction between them. 
A second level of analysis was to view changes in the use of money across the 
board of the different legal traditions which operated under Roman regime. Such an 
analysis achieved the most detailed level of investigation mainly with regard to interest-
bearing deposits. Studying this money-related institution as reflected in three different 
legal systems shows just how interconnected the institutionalised legal sphere of the 
Roman empire actually was. The complexity of the economic environment within which 
the empires inhabitants operated was such that reciprocal movements of ideas and legal 
formats took place within and between legal traditions. Individuals self-adjusted their 
course of action to this dynamic reality, using a range of available legal formats 
according to which had best suited their interests; thereby casting new meaning into 
existing institutions, with the outcome of transforming money into an omnipresent 
phenomenon and an underlying formation of thought.  
The innovative contribution of this study has been in suggesting a complexity-
oriented approach to modelling the behaviour of money in the Roman empire. Such an 
approach, I believe, should be of interest not only to economic historians, but also to 
ancient historians generally; as it helps to understand the multidirectional dynamics of 
economic and legal interactions in a diverse and multicultural society as the Roman one. 
Perhaps the most deductive conclusion of the complexity approach is that we cannot 
understand growth, decline, or crisisin the Roman empire in the second and third 
- 315 - 
centuries CE, or in any other time or society for that matteronly in terms of inflation, 
or changes in the currency, or in the finesse and quality of the coinage, as historians have 
tended to do in the past. Such an explanation would just be too simplistic; hence, fails to 
explain, for example, why the papyri from the third and early-fourth centuries CE do not 
show significant changes in individual patterns of behaviour in documentation of 
economic transactions by ordinary people;
 or, why numismatic evidence from the 
late-second and early-third centuries, which displays consistent decrease in coin quality 
and an increase in coin quantity, does not sufficiently correlate with evidence for relative 
price stability.
 This is partially because how people regard money does not depend 
solely on its physical manifestations. In fact, more often than not how money behaves
whether it is debased, devalued, or re-tariffedis detached from the actual value of the 
tokens which represent a currency at any one moment in time or any one place. People 
still use money in the same ways, because the governmental authorities do nothing to 
change that, either in law or in practice.  
Changes, of course, do occur, but these are driven by dynamics which cannot be 
described simply in linear terms of cause and effect. Money is an amorphous formation of 
thought which may accommodate different interpretations; these form and influence the 
cognitive institutional framework within which people operate. Changes in the meaning 
cast into the notion of money affect its economic applications; a relation that also goes 
the other way around, i.e. alterations in how money is applied in economic exchange 
influence how people perceive and understand money. These alterations could derive 
Bagnall (1985); Drexhage (1991); Carri (1997).
Rathbone (1996); (1997); Carri (2007); Haklai-Rotenberg (2011).
- 316 - 
from a top-down institutional intervention, whether consciously initiated,
unintentionally introduced
; or, be motivated by bottom-up developments, stirred by the 
desire of individuals to better pursuit their interests within a complex network of legal, 
social, and economic possibilities. The present study provides an in-depth, albeit 
restricted, account of Roman money as a complex phenomenon; thereby suggesting how 
future research on period(s) of economic crisis might proceed by using complexity-
oriented approaches of the sort advocated here. The natural next step is to see how these 
approaches can be translated back, or applied to, a narrative economic history, 
particularly of the period from Hadrian to Constantine. 
As, for example, the introduction of a lower maximum interest rate after the Roman annexation of Egypt. 
E.g. the reciprocal exchange of ideas and legal formats which is the outcome of the fact that different 
legal traditions coexisted within the same political, administrative, and economic sphere. 
- 317 - 
- 318 - 
Bibliography 
AKERLOF, G. A., (1970), The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the Market 
Mechanism, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84.3: 488500. 
ALSTON, L. J., (2008), New Institutional Economics, in DURLAUF, S. N., BLUME, L. 
E., (eds.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2
 ed., Palgrave 
Macmillan. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online, Palgrave 
Macmillan, 30 September 2012.  
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_N000170 
ALZON, C., (1963), Rflexions sur l'histoire de la locatio-conductio, RD 41: 553-91. 
________ (1966), Les risques dans la locatio-conductio, Labeo 12: 311-7. 
AMELOTTI, M., (2007/8), Salvatore Riccobono e il  Gnomon  dell idios logos , 
Annali del Seminario Giuridico dellUniversita di Palermo 52: 15-23. 
AMIRANTE, L., (1959), Richerche in tema di locazione, BIDR 3: 9-119. 
ANDERSON, P. W., ARROW, K. J., PINES, D., (eds.), (1988), The economy as an evolving 
complex system: the proceedings of the Evolutionary Paths of the Global 
Economy Workshop, held September, 1987 in Santa Fe, New Mexico, 
Redwood City, Ca.: Addison-Wesley. 
ANDREAU, J., (1987), La vie financire dans le monde romain: les mtiers de manieurs 
d'argent (IVe sicle av. J.-C.- IIIe sicle ap. J.-C.), Roma: Ecole franaise de 
Rome. 
________ (1999), Banking and Business in the Roman World, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
________ (2000), Commerce and finance, in BOWMAN, A. K., GARNSEY, P., 
RATHBONE, D., (eds.), The Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. XI, The High 
Empire, A.D. 70192, 2
 ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 
769-86.  
________ (2006), Roman law in relation to banking and business: a few cases, in 
BANG, P. F., IKEGUCHI, M., ZICHE, H. G., (eds.), pp. 201-14.  
________ (2008), Le vocabulaire de lintrt  la fin de la rpublique, in VERBOVEN, 
K., VANDORPE, K., CHANKOWSKI, V., (eds.), pp. 201-10. 
________ (2008b), The Use and Survival of Coins and of Gold and Silver in the 
Vesuvian Cities, in HARRIS, W. V., (ed.), pp. 208-25. 
ANDREAU, J., BRIANT, P., DESCAT, R., (eds.), (1997), conomie antique: prix et 
formation des prix dans les conomies antiques, Saint-Bertrand-de-
Comminges: Muse archologique departmental. 
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_N000170
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=2
- 319 - 
ARANGIO-RUIZ, V., (1928), Lineamenti del sistema contrattuale nel diritto dei papyri, 
Milano: Societa editrice "Vita e pensiero. 
________ (1949), Il mandato in diritto romano: corso di lezioni svolto nell'Universit di 
Roma, anno 1948-1949, Napoli: Jovene. 
________ (1956), La compravendita in diritto romano, Napoli: Jovene. 
ARESTIS, P., SAWYER, M., (eds.), (2006), A handbook of alternative monetary 
economics, Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar. 
ARTHUR, W. B., (1990), Positive Feedbacks in the Economy, Scientific American 262: 
92-9. 
ARTHUR, W. B., DURLAUF, S. N., LANE, D. A., (eds.), (1997), The economy as an 
evolving complex system II, Santa Fe Institute, Studies in the Sciences of 
Complexity, Reading, Mass: Addison-Wesley. 
ARTHUR, W. B., DURLAUF, S. N., LANE, D. A., (1997), Introduction, in ARTHUR, W. 
B., DURLAUF, S. N., LANE, D. A., (eds.), pp. 1-14. 
AUBERT, J.-J., (1999), Les institores et le commerce maritime dans lEmpire romain, 
Topoi 9: 145-64. 
________ (2002), Conclusion: A Historians Point of View, in AUBERT, J.-J., SIRKS, A. 
J. B., (eds.), pp. 183-192. 
________ (2003), Monetary policy and Greshams Law in the late third century, in LO 
CASCIO, E., (ed.), pp. 245-63. 
________ (2007), Dealing with the Abyss: the nature and purpose of the Rhodian Sea 
Law on Jettison (Lex Rhodia de Iactu, D. 14.2) and the making of Justinians 
Digest, in CAIRNS, J. W., DU PLESSIS, P. J., (eds.), pp. 158-72. 
AUBERT, J.-J., SIRKS, A. J. B., (eds.), (2002), Speculum Iuris: Roman Law as a 
Reflection of Social and Economic Life in Antiquity, Michigan: Ann Arbor, 
The University of Michigan Press. 
BAGNALL, R. S., (1977), Price in 'Sales on Delivery', GRBS 18.1: 85-96. 
________ (1985), Currency and inflation in fourth century Egypt, Chico, CA: Scholars 
Press. 
________ (1995), Reading papyri, writing ancient history, London: Routledge. 
BANG, P. F., (2008), The Roman Bazaar, A Comparative Study of Trade and Markets in a 
Tributary Empire, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
________ (2009), The ancient economy and new institutional economics: review 
article, JRS 99: 194-206. 
BANG, P. F., IKEGUCHI, M., ZICHE, H. G., (eds.), (2006), Ancient economies, modern 
methodologies: archaeology, comparative history, models and institutions, 
Bari: Edipuglia. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=4
- 320 - 
BANG, P. F., IKEGUCHI, M., ZICHE, H. G., (2006), Introduction, in BANG, P. F., 
IKEGUCHI, M., ZICHE, H. G., (eds.), pp. 7-24. 
BARLOW, C. T., (1978), Bankers, Moneylenders, and Interest Rates in the Roman 
Republic, PhD Diss., University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 
BAVIERA, G., (1898), Le due scuole dei giureconsulti romani, Firenze: Fratelli Cammelli 
(reprinted, Rome: "LErma" di Bretschneider, 1970). 
BEHRENDS, O., (1983-1984), Giurisprundenze e giuristi. Le due giurisprudenze romane 
e le forme delle loro argomentazioni, Index 12: 189-225. 
________ (2002), Der ungleiche Tausch zwischen Glaukos und Diomedes und die Kauf-
Tausch-Kontroverse der rmischen Rechtsschulen, Historische 
Anthropologie 10: 245-66. 
BERGER, A., (1953), Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Roman Law, TAPhS 43.2: 335-808. 
BERTRAND-DAGENBACH, C., (1990), Alexandre Severe et l'Histoire auguste, Bruxelles: 
Latomus. 
BETTI, E., (1915), Sul valore dogmatico della categoria contrahere in giuristi 
proculiani e sabiniani, BIDR 28: 3-96. 
BIBOW, J., (2006), Liquidity preference theory, in ARESTIS, P., SAWYER, M., (eds.), pp. 
328-45. 
BILLETER, G., (1898), Geschichte des Zinsfusses im griechische-rmischen Altertum bis 
auf Justinian, Leipzig: Teubner. 
BLACK, J., (2002), Oxford Dictionary of Economics, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
BLAHO, P., (2008), Abgrenzung zwischen Kauf und Tausch in der Dichtung des 
Homer, in JAKAB, E., ERNST, W., (eds.), Kaufen nach Romischem Recht: 
Antikes Erbe in den europaischen Kaufrechtsordnungen, Berlin; Heidelberg: 
Springer, pp. 53-60. 
BLANSHARD, A. J. L., (2006), Review of Money and the Early Greek Mind. Homer, 
Philosophy, Tragedy by R. Seaford, JHS 126: 169-70. 
BLOCH, M., PARRY, J., (1989), Introduction: money and the morality of exchange, in 
BLOCH, M., PARRY, J., (eds.), Money and the Morality of Exchange, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 132. 
BOGAERT, R., (1966),  es origines antiques de la banque de dp t: une mise au point 
accompagne dune esquisse des oprations de banque en  sopotamie, 
Leyde: A. W. Sijthoff. 
________ (1968), Banques et banquiers dans les cits grecques, Leyde: A. W. Sijthoff. 
________ (1992), Les banques  Alexandrie aux poques grco-romaine et byzantine, 
AncSoc 23: 31-42. 
________ (1994), Trapezitica Aegyptiaca, Papyrologica Florentia, Vol. XXV, Firenze: 
Gonnelli. 
- 321 - 
________ (1995), Liste gographique des banques et des banquiers de l'gypte romaine, 
30A-284, ZPE 109: 133-73. 
________ (2000), Les oprations des banques de lgypte romaine, AncSoc 30: 135-
________ (2001), Les documents bancaires de l'gypte grco-romaine et byzantine, 
AncSoc 31: 173-288. 
BOHANNAN, P., (1955), Some principles of exchange and investment among the Tiv of 
Central Nigeria, American Anthropologist 57: 60-70. 
________ (1959), The impact of money on an African subsistence economy, Journal of 
Economic History 19: 491-503. 
BOLIN, S., (1958), State and Currency in the Roman Empire to 300 A.D., 
Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell. 
BONIFACIO, F., (1947), Ricerche sul deposito irregolare in dritto romano, BIDR 8: 80-
BONNER, Anthony, (2007), The art and logic of Ramon Llull: a user's guide, Leiden: 
Brill. 
BOWMAN, A. K., (2005), Egypt from Septimius Severus to the Death of Constantine, in 
BOWMAN, A. K., CAMERON, A., GARNSEY, P., (eds.), The Cambridge 
Ancient History, Vol. XII, The Crisis of Empire, A.D. 193-337, 2
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 313-26. 
BOWMAN, A. K., WILSON, A., (eds.), (2009), Quantifying the Roman economy: methods 
and problems, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
BROCK, W. A., (1997), Asset Price Behavior in Complex Environments, in ARTHUR, 
W. B., DURLAUF, S. N., LANE, D. A., (eds.), pp. 385-423. 
BRUNA, F. J., (1972), Lex rubria: Caesars Regelung fr die richterlichen Kompetenzen 
der Munizipalmagistrate in Gallia Cisalpina: Text, bersetzung und 
Kommentar mit Einleitungen, historischen Anhngen und Indizes, Leiden: 
Brill. 
BUCKLAND, W. W., (1941), Interpolations in the Digest: A criticism of criticism, 
Harvard Law Review 54: 1273-1310. 
________ (1963), A Text-book of Roman Law from Augustus to Justinian, 3
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
BRGE, A., (1982), Geld- und Naturalwirtschaft im vorklassischen und klassischen 
rmischen Recht, ZRG 99: 128-57. 
________ (1987), Fiktion und Wirklichkeit: Sociale und rechtliche Structuren des 
rmischen Bankwesens, ZRG 117: 465-558. 
BURNETT, A., (1987), Coinage in the Roman World, London: Seaby. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/aph/index.php?do=notice&num=6
- 322 - 
BURNETT, A., AMANDRY, M., CARRADICE, I., (1999), Roman Provincial coinage. Vol. 
II: From Vespasian to Domitian (AD 6996), London; Paris: British Museum 
Press; Bibliothque Nationale. 
BURNETT, A., AMANDRY, M., RIPOLLS, P. P., (1992), Roman Provincial coinage. Vol. 
I: From the death of Caesar to the death of Vitellius (44 BCAD 69), London; 
Paris: British Museum Press; Bibliothque Nationale. 
BUTCHER, K., (1988), Roman Provincial Coins: an Introduction to the 'Greek Imperials', 
London: Seaby. 
BUTCHER, K., PONTING, M., (1995), Rome and the East: Production of Roman 
Provincial Silver Coinage for Caesarea in Cappadocia under Vespasian, AD 
69-79, OJA 14.1: 63-77. 
________ (1997), A study of the chemical composition of Roman silver coinage, AD 
196-197, AJN 9: 17-35. 
________ (2005a), The Roman Denarius under the Julio-Claudian emperors: mints, 
metallurgy and technology, OJA 24.2: 163-197. 
________ (2005b), The Egyptian billon tetradrachm under the Julio-Claudian emperors 
 fiduciary or intrinsic?, SNR 84: 93-124. 
CAIRNS, J. W., DU PLESSIS, P. J., (eds.), (2007), Beyond Dogmatics: Law and Society in 
the Roman World, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
CALABRESI, G., (1968), Transaction costs, resource allocation and liability rules: a 
comment, Journal of Law and Economics 11: 6773. 
CALDWELL, B., (2004), Hayeks challenge: An intellectual biography of F A  Hayek, 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
CAMODECA, G., (1992), L'archivio Puteolaneo dei Sulpicii, Napoli: Jovene. 
________ (1999), Tabulae Pompeianae Sulpiciorum (TPSulp.): edizione critica 
dell'archivio puteolano dei Sulpicii, Rome: Quasar. 
________ (2003), Il credito negli archivi campani: Il caso di Puteoli e di Herculaneum, 
in LO CASCIO, E., (ed.), pp. 69-98. 
CANCELLI, F., (1963), L'origine del contratto consensuale di compravendita nel diritto 
romano : appunti esegetico-critici, Milano: Giuffr. 
CAPOGROSSI COLOGNESI, L., (1998), Remissio mercedis e rischi contrattuali, in 
MAGDELAIN, A., HUMBERT, M., THOMAS, Y., (eds.), Mlanges  la mmoire 
de Andr Magdelain, Paris: Editions Panthon-Assas, pp. 73-89. 
________ (2005), Remissio Mercedis: Una Storia Tra Logiche Di Sistema E Autorit 
Della Norma, Napoli: Jovene. 
CARRI, J.-M., (2005), Developments in provincial and local administration, in 
BOWMAN, A. K., CAMERON, A., GARNSEY, P., (eds.), The Cambridge 
http://141.84.97.70:8080/exist/cat/lwi-query.xq?start=1&howmany=50&query=document%28%29%2F%2FITEM%5Bnear%28UA%2FAU%2C%27Camodeca%2C+Giuseppe%27%29%5D&queryText=Autor/K%C3%B6rperschaft%20ist%20'Camodeca,%20Giuseppe'
- 323 - 
Ancient History, Vol. XII, The Crisis of Empire, A.D. 193-337, 2
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 269-312. 
________ (2007), Les crises montaires de lEmpire romain tardif, in THRET, B., 
(ed.), La monnaie dvoile pas ses crises, Vol  I: Crises montaires dhier et 
daujourdhui, Paris: Editions de lEcole des hautes tudes en sciences 
sociales, pp. 131-69. 
CASTI, J. L., (2002), Money is funny, or why finance is too complex for physics, 
Complexity 8.2: 1418. 
CAVALIERI, D., (2004), 'On Some Equilibrium and Disequilibrium Theories of 
Endogenous Money: A Structuralist View,' History of Economic Ideas 12.3: 
51-83. 
CHAUMONT-CHANCELIER, F., (1999), Hayek's Complexity, Journal des Economistes et 
des Etudes Humaines 9.4, ISSN (Online) 1145-6396, DOI: 10.2202/1145-
6396.1173, December 1999. 
COASE, R., (1937), The Nature of the Firm, Economica 4.16: 386405. 
________ (1960), The Problem of Social Cost, Journal of Law and Economics 3.1: 1
________ (1974), The choice of the institutional framework: a comment, Journal of 
Law and Economics 17: 4936. 
COHEN, E. E., (1992), Athenian Economy and Society: A Banking Perspective, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.  
________ (2001), A New Balance Sheet for the Ancient Economy. Review Article: 
ANDREAU, J., BRIANT, P., DESCAT, R., (eds.), conomie antique. Vol. 1, Les 
changes dans l'antiquit: Le rle de l'tat; Vol. 2, Prix et formation des prix 
dans les conomies antiques; Vol.3, La guerre dans les conomies antiques, 
AJA 105.2: 313-5. 
________ (2005), Commercial law, in GAGARIN, M., COHEN, D., (eds.), The 
Cambridge companion to ancient Greek law, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 290-302. 
________ (2008), The Elasticity of the Money-Supply at Athens, in HARRIS, W. V., 
(ed.), pp. 66-83. 
COLANDER, D., (ed.), (2000), Complexity and the History of Economic Thought: 
Perspectives on the History of Economic Thought. Selected papers from the 
history of economics Society Conference, 1998, London: Routledge.  
COLANDER, D., HOLT, R. P. F., ROSSER, J. B., (2004a), The changing face of economics: 
Conversations with cutting edge economists, University of Michigan Press 
(reprinted 2007).  
________ (2004b), The changing face of mainstream economics, Review of Political 
Economy 16.4: 485-99.   
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cplx.v8:2/issuetoc
http://dx.doi.org/10.2202/1145-6396.1173
http://dx.doi.org/10.2202/1145-6396.1173
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Nature_of_the_Firm
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Problem_of_Social_Cost
- 324 - 
CORNELISSEN, B., HOLTEN, D., ZAIDMAN, A., MOONEN, L., VAN WIJK, J. J., VAN 
DEURSEN, A., (2007), Understanding Execution Traces Using Massive 
Sequence and Circular Bundle Views, 15th IEEE International Conference 
on Program Comprehension (Proceedings of ICPC 2007), pp. 49-58. 
Available online at: 
http://www.win.tue.nl/~dholten/papers/understanding_execution_traces_icpc.
________ (2008), Execution Trace Analysis through Massive Sequence and Circular 
Bundle Views, Elsevier Journal of Systems & Software (JSS) 81.12: 2252-
68. Available online at: 
http://www.win.tue.nl/~dholten/papers/execution_trace_analysis_jss.pdf  
CORNING, P. A. (2002), The re-emergence of emergence: A venerable concept in 
search of a theory, Complexity 7.6: 18-30. 
COSTA, E., (1915), La locazione di cose nel diritto romano, Turin (Reprinted 1966, 
Roma: L'Erma di Bretschneider). 
COTTIER, M., CRAWFORD, M. H., CROWTHER, C. V., et al., (2008), The customs law of 
Asia, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
COTTON, H. M., (1995), The archive of Salome Komaise daughter of Levi: another 
archive from the  Cave of Letters , ZPE 105: 171-208. 
________ (1999), The languages of the legal and administrative documents from the 
Judaean desert, ZPE 125: 219-31. 
________ (ed.), (2002), The Documents from the Bar Kokhba period in the Cave of 
Letters: Hebrew, Aramaic and Nabatean-Aramaic Papyri /edited by Yigael 
Yadin, Jonas C. Greenfield, Ada Yardeni, Baruch A. Levine, with additional 
contributions by Hannah M. Cotton, Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society. 
________ (2007), Private international law or conflict of laws: reflections on Roman 
provincial jurisdiction, in HAENSCH, R., HEINRICHS, J., (eds.), Herrschen 
und Verwalten: der Alltag der rmischen Administration in der Hohen 
Kaiserzeit, Kln: Bhlau, pp. 234-55. 
COTTON, H. M., YARDENI, A., (eds.), (1997), Aramaic, Hebrew, and Greek documentary 
texts from Na al  ever and other sites:  ith an appendix containing alleged 
Qumran texts (the Seiyl collection II), Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
CRAWFORD, M. H., (1975), Finance, Coinage and Money from the Severans to 
Constantine, ANRW 2: 560-93.  
________ (1985), Coinage and Money under the Roman Republic: Italy and the 
Mediterranean economy, London: Methuen. 
________ (1996), Roman Statutes, Vol. I, London: Institute of Classical Studies, 
University of London. 
http://www.win.tue.nl/~dholten/papers/understanding_execution_traces_icpc.pdf
http://www.win.tue.nl/~dholten/papers/understanding_execution_traces_icpc.pdf
http://www.win.tue.nl/~dholten/papers/execution_trace_analysis_jss.pdf
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=10
- 325 - 
CRAWFORD, M. H., REYNOLDS, J. M., (1979), The Aezani Copy of the Prices Edict, 
ZPE 34: 163-210. 
CRISTALDI, S. A., (2007), Il contenuto dell'obbligazione del venditore nel pensiero dei 
giuristi dell'et imperiale, Milano: Giuffr. 
CROOK, J. A., (1967), Law and life of Rome, Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press. 
CUOMO, S., (2007), Measures for an emperor: Volusius Maecianus monetary pamphlet 
for Marcus Aurelius, in KNIG, J., WHITMARSH, T., (eds.), Ordering 
knowledge in the Roman Empire, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 206-28. 
CUQ, E., (1928), Manuel des Institutions juridiques des Romains, 2
 ed., Paris: Plon. 
DALLA MASSARA, T., (2004), Alle origini della causa del contratto. Elaborazione di 
unconcetto nella giurisprudenza classica, Padova: CEDAM. 
________ (2011), La causa del contratto nel pensiero di aristone: della necessit di un 
concetto, in GAROFALO, L., (ed.), Scambio e gratuit. Confini e contenuti 
dell'area contrattuale, Padova: CEDAM, pp. 175-220. 
DALTON, G., (1965), Primitive Money, American Anthropologist 67: 44-65. 
________ (1971), Economic anthropology and development: essays on tribal and 
peasant economies, New York: Basic Books. 
DAUBE, D., (1944), Civil Law of the Mishnah: The Arrangement of the Three Gates, 
Tulane Law Review 18.3: 351-407. 
________ (1947), Did Macedo murder his father?, ZRG 65: 261-311. 
________ (1949), The Three Quotations from Homer in Digest 18, 1, 1, 1, Cambridge 
Law Journal 10.2: 213-5. 
________ (1953), Generalisation in D. 18.1, de contrahenda emptio, in LAURIA, M., 
(ed.), Studi in onore di Vincenzo Arangio-Ruiz nel XLV anno del suo 
insegnamento, Vol. I, Napoli: Jovene, pp. 185-200. 
________ (1959), Certainty of Price, in DAUBE, D., (ed.), Studies in the Roman law of 
sale: dedicated to the memory of Francis de Zulueta, Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, pp. 9-45. 
DAVID, P. A., (1985), Clio and the Economics of QWERTY, The American Economic 
Review 75.2: 332-7. 
________ (2001), Path dependence, its critics and the quest for historical economics, 
in GARROUSTE, P., IOANNIDES, S., (eds.), pp. 15-40. 
DAVIDSON, P., (1972), Money and the Real World, The Economic Journal 82.325: 101-
________ (2006), Keynes and money, in ARESTIS, P., SAWYER, M., (eds.), pp. 139-53. 
http://econwpa.wustl.edu/eps/eh/papers/0502/0502003.pdf
- 326 - 
DAVIES, G., (1994), A history of money: from ancient times to the present day, Cardiff: 
University of Wales Press. 
DAVIES, J. K., (1998), Ancient Economies: Models and Muddles, in PARKINS, H., 
SMITH, C., (eds.), pp. 221-52. 
________ (2005), Linear and Nonlinear Flow Models for Ancient Economies, in 
MANNING, J. G., MORRIS, I., (eds.), pp. 127-56. 
DAY, R. H., (1992), Complex Economic Dynamics: Obvious in History, Generic in 
Theory, Elusive in Data, Journal of Applied Econometrics 7 (Supplement: 
Special Issue on Nonlinear Dynamics and Econometrics): 9-23. 
DE BLOIS, L., (2006), Administrative strategies of the Emperor Severus Alexander and 
his advisers, in KOLB, A., (ed.), Herrschaftsstrukturen und 
Herrschaftspraxis: Konzepte, Prinzipien und Strategien der Administration 
im rmischen Kaiserreich. Akten der Tagung an der Universitt Zrich, 18.-
20.10.2004, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, pp. 45-52. 
DELEUZE, G., GUATTARI, F., (1987), A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and 
Schizophrenia, Translation and Foreword by Brian MASSUMI, Minneapolis; 
London: University of Minnesota Press. 
DE CALLATA, F., (ed.), (2011), Quantifying monetary supplies in Greco-Roman times, 
Bari: Edipuglia. 
DE NEEVE, P. W., (1983), Remissio mercedis, ZRG 100: 296-339. 
________ (1984), Colonus: private farm-tenancy in Roman Italy during the Republic and 
the early principate, Amsterdam: J.C. Gieben.  
________ (1985), The price of agricultural land in Roman Italy and the problem of 
economic rationalism, Opus 4: 77-109. 
DE ZULUETA, F., (1953), The Institutes of Gaius. Vols. 1-2, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
________ (1957), The Roman Law of Sale: Introduction and selected texts, 2
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
DIGNAS, B., (2002), Economy of the Sacred in Hellenistic and Roman Asia Minor, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
DOW, S. C., (2006) Endogenous money: structuralist, in ARESTIS, P., SAWYER, M. 
(eds.), pp. 34-51. 
DREXHAGE, H.-J., (1991), Preise, Mieten/Pachten, Kosten und Lhne im rmischen 
gypten bis zum Regierungsantritt Diokletians, St. Katharinen: Scripta 
Mercaturae. 
DUNCAN-JONES, R., (1982), The Economy of the Roman Empire. Quantitative Studies, 
 ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
________ (1990), Structure and scale in the Roman economy, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=9
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=5
- 327 - 
________ (1994), Money and Government in the Roman Empire, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
________ (1997), Numerical distortion in Roman writers, in ANDREAU, J., BRIANT, P., 
DESCAT, R., (eds.), pp. 147-59. 
DU PLESSIS, P. J., (2003), A History of Remissio Mercedis and Related Legal Institutions, 
Kluwer: Sanders Institute.  
________ (2006), The Roman Concept of lex contractus, Roman legal tradition 3: 79-
________ (2012a), Letting and hiring in Roman legal thought, 27 BCE - 284 CE, Leiden; 
Boston: Brill. 
________ (2012b), Theory and Practice in the Roman Law of Contracts, in MCGINN, 
T. A. J., (ed.), pp. 131-57. 
ECK, W., (1979), Die staatliche Organisation Italiens in der hohen Kaiserzeit, Mnchen: 
Beck. 
________ (2000), Provincial administration and finance, in BOWMAN, A. K., 
GARNSEY, P., RATHBONE, D., (eds.), The Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. 
XI, The High Empire, A.D. 70192, 2
 ed., Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 266-92. 
ECKHARDT, B., (2011), Geld, Macht, Sinn. berpekuniarisierte Verhltnisse im Athen 
des fnften und vierten Jahrhunderts v. Chr., in ECKHARDT, B., MARTIN, K., 
(eds.), pp. 14-56. 
ECKHARDT, B., MARTIN, K., (eds.), (2011a), Geld als Medium in der Antike, Berlin: 
Verlag Antike. 
________ (2011b), Einfhrung: Geld als Medium in der Antike, in ECKHARDT, B., 
MARTIN, K., (eds.), pp. 7-13. 
EGGERTSSON, T., (1996), A note on the economics of institutions, in ALSTON, L. J., 
EGGERTSSON, T., NORTH, D. C., (eds.), Empirical Studies in Institutional 
Change, New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 6-24. 
EHRHARDT, A., (1958), Parakatatheke, ZRG 75: 32-90. 
EICHHOLZ, D. E., (1935), The Pseudo-Platonic Dialogue Eryxias, CQ 29.3-4: 129-149. 
EINZIG, P., (1949), Primitive money in its ethnological, historical and economic aspects, 
London: Eyre & Spottiswoode. 
ERDKAMP, P., (2005), The grain market in the Roman Empire: a social, political and 
economic study, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
ERNST, W., (1997), Gattungskauf und Lieferungskauf im rmischen Recht, ZRG 114: 
272-344. 
FALCHI,G. L., (1981), Le controversie tra sabiniani e proculiani, Milano: Giuffre. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=5
- 328 - 
FERRINI, C., (1884-1897), Institutionum graeca paraphrasis Theophilo antecessori vulgo 
tributa ad fidem librorum manu scriptorum recensuit, Berolini: S. Calvary 
[repreinted (1967), Darmstadt: Scientia Verlag Aalen]. 
________ (1929), colonia partiaria, in Opere di Contardo Ferrini, vol. III, pp. 1-16. 
[Re-print of ber die colonia partiaria, Archiv fr die civilistische Praxis 81 
(1893): 1-20, non vidi]. 
FIGUEIRA, T. J., (1984), Karl Polanyi and ancient Greek trade: the port of trade, in 
GRAHAM, A. J., (ed.), Early trade and traders in the Mediterranean, 
Chicago: The Ancient World, pp. 15-30. 
________ (2006), Review of Money and the Early Greek Mind by Richard Seaford, CW 
99.4: 467-8. 
FILIPPO, C., (2012), Review of Geld als Medium in der Antike, ed. by Benedikt 
Eckhardt, Katharina Martin, 2011, BMCRev 04.50. 
FINCKH, H. E., (1962), Das Zinsrecht der grko-gyptischen Papyri, Diss., Erlangen-
Nrnberg. 
FINLEY, M. I., (1985), The Ancient Economy, reprinted (1999), Foreword by Ian 
MORRIS, Berkeley; London: University of California Press. 
FIORI, R., (1999),  a definizione della locatio conductio  Giurisprudenza romana e 
tradizione romanistica, Napoli: Jovne.  
________ (1998-1999), Ius civile, ius gentium, ius honorarium: il problema della 
'recezione' dei iudicia bonae fidei, BIDR  101-102 (3a ser. 40-41): 165-97. 
________ (2006), Bona fides. Formazione, esecuzione e interpretazione del contratto 
nella tradizione civilistica (Parte prima), in Modelli teorici e metodologici 
nella storia del diritto privato 2, Napoli: Jovene Editore, pp. 127-228. 
________ (2008), Fides e bona fides. Gerarchia sociale e categorie giuridiche, in FIORI, 
R., (ed.), Modelli teorici e metodologici nella storia del diritto privato 3, 
Napoli: Jovene Editore, pp. 237-60. 
________ (2011), Bona fides. Formazione, esecuzione e interpretazione del contratto 
nella tradizione civilistica (Parte seconda), in FIORI, R., (ed.), Modelli teorici 
e metodologici nella storia del diritto privato 4, Napoli: Jovene Editore, pp. 
97-242. 
________ (2012), The Roman Conception of Contract, in MCGINN, T. A. J., (ed.), pp. 
40-75. 
FISHER, I., (1922), The Purchasing Power of Money: Its Determination and Relation to 
Credit, Interest, and Crises, 2
 ed., reprinted 1963, New York: Augustus M. 
Kelly. 
FLECKNER, A. M., (2010), Antike Kapitalvereinigungen: ein Beitrag zu den 
konzeptionellen und historischen Grundlagen der Aktiengesellschaft, Kln: 
Bhlau. 
- 329 - 
________ (2011), Review of Kapitalmanagement und Kapitaltransfer im Westen des 
Rmischen Reiches, by Barbara Stelzenberger, (Leidorf, 2008), ZRG 128: 
677-695. 
FONTANA, G., (2004), Rethinking Endogenous Money: A Constructive Interpretation of 
the Debate between Horizontalists and Structuralists, Metroeconomica 55.4: 
367385. 
FORABOSCHI, D., GARA, A., (1981), Sulla differenza tra tassi di interesse in natura e in 
moneta nellEgitto greco-romano, Proceedings of the XVI International 
Congress of Papyrology, pp. 335-43. 
FRANK, T., (ed.), (1933-40), An Economic Survey of Ancient Rome, 5 Vols., Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
FRIEDMAN, B. M., (2008), money supply, in DURLAUF, S. N., BLUME, L. E., (eds.), 
The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2
 ed., Palgrave Macmillan. 
The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online, Palgrave Macmillan, 27 
September 2013.  
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_M000236  
FRIEDMAN, M., (1969), The Optimum Quantity of Money, Chicago: Aldine (reprinted 
2005). 
________ (2008), quantity theory of money, in DURLAUF, S. N., BLUME, L. E., (eds.), 
The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2
 ed., Palgrave Macmillan. 
The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online, Palgrave Macmillan, 16 
April 2012. http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_Q000006 
FRIER, B. W., (1980), Landlords and Tenants in Imperial Rome, Princeton: Princeton 
University Press. 
________ (1989-90), Law, Economics, and Disasters down on the Farm: Remissio 
Mercedis Revised, BIDR 31-32: 237-70. 
________ (1996), Early classical private law, in BOWMAN, A. K., CHAMPLIN, E., 
LINTOTT, A., (eds.), The Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. X, The Augustan 
Empire, 43 BCAD 69, 2
 ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 
95978. 
FRIER, B. W., KEHOE, D. P., (2007), Law and economic institutions, in SCHEIDEL, W., 
MORRIS, I., SALLER, R., (eds.), pp. 113-43. 
FURUBOTN, E. G., RICHTER, R., (eds.), (1991), The New institutional economics: a 
collection of articles form the journal of institutional and theoretical 
economics, Tbingen: Mohr. 
GAIA, D. V., (2009), Abundance of currency and financial crisis in Rome: legal and 
economic issues around interest rates at the time of Augustus and Tiberius, 
Histria (So Paulo: Universidade Estadual Paulista) 28.2: 571-602. 
(Published in Portuguese, Abundncia de liquidez e crise financeira em 
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_M000236
http://www.scielo.br/cgi-bin/wxis.exe/iah/?IsisScript=iah/iah.xis&base=article%5Edlibrary&format=iso.pft&lang=i&nextAction=lnk&indexSearch=AU&exprSearch=GAIA,+DEIVID+VALERIO
- 330 - 
Roma: questes jurdicas e econmicas em torno das taxas de juros na poca 
de Augusto e de Tibrio). 
GALLO, F., (1992), Synallagma e conventio nel contratto: ricerca degli archetipi della 
categoria contrattuale e spunti per la revisione di impostazioni moderne, 
Torino: Giappichelli. 
GALSTERER, H., (1986), Roman law in the provinces: some problems of transmission, 
in CRAWFORD, M. H., (ed.),  Impero romano e le strutture economiche e 
sociali delle province, Como: New Press, pp. 1327. 
________ (2000), Local and provincial institutions and government, in BOWMAN, A. 
K., GARNSEY, P., RATHBONE, D., (eds.), The Cambridge Ancient History, 
Vol. XI, The High Empire, A.D. 70192, 2
 ed., Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 344-60. 
GANDOLFI, G., (1976), Il deposito nella problematica della giurisprudenza romana, 
Milano: Giuffre. 
GARRISON, R. W., (2005), The Austrian School, in SNOWDON, B., VANE, H. R., (eds.), 
Modern Macroeconomics: Its Origins, Development and Current State, 
Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar, pp. 474-516. 
GARROUSTE, P., IOANNIDES, S., (eds.), (2001), Evolution and Path Dependence in 
Economic Ideas: Past and Present, Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar 
Publishing. 
GAURIER, D., (2004), Le droit maritime romain, Rennes: Presses universitaires de 
Rennes. 
GAUS, G. F., (2006), Hayek on the evolution of society and mind, in FESER, E., (ed.), 
The Cambridge companion to Hayek, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 23258. 
GEIGER, K., (1962), Das depositum irregulare als Kreditgeschft, Diss., Freiburg. 
GERNET, L., (1981), The anthropology of ancient Greece, Translation by John Hamilton 
and Blaise Nagy of Anthropologie de la Grce antique (1968), Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
GILBERT, E., (2005), Common cents: situating money in time and place, Economy and 
Society 34(3): 35788. 
GILIBERTI, G., (1984), Legatum kalendarii. Mutuo feneratizio e struttura contabile del 
patrimonio nell'et del principato, Napoli: Jovene. 
________ (1999), De la rente agricole  linvestissement financier: le rle de lesclave 
 kalendario praepositus , Topoi (Lyon) 9.1: 165-78. 
GIODICE-SABBATELLI, V., (1993), Le tutela giuridica dei fedecommessi fra Augusto e 
Vespasiano, Bari: Cacucci Editore.  
GIOVANNINI, A., (2004), Die Tabula Heracleensis: Neue Interpretationen und 
Perspektiven. Teil I: Die  frumentationes , Chiron 34: 187-204. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=2
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/aph/index.php?do=notice&num=13
- 331 - 
________ (2008), Die Tabula Heracleensis: Neue Interpretationen und Perspektiven. 
Teil II: Die lex Iulia municipalis, Chiron 38: 47-61. 
GIRALDO PALOMINO, A. F., (2005), La neutralidad del dinero y la dicotoma clsica en 
la macroeconoma, Cuadernos de Economa 27.45: 75-93. 
GLCK, C. F., (1813), Ausfhrliche Erluterung der Pandecten nach Hellfeld. Ein 
Commentar, Vol. 15, Erlangen: Johan Jacob Palm. 
GNOS, C., (2006), French circuit theory, in ARESTIS, P., SAWYER, M., (eds.), pp. 87-
GNOS, C., ROCHON, L.-P., (eds.) (2008), The Keynesian Multiplier, London; New York: 
Routledge.  
GOODHART, C. A. E., (1984), Monetary Theory and Practice: The UK Experience, 
London: Macmillan. 
GONZLEZ, J., (1986), 'The Lex Irnitana: a new copy of the Flavian municipal law', JRS 
76: 147-243. 
GORDON, W. M., (1982), Observations on depositum irregulare, in BISCARDI, A., 
PASTORI, F., (eds.), Studi in onore di Arnaldo Biscardi, vol. III, Milano: 
Istituto editoriale Cisalpino, La Goliardica, pp. 363-72. 
GORDON, W. M., ROBINSON, O. F., (1988), The institutes of Gaius, London: Duckworth. 
GRANT, M., (1954), Roman imperial money, London: Nelson. 
________ (1996), The Severans: the changed roman empire, London: Routledge. 
GREENIDGE, A. H. J., (1894), Infamia: its place in Roman public and private law, 
Oxford: Clarendon Press (reprinted 1977). 
GREENWALD, Bruce C., (1986), Adverse Selection in the Labour Market, The Review 
of Economic Studies 53.3: 325-47. 
GRENFELL, B. P., HUNT, A. S., (1906), Papyrus Cattaoui, Archiv fr Papyrusforschung 
und verwandte Gebiete 3.1: 5567. 
GRIERSON, P., (1978), The Origin of Money, Research in Economic Anthropology 1: 1-
GUARINO, A., (1999), La multiforme locatio-conductio, IURA 50:1-5. 
HAKLAI-ROTENBERG, M., (2001), Aurelians Monetary Reform: Between Debasement 
and Public Trust, Chiron 41: 1-39. 
HANSON, A. E., (2005), The widow Babatha and the poor orphan boy, in KATZOFF, R., 
SCHAPS, D., (eds.), Law in the documents of the Judaean desert, Leiden: 
Brill, pp. 85-103. 
HARKE, J. D., (2005), Laesio enormis als error in negotio, ZRG 122: 91-102. 
HARL, K. W., (1996), Coinage in the Roman Economy, 300 B.C. to 700 A.D., 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
http://solo.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/primo_library/libweb/action/search.do?vl(freeText0)=+Pastori%2c+Franco&vl(169119528UI0)=creator&vl(225595489UI1)=all_items&vl(1UIStartWith0)=exact&fn=search&tab=local&mode=Basic&vid=OXVU1&scp.scps=scope%3a(NET)%2cscope%3a(OX)
http://solo.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/primo_library/libweb/action/search.do?vl(freeText0)=%20Gordon%20%2c+William+M+&vl(60606419UI0)=creator&vl(103770091UI4)=all_items&vl(1UIStartWith0)=exact&fn=search&tab=local&mode=Advanced&vid=OXVU1&scp.scps=scope%3a(OX)
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2073/action/showPublication?journalCode=revieconstud
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2073/action/showPublication?journalCode=revieconstud
- 332 - 
HARTMUT, W., (1976), Die Constitutio Antoniniana und Papyrus Gissensis 40 I, Thesis 
submitted to the University of Kln.  
HARRIS, W. V., (2006), A revisionist view of Roman money, JRS 96: 1-24. 
________ (2007), The Late Republic, in SCHEIDEL, W., MORRIS, I., SALLER, R., (eds.), 
pp. 511-39. 
________ (ed.), (2008a), The Monetary Systems of the Greeks and Romans, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
________ (2008b), Introduction, in HARRIS, W. V., (ed.), pp. 1-11. 
________ (2008c), The Nature of Roman Money, in HARRIS, W. V., (ed.), pp. 174-207. 
HART, K., (1986), Heads or Tails? Two Sides of the Coin, Man 21.4: 637-56. 
________ (2007), Money is always personal and impersonal, Anthropology Today 23.5: 
12-6. 
HAUPT, P., (2001), Rmische Mnzhorte des 3. Jhs. in Gallien und den germanischen 
Provinzen: Eine Studie zu aechologischen Aspecten der Entstehung, 
Verbergung und Auffindung von Mnzhorten, Grunbach: Verlag Bernhard 
Albert Greiner. Database available online at:  
http://www.archaeologie.geschichte.uni-mainz.de/  
HAYEK, F. von, (1948), Individualism and Economic Order, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
________ (1960), The Constitution of Liberty, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
________ (1967), The Theory of Complex Phenomena, in his Studies in Philosophy, 
Politics, and Economics, London, UK: Routledge & Kegan Paul, pp. 22-42. 
HEINER, R. A., (1986), Uncertainty, signal-detection experiments, and modelling 
behaviour, in LANGLOIS, R. N., (ed.), Economics as a process: essays in the 
new institutional economics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 59-
HEINSOHN, G., STEIGER, O., (2006), Interest and money: the property explanation, in 
ARESTIS, P., SAWYER, M., (eds.), pp. 490-507. 
HENSHKE, D., (1997), The Original Mishnah in the discourse of later Tannaim, Ramat-
Gann, Israel: Bar-Ilan University Press (in Hebrew, Mishnah Rishonnah 
beTlmudam shel Tannaim Aharonim). 
HERSKOVITZ, M. J., (1952), Economic anthropology: the economic life of primitive 
peoples, New York: Norton. 
HERZOG, R., (1919), Aus der Geschichte des Bankwesen im Altertum: Tesserae 
nummulariae, Giessen: A. Tpelmann. 
HOLLAND, J. H., (1998), Emergence: From Chaos to Order, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; Reading, Mass.: Addison Wesley. 
http://www.archaeologie.geschichte.uni-mainz.de/
- 333 - 
HOLLANDER, D. B., (2007), Money in the late Roman Republic, Leiden; Boston: Brill. 
HOLTEN, D., (2006), Hierarchical Edge Bundles: Visualization of Adjacency Relations 
in Hierarchical Data, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics 12.5: 741-8. Available online at: 
http://www.win.tue.nl/~dholten/papers/bundles_infovis.pdf  
HOMER, S., SYLLA, R., (2005), A History of Interest Rates, 4
 ed., New Jersey:  John 
Wiley & Sons. 
HONOR, T., (1962), Gaius, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
________ (1979), Imperial rescripts A.D. 193-305: authorship and authenticity, London: 
Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies. 
________ (1994), Emperors and Lawyers, 2
 edition, completely revised, with a 
Palingenesia of Third-Century Imperial Rescripts 193305 AD, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
________ (2002), Ulpian: Pioneer of Human Rights, 2
 ed., Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
HONSELL, H., (1969), Quod interest im bonae-fidei-iudicium: Studien zum rmischen 
Schadensersatzrecht, Mnchen: Becksche. 
HOPKINS, K., (1980), Taxes and Trade in the Roman Empire, JRS 70: 101-125. 
________ (2009), The Political Economy of the Roman Empire, in MORRIS, I., 
SCHEIDEL, W., (eds.), pp. 178-204. 
HOWELLS, P., (2006), Endogeneity of money: empirical evidence, in ARESTIS, P., 
SAWYER, M., (eds.), pp. 52-68. 
HOWGEGO, C., (1990), Why did the Roman strike coins?, NC 150: 1-25. 
________ (1992), The Supply and Use of Money in the Roman World, 200 B.C. to A.D. 
300, JRS 82: 1-31. 
________ (1994), Coin circulation and the integration of the Roman economy, JRA 7: 
5-21. 
________ (1995), Ancient history from coins, London: Routledge. 
________ (2009), Some Numismatic Approaches to Quantifying the Roman economy, 
in BOWMAN, A. K., WILSON, A., (eds.), pp. 287-95.  
HUDSON, M., (2000), How interest rates were set, 2500 BC-1000 AD:  mas ,  tokos  
and  foenus  as metaphor for interest accruals, JESHO 43.2: 132-61. 
HUMPHREY, T. M., (1984), On Non-neutral Relative Price Effects in Monetarist 
Thought: Some Austrian Misconceptions, Economic Review 70.3: 13-20. 
IBBETSON, D., (2005), High Classical Law, in BOWMAN, A. K., CAMERON, A., 
GARNSEY, P., (eds.), The Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. XII, The Crisis of 
http://www.win.tue.nl/~dholten/papers/bundles_infovis.pdf
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:5737/indexinglinkhandler/sng/author/Humphrey,+Thomas+M/$N?accountid=13042
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:5737/pubidlinkhandler/sng/pubtitle/Economic+Review/$N/24729?accountid=13042
- 334 - 
Empire, A.D. 193-337, 2
 ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 
184-199. 
IMPALLOMENI, G., (1996), Locazione nel diritto romano, in Scritti di diritto romano e 
tradizione romanistica. Pubblicati a cura della Facolta di Giurisprudenza 
dellUniversita di Padova, Padova: CEDAM, pp. 651-9 (= Locazione nel 
diritto romano, Digesto delle discipline Privatistiche: Sezione civile 11 
(1994): 89-94). 
INNES, A. M., (1913), What is money?, Banking Law Journal 30.5: 377408. 
(Reprinted in WRAY, L. R., (ed.), Credit and State Theories of Money, 
Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar, (2004), pp. 14
________ (1914), The credit theory of money, Banking Law Journal 31.2: 15168. 
(Reprinted in WRAY, L. R., (ed.), Credit and State Theories of Money, 
Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar, (2004), pp. 50
IRELAND, S., (2009), Monetary Systems. Review of The Monetary Systems of the 
Greeks and Romans, ed. by William V. Harris, 2008, CR 59.1: 201-3. 
JAKAB, E., (2000), Vectura pro mutua: berlegungen zu TP 13 und Ulp. D. 19, 2, 15, 
61, ZRG 117: 244-73. 
________ (2009), Risikomanagement beim weinkauf: Periculum und Praxis im Imperium 
Romanum, Mnchen: C.H. Beck. 
JOVANOVIC, F., SCHINCKUS, C., (2013), The History of Econophysics Emergence: a 
New Approach in Modern Financial Theory, History of Political Economy 
45.2 (forthcoming). Available online at:  
http://www.business.uwa.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/2299071/Jovano
vic_paper_HETSA_2013.pdf  
JOHNSON, A. C., (1936), Roman Egypt to the Reign of Diocletian. An Economic Survey 
of Ancient Rome, vol. II, ed. T. Frank, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.  
JOHNSTON, D., (1985), Munificence and Municipia: Bequests to Towns in Classical 
Roman Law, JRS 75: 105-125.  
________ (1988), The Roman Law of Trust, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
________ (1989), Justinians Digest: The Interpretation of Interpolation, Oxford 
Journal of Legal Studies 9: 149-66. 
________ (1999), Roman Law in Context, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
________ (2005), Epiclassical Law, in BOWMAN, A. K., CAMERON, A., GARNSEY, P., 
(eds.), The Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. XII, The Crisis of Empire, A.D. 
193-337, 2
 ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 200-207. 
________ (2007), Suing the Paterfamilias: Theory and Practice, in CAIRNS, J. W., DU 
PLESSIS, P. J., (eds.), pp. 173-84. 
javascript:open_window(%22http://a20.libnet.ac.il:80/F/YX8H61DINMNFHSDFU1MK8PVGXEVF4F7KFKY52B8TNJA92D2IKG-84698?func=service&doc_number=000424560&line_number=0009&service_type=TAG%22);
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=13
http://www.business.uwa.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/2299071/Jovanovic_paper_HETSA_2013.pdf
http://www.business.uwa.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/2299071/Jovanovic_paper_HETSA_2013.pdf
- 335 - 
JOLOWICZ, H. F., (1937), The Origin of Laesio Enormis, The Juridical Review 49: 47-
JOLOWICZ, H. F., NICHOLAS, B., (1972), Historical introduction to the study of Roman 
Law, 3
 ed., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
JONES, D., (2006), The Bankers of Puteoli: Finance, Trade and Industry in the Roman 
World, Stroud: Tempus. 
JONGMAN, W. M., (2002), Alimenta, New Pauly I, coll. 509-10. 
________ (2007), The early Roman empire: Consumption, in SCHEIDEL, W., MORRIS, 
I., SALLER, R., (eds.), pp. 592-618. 
________ (2009), Archaeology, Demography, and Roman Economic Growth, in 
BOWMAN, A. K., WILSON, A., (eds.), pp. 115-26.  
JRDENS, A., (1990), Vertragliche Regelungen von Arbeiten im spten 
griechischsprachigen gypten (P.Heid. V), Heidelberg: Carl Winter. 
________ (1993), Kaufpreisstundungen (Sales on Credit), ZPE 98: 263-82. 
KABABJI, M. D., (2011), Pitfalls in Economic Thinking. Available online at SSRN 
(=Social Sciences Research Network), (August 1, 2011):  
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1902705 ; http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1902705  
KAHNEMAN, D., TVERSKY, A., (1979), Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under 
Risk, Econometrica 47.2: 263-92. 
________ (1986), Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions, Journal of Business 
59 (4.2: The Behavioural Foundations of Economic Theory): 251-78. 
KARLOWA, O., (1885), Rmische Rechtsgeschichte, Leipzig: Veit & comp. 
KASER, M., (1971), Das rmishce Privatrecht, Erster Abschnitt: Das altrmische, das 
vorklassische und klassische Recht. Erster Abschnitt, 2
 ed., Mnchen: C.H. 
Beck'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung. 
________ (1972), Zur Methodologie der romischen Rechtsquellenforschung, 
Sitzungsberichte der sterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
Philosophisch-historische Klasse, Bd. 277, Abh. 5, Wien: Bhlau. 
________ (1975), Das rmishce Privatrecht, Erster Abschnitt: Das altrmische, das 
vorklassische und klassische Recht. Zweiter Abschnitt, 2
 ed., Mnchen: 
C.H. Beck'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung. 
KASTNER, K., (1962), Die zivilrechtliche Verwahrung des grko-gyptischen 
Obligationenrechts im Lichte der Papyri (), Diss., Erlangen-
Nrnberg. 
KATSARI, C., (2008), The Monetisation of the Roman frontier, in HARRIS, W. V., (ed.), 
pp. 242-66. 
________ (2011), The Roman monetary system: the Eastern provinces from the first to 
the third century AD, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1902705
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1902705
http://www.moneyscience.com/pg/bookmarks/Admin/read/47746/prospect-theory-an-analysis-of-decision-under-risk-pdf-1979
http://www.moneyscience.com/pg/bookmarks/Admin/read/47746/prospect-theory-an-analysis-of-decision-under-risk-pdf-1979
http://www.moneyscience.com/pg/bookmarks/Admin/read/49053/rational-choice-and-the-framing-of-decisions-pdf-1985
- 336 - 
KATZOFF, R., SCHAPS, D., (eds.), (2005), Law in the documents of the Judaean desert, 
Leiden: Brill. 
KAUFMANN, H., (1964), Die altrmische Miete: ihre Zusammenhnge mit Gesellschaft, 
Wirtschaft, und staatlicher Vermgensverwaltung, Habilitationsschrift, 
Frankfurt am Main, Forschungen zum rmischen Recht 18, Kln: Bhlau. 
KAY, P., (2009), The economic impact of Rome's imperial expansion from the second 
Punic war to Mithradates VI of Pontus, D.Phil. Thesis., University of Oxford. 
KEHOE, D. P., (1992), Management and investment on estates in Roman Egypt during the 
early Empire, Bonn: Habelt. 
________ (1993), The Management of a Roman Senators Estates, in HERR, Richard 
(ed.), Themes in Rural History of the Western World, Ames: Iowa State 
University Press, pp. 45-66. 
________ (1997), Investment, profit, and tenancy: the jurists and the Roman agrarian 
economy, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
________ (2007), Law and the rural economy in the Roman Empire, Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press. 
________ (2012), Roman Economic Policy and the Law of Contract, in MCGINN, T. A. 
J., (ed.), pp. 189-214. 
KELLY, J. M., (1970), A hypothesis of the origin of mutuum, The Irish Jurist 5: 156-63. 
KESSLER, D., TEMIN, P., (2008), Money and Prices in the Early Roman Empire, in 
HARRIS, W. V., (ed.), pp. 137-59. 
KEYNES, J. M., (1936), The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, 
London: Macmillan. 
________ (1937), The General Theory of Employment, The Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 51.2: 209-223.  
KIRMAN, A. P., (1997), The Economy as an Interactive System, in ARTHUR, W. B., 
DURLAUF, S. N., LANE, D. A., (eds.), pp. 491-531. 
KLAMI, H. T., (1969), Mutua magis videtur quam deposita. ber die Geldverwahrung 
im Denken der rmischen Juristen, Helsinki: Akad. Buchhandl. 
________ (1986), Depositum und , Iuris Professio, Festgabe fr Max 
Kaser, pp. 89-100. 
________ (1987), Laesio enormis in Roman Law, Labeo 33: 48-63. 
KLAES, M., (2008), transaction costs, history of, in DURLAUF, S. N., BLUME, L. E., 
(eds.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2
 ed., Palgrave 
Macmillan. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online, Palgrave 
Macmillan. 30 September 2012.  
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_T000239  
- 337 - 
KODREBSKI, J., (1976), Der Rechtsunterricht am Ausgang der Republik und zu Beginn 
des Prinzipats, ANRW 2.15: 177-96. 
KOPPL, R., (2009), Complexity and Austrian economics, in ROSSER, J. B., (ed.), 
Handbook of research on complexity, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, pp. 
393-406. 
KREMER, A., (2000), Die Verhltnisse do ut facias und facio ut des als ausgewhlte 
Beispiele der Innominatkontrakte im klassischen rmischen Recht, in 
ZABOCKA, M., WOODKIEWICZ, W., (eds.), Au-del des frontires: 
mlanges de droit romain offerts  Witold Woodkie icz, Vol. I, Varsovie: 
Liber, pp. 409-27. 
KROLL, J. H., (2005), History of Coinage. Review of The Invention of Coinage and the 
Monetization of Ancient Greece, by D. M. Schaps, 2004, CR 55.1: 344-6.  
________ (2008), The Monetary Use of Weighted Bullion in Archaic Greece, in 
HARRIS, W. V., (ed.), pp. 12-37. 
KRUGMAN, P., (1996), The Self-Organizing Economy, Oxford: Blackwell. 
________ (1997), How the Economy Organises Itself in Space: A Survey of the New 
Economic Geography, in ARTHUR, W. B., DURLAUF, S. N., LANE, D. A., 
(eds.), pp. 239-62. 
KRUGMAN, P., WELLS, R., (2009), Chapter 14: Money, Banking, and the Federal 
Reserve System: Reserves, Bank Deposits, and the Money Multiplier, in 
Macroeconomics, 2nd ed., New York, NY: Worth Publishers, pp. 381414. 
KRUIT, N., (1992), Local Customs in the Formulas of Sales of Wine for Future Delivery 
(A Supplement to P.Heid.V), ZPE 94: 167-84. 
KUBITSCHEK, J. W., (1894), Alimenta, RE I, coll. 1484-9. 
KHNERT, H., (1965), Zum Kreditgeschft in den hellenistischen Papyri gyptensbis 
Diokletian, Diss., Freiburg. 
KURKE, L., (1999), Coins, bodies, games, and gold: the politics of meaning in archaic 
Greece, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
KRUSE, T., (2002), Der knigliche Schreiber und die Gauverwaltung: Untersuchungen 
zur Verwaltungsgeschichte gyptens in der Zeit von Augustus bis Philippus 
Arabs (30 v. Chr.-245 n. Chr.), Mnchen; Leipzig:  Saur. 
KYDLAND, F. E., PRESCOTT, E. C., (1982), Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations, 
Econometrica 50.6: 134570. 
LAFFI, U., (1986), La lex Rubria de Gallia Cisalpina, Athenaeum 64: 5-44. 
LAGERSPETZ, E., (1984), Money as A Social Contract, Theory and Decision 17: 1-9. 
LANE, D. A., (1997), Is What Is Good for Each Best for All? Learning From Others in 
the Information Contagion Model, in ARTHUR, W. B., DURLAUF, S. N., 
LANE, D. A., (eds.), pp. 105-27. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Money_multiplier#CITEREFKrugmanWells2009
http://books.google.com/books?id=dpTBdNGGrtUC&pg=PA393
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1913386
- 338 - 
LANGLOIS, R. N., (1986), Rationality, institutions, and explanation, in LANGLOIS, R. 
N., (ed.), Economics as a process: essays in the new institutional economics, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 225-41. 
LAUFFER, S., (1971), Diokletians Preisedikt, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co. 
LAVAN, M., (2013), Slaves to Rome: Paradigms of empire in Roman culture, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
LAVOIE, M., (2006), Endogenous money: accommodationist, in ARESTIS, P., SAWYER, 
M., (eds.), pp. 17-34. 
LAZZARINI, M. L., (1998), Parakatithenai, Hespera: studi sulla grecit di occidente 9: 
155-9. 
LEE, F., (2009), A history of heterodox economics: challenging the mainstream in the 
twentieth century, London: Routledge. 
LEESEN, T. G., (2008), The controversy about the nature of the price in a contract of 
sale, RIDA 55: 283-301. 
________ (2010), Gaius Meets Cicero: Law and Rhetoric in the School Controversies, 
Leiden: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. 
LEIJONHUFVUD, A., (1981), Life among the Econ, in Information and Coordination: 
Essays in Macroeconomic Theory, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 347-
________ (1997), Macroeconomics and Complexity: Inflation Theory, in ARTHUR, W. 
B., DURLAUF, S. N., LANE, D. A., (eds.), pp. 321-35. 
LENEL, O., (1889), Palingenesia iuris civilis: iuris consultorum reliquiae quae Iustiniani 
Digestis continentur, ceteraque iuris prudentiae civilis fragmenta minora 
secundum auctores et libres, Leipzig: Bernhard Tauchnitz. Reprinted with 
supplement, Graz, Austria: Akademische Druck Verlagsanstalt (1960). 
________ (1931), Afrikans Qustionen. Versuch eine kritischen Palingenesie, ZRG 51: 
1-53. 
LEVY, E., (1951), West Roman vulgar law: the law of property, Philadelphia: American 
Philosophical Society. 
LEWIS, A. D. E., (1973), The Trichotomy in Locatio Conductio, The Irish Jurist 8: 164-
LEWIS, N., (1945), The meaning of   and kindred expressions in loan 
contracts, TAPhA 75: 126-39. 
________ (ed.), (1989), The Documents from the Bar Kokhba period in the Cave of 
Letters. Greek papyri edited by Naphtali Lewis; Aramaic and Nabatean 
signatures and subscriptions edited by Yigael Yadin and Jonas C. Greenfield, 
Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=17
- 339 - 
________ (1996), Again, the Money Called Blacks, in KATZOFF, R., PETROFF, Y., 
SCHAPS, D., (eds.), Classical studies in honor of David Sohlberg, Ramat Gan, 
Israel: Bar-Ilan University Press, pp. 399- 401. 
LIEBS, D., (1976), Rechtsschulen und Rechtsunterricht im Prinzipat, ANRW 2.15: 197-
LIMA, M., (2011), Visual Complexity: Mapping Patterns of Information, Princeton 
Architectural Press: New York. 
LINDGREN, K., (1997), Evolutionary Dynamics in Game-Theoretic Models, in 
ARTHUR, W. B., DURLAUF, S. N., LANE, D. A., (eds.), pp. 337-67. 
LINTOTT, A., (1993), Imperium Romanum: politics and administration, London: 
Routledge. 
________ (2002), Freedmen and Slaves in the Light of Legal Documents from First-
Century A.D. Campania, CQ 52.2: 555-65. 
LITEWSKI, W., (1973), Rmisches Seedarlehen, IURA 24: 112-83. 
________ (1974), Le dpt irrgulier, RIDA 21: 215-62. 
________ (1975), Le dpt irrgulier (II), RIDA 22: 279-315. 
LIU, J., (2007), The Era of Patavium Again, ZPE 162: 281-9. 
________ (2008), The Economy of Endowments: the Case of the Roman Collegia, in 
VERBOVEN, K., VANDORPE, K., CHANKOWSKI, V., (eds.), pp. 231-56. 
LO CASCIO, E., (ed.), (2003), Credito e Moneta nel mondo Romano. Atti degli Incontri 
capresi di storia delleconomia antica (Capri 12-14 ottobre 2000), Bari: 
Edipuglia. 
________ (2006), The role of the state in the Roman economy: making use of the new 
institutional economics, in BANG, P. F., IKEGUCHI, M., ZICHE, H. G., (eds.), 
pp. 215-35. 
________ (2011), La quantificazione dell 'offerta di moneta a Roma: il ruolo del credi, 
in DE CALLATA, (ed.), pp. 31-42. 
LOMBRDI, L., (1961), Dalla fides alla bona fides, Milano: Giuffr. 
LONGO, C., (1912), Sulla natura della merces nella locatio conductio, Mlanges Girard: 
105-117. 
LONG, G., (1875), PANDECTAE or DIGESTA, in SMITH, W., (ed.), A Dictionary of 
Greek and Roman Antiquities, London: John Murray, pp. 858-61. 
LONGO, G., (1953), Questioni esegetiche, in Studi Albertario, vol. I, pp. 687-697. 
MACMULLEN, R., (1982), The Epigraphic Habit in the Roman Empire, AJPh 103: 233-
MACRO, A. D., (1976), Imperial provisions for Pergamum. OGIS 484, GRBS 17: 169-
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/aph/index.php?do=notice&num=2
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/aph/index.php?do=notice&num=2
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=1
- 340 - 
MAFFI, A., (2005), Family and property law, in GAGARIN, M., COHEN, D., (eds.), The 
Cambridge companion to ancient Greek law, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 254-66. 
MALINOWSKI, B., (1922), Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An account of native 
enterprise and adventure in the archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea, 
London: Routledge (reprinted 2002). 
MALMENDIER, U., (2005), Roman Shares, in GOETZMANN, W. N., ROUWENHORST, K. 
G., (eds.), The Origin of Value. The Financial Innovations that created 
Modern Capital Markets, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 31-42. 
MANDEL, E., (1970), Marxist Economic Theory, New York: Monthly Review Press. 
MANNING, J. G., MORRIS, I., (eds.), (2005), The Ancient Economy: Evidence and 
Models, Stanford, California: Stanford University Press. 
MANOVICH, L., (2011), Introduction, in LIMA, M., Visual Complexity, pp. 11-13. 
MANTHE, U., (1989), Das senatus consultum Pegasianum, Berlin: DunckerandHumblot.  
MARTIN, S. D., (1989), The Roman Jurists and the organization of private building in the 
late republic and early empire, Bruxelles: Latomus. 
________ (1990), Servum meum mulionem conduxisiti: Mules, Muleteers and 
Transportation in Classical Roman law, TAPhA (120): 301-14. 
________ (2002), Roman law and the study of land transportation, in AUBERT, J.-J., 
SIRKS, A. J. B., (eds.), pp. 151-168. 
MASCHI, C. A., (1973), La categoria dei contratti reali: Corso di diritto romano, Milano: 
Giuffre. 
MATHIOWETZ, D., (2007), The Juridical Subject of `Interest', Political Theory 35: 468-
MAURER, B., (2006), The Anthropology of Money, Annual Review of Anthropology 35: 
15-36. 
MAUSS, M., (1925), The gift: Form and reason for exchange in archaic societies, 
London: Routledge (reprinted 2008). 
MAYER-MALY, T., (1956), Locatio Conductio, Wien: Herold. 
________ (1991), Pactum, Tausch und laesio enormis in den sog. Leges Barbarorum, 
ZRG 108: 213-33. 
________ (2002), Comptes Rendus. Review of R. FIORI, La definizione della locatio 
conductio, Giurisprudenza romana e tradizione romanistica (Napoli, 1999), 
The Legal History Review 70.3: 353-4. 
________ (2004), Homer in rmischen Rechtstexten, RHD 72: 231-41. 
MCCALLUM, B., (1986), On real and sticky price theories of the business cycle, 
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 18.4: 397414. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ernest_Mandel
- 341 - 
MCGINN, T. A. J., (ed.), (2012), Obligations in Roman law: past, present, and future, 
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
MEDICUS, D., (1962), Id quod interest: Studien zum rmischen Recht des 
Schadensersatzes, Kln; Graz: Bhlau. 
MEISSEL, F.-S., (2004), Societas: Struktur und Typenvielfalt des rmischen 
Gesellschaftsvertrages, Frankfurt am Main: P. Lang. 
________ (2013), Review of A. M. Fleckner, Antike Kapitalvereinigungen : ein Beitrag 
zu den konzeptionellen und historischen Grundlagen der Aktiengesellschaft 
(Kln, 2010), ZRG 13: 543-61. 
MLZE-MODRZEJEWSKI, J., (1990), Droit imprial et traditions locales dans lEgypte 
romaine, Aldershot, Hampshire: Variorum.  
MELITZ, J., (1970), The Polanyi School of Anthropology on Money: An Economist's 
View, American Anthropologist 72.5: 1020-40. 
MESHORER, Y., (1992), The 'Black Silver' Coins of the Babatha Papyri: A Re-
evaluation', The Israel Museum Journal 10: 67-74. 
METCALFE, J. S., FOSTER, J., (eds.), (2007), Evolution and Economic Complexity, 
Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar. 
METCALF, W. E., (2012), The monetary system of the Roman East: caveat lector. A 
review article on Constantina Katsari, The Roman Monetary System: the 
Eastern Provinces from the First to the Third Century AD, Cambridge, 2011, 
JRA 25: 864-9. 
MEYER, E. A., (2004), Legitimacy and law in the Roman world: "Tabulae" in Roman 
belief and practice, Cambridge: University Press. 
________ (2007), Diplomatics, Law and Romanisation in the Documents from the 
Judaean Desert, in CAIRNS, J. W., DU PLESSIS, P. J., (eds.), pp. 53-82. 
MICHEL, J., (1962), Gratuit en droit romain, Bruxelles: Universit Libre de Bruxelles. 
MILLETT, P., (1991), Lending and Borrowing in Ancient Athens, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
MISERA, K.-H., (1977), Der Nutzungstausch bei Nachbarn und Miteigentmern. Zu den 
klassischen Grundlagen der justinianischen Quellen, ZRG 94: 267-92. 
MOLNR, I., (1982), Object of locatio conductio, BIDR 85: 127-42. 
________ (1983-1984), Rechte und Pflichten der Subjekte der locatio conductio, Index 
(Quaderni camerti di studi romanistici, International Survey of Roman Law) 
12: 157-88. 
MOMMSEN, T., (1860), Geschichte des rmische Mnzwesen, Berlin: Weidmann. 
________ (1885), Die rmischen Anfnge von Kauf und Miethe, ZRG 6: 260-75. 
- 342 - 
MONSON, A., (2009), Review on Sitta von Reden, Money in Ptolemaic Egypt: From the 
Macedonian Conquest to the End of the Third Century BC, Cambridge, 
2007, CJ 105.2: 177-180. 
MONTEVECCHI, O., (1988), La papirologia, Milano: Vita e pensiero.  
MONTGOMERY, M. R., (2000), Complexity Theory: An Austrian perspective, in 
COLANDER, D., (ed.), pp. 227-40. 
MOORE, B. J., (1988), Horizontalists and Verticalists: The Macroeconomics of Credit 
Money, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
________ (2006), Shaking the Invisible Hand: Complexity, Endogenous Money and 
Exogenous Interest Rates, New York: Palgrave Macmillan.  
MORLEY, N., (2004), Theories, Models and Concepts in Ancient History, London: 
Routledge. 
________ (2007), The early Roman empire: Distribution, in SCHEIDEL, W., MORRIS, I., 
SALLER, R., (eds.), pp. 570-91. 
MORRIS, I., (1986), Gift and commodity in archaic Greece, Man 21: 1-17. 
MORRIS, I., SCHEIDEL, W., (eds.), (2008), The Dynamics of Ancient Empires: State 
Power from Assyria to Byzantium, New York; Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
MROZEK, S., (1973), Zu der kaiserlichen und der privaten Kinderfrsorge in Italien im 2. 
und 3. Jh., Klio 55: 281-4. 
________ (1985), Zum Kreditgeld der frhen rmischen Kaiserzeit, Historia: 
Zeitschrift fr Alte Geschichte 34: 310-23. 
________ (1988), Die Privaten Alimentastiftungen in der rmischen Kaiserzeit, in 
KLOFT, H., (ed.), Sozialmassnahmen und Frsorge. Zur Eigenart antiker 
Sozialpolitik, Granz: Horn, pp. 155-66. 
________ (2001), Faenus: Studien zu Zinsproblemen zur Zeit des Prinzipats, Stuttgart: 
Steiner. 
MULDREW, C., (1998), The Economy of Obligation: the Culture of Credit and Social 
Relations in Early Modern England, Basingstoke: Macmillan. 
NELASON, R. R., WINTER, S. G., (1982), An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change, 
Cambridge, Mass.; London: Harvard University Press. 
NELSON, H. L. W., (1985), Ciceros Vorschlge fr ein neues juristisches Lehrbuch. 
Betrachtungen ber De oratore i, 185-192, Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der 
Wilhelm-Pieck-Universitt Rostock 34.1: 37-9. 
NELSON, H. L. W., MANTHE, U., (1999), Gai Institutiones III. 88-181: Die 
Kontraktsobligationen: Text und Kommentar, Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
NICOLET, C., (1988), La pense conomique des Romains, Rpublique et Haut-Empire, 
in Rendre  Csar: conomie et socit dans la Rome antique, Paris: 
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublication?journalCode=histzeitalte
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublication?journalCode=histzeitalte
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_R._Nelson_(economist)
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sidney_G._Winter
http://books.google.com/books?id=6Kx7s_HXxrkC
- 343 - 
Gallimard, pp. 117-219. [= Il pensiero economico dei Romani, in FIRPO, L., 
(ed.), Storia delle idee politoche, economiche e sociali, Vol. I, (1982), Turin: 
UTET, pp.  877-960]. 
NICOLIS, G., PRIGOGINE, I., (1989), Exploring complexity: An introduction, New York: 
W. H. Freeman. 
NORTH, D. C., (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
________ (1991), Institutions, Journal of Economic Perspectives 5.1: 97-112. 
________ (1993), Institutional Change: A Framework of Analysis, in SJSTRAND, S.-
E., (ed.), Institutional change: theory and empirical findings, Armonk, N.Y.: 
Sharpe, pp. 35-46. 
________ (1997), Some Fundamental Puzzles in Economic History/Development, in 
ARTHUR, W. B., DURLAUF, S. N., LANE, D. A., (eds.), pp. 223-37. 
NORTH, G., (2012), Mises on Money, Auburn, Alabama, USA: Ludwig von Mises 
Institute.  
OUDSHOORN, J. G., (2007), The relationship between Roman and local law in the 
Babatha and Salome Komaise archives: general analysis and three case 
studies on law of succession, guardianship, and marriage, Leiden: Brill. 
OWEN, G., LAW, J., (eds.), (2005), Oxford Dictionary of Accounting, 3
 ed., Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
PALING, D., (1973), Emptio spei and emptio rei speratae, The Irish Jurist 8: 178-82. 
PARKINS, H., SMITH, C., (eds.), (1998), Trade, Traders and the Ancient City, London: 
Routledge. 
PASCH, R., (2000), Complexity and Economic Method, in COLANDER, D., (ed.), pp. 
215-26. 
PATINKIN, D., (2008), neutrality of money, in DURLAUF, S. N., BLUME, L. E., (eds.), 
The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2
 ed., Palgrave Macmillan. 
The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online, Palgrave Macmillan, 16 
April 2012.  
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_N000054  
PATTERSON, J. R., (1987), Crisis: what crisis? Rural change and urban development in 
imperial Apennine Italy, PBSR 55: 115-46. 
PEACHIN, M., (2002), Introduction, in AUBERT, J.-J., SIRKS, A. J. B., (eds.), pp. 1-14. 
PELLOSO, C., (2007), Le origini aristoteliche del synallagma di Aristone, in 
GAROFALO, L., (ed.), La compravendita e l'interdipendenza delle 
obbligazioni nel diritto romano, Padova: CEDAM, pp. 3-100. 
________ (2011), do ut des e do ut facias. Archetipi labeoniani e tutele acontrattualinella 
giurisprudenza romanatra primo e secondo secolo d.C., in GAROFALO, L., 
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_N000054
- 344 - 
(ed.), Scambio e gratuit. Confini e contenuti dell'area contrattuale, Padova: 
CEDAM, pp. 89-173. 
PENNITZ, M., (2002), Zur Anfechtung wegen laesio enormis im rmischen Recht, in 
SCHERMAIER, M. J., RAINER, J. M., WINKEL, L. C., (eds.), Iurisprudentia 
Universalis: Festschrift fr Theo Mayer-Maly zum 70. Geburtstag, Kln; 
Weimar; Wien, pp. 575-89. 
PESTMAN, P. W., (1971), Loans Bearing No Interest?, JJP 16-17: 7-29. 
PIRO, L., (2001), Definizioni perimetrale e location conductio, Index 29: 414-36. 
PLATSCHEK, J., (2011), Bemerkungen zur Datierung der laesio enormis, ZRG 128: 406-
POLANYI, K., (1944), The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of 
Our Times, Boston MA: Beacon (reprinted 2001). 
________ (1957), The economy as instituted process, in POLANYI, K., ARENSBERG, C. 
M., PEARSON, H. W., (eds.), Trade and Market in the Early Empires: 
Economies in History and Theory, Glencoe IL: Free Press & Falcon's Wing 
Press, pp. 243-269.  
________ (1966), Dahomey and the Slave Trade: An Analysis of an Archaic Economy, 
Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
________ (1968), The Semantics of Money-Use, in DALTON, G., (ed.), Primitive, 
Archaic and Modern Economies; essays of Karl Polanyi, Garden City: 
Anchor Books, pp. 175-203. 
________ (1977), Money objects and money uses, in POLANYI, K., The Livelihood of 
Man, New York; London: Academic Press, pp. 97121. 
PONTING, M., (2009), Roman Silver Coinage: Mints, Metallurgy, and Production, in 
BOWMAN, A. K., WILSON, A., (eds.), pp. 269-80.  
PRASCH, R. E., (2000), Complexity and economic method: an institutionalist 
perspective, in COLANDER, D., (ed.), pp. 215-26. 
PRINGSHEIM, F., (1916), Der Kauf mit fremdem Geld: Studien ber die Bedeutung der 
Preiszahlung fr den Eigentumserwerb nach griechischem und rmischem 
Recht, Leipzig: Verlag von Veit. 
________ (1950), The Greek Law of Sale, Weimar: H. Bhlaus Nachfolger. 
RATHBONE, D., (1991), Economic rationalism and rural society in third-century A.D. 
Egypt: the Heroninos archive and the Appianus estate, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
________ (1996), Monetisation, non price-inflation, in third-century A.D. Egypt?, in 
KING, C. E., WIGG, D. G., (eds.), Coin Finds and Coin Use in the Roman 
World: The Thirteenth Oxford Symposium on Coinage and Monetary History 
25-27.3.1993, Berlin: Gebr. Mann, pp. 321-39. 
- 345 - 
________ (1997), Prices and Price Formation in Roman Egypt, in ANDREAU, J., 
BRIANT, P., DESCAT, R., (eds.), pp. 183-243. 
________ (2001), The "Muziris" papyrus (SB XVIII 13167): financing Roman trade 
with India, Bulletin de la Socit archologique d'Alexandrie 46: 39-50. 
________ (2003), The financing of maritime commerce in the Roman empire, I-II AD, 
in LO CASCIO, E., (ed.), pp. 197-229. 
RATHBONE, D., TEMIN, P., (2008), Financial Intervention in first century AD Rome and 
eighteenth century England, in VERBOVEN, K., VANDORPE, K., 
CHANKOWSKI, V., (eds.), pp. 371-419. 
RAVIER, A. O., (2011), The Non-Neutrality of Money: A Response to Dr. Humphrey, 
Procesos de Mercado: Revista Europea de Economa Poltica 8.2: 263-284. 
REALFONZO, R., (2006), The Italian circuitist approach, in ARESTIS, P., SAWYER, M., 
(eds.), pp. 105-120. 
REINHARDT, T., (2003),  arcus Tullius Ciceros Topica, edited  ith a translation, 
introduction and commentary by Tobias Reinhardt, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
RENGER, J., (2005), Interest, New Pauly, vol. 6, pp. 849-50. 
RICKMAN, G., (1971), Roman granaries and store buildings, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
ROBINSON, Olivia F., (1997), The Sources of Roman Law: Problems and Methods for 
Ancient Historians, London: Routledge. 
ROCHON, L.-P., (2003), On Money and Endogenous Money: Post Keynesian and 
Circulation Approaches, in ROCHON, L.-P., ROSSI, S., (eds.), Modern 
theories of money: the nature and role of money in capitalist economies, 
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, pp. 115-141. 
ROEMER, J. E., (1981), Analytical foundations of Marxian economic theory, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
ROSENFELD, B.-Z., MENIRAV, J., (2001), Methods of Pricing and Price Regulation in 
Roman Palestine in the Third and Fourth Centuries, JAOS 121.3: 351-69. 
________ (2005), Markets and marketing in Roman Palestine, Leiden; Boston: Brill. 
ROSSER, J. B., (2008), Econophysics and Economic Complexity, Advances in Complex 
Systems 11.5: 745-60. 
________ (2010), How complex are the Austrians?, in KOPPL, R., HORWITZ, S., 
DESROCHERS, P., (eds.), What is so Austrian about Austrian Economics? 
(Advances in Austrian Economics, Vol. 14), Emerald Group Publishing 
Limited, pp. 165-179. 
- 346 - 
ROTH, W.-D., (1970), Untersuchungen zur Kredit-Parathk im rmischen gypten: ein 
Beitrag zum Zinsrecht der Papyri und zum [nomos tn parathkon], Diss., 
Marburg. 
ROWAN, C., (2011), A review on Constantina Katsari, The Roman Monetary System: the 
Eastern Provinces from the First to the Third Century AD, Cambridge, 2011, 
BMCRev, September 2011, online: http://bmcr.brynmawr.edu/2011/2011-09-
39.html  
RUBINSTEIN, A., (1998), Modeling bounded rationality, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
RUPPRECHT, H.-A., (2005), Greek Law in Foreign Surroundings: Continuity and 
Development, in GAGARIN, M., COHEN, D., (eds.), The Cambridge 
Companion to Ancient Greek Law, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 328-42. 
SASSE, C., (1958), Die Constitutio Antoniniana :eine Untersuchung uber dem Umfang 
der Burgerrechtsverleihung auf Grund des papyrus Giss. 40, I, 
Wiesbaden: O. Harrassowitz. 
SATLOW, M. L., (2005), Marriage payments and succession strategies in the documents 
from the Judaean desert, in KATZOFF, R., SCHAPS, D., (eds.), pp. 51-65. 
SCACCHETTI, M. G., (1984), Note sulle differenze di metodo fra Sabiniani e Proculiani, 
in BISCARDI, A., PASTORI, F., (eds.), Studi in onore di Arnaldo Biscardi, vol. 
V, Milano: Istituto editoriale Cisalpino, La Goliardica, pp. 369-404. 
SCHANZ, M., (1884), Die Analogisten und Anomalisten im rmischen Recht, 
Philologus 42: 309-318. 
SCHAPS, D., (2004), The Invention of Coinage and the Monetization of Ancient Greece, 
Ann Arbor. 
________ (2008), What Was Money in Ancient Greece?, in HARRIS, W. V., (ed.), pp. 
38-48. 
SCHEIDEL, W., (2002), A model of demographic and economic change in Roman Egypt 
after the Antonine plague, JRA 15: 97-114. 
________ (2007), Demography, in SCHEIDEL, W., MORRIS, I., SALLER, R., (eds.), pp. 
38-86. 
________ (2008), The Divergent Evolution of Coinage in Eastern and Western Eurasia, 
in HARRIS, W. V., (ed.), pp. 267-86. 
________ (2009), The Monetary Systems of the Han and Roman Empires, in 
SCHEIDEL, W., (ed.), Rome and China: Comparative Perspectives on Ancient 
World Empires, New York, N.Y.; Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 137-
________ (2010a), Coin quality, coin quantity, and coin value in early China and the 
Roman world, AJN 22: 93-118. 
http://bmcr.brynmawr.edu/2011/2011-09-39.html
http://bmcr.brynmawr.edu/2011/2011-09-39.html
http://solo.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/primo_library/libweb/action/search.do?vl(freeText0)=+Pastori%2c+Franco&vl(169119528UI0)=creator&vl(225595489UI1)=all_items&vl(1UIStartWith0)=exact&fn=search&tab=local&mode=Basic&vid=OXVU1&scp.scps=scope%3a(NET)%2cscope%3a(OX)
- 347 - 
________ (2010b), Real wages in early economies: evidence for living standards from 
1800 BCE to 1300 CE, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the 
Orient 53:425-62. 
________ (2012), Roman wellbeing and the economic consequences of the Antonine 
Plague, in LO CASCIO, E., (ed.),  impatto della peste antonina, 
Edipuglia: Bari, pp. 265-95. 
SCHEIDEL, W., MORRIS, I., SALLER, R., (eds.), (2007a), The Cambridge economic 
history of the Greco-Roman world, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
SCHEIDEL, W., MORRIS, I., SALLER, R., (2007b), Introduction, in SCHEIDEL, W., 
MORRIS, I., SALLER, R., (eds.), pp. 1-12. 
SCHEIDEL, W., VON REDEN, S., (eds.), (2002), The Ancient Economy, New York: 
Routledge. 
SCHELTEMA, H. J., (2004), Opera Minora: ad Iuris Historiam Pertinentia, collected by 
Nicolaas Van der Wal, Groningen: Chimaira (= Idem, ber die Werke des 
Stephanus, RHD (1958) 26: 5-14. 
SCHERMAIER, M. J., (2000), Bona fides in Roman contract law, in WHITTAKER, S., 
ZIMMERMANN, R., (eds.), Good Faith in European Contract Law, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 63-92. 
SCHINCKUS, C., (2013), Between complexity of modelling and modelling of complexity: 
An essay on econophysics, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its 
Applications, 392.17: 3654-3665.  
SCHNEIDER, H., (2007), Technology, in SCHEIDEL, W., MORRIS, I., SALLER, R., (eds.), 
pp. 144-71. 
SCHOTTER, A., (1981), The Economic Theory of Social Institutions, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
SCHREINER, J. H., (1963), Greek Papyri from the Oslo collection, SO 38.1: 38-46. 
SCHUBERT, H., (1992), Das Verhltnis von Denar zu Antoninian in den Mnzschtzen 
der ersten hlfte des 3. Jahehunderts n. Chr., LNV 4: 259-80. 
SCHULZ, F., (1949), The post classical edition of Papians libri quaestionum, in 
Scritti in onore di Contardo Ferrini: pubblicati in occasione della sua 
beatificazione, Vol. 4, Milano: Societ editrice Vita e pensiero, pp. 254-67. 
SCHUMPETER, J. A., (1911), The Theory of Economic Development, trans. R. Opie, 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
SCHWARTZ, J., (1975), L. Domitius Domitianus: tude numismatique et papyrologique, 
Bruxelles: Fondation gyptologique reine lisabeth. 
SCOTT, M., (1994), Aristotle on Money, Phronesis 39.1: 26-44. 
SCOTT, R. W., (1987), The Adolescence of Institutional Theory, Administrative Science 
Quarterly 32: 493-511. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=26
- 348 - 
________ (2001), Institutions and Organisations, 2
 ed., Thousand Oaks, Calif.; 
London. 
SCOTT, S. P., (ed. et trans.), (1932), The Civil law, including the Twelve tables: the 
Institutes of Gaius, the Rules of Ulpian, the Opinions of Paulus, the 
Enactments of Justinian, and the Constitutions of Leo, 17 vols., Cincinnati: 
The Central Trust Company. 
SEAFORD, R., (1994), Reciprocity and ritual: Homer and tragedy in the developing city-
state, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
________ (2004), Money and the Early Greek Mind: Homer, Philosophy, Tragedy, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
________ (2008), Money and Tragedy, in HARRIS, W. V., (ed.), pp. 49-65. 
SEGR, G., (1907), Sul deposito irregulare in dritto romano, BIDR 19: 197-234. 
SHAPIRO, A. F., (2000), A Hitchhikers guide to the techniques of adaptive nonlinear 
models, Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 26: 119132. 
SHERIDAN, J. A., (1986), Loan through a Bank , BASP 23: 149-53. 
SHERWIN-WHITE, A. N., (1973), The Roman citizenship, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
SILVER, M., (2009), Historical otherness, the Roman bazaar, and primitivism. P. F. Bang 
on the Roman economy: review article, JRA 22.2: 421-43. 
SIMON, D., (1965), Quasi-. Zugleich ein Beitrag zur Morphologie 
griechisch-hellenistischer Schuldrechtstatbestnde, ZRG 82: 39-66. 
SIMON, H. A., (1983), Reason in Human Affairs, Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
SIRKS, A. J. B., (1985), La laesio enormis en droit romain et byzantin, RHD 53.3-4: 
291-307. 
________ (1991), Food for Rome: the legal structure of the transportation and 
processing of supplies for the imperial distributions in Rome and 
Constantinople, Amsterdam: Gieben. 
________ (1992), Diocletians option for the buyer in case of rescission of a sale. A 
reply to Klami, RHD 60: 39-47. 
________ (1995), Laesio enormis und die Auflsung fiskalischer Verkufe, ZRG 112: 
411-22. 
________ (1998), The management of public loans of towns (the cura kalendarii) and of 
their finances in general, in CRIF, G., GIGLIO, S., SARGENTI, M., (eds.), 
Atti dell'Accademia romanistica costantiniana: XII Convegno internazionale 
in onore di Manlio Sargenti, Napoli: Edizioni scientifiche italiane, pp. 378-
________ (2002), Sailing in the off-season with reduced financial risk, in AUBERT, J.-
J., SIRKS, A. J. B., (eds.), pp. 134-50. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=1
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/aph/index.php?do=notice&num=3
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=22
- 349 - 
________ (2007), Laesio enormis again, RIDA 54: 461-69. 
________ (2012), Comptes rendus. Review of A. M. Fleckner, Antike 
Kapitalvereinigungen : ein Beitrag zu den konzeptionellen und historischen 
Grundlagen der Aktiengesellschaft (Kln, 2010), RHD 80: 211-3. 
SMITHIN, J., (2006), The theory of interest rates, in ARESTIS, P., SAWYER, M., (eds.), 
pp. 273-90. 
SNOWDON, B., VANE, H. R., (2005), Modern Macroeconomics: Its Origins, Development 
and Current State, Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar. 
SOKOLOWSKI, P., (1896), Die Lehre von der Specification, ZRG 17: 252-311. 
SPERBER, D., (1973), Laesio Enormis and the Talmudic Law of Onaah, Israel Law 
Review 8: 254-74. 
SPOERRI-BUTCHER, M., (2006), Roman Provincial Coinage, Vol. VII: De Gordien Ier  
Gordien III (238-244 aprs J.-C.): Province d'Asie, London; Paris: British 
Museum Press; Bibliothque Nationale. 
STEIN, P. G., (1972), The Two Schools of Jurists in the Early Roman Principate, CLJ 
31: 8-31. 
________ (1977), Sabino contra Labeone: Due tipi di pensiero giuridico romano, BIDR 
19: 55-65. 
STELZENBERGER, B., (2008), Kapitalmanagement und Kapitaltransfer im Westen des 
Rmischen Reiches, Rahden/Westf. : VML, Verlag Marie Leidorf. 
STIGLER, G. J. (1961), The Economics of Information, Journal of Political Economy 
69.3: 21325. 
STOLFI, E., (1997), Il modello delle scuole in Pomponio e Gaio, SDHI 63: 1-105.  
STROBEL, K., (1989), Inflation und monetre Wirtschaftsstrukturen im 3.Jh. n. Chr. Zu 
Daniel Sperbers Bild der wirtschafts- und whrungsgeschichtlichen Krise, 
MBAH 8.2: 10-31. 
________ (2002), Geldwesen und Whrungsgeschichte des Imperium Romanum im 
Spiegel der Entwicklung des 3. Jahrhunderts n. Chr.  Wirtschaftsgeschichte 
in Widerstreit von Metallismus und Nominalismus, in STROBEL, K., (ed.), 
Die konomie des Imperium Romanum. Strukturen, Modelle und Wertungen 
im Spannungsfeld von Modernismus und Neoprimitivismus: Akten des 3. 
Trierer Symposiums zur antiken Wirtschaftsgeschichte, St. Katharinen: 
Scripta Mercaturae, pp. 86-168. 
SUTHERLAND, C. H. V., (1987), Roman History and Coinage 44 BC- AD 69, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
SZAIVERT, W., WOLTERS, R., (2005), Lhne, Preise, Werte: Quellen zur rmischen 
Geldwirtschaft, Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 
- 350 - 
SWARNEY, P. R., (1970), The Ptolemaic and Roman idios logos, Diss., Yale 1965, 
Toronto (American Studies in Papyrology 8). 
TALAMANCA, M., (2003), La bona fides nei giuristi romani: Leerformeln e valori 
dell'ordinamento, in GAROFALO, L., (ed.), Il ruolo della buona fede 
oggettiva nell'esperienza giuridica storica e contemporanea. Atti del 
Convegno internazionale di studi in onore di Alberto Burdese (2001) vol. 4, 
Padoa: CEDAM, pp. 1-312. 
TCHERNIA, A., (2003), Remarques sur la crise de 33, in LO CASCIO, E., (ed.), pp. 131-
TELLEGEN, J. W., (1988), Gaius Cassius and the Schola Cassiana in Plinys Letter VII 
24.8, ZRG 105: 263-311. 
TEMIN, P., (2001), A market economy in the early Roman Empire, JRS 91: 169-181. 
________ (2004), Financial Intermediation in the Early Roman Empire, The Journal of 
Economic History 64.3: 705-33. 
________ (2006), The Economy of the Early Roman Empire, The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 20.1: 133-51. 
________ (2011), A review on Constantina Katsari, The Roman Monetary System: the 
Eastern Provinces from the First to the Third Century AD, Cambridge, 2011, 
in AHB Online Reviews 1:4042. 
TENGER, B., (1993), Die Verschuldung im romischen Agypten (1.-2. Jh. n. Chr.), St. 
Katharinen: Scripta Mercaturae. 
TERPSTRA, T.T., (2013), Trading communities in the Roman world: a micro-economic 
and institutional perspective, Leiden: Brill. 
THILO, R. M., (1980), Der codex accepti et expensi im rmischen Recht: Ein Beitung zur 
Lehre von der Litteralobligation, Gottingen: Muster-Schmidt.  
THOMAS, J. A. C., (1958), The Nature of Merces, Acta Juridica 1: 191-9. 
________ (1959), Celsus: Sale and the passage of property, in DAUBE, D., (ed.), Studies 
in the Roman law of sale: dedicated to the memory of Francis de Zulueta, 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 160-70. 
________ (1971), D. 19, 2, 35, 1, BIDR 74: 83-8. 
THOMSON, J.M., (1970), Arra in sale in Justinians Law, The Irish Jurist 5: 179-87. 
TOBIN, J., (2008), money, in DURLAUF, S. N., BLUME, L. E., (eds.), The New Palgrave 
Dictionary of Economics, 2
 ed., Palgrave Macmillan. The New Palgrave 
Dictionary of Economics Online, Palgrave Macmillan, 18 April 2012.  
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_M000217  
TUMMINELLO, M., ASTE, T., DI MATTEO, D., MANTEGNA, R. N., EUGENE STANLEY, 
H., (2005), A Tool for Filtering Information in Complex Systems, 
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_M000217
- 351 - 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 102.30: 10421-6. 
TOURI, K., (2004), The ius respondendi and the Freedom of Roman Jurisprudence, 
RIDA 51: 295-337. 
________ (2007), Legal Pluralism and the Roman Empire, in CAIRNS, J. W., DU 
PLESSIS, P. J., (eds.), pp. 39-52. 
TYMOIGNE, ., WRAY, L. R., (2006), Money: an alternative story, in ARESTIS, P., 
SAWYER, M., (eds.), pp. 1-16. 
VAN DEN BRINK, H., (1974), The Charm of Legal History, Amsterdam: Hakkert. 
VANDENBROECK, P., GOOSSENS, J., CLEMENS, M., (2007), Tackling obesities: Future 
ChoicesBuilding the Obesity System Map, London: Government Office for 
Science, Dept. of Innovation, Universities and Skills. 
VAN DER LEEUW, S., MCGLADE, J., (eds.), (1997a), Time, process, and structured 
transformation in archaeology, London: Routledge. 
________ (1997b), Archaeology and non-linear dynamics  new approaches to long-
term change, in VAN DER LEEUW, S., MCGLADE, J., (eds.), pp. 1-31. 
VANDER WAERDT, P. A., (1990), Philosophical Influence on Roman Jurisprudence? 
The Case of Stoicism and Natural law, ANRW 36.4: 4851-900. 
VAUGHN, K. I., (1999), Hayeks Implicit Economics: Rules and the Problem of Order, 
Review of Austrian Economics 11: 12944. 
VELUPIALLI, K. V., (2011), Non-Linear Dynamics, Complexity and Randomness: 
Algorithmic Foundations, Journal of Economic Surveys 25.3: 54768. 
VENNIX, J. A. M., (1996), Group model building: facilitating team learning using system 
dynamics, Chichester: John Wiley. 
VERBOVEN, K., (2002), The economy of friends: economic aspects of amicitia and 
patronage in the Late Republic, Bruxelles: Latomus. 
________ (2008), Faeneratores, negotiators and Financial Intermediation in the Roman 
World (Late Republic and Early Empire), in VERBOVEN, K., VANDORPE, 
K., CHANKOWSKI, V., (eds.), pp. 211-29. 
VERBOVEN, K., VANDORPE, K., CHANKOWSKI, V., (eds.), (2008), Pistoi dia tn technn: 
bankers, loans and archives in the ancient world. Studies in honour of 
Raymond Bogaert, Stadia Hellenistica 44, Leuven: Peeters. 
VEYNE, P., (1965), Les Alimenta de Trajan, in PIGANIOL, A., TERRASSE, H., (eds.), 
 es Empreurs romains dEspagne  Colloque de Madrid-Italica, 31 mars - 6 
avril 1964, Paris: ditions du Centre national de la Recherche scientifique, 
pp. 162-79. 
VIGNERON, R., (1984), Rsistance du droit romain aux influences. Le cas du dpt 
irrgulier, RIDA 31: 307-24. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/aph/index.php?do=notice&num=1
- 352 - 
VISKY, K., (1974), Die Arra in den rmischen Rechtsquellen des III. Jahrhunderts und in 
der Justinianischen Gesetzgebung, Romanitas: revista de cultura romana 
(Rio de Janeiro) 12-13: 426-52. 
________ (1975), Larra nelle fonti giuridiche del III secolo e nella codificazione 
giustinianea, in Accademia romanistica costantiniana  Atti: I  Convegno 
internazionale (Spello  Fologno  Perugia, 18-20 settembre 1973), Perugia: 
Libreria universitaria, pp. 392-416. 
________ (1983), Spuren der Wirtschaftskrise der Kaiserzeit in den rmischen 
Rechtsquellen, Budapest: Akadmiai Kiad. 
VOIGT, M., (1889), Rmische Rechtsgeschichte II, Stuttgart: J.G. Cotta'sche, (reprinted 
Aalen: Scientia, 1963). 
VON MISES, L., [1953 (1912)], The Theory of Money and Credit, translated from the 
German by H. E. Batson, New Haven: Yale University Press. 
VON REDEN, S., (1995), Exchange in ancient Greece, London: Duckworth (reprinted 
2003). 
________ (1998), The Commodification of Symbols: Reciprocity and its Perversions in 
Menander, in GILL, C., POSTLETHWAITE, N., SEAFORD, R., (eds.), 
Reciprocity in Ancient Greece, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 255-78. 
________ (2002), Money in the ancient economy: A survey of recent research, Klio 84: 
141-74. 
________ (2007), Money in Ptolemaic Egypt, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
________ (2009), Review of The Monetary Systems of the Greeks and Romans, ed. by 
William V. Harris, 2008, The Economic History Review 62.2: 494-5. 
________ (2010), Money in Classical Antiquity, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.  
WALKER, D. R., (1976-8), The Metrology of the Roman Silver Coinage. Part I. From 
Augustus to Domitian; Part II. From Nerva to Commodus; Part III: from 
Pertinax to Uranius Antonius, BAR Suppl. 5; 22; 40, Oxford: British 
Archaeological Reports.  
WALLACE, N., (2008), fiat money, in DURLAUF, S. N., BLUME, L. E., (eds.), The New 
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2
 ed., Palgrave Macmillan. The New 
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online, Palgrave Macmillan, 30 
September 2013.   
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_F000059  
WARE, C., (2013), Information visualization: perception for design, 3
 ed., Waltham, 
Mass.: Elsevier; Morgan Kaufman. 
WASSINK, A., (1991), Inflation and Financial Policy under the Roman Empire to the 
Price Edict of 301 A.D., Historia 40.4: 465-93. 
WATSON, A., (1961), Contract of Mandate in Roman Law, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
http://www.dictionaryofeconomics.com/article?id=pde2008_F000059
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublication?journalCode=histzeitalte
- 353 - 
________ (1964), The Origins of Consensual Sale: A Hypothesis, RHD 32: 245-54. 
________ (1965), The Law of Obligations in the Later Roman Republic, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
________ (1971), The Law of Succession in the Later Roman Republic, Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
________ (1974), Law Making in the Later Roman Republic, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
________ (1981), The Hidden Origin of Enorm Lesion, Journal of Legal History 2.2: 
186-93. 
________ (1985), The Digest of Justinian. Latin text edited by Theodor Mommsen with 
the aid of Paul Krueger; English translation edited by Alan Watson, 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
________ (1994), Prolegomena to establishing pre-Justinianic texts, RHD 62.2: 113-25. 
________ (1995), The Spirit of Roman Law, Athens; London: University of Georgia 
Press. 
________ (2007), Law and Society, in CAIRNS, J. W., DU PLESSIS, P. J., (eds.), pp. 9-
WEAVER, W., (1948), Science and complexity, American Scientist 36.4: 536-44. 
WEBER, M., (1927), General Economic History, New York: Greenberg. 
WEINGORT, A., (1979), Intrt et crdit dans le droit talmudique, Paris: Librairie 
gnrale de droit et de jurisprudence. 
WEISER, W., COTTON, H. M., (1996), "Gebt dem Kaiser, was des Kaisers ist...": Die 
Geldwhrungen der Griechen, Juden, Nabater und Rmer in syrisch-
nabatischen Raum unter besonderer Bercksichtigung des Kurses von 
Sela'/Melaina und Lepton nach der Annexion des Knigreiches der Nabater 
durch Rom, ZPE 114: 237-87. 
WEISS, E., (1925), Lex Cornelia, RE vol. XXII.2, pp. 2343-4. 
WENGER, L., (1953), Die Quellen des rmischen Rechts, Wien: Holzhausen. 
WESTBROOK, R., (2008), The Origin of Laesio Enormis, RIDA 55: 39-52. 
WHITEHORNE, J. E. G., (1991), P. Mich. inv. 225: A Petition to the Egistrategus P. 
Marcius Crispus, CE 66: 250-6. 
WIBLE, J., (2000), What is complexity?, in COLANDER, D., (ed.), pp. 15-30. 
WICKSELL, K. (1936 [1898]), Interest and Prices: a study of the causes regulating the 
value of money, London: Macmillan.  
WIEACKER, F., (1960), Textstufen klassischer Juristen, Gttingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht. 
________ (1963), Zum Ursprung der bonae fidei iudicia, ZRG 80: 1-41. 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2311/index.php?do=notice&num=7
- 354 - 
________ (1974), Textkritik und Sachforschung: Positionen in der gegenwrtigen 
Romanistik, ZRG 91: 1-40. 
________ (1988), Rmische Rechtsgeschichte: Quellenkunde, Rechtsbildung, 
Jurisprudenz und Rechtsliteratur, Mnchen: C. H. Beck. 
WILLIAMS, J., (2009), Review of David Hollander, Money in the Late Roman Republic, 
Brill 2007, JRS 99: 229. 
WILLIAMSON, O. E., (1975), Markets and Hierarchies, Analysis and Antitrust 
Implications: A Study in the Economics of Internal Organization, New York: 
Free Press; London: Collier Macmillan. 
________ (1979), Transaction-cost economics: the governance of contractual relations, 
Journal of Law and Economics 22: 233-61. 
WILSON, A., (2002), Machines, power, and the ancient economy, JRS 92: 1-32. 
WILSON, R. B., (2008), exchange, in DURLAUF, S. N., BLUME, L. E., (eds.), The New 
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2
 ed., Palgrave Macmillan. The New 
Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online, Palgrave Macmillan, 27 
December 2012.  
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:4119/article?id=pde2008_E000146&edition=cur
rent&q=exchange&topicid=&result_number=2 
WOLTERS, R., (1987), Die Kreditkrise des Jahres 33 n. Chr., LNV 3: 23-58. 
________ (1999), Nummi Signati. Untersuchungen zur rmischen Mnzprgung und 
Geldwirtschaft, Mnich: Beck. 
WOOLF, G., (1990), Food, Poverty and Patronage. The Significance of the Epigraphy of 
the Roman Alimentary Schemes in Early Imperial Italy, PBSR 58: 197-228. 
WOYTEK, B. E., UHLIR, K., ALRAM, M., SCHREINER, M., and GRIESSER, M., (2007a), 
The Denarius under Trajan: New Metallurgical Analyses, NC 167: 147-63. 
________ (2007b), Metallanalytische Forschungen zur Denarprgung Kaiser Traians (98 
- 117 n. Chr.), Kunsthistorisches Museum (Wien), Technologische Studien 4: 
69-101. 
WRAY, L. R., (1990), Money and Credit in Capitalist Economies: the Endogenous 
Money Approach, Aldershot, UK; Brookfield, USA: Edward Elgar. 
YOUTIE, H. C., (1977), P. Mich. Inv. 829: , ZPE 24: 125-7. (Reprinted in 
YOUTIE, H. C., (1981), Scriptiunculae posteriores, Vol. 1, Bonn: R. Habelt 
Verlag, no. 81, pp. 387-9.) 
________ (1978), P. Mich. Inv. 175: , ZPE 30: 175-7. (Reprinted in YOUTIE, 
H. C., (1981), Scriptiunculae posteriores, Vol. 1, Bonn: R. Habelt Verlag, no. 
102, pp. 467-9.)   
ZEHNACKER, H., (1980), Unciarium fenus (Tacite, Annales 6.16), in WUILLEUMIER, P., 
(ed.), Mlanges de littrature et d'pigraphie latines, d'histoire ancienne et 
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:4119/article?id=pde2008_E000146&edition=current&q=exchange&topicid=&result_number=2
http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:4119/article?id=pde2008_E000146&edition=current&q=exchange&topicid=&result_number=2
- 355 - 
d'archologie: hommage  la mmoire de Pierre Wuilleumier, Paris: Belles 
Lettres, pp. 353-362. 
ZELIZER, V. A. R., (1989), The Social Meaning of Money: Special Monies, The 
American Journal of Sociology 95.2: 342-77. 
________ (1997), The Social Meaning of Money: Pin Money, Paychecks, Poor Relief, 
and Other Currencies, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
ZHANG, L., (2007), Contratti innominati nel diritto romano. Impostazioni di Labeone e di 
Aristone, Milano: Giuffr. 
ZIMMERMANN, R., (1996), The Law of Obligations, Roman Foundations of the Civilian 
Tradition, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
