Searches for proton 
radioactivity from 
highly-deformed nuclei 
Peter Munro MSci (Hons.) 
Thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the 
College of Science and Engineering 
II \W/ iRA 
INAI \ 
School of Physics 
University of Edinburgh 
Abstract 
Proton radioactivity from the highly neutron-deficient nuclide ' 35Tb 
has been identified using a new double-sided silicon strip detector (DSSD) 
system at the Fragment Mass Analyser at Argonne National Laboratory. 
The decay occurs with an energy of E = 1179(7)keV and a half-life t 1 ,, 2  = 
94Otjts. ' 35Tb was produced via the bombardment of a 92Mo target with 
a 315MeV 50Cr beam, and is the first isotope to be detected from a (p6n) 
evaporation channel in heavy ion fusion-evaporation reactions. Proton decay 
rate calculations suggest that this nuclide has a large prolate deformation, 
in agreement with the predictions of the Mller-Nix mass model and the 
experimental observations of the neighbouring odd-even lanthanide proton 
emitters 131 Eu and 141 Ho. 
An unsuccessful search for the predicted proton emitters 125,126  Pm, 
using the (p6n) and (p5n) evaporation channels respectively, is also reported. 
The non-observation of 126Pm is consistent with mass model Q predictions, 
but the non-observation of proton emission from 125Pm suggests a Q value 
which differs significantly from predictions, or places an upper limit on the 
production cross-section of this nucleus. 
The Q predictions of the Mller-Nix and Liran-Zeldes mass models are 
compared with the currently available data set of experimentally-derived Q 
values for proton-unbound nuclei in the region of observed proton radioac-
tivity. Both models are found to perform reasonably well and provide useful 
predictions in this extremely neutron-deficient region. 
Declaration 
This thesis has been composed by myself. 
The experimental work described in this thesis was performed by my-
self and fellow collaborators; the data analysis is my own work. 
No portion of the work referred to in this thesis has been submitted 
in support of an application for another degree qualification of this or any 
other university or other institute of learning. 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks to the following colleagues and collaborators: Gary Davids, 
Tom Davinson, Nick Harrington, Zhong Liu, Hassan Mahmud, the late Tad 
Pennington, Andrew Robinson, Ewan Roche, Dariusz Seweryniak and my 
supervisor Professor Phil Woods. 
Funding for this PhD research was provided by the Engineering and 
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC). 
Thanks to Emily and my parents. 
Contents 
Abstract 	 ii 
Declaration  
Acknowledgements 	 iv 
List of Figures 	 viii 
List of Tables 	 xii 
1 Introduction 	 1 
2 Theory 	 16 
CONTENTS 	 vi 
2.2.2 Semi-classical interpretation of proton decay rates 20 
3 Experimental Method 47 
3.7.2 	Decay Events 	. 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 ... 	. 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 . . 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 . 	 71 
CONTENTS 
4 Results and Discussion 76 
4.2.1 	Previous search experiments for proton emission from 
4.3.1 	Previous search experiments for proton emission from 
5 Conclusions 	 116 
Bibliography 	 124 
List of Figures 
1.1 Plot of atomic number Z against neutron number N for the 
known nuclides, illustrating the stable nuclides (as black squares), 
the proton and neutron drip-lines, and the various possible 
decay modes (red for 3+/electron  capture, blue for 0 de-
cay, yellow for a decay, gold for proton decay and green for 
2.1 The energy level scheme obtained by using a Woods-Saxon 
potential and Woods-Saxon potential with a spin-orbit term. 
The magic number shell closures are shown . . . . . . . . . . 21 
2.3 Nilsson level diagram for protons (50<Z<82) as a function 
of deformation parameter E2,  with 4 = /6, calculated as 
described by Bengtsson and Ragnarsson [Ben85] . . . . . . . 32 
2.4 Mller-Nix mass model deformation predictions (squares are 
stable nuclei, circles are known proton emitters beyond the 
predicted proton drip line) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 
3.1 The Argonne Fragment Mass Analyser . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	52 
LIST OF FIGURES 
3.3 Schematic of the detection system chamber from the focal 
plane onward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	55 
3.4 a) Two-dimensional PPAC hit pattern and b) projection onto 
the x-axis for the reaction 92 Mo(58Ni,p2n)'47Tm, with the 
FMA set to transmit A=147, Q=27 recoils . . . . . . . . . . 	57 
3.5 Schematic of the DSSD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	60 
3.6 The DSSD mounted on the vacuum chamber flange, showing 
the cable feedthroughs on each side, coolant tubes (top) and 
a penny for size comparison (bottom left) . . . . . . . . . . . 	61 
3.7 Schematic of the trigger logic for the DSSD system . . . . . . 67 
4.1 Decay energy spectrum from 1 47 T commissioning run. . . . 77 
4.2 Front decay energy vs. rear decay energy in the DSSD with 
single multiplicity conditions. The red boxes indicate events 
where a portion of the charge on the rear facestrip has been 
shared with an adjacent strip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 
4.3 Front decay energy vs. rear decay energy in the DSSD with 
single front multiplicity and double rear multiplicity. The 
red boxes indicate the lack of double rear multiplicity charge 
sharing events where the amount of charge shared is less than 
the detector threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81 
4.4 PPAC x position spectrum for the '35Th experiment. . . . . 86 
4.5 DSSD decay events associated with A=135 recoils from the 
LIST OF FIGURES 
4.6 DSSD decay events associated with A=135 recoils from the 
reaction 50  C + 92 Mo (blue indicates one count per bin, green 
indicates five or more counts per bin) .. . . . . . . . . . . . . 88 
4.7 Plot of proton decay half-life against quadrupole deformation 
/32 for ' 35Tb. The horizontal band represents the experimen-
tally measured value (including errors), while the lines show 
the theoretical calculations for the three likely proton config-
4.8 Various possible permutations of the proton-emitting 7/2 
4.9 PPAC x position spectrum for the "'Pm experiment. . . 	98 
4.10 DSSD decay events associated with A=126 recoils from the 
4.11 DSSD decay events associated with A=126 recoils from the 
4.12 Gamma-ray energy spectra from the Ge detector mounted 
behind the focal plane, for the A=125 (top) and A=126 (bot- 
tom) runs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . 	102 
4.13 PPAC x position spectrum for the 121  Pm experiment. 	103 
4.14 DSSD decay events associated with A==125 recoils from the 
4.15 DSSD decay events associated with A=125 recoils from the 
LIST OF FIGURES 	 xi 
4.16 Proton separation energy predictions of the Mller-Nix mass 
model compared to experimentally-measured proton decay Q- 
 values (black circles) and proton separation energies derived 
from indirect experimental mass measurements (red circles, 
with error bars shown where they exceed the size of the data 
point) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 
4.17 Proton separation energy predictions of the Liran-Zeldes mass 
model compared to experimentally-measured proton decay Q-
values (black circles) and proton separation energies derived 
from indirect experimental mass measurements (red circles, 
with error bars shown where they exceed the size of the data 
point) . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112 
List of Tables 
4.1 Comparison of spin-parity predictions of the Mller-Nix model 
for deformed lanthanide proton emitters with values derived 
from the theoretical analysis of the experimentally-measured 
half-lives (assuming deformations close to those predicted by 
Mller-Nix). It should be noted that the spin-parity assign-
ment for ' 31 Eu has been confirmed independently by analysis 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1 Exotic Nuclei 
The ultimate limits of nuclear stability for exotic neutron-deficient or neutron-
rich nuclides are defined by the proton and neutron drip-lines: the points 
at which it becomes energetically possible for a nucleus to spontaneously 
emit a nucleon from its ground state, with the Q-value of this decay mode 
given by the proton or neutron separation energy. All isotopes beyond the 
drip-lines are therefore unbound, but some isotopes which are close to the 
proton drip-line may still exist for a long enough time for their properties to 
be investigated experimentally, due to the hindrance effect of the Coulomb 
barrier on the emission of a charged particle. The study of such exotic nu-
clei is more challenging than the study of nuclei close to stability because 
the nuclear half-life reduces rapidly as one moves further from the valley 
of stability. Figure 1.1 shows the chart of nuclides, a plot of atomic num-
ber Z against neutron number N, with the stable isotopes represented as 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 2 
black squares and the various possible decay modes represented by colours. 
For stable nuclei of low mass A, the ratio of neutrons to protons is ''-'1, 
but increases significantly with increasing mass due to the mutual Coulomb 
repulsion between the protons in the nucleus, so that the heaviest known 
stable nuclei have a neutron-to-proton ratio of >1.5. The Coulomb force 
also causes the proton drip-line to be much closer to the valley of stability 
than its neutron counterpart. 
On each side of the valley of stability are regions where nuclei decay via 
-the weak interaction by emission of a)3 particle (an electron for the neutron-
rich side or a positron for the neutron-deficient side) and a neutrino, which 
converts a proton to a neutron or vice versa. Proton-rich nuclei may also 
capture an atomic electron to convert a proton to a neutron. 3 decay has the 
effect of moving the nucleus towards the valley of stability without changing 
its number of nucleons: the energy available for the decay process comes 
from the difference between the binding energies of the parent and daughter 
nuclei. The available decay energy increases further from stability, meaning 
that the decay process occurs on a faster timescale (i.e. the decay half-life 
decreases). Other decay modes become possible fax from stability, such as /3-
delayed nucleon emission, where the ,/3 decay of a precursor nucleus populates 
an excited state in the daughter so high in energy that it is unbound to the 
emission of one or more particles. 3-delayed emission of protons, neutrons 
and a particles, which occurs on a similarly fast timescale to the 'y decay of 
the excited states, has been studied extensively [Poe89]. For most medium 
to heavy nuclei, the density of excited states in the unbound region is so 
high that it is virtually impossible to identify individual states from peaks 
in the particle energy spectra with the available experimental resolution. 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
ILI 00 
'\ 	JLTh 
- 	.i.. 
- --I 
-i1_1:1  I 	'J 
I 	 .. n 
Figure 1.1: Plot of atomic number Z against neutron number N for the known 
nuclides, illustrating the stable nuclides (as black squares), the proton and neutron 
drip-lines, and the various possible decay modes (red for f3/electron capture, blue 
for decay, yellow for a decay, gold for proton decay and green for spontaneous 
fission). 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 4 
The Coulomb energy is proportional to Z 2 , while the nuclear binding 
energy increases approximately with the mass number A, meaning that the 
Coulomb repulsion bedomes proportionally more important for heavier nu-
clei, particularly on the neutron-deficient side of stability. This repulsion can 
result in the spontaneous emission of a tightly-bound a particle becoming 
competitive (in terms of decay rate) with the /3-decay process. a decay is ex-
tremely sensitive to the available decay energy, much more so than @ decay, 
and becomes the dominant decay mode for proton-rich isotopes above the 
Z=82 shell closure, a decay has not been observed in the particular mass 
region studied in this work (125 < A < 135), but several heavier proton 
emitters have a significant a-decay branch. Similarly, spontaneous nuclear 
fission may be a competitive decay mode for heavy proton emitters, but is 
not an issue for the medium mass region investigated in this work. 
It is possible for nuclei beyond the proton drip-line to decay by emis-
sion of a proton from their ground state, although this is not seen immedi-
ately beyond the drip-line for nuclei with Z> 50 because the available decay 
energy is not large enough for the mode to become competitive with /3 or a 
decay. Proton emission does not usually become the dominant decay mode 
until the drip-line is crossed by several isotopes, when the proton partial 
half-life has dropped below those of the competing modes. Proton decay is 
a similar process to a decay in that a particle has to tunnel through a poten-
tial barrier to escape the nucleus, but the former requires no preformation 
of a cluster of nucleons within the nucleus, so is easier to model theoreti-
cally. The potential barrier has a Coulomb component, which is relatively 
less important for protons than for alphas because of their lower charge, and 
a centrifugal component related to the angular momentum carried away by 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 5 
the particle which is more important for protons because of their lower mass 
than alphas. The hindrance effect of the Coulomb barrier is sufficient for 
heavier nuclei (Z>50) to slow the proton decay rate to an experimentally 
detectable timescale (> 1is). 
The study of proton emission is in fact a very useful tool for studying 
the structure of these exotic drip-line nuclides. The proton decay rate is 
extremely sensitive to the orbital angular momentum of the unbound pro-
ton, so that an accurate measurement of the half-life can often identify the 
particular single-particle orbital of the odd proton by comparison with a 
theoretical calculation and thus shed light on the level orderings of these 
extremely neutron-deficient nuclei. Proton emission also turns out to be 
sensitive to the nuclear shape: several proton emitters have been found in 
regions far from the 'magic numbers' of shell closures and are predicted 
to have significant quadrupole deformations (prolate, like a rugby ball, or 
oblate like a discus). The measurement of the energy of the emitted proton 
also yields the one-proton separation energy of the parent, which in turn 
directly relates to its binding energy and mass, providing very useful data 
to allow comparisons with the predictions of mass models. This new data 
can be incorporated into these models to improve them further. In this very 
neutron-deficient region of nuclides, proton decay studies are often the only 
way of gaining this kind of information. 
All the ground state proton emitters discovered so fax are odd-Z nu-
clides; this is not surprising, given that the natural pairing of nucleons makes 
the emission of a single proton from an even-Z nucleus very unlikely ener-
getically. However, examples of simultaneous emission of two protons have 
recently been observed experimentally and will be discussed later. 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 6 
The region around the proton drip-line up to around Z=50 is also of 
interest in nuclear astrophysics studies, particularly the nucleosynthesis of 
the heavier elements in explosive stellar environments such as X-ray bursters. 
Many of the properties of the rapid proton, or 'rp', capture process which 
occurs in stars can also be investigated in nuclear physics experiments on 
Earth. The rates at which these reactions occur (which again relate to the 
tunneling of a particle through a nuclear Coulomb barrier) are intrinsically 
linked with the elemental abundances of the universe. It is unlikely that 
the rp process proceeds as fax as the particular mass region investigated in 
this work, due to the small region of a-emitting isotopes close to the proton 
drip-line above Z=50. 
The study of nuclei at the neutron drip-line is extremely difficult for all 
but the lowest-Z isotopes. The absence of Coulomb repulsion ensures that 
the neutron drip-line is much further from stability than the proton drip-
line, and is therefore often more difficult to access in terms of experimental 
production of the isotopes. Also, because neutrons have no charge, they 
experience no Coulomb component in the potential barrier they must tunnel 
through, and therefore can tunnel at rates too fast for detection with current 
experimental techniques. Even if the decay occurs on a suitable timescale, 
the difficulty of detecting the uncharged neutron (compared with the ease 
of detecting the charged proton in convenient solid state detectors) makes 
it very difficult to measure meaningful physical quantities. The neutron 
drip-line has been mapped only as far as Z=9 thus far, compared with the 
virtually complete mapping of the proton drip-line for odd-Z nuclei up to 
Z=50. Interesting phenomena in the highly neutron-rich region include the 
'halo' nucleus "Li [Tan85], where two very loosely bound valence neutrons 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 7 
cause the nucleus to have an extremely wide matter radius. Similar halo 
effects in proton-rich nuclei are suppressed by the Coulomb barrier, but 
have recently been observed in nuclei such as 1 7 N [Kan05]. 
1.2 Production of Proton Drip-line Isotopes 
The key issues for experimenters searching for new proton emitters are pro-
ducing the desired exotic isotope in sufficient quantities and being able to 
detect its subsequent decay, which may occur on a very fast timescale (per-
haps on the order of microseconds). These extremely neutron-deficient nuclei 
obviously do not occur in nature, and must be produced in experiments at 
accelerator facilities. 
Several different types of nuclear reaction have been used to gener-
ate nuclei at or beyond the proton drip-line. Transfer reactions, such as 
(4 He,8He), can be useful for producing light exotic nuclei, due to the close 
proximity of the proton drip-line to stability at low Z, but are of little use 
in the mass region of ground-state proton emitters. Proton-induced target 
spallation has been used at CERN-ISOLDE to study proton-rich nuclei, but 
the value of this method is limited by the long ion release times (hundreds of 
milliseconds) relative to the half-lives of drip-line nuclei (usually on the order 
of milliseconds or less). Projectile fragmentation reactions have been used 
successfully, for example at the GANIL facility, to map most of the proton 
drip-line up to A=100. In these experiments, a high energy (>100MeV/u) 
neutron-deficient beam is fragmented on a target and the resulting fragment 
ions can be identified by time-of-flight and energy loss techniques. Fragmen-
tation was recently used to detect the first ever example of simultaneous 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 8 
two-proton emission (see next section), and it is thought that it could be 
useful for accessing predicted heavy proton emitters for which spontaneous 
nuclear fission is a competitive decay branch. 
All the presently known examples of ground-state one-proton emission, 
occuring in the medium-heavy mass region of 100 <A< 190, have been de-
tected using heavy ion fusion-evaporation reactions. In this case, a neutron-
deficient beam, with energy on the order of 5-10MeV/u, is projected at a thin 
neutron-deficient target. The beam and target nuclei fuse together to cre-
ate a highly-excited compound nucleus, which reduces its energy by quickly 
'evaporating' off nucleons. These recoiling fusion-evaporation residues pass 
out of the target and can be analysed by mass separation techniques and 
then implanted into a solid state detector to measure their subsequent de-
cays. Fusion-evaporation reactions preferentially populate high spin excited 
states in the recoils, which has aided in the discovery of proton-emitting 
isomeric states as well as ground states. A significant problem for these re-
actions is that protons evaporate preferentially over neutrons in this region, 
pushing the residues further from the drip-line, so the beam energy must be 
carefully controlled to excite the compound nucleus with just the right energy 
to optimise the necessary evaporation channel for production of the desired 
nuclide. Even so, this nuclide is likely to be produced with a much lower 
cross-section than many of the other possible evaporation residues. Most of 
these other recoils, and many unreacted primary beam particles which have 
passed straight through the target, can be removed at the mass separation 
stage, thus reducing the potentially crippling background. The separation 
stage must also unambiguously identify the recoil so that its subsequently 
detected decay can be clearly correlated to its parent. 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
Tih1 1.1: R'iwf.iomc irodurino vroton-emittino isotones. 
Reaction Production cross-section Year discovered 
92Mo(5 Ni, p2n) 147Tm ' 	 30tb 1982 
96Ru(58Ni, p2n) 151 Lu 50.tb 1982 
96Ru(58Ni, p3n) 150Lu 5pb 1993 
92 Mo(58 Ni, p3n) 146Tm '..' lpb 1993 
92 Mo(58 Ni, p4n) 145Tm r..i500nb 1997 
92 Mo(54Fe, p4n) 141 Ho 's'250nb 1997 
64Zn(58 Ni, p4n) 117La r...,240nb 2001 
96Ru(40Ca, p4n)'31 Eu '90nb 1997 
92 Mo(54Fe, p5n) 140 Ho '-'13nb 1999 
58 Ni( 78 Kr, p5n) 130Eu r.10nb 2001 
All the known proton emitters have been discovered by T(B,pxn) re-
actions, where T is the target isotope, B is the beam species and 'pxn' rep-
resents one proton and a certain number of neutrons being evaporated from 
the compound nucleus. A table comparing the production cross-sections of 
various proton emitters from these reactions is shown below. 
1.3 Proton Radioactivity Search Experiments 
1.3.1 Early experiments 
It was initially expected in the 1960s that prompt (i.e. not /3-delayed) proton 
emission would be quite common from isomeric states of isotopes which 
were proton-bound in their ground state. Such nuclides would be closer 
to the valley of stability and therefore easier to produce, but competition 
from 'y  decay and high centrifugal barriers complicated these first search 
experiments. The only example of direct proton emission below A=100 was 
detected as a surprising result of a,3-delayed proton experiment. A 1.5MeV 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 10 
proton was observed from a high-spin isomer 53m  Co [Jac70, Cer70], which 
until very recently was the only example of isomeric direct proton emission 
from a ground state proton-bound nucleus. These early experiments were 
hampered by the limited species and currents of the available beams. 
A decade passed before the discovery of the first ground-state proton 
emitters at the GSI facility. Improvements in ion source and accelerator 
technology meant that heavy ion beams could now be used effectively, and 
Hofmann et at [Hof82a] detected the proton decay of 151 Lu using the reaction 
96Ru(58Ni,p2n) and the velocity filter SHIP [Mun79]. The in-flight separa-
tion of the recoils from the primary beam occurs on a timescale of about a 
microsecond, after which the recoils are implanted into an array of position-
sensitive silicon detectors. Implant-decay correlations were recorded by not-
ing decays occuring within a certain time window at the same position as 
a preceding. implant. The sensitivity of the system to short half-lives was 
improved by cycling the beam (5ms on, 15ms off), and longer half-lives could 
be investigated by completely blocking the residues from the detectors for 
periods of about 300ms. A clear peak was observed in the decay energy 
spectrum at an energy of "-'1.2MeV, too low for an alpha decay process, 
with a half-life on the order of 80ms. The decay was assigned to the h 11 12  
orbital of ' 51 Lu on the basis of measured production cross-sections and ex-
citation functions: there was no explicit mass identification of the recoils in 
this experiment, and an attempted measurement at the neighbouring on-
line mass separator (using the ISOL technique) was found to be impeded by 
background from the c decay of 151  Ho. 
The GSI on-line mass separator was also used to detect the second 
ground state proton emitter, 147Tm, which was discovered by .Klepper et al 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 11 
[K1e82] using the reaction 92 Mo(58Ni,p2n). The indirect separation method 
of ISOL (implantation of the residues into a catcher foil in an ion source 
which then releases the residues into the separator) limits this experimental 
set-up to searching for nuclei with half-lives on the order of lOOms or above, 
but it does provide unambiguous mass identification of the ions. ' 47Tm was 
found to decay by proton emission with energy 1.05MeV and half-life '-'0.5s. 
A team at the Technical University of Munich used a fast catcher 
detection system initially developed for 'y-ray spectroscopy with an annu-
lar gas-filled detector built for o-particle measurement to search for proton 
emitters produced by reactions between "Ni beams and 1 8 N and 54  Fe tar-
gets. Faestermann et al reported the discovery of the lightest-known ground 
state proton emitters 109J  [Fae84] and also "'Cs [Gi187]. This experimental 
set-up, although fast enough to detect decays down to iOns, was inefficient 
compared to the GSI techniques and the lack of separation created an in-
evitable background which hindered the search for proton emitters with 
lower production cross-sections. 
1.3.2 Experiments at Daresbury and Argonne 
The major technological breakthrough in experimental searches for proton 
emitters was the combination of a double-sided silicon strip detector (DSSD) 
with an in-flight mass separator. A DSSD and its accompanying electronics 
were developed by the Edinburgh group [Se192a1 and installed at the Recoil 
Mass Separator (RMS) at Daresbury, where the system was successfully used 
to study many neutron-deficient isotopes in the early 1990s. Previous experi-
ments using a position-sensitive silicon surface barrier detector [Woo89] were 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
not entirely successful due to the slow overload recovery of the system after 
an implantation event (about 200zs). The excellent energy and position res-
olution of the DSSD, combined with the ability of the system to restore its 
sensitivity to decays a short time after recoil implantation (<lOps) made the 
system extremely useful for such studies. The virtual transparency of the 
DSSD to 6 decay helped to produce very clean decay energy spectra from 
which a great amount of useful nuclear structure information was found. 
The Daresbury RMS consisted of two Wien filters, which provided ve-
locity selection of the recoils and rejected the primary beam, followed by 
a magnetic dipole which dispersed the residues according to their mass-to-
charge (A/Q) ratios, so that the position of the recoil when it reached the 
focal plane (where the DSSD was positioned) was directly indicative of its 
A/Q. A carbon foil detector upstream of the focal plane was used to differ-
entiate between implantation and decay events. The first use of this DSSD 
system was the remeasurement of the decay of 1091  [Se193], which was directly 
shown to be a A=109 decay (the Munich team had no explicit mass iden-
tification) and was also correlated with the c decay of its daughter nuclide 
'8Te. Other experiments were carried out to search for proton emission from 
isotopes such as 128  Pm, 132 Eu, 138Tb, 142  Ho, 146Tm, 156Ta, 160Re and 112CS, 
with the latter four successfully identified [Pag92, Liv93a, Liv93b, Pag94]. 
In addition, a proton transition which had been previously observed at GSI 
with no clear mass assignment was unambiguously identified as the decay of 
150 Lu [Se193]. 
The closure of the Nuclear Structure Facility at Daresbury in 1993 
brought a temporary halt to this set of experiments, but soon after the Ed- 
inburgh group started collaborating with Argonne National Laboratory on 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 13 
more DSSD-based proton radioactivity searches. The experimental set-up 
of the Argonne Fragment Mass Analyser (FMA) combined with the DSSD 
will be described fully in Chapter 3. This ongoing experimental programme 
has been extremely successful at discovering new proton-emitting states, 
including the proton decay of four isotopes of Iridium [Dav97, Mah02b], 
the first example of proton emission above the Z=82 shell closure in 185mBj 
[Dav96], and the proton decay of the rare earth isotopes ' 31 Eu and 141 Ho. 
These latter two are predicted by mass models [Mo197] to have large pro-
late deformation, and their anomalous decay rates (which do not agree with 
the theory for spherical nuclei) bear out that prediction. Other evidence 
for their deformation includes the observation of rotational bands in their 
proton-decay-tagged 7-ray spectra [SewOla, SewOib] and the observation of 
fine structure [Son99]. This latter phenomenon describes the proton decay 
branching to the first excited state of the daughter as well as the ground 
state, producing two peaks in the decay energy spectrum, and is character-
istic of significant deformation in the daughter nucleus. It should be noted 
that experimental evidence for high deformations in neutron-deficient lan-
thanide isotopes was first discovered as far back as 1961 [She6l], in the form 
of anomalous excitation energies in even-even nuclei. 
More recent developments at Argonne include a focus on odd-odd pro-  - 
ton emitters, where the decay process is influenced by the residual interaction 
between the outgoing proton and the odd neutron. Proton emission from 
isotopes such as 130Eu [Dav04], 146 T [Rob05b], ' 50Lu [Rob03] and "'Au 
[Mah02b] have been studied in detail to better understand the effect of this 
interaction on the proton decay rate. As mentioned previously, decay-tagged 
7-ray spectroscopy [Pau95] is possible when the Gammasphere detector is 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 14 
installed around the target chamber, and such experiments have been per-
formed on several proton emitters (e.g. 1 47 T [Sew97]), including the rare 
earths already discussed. 
Experiments performed at the Argonne FMA facility in 2001 and 2002 
form the core of this thesis, and will be discussed later. 
1.3.3 Other experiments 
In recent years, other research groups have performed successful search ex-
periments for new proton emitters, most notably at Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory (ORNL) who first observed, the fast proton decays of 'Ho and 
145 T [Ryk99, Bat98]. Using a familiar mass spectrometer/DSSD combi-
nation, the ORNL team have developed digital pulse analysis techniques, 
originally intended for 'y-ray spectroscopy, which allows them to record the 
shape of the overloading recoil implantation energy pulse and identify fast 
proton decay events lying on the tail of the pulse while the electronics are 
still recovering from saturation. In the last few years the ORNL team have 
shown evidence for fine structure in 145Tm and 146 T [Kar03, Gin03]. 
In 1999, a team based in Legnaro again used the mass spectrome-
ter/DSSD technique to detect proton emission from the isotope "'La [SorOl], 
a result which was soon confirmed by an experiment at Argonne. The Leg-
naro team have continued to search for candidate proton emitters such as 
126Pm [SorO3]. A team at the gas-filled separator RITU at Jyvskyl recently 
reported the observation of the new proton-emitting state 164fr  [KetOl]. 
RITU has a very high transmission efficiency compared to facilities such as 
the FMA due to its high charge state acceptance, and so is particularly use- 
Chapter 1. Introduction 	 15 
ful for investigating nuclei with low production cross-sections (for example, 
in the case of heavy nuclei where the compound nucleus produced by a fu-
sion reaction has a high probability of spontaneous fission). However, RITU 
suffers from inferior mass separation characteristics compared to the FMA, 
which can hinder the mass identification of decays at the focal plane. 
One of the most exciting recent developments in the field of proton-rich 
nuclei was the discovery of two-proton emission from the isotope 45Fe via 
fragmentation reactions at the GANIL and GSI facilities [Gio02, Pfu02]. It 
has been hypothesised that a similar experimental approach could be used to 
detect heavy single proton emitters beyond Bismuth with the fragmentation 
of a 238U beam, and a preliminary experiment exploring this method has 
been performed [Liu04]. 
Before the experiments described in this work took place, at least one 
example of a proton emitting isotope had been detected for every odd-Z 
element in the region 51 <Z< 83, with the exception of Praseodymium, 
Prometheum and Terbium (Z=59, 61 and 65 respectively), although there 
remains some doubt as to the existence of a small (<1%) proton emission 
branch in the decay of ' 5 Sb observed by Tigh et al [Tig94], because several 
subsequent experiments have been unable to reproduce this result (including 
a DSSD-based experiment at the GSI on-line mass separator [Liu05]). 
Chapter 2 
Theory 
Proton emission is a very pure example of quantum tunneling; unlike 
a decay, there is no need to consider the preformation of a compound par-
ticle within the nucleus. The unbound proton tunnels through the nuclear 
potential barrier, with a rate determined by its energy relative to the barrier 
height and other factors such as its angular momentum and nuclear defor-
mation, leaving a daughter nucleus which will decay towards stability by 
decay (or sometimes a decay). For proton decay'to occur, a nucleus must be 
sufficiently proton-unbound for the decay to be competitive; this is why one 
must often go several isotopes beyond the proton drip-line to reach a proton 
emitter, as a small proton decay Q-value can give a proton tunneling rate 
many orders of magnitude slower than 3 decay. If the decay energy is too 
large however, then the decay may occur on a timescale too fast for experi-
mental measurement, which is currently limited to times greater than r'.1ts 
(by recoil separator flight time for fusion-evaporation reactions, and by the 
implantation recovery time of the detector for fragmentation reactions). 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 17 
2.1 Energetics 
Proton decay can occur when the emission of a proton results in the nucleus 
increasing its binding energy. The binding energy of a nucleus is the energy 
required to break it up into its constituent protons and neutrons; therefore 
increasing the binding energy means the nucleus is more stable. In terms of 
a decay Q-value, this can be expressed as: 
Qp = (Mzi - M - mH)c > 0 	 (2.1) 
where Mz+i and Mz  are the atomic masses of the parent and daughter 
nuclei and mH is the atomic mass of hydrogen. Expressing the Q-value in 
terms of binding energy rather than mass gives: 
Qp  = B - B +1 > 0 	 (2.2) 
where the binding energy is given by Bz  = (ZMH + NM - MZ,N)C 2 . The 
principle of conservation of momentum means that the kinetic energy of the 
decay is not given solely to the emitted proton but must be shared with the 
recoiling daughter nucleus. Although the much smaller mass of the proton 
compared to the nucleus means that the vast majority of the decay energy 
is carried away by the proton, the recoil is not insignificant and 'must be 
corrected for when calculating a Q-value from a measured proton energy. 
E = M 
(2.3) 
z + m 
Another correction which must be considered is the energy loss of the 
emitted proton when passing through the cloud of electrons surrounding the 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 18 
daughter nucleus. This energy, on the order of about lOkeV, is equivalent to 
the difference in atomic binding energies of the parent and daughter atoms, 
and can be obtained from the work of Huang and Mark [Hua76]. Taking into 
account this electron screening correction E3  gives the following formula for 
the proton decay Q-value needed for barrier penetration calculations: 
E(M + m) E
8 	 (2.4) Q + E8 = M 
2.2 Spherical Proton Emitters 
There have been many different approaches to the theoretical treatment of 
proton emission over the last two decades. At a fundamental level, proton 
emission can be treated in a similar way to the a-decay process, but with the 
inclusion of a spin-orbit term since the smaller particle has non-zero spin. 
The most basic theoretical explanations begin with the assumption that the 
proton occupies a single-particle orbit defined by the spherical shell model. 
2.2.1 Spherical shell model 
The nuclear shell model, based oi a similar theory for atomic electron shells, 
was successfully used to explain the existence of apparent 'magic numbers' in 
nuclei. Experimental evidence such as nucleon separation energies demon-
strated that nuclei with specific numbers of proton or neutrons (such as 
2, 8, 20, 50 and 82) had special properties. Such apparent discontinuities 
in quantities related to atomic electrons had been explained by considering 
the particles as building up in shells filled according to the Pauli Exclu-
sion Principle, with 'magic' numbers of particles explained by large energy 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 19 
gaps between shells, and so a similar technique was applied to the nuclear 
problem. 
In the shell model, one assumes that each nucleon moves in a spher-
ically symmetric potential which is generated by the interactions of all the 
other nucleons with each other. Once defined, this average potential can then 
be used to find the nucleon energy levels by solving the time-independent 
Schrdinger equation: 
_2 + V(r)) b(r) = e(r) (2.5) 
It is still an open problem to derive the nuclear mean field from a 
microscopic approach, starting from the bare interaction between nucleons, 
so phenomenological shapes have to be adopted. The potential can be sim-
ulated in a variety of ways: for example, the Hartree-Fock method produces 
an average potential by summing two-body interactions, but is very com-
plex. A simpler but still effective technique is to use a one-body potential 
estimated from basic nuclear properties, such as the Woods-Saxon potential 
[Woo54] which imitates the mass distribution in the nucleus: 
Vws(r) = vo [i + 
exp (r _Ro)] 
(2.6) 
where I?o  is the mean nuclear radius (often given by R0  = RNA"', with 
RN a constant of roughly 1.2fm) and a determines the surface diffuseness. 
The Woods-Saxon potential is considered to be a good approximation to the 
real nuclear potential, certainly much better than other simplistic potentials 
such as the finite square well and harmonic oscillator. A nucleon close to 
the nuclear centre experiences no force, while a nucleon at the surface expe- 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 20 
riences a strong attractive force, and beyond the surface the potential drops 
quickly to zero, which agrees with the well-known short range nature of the 
nuclear force. 
The energy levels calculated using the Woods-Saxon potential are 
shown on the left-hand side of Figure 2.1. Only the first three magic numbers 
are successfully simulated by this simplistic method. However, the addition 
of a spin-orbit term to the interaction breaks the orbital angular momentum 
degeneracies of the states, splitting each 1 level into two separate levels de-
fined by j =1  1/2 (for 1 > 0), each with degeneracy 2j + 1. As shown on 
the right-hand side of Figure 2.1, the addition of the spin-orbit term to the 
Woods-Saxon potential successfully reproduces the observed magic numbers 
and therefore shell closures [May49, Hax49]. The Fermi level for a shell 
model nucleus can be calculated simply by filling the single-particle states 
of increasing energy in accordance with the Pauli Exclusion Principle. For a 
nucleus with an odd number of protons and an even number of neutrons, the 
angular momentum of the whole nucleus is given by that of the outermost 
unpaired proton. 
The spherical shell model is quite successful for predicting the prop-
erties of nuclei near shell closures, but nuclides fax from shell closures can 
have significant quadrupole deformation and the spherical shell model is 
insufficient to describe these more exotic creatures (see section 2.3.1). 
2.2.2 Semi-classical interpretation of proton decay rates 
As mentioned previously, proton decay can be treated in a similar way to 
a decay, with a particle tunneling through a potential barrier composed of 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 21 
lh 9/2 
92 . . 
1h1112  
3s _________________ 3c 
5/2 58 
2d  ig 1 	________________________ . . . . . .. 7/2 
2P2 1f5/2  
28 3/2 
Id 3/2 
2s . . . .  2 1/2 
Id ______________ id 
'p _______________ 
:11 	11.. ip 
2 3/2 
is 151/2 
WoodsSaxon WoodsSaxon plus 
spinorbit coupling 
Figure 2.1: The energy level scheme obtained by using a Woods-Saxon poten- 
tial and Woods-Saxon potential with a spin-orbit term. The magic number shell 
closures are shown. 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 22 
the sum of a central nuclear potential V, a Coulomb term VC which is 
proportional to the charge of the particle, and a centrifugal term V which is 
proportional to 1(1 + 1)/rn. Since the proton is both lighter and has a lower 
Z than an a particle, it experiences a larger centrifugal barrier and a smaller 
Coulomb barrier than the a particle. The combined Coulomb and centrifugal 
potentials give rise to barriers as large as '-'-'15MeV, compared to the 1MeV 
proton energy. The proton is also a fermion with a spin of 1/2, and so a spin-
orbit potential term V0 must also be included (this is not necessary for the 
a particle, which has zero spin). A commonly used approximation for 
is the real part of the optical Becchetti-Greenlees potential [Bec69], which 
was constructed from proton elastic scattering data. The total potential is 
therefore given by: 
V(r) = V... (r) + Vc(r) + V, (r)+ Vso(r) 	 (2.7) 
The first attempts to describe proton decay rates used the one di-
mensional semi-classical WKB barrier approximation, based on the early 
a-decay theory of Gamow [Gam28], with a decay constant A given by the 
product of a factor describing the frequency of tunneling 'attempts' and a 
transmission coefficient T, with A of course equivalent to 1n2/t 1 12 . Hofmann 
[Hof89] gives the following expression for the frequency factor: 
= u3I2R(zZe2/Rc - Q)1/2 	
(2.8) 
where M is the reduced mass of the system, RC is the Coulomb radius (RC  = 
1.21A' 13  in fm), z is the charge of the proton (i.e. 1) and Z is the charge of 
the daughter nucleus. 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 23 
-45MeV 
Q -1MeV 
Figure 2.2: The proton-nucleus potential. 
The WKB (Wentzel, Kramers, Brillouin) approximation, which is based 
on the assumption that the potential varies slowly relative to the proton 
wavefunction, is then used to define the transmission coefficient T as e_2Gii, 
where the Gamow factor G,1 is proportional to the integral of the potential 
over the classically forbidden region: 
= /f V(V(,r) - 	 (2.9) 
where r1  and r2 are the classical turning points as shown in Figure -2.2. 
The transmission factor T therefore has an exponential dependence on 
the proton decay Q-value Q (leading to the half-life being proportional to 
e'lv'QP with a a constant), meaning that the decay rate can vary over many 
orders of magnitude with just a very small change in Q. The centrifugal part 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 24 
of the potential barrier varies significantly depending on the orbital angular 
momentum l carried away by the proton, and this variation also affects 
the transmission factor. The proton partial half-life is therefore extremely 
sensitive to both the decay energy Q and the orbital angular momentum 
of the proton ip.  and this angular momentum dependence can often be used 
to identify the spin of the proton state by comparing the experimentally 
measured half-life with the half-lives calculated for the various possible I 
orbitals the proton could occupy using the observed decay energy. The 
proton decay branch will compete with /3 decay (or even a decay), so that the 
experimentally measured half-life is a combination of the partial half-lives 
for the different branches; ideally, the branching fraction can be quantified 
by observing the competing decay modes, but in reality it is usually more 
practical to estimate the partial half-life for 3/EC decay from calculations. 
The 3 partial half-life is usually on the order of hundreds of milliseconds, so 
that if the proton decay occurs on a timescale of a millisecond or less one 
can consider the state to decay by proton emission 100% of the time. Given 
the calculation of proton partial half-life as a function of Q, one can define 
a Q-value window representing the range of energies for which the proton 
decay has an experimentally observable half-life. Decays faster than 1s 
are impossible to detect with current mass separation methods, and decays 
slower than about is are unlikely to compete effectively with /3 decay. This 
time window of 1s-1s results in a small observable Q-value window around 
1MeV. 
The semi-classical method was used to analyse the results of proton 
decay experiments for many years, and was sufficient in most cases to make 
an unambiguous qualitative assignment of the proton orbital angular mo- 
Chapter 2. Theory 	S 	 25 
menturn and therefore the parent state. Indeed, for some spherical proton 
emitters, it has been shown [Abe97} that the WKB approach gives half-lives 
within 10% of the more sophisticated methods described in the next section. 
2.2.3 Modern proton decay theory 
The flourishing of the experimental study of proton emission over the last 
two decades has led to a concerted effort to produce quantitative theoretical 
explanations for the process of proton decay, which can then be compared 
with. nuclear structure models. The simple semi-classical method, utilising 
the SWKB approximation, is not sufficient to describe the subtleties of pro-
ton emission and several new theories have been developed in recent years. 
All these theories consider proton emitters as extremely narrow resonances 
which can be thought of as quasi-stationary states. The resonance width F 
relates to the proton partial half-life by ti/2, = h/['1ri2. The theoretical de-
scription of these states is a challenging task due to the dramatically different 
energy scales for the resonance energy (r-'lMeV) and width (from ,10_ 16  
to i.i10 22 MeV). The two main theoretical approaches are the direct' and 
'distorted wave' methods. 
In both approaches, one considers the parent nucleus as the unbound 
proton moving in the potential of the daughter and solves the Schrdinger 
equation accordingly to find the proton single-particle wave function, with 
the nuclear potential depth adjusted to reproduce the experimental proton 
decay Q-value. In reality, the process of proton emission is more compli-
cated since the perfect separation of the nuclear many-body wave function 
into that of the proton and daughter cannot truly be made. However, this 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 26 
approximation has proved sufficient to describe the properties of these res-
onances, as we shall see. In the 'direct' approach of Maglione and Ferreira 
[Mag98], the single particle wave function is defined to be a Coulomb wave 
at large distances from the nucleus, beyond the range of the nuclear force. 
The radial part of the wave function, 1 (r) = u1(r)/r, is matched to this 
outgoing wave L1t(r),  thus imposing the decay on the quasistationary state. 
ul3(r) = re/47t(r) = Nj"'[G1 (kr) + iFi (kr)]  
where F1  and G1 are the regular and irregular Coulomb functions, k is the 
wave number /ZE/h and N.11  is a normalisation constant, or matching 
amplitude. The decay width is found directly from the matching amplitudes 
by calculating the radial probability flux F13  through a sphere. 
27r 	2ir 
F13 = L 	ui (r)I 2ur2 sinOdOdb 	 (2.11) 
d.  urn uzj (r)1 2  = N1 ' 2 	 (2.12)3 1
where v is hk/, the particle velocity (p being the reduced mass of the 
system). This flux is equivalent to the inverse of the mean lifetime. The 
matching amplitude N can then be determined at a specific radius R inside 
the classical external turning point, because the wave function decreases 
very rapidly outside the nucleus (typically by 10 orders of magnitude). A 
matching radius of -'25fm is thought to be adequate for the known spherical 
proton emitters [DavOOa], whereas the classical external turning point is 
usually in the region 80-100fm. The 'direct' method decay width is therefore 
given by: 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 27 
112 k 	u13(R) 	2 r7(R) = ,iGj(R)+iF1(R) 	 (2.13) 
which is effectively independent of R for distances beyond the range of the 
nuclear potential. Because the imaginary part of the resonance energy (i.e. 
the decay width) is so much smaller than the real part, it is usual to neglect 
the imaginary term in the denominator. 
The 'distorted wave' approach, first formulated by Bugrov et al [Bug85], 
is based on the Gell-Mann-Goldberger transformation and makes useof the 
Coulomb wave functions determined by the pointlike Coulomb interaction. 
We consider the resonance width as: 
2RITA+1,z+1:A,zI
	 (2.14) 
where the transition amplitude TA+1,Z+1:A,Z, the overlap of the parent and 
daughter states, is calculated using the distorted-wave Born approximation 
(DWBA): 
TA+1,Z+1:A,Z = < ApApIVApTA+1> 	 (2.15) 
where ?/'Ap is the outgoing spherical wave representing the relative motion of 
the proton with respect to the daughter, WAp  is the product of the intrinsic 
wavefunctions of the proton and daughter, 11JA+1 is the metastable state of 
the parent nucleus (i.e. the initial state) and VAp  is the interaction between 
proton and daughter. As before, VAp  should strictly be the sum of two-body 
interactions between the emitted proton and each of the other nucleons in 
the daughter, but it can be approximated by a sum of a simple optical 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 28 
nuclear potential and the Coulomb potential. The daughter nucleus is again 
treated as an inert core. 
The Gell-Mann Goldberger transformation [Fes92] can be used to 
rewrite the transition amplitude term as: 
TA+1,Z+1:A,Z =< WAp'b p IV - V  IWA+l> 	 (2.16) 
where OC is the scattering wavefunction associated with the point charge 
Coulomb potential Vc9.  The key point in this formalism is the difference 
between the Coulomb potential from the finite charge distribution VC and 
that of the point charge V,  which leads to the distortion of the outgoing 
wave. The radial component of Ap is: 
V-2"F1(kr)= irh2k r 	 (2.17) 
where k is the wave number and F1  is the regular Coulomb function. The 
initial state wave function "A+1  can be expressed as the product of the 
daughter nucleus wave function and the proton wave function. The radial 
wavefunction u13  (r) of the quasibound proton can be found by matching 
it smoothly to an irregular Coulomb function G1 (kr) that asymptotically 
describes the proton at large distances from the nucleus, in a similar manner 
to the 'direct' approach. This method ultimately provides the following 
expression for the resonance width: 
4p 	 2 
 Fl(kr)[VN(r) - Vc (r)]ujj(r)dr. 	(2.18) 
The nuclear interaction VN contains the spin-orbit term. It has been 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 29 
shown [DavOOb] that the 'direct' and 'distorted wave' methods are effectively 
equivalent for spherical proton emitters. 
2.3 Deformed Proton Emitters 
Nuclei far from closed shells often have large quadrupole deformations, giving 
them prolate or oblate spheroidal shapes. For such nuclei a spherical poten-
tial cannot be used to calculate their properties; and different approaches 
must be pursued. Many measured proton emitters are predicted by mass 
models (see section 2.5 and [Mo195]) to have significant prolate deformations 
(02 "-' 0.3), and the failure of spherical proton emission theory to explain 
their decay rates is clear evidence of that deformation. 
2.3.1 Nilsson model 
In the early 1950s, it was observed that some nuclei far from closed shells 
exhibited quadrupole moments many times larger than could be accounted 
for by a single particle. Rainwater [Rai50] suggested that the single parti-
cle deforms the whole nucleus, and that the observed quadrupole moment 
results from the collective deformation of many orbits. This concept was de-
veloped mathematically by Bohr and Mottelson into the 'collective' model of 
the nucleus. A microscopic approach to deformed nuclei was formulated by 
Nilsson [Ni155], who used the shell model with a deformed harmonic oscil-
lator potential approximating the nuclear shape (although a Woods-Saxon 
potential can also be used). The energy levels are given by eigenvalues of 
the following Hamiltonian: 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 30 
H = _V2  + mwgr2 - / inwo2 r2 y2o + CL. + D12 	(2.19) 
where Loo  is the oscillator frequency (with hw0  = 41A 1/3), C and D are 
Clebsh-Gordan and D-matrix coefficients and Y20  is the spherical harmonic 
oscillator. 5 is the deformation parameter AR/R,,, where Rrms  is the 
root mean square nuclear radius and AR is the difference between the semi-
major and semi-minor axes of the ellipsoid. This quantity relates to other 
deformation parameters, including the commonly-used /32,  as follows: 
12 	5,3 	37,4 
E2 	6 
The deformed potential breaks the 2j + 1 degeneracy of the spherical 
shell model orbitals, creating j + 1/2 sub-shells with a degeneracy of two. 
For these states, 1 and j cease to be good quantum numbers, and they can 
instead be defined by Q, the projection of j on the ellipsoid symmetry axis, 
and of course the parity. With the approximation of an infinite deformation, 
the nucleon wavefunction can also be identified by three asymptotic quantum 
numbers: the total oscillator shell number N, the number of nodes in the 
z direction n and the projection of 1 on the symmetry axis A. A Nilsson 
level is therefore usually described in the form [NnA]. The Nilsson shell 
model (see figure 2.3) fills up in the same manner as its spherical counterpart, 
starting from the lowest energy and building up to find the likely states of 
the Fermi level nucleons, and the ground state nuclear deformation can be 
found by minimising the sum of the single particle energies with respect 
to the deformation. The energy levels can be thought of as depending on 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 31 
the spatial orientation of the single particle orbital relative to the deformed 
core i.e. the component of j along the symmetry axis. For nuclei with 
prolate deformation, orbits with smaller Q interact more strongly with the 
core, are more tightly bound and therefore lower in energy than orbits with 
relatively higher Q, and vice versa for nuclei with oblate deformation (where 
orbits with large Q involve motion localised near the equatorial plane). The 
Nilsson wavefunctions do not possess a fixed angular momentum J - rather, 
it can be projected onto rotational states of many different angular momenta 
R. Therefore a particle with j in a Nilsson orbit gives rise to a rotational 
band rather than a single state, with J = j + R (j precessing around the 
symmetry axis). 
2.3.2 Proton emission from deformed nuclei 
Deformed proton emitters, as in the case of their spherical equivalents, can 
be treated as narrow resonances of the odd proton moving in a single-particle 
Nilsson level of a deformed potential, with 'direct' and 'distorted wave' treat-
ments to calculate the resonance widths and thus the decay rates. 
The single-particle Nilsson wave function of the unbound proton can 
be expanded into spherical components, where the coefficients of this ex-
pansion can be understood as the amounts of the various spherical single-
particle states present in the wave function. It is assumed that the daughter 
deformation is identical to that of the parent nucleus. For the decay to 
the ground state of an even-even daughter, angular momentum conservation 
implies that the outgoing proton has j, = J2  = K, the projection of the 
quasibound proton's angular momentum on the core symmetry axis. 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 32 
1,2 I770 1 
-ts'4soj 
-. 	 -- 	 ..-, 
.-.. r 2 / ? 
112411 	- 	- 	.11241l 
------------ 
-4k:. ------- 	 ---------- 
2dJ CL 
411 12(4111 
- 	1/2 4311 	- ..-- 	 3/2411 w
- .  ---:--. --- 	512413  
-- 	- 	- 	 - 
9)2-' 	
-. 	 '.. 
12(651] 
--. 	 ----i - 
- 	-- 	--- 	 - 	-- 
- - 	- 	-- 	 - 	-- 	
- 	- 1213031 
- - (50) 	 ----- 	
-.-. 	 -- - 
': -- 
/2(5321 
30431 	
- c-- 	.---. 
13 0J 20:30 	0.5 	0.6 
Figure 2.3: Nilsson level diagram for protons (50<Z<82) as a function of de- 
formation parameter E2,  2 with E4 = e/6, calculated as described by Bengtsson and 
Ragnarsson [Ben85]. 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 33 
The range of the Coulomb quadrupole interaction is large, which com-
plicates the direct method, which relies on the Coulomb potential being 
spherically symmetric. It has been shown [DavOOa] that the half-life results 
of the direct and distorted wave methods for deformed proton emitters in 
the adiabatic limit only agree to within 20%, whereas they gave identical 
results for spherical emitters. These methods which had been successful for 
spherical proton emitters proved somewhat innacurate in deformed cases, 
so more advanced models were developed. The coupled channels Green's 
function method was used to calculate proton decay rates in this work. 
In the coupled channels approach [EsbOOJ, we consider an unbound 
proton interacting with the axially symmetric, quadrupole deformed core 
(the daughter nucleus) which may have non-zero excitation energy (the so-
called 'particle-rotor' model). The coupled equations are solved for real 
energies using the Green's function method [Bug89], and it has been shown 
[EsbOO] that the decay rate results produced by this method compare favoura-
bly with those obtained by the 'direct' method [Mag98]. 
In the laboratory frame, for a total spin I of the decaying state, the 
decay channels are labelled by the quantum numbers (ljR) where 1 and 
j specify the single particle orbits and R is the angular momentum of the 
rotating core. We consider only the ground state rotational band of the rotor, 
with energy ER = (h2 12J0)R(R + 1) where J0  is the moment of inertia and 
R=0,2,4.. etc. 
The total wavefunction is: 
TIM (r,w) = E PLI1(jR)IM) 	 (2.20) 
Chapter 2. Theory 
where 
Il(iR)IM) = E (jmRM R IIM)IRM R )Iljm) 	(2.21) 
is the channel-spin wavefunction, obtained by coupling the single parti-
cle wavefunction him)  to that of the rotor IRMR ), where M is the projection 
of the total spin I on the laboratory axis. 
The Hamiltonian of the proton-core system is: 
H = T + V(, w) + l/18 (r) + HR 	 (2.22) 
where T is the kinetic energy of the proton relative to the core, V(, w) 
is the Coulomb plus nuclear interaction (a function of proton position r and 
the rotor orientation w), V13 (r) is the spin-orbit interaction and HR is the 
Hamiltonian of the rotor. 
The Coulomb plus nuclear interaction is expanded in multipoles: 
V(r,w) = 	VA(r)PA [cos (9')] 	 (2.23) 
where 9' is the orientation of the proton with respect to the symme-
try axis of the rotor. Using the wavefunction from equation 2.20 in the 
Schrdinger equation results in the set of coupled differential equations for 
the radial wavefunctions: 
(h13  + ER - E)'IMR(r) = - I 	(1(jR)IMP[cos(9')] 
l'j'R' .Xo 	 (2.24) 
x h1'(j'R')IM)V A (r)'qF (r) 
Chapter 2. Theory 
where hij  includes the monopole terms of the interaction: 
h2 ( & 	l(l+1)\ 
h13  = - 	
+Vo(r)+V13 (r) 	(2.25) 
2p 	dr2  
The deformed spin-orbit interaction can be written as [She69]: 
V13 (r,O) = 4Vso([Vf(r, 9)] x p). 	 (2.26) 
where 0 is the angle between r and the symmetry axis of the rotor, 
p is the momentum and f(r, 9) is the Fermi function. Using the multipole 
expansion f(r, 9) = EAfA(r)PA [cos (9)],  we can derive the expression: 
V1 3 (r, 9) 4 V50 	(PA1. - 
f-\.[i S, PA] d  
A rdr 	r 	dr 
(2.27) 
fA dPA  
- r2d cos (9) r 12 ) 
Further details on these potentials can be found in [EsbOO]. 
Using the solutions to the coupled equations, the decay width can 
then be calculated using the 'direct' and distorted wave methods described 
previously. In this work, the solutions are matched to Coulomb waves at 
a relatively small distance (roughly 15-20fm) which is outside the range of 
nuclear couplings, and real energies (i.e. stationary states) are used. The 
decay properties of the standing wave are extracted by applying the outgoing 
distorted wave Green's function method (see [EsbOO] for full details), which 
includes the effect of long-range Coulomb couplings (out to a radius of about 
lOOfm, near the outer classical turning point) in the calculation. 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 36 
The calculations in this work were performed in the adiabatic limit (i.e. 
assuming the rotor has infinite moment of inertia and therefore collapsing 
the rotational band to zero energy, making the reference frame of the rotor 
equivalent to the laboratory frame) and used the K representation rather 
than the R representation described above. We consider the system in the 
body-fixed frame of the rotor rather than the laboratory frame, with the 
available decay channels labelled (ljK) where K is the projection of the 
total spin I on the symmetry axis. Transformation can be made between 
the R and K bases as follows [EsbOO]: 
ii 	 -iR01iR(r) and 	R(r)=>AbfJ<(r) 	(2.28) 
R 	 K).O 
where 
1K 	/2R+1 
A3R = V 
21+1 (jKROIIK)/1 + (_i)R 	(2.29) 
assuming even R, which is valid for the ground state rotational band. 
The coupled equations (c.f. equation 2.24) are obtained in the K represen- 
tation by using the above relations and summing over R: 
(h13  - E)'b/'<(r) + 	W' fJ"(r) = KK' 
K'>(J 
- 	ljKI13jlhjIK)oV(r)4I44t(r) 
vi' A>O 
(2.30) 
where 
Chapter 2. Theory. 	 37 
Wj, = 	A1ERA ' 	 (2.31) 
This coupling matrix contains off-diagonal terms due to Coriolis mix-
ing between neighbouring K values (i.e. K' = K + 1). The adiabatic limit 
in the K representation eliminates these off-diagonal terms and therefore 
simplifies the calculation by reducing the number of coupled channels (the 
number being equal to the number of single particle orbits that one includes, 
with the restriction j > K). The adiaMtic limit is equivalent to assuming 
that the Coriolis and centrifugal perturbations to the structure are negligi-
Calculations using the distorted wave Green's function method in the 
adiabatic limit are expected to give a more realistic estimate of the decay 
width than the full coupled channel approach for states with relatively high 
spin (such as the 7/2 -  ground state of "Ho) due to the greater Coriolis 
mixing effects involved (compared to lower spin states). 
2.3.3 Fine structure in proton decay 
A predicted consequence of large prolate deformation in an even-even nu-
cleus is the lowering of the energy of the first excited 2+  rotational state. 
In terms of proton emission, this can result in a significant branching of the 
proton decay of an odd-even nucleus to the first excited state of the daughter 
by increasing the decay energy available to this branch. This effect is known 
as fine structure, and has been observed in the proton decay of the deformed 
odd-even nuclides 131 Eu [Son99] and 145Tm [Kar03]. Other predicted lan-
thanide proton emitters such as 135Tb and 125Pm were also considered likely 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 38 
to exhibit this phenomenon. Fine structure has also been observed in the 
proton decay of odd-odd ' 46Tm [Gin03], although this example is compli-
cated by the even-odd nature of the daughter which leads to a complex decay 
scheme with at least five separate transitions. After the proton decay to the 
excited state of the daughter, this state quickly decays to the ground state 
by -y decay or internal conversion. The internal conversion coefficient (the 
probability of electron emission relative to 'y emission) is roughly indepen-
dent of nuclear structure details, and is found to increase as Z 3 , decrease 
rapidly with transition energy E, increase rapidly with multipole order L, 
and decrease as 1/n3  where n is the atomic electron shell number, which 
causes the internal conversion process to be dominated by K-shell emission. 
The electrons in the K shell are much more tightly bound than their coun-
terparts in the higher shells, which means that their measured energy will 
be reduced significantly from the energy of the daughter excited state by 
an amount equal to the K-shell binding energy. Detailed computations of 
internal conversion coefficients, using the proper atomic wave functions, are 
tabulated in various works (for example, in the Table of Isotopes [Fir95]). 
In deformed nuclei, the wave function of the decaying state is a mix-
ture of several spherical j components. In the adiabatic limit, only the 
angular momentum projection on the symmetry axis is a good quantum 
number (along with parity). Only the spherical single particle component 
with the lowest angular momentum (bearing in mind conservation of angular 
momentum and parity) effectively contributes to the decay, and it is usually 
a relatively small component of the total wavefunction. The decay width is 
proportional to the square of the amplitude of this component in the initial 
wavefunction. 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 39 
The Coriolis coupling can admix states with smaller l values, and 
therefore lower centrifugal barriers, into the proton wave function. Low-1 
components, however small, can substantially affect the lifetime. Coupling 
to the 2 state allows proton single-particle states with lower i p  to contribute 
to the decay, which compensates for the lower decay energy by lowering the 
effective centrifugal barrier. 
The energy of the excited state of the daughter is included directly 
in the adiabatic limit by the distorted wave Green's function method de-
scribed previously, by using the correct 'asymptotic momentum' hkR in 
the distorted Coulomb wavefunctions and matching amplitude, where kR = 
/2ii(Eres ER)  (Eres  being the proton resonance energy and ER the rota-
tional energy of the excited core). 
2.4 Spectroscopic Factors 
The simplistic view of the proton emitter as an inert core coupled to a proton 
in a well-defined single-particle orbital with a particular angular momentum 
is not satisfactory for a complete description of the proton decay process. 
This model may be sufficient for an order-of-magnitude calculation, which 
may be enough to determine the proton orbital, but for a more accurate and 
sophisticated picture, nuclear structure effects must be taken into account. 
The proton decay can be significantly hindered, and therefore the half-life 
increased, by the incomplete overlap of the parent and daughter nuclear 
wavefunctions; for example if a hole in an orbital in the parent nucleus is 
filled in the daughter. This overlap hindrance effect is described by the 
spectroscopic factor S. 
Chapter 2. Theo 
The experimental spectroscopic factor is defined as the ratio of the 
theoretically estimated half-life to the actual measured half-life: 
(2.32') 
Incomplete wavefunction overlap will lead to the experimental half-life 
being longer than the theoretical prediction, and therefore the spectroscopic 
factor will be less than one. 
The theoretical spectroscopic factor is a measure of the likelihood that 
one nucleon (or hole) position will differ from the initial (parent) to the final 
(daughter) nuclear state: 
> 1 2 	(2.33) 
where ?J5j2  and 'j1  are the initial and final states and 	is the creation 
operator relating to the single particle orbital (nlj), defining the angular 
momentum carried away by the proton. This is analogous to the calculation 
used to describe the hindrance in proton pick-up reactions [Boh69]. 
The theoretical spectroscopic factor can be calculated in several dif-
ferent ways. Davids et al [Dav97] estimated the spectroscopic factors of 
the proton emitters in the region 65 < Z < 82 using a low-seniority shell 
model calculation, which characterises the configurations of ri particles in 
i orbitals by the number of particles combined in O pairs. The seniority 
quantum number denotes the number of unpaired particles in the model 
space. This model considered 18 particles in the 81/2,  d3/2 and h 11 12  spheri-
cal proton orbitals above the Z=64 sub-shell closure, with neutrons assumed 
to be spectators (so that their configuration is not altered by the proton de- 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 41 
cay process). A proton pairing interaction was used, and the three orbitals 
were assumed to have the same energy. The final result, after considering 
the overlap between parent and daughter wavefunctions and evaluating the 
reduced matrix element for the case of a full set of particles, was shown to 
St(p) = 	 (2.34) 
where p is the number of proton hole pairs counting down from Z=82 
in the daughter nucleus. This simple expression was found to model the 
decreasing spectroscopic factors of the string of known proton emitters from 
Z=69 to Z=81 with reasonable accuracy, apart from the cases of proton 
decay from the d31 2  orbital. 
A more intricate approach, using the independent quasi-particle ap-
proximation of BCS theory, is described by Aberg, Semmes and Nazarewicz 
[Abe97]. This method considers the proton emitter as an inert core with 
an odd proton represented by a single quasi-particle state, with the spectro-
scopic factor given by: 
(2.35) 
where 	is the probability that the spherical orbital represented by 
j is empty in the daughter nucleus (where 1 means completely empty on 
average and 0 means completely full on average). This quantity is equal to 
1 - v where v3  is the occupation probability: 
v(1 
[( - )2 + &]1/2) 	
(2.36) 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 42 
where \ is the Fermi level energy, L is the proton pairing gap en-
ergy,  is the relevant single-particle level energy (calculated by solving 
Schrdinger's equation with a suitable potential), and G, is the proton pair-
ing strength, which is given by: 
G = [19.9 + 0.176(N - Z)] 	 (2.37) 
Only a few levels below and above the Fermi energy (within a range 
of L) contribute to the configuration mixing caused by pairing correlations. 
This method can be used for deformed as well as spherical proton 
emitters, as long as the single-particle level energies are known accurately, 
particularly those near the Fermi surface. 
2.5 Mass Models 
As shown in section 2.2, the decay rate of a proton-emitting nucleus is ex-
tremely sensitive to the proton decay Q-value, so in order to tell whether 
a search experiment for a particular proton decay candidate is feasible it 
is advantageous to have a rough approximation of these values. One can 
estimate the one-proton separation energies of extremely neutron-deficient 
nuclei, and therefore their proton decay Q-values, by utilising the various 
nuclear mass models which have been formulated over the last few decades. 
These models, although differing in their approaches, all use sets of ad-
justable parameters which are modified by fitting to experimental data to 
explain nuclear structure effects which cannot be interpreted satisfactorily 
by the simple shell model theory. It is often found that more complex models 
with a larger number of parameters provide a better fit to data than models 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 43 
with a smaller parameter set, although this higher level of complexity may 
not necessarily reflect the accuracy of the model's predictions beyond the 
known data set. Indeed, models with fewer parameters are thought to give 
better predictions beyond their known data sets. As well as predicting mass-
related properties like the one-proton and one-neutron separation energies, 
such models also can provide estimates for properties such as deformation 
and the position of the Fermi level. 
2.5.1 Mller-Nix mass model 
The macroscopic-microscopic model of Mller et al [Mo195, Mo197] is com-
monly used to estimate and compare the properties of proton emitters. In 
this model, the nuclear binding energy and therefore the mass is found by 
considering the combination of a macroscopic semi-empirical term (which 
covers familiar mass concepts such as volume and surface energy, Coulomb 
repulsion of the protons and pairing energy) and a microscopic term which 
deals with single-particle shell model corrections and pairing energy. 
E(Z, N, ) = Emacro(Z, N, ) + Ernicro(Z, N, ) 	(2.38) 
where e is a deformation parameter, showing the shape-dependence 
of the model. The macroscopic term is based on the finite range droplet 
model, a development of the droplet model described by Myers [Mye77], 
with an extra term to account for the short range of the nuclear force. 
The microscopic term is found by comparing the single-particle levels of the 
Nilsson model with those calculated by Strutinsky's method [Str67, Str68] 
to find the shell correction, and then evaluating the pairing term using the 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 44 
Lipkin-Nogami version of BCS theory [Pra73]. 
The ground state nuclear masses are evaluated by minimising the total 
energy with respect to the deformation parameter, and one-proton separa-
tion energies can then be calculated from these values. The model also 
provides predictions for ground state nuclear deformations, as shown in Fig-
ure 2.4 for the region around the proton drip-line from Z=50 to Z=85. These 
predictions show the expected pattern of significant quadrupole deformation 
away from shell closures, and this model's estimates of the deformations of 
proton emitters have been shown to agree well with experimental data. The 
Mller-Nix model also provides estimates of the spin and parity of odd nu-
cleons, which can be useful in identifying the likely state of the unbound 
proton in a proton-emitting nucleus, and other useful quantities such as the 
partial half-life for 0 decay. 
The Mller-Nix model uses 38 parameters, only 16 of which are eval-
uated by least-squares fitting to measured mass data of 1654 nuclides. The 
RMS error for the model's mass predictions is estimated to be around 
700keV. 
2.5.2 LiranZe1des mass model 
The mass model of Liran and Zeldes [Lir76] has also proven to be quite 
useful for proton decay studies. This model uses a shell model method with 
a strong pairing interaction which is complicated by one- and two-nucleon 
excitations within sub-shells and shells connected to nuclear deformation 
and core excitation. The nuclear ground state energy can be expressed as: 
Chapter 2. Theory 	 45 
\NL P 22 1TJ 
BETA - DEFORMATION 
D - 	Above 0.25 
0.15-025 00 
0.05-0.15 
-0.05- -0.05 
5 - 	-0.15--0.05 
025--0.15 
- Below-025  
UU UU 
50 	60 	70 	80 	90 	100 	110 
NEUTRON NUMBER 
Figure 2.4: MIler-Nix mass model deformation predie.tiomc (squares are stable 
nuclei, circles are known proton emitters beyond the predicted proton drip line). 
Chapter 2 Theory 	 46 
E(Z, N) = Epair(Z, N) + Eclef(Z, N) + Ec01(Z, N) 	(2.39) 
where Ejr  is the pairing energy, E1 is the deformation energy asso-
ciated with configuraton mixing and E is the Coulomb energy. The Epajr 
and E1 terms are treated differently for regions where the valence nucleons 
occupy the same major shell and regions where they occupy different shells. 
The Liran-Zeldes model has 178 independent parameters which are deter-
mined by least-squares fitting from the data of 1818 known nuclides, with 
the requirement that the mass surface must be continuous at the boundaries 
between the different shell regions. The RMS error in the mass predictions 
for this model is estimated to be around 500keV. 
Chapter 3 
Experimental Method 
3.1 Introduction 
There are many difficulties involved in experiments searching for proton ra-
dioactivity; the production of exotic drip-line nuclei in sufficient quantities, 
the detection of the emitted proton (if the decay mode exists) and the un-
ambiguous identification of the parent nucleus. The first proton-emitting 
isotopes were identified in the early 1980s using methods as diverse as ave-
locity filter [Hof82a], on-line mass separation [K1e82] and a catcher foil com-
bined with an ionisation chamber [Fae84]. However, the most productive 
technique has proved to be the use of a recoil mass spectrometer combined 
with a double-sided silicon strip detector (DSSD) [Sel92a]. This chapter 
will describe the apparatus and procedures used to search for new proton-
emitting nuclides at Argonne National Laboratory, including the installation 
of a new DSSD system. 
The Argonne Tandem Linear Accelerator System (ATLAS) supplies 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 48 
a heavy ion beam which impinges on a thin target, producing exotic nu-
clei by fusion-evaporation reactions, which are then dispersed according to 
their mass-to-charge (A/Q) ratio by the Fragment Mass Analyser (FMA). 
At the focal plane of the FMA, a multi-wire proportional counter provides 
position data, enabling the masses of the recoils to be identified,. and en-
ergy loss data which allows the recoils to be differentiated from scattered 
beam particles. The recoils then defocus and implant into a DSSD, illumi-
nating it approximately uniformly. The DSSD described in this thesis is an 
entirely new design, consisting of 80 orthogonal strips on each side, giving 
6400 'quasi-pixels' over an area of 1024mm 2 . This area is large enough to 
cover the full FMA image, as did a previous detector with only 40 strips per 
face and thus a factor of six fewer quasi-pixels per unit area. The new DSSD 
retains the fine granularity necessary for accurate correlations possessed by 
another previous detector, which had 48 strips per face and an area four 
times smaller. 
3.2 Selection of Heavy Ion Beam and Target 
The Argonne Tandem Linear Accelerator System [Aro86] was the world's 
first superconducting linear accelerator for ions when brought on-line in 
1985. As the name implies, it initially used a 9MV tandem Van de Graaff 
ion source to inject the beam into two 20MV linacs, but the facility was 
upgraded in 1987 to allow the use of an electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) 
ion source, linked to a 12MV injector linac (the Positive Ion Injector, or P11) 
[Bo193]. The ions from the ECR+PII system are then injected into the main 
20MV linac system, which can accelerate the particles to energies of up to 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 49 
17MeV/u. The ECR source, which produces positive ions by heating the 
electrons of a plasma in a magnetic field with a specific microwave frequency, 
is superior to the electrostatic tandem because it allows a wider variety of 
beam species (up to uranium, and including noble gases which cannot be 
produced efficiently as negative ions for a tandem accelerator) and a higher 
beam current (up to 100 particle-nanoamperes, or pnA, for a "Ni beam). 
A second ECR source was completed in 1997, and the original source was 
upgraded in 2000, which increased the available beam intensity by an order 
of magnitude. In 2001-2002, the ECR source system underwent another 
upgrade [Moe02] which increased the available beam intensity by a further 
factor of two. 
All the observed direct proton-emitting nuclides have been produced 
using fusion-evaporation reactions (with beam energies on the order of 5MeV/u). 
If proton-rich (but necessarily stable) isotopes are used for the beam and 
target, then it becomes possible to access the proton drip-line region. The 
residues from such reactions, where the beam and target nuclei fuse to create 
a highly-excited compound nucleus which then 'evaporates' off particles to 
reduce its energy, tend to be less proton-rich than the compound nucleus due 
to the preferential evaporation of protons caused by the high density of states 
for protons in this region and high neutron separation energy. This prefer-
ence towards the compound nucleus moving away from the proton drip-line 
and towards stability means that a search for proton radioactivity involves 
probing relatively low cross-section reactions where more neutrons than pro-
tons are evaporated. The final choices of the beam and target isotopes are 
dependent on several factors apart from the desired reaction product, such 
as the isotopic abundances of the materials and their physical properties. 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 50 
For example, the nuclide 96Ru is extremely proton-rich but makes up only 
'-.'5% of the isotopic abundance of Ruthenium; this may make it desirable to 
use a specially isotopically-enriched sample rather than a sample with the 
natural isotopic abundances, although this can often prove very costly. The 
physical properties of materials come into play with target selection; for ex-
ample, a 40Ca target must be handled with care as it oxidises easily and may 
not be able to withstand the heat deposited by an intense incident beam, 
unlike a 92 Mo target which has a much higher melting point. One must also 
consider the use of inverse kinematics (i.e. where the beam species is heavier 
than the target), which increases the proportion of residues ejected from the 
target in the forward direction, and thus increasing the transmission through 
the FMA, at the cost of increasing the amount of scattered beam particles 
passing through the FMA. 
Once the beam and target nuclides are selected, the beam energy (and 
intensity) and the target thickness must be decided. These are, of course, 
correlated parameters; the beam energy is chosen to maximise the desired 
evaporation channel by selecting a particular compound nucleus excitation 
energy for nuclei in the centre of the target; the thicker the target, the greater 
the energy loss of the ion beam up to the centre of target. The optimum 
excitation energy of the compound nucleus can be estimated with reasonable 
accuracy using the HIVAP computer programme [Rei85] developed at GSI, 
a statistical calculation code which models the fusion-evaporation process 
for an excited compound nucleus. If this optimum energy is achieved at the 
centre of the target then a range of energies ('-.'5MeV) at either side will also 
be included. The target thickness is chosen by balancing the demand for a 
high yield of reaction products (which requires a relatively thick target) with 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 51 
the need to ensure that the energy spreading of the recoils due to multiple 
scattering is not greater than the acceptance of the FMA (which limits the 
useful target thickness if the separation process is to remain efficient). In 
practice, the target thickness is nearly always on the order of 0.5-1 mg/cm 2 . 
A selection of targets were mounted on a 'ladder', which could be easily 
raised or lowered to change target type. In order to disperse the heat de-
posited by the beam over a large area of the target rather than one small spot 
(which can easily destroy the target when high beam currents are used), the 
target can be rotated and the beam 'wobbled' (oscillated vertically). Both 
of these methods were employed in the experiments described in Chapter 4. 
A 20ig/cm2  carbon reset foil is placed a few centimetres downstream 
of the target to equilibrate the charge state of recoils before they enter the 
3.3 The Fragment Mass Analyser 
The FMA [Dav89, Dav92] is an 8m long recoil mass spectrometer used for 
separating nuclear reaction products (see figures 3.1 and 3.2). Its main com-
ponents are two electric dipoles (with maximum fields of 50kV/cm) symmet-
rically placed before and after a 40 magnetic dipole (with maximum field 
1.1T). The FMA separates the reaction products from the primary beam 
and then disperses them achromatically according to their mass-to-charge 
ratio (A/Q) at the focal plane; This design results in a high acceptance in 
energy (20% ), A/Q (7% ) and solid angle (r.'  8msr), with a consequent 
transmission efficiency of typically 10-20% , depending on the particular re-
action. In the original FMA design, the unreacted primary beam normally 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 52 
;l fi ll
Figure 3.1: The Argonne Fragment Mass Analyser. 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 53 
stopped on the anode of the first electric dipole, although multiple scatter-
ing resulted in a small fraction of beam passing through the separator and 
reaching the focal plane (beam rejection 10-12),  which was sufficient to 
approach the maximum rates at which the focal plane detectors could be 
run (particularly when utilising inverse kinematics). Between the 135Tb ex-
periment and the ' 25"26Pm search, the anode of the first dipole was replaced 
with a 'split' anode, which allows the primary beam to pass through a small 
slit and be stopped on a tantalum plate inside the anode. This upgrade fur-
ther reduced the scattered beam problem by a factor of eight (as measured 
using the reaction "Ni + 92Mo to produce the proton emitter '47Tm via 
the (p2n) evaporation channel [Dav021). Quadrupole doublets at either end 
of the FMA assist in geometric focusing and solid-angle enhancement; the 
aperture diameter of the exit quadrupole is larger than that for the entrance 
in order to accommodate the dispersed masses. The FMA can be rotated 
about the target position, in reaction mechanism studies for example, but in 
this experiment was used in the 00  orientation. The resolution achieved by 
the FMA is on the order of d(A/Q)/(A/Q) 1/350. The (A/Q) dispersion 
at the focal plane is typically 10mm per percentage mass difference, e.g. 
10mm between adjacent masses at A100, which can be easily resolved by 
position-sensitive detectors. 
All the power supplies for the ion-optical elements of the FMA are con-
trolled and monitored by a custom application programme [Dav94] running 
on a dedicated computer, a Macintosh IIcx. In addition, the programme 
monitors vacuum conditions, conditions the electric dipoles and controls the 
magnetic fields in a feedback loop with field sensors. The FMA is prepared 
for the transmission of a particular recoil by entering the energy, mass and 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 54 
Focal Plane 
Target 	Focusing 	/ 	 / 	 \ 	Focusing 
Chamber 	Quadrupolcu / 	Electric Dipole I \ 	 / 	Electric Dipole 2 \ Quadrupolcu 
Magnetic 
Dipole 
PPAC 	DSSD 
Figure 3.2: Schematic of the Argonne Fragment Mass Analyser. 
charge state of the particle into the programme, which then calculates and 
implements the required fields. A web-based code [Blu96] can be used to 
calculate the energy and optimum charge state of the desired recoil, given 
the beam and target parameters. In fact, the FMA can transmit up to three 
charge states of the central mass, although the yield of the non-central states 
can be significantly reduced. During experiments, it is often profitable to 
change the FMA charge state setting (to a half-integer charge state, for ex-
ample), or indeed the mass setting, in order to improve the yield by having 
two near-central charge states of the desired mass (rather than one central 
and two reduced 'edge' states). Alteration of the A/Q setting can also be 
useful in reducing scattered beam flux at the focal plane, which can occur if 
a particular beam charge state gives a very similar A/Q ratio to that of the 
desired recoil. 
3.4 Detection System 
The arrangement of the detection system at and beyond the focal plane of 
the FMA is shown in figure 3.3. The PPAC is situated at the focal plane, 
Retractable 
degrader foil 
DSSD Reaction 	- 
products 
dispersed by FMA 	
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 55 
711-1 
Vacuum fecdthroughs 
to preamplifiers (mounted 
wiside chamber) 
Retractable slits 
Figure 3.3: Schematic of the detection system chamber from the focal plane 
onward. 
and measures the position (i.e. A/Q, as shown in figure 3.4) and energy loss 
of the recoils moving through it. The recoils then pass through a degrader 
foil, which reduces their energy (see later), and are finally implanted into 
the DSSD. The time taken for the particles to traverse the 40cm distance 
between PPAC and DSSD is recorded by a time-to-digital convertor (usually 
a few tens of nanoseconds). Each event in the DSSD, either the implantation 
or the subsequent decay of a recoil, is recorded and time-stamped by a lOOns 
clock. Implantation events are identified by a PPAC-DSSD coincidence, and 
decay events by PPAC-DSSD anti-coincidences. The energy with which a 
recoil enters the DSSD is crucial; if the energy is too high, the system will be 
'blind' to decays for a period of up to 7s due to amplifier overload (see 
section 3.5), whereas if the energy is too low the recoils will implant too close 
to the surface, so that a large fraction of any subsequently emitted particles 
will escape out of the upstream (front) side of the detector without depositing 
their full energy. Degrader foils, usually - 1mg/cm 2  of aluminium, are used 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 56 
to reduce the recoil energy to a suitable level (which can be found with a 
simple energy loss calculation given the usual desired implantation depth of 
1O-12jtm). 
Implant-decay correlations within individual 'pixels' on the DSSD are 
then used to identify known proton or alpha decays and to assign accurate 
masses to new decays. In the past, decay-decay correlations have also been 
used to clearly identify daughter and even grand-daughter decays [Dav97]. 
The rate of implantation of recoils into the DSSD, and therefore fundamen-
tally the beam current, is limited in practice since implant-decay correlations 
become extremely uncertain when the time between implantation events in 
a pixel is comparable to the half-life of the implanted nucleus. Assuming the 
recoils are defocused to uniformly illuminate a 6400-pixel DSSD, a 6kHz 
implantation rate will give an average time of is between implantations 
in a single pixel, which is usually satisfactory since a typical proton decay 
half-life is r-'  lOms. However, the condition of the PPAC and the dead-time 
of the data acquisition system can also act as a limit at rates of 5kHz. 
The implantation rate can be reduced, while still transmitting the mass of 
interest, by blocking unwanted masses at the focal plane using mobile 'slits' 
positioned just before the PPAC. This is usually done by altering the FMA 
A/Q setting to produce two near-central charge states of the desired mass, 
then lowering an obstruction between these points to cut out unwanted re-
coils and finally moving obstructions in from both sides to block everything 
except the two A/Q states of interest. 
There is also a standard triple alpha source in the detection system 
chamber which can be positioned in front of the DSSD for calibration and 
gain-matching purposes, and can be used to check for strips which have 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 
PPAC x position 
148 	 147 
Fi. 148 
PPAC x position 
Figure 3.4: a) Two-dimensional PPAC hit pattern and b) projection onto the x-
axis for the reaction 92 Mo(Ni,p2n) 147 Tm, with the FMA set to transmit A=1j7, 
Q=27 recoils. 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 58 
shifted in gain during the course of the experiment. 
3.4.1 PPAC 
The PPAC (parallel plane avalanche counter) is a multi-wire proportional 
counter situated at the focal plane of the FMA. In its original design, it 
consists of a series of parallel plane wire grids (cathode, x-position, anode, 
y-position) between thin (< 1jm) mylar entrance and exit windows, and is 
filled with isobutane at a pressure of 3 torr. The voltages typically used are 
-200V for the cathode and 350-400V for the anode. Data on the position of 
a recoil passing through the PPAC is produced by delay-line readouts from 
both ends of the two orthogonal position grids. Energy loss information 
is taken from the cathode, and the anode signal is used to start the time-
to-digital convertor (TDC) which records the PPAC-DSSD time-of-flight. 
This time-of-flight is useful later in differentiating between true recoils and 
scattered beam. 
This PPAC design has a maximum event rate of 5kHz, which can 
often be the limiting factor in the overall experimental event rate. This 
limit led to- the installation of a new PPAC after the ' 35Tb experiment but 
before the 125"26Pm attempt. The new PPAC [PenOl] has cathode and anode 
planes consisting of mylar foils metallised with gold on each side (instead 
of wire planes), and has a second cathode between the y-position grid and 
the exit window. This new design has been shown to run at event rates of 
up to 20kHz, thus potentially allowing the use of larger beam currents than 
previously feasible. 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 59 
3.4.2 DSSD 
The key piece of equipment in the whole detection system is the double-sided 
silicon strip detector (DSSD), which lies 40cm beyond the focal plane of the 
Fragment Mass Analyser. Until the ' 35Tb experiment, the experimentalist 
had a choice of two DSSDs to utilise; one consisting of 40 orthogonal strips 
on each side, with a strip pitch of 1mm, and the other with 48 strips on 
each side and a strip pitch of 335izm. The former detector can capture more 
recoils than the latter due to its larger area, but its inferior 'granularity' 
(number of strips/pixels per unit area) limits the useful implantation rate 
for which recoil-decay correlations can be reliably established. Clearly, a 
new DSSD which could combine the large area of the 40 x 40 design and the 
excellent granularity of the 48 x 48 version would be ideal for improving the 
system to detect proton emitters with very low production cross-sections. 
However, there is always a compromise between the reduction of the strip 
width (and so pixel size) and the corresponding increase in both the dead 
area on the detector (due to inter-strip separation) and the required instru-
mentation (amplifiers and ADC channels). A new DSSD with 80 orthogonal 
strips on each side, with a strip pitch of 400jm (giving only a slightly infe-
rior granularity to the 48x48, and an area large enough to accept the full 
FMA image) was designed by the Edinburgh group, manufactured by Mi-
cron Semiconductors Ltd. and installed at the FMA immediately before the 
' 35Tb experiment. 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 60 
p  side 
Figure 3.5: Schematic of the DSSD. 
3.4.3 Design 
The detector consists of a slightly n-type substrate with 80 p implanted 
strips on the front face crossed with 80 implanted strips on the rear face 
(see figure 3.5). Each strip has a length of 32mm and an active width of 
350,am, which, combined with an inter-strip region of 50tm, gives a total 
strip pitch of 400/Lm. The orthogonal strips effectively produce 6400 indi-
vidual pixels, each identified by the x and y coordinates given by a certain 
front and back strip number. Signals from adjacent strips are read out from 
alternate sides of the detector (see figure 3.6). The DSSD has a surface area 
of 1024mm2  and a thickness of 70pm. The detector operates as a reverse-
biased p-n junction diode, with a negative bias of about -50V applied to the 
P side through the preamplifiers. The depletion voltage for a detector of 
this thickness is only about -20V; the DSSD is overbiased to reduce the effect 
of leakage current fluctuations and to maximise charge collection (a larger 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 
mmmiiii wrru 
Dj23-S-L 
---- _J- 
Figure 3.6: The DSSD mounted on the vacuum chamber flange, showing the cable 
feedthroughs on each side, coolant tubes (top) and a penny for size comparison 
(bottom left). 
field will sweep the charge carriers out of the depletion region more quickly 
and reduce the possibility of recombination). Each strip has an aluminium 
contact layer to act as an electrode, which is connected to the surrounding 
wafer by an ultrasonically-bonded fine wire. Each implanting particle must 
pass through a dead layer of 0.8im (comprising the Al contact and the p 
layer) before reaching the active volume of the DSSD. The detector surface 
is passivated by an oxide layer to reduce surface-related leakage currents. 
The DSSD is specifically designed to be sensitive to proton and al- 
pha decays but virtually transparent to beta decay. A 1MeV proton has a 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 62 
range of ".'15m in silicon, and a typical 5MeV alpha particle has a range of 
'251im. Such decays would almost certainly be localised within one pixel, 
whereas a 1MeV /3 particle with a range of ri1mm would pass through many 
pixels or more likely escape the detector very quickly and deposit very lit-
tle energy, probably far below the DSSD amplifier threshold of 300-450keV. 
This effective 3 transparency greatly reduces the background seen in this 
type of experiment compared to the use of a single-segment silicon detector; 
each pixel effectively operates as an individual, independent detector. 
The DSSD is cooled to -25C during experiments in order to minimise 
the thermal generation of charge carriers and so optimise the energy resolu-
tion, which was expected to be about 20-25keV for alpha particles and about 
15keV for protons given the performance of previous detectors (although the 
resolution inevitably deteriorates as the detector suffers radiation damage 
from implanted ions over the course of several experiments, as described in 
Chapter 4). 
3.4.4 Other detectors 
A thick (300tm), large area silicon detector was positioned immediately 
behind the DSSD. Its purpose is to detect positrons and 0-delayed protons 
produced by decays within the DSSD, and therefore coincidences between 
back detector signals and DSSD signals are used to veto DSSD events. This 
helps to reduce the background around the expected energy range for direct 
proton emission ( 1MeV). As well as this method for vetoing particles 
escaping from the DSSD in the forward direction, a similar technique has 
previously been used to detect particles escaping in the backwards direction 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 63 
(i.e. through the front face of the DSSD). The so-called 'Box' detector, not 
used in these experiments, consists of four silicon strip detectors forming the 
four sides of an open-ended box upstream of the DSSD and covers '-p75% of 
the solid angle in this direction. For the ' 25"26Pm experiment, a Germanium 
detector was placed outside the vacuum chamber, immediately behind the 
flange, in order to identify gamma decays taking place within the DSSD and 
hopefully confirm the PPAC mass assignments (as described in Chapter 4). 
3.5 Electronics 
Over the years, the Edinburgh group has designed a dedicated suite of elec-
tronics to instrument double-sided strip detectors. The signals from the 
DSSD pass out of the vacuum chamber through cable feedthroughs and into 
the charge-sensitive preamplifiers mounted on the rear plate of the chamber. 
It is necessary to locate the pre.amps as close as possible to the detector to 
minimise the capacitance (and therefore the noise) related to the length of 
the cables from the detector. Each strip is instrumented individually, and 
each side of the DSSD requires a different form of preamp because the signals 
are of opposite polarity. The preamplifiers have a sensitivity of 20mV/MeV 
and a dynamic range of 0-200MeV. 
The signals are then fed via ribbon cables into the shaping amplifier 
stage. This section consists of two sets of 160 Edinburgh/RAL shaping am-
plifiers, one with a dynamic range of 0-200MeV (over an output range of 0-
1OV, gain=5), to measure the high energy implantation events in both sides 
of the DSSD, and another set with higher gain (=50, giving 0-20MeV dy-
namic range) to measure the decays. These shaping amplifiers are mounted 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 64 
in sets of eight on Eurocard motherboards and produce output signals suit-
able for analogue-to-digital convertors (ADCs), with a rise time of roughly 
1s and a tail lasting for 4-5s. Each amplifier also has a leading-edge dis-
criminator which produces logic pulses (ECL) for triggering. DC offset and 
pole-zero can be adjusted with potentiometers on each amplifier, but there is 
only one potentiometer for each motherboard to set a common discriminator 
threshold level for all eight amps (which is usually set as low as electronic 
noise allows). The amplifiers are designed to have a reasonably quick over-
load recovery, because the high-gain decay amps are also exposed to the 
high energy implantation signals which have the effect of saturating them. 
If the implantation has an energy of more than four times the full decay 
amplifier range (i.e. ' s.' 80MeV), this produces a DC pedestal effect which 
can leave the amp insensitive to decays for hundreds of microseconds. This 
is the reasoning for introducing a degrader foil in front of the DSSD to limit 
the implantation energy of recoils from the FMA. In order to instrument the 
80 x 80 DSSD, a new set of 64 preamps, recoil amps and decay amps had to 
be tested and installed, necessitating a total reorganisation of the electronics 
arrangement. 
Overload recovery of the shaping amplifiers is a key issue for detecting 
short-lived proton radioactivities. There are several proton emitters (for 
example 113  Cs and 171 Au) with half-lives on the order of a few microseconds, 
whose detection is impaired when using the shaping amplifiers described 
above. For example, even if the decay amp is no longer overloaded after an 
implantation, a decay signal 10-15ts later may be riding on the tail of the 
recoil pulse and so may appear to have a significantly higher energy than 
in reality i.e. the measured energy is time-dependent for very fast times. 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 65 
To increase the sensitivity of the detection system to fast proton emitters, a 
new set of delay-line shaping amplifiers was designed and built at Argonne 
between the ' 35Tb experiment and the 125"26Pm search which could recover 
to baseline within 11-is after an implantation. This time is very close to the 
actual flight time of a recoil from target to DSSD, which imposes the physical 
lower limit on decay time observability. This new delay-line system runs in 
parallel with the Edinburgh/RAL electronics, and was used successfully in 
the 125,126  Pm attempt and other experiments [Rob03]. 
The analogue signals from the decay amps are fed into a bank of ten 
Philips peak-sensing ADCs in a CAMAC crate, and the signals from the 
recoil amps are digitised using the more cost-effective method of pulse-to-
charge (PTQs) followed by charge-to-digital convertors (QDCs) in another 
CAMAC crate. The latter method offers inferior resolution to a single stage 
ADC, but the energy resolution of the recoils has to be known only approx-
imately (for the purposes of vetoing scattered beam) and this latter method 
is satisfactory. 
Logic signals for decay triggering were taken first from the Edin-
burgh/RAL shaping amplifier discriminators and then later from the Ar-
gonne delay-line amplifiers (when they became available). Logic signals for 
recoil triggering come from the PPAC rather than the DSSD system. The 
ECL signals from the decay amps are fed into modules which produce an 
OR of input signals 1-16, 17-32, 33-48, 49-64 and 65-80 for both the front 
and back sides of the detector, and these outputs produce an ADC hit pat-
tern. Total OR signals for each side of the detector are also produced, DF 
and DB, and a coincidence between these two produces a valid DSSD event 
(i.e. at least one front and one back strip fires). The PPAC anode signal is 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 66 
used to generate coincidences and anti-coincidences between the PPAC and 
DSSD; the former signifying a recoil event (event type 1), the latter a decay 
(event type 2). These signals are used to set the relevant bit in the event 
type word, gate the ADCs, strobe the ADC hit pattern register, latch the 
clock and trigger the acquisition system. When the event has been read out, 
a signal is produced to clear the ADCs and QDCs, and the system is ready 
for a new event. Figure 3.7 illustrates the logic system. 
The data acquisition system used was the MSU/NSCL system. The 
front end is a VME-based system in which a master programme packs the 
events into buffers and send them across an ethernet link to the back-end 
Alpha computer which routes the data to tape, on-line analysis or scaler 
as necessary. When a trigger is accepted, a slave programme on the VME 
system reads the data from the required ADCs or QDCs in the CAMAC 
crates, and also reads the clock to time-stamp the event. The slave pro-
gramme is written in C, and was relatively simple to modify to cope with 
the new DSSD and associated electronics. The readout time is typically a 
few hundred microseconds, which means that decays with an implant-decay 
correlation time shorter than this cannot be treated as an individual event.. 
Instead, the decay busy signal is vetoed (to allow new decay data to be read) 
after the electronics common to both implantations and decays is read out, 
then the implant-only electronics is read out, and then the slave checks to 
see if a new decay has occured during this period. If there is a new decay, a 
'1' bit is placed in the event stream to indicate a 'fast decay' and the decay 
data is added to the end of the implantation event. This method reduces 
the effective implant-decay dead time to less than lOps, compared to the 
implant-implant dead time of up to '--'500ps, which is just about acceptable 
DSSD discriminator 
outputs 
LcCroy 
Front 564 
17-32 
33-48 [I 
49-64 [J 
65-80 Ii 
ADC hit pattern 
bit#1 
bit#2 
bit#3 
Recoil QDC gate 
scaler 
Event type bit #2 
ADC hit pattern strobe 
Master gate 
Clock latch 
scaler 
 Event type bit #1 
 To decay busy / end-of-event logic 
Decay ADC gate 
I Back 1-16 17-32 33-48 49-64 65-80 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 68 
given a typical DSSD implant rate of 2-5kHz. 
3.6 Setup and calibration of detector system 
As mentioned earlier, a web-based setup code [B1u96] is used to calculate 
values for the energy and charge state of a desired recoil given input variables 
such as beam energy and species, target material and thickness, and the mass 
and Z of the recoil. The resulting values are then fed into the FMA control 
computer which sets the electric and magnetic dipole fields accordingly. The 
thickness of the degrader foil upstream of the DSSD can also be selected 
with the setup code to limit the implantation energy of recoils and prevent 
amplifier overload. 
The beam is initially set to a much lower current than its full exper-
imental state, in order to ensure that the FMA is functioning properly and 
that no detectors can be damaged by a high flux of beam particles or recoils. 
For example, it is possible that the beam could be impinging on the target 
frame rather than the target itself, scattering a large proportion of beam 
particles. The DSSD is usually masked when beginning setup by closing a 
valve immediately downstream of the PPAC. The on-line spectra produced 
by the PPAC are used to check whether the FMA has the optimum settings 
for detecting the recoil of interest. For example, the FMA usually transmits 
three different charge states of a particular mass, but the transmission of 
the two states towards the edges may be significantly weakened. It is there-
fore common to alter the FMA settings to transmit two near-central charge 
states instead, and in this way the slits immediately upstream of the PPAC 
(as shown in figure 3.3) can be used to cut out all other A/Q states. There 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 69 
can be problems if the mass-to-charge ratio of scattered beam particles is 
close to that of the recoil of interest, so it may be necessary to move to a 
neighbouring recoil charge state to avoid swamping the detectors with scat-
tered beam. Scattered beam is an issue in terms of radiation damage of the 
DSSD, false implant-decay correlations and also the rate limit of the PPAC 
(although this latter problem has been alleviated by the installation of the 
new high-rate PPAC). The scattered beam problem is exacerbated when us-
ing inverse reaction kinematics, but this was not the case in the experiments 
discussed here. 
After the experimentalist is satisfied with the FMA settings, the DSSD 
can be exposed to recoils and the system checked to make sure it is oper-
ating within acceptable parameters. In particular, the pole-zero settings of 
the decay amplifiers must be checked to ensure that there is no significant 
long-lived baseline undershoot after the implantation signals which would 
effectively reduce the amplitude of subsequent decay signals and ruin the 
energy resolution. The overload recovery response must also be checked for 
the pedestal effect mentioned previously, and a thicker degrader foil can be 
inserted at this point if necessary. The 160 strips of the DSSD can be roughly 
gain-matched (i.e. each strip calibrated with its own gain and offset value) 
using a triple alpha source ( 241Am, 240Pu, 211  Ca) which can be positioned 
in front of the detector in the vacuum chamber. This calibration must take 
into account variable dead layer effects; the source is positioned close to the 
centre of the DSSD, so that alphas implanting into strips near the detector 
edges must pass through a thicker dead layer and thus lose more energy than 
alphas implanting into the centre. 
Event rates in the detectors (for example PPAC, DF, DB, DF AND 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 70 
DB, all typically around 3k-5k per second in this work) are displayed as 
scalers, indicating the onset of any problems such as the failure of the target 
(sudden increase in implantation rate) or electronic noise problems on one 
side of the DSSD (a sudden increase in DF without a concomitant increase 
in DB, for example). 
3.7 Data Analysis 
The analysis utilises correlations in position (i.e. in a single DSSD quasi-
pixel) and time between implantation events and subsequent decay events 
to provide a parent nucleus mass assignment for peaks in the decay energy 
spectrum. Implantation and decay events are treated entirely separately in 
the sorting code, in terms of having different vetos and conditions placed 
on them. 'Fast decay' events, where decay data is appended on to an im-
plantation event, are processed by both the implant and decay sections of 
the sorting code. The only hardware condition applied to DSSD events is 
that the events should have multiplicity > 1 on each side i.e. at least one 
strip on each side of the detector should fire for a valid event. However, 
some multiplicity = zero events, false triggers caused by electronic noise, are 
inadvertently recorded. 
3.7.1 Implantation Events 
The implantation strips were not gain-matched because the energy resolu- 
tion for implantation events does not need to be particularly accurate for 
the purposes of this analysis. For each event, the multiplicity condition is 
checked (> 1 on each side) and the strip with the highest energy signal on 
Chapter 3. Eerimental Method 	 71 
each side is used to reference a particular pixel. Data from the PPAC (two-
dimensional position of the transmitted particle, energy loss of the particle) 
is recorded in the event, along with the PPAC-to-DSSD time-of-flight, and 
this data is analysed and used to investigate whether the particle in question 
is a true fusion-evaporation recoil or a scattered beam ion. This is usually 
achieved by one of two methods. In the first, a two-dimensional spectrum 
of DSSD implantation energy against PPAC-DSSD time-of-flight is plotted, 
and two distinct groups can be discerned due to the significant difference in 
masses between beam and recoils (the energy is roughly proportional to the 
particle mass and inversely proportional to the square of the time-of-flight). 
The second method is to produce a two-dimensional plot of PPAC horizontal 
position against PPAC energy loss, which shows the familiar A/Q groups 
over a background with lower energy loss (the beam particles). This agrees 
with the expectation that a scattered beam particle will lose significantly 
less energy than a recoil in the PPAC due to the former's higher speed and 
likely lower charge state. When the sort code identifies a valid recoil event, 
it stores the PPAC horizontal position and implantation time in an array, 
referenced by its associated front and back strip numbers. This information 
can then be correlated with the next decay event to occur in the same pixel. 
3.7.2 Decay Events 
The sorting code first double-checks that the decay event is definitely not 
an implantation event, by checking for a PPAC cathode (energy loss) sig-
nal. Although the hardware should differentiate between implantations and 
decays using PPAC-DSSD coincidence and anti-coincidence respectively, oc- 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 72 
casionally the PPAC anode may not fire and a recoil may be recorded as 
 decay event. The PPAC cathode data is included in the decay event as 
 final check, although this. stage is rarely needed in practice since a stow-
away implantation event is unlikely to have an energy as low as the typical 
0-6MeV range of decay processes. As with the implantation events, the 
sorting code applies a multiplicity check to the decay events. Only events 
with multiplicity one on each side are wanted; a larger multiplicity on one or 
both sides of the detector implies that the charge produced by the event has 
been shared between multiple adjacent strips, and thus no accurate energy 
measurement can be made. The single multiplicity condition is also impor-
tant for vetoing 0-decay events. Given the performance of past detector 
systems, it was expected that 90 % of decay events would pass the sin-
gle multiplicity condition. The decay ADC output is then calibrated using 
that strip's unique gain-match parameters (gain and offset) determined by 
a calibration reaction run immediately before the main experiment. In the 
case of these experiments, the calibration reaction used was 58  N + 92 Mo 
150yj* - '47Trn + p2n, producing the proton emitter with the highest 
production cross-section. To have an accurate calibration it is important to 
have as many statistics as possible in all the strips (particularly the edge 
strips which receive less of the FMA image than the central strips), and 
because the time to run the calibration reaction is strictly limited, it is best 
to use the most readily-produced proton emitter. 147Tm is also advanta-
geous because it has two proton-emitting states, the ground state and an 
isomer, although the isomer is usually not produced in sufficient quantities 
to use as a calibration point for individual strips (but can still be used as an 
overall gain-matching check). It is important to use a proton for calibration 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 73 
rather than rely only on alpha decays because it is vital to have at least one 
data point in the likely proton energy region ("-'1MeV) to ensure the relia-
bility of the calibration. Two alpha decays are also used in the calibration; 
these are among the well known alpha lines which appear in the calibration 
from recoils produced by reactions with isotopic target contaminants (such 
as 94Mo). Care must be taken when combining proton and alpha lines in a 
calibration, because the two particles have a slightly different pulse height 
response in a silicon detector. The cause of this effect is not entirely clear, 
but the difference in response has been accurately quantified with the ratio 
EP/E = 0.986(2) ([Len86]), i.e. a proton with energy 1MeV produces a 
pulse height 'p1.4% lower than an alpha particle with energy 1MeV. The 
recoil energy of the daughter nucleus of these decays is also partially de-
tected by the DSSD and must be accounted for; most of its energy is lost in 
elastic non-ionising collisions with the atomic lattice ([Hof82b]). As opposed 
to the on-line calibration with the external triple alpha source, these decays 
occur inside the detector and thus no surface dead layer effects have to be 
considered. Several other conditions are applied to decay events, including 
an 'equal energy' condition where events are rejected unless the energy val-
ues measured on both sides of the DSSD are within 20keV. As mentioned 
previously, events are vetoed if they are coincident with an event in the back 
Si detector, indicating that a particle has escaped from the DSSD into the 
other detector and therefore the energy measured in the DSSD is not the 
total energy. 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 74 
3.7.3 Mass Assignment of Decays 
In order to reliably correlate decays with their preceding implantation events, 
the average rate of implantations in a pixel has to be significantly longer than 
the expected decay half-life. This condition is satisfied by ensuring that the 
total DSSD implantation rate is on the order of 5kHz, giving roughly 1 im-
plantation per pixel per second (assuming uniform irradiation over the 6400 
pixels), compared to typical alpha and proton decay half-lives on the order 
of 10-100ms. The sort programme accesses the implantation array and re-
trieves the PPAC horizontal position and time of the last valid recoil event 
occuring in the same pixel as the decay event being analysed. The mass of 
the decaying nucleus can then be derived from the PPAC x data, for example 
in a two-dimensional plot of DSSD decay energy against PPAC x position. 
A short piece of code at Argonne calculates the expected PPAC x position 
of the various possible A/Q states in the reaction, once the 'centre' of the 
PPAC has been defined in the calibration reaction, allowing an unambigu-
ous mass identification of the peaks in PPAC x spectra. The time of the 
last implant event in the pixel can then be subtracted from the decay event 
time to give the implant-decay correlation time, which can then be used to 
apply time gates to the decay data. For examp1e, one can look at fast or 
slow events to preferentially search for short-lived or long-lived decays re-
spectively. Once a decay line is located, the correlation time data is finally 
used to calculate the decay half-life. With heavier nuclei, decay-decay corre-
lations are often possible too i.e. when the proton or alpha decay daughter 
also has an identifiable alpha decay branch. However, there are no alpha 
emitters in the mass region under investigation in these experiments and so 
Chapter 3. Experimental Method 	 75 
this technique could not be used. 
Chapter 4 
Results and Discussion 
The results presented in this thesis are taken from experiments carried 
out in 2001 and 2002 at Argonne National Laboratory, and the analysis was 
performed by myself. The discovery of a proton-emitting state in 135 T was 
first reported in [Sew03], and is published in full in [Woo04]. The unsuccess-
ful searches for proton emission from 121  Pm and 121  Pm are presented here 
for the first time. 
4.1 Commissioning of new DSSD 
The first experiment using the new 80x80 double-sided silicon strip detec-
tor, the search for proton radioactivity from ' 35Tb, was carried out in July 
2001 at the Argonne Fragment Mass Analyser. Immediately before this 
experiment, a brief commissioning and calibration run was performed us-
ing a 270MeV 58  N beam on a 0.775mg/cm2 92Mo target to produce the 
well-known proton emitter ' 47Tm [K1e82] via the (p2n) evaporation channel, 
which has a relatively large cross-section of ' 30tb. 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 77 
0 100 
500 	1000 	1500 	3500 	4000 	4500 	5000 	5500 
Decay energy (keV) 
Figure 4.1: Decay energy spectrum from 147 Tm  commissioning run. 
Chapter 4 . Results and Discussion 	 78 
In this reaction, a number of alpha emitters are produced in addition 
to the proton emitter 1 47 T due to the presence of isotopic target contami-
nants (i.e. the presence of less neutron-deficient molybdenum isotopes in the 
target, despite efforts to make it isotopically pure). These are shown in Fig-
ure 4. 1. M'47  Tm  proton line from the ground state 
decay and the smaller 1.119MeV from proton decay of the 147Tm isomer. 
Note that these events are sitting on the tail of a distribution produced by 
escaping alpha particles. It was found that the energy resolution of the pro-
ton peaks was around 15keV FWHM, and around 20-25keV FWHM for the 
alpha peaks - this is consistent with the performance of DSSDs previously 
used by the Edinburgh group [Sel92a]. It was found that the front face of 
the DSSD had marginally better energy resolution than the rear side, which 
agrees with the generally superior properties of the front face (as explained 
below). 
Usually a single strip multiplicity condition is required for each face 
of the DSSD when running experiments, so that any event which triggers 
more than one strip on either side is discarded. Proton radioactivity typically 
involves energies of '-.'lMeV, which means the protons have a range of ' --'l5itm 
in silicon. Given a strip pitch of 400m, the vast majority of proton events 
should be single multiplicity as the particle does not usually have sufficient 
energy to reach an adjacent strip. Figure 4.2 shows a plot of front side decay 
energy against rear side decay energy with single multiplicity conditions 
on each side, with the ' 47Tm proton line and alpha lines indicated. As 
expected, the vast majority of events are concentrated on the 'equal energy' 
diagonal. However, events can be seen in horizontal strips to the left of the 
peaks (highlighted in red boxes for the proton line and the four main alpha 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 
5 - 	4 	 - 
Alpha lines  
.,. 	.- 
Z scale counts 
Tn proton 50-500 
1.05MeV 5-50 
1 	 2 	3 	4 	5 
Back (n) energy (MeV) 
Figure 4.2: Front decay energy vs. rear decay energy in the DSSD with single 
multiplicity conditions. The red boxes indicate events where a portion of the charge 
on the rear face strip has been shared with an adjacent strip. 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 80 
lines) which indicate that some charge sharing occurs on the rear face of 
the DSSD. This is demonstrated by the fact that although 98% of the 
events have single multiplicity on the front face, only ' 90% of the events 
have single multiplicity on the rear face, with 9% having a multiplicity 
of two, indicating the sharing of charge between two adjacent rear strips. 
Figure 4.3 is a similar plot to the previous figure, but with the conditions 
of single front face multiplicity and double rear face multiplicity (with the 
rear energy plotted being the higher of the two). One can see in this plot 
the continuation of the horizontal strips of events from the previous plot; 
the strips of charge-sharing events are split between the two plots due to 
the '..i400keV energy threshold of the detector system, which means that at 
least this amount of energy must be deposited in a strip for an event to 
be triggered. Thus the charge-sharing events in the first figure extend to 
'400keV below the peaks, with events where >400keV is shared appearing 
in the second figure. Note also that the charge-sharing events halt at the 
point where front energy equals twice the rear energy (the red dashed line 
in the figure) - this is due to the fact that only the higher of the two rear 
energies is plotted. 
A noticeable feature of Figure 4.2 is the presence of the diagonal lines 
dropping down from the main peaks, at an angle of 25 to the main 
diagonal. These lines represent events with a reduced energy in both the 
rear and front face signals, which are rejected by the equal energy condition 
in the software. Yorkston et al [Yor87] propose a charge trapping mechanism 
which causes reduced charge collection for those particles depositing energy 
close to the surface inter-strip region. These events could be explained if 
the resulting deficit in the charge collected at the front face is half of that 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 
 / _,  . . -. 	.. ..-. ... .-. .1 
/Alpha lines 
Z scale counts 
 	 proton 50-500 
1.05MeV 5-50 
2 	 3 	 4 	 5 
Back (n) energy (MeV) 
Figure 4.3: Front decay energy vs. rear decay energy in the DSSD with single 
front multiplicity and double rear multiplicity. The red boxes indicate the lack of 
double rear multiplicity charge shang events where the amount of charge shared 
is less than the detector threshold. 
Chapter 4 . Results and Discussion 	 82 
in the charge collected at the rear face. This undesirable property has been 
observed previously in DSSDs [Se192b]. This effect is due to the construction 
of the detector - the rear strips are created by implanting strips onto 
the n-type substrate with thin p isolating lines between them to provide 
interstrip resistance to disconnect the strips. There does not seem to be 
any correlation between the charge-sharing and signal loss events and any 
particular strips on the detector (e.g. the edge strips, which often display 
increased electronic noise) - the effects occur uniformly over all rear strips. 
As seen in previous DSSD systems, the recoil multiplicity character-
istics of the detector were noticeably inferior to the decay branch, with, 
in this case, '-'80% of implantation events having single front multiplicity 
and only '-'60% having single rear face multiplicity. The recoil signals are 
handled by different shaping amplifiers to the decay signals, and this effect 
has previously been attributed to pick-up in this recoil branch aided by the 
much larger pulses (a typical implantation event has energy of 30-50MeV, 
compared to the typical 1 45MeV range of decay events). 
There was no noticeable degradation in the energy resolution of the 
detector due to radiation damage during the course of the 135Tb experi- 
ment. However, prior to the experiments searching for proton emission from 
125"26Pm it was noted that the resolution had degraded significantly (from 
'--'15keV to '-'50keV FWHM). It was estimated that the level of degradation 
and the amount of implantations the detector had been exposed to in the 
intervening period was roughly consistent with the effects observed by Liv- 
ingston et al [Liv96] in a previous study of heavy ion radiation damage in 
DSSDs. In that work it was estimated that a dose of 6 x 106  fragments 
for illumination on the p+  detector face would produce a similar en- 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 83 
ergy resolution degradation to that observed in the current DSSD, which was 
estimated to have suffered a dose of 2 x 10 7  fragments nun 2  (assuming 
near-uniform illumination). The two dosage figures perhaps should not be 
directly compared since the detector tested in the previous work had failed 
to meet the quality assurance criteria for commercial use. A new DSSD, 
identical in design and with very similar performance characteristics, was 
installed at the FMA prior to the ' 25"26Pm searches to ensure that the ex-
perimental energy resolution was optimal. The radiation-damaged DSSD 
could still be used in experiments where the energy resolution was not crit-
ical, for example the investigation of ' 50Lu [Rob03] where the key issue was 
the measurement of the half-lives of the two known proton-decaying states. 
4.2 Proton radioactivity of 135Tb 
4.2.1 Previous search experiments for proton emission 
from Tb isotopes 
Soon after the discovery of ground state proton radioactivity from the lan-
thanide nuclides 7Tm and 'Lu at SHIP and the on-line mass separator 
at GSI in 1982, a series of experiments were carried out at that labora-
tory searching for further examples of proton decay from isotopes of the 
odd-Z lanthanide elements Prometheum, Europium, Terbium and Holmium 
(Z=61, 63, 65 and 67 respectively) [Lar83]. The experiments searching for 
proton emission from 136"37"38Tb used 200-240MeV beams of 41  Ca from the 
UNILAC accelerator impinging on a 1.07mg/cm2 102  Pd target to produce 
the desired nuclides by heavy ion fusion-evaporation (pxn) reactions. The 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 84 
specific evaporation channels from the compound nucleus l42Dy* are x=3, 
4 and 5 for 138Tb, 137 T and 136 T respectively, with the associated pro-
duction cross-sections calculated by HIVAP [Rei85] to be 120b, 1.9tb and 
180nb. The evaporation residues were stopped in a thermal ion source, then 
separated according to their mass and finally implanted into a thin carbon 
foil placed in front of LE-E telescopes. The system was designed so that 
"-'1MeV protons would be stopped in the thin LE detector, but positrons 
and higher energy /3-delayed protons would pass through to the E detector, 
so that directly-emitted protons could be picked out in the energy spectra 
of the LE detector in anticoincidence with the E detector. These exper-
iments showed no evidence for proton emission from any of the Terbium 
isotopes, although the nature of mass separator experiments, due to the de-
lay between creation of the evaporation residue and its subsequent release 
from the ion source, means that nuclides with half-lives below ims are 
usually not detectable. A similar experiment was undertaken [Nit83] at the 
OASIS on-line isotope separator at Berkeley, utilising a 480MeV 92 Mo beam 
and a 1-2mg/cm2 50Cr target to search for 137Tb via the (p4n) evaporation 
channel. Again, no evidence for proton emission was found. 
More recently, an experimental search for proton radioactivity from 
136"37Tb was undertaken at the Oak Ridge recoil mass separator in tan-
dem with a DSSD-based detection system [Ryk99]. A 15pnA, 290MeV 50Cr 
beam from the Holified Radioactive Ion Beam Facility (HRIBF) was used 
to bombard a 0.91mg/cm 2 92 Mo target for 35 hours, but no proton decays 
were observed. The Oak Ridge team point out that the proton separation 
energy of '36Tb may well be less than, or only slightly greater than, that of 
its odd-even neighbour 137Tb, an effect demonstrated in the proton-emitting 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 85 
isotopes of the odd-Z neighbour Holmium, 'Ho and ''Ho (E=1086keV 
and 1 l69keV respectively). Mller et al [Mo197] predict Q for 136"37Tb to 
be 540keV and 510keV respectively, which would not lead to proton emission 
fast enough to compete with 3 decay, and therefore is consistent with the 
experimental non-observation of proton radioactivity from these nuclides. 
The Liran-Zeldes model predicts slightly larger Q values for 136"37Tb of 
1MeV and 0.79MeV respectively, in which case a proton decay branch in 
136 T could potentially exist. 
4.2.2 Experimental details and results 
The search for proton emission from 135Tb at the Argonne FMA was under-
taken immediately after the commissioning of the new 80 x 80 DSSD. A beam 
of "Cr ions with energy 315MeV and average current 10pnA from the AT-
LAS accelerator was used to bombard a rotating 0.775mg/cm 2 92Mo target 
for approximately 96 hours. The beam energy was selected to produce the 
optimum centre-of-target excitation energy for the compound nucleus 142 Dy* 
to maximise the (p6n) evaporation channel (roughly 113MeV, as estimated 
with HIVAP [Rei85]). The FMA transmission settings were; recoil energy 
E=87.9MeV, mass A==135 and charge state Q=25.5, with the focal plane 
slits positioned to allow transmission of the two near-central charge states 
25 and 26k, as shown in Figure 4.4. A 0.825mg/cm 2  Aluminium degrader 
foil was positioned in. front of the DSSD to reduce the implantation energy 
and depth of the recoils and so avoid overloading the amplifiers. The DSSD 
was instrumented with the semi-Gaussian shaping amplifiers, and the back 
silicon veto detector was installed immediately downstream. The 147Tm data 
Chapter 4 . Results and Discussion 	 86 
8.Oxl 06 
6.00 0'  
4.0x106  
2.00 0' 
PPAC x position 
Figure 4.4: PPAC x position spectrum for the 135  Tb experiment. 
from the commissioning run was used to gainmatch and calibrate the DSSD 
for this experiment. 
The energy spectrum of decay events in the DSSD following the im-
plantations of A=135 recoils is shown in Figure 4.5, and a two-dimensional 
plot of recoil-decay time against decay energy is shown in Figure 4.6. The 
wide peak around '-'.' 500keV seen in Figure 4.5 is caused by background from 
/3-decay and escaping 3-delayed protons, while the approximately flat back-
ground at higher energies is also associated with /3-delayed protons. In the 
bottom part of Figure 4.5, which shows decay events occurring within 6ms 
of an A=135 implantation event, an obvious peak can be seen at an energy 
just below 1.2MeV, with negligible background above 700keV. This energy 
is almost certainly too low to originate from an of-decay event, and is typical 
of direct proton emission. The A=135 isobars 135 G and 135 E are pre-
dicted by mass models [Mo197] to be proton-bound, while the even-Z 135Dy, 
ter 4. Results and Discussion 
0.5 	 1.0 	 15 	 2.0 	 2.5 
Energy (MeV) 
Figure 4.5: DSSD decay events associated with A=135 recoils from the reaction 
50 Cr + 92 Mo. 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 
Decay energy (keV) 
Figure 4.6: DSSD decay events associated with A=135  recoils from the reaction 
50 C + 92 Mo (blue indicates one count per bin, green indicates five or more counts 
per bin). 
although predicted to be slightly proton-unbound, would be produced by 
the extremely low cross-section (7n) evaporation channel, making it a very 
improbable candidate for the origin of the proton line. Therefore the most 
likely assignment for the peak is the proton decay of 1 Tb, produced by the 
(p6n) evaporation channel. 
After calibration, the energy of the peak was measured to be 1179(7)keV, 
which gives a Q-value for the proton decay of 1 188(7)keV after correction for 
electron screening, daughter recoil and pulse height deficit. The one-proton 
separation energy calculations of the macroscopic-microscopic mass model of 
Mller et al [Mo197] predict that the Q-value for the proton decay of ' 35Tb is 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 
1.15MeV. This particular model also successfully predicts the onset of proton 
emission for the isotopes of both Europium and Holmium, and demonstrates 
its usefulness again in this case. The Liran-Zeldes model [Lir76] predicts the 
one-proton separation energy of ' 35Tb to be 1.47MeV. The half-life of the 
peak was calculated to be 940+330  ms using the maximum likelihood method -220 
[Mey75], because there were insufficient counts in the peak to fit an accurate 
exponential decay curve. The production cross-section for 135Tb from the 
(p6n) evaporation channel was found to be .-.'1.5nb, assuming a combined 
FMA and DSSD efficiency of 8%. This experiment demonstrates the first 
successful measurement of a (p6n) evaporation reaction product at the pro-
ton drip-line. The two examples of proton emitters created using the (p5n) 
evaporation channel ( 130Eu [Dav04] and 140Ho [Ryk99]) were produced with 
cross-sections on the order of lOnb, suggesting a (p6n) cross-section of 1nb 
if we consider the approximation of the cross-section decreasing by roughly 
an order of magnitude with each extra neutron evaporated (as demonstrated 
in Table 1.1), in agreement with the experimental value. Mller et al [Mo197] 
predict the 13-decay half-life of ' 35Tb to be 193ms, so it is reasonable to as-
sume a 100% proton decay branch for this nuclide. 
It is possible that the distribution of counts visible around '500keV in 
the lower part of Figure 4.5 contains several events related to protons from 
the decay of 135 T escaping through the front of the DSSD and depositing 
only part of their energy. The recoils are implanted to a depth of r.10-12,am, 
while the range of a 1MeV proton in silicon is slightly greater than this 
('-15-20m). However, from solid angle considerations it is unlikely that 
>35% of protons would escape through the front of the detector, so this 
concept cannot explain all of the events in this region (although it probably 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 90 
accounts for the majority). This explanation is also likely to apply to the 
two events occuring '-'180keV below the main peak, which would imply that 
the majority of the proton energy was deposited in the detector. A half-
life on the order of milliseconds would be quite short for 3-decay, making 
that effect unlikely to be the source of the other low energy counts, so the 
most likely explanation for these remaining few events is simply the effect of 
electronic noise (particularly for the two events in this region occurring only 
a few microseconds after an implantation, an unfeasibly short recoil-decay 
time). 
4.2.3 Discussion of results 
If we assume that '35Tb has a spherical shape and perform WKB calcu-
lations using the Bechetti-Greenlees optical potential [Bec69] based on the 
odd proton occupying the s 1 12 , d31 2  or h1112  orbitals, then the resulting the-
oretical proton partial half-lives are 240ns, 2.4jts and 9.5ms respectively, 
none of which agree with the experimental value. Mller et al [Mol95] pre-
dict that 135Tb has a significant prolate deformation of 32 0.325, so it is 
not surprising that the half-life cannot be explained by the simple spherical 
model. The odd proton is predicted to occupy the 3/2[411] Nilsson level 
based on the 2d512  spherical sub-shell, although the 5/2k [413] and 7/2 -  [523] 
levels (based on the 19 71 2  and 1h11 12  spherical sub-shells respectively) are 
predicted to be very close to the Fermi surface for the expected deformation. 
The proton decay rate of ' 35Tb as a function of the deformation parame-
ter 32 was therefore calculated using the coupled channels Green's function 
method of Esbensen and Davids in the adiabatic limit [EsbOO] for the likely 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 91 
proton levels 3/2k, 5/2k and 7/2 - . The results of these calculations are 
shown in Figure 4.7 and compared with the experimental half-life with error 
bars (displayed as a horizontal band). The theoretical half-lives have been 
divided by the spectroscopic factor of u2  = 0.57, which was estimated by a 
BCS calculation using single-particle level energies similar to that shown for 
' 31 Eu in [EsbOO]. A value for the proton pairing energy of L=0.85MeV was 
used in the calculation, which was obtained from the odd-even mass differ-
ences calculated by Mller et al [Mo195]. Figure 4.7 clearly shows that the 
calculated half-life for the 7/2 -  orbital agrees very nicely with the experi-
mental value at the predicted deformation, whereas the half-lives of the 5/2k 
and 3/2k orbitals are far too fast (by factors of "3 and .'15 respectively). 
On this basis, the proton line can be confidently assigned to the 7/2 -  orbital 
in this highly deformed nucleus, which means that the state decays by 1=3 
proton emission to the 0+  ground state of 134Gd. For the purposes of these 
calculations, an axially symmetric shape was assumed for 135Tb, in contrast 
to the postulated slightly triaxial shape of the neighbouring proton emitter 
"'Ho [SewOla]. 
The 7/2-  orbital may not be the ground state of ' 35Tb, as it is in the 
neighbouring "'Ho. It is possible that this state is an isomer, although if this 
is the case then the ground state is unlikely to be the 5/2k configuration. In 
this situation, there would be a fast (i.e. picosecond) El gamma transition 
from 7/2 -  to the ground state, which would make any proton decay branch 
trivially small, unless the excitation energy of the 7/2 -  state was less than 
50eV (predicted by Weisskopf estimates), which would be an unusually small 
energy difference between low-lying states in medium mass nuclei (but this 
cannot be completely ruled out). The configuration of 3/2k ground state 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 92 
Half-life for 135Tb, S1=0.5 
0 	 0.1 	 0.2 	 0.3 	 0.4 
Figure 4.7: Plot of proton decay half-life against quadrupole deformation /32  for 
' 35 Th. The horizontal band represents the experimentally measured value (includ-
ing errors), while the lines show the theoretical calculations for the three likely 
proton configurations. 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 93 
with 7/2-  proton-emitting isomer is more likely; the M2 gamma transition 
could occur on a similar or longer timescale to the proton decay branch 
with a reasonable 7/2 -  excitation energy (Weisskopf estimate >2.5ms for 
excitation energies <50keV) and so would not prevent the observation of 
proton emission. There are no events in the energy spectrum which would 
obviously correspond to proton decays from a 3/2+  ground state of 135Tb, 
which would probably have a half-life below 100us - there are two events 
which occur '--'115keV below the main proton peak, but if this were indeed 
the excitation energy of the 7/2 -  state then its gamma transition rate would 
be an order of magnitude faster than its proton decay rate and so it would 
be difficult to understand the observation of a 7/2 -  proton-decaying state. 
The 3/2k state is in fact the predicted [Mo197] and experimentally measured 
ground state [Son99] of the neighbouring proton emitter 131 Eu. The 7/2 
state is the proton-emitting ground state of the nearby 141 Ho [Dav98]. The 
three possible configurations of the proton-emitting 7/2 -  state are shown in 
Figure 4.8. 
The phenomenon of fine structure has been observed in both 131 Eu and 
141 Ho, and was anticipated as a possibility for 135Tb also. Assuming that 
the even-even proton daughter nucleus 134Gd has a similar deformation to 
the parent (02  '.'0.33), the Grodzins formula [Gro62] predicts the excitation 
energy of the first excited 2 state to be '-'120keV. Coupled channels calcula-
tions (in the method of [EsbOO]) predict a branching ratio of '8% to a state 
at this energy. In the bottom part of Figure 4.5, there are two events which 
correspond to this energy, lying 115keV below the main proton peak. It is 
estimated [Fir95] that this state will decay by internal conversion 60% of the 
time, with half of these electrons being emitted from the K shell (with bind- 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 94 
ing energy "-30keV) and half from the higher shells (with negligible binding 
energy). The internal conversion electrons will be detected simultaneously 
with the proton by the DSSD and their energies summed - therefore we 
would expect to see roughly 40% of the proton decays to the excited state 
appearing in a fine structure line '-'120keV below the main peak (gamma 
decay), roughly 30% appearing '-..'30keV below the main peak (K-shell in-
ternal conversion) and another 30% being added back into the main proton 
peak (higher shell internal conversion), although one must also take into 
account the fact that the electrons have a much longer range in silicon than 
the protons and may well escape from the detector, depositing only part of 
their energy and producing a continuum of events between the main proton 
peak and the fine structure peak. The statistics gathered in this experiment 
are simply not sufficient to be able to make a definitive statement regarding 
the existence of fine structure in 135Tb, although it is likely that the fine 
structure branching ratio is no greater than about 25% (if one considers the 
two events lying '-.'115keV below the main peak as representing 40% of the 
decays to the excited state), if indeed it exists. To settle the issue, the exper-
iment should be run again (with the higher beam currents now achievable 
at ATLAS/FMA) to gain better statistics, and the results compared with 
a Monte Carlo simulation of the fine structure decay process, as performed 
by Sonzogni et al to conclusively establish the presence of fine structure in 
131 Eu [Son99]. 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 95 
Isomer 	 7/2-  
Eex <50eV 
Ground 	_____________ 
7/2- 	 5/2+ state 
Eex  <5OkeV 
Figure 4.8: Various possible permutations of the proton-emitting 7/2-  state in 
'35m. 
4.3 Search for proton radioactivity of "'Pm 
4.3.1 Previous search experiments for proton emission 
from Pm isotopes 
Shortly after the initial discovery of ground state proton radioactivity from 
147Tm and 151 Lu in 1982, a series of experiments were carried out at the GSI 
on-line mass separator to search for proton emission from neutron-deficient 
Prometheum isotopes [Lar83]. Beams of 40Ca from the UNILAC accelerator, 
with energies 200-240MeV, were used with a 2.1mg/cm 2 92 Mo target to pro-
duce the nuclides 126"27' 128Pm using the (p5n), (p4n) and (p3n) evaporation 
channels respectively, with production cross-sections estimated with HIVAP 
to be 24nb, 910nb and 27ib. The experimental set-up was identical to that 
described for the 136"37"38Tb search mentioned in the previous section. No 
evidence for proton-decaying states was found for any of the nuclides, al-
though the predicted proton partial half-life of 126Pm (< Ims) would be too 
fast for a mass separator facility to detect. A similar experiment was under-
taken [Nit83] at the OASIS on-line isotope separator at Berkeley, utilising 
a 213MeV 40Ca beam and a 1-2mg/cm2 92Mo target to search for 127Pm 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 96 
via the (p4n) evaporation channel: again, no evidence for proton emission 
was found. A decade later, the Edinburgh group performed an unsuccessful 
search for proton emission from 118  Pm at the Daresbury recoil mass spec-
trometer using a DSSD-based setup [Liv93a]. 
Two more recent experimental searches for proton emission from 126  Pm 
have been reported. In the first experiment at the Argonne FMA [Mah02a], 
a 432MeV, 3.5pnA, "Kr beam from ATLAS was used with a 751tg/cm 2  
54 Fe target to produce the desired nuclide. No decays faster than 300js 
with an energy lower than 2MeV were observed in the DSSD, and a cross-
section limit for the production of 126Pm was estimated at lOnb or less. 
There were concerns that the beam energy was significantly above the opti-
mum value (predicted by HIVAP) for the (p5n) evaporation channel. In the 
second reported search using a very similar DSSD-based setup at the Recoil 
Mass Spectrometer at Legnaro [Sor03], a 330MeV 58  N beam from the ALPI 
tandem-linac accelerator system was used with an isotopically enriched 745e 
target in an initial attempt, but problems with the stability of the target led 
to another attempt using the inverse kinematic reaction (a 425MeV 0.5pnA 
'Se beam on a 18 N target). This experiment produced no clear proton 
decay events, and suggested a production cross-section lower than lOnb. 
4.3.2 Experimental details and results 
After the '35Tb experiment in 2001, the ATLAS-FMA system underwent a 
series of upgrades, including a new ECR ion source, a new FMA split anode 
and a new high-rate PPAC at the FMA focal plane, which enabled proton 
decay experiments to be run at significantly higher beam currents (and there- 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 97 
fore event rates) than were previously available - see the previous chapter for 
more information. A search for proton emission from ' 26  Pm was undertaken 
in 2002 using a 238MeV 24pnA (average) "Ca beam on a 0.775mg/cm 2 92 Mo 
target for approximately 42 hours. This beam energy produced a centre-of-
target excitation energy for the compound nucleus 132Sm*  of 96MeV, the 
optimum value predicted by HIVAP for the (p5n) evaporation channel. The 
FMA transmission settings were E=57MeV, Q=23.5 and M=126.5, and the 
focal plane slits were positioned to transmit the charge states 23 and 24k, as 
shown in Figure 4.9. For this experiment and the 125Pm search, a new 80x80 
DSSD, identical to the first, was installed beyond the focal plane, as the first 
detector had undergone significant radiation damage since its commission-
ing. The DSSD was instrumented with both the traditional semi-Gaussian 
shaping amplifiers and the fast delay-line amplifiers in parallel (see Experi-
mental Method chapter). The back silicon veto detector was installed behind 
the DSSD as usual, and a Germanium detector was positioned immediately 
behind the detector mounting to pick up gamma rays associated with decays 
in the DSSD. Before the main experiment, a calibration reaction producing 
147Tm was performed. 
The decays that occurred in the DSSD during the ' 26  Pm run with an 
energy below 2MeV are shown in Figure 4.10 for various recoil-decay time 
limits. A two-dimensional plot of recoil-decay time against decay energy is 
shown in Figure 4.11. These spectra were obtained via the shaping ampli-
fiers, as the delay-line amplifiers were found to have an inferior energy reso-
lution (FWHM greater by a factor of 2). Although there are two fast events 
at an energy of about 1.2MeV shown in the bottom part of Figure 4.10, 
the spectrum is not completely clean (due to background from 3-delayed 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 98 
 6x106  
5x106  
4x10  
3xi06  
lxi 0
PPAC X position 
Figure 4.9: PPAC x position spectrum for the 126  Pm experiment. 
protons) and there is no evidence that these events relate to proton radioac-
tivity. A cross-section limit of r-i450pb can be placed on 126Pm for proton 
decay with t 1 1 2  <50ms, which represents a search of great sensitivity. This 
cross-section is based on the level of counts seen in the spectrum around 
the typical proton energy of 1MeV, the thickness of the target used, the 
integrated beam current on target of '-.' 2.3 x 1016  particles and a combined 
FMA-DSSD efficiency of around 8%. It was assumed that experimental 
dead time was not an issue in terms of efficiency due to the relatively low 
implantation rate. 
126Pm is predicted by Mller et al [Mo197] to have a S, of 0.58MeV, 
which is relatively low compared to nearby proton emitters and would be 
unlikely to produce a proton decay fast enough to compete with the predicted 
/3-decay partial half-life of 175ms. The Liran-Zeldes model [Lir76] predicts 
S=0.92MeV, which is on a par with the observed S, values of nearby proton 
emitters, but this model has been shown to overestimate the S i,, values of 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 99 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
T <lOOms 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
T < lOms 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1800 1800 2000 
T < ims 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
Energy (keV)' 
Figure 4.10: DSSD decay events associated with A =126 recoils from the reaction 
40 Ca+92 Mo 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 
500 	 1000 	 1500 	 2000 
Decay energy (keV) 
Figure 4.11: DSSD decay events associated with A-126 recoils from  the reaction 
50 c + 92 Mo. 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 101 
proton emitters below Z=69 by typically 200keV (see section 4.5). Thus the 
non-observation of proton radioactivity from 126Pm is consistent with mass 
model predictions. 
The experiment utilised a 8Ca beam from ATLAS, which has previ-
ously seen to be contaminated with atmospheric VAr. As well as requesting 
the beam operators to regularly check the purity of the beam, the Ger-
manium detector mounted behind the DSSD provided some comfort that 
nuclides in the expected region (i.e. from the compound nucleus 132S m* 
rather than 132Nd*)  were being produced. The lower half of Figure 4.12 
shows the energy spectrum produced by the Germanium detector during 
the A=126 run, with tentative assignments for the gamma lines. Although 
this spectrum is not as simple to interpret as its A=125 counterpart, the 
389keV line characteristic of 126Cs (which is not present in the A=125 spec-
trum) can clearly be seen, along with lines which agree to the /3-decay chain 
ancestors 126Ba, 126 La, 121 C and potentially 121  Pr. This last nuclide should 
produce 125La via 0-delayed proton emission, and we do indeed see some 
lines which agree to the A=125 /3-decay chain shown in the top half of Fig -
ure 4.12 (although notably not 1 21 C or any of its A=124 /3-delayed proton 
descendants). These observations suggest the presence of (o2p) or (cpn) 
evaporation residues from the 132Sm*  compound nucleus produced by the 
40 Ca beam, rather than the much lower cross-section (p5n) or (a2n) residues 
from a 132Nd*  compound nucleus produced by a 40Ar beam. 
<N 	 I <N 
I 	<N 	 Ji g' 
50000 
A = 125 
550 600 
A = 126 
o '-f 
4) )Q 
bo I- 
100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 50 
(0 	 0 	 II 
Ib' 	 II 
0) 	 II 
AtJjIJj 	I 
I CO) 
250000 
200000 
150000 
100000 
(1) 50000 
150000 
100000 
n --'----- 	 ____ 
, 	 I I I I 	I I I I I I I 	 I 	 I 	 I 	I I I I I I I 	 I  I -rT, I I 	 I I I I I I I I I J 
50 	100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 
Energy (key) 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 103 
8.Oxl 06 
6.0x106  
4.0x106  
2.0x106  
PPAC X position 
Figure 4.13: PPAC x position spectrum for the 125  Pm experiment. 
4.4 Search for proton radioactivity of 125Pm 
An experiment searching for proton decay from 125Pm was performed, the 
first known attempt. The run took place during the same period as the 
' 26  Pm run with the same experimental set-up, lasted roughly 102 hours, 
and utilised a 260MeV 40  Ca beam, with an average current of 22pnA, pro-
ducing a compound nucleus excitation energy of 108MeV in the centre of 
the 0.775mg/cm2 92 Mo target (the optimal excitation energy for the p6n 
evaporation channel). The FMA was set to transmit recoils of mass 125, 
energy 62.5MeV and charge state 22.5, with the focal plane slits positioned 
to allow transmission of the charge states 22+  and  23+,  as shown in Figure 
4.13. 
The decays that occurred in the DSSD during the "'Pm run with an 
energy below 2MeV are shown in Figure 4.14 for various recoil-decay time 
limits, while Figure 4.15 shows a two-dimensional plot of recoil-decay time 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 
30-1 	n 	 T<ls 
20-1 	 Oh'10 	Oii 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
T < lOOms 
0 	 	.'." ' I I q I j .  	' 111  11 J'91 I  J J I  	U 	IJI J 1 . ih1J 1  
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 - 4- C 
o 	 T<lOms 0 
 All  P 	Q ill0 .' 91 	I 	  	. .?I 'I, 11;11111    IJ I J I P1 	 
200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
2- 	 ,T<lms 
 . 	 . . 	 . 	 	 	   	 	. 	  	. 	  	 
0 	200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 
Energy (keV) 
Figure 4.14: DSSD decay events associated with A =125 recoils from the reaction 
40Ca+92Mo 
500 	 1000 	 1500 	 2000 
' 	150 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 105 
Decay energy (key) 
Figure 4.15: DSSD decay events associated with A-125 recoils from  the reaction 
50 C + 92 Mo. 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 106 
against decay energy (again, output from shaping amplifiers rather than 
delay-line amplifiers were used). Although there is a fast event at an energy 
of about 1.35MeV shown in the bottom part of the figure, the spectrum is 
not completely clean (due to background from 3-delayed protons) and in 
fact this event was found to have a recoil-decay time of less than 1s, so 
it is impossible that this event could relate to proton radioactivity. The 
upper two sections of Figure 4.14 hint at potential candidate proton peaks 
in the region 1.3-1.4MeV, but a long-lived proton decay such as this cannot 
be cleanly identified as a vertical line (with a decaying exponential time 
distribution, as demonstrated for ' 35Tb in Figure 4.6) amidst the background 
in the two-dimensional plot Figure 4.15. A cross-section limit of .--'200pb can 
be placed on 125  PM for proton decay with t 1 12  <50ms, based on an integrated 
beam current on target of '-' 5.2 x 1016  particles, which represents a search of 
unprecedented sensitivity in proton radioactivity experiments, made possible 
by the higher beam currents available from ATLAS and the corresponding 
improvements in the FMA experimental set-up (i.e. split anode, high-rate 
PPAC and the 80x80 DSSD). 
125Pm is predicted by Mller et al [Mo197] and Liran and Zeldes [Lir76] 
to have a S, of 1.24MeV and 1.45MeV respectively, either of which one would 
naively expect to lead to a proton decay significantly faster than the pre-
dicted/3-decay partial half-life of 158rns. Spherical WKB calculations predict 
t112 ''50ns for the likely single-particle levels d31 2  and d512 , whereas deformed 
calculations (in the method of Esbensen and Davids described in Chapter 2) 
suggest t112 r.i120jts for the likely 5/2[532] Nilsson configuration. A proton 
decay with this predicted energy and half-life should be easily detectable 
using the FMA-DSSD experimental method, and so the non-observation of 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 107 
proton emission from 125  Pm apparently represents a rare case of the failure 
of mass model predictions to localise the onset of proton radioactivity in this 
region. In terms of energetics, two possible explanations present themselves. 
The proton separation energy may be too large, and thus the decay rate too 
fast, for the proton decay to be observable (i.e. t 112 < 1s), in which case it is 
possible that Prometheum may be the only odd-Z element between Z=51 and 
Z=83 which does not have at least one proton-decaying isotope. However, if 
S is indeed too large for 125Pm, it may in fact be lower for its more exotic 
odd-odd neighbour 124Pm  (this effect has been seen in the proton emitting 
partners 112,113  Cs and the highly deformed l40,l4iHo,  for example). The other 
explanation for non-observation of 125Pm is that its S, may be too low, and 
thus the decay rate too slow, for proton emissionto compete effectively with 
/3-decay. It is still possible that 124Pm may have a higher S, than 125pm, 
which is the case for Prometheum's near-neighbours 130,13iEu  and so could 
potentially exhibit proton decay. However, with current stable beam-target 
combinations the nuclide 124pm  could only be produced via a (p7n) evapo-
ration channel, which would probably be too weak to be detectable with this 
experimental technique, even with the recent upgrades in the ATLAS-FMA 
system. It is also possible that the centrifugal barrier helping to contain the 
odd proton in 125Pm is unusually low, due to the proton having a lower l 
value than expected, which could cause the decay to occur too quickly for 
observation. This could be the case if the proton occupied the 1/2[420] 
Nilsson level (based on the d 512  spherical sub-shell), allowing s-wave proton 
emission, although this state is not expected to be close to the Fermi sur-
face at the expected deformation, therefore this explanation seems unlikely. 
Of course, a final possibility is that 125Pm does exhibit proton radioactivity 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 108 
but the production cross-section for this particular (p6n) fusion-evaporation 
reaction is below '-'.'200pb. Experimental measurements of production cross-
sections of proton emitters have shown that 'nuclides produced via a (p5n) 
evaporation channel (e.g. 140Ho, 130Eu and '64b) have cross sections in the 
range '10-15nb, while (p4n) evaporation residues (e.g. 145Tm, 141 Eu, 131 E 
and "'La) exhibit cross-sections over a wide range from '-'lOOnb to ri500nb. 
Given the measured (p6n) production cross-section for ' 35Tb of '--'1.5nb, it 
is not unreasonable that the (p6n) cross-section for 125 Pm could be a factor 
of 7-8 lower, given the factor of 5 variation in the (p4n) cross-sections. To 
settle the issue, the experiment should be repeated with a similarly high 
beam current (20-25pnA) and over a longer period, for example 200 hours, 
which would probe production cross-sections of lOOpb or lower. 
Again, the Germanium detector mounted behind the DSSD provided 
some comfort that ATLAS was producing a 40  Ca (rather than 40Ar) beam. 
The top half of Figure 4.12 shows the gamma decay spectrum during the 
A=125 run, with tentative assignments for gamma lines. Lines consistent 
with the e3-decay of the nuclides 125 Ce, 125 La, 125Ba, 125  Cs and 125 X can be 
identified, along with the A=124 nuclides 1 24 B and 124 Cs, which are pro-
duced by /3-delayed proton emission from 125Ce. There is no clear evidence 
for gammas produced by the 0-decay of 115  Pr [Pau98], which suggests that 
125 C is being produced via the (ci2pn) evaporation channel from the 132 Sm* 
compound nucleus produced by the 40Ca beam, rather than the much lower 
cross-section (a3n) residues from a 132Nd*  compound nucleus produced by 
an 40Ar beam. 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 109 
4.5 Comparison with mass model predictions 
The complete set of data on ground-state proton decay energies in the range 
51<Z<83 (for odd Z) was used to test the accuracy of the one-proton sep-
aration energy predictions of the two mass models described in section 2.5. 
It should be noted that nuclides for which proton emission has been ob-
served from an isomer but not the ground state (i.e. 164mfr  and 185mBi)  have 
been included in the comparison, assuming that the excitation energy of the 
isomer is small relative to the proton separation energy of the nucleus. Sim-
ilarly, 135Tb has been included in the comparison, although it has not yet 
been established whether the proton decay proceeds from the ground state 
or a possible isomer, as discussed in section 4.2. The proton emitters 121  Pr 
and 144Tm, which were discovered after the experiments discussed in this 
chapter took place (see Chapter 5 for further information), are also included 
in the comparison. 
The comparison is extended by the inclusion of known proton sepa-
ration energies of other proton-unbound nuclides (which are not sufficiently 
unbound to exhibit proton radioactivity). These values were taken from 
the most recent Atomic Mass Evaluation (AME) [Aud03], and only include 
those nuclides with masses derived from experimental reaction/decay mea-
surements (rather than systematic trends). It should be noted that most 
of these AME S values were derived using experimental data on c de-
cays measured by Edinburgh group collaborations using the mass separator-
DSSD technique that has proved so fruitful in the study of proton decay (see 
{Pag96], [Dav97] and [Po199] for examples). 
Only one of the proton separation energy values used in this compari- 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 110 
son, that of 18913i, has been surveyed by direct mass measurement techniques 
(as opposed to indirect methods such as the study of decays). This was 
achieved by Schottky mass spectrometry at the Experimental Storage Ring 
at GSI [Nov02, Lit05], and yielded a result of S=-370(110)keV, in agree-
ment with the AME value of -470(50)keV which was derived from indirect 
methods. This mass measurement technique is currently limited to the study 
of nuclides with half-lives on the order of several hundreds of milliseconds or 
longer, and is therefore of limited use in further exploring the mass surface 
in this region of odd-Z proton-unbound nuclei. However, the ISOLTRAP 
Penning trap facility at CERN-ISOLDE has been shown to provide accu-
rate mass measurements for nuclides with half-lives as short as "-70ms, so 
this alternative method may provide more useful mass data in this region in 
the future (see [BecOO] and [Lun03] for more information on this technique). 
Figures 4.16 and 4.17 show the predictions of the Mller-Nix and Liran-
Zeldes models compared to the experimentally-derived S, values. 
It was found that the Liran-Zeldes model produces better overall Q 
predictions than the model of Mller et al for this extremely neutron-deficient 
region, with mean and RMS deviations of -46keV and 211keV respectively, 
compared to -230keV and 430keV respectively for the latter model. It was 
observed that the Liran-Zeldes model Q predictions tend to be too high 
for the lighter (Z<69) proton emitters, thus underbinding them, while the 
heavier examples are overbound (with the exception of the Thallium and 
Bismuth isotopes). The Mller-Nix model was seen to generally overbind 
the nuclides over the whole mass region considered (again, with the notable 
exception of the Bismuth isotopes), hence the larger mean deviation. To 
put these deviation values in perspective, it is useful to note that the RMS 
Chapter 4 . Results and Discussion 
S P  (keV) 
.. 	0 0) 0) .  
o 0 	C) 0 0 CD 0 0 0 
o o o o 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
I. 	1,1.1.1 	1.1.1 
- 	 - 
0 	 C) S 
. 	 ) 
 :-__ 
. , 	  
3 	 3. .-------- 
- a). 	 . 
o 	 *- 
S 0 -a 
Figure 4.16: Proton separation energy predictions of the Mller-Nix mass model 
compared to experimentally-measured proton decay Q-values (black circles) and 
proton separation energies derived from indirect experimental mass measurements 
(red circles, with error bars shown where they exceed the size of the data point). 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 
SP  (keV) 
- 	.- .- - 
o O 0) . 	IQC 0) 0) .  
0000000000 
00000000000 
. 	I 	 	I 	 	I 	 	I 	 	I 	 	I 	 	I 	 	I 	 	I 	 	I 
 	 S 
C) CD 
0 	  
- 	m 	 
U) 	.i.. 
3 	 S 
CD 0  - 
S-I.--- 
C) 	 CD 
..- 	- 	 ;o  
Figure 4.17: Proton separation energy predictions of the Liran-Zeldes mass 
model compared to experimentally-measured proton decay Q-values (black circles) 
and proton separation energies derived from indirect experimental mass measure-
ments (red circles, with error bars shown where they exceed the size of the data 
point). 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 113 
deviations of these two models when compared to the 2135 nuclei of an in-
terim atomic mass compilation were found to be 586keV for Liran-Zeldes 
and 676keV for Mller-Nix [Lun03], which demonstrates that both models 
are relatively successful in this particular region. 
The Liran-Zeldes model is significantly older than the macroscopic-
microscopic model, although it does contain 178 independent parameters 
which are determined by least-squares fitting from the data of 1818 nu-
clides, while the Mller-Nix model contains 38 parameters, only 16 of which 
are evaluated by least-squares fitting to measured mass data of 1654 nu-
clides. Thus it is not surprising that the model with the largest parameter 
space and the largest data set fares best, although it is remarkable that 
either model comes so close to calculating the masses of such exotic nu-
clei, bearing in mind that these predictions are extrapolated many neutrons 
further from stability than the nuclides used in the model data sets. The 
accuracy of the Liran-Zeldes predictions for the Bismuth isotopes 185189 13i 
is particularly notable, as can be seen in Figure 4.17, with an RMS deviation 
of only 55keV (compared to 205keV for the nuclides in the range 71<Z<81), 
which would probably be reduced even further if the excitation energy of 
the isomeric proton emitter 115mBj  were known and subtracted. The success 
of the Bismuth predictions may be due to the proximity of the Z=82 shell 
closure; the predictions for the Lutetium isotopes have a relatively low RMS 
deviation of 129keV, which may be due to the presence of the N=82 shell 
closure. It has also been demonstrated that the Liran-Zeldes predictions for 
Qa in the region below the Z=82 shell closure are far superior to those of 
the Mller-Nix model [Sew99]. 
Although the predictions of the Mller-Nix model in terms of absolute 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 114 
Table 4.1: Comparison of spin-parity predictions of the Mller-Nix model for de-
formed lanthanide proton emitters with values derived from the theoretical analysis 
of the experimentally-measured half-lives (assuming deformations close to those 
predicted by Mller-Nix). It should be noted that the spin-parity assignment for 
131 has been confirm' onfirmed independently by analysis of the fine structure branching 
ratio [Son991. 
Nucleus Mller-Nix Q 	from t 112  
"7La 3/2k 3/2k or 3/2 
121 Pr 3/2-  3/2k or 3/2 
131 Eu 3/2k 3/2k 
135 T 3/2k 7/2 
141 Ho 7/2-  7/2 
values may be inferior, it can be seen to predict the onset of proton emission 
at the correct mass number for many isotopes by a large sudden increase 
in Q; for example, predicted Q increases by 0.7MeV between 132 E and 
131 Eu, by 0.6MeV between 1 36 T and 135Tb, and by 0.8MeV between 112  Ho 
and "Ho. The Liran-Zeldes model Qp tends to increase more smoothly, 
with increments of 0.45MeV for the onset of proton emission in Eu, Tb and 
Ho. It can be seen from the figures that the effect of odd-even staggering is 
much more pronounced in the Mller-Nix predictions than their Liran-Zeldes 
counterparts, with the exception of Bismuth. This staggering includes the 
accurate prediction that the Qp  values of the odd-odd proton emitters 112 Cs 
and 140110  are less than their odd-even neighbours 113  Cs and 141  Ho, which 
is not the case in the Liran-Zeldes predictions. The Mller-Nix model also 
provides predictions regarding 0 decay (Qfi and half-life) and the spin and 
parity of the odd particle (as shown in Table 4.1), which were found to be 
accurate for 131 Eu and 141 Ho, but not 135Tb (although the density of Nilsson 
levels in this region is likely to be finer than the precision of the model, 
Chapter 4. Results and Discussion 	 115 
so this one failure is certainly not significant). The Mller-Nix model also 
predicts the ground-state deformation of the nucleus, and has been shown 
to be in excellent agreement with experimentally-derived shape information 
in this region. The presence of prolate deformation in the neutron-deficient 
lanthanide region has been demonstrated directly by the observation of rota-
tional bands in proton emitters (e.g. in ''Ho [SewOla]), as well as indirectly 
by the reduced energy of the first excited state of even-even proton-decay 
daughter nuclei which allows fine structure branching (e.g. in 131 Eu [Son99]). 
Deformation is also implied by the failure of spherical proton decay mod-
els to reproduce the measured decay rates, and is also indicated by other 
experimental methods (e.g. the study of 6-delayed proton emission [Xu05]). 
Chapter 5 
Conclusions 
5.1 Summary 
Searches for new examples of proton radioactivity from highly deformed lan-
thanide nuclei were conducted at the FMA at Argonne National Laboratory 
in 2001 and 2002, utilising a new purpose-built double-sided silicon strip 
detector (DSSD) system. 
The properties of the detector (in terms of energy resolution and strip 
multiplicity) were found to be acceptable for such studies during a brief 
commissioning run, and shortly after this the new proton emitter 135Tb 
was observed with a proton energy of 1.18MeV. This highly exotic nuclide 
was produced using heavy ion fusion-evaporation reactions via the (p6n) 
evaporation channel, the first such use of this extremely low cross-section 
channel, which illustrates the improved sensitivity of the FMA-DSSD tech-
nique (made possible by an increase in available beam current and the new 
detector). The experimental proton decay rate was compared to calculations 
Chapter 5. Conclusions 	 117 
made by C.N. Davids, using the coupled channels method as described in 
[EsbOO], and was found to be consistent with the large prolate deformation 
predicted for this isotope (due to its remoteness from closed shells for both 
protons and neutrons), specifically a deformation of 32 >0.3, with the odd 
proton occuping a 7/2 -  Nilsson state. It is not clear whether this proton-
decaying state is the ground state of '35Tb, or a low-lying isomeric state. It 
is also possible that this proton emitter exhibits fine structure, as is the case 
with its near-neighbours 131 Eu and 141 Ho, although another experiment with 
improved statistics is required to confirm this hypothesis. Figure 5.1 com-
pares the decays of these three highly-deformed lanthanide odd-even proton 
emitters. 
Experimental searches for proton emission from the nuclides 125,126  Pm 
were carried out the following year, 2002. The production reactions utilised 
the (p6n) and (p5n) evaporation channels respectively, and further upgrades 
to the experimental system (i.e. a split anode and new PPAC) allowed the 
experiments to be run with twice the beam current of the '35Tb experiment, 
and thus to be more sensitive in terms of probing low production cross-
sections. No evidence was found for proton radioactivity from either of these 
nuclides: this was not entirely surprising in the case of 126  Pm, as mass models 
predict that the proton separation energy for this isotope is unlikely to be 
sufficiently large for proton emission to compete effectively with /3-decay. 
The non-observation of the proton decay of 125Pm can be explained in four 
ways. Firstly, the proton separation energy is too large (and thus the decay 
process too fast) for proton emission to be observable in this experimental 
method. Secondly, the proton separation energy may still be too low for 
proton emission to compete with /3-decay, despite this nuclide being further 
Chapter 5. Conclusions 
131 E 
T112  2Oms 
130 s 
__________________ 
Isomer 
7/2 	 1 p =o/2  
Ground state 	 T112  - 8s 
-4ms 	 N;200keV 
135 1_tn 
3/2 k  
1p=3 	 2 
T1  Ims 	 I15keV? 
134 Gd 
Figure 5.1: Proton decay schemes of 131Eu, 141  Ho and 135 
Chapter 5. Conclusions 	 119 
from stability (and thus probably having a larger proton separation energy) 
than 116  Pm. Thirdly, the odd proton has a lower than expeted angular 
momentum which reduces the height of the centrifugal barrier and allows 
the decay to proceed too quickly for observation. Finally, "'Pm may in fact 
decay by proton emission on an observable timescale, but the production 
cross-section may be too low for the decay to have been observed in the 
experiment. It would be unusual if Prometheum had no observable proton-
emitting isotopes at all, as at least one has been found for every odd-Z 
element in the range 51<Z<83 (see next section), so it is important that the 
search for proton emission from "'Pm is repeated with improved statistics in 
order to settle this important question. It is possible that, with yet further 
improvements in the sensitivity of the system, the even more exotic 124  Pm 
could be investigated in the future. 
A comparison of experimentally determined proton separation energies 
and those predicted by mass models (specifically those models of Mller et 
al [Mol95, Mo197] and Liran & Zeldes [Lir76]) was carried out. It was found 
that the older Liran-Zeldes model produces results closer to experimental S 
values than the newer model of Mller et al (with RMS deviations of 216keV 
and 438keV respectively), although it should be noted that the former model 
contains a much larger parameter space than the latter (178 parameters in 
the former, 38 in the latter). 
5.2 Future progress 
After the experiments described in this thesis were performed, a major de- 
velopment in the field of proton emission from highly deformed nuclei was 
Chapter 5. Conclusions 	 120 
the discovery of the proton radioactivity of 12  'Pr [Rob05a], again utilising 
the FMA-DSSD system at Argonne. This nuclide was again produced via a 
(p6n) evaporation reaction, with a production cross-section comparable to 
that probed in the search for 125Pm. The proton-decaying state was identi-
fied as either 3/2k or 3/2 -  by comparison of experimental and theoretical 
half-lives, and the measured half-life of '-'lOms was shown to be far too fast 
to agree with the postulated observation of "'Pr proton radioactivity by the 
Dubna group in the 1970s. This proton emitter was included in the mass 
model comparison in the previous chapter, with Qp  of 0.9MeV. The discov-
ery of this proton emitter leaves Prometheum as the only element in the 
range 51<Z<83 which does not have a single observable proton-emitting 
isotope, which emphasises the importance of further investigation of the 
neutron-deficient Pm isotopes. Another proton emitter, ' 44Tm, has also 
been recently discovered by the Oak Ridge group [Grz05] via a (p5n) evapo-
ration reaction with production cross-section of '-.'10nb (which is consistent 
with other examples of this evaporation channel). Two proton lines were 
reported, at energies of 1.70MeV and 1.43MeV, although the interpretation 
of these lines in terms of the structure of the nucleus is complicated by its 
odd-odd nature, as is the case with ' 46Tm. For the purposes of the 'mass 
model comparison in the previous chapter, it was assumed that Q for 1 44 T 
is 1.7MeV. 
The programme of upgrades to the FMA-DSSD detection technique 
includes; an upgraded ion source producing higher beam currents, a split 
anode in the first electric dipole of the FMA which drastically reduces the 
number of scattered beam particles reaching the focal plane, a new position-
sensitive focal plane detector (the PPAC) with a much higher rate limit, 
Chapter 5. Conclusions 	 121 
the new large area (and fine granularity) DSSD which is large enough to 
cover the full FMA image and was used for the first time in the experiments 
described in this thesis, and the delay-line amplifiers which now instrument 
the DSSD and allow accurate measurement of decay energies within 1s 
of an implantation. These improvements allow the experimenter to search 
for proton decay candidates with extremely low production cross-sections 
(<500 picobarns with '-.50 hours of beam time) and to detect decays with 
half-lives on the order of a few microseconds. For example, this could allow 
the detection of proton radioactivity from more exotic nuclides in the region 
of predicted high deformation such as ' 29Eu and "6  La, which may possi-
bly have Q, values which lead to proton decays on an observable timescale 
(predicted r'-1.8MeV and '--.0.7-1.3MeV respectively), produced by (p6n) and 
(p5n) evaporation channels respectively. A cross-section limit of '--.5nb has 
already been placed on the decay of "'La in a previous experiment at the 
FMA [Mah02a], which occurred prior to the installation of the delay-line 
amplifiers and thus was not sensitive to decays on the order of a few mi-
croseconds. It is possible that proton decay candidates produced via (p7n) 
evaporation channels could be probed in the future: for example, 1 34 T is 
predicted to have a Qp  value only slightly larger than 135  T (1.28MeV com-
pared to 1.15MeV according to the Mller-Nix model), and so the decay 
could be slow enough to be detected if the nucleus could be produced in 
sufficient quantities. It is also possible that the improved experimental set-
up could be used to search for ground-state proton decay candidates below 
Z=50, although it is likely that if proton emitters exist in this region then 
they should have already been identified in fragmentation reactions which 
have mapped the proton drip-line. 
Chapter 5. Conclusions 	 122 
A repetition of the 135Tb experiment with higher statistics would be 
very beneficial in terms of confirming or. ruling out the presence of fine 
structure in the proton decay of this nucleus. Fine structure has already 
been observed in the neighbouring proton emitters 131 Eu and 141  Ho, and 
its presence in the decay of 135 T would provide another way of identifying 
the spin and parity of the decaying state (in addition to the comparison of 
experimental and theoretical half-lives), as well as measuring the energy of 
the first excited state in 134Gd. 
The main focus of proton radioactivity studies at the FMA in re-
cent years has been the investigation of odd-odd nuclei to study the effect 
of the residual interaction between the odd proton and the odd neutron. 
Specifically, 146Tm [Rob05b] and ' 50Lu [Rob03] have been reinvestigated 
with much improved statistics compared to previous experiments. Proton 
emission from odd-odd nuclei is influenced by the level schemes of both par-
ent and daughter, which may be complex due to the coupling of the odd 
proton and neutron, and so highly accurate measurements of the proton en-
ergy and particularly the decay half-life are essential to perform meaningful 
comparisons with theory and so piece together the decay schemes. 
After the experiments described in this thesis, the Gammasphere de-
tector was installed around the target chamber at the FMA. This allows the 
detection of gamma-rays from the fusion-evaporation recoils shortly after 
they are created, which can then be 'tagged' by correlating them with mea-
sured particle decay events when the recoils reach the DSSD (the so-called 
recoil-decay tagging, or RDT, method). This technique has previously been 
used to identify rotational bands in the gamma-ray spectra of 141 Ho [SewOla] 
and ' 31 Eu [SewOib], which acts as independent and direct confirmation of 
Chapter 5. Conclusions 	 123 
the deformation of these nuclei (in addition to the comparison of experimen-
tal and theoretical half-lives). The RDT technique has since been used to 
identify rotational bands in 1 45 T and 146  T [Sew05]. 
The search for proton emitters heavier than 1 85 B could be facilitated 
by the use of gas-filled separators such as RITU, or by the use of fragmen-
tation reactions using a 238U beam [Liu04]. Fragmentation reactions were 
recently used to discover the second example of two-proton emission, 54  Z 
[B1a05], at the GANIL facility, which now allows meaningful comparisons 
with theory for this highly exotic decay mode. A single candidate event for 
the two-proton decay of 48  N has also been recently reported [Dos05]. 
The other important recent development in the field of proton radioac-
tivity was the discovery of direct proton emission from a 21+  isomer in 94  A 
(which is proton-bound in its ground state) at the GSI on-line mass sepa-
rator [Muk05]. There is preliminary evidence that this isomer also exhibits 
two-proton decay, as well as /3-delayed proton and two-proton emission, mak-
ing it a truly unique state. This discovery also represents only the second 
example of one-proton emission below Z=50, the other being the very first 
proton emitter to be discovered, 13,  Co, 35 years previously. 
In conclusion, the study of proton radioactivity in highly-deformed 
neutron-deficient nuclei provides unique information on nuclear structure 
beyond the proton drip-line, demonstrates the effect of deformation on the 
tunneling process, inspires progress in theoretical proton decay models, and 
also provides data for comparison with (and the future improvement of) 
mass models. The investigation of proton emission from nuclei remains a 
vital and interesting branch of nuclear physics. 
Bibliography 
[Abe97] S. Aberg, P. B. Semmes and W. Nazarewicz, Phys. Rev. C 56, 1762 
(1997). 
[Aro86] J. Aron et al, Rev. Sd. Inst. 57(5), 737 (1986). 
[Aud03] G. Audi, A. H. Wapstra and C. Thibault, Nuci. Phys. A 729, 337 (2003). 
[Bat98] J. C. Batchelder et al, Phys. Rev. C 57, R1042 (1998). 
[Bec69] F. D. Becchetti, Jr. and G. W. Greenlees, Phys. Rev. 182, 1190 (1969). 
[BecOO] D. Beck et al, Eur. Phys. J. A 8, 307 (2000). 
[Ben85] T. Bengtsson and I. Ragnarsson, Nuci. Phys. A 436, 14 (1985). 
[B1a05] B. Blank et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 232501 (2005). 
[B1u96] D. J. Blumenthal, http://www.phys.anl.gov/fma/fmarecoiLform.html  
(1996). 
[Boh69] A. Bohr and B. R. Mottelson, Nuclear Structure, Vol. 1, McGraw-Hill 
(1969). 
[Bo193] L. M. Bollinger et al, Nuci. Instr. Methods A 328, 221 (1993). 
[Bug85] V. P. Bugrov.et al, Soy. J. Nucl. Phys. 41, 717 (1985). 
[Bug89] V. P. Bugrov and S. G. Kadmensky, Soy. J. Nucl. Phys. 49, 967 (1989). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Cer70] J. Cerny et al, Phys. Lett. B 33, 284 (1970). 
[Dav89] C. N. Davids and J. D. Larson, Nuci. Instr. Methods B 40/41, 1224 
(1989). 
[Dav92] C. N. Davids et al, Nuci. Instr. Methods B 70, 358 (1992). 
[Dav94] C. N. Davids, Nuci. Instr. Methods A 345(3), 528 (1994). 
[Dav96] C. N. Davids et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 592 (1996). 
[Dav97] C. N. Davids et al, Phys. Rev. C 55, 2255 (1997). 
[Dav98] C. N. Davids et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1849 (1998). 
[DavOOa] C. N. Davids and H. Esbensen, Phys. Rev. C 61, 054302 (2000). 
[DavOOb] C. N. Davids, Proc. 1st mt. Symposium on Proton-Emitting Nuclei, ed. 
J. C. Batchelder, American Institute of Physics, 200 (2000). 
[Dav02] C. N. Davids, Argonne Annual Report 2002, 104 (2002). 
[Dav04] C. N. Davids et. al., Phys. Rev. C 69, 011302(R) (2004). 
[DosOS] C. Dossat et al, Phys. Rev. C 72, 054315 (2005). 
[EsbOO] H. Esbensen and C. N. Davids, Phys. Rev. C 63, 014315 (2000). 
[Fae84] T. Faestermann et al, Phys. Lett. B 137, 23 (1984). 
[Fes92] H. Fesbach, Theoretical Nuclear Physics: Nuclear Reactions, John Wiley 
and Sons Inc., New York (1992). 
[Fir95] R. B. Firestone, Table of Isotopes 8th edition, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 
New York (1995). 
[Gam28] G. Z. Gamow, Phys. 51, 204 (1928). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Gi187} A. Gillitzer et al, Zeitschrift fr Physik A 326, 107 (1987). 
[Gin03} T. N. Ginter et al, Phys. Rev. C 68, 034330 (2003). 
[Gio02] J. Giovinzzo et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89 102501 (2002). 
[Gro62] L. Grodzins, Phys. Lett. 2, 88 (1962). 
[Grz05] R. Grzywacz et al, Eur. Phys. J. A 25, 145 (2005). 
[Hax49] O.Haxel, J. H. D. Jensen and H. E. Suess, Phys. Rev 75, 1766 (1949). 
[Hof8l] S. Hofmann et al, Zeitschrift fr Physik A 299, 281 (1981). 
[Hof82a] S. Hofmann et al, Zeitschrift fr Physik A 305, 111 (1982). 
[Hof82b} S. Hofmann et al, GSI Sci. Rep. 1981 GSI 81-1, 241 (1982). 
[Hof89] S. Hofmann, in Particle Emission from Nuclei Vol. 2, eds. D. N. Poenaru 
and M. S. Ivascu, CRC Press Inc., Florida (1989). 
[Hua76] K. N. Huang and H. Mark, At. Data Nuci. Data Tables 18, 243 (1976). 
[Jac70] K. P. Jackson et al, Phys. Lett. B 33, 281 (1970). 
[Kan05} R. Kanungo et al, Eur. Phys. J. A 25, 327 (2005). 
[Kar03] M. Karny et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 012502 (2003). 
[KetOl] H. Kettunen et al, Acta Phys. Pol. B 32, 989 (2001). 
[K1e82] 0. Klepper et al, Zeitschrift fr Physik A 305, 125 (1982). 
[Lar831 P. 0. Larsson et al, Zeitschrift fr Physik A, 314, 9 (1983). 
[Len86] W. N. Lennard et. al., Nucl. Instr. Methods A 248, 454 (1986). 
[Lir76] S. Liran and N. Zeldes, At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 17, 431 (1976). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Lit05J Yu. A. Litvinov et al, Nuci. Phys. A 756, 3 (2005). 
[Liu04] Z. Liu et al, Nuci. Instr. Methods A 543, 591 (2004). 
[Liu05] Z. Liu et al, Phys. Rev. C 72, 047301 (2005). 
[Liv93a] K. Livingston et al, Phys. Rev. C 48, 3113, (1993). 
[Liv93b] K. Livingston et al, Phys. Lett. B 312, 46, (1993). 
[Liv96] K. Livingston et al, Nuci. Instr. Methods A 370, 445, (1996). 
[Lun03] D. Lunney, J. M. Pearson and C. Thibault, Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 1021 
(2003). 
[Mag98] E. Maglione, L. S. Ferreira and R. J. Liotta, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 538 
(1998). 
[Mah02a] H. Mahmud, PhD Thesis, University of Edinburgh (2002). 
[Mah02b] H. Mahmud et al, Eur. Phys. J. A 15, 85 (2002). 
[May49] M. G. Mayer, Phys. Rev 75, 1969 (1949). 
[Mey75] S. L. Meyer, Data Analysis for Scientists and Engineers, John Wiley and 
Sons Inc., New York (1975). 
[Moe02] D. P. Moehs et al, Rev. Sci. Inst. 73(2), 576 (2002). 
[Mo195] P. Mller et al, At. Data Nuci. Data Tables 59, 185 (1995). 
[Mol97] P. Mller, J. R. Nix and K.-L. Kratz, At. Data Nuci. Data Tables 66, 
131 (1997). 
[Muk05] I. Mukha etal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 022501 (2005). 
[Mun79] G. Mnzenberg et al, Nucl. Instr. Methods 161, 65 (1979). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Mye77] W. D. Myers, Droplet Model of the Atomic Nucleus, Plenum, New York 
(1977). 
[Ni155] S. G. Nilsson, Dan. Mat.-Fys. Medd 29, 16 (1955). 
[Nit83] J. M. Nitschke, M. D. Cable and W. D. Zeitz, Zeitschrift fr Physik A 
312, 265 (1983). 
[Nov02] Y. N. Novikov et al, Nuci. Phys. A 697, 92 (2002). 
[Pag92] R. D. Page et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 1287 (1992). 
[Pag94] R. D. Page et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 1798 (1994). 
[Pag96] R. D. Page et al, Phys. Rev. C 53, 660 (1996). 
[Pau95] E. S. Paul et al, Phys. Rev. C 51, 78 (1995). 
[Pau98] E. S. Paul et al, Phys. Rev. C 58, 801 (1998). 
[PenOl] T. Pennington et al, Argonne Annual Report 2001, 96 (2001). 
[Pfu02] M. Pfutzner et al, Eur. Phys. J. A 14, 279 (2002). 
[Poe89] Particle Emission from Nuclei, Vol. 3, eds. D. N. Poenaru and M. S. 
Ivascu, CRC Press Inc., Florida (1989). 
[Po199] G. L. Poli et al, Phys. Rev. C 59, R2979 (1999). 
[Pra73] H. C. Pradhan, Y. Nogami and J. Law, Nuci. Phys. A 201, 357 (1973). 
[Rai50] J. Rainwater, Phys. Rev. 79, 432 (1950). 
[Rei85] W. Reisdorf, Zeitschrift fr Physik A 444, 154 (1985). 
[Rob03] A. P. Robinson et al, Phys. Rev. C 68, 054301 (2003). 
[RobOSaJ A. P. Robinson et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 032502 (2005). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Rob05b] A. P. Robinson, et al, Eur. Phys. J. A 25, 155 (2005). 
[Ryk99] K. Rykaczewski et al, Phys. Rev. C 60, 011301 (1999). 
[Se192a] P. J. Sellin et al, Nuci. Instr. Methods A 311, 217 (1992). 
[Se192b] P. J Sellin, PhD Thesis, University of Edinburgh (1992). 
[Se193] P. J. Sellin et al, Phys. Rev. C 47, 1933 (1993). 
[Sew97] D. Seweryniak et al, Phys. Rev. C 55, R2137 (1997). 
[Sew99] D. Seweryniak et al, Phys. Rev. C 60, 031304 (1999). 
[SewOla] D. Seweryniak et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1458 (2001). 
[SewOib] D. Seweryniak et al, Nuci. Phys. A 682, 247c (2001). 
[Sew03] D. Seweryniak et al, Acta Phys. Pol. B 34, 2419 (2003). 
[SewOS] D. Seweryniak et al, Eur. Phys. J. A 25, 159 (2005). 
[She6l] R. K. Sheline, T. Sikkeland and R. N. Chanda, Phys. Rev. Lett. 7, 446 
(1961). 
[She69] H. Sherif, Nuci. Phys. A 131, 532 (1969). 
[Son99] A. A. Sonzogni et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1116 (1999). 
[SorOl] F. Soramel et al, Phys. Rev. C 63, R031304 (2001). 
[Sor03] F. Soramel et al, Proc. 2nd mt. Symposium on Proton-Emitting Nuclei, 
eds. E. Maglione and F. Soramel, American Institute of Physics (2003). 
[Str67] V. M. Strutinsky, Nuci. 'Phys. A 95, 420 (1967). 
[Str68] V. M. Strutinsky, Nuci. Phys. A 122, 1 (1968). 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[Tan85] I. Tanihata et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2676 (1985). 
[Tig94] R. J. Tighe et al, Phys. Rev. C 49, R2871 (1994). 
[Woo54} R. D. Woods and D. S. Saxon, Phys. Rev. 95, 577 (1954). 
[Woo89] P. J. Woods et al, Nuci. Instr. Methods A 276, 196 (1989). 
[Woo97] P. J. Woods and C. N. Davids, Annu. Rev. Nuci. Part. Sci. 47, 541 
(1997). 
[Woo04] P. J. Woods et al, Phys. Rev. C 69, 051302 (2004). 
[Yor871 J. Yorkston et al, Nuci. Instr. Methods A 262, 353 (1987). 
[Xu05] S. W. Xu et al, Phys. Rev. C 71, 054318 (2005). 
