Recharacterising Face Recognition Deficits in Developmental Prosopagnosia 
Ebony Murray 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements of Bournemouth University for 
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Submitted October 2020 
Copyright Statement 
This copy of the thesis has been supplied on condition that anyone who consults it is understood 
to recognise that its copyright rests with its author and due acknowledgement must always be 
made of the use of any material contained in, or derived from, this thesis. 
Abstract 
Developmental prosopagnosia (DP) is a neurodevelopmental condition characterised by a 
relatively selective deficit in face recognition. Current approaches to diagnose the condition 
vary within the field, making comparisons across studies difficult. Furthermore, theoretical 
inferences rely on accurate identification of people with DP and, combined with the fact that 
some individuals also report moderate-to-severe psychosocial consequences of the condition, 
the methods used to diagnose DP have been under increasing scrutiny. Thus, the present thesis 
aimed to address contemporary issues relating to the diagnosis of DP. Specifically, the thesis 
begins by investigating the utility of self-report, and presents a list of empirically-driven 
hallmark symptoms of the condition which can aid the identification of DP in children and 
adults, both in oneself and in others. The thesis then explores objective measures of face 
processing; Chapter Four presents, for the first known time, the test-retest reliability for the 
Cambridge Face Memory Test (CFMT)  the leading test of unfamiliar face recognition. 
Interestingly, this value falls just short of accepted psychometric protocols, and 
recommendations for using two separate tests of the same subprocess of face processing are 
suggested. With this in mind, Chapter Five supported the diagnostic utility of repeat assessment 
for face perception. We present a new test of face matching and, in combination with the 
original Benton Facial Recognition Test, advocate the use of identifying face perception 
deficits in DP by administering two separate tests. Finally, we come away from behavioural 
measures to consider more nuanced means of dissociating DP from other developmental 
conditions that are commonly associated with face recognition difficulties. For instance, many 
people with autistic spectrum conditions (ASCs) struggle with face recognition, and many DPs 
avoid social situations  an outward symptom that may be confused with ASCs. Given face 
recognition difficulties likely have different underpinnings in the two conditions, Chapter Six 
employs eye-tracking methods to differentially diagnose face recognition impairments in DP 
versus ASCs. Whilst sample size is low due to the interruption of data collection by COVID-
19, we find that those with ASC look more towards non-social stimuli than DP participants, 
particularly when the scene is more social and interactive. Those with DP look more towards 
extrafacial information, such as hair and bodies, than ASC participants. The thesis concludes 
with a summary of recommendations for the future diagnosis of DP. 
Thesis Structure 
The present thesis confirms to an integrated thesis format in which chapters (chapters 2 - 5) 
consists of articles which have been written in a style that is appropriate or publication in peer 
reviewed journals. Chapter 6 is not currently prepared as a manuscript. The initial and final 
chapters present and Introduction and Discussion of the field of research undertaken. The 
articles included in this thesis are at various stages of the publication and review process, and 
the status of each paper is summarised below. The main text in each chapter is presented as 
exact replications of the submitted manuscript and inevitably, there is some repetition as a 
consequence. 
Status of articles from this thesis  
Chapter 2 has been published as: Murray, E., Hills, P., Bennetts, R., & Bate, S. 
(2018). Identifying Hallmark Symptoms of Developmental Prosopagnosia for Non-Experts. 
Scientific Reports, 8(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-20089-7 
Chapter 3 has been published as: Murray, E., & Bate, S. (2019). Self-ratings of face 
recognition ability are influenced by gender but not prosopagnosia severity. Psychological 
Assessment, 31(6), 828-832. https://doi.org/10.1037/pas0000707 
Chapter 4 has been published as: Murray, E., & Bate, S. (2020). Diagnosing 
developmental prosopagnosia: repeat assessment using the Cambridge Face Memory Test. 
Royal Society Open Science, 7(9). https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.200884 
Chapter 5 has been submitted for publication as: Murray, E., Bennetts, R.J., Tree, J., 
& Bate, S. (2020). An Update of the Benton Facial Recognition Test. Manuscript submitted 
for publication: Behavior Research Methods. 
Contents 
1. Chapter 1: Introduction 
2. Chapter 2: Identifying Hallmark Symptoms of Developmental Prosopagnosia for 
Non-Experts 
3. Chapter 3: Self-Ratings of Face Recognition Ability are Influenced by Gender but not 
Prosopagnosia Severity 
4. Chapter 4: Diagnosing Developmental Prosopagnosia: Repeat Assessment using the 
Cambridge Face Memory Test 
5. Chapter 5: An Update of the Benton Facial Recognition Test 
6. Chapter 6: Diagnosing Developmental Prosopagnosia: Repeat Assessment using the 
Cambridge Face Memory Test 
7. Chapter 7: General Discussion 
7.1 Identifying Hallmark Symptoms of Developmental Prosopagnosia for Non-Experts  202 
7.2 Self-Ratings of Face Recognition Ability are Influenced by Gender but not 
7.3 Diagnosing Developmental Prosopagnosia: Repeat Assessment using the Cambridge 
7.5 Using Gaze Behaviour to Differentiate Between Developmental Prosopagnosia and 
List of Tables 
4.1  Correlation matrix for repeat administration of the original CFMT, the CFMT-Aus and 
4.2  Correlation matrix for each section of the original CFMT1 and the CFPT and famous 
4.3  Descriptive Statistics for the separate stages of the CFMT1, CFMT2 and CFMT-Aus, 
5.1  Descriptive data for the upright versions of the BFRT-c and BFRT-r for younger 
5.2  Normalised accuracy scores and task completion times for the 31 DP participants on the 
6.1  Scores on each of the background screening tests for the three groups of participants  . 172 
6.2  Dwell times for each of the significant interactions of Direction of Reading and Group, 
6.3  Dwell times for each of the interactions of Direction of Reading and Group, for the AOIs 
List of Figures 
2.1  The self-reported age at which DPs gain insight into their face recognition difficulties. 38 
5.2   Mean accuracy on the BFRT-r and BFRT-c for males and females separately, and the 
5.3 Mean task completion times on the BFRT-r and BFRT-c for males and females 
5.4  Mean task accuracy on the BFRT-c and BFRT-r for younger control participants, older 
5.5  Mean task completion times on the BFRT-c and BFRT-r for younger control participants, 
6.2  Illustration of the three-way interaction between Direction of Reader, AOI and Group, 
6.3 Illustration of the three-way interaction between Direction of Reader, AOI and Group, for 
Acknowledgments 
Without a shadow of a doubt, I begin with my first and biggest Thank You to Prof Sarah 
Bate. My supervisor since my second year of my BSc, I simply couldnt have done this without 
you. Thank you for your patience, guidance, knowledge, and support over the last eight or nine 
years. It has never been unappreciated, and it has been an absolute privilege to work with you 
and learn from you. I also thank Dr Rachel Bennetts who has only ever been supportive of me 
and my studies, and an unwitting victim of my silly questions To all of my collaborators and 
co-authors, for every single piece of advice and help along the way, it hasnt ever been taken 
for granted. Thank you Peter, Nicola, Rachel, Jeremy and Steph. To the BU PhD office family, 
thank you for always helping me, encouraging me, and just generally putting up with me  
 To Ryan, thank you for everything. The past few years have been a whirlwind of 
studying, new jobs, house moves, and loving and remembering our beautiful Goose. Its not 
been the easiest of times, and Im thankful for everything youve helped me achieve and get 
through. Big, big thank yous also to all of my friends. To the Hreod girls, Uni gals and dancing 
girls, all of whom I just cant seem to shake off after all these years, thank you for being you. 
To name a few, a special big thank you through my university years must go to Trice, Emma 
and Meghan. For the holidays and trips away, conversation and advice, unnecessary amounts 
of wine, and everything else that a girl needs in a friendship, I thank you all.  
 My family. Your everlasting support has never gone unknown or unappreciated. I am 
so thankful for you all. To Mum and Dad, whom I love and appreciate silly amounts, thank you 
for everything. I couldnt be writing this without you. To my brothers, grandparents, and Chris, 
thank you for all youve done over the years. Your advice, quick wit and silliness has been so 
very welcomed and valued. And, finally, with a heavy heart, to my wonderful stepmum, Tracy. 
It breaks my heart youre not here to see this and for me to thank you in person for all you did 
for me. You lit up every room, and we miss you every day.  
Authors Declaration 
I hereby declare that the work presented in this thesis has not been, and will not be, submitted 
in whole or in part to another University for the award of any other degree.  
Chapter One: Introduction 
Faces provide information about ones gender, age, ethnicity, emotional state, and perhaps 
most importantly, they identify the owner; the ability to recognise an individual just by looking 
at their face is crucial for human social interaction. Although it was once thought that 
everybody is an expert at recognising faces (e.g. Carey, 1992), it is now widely acknowledged 
that face recognition abilities vary within the typical population (e.g. Bate et al., 2010) with 
some individuals recognising faces at a level that is well above average (Russell et al., 2009) 
and others performing very poorly. These latter individuals may have a visuo-cognitive 
condition known as prosopagnosia  a disorder characterised by a relatively selective 
impairment in face recognition.  
Traditionally, prosopagnosia was believed to only be acquired in nature, following 
neurological injury or illness, typically affecting the occipitotemporal regions (e.g. Barton, 
2008). However, the turn of the century saw an increase in reports of developmental 
prosopagnosia (DP), an apparently parallel form of the condition which occurs without any 
neurological damage, socio-emotional dysfunction, or lower-level visual deficits 
(McConachie, 1976). Currently, DP is estimated to affect approximately 2  2.5% of the adult 
population (Bowles et al., 2009) and 1.2  4% of those in middle childhood (Bennetts et al., 
2016) (although note that, by definition, the lower end of a normal distribution would 
encompass 2.5% of the population and therefore, prevalence rates reflecting this may be a 
statistical artefact: Barton & Carrow, 2016), and recent investigations report that DP often runs 
in families, suggesting the condition has a genetic component (Duchaine et al., 2007; Johnen 
et al., 2014; Schmalzl et al., 2008), a finding that accords with the broader view that face 
recognition ability is a heritable trait (Shakeshaft & Plomin, 2015; Wilmer et al., 2010; Zhu et 
al., 2010).  
Initially, however, it was believed that DP was an extremely rare disorder with very 
few cases being reported. Yet, with rapid increases in the reports of DP, individuals with the 
condition have been used to make theoretical inferences about the development and functioning 
of the cognitive and neural architecture of the typical and impaired face recognition system 
(e.g. Duchaine & Nakayama, 2005; Dalrymple et al., 2017; Daini et al., 2014; Towler et al., 
2012). Given that these theoretical inferences rely on accurate identification of people with DP, 
and that some individuals also report moderate-to-severe psychosocial consequences of the 
condition (Adams et al., 2019; Dalrymple et al., 2014; Murray et al., 2018; Yardley et al., 2008) 
the methods used to diagnose DP have been under increasing scrutiny. Indeed, whilst 
identifying cases of acquired prosopagnosia is often straightforward as the individual is aware 
they have lost a skill that they once had, and there is often neurological evidence to support a 
diagnosis, identifying and diagnosing DP is not so simple. The condition is not listed as a 
psychiatric disorder in the DSM-V (American Psychological Association, 2013) and no formal 
diagnostic criteria currently exist.  
However, current approaches to diagnosis reflect and extend on the protocols used to 
examine face processing deficits in the acquired prosopagnosia literature, where tests of 
familiar/famous face recognition, unfamiliar face recognition, and face perception tests were 
administered. Using a combination of tasks which assess each of these three abilities, dominant 
recommendations suggest that DP is diagnosed when scores fall into the impaired range 
(typically at least two SDs from the control mean; although see DeGutis et al., 2012, 2014; 
Palermo et al., 2017; White et al., 2016 for using 1.7 SDs from the mean) on any two of these 
three tasks (Bate & Tree, 2017; Dalrymple & Palermo, 2015). This recommendation for 
repeated testing (i.e. not relying on a single score on a single test) reduces the chance that it 
happened by chance (Young et al., 1993, p. 945) and is vital for minimising false alarms.  
Critically though, there is some contention about the precise tasks that should be used 
to assess each of these sub-processes. Most researchers administer different combinations of 
self-report, a famous faces test, an unfamiliar face memory task and a measure of unfamiliar 
face perception. The leading tasks used to assess these subprocesses are discussed in detail 
below. In addition to inconsistencies in the specific tests used to diagnose DP across the field, 
the approach to diagnosis can also be contentious. Inviting individuals to the lab and 
administering full, thorough screening sessions can be costly and time-consuming. With much 
larger numbers of people self-referring to research teams in the belief that they are living with 
DP, there is a need to develop rapid, time- and cost- effective protocols. Similarly, these 
protocols are needed to meet the trend for online testing; since increased accessibility of the 
internet, online testing has increased in popularity. However, web-based research has also been 
found to have larger dropout rates than lab-based studies (Birnbaum, 2004). Those taking part 
in online research are free of any social pressure from the researcher or potential embarrassment 
or confrontation in explaining that they no longer with to take part; the participant simply clicks 
a button to quit the test early, or completes some subsets of the experiment but not all. This is 
highly important for identifying cases of DP because all test results need to be considered. 
Moreover, in lab-based research, the fact that one person may participate on multiple occasions 
has rarely been considered a problem. However, online testing increases the possibility of 
multiple submissions from a single person. Combined with the fact that leading tests of face 
recognition are readily available online, scores on tests may also not be accurate (for example, 
due to practice effects). 
In the following sections, the leading tasks of face processing which are utilised in the 
diagnosis of DP are discussed. Critical limitations of the existing tasks and approaches to 
diagnosis are highlighted. The thesis then presents five chapters, each of which tackle a 
different challenge in the current protocols for DP diagnosis. The overall thesis is then 
discussed, and suggestions for future research are offered. 
Familiar face recognition 
Assessments of familiar face memory are an obvious choice of test due to their ability to reflect 
the hallmark symptom of DP: a deficit in recognising familiar faces. Whilst assessing familiar 
face recognition abilities in children often adopts a test created using personally familiar faces 
(e.g. Bennetts et al., 2018; Brunsdon et al., 2006; Wilson et al., 2010), these tests are seldom 
used in adults; it is challenging and time-consuming to acquire a large number of images of 
personally familiar faces, and is difficult to control for the level of familiarity for each face 
(e.g., whether a target is someone that is seen every day, compared to someone seen only once 
a month). Moreover, it is difficult to obtain normative data for personally familiar face tests, 
and thus, identifying an atypical score is challenging. 
In light of these difficulties, personally familiar faces are often dismissed and replaced 
with a famous faces test. Images of famous people are plentiful on the internet and easy to 
access, meaning that a large stimuli set can be acquired quickly. These stimuli can then be used 
to create a single famous faces test, suitable for an entire sample of participants and not just a 
single person. However, famous faces tests do not overcome the issue of degree of familiarity, 
stemming from the amount of contact that person has had with each famous person, in addition 
to substantial age and nationality effects. Furthermore, most individuals with DP can identify 
at least some highly familiar faces (e.g. Bate et al., 2019). Finally, as online testing increases 
in popularity, famous face tests are more difficult to administer and score virtually, particularly 
on a largescale basis. 
Self Report 
Most researchers agree that anecdotal evidence of everyday difficulties with face recognition 
is required to support a DP diagnosis (Corrow et al., 2016; Grter et al., 2009). Existing reports 
have mostly relied upon the individual to describe incidents of everyday failures of face 
recognition (e.g. Bennetts et al., 2015; Corrow et al., 2016), although some researchers have 
developed more formal questionnaires or structured interviews for this purpose (e.g. Shah et 
al., 2015; Kennerknecht et al., 2008; although note, that the items which make up these 
questionnaires and interviews are not empirically-driven, but rather, devised by the 
researchers). 
However, a more fundamental identification of the everyday behavioural traits that are 
associated with DP is an important issue, irrespective of any debates surrounding the formal 
diagnosis of the condition. Indeed, the objective diagnosis of DP typically requires an 
individual to initially self-refer (or be referred by a guardian or significant other) to a laboratory 
for screening, yet this process requires that person to have some awareness of their face 
recognition difficulties relative to unaffected others. Although some self-report tools have been 
shown to successfully identify at least some candidates for DP (Gray et al., 2017), many 
anecdotal reports suggest a lack of awareness into the severity of ones face recognition 
difficulties (Fine, 2012; Sutton, 2016). Further, much work examining the typical population 
indicates that people have limited insight into their own abilities (e.g. Zell & Krizan, 2014) and 
specifically into their face recognition skills, reporting only weak-to-moderate correlations 
between subjective ratings and scores on objective tests (e.g. Bindemann et al., 2014; Laguesse 
et al., 2013).  
Unlike those with acquired prosopagnosia, those with DP do not experience an abrupt 
loss of their face recognition skills and therefore, do not have a point of comparison: many 
individuals tested in our laboratory did not become aware of their difficulties until mid or even 
late adulthood (see also Fine, 2012; Sutton, 2016). It is also unclear whether participant gender 
influences the self-report of prosopagnosia symptoms, and there is some precedent to suggest 
this may be the case. In typically developing samples, males tend to rate themselves more 
favourably than females on traits such as intelligence and attractiveness (e.g. Cooper et al., 
2018; Ehrlinger & Dunning, 2003; Sim et al., 2015). Additionally, females with various 
developmental conditions appear to rate their symptoms as more severe than males (e.g. autism 
spectrum conditions (ASCs): Lai et al., 2011; Moseley et al., 2018; attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Vildalen et al., 2016). Taken together, it may be plausible to 
hypothesise that females with prosopagnosia will self-report more severe face recognition 
difficulties than their male counterparts. 
In sum, whilst it is agreed that individuals who are screened must self-report difficulties 
with face recognition in their daily lives, it is vital that researchers continue to administer 
objective tests of face processing skills to overcome difficulties with self-awareness, and to 
overcome potential issues with self-report that are not yet known (e.g. gender effects). 
Unfamiliar face memory 
Unfamiliar face recognition tests are a standardised way to measure the core symptom of DP: 
a face recognition impairment. Overcoming the shortfalls of familiar face recognition tasks, 
unfamiliar face tests offer a common starting point for all participants (i.e. all faces are 
unfamiliar at the start of the test). Moreover, the level of exposure to each face is tightly 
controlled, allowing more accurate norming data to be collected across different samples from 
the typical population. 
Traditionally, the Warrington Memory for Faces test (RMF: Warrington, 1984) was 
used to assess unfamiliar face memory and identify cases of DP (e.g. Bate et al., 2008; Bentin 
et al., 1999; Duchaine, 2000; Kracke, 1994; McConachie, 1976). The RMF is comprised of 50 
black and white images of unfamiliar males. Each image is presented to the participant one at 
a time for three seconds. Following this initial presentation, participants are shown two images 
at the same time: an identical photograph to one they saw earlier, and a distractor photograph. 
Participants are asked to decide which of the two faces the familiar one is. The RMF is easy to 
administer, and the test places few demands on other cognitive functions such as attention, 
organisation and motor functioning. 
Nonetheless, concerns about the lack of information about the internal-consistency or 
test-retest reliability of the RMF have been raised (Kapur, 1987) and the normative data for 
this test have also been questioned (OBryant et al., 2003). Issues have also been raised 
specifically regarding DP diagnoses; the RMF stimuli include photographs which include the 
models hair, clothing, and variations of head postures and body positions, all of which vary 
greatly between the images. Thus, it is debatable as to whether participants are making 
decisions based on the models face, or are relying on extrafacial cues to aid recognition (for a 
discussion, see Duchaine & Weidenfeld, 2003).  
In light of these concerns, Duchaine and Nakayama (2006) developed the Cambridge 
Face Memory Test (CFMT), a test of unfamiliar, short-term face memory, now considered to 
be the gold standard within face recognition literature. The CFMT uses images of male faces, 
aged in their 20s and early 30s. Each individual is displayed in the same range of poses and 
lighting conditions, with neutral expressions. All faces are cropped so that no hair is visible 
and facial blemishes are removed. Images are greyscale. The general objective of the CFMT is 
to introduce six unfamiliar faces to the participant and then test their recognition of those faces. 
It contains three test stages which increase in difficulty as the test progresses: (a) Learn stage: 
Participants view a target face from three viewpoints for 3-seconds per image. They are then 
presented with triads of faces, where one is an identical image of the target face, and two are 
distractors. Participants choose which of the three faces is the target. This is repeated for six 
faces, resulting in a maximum score of 18. (b) Test stage: Thirty triads of faces are presented, 
where one face is a novel image of a target identity intermixed with two distractors. Target 
faces are displayed under previously unseen viewpoint or lighting conditions. (c) Noise stage: 
Twenty-four new triads are displayed with added visual noise. Again, each trial contains any 
one of the targets and two distractors. The entire test is scored out of 72, and chance is a score 
of 24. There is no time limit for participants to elicit responses.  
The CFMT is believed to overcome the drawbacks associated with the RMF. Stimuli 
are cropped and limited strictly to facial information (i.e. no clothing, no hair). The task is also 
more akin to everyday face recognition, in that the test gives the participant the chance to 
gradually gain knowledge of a persons face from a variety of angles; participants view each 
of the six target faces a total of 17 times during the test. Repetition of the distractor faces is 
also a benefit as the task involves discrimination of multiple familiar faces. This, once again, 
is a better simulation of real-world events.  
Moreover, the test has high validity and high reliability (Wang et al., 2015), and whilst 
performance on the CFMT has been found to decline significantly after the age of 50 years, 
formulae for age adjusted z-scores have been provided (Bowles et al., 2009). Theoretically, 
there is good evidence that the CFMT is a valid measure of face memory, rather than 
generalised memory or memory for images. For instance, the test only has a modest correlation 
with other aspects of visual memory (e.g. abstract art: Wilmer et al., 2010; cars: Dennett et al., 
2012). Considering these strengths of the CFMT, it is unsurprising that it now considered the 
gold-standard and is nearly always used to identify cases of DP (e.g. Bate et al., 2009; Burns 
et al., 2017; Bylemans et al., 2020; Carrow et al. 2016; Marsh et al., 2019; Nemeth et al., 2014; 
Palermo et al., 2011). 
However, some things remain unknown about the CFMT. For instance, some 
individuals self-report difficulties with face recognition in their daily lives and yet score 
typically on the CFMT (e.g. Bate et al., 2019). Additionally, the test is readily available online 
and, combined with the fact that individuals likely self-refer themselves to multiple research 
teams and may complete the CFMT multiple times, little is known about potential practice 
effects. Importantly, to date, there has been no examination of the test-retest reliability of the 
CFMT. Aside from practice, individuals performance on the CFMT can vary daily, and 
inconsistent performance has been reported in the face recognition literature for typical 
participants and those with proficient face-processing skills (Bindemann et al., 2012; Bate et 
al., 2018; Bate, Frowd et al., 2019). Aside from the influence of chance (McKone et al., 2011; 
Young et al., 1993) these inconsistencies could result from intrinsic factors (e.g. mood, fatigue 
or distraction) or the psychometric properties of the task in hand (Young & Noyes, 2019). 
Moreover, a recent report has suggested that the CFMT can be shortened, and maintain its 
diagnostic utility (Corrow et al., 2018), offering a more time-efficient but equally effective way 
of identifying DP. Thus, despite its popularity amongst DP researchers, further work is still 
required to gain a full understanding of the tasks psychometric properties and diagnostic 
utility. 
Face perception 
While prosopagnosia is primarily conceived as a deficit in facial identity recognition, existing 
reports have identified differences in prosopagnosics abilities to perceive facial identity - a 
stage which occurs earlier in the face processing system (e.g. Bruce & Young, 1989, Haxby et 
al., 2000). In the acquired prosopagnosia literature, some individuals have been found to have 
intact face perception skills (e.g. Barton et al., 2002; Benton, 1980) and in others, this ability 
is impaired (e.g. Barton et al., 2002; Gainotti et al., 2003; Young & De Haan, 1988). Such 
reports motivated the claim that there may be subtypes of prosopagnosia, often referred to as 
apperceptive and associative variants (De Renzi et al., 1991). In apperceptive 
prosopagnosia, the deficit is an inability to form an accurate representation of the face from the 
available visual data available (i.e. a perception deficit). In contrast, in associative 
prosopagnosia, the individual is able to perceive the face. More precisely, the deficit lies in the 
process of matching this facial information to facial memory (i.e. a recognition deficit).  
 Similarly, some individuals with DP appear to have intact face perception skills 
(Bowles et al., 2009; Dalrymple et al., 2014; McKone et al., 2011; Ulrich et al., 2017) whereas 
others show face perception deficits (Avidan et al., 2011; Bate et al., 2019; Biotti et al., 2019; 
Duchaine et al., 2007; Righart & de Gelder, 2007; White et al., 2017). Consequently, current 
diagnostic protocols ensure that both face perception and face recognition skills are assessed, 
and permitting further investigation into these subtypes of prosopagnosia. However, as 
discussed above, the administration of different tests to assess these processes makes 
comparisons across studies difficult and, consequently, reaching a conclusion is also difficult.  
Traditionally, researchers used the Benton Facial Recognition Test (BFRT: Benton & 
Van Allen, 1968; see Benton et al. (1983) for the formal reference of the test), a face matching 
task that is traditionally administered face-to-face using hard copy materials. Participants are 
simultaneously presented with a target face above an array of six test faces. In the first six trials, 
one face in the array matches the identity of the target face, and in the final 16 trials, three faces 
in the array match the identity of the target. All images are grayscale and display the overall 
shape of the face, but are cropped below the chin and beyond the hairline.  
The task was originally developed for the assessment of acquired prosopagnosia 
(Barton, 2008; Bate & Bennetts, 2015; Van Belle et al., 2011), but has since been widely used 
to assess face perception skills in a number of neurological, clinical and psychiatric conditions 
(Annaz et al., 2009; Rabin et al., 2005; Sachse et al., 2014), including the identification of DP 
(e.g. Bentin et al., 1999; de Gelder & Stekelenburg, 2005; Duchaine, 2000; Kracke, 1994; 
McConachie, 1976).  
Yet, the popularity of the BFRT has reduced in recent years, particularly for the 
assessment of individuals suspicious for prosopagnosia. Duchaine and Weidenfeld (2003) 
reported that when the inner features of the faces in the BFRT were obscured, most typical 
participants could still achieve a typical score using the hairline and eyebrows alone. Further, 
many individuals with DP can also achieve typical scores on this task (e.g. Duchaine & 
Nakayama, 2006), in contrast to group performance on alternative tests of face perception (Bate 
et al., 2019; Biotti et al., 2019). 
In response to these findings, the Cambridge Face Perception Test (CFPT: Duchaine et 
al., 2007) was developed and has since become a widely used face perception test for the 
diagnosis of DP (e.g. Bennetts et al., 2015; Bylemans et al., 2020; Johnen et al., 2014; Lee et 
al., 2010; Marsh et al., 2019; Palermo et al., 2011). The CFPT presents participants with six 
morphed faces that are to be organised in order of similarity to a simultaneously presented 
target face. The trials are timed, and the target image is presented at a rotated angle while the 
test faces are presented from a frontal viewpoint. Collectively, these test characteristics aimed 
to prevent the application of laborious atypical compensatory strategies that could be used to 
achieve a typical score. However, much less is known about the reliability and other 
psychometric properties of this test, and there are some difficulties in its administration. For 
instance, the task requires proficient use of a computer mouse within a strict time period, and 
the instructions are complex for online administration, particularly with clinical and older 
participants (Bate et al., 2018; Bate, Frowd et al., 2019; Bowles et al., 2009). Others query 
whether morphed faces are unnaturally similar (White et al., 2017), and whether the 
requirement for similarity judgements initiates higher-level cognitive processes than required 
for the simplistic identity matching of simultaneously presented naturalistic facial images 
(Rossion & Michel, 2018). Arguably then, taken together, there is no reliable test of face 
perception available, especially one which meets the needs of online testing. Consequently, the 
fundamental nature of DP is still not fully understood.  
Other Considerations 
It is now widely accepted that not one single objective test is robust enough to identify and 
diagnose DP. Thus, testing protocols have reflected those used in acquired prosopagnosia, and 
researchers often administer a combination of self-report, a test of familiar/famous face 
recognition, an unfamiliar face recognition test, and a face perception test. Yet, as discussed 
above, there are at least some issues or unknown factors associated with all the tests that are 
commonly used in the field. Moreover, there is no biological indicator of DP (i.e. no gene), and 
there is the additional complication that these assessments only measure the outer symptom 
(face processing difficulties) and not the underlying issue. Accordingly, alongside these 
assessments, there is a need to exclude alternative explanations for face-processing deficits, 
such as visual dysfunction or neurological injury, and the presence of other 
neurodevelopmental disorders such as ASCs, in which, face recognition impairments are often 
reported (Barton et al., 2004; Bradshaw et al., 2011; Chawarska & Volkmar, 2007; Neil et al., 
2016). Indeed, given that DP and ASC share this critical symptom, the conditions are 
sometimes confused. Combined with the fact that public and professional awareness of DP 
remains relatively low, DP can be misinterpreted as ASC, particularly in younger age groups 
(e.g. Dalrymple et al., 2014). 
Yet, the underpinning processes in these conditions likely differ from each other and 
one innovative method which can potentially differentiate DP and ASC, is the use of eye-
tracking technology. Eye-tracking is widely used to examine information processing (Rayner, 
2009) since it is well established that eye movement patterns provide detailed insight into on-
going cognitive processing (Liversedge & Findlay, 2000) and is a direct measure of visual 
social attention (e.g. Frank et al., 2011). Furthermore, the development of unobtrusive eye-
tracking systems that are readily available to researchers has resulted in an increase in eye-
tracking methods being employed in psychological sciences over the past decade. Taken 
together, eye-tracking offers a way to overcome artificial accuracy scores on tests on face 
processing, and, importantly, is suitable for young children. As such, it offers an innovative 
means of distinguishing DP from ASC - something which has not yet been explored. 
Support for this suggestion comes from findings that ASC participants (Chawarska et 
al., 2016; Falck-Ytter et al., 2015; Riby et al., 2013; Sumner et al., 2018; Wilson et al., 2010; 
Zantinge et al., 2017) and those with DP (Bobak et al., 2017; De Luca et al., 2019; Malaspina 
et al, 2017; Schwarzer, 2007) both show atypical eye gaze behaviour when viewing faces 
and/or scenes which include faces, in contrast to control participants. While the eye movements 
of ASC and DP participants have not yet been directly compared, it is likely that the face-
processing impairments across these groups have different cognitive and neural underpinnings 
that can be indexed by manipulations in eye-tracking stimuli. For instance, ASC is 
characterised by deficits in social communication and interaction (DSM-V: American 
Psychological Association, 2013) whereas those with DP do not typically report these 
symptoms (other than resulting from their face recognition impairments), and instead their 
difficulties appear visuo-cognitive in nature (e.g. Towler et al., 2017). Consequently, it may be 
that there are some distinct differences in eye-movement patterns between these conditions 
when the social context of facial presentation is manipulated, offering an innovative means to 
potentially distinguish the two conditions. Moreover, given the importance of identifying ASC 
and DP accurately as early in life as possible, eye-tracking methods offer a suitable task for 
younger populations; eye-tracking overcomes age-related limitations of standard face 
processing tasks, and offers a short and engaging means of assessment.  
Thesis Aims 
In light of the issues discussed above, the overall aim of this thesis is to address contemporary 
outstanding issues related to the diagnosis of DP. Specifically, the thesis aims to: 
- (a) develop an empirically-driven list of symptoms that are representative of the 
disorder,  
- (b) evaluate the utility of existing self-report instruments (the PI20) in discriminating 
disorder severity and its susceptibility to gender effects,  
- (c) evaluate the outstanding psychometric issue of test-retest reliability in the CFMT,  
- (d) develop and evaluate a new test of face perception that overcomes issues with 
existing tests and offers the opportunity for repeat-assessment 
- (e) investigate the utility of eye-tracking as a tool for distinguishing DP from ASC. 
As a part of this integrated-thesis, three chapters are presented as published papers. 
Chapter Two, titled Identifying Hallmark Symptoms of Developmental Prosopagnosia for 
Non-Experts, was published in Scientific Reports in 2018. Chapter Three was published in 
Psychological Assessment in 2019, titled Self-Ratings of Face Recognition Ability are 
Influenced by Gender but not Prosopagnosia Severity. Chapter Four, titled Diagnosing 
Developmental Prosopagnosia: Repeat Assessment using the Cambridge Face Memory Test 
was published in 2020 in Royal Society Open Science. The fifth chapter is presented as a 
manuscript, titled An Update of the Benton Facial Recognition Test, and is currently under 
review at Behavior Research Methods. Finally, due to data collection being interrupted by the 
current COVID-19 pandemic, Chapter Six presents the available data for the project titled 
Using Gaze Behaviour to Differentiate Between Developmental Prosopagnosia and Autism 
Spectrum Conditions. Data collection for this project will be completed when face-to-face 
testing can resume, and the chapter will subsequently be prepared for publication. 
Introduction to Chapter Two 
Identifying Hallmark Symptoms of Developmental Prosopagnosia for Non-Experts 
The first study reported here is concerned with the use of self-report instruments in DP 
diagnosis. Most researchers agree that anecdotal evidence of everyday difficulties with face 
recognition is needed in order to support a DP diagnosis, and some researchers have developed 
formal questionnaires or structured interviews for this purpose. However, the items used in 
these questionnaires or interviews have mainly been drawn from informal discussions with 
those living with the condition, and/or anecdotal reports in the available literature. Thus, no 
empirically-driven symptom list exists for DP that is available to the public, researchers, and 
other professionals who may need to identify the condition. For instance, school teachers or 
educational psychologists may benefit from a symptom list to distinguish DP from ASC.  In 
addition, to our knowledge, no study has investigated the indicators of DP that could exist from 
the point of view of a person without the condition and, thus, how DP could be identified by 
others. This is imperative to consider, given that much evidence suggests that individuals have 
a limited insight into their abilities. 
The paper presented in Chapter Two used qualitative methods to examine when 
individuals gained insight into their condition, and to identify common symptoms or 
characteristics that could be useful in the detection of DP. Individuals with DP, their unaffected 
significant others, and parents of children with the condition completed questionnaires and 
follow-up semi-structured interviews about their experiences of the condition. In short, 
findings indicate that most individuals do not become aware of their own difficulties until 
adulthood. Yet, symptoms of DP may still be apparent in childhood, even if the affected 
individual is unaware of their difficulties at the time. Consequently, there is a possibility that 
DP can be spotted by others, if provided with an appropriate symptom checklist. To aid the 
detection of DP in both adulthood and childhood, this paper lists sixteen evidence-based 
hallmark symptoms of the condition. 
Chapter Two: 
Identifying Hallmark Symptoms of Developmental Prosopagnosia for Non-
Experts 
Full reference: 
Murray, E., Hills, P., Bennetts, R., & Bate, S. (2018). Identifying Hallmark Symptoms of 
Developmental Prosopagnosia for Non-Experts. Scientific Reports, 8(1). 
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/30271/  
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/30271/
Introduction to Chapter Three 
Self-Ratings of Face Recognition Ability are Influenced by Gender but not Prosopagnosia 
Severity 
Chapter Three continues investigation into the self-report of DP symptoms. Most researchers 
agree that anecdotal evidence of everyday difficulties with face recognition is required to 
support a DP diagnosis. However, evidence suggests that many individuals have limited insight 
into their abilities and, consequently, self-reported ratings of face recognition skills mostly 
produce only weak-to-moderate associations with objective measures of performance (e.g. 
Bobak et al., 2016; Bowles et al., 2009; Palermo et al., 2017). Interestingly, the 20-item 
Prosopagnosia Index (PI20; Shah et al., 2015) has fared more successfully in identifying people 
who may have DP compared to the typical population. 
However, it remains unclear whether such self-report measures can be used to index 
the severity of face recognition impairments in people with prosopagnosia. While Shah and 
colleagues (2015) suggested that PI20 scores in the ranges of 64-74, 75-84 and 85-100 are 
indicative of mild, moderate and severe DP respectively, a specific analysis considering the 
relationship between prosopagnosia severity and PI20 scores was not reported. Moreover, a 
novel question that has not yet been explored is whether participant gender influences the self-
report of prosopagnosia symptoms, and there is some precedent to suggest this may be the case 
(for example, males rate themselves more favourably than females on traits such as intelligence 
and attractiveness; females rate the symptoms of their developmental condition as more severe 
than males).  
Chapter Three addressed these issues in 47 adults with DP. Comparisons between PI20 
and CFMT scores suggested that (a) self-report of prosopagnosia symptoms does not index 
disorder severity, and (b) gender does influence self-ratings of prosopagnosia symptoms. In 
light of these findings, we recommend that future research needs to probe the underpinnings of 
this gender effect, and, as a minimum, develop separate cut-offs (or even instruments) for use 
with male and female participants. 
Chapter Three: 
Self-Ratings of Face Recognition Ability are Influenced by Gender but not Prosopagnosia 
Severity 
Full reference: 
Murray, E., & Bate, S. (2019). Self-ratings of face recognition ability are influenced by 
gender but not prosopagnosia severity. Psychological Assessment, 31(6), 828-832.  
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/32362/  
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/32362/
Introduction to Chapter Four 
Diagnosing Developmental Prosopagnosia: Repeat Assessment using the Cambridge Face 
Memory Test 
Chapter Four moves away from issues surrounding self-report, to address outstanding issues 
associated with the dominant test used for DP diagnosis: the Cambridge Face Memory Test 
(CFMT). Current approaches to DP diagnosis typically employ a combination of self-report, a 
famous faces test, the CFPT and the CFMT. However, several variables likely influence 
performance on these tests irrespective of actual ability such as mood, fatigue or distraction. 
Furthermore, with an increased trend towards online testing (and hence, online screening), 
coupled with the fact that the CFMT is readily available online, individuals may be completing 
these tasks multiple times. Crucially, little is known about potential practice effects and, to 
date, there has been no examination of the test-retest reliability of the CFMT. Additionally, 
with increasing numbers of people referring themselves to research teams on suspicion of DP, 
there is a need to develop time-effective methods to identify the condition. This concern may 
potentially be addressed by existing evidence that suggests the CFMT can be shortened, while 
retaining its reliability for DP diagnosis. 
Chapter 4 therefore examined the test-retest reliability of the CFMT, and found that this 
fell just below psychometric standards. Single-case analyses revealed further inconsistencies 
in performance that were not driven by testing location (online or in-person), nor the time-lapse 
between attempts. In addition, later administration of an alternative version of the CFMT (the 
CFMT-Aus) was found to be valuable in confirming borderline cases. Finally, our data support 
the claim that the CFMT can be shortened; the learn and novel stages are as sensitive to 
identifying cases of DP as is the entire test. 
Chapter Four: 
Diagnosing Developmental Prosopagnosia: 
Repeat Assessment using the Cambridge Face Memory Test 
Full reference: 
Murray, E., & Bate, S. (2020). Diagnosing developmental prosopagnosia: repeat 
assessment using the Cambridge Face Memory Test. Royal Society Open Science, 7(9).  
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/34647/  
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/34647/
Introduction to Chapter Five 
An Update of the Benton Facial Recognition Test 
Chapter Five moves on to consider issues associated with existing tests of face perception. 
Indeed, the many criticisms associated with these tasks were described in Chapter One, with a 
focus on the dominant tasks used to date: the Benton Facial Recognition Test (BFRT) and the 
Cambridge Face Perception Test (CFPT). Nevertheless, the advantages of the BFRT paradigm 
lend it to be a rapid and simple assessment of face perception - a particularly important concern 
in very recent times as the trend for online testing increases. However, the images in the BFRT 
are flawed, in that they are unusual in colour, lighting, and viewpoints (even in those images 
that are not manipulated) and the extrafacial information within the stimuli allow the task to be 
completed by means other than processing the face (Duchaine & Weidenfeld, 2003). Thus, the 
images in the original BFRT require updating. Moreover, Chapter Four advocates the need for 
multiple versions of a task to facilitate repeat-assessment; that is, face perception should be 
measured using two different tasks which tap the same process. 
 Consequently, in Chapter Five, we present a new test of face perception which adopts 
the procedure of the BFRT, but is created using high quality, ambient facial images to address 
recent theoretical progress in the face recognition literature. Norming data and reliability and 
validation data are presented. Investigations using a sample of participants with developmental 
prosopagnosia (DP) show that some of these individuals were only impaired on the BFRT-r, 
and some were only identified using the BFRT-c. It is important to note that for DP inclusion 
criteria and test performance in the present paper, we adopted more liberal cut-offs of 1.7 SDs. 
This was to allow for the possibility that (a) face perception may be differentially affected in 
different individuals and the experiment sought to capture rather than exclude this variability, 
and (b) because many think that face perception is impaired rather than intact in most DPs, we 
were more conservative towards deeming the latter. Together, these patterns of performance 
highlight the importance of administering more than one task when screening for face 
perception deficits. Data stress the importance of monitoring completion times as well as 
accuracy scores on tasks of face matching. Finally, the present paper supports existing reports 
that online testing is an effective approach to DP testing. Upon publication, we will make the 
new version of the BFRT freely available to the field.  
Chapter Five: 
An Update of the Benton Facial Recognition Test 
Full reference: 
Murray, E., Bennetts, R.J., Tree, J., & Bate, S. (2020). An Update of the Benton 
Facial Recognition Test. Manuscript submitted for publication: Behavior Research 
Methods. 
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/35553/ 
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/35553/
Introduction to Chapter Six 
Using Gaze Behaviour to Differentiate Between Developmental Prosopagnosia and Autism 
Spectrum Condition 
The final chapter moves beyond self-report and behavioural screening for developmental 
prosopagnosia (DP), to examine the use of eye-movement technology in differentially 
diagnosing face recognition deficits in different developmental conditions. Indeed, existing 
reports, including that of Chapter Two, suggest that DP can be misinterpreted as an autism 
spectrum condition (ASC), especially in younger age groups. This is because face recognition 
deficits manifest in both conditions, and public and professional awareness of DP remains 
relatively low. Yet, behavioural symptoms of both ASC and DP can be apparent in very young 
children, although it has not yet been explored whether the likely different underpinnings of 
face recognition difficulties can be detected and differentiated.   
One method which has the potential to address this issue is the use of eye-tracking technology. 
While ASC participants and those with DP have shown atypical eye gaze behaviour when 
viewing faces and/or scenes with faces in contrast to control participants, the two groups have 
not yet been directly compared. Yet, one might predict that face recognition difficulties in ASC 
are more prevalent in social or interactive contexts given the common deficits in social 
communication and interaction, whereas those in DP are thought to be visuo-cognitive in 
nature, and should therefore remain stable across all social conditions. 
We address this issue in Chapter Six, exploring the differences in eye gaze behaviour between 
those with ASC, DP, and typically developing controls. It is important to stress that data 
collection was interrupted by the on-going COVID-19 pandemic and, as such, the sample size 
presented here is small. However, we report that individuals with ASC look towards non-social 
stimuli to a greater extent than DPs and controls when scenes are more social and interactive 
in nature. Trends in the data also suggest that those with DP look at the hair and bodies more 
than control and ASC participants. When examining eye gaze on the internal features of the 
face, DP participants dwelled on the mouth more than those with ASC and control participants. 
Taken together, the preliminary analyses presented here suggests that this paradigm potentially 
can identify group differences in eye-movements, as hypothesised, when the power increases. 
Consequently, when authorised to do so, data collection will resume and the present chapter 
will be prepared for publication. 
Chapter Six: 
Using Gaze Behaviour to Differentiate Between Developmental Prosopagnosia and Autism 
Spectrum Condition 
Ebony Murray, Stephanie Chase, Nicola Gregory, Rachel Moseley and Sarah Bate 
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/35666/  
https://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/35666/
Chapter Seven: General Discussion 
Present protocols for the diagnosis of developmental prosopagnosia (DP) in adulthood 
recommend the use of a combination of self-report, a famous faces test, a test of unfamiliar 
short-term memory and a face perception task (Bate & Tree, 2017; Dalrymple & Palermo, 
2015). However, there are inconsistencies in the tasks which are used across research teams, 
and even for the tasks which most agree to use, there are some concerns. Thus, the overarching 
aim of the thesis was to address contemporary issues relating to the diagnosis of DP, and to 
develop the fields understanding of existing diagnostic protocols. More specifically, the thesis 
aimed to: 
- (a) develop an empirically-driven list of symptoms that are representative of the 
disorder,  
- (b) evaluate the utility of existing self-report instruments (the PI20) in discriminating 
disorder severity and its susceptibility to gender effects,  
- (c) evaluate the outstanding psychometric issue of test-retest reliability in the CFMT,  
- (d) develop and evaluate a new test of face perception that overcomes issues with 
existing tests and offers the opportunity for repeat-assessment 
- (e) investigate the utility of eye-tracking as a tool for distinguishing DP from ASC. 
 First of all, given that inconsistencies in diagnosing DP is evident within the literature, 
it is imperative to outline how DP was classified in the present thesis, before discussing the 
findings in more detail. For all chapters, individuals self-referred themselves to the research 
team. They registered their details on our website provided anecdotal evidence of their face 
processing difficulties in their everyday lives. They were then contacted to either attend a 
screening session in the lab, or online. Typically, individuals completed the CFMT and CFPT. 
Those who came into the lab, or competed the tests online but were willing to complete a 
famous faces test over the phone, completed said test. For those who completed all three tests, 
they needed to show impairment on two or more of these. For those who only completed the 
CFMT and CFPT, they needed to show an impairment on both tests. Thus, we followed existing 
protocols that an individual shows atypicality on two or more of three objective measures of 
face processing (Bate & Tree, 2017; Dalrymple & Palermo, 2015). However, we note that 
many studies use impaired performance on two tests of face memory, and do not use the CFPT 
in the diagnosis of the condition (e.g. Biotti et al., 2017; Fry et al., 2020; Susilo & Duchaine, 
2013; Ulrich et al., 2017). Presumably, this reflects the fact that difficulties with face 
recognition is the characteristic symptom of the condition. 
Nevertheless, assessing both face perception and face memory acknowledges that DP 
can present in different ways, and the idea of there being different subtypes of DP is not new 
(for discussions see Bate et al., 2019; De Renzi et al., 1991; McKone et al., 2011). In addition, 
recent work from our lab suggests that impairments on the CFMT and CFPT, but intact famous 
faces test scores, is very rare (Bate et al., 2019). Indeed, most will also be impaired on a famous 
faces test (thus, impaired on all three tasks), or will only be atypical on a famous faces test. 
Hence, in the cases where participants only completed the CFMT and CFPT, it is probably fair 
to assume that they would also score within the atypical range on a famous faces test as well. 
Nevertheless, we point out here that during the present thesis, only a very small minority of 
participants were classified as DP in the absence of an atypical score on the CFMT and famous 
faces test. A downfall of using only the CFPT and CFMT however, is that individuals who 
were typical on the CFPT and atypical on the CFMT (or vice versa), may have been DP. An 
atypical score on a famous faces test could have confirmed their DP, and additional participants 
may have been available for the research. Indeed, as the popularity of online testing continues 
to rise, a virtual method of administering a famous faces test would be valuable. Whilst 
attempts have been made to do this, it is noted that the scores on these tasks may be deflated 
as unfamiliar famous people are not excluded from the overall scores (Aripze et al., 2019), as 
is typically done in the lab. 
Moving on to the thesis and research presented here, an initial investigation developed 
a list of hallmark symptoms of DP for non-experts to use to identify the condition in themselves 
and in another person. Chapter Three extended this investigation of self-report tools, examining 
the congruency of subjective and objective face processing measures, while also exploring 
gender effects in self-report. The thesis then moved to objective tests of face processing. 
Chapter Four investigated the test-retest reliability of the leading test of unfamiliar face 
recognition, the Cambridge Face Memory Test (CFMT), and the importance of repeat-testing 
in DP screening. Chapter Five presented a new test of face perception which overcomes the 
limitations and builds upon the strengths of existing tasks, and investigated the diagnostic 
utility of repeated assessment of a single subprocess of face processing (in this case, face 
matching). Finally, Chapter Six presents the preliminary data from the first known study that 
has directly compared the eye-movements of those with autism spectrum conditions (ASCs) 
and those with DP. Below, I discuss each of the contemporary issues relating to the diagnosis 
of DP, in light of the research presented in the current thesis. I outline what the findings have 
added to the current understanding of identifying the condition, and highlight area for future 
research. 
Identifying Hallmark Symptoms of Developmental Prosopagnosia for Non-Experts  
Self-report methods which aim to measure ones face processing abilities have been developed 
based upon anecdotal evidence and discussions in the laboratory (e.g. The PI20: Shah et al., 
2015; The Cambridge Face Memory Questionnaire: Arizpe et al., 2019). While there has been 
some promise of subjective measures being able to identify cases of DP (e.g. Arizpe et al., 
2019; Gray et al., 2017; Livingston & Shah, 2017) there is mixed evidence for the success of 
self-report measures elsewhere (e.g. Bate & Dudfield, 2019; Estudilo & Wong, 2021; Palermo 
et al., 2017). As such, there is evidence to suggest that individuals have a limited insight into 
their face processing skills. Chapter Two builds on this argument using qualitative data; we 
report that individuals with DP feel that they have a limited insight into their in(abilities) and 
often do not become aware of their difficulties until middle-late adulthood. Consequently, it 
will mean that identifying ones face recognition deficits may fall to someone else and, 
accordingly, a list of simple to identify symptoms of DP would be beneficial for non-experts. 
Thus, Chapter Two developed a list of hallmark symptoms based on empirical evidence from 
those living with DP, their unaffected significant others, and parents of children with DP, was 
developed. 
 To our knowledge, this is the first list of hallmark symptoms which have been 
developed based on empirical data, and are useful both for oneself and for another person, both 
in adulthood and childhood. However, it is not to go unappreciated that this checklist was 
devised by data obtained from participants who either have confirmed DP, are significant others 
of someone with confirmed DP, or are parents of DP children. It would therefore be valuable 
to assess how well this checklist differentiates those who have met the criteria for DP and 
control participants. Indeed, we have started to collect data on this matter; we sent the final list 
of the 18 symptoms back to those who participated in the original investigation. We asked 
participants to just mark whether they agreed or disagreed whether that specific symptom 
reflected their own experiences. Each person could return a maximum total of 18 agrees. A 
total of 21 DPs, 6 SOs and 2 parents responded. We also sent this to 21 age-matched control 
participants to ask them to reflect upon their own face processing skills, 6 participants who 
answered the questionnaire whilst thinking about their significant others face processing 
abilities, and 5 parents who reflected on their childs skills. To summarise, DPs returned higher 
agree than controls (N = 310 out of a possible 378, and 68 respectively), as did significant 
others (N = 73 out of a possible 108 for DP significant others; N = 21 for controls) and parents 
(N = 30 out of a possible 36 for DP parents; N = 17 out of a possible 90 for controls). On face 
value, the symptoms listed in Chapter Two reflect the real-world experiences of DP. 
However, we also recommend  and are working towards  future investigation that 
assess how well this checklist differentiates those who have met the criteria for DP and those 
who self-report face recognition difficulties but do not meet the current diagnostic criteria for 
the condition. The checklist has been translated to a questionnaire, in which participants are 
asked to score their (or their childs, or their significant others) face recognition 
skills/experiences on a scale of 1  5. Individuals with confirmed DP are completing this 
alongside unrelated research, and individuals who refer themselves to our website are also 
completing it when they register. Furthermore, it is suggested that future work seeks to fully 
validate the checklist and determine which questions should receive a higher weighting in a 
self-report version of the questionnaire, or when working with children with DP. Thus, a large, 
new sample of DPs, significant others and parents should be sought in future investigations. It 
is hoped that the research which is underway will go some way to answer these questions.  
Self-Ratings of Face Recognition Ability are Influenced by Gender but not Prosopagnosia 
Severity 
As aforementioned, existing self-report methods have been developed based upon 
anecdotal evidence and discussions in the laboratory. To date, there is mixed evidence for the 
success of self-report measures. Chapter Three of the present thesis adds to this debate; we 
report no correlation between the CFMT and PI20 in a sample of individuals previously 
identified as having DP. Thus, the research strongly suggested that individuals with DP have a 
limited insight into their face recognition (in)abilities (a suggestion which is further supported 
by the qualitative data we present in Chapter Two). This may be because our DP participants 
were recruited using more conservative inclusion criteria than those of Livingston and Shah; 
whilst our DP participants scored at least two standard deviations below the mean on two or 
more of three tasks of face processing, the DPs in Livingston and Shahs report differed by 
controls  in some cases  by only one standard deviation. As a result, it is argued here that it 
may be that the previously reported correlations were driven by individuals who would be 
better categorised as typical perceivers. The PI20 may therefore be sufficiently sensitive to 
tap face recognition skills across the typical spectrum, but not to gauge severity in people with 
prosopagnosia. Whilst this may indeed be the case, it might also be that this reflects the fact 
that a sample of DPs will inevitably provide a limited range on the CFMT, given that a low 
CFMT score is (almost always) a prerequisite of DP classification (although see Bate et al. 
(2019) for cases where CFMT is intact, and CFPT and famous faces test scores are impaired).  
 Secondly, the paper found that males self-report their DP symptoms as less severe than 
female DPs. However, the direction and underpinnings of the effect reported here are unclear: 
while women over-reported prosopagnosia symptoms compared to men, they also showed no 
relationship between PI20 and CFMT scores. Data suggest that males may have more accurate 
insights into their face recognition skills, although it is noted that larger sample sizes are 
required in future work in order to further explore this effect. It should also be investigated 
whether gender effects are driven by certain behavioural traits (i.e. certain items in the PI20); 
indeed, if some items have greater sensitivity to the traits of male or female DPs, the existing 
instrument may require some expansion. Indeed, this is also something which is remains 
unanswered in relation to the checklist of symptoms that we present in Chapter Two, and future 
research endeavours to explore whether there are gender-differences on certain items of our 
own checklist as well.  
 Much remains unanswered or left to be debated in light of self-report and face 
processing skills. Importantly, no consensus exists among the research community for how 
self-report should be applied when identifying cases of DP. Should a DP diagnosis be given 
based upon exceptionally poor performance on objective measures but typical scores on self-
report instruments? What happens in cases where individuals return significantly low self-
report scores but fall within the typical range on objective measures? The data presented in the 
current thesis cannot resolve this, but the checklist offers a more inclusive method of 
identifying face recognition difficulties, and the data in Chapter Three do go some way to add 
to the literature that self-report methods will not be successful, alone, to identify all cases of 
DP. In line with this, we suggest that self-reported everyday difficulties with face processing 
must be evident (and, of course, is usually the case given that these individuals self-refer 
themselves to the research team), but that objective face processing difficulties are needed to 
support and confirm a diagnosis. 
Diagnosing Developmental Prosopagnosia: Repeat Assessment using the Cambridge Face 
Memory Test 
Once individuals report that they have difficulties with face recognition in their daily lives, 
they are typically then invited to participate in a series of objective measures of face processing. 
This approach of repeated testing decreases the likelihood that a diagnosis is given (or missed) 
by chance. Furthermore, this approach considers the viewpoint that DP is a heterogeneous 
condition and may be composed of subtypes (De Renzi et al., 1991). Yet, there has been some 
inconsistencies in the objective measures which are used to identify cases of DP. Fortunately, 
the field has a gold-standard test of unfamiliar face recognition in the Cambridge Face 
Memory Test (CFMT). However, whilst much work has been done to explore the psychometric 
properties, validity, and reliability of the CFMT, there has been no investigation into the test-
retest reliability of the task. Consequently, Chapter Four for the first known time, reported the 
test-retest reliability of the test. The diagnostic utility of administering a shorter version of the 
CFMT was explored, as was the administration of an alternative version of the CFMT (the 
CFMT-Aus). 
 Strikingly, the test-retest reliability of the CFMT was found to fall just short of accepted 
psychometric standards, producing a reliability co-efficient of .68. While these psychometric 
standards are applied to a range of psychometric tests, a co-efficient of .68 is lower than 
typically seen on tests of visual memory (e.g. .74 in Nakayama et al., 2014) and specifically, 
on alternative tests of face memory (e.g. .74 and .76 on the faces subtest of the Recognition 
Memory Test, in Bird et al., 2003). Single-case analyses also identified some inconsistencies 
in performance and interestingly, approximately 30% of participants performed better at their 
first attempt on the CFMT than on their second. Thus, some day-to-day inconsistencies in 
performance aside from practice effects are evident. These inconsistencies, and the practice 
effect itself, may result from individual variability in fluctuations in cognitive performance, or 
from intrinsic factors such as mood, fatigue, or distraction. While we did not directly assess 
these factors here, they should be considered in future research.  
Finally, Chapter Four supports a recent proposal that the CFMT retains its sensitivity 
when only the learn and test stages are administered (Corrow et al., 2018). Indeed, this finding 
highlights that a more efficient, shorter version of the task can be utilised and that will 
consequently benefit the burden of repeated assessment. Taken together, as performance on 
tests of face processing can be affected by factors irrespective of ones face processing skills 
(e.g. mood, fatigue, chance) and the test-retest reliability of the CFMT falls just short of the 
accepted parametric standards, the present paper argues for a new protocol for the screening of 
DP: a second, alternative test which assesses the same skill should be administered, preferably 
on a different day. To make this process more efficient, our data support the claim that the 
CFMT can be shortened; the learn and novel stages are as sensitive to identifying cases of DP 
as is the entire test. Finally, data also support that online testing is equally efficient and reliable 
as in-lab testing. 
 Alternatively, this pattern of findings may simply reflect the influence of chance and, 
aside from the unlikely event that a task has perfect reliability, individual scores will suffer 
from at least some uncertainty. Yet, this measurement error is rarely considered by researchers 
when identifying cases of DP. A potential solution to practice effects on the CFMT, and to 
consider this measurement error, is to develop different versions of the task, using the same 
paradigm but novel stimuli. Indeed, previous research also suggests that whilst practice effects 
are often large with repeated versions of the same memory test (for a discussion, see Calamia 
et al., 2012), alternative forms of the same test yield much smaller practice effects (e.g. 
Beglinger et al., 2005; Benedict & Zgaljardic, 1998). The current study investigated this 
possibility, via administration of the CFMT-Aus; there were inconsistencies in performance 
between the original CFMT and CFMT-Aus in both directions, and the paper therefore argued 
that repeat assessment should occur on a separate day. This would address any ambiguous cases 
stemming from differences in day-to-day cognitive functioning. 
An Update of the Benton Facial Recognition Test 
Chapter Four recommended that two separate tests of face processing which assess the same 
skill should be administered on different days. Chapter Five further explored this 
recommendation in the context of face perception. Firstly, following consideration of existing 
face perception tests, including the Cambridge Face Perception Test (CFPT) and the Benton 
Facial Recognition Test (BFRT) (although note that there are other face perception tests 
available to the field such as the Glasgow Face Matching Test and the Pairs Matching Test, 
these tasks are more widely used to explore performance of Super Recognisers, and reports 
have suggested that matching paradigms are vulnerable to responses biases; hence, these were 
not utilised in the present study), a new test of face perception was presented (the BFRT-r). 
The BFRT-r is quick to administer, with typically developing control participants taking 
approximately four to six minutes to complete the task. Moreover, the task is very simple in its 
procedure, making it highly suitable for the growing trend for online testing. Similar to the 
findings reported in Chapter Four, data support online implementation: strong internal 
reliability and inter-item correlations derived from online samples directly support this mode 
of testing. Still, it is appreciated that a pivotal question remains unanswered at present, that is, 
whether the BFRT-r is equally vulnerable to high performance based on extrafacial 
information. Thus, future research is underway to explore this.  
 Secondly, to investigate the importance of administering more than one version of a 
task which assesses the same subprocess of face processing, participants with DP were asked 
to complete the BFRT-r and the BFRT-c (Rossion & Michel, 2018). Approximately half of the 
DP sample presented with no impairment on either version of the BFRT. While eight of the 
remaining 16 DPs consistently displayed deficits on both versions of the BFRT, five were only 
detected on the BFRT-r and three by the BFRT-c. In sum, these patterns of performance 
highlight the importance of administering more than one task when screening for face 
perception deficits, further supporting the recommendation for repeated testing in Chapter 
Four.   
 Moreover, this paper explored the role of measuring completion times for the 
assessment of DP. While existing tests of face perception enforce a strict time-limit to complete 
the test (the CFPT) or do not measure completion times at all (the original version of the 
BFRT), completion times are easily monitored in both the BFRT-c and BFRT-r given their 
electronic format. Consistent with existing work (e.g. Bukach, et al., 2006; Busigny & Rossion, 
2010; Delvenne et al., 2004; Jansari et al., 2015), the finding reported here that 12 DPs were 
only impaired on completion time (but not accuracy) on either, or both tests, highlights the 
importance of assessing both measures. We acknowledge that longer completion times may 
reflect the use of laboured face processing strategies and methods which ultimately lead to a 
correct response. However, the older adult control participants took longer to complete the task 
than younger adults, although the same effect did not emerge for accuracy. Thus, to further the 
recommendations for identifying DP accurately, we strongly suggest that age-matched norms 
are used for identifying impaired performance on these tasks. 
 What this finding also brings light to is the nature of DP, that is, the argument of 
whether those with DP are quantitatively or qualitatively different to typically developing 
individuals. Indeed, research identifying individuals who are extremely good at recognising 
faces  so called super recognisers (Russel et al., 2009)  suggests that those with DP are 
simply one end of the face recognition spectrum, whilst super recognisers represent the other 
(top) end of the spectrum. If this view is believed, the that is evidence that DP performance is 
quantitatively different from the majority, something which forms the basis for the quantitative 
data presented in Chapter Three and Chapter Four. However, these differences in response 
times in Chapter Five suggest that those with DP are likely qualitatively different to typical 
developing controls. That is, they are eliciting signs that they have different processing 
strategies when completing face processing tasks. This view is further supported by eye-
tracking data, something which Chapter Six of the present thesis speaks to. 
Using Gaze Behaviour to Differentiate Between Developmental Prosopagnosia and Autism 
Spectrum Condition 
Finally, the thesis presents preliminary analyses of eye-tracking data, which aimed to explore 
eye-movement differences between those with ASC and those with DP. Existing reports, 
including Chapter Two of this thesis, suggest that ASC and DP can be confused, especially in 
childhood. It is vital to accurately differentiate these conditions so that a misdiagnosis can be 
avoided, and appropriate support can be provided. Chapter Six presents the first study, to our 
knowledge, that directly compares the eye-movements of those with DP to those with ASC 
with the aim of differential diagnosis. 
Firstly, the data support and build upon existing reports revealing that those with ASC 
and DP elicit atypical eye-movements in response to scenes containing faces, as compared to 
control participants. Moreover, it was found that ASC participants spend more time looking at 
the background in scenes (i.e. non-social information) than DP participants, when the scene is 
more social in nature. It is vital to note that these group differences are the only ones to reach 
statistical significance here and this is highly likely due to the low sample size in this analysis 
- a consequence of interrupted data collection due to the ongoing pandemic. Yet, the data 
strongly suggest that those with ASC, and more importantly in light of the focus of the present 
thesis, DP is qualitatively different to the typically developing population. Whilst eye-tracking 
research in DP is scarce, these preliminary findings go some way to support the existing 
literature, and supporting the view that those with DP are qualitatively different to control 
participants; those with DP are doing something qualitatively different to typically developing 
individuals (and to those with ASC) when presented with faces. 
Additionally, trends within the data suggest that DPs look more at extrafacial 
information including the hair and bodies, supporting our hypothesis. When looking at eye-
movement data on the internal features of the face, both DPs and ASC participants look less at 
the eyes that control participants. Differences between DP and ASC participants, however, 
were seen in the descriptive statistics in dwell times on the mouth; those with ASC looked at 
the mouth similar to controls and less than those with DP. It is difficult to interpret this trend 
in the data at present, but it would be valuable to explore this difference further when a larger 
sample size has been tested. We fully acknowledge and appreciate that the present analysis 
requires more data to increase the power; unfortunately, the present COVID-19 pandemic 
interrupted data collection. Accordingly, when able to do so, data collection will continue, and 
the chapter will be prepared as a manuscript for publication.  
Summary and Future Directions 
This thesis presents a series of chapters which develop the current protocols for the diagnosis 
of DP, and extend existing recommendations to more reliably identify the condition. In 
summary, the work started by highlighting the challenges of self-report; not only do those with 
DP have a limited insight into their face recognition difficulties, there is also a gender 
difference in self-reporting behaviours which have not previously been identified. Indeed, 
future work is required to investigate this gender difference further and there is more to be 
known about the underpinnings of this effect. Based on these findings, however, it is 
recommended that gender-matched norms are used to identify atypical scores on self-report 
measures. Moreover, additional research aims to fully validate the symptom list presented in 
Chapter Two. Investigating gender differences in self-report using this checklist would also be 
invaluable; if gender differences are not apparent in the presented, empirically-driven symptom 
checklist, then this would raise questions about the instruments more so that gender effects 
(and vice versa). Similarly, additional work should explore the relationship between the 
checklist that we present in Chapter Two and existing self-report instruments, in order to 
explore the benefits of developing a symptom list based on empirical data. Taken together, 
more would be understood about self-report and its role in the identification of DP. 
 In addition, Chapters Four and Five strongly advocate the use of repeated testing in DP 
screening. At present, those suspicious of DP complete multiple tests, but each test typically 
assesses different subprocesses of face processing (that is, familiar face recognition, unfamiliar 
face memory, face perception). Thus, the same process is not tested repeatedly, and this 
approach fails to acknowledge that scores can be achieved irrespective of actual ability; 
extraneous factors such as day-to-day fluctuations in cognitive abilities, intrinsic factors such 
as mood and fatigue, and potential issues with the psychometric properties of the task being 
used are overlooked. Thus, individuals can still be identified  or missed  for DP by only 
assessing each skill once. However, future work should further explore the diagnostic utility of 
the recommendation that two different tasks which assess the same skill, should be 
administered on separate days. Given this thesis also recommends that the efficiency of 
screening can be improved, repeat-testing should not be laborious for the participant. Indeed, 
we found that the CFMT can retain its diagnostic utility if shortened, and the BFRT-c and 
BFRT-r are very quick to complete. Combined with the findings that online testing is equally 
as effective as in-lab testing, this battery of tests would provide researchers with a more 
thorough examination of an individuals face recognition deficits at no additional cost 
(financially nor time) to the researcher.  
 Finally, Chapter Six presents preliminary data from the first study, to our knowledge, 
to directly compare DP and ASC via eye-movement analyses. While data collection will 
resume and more firm conclusions will be drawn from this experiment in the future, it appears 
that eye-tracking offers a short, engaging and low-demanding task which may successfully 
differentiate these conditions. Future research might also aim to explore the observed scanning 
differences in children with the conditions: this would exclude the possibility that the effects 
simply reflect coping strategies which have been developed by adulthood, and it may be that 
they are exacerbated in younger samples.  While we await authorisation to resume this study, 
we hope that this work will initiate an exciting new avenue for DP diagnosis, allowing face 
recognition deficits to be differentiated across developmental conditions, and in increasingly 
younger participants. Ultimately, improved diagnostic protocols will improve the scientific 
study of DP, and allow those who experience the condition to access appropriate support, and 
perhaps intervention, in the timeliest manner. 
Concluding Remarks 
The present thesis has aimed to address some of the contemporary issues relating to the 
diagnosis of DP, and develop the fields understanding of existing diagnostic protocols. Taking 
all evidence together, we recommend that the empirically-driven list of hallmark symptoms 
presented in Chapter Two be used to identify face recognition difficulties in oneself or in 
another, in adulthood or in childhood, thus overcoming the limitations that individuals lack 
insight into their own (in)abilities. Given that Chapter Three supports the existing literature 
which reports that subjective and objective evidence of face recognition impairments do not 
have a significant relationship, we propose that objective measures of face processing are 
always then administered. Whilst different research teams use different tests to identify cases 
of DP (for a discussion, see Corrow & Barton, 2016), we strongly advocate the use of repeat 
testing. Chapter Four and Five illustrate that individuals can score in the typical range on a face 
processing task on one day, but in the atypical range on another. Repeat testing will ensure that 
those who are being identified as DP are not false positives, but will also reduce the chance 
of missing false negatives. Given the evidence here for practice effects and/or low test-retest 
reliability of face processing tasks, combined with the evidence in Chapter Five, it is proposed 
that different tests which tap the same subprocess of face processing are used during this 
repeated testing. Finally, when faced with (potentially) alternative explanations for ones face 
recognition difficulties, Chapter Sixs preliminary data suggest that eye-tracking may offer a 
novel method to differentiate conditions.  
References 
Adams, A., Hills, P., Bennetts, R., & Bate, S. (2019). Coping strategies for developmental 
prosopagnosia. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 1-20. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2019.1623824 
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (5th ed.). https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596  
Annaz, D., Karmiloff-Smith, A., Johnson, M., & Thomas, M. (2009). A cross-syndrome 
study of the development of holistic face recognition in children with autism, Down 
syndrome, and Williams syndrome. Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 102(4), 456-486. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2008.11.005 
Arizpe, J., Saad, E., Douglas, A., Germine, L., Wilmer, J., & DeGutis, J. (2019). Self-
reported face recognition is highly valid, but alone is not highly discriminative of 
prosopagnosia-level performance on objective assessments. Behavior Research 
Methods, 51(3), 1102-1116. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-018-01195-w 
Avidan, G., Tanzer, M., & Behrmann, M. (2011). Impaired holistic processing in congenital 
prosopagnosia. Neuropsychologia, 49(9), 2541-2552. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.05.002 
Barton, J.S. (2008). Structure and Function in Acquired Prosopagnosia: Lessons from a 
Series of 10 Patients with Brain Damage. Journal of Neuropsychology, 2(1), 197-225. 
https://doi.org/10.1348/174866407X214172 
Barton, J., & Corrow, S. (2016). The problem of being bad at faces. Neuropsychologia, 89, 
119-124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.06.008  
Barton, J., Press, D., Keenan, J., & O'Connor, M. (2002). Lesions of the fusiform face area 
impair perception of facial configuration in prosopagnosia. Neurology, 58(1), 71-78. 
https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.58.1.71 
Bate, S., & Bennetts, R. (2014). The rehabilitation of face recognition impairments: a critical 
review and future directions. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00491 
Bate, S., Bennetts, R., Gregory, N., Tree, J., Murray, E., & Adams, A., Bobak, A.K., Penton, 
T., Yang, T., & Bannisy, M.J. (2019). Brain Sciences, 9(6), 133. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci9060133 
Bate, S., Frowd, C., Bennetts, R., Hasshim, N., Murray, E., & Bobak, A.K., Wills, H., & 
Richards, S. (2018). Applied screening tests for the detection of superior face 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2019.1623824
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2008.11.005
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.05.002
https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.58.1.71
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00491
https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci9060133
recognition. Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications, 3(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41235-018-0116-5 
Bate, S., Frowd, C., Bennetts, R., Hasshim, N., Portch, E., Murray, E., & Dudfield, G. (2019). 
The consistency of superior face recognition skills in police officers. Applied 
Cognitive Psychology, 33(5), 828-842. https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.3525 
Bate, S., Haslam, C., Jansari, A., & Hodgson, T. (2009). Covert face recognition relies on 
affective valence in congenital prosopagnosia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 26(4), 
391-411. https://doi.org/10.1080/02643290903175004 
Bate, S., Haslam, C., Tree, J., & Hodgson, T. (2008). Evidence of an eye movement-based 
memory effect in congenital prosopagnosia. Cortex, 44(7), 806-819. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2007.02.004 
Bate, S., Parris, B., Haslam, C., & Kay, J. (2010). Socio-Emotional Functioning and Face 
Recognition Ability in the Normal Population. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 48 (2), 239-242. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2009.10.005 
Bate, S., & Tree, J. (2017). The Definition and Diagnosis of Developmental 
Prosopagnosia. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70(2), 193-200. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1195414 
Beglinger, L., Gaydos, B., Tangphao-Daniels, O., Duff, K., Kareken, D.A., & Crawford, J., 
Fastenau, P.S., & Sirmers, E.R. (2005). Practice effects and the use of alternate forms 
in serial neuropsychological testing. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 20(4), 
517-529. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acn.2004.12.003 
Benedict, R., & Zgaljardic, D. (1998). Practice Effects During Repeated Administrations of 
Memory Tests With and Without Alternate Forms. Journal of Clinical And 
Experimental Neuropsychology, 20(3), 339-352. 
https://doi.org/10.1076/jcen.20.3.339.822 
Bentin, S., Deouell, L., & Soroker, N. (1999). Selective visual streaming in face recognition. 
Neuroreport, 10(4), 823-827. https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-199903170-00029 
Benton, A. (1990). Facial Recognition 1990. Cortex, 26(4), 491-499. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-9452(13)80299-7 
Benton, A. L., Sivan, A. B., Hamsher, K. D. S., Varney, N. R., & Spreen, O. (1983). Facial 
recognition: Stimulus and multiple choice pictures. In A. L. Benton, A. B. Sivan, K. 
D. S. Hamsher, N. R. Varney, & O. Spreen (Eds.), Contribution to 
neuropsychological assessment (pp. 3040). Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41235-018-0116-5
https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.3525
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643290903175004
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2007.02.004
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2009.10.005
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1195414
https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-199903170-00029
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-9452(13)80299-7
Benton, A. L., & Van Allen, M. W. (1968). Impairment in facial recognition in patients with 
cerebral disease. Transactions of the American Neurological Association, 93, 3842. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-9452(68)80018-8 
Bennetts, R., Butcher, N., Lander, K., Udale, R., & Bate, S. (2015). Movement cues aid face 
recognition in developmental prosopagnosia. Neuropsychology, 29(6), 855-860. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000187 
Bennetts, R., Murray, E., Boyce, T. & Bate, S. (2018). Prevalence of face recognition deficits 
in middle childhood. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology. 70(2), 234-
258. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1167924 
Bindemann, M., Attard, J., & Johnston, R. (2014). Perceived ability and actual recognition 
accuracy for unfamiliar and famous faces. Cogent Psychology, 1(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23311908.2014.986903  
Bindemann, M., Avetisyan, M., & Rakow, T. (2012). Who can recognize unfamiliar faces? 
Individual differences and observer consistency in person identification. Journal Of 
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 18(3), 277-291. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029635  
Biotti, F., Gray, K., & Cook, R. (2019). Is developmental prosopagnosia best characterised as 
an apperceptive or mnemonic condition?. Neuropsychologia, 124, 285-298. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.11.014 
Biotti, F., Wu, E., Yang, H., Jiahui, G., Duchaine, B., & Cook, R. (2017). Normal Composite 
Face Effects in Developmental Prosopagnosia. Cortex, 95, 63-76. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.07.018 
Bird, C., Papadopoulou, K., Ricciardelli, P., Rossor, M., & Cipolotti, L. (2003). Test-retest 
reliability, practice effects and reliable change indices for the recognition memory 
test. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 42(4), 407-425. 
https://doi.org/10.1348/014466503322528946 
Birnbaum, M. (2004). Human Research and Data Collection via the Internet. Annual Review 
of Psychology, 55(1), 803-832. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.55.090902.141601 
Bobak, A., Pampoulov, P., & Bate, S. (2016). Detecting Superior Face Recognition Skills in 
a Large Sample of Young British Adults. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01378  
Bobak, A., Parris, B., Gregory, N., Bennetts, R., & Bate, S. (2017). Eye-Movement Strategies 
in Developmental Prosopagnosia and Super Face Recognition. Quarterly Journal of 
https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000187
https://doi.org/10.1080%2F17470218.2016.1167924
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.11.014
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.55.090902.141601
Experimental Psychology, 70(2), 201-217. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1161059 
Bowles, D., McKone, E., Dawel, A., Duchaine, B., Palermo, R., & Schmalzl, L., Rivolta, D., 
Wilson, E., & Yovel, G. (2009). Diagnosing prosopagnosia: Effects of ageing, sex, 
and participantstimulus ethnic match on the Cambridge Face Memory Test and 
Cambridge Face Perception Test. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 26(5), 423-455. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643290903343149 
Bradshaw, J., Shic, F., & Chawarska, K. (2011). Brief Report: Face-Specific Recognition 
Deficits in Young Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 41(10), 1429-1435. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-010-
1150-4 
Bruce, V., & Young, A. (1986). Understanding face recognition. British Journal of 
Psychology, 77(3), 305-327. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8295.1986.tb02199.x 
Brunsdon, R., Coltheart, M., Nickels, L., & Joy, P. (2006). Developmental prosopagnosia: A 
case analysis and treatment study. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 23(6), 822-840. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643290500441841 
Bukach, C. M., Bub, D. N., Gauthier, I., & Tarr, M. J. (2006). Perceptual expertise effects are 
not all or none: Spatially limited perceptual expertise for faces in a case of 
prosopagnosia. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 4863. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/089892906775250094 
Burns, E., Bennetts, R., Bate, S., Wright, V., Weidemann, C., & Tree, J. (2017). Intact word 
processing in developmental prosopagnosia. Scientific Reports, 7(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-01917-8 
Busigny, T., & Rossion, B. (2010). Acquired prosopagnosia abolishes the face inversion 
effect. Cortex, 46, 965981. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2009.07.004 
Bylemans, T., Vrancken, L., & Verfaillie, K. (2020). Developmental Prosopagnosia and 
Elastic Versus Static Face Recognition in an Incidental Learning Task. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02098 
Calamia, M., Markon, K., & Tranel, D. (2012). Scoring Higher the Second Time Around: 
Meta-Analyses of Practice Effects in Neuropsychological Assessment. The Clinical 
Neuropsychologist, 26(4), 543-570. https://doi.org/10.1080/13854046.2012.680913 
Carey, S. (1992). Becoming a face expert. Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society B 
Biological Sciences, 335(1273). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.1992.0012 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1161059
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643290903343149
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-010-1150-4
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-010-1150-4
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8295.1986.tb02199.x
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643290500441841
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-01917-8
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02098
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.1992.0012
Chawarska, K., Ye, S., Shic, F., & Chen, L. (2015). Multilevel Differences in Spontaneous 
Social Attention in Toddlers with Autism Spectrum Disorder. Child 
Development, 87(2), 543-557. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12473 
Chawarska, K., & Volkmar, F. (2007). Impairments in monkey and human face recognition 
in 2-year-old toddlers with Autism Spectrum Disorder and Developmental 
Delay. Developmental Science, 10(2), 266-279. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
7687.2006.00543.x  
Cooper, K.M., Krieg, A., & Brownell, S.E. (2018). Who Perceives They Are Smarter? 
Exploring the Influence of Student Characteristics on Student Academic Self-Concept 
in Physiology. Advances in Physiology Education, 42(2), 200-208. 
https://doi.org/10.1152/advan.00085.2017 
Corrow, S., Albonico, A., & Barton, J. (2018). Diagnosing Prosopagnosia: The Utility of 
Visual Noise in the Cambridge Face Recognition Test. Perception, 47(3), 330-343. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0301006617750045 
Corrow, S.L., Dalrymple, K.A. & Barton, J.J. (2016). Prosopagnosia: current perspectives. 
Eye and Brain, 26(8), 165-175. https://doi.org/10.2147/EB.S92838 
Daini, R., Comparetti, C.M. & Ricciardeli, P. (2014). Behavioral dissociation between 
emotional and non-emotional facial expressions in congenital prosopagnosia. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 974. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00974 
Dalrymple, K.A., Elison, J.T. & Duchaine, B. (2017). Face-selective -and domain-general 
visual processing deficits in children with developmental prosopagnosia. Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70(2), 259-275. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2015.1122642 
Dalrymple, K.A., Fletcher, K., Corrow, S., das Nair, R., Barton, J.J., Yonas, A., & Duchaine, 
B. (2014). A Room Full of Strangers Every Day: The Psychosocial Impact of 
Developmental Prosopagnosia on Children and Their Families. Journal of 
Psychosomatic Research, 77(2), 144-150. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2014.06.001 
Dalrymple, K., Garrido, L., & Duchaine, B. (2014). Dissociation between face perception and 
face memory in adults, but not children, with developmental 
prosopagnosia. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 10, 10-20. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2014.07.003 
de Gelder, B., & Stekelenburg, J. (2005). Naso-temporal asymmetry of the N170 for 
processing faces in normal viewers but not in developmental 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12473
https://doi.org/10.1177/0301006617750045
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00974
https://doi.org/10.1080%2F17470218.2015.1122642
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2014.07.003
prosopagnosia. Neuroscience Letters, 376(1), 40-45. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2004.11.047 
De Luca, M., Pizzamiglio, M., Di Vita, A., Palermo, L., Tanzilli, A., Dacquino, C., & 
Piccardi, L. (2019). First the nose, last the eyes in congenital prosopagnosia: Look 
like your father looks. Neuropsychology, 33(6), 855-861. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000556 
De Renzi, E., Faglioni, P., Grossi, D., & Nichelli, P. (1991). Apperceptive and Associative 
Forms of Prosopagnosia. Cortex, 27(2), 213-221. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-
9452(13)80125-6 
DeGutis, J., Chatterjee, G., Mercado, R., & Nakayama, K. (2012). Face gender recognition in 
developmental prosopagnosia: Evidence for holistic processing and use of configural 
information. Visual Cognition, 20(10), 1242-1253. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13506285.2012.744788 
DeGutis, J., Cohan, S., & Nakayama, K. (2014). Holistic face training enhances face 
processing in developmental prosopagnosia. Brain, 137(6), 1781-1798. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu062 
Delvenne, J.F., Seron, X., Coyette, F., & Rossion, B. (2004). Evidence for perceptual deficits 
in associative visual (prosop)agnosia: A single-case study. Neuropsychologia, 42, 
597612. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2003.10.008 
Dennett, H., McKone, E., Tavashmi, R., Hall, A., Pidcock, M., Edwards, M., & Duchaine, B. 
(2011). The Cambridge Car Memory Test: A task matched in format to the 
Cambridge Face Memory Test, with norms, reliability, sex differences, dissociations 
from face memory, and expertise effects. Behavior Research Methods, 44(2), 587-
605. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-011-0160-2 
Duchaine, B. (2000). Developmental prosopagnosia with normal configural 
processing. Neuroreport, 11(1), 79-83. https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-200001170-
00016 
Duchaine, B., Germine, L., & Nakayama, K. (2007). Family resemblance: Ten family 
members with prosopagnosia and within-class object agnosia. Cognitive 
Neuropsychology, 24(4), 419-430. https://doi.org/10.1080/02643290701380491 
Duchaine, D., & Nakayama, K. (2005). Dissociations of face and object recognition in 
developmental prosopagnosia. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(2), 249-261. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/0898929053124857 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2004.11.047
https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000556
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-9452(13)80125-6
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0010-9452(13)80125-6
https://doi.org/10.1080/13506285.2012.744788
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu062
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-011-0160-2
https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-200001170-00016
https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-200001170-00016
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643290701380491
https://doi.org/10.1162/0898929053124857
Duchaine, B., & Nakayama, K. (2006). The Cambridge Face Memory Test: Results for 
neurologically intact individuals and an investigation of its validity using inverted 
face stimuli and prosopagnosic participants. Neuropsychologia, 44(4), 576-585. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2005.07.001 
Duchaine, B., & Weidenfeld, A. (2003). An evaluation of two commonly used tests of 
unfamiliar face recognition. Neuropsychologia, 41(6), 713-720. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0028-3932(02)00222-1 
Ehrlinger, J. & Dunning, D. (2003). How Chronic Self-Views Influence (And Potentially 
Mislead) Estimates of Performance. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 
84(1), 5-17. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.84.1.5 
Falck-Ytter, T., Thorup, E., & Blte, S. (2014). Brief Report: Lack of Processing Bias for the 
Objects Other People Attend to in 3-Year-Olds with Autism. Journal of Autism And 
Developmental Disorders, 45(6), 1897-1904. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-014-
2278-4 
Fine, D.R. (2012). A life with prosopagnosia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 29(5-6). 354-359. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2012.736377 
Fletcher-Watson, S., Leekam, S., Benson, V., Frank, M., & Findlay, J. (2009). Eye-
movements reveal attention to social information in autism spectrum 
disorder. Neuropsychologia, 47(1), 248-257. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.07.016 
Frank, M., Vul, E., & Saxe, R. (2011). Measuring the Development of Social Attention Using 
Free-Viewing. Infancy, 17(4), 355-375. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-
7078.2011.00086.x  
Freeth, M., Chapman, P., Ropar, D., & Mitchell, P. (2010). Do Gaze Cues in Complex 
Scenes Capture and Direct the Attention of High Functioning Adolescents with ASD? 
Evidence from Eye-tracking. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 40(5), 
534-547. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-009-0893-2 
Fry, R., Wilmer, J., Xie, I., Verfaeille, M., & DeGutis, J. (2020). Evidence for Normal Novel 
Object Recognition Abilities in Developmental Prosopagnosia. Royal Society Open 
Science, 7(9). https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.200988 
Gainotti, G., Barbier, A., & Marra, C. (2003). Slowly progressive defect in recognition of 
familiar people in a patient with right anterior temporal atrophy. Brain, 126(4), 792-
803. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awg092 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2005.07.001
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0028-3932(02)00222-1
https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0022-3514.84.1.5
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-014-2278-4
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-014-2278-4
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2012.736377
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2008.07.016
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-009-0893-2
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awg092
Gray, K., Bird, G., & Cook, R. (2017). Robust associations between the 20-item 
prosopagnosia index and the Cambridge Face Memory Test in the general 
population. Royal Society Open Science, 4(3), 160923. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.160923 
Grter, T., Grter, M., Bell, V. & Carbon, C.C. (2009). Visual mental imagery in congenital 
prosopagnosia. Neuroscience Letters, 453(3), 135-140. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2009.02.021 
Haxby, J., Hoffman, E., & Gobbini, M. (2000). The distributed human neural system for face 
perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 4(6), 223-233. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(00)01482-0 
Jansari, A., Miller, S., Pearce, L., Cobb, S., Sagiv, N., Williams, A. L., Tree, J., & Hanley, J. 
R. (2015). The man who mistook his neuropsychologist for a popstar: When 
configural processing fails in acquired prosopagnosia. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 9, 390. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00390 
Johnen, A., Schmukle, S., Httenbrink, J., Kischka, C., Kennerknecht, I., & Dobel, C. (2014). 
A family at risk: Congenital prosopagnosia, poor face recognition and visuoperceptual 
deficits within one family. Neuropsychologia, 58, 52-63. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.03.013 
Kapur, N. (1987). Some comments on the technical acceptability of Warrington's 
Recognition Memory Test. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 26(2), 144-146. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8260.1987.tb00741.x 
Kennerknecht, I., Ho, N.Y., & Wong, V.C. (2008). Prevalence of Hereditary Prosopagnosia 
(HPA) in Hong Kong Chinese Population. American Journal of Medical Genetics 
Part A, 146A(22), 2863-2870. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32552 
Kracke, I. (2008). Developmental prosopagnosia in Asperger syndrome: presentation and 
discussion of an individual case. Developmental Medicine & Child 
Neurology, 36(10), 873-886. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.1994.tb11778.x 
Laguesse, R., Tez, T., Hall, B., Irons, J., McKone, E., Daini, R., Albonico, A., Malaspina, M., 
Taylor, E., Rhodes, G., Charpentier, A., Rossion, B., & Palermo, R. (2013). 
Subjective self-assessment of face recognition ability is only weakly related to 
objective measures of face recognition performance. Journal of Vision, 13(9), 979-
979. https://doi.org/10.1167/13.9.979  
Lai, M., Lombardo, M.V., Pasco, G., Ruigrok, A.N.V., Wheelwright, S.J., Sadek, S.A., 
Chakrabarti, B., MRC AIMS Consortium., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2011). A Behavioral 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.160923
https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(00)01482-0
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00390
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.03.013
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8260.1987.tb00741.x
https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32552
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.1994.tb11778.x
Comparison of Male and Female Adults with High Functioning Autism Spectrum 
Conditions. PLoS ONE, 6(6). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0020835 
Lee, Y., Duchaine, B., Wilson, H., & Nakayama, K. (2010). Three cases of developmental 
prosopagnosia from one family: Detailed neuropsychological and psychophysical 
investigation of face processing. Cortex, 46(8), 949-964. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2009.07.012 
Liversedge, S., & Findlay, J. (2000). Saccadic eye movements and cognition. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 4(1), 6-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(99)01418-7  
Livingston, L., & Shah, P. (2017). People with and without prosopagnosia have insight into 
their face recognition ability. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 71(5), 
1260-1262. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2017.1310911 
Malaspina, M., Albonico, A., Toneatto, C., & Daini, R. (2017). What do eye movements tell 
us about the visual perception of individuals with congenital 
prosopagnosia?. Neuropsychology, 31(5), 546-563. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000362 
Marsh, J., Biotti, F., Cook, R., & Gray, K. (2019). The discrimination of facial sex in 
developmental prosopagnosia. Scientific Reports, 9(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-55569-x 
McConachie, H.R. (1976). Developmental prosopagnosia. A single case report. Cortex, 
12(1), 7682. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-9452(76)80033-0 
McKone, E., Hall, A., Pidcock, M., Palermo, R., Wilkinson, R., Rivolta, D., Yovel, G., 
David, J.M., & OConnor, K.B. (2011). Face ethnicity and measurement reliability 
affect face recognition performance in developmental prosopagnosia: Evidence from 
the Cambridge Face Memory TestAustralian. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 28(2), 
109-146. https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2011.616880 
Moseley, R.L., Hitchiner, R., & Kirkby, J.A. (2018). Self-Reported Sex Differences in High-
Functioning Adults with Autism: A Meta-Analysis. Molecular Autism, 9(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-018-0216-6 
Murray, E., Hills, P.J., Bennetts, R.J., & Bate, S. (2018). Identifying Hallmark Symptoms of 
Developmental Prosopagnosia for Non-Experts. Scientific Reports, 8(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-20089-7 
Nakayama, Y., Covassin, T., Schatz, P., Nogle, S., & Kovan, J. (2014). Examination of the 
Test-Retest Reliability of a Computerized Neurocognitive Test Battery. The American 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2009.07.012
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2017.1310911
https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000362
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-55569-x
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-9452(76)80033-0
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2011.616880
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-018-0216-6
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-20089-7
Journal of Sports Medicine, 42(8), 2000-2005. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0363546514535901 
Neil, L., Cappagli, G., Karaminis, T., Jenkins, R., & Pellicano, E. (2016). Recognizing the 
same face in different contexts: Testing within-person face recognition in typical 
development and in autism. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 143, 139-153. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2015.09.029 
Nmeth, K., Zimmer, M., Schweinberger, S., Vakli, P., & Kovcs, G. (2014). The 
Background of Reduced Face Specificity of N170 in Congenital Prosopagnosia. Plos 
ONE, 9(7), e101393. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0101393  
Neumann, D., Spezio, M., Piven, J., & Adolphs, R. (2006). Looking you in the mouth: 
abnormal gaze in autism resulting from impaired top-down modulation of visual 
attention. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 1(3), 194-202. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsl030 
O'Bryant, S., Hilsabeck, R., McCaffrey, R., & Gouvier, W. (2003). The Recognition Memory 
Test Examination of ethnic differences and norm validity. Archives of Clinical 
Neuropsychology, 18(2), 135-143. https://doi.org/10.1093/arclin/18.2.135 
Palermo, R., Rossion, B., Rhodes, G., Laguesse, R., Tez, T., & Hall, B., Albonico, A., 
Malaspina, M., Daini, R., Irons, J., Al-Janabi, S., Taylor, L.C., Rivolta, D., & 
McKone, E. (2017). Do People Have Insight into their Face Recognition 
Abilities?. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70(2), 218-233. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1161058 
Rabin, L., Barr, W., & Burton, L. (2005). Assessment practices of clinical neuropsychologists 
in the United States and Canada: A survey of INS, NAN, and APA Division 40 
members. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 20(1), 33-65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acn.2004.02.005 
Rayner, K. (2009). Eye movements and attention in reading, scene perception, and visual 
search. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62(8), 1457-1506. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470210902816461  
Riby, D., Hancock, P., Jones, N., & Hanley, M. (2013). Spontaneous and cued gaze-
following in autism and Williams syndrome. Journal of Neurodevelopmental 
Disorders, 5(1), 13. https://doi.org/10.1186/1866-1955-5-13 
Righart, R., & de Gelder, B. (2007). Impaired face and body perception in developmental 
prosopagnosia. Proceedings of The National Academy of Sciences, 104(43), 17234-
17238. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707753104 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2015.09.029
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsl030
https://doi.org/10.1093/arclin/18.2.135
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1161058
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acn.2004.02.005
https://doi.org/10.1186/1866-1955-5-13
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0707753104
Russell, R., Duchaine, B., & Nakayama, K. (2009). Super-recognizers: People with 
extraordinary face recognition ability. People with extraordinary face recognition 
ability. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(2), 252-257. 
https://doi.org/10.3758/PBR.16.2.252 
Rutherford, M., & Towns, A. (2008). Scan Path Differences and Similarities During Emotion 
Perception in those With and Without Autism Spectrum Disorders. Journal Of Autism 
And Developmental Disorders, 38(7), 1371-1381. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-
007-0525-7 
Sachse, M., Schlitt, S., Hainz, D., Ciaramidaro, A., Walter, H., & Poustka, F., Bolte, S., & 
Freitag, C.M. (2014). Facial emotion recognition in paranoid schizophrenia and 
autism spectrum disorder. Schizophrenia Research, 159(2-3), 509-514. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2014.08.030 
Schmalzl, L., Palermo, R., & Coltheart, M. (2008). Cognitive heterogeneity in genetically 
based prosopagnosia: A family study. Journal of Neuropsychology, 2(1), 99-117. 
https://doi.org/10.1348/174866407x256554 
Schwarzer, G., Huber, S., Grter, M., Grter, T., Gro, C., Hipfel, M., & Kennerknecht, I. 
(2007). Gaze behaviour in hereditary prosopagnosia. Psychological Research, 71(5), 
583-590. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00426-006-0068-0 
Shah, P., Sowden, S., Gaule, A., Catmur, C., & Bird, G. (2015). The 20 item prosopagnosia 
index (PI20): relationship with the Glasgow face-matching test. Royal Society Open 
Science, 2(11), 150305. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.150305 
Shakeshaft, N., & Plomin, R. (2015). Genetic specificity of face recognition. Proceedings of 
The National Academy of Sciences, 112(41), 12887-12892. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1421881112 
Sim, S.Y, Saperia, J., Brown, J.A., & Bernieri, F.J. (2015). Judging Attractiveness: Biases 
Due to Raters Own Attractiveness and Intelligence. Cogent Psychology, 2(1). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23311908.2014.996316 
Sumner, E., Leonard, H., & Hill, E. (2018). Comparing Attention to Socially-Relevant 
Stimuli in Autism Spectrum Disorder and Developmental Coordination 
Disorder. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 46(8), 1717-1729. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802-017-0393-3 
Susilo, T., & Duchaine, B. (2013). Advances in Developmental Prosopagnosia. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology, 23(3), 423-429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2012.12.011 
https://doi.org/10.3758/PBR.16.2.252
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-007-0525-7
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-007-0525-7
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2014.08.030
https://doi.org/10.1348/174866407x256554
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00426-006-0068-0
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.150305
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1421881112
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802-017-0393-3
Sutton, A. Face blindness (prosopagnosia) and me. (2008). 
http://www.faceblind.me/andy/faceblindandme.html 
Towler, J., Fisher, K., & Eimer, M. (2017). The Cognitive and Neural Basis of 
Developmental Prosopagnosia. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70(2), 
316-344. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1165263  
Towler, J., Gosling, A., Duchaine, B. & Eimer, M. (2012). The face-sensitive N170 
component in developmental prosopagnosia. Neuropsychologia, 50(14), 3588-3599. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.10.017 
Trevisan, D., Roberts, N., Lin, C., & Birmingham, E. (2017). How do adults and teens with 
self-declared Autism Spectrum Disorder experience eye contact? A qualitative 
analysis of first-hand accounts. PLOS ONE, 12(11), e0188446. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0188446 
Ulrich, P., Wilkinson, D., Ferguson, H., Smith, L., Bindemann, M., Johnston, R., & 
Schmalzl, L. (2017). Perceptual and Memorial Contributions to Developmental 
Prosopagnosia. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70(2), 298-315. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1177101 
Van Belle, G., De Graef, P., Verfaillie, K., Busigny, T., & Rossion, B. (2010). Whole not 
hole: Expert face recognition requires holistic perception. Neuropsychologia, 48(9), 
2620-2629. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.04.034 
Vildalen, V.U., Brevik, E.J., Haavik, J., & Lundervold, A.J. (2016). Females with ADHD 
Report More Severe Symptoms Than Males on the Adult ADHD Self-Report Scale. 
Journal of Attention Disorders. https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054716659362 
Warrington, E. K. (1984).Recognition Memory Test: Manual. NFER-Nelson. 
White, D., Rivolta, D.A., Burton, M., Al-Janabi, S., & Palermo, R. (2017). Face Matching 
Impairment in Developmental Prosopagnosia. Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 70(2), 287-297. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1173076 
Wilmer, J.B., Germine, L., Chabris, C.F., Chatterjee, G., Williams, M., Loken, E., 
Nakayama, K., & Duchaine, B. (2010). Human face recognition ability is specific and 
highly heritable. Proceedings of The National Academy of Sciences, 107(11), 5238-
5241. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0913053107 
Wilmer, J., Germine, L., & Nakayama, K. (2014). Face recognition: a model specific 
ability. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00769 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.10.017
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0188446
https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2016.1177101
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2010.04.034
https://doi.org/10.1177%2F1087054716659362
https://doi.org/10.1080%2F17470218.2016.1173076
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00769
Wilson, C., Brock, J., & Palermo, R. (2010). Attention to social stimuli and facial identity 
recognition skills in autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Intellectual Disability 
Research, 54(12), 1104-1115. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2788.2010.01340.x 
Wilson, C. E., Palermo, R., Schmalzl, L., & Brock, J. (2010). Specificity of impaired facial 
identity recognition in children with suspected developmental prosopagnosia. 
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 27(1), 3045. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2010.490207  
Yardley, L., McDermott, L., Pisarski, S., Duchaine, B., & Nakayama, K. (2008). 
Psychosocial Consequences of Developmental Prosopagnosia: A Problem of 
Recognition. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 65(5), 445-451. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychores.2008.03.013 
Young, A., & De Haan, E. (1988). Boundaries of covert recognition in 
prosopagnosia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 5(3), 317-336. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643298808252938 
Young, A. W., Newcombe, F., de Haan, E. H., Small, M., & Hay, D. C. (1993). Face 
perception after brain injury. Selective impairments affecting identity and expression. 
Brain, 116, 941959. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/116.4.941 
Young, A., & Noyes, E. (2019). We need to talk about superrecognizers Invited commentary 
on: Ramon, M., Bobak, A. K., & White, D. Superrecognizers: From the lab to the 
world and back again. British Journal of Psychology, 110(3), 492-494. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjop.12395 
Zantinge, G., van Rijn, S., Stockmann, L., & Swaab, H. (2017). Physiological Arousal and 
Emotion Regulation Strategies in Young Children with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 47(9), 2648-2657. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-017-3181-6 
Zell, E., & Krizan, Z. (2014). Do People Have Insight into Their Abilities? A 
Metasynthesis. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9(2), 111-125. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691613518075  
Zhu, Q., Song, Y., Hu, S., Li, X., Tian, M., Zhen, Z., Dong, Q., Kanwisher, N., & Liu, J.  
(2010). Heritability of the Specific Cognitive Ability of Face Perception. Current 
Biology, 20(2), 137-142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.11.067 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2788.2010.01340.x
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2010.490207
https://doi.org/10.1080/02643298808252938
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjop.12395
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-017-3181-6
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.11.067
