Coversheet for Thesis in Sussex Research Online
AUniversityofSussexPhDthesis
AvailableonlineviaSussexResearchOnline:
http://sro.sussex.ac.uk/ 
Thisthesisisprotectedbycopyrightwhichbelongstotheauthor. 
Thisthesiscannotbereproducedorquotedextensivelyfromwithoutfirst
obtainingpermissioninwritingfromtheAuthor 
Thecontentmustnotbechangedinanywayorsoldcommerciallyinany
formatormediumwithouttheformalpermissionoftheAuthor 
Whenreferringtothiswork,fullbibliographicdetailsincludingthe
author,title,awardinginstitutionanddateofthethesismustbegiven
PleasevisitSussexResearchOnlineformoreinformationandfurtherdetails 
Asymptotic Safety And High-Energy Scattering At The
Large Hadron Collider
Rob Old
June 2, 2016
UNIVERSITY OF SUSSEX
ROBERT OLD DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
ASYMPTOTIC SAFETY AND HIGH-ENERGY SCATTERING
AT THE LARGE HADRON COLLIDER
SUMMARY
The fascinating idea that in higher-dimensional models the fundamental scale of grav-
ity, the Planck scale, could be as low as the electroweak scale has stimulated a substantial
body of work in the past decade. In addition to solving the hierarchy problem, a low
quantum gravity scale also oers the exciting prospect that collider experiments become
sensitive to the quantum nature of gravity. Quantum gravity signatures include missing
energy due to graviton emission, enhancement of standard model reference processes via
virtual graviton exchange, or the production and decay of mini black holes. Dedicated
searches for all of these are presently under way at the Large Hadron Collider.
Previous predictions for colliders have been encumbered by the absence of a complete
theory of quantum gravity. However, the recent years have also seen important progress
in the understanding of gravity as an asymptotically safe quantum field theory, in which
the high-energy behaviour is controlled by an interacting fixed point. The notorious di-
vergences of perturbation theory are thus avoided, and the theory remains predictive at
arbitrarily high energies.
In this thesis, we investigate the eects of asymptotic safety upon predictions for
graviton-mediated processes in higher-dimensions at colliders. We consider single-graviton
mediated eects in the Born approximation as well as the multi-graviton exchanges which
dominate the forward scattering region at transplanckian energies, as described by the
eikonal approximation. Cross sections are derived and a detailed comparison with find-
ings from eective theory is made. Using the PYTHIA event generator we find that for
some regions in parameter space quantum gravity eects are enhanced over the semiclas-
sical predictions, as well as over standard model backgrounds. The use of our results to
constrain our theory parameters is discussed.
Acknowledgements
This work has been carried out under the supervision of Daniel Litim. I am grateful for
his tolerance of my often empty desk so that I could be with my family in Liverpool, and
for his eorts in coercing me to the completion of this thesis. The sta at Sussex have
proved helpful to a fault, and I have called on all of them for help and guidance at some
point or another; special thanks in particular are due to Andrea Banfi, for his help with
the HPC cluster; Francesco Hautmann, for his collaboration on the stationary phase and
phenomenological work to be described; and to my second supervisor Stephan Huber, for
his patient ear.
It is a source of great regret that I couldnt be around to share more beers than
those I enjoyed with my fellow students, especially those with whom I have shared an
oce and a supervisor: Raul, Kostas, Edouard (and his knowledge of books, maths and
Mathematica), Kevin (and long chats about black holes) and Jan (my linguistic mentor
as well as collaborator).
I am grateful to Gudrun Hiller and Henning Sedello at the University of Dortmund
for hospitality, and for making their code available to me, and to Eleni Vryonidou for
correspondence and for kindly providing some of her data. I have been supported by an
STFC studentship.
Finally, I must acknowledge the love and support of my family. Some who are no
longer here to witness the completion of my PhD left me in no doubt that it would not
have made the least dierence to their opinion of me if they had, such was their unfailingly
blind partiality. My parents made enormous sacrifices for my education, and better still
brought me up in a house full of books- one of which, A brief history of time, led me
directly along the path this thesis completes. My aunt Tuts Eileen has always been a
well of support and humour. And last, but by no means least, to my most immediate
family- Mary, James, Pascal and Merlin. For the last four years, and especially in the last
few weeks, I have been negligent of my duties around the house/playing Xbox/going for
walkies/ as a comfy knee undisturbed by a laptop (respectively). Words cannot express
how much I am looking forward to spending the rest of my life making good on the debt
Ive thus built up.
Contents
Acknowledgements ii
Declaration iv
1 Introduction 1
2 Preliminaries 4
2.1 Scales and divergences in quantum gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2 Asymptotically safe gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2.1 Asymptotic safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2.2 The exact RG equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.2.3 A practical implementation of asymptotic safety . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3 Quantum gravity at the LHC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.4 High-energy gravitational scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.4.1 Semiclassical gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.4.2 The eikonal amplitude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3 Quantum gravity in the eikonal 32
3.1 Semiclassical gravity? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.1.1 Born amplitude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.1.2 Eikonal Phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.1.3 Eikonal amplitude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
3.2 RG improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.2.1 Born amplitude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
3.2.2 Eikonal phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
3.2.3 Eikonal amplitude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
3.3 The stationary phase approximation to the eikonal amplitude . . . . . . . . 54
3.3.1 Semiclassical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.3.2 RG improvement of the eikonal phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
3.4 Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
4 Phenomenology of quantum gravity 65
4.1 Transplanckian scattering at hadron colliders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
4.2 Dimensional regularisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
4.3 Phenomenology of quantum gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
5 Conclusions 75
A Calculations with linear RG running 85
A.1 Calculation of AL & L . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
A.2 Contour integral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
B Special Functions 89
B.1 Bessel Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
B.2 Hypergeometric functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
B.3 Meijer-G functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
C The Stationary Phase Approximation 92
C.1 Asymptotic expansion of integrals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
List of Figures
2.1 Comparison of the analytic solution (red) to the RG equations (2.26) in
n = 6 to the parametrisations ZQ (magenta) and ZL (blue) for the field
strength renormalisation factor for the graviton. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.2 Giddings proposed Phase diagram for gravitational scattering; repro-
duced from [1]. The quantum limit is imposed by the uncertainty prinic-
ple E > 1/b in natural units; the boundaries between the other regions are
explained in the main text. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.3 A typical ladder diagram, created by J. Schroder, that contributes to the
eikonal amplitude. The straight lines represent the participating scattering
particles. The wiggly lines represent virtual gravitons. . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.1 The Born Amplitude with a sharp UV cuto for dierent numbers n of
extra dimensions: n=3 (red), 4 (blue), 5 (magenta), 6 (grey). Each has
been normalised to the value of each amplitude at t = 0; note that this
procedure removes the dependence of the amplitudes on the values of the
dimensionful parameters s,M , except insofar as that  sets the scale on the
horizontal axis. For comparison we also plot the asymptotic limit  2/t
(green). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.2 The eikonal phase in eective field theory for n varying from 3 to 6 (top
to bottom), normalised to its value at b = 1/. Note the variation of the
scaling behaviour with n for large  = b. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.3 The functions Fn(y) for the labelled values of n. The real parts are shown
in red, the imaginary parts in blue, and the absolute values in magenta. . . 40
3.4 In this figure we compare the eikonal amplitude obtained via dimensional
regularisation (blue) to that derived in eective field theory with  = 0.8MD
(yellow) and  = MD (red). We have used the reference values of
TeV; MD = 1.5TeV in n = 6. Note that as the DR amplitude makes no
reference to the scale  we have plotted our momentum transfer in units of
TeV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
3.5 The quenched approximation to the RG-improved Born amplitude for dif-
ferent numbers n of extra dimensions, normalised to the value of each am-
plitude at t = 0 Note that this procedure removes the dependence of the
amplitudes on the values of the dimensionful parameters s,MD,T except
insofar as that T sets the scale on the horizontal axis. Here we compare
the amplitudes to their asymptotic limit  1/q4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3.6 The linear approximation to the RG-improved Born amplitude for dierent
numbers n of extra dimensions, normalised to the value of each amplitude
at t = 0. Here we compare the amplitudes to their asymptotic limit  1/q4. 45
3.7 Here we compare dierent prescriptions for implementing asymptotic safety
in the Born amplitude in n = 5 (red) and n = 6 (blue). The dashed curves
show the quenched prescription (2.29) and the solid curves show the linear
prescription (2.30). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
3.8 The quenched approximation to the RG-improved eikonal phase for dierent
numbers n of extra dimensions. Here we see that in this approximation Q
oscillates wildly about the expected value  bn. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
3.9 The linear approximation to the RG-improved eikonal phase (solid lines)
for dierent numbers n of extra dimensions. In this approximation to the
running of GN , the asymptotic  bn behaviour as expected from the semi-
classical analysis (dashed lines) is clear. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
3.10 Here we plot the functions Hn(b
0) for dierent numbers of extra dimensions.
We see here that the functions grow as  bn at small arguments and settle
to 1 at long distances, as required to reproduce the semiclassical result. . . 50
3.11 Variation of the eikonal amplitudes with T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.12 The absolute value of F4 is plotted against y for dierent fixed z: The DR
case (black), z = 10 (blue), z = 5 (blue,dashed), z = 2 (blue, dotted), z = 1
(orange), z = 0.8 (orange,dashed) and z = 0.5 (red). . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.13 The absolute value of F3 is plotted against z for dierent fixed y: y = 0
(blue), y = 1 (red) and y = 5 (green). The DR case is always given as a
dashed line in the corresponding colour. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.14 @
@(bT )
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
3.15 The derivative of the eikonal phase with respect to its argument for varying
n. The eect of the fixed point is to make the derivative of  vanish at bT =
0, which together with the eventual onset of classical scaling behaviour,
enforces the existence of a maximal value of the derivative. . . . . . . . . . 56
3.16 These plots show the length scales defined by the stationary phase approx-
imation in n = 3. The classical result is shown in gold. The blue and red
lines are the numerical solutions of the stationary phase condition @
corresponding respectively to roots at long and short distances. Left: The
blue and red curves merge when q is equal to the maximum value of @
for greater values of q the root finder returns this value for bs as the best
approximation to the stationary point, but no solutions exist. Right: We
see that the ratio of the stationary phase length scale tends to the classical
result as we take the semi-classical limit of large T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
3.17 Here we check that we can indeed dierentiate between the stationary phase
approximations to the real (red) and imaginary (blue) parts of the semi-
classical (SC, solid lines) and RG-improved amplitudes (dashed lines). In
this plot for the purposes of comparison we have included dimensionful
factors of b2c and 
T , so that each diers from the full eikonal amplitude
by the same factor 4s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
3.18 Here we show the stationary phase approximation to f(n, c, q). With large
enough
s, it is easy to satisfy the condition 1  q/T  0.06 s
Mn+2D
we find that the stationary phase approximation works well unless q is very
small (so that expanding the Bessel function is illegitimate) or close to the
critical value where the two roots merge. At this value the expression (C.7)
breaks down, because the second derivative of the eikonal phase vanishes. . 59
3.19 This plot shows the real (red) and imaginary (blue) parts of the short-
(solid) and long- (dashed) distance stationary points to the stationary phase
approximation. The dominance of the long distance physics is clear. . . . . 60
3.20 Here we show the ratio (3.64) with lengths expressed in units of bc, plotted as
a function of the variable z. The peak at z  2 corresponds to the divergence
of 00L(b); for values of z below this, the stationary phase approximation
breaks down. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
3.21 Comparison of (3.72) to the numerical evaluation of the eikonal. . . . . . . 62
3.22 In this figure the blue dotted curve represents the absolute value of |f | for
the indicated parameters. The solid lines represent the scaling behaviours
found in the semiclassical result (3.20) (blue) and in (3.33) (pink). The
vertical red dashed line denotes the value of q/T at which the stationary
phase approximation breaks down. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
4.1 Illustrating the rapid decay of the PDFs at large x. Here we show the
MSTWLO2008 pdfs at Q = 1TeV. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
4.2 Comparison of our determination of the dierential cross-section to that
of the authors [2] for Q = q (pink), Q = PT /2 (yellow) and the stationary
phase matching (blue). The solid curves are our results, and the data points
are their results, kindly provided by E. Vryonidou. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
4.3 Comparison of positive and negative rapidity separations with and with-
out imposing crossing symmetry on the amplitude, kindly provided by
E.Vryonidou. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
4.4 Comparison of the exclusive (blue) and inclusive (pink) dijet dierential
cross-sections. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
4.5 Illustration of the eect of varying MD on the dijet signal, with MD=1.5
TeV (red) and MD=3 TeV (green). We also compare the signal to the QCD
background (blue). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
4.6 In these plots, we compare the variation of the dierential cross section with
T (left) to the variation of F (y, z) with z in n = 5 (above) and n = 6 (below). 72
4.7 The RG-improved eikonal cross-section, with the contributions of positive
(blue) and negative (red) rapidity separations of the jets separated. The
increased dominance of positive over negative rapidities due to the more
rapid decay of the RG-improved amplitude with t is clear. . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.1 The contour used to evaluate the eikonal phase, with poles corresponding
to n = 6. The contribution from a semicircular contour of radius R (here
shown with R = 10) decays exponentially. The poles of the integrand are
denoted by the blue crosses (for b = 1). We make a semicircular indentation
around the pole at z = 0, and approach the branch cut along the negative
axis from above. Obviously we take the limit in which these indentations
tend to zero. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
Chapter 1
Introduction
The investigation of scattering amplitudes describing the gravitational interactions of par-
ticles is a subject with a long history, stretching back at least as far as [3]. That it is such
an area of active research more than fifty years later is testament to the fact that it is
both dicult and interesting, a tangled thicket of seemingly impenetrable mysteries from
which insights are hard-won, but amply rewarding.
As emphasised by Giddings [1], the scattering formulation provides a firm footing from
which to begin exploring some of the deepest questions in physics. In quantum gravity, it
is not even clear how to define observables with complete generality. Quantum field theory
is usually couched in terms of n-point correlation functions of local fields,
G(x1, . . . , xn) = h(x1) . . .(xn)i (1.1)
but the classical theory of gravity, general relativity, has a gauge symmetry in the form
of dieomorphism invariance; a function like (1.1) will clearly not be a gauge-invariant
quantity, as under a local transformation x  x + (x) each field will vary by some
amount  = @. However, by working in an asymptotically flat spacetime, we can
give meaning to the concept of momentum eigenstates defined at infinity which do not
suer from this problem, and hence formulate a gauge-invariant S-matrix. This formalism
makes unitarity manifest, and has played an important role [4] in the emerging consensus
that the decay of a black hole via Hawking radiation preserves information.
The scattering formulation also provides a convenient framework in which to check that
the physical consequences of some theory are reasonable, in the sense that they do not
conflict with already established physics. In particular, it is known that general relativity
provides an excellent description of a wide range of physical phenomena. This strongly
suggests that scattering amplitudes derived from the classical action for a symmetric tensor
g of rank two coupled to a matter described by a Lagrangian Lm (see e.g. [5]),
S =  1
16GN
|Det(g)| (R + Lm) (1.2)
where R is the Ricci scalar corresponding to g , should provide a useful description of
physical processes in which the quantum mechanics of the colliding particles is important,
but the gravitational field can be treated as classical. The most obvious example is that
at low energies, we would usually expect to be able to apply leading order perturbation
theory, and indeed the Born amplitude thus derived reproduces the result obtained by
taking the Fourier transform of the Newtonian potential. However, it was first realised
by tHooft [6] that due to the weakening of gravity with distance, we can consider the
quantum mechanics of processes occurring at substantially higher energies even than the
Planck scale, provided that we restrict our attention to large impact parameters. This
picture was subsequently corroborated by the analysis of the Verlindes [7] and connected
to the use of the eikonal approximation by Kabat and Ortiz [8]. In a similar vein it is
natural to consider the relation of these ideas to the process of black hole formation via
the Hoop conjecture [9]; a black hole is expected to form in a collision when the impact
parameter of a collision becomes less than the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the
centre-of-mass energy.
Using the methods of eective field theory, one can go even further, and consider some
radiative corrections to physical processes that arise when the quantum theory of the
gravitational field is taken into account. Such a program has been initiated by Donoghue
in particular [10, 11]. However, gravity is famously non-renormalizable [12, 13, 14], so
that this procedure leaves us with expressions that depend explicitly on the method of
regulating ultraviolet divergences.
This leads us naturally to wonder about the domain of validity of our eective field
theory approach. Historically, this was always assumed to be comparable to the Planck
scale MP l, defined by Newtons constant GN via GN = M
P l in units such that c = ~ =
1. This assumption was called into question by the famous proposal of Arkani-Hamed,
Dimopoulos and Dvali (ADD) that spacetime might have more than four dimensions,
but that only gravity can propagate in the extra dimensions [15, 16]. In this scenario
the fundamental scale associated with gravity is lowered to  1 TeV, with the apparent
hugeness of the Planck scale being merely the emergent result of gravity spreading out
over a relatively large compactified volume Vn associated with the extra dimensions. This
idea was the stimulus for thousands of subsequent papers. As well as solving the hierarchy
problem it oers the exciting possibility that that the riddles of quantum gravity can be
subjected to experimental probe at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC).
Of course, such a possibility creates an impetus to refine our theoretical understand-
ing of quantum gravity to the point where concrete predictions about the corresponding
phenomenology can be made. In recent years significant progress has been made in under-
standing gravity as an asymptotically safe field theory: one whose ultraviolet behaviour is
governed by an interacting fixed point [17]. This oers an extremely conservative resolu-
tion to the problem of how gravity is fundamentally defined. An extremely broad body of
computational evidence [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27] in support of this scenario
has formed, and in consequence there is an increasing amount of discussion of the physical
consequences of the theory. Previous investigations have looked into the eects of this
modification of gravity upon black holes [28, 29, 30, 31, 32], cosmology [33, 34, 35, 36],
and other processes relevant to the LHC [37, 38, 39, 40].
The purpose of this thesis is to consider the phenomenology of this theory of quantum
gravity at the LHC, with specific reference to scattering at high energies. Chapter 2
develops the theoretical ideas of the ADD model, asymptotic safety, and transplanckian
scattering necessary to understand the present work and place it in context. Chapter
3 derives the elastic scattering amplitudes of particles at transplanckian energies in our
framework, and explores the relationship of our results to the semiclassical framework
using the methods of the stationary phase approximation. Chapter 4 then explores the
corresponding phenomenology of our amplitudes, investigating dijet production using the
PYTHIA 8.1 event generator.
Chapter 2
Preliminaries
In this chapter we review the individual theoretical strands that inform our project. We
begin by discussing some of the problems that have been encountered in trying to define
a theory of quantum gravity, and the hierarchy problem of the Standard Model of par-
ticle physics. We review the framework of the renormalization group, and then discuss
a putative solution to each of these problems in turn. We discuss Weinbergs asymptotic
safety hypothesis for gravity, and review the computational evidence that supports it.
We describe the higher-dimensional framework of Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos and Dvali,
in which quantum gravity will become significant for LHC phenomenology. The chapter
concludes with a discussion of semiclassical approaches to gravitational scattering, with
particular reference to the eikonal amplitude, which will play a key role in the subsequent
development of this thesis.
2.1 Scales and divergences in quantum gravity
Legend has it [41] that in the 1950s, when he first started to work on the subject, Feynman
hoped that quantizing gravity might be a piece of cake. After all, even today the prin-
cipal approach used to investigate a quantum field theory is to compute, using Feynmans
diagrams, correlation functions of the theory by perturbatively expanding around the free
theory in powers of some weak coupling. In our experience, of course, the gravitational
coupling is certainly suitably feeble; in the first lecture of [41], Feynman illustrates the
point by computing the ratio of the Newtonian and Coulomb force between two charged
protons:
Felectric
Fgrav
= 4.17  1042 (2.1)
Some results of the early investigations into quantum gravity were actually quite reward-
ing. For example, it is known from group theory that any attempt to treat the metric
tensor g of general relativity as a field to be quantized will result in massless spin-2
particles. Fascinatingly, however, it also emerged [41, 42, 43, 44] that the quantum theory
of a massless spin-2 particle is inconsistent unless it contains a gauge symmetry equiva-
lent to the dieomorphism invariance of the classical metric; which couples to all other
fields universally through their energy-momentum tensor acting as a conserved source;
and which must necessarily possess self-interactions such that the Einstein-Hilbert action
is reproduced- provided that we restrict our attention to terms containing at most two
derivatives of the spin-2 field, a point to which we will return shortly. This theory also
turns out to be infrared-safe [45].
Of course, quantum gravity is still the subject of intensive research today. The most
infamous diculty is that of interpreting the ultraviolet divergences that occur in pertur-
bation theory, which cannot be renormalized into parameters present in the bare Lagranga-
ian. Such divergences occur at two-loop order in pure gravity [12, 13] and at one loop
when gravity is coupled to scalar matter [14]. Such theories suer from a lack of predictive
power, and it is generally assumed that non-renormalizability is indicative of a need for
new physics. The modern student is taught such behaviour can be anticipated from the
fact that Newtons constant GN has negative mass dimension. By dimensional analysis,
a perturbative expansion of a dimensionless scattering amplitude M in any theory with a
generic coupling G of mass dimension [G] = 2 must be of the form
M = GE2 + G2E4 + . . . (2.2)
where E is some energy scale. If E is assumed to be a characteristic energy scale of
the process under consideration, such as the centre of mass energy, then even our tree-
level estimate would suggest that we might encounter diculties with unitarity as E
increases. However, if one regulates the divergences in Feynman diagrams with an ultra-
violet cuto , then at higher orders in perturbation theory it naturally emerges that
E  . As we increase   1, as quantum mechanics tells us we must in order to sum
over all intermediate states, then divergences appear at all orders in perturbation theory;
to absorb them all into parameters of the model would require a model with infinitely
many parameters to be determined by experiment, and hence lacking predictive power.
It is assumed, then, that a new physical description of the process under consideration is
needed before the energy scale E becomes comparable to the mass scale M defined by the
constant G. This is borne out in practice by the Fermi theory of weak interactions. Beta
decay was originally described by a Lagrangian of the form
LI = GF     (2.3)
where the Fermi constant GF clearly has mass dimension [GF ] = 2. When the full
Glashow-Weinberg-Salam (GWS) theory of weak interactions was developed, it turned
out that GF  M2W ; the negative mass dimension of the constant heralded the existence
of the W -boson, which was too massive to have been detected in Fermis day. A Lagrangian
such as (2.3), which provides a good description of physics at energies below the masses
of the weak bosons, but fails at the scale of electroweak physics of which it is ignorant,
is called an eective Lagrangian , and can be obtained from the GWS theory by simple
Feynman diagram analysis; one says that the weak bosons have been integrated out of
the theory. By analogy, it is argued that at energies comparable to MP l, new physics
(such as string theory) kicks in to restore order to the gravitational sector. The necessity
of some new physics at short distance scales is also indicated by the infamous curvature
singularities of classical general relativity, most notably those found at the centre of a
black hole. Classically such spacetimes are geodesically incomplete, as a test particle that
falls into the black hole will inevitably be drawn into the singularity where the metric field
is no longer defined in a finite proper time.
It was the brilliant insight of Wilson [46, 47] to apply the logic of integrating out
physically inaccessible degrees of freedom to high-momentum modes, relating early work
on the renormalization group in particle physics to ideas from condensed matter such as
Kadanos block spin scaling laws for a ferromagnet. This process generates terms not
present in the bare Lagrangian- just as integrating out the W -boson induced a four-fermion
interaction, when none is present in the GWS Lagrangian- and shifts the coecients of
those terms that are present. If we are interested in physics occurring at some momentum
scale k, then it makes sense to formulate our description of that physics using the eective
Lagrangian obtained by integrating out all momentum modes larger than k; the coecients
i of the terms in this Lagrangian depend on k, i(k). From this point of view, we should
regard the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian not as the fundamental definition of our theory
of gravity, but as the leading order term in an eective Lagrangian which will contain all
terms consistent with the gauge symmetry, which classically would be identified as scalars
formed from the curvature tensor:
L = pg(c0 + c1R + c2R2 + c3RR + ... . . .) (2.4)
where all the parameters ci(k) run with energy scale k, and at low energies c0 =
CC/(8GN ) (where CC is the cosmological constant) and c1 = (16GN )1. It was
suggested by Weinberg [17] that allowing Newtons constant to run with energy as G(E)
might solve the problems associated with the negative mass dimension of GN . If at high
energies G(E)  E2, then the corresponding dimensionless coupling g = G(E)E2 will
tend to a fixed value g. Together with an assumption that only finitely many measure-
ments are necessary to specify the high-energy behaviour of the theory, this is referred
to as the asymptotic safety hypothesis. Exciting theoretical developments made over the
last two decades, to be reviewed in the next section, have led to a significant body of
calculational evidence in support of this conjecture.
Whilst not as dramatic as the ultraviolet catastrophe of perturbative quantum gravity,
the Wilsonian analysis of the Standard Model of particle physics reveals that it too pos-
sesses an unsatisfactory feature. When computing the k-dependence of running couplings,
it is typically still necessary to regulate the divergences of perturbation theory. If one
assumes that the theory will ultimately break down at some very high scale , then scalar
particles receive corrections to their bare (mass)2 parameters on the order of 2. The
standard model, of course, contains just such a scalar: the celebrated Higgs boson, whose
mass is measured [48, 49] to be mH  125 GeV. The most obvious candidate for physics
beyond the standard model is gravity; but the Planck scale is vastly larger than that as-
sociated with any other physics known to man: MP l  1019GeV. (Indeed, the hugeness
of the ratio Felectric/Fgrav given earlier is the result of the hugeness of the Planck scale
relative to the proton mass.) From the Wilsonian point of view, the disparity between the
measured Higgs mass and the natural value we would calculate requires the initial
mass defined at the scale k =  to be incredibly finely tuned such that the calculable
quantum corrections reduce it to 1017 of its initial value. This unnaturalness is the fa-
mous hierarchy problem of the standard model, and has led many theorists to believe that
physics beyond the standard model must set in at much lower scales, on the order of  = 1
TeV, which might thus be experimentally accessible at the Large Hadron Collider.
One of the most exciting proposals as to what this new physics might be was made
by Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulous and Dvali [15]. They observed that the experimental
constraints on the dimensionality of spacetime that come from gravity are far weaker
than those that come from the Standard Model. In their scenario, the standard model is
confined to a four-dimensional brane in a higher-dimensional spacetime, whilst gravity is
capable of probing d = 4+n dimensions. The extra dimensions are still compactified, but
the radius R of compactification can be far larger than in models in which the standard
model probes the extra dimensions; at the time of their proposal, R  1mm had not
been ruled out by experiment Correspondingly, in this model the truly fundamental
scale MD of the d-dimensional gravity theory is lowered significantly, being related to the
Planck scale as M2P l = 8R
nMn+2D . If realised in nature, this would mean that the LHC
would become sensitive to the nature of quantum gravity, allowing us an unprecedented
opportunity to develop our understanding.
Of course, it is in the nature of modern phenomenology that a precise prediction is
necessary in order to discover anything, particularly in so messy an environment as in a
hadron collider. This presents a problem to the experimentalist who wishes to discover
quantum gravity without professing to understand it. One ingenious way around this
problem is oered in the form of semiclassical approximations. After all, we are used to
using gravity in its astrophysical setting, in which the masses involved are vastly higher
than the paltry MP l  2 108kg; the condition is that we do not probe short distances.
In particular, in [50] the eikonal approximation was employed to compute a semi-classical
approximation to the elastic scattering of partons at transplanckian (E  MD) energies
through small angles.
In this thesis, we consider that asymptotic safety oers us a well-defined, predictive
theory of quantum gravity, and investigate its experimental consequences if large extra
dimensions are to be found at the LHC. The remainder of this chapter is dedicated to a
more detailed review of the dierent aspects of our theoretical framework: the asymptotic
safety conjecture, the ADD scenario, and the physics of transplanckian scattering.
2.2 Asymptotically safe gravity
2.2.1 Asymptotic safety
In order to formulate the asymptotic safety hypothesis more precisely, we will begin by
reviewing some of the concepts of the renormalisation group in more detail. Our treatment
will follow that of Weinbergs original proposal [17]. As discussed in the preceding section,
when defining a quantum field theory it is not sucient merely to specify the Lagrangian;
it is also necessary to specify the scale at which we are defining the theory. When one
talks about e.g. 4 theory, it is implicitly assumed the bare Lagrangian is being defined
at the cuto scale  which defines the domain of validity of the theory, which for a
fundamental theory will be infinity. If we choose some functional basis (such as powers
of the scalar field ), then we can think of the couplings gi as co-ordinates of this bare
Lagrangian in an infinite dimensional space, and specify the action as Sbare[{gi}]. The
result of integrating out the modes above the scale  is the eective action Seff [{gi()}];
as   0 we are performing the full path integral, and recover the so-called quantum or
average action . In the functional space parametrized by our couplings, this evolution
is governed by an infinite set of coupled first-order dierential equations:
dgj()
= j({gi()}) (2.5)
In these equations the -functions depend only on dimensionless variables; if a coupling
gi has mass dimension di, we define corresponding dimensionless couplings gi = 
di gi.
Let us consider the couplings at a finite scale , and consider how this system evolves as
  1. For the theory to make sense up to arbitrarily high energies, it is necessary that
each coupling tends to a limiting value gi,. In order for this to happen, each of the 
functions of the theory must vanish when evaluated at the limiting values:
j({gi,}) = 0 (2.6)
Such a set of values gi, for the couplings is said to define a fixed point for the RG flow of
the theory space.
In order for such a fixed point to have any relevance to the real world, it is necessary
that it is connected by the RG flow to the point in theory space where we find ourselves to
live, in the sense that if at very high energies the measured values of our couplings dier
from their fixed point values by some small amount gi, then the solution to the equations
(2.5) evolved to an RG scale  must map these values of the couplings to the measured
values gi(). Of course, we cannot measure infinitely many couplings. For our theory to
be predictive, we require that the critical surface of points which flow into the fixed point
as   1 is finite dimensional.
It is interesting to consider the flow in the vicinity of the fixed point. When all
the couplings are close to their fixed point values we can linearise the flow, defining
a displacement vector in coupling space gi = gi  gi , and approximating the beta
functions by the action of the so-called stability matrix
Bij =
(2.7)
In the vicinity of the fixed point, the flow thus becomes described by the simple system
dgj()
= Bijgi (2.8)
Once we recognise that powers of  are eigenfunctions of the logarithmic derivative oper-
ator @, it is clear that the solution to this system of equations is readily given in terms
of the eigenvectors V K and corresponding eigenvalues K of the stability matrix:
gi() = g
K (2.9)
This expression makes it clear that as   1, a point in theory space is drawn towards
the fixed point by the RG flow if its displacement vector can be decomposed into eigenvec-
tors whose eigenvalues K are negative. These eigenvalues are called the critical exponents
of the theory, and our requirement that the ultraviolet fixed point has a finite dimen-
sional critical surface becomes the requirement that the corresponding stability matrix
has finitely many negative critical exponents. This formulation leads us to the following
heuristic argument. As gi = 
di gi, the RG equation for gi has the form
= digi + di
dgi()
(2.10)
where the term  dgi()
results from quantum corrections to the running of the coupling.
Of course, the coupling gi corresponding to any operator whose mass dimension exceeds
that of our spacetime will have a negative mass dimension di, and so based on our expec-
tations of classical scaling, we would expect only finitely many couplings (corresponding
to perturbatively renormalizable and super-renormalizeable operators) to have negative
critical exponents. In order for quantum corrections to change this picture, they would
need to be so violent as to reverse the sign of infinitely many classical scaling exponents.
A brief comment on terminology is in order at this point. With the canonically nor-
malized metric field g as in the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian, the factor
16GN
appears
in front of the kinetic term in the action, and it is therefore common to use the language
of field strength or wavefunction renormalisation to describe the running of Newtons con-
stant. Pre-empting the discussion of a higher-dimensional analog GD of Newtons constant,
in d spacetime dimensions the dimensionless running gravitational coupling is defined to
g() = d2G()  d2GDZ1() (2.11)
where Z1() is the field strength renormalisation factor for the graviton. Eq. (2.10) then
becomes [21, 51]
g() = (d 2 + )g (2.12)
where  =
dlnZ()
is known as the anomalous dimension of the graviton. Gravity is
unusual in that typically field strengths are inessential couplings- defined as couplings
which can be changed without aecting the Lagrangian when the fields are put on-shell
[17]. (Our requirement for the finite dimensionality of the critical surface strictly speaking
only refers to the number of essential couplings.) However, gravity is dierent because its
universal coupling to all other fields eectively defines all length scales [52].
A theory whose high-energy behaviour is governed by a fixed point with a finite-
dimensional critical surface is said to be asymptotically safe. Asymptotically free theories
such as QCD are a special case of asymptotic safety, but this formulation allows for the
more general possibility that a theory remains interacting at all scales.
When Weinberg proposed that asymptotic safety might oer a resolution to the prob-
lem of the high-energy behaviour of gravity, he was limited in his investigations by his
ability to calculate the beta functions of the theory. He was able to show that gravity
is asymptotically safe in 2 +  dimensions, where  is assumed small, as gravity becomes
renormalizable in two dimensions. The theory thus lay dormant until the advent of the
exact renormalisation group equation, or ERGE, first derived by Wetterich [53].
2.2.2 The exact RG equation
Our treatment of this equation follows review articles such as [54]. In order to remove
ambiguity in our conception of large and small momenta, we will assume that our
theory has been analytically continued from Minkowski space (where one can have high-
energy lightlike modes with q2 = 0) to Euclidean 4-space. Then the vacuum-vacuum
amplitude in the presence of a source, Z[J ], and its logarithm W [J ], are given by
Z[J ] = eW [J ] =
D'eSbare[']+J ' (2.13)
where we have adopted the shorthand J  =
ddxJ(x)'(x), and the eective action []
is defined as
[] = sup
(J  W [J ]) (2.14)
This definition singles out a J [] which maximises [].
The ERGE is formulated in terms of an action k that has only been averaged over
those modes of momentum p > k, and satisfies
k Sbare (2.15)
k0  (2.16)
The notational distinction between this quantity and the orignal Wilsonian eective action
Seff [{gi(k)}] at the scale k is essentially one of useage and emphasis. In a textbook
presentation such as [55], Seff [{gi(k)}] is presented as somehow containing less information
than Sbare, as we have averaged over the high-energy modes. However, in that context
the path integral over modes of momentum > k is performed in the absence of a source,
and consequently we lose the ability to describe how the theory responds to being driven
by a source whose Fourier transform contains high-frequency modes. In other words, the
vertices of that action are not appropriate for computing Feynman diagrams in which
momenta larger than k are flowing through the external legs. In contrast, the full eective
action  contains all the information about the theory; it is the generating function of
one-particle irreducible (1PI) diagrams.
Instead of attempting to perform the path integral over a restricted set of modes
directly, the ERGE is formulated using an integral over all momentum modes, but by
modifying the bare action with the addition of a regulator term Sk[] that suppresses
the contribution of modes of momentum p < k. This term takes the form of a momentum-
dependant mass term:
Sk['] =
(2)d
'(q)Rk(q)'(q) (2.17)
To suppress low-frequency modes, we require that for p < k, Rk(p) > 0, and typically
Rk(p)  k2 for small p. Condition (2.16) is satisfied if we remove the regulator as k
becomes small, so that Rk(p)
k0 0. To satisfy (2.15), we must have Rk(p) k 1; a
careful treatment [53] shows that the functional integral becomes dominated by a saddle
point in this limit, so that eectively no integral is performed, and ek  eS up to a
physically irrelevant constant factor.
Any function Rk(p) that satisfies these properties will produce an RG flow with physi-
cally acceptable properties, in the sense that it reproduces the correct limiting behaviour.
Once we have chosen a regulator function, we define a regulated path integral (and
corresponding derived quantities) by
Zk[J ] = e
Wk[J ] =
D'eSbare[']Sk[']+J ' (2.18)
The physical running eective action k is related to the Legendre transform k of Wk
k = sup
(J  Wk[J ]) (2.19)
k = k  Sk (2.20)
We introduce the RG time t = ln k, so that k@k = @t; then k can be shown (see e.g.
[54]) to satisfy the ERGE:
@tk[] =
(@tRk)(
(2)[] + Rk)
(2.21)
It is important to note that as the regulator Rk(q
2) vanishes for q  k, its derivative
@tRk also vanishes at large q. This means that the contribution of ultraviolet modes to
the trace in (2.21) is strongly suppressed.
In practice, it is dicult to solve the flow equation exactly. If we consider the expansion
of [] in some functional basis Pi[] (e.g. powers of  and its derivatives)
[] =
giPi[] (2.22)
then we can identify the coecient of Pi in the expansion of the trace on the right hand
side of the flow equation as the beta function i({gj}) for the coupling gi, and we re-
cover our previous infinite tower of coupled 1st-order partial dierential equations (2.5).
Thus, solving the flow equation analytically is equivalent to solving this infinite tower of
equations.
This does, however, suggest a natural method for obtaining approximate solutions,
which is to consider a restriction of the theory space to some finite set of N couplings, so
that once the functions i have been calculated, the system of equations can be solved via
elementary methods. The ERGE thus enters here as a tool for calculating the i functions
provided that we can evaluate the trace in (2.21). This can be done using e.g. heat kernel
methods.
This approach oers the exciting possibility of investigating the strong coupling regime
where perturbation theory fails. It is particularly well-suited to investigate the asymptotic
safety hypothesis, in which we are interested in the fixed points of the flow of what has
become an N -dimensional vector field @tgi in some N -dimensional theory space. A realistic
theory of asymptotically safe gravity requires us to find two fixed points connected to each
other by the RG flow, one of which at the infra-red k  0 end of the flow must describe
the observed world in which gravitational eects are typically extremely weak.
It is, however, natural to wonder to what extent throwing infinitely many terms away
aects our answers in the absence of a small expansion parameter. A partial answer to
this question can be given based on arguments of consistency. One check that can be
made is to investigate the dependence of the flow, in particular the location of the fixed
points and their corresponding critical exponents, on the specific choice of regulator Rk.
Were it possible to include all terms in , then as we have seen above these endpoints
should be independent of this choice; their dependence upon it therefore provides some
clue as to how sensitive our picture of the flow is to those terms which we have neglected.
Another check that can be performed is to vary the number of terms included; If the flow
can be calculated with N = 6 and N = 7, and the projection of the 7-dimensional flow
onto the 6-dimensional subspace formed by setting the seventh coupling to zero is close to
that calculated in the 6-dimensional case, then we might be inclined to guess that the flow
when N = 8 will not be too dissimilar to that weve already calculated, and so on. Some
regulators are found to accelerate the convergence of the flow to such a stable picture; this
is referred to as optimising the flow [56, 57].
In the asymptotic safety scenario, we require that the ultra-violet fixed point has
a finite-dimensional critical surface. By restricting our attention to a finite dimensional
theory space, we seemingly preclude any possibility of finding anything other than a finite-
dimensional critical surface Again, we must appeal to our earlier reasoning, and proceed
inductively (in the philosophical rather than mathematical sense). If we find that for some
large set of couplings that only the first two are relevant in the UV, then we might guess
that they are the only two couplings that are; if we find that every even power of the
field is relevant, then we are likely to assume that there are infinitely many UV-relevant
terms in the full theory, which we would thus regard as fundamentally sick (Weinbergs
heuristic argument given above notwithstanding).
Happily, all evidence presently suggests that there exists an ultraviolet fixed point
with a three-dimensional critical surface. The most spectacular evidence for this picture
came in [27], in which the theory space under consideration was that of polynomials in
the Ricci scalar
gRn of order 35. It was reported there that the UV fixed point existed
with a three-dimensional critical surface determined by the cosmological constant, R and
R2, and all higher curvature invariants exhibit their canonical scaling dimension. It has
been shown that the fixed point persists in higher dimensions [18, 19, 20, 21] and when
gravity is coupled to matter [22, 23, 24, 25, 26]. The reader is referred to review articles
[58, 59] for a more detailed overview.
For comparison to our subsequent approximations, it will be helpful to have a rela-
tively simple description of the beta functions for d-dimensional gravity obtained using
the ERGE. It was shown in [20] that retaining only the Ricci scalar in the gravitational
Lagrangian, the -function for the dimensionless Newtons constant g() defined by (2.11)
is given by
g = cd
(1  4dg/cd)(d 2)g/cd
1 + 2(2  d)g/cd
(2.23)
where cd = (d/2 + 2)(4)
d/21. We see that g vanishes at the Gaussian fixed point
g = 0, and at the non-Gaussian value g = cd/4d. Associated to each fixed point is a
critical exponent FP , defined by d/dg(gFP ) = FP ; these are found to be
G = 2  d (2.24)
NG = 2d
d + 2
(2.25)
These have opposite signs, which reflect the fact that the Gaussian fixed point is IR-
relevant, whilst the non-Gaussian value fixed point g is UV attractive. This flow is readily
integrated, so that imposing the boundary condition g( = )  g, g() is determined
implicitly by
1/G g  g()
g  g
1/NG
(2.26)
As the theoretical picture becomes increasingly compelling, and calculations of ever-
increasing diculty serve only to confirm this existing picture, investigations into asymp-
totic safety must now begin to consider whether or not it actually describes the real world.
It is to this end that we consider the exciting prospect that quantum gravity may reveal
its true nature to us at the LHC.
2.2.3 A practical implementation of asymptotic safety
As discussed in the previous section, the endpoint of an RG flow is described by a func-
tional  whose functional derivatives (n)/(p1) . . . (pn) describe 1PI n-point vertices;
using these functions as vertices in tree-level Feynman diagrams is equivalent to the use of
bare vertices and summing over Feynman diagrams with dierent topologies. The compu-
tational strategy adopted here, following [40], is to use in this spirit information derived
from the RG studies of gravity described in the previous section. We implement the RG
improvement for the gravitational coupling GD
GD  G() (2.27)
using the framework first introduced in [40], via the use of functional ansatze for the field
strength renormalization Z1() for the graviton. As discussed above in equation (2.11),
this renormalization induces a running gravitational constant defined by
G() = GDZ
1() (2.28)
Diagramatically, this can be viewed as using the exact propagator for the graviton between
classical vertices encoding the coupling to matter. We assume that the principal eects of
the RG running of gravity can be encoded using a running GD in this way. A more exact
treatment would allow for a separate contribution from the coupling to matter.
We know that at low energies Z()  1, and at high energies we must have Z1() 
(n+2) (in d = 4 + n dimensions) for there to be a fixed point. The distinction between
low and high energies is parametrised by an energy scale which we call T . This scale
is analogous to the scale QCD  200 MeV which emerges from the RG dynamics of QCD,
and describes the onset of quantum corrections to the canonical scaling of Newtons cou-
pling with energy. In [60] it was shown that this transition between the scaling behaviours
becomes narrower as the number of extra dimensions increases, so it is meaningful to say
that the transition occurs at the scale T . Taking the limit in which this this transition
is infinitely narrow motivates the so-called quenched approximation to the running of
Z1(),
Z1Q () = 1 + 
(2.29)
We also find it necessary to use a smoother interpolation between the scaling regimes,
which we refer to as the linear matching.
ZL() = 1 +
(2.30)
This parametrisation is similar to that used by Hewett and Rizzo [39]. Those authors,
however, treat the 4-dimensional momentum carried by the graviton dierently from that
in the n-extra dimensions, a point which we will clarify once we have discussed the ADD
model in more detail. Both of these parametrisations were introduced in [40].
We compare these ansatze to the flow defined by (2.26) in fig. 2.1. For the sake
of consistency we have imposed the boundary condition g = g/2, using units of T
for the RG scale  and rescaling the coupling in terms of g. We see that the linear
running (2.30) in particular provides a good approximation to the full solution of the
RG equations. This figure also makes it obvious how the quenched approximation (2.29)
consists of an instantaneous transition between classical and fixed point scaling of the
gravitational coupling.
2.3 Quantum gravity at the LHC
The starting point for the proposal of Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos and Dvali [15] is the
conjecture that the electroweak scale mEW is the only fundamental scale in nature that
relates to all physics known experimentally thus far. In this scenario, the hugeness of MP l
relative to mEW is something that emerges naturally from the model as a consequence
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
m LT
Figure 2.1: Comparison of the analytic solution (red) to the RG equations (2.26) in n = 6
to the parametrisations ZQ (magenta) and ZL (blue) for the field strength renormalisation
factor for the graviton.
of the existence of n extra dimensions, which are compactified with characteristic scale R
which can be far larger than previously considered. The novel feature of their proposal
is that the Standard Model particles are confined to a four-dimensional hypersurface- the
brane- in the higher-dimensional bulk spacetime, but gravity is not. An heuristic
picture for this comes from string theory: one can imagine the standard model particles to
be described by open strings which are tied down to the brane at both ends like the
strings on a violin, whilst the gravitons are described by closed strings- loops of string
like an elastic band which are free to propagate throughout the bulk. This string theory
picture is however only heuristic; in their original paper [15] they present a field-theoretic
construction in which the brane is a topological defect in a SU(4)SU(2)SU(2) gauge
theory in 6 dimensions. A key hypothesis of the present work is that one can construct
a well-defined interacting quantum field theory of gravity that makes sense at all scales;
our theory is perhaps most naturally regarded as distinct from string theory, and it is
therefore important for our purposes that a purely field-theoretic realisation of the ADD
brane is possible.
This means that all previous tests on the dimensionality of spacetime that come from
electroweak and strong forces have only probed the dimensionality of the brane. Those
tests that derive from gravitational physics- such as the r2 law for gravitation- have only
probed spacetime on much larger scales; at the time of their proposal, it was consistent
with existing measurements that the compactification scale R was as large as 1mm, and
that sub-milimetre tests of the Newtonian force law would reveal a transition from r2 to
r(2+n) behaviour Neglecting numerical factors, based on Gauss law the flux spreading
into the compactified dimensions cannot exceed  Rn, and the corresponding force law
becomes
m2+nEW
rR 1
m2+nEWR
(2.31)
which suggests that the Planck scale is related to mEW and the length scale R as
M2P l  m2+nEWRn (2.32)
We can see how such a relationship emerges from the underlying field theory by considering
a d-dimensional analog of the Einstein-Hilbert action (using the Myers-Perry convention
for GD [61])
16GD
d4+nxR (2.33)
We now make two assumptions: that the 4-dimensional curvature of the brane is indepen-
dent of the bulk co-ordinates, and that the extra dimensions are essentially flat. To justify
this latter assumption, note that the characteristic energy scale associated with the physics
that gives rise to the brane is likely to be  mEW , so that at distances r > 1/mEW from
the brane curvature will be negligible; but our relation (2.32) implies that the radius R of
the extra dimensions  (MP l/mEW )1/n1/mEW -i.e. vastly larger than 1/mEW . Then the
bulk volume integral in (2.33) factorises, so that
16GD
dny =
16GD
d4xR (2.34)
so that we have GNVn = GD. We use the conventions of Giudice, Ratazzi and Wells [62],
in which R is the radius of the compactified space (which is assumed to be a torus of
volume Vn = (2R)
n), and define the fundamental quantum gravity scale MD to be
such that
M2P l = 8R
nMn+2D (2.35)
At this stage in our argument, it is not clear that the lowered Planck mass is of direct
experimental relevance from our vantage point on the brane: even if the fundamental
gravity scale is MD  1 TeV, the four-dimensional theory appears to couple to gravity
 1/MP l. However, the four-dimensional observer sees a tower of Kaluza-Klein modes of
the graviton; we have eectively gained an infinite number of species of graviton, with mass
splittings mKK = 1/R. From the d-dimensional point of view, the brane can exchange
momentum in the directions transverse to its orientation with the graviton; an observer
who models the brane itself as an infinitely massive and inflexible brick wall, such as
one formulating a 4D eective field theory on the brane, will therefore lose d-dimensional
momentum conservation, and bulk momenta will not be constrained at vertices in Feynman
diagrams. A more formal way of seeing this is that the position of the brane in the bulk
spontaneously breaks d-dimensional translational invariance; supplanting the bulk with a
d-dimensional gravity theory gauges this translational invariance, and the KK modes of
the graviton acquire a mass by eating the Goldstone bosons associated with the underlying
broken symmetry [63].
The upshot of all of this is that associated to each graviton propagator is a sum
over the bulk momenta carried by that graviton. The coupling of any individual KK-
mode to the standard model is suppressed by MP l, and so the experimental signature
of graviton emission at collider experiments is missing energy [62]. The energy carried
o by gravitons into the bulk also implies astrophysical constraints due to the observed
cooling rate of supernova 1987a [64, 65]. These latter constraints are extremely stringent
for n = 2 (see Table 2.1) but hardly constrain higher dimensions; one finds from (2.35)
that if MD  1TeV the splitting is
mKK  101231/neV (2.36)
so that for e.g. n = 6, mKK  7 MeV; the temperature of the supernova is estimated to
be around T =30 MeV, and hence only a few modes can be excited. The uncertainty in
the supernova temperature implies an uncertainty in the bound, but for n = 2 estimates
on the bound vary between 10  100 TeV [66]. By contrast, at colliders such splittings
are negligible compared to the energy resolution; so unless n is very large, we can well
approximate the sum over KK modes by an integral. As m = n/R, we have that
p2 + m2
p2 + m2
(2.37)
For graviton emission processes, this sum is cut o by the conservation of energy. However,
for internal graviton lines we must consider arbitrarily o-shell gravitons, and even a
tree-level Feynman diagram featuring graviton exchange becomes associated with a one-
loop structure. Of course, one finds that these integrals diverge, and we are confronted
with the fact that gravity is not a renormalizable quantum field theory. In consequence,
the method of regulating these UV divergences manifests itself in physical results. It is
common practice, therefore, to introduce an ultraviolet cuto which is taken to be at a
somewhat arbitrary scale  MD; this procedure is hoped to give us our best estimate
of the order of magnitude of the process cross-section, together with the shape of the
dierential cross-section. This was the approach adopted in the papers [67, 62] in which
the Feynman rules for the couplings of gravity to the standard model were laid down. In
particular, bounds on processes mediated by virtual gravitons are often quoted in terms
of the string scale MS in the conventions of [67]; this is related to the scale MD by [68]
MS = 2
i1/(n+2)
MD (2.38)
It is important to emphasise the nature of this relationship. The authors [67] relate the
string scale MS to the d-dimensional analog of Newtons constant that we refer to as
GD; eq. ((2.38)) reflects the fact that refs. [67] and [62] adopt dierent definitions of
a mass scale relating to GD. We have used this rescaling to convert bounds quoted in
terms of MS to those on MD. However, it must also be pointed out that the authors [67]
choose MS to be the scale at which they cut o their KK sum to give meaning to the
amplitudes for processes mediated by virtual gravitons. This assumption is impossible to
justify in any rigourous way; in the words of the authors of [62], these amplitudes are not
fully calculable, and hence there is a sense in which these bounds are little more than
heuristic. It is also important to point out that often people informally refer to the cuto
scale of the KK tower as the string scale being lower than MD, in the expectation that
the eective theory breaks down before the fundamental gravity scale; in this sense they
are not describing the scale MS as related to MD by (2.38), as the numerical factors in
that equation actually imply that MS > MD.
Process n=2 n=3 n=4 n=5 n=6
pp  jj 1.95 2.43 2.00 1.73 1.53
pp  e+e or + 1.23 1.42 1.17 1.01 0.9
pp  j + /ET 5.61 4.38 3.86 3.55 3.26
Table 2.1: Experimental constraints on the scale MD from collider processes, taken from
the CMS review [69]; bounds from ATLAS are comparable [70]. The data come from
s = 8TeV LHC run, with at least L=19.6 fb1 of integrated luminosity. Note that
bounds on processes mediated by virtual gravitons are usually quoted in terms of the
string scale MS related to MD by equation (2.38); we have converted them for consistent
presentation here.
In light of this ambiguity, it clearly seems desirable to try and avoid guessing unknowns
in our physical predictions. Furthermore, as the LHC is a hadron collider, we are inevitably
sensitive to a wide range of energy scales simultaneously. Whilst our eective field theory
approach might be reliable in the sub-Planckian regime
s  MD, we will encounter
signals from the Planckian
s  MD and even transplanckian region
s  MD, and so
it is clearly desirable to try and say something about these regimes as well. (Note that we
are comparing our energy scales to the fundamental scale MD  MP l, but the abuse of
language in this terminology is conventional.)
In this latter regime it has been observed that general relativity provides an excellent
description of gravity at extremely high (astrophysical) centre-of-mass energies [71], pro-
vided that we restrict our attention to objects which are well-separated in space. This
therefore motivates the application of semi-classical approximations, in which we take the
general relativistic description of the process under consideration as a starting point. We
will discuss these in more detail in the next section. We should, however, conclude our
discussion of the phenomenology of the ADD model by mentioning the most spectacu-
lar prediction of semiclassical gravity at the LHC: that of black hole production. The
phenomenology of such a process typically assumes [72, 73, 74, 50] that for suciently
large centre-of-mass energies black holes are produced with the geometric cross-section
  R2S , and decay thermally via Hawking radiation [75]; this would produce high mul-
tiplicity events with large transverse momentum, and a democratic production of species.
This picture is, however, subject to corrections due to the d-dimensionality of the gravity
theory [76] and departures from thermality [77]. Studies of asymptotically safe black holes
have been carried out in [28, 29, 30, 31], and the corresponding phenomenology investi-
gated in [32]. A further theoretical complication is that it is typically assumed that black
holes have a minimum mass (on the order of the fundamental gravity scale), owing to the
fact that their Compton wavelength cannot be less than their Schwarzschild radius [78];
for this reason experimental bounds on this signature are usually quoted in terms of a
minimum black hole mass rather than constraining the gravity scale [69]. This minimum
mass MBH is a slowly decreasing function of MD and n, and the precise details are model-
dependant; however, typical values for values of MBH are around 4.5-6 TeV for MD in the
1.5-5 TeV region [69].
2.4 High-energy gravitational scattering
2.4.1 Semiclassical gravity
The astrophysical successes of general relativity make it clear that high energies and
short distances are not, in general, the same thing. The combined centre of mass energy
of a pair of stars interacting via gravity is incomparably huger than the energy scale of any
fundamental physics dreamt up by theorists, and yet the large distances by which they
are separated leaves them amenable to a description via well-understood physics. Clearly,
our rule of thumb derived from Fourier analysis is inapplicable to such situations, because
it is quite wrong to assume that the interaction between e.g. the Sun and the Earth is
mediated by a single graviton. Rather, we should assume that arbitrarily many gravitons
are being exchanged in this scenario, each of which carries only a minuscule fraction of
the total momentum transferred between the two bodies. The fact that these gravitons
are not probing the high-energy behaviour of the theory then leads to the possibility of
describing the amplitudes using semiclassical approximations. By this, we mean that we
will describe the gravitational field purely through the classical Lagrangian (2.33) for d-
dimensional gravity, with the corresponding field equations and solutions, and neglecting
any other operators that we would usually consider to arise from loop eects. We shall,
however, consider loop diagrams, but a restricted class of loop diagrams which correspond
to the higher orders in perturbation theory in the relativistic quantum mechanics of two
particles interacting via a classical gravitational potential. (The meaning of this statement
may become more transparent in light of the diagrammatic discussion of section 2.4.2.)
The interplay between the centre-of-mass energy E of a two-body system and the im-
pact parameter b of their collision is nicely summarised in Fig. 2.2 by Giddings phase
diagram [1] for gravitational interactions. For any E there exists some suciently large
b such that the gravitational interaction between two bodies is weak enough to be ade-
quately described by the exchange of a single graviton- the Born amplitude. As we lower
b, or increase E, it becomes necessary to consider the eects of many-graviton exchange-
the eikonal regime. The central goal of the present work is to understand the theoretical
description of this regime in the ADD framework, and to derive corresponding experi-
mental signatures. The mathematical description of this regime is given by an elastic
scattering amplitude MEik; the scattering of the Earth and Moon is given by a pole in
this scattering amplitude [1], as per the general framework of bound states in field theory
(see e.g. [79]). We defer an explanation of the boundary between the Born and eikonal
regimes in fig. 2.2 to the quantitative discussion of this amplitude in section 2.4.2.
Figure 2.2: Giddings proposed Phase diagram for gravitational scattering; reproduced
from [1]. The quantum limit is imposed by the uncertainty prinicple E > 1/b in natural
units; the boundaries between the other regions are explained in the main text.
If either b is decreased further, or E increased, eventually b becomes equal to the
Schwarzschild radius corresponding to E, which in D dimensions is given by [61]
RS(E) =
8(D12 )
D  2
#1/(D3)
(GDE)
1/(D3) (2.39)
In the region of the E  b plane for which b < RS(E) (and b, E are not comparable to
the Planck length or mass) we expect a black hole to form, which we might still hope to
describe by semi-classical physics. The line b = RS(E) marks the division between the
eikonal and black hole regimes in fig.2.2.
To the extent that the semi-classical approach is valid, the infamous problems of quan-
tum gravity discussed above are thus relegated to the small region of the Eb plane marked
NR (for non-renormalizable) in fig. 2.2, in which both distance and energy scales are
Planckian. Of course, anybody who thinks they have a theory of quantum gravity would
do well to begin exploring its consequences in regions we believe we understand already.
It is in this spirit that we turn our attention to the eikonal amplitude.
2.4.2 The eikonal amplitude
In this section we will derive the so-called eikonal amplitude which describes the elastic
scattering of particles with asymptotically large centre-of-mass energies that are spatially
well-separated. This derivation is quite general: we shall see that all of the physical input
from one particular theory is encoded in the Born amplitude AB of the theory, and our
final form for the amplitude is the result of an argument based on combinatorics and
kinematics, which holds as well for electrodynamics as it does for gravity. However, this
expression turns out to be particularly useful for applications in gravity, for reasons that
will be discussed subsequently. Important early references include [80, 81, 82, 83].
There exists a pretty argument based on unitarity that any 2-2 scattering amplitude
for which the cross-section grows with energy must be peaked in the forward direction
[79]. Recall the optical theorem: that if each particle in the initial state has momentum p
and energy E in the centre-of-mass frame, then the total cross-section  for the process is
related to the forward scattering amplitude via
ImM(s, t = 0) = 2Ep (2.40)
Here we have parametrised our amplitude for the 2-2 process with momenta p1, p2  p3, p4
as a function of the Mandelstam variables
s = (p1 + p2)
= E2CM
t = (p1  p3)2
= 2p2CM (1  cos CM )
where ECM , pCM , CM are respectively the total energy, the momentum of either particle,
and the scattering angle in the centre-of-mass frame. If the dierential cross-section d
varies smoothly as a function of the scattering angle, then within some solid angle 
about the variation in d
d is bounded; let us agree to choose  so that
d does not
change from its forward value by more than a factor of two. Then
642E2
|M(s, t = 0)|2  1
642E2
|ImM(s, t = 0)|2 (2.41)
Here we have used the simplified form of the relationship between the dierential cross-
section and the scattering amplitude
642E2
(2.42)
for the case where all the particles have the same mass, but this does not aect the final
outcome. Using (2.40) this then implies that
  32
(2.43)
So we see that unless  decreases with energy faster than  E2, the range of solid
angle  into which the final state particles are scattered becomes increasingly narrow as
the centre-of-mass energy E increases. As the graviton couples to the energy-momentum
tensor of matter, we clearly expect gravitational cross-sections to grow with energy, and
hence that scattering is strongly peaked in the forward direction. This suggests that as
perturbation theory fails in the transplanckian region E  MD, we can instead make an
approximation to leading order in the scattering angle, or equivalently in the ratio t/s.
This approximation will be used to sum an infinite set of Feynman diagrams corresponding
to the exchange of arbitrarily many low-energy gravitons.
In this s  1 limit, we should lose little accuracy by neglecting particle masses; our
expectation is therefore that the helicity of the colliding particles should be conserved.
If we assume that a small momentum transfer corresponds to a negligible change in the
separation of the particles in the space transverse to the direction defined by the incoming
beam, helicity conservation follows from the conservation of the total angular momentum
of each particle. We therefore assume each vertex is diagonal in any spin indices carried by
the external particles, and so we lose nothing by deriving our amplitude on the assumption
that these particles are scalars. We consider only the three-point vertex in which a matter
particle emits or absorbs a graviton, and model this vertex as a function iV (pj) only of
the momentum pj of the external particle, neglecting any dependence on the momentum q
carried by the exchanged graviton. These vertices may carry spacetime indices that relate
to the momentum of the external particles, but such indices will always appear contracted
against an index from the other external particles worldline, and we will leave such sums
implicit. It is also convenient in this massless limit to formulate our argument in terms of
the lightcone variables, taking the particles to be incident along the x-axis:
q+ = q0 + q1 (2.44)
q = q0  q1 (2.45)
so that the metric becomes
ds2 = dx+dx  dx2? (2.46)
where dx2? = dx22 + dx23 is the squared distance element in the two-dimensional plane
Figure 2.3: A typical ladder diagram, created by J. Schroder, that contributes to the
eikonal amplitude. The straight lines represent the participating scattering particles. The
wiggly lines represent virtual gravitons.
transverse to the axis defined by the incoming particles. Note that the Jacobian associated
with this coordinate transformation has the value |J | = 2.
Within this setup, we can write the Born amplitude (somewhat schematically) as
iAB(s, t = q2  q2?) = (i)V (p1)iD(q2?)(i)V (p2) (2.47)
where iD(q2?) is the Feynman propagator for the exchanged gauge boson. We have ap-
proximated this as a function of the transverse momentum q?, as in the limit p1  p3
we have the on-shell condition p23  p1  p3 = p1  (p1  q) = p1  q = 0, and in the
centre-of-mass frame q0 = 0 as our scattering is elastic.
Having established the nature of the approximations we are making, we now consider
n-gauge boson exchange processes, as described by ladder and crossed ladder Feynman
diagrams of the form typified in figure 2.3. There are n such diagrams, corresponding to
the permutations in which the n momenta qi emitted in succession from the top worldline
of the external particle (which we take to have 4-momentum p+) can be absorbed by the
worldline of the particle travelling in the q direction.
Corresponding to this figure is the amplitude
iMnboson =
perms 
(1)nV (p+)nV (p)n
(2)4
. . .
(2)4
iD(q1) . . . iD(qn)
 (2)4(4)(q1 + . . . qn  q)
(p+  q1)2
. . .
(p+  qn)2
(p  q(1))2
. . .
(p+  q(n))2
(2.48)
where (i) represents the action of the permutation corresponding to the specific diagram
under consideration; the full n-boson exchange amplitude is described by the sum over
such permutations. In the external propagators, we use that the external momenta are
on-shell, and neglect terms quadratic in the transferred momentum compared to those
which are linear in the external momentum:
(p qi)2  2p  qi (2.49)
Throwing away terms of order q2i is permissible even inside an integral over qi because
the propagators D(q)  q2; furthermore, so long as we are considering that the overall
momentum transfer q2 is small, any large momentum carried by qi must be compensated
for by a large momentum carried in the opposite direction by qj , so we expect that the
contribution of such large momentum modes will be suppressed by both phase space factors
and multiple propagators. By contrast, no such argument yet exists as to why we should
throw away p qi at this stage in our analysis; the orthogonality of the momentum transfer
to the external momenta will rather emerge shortly.
We now make use of the identity [55]
perms 
p  q(1)
. . .
p  (q(1) + . . . + q(n))
p  q1
. . .
p  qn
(2.50)
For the terms that appear dotted with p, this sum over permutations has already ap-
peared as we sum over Feynman diagrams. As our integrand is now symmetric under
permutations of the the qi apart from the propagator factor (p
+  q1) . . ., permuting the
qi becomes equivalent to relabelling our integration variables, and so we can average over
permutations to use this identity if we introduce a factor 1/n.
Now using [79]
x i = i(x) + P
(2.51)
inside an integral (which can be understood from the residue theorem with a pole on the
real axis) we can write
2p  qj
(qj )
(2.52)
where E is the energy of either particle in the centre-of-mass frame. Here we have thrown
away the principal value term because the principal value of the integral
q+q  q2?
(2.53)
vanishes. Note that this approach is essentially similar to the use of the Cutkosky rules
to put the external particles on-shell directly, which is that taken in [50]; the approach
adopted here, however, allows a far more transparent treatment of the gauge boson mo-
menta and the ensuing combinatorics. Note that there are 2(n 1) such factors in total,
and the overall delta function allows us to set the q components of the final gauge boson
momentum equal to those at which we evaluate our amplitude; these we neglect by our
earlier argument. Gathering factors and integrating out delta functions, and remember-
ing to include the Jacobian factor of 2 when we change to the q co-ordinates in our
integration measure, we find
Mnboson(s, t) =
(8E2)n1
V (p1)
nV (p2)
d2q1,?
(2)2
. . .
d2qn,?
(2)2
(2)2
 D(q21,?) . . . D(q2n,?)(2)4(2)(q1,? + . . .qn,?  q?) (2.54)
Using the integral representation of the delta function,
(2)(q) =
(2)2
eiqb (2.55)
where b is the impact parameter vector in the transverse space, and writing 8E2 = 2s, we
can write this as
iMnboson = 2s
iV (p1)
(2)2
eibq?D(q2)V (p2)
eibq (2.56)
Defining the eikonal phase (b) as
(b)  1
(2)2
eibq?AB(s, t = q2?) (2.57)
V (p1)V (p2)
(2)2
eibq?D(q2)
we see that
Mnboson(s, t = q2?) = 2s
d2beibq?(i(b))n (2.58)
This beautifully simple result leads us to sum the infinite series of diagrams for arbitary
n, giving the final answer
MEik(s, t = q2?) = 2is
d2beibq?
ei(b)  1
(2.59)
This derivation makes it clear that the summation of diagrams that leads to the eikonal
form is valid independently of the details of theory. At the computational level, we begin
with the Born amplitude of the theory (2.47), work out the corresponding eikonal phase
 defined by (2.57), and plug it into the general formula (2.59). This generality will be of
use in the next chapter to us when we consider the dierent approaches to dealing with
the tree-level divergences of the Born amplitude in the ADD scenario.
In light of our earlier discussion about forward scattering and unitarity, it is interesting
to note that the the eikonal amplitude satisfies the optical theorem (2.40) if the eikonal
phase  is real; (2.40) implies that
ImAeik(s, 0)
d2b(1  eIm cos Re) (2.60)
Whilst in the massless limit our kinematic assumptions imply the relation
|MEik|2
64sp2
|MEik|2
16s2
(2.61)
and hence
16s2
dt|MEik|2
d2b(1 + e2Im  2eIm cos Re)
Thus we see that if  is real, then the eikonal will satisfy the optical theorem [50]. This
can be understood in the following way. It will frequently be convenient to make use of
the identity Z
dnyeixyf(y) =
(2)n/2
xn/21
dyyn/2Jn/21(xy)f(y) (2.62)
so that we can write (2.59) as
Aeik = 4is
dbbJ0(qb)(e
i  1) (2.63)
It is instructive [84, 85] to compare this to the partial wave expansion of the scattering
amplitude of a particle with momentum k from a potential:
f() =
(2`+ 1)
e2i`
P`(cos ) (2.64)
In the limit of large k, b presently under discussion, ` = kb is large. Furthermore, this limit
is semiclassical in the sense that the spacing  ~ between angular momentum eigenstates
becomes negligible compared to the large angular momenta under consideration, so that
the sum can be replaced by an integral. Using the asymptotic behaviour of the Legendre
polynomial in `, P`(cos )  J0(`)  J0(bq) (where we have approximated  = q/k), so
that we have
f( = q/k)  ik
dbbJ0(bq)(e
2i(b)  1) (2.65)
We see that  acquires the interpretation of a phase shift, and the eikonal amplitude a sum
over all partial waves which happens to be dominated by large angular momentum modes;
this explains its unitarity so long as the phase shifts are real. In [86] the boundary between
the elastic and black hole regions of fig. 2.2 was investigated by allowing the phase shifts
to become complex, as black hole production is expected to be a highly inelastic process
due to Hawking radiation.
It is also instructive to compare (2.57) to the relationship between the Born amplitude
and the classical potential V (x) [55]:
AB = i
d3xV (x)eixp (2.66)
So we see that , as well as having the interpretation of a phase shift, will be closely related
to the classical potential experienced by each particle due to the interaction. The dierence
is that in(2.57) the Fourier transform is only taken over the transverse co-ordinates to the
beam axis; this can be understood if it is recognised that the phase shift results from
integrating the potential experienced by a particle along its worldline.
Having discussed the eikonal amplitude in some generality, it is now perhaps appropri-
ate to specify its particular relevance for gravity. As we have already observed, we expect
based on our unitarity argument that forward scattering will be particularly relevant for
gravity, as the cross-sections are expected to grow with energy. This is visible, for example,
in the Born amplitude derived from an Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian minimally coupled to
matter, which in spacetime of arbitrary dimension takes the form [1]
AB(s, t) = 
8GDs
(2.67)
As expected, we see that this grows strongly with s, and decays with t. The eikonal phase
corresponding to (2.67) according to (2.57) is given by [1]
(b, s) =
nSn+2
(2.68)
where the factor
2n/2
(n/2)
(2.69)
is the area of the n-dimensional unit sphere. We see from this equation that the dividing
line between Born and eikonal regions in fig. 2.2 corresponds to the requirement that the
modulus of || & 1; for || < 1 we can expand the exponential in (2.59) in a series, the
leading order term of which merely reproduces the Born amplitude.
To assess the validity of the approximation, we can also compare the relative contri-
butions of the Feynman diagrams that are and are not included in the eikonal amplitude,
at any fixed order in perturbation theory. This does of course require that one has a way
of making sense of the diagrams which would ordinarily contain divergences, but such
a programme has been undertaken in supergravity [87] and string theory [88], where it
was found that the ladder and crossed ladder diagrams do indeed dominate those which
are neglected. The eikonal amplitude and its leading corrections have been extensively
investigated in string theory, [89, 90, 91, 92].
Furthermore, the eikonal amplitude for gravity has been shown to have a semi-classical
interpretation. One of the early works that pioneered the use of semi-classical approxima-
tions at high energies was that of tHooft [6], who derived the elastic scattering amplitude
of a particle in response to the shockwave in an Aichelburg-Sexl metric [93]:
U(s, t) =
(1  iGNs)
4(iGns)
1iGs
(2.70)
Kabat and Ortiz showed [8] that the eikonal amplitude for gravity, using (2.67) in d = 4
for the Born amplitude, is equivalent to this result (up to a choice of scale for a graviton
mass introduced to regulate infrared divergences). It is interesting to note [6] that the
absolute value, and hence the cross-section, of this expression is exactly identical to that
of (2.67).
This completes our survey of the concepts necessary to understand the present work
in context. We now turn our attention to the study of the eikonal regime at the LHC, if
asymptotically safe quantum gravity is allowed to reveal itself by through the existence of
large extra dimensions.
Chapter 3
Quantum gravity in the eikonal
In this chapter, we investigate the scattering amplitudes which describe transplanckian
scattering if gravity probes a higher-dimensional spacetime whilst the colliding particles
are confined to a 3+1-dimensional brane. We begin in section 3.1 by assessing the claim
made in the literature [1, 8, 50] that the eikonal approximation is independent of the
UV completion of the theory. We will demonstrate that there is good reason to question
this hypothesis in the ADD framework, and argue that we are therefore compelled to
describe the process using a genuine theory of quantum gravity. We then seize this exciting
opportunity to explore the physics of asymptotically safe gravity. In section 3.2 we use
the computational framework first presented in [40] to provide a practical approach to
calculating these amplitudes. We will explore how sensitive our results are to the dierent
approximations to the RG evolution of the gravitational coupling G(). In section 3.3
we explore the underlying reasons for the failure of the arguments oered in support of
the expectation that semiclassical physics could be applied, using the techniques of the
stationary phase approximation.
3.1 Semiclassical gravity?
In this section we explore methods of computing the eikonal scattering amplitudes that
seek merely to parametrise our ignorance of the underlying gravity theory. As discussed
in the preceding chapter, the calculation of the eikonal amplitude proceeds in essentially
three steps: compute the Born amplitude of the theory; work out the corresponding eikonal
phase (b) via (2.57); and insert the result into (2.59) to compute the eikonal amplitude
Meik itself.
3.1.1 Born amplitude
As discussed in section 2.3, in the ADD scenario there are infinitely many KK modes of
the graviton, and the Born amplitude for a single graviton exchange sums over the entire
KK tower. The corresponding Feynman diagrams do however have an identical topology
to those of more familiar frameworks, and we can still talk about processes occurring in
the x-channel, where x = s, t or u = s  t is one of the Mandelstam variables. The
Born amplitude in the x-channel may be written in the form A = S(x)  T [62], where
T = TT 
n + 2
T T
 (3.1)
is a function of the energy-momentum tensor T of the theory, and n is the number of
compactified extra dimensions; and
S(x) =
Mn+2D
Mn+2D
2n/2
(n/2)
xm2 (3.2)
in which we have assumed that the spacing between the Kaluza-Klein masses m is well
below our experimental resolution, such that we may replace the sum by an integral for
analytic convenience. We will restrict our attention to t-channel processes, such that the
denominator of the integrand 3.2 never vanishes as t < 0. This form is convenient because
the coupling of the graviton to matter is independent of the KK mode under consideration,
so that we may perform the sum S(x) over KK masses without specifying any particular
2  2 process; the details of a particular field content for our theory are encoded in
T . At suciently high energies, we may neglect both non-gravitational interactions and
the masses of our particles; then T
 vanishes, and the matrix element of T
 between
momentum eigenstates is simply [50]
hp|T |pi = 2pp (3.3)
T then contributes a factor (2p1p1)(2p2,p2,) = s2. For subsequent convenience we define
Mn+2D
Sn (3.4)
The integral (3.2) exhibits a logarithmic divergence for n = 0, but setting n = m = 0 and
not doing the integral reproduces the Born amplitude of the Einstein-Hilbert action. In 2 or
more extra dimensions the integral is UV divergent, and therefore requires regularization.
In existing literature this has been done via dimensional regularization [50], a sharp UV
cut-o in eective field theory [62, 67], and by modelling the brane as a dynamical object
with a finite width [94].
In n = 2 the regularised integrals also diverge as q  0; as our principal interest is in
the ultraviolet physics of gravity, we will generally restrict our attention here to n > 2.
Dimensional Regularisation
In [50] the authors exploit the convergence of (3.2) for 0 < n < 2 to obtain a result which
may be analytically continued to a wider range of n:
ADR = C
tm2 = C(t)
n/21 1
xn/21
1 + x
(3.5)
=  s
Mn+2D
n/2(t)n/21(1  n/2)
We have corrected this result for a minus sign not present in [50]. This has poles for even
integers n > 2 but is otherwise well-behaved. Note that for n  2 this is an increasing func-
tion of momentum transfer q =
pt, wheras for 0 < n < 2 where the integral converges it
is a decreasing function, as would be required for forward scattering to dominate. The use
of this amplitude as the starting point for an eikonal calculation has thus been criticised
in [94]. This behaviour can be understood on dimensional grounds- in the absence of a
cuto scale , the momentum transfer
pt provides the necessary powers of energy to
keep the amplitude dimensionless. The fact that the Born amplitude contains no such
scale means that the eikonal amplitude should in principle allow one to make predictions
that constrain MD directly; however, this argument only holds on the assumption that
the eikonal amplitude is insensitive to the details of how the Born amplitude is regulated.
This will be discussed in much greater detail below.
Eective Field Theory
In order to better understand how dimensional regularisation works, it is instructive to
compare it to the results obtained by imposing a sharp UV cuto in the integral in (3.2):
tm2 =
F (1, n/2, 1 + n/2,2/t) (3.6)
so that
AEFT = C
F (1, n/2, 1 + n/2,2/t) (3.7)
Here and throughout, F denotes the hypergeometric function 2F1.
The hypergeometric function is defined by the series expansion (B.6). We may expand
F in this series, and partially re-sum it for the cases where n is definitely odd or even, to
AEFT HqL
AEFT H0L
0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0
Figure 3.1: The Born Amplitude with a sharp UV cuto for dierent numbers n of extra
dimensions: n=3 (red), 4 (blue), 5 (magenta), 6 (grey). Each has been normalised to the
value of each amplitude at t = 0; note that this procedure removes the dependence of the
amplitudes on the values of the dimensionful parameters s,M , except insofar as that 
sets the scale on the horizontal axis. For comparison we also plot the asymptotic limit
 2/t (green).
recover the expansions presented for the cut-o amplitudes in [62, 67]:
F (1, n/2, 1 + n/2,2/t) = n
 (3.8)
(1)n/2 ln
1  2
Pn/21
if n is even
(1)(n1)/2
tan1
P(n1)/21j=0 (2j + 1)1(1)j
2j+1#
if n is odd
To understand how this is related to dimensional regularisation, we use the identity (B.9)
so that for odd n we have
AEFT = ADR  C
n 2F
1, 1  n
; 2  n
(3.9)
The first term is the amplitude of dimensional regularisation, and is independent of ,
whilst the second term diverges in the limit   1. We therefore see that dimensional
regularisation corresponds to an infinite subtraction, as noted in [94], and that the t-
dependence of the subtracted term totally changes the behaviour of the amplitude as a
function of t.
As F (,; ; 0)  1, for large t  2 we have that
t/21 C
(3.10)
In the limit t/2  0, each term in the series expansions (3.8) vanishes; isolating
the the terms of order t/2, which have the same coecient in even and odd n, we find:
F (1, n/2, 1 + n/2,2/t)
t/20 C 
n 2 (3.11)
Note that as this limit is finite and independent of t, scattering at 4-momentum trans-
fers that are small compared to  is isotropic; in terms of the Mandelstam variables, the
channels s-, t- and u- all make comparable contributions to the amplitude [95]. It is often
parametrised on dimensional grounds in terms of an eective mass Me as
S(x = 0) =  4
(3.12)
The limiting behaviour of AEFT as t  0,t  1 is also easily observed from the
defining integral 3.6.
3.1.2 Eikonal Phases
The defining relation (2.57) can be conveniently re-written using the expression (2.62), so
(b, s) =
dqqJ0(qb)AB(s, t = q2) (3.13)
Dimensional Regularisation
Corresponding to the Born amplitude (3.6) the authors [50] found that
DR = 
n/2(1  n/2)
dqqn1J0(qb) (3.14)
Passing from the first to the second line uses the result (B.1). (This result diers from
that in [50] by the same minus sign as that in (3.6).) The parameter
(4)n/21(n/2)s
4Mn+2
(3.15)
is the length scale at which DR becomes of order one, and hence dictates when the eikonal
is relevant. There are a number of important facts to appreciate about this result.
The first point to note is that DR(b) is well-defined in all numbers of extra dimensions
n, despite the fact that it has been derived via a Born amplitude that diverges for all even n.
The second, particularly in light of (2.66), is the striking similarity between (b)  bn and
a Newtonian potential V (r)  r(n+1). In [96] it was shown that this result was equivalent
to that obtained by exchanging the orders of integration in the Fourier transform in (2.57)
and in the Born amplitude. Of course, this procedure is only strictly legitimate when
both integrations are absolutely convergent. As discussed above, this will be the case
when 0 < n < 2. In fact, this is also the result obtained for  in d flat dimensions [1].
There are two possible viewpoints that we might adopt regarding this result. The first
is that although our regularisation process might appear to be mathematically suspect, it
is physically reasonable that we have recovered the semiclassical result (3.15) in the context
of a semiclassical calculation. However, we do not find this argument persuasive. It is easy
to imagine that the eective potential that arises from integrating over all modes diers
in some respect from the classical potential, and the KK tower certainly probes high-
energy modes. We have seen in our discussion of the Born amplitude that dimensional
regularisation amounts to an infinite subtraction. Looking at this result, it appears as if
that subtraction amounts to the contribution of the entire KK tower It therefore seems
worthwhile to consider the eikonal phase with a cuto imposed upon the KK tower, to see
how this modifies our results.
Eective Field Theory
We calculate the eikonal phase for eective field theory by exchanging the order of inte-
gration of m and q. Note that in contrast to the dimensionally regularised case, all of our
integrals are now absolutely convergent for finite , and hence this procedure should not
aect the final outcome. We thus find
EFT = 
dmmn1
dqJ0(qb)
q2 + m2
=  C
dmmn1K0(mb) (3.16)
=  s
Mn+2D
n/21
K1()1F2
1; 1 +
, 1 +
+ nK0()1F2
1; 1 +
(3.17)
where we have defined  = b.
cEFT HbL
cEFT H1L
1 2 5 10 20
0.001
Figure 3.2: The eikonal phase in eective field theory for n varying from 3 to 6 (top to
bottom), normalised to its value at b = 1/. Note the variation of the scaling behaviour
with n for large  = b.
At  = 0, the hypergeometric series truncate to 1; the behaviour of EFT at small
impact parameters is therefore dominated by the modified Bessel functions K(). Using
the series expansion (B.4) for K at small arguments we see that
K  log  (3.18)
so we see that the short-distance behaviour of EFT is dominated by a logarithmic diver-
gence from the function K0().
For large impact parameters, we use the asymptotic expansions (B.5), (B.10) of the
K and 1F2 functions to recover the expected behaviour
EFT (b)  
(3.19)
where bc is defined as above, and we have neglected terms of order e
b. This limit was
recovered in [97] by direct asymptotic expansion of eq. (3.16).
To what extent then is the eikonal phase  independent of the regulator used in AB?
This appears to depend on the relative contributions of the length scales greater or less
than  1/. The authors [97] numerically integrated the eikonal amplitude using (3.16)
with  = MD = 1TeV and for dimensional regularisation, and found little dierence.
However, that was in the context of the eikonal scattering of neutrinos from cosmic rays
o neutrinos, with a centre-of-mass energy
s  1010 GeV rather higher than those
accessible at the LHC. As the largeness of the centre of mass energy was crucial to the
semi-classical rationale behind the eikonal, it seems worthwhile checking the regulator
dependence of the eikonal amplitude at the LHC explicitly.
3.1.3 Eikonal amplitude
We now consider the eikonal amplitude corresponding to (3.15) and (3.17) in turn, to see
to what extent the full eikonal amplitude is sensitive to the procedure used to define AB.
Dimensional Regularisation
Using the eikonal phase (3.15) we write
MDR = 4is
dbbJ0(qb)(e
i( bcb )
= 4isb2c
dxxJ0(xy)
n  1
(3.20)
 4sb2cFn(bcq) (3.21)
It was shown in [98] that the functions Fn can be expressed in terms of Meijer-G functions.
Correcting for various minus signs, we find that
Fn(y) =
22/n1
(Rn(y) + In(y)) (3.22)
Rn(y) = G
n+1,0
0,2(n+2)
22n+2n2n
0, n22n ,
, . . . , n1
, 0, n1
, n2
, . . . , 1
A (3.23)
In(y) = G
n+1,0
0,2(n+2)
22n+2n2n
, . . . , n1
, n1
, 0, n22n ,
, . . . , 1
A (3.24)
We plot this in fig. 3.3 for dierent values of n. We note immediately that this regular-
isation scheme does not exhibit the same correspondence between the Born and Eikonal
dierential cross-sections that is found in ordinary four-dimensional gravity. The eikonal
amplitudes shown here clearly demonstrate that forward scattering dominates, wheras the
Born term (3.6) grows indefinitely as a function of q.
0 2 4 6 8 10
0 2 4 6 8 10
0 2 4 6 8 10
0 2 4 6 8 10
Figure 3.3: The functions Fn(y) for the labelled values of n. The real parts are shown in
red, the imaginary parts in blue, and the absolute values in magenta.
Eective Field Theory
For the more complicated eikonal phase corresponding to a sharp cuto no corresponding
closed form expression appears to exist. Figure 3.4 compares the dimensionally regularised
result to the numerical integration of
MEFT = 4is
dbbJ0(qb)(e
iEFT  1) (3.25)
where EFT is given in (3.17). We see that for   MD at typical LHC energies there can
be a factor of 2 dierence between dimensional regularisation and eective field theory
at small angles. This explicitly demonstrates that the eikonal amplitude is sensitive to
our treatment of the Born amplitude. In [50] they allow for the possibility that quantum
gravity eects might significantly alter their signal, but claim that the eikonal amplitude
should nonetheless be insensitive to the regularisation procedure.
The fact that we cannot systematically and consistently eliminate the contribution of
short-distance modes to physical results suggests that we are forced to confront the physics
of the high energy scale directly. There are two candidates for the unknown physics: that
which gives rise to the 3-brane, and that which solves the problems of quantum gravity.
Phenomenological parametrisations of ascribing a thickness or tension to the brane yield
an eikonal phase with a similar behaviour to that found in eective field theory [94]. Our
interest arises from the other possibility: that the LHC may oer us the opportunity
to probe the physics of quantum gravity. Whilst the string corrections discussed in [50]
are incalculable, in asymptotic safety a practical method for investigating the underlying
theory of quantum gravity has already been outlined. The remainder of this work will be
dedicated to understanding how asymptotic safety might reveal itself in this scenario.
MEik
L=0.8MD
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
q HTeVL
Figure 3.4: In this figure we compare the eikonal amplitude obtained via dimensional
regularisation (blue) to that derived in eective field theory with  = 0.8MD (yellow) and
 = MD (red). We have used the reference values of
s =9 TeV; MD = 1.5TeV in n = 6.
Note that as the DR amplitude makes no reference to the scale  we have plotted our
momentum transfer in units of TeV.
3.2 RG improvement
We now begin our investigation of asymptotically safe scattering amplitudes, using the
parametrisations (2.29), (2.30) for the running gravitational constant. Implementing an
RG improvement necessitates making a connection between the RG scale  and some
momentum scale in our physical problem. We will take  to be the d-dimensional graviton
momentum, so that
2 = t + m2 (3.26)
As this matching depends on the KK mass m of the graviton, we must include the factor
Z1() inside our integrals over the bulk momenta of exchanged gravitons. Our approach
therefore diers from that of Hewett and Rizzo [39], who use a parametrisation for Z1()
equivalent to (2.30), but only match the RG scale to the four-dimensional momentum
transfer.
Further to the discussion in section (2.2.3), we also emphasise that we are treating the
underlying gravity theory as that of d-dimensional spacetime, with no regard to the ADD
construction. This is very much in keeping with the spirit of the model, but it is antic-
ipated that there is at least one eect specific to this scenario that we neglect. Clearly,
at very small  < 1/R we must see four -dimensional gravity [60], which our parametri-
sations do not account for. The momentum transfers we will ultimately consider in our
phenomenological study are suciently large that this approximation has no significant
eect.
3.2.1 Born amplitude
Quenched approximation
The Born amplitude in the t-channel, retaining only the leading order in t/s is then
given by
AQ = C
tm2Z
t + m2) (3.27)
The subscript Q simply denotes that we are using the prescription (2.29). The functional
form of the resulting integral depends on the value of
pt/T 
t0. For
t0 > 1 we
are immediately in the fixed point regime, and the integral in (3.27) becomes comparatively
simple. For t0 < 1 the resulting integral is more complicated, as we split the integration
region up into intervals in which the integrand does and does not exhibit fixed point
scaling.
The expressions for these dierent kinematic regions can be combined into the ampli-
AQ = Cn2T
n(2 + n)t02
+ (1 + t0)(1 + t0)n/2
1, n2 ,
2 , 1 +
 (2 + nt
n(2 + n)t02
(3.28)
This result agrees with the high-energy limit t/s  0 of the full Born amplitude (inclusive
of s, t and u channels) in asymptotic safety derived in [38, 37]. It is clear from this
expression that for t0 > 1, the amplitude decays as  1/t02, in constrast to the eective
field theory result. This can be understood from the perspective of four-dimensional
physics: If GD()  2d, then in d = 4 the running Newtons constant must vary
 2; as we have integrated out all KK modes, from the matching (3.26) we must
have GN ()  1/t at high energies. Using this running GN in (2.67) reproduces  t2
behaviour, so that the four-dimensional GN inherits the fixed point of the underlying
d-dimensional gravity theory [40].
AQ HqL
AQ H0L
L4t2
0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0
0.001
Figure 3.5: The quenched approximation to the RG-improved Born amplitude for dierent
numbers n of extra dimensions, normalised to the value of each amplitude at t = 0
Note that this procedure removes the dependence of the amplitudes on the values of the
dimensionful parameters s,MD,T except insofar as that T sets the scale on the horizontal
axis. Here we compare the amplitudes to their asymptotic limit  1/q4.
The hypergeometric function is related to the one that appeared in eective field theory
by the substitution 1/t  1 + 1/t, and we obtain expansions related to those of eective
field theory by analytic continuation:
F (1, n/2, 1 + n/2, 1 + 1/t0) = n
n/2
 (3.29)
ln (t0) +Pn/21j=1 1j
1 + 1
if n is even
tanh1
1 + 1
P(n1)/21j=0 (2j + 1)1(1)j
1 + 1
j+1/2
if n is odd
We can use these to recover the t0  0 limit of AQ:
AQ = Cn2T
n 2 +
(3.30)
The identity (B.9) gives us the relationship to dimensional regularisation:
AQ = (1  t0)ADR + Cn2T D(t0, n) (3.31)
where
D(t0, n) =
n(2 + n)t02
+ (1 + t0)
(1 + t0)n/21
n 2 F
1, 1  n
, 2  n
1 + t0
(3.32)
Again, we see that dimensional regularisation diers from the large T limit of our
amplitude by an infinite subtraction.
Linear Approximation
We defer our calculation of the Born amplitude using the prescription (2.30) to appendix
A.1. We define
1 if n is even
2 if n is odd
2 + 1 if n is even
n + 2 if n is odd
and find for the general result
AB(s,q2) = 
s2n2T
Mn+2D
(2)n/2+1l
n + 2
(2k)n/21
Gl,l+kk+l,k+l
1  22k
, . . . , l  22k , 0, 1k , . . . , k1k
2k , . . . , l  n2k , n2k . . . , 1k
2 + k  1
A (3.33)
A special case of this result for n = 6 was found in [40] in terms of elementary functions,
and we have checked that our result agrees with that expression. Using (B.13) we again
reproduce the universal q4 behaviour.
AL HqL
AL H0L
L4t2
0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0
0.001
Figure 3.6: The linear approximation to the RG-improved Born amplitude for dierent
numbers n of extra dimensions, normalised to the value of each amplitude at t = 0. Here
we compare the amplitudes to their asymptotic limit  1/q4.
3.2.2 Eikonal phase
Quenched Approximation
For even n one can use the binomial expansion of (1 + t)n/2 in AQ to express it in a way
that can be integrated in Mathematica, and thus find the eikonal phase Q expressed as
ZQ n=5
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Figure 3.7: Here we compare dierent prescriptions for implementing asymptotic safety
in the Born amplitude in n = 5 (red) and n = 6 (blue). The dashed curves show the
quenched prescription (2.29) and the solid curves show the linear prescription (2.30).
a function of the dimensionless variable b0 = bT :
(1)n/2
 n21X
(1)j(j + 1)
2  j
2  j; 1, n2 + 1; b
n2(n + 2)2
(n + 2) 1F2
+ 1; 2,
+ 2;b
+ n 2F3
+ 1; 2,
+ 2;b
+ 2(n + 2)2J0(b
n(n + 2)
 n2X
(1)k
k  1; 1, k; b024
k  1 +
n 1F2
k; 1, k + 1; b024
2J1(b
(  1)b02 + b02 log
 b04 2F3
1, 1; 2, 3, 3; b024
64n(n + 2)
For odd n we are forced to resort to to the construction of interpolating functions via
direct numerical integration of (3.13). We plot these in fig. 3.8. We remark that for large
impact parameters Q oscillates wildly about the expected value  bn; this appears to
be merely an artefact of the quenched prescription, due to the non-analyticity of the step
function.
cQ Hb'L
cQ H1L
1 2 5 10 20
0.001
Figure 3.8: The quenched approximation to the RG-improved eikonal phase for dierent
numbers n of extra dimensions. Here we see that in this approximation Q oscillates
wildly about the expected value  bn.
Linear Approximation
Deferring the calculational details to A.1, we find the general expression
0) =  s
Mn+2D
(2)n/2+1l
b0n/2
n + 2
(3.34)
 Gk+l,ll,2k+l
2k
1  n2n+4
, . . . , 1
l  n2n+4
where again b0 = bT , k and l were defined in (3.33), and
1  n
2n + 4
, . . . ,
l  n
2n + 4
, . . . ,
+ k  1
, . . . ,
+k1)
Using the formula (B.14) we find that for b  1T we reproduce the now-familar result
L(b)  
(3.35)
2 5 10 20 50 100 200bLT
0.001
s =MD=LT=1
Figure 3.9: The linear approximation to the RG-improved eikonal phase (solid lines) for
dierent numbers n of extra dimensions. In this approximation to the running of GN , the
asymptotic  bn behaviour as expected from the semiclassical analysis (dashed lines) is
clear.
We see that thanks to the continuous derivatives of the prescription (2.30) this exhibits
none of the long-distance pathologies exhibited by Q. For b  0 we find from (B.13) that
L(0) = 
Mn+2D
2n(n + 2)
 (3.36)
It is striking that in contrast to the eective field theory case (3.17) which diverged log-
arithmically at small arguments, L tends to a finite value. This is because the EFT
prescription only regulates the high energy modes of the KK tower, without fundamen-
tally altering the behaviour of gravity at short distances. By contrast, the framework
adopted here is intended to describe a fundamentally well-behaved theory of gravity. In-
deed, we also find that the derivative of L vanishes at zero impact parameter, and regard
this as a signature of the underlying fixed point of the theory.
This argument can be generalised: using the matching (3.26), by the argument in A.1
we can write the eikonal phase corresponding to a generic field strength renormalisation
Z1() in the form
(b) = Xnb
dn/21Z1()Jn/2(b) (3.37)
with Xn an irrelevant n-dependent constant. At small arguments, by (B.2) Jn/2(b) 
bn/2, so that this integral is finite as b  0, and converges due to the factor Z1(), so
that (0) is finite. Dierentiating with respect to b, we have
dn/21Z1()bn/2
Jn/2(b) +
dJn/2(b)
(3.38)
Using (B.3), the term in square brackets becomes
Jn/2(b) +
Jn/21(b)  Jn/2+1(b)
b0 n2b
(n/2+1)
n/21
(n/2)
+ O(bn/2+1)
= 0 + O(bn/2+1)
So we see that it is also a generic feature of our formulation that the first derivative of
(b) vanishes at zero impact parameter. We find no such cancellation with the second
derivative of , so that we might expect it to diverge in the small b limit due to the
terms inversely proportional to powers of b. In fact, it seems that the integral softens this
divergence slightly, so that we find for L the expansion
L(b)  0 + b02(An + Bn log(b0)) (3.39)
so we see that the second derivative of  diverges logarithmically. It is interesting to
reflect on this fact in light of the analogy between quantum field theory and the sta-
tistical mechanics of systems with infinitely many degrees of freedom; in applications of
the renormalization group in the latter context, fixed points correspond to second-order
phase transitions, in which the second derivatives of the thermodynamic free energy are
discontinuous.
It is interesting to reconsider the connection between the eikonal phase and the classical
potential in light of this result. We would have reproduced the qualitative features of L
if we had taken defined a gravitational constant that ran in position space as G(b)  bn at
short distances, and remained approximately constant  GD at long distances. We might
expect analogous remarks to apply to the Newtonian potential  r(1+n), or equivalently
to the metric components in a relativistic setting. Such methods have been applied to
e.g. discussions of RG-improved black hole metrics in [28, 29, 30, 31]; this result seems
to provide a further vindication of such approaches. In fact, using the identity (B.15),
we can define a multiplicative renormalisation factor Hn(b
0) for GN that runs in position
space, by
0) = 
0) (3.40)
10 20 30 40b
Figure 3.10: Here we plot the functions Hn(b
0) for dierent numbers of extra dimensions.
We see here that the functions grow as  bn at small arguments and settle to 1 at long
distances, as required to reproduce the semiclassical result.
where
(2)1l
(n/2)
n + 2
kn/2 (3.41)
 Gk+l,ll,2k+l
2k
, . . . , 1
, . . . , 1, 1
2 , . . . ,
2 + k  1
, 0, . . . , (k  1)/k
The functions Hn are plotted in fig. 3.10.
We can use the finiteness of L(0)  0 to define a length scale bT  1/T character-
istic of our RG improvement, by
0 = 
(3.42)
bT is thus the length scale at which the semi-classical eikonal phase (3.15) attains the
maximal value of L in our framework. It provides a strict lower bound on the length
scale at which the eects of RG improvement must manifest themselves. Its explicit
expression is
bT = 
n2 2
n (n + 2)
 csc
(3.43)
There is one further important remark to be made in connection with the semi-classical
limit DR. We have seen that L reproduces this limit at large arguments. This can be
understood as saying that the RG-improvement only aects the short-distance physics
of gravity. However, the dimensionless argument bT of the complicated functions in
(3.35),(3.41) also becomes larger as we increase the scale T . There is then a sense in
which gravity looks more classical as we push the onset of fixed point scaling to ever
higher energy scales. This point will become important in our discussion of the eikonal
amplitudes.
3.2.3 Eikonal amplitude
We have numerically integrated the renormalisation-group-improved eikonal amplitudes
MRG(s, t) using L. The most obvious question to address is how varying the new pa-
rameter T of our theory aects the absolute value of MRG, and hence on observable
physics relevant for our discussion of phenomenological signals in chapter 4. We illustrate
the eects of this variation in figure 3.11.
The first lesson to be gained from figure 3.11 is that for suciently large T our eikonal
amplitudes coincide with those of dimensional regularisation. This was to be expected from
our discussion of L in the preceding section 3.2.2. As discussed there, in the large T
limit L  DR, as fewer momentum modes are aected by the weakening of gravity due
to the fixed point. That this is realised at the level of the full eikonal amplitude amounts
to an important consistency check.
The second immediately striking point about fig. 3.11 is that for values of T < MD,
the eikonal amplitude exhibits the same scaling behaviour  q4 as the Born amplitude.
It is interesting to compare this to the situation in 4-dimensional gravity, where tHoofts
amplitude (2.70) has the same absolute value as the Born amplitude (2.67). Here we see
that the semi-classical amplitude in the ADD case does not share this feature, whilst
our description in which the quantum field theoretic eects are most important appears
to This is, however, easily understood mathematically. In the case T < MD, from (3.35)
the absolute value of L < 1, and we can expand the exponential in (2.59)
ei  1  i (3.44)
The Fourier transform in (2.59) thus inverts that in (2.57), and we recover the Born
amplitude. It is important to emphasise that this argument is only meaningful because the
Born amplitude is well-defined within our framework; without a regularisation procedure
in place, expanding the exponential ei in (2.59) produces an infinite sum of divergent
integrals.
The above arguments are quite general, and should hold in any number of extra dimen-
sions. To facilitate further comparison with the amplitudes of dimensional regularisation,
0.1 0.2 0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0 10.0 20.0
0.001
MEikHq bcL s =9TeV;M=1TeV;n=6
HqbcL-4
LT HTeVL
Figure 3.11: Variation of the eikonal amplitudes with T .
it is helpful to parametrise our results in a manner analogous to that in (3.21):
MRG(s, t) = i4sb2cF (y, z) (3.45)
where
y  qbc (3.46)
z  bc
= (0)1/n (3.47)
where bT was defined in (3.42). The functions Fn(y) of dimensional regularisation de-
pended only on the variable y; the variable z encodes the information about our RG
improvement. It varies with the dimensionful parameters of our theory as
(3.48)
Our condition for semi-classicality is thus that of large z. Fig. 3.12 shows the realisation
of our physical picture in n = 4, expressed in terms of the variables y, z.
It is interesting to consider this variation of F (y, z) for fixed y. In fig. 3.13 we plot this
variation in n = 3. There we see clearly that for large values of z, FRG(y, z)  FDR(y) as
desired. For small values of z, we see that F (y, z) grows with z with a power law. This
follows from the fact that in this limit we recover AL from MRG, and the Born amplitude
varies as (T /MD)
n2  zn2 from (3.48).
Fig.3.13 also reveals an interesting feature of this transition: that at a certain value
of z that is largely insensitive to y, |F (y, z)| reaches a supremum that is larger than
0.01 0.1 1 10 y
0.001
FHy,zL n=4
z=0.5
z=0.8
Figure 3.12: The absolute value of F4 is plotted against y for dierent fixed z: The DR
case (black), z = 10 (blue), z = 5 (blue,dashed), z = 2 (blue, dotted), z = 1 (orange),
z = 0.8 (orange,dashed) and z = 0.5 (red).
2 4 6 8 10 z
FHy,zL n=3
y=5 HDRL
y=1 HDRL
y=0 HDRL
Figure 3.13: The absolute value of F3 is plotted against z for dierent fixed y: y = 0
(blue), y = 1 (red) and y = 5 (green). The DR case is always given as a dashed line in
the corresponding colour.
that attained in the semiclassical limit. This is a striking, almost paradoxical result:
that by suppressing the contribution of some high-energy modes, we can increase the
corresponding dierential cross-section
We can begin understand this if we reflect on how short-distance physics contributes
to the semi-classical amplitude (3.20). At short distances DR  bn becomes extremely
large, and so the complex exponential eiDR oscillates extremely rapidly. In consequence,
these rapid fluctuations serve to cancel each other out. This argument can be formalised
using the methods of the stationary phase approximation, which we will discuss in detail
in the next section. We see then that as we increase T , the absolute value of MRG is
subject to two competing eects: it is enhanced as the contribution of some modes is
unsuppressed, but decreased due the increasingly rapid oscillations of eiL .
3.3 The stationary phase approximation to the eikonal am-
plitude
We wish to make a stationary phase approximation of integrals of the form
Meik = 4is
dbbJ0(qb)(e
i  1) (3.49)
For large arguments the Bessel function can be expanded as
J0(x) 
(3.50)
so upon expanding the cosine in terms of complex exponentials, in this limit we can express
the integrand in (3.49) as a sum of terms with exponents  
qb 4
. The stationary
phase approximation defines a length scale bs at which the derivative of this exponent with
respect to b vanishes, so that
 q = 0 (3.51)
If the derivative @
has a constant sign, only one of the positive/negative frequency modes
from expanding the Bessel function contributes to the approximation. The location of the
stationary point bs will clearly depend on q, as well as whatever parameters enter the
definition of .
We remark that, formally speaking, q is playing the role of the large parameter which
was denoted x above. However, we will see that the relative error in the stationary phase
approximation is often much better than the 1/
q error estimate we would naively make
based on the above logic. We will discuss this point in more detail below with reference
to the semiclassical and RG-improved eikonal amplitudes.
3.3.1 Semiclassical analysis
Let us recall the integral representation of the functions Fn(y) of Giudice et al. in terms
of the variables x = b/bc, y = qbc,
F (y) = i
dxxJ0(xy)
n  1
(3.52)
Expanding the Bessel function in terms of complex exponentials, the function  pxei(xy/4)
has no stationary points, so we neglect the contribution of the -1 term from the brackets.
F (y) 
dxf(x)eiy (x) (3.53)
where we have defined
 (x) = (x
)  x
(3.54)
f(x) = i
(3.55)
To look for stationary points, we dierentiate
 0(x) = 1 + n
x(n+1)
 0 (3.56)
so we see that only   will contribute to the expansion, and we identify
xs(y) =
(3.57)
To be explicit, this corresponds to a physical length scale
bs(q) = bc
(3.58)
We see that the second derivative
 00(x) = n(n + 1)x
(n+2)
(3.59)
is always negative, so we choose a minus sign in the exponent of (C.7), which finally
becomes
F (y)  iyn+2n+1 n
1/(n+1)
n + 1
expi(n + 1)
(3.60)
The applicability of this approximation is frequently cited [1, 50] as an argument in
favour of the semiclassical nature of the eikonal amplitude. It establishes a one-to-one
correspondence between the momentum transfer (and hence the scattering angle) and the
impact parameter of the collision, as would be found in classical physics. Furthermore,
the characteristic length scale bs defined in (3.58) grows with energy, so that at larger and
larger centre-of-mass energies the short distance physics becomes less and less relevant.
2 4 6 8 10b
,s=MD=LT=1
Figure 3.14: @
@(bT )
Figure 3.15: The derivative of the eikonal phase with respect to its argument for varying
n. The eect of the fixed point is to make the derivative of  vanish at bT = 0, which
together with the eventual onset of classical scaling behaviour, enforces the existence of a
maximal value of the derivative.
3.3.2 RG improvement of the eikonal phase
Due to the complexity of our functions we must resort to determining bs numerically. It is
clear, however, from fig. 3.15 that the derivative is bounded, so that solutions to (3.51) do
not exist for q & dn
sn+1T
Mn+2D
, where dn is an n-dependent constant on the order of dn  0.06
. This behaviour follows from the fact that 0(b) vanishes at the origin as discussed in
section 3.2, and at infinity as  bnc b(n+1), and is well-behaved everywhere in between.
As the eikonal phase L depends on the dimensionless variable bT , it is convenient
in many cases to re-scale our integral in terms of T , so that
MRG =
f(n, c, q) (3.61)
where
f(n, c, q) = i
db0b0J0(q/T b
0)(eicL(b
0)  1) (3.62)
From this equation we see that the condition for the large-argument expansion of the
Bessel function is q  T . However, we also have the condition that q . 0.06 s
Mn+2D
. From
this it follows that, for there to be an extended stationary phase region, we require bTT 
bc. This appears to be the same condition as that for the semi-classical approximation,
but it does not automatically follow that the semiclassical stationary phase is a good
approximation; this depends on the relative magnitude of q and T . The semiclassical
approximation will work for b1c  q  T , whilst the stationary phase approximation to
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0q TeV
bsTeV-1
s =9 TeV; MD=LT=3 TeV; n=3
Classical Result
Short Distance
Long Distance
(a) q-dependence
0 2 4 6 8 10 L
bs,RG
(b) T - dependence
Figure 3.16: These plots show the length scales defined by the stationary phase approx-
imation in n = 3. The classical result is shown in gold. The blue and red lines are the
numerical solutions of the stationary phase condition @
= q, corresponding respectively
to roots at long and short distances. Left: The blue and red curves merge when q is equal
to the maximum value of @
; for greater values of q the root finder returns this value for
bs as the best approximation to the stationary point, but no solutions exist. Right: We
see that the ratio of the stationary phase length scale tends to the classical result as we
take the semi-classical limit of large T .
the RG-improved eikonal may be useful when 1  q/T  0.06 s
Mn+2D
. We check that we
can dierentiate between them in figure 3.17.
We compare the numerical evaluation of f with the corresponding stationary phase
approximation in Fig 3.18 below, for two sets of choices of the parameters in the problem.
We see that the stationary phase approximation works well within its expected domain of
validity, but that for a realistic choice of values relevant for LHC physics this region does
not exist.
We denote by b0s and b
l the short and long distance roots of the condition that
q/T . For 
00(bs) not too small, we find that
f(n, c, q) 
 s
00(b0s)
 exp i((b
s)  qb0s/T + /2) +
s
00(b0l)
 exp i((b
l)  qb0l/T )
(3.63)
where 00(b0i) means
b0=b0i
It is also interesting to compare the contributions coming from both the short and long
distances. We see that the long distance eect dominates until q gets extremely close to its
critical value. This can be understood from the fact that the modulus of each contribution
MSPH4psL
s =9 TeV; MD=LT=1 TeV; n=6
Re@SCD
Re@RGD Im@SCDIm@RGD
1 2 3 4 5
q TeV
Figure 3.17: Here we check that we can indeed dierentiate between the stationary phase
approximations to the real (red) and imaginary (blue) parts of the semi-classical (SC,
solid lines) and RG-improved amplitudes (dashed lines). In this plot for the purposes of
comparison we have included dimensionful factors of b2c and 
T , so that each diers from
the full eikonal amplitude by the same factor 4s.
varies as
r b
00(b0i)
. This eect is twofold: the length scale bi enhances the relative
contribution of the long to short distances, whilst the second derivative of  gets large at
short distances, diverging logarithmically at b0 = 0.
Using this knowledge, we can return to the earlier discussion of the competing eects
of varying T on the absolute value of the eikonal. Let us neglect the short-distance
contribution in comparison to the long-distance one. Then the absolute value of MRG
depends on the ratio
 =
00DR(b)
(3.64)
We plot this ratio for n = 3, y = 5 in fig. 3.20. We see that the pattern of enhancement
or suppression of this ratio with z exactly replicates that of 3.13 for large values of z, and
that the peak in fig. 3.13 corresponds to the point at which the 00L(b) diverges. This is a
1 2 3 4 5 q TeV
fHn,c,qL
s=9 TeV;
MD=LT=1 TeV; n=6
Re@numericsD
Re@stat phaseD
Im@numericsD
Im@stat phaseD
Figure 3.18: Here we show the stationary phase approximation to f(n, c, q). With large
enough
s, it is easy to satisfy the condition 1  q/T  0.06 s
Mn+2D
and we find that the
stationary phase approximation works well unless q is very small (so that expanding the
Bessel function is illegitimate) or close to the critical value where the two roots merge. At
this value the expression (C.7) breaks down, because the second derivative of the eikonal
phase vanishes.
precise sense in which the enhancement of |MRG| relative to the semiclassical expectation
corresponds to the integrand oscillating more slowly.
This expression becomes singular at the value q = qc, when 
00(bs) = 0. At this point,
it is obviously appropriate to instead make a third-order expansion of , i.e. use equation
(C.7) with p = 3. However, this expression clearly also fails when 00(bs) is small but finite.
When this is the case, the second-order approximation to (b) no longer suppresses the
integration suciently rapidly. In this case we adopt the following strategy. We expand
 to third order about the stationary point, so that
(b)  qb  (bs) + qbs +
00(bs)(b bs)2 +
000(bs)(b bs)3 (3.65)
 ax3 + bx2 + c (3.66)
in which we have defined x = (bbs) and introduced obvious constants a, b, c to simplify the
presentation of what follows. Note, however, the minus sign inserted so that a =  13000(bs)
s =9 TeV; MD=LT=1 TeV; n=6
Re@shortD
Re@longD Im@shortDIm@longD
0 1 2 3 4 5
q TeV
Figure 3.19: This plot shows the real (red) and imaginary (blue) parts of the short- (solid)
and long- (dashed) distance stationary points to the stationary phase approximation. The
dominance of the long distance physics is clear.
is positive. We can then write, near the critical point,
ei(qb
ei(cqbs
dxei(ax
3bx2) (3.67)
If we define y via the equation
x = y +
(3.68)
then this becomes
ei(qb
ei(cqbs
2b3/27a2)
dyei(ay
3(b2/3a)y) (3.69)
We now rescale the integration variable y  (3a)1/3y, and extend the region of integration
to the entire positive real y-axis. Using the integral representations of the Airy and Scorer
functions,
Ai(x) =
dt cos
t3  xt
(3.70)
Gi(x) =
dt sin
t3  xt
(3.71)
2 4 6 8 10 z
xRG cDR
xDR cRG
n=3; y=5
Figure 3.20: Here we show the ratio (3.64) with lengths expressed in units of bc, plotted
as a function of the variable z. The peak at z  2 corresponds to the divergence of 00L(b);
for values of z below this, the stationary phase approximation breaks down.
our result becomes, replacing the constants a, b, c by their expressions as the derivatives
of  at b = bs,
f(n, c, q) 
ei((bs)qbs
(1/3)(00)3/((000)2))(000)(1/3)
(00/2)2
(000/2)4/3
 iGi
(00/2)2
(000/2)4/3
(3.72)
We compare this to the full numerical expression in fig. 3.21. We see that it works well
in the vicinity of the critical point, but gets progressively worse as we move away from
q = qc. Naively, we might have expected that the inclusion of the third derivative in our
approximation could only improve our approximation. However, we have to remember
that the logic underlying the stationary phase approximation involves the extension of
a local approximation to the exponent about the saddle point to an infinite integration
region, and that the nature of this extension is qualitatively dierent for the case of cubic
and quadratic approximations.
This raises the question of what happens for q > qc. In fig. 3.22 we see that a transition
occurs from the semiclassical scaling law  qn+2n+1 to the Born law  q4.
We can understand this by the following heuristic argument. Let us consider the
expansion of ei  1 in powers of L. As already discussed, the term of order L merely
4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 5.1q TeV
fHn,c,qL
s=9 TeV;
MD=LT=1 TeV; n=6
Re@stat phaseD
Re@numericsD
Im@stat phaseD
Im@numericsD
Figure 3.21: Comparison of (3.72) to the numerical evaluation of the eikonal.
reproduces the Born amplitude. At order 2 we have
d2beiqb2L =
d2kAL(k)AL(q  k)  M(2)(q) (3.73)
by the convolution theorem. For q asymptotically large, we can neglect k in the argument
of the second term over most of the integration region, and so the second term varies as
 q4. The only region in which this is not true is that region in which k is itself on
the order of q, in which event the first term AL(k)  AL(q)  q4. Having established
that this term exhibits the Born scaling, we can proceed inductively and express the term
of order 3 as a convolution of AL with M(2)(q); the same argument then suggests that
M(3)(q)  q4.
Of course, it does not automatically follow that this transition between the scaling
behaviours in q is experimentally observable, due to the kinematic limit t/s < 1. Having
investigated the theory of the RG-improved eikonal amplitudes in some detail, we now
turn our attention to the corresponding experimental consequences.
3.4 Summary
We begun the chapter in section 3.1 by critically examining the claim that the eikonal am-
plitudes should be insensitive to the method used to regulate the sum over KK modes. We
showed analytically how the dimensional regularisation procedure was related to adding
a sharp cut o to the KK tower, both at the level of the Born amplitude and the eikonal
0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0 10.0 20.0
0.001
f n=6,s=81,L=M=1
Figure 3.22: In this figure the blue dotted curve represents the absolute value of |f | for
the indicated parameters. The solid lines represent the scaling behaviours found in the
semiclassical result (3.20) (blue) and in (3.33) (pink). The vertical red dashed line denotes
the value of q/T at which the stationary phase approximation breaks down.
phase. We compared the resultant eikonal amplitudes, and found that in contrast to the
theoretical consensus the two procedures gave dierent answers.
In section 3.2 we calculated the Born amplitude for the exchange of the KK tower of
ADD gravitons on the assumption that gravity is asymptotically safe, to leading order in
t/s, in various approximations to the RG running of the gravitational coupling G().
These amplitudes depend upon a parameter T , which parametrises the energy scale
at which the running of G() changes from that associated with its classical dimension
to that associated with the UV fixed point of the d-dimensional gravity theory. The
corresponding eikonal phases were computed, and it was demonstrated that whilst the
discontinuous derivative of ZQ introduced long-distance pathologies into Q, the eikonal
phase L given by (3.35) reproduced the expected  bn behaviour at long distances whilst
tending to a constant at short distances, reflecting the underlying fixed point of the theory.
We commented upon the relation of this finding to other results such as spacetimes that
depend on a gravitational coupling that runs in position space. Using this expression, we
calculated an RG-improved eikonal amplitude for spacetimes of varying dimensionality.
It was shown that at momentum transfers large compared to T the eikonal amplitude
exhibited the same q4 scaling behaviour as the Born amplitude, which had been argued
to be another signature of fixed point scaling.
In section 3.3 we analysed the reasons for the failure of the arguments in favour of the
semiclassical approximation, using the techniques of the stationary phase approximation.
It was shown that whilst the unbounded growth of the semiclassical eikonal phases led to
the existence of a stationary phase approximation at arbitrarily high momentum transfers,
the vanishing derivative of L at zero impact parameter led to a momentum transfer qcrit
at which this approximation breaks down in our approach. It was shown numerically that
this qcrit marks the onset of the q
4 scaling.
Chapter 4
Phenomenology of quantum
gravity
In this chapter we discuss the phenomenology of the transplanckian elastic scattering
amplitudes calculated in the previous chapter. Section 4.1 outlines the corresponding
experimental signatures. In section 4.2 we reproduce some existing results based on the
semiclassical approximation to these amplitudes, to compare our implementation to that
of previous authors. Section 4.3 presents our main results, and discusses how they could
play a role in constraining the theory parameters of our model.
4.1 Transplanckian scattering at hadron colliders
In order to deduce the experimental signatures through which quantum gravity might
reveal itself at the Large Hadron Collider, we are forced to consider the well-known com-
plications that arise due to the composite nature of the proton. The elastic scattering
amplitudes calculated in the preceding chapter describe the collisions of the underlying
partons, so we expect that the corresponding experimental signal will be dijet produc-
tion. In order to investigate processes occurring at transplanckian energies s  M2D, we
restrict our attention to dijet pairs with a very large invariant mass MJJ ; following [50, 2]
we will demand that MJJ  MJJ,min = 9 TeV. To reduce the QCD background the cut
pT > 100 GeV is also imposed. The dijet signal that results from the Born amplitude cal-
culated within eective field theory was calculated in [99], but their methods are clearly
inapplicable at such high invariant masses.
The condition of small-angle scattering is slightly less straightforward to describe at a
hadron collider, because the centre-of-mass of the colliding partons is boosted with respect
to the laboratory frame by an unknown amount that depends on the relative fractions xi
of the hadron momentum carried by the colliding partons, and hence transforming the
scattering angle by an unknown amount. It is therefore useful to introduce the pseudora-
pidity separation of the jets, which in the limit of negligible particle mass is related to the
Mandelstam variables and the centre-of-mass scattering angle  by [100]
 = log
t  1
= log
1 + cos 
1  cos 
(4.1)
This is a Lorentz invariant quantity, and we see that the limit of small  corresponds
to large . Our cuts on pT together with the LHC restriction that
s < 14 TeV
imply a maximum pseudorapidity separation of  = 9.88 [2]. Experimentally, we cannot
dierentiate between scattering through an angle  and through  , which corresponds
to swapping  $ . We therefore follow previous authors and plot d/d|| as our
basic observable.
It was checked in [101] that the usual methods of factorization in QCD can be applied
to the problem of transplanckian scattering in the ADD scenario, so that the observable
dierential cross-section is related to that for the underlying partonic event by
dx2fi(x1, Q
2)fj(x2, Q
(x1, x2)(s(x1, x2) M2JJ,min) (4.2)
where the partonic dierential cross-section is related to the scattering amplitude M(s, t)
(x1, x2) =
|M(s(x,1 , x2), s(x,1,x2)e+1 )|2
16s(x,1 , x2)
(e + 1)2
(4.3)
Here the partonic s(x,1 , x2) is related to the hadronic Mandelstam variable S by
s(x,1 , x2) = x1x2S (4.4)
The functions fi(x1, Q
2) that appear in (4.2) are parton density functions (PDFs), describ-
ing the density of partons of species i carrying a fraction xi of the hadron momentum. An
illustrative plot is given in fig. 4.1.
We have implemented the eikonal scattering amplitudes discussed in the previous chap-
ter in the PYTHIA 8.1 event generator [102, 103] as semi-internal processes, i.e. as derived
C++ classes whose member functions return the partonic dierential cross-section in a
form appropriate for PYTHIA to use in the initial stage of generating LHC events. We
use the MSTW08LO [104] PDF sets, but have checked against CTEQ5L [105] and find
little dierence.
xfHxL
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
0.001
Figure 4.1: Illustrating the rapid decay of the PDFs at large x. Here we show the MST-
WLO2008 pdfs at Q = 1TeV.
4.2 Dimensional regularisation
In order to make use of (4.2) it is necessary to choose a factorization scale Q at which to
evaluate the parton density functions. For processes that are adequately characterised by
the exchange of a single force-carrying boson, this would normally be taken to be propor-
tional to the momentum of that boson. However, as we have discussed, transplanckian
scattering through small angles intrinsically involves the exchange of many relatively soft
gravitons, each carrying only a fraction of the total momentum transferred. As these
gravitons will have a comparatively long wavelength , one might expect that their ability
to resolve partons that appear as particle-antiparticle pairs that exist for time t  1/
is limited. Ref. [106] therefore advocated a matching prescription based on the stationary
phase approximation that Q =
pt = q if q < 1/bc, and Q = 1/bs < q if q  1/bc, where
bs was defined in (3.58).
PYTHIA does not have a provision for such custom factorisation scale matchings
Q = Qc, so in order to reproduce the results of [2] we evaluate our PDFs f(xi, Q
2) at a
fixed scale Q0, and when an event occurs we include a weight
f(x1, Q
f(x1, Q
f(x2, Q
f(x2, Q
(4.5)
when assigning the event to the corresponding pseudorapidity bin in our histograms.
In fig. 4.2 we compare our results to those of [2]. Overall, we find good agreement,
and in particular note that choice of smaller scales Q corresponds to a larger signal. There
is a slight discrepancy in the matching Q = q at around ||  6. We believe that this
is accounted for by the dierent way in which we treat identical particles. When the
colliding partons are identical, and carry identical color, the authors [2] symmetrise the
0 2 4 6 8 10Dh
0.002
0.005
0.010
0.020
0.050
0.100
0.200
Figure 4.2: Comparison of our determination of the dierential cross-section to that of the
authors [2] for Q = q (pink), Q = PT /2 (yellow) and the stationary phase matching (blue).
The solid curves are our results, and the data points are their results, kindly provided by
E. Vryonidou.
amplitude in t $ u to respect the quantum mechanics of indistinguishable particles [107].
In our view, however, this is not appropriate. Such symmetrisation occurs naturally in
the sum over Feynman diagrams including t- and u- channel diagrams, but the latter is
not included in the summation of diagrams which contribute to the eikonal amplitude,
and is clearly subleading in t/s [8]. By symmetrising the amplitude in t $ u after the
summation one significantly- and in our view artificially- enhances the contribution of
particles which scatter through extremely large angles. This eect can be seen in fig. 4.3.
The investigations [50, 2] both used leading-order codes in which the matrix elements
were directly integrated against the PDFs using a VEGAS algorithm. By contrast, Pythia
has the capability to produce a more realistic simulation, allowing for the production of
extra jets by initial- and final- state radiation, or in the evolution of the parton shower.
In this case the rapidity dierence must be taken between the two hardest jets (ordered
in terms of transverse momentum from the beam axis). We compare the inclusive and
exclusive dijet cross-sections in fig. 4.4 and find little dierence.
We reproduce the results of [2] varying MD in fig. 4.5, as well as the comparison to the
QCD background. We find that the QCD background, which dominates at the very largest
rapidities, is reduced compared to their results. This appears to be a dierence between
PYTHIA and their VEGAS implementation, as the authors [50] used Pythia to simulate
new-without
old-with special case
109876543210
0.001
0.0001
1e-05
1e-06
1e-07
1e-08
Figure 4.3: Comparison of positive and negative rapidity separations with and without
imposing crossing symmetry on the amplitude, kindly provided by E.Vryonidou.
the QCD background, and our results agree with theirs. The important point that the
transplanckian signal can clearly be distinguished from the QCD background at rapidities
|| < 7.5 is unaected. In [50] the precise criteria imposed for forward scattering was
that  > 3, so a clear range exists in which the eikonal approximation is kinematically
reliable, and in which the signal can be distinguished from the background.
4.3 Phenomenology of quantum gravity
In this section we present the dijet signals corresponding to the RG-improved eikonal
amplitude. The matrix elements were evaluated using the ALGLIB library to interpolate
a 2-dimensional grid of data points tabulated using Mathematica 8.
We have seen in section 3.3 that there exists a critical momentum transfer qc for
which the stationary phase approximation breaks down. It follows that a matching of
the factorisation or RG scales based on this approximation would likely introduce an
unphysical discontinuity in observables at large momentum transfers, or equivalently at
small rapidities. For this reason, we are forced to employ the simple prescription RG =
F = PT /2. As it was observed in the last section that harder scale choices tend to reduce
2 4 6 8 10 Dh
0.010
0.100
0.050
0.020
0.030
0.015
0.150
0.070
Figure 4.4: Comparison of the exclusive (blue) and inclusive (pink) dijet dierential cross-
sections.
0 2 4 6 8 Dh
0.001
s =14 TeV; n=6
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the eect of varying MD on the dijet signal, with MD=1.5 TeV
(red) and MD=3 TeV (green). We also compare the signal to the QCD background (blue).
the signal, we expect that any softening of the factorisation scale due to multi-graviton
exchange will only serve to increase the signal relative to our predictions. However, due
to this theoretical uncertainty, we will try and indicate a key experimental signature for
asymptotically safe gravity in the shape of the dijet distribution.
In principle, the relationship T /MD is calculable, being related to the value g of the
gravitational coupling at the ultraviolet fixed point via g = (T /MD)
n+2. However, the
study of higher-dimensional RG flows is not yet as developed as that in four dimensions,
but has only been studied at the Einstein-Hilbert level. For this reason, it is prudent to
treat T as a free parameter and investigate how the dierential cross-section varies with
it. Clearly, we expect that as T becomes large, our observables should reproduce those
of dimensional regularisation. However, we have also seen before this limit is attained, we
can see either an enhancement or a suppression of our signal depending on the variable z
defined in (3.47). Furthermore, due to the integration over individual parton momenta in
(4.2), for any fixed value of T we expect from (3.48) to sample a range of values of z.
However, it is known that the PDFs decrease extremely rapidly at high energies. This
is illustrated in fig. 4.1. As our minimum invariant mass MJJ is so high, partonic centre
of mass energies significantly above the threshold make almost no contribution due to the
smallness of the PDFs at large x. This allows us to identify a value of z that corresponds
to a particular value of T ,
(4.6)
In fig. 4.6 we compare the eikonal dierential cross-sections to those obtained from di-
mensional regularisation, and compare their relative sizes to the variation of the function
F (y, z) defined in (3.45) with z. The vertical dashed lines in the plots of F (y, z) illustrate
the values of z that correspond to the values of T for the cross-section curve of that
colour. We see that the pattern of enhancements and suppressions in the cross-section ex-
actly follows the variation of F (y, z) about its semiclassical limit with z. In particular, the
blue curves in figs. 4.6a,4.6c corresponding to values MJJ = 9 TeV, T = MD = 1.5TeV
exhibit an enhancement of the dierential cross-section relative to the semi-classical pre-
diction; using (4.6) the corresponding values of z are indicated by the vertical dashed
blue lines in figs. 4.6b, 4.6d, and in both cases we see that |Fn(y, z)| is peaked above the
limiting value of large z.
The most important message to be extracted from these plots is that one cannot
straightforwardly use this signal to constrain MD without simultaneous consideration of
T . Indeed, whilst in the semiclassical theory we straightforwardly expect that increasing
2 4 6 8 Dh
0.001
0.005
0.010
0.050
0.100
0.500
1.000
S =14 TeV; n=5; MD=1.5 TeV
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 z
FHy=1,zL n=5
2 4 6 8 Dh
0.001
0.005
0.010
0.050
0.100
0.500
1.000
S =14 TeV; n=6; MD=1.5 TeV
5 10 15 z
FHy=1,zL
Figure 4.6: In these plots, we compare the variation of the dierential cross section with
T (left) to the variation of F (y, z) with z in n = 5 (above) and n = 6 (below).
MD serves to suppress the signal, we infer from this discussion that regions of parameter
space exist in which increasing MD reduces the value of the variable z such that the signal
is actually enhanced.
The red curves in 4.6a,4.6c also merit comment. They correspond to a value of z in
which the RG-improved amplitudes are lower than the semi-classical expectation. They are
remarkable, however, for the complicated pattern of peaks at small rapidity separations.
The peaks in the semi-classical dierential cross-section were identified in [50] as a potential
method by which the number n of extra dimensions might be identified. These oscillatory
features serve as a warning of the possibility of more complicated distributions.
We also see that the blue curves in figs. 4.6a,4.6c are interesting not only because
of the enhancement in the signal, but because of the dierent shape of the distribution,
falling o much more rapidly with decreasing ||. This can also be understood using
(4.6), so that we can regard || as a function only of the Mandelstam variable t with all
other parameters fixed. We identify it as being due to the onset of fixed point scaling as
positive
negative
0 2 4 6 8
0.001
Figure 4.7: The RG-improved eikonal cross-section, with the contributions of positive
(blue) and negative (red) rapidity separations of the jets separated. The increased domi-
nance of positive over negative rapidities due to the more rapid decay of the RG-improved
amplitude with t is clear.
seen in fig. 3.22; using eqs. (4.1), (4.3), if |M|  t2, then it follows that for small ||
 e(e + 1) (4.7)
We also see in fig. 4.7 that this eect leads to a reduced contribution from negative
||. We emphasise that this behaviour is universal, and will hold in any number of extra
dimensions. The only requirement is that the  t2 scaling behaviour be kinematically
accessible, i.e. qc <
MJJ .
What, then, if we find ourselves in the happy position of finding an excess of dijet
events at high invariant masses over the standard model predictions when the LHC has
completed its 14 TeV run? Our results suggest that the first thing to do is observe whether
or not we see the exponential shape (4.7) in the distribution. If we do, then the rapidity
separation at which it occurs could be used to infer the critical momentum transfer qc at
which we see the onset of fixed point scaling. Alternatively, we might find that the data
are well-described by the semiclassical distribution. This would then mean that we were
in a situation where the fixed point described extremely strong coupling in the ultraviolet,
and the results of [2, 50] could be used to determine MD and n.
To calculate the total cross-sections, the authors [2, 50] only integrate over rapidity
separations 3 < || < 4 in order to maximise their signal-to-background ratio. The above
discussion suggests that we can estimate estimate upper and lower bounds on a predicted
cross-section in the eikonal regime by varying z so that F (y, z) varies about its asymptotic
limit; we carry this out by taking MD = 1.5 TeV, and T = 1.5, 3 TeV (corresponding
to the blue and red curves respectively in fig. 4.6c). We present these results in table4.1.
We see that for these choices of parameter, the signal should be extremely clear. This is
a consequence of both the fact that the gravitational coupling is large at transplanckian
energies
s > MD, and the fact that the QCD background for our cuts is small.
3 < || < 4; T = 1.5 TeV T = 3 TeV
pT > 100 GeV;
MJJ > 9TeV
 (fb) 778 233
B 4948 1480
L=30 fb1
B 15600 4680
L=300 fb1
Table 4.1: Predicted cross-sections and S/
B values for the specified choices of model
parameters. The QCD background of dijets with very large invariant masses has been
calculated in PYTHIA to be QCD =0.7 fb.
Chapter 5
Conclusions
The scenario envisioned by the ADD authors in which large flat extra dimensions exist
is tremendously exciting and theoretically challenging, with many observables not being
strictly calculable due to the perturbative non-renormalisability of gravity. In this thesis
we have examined graviton exchange at transplanckian energies in the ADD model, sup-
planted for the first time by calculations in a genuinely quantum framework for gravity,
that of the asymptotic safety. We have argued that due to the high energies probed by the
tower of exchanged Kaluza-Klein states of the graviton, a process that we would usually
expect to be described well by semiclassical physics becomes exquisitely sensitive to the
UV completion of gravity.
In chapter 2 we reviewed all the theoretical elements that underpin our work. We
discussed the motivation and evidence for the asymptotic safety of gravity, including dis-
cussion of explicit RG equations and the beta function for the gravitational coupling in the
simplest approximation. We reviewed the physics of the ADD model in detail, explaining
how the divergent sums over KK modes of the graviton arise due to neglecting the bulk
momentum of the brane on which we are trapped. We gave a complete and explicit deriva-
tion of the eikonal amplitude, and discussed its applicability to gravitational scattering at
high energies, as well as its particularly pleasing features from the perspective of unitarity.
In chapter 3 we demonstrated explicitly that at LHC energies, the eikonal amplitude
becomes sensitive to the methods used to define the naively divergent Born amplitude. We
calculated the RG-improved Born amplitudes in various approximations. We determined
the corresponding eikonal phases , and interpreted the short distance behaviour as being
indicative of the underlying fixed point of the theory. From the physically acceptable
linear prescription ZL for the running of G() we calculated the corresponding eikonal
scattering amplitudes, and showed that the semiclassical approximation was borne out
only in the limit of very strong coupling in the complete quantum gravity theory. We
examined the stationary phase approximation to our amplitudes, demonstrating explicitly
how the theoretical pillars that underlie the semiclassical nature of the eikonal amplitude
fail in the ADD scenario: through the creation of a second saddle point at short distances;
through a shortening of the length scale that characterises the process; and through the
eventual breakdown of the approximation.
In chapter 4 we considered the phenomenology of transplanckian scattering in our
framework, investigating the dierential djiet cross section at large invariant masses and
pseudorapidity separations. We reproduced known results, both using the semiclassical
amplitudes and in the limit of large T in the RG-improved equations, as a check on
the consistency of our framework. We explained how dierent regions of our parameter
space could serve to either enhance or suppress the experimental signature relative to
the semiclassical ansatz. We identified the power law (4.7) as a signature of fixed point
scaling, and argued that in the event of an experimental signature at the LHC it would
form a useful indicator as to whether the UV interacting fixed point of quantum gravity
is strongly or weakly coupled.
Of course, this work could be extended in many directions. One fascinating extension
would be to explore the transition from the elastic scattering regime to that of black hole
formation, which due to Hawking radiation is usually expected to be strongly inelastic.
In [108] it was argued that asymptotically safe black holes are thermodynamically stable,
eventually forming Planck-sized remnants, but the question of whether or not they are
stable quantum mechanically is an altogether dierent one- one that forces us to concede
our ignorance of what is going on behind the event horizon of a black hole small enough
for quantum mechanics to become important. This discussion would also be of interest in
d = 4. Whilst the UV sensitivity of the eikonal in the ADD scenario can ultimately be
traced back to the KK tower, the transition to black hole formation is associated with a
loop diagram [1] which it would be interesting to investigate within asymptotic safety.
A more complete treatment of our phenomenology would also be desirable. The in-
formation we have been able to extract about our model parameters is at best partial; it
would be interesting to adopt an integrated approach, using a combination of channels to
determine each of the parameters T , MD and n.
Bibliography
[1] Steven B. Giddings. The gravitational S-matrix: Erice lectures. arXiv:1105.2036v1
[hep-th], 2011.
[2] W. J. Stirling, E. Vryonidou, and J. D. Wells. Eikonal regime of gravity-induced
scattering at higher energy proton colliders. Eur. Phys. J., C71:1642, 2011.
[3] R.P. Feynman. Quantum theory of gravitation. Acta Phys.Polon., 24:697722, 1963.
[4] S.W. Hawking. Information loss in black holes. Phys.Rev., D72:084013, 2005.
[5] Steven Weinberg. Gravitation and Cosmology: Principles and Applications of the
General Theory of Relativity. Wiley, New York, NY, 1972.
[6] G. t Hooft. Graviton dominance in ultra-high-energy scattering. Physics Letters B,
198(1):61  63, 1987.
[7] Herman L. Verlinde and Erik P. Verlinde. Scattering at Planckian energies.
Nucl.Phys., B371:246268, 1992.
[8] Daniel N. Kabat and Miguel Ortiz. Eikonal quantum gravity and Planckian scat-
tering. Nucl. Phys., B388:570592, 1992.
[9] Kip Thorne. Magic without magic: John Archibald Wheeler; a collection of essays
in honor of his sixtieth birthday. 1972.
[10] John F. Donoghue. Leading quantum correction to the Newtonian potential.
Phys.Rev.Lett., 72:29962999, 1994.
[11] John F. Donoghue. General relativity as an eective field theory: The leading
quantum corrections. Phys.Rev., D50:38743888, 1994.
[12] Marc H. Goro and Augusto Sagnotti. QUANTUM GRAVITY AT TWO LOOPS.
Phys.Lett., B160:81, 1985.
[13] Marc H. Goro and Augusto Sagnotti. The Ultraviolet Behavior of Einstein Gravity.
Nucl.Phys., B266:709, 1986.
[14] tHooft and Veltman. One-loop divergencies in the theory of gravitation. Annales
de lInstitut Henri Poincar : Section A, Physique thorique, 20:69, 1974.
[15] Nima Arkani-Hamed, Savas Dimopoulos, and G. R. Dvali. The hierarchy problem
and new dimensions at a millimeter. Phys. Lett., B429:263272, 1998.
[16] Ignatios Antoniadis, Nima Arkani-Hamed, Savas Dimopoulos, and G.R. Dvali. New
dimensions at a millimeter to a Fermi and superstrings at a TeV. Phys.Lett.,
B436:257263, 1998.
[17] Steven Weinberg. General Relativity: An Einstein Centenary Survey. CUP, 1979.
[18] Peter Fischer and Daniel F. Litim. Fixed points of quantum gravity in higher di-
mensions. AIP Conf.Proc., 861:336343, 2006.
[19] Peter Fischer and Daniel F. Litim. Fixed points of quantum gravity in extra dimen-
sions. Phys.Lett., B638:497502, 2006.
[20] Daniel F. Litim. Fixed points of quantum gravity. Phys. Rev. Lett., 92:201301, 2004.
[21] Daniel F. Litim. On fixed points of quantum gravity. AIP Conf. Proc., 841:322329,
2006.
[22] Jan-Eric Daum, Ulrich Harst, and Martin Reuter. Running Gauge Coupling in
Asymptotically Safe Quantum Gravity. JHEP, 1001:084, 2010.
[23] J.-E. Daum, U. Harst, and M. Reuter. Non-perturbative QEG Corrections to the
Yang-Mills Beta Function. Gen. Relativ. Gravit., 2010.
[24] Roberto Percacci and Daniele Perini. Constraints on matter from asymptotic safety.
Phys.Rev., D67:081503, 2003.
[25] Roberto Percacci and Daniele Perini. Asymptotic safety of gravity coupled to matter.
Phys.Rev., D68:044018, 2003.
[26] U. Harst and M. Reuter. QED coupled to QEG. JHEP, 1105:119, 2011.
[27] K. Falls, D.F. Litim, K. Nikolakopoulos, and C. Rahmede. A bootstrap towards
asymptotic safety. 2013.
[28] Benjamin Koch and Frank Saueressig. Structural aspects of asymptotically safe
black holes. Class.Quant.Grav., 31:015006, 2014.
[29] Daniel F. Litim and Konstantinos Nikolakopoulos. Quantum gravity eects in Myers-
Perry space-times. JHEP, 1404:021, 2014.
[30] Kevin Falls, Daniel F. Litim, and Aarti Raghuraman. Black Holes and Asymptoti-
cally Safe Gravity. Int.J.Mod.Phys., A27:1250019, 2012.
[31] D. Becker and M. Reuter. Asymptotic Safety and Black Hole Thermodynamics.
2012.
[32] Kevin Falls. Asymptotic safety and black holes. PhD thesis, U. Sussex, 2013.
[33] Steven Weinberg. Asymptotically Safe Inflation. Phys.Rev., D81:083535, 2010.
[34] Adriano Contillo. Inflation in asymptotically safe f(R) theory. J.Phys.Conf.Ser.,
283:012009, 2011.
[35] Edmund J. Copeland, Christoph Rahmede, and Ippocratis D. Saltas. Asymptotically
Safe Starobinsky Inflation. 2013.
[36] Mark Hindmarsh, Daniel Litim, and Christoph Rahmede. Asymptotically Safe Cos-
mology. JCAP, 1107:019, 2011.
[37] J. P. Brinkmann, G. Hiller, Litim D. F., and J. Schroder. to appear.
[38] Jan Schroder. Unitarity Bounds for Higgs Scattering within a 4+n dimensional
setup of Fixed Point Gravity. Diploma thesis, Lehrstuhl fur Theoretische Physik
III, Fakultat fur Physik, Technische Universitat Dortmund, 2011.
[39] JoAnne Hewett and Thomas Rizzo. Collider Signals of Gravitational Fixed Points.
JHEP, 0712:009, 2007.
[40] Erik Gerwick, Daniel Litim, and Tilman Plehn. Asymptotic safety and Kaluza-Klein
gravitons at the LHC. Phys.Rev., D83:084048, 2011.
[41] Feynman, Morinigo, and Wagner. Feynman Lectures on Gravitation. Westview
Press, 2003.
[42] S. Weinberg. Derivation of gauge invariance and the equivalence principle from
lorentz invariance of the s-matrix. Phys. Lett., 9:357, 1964.
[43] S. Weinberg. Photons and gravitons in perturbation theory: Derivation of maxwells
and einsteins equations. Phys. Rev., 138:B988, 1965.
[44] Stanley Deser. Selfinteraction and gauge invariance. Gen.Rel.Grav., 1:918, 1970.
[45] S. Weinberg. Infrared photons and gravitons. Phys. Rev, 140:B516B524, 1965.
[46] Kenneth G. Wilson. Renormalization group and critical phenomena. 1. Renormal-
ization group and the Kadano scaling picture. Phys.Rev., B4:31743183, 1971.
[47] Kenneth G. Wilson. Renormalization group and critical phenomena. 2. Phase space
cell analysis of critical behavior. Phys.Rev., B4:31843205, 1971.
[48] Georges Aad et al. Observation of a new particle in the search for the Standard
Model Higgs boson with the ATLAS detector at the LHC. Phys.Lett., B716:129,
2012.
[49] Serguei Chatrchyan et al. Observation of a new boson at a mass of 125 GeV with
the CMS experiment at the LHC. Phys.Lett., B716:3061, 2012.
[50] Gian F. Giudice, Riccardo Rattazzi, and James D. Wells. Transplanckian collisions
at the LHC and beyond. Nucl. Phys., B630:293325, 2002.
[51] Daniel F. Litim. Renormalisation group and the Planck scale. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.,
A 369:27592778, 2011.
[52] Roberto Percacci and Daniele Perini. On the ultraviolet behaviour of Newtons
constant. Class.Quant.Grav., 21:50355041, 2004.
[53] Christof Wetterich. Exact evolution equation for the eective potential. Phys.Lett.,
B301:9094, 1993.
[54] Holger Gies. Introduction to the functional RG and applications to gauge theories.
Lect.Notes Phys., 852:287348, 2012.
[55] Michael E. Peskin and Dan V. Schroeder. An Introduction To Quantum Field Theory
(Frontiers in Physics). Westview Press, 1995.
[56] Daniel F. Litim. Optimization of the exact renormalization group. Phys.Lett.,
B486:9299, 2000.
[57] Daniel F. Litim. Optimized renormalization group flows. Phys.Rev., D64:105007,
2001.
[58] M. Niedermaier. The asymptotic safety scenario in quantum gravity: An introduc-
tion. Class. Quant. Grav., 24:R171230, 2007.
[59] Martin Reuter and Frank Saueressig. Quantum Einstein Gravity. New J.Phys.,
14:055022, 2012.
[60] Daniel F. Litim and Tilman Plehn. Signatures of gravitational fixed points at the
LHC. Phys.Rev.Lett., 100:131301, 2008.
[61] Robert C. Myers and M.J. Perry. Black Holes in Higher Dimensional Space-Times.
Annals Phys., 172:304, 1986.
[62] Gian F. Giudice, Riccardo Rattazzi, and James D. Wells. Quantum gravity and
extra dimensions at high-energy colliders. Nucl. Phys., B544:338, 1999.
[63] Raman Sundrum. Eective field theory for a three-brane universe. Phys.Rev.,
D59:085009, 1999.
[64] Schuyler Cullen and Maxim Perelstein. SN1987A constraints on large compact di-
mensions. Phys. Rev. Lett., 83:268271, 1999.
[65] Vernon D. Barger, Tao Han, C. Kao, and Ren-Jie Zhang. Astrophysical constraints
on large extra dimensions. Phys. Lett., B461:3442, 1999.
[66] Csaba Csaki. TASI lectures on extra dimensions and branes. 2004.
[67] Tao Han, Joseph D. Lykken, and Ren-Jie Zhang. On Kaluza-Klein states from large
extra dimensions. Phys. Rev., D59:105006, 1999.
[68] Leif Lonnblad and Malin Sjodahl. Classical and non-classical ADD-phenomenology
with high-E (perpendicular) jet observables at collider experiments. JHEP, 10:088,
2006.
[69] Greg Landsberg. Searches for Extra Spatial Dimensions with the CMS Detector at
the LHC. Mod. Phys. Lett., A30(15):1540017, 2015.
[70] Michael Kruskal. Searches for dark matter and extra dimensions with the ATLAS
detector. EPJ Web Conf., 95:04034, 2015.
[71] Cliord M. Will. The Confrontation between General Relativity and Experiment.
Living Rev. Rel., 17:4, 2014.
[72] Tom Banks and Willy Fischler. A Model for high-energy scattering in quantum
gravity. 1999.
[73] Savas Dimopoulos and Greg L. Landsberg. Black holes at the LHC. Phys.Rev.Lett.,
87:161602, 2001.
[74] Steven B. Giddings and Scott D. Thomas. High-energy colliders as black hole fac-
tories: The End of short distance physics. Phys.Rev., D65:056010, 2002.
[75] S.W. Hawking. Particle Creation by Black Holes. Commun.Math.Phys., 43:199220,
1975.
[76] Philip C. Argyres, Savas Dimopoulos, and John March-Russell. Black holes and
submillimeter dimensions. Phys.Lett., B441:96104, 1998.
[77] Patrick Meade and Lisa Randall. Black Holes and Quantum Gravity at the LHC.
JHEP, 0805:003, 2008.
[78] Ted Jacobson. Introduction to quantum fields in curved space-time and the Hawking
eect. In Lectures on quantum gravity. Proceedings, School of Quantum Gravity,
Valdivia, Chile, January 4-14, 2002, pages 3989, 2003.
[79] Steven Weinberg. The Quantum theory of fields. Vol. 1: Foundations. 1995.
[80] Maurice Levy and Joseph Sucher. Eikonal approximation in quantum field theory.
Phys.Rev., 186:16561670, 1969.
[81] Henry D.I. Abarbanel and Claude Itzykson. Relativistic eikonal expansion.
Phys.Rev.Lett., 23:53, 1969.
[82] G. Tiktopoulos and S.B. Treiman. Relativistic eikonal approximation. Phys.Rev.,
D3:10371040, 1971.
[83] Hung Cheng and Tai Tsun Wu. Impact factor and exponentiation in high-energy
scattering processes. Phys.Rev., 186:16111618, 1969.
[84] Hung Cheng and T.T. Wu. EXPANDING PROTONS: SCATTERING AT HIGH-
ENERGIES. MIT Press, 1987.
[85] Jun John Sakurai. Modern Quantum Mechanics. Addison-Wesley, 1994.
[86] Steven B. Giddings and Mark Srednicki. High-energy gravitational scattering and
black hole resonances. Phys.Rev., D77:085025, 2008.
[87] Steven B. Giddings, Maximilian Schmidt-Sommerfeld, and Jeppe R. Andersen. High
energy scattering in gravity and supergravity. Phys.Rev., D82:104022, 2010.
[88] D. Amati, M. Ciafaloni, and G. Veneziano. Planckian scattering beyond the semi-
classical approximation. Phys.Lett., B289:8791, 1992.
[89] D. Amati, M. Ciafaloni, and G. Veneziano. Superstring Collisions at Planckian
Energies. Phys.Lett., B197:81, 1987.
[90] D. Amati, M. Ciafaloni, and G. Veneziano. Classical and Quantum Gravity Eects
from Planckian Energy Superstring Collisions. Int.J.Mod.Phys., A3:16151661, 1988.
[91] D. Amati, M. Ciafaloni, and G. Veneziano. Can Space-Time Be Probed Below the
String Size? Phys.Lett., B216:41, 1989.
[92] D. Amati, M. Ciafaloni, and G. Veneziano. Higher Order Gravitational Deflection
and Soft Bremsstrahlung in Planckian Energy Superstring Collisions. Nucl.Phys.,
B347:550580, 1990.
[93] P.C. Aichelburg and R.U. Sexl. On the Gravitational field of a massless particle.
Gen.Rel.Grav., 2:303312, 1971.
[94] Malin Sjodahl and Gosta Gustafson. Gravitational scattering in the ADD-model at
high and low energies. Eur. Phys. J., C53:109119, 2008.
[95] Leif Lonnblad and Malin Sjodahl. Classical and non-classical ADD-phenomenology
with high-E (perpendicular) jet observables at collider experiments. JHEP, 0610:088,
2006.
[96] Dmitry V. Galtsov, Georgios Kofinas, Pavel Spirin, and Theodore N. Tomaras.
Classical ultra-relativistic scattering in ADD. JHEP, 0905:074, 2009.
[97] J.I. Illana, M. Masip, and D. Meloni. TeV gravity at neutrino telescopes. Phys.Rev.,
D72:024003, 2005.
[98] E.M. Sessolo and D.W. McKay. Eikonal contributions to ultra high energy neutrino-
nucleon cross sections in low scale gravity models. Phys.Lett., B668:396403, 2008.
[99] David Atwood, Shaouly Bar-Shalom, and Amarjit Soni. Dijet production at hadron
colliders in theories with large extra dimensions. Phys.Rev., D62:056008, 2000.
[100] Tao Han. Collider phenomenology: Basic knowledge and techniques. pages 407454,
2005.
[101] Paolo Lodone and Vyacheslav S. Rychkov. Radiation Problem in Transplanckian
Scattering. JHEP, 0912:036, 2009.
[102] Torbjorn Sjostrand, Stephen Mrenna, and Peter Z. Skands. PYTHIA 6.4 Physics
and Manual. JHEP, 0605:026, 2006.
[103] Torbjorn Sjostrand, Stephen Mrenna, and Peter Z. Skands. A Brief Introduction to
PYTHIA 8.1. Comput.Phys.Commun., 178:852867, 2008.
[104] A.D. Martin, W.J. Stirling, R.S. Thorne, and G. Watt. Parton distributions for the
LHC. Eur.Phys.J., C63:189285, 2009.
[105] H.L. Lai, J. Botts, J. Huston, J.G. Morfin, J.F. Owens, et al. Global QCD analysis
and the CTEQ parton distributions. Phys.Rev., D51:47634782, 1995.
[106] Roberto Emparan, Manuel Masip, and Riccardo Rattazzi. Cosmic rays as probes of
large extra dimensions and TeV gravity. Phys.Rev., D65:064023, 2002.
[107] E.Vryonidou. Private communication.
[108] Kevin Falls and Daniel F. Litim. Black hole thermodynamics under the microscope.
Phys.Rev., D89:084002, 2014.
[109] I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik. Table of integrals, series, and products. Else-
vier/Academic Press, Amsterdam, seventh edition, 2007. Translated from the Rus-
sian, Translation edited and with a preface by Alan Jerey and Daniel Zwillinger,
With one CD-ROM (Windows, Macintosh and UNIX).
[110] Yudell L. Luke. Special functions and their approximations, volume 1. Academic
Press, 1969.
[111] Wolfram Research. Wolfram functions.
Appendix A
Calculations with linear RG
running
A.1 Calculation of AL & L
Using the prescription (2.30) in (3.13), we have
L = 
Cn+2T
dm qJ0(b
q2 + m2
1 + (q2 + m2)n/2+1
(A.1)
Here m and q are the dimensionless 4-momentum and KK mass, expressed in terms
of the transition scale T , whilst again b
0 = bT . We evaluate this integral by switch-
ing to polar co-ordinates in (dimensionless) momentum space via the prescription q 
 sin ,m   cos , so that  is now our dimensionless RG scale. It then becomes
L = 
Cn+2T
Z /2
1 + n+2
0 sin ) cosn1  sin 
= C
1 + n+2
b022
= C
1 + n2
nbn/2
n/21
1 + n+2
Jn/2(b
= C
2n/21
b0n/2
n/21
1 + n+2
 n
4 ,n4
= C
2n/21
b0n/2
n + 2
 (n/2+2)
1 + z
 n
4 ,n4
This is now in the form in which we can apply (B.12). The only proviso is that the
fractional exponent of the argument of the G-function must be fully simplified, which
motivates the definitions of l and k given in the main text. The corresponding Born
amplitude (3.33) is then determined from L by inverting the Fourier transform, using
(2.62), re-writing the Bessel function as a Meijer-G function, and using (B.16).
A.2 Contour integral
We wish to evaluate the eikonal phase, starting with the integral representation
(b) =  s
Mn+2D
2n/21
n/21
1 + n+2
Jn/2(b) (A.2)
  s
Mn+2D
 (A.3)
where Sn =
2n/2
(n/2)
is the area of the unit-n sphere and b is the impact parameter in units
of inverse T .
We work throughout in even n.
The integral (A.2) is ill-suited to evaluation via contour methods, because the Bessel
function grows exponentially with the modulus of the imaginary part of its argument. We
instead use the Hankel function
H(1) (z) = J(z) + iY(z) (A.4)
For x > 0 2 R the Bessel function of the second kind Y(x) is real, so (A.2) becomes
(b) = Sn
2n/21
n/21
1 + n+2
(A.5)
2n/21
dR()H
(A.6)
The advantage of this replacement is that H(z) has the asymptotic behaviour
H(z) 
ei(z/2/4) (A.7)
so that it decays exponentially in the upper complex plane. (c.f. Evaluating integrals of
cos(x) with a rational function by identifying cos(x) = Re
, rather than expanding
the cosine in terms of complex exponentials.)
We can extend this to an integral over the entire real axis. Using the identity
Y(ze
mi) = emiY(z) + 2i sin(m) cot()J(z) (A.8)
for integer m, with m = 1, we see that for real positive x
(x) = Jn/2(x) + i(ein/2Yn/2(x) + 2i cos(n/2)Jn/2(x))
= (1)n/2Jn/2(x) + i(1)n/2Yn/2(x) (A.9)
where we have used that Bessel functions of odd order  are odd. (We remark that Y
in general has a branch point and a pole at the origin, with a branch cut along the real
negative axis; this is identity is consistent with the continuity of Y(x+ i) for decreasing
positive ). We also have that in even n
R() = (1)n/21R() (A.10)
so that the real part of the integrand in (A.2) is an even function. We can therefore
multiply by 1/2 and extend the integral to the whole real axis:
(b) = Sn
2n/21
n/21
1 + n+2
(A.11)
It follows from (A.9) that the imaginary part is an odd function if n/2 is an odd integer,
so that in e.g. n = 6 Re is actually superfluous in this equation, but it is required in
general.
We evaluate this integral via the residue theorem, with a contour illustrated in Fig.
A.1. The rational function R() has poles when n+2 = (1); in the upper complex plane,
this corresponds to the numbers  = {eim/(n+2) : m =1, . . . , (n+2)/2}, the residues at
which are straightforwardly evaluated using standard methods. To identify the residue at
 = 0 we expand Yn/2(b) in the series for integer m
Ym(z) =
2Jm(z) ln
(m k  1)
2km
+ finite
(A.12)
As this appears in the integrand multiplied by n/21, the residue is given by the k = 0
term:
Res(R()H
(b)) = i
(n/2  1)
(A.13)
(Note that the contribution from this residue is weighted by 1/2 relative to those poles
that lie inside the contour of integration.) We then find that
(b) = Sn
2n/21
(2i)
 (n+2)/2X
(eim/(n+2))n/21Hn/2((e
im/(n+2))b)
(n + 2)(eim/(n+2))n+1
(n/2  1)
n/2 
Note that as the Hankel function decays exponentially at large arguments, this expres-
sion makes the  bn behaviour of  manifest; it originates from the contribution from
the pole at  = 0.
-10 -5 5 10 ReHzL
ImHzL
Figure A.1: The contour used to evaluate the eikonal phase, with poles corresponding
to n = 6. The contribution from a semicircular contour of radius R (here shown with
R = 10) decays exponentially. The poles of the integrand are denoted by the blue crosses
(for b = 1). We make a semicircular indentation around the pole at z = 0, and approach
the branch cut along the negative axis from above. Obviously we take the limit in which
these indentations tend to zero.
Appendix B
Special Functions
Here we present the definitions of and some relations involving the special functions used
in the text. These relations can be found in [109, 110, 111]
B.1 Bessel Function
zaJb(z) = 2
1 + a + b
1 + a b
(B.1)
J(z) =
(1)k(z/2)2k+
k(k +  + 1)
(B.2)
(J1  J+1) (B.3)
K(z) =
(1)k (  k  1)
k(z/2)2k
+(1)+1
(z/2)+2k
k( + k)
ln(z/2)  1
 (k + 1)  1
 ( + k + 1)
(B.4)
K(z) 
ez [1 + O (1/z)] (B.5)
which holds for any  at this leading order.
B.2 Hypergeometric functions
The Hypergeometric function2F1  F is defined for |z| < 1 by the series
F (,; ; z) =
()n()n
(B.6)
where
()n =
(+ n)
= (+ 1) . . . (+ n 1) (B.7)
is the Pochammer symbol. pFq is defined analogously. It admits the integral representation
F (,; ; z) =
()(  )
dtt1(1  t)1(1  tz) (B.8)
For   not an integer, the hypergeometric function F satisfies
F (,; ; z) =
()(  )
()(  )(z)
F (,+ 1  ;+ 1  ; 1
) (B.9)
()( )
()(  ) (z)
F (, + 1  ; + 1  ; 1
1F2(a; b1, b2; z) 
(b1)(b2)
(4)1/2
zz [1 + O (1/z)] (B.10)
where
+ a + b1  b2
(B.11)
B.3 Meijer-G functions
(z + )
Gmnpq
kl1z
(2)(k1)c+l1()
km+l,kn+l
kp+l,kq+l
A (B.12)
1  
, . . . ,
l  
, . . . ,
a1 + k  1
, . . . ,
an + k  1
, . . . ,
an+1 + k  1
, . . . ,
, . . . ,
ap + k  1
, . . . ,
 + l  1
, . . . ,
b1 + k  1
, . . . ,
, . . . ,
bm + k  1
, . . . ,
bm+1 + k  1
, . . .
, . . .
bq + k  1
This formula assumes that the greatest common denominator of (l, k) is one.
The following formulae relate the Meijer-G functions to the generalised hypergeometric
function, pFq1. Their utility for making asymptotic expansions of the Meijer-G function
follow from the observation that pFq(a;b; 0)  1 for any p parameters an and q parameters
bq. Here the asterisks denote the omission of the parameter bh from the corresponding
lists.
Gmnpq

j=1 (bj  bh)
j=1 (1 + bj  ah)Qq
j=m+1 (1 + bh  bj)
j=1 (aj  bh)
xbh (B.13)
 pFq1(1 + bh  a1, . . . , 1 + bh  ap; 1 + bh  b1, . . . , , . . . , 1 + bh  bq;
(1)pmnx)
Gmnpq

j=1 (ah  aj)
j=1 (1 + bh  aj)Qp
j=1 (aj  ah + 1)
j=m+1 (ah  bj)
xah1 (B.14)
 pFq1(1 + b1  ah, . . . , 1 + bq  ah; 1 + a1  ah, . . . , , . . . , 1 + ap  ah;
(1)qmnx1)
xkGmnpq

A = Gmnpq

a + k
b + k
A (B.15)
1Gm,np,q

a1, . . . , an, an+1, . . . , ap
b1, . . . , bm, bm+1, . . . , bq
AGs,tu,v

c1, . . . , ct, ct+1, . . . , cu
d1, . . . , ds, ds+1, . . . , dv
m+t,n+s
v+p,m+q
(B.16)
where
x = a1, . . . , an, d1 + 1, . . . , ds + 1, ds+1 + 1, . . . , dv + 1, an+1, . . . , ap
y = b1, . . . , bm, c1 + 1, . . . , ct + 1, ct+1 + 1, . . . , cu + 1, bm+1, . . . , bq
Appendix C
The Stationary Phase
Approximation
C.1 Asymptotic expansion of integrals
The purpose of the stationary phase approximation is to estimate the behaviour of integrals
of the form
I(x) =
dtf(t) exp(x(t)) (C.1)
for asymptotically large x. Changing variables to s = (t) gives
I(x) =
f(t(s))
0(t(s))e
xs (C.2)
Repeated integration by parts yields a power series in 1/x. This procedure, however, fails
when 0(t) = 0 on the interior of the integration region. If such a stationary point t
exists, then we argue that, for asymptotically large x, such integrals are dominated by
those stationary points which correspond to a maximum value of (t). Near such a point
we can expand
(t)  (t) + 1
(p)(t)tp (C.3)
where p is the order of the first nonvanishing derivative of  at t, and (p)(t) < 0 as t
is a maximum of . The contribution of such a point to I(x) is given by
I(x, ) 
Z t+
dtf(t) exp((t) +
(p)(t)tp) (C.4)
We can evaluate such an integral by now letting  1; the additional integration region
contains no stationary points of our approximated integrand, so by our earlier argument
about integrating by parts, the error thus introduced is of order 1/x, and is therefore
subleading to the contributions that we isolate here. One then finds that
I(x) = 
2(1/p)(p)1/p
p(x(p)(t))1/p f(t
) (C.5)
where
2 if t* = a or b
1 if t* 2 (a,b)
An exectly analagous argument applies to integrals of the form
I(x) =
dtf(t) exp(ix(t)) (C.6)
for x,  real; instead of the exponential decay suppressing the integrand, the stationary
points dominate because for large x the period of the oscillations becomes extremely short,
so that neighbouring regions in the integral cancel each other out. Here one finds that
I(x) = 2f(t)ei(x(t
)/2p)
x|(t)|
(1/p)
(C.7)
The sign of i/2 is that of the second derivative 00(t). In this context with an imaginary
exponent in the integrand, this approximation is known as the method of stationary phase;
for a purely real exponent, it is usually referred to as Laplaces method.
It is important to understand the logic underlying this approximation: in the x  1
limit, only very small changes t are needed to shift the value of the phase by  = 2, so
that f(t) changes very little over a period of the exponential. It is for this reason that the
integral is dominated by the contribution from regions in the immediate neighbourhood
of points at which 0(t) = 0. It is the smallness of such regions that allows us to Taylor
expand our exponent about the critical points, and the large suppression of contributions
from regions away from the stationary point that allows us to then extend the region of
integration of the polynomial approximation of  from the immediate neighbourhood of
the stationary point to e.g. the entire real axis (or any other convenient extended contour)
for ease of evaluating the integral.
	PhD Coversheet
	Old, Rob
	Acknowledgements
	Declaration
	Introduction
	Preliminaries
	Scales and divergences in quantum gravity
	Asymptotically safe gravity
	Asymptotic safety
	The exact RG equation
	A practical implementation of asymptotic safety
	Quantum gravity at the LHC
	High-energy gravitational scattering
	Semiclassical gravity
	The eikonal amplitude
	Quantum gravity in the eikonal
	Semiclassical gravity?
	Born amplitude
	Eikonal Phases
	Eikonal amplitude
	RG improvement
	Born amplitude
	Eikonal phase
	Eikonal amplitude
	The stationary phase approximation to the eikonal amplitude
	Semiclassical analysis
	RG improvement of the eikonal phase
	Summary
	Phenomenology of quantum gravity
	Transplanckian scattering at hadron colliders
	Dimensional regularisation
	Phenomenology of quantum gravity
	Conclusions
	Calculations with linear RG running
	Calculation of AL & L
	Contour integral
	Special Functions
	Bessel Function
	Hypergeometric functions
	Meijer-G functions
	The Stationary Phase Approximation
	Asymptotic expansion of integrals
