The development of quality indicators for 
Taiwanese institutional dementia care 
Che-Ying Lin 
Thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Department of Applied Social Science 
University of Stirling 
Declaration 
I declare that none of the work contained within this thesis has been submitted 
for any other degree at any other university. The contents found herein have 
been composed by the candidate, Che-Ying Lin 
Che-Ying Lin 
Acknowledgements 
Sincere thanks are due to all who have supported and assisted me throughout 
the past four years. 
Dr. Anthea Innes and Dr. Louise McCabe encouraged me to start the program 
of study. 
I would like to thank my principal supervisor Professor Alison Bowes for her 
guidance, encouragement, and confidence in me over the course of the study.  
Dr. Paul Lambert, my second supervisor, has always been available to discuss 
and evaluate materials, and has always offered positive and practical advice to 
me for the improvement of my thesis. 
Thanks to my friends and fellow DASS Ph.D. students for supporting me 
through many tough times and brightening my days. A special thank you goes 
to Dr. Fiona Kelly for her invaluable assistance and helpful suggestions. Thank 
you for always being there for me.  
Thank you to all the participants and 14 Taiwanese care homes for allowing me 
to carry out my fieldwork. 
An extra special thank-you is due to my mother and my older sister for their 
love, generous financial support, and belief in me at all times. I could not have 
fulfilled the dream of studying abroad, if I was not so blessed in this way. 
Finally, particular thanks go to my best friend and wife, Joyce who has been 
very supportive and understanding. Words cannot express how much I 
appreciate her and love her. 
God has such richly blessed me with a great life and a wonderful family. Thank 
you for your promise to me 
Trust in the Lord with all your heart and lean not on your own 
understanding; in all your ways acknowledge him, and he will make your 
paths straight (Proverbs 3:5-6). 
Abstract 
This study is a mixed-method study that seeks to develop a set of institutional 
dementia care indicators to evaluate quality of care and inform the improvement 
of quality of life (QOL) for Taiwanese people with dementia living in care homes. 
It also uses comparative analysis to compare the different features of policy and 
its delivery in dementia care between Scotland and Taiwan, a comparison 
designed to aid the development of dementia care policy, and the 
establishment of quality indicators for institutional dementia care, in Taiwan. 
This study employed the person-centred care approach at the micro 
perspective, and the total quality management (TQM) approach at the macro 
perspective, in order to inform a seamless care model for people with dementia 
living in care homes. Data were collected in two stages: comments from experts 
in dementia care were recorded in an exercise using Delphi methodology; 
subsequently the opinions of service receivers were recorded in a fieldwork 
exercise. The Delphi exercise (stage one) acted as the pre-test, involving 24 
experts in dementia care in Scotland and Taiwan in evaluating the usefulness 
and applicability of proposed quality indicators for institutional dementia care. 
Quantitative and qualitative data from the Delphi panel were analyzed. The 
fieldwork (stage two) collected 237 questionnaires (from 122 residents with 
dementia and 115 family members) in 14 Taiwanese care homes for people 
with dementia (including special care units within care homes). The field test 
data were analyzed using reliability and item analysis, confirmatory factor 
analysis (CFA), and descriptive and inferential statistics. 
Initially, 43 proposed quality indicators for institutional dementia care were 
identified through literature review. However, after two Delphi rounds, only six 
key dimensions (41 quality indicators) were identified by consensus as the 
important items for use in measurement of quality of care for people with 
dementia living in Taiwanese care homes. Through reliability and item analysis, 
and CFA, this research developed a model which is a three-factor structure 
(social care, health and personal care, and environment) with 18 quality 
indicators. The 18 quality indicators have high reliability, validity, and credibility 
and load onto a second order factor which represents quality of care for people 
with dementia living in care homes. Further analysis was then conducted to 
explore how relative ratings on these three factors differed according to 
measured characteristics of the residents and their family members. In general, 
only a few strong patterns of difference emerged and multiple linear regression 
analysis suggested that differences in ratings could not be attributed to 
influences of socio-economic and socio-demographic differences between 
respondents.   
The study concludes that the Delphi method could be used as a methodology 
for health services research to integrate the opinions of multidisciplinary 
dementia experts and that CFA is an effective technique to study the empirical 
factor structure. The findings suggest that the 18 quality indicators could be 
suitable criteria for people with dementia and their family members to evaluate 
care quality and select an appropriate care home. The indicators also have 
important policy implications for the Taiwanese Government and regulations 
intended to ensure that care homes meet the requirements of service receivers. 
Table of Contents 
Chapter 2- A comparison of dementia care policy between 
Chapter 3- Construction of dementia care -The philosophical 
3.5 Citizenship and the construction of dementia care: The 
3.6 Good quality dementia care: The person-centred care approach ..  76 
Chapter 4- Improvement of quality of care and quality of life 
4.3 What are quality of care and quality of life for people with 
4.4 The components of quality of care and quality of life for people 
4.5 What are the requirements of people with dementia living in 
Chapter 6- An investigation of quality indicators for 
Chapter 7- An empirical survey of quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care: The perceptions 
List of Tables 
Table 6.3- Change of operational definitions of quality indicators that 
Table 6.5- Change of operational definitions of quality indicators that 
Table 6.6- New quality indicators with operational definitions that gained 
Table 7.3- Frequencies and percentages of participant characteristics 
Table 7.4- Frequencies and percentages of geographical distribution 
Table 7.7- Comparison of fit index between before and after modification 230 
Table 7.8- The differences between arguments of theories, opinions of 
experts, and perception of service receivers on quality 
Table 7.9- Final set of quality indicators for institutional dementia care ..  236 
Table 7.14- Means analysis of three factors on size of the care home ...  247 
Table 7.16- Means analysis of three factors on geographic distribution 
List of Figures 
Figure 3.1- A psychosocial model of the experience of people with 
Figure 4.3- The Internal- Business- Process Perspective- The Generic 
Figure 5.1- The mixed-method model of development of quality 
Figure 7.1- Final model of second-order factorial structure for quality 
Chapter 1- Introduction to the thesis 
1.1 Introduction 
Taiwan is facing the challenges of increasing numbers of people with dementia. 
This is because Taiwan is an aging society. Moreover, dementia is a chronic 
and progressive illness, and unfortunately, dementia incidence increases with 
the aging population raising subsequent economic and social challenges.  
According to the Department of Statistics, Ministry of the Interior in Taiwan 
(2009b), at the end of 2008, there were 2,402,220 people in the age group of 
over 65 years, accounting for 10.43% of the Taiwanese population. Since the 
birth rate decreases and life expectancy rises, the Council for Economic 
Planning and Development estimates the number of older people in Taiwan will 
reach 20.69 per cent of the population by 2027 (Department of Social Affairs, 
2003c). There were 85,383 Taiwanese people with dementia in 2005 (Lee, 
2005). For this reason, it can be predicted that the number of people with 
dementia will escalate dramatically. Thus, Taiwan is going to face the 
challenges of an aging society and increasing numbers of people with dementia 
simultaneously. The climate is now right for the Taiwanese Government to plan 
how to provide diverse services for its aging population including both people 
with dementia and their family caregivers. 
Standards of acute medical care in Taiwan are very advanced. Patients 
generally receive expert diagnosis and effective treatment rapidly. However, 
standards in long-term care provision are less advanced, and it is arguably time 
for Taiwanese policy makers to learn a lesson from other societies to build up 
policies to cover diverse requirements of people with dementia and their family 
caregivers.  
In dementia care policy and its delivery, Scotland may be the most advanced 
nation. For example, case/care management was established for people with 
dementia in 1991. In 1999, the UK Parliament devolved powers to the Scottish 
Parliament. From then on, the Scottish Executive has focused more on the 
issue of dementia care; and has set up dementia care within the policy and 
welfare of health, mental health, long-term care, older people, and incapacity. 
Moreover, Scotland developed national care standards in 2001; began 
providing free personal care in 2002; and started paying family caregivers who 
care for people with dementia at home in 2006. Scotland is also home to 
initiatives in research on dementia care, such as that carried out at the 
Dementia Services Development Centre (DSDC) founded at the University of 
Stirling in 1989.  
In addition, in practice, more Scottish care homes emphasize the privacy and 
dignity of residents than, for example, in Taiwanese care homes. For instance, I 
have visited five different kinds of Scottish care homes for people with dementia. 
I found that all bedrooms in Scottish care homes are single and with built-in 
private en-suite facilities. Moreover, particularly, Scottish care home staff treat 
residents with dementia with respect and friendliness, avoiding shouting at 
them while I visited those care homes.   
The incidence of dementia increases sharply with age. According to 
Alzheimers Disease International (2008), the incidence of dementia is about 2 
per cent of people aged under 65, but after the age of 65, it doubles with every 
five year increase in age. Ferri et al. (2005) estimate that in the world there 
were around 24 million people with dementia in 2001 and this number will rise 
to 42.3 million and 81.1 million in 2020 and 2040 respectively. There are 
different types of dementia. Rabins et al. (1997) observe that Alzheimer's 
disease generally accounts for 50%-75% of all dementia. Vascular dementia is 
the next most common, with the other types of dementia taking up small 
fractions of the total. In order to cope with increasing numbers of people with 
dementia and develop quality care for them, detailed investigation on how 
dementia and dementia care are constructed is required.  
The demand of long-term care services will increase in the near future because 
the first of the baby boom generation will reach 65 years old in 2011 and they 
will last until 2030 (Wunderlich and Kohler, 2001). Particularly, in developed 
countries, birth rate decreases and life expectancy rises. The population is 
aging and the incidence of dementia has increased. Institutional care plays a 
crucial role in modern society because adult children are working outside their 
homes. In Taiwanese society, since the culture of filial piety is emphasized, 
taking care of the older or ill relatives is taken as the responsibility of family 
members. Therefore, most people with dementia live in communities and are 
looked after by family caregivers. However, the problems experienced by 
people with dementia, such as, offensive behaviours, uncleanness, 
hallucination, delusion, wandering, and unable to take care of themselves, 
really cause a great suffering and burden on family caregivers. Additionally, 
nowadays most Taiwanese adult children have to work outside the home. Thus, 
institutional dementia care is likely to play the crucial role in Taiwan in the near 
future.  
Most Taiwanese people with dementia live in a poor care environment. In 
Scotland, as Alzheimer Scotland (2005) states, there were 63,000 Scottish 
people with dementia in 2005, 30% lived in institutional care and care home 
beds for people with dementia are still insufficient. In Taiwan, there were 85,383 
people with dementia in 2005 (Lee, 2005). According to Department of Social 
Affairs (2007c), the number of people with dementia living in care homes was 
about 19,047 in 2004. Nevertheless, only 24 Taiwanese designed care homes 
provide 1,015 beds for people with dementia (Taiwan Alzheimers Disease 
Association, 2008). The evidence seems to be strong that Taiwanese people 
with dementia are not placed in appropriate care environments. 
Institutional dementia care in Taiwan is affected by financial issues. Particularly, 
in order to meet the mixed and specific requirements of people with dementia, 
the care home environment should be well-designed and employ trained and 
qualified staff. However, since it will cost much more to provide those specific 
services, most Taiwanese care homes do not desire to take care of people with 
dementia. For example, when I was invited by the local Government to inspect 
a Taiwanese care home in 2005, the manager of this care home was answering 
a phone call from a family caregiver asking the manager to place his relative 
with dementia in this care home. However, the manager said, I cannot look 
after your relative with dementia because firstly I have to prevent him from 
wandering away and I could not guarantee this, secondly if I want to care for 
your relative, I would have to spend a lot of money to renew or add facilities. 
In academia and practice, institutional dementia care is not promoted very well. 
Although Scotland and Taiwan have developed care standards as a tool to 
assess the quality of institutional care for older people, they still did not set up 
quality indicators for institutional dementia care. Differences in practices 
between Taiwan and Scotland suggest that it would be useful to develop a set 
of institutional dementia care indicators with reliability, validity, and credibility to 
evaluate quality of care and enhance quality of life for Taiwanese people with 
dementia living in care homes. This thesis describes a programme of research 
undertaken with that objective in mind.  
1.2 Personal and professional background  
My personal and professional background inspires me to conduct this research. 
My educational background includes social work and administration 
management. I completed a Bachelor degree in Sociology on Social Work (also 
a minor in Psychology) from National Cheng Chi University and a Master 
degree in Business Administration from National Dong Hwa University in 
Taiwan.  
As well as professional training, I have experience based knowledge in 
institutional dementia care because my personal career focused on institutional 
care and quality improvement. For instance, previously I was in the position as 
the director of social work department in Kaohsiung Christian hospital in Taiwan. 
My duties were supervision of the care home that provides a special care unit 
for people with dementia, the largest Taiwanese day care centre for people with 
dementia, and the home care centre. Owing to the consensus and endeavour 
of all staff, this hospital has set up a top long-term care system in Taiwan and 
has been a trendsetter in the field since 2004. Before that I was in the position 
as the director of social service department in Tzu Chi general hospital in 
Taiwan. This hospital is one of the best acute medical care institutions in 
Taiwan and has been a trendsetter in the field as well. This hospital also built a 
day care centre for people with dementia in 1998.   
When I worked for the Kaohsiung Christian hospital, I was also working as a 
lecturer in the department of senior citizen service management at the Meiho 
Institute of Technology in Taiwan. The main modules that I lectured were social 
work management, non-profit organization management, and institution 
management. At the same time, I published some papers in dementia care.  
Based on my academic and practical background, I had been a member in the 
inspection committee for long-term care and home care for the local 
Government, and a member in the consultation committee for care homes for 
Taiwanese central Government. Thus, I have inspected many Taiwanese care 
homes and assisted many Taiwanese care homes to improve their quality of 
care. My experiences in care homes suggested to me a considerable need for 
improvement in care provision in Taiwan.  
For these reasons, I came to Scotland to undertake a PhD to enhance my 
knowledge about advanced dementia care and research capacity. I expected to 
develop quality indicators for institutional dementia care which meet theory and 
reality simultaneously, and then to build a high quality care home for low 
income people with dementia in terms of the quality indicators, finally to spread 
this model to assist people with dementia around Chinese society. 
1.3 Research objectives  
This research aims to set up institutional care standards to evaluate quality of 
care and to inform the improvement of the QOL for people with dementia living 
in Taiwanese care homes. This research is expected to explore dementia care 
policies to assist Taiwanese policy makers to learn from other countries on how 
to develop dementia care policy. Moreover, quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care developed in this research should be helpful to academic 
research, policy makers, service providers, people with dementia and their 
family caregivers, and to enhance service quality of dementia care institutions 
more generally.  
Accordingly, the objectives of this research are as follows:  
1. To gather proposed quality indicators which could improve quality of care for 
people with dementia living in care homes from the literature and to sift out 
the proposed quality indicators applicable to institutional dementia care in 
Taiwan. 
2. To have the service providers, people with dementia and their families, local 
authorities concerned, and experts in dementia care reach a common 
consensus on quality indicators for institutional dementia care in Taiwan.   
3. To further understand the survey results as well as the usefulness and 
applicability of quality indicators for institutional dementia care in Taiwan.   
4. To develop a set of institutional dementia care indicators with reliability, 
validity, and credibility, which could be taken as the standards in evaluating 
the quality of institutional dementia care as well as the basis for framing the 
assessment system of dementia care institutions.   
1.4 Literature review methodology 
This research used many different types of literature to identify the existing 
issues and debates about the topic, concepts and theories related to this 
research, and to develop the research questions and methodological 
approaches. Media consulted included books, scholarly journal articles, official 
documents and statistics, research reports, and conference proceedings.   
These searches generated a large volume of relevant literature. To proceed 
effectively, the most recent studies, and those with the most direct links to the 
research area were concentrated upon. Existing collections were consulted 
using the libraries of the University of Stirling and the DSDC. In addition 
computer databases from the library system at the University of Stirling were 
searched. Searches were conducted across Cambridge Journals, Cochrane 
Library, IngentaConnect, JSTOR, Oxford Journals, PubMed, Science Citation 
Index, Social Science Citation Index, Science Direct, SpringerLink, Web of 
Science, Wiley Journals, and ZETOC Search. Since the literatures in computer 
database are in English, Google Scholar was used to assist to search Chinese 
language literatures to cover the articles published in Chinese related to this 
topic. English keywords used for database searching comprised people with 
dementia, dementia care, long-term care, nursing/care home, quality of 
life, quality of care, quality indicator, care standard, comparative study, 
Delphi method, and confirmatory factor analysis. Relevant Acts, statistics, 
policy reports, and advocacy were searched through official websites, including 
the Government websites (e.g. the Scottish and Taiwanese Governments) and 
advocacy organizations websites (e.g. WHO, Alzheimers Disease International, 
Alzheimer Scotland, and Taiwan Alzheimers Disease Association).   
The researcher has made the best effort to discuss all important issues, 
concepts, and theories relevant to this study in depth through focussed review 
to inform the readers of existing information and knowledge and to illustrate the 
contribution of the current research. However, there are some gaps in the 
literature. For example, dementia care policy and its delivery are less 
developed in Taiwan; standards in institutional dementia care have not been 
promoted; and there is a lack of person centred perspective in Taiwanese care 
as well. Thus, Taiwanese literature addressing these areas is not available. 
There is also a lack of comparative studies on dementia care. This 
methodological gap makes the study of transfer of policy and practice lessons 
particularly challenging.  
1.5 Structure of the thesis 
The thesis is divided into three main sections. The first section consists of three 
literature review chapters. The second section outlines the methodological 
approach and research methods. The final section focuses on data analysis, 
discussion, and conclusion.  
The literature review is split into three chapters. Chapter 2 looks in detail at Acts 
and reports for people with dementia in Scotland and Taiwan. The evidence 
supports my argument that since both Taiwan and Scotland are aging societies 
and dementia increases with an aging population, this affects both societies 
and economies. Taiwan and Scotland presently face the challenges of 
increasing numbers of people with dementia, but Scotland is currently more 
advanced than Taiwan in their policy towards dementia care. A comparative 
policy analysis could offer more information for Taiwan to learn a lesson from 
Scotland. In addition, a comparative analysis of existing care standards 
currently practiced in Taiwan and Scotland could provide more information for 
developing quality indicators for institutional dementia care.  
Chapter 3 discusses the construction of dementia care. Approaches to 
dementia care differ in philosophy, emphasis, and method. This chapter 
focuses on the different philosophical approaches and explores how those 
approaches contribute to various viewpoints on dementia care. In particular, the 
person-centred care approach is based on focusing on the person with 
dementia not the disease and services required. Moreover, the person-centred 
care approach has sharply shifted the culture of dementia care in the UK. 
Therefore, the person-centred care approach is distinct from the psychosocial 
approach to illustrate how the person-centred approach affects dementia care 
institutions. In this chapter, and throughout this thesis, I argue that the person-
centred care approach at the micro perspective best meets the requirements 
of people with dementia living in care homes. 
Total Quality Management (TQM) is an approach to service delivery which has 
contributed to the success in quality improvement in many long-term care 
institutions. Institutions could use this approach to improve quality of care for 
residents. In Chapter 4, the TQM literature supports my argument that the 
principles and techniques of TQM could assist care homes to achieve this main 
goal of improving quality of care for residents with dementia. The TQM 
approach offers the theoretical and conceptual frameworks and examines 
whether quality indicators, which are selected through reviewing literature, fit 
institutional dementia care. Identifying the outputs of care provision and 
understanding the requirements of residents with dementia are the key steps 
towards implementing a TQM approach in this field. In this chapter, I also 
explore the components of quality of care and quality of life in institutional 
dementia care, and the requirements of people with dementia living in care 
homes, in order to establish proposed quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care. 
The second section discusses the methodological approach and research 
design in Chapter 5. The TQM approach is used as the conceptual framework 
for this research design. A combination of qualitative and quantitative research 
methods are used to develop quality indicators for institutional dementia care in 
Taiwan. In order to ensure that the quality indicators are not merely rhetoric but 
are useful and applicable in reality, the Delphi method and questionnaire survey 
are used to collect the opinions of all stakeholders of dementia care involved in 
this research. Four kinds of data analysis method are adopted covering 
reliability, validity, and item analysis; descriptive statistics (frequency, 
percentage, mean, median, inter-quartile range); inferential statistics (Pearsons 
product-moment correlation, t-test, one-way analysis of variance [one-way 
ANOVA], and multiple regression analysis); and confirmatory factor analysis 
(CFA). The quantitative data in this research are analysed by using SPSS for 
Windows. version 16.0. The Analysis of Moment Structures (AMOS) software 
7.0 revision is used to conduct the CFA. Due to the specific participants, the 
final section discusses the ethical considerations that are the most important 
issue in this research.  
The sixth chapter aims to explore and discuss the process and findings of the 
Delphi consensus study. A summary of expert characteristics and rating results 
from the Delphi exercise round one are presented. The following discusses the 
result from each of the quality indicators, provides the results of quantitative 
data analysis, and summarizes the comments of experts to produce the round-
two questionnaire which includes 46 quality indicators. Finally, I present the 
results of the Delphi exercise round two and the context of the questionnaire 
which includes 41 quality indicators for the fieldwork.  
Chapter 7 extends the findings and discussion to include the analysis and 
interpretation of quantitative data gained from the perception of service 
receivers; and the exploration of findings which relate to the previous research. 
It begins with analysis of the distribution of care homes and participants. The 
subsequent section aims to report on how to improve the reliability through 
internal consistency and reliability, item-total correlations, and discriminative 
power analysis, and then to provide the appropriate number of factors by 
exploratory factor analysis (EFA) with the scree test, finally to develop the 
second-order confirmatory factor model. The final section extends the analysis 
and discusses of differences in ratings whether the results are consistent with 
previous research.  
The final chapter highlights how this research has made contributions to 
knowledge in methodology, theory, and practice in dementia care. 
Subsequently, I present the implications of the findings for research and 
practice: academia and policy makers. Finally, I discuss the limitations of the 
study and recommendations for further research.  
Chapter 2- A comparison of dementia care policy 
between Scotland and Taiwan  
2.1 Introduction 
The aim of this cross-national comparative chapter is to use comparative 
analysis to examine the different features of policy and its delivery in dementia 
care between Scotland and Taiwan, particularly in service provision and 
delivery for people with dementia. According to Tester (1999), comparative 
approaches are beneficial to establish appropriate long-term care policy by 
learning the responses taken from other countries. However, due to political, 
social, economic and cultural differences, policy learning and transfer are not a 
straightforward exercise. The aims of comparative social research are to 
describe and compare the phenomena in different countries side-by-side, to 
classify welfare systems or policies, to explain those similarities and differences 
between two countries, and to generate and test theories to provide generalised 
explanations (Carmel, 2004). Thus, it is expected that the dementia care policy 
and its association to quality indicators for institutional dementia care can be 
developed through policy learning and transfer in Taiwan through careful 
consideration of these differences. 
Dementia care is a prominent policy concern in developed countries and aging 
societies (Moise et al., 2004), because dementia inflicts a large burden on the 
economy and society of a country. Both Scotland and Taiwan are facing the 
challenges of increasing numbers of people with dementia, and the diversity of 
services that need to be provided for people with dementia.  
The incidence of dementia rises with age. As shown in Table 2.1, although the 
population in Taiwan is about four times that of Scotland, Taiwanese people 
with dementia are only about 1.4 times that of Scotland because there are a 
higher percentage of older people in Scotland. In Scotland, the General 
Register Office for Scotland (2006) reported that the number of people of 
pensionable age will increase by 35 per cent from 0.97 million to 1.31 million 
from 2004 to 2031. The number of births increased by 2.9 per cent from 2004 to 
2005 in Scotland, but the recent rise in birth rates does not offset the steadily 
increased aging population. In Taiwan, the Department of Social Affairs (2003c) 
provides demographic information. They estimate the number of older people in 
Taiwan will reach 20.69 per cent by 2027, whilst the number of births has 
reduced. It was estimated that the birth rate fell by 21.33 per cent in 2004 
compared with 1976 (Lin, 2005).  
  Table 2.1 Scotland and Taiwan compared 
Item\Nation Scotland Taiwan 
Area 78,782 sq km
 36,188 sq km 
Population 5,094,800
  22,770,383 
expectancy 
74.3 years (male) 
 79.4 years (female)
73 years (male) 
79 years (female)
Older 
people 
rates 
19% (pensionable age: 
60 and over for women 
and 65 and over for 
men, 970,000) 
9.74% (over 65 years , 
2,216,804)
People with 
dementia 
63,000 
85,383
GNI per 
capita  
18,800 
8,085 
Source: 
 Scottish Executive, 2006a;
 General Register Office for Scotland, 
2006;
Alzheimer Scotland, 2005;
 The World Bank, 2006;
 The Department of 
Statistics, , Ministry of the Interior in Taiwan, 2007;
 Lee, 2005 
Both Scotland and Taiwan have the GNI per capita of a developed country. 
Compared with developing countries, it may be anticipated that both Scotland 
and Taiwan have a higher capacity to find solutions to ease the economic 
burden of the ever-increasing population of people with dementia in each 
society.  
Policies in dementia care were initiated earlier and were more comprehensive 
in Scotland compared with Taiwan. Since the UK Parliament devolved powers 
to the Scottish Parliament in 1999, the Scottish Government has focused more 
intensively on the issue of dementia care and many care policies have been 
initiated to benefit people such as those with dementia and those requiring 
long-term care. Subsequently, in order to improve the quality of dementia care, 
the Scottish national dementia strategy was issued after my research was 
finished. In Taiwan, though the Disability Welfare Act (Department of Social 
Affairs, 1980a) acknowledges people with dementia and categorises them as 
disabled people, no public sector was responsible for their well being until 2004. 
It can be seen that Scotland is more experienced in its policy towards dementia 
care and that Taiwanese policy makers may learn from its example. 
2.2 The typology of welfare regimes 
According to different indicators or dimensions, many scholars have established 
different welfare system theories to compare differences and similarities. Based 
on the responsibility of the State for social welfare, George and Wilding (1976) 
classify welfare systems as the anti-collectivists, the reluctant collectivists, the 
Fabian socialists, and the Marxists. After that, more welfare systems models 
were developed. Lee and Raban (1983) argue that the welfare systems models 
could be categorized in a continuum between anti-state/pro-state instead of 
separate types. Subsequently, Esping-Andersen (1990) adds the roles of family 
and market for social welfare in regime theory in terms of the degree of 
decommodification and modes of solidarity (see Table 2.2).  
Table 2.2 A summary overview of regime characteristics 
 Liberal Social 
democratic 
Conservative 
Role of: 
  Family 
  Market 
  State 
Marginal 
Central 
Marginal 
Marginal 
Marginal 
Central 
Central 
Marginal 
Subsidiary 
Welfare state: 
  Dominant mode 
    of solidarity 
Individual Universal Kinship 
Corporatism 
Etatism 
Dominant locus 
    of solidarity 
Market 
State 
Family 
Degree of  
    decommodification 
Minimal 
Maximum 
High (for bread- winner) 
Modal 
Examples 
Sweden 
Germany 
Italy 
Source: Esping-Andersen (1999: 85) 
Esping-Andersen (1990) treats the welfare system as a whole to identify and 
analyse the interactions between political, economic, and social policy 
dimensions (Mabbert and Bolderson, 1999). This approach stresses two key 
directions (Mabbert and Bolderson, 1999) based on the degree of 
decommodification (the degree to which social policy makes individuals or 
families independent of market participation) and modes of solidarity (the 
degree of distribution of welfare benefits) (Esping-Andersen, 1990). In addition, 
this approach groups countries based on their social policies (Mabbert and 
Bolderson, 1999), which divides the classical political economy of Western 
countries into three key typologies of welfare regime: liberal, conservative, and 
social democratic (Esping-Andersen, 1990). Esping-Andersen (1999) also 
points out an alternative way is to segment welfare regimes into 8 types in 
terms of managing social risks within the family, state and labour markets: 
familialist, or non- familialist; residual, universalist, and social insurance models; 
little, medium, and strong labour market regulation forms. These 8 types of 
regime could be employed to classify the Western countries more accurately. 
Following the three welfare regime types of Esping-Andersen, further typologies 
were developed. Arts and Gelissen (2002) classify these welfare regime types 
into five types: the liberal/ Anglo-Saxon/Protestant liberal/ basic security type, 
the conservative/Bismarckian/Continental type, the social-democratic/ 
Scandinavian/Nordic type, the Southern/Mediterranean/late female mobilization 
type, and the radical/targeted type.  
There are some drawbacks of regime theory. Esping-Andersen (1996) argues 
that welfare states are in transition. Arts and Gelissen (2002) find that it is easy 
to establish a new welfare regime through adding or replacing some important 
attributes. For example, in terms of employment relations system, occupational 
system, employment-sustaining policy, and pension system, Buchholz et al. 
(2006) add two new welfare regimes for Western countries: Southern European 
welfare regime (Italy and Spain) and post-socialist welfare regime (Czech 
Republic, Estonia, and Hungary). Thus, regime theory cannot sufficiently 
explain most of the welfare regimes in the world. As Mabbert and Bolderson 
(1999) state, it is difficult to standardize and control when testing social welfare 
models across countries. 
The initial regime theory has additional weaknesses as it is only employed to 
explore social security, pension expenditure, and labour market policy (Esping-
Andersen, 1990) and is too focused on income-maintenance programmers, 
state-market nexus, and male production workers (Esping-Andersen, 1999). 
The issues with female and different ethnic workers are ignored in the theory. 
This is a particular problem in the care environment where female workers 
traditionally play crucial roles in long-term care (Tester, 1999). 
The other drawback of regime theory is that this theory can only be applied at 
the most general level of the countrys welfare state and it cannot reflect the 
changing paths in different countries (Mabbert and Bolderson, 1999). The true 
welfare states of nations are the combinations of various types (Arts and 
Gelissen, 2002). Taiwanese and Scottish welfare states are both unique and 
they cannot be explained fully by any of the welfare regimes alone. Thus, it is 
not easy to compare similarities and differences between Taiwanese and 
Scottish welfare states by using regime theory. Recognising these drawbacks, it 
may be helpful for the task at hand. I can still use the concept but not the detail.  
In the following sections, the regime theory of Esping-Andersen will be 
employed to examine whether Scottish and Taiwanese welfare systems fit into 
any one of them. This will help to compare Scottish and Taiwanese welfare 
systems. 
2.2.1 Scottish welfare regime 
It is difficult to fit Britain into any of the three welfare state types identified by 
Esping-Andersen (1990), because the British system has distinctive attributes 
which are an uneasy mix of the market and universalism (Cochrane et al., 
2001). According to Esping-Andersen (1990), Britain is classified as a liberal 
welfare regime, because the key attributes in its welfare state are 
predominately market-centred, means-tested assistance, and limited 
decommodification. However, in 1999, Esping-Andersen considers that the UK 
is classified as having little labour regulation, a mix of residual and Universalist 
welfare state, and non-familialist. Thus, Clarke et al. (2001) conclude that the 
British welfare system is in transition from a mix of liberal and social democratic 
regimes to a combination of neo-liberal and residual social democratic regimes, 
using regimes of Esping-Andersen. 
Scotland has its own welfare system which is different from the other British 
countries, exacerbated when the UK Parliament devolved powers to the 
Scottish Parliament in 1999; and when the Scottish National Party came to 
office in 2007. Since different political ideologies often introduce different 
welfare systems, regime theory might be inappropriate to explain Scottish 
welfare systems. Thus, it is possible that the Scottish welfare systems could be 
classified as the undefined regime (Ragin, 1994), because the Scottish 
welfare system is a transitional system from a liberal regime to a social 
democratic regime due to its specific characteristics. 
2.2.2 Taiwanese welfare regime 
The Taiwanese welfare regime is dynamic in response to the different 
ideologies of its political parties. As Goodman and Peng (1996) note, the 
development of Taiwanese social welfare is a learn-as-we-go approach. 
Esping-Andersen (1999) categorizes the East Asian area as the fourth world 
because of its unique version of capitalism, such as high employment, strong 
labour market regulation, and an egalitarian distribution of income. However, 
Aspalter (2002b) argues that the Western welfare states theories are not 
sufficient to explain the East Asian (including Taiwanese) welfare states 
because the social structure, political parties, social pressure groups, and 
institutional arrangements are different from Western countries. Goodman and 
Peng (1996) also argue that although the Taiwanese welfare system revises 
many Western social welfare ideas, it does not follow any particular Western 
welfare state types in terms of social, cultural, and political background. 
The Taiwanese welfare state is determined by the political choices and 
preferences of its major political parties. Economy is also a factor in the welfare 
state. It is suggested that economic development is more important than party 
preference in welfare effort (Mabbert and Boderson, 1999). Particularly, Taiwan 
is a newly industrializing and modernizing country (Goodman and Peng, 1996; 
Giddens and Griffiths, 2006). This led to the remarkable transformation in the 
Capitalist economy of Taiwan (White and Goodman, 1998). The economic 
development has shaped the Taiwanese welfare state. However, according to 
Aspalter (2002a), there is a direct causal relationship between political 
competition and welfare state construction in Taiwan through democratic 
elections, particularly, in 2000 when the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) 
won the presidential election over the Chinese Nationalist Party (also known as 
Kuomintang, KMT) which was in power for prior decades. 
Prior to the 1990s, Taiwan had been classified as a conservative welfare 
regime (Hill and Hwang, 2005) and a residual social insurance system 
(Goodman and Peng, 1996; Aspalter, 2002b). At that time, the welfare system 
was introduced by The KMT which was established in 1912 by Dr. Sun Yat-sen 
(Father of the Nation) whose political ideology was influenced by Bismarckian 
political theory which emphasised the function of family and state sectors, and 
through mutual aid to establish a social security system (Goodman and Peng, 
1996).  
However, democratization has significantly changed the Taiwanese welfare 
state after the 1990s (Ku, 2002). There has been an ideological competition 
between the two key Taiwanese political parties, the social democratic welfare 
(DPP) and multicultural (KMT) regimes. The Democratic Progressive Party 
(1993) argues that its welfare effort is to establish a welfare country with left-
wing political ideology to provide universal and maximum welfare benefits for 
the whole population. Based on the political ideology and social insurance 
principle, the Kuomintang (2007) sets out a new welfare regime, a multicultural 
welfare regime, to offer different benefits and services to different groups in the 
population: women, older people, children and adolescents, indigenes, disabled 
people, and foreign spouse families.  
On the other hand, democratization also limits the development in the 
Taiwanese welfare state, because political parties only focus on how to please 
voters to acquire political power instead of the actual welfare of the voters (Ku, 
2002). In order to gain electoral support, the expenditure of social security will 
continue to increase in Taiwan (Ku, 2002). It can be anticipated that the 
increase in the public debt will be simply transferred to future generations 
(Myles, 2002). Thus, regime theory is not appropriate to describe the current 
Taiwanese welfare system and it cannot predict how the Taiwanese welfare 
state would be changed and formulated in the future. Perhaps, the undefined 
regime also suits the Taiwanese welfare state, because the Taiwanese welfare 
system is a transitional system from a conservative regime to a social 
democratic regime. At this stage, I have characterised the system overall and 
identified its key characteristics.  
2.3 Policy transfer    
Political party competition, demographic aging, and globalization are the driving 
forces for Taiwanese policy makers. In order to satisfy the needs of Taiwanese 
people, policy makers are pressured to adopt the social policy and its delivery 
from more developed countries in order to achieve international standards. 
Goodman and Peng (1996) observe that the Taiwanese social welfare system 
is developed in response to immediate economic and political circumstances. 
Ku (2002) claims that the Taiwanese welfare state is impacted by demographic 
aging, family function in the role of welfare provider, and democratization and 
influenced by economic globalization, post-industrialization, and 
democratization (Lan, 2008). Thus, it can be concluded that politics, aging, 
economic global factors lead policy transfer in Taiwan. 
Policy transfer is defined by Dolowitz and Marsh (2000) as the process by 
which knowledge about policies, administrative arrangements, institutions and 
ideas in one political system (past or present) is used in the development of 
policies, administrative arrangements, institutions and ideas in another political 
system (p. 5). They also suggest that policy transfer is a continuum process 
from lesson-drawing to coercive transfer (see Figure 2.1). When society, politics, 
and economics are stable within a country, policy transfer could be voluntary; 
but if there are some political crises, policy transfer could be coercive, 
particularly, while one country is directly imposed by another to change its 
policy state (Dolowitz and Marsh, 2000).  
Figure 2.1 From lesson-drawing to coercive transfer 
Source: Dolowitz and Marsh (2000: 13) 
Even though the KMT and DPP are facing constant electoral pressure in 
Taiwan and there is a political and economic threat from China, Taiwanese 
policy transfer still might not be a coercive type, because Taiwan is 
independent in its own policy making. There is a constant desire for 
international acceptance especially becoming a member of United Nations. 
Taiwanese policy transfer is therefore a voluntary one. 
As for the procedures of policy transfer, Evans and Davies (1999) suggest the 
key processes are recognition of welfare regime change, a search for policy 
regimes, evaluation, decision-making, and implementation. Goodman and Peng 
(1996) also recommend that the development of the future Taiwanese social 
welfare system should be in terms of economic, political, and cultural conditions; 
and Western welfare models. Thus, an adopt and adapt process is more 
flexible for pragmatic change in Taiwan (Goodman and Peng, 1996). The key 
processes of policy transfer identified by Evans and Davies (1999) will be 
followed in this thesis. That is, the processes of a search for policy regimes and 
policy evaluation will be focused, because they have been recognized to 
change the Taiwanese welfare regime. 
With regard to the translation issue, since a word- for-word approach to 
translation of the outcome is not familiar within the target context (McCabe, 
2007), this research will adopt a free translation and adaptation approach to 
allow the translated text and content to fit into Taiwanese culture, in order to 
take into account the culture differences between Taiwanese and Scottish 
contexts.  
2.4 Methodological approaches for comparison  
Different methodological approaches differ in scale and emphasis when 
comparing cross-national social policies. Tester (1999) argues that 
methodological approaches and methods in comparative study are principally 
the same as in social research. However, some researchers prefer specific 
methodological approaches for comparative study. For example, Ragin (1987) 
finds that the key methodological approaches for comparative study could be a 
case-oriented comparative method, variable-oriented approach, or the mixed 
comparative strategy. Tester (1999) states that there are three key approaches 
for comparative study: large-scale design, small-scale study, and combined 
strategy. Ebbinghaus (2005) also considers that large-N
cross-national study 
and small-N case study are suitable for comparative cross-national research. In 
the following sections, I will discuss the features of those approaches and 
identify the appropriate approach for this comparative policy study. 
The key strength of large-scale methods in social policy research for cross-
national comparisons is that the researcher can employ macro-economic, social, 
and political data to explore many countries; and specific linguistic and cultural 
problems of comparability may be minimized (Kennett, 2001). However, the 
weakness of this approach is the lack of sufficient explanation and 
interpretation of specific phenomena (Kennett, 2001) because it tends to 
simplify and generalize the real social world (Ragin, 1987). Particularly, when 
the emphasis is on the areas of social policy, or a strictly defined set of 
interventions, no regression of common factors will reach a good fit due to 
country-specific factors (Mabbert and Bolderson, 1999). Thus, this approach 
could not resolve theoretical debates (Mabbert and Bolderson, 1999).  
On the other hand, according to Kennett (2001), small-N methods focus on 
exploration of cultural discrepancy to identify and explore the similarities and 
differences between two or more countries, though this approach is insufficient 
in international or global contexts (Cochrane et al., 2001), such as in the 
comparison attempted in this research. However, the case study approach is 
extremely valuable as a learning exercise to understand the structures, values, 
and practices of other countries; and to reflect on how these differences could 
benefit ones own country and shed new lights on knowledge (Mabbert and 
Bolderson, 1999). 
The third key approach for comparative study is the combined strategy. A 
mixed-method approach seeks to integrate qualitative and quantitative methods 
into a single approach. The key attribute of this approach is to employ 
qualitative and quantitative methods as complementary methods to compare 
the existing data and collect new data between different countries 
simultaneously (Tester, 1999). It allows for examination of large numbers of 
cases and clarification of complex individual causation (Ragin, 1987).    
In conclusion, I argue that the mixed-method approach is most appropriate for 
this research to develop quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia 
care based on a cross-national comparative study. However, at the stage of 
comparative social policy study, the case study approach with comparative 
analysis is more suitable because the aim of this research is to learn lessons 
from Scotland through comparative social policy study to formulate Taiwanese 
dementia care policies. Since at this stage this research will only focus on the 
relevant dementia care policy and its delivery between Taiwan and Scotland, 
the large-scale approach is not appropriate.   
2.5 Dimensions of dementia care policy 
National policies for long-term care reflect political, economic, socio-cultural, 
and international issues (Phillips and Chan, 2002). The United Nations (UN) 
(1991) claims that Governments should incorporate five principles into their 
national policy for older people: independence, participation, care, self-fulfilment, 
and dignity. The UN (1991) also recommends other key components such as 
health care, nutrition, clothing, housing and environment, social care, 
community care, home care, institutional care, education, recreational service, 
spiritual service, human rights, social participation, protection, self-decision, 
income support and employment. These components could be grouped into 
four kinds of welfare: health and personal care, social care, housing and 
environment, and financial support.  
In comparative research on long-term care, Tester (1999) suggests that there 
are more specific components: health care, social care, financial support, family 
carers, institutional care, community care, and informal care. She also points 
out that feminist social policy on long-term care emphasises gender and caring, 
particularly the gendering of the welfare system and unpaid work. In the Asia-
Pacific region, Phillips and Chan (2002) observe that long-term care issues 
should include health care, social services (including housing), and social 
security (financial support). According to the arguments of UN, Tester, and 
Phillips and Chan above, there are four key aspects that might play the most 
important roles in dementia care: health care, social care, financial support, and 
housing services.  
Law and policy provide good recommendations for people with dementia and 
the stakeholders. The following sections will focus on these four key aspects to 
explore how the features of the law and policies influence and contribute to 
services for people with dementia and family members in Scotland and Taiwan; 
and the translation of the policy and its delivery into quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care. 
2.6 Health Care 
Many Acts and reports are related to health care in Scotland. The National 
Health Service Act 1946 laid down the foundation of National Health Service 
(NHS). Later in 1948, the NHS was introduced in Scotland (Crombie et al., 
2003). The Scottish Executive was established in 1999 and from then on, the 
Scottish Executive Health Department has been responsible for all health 
policies and the supervision of the NHS (Crombie et al., 2003).  
The Design to Care (1997) was introduced in order to improve health, to reduce 
health inequalities, and to replace the internal market which focuses on the 
short term. It encourages the NHS Scotland to develop a partnership approach 
and a longer time frame of co-operation (The Scottish Office, 1997a). In the 
same year, the Framework for Mental Health Service in Scotland was 
established. It considers that Health Boards play a lead role in integrating NHS 
Trusts, Primary Care Trusts, and Local Health Care Co-operatives and at the 
same time it published the health improvement programmes which comprise 
protecting public health, improving and promoting health, assessing needs, and 
managing service strategy and performance (The Scottish Office, 1997b). In 
addition, this framework recommends the Scottish Government to provide 
assistance to service user, carer, and staff to form partnerships, and to help 
stakeholders to plan and deliver health care, social work and housing services 
to fit the needs of people with mental health problems, including people with 
dementia (The Scottish Office, 1997b). This framework is the first one to 
consider the care needs of people with dementia in Scotland (Jackson et al., 
2003). Subsequently, the Scottish Government began to focus on needs 
assessment for people with dementia and published the Scottish Needs 
Assessment Programme in 2000 (Muir et al., 2000).  
As Our National Health (2000) argues, based on partnership, all health care 
providers should improve health, reduce inequalities in health, and ensure that 
older people receive timely care and treatment (Scottish Executive, 2000b). The 
Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 enables NHS Scotland to 
involve all general practitioners (GPs) listed in the medical system to offer 
personal medical services (Scottish Executive, 2002). Armstrong et al. (2002) 
highlight the need of NHS Boards and Local Authorities to be aware of the 
physical and mental health of people with dementia and to provide appropriate 
and rapid health services to meet their needs. In 2003, the Partnership for Care 
also suggests that improving health and reducing inequalities in health are the 
most important issues in health care (Scottish Executive, 2003).  
According to the National Framework for Service Change in the NHS in 
Scotland (2005), older peoples health care needs are different from younger 
members of society (Holdsworth et al., 2005). Therefore, this Framework 
advises that policies and services should support individuals wellbeing and 
empower an individual to play a self-management role in health care 
(Holdsworth et al., 2005).  
Prior to 1995, there were several different health insurance schemes in Taiwan, 
including Government employee's insurance, labourers insurance, teachers 
insurance of private schools, farmer's insurance and military personnel 
insurance (Bureau of National Health Insurance, 2007). However, these 
schemes only cover about 59% of the population (Bureau of National Health 
Insurance, 2007). In order to ensure that the entire population could obtain 
appropriate health care, the Taiwanese Parliament passed the National Health 
Insurance Act in 1994 and the National Health Insurance program was 
launched to offer universal health care in 1995 (Bureau of National Health 
Insurance, 2007). The Bureau of National Health Insurance is the responsible 
authority for the National Health Insurance program and it is administrated by 
the Department of Health, Taiwanese Executive (Department of Health, 
Taiwan). Since 1995, the National Health Insurance program began to provide 
health care for all patients. Taiwanese health care became highly accessible 
because of the high coverage rate of hospitals. Moreover, Taiwanese patients 
could go to hospitals directly without referrals from GPs. Free health care is 
possible, if a person with dementia was categorized as having Major illness and 
injury: Senile and pre-senile organic psychotic conditions (Bureau of National 
Health Insurance, 2007).  
Since dementia is a progressive disease, there will be a great change in the 
disease process, and memory problems will get worse over time (Alzheimer 
Scotland, 2006). At the severe end of the disease, people with dementia may 
be completely dependent. Failure to recognise time, place and person, illogical 
speech and incontinence are all very common (Jacques et al., 2004b). 
Therefore, continuing medical attention is required in dementia in order to 
manage these progressive symptoms (Mace and Rabins, 1999).  
According to the above mentioned policies, it seems to indicate that both 
Scotland and Taiwan have set up a health care system and provided health 
care for people with dementia. In practice, Taiwanese health care is more 
accessible than that of Scotland and early diagnosis and treatment is possible 
for people with dementia. For instance, when I suspected my mother had 
vascular dementia in April 2006, I took her to the general hospital to visit the 
neurologist to make a diagnosis and make an appointment to test the computed 
tomography. It only took three days to confirm her vascular dementia and treat 
her with aspirin. One month later, my mother had recovered from the vascular 
dementia, because when I visited her, she did not ask me whether I have 
finished the dinner at least 5 times within 10 minutes. Therefore, it may not be 
necessary to transfer all related health care policy from Scotland to Taiwan, 
because earlier diagnosis is more likely occur in Taiwan. However, in Taiwan, 
when people with dementia move into care homes, institutions are responsible 
for providing long-term care. Unlike acute dementia care described above, the 
standards of long-term care in Taiwan are less satisfactory. It is necessary to 
establish related quality indicators for institutional dementia care.  
2.7 Social Care 
An increasing aging population not only has social and economic implications 
but it also places greater demand on health care and social care (General 
Register Office for Scotland, 2006). As Adams and Manthorpe (2003) state, it is 
the most important responsibility for dementia care practitioners to associate 
with others working in services and provision for disabled people and older 
people. Unfortunately, as yet, dementia cannot be cured by any medicine. 
Although health care could control physical and mental problems of people with 
dementia, social care plays an important role in improvement of QOL for people 
with dementia and their families. Hence, Jackson et al. (2003) considers that 
modernization, inclusion, justice for all, community based care, support of 
carers and partnership between agencies and service users and carers are the 
key themes in social care for people with dementia. Moreover, when social 
inclusion is valued in institutional care, it is possible to achieve the objective of 
protecting the rights of people with dementia living in care homes. Furthermore, 
in order to provide knowledge and skills for new treatment, it is necessary to 
invest in research and development in dementia care.   
In the following sections, I will explore the main social care policies for people 
with dementia, which include social justice and social inclusion, rights protection, 
partnership, family caregivers, community care, institutional care, care 
standards, and research and development.  
2.7.1 Social justice and social inclusion 
Social justice is true equality, equal rights, and equal distribution (Sevenhuijsen, 
1998). Social inclusion is total acceptance without condition (Repper and 
Perkins, 2003). Due to negative stereotypes and social stigma, people with 
dementia have to face many social restrictions and barriers. Fortunately, in 
social justice and social inclusion policies, the Scottish Office (1999) 
recommends that the promotion of social inclusion should be built upon 
integration, prevention, understanding, inclusiveness, and empowerment.  
The report of the Royal Commission, With Respect to Old Age (1999) urges the 
Scottish Executive (and the other UK administrations) to provide services with 
equity and justice (Innes, 2002). The Scottish Executive (2000c) had accepted 
the Royal Commission's recommendations about social justice for older people 
and endorsed quality and standards of care, support for carers, direct payments, 
joint care, transfer of preserved rights, and residential allowance. Thus, the 
Scottish Executive (2000b) suggests that good health care should be based on 
social justice and integrated services to empower people with dementia to 
preserve independence and dignity in health care.  
However, in Taiwan, dementia is regarded as an aged and progressive 
condition and people with dementia in the acute confused stage are treated as 
psychiatric patients. There is no consideration of social justice and social 
inclusion for people with dementia in Taiwan today. Thus, the concepts and 
policies related to social justice and social inclusion need to be learnt from 
Scottish experience to reduce social restrictions and barriers for people with 
dementia and their families. In institutional dementia care, if policy can focus 
more on social justice and social inclusion and the policy is implemented, it may 
make the care home staff respect and listen more to the residents and their 
families, and the QOL for people with dementia living in care homes may be 
more enhanced. 
2.7.2 Rights protection 
The Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000 creates safeguards not only 
protecting welfare and finance for adults with incapacity but also providing 
complex services to them (Scottish Executive, 2000a). Thus, the Act considers 
that the sheriff should consult any attorney directly and the attorney should 
consider the adults wishes and feelings, and exercise minimum intervention 
under the Act (Scottish Executive, 2000a). His/her action should benefit adults 
with incapacity and encourage them to choose their own guardian, continuing 
attorney, and welfare attorney as well as to develop new skills concerning their 
property, finance, and welfare (Scottish Executive, 2000a). The introduction of 
this Act almost completely changed the law about people with dementia 
(Alzheimer Scotland, 2006).  
In 1980, the Taiwanese Parliament passed the Senior Citizens Welfare Act to 
enable the Taiwanese Executive to protect the rights of economic security for 
older people and to provide sufficient social welfare for them (Department of 
Social Affairs, 1980b). In the same year, the Disability Welfare Act was also 
passed. This Act considers that people with dementia have the same rights as 
everyone else, such as employment, education, health and rehabilitation care, 
and social welfare service (Department of Social Affairs, 1980a). They are the 
first two Acts which address the concerns of older people and people with 
dementia (Lung and Lin, 2005). Subsequently, more Acts were set up in order 
to protect the rights of older people and to improve the QOL for older people, 
including the Regulations on Promoting Senior Citizens Welfare Committee in 
1998 (Department of Social Affairs, 1998h) and the Contract Format of Care 
Homes in 2005 (Department of Social Affairs, 2005a). 
Thus, both the Scottish and Taiwanese Government have developed policies to 
protect the rights of people with dementia. However, it is also important to put 
these policies into practice, to educate institutions and staff about the equal 
rights of people with dementia. 
2.7.3 Partnership 
On the aspect of partnership, the report Modernising Community Care (1998) 
argues that the Scottish Government should modernize community care by joint 
working based on a partnership to provide better services, faster decisions, and 
to fit peoples needs (The Scottish Office, 1998). Joint work for delivering 
community care services should include single assessments, intensive care 
management, information sharing, equipment and adaptations, occupational 
therapy services (Scottish Executive, Joint Future Group 2000, pp. 7-8). 
According to the Scottish Executive (2000c), effective innovative care involves 
the NHS, local authorities and voluntary sectors working together to provide 
health and social care quickly, individually and flexibly, which meet the needs of 
older, fragile people at home based on independence and dignity. The 
Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 permits Scottish Ministers, the 
Commission, and the Council to provide regulating care services built upon the 
principles of safety, welfare, eligibility, independence, and diversity (Scottish 
Executive, 2001c). The Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 
enables the minister to implement joint working where they consider services 
require this (Scottish Executive, 2002). The Scottish Executive (2003) 
recognises that partnership with social work is to develop person-centred and 
integrated care for older people in the community, and has to ensure it could 
deliver faster and better services to meet the needs of older people. The report 
of Jay et al. (2005) advises that joint services should involve service receivers 
and carers to design and deliver services for older people based on the two 
principles of person-centred care and an outcome focus. Moreover, Jay et al. 
consider that to meet the demands of an aging society and older people, the 
housing, health, and social services should form a partnership for efficient 
planning and delivery of service. 
The aging population forces the Scottish Government to focus on the severe 
challenges of complex health care and delivery (Kerr et al., 2005). However, 
Kerr et al. (2005) consider that the NHS in Scotland could meet these 
challenges by: 
Building a new relationship of partnership and trust with the public aligned 
around the direction set in this report; equipping frontline staff to design 
service change and to develop new roles and skills; ensuring all staff are 
working to a shared vision with a sense of pride in what they are doing; 
providing modern information and communications technology to improve 
access, quality and effectiveness; maximising services in the community; 
delivering care that is as local as possible and as specialised as 
necessary (p. 64). 
A report by Roe et al. (2006) suggests that in order to provide the highest 
quality services, promoting wellbeing, and risk management, social work 
services should be required to integrate the public, private and voluntary 
sectors. That is, an integrated care system aims to provide seamless services 
for people with dementia who live in institutions.  
However, in Taiwan, the care model is divided into a social care model and 
health care model. They are administrated by two different departments, the 
Department of Social Affairs and the Department of Health. There still is a gap 
between these two care systems in Taiwan. People with dementia tend to have 
higher dependency and need more care from both health and social services. 
In order to deliver this balance of care for people with dementia more effectively, 
the lesson of partnership policy needs to be learnt from Scotland. Although the 
principle of partnership exists, the practice can be problematic (Dowling et al., 
2004; Rummery, 2009). 
2.7.4 Family caregivers 
The Carers (Recognition and Services) Act 1995 offers the assessment 
concept for assessing the care ability of carers, and connecting the purposes of 
care (The UK Parliament, 1995). The responsibility of carers is set out in the 
Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 and it encourages carers to 
contribute their views to assess care needs before providing services to the 
cared-for person (Scottish Executive, 2002). The Scottish Executive (2006b) 
claims that in the carer dimension, Scottish social policy has integrated 
recognition, partnership, and joint working to support family carers.  
Scotland has developed the above policies to support family caregivers. 
However, as Chang (2003) points out, in the society of Taiwan, as the culture of 
filial piety is commonly emphasized, taking care of the elderly or sick family 
member is generally regarded as the responsibility of the family. Thus, to date 
there is no Government document which focuses on family caregivers in 
Taiwan. It is important to have related policies to support family caregivers 
whether caring for people with dementia is the responsibility of the families or 
the whole society.  
2.7.5 Community care 
The Scottish Government continues to support the community care policy, and 
combine existing resources with new ones to provide social work, health and 
housing services for people who need them (The Scottish Office, 1998). 
Subsequently, the Care in the Community (1999) enables the Scottish 
Executive to develop and implement community care (The Scottish Parliament, 
1999). The Report of the Joint Future Group (2000) states that older people at 
home need access to a diverse and continuing care, including intensive 
support and care schemes; more flexible and comprehensive short break 
services; and a practical, low level shopping/domestic/household maintenance 
service (Scottish Executive. Joint Future Group, 2000: 12). The Community 
Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 enables Councils to set up a Direct 
Payments Scheme to empower older people who are cared for in the 
community (Scottish Executive, 2002).  
In Taiwan, the Department of Health began to provide home nursing care for 
people in need in 1987 (Lung and Lin, 2005). In order to achieve the goal of 
care in the community, the Project of Promoting Home Care (1998) encourages 
the local Government to offer personal care for older people and disabled 
people at home (Department of Social Affairs, 1998f). The Taiwanese 
Government set up the Project of Promoting Care Services for Older People in 
1998. The objective of this project is to achieve community care through 
community resources development and volunteer participation (Department of 
Social Affairs, 1998e). The Plan of Establishing Community Care Centres (2005) 
encourages the private sectors to set up community care centres to provide 
visiting, phone calls, meal service, and health promotion (Department of Social 
Affairs, 2005b). In 2005, the Regulations on Managing Home Care Provision 
Units permits the local Government to inspect home care provision units, in 
order to improve the service quality and to protect the rights of service users 
(Department of Social Affairs, 2005c). 
In Taiwan, there were about 85,383 people with dementia in 2004 (Lee, 2005). 
Only about 19,047 persons lived in care homes (Department of Social Affairs, 
2007c). Most people with dementia lived in the community and were cared by 
their families. Thus, it is necessary to have sufficient resources for carers in 
order to look after people with dementia in the community. Currently in Taiwan, 
the care resources provided by the Government consist of financial support for 
health care and institutional care, and living cost for medium and low income 
people (Zhou et al., 2005). In addition, free respite care, emergency service 
lines, home care, and home nursing care were also offered for people with 
dementia (Zhou et al., 2005).  
Nevertheless, in practice, there were only fifteen day care centres which 
provided 1502 places for people with dementia in Taiwan in 2005 (Lin, 2005). 
The free respite care offered by the local Government only lasts seven days per 
year and 8-32 hours per month for free home care. In addition, the cost of 
individual home care is equivalent to 3.6 per hour which is higher than the 
cost of institutional care. The cost of day care (200-300 per month) and 
respite care (500 per month) is not cheaper than institutional care (300-
800 per month) (Lin and Liu, 2006a). Accordingly, due to the insufficient and 
expensive community care, the ideals of care in the community and care by the 
community are not achieved at this moment. Thus, taking care of people with 
dementia is still the responsibility of the family in Taiwan today.  
2.7.6 Institutional care 
Care home service is defined as a service, which provides accommodation, 
together with nursing, personal care or personal support, for persons by reason 
of their vulnerability or need (Scottish Executive, 2001b: 2(3)). When people 
need more support after assessment of individuals needs and circumstances, 
residential or nursing homes generally can offer more than what they can 
receive from their own homes or the community (Department of Health, 1989). 
Moreover, institutional care also provides the services that community care 
could offer such as respite care, day care, home care, terminal care, 
hydrotherapy, and consultant-supervised post-operative/convalescent care 
(Peace et al., 1997); and the quality of services might even be better than 
community care (Huber, et al., 2005). 
In Taiwan, the standards for care homes are set out in documents such as the 
Regulations on Establishing Standards of Senior Citizens Welfare 
Organizations (1981), the Permission Regulations on Establishing Senior 
Citizens Welfare Organizations (1998), and the Permission Regulations on 
Establishing Standards of Long-term Care Organizations (1998). These require 
the institution to provide an establishment plan which includes service items, 
charge standard, contract, organizational structure, physical environment, 
personnel establishment, and financial plan prior to establishing the institution 
(Department of Social Affairs, 1981, 1998b, 1998c). Furthermore, the only 
qualified staff can be employed to provide professional care for older people 
(Department of Social Affairs, 1998g). In addition, the continuity of care of any 
residents living in private care homes is ensured by the fact that the local 
Government will take over when they cannot continue to operate for any reason 
(Department of Social Affairs, 1999). The Taiwanese Government evaluates 
care homes to ensure quality of care (Department of Social Affairs, 2000a) and, 
in order to encourage care homes to offer higher quality of care for older people, 
awards are given to care homes with good performance (Department of Social 
Affairs, 2000b). 
As Reilly et al. (2005) say, Approximately one third of people with dementia are 
likely to enter residential care (p. 8). 30% of the 63,000 Scottish people 
diagnosed with dementia are living in institutions. In Taiwan, the number of 
people with dementia living in care homes was about 19,047 in 2004 
(Department of Social Affairs, 2007c). Since dementia is a progressive and 
incurable disease, many of people with dementia are likely to spend the latter 
part of their lives in care homes. Owing to insufficient long-term beds for people 
with dementia, Taiwanese care homes are encouraged to establish special care 
units to offer small scale but diverse and professional services for older people 
with dementia (Department of Social Affairs, 2007c).  
Institutional care can offer a one-stop service which fits well with the current 
situation in Taiwan where low birth rates and economic burden have led adult 
children to work outside the home leaving elderly or disabled people at home 
and where community care is generally considered to be insufficient and 
expensive. Therefore, the institutional dementia care policy plays the crucial 
role in dementia care in Taiwan. Fortunately, both Scotland and Taiwan have 
developed policies to improve the QOL for older people living in institutions, and 
therefore quality indicators for institutional dementia care will be essential in 
Scotland or Taiwan.  
2.7.7 Care standards 
The aims of care standards are to minimize poor-quality care and to enhance 
average level of care (Huber et al., 2005). In order to evaluate care quality or 
performance of care homes accurately, care standards for older people living in 
care homes have been developed in both Taiwan and Scotland. The following 
sections will compare the differences between the two care standards that have 
been developed in Taiwan and Scotland; and discuss which quality indicators 
are most appropriate for measuring the needs of people with dementia. At the 
same time, care standards in other countries will be mentioned and common 
dimensions or foci will be discussed. 
Care standards are the basis of institutional care, and quality indicators are 
used to measure care performance against the standards. According to 
Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety (2006), care standards 
are service specific standards and they cover a range of institutional care 
settings. Manard (2002) states that quality indicators are markers of potentially 
poor or excellent health care quality (p. 1). It can be seen that both care 
standards and quality indicators are the basic ingredients of assessment in 
quality of care, and that service users and stakeholders could use them for 
reference and minimal criteria to evaluate quality of care for residents.  
The Scottish Executive (1999) developed the care standards for residential care, 
day care, home-based care, respite services, and carers' services to make 
services better. The Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001 enabled the 
Scottish Government to establish a system of regulation of care services, and 
to set up an inspection to ensure that social services could fulfil national care 
standards (Scottish Executive, 2001c). Accordingly, the National Care 
Standards was set up to improve the quality of institutional care (Scottish 
Executive, 2001b). In the Range and Capacity Review Group (Hunter et al., 
2006), in order to ensure that individuals could receive care with the quality of 
national care standards, eight regulation and inspection bodies, across housing, 
social and health care were established.  
Using the principles of dignity, privacy, choice, safety, realising potential and 
equality and diversity (Scottish Executive, 2005:7), the Scottish Executive 
developed 20 standards in the National Care Standards: Care home for Older 
People in 2001 which was subsequently revised in 2005. In these Care 
Standards, issues of residents are considered before moving in (standards 1 to 
6), when settling in (standards 7 to 11), day-to-day life (standards 12 to 19), and 
moving on (standard 20). 
National care standards developed by the National Care Standards Committee 
include people who use services, their families and carers, along with staff, 
professional associations, regulators from health and social care, local 
authorities, health boards and independent providers (Scottish Executive, 
2005:4). According to the Scottish Executive (2005), the standards are 
grouped under headings which follow the persons journey through the service  
(p. 5). That is, Scottish care standards prefer to consider service users rather 
than the other stakeholders when evaluating quality of care in care homes.  
In Taiwan, based on the Facility Guide for the Nursing Home Quality 
Indicators and Fit For The Future? National Required Standards for 
Residential and Nursing Homes for Older People, Cheng developed quality 
indicators of long-stay care for older people in 2000. Subsequently, the Ministry 
of the Interior modified these quality indicators and divided them into five main 
categories, 120 criteria to evaluate the care homes for older people, comprising 
management and administration, personal and professional care, physical 
environment and safety, rights and prevention, and improvement and 
innovation (Ministry of the Interior, 2000).  
Taiwanese care standards were initially modified from two care standards from 
the USA and the UK. The modified standards were subsequently confirmed by 
two focus groups, one included four academics in social work, and the other 
comprised seven service providers. The standards were not further assessed 
for appropriateness and all of Taiwanese evaluation indicators emphasize the 
written documentation. A check list is usually used as the proof of action in the 
care homes. However, in reality, written document may not truly reflect on the 
true situation. Thus, I argue that the current Taiwanese care standards are 
subjective and unsuitable for evaluating care homes. 
Although in general the care standards in Taiwan and Scotland are both 
designed for older people living in care homes, some of them were employed in 
the development of quality indicators for institutional dementia care, such as 
contract, complaint procedure, accident procedure, fire safety, clinical record, 
rehabilitation, and festival activity. However, the requirements of people with 
dementia living in care homes are more complex and the requirements are 
different in many aspects. I would suggest that a specific care standard is 
required for people with dementia. 
Many other countries also develop quality indicators to assist long-term care 
organizations to improve quality of care, such as the USA and Japan. Maryland 
Hospital Association created the International Quality Indicator Project (IQIP) in 
1985, which focuses on health care and outcome and 6 long-term care 
indicators are built. Although IQIP focuses on health care and outcomes of 
service provision, it provides the quantitative indicators for evaluating the quality 
of long-term care. Castle et al. (2005) also suggest that quality indicators in 
nursing facilities are state-level physical restraint use, urethral catheterization, 
contractures, pressure ulcers, and psychoactive medication (p. 1173). 
Therefore, some of these indicators were adopted in this research such as 
unplanned weight change, pressure ulcers, unscheduled transfers/discharges 
to inpatient acute care, nosocomial infections, and physical restraint use. 
The external appraisal items of service provision for group homes which care 
for senior citizens with dementia was developed in Japan in 2002 (Ministry of 
Health and Labour, 2002). The external appraisal include 5 categories, 79 items, 
comprising management philosophy (4 items), physical environment (10 items), 
care service (38 items), management systems (19 items), and results (8 items). 
However, Japanese appraisal items are only appropriate for group homes, new 
care homes, or small size care homes (Ministry of Health and Labour, 2002), so 
that they might not apply to existing care homes for people with dementia or 
care home of other sizes. 
In conclusion, an institution could adopt and modify the existing care standards 
that are appropriate for its policy and goals to improve the QOL for residents. 
However, people with dementia living in care homes need specific care 
standards and separate quality indicators. In addition, the quality indicators 
should be high in reliability, validity, and acceptability. Due to lack of finance 
and human resource, it is necessary to develop a set of quality indicators which 
is simple, efficient, and effective to assist care homes to improve quality of care 
and QOL for people with dementia. 
2.7.8 Research and development 
With regard to research and development in dementia care, the first dementia 
services development centre was established in 1989 at the University of 
Stirling, Scotland (Adams and Manthorpe, 2003). The DSDC (2006) offers 
information, education, training, publications, consultancy and research about 
dementia care for staff, students, carers, and Governments.  
In Taiwan, the Department of Health established a sector within the Bureau of 
Nursing and Health Services Development in 2004 to be responsible for caring 
http://www.dass.stir.ac.uk/
http://www.dass.stir.ac.uk/
for people with dementia, and increased investment in research into dementia 
care, such as eight research projects in 2005 and five in 2006 (Huang, 2006).  
A dementia research and development centre with diversity and integration 
could provide more knowledge and information for stakeholders. There is no 
centre like this established in Taiwan. The Taiwanese Government may need to 
consider the investment in dementia research as well as establish a 
professional dementia research centre for offering information, education, 
training, consultancy and research for stakeholders.  
Overall, in order to improve quality of care and QOL for people with dementia, 
Scotland has developed a social care policy based on the person-centred care 
approach because this approach is focused on individual needs and based on 
joint working to integrate all care resources to provide services effectively for 
people with dementia and their carers. However, the areas still requiring further 
improvement in Taiwan include social justice and social inclusion, partnership, 
carers, community care, and research and development. 
2.8 Financial Support 
The expenditure on health care in Scotland takes up one third of the annual 
budget and the funding comes from taxation and national insurance (Crombie 
et al., 2003). The Report of the Joint Future Group (2000) suggests the Scottish 
Executive should establish a plan and financial framework for commencing to 
provide services for older people from 2001 (Scottish Executive, Joint Future 
Group, 2000). Moreover, in 2000, the report Our National Health urges the 
Scottish Government to combine resources and manage services for offering 
older people free home care up to four weeks from leaving hospital from 2002 
(Scottish Executive, 2000b). The report Fair Care for Older People (2001) 
recommends that the Government should provide personal care and nursing 
care for older people who already live in care homes (Bell et al., 2001). All 
these documents suggest that when an older person is living in a care home 
and requiring care services, there will be financial aid. The Community Care 
and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 enables the Scottish Executive to provide free 
personal care for people living at home or in care homes (Scottish Executive, 
2002). Therefore, the local authority will make a payment of 90 per week for 
personal care and 65 per week for nursing care without further assessment 
(Bell et al., 2001: 5) direct to the care provider. Since 1 July 2002, the Scottish 
Executive has offered payment (145 per week) for free personal care for 
people aged 65 and over, and a free nursing care payment (65 per week) for 
people of any age, if they need it (Scottish Executive Health Department, 2006). 
In addition, from October 2002, older people and disabled people can obtain 
free local off-peak bus travel (Scottish Executive, 2001a).  
Dementia will influence significantly personal and public finances in the future 
(Jacques et al., 2004a). Thus, in 2006, The Future of Unpaid Care in Scotland 
advises the Scottish Government should be based on the principles of greater 
recognition of and respect for unpaid carers as key partners and providers, and 
the development of a rights based policy framework to support unpaid carers 
(Scottish Executive, 2006b: 3-4) to improve carers QOL by providing cash 
payments, respite options, emotional support, information, training, advocacy, 
and guidance. Therefore, the Range and Capacity Review Group (2006) 
recommends the Scottish Executive to set up more flexibility and integration of 
planning and funding to provide free personal care services and free nursing 
care services for older people (Hunter et al., 2006).  
In Taiwan, similar financial aid was also proposed. In 1980, the Senior Citizens 
Welfare Act enabled the Taiwanese Executive to provide economic security for 
older people, including an elderly living allowance for the medium and low 
income family, elderly allowance of special care for the medium and low income 
family , and annuities insurance (Department of Social Affairs, 1980b). 
According to the Elderly Living Allowance for the Medium and Low Income 
Family, the Taiwanese Government makes a payment of 45 per month for the 
medium income older people and 90 per month for the low income older 
people (Department of Social Affairs, 1998a). The Plan of Free Health Check 
and Prevent Health Items for Older People has provided free health checks for 
older people since 1998 (Department of Social Affairs, 1998d). Furthermore, 
since 2000, medium and low Income older people can obtain free health care, 
in terms of the Free National Health Insurance for the Medium and Low Income 
Senior Citizens (Department of Social Affairs, 2000c). 
Under to the Elderly Allowance of Special Care for the Medium and Low 
Income Family, the Taiwanese Government offers payment up to 100 per 
month for the family who meet the conditions from 2002 (Department of Social 
Affairs, 2002a). The Temporary Implementation Ordinance of Social Benefit 
Living Supplement Programs for Senior Citizens permits the local Government 
to makes a payment of 60 per month for older people whose total properties 
are under 100,000 (Department of Social Affairs, 2002b). The Plan of Free 
Home Care for Disabled People offers free home care (8-32 hours per month) 
for those who meet the different conditions (Department of Social Affairs, 
2004a). 
The given system should offer different kinds of financial help for older people, 
including the retirement pension; means-tested income support with special 
premiums for the very old and disabled; housing benefit; attendance allowance, 
and, for those who provide care, the invalid care allowance (Kraan et al., 1991: 
47). In addition, the costs of dementia care are higher than other diseases 
given its progressive and incurable nature (Alzheimer Scotland, 2006). 
Therefore, Huang (2006), the director of the Bureau of Nursing and Health 
Services Development, argues that the Taiwanese Government should 
increase financial support for public hospitals to look after people with dementia.  
Compared with Scotland, the evidence seems to indicate that the funding from 
the Taiwanese Government is insufficient to support people with dementia and 
their family caregivers. For example, the GNI per capita is 18,800 in Scotland 
in 2005 which is 2.33 times that of Taiwan (8,085) (see Table 2.1). However, 
the Scottish Government provides payment (156 per week) for free personal 
care for those aged 65 and over, if they are assessed as needing it; and a free 
nursing care payment (71 per week) for those assessed as needing care. In 
Taiwan, the maximum total payment which all polices permitted is 120 per 
month and this is only for one low income older or disabled person. This 
means that the payment is 7.5 times higher in Scotland. Thus, according to 
national budgets, serious consideration is required for the Taiwanese 
Government to raise the sums currently given to support care expenses for 
those in need.  
2.9 Housing Service 
A well-designed environment could improve the QOL for people with dementia 
living in care homes (Alzheimers Australia, 2004). Theoretically, policy leads 
practice, the housing policy has great influences on the physical environment 
for people with dementia. 
In Scotland, the Modernizing Community Care (1998) considers that housing is 
the basis of social care and it also encourages local authorities to promote high 
quality rented housing to meet community care needs by integrating housing 
providers (The Scottish Office, 1998). Additionally, wandering and disturbed 
behaviour of people with dementia could be improved by adapting the 
environment to meet their unique needs (The Scottish Office, 1998). The Needs 
Assessment Report (2003) states that new build/remodelled housing which 
includes dementia friendly design features; alterations to the structure of the 
property/adaptations to assist with mobility and with cognitive impairment; the 
provision of a range of assistive technology (p. 43) will benefit people with 
dementia to gain self-esteem and appreciation, and this will assist them to be 
as independent as possible (Jackson et al., 2003). Furthermore, the report 
notes that smaller domus-like units, special care units within residential homes, 
and the Confused and Demented Elderly units were developed because they 
could deliver more flexible and effective health and social care to fit the needs 
of people with dementia and their family caregivers.  
Overcoming the Obstacles to the Improvement of Dementia Care (2004) 
suggests that attention should be paid to designing the built environment for 
people with dementia (Jacques et al., 2004a), especially lower level 
environment which could be more beneficial (Jay et al., 2005).  
The report National Framework for Service Change in the NHS in Scotland 
(2005) suggests that housing as a determinant to the health and wellbeing for 
older people (Holdsworth et al., 2005). Housing need and provision will 
increase with the aging population and Governments should improve and adapt 
housing with emerging IT and health technology to provide a warm and safe 
home for older people. In addition, the report considers that Scotlands social 
and sheltered housing stock should be age-friendly based on access, design, 
and security. That is, based on flexible services and minimum intervention, 
housing has a significant influence on the care needs of older people in care 
homes (Hunter et al., 2006).  
In Taiwan, the aim of The Design Standard for the Basic Facilities and 
Establishments of Senior Citizens Housing (2003) is to set up a quiet, safe, 
hygienic, and bright environment for older people who can live independently 
(Department of Social Affairs, 2003d). The Regulations on General 
Management of Senior Citizens Housing (2003) considers that the operation of 
older peoples housing should be through business administration to provide 
diverse and cheap services (Department of Social Affairs, 2003b). The Chapter 
16, Senior Citizens Housing Development, as provided in Design and 
Construction Part of Construction Technical Regulations (2003) asks that the 
providers of older peoples housing should offer safe and sufficient space and 
areas for older people (Department of Social Affairs, 2003a). The Project of 
Promoting Non-Governmental Participation in Senior Citizens Housing 
Development (2004) permits the Government to provide low interest loans to 
encourage the private sector to build rented houses which have standardized 
facilities and equipment with obstruction- free, convenient, and personalized 
environment for senior citizens (Department of Social Affairs, 2004b). 
A study by Cox (1998) argues that the key themes for housing and supports for 
people with dementia are: partnership; funding; ensuring a range of 
appropriate housing, care and support; providing familiar, home-like, domestic 
environments; quality and standards; empowerment and inclusion (pp. 101-
111). Subsequently, Cox (2006) observes ten care homes and points out that 
the emerging themes are: promoting the services; making the right move; 
design, space and choice; privacy and social interaction; and adapting to 
changing needs (pp. 78-84). Attention to these could offer some insights for 
institutions to face the challenges and dilemmas experienced (Cox, 2006).  
Housing for people with dementia should adapt to their needs and be 
convenient, comfortable and warm (Adams and Manthorpe, 2003). A specific 
design for impaired memory, impaired learning, impaired reasoning, impaired 
sense, and for reduced stress are also essential (The Dementia Services 
Development Centre, 2006). In addition, designing interiors for people who 
have dementia should be based on the following principles: to be able to find 
things and directions simply, to see and recognise objects and features easily, 
to meet varying ethnic and cultural requirements, and to benefit staff, carers, 
and visitors (Pollock, 2003).  
In order to enhance the QOL for people with dementia living in care homes, the 
Government should develop housing policy with detailed attention to the 
designing of the built environment for people with dementia. Scotland has 
already not only focused on the housing policy for older people but also people 
with dementia. Taiwan still has room for improvement.  
2.10 Summary 
Dementia is a specific illness which particularly affects older age groups. Since 
the evidence shows that both Taiwan and Scotland are aging societies, Taiwan 
and Scotland both face the challenges of increasing numbers of people with 
dementia. In order to decrease the burden on societies and economies, both 
countries have good intentions to satisfy the complex needs of people with 
dementia by providing and delivering high quality services for dementia care.  
Through the literature review, it can be concluded that health care, social care, 
financial security, and housing services all play significant roles in dementia 
care.  
In the University of Stirling, Scotland, the DSDC was established in 1989. It is a 
centre principally for providing information, education, training, publications, 
consultancy, and research for all stakeholders. In 1997, needs assessment for 
people with dementia was commenced in the document Framework for Mental 
Health Services in Scotland. From then on, the Scottish Executive has 
published further Acts and reports focused on how to offer the high quality 
services in dementia care. Hunter et al. (2006) commented that the specific 
needs of dementia care could be met in Scotland. Furthermore, the authors 
report that high QOL for people with dementia could be created in Scotland by 
providing more flexible services, step up and step down, better use of 
equipment and adaptations, technology and telecare, mainstreaming of joint 
future, and increasing emphasis on promoting active aging and on prevention 
(Hunter et al., 2006: 31) based on the principle of minimum intervention.  
On the other hand, the Taiwanese Government has begun to take dementia 
care more seriously from 2004 onwards. Therefore, a sector within the Bureau 
of Nursing and Health Services Development has been established to be 
responsible for dementia care, dementia research, and promotion of the 
importance of dementia care.  
As has been stated before, both Scottish and Taiwanese Government have 
constructed related policies for people with dementia in relation to health care, 
rights protection and institutional care. Nevertheless, it is less comprehensive in 
Taiwan. For example, issues related to social justice and social inclusion, 
partnership, carers, community care, research and development, financial 
support, and housing are not fully covered in dementia care policy in Taiwan.  
As discussed above, well-designed care homes could offer better 24-hour 
individual care and activities by qualified nurses and trained staff for people with 
dementia. Institutional care could also provide the one-stop service to meet all 
needs of people with dementia. It can provide everything which community care 
could supply but with a wider range and higher quality of services. Institutional 
care could be the best option for meeting the requirements of people with 
dementia and their families in the modern society. However, people with 
dementia and their families do not generally want to enter long-term care due to 
low quality of most Taiwanese care homes. Thus, if care homes are good then 
there might be less reluctance to go into one. However, Scotland is more 
experienced than Taiwan in most care policies for people with dementia and 
their families, but there is no quality indicator for institutional dementia care 
developed in either Scotland or Taiwan to assess the quality of institutional 
dementia care. Therefore, in this thesis I propose that the development of a 
series of quality indicators to evaluate quality of care and to improve QOL for 
people with dementia living in care homes is an important task.  
Chapter 3- Construction of dementia care- The 
philosophical approach of dementia care 
3.1 Introduction 
There are many philosophical approaches exploring dementia and dementia 
care, and different viewpoints about how to treat dementia and how to care for 
people with dementia have been suggested. Adams and Manthorpe (2003) 
divide various discourses about people with dementia into four approaches. 
These are dementia as a bio-medical construction, dementia as a behavioural 
problem, dementia as a subjective experience, and dementia as a disability 
(Adams and Manthorpe, 2003). Harding and Palfrey (1997) note that the key 
models for analysing dementia include: the classical model, the medical model, 
the social constructionist model, and the psychological and linguistic models. 
Goldsmith (1996) states that biomedical, personhood, and the experience of 
dementia care the core approaches for dementia care. Marshall (2005) 
considers that the medical approach, the social or disability approach, and the 
citizenship approach are the core approaches. All these approaches can be 
classified into five main categories: the bio-medical approach, the psychosocial 
approach, the social approach, the citizenship approach, and the person-
centred care approach. 
Even though these approaches have different emphases, all of them contribute 
to our knowledge of the multidimensional aspects of dementia care and how 
they integrate with each other (Marshall, 2005). For instance, Woods (1995) 
indicates that the psychosocial approach could complement the medical and 
neurological models. Therefore, Marshall (2005) argues that all approaches 
should be considered when considering care for people with dementia and the 
needs of their families.  
Dementia is a chronic and progressive condition and it affects not only the 
person with dementia and their carers but also the wider society in general. 
Therefore, extensive interventions are required such as medical treatment, 
psychological and social interventions, long-term support, and others. Although 
these interventions differ in philosophy, emphasis, and methods, all of them 
attempt to improve cognition, behaviour, and QOL for people with dementia. 
Combining the existing approaches from literature and the available 
interventions for dementia care, this chapter is to focus on the following five 
major approaches (bio-medical, psychosocial, social, citizenship, and the 
person-centred care) and further explore how they lead to various perceptions 
over dementia care. 
3.2 What is dementia care? The bio-medical approach 
The bio-medical theories argue that the causes of dementia can be attributed to 
factors such as genetic susceptibility, trauma, infection, depression, malnutrition, 
and drug-induced changes in cerebral function (Payne and Hahn, 1992). There 
are three principal systems for diagnosing and classifying dementia in medical 
diagnosis: the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) by 
the American Psychiatric Association, the International Classification of 
Diseases (ICD) by the World Health Organization (WHO), and the Clinical 
Dementia Rating (CDR) Scale by the Washington University.  
The DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1995) describes dementia as 
follows:  
Dementia is characterized by the development of multiple cognitive 
deficits(including memory impairment ) that are due to the direct 
psychological effects of a general medical condition, to the persisting effects 
of a substance, or to multiple a etiologies (e.g. the combined effects of 
cerebrovascular disease and Alzheimers disease) (p. 137).  
The term dementia is defined in ICD (The World Health Organization, 1994) 
A syndrome due to disease of the brain, usually of a chronic or 
progressive nature, in which there is disturbance of multiple higher cortical 
functions, including memory, thinking, orientation, comprehension, 
calculation, learning capacity, language, and judgment. Consciousness is 
not clouded. The impairments of cognitive function are commonly 
accompanied, and occasionally preceded, by deterioration in emotional 
control, social behaviour, or motivation. This syndrome occurs in 
Alzheimer's disease, in cerebrovascular disease, and in other conditions 
primarily or secondarily affecting the brain (p. 28).  
Hughes et al. developed the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) for the staging of 
dementia in 1982, which classifies people with dementia in terms of memory, 
orientation, judgment and problem solving, community affairs, home and 
hobbies, and personal care. The CDR scale identifies five stages of dementia: 
healthy, questionable dementia, mild dementia, moderate dementia, and severe 
dementia (Hughes et al., 1982). 
DSM, ICD, and the CDR scale are commonly applied in Taiwan. Taiwanese 
physicians adopt DSM and ICD as the dementia diagnostic and treatment 
criteria, and use the CDR scale to identify the stage of dementia. 
The medical model emphasises that most behaviour patterns of people with 
dementia are caused by neuropathological changes (Woods, 1995). According 
to Cheston and Bender (1999), the organic model focuses on neurological 
damage, cognitive change, and symptomatic behaviour. This model considers 
that emotions and emotional states are symptoms, which derive from 
neurological damage (Cheston and Bender, 1999). Therefore, Cheston and 
Bender argue that people with dementia cannot make independent judgments 
because of cognitive impairment. 
The American Psychiatric Association (2000) argues that dementia involves 
cognitive deficits, which comprise memory impairment and cognitive 
disturbances. In addition, the cognitive deficits lead to significant impairment in 
social or occupational functioning (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). 
The bio-medical approach states that when the disease attacks the mind, the 
self of people with dementia will begin to regress until they become completely 
unaware of their surroundings (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). 
Physical progression also occurs when the body suffers complete loss of 
mental function, and ultimately death. In addition, there is currently no known 
cure for dementia (Fearnley, 2006).  
Dewing (2002) indicates that the bio-medical approach emphasizes exclusion 
and cognitive incompetence in dementia. That is to say, people with dementia 
are perceived as not able to participate in social activities, due to losing their 
abilities in communication, memory, language, and perception (Dewing, 2002). 
In other words, the bio-medical approach identifies people with dementia as 
patients with neurological or mental illness. The approach also claims that 
people with dementia have no sense of self, they cannot make decisions, and 
they probably infringe upon other people. Thus, people with dementia only have 
limited human value. This argument might lead people with dementia to be 
objectified, and experience subsequent oppression and discrimination (Adams 
and Manthorpe, 2003). 
The medical model emphasises that the decline of physical and mental function 
is inevitable. The professional view is very prominent in dementia care (Clarke, 
1999). Although pathophysiology and professional medical viewpoints are 
dominant in dementia care, this approach has some benefits for people with 
dementia in health care. Hatzidimitriadou and Milne (2005) indicate that early 
assessment and appropriate intervention play significant roles in developing 
effective support for people with dementia. Woods (1995) also notes that early 
intervention for dementia care could be helpful in establishing a standard care 
pattern which could be maintained and developed over time. Accordingly, Iliffe 
et al. (2003) conclude that early diagnosis of dementia benefits patients, 
families, and local services. To the patients, the advantages include reducing 
uncertainty, encouraging acceptance with the problem, excluding remediable 
causes, planning appropriate support, and avoiding future crises; families would 
benefit from the awareness of prognosis and the disease course, the time to 
consider counselling, to organize support, to make appropriate legal 
arrangements, and to plan for the future. Therefore, a better QOL through 
education and anticipation of problems can be expected. Benefits of early 
diagnosis to local services include allowing time to integrate and distribute 
resources, to decrease the services gaps, and thus increase the likelihood of 
meeting the needs of people with dementia and their carers (Iliffe et al., 2003).  
Furthermore, biomedical approaches have made contributions in developing 
medication which is another important breakthrough in dementia care. Rabins 
et al. (1997) find that there are many psychoactive medications for people with 
dementia, which in some cases could restore cognitive abilities, prevent further 
decline, and increase functional status, such as cholinesterase inhibitors, 
vitamin E, selegiline, ergoloid mesylates, NSAIDs, estrogen supplementation, 
melatonin, botanical agents, and chelating agents. When used appropriately 
antipsychotic drugs can relieve symptoms and decrease distress for people 
with dementia; and can promote safety for themselves, co-residents, and the 
staff members (Rabins et al., 1997). However, the use of medications should be 
judicious with considerable care since side effects could be equally harmful 
(Rabins et al., 1997). 
Coverdale et al. (2006) use the concept of geriatric assent to develop ethically 
justified clinical strategies for dementia care. There are four steps to promote 
geriatric assent, and to support beneficence and respect for autonomy:  
Identifying the patients long-standing values and preferences; assessing 
plans of care in terms of bio-psychosocial safety and independence along 
with the patients values and preferences; protecting remaining autonomy; 
and cultivating the professional virtues of steadiness, self-effacement, and 
self-sacrifice when making decisions that risk the patients future health 
and safety (Coverdale et al., 2006:151). 
The physicians fit the roles in surrogate decision-making for people with 
dementia because they are able to communicate with people with dementia, 
listen to their voice, and understand their wishes more than family carers can 
do; and the families generally believe the physicians decisions are more 
beneficial to people with dementia (Silberfeld et al., 1996). 
The bio-medical model plays an important role in the construction of dementia 
care. Although a professional bio-medical culture does not consider the non-
medical needs of people with dementia (Kmpers et al, 2005), people rely on 
the medical approach  to keep physical distress at bay (Goldsmith, 1996), and 
in the events of acute health care and progressive symptoms, bio-medical care 
is generally the necessary priority. Particularly, in mild dementia, early 
diagnosis, early assessment, and appropriate intervention could modify 
symptoms and behaviours, and establish routine care patterns for people with 
dementia. Thus, bio-medical factors associated with health care were adopted 
in the development of quality indicators for institutional dementia care in this 
study. As with all the indicators, these were critically reviewed during the course 
of the research. 
3.3 Understanding dementia care: The psychosocial approach 
Psychology helps to construct people with dementia in relation to their 
behavioural problems. By listening to the voice of their inner interpretation and 
through the techniques of psychosocial interventions, it enables patients to 
relearn and to make personal choices. Therefore, people with dementia can be 
enabled to contribute to their own development (Adams and Manthorpe, 2003).  
The psychosocial approach emphasises that caring for people with dementia is 
a family burden; and professional and family views are dominant in dementia 
care (Clarke, 1999). Iliffe et al. (2006) also consider that psychosocial 
interventions are effective therapies for dementia care and they could fill a 
therapy vacuum. The psychosocial interventions may involve a behaviour-
oriented approach, emotion-oriented approach, cognition-oriented approach, 
and stimulation-oriented approach for dementia care (Rabins et al., 1997). Key 
skills of psychosocial interventions required in dementia care are pattern 
recognition; deductive synthesis to reduce uncertainty; dialogue and disclosure; 
disability perspectives; and case management with shared care (Iliffe et al., 
2006:327). In addition, empathy, complete understanding, respect, and reliance, 
good interpersonal relationships are also important for a successful therapeutic 
relationship (Rogers, 1951).  
The experience of people with dementia can be illustrated by the psychosocial 
model (see Figure 3.1) developed by Pratt and Wilkinson (2003). The model 
combines the patients desire and ability to know the diagnosis with social 
context. The model allocates different responses (detachment, distress, 
maximizing coping strategies, and decline and denial) into four quadrants.  
  Ability and desire to 
know diagnosis (high) 
Quadrant 2: 
Distress 
 Quadrant 3: 
Maximizing 
coping 
strategies 
Social 
context  
(negative) 
   Social 
context 
(positive) 
 Quadrant 1: 
Detachment 
Ability and desire to 
know diagnosis (low) 
Quadrant 4: 
Decline and 
denial 
Figure 3.1 A psychosocial model of the experience of people with dementia 
Source: Pratt and Wilkinson (2003:189) 
According to Pratt and Wilkinson (2003),  
Individual experience can be located in any of these quadrants as a 
function of the combined effect of social context, alongside individual 
response. The model proposes that social context can contribute to the 
experience of distress or the ability of individuals to access maximizing 
coping strategies (p. 181). 
Moreover, the diagnosis could contribute to the feelings of distress when people 
with dementia demonstrate the ability and desire to know their diagnosis (Pratt 
and Wilkinson, 2003). Therefore, social context should be included in the 
individual assessment to decrease distress and increase positive coping (Pratt 
and Wilkinson, 2003). Psychosocial interventions in care homes should be 
encouraged and supported because they are built upon sensitive interpretations 
of people with dementia, and their complex needs could be met (Bruce et al., 
2002).  
According to the psychosocial approach, people with dementia living in care 
homes may participate in psychosocial activities which have been suggested by 
Rabins et al. (1997) including behavior treatment, reminiscence therapy, 
cognitive retraining, reality orientation, skills training, recreational therapy, and 
art therapy; and these could be beneficial for modifying their behaviour and 
maintaining their cognitive competence. Thus, based on the psychosocial 
approach, these psychological activities were employed in the development of 
quality indicators for institutional dementia care. 
3.4 Interpreting dementia care: The social approach 
Dementia occurs within a societal context, and is affected by factors such as 
age, gender, occupation, education, and social class. Social roles may 
influence the dementia journey, because social roles run through each of these 
factors above. For example, owing to low self-esteem, limited social networks 
or social support, and social identity, people with dementia may experience 
disorientation resulting from their withdrawal from society and their limited 
social engagement (Cheston and Bender, 1999). In particular, when dementia 
is regarded as a mental illness, social stigma and shame are attached (Downs, 
2000). The socio-cultural circumstances of the illness may interfere with the 
family's willingness and ability to offer the necessary support for people with 
dementia (Downs, 2000).  
Important theories of aging include disengagement theory, activity theory, and 
continuity theory (Payne and Hahn, 1992). According to disengagement theory, 
older people withdraw from society because the society disengages them; 
conversely, activity theory sees older people as being active and contributing; 
and continuity theory argues that older people will maintain a familiar level of 
activity and strength in their later life (Payne and Hahn, 1992). Thus, according 
to these three theories of aging and based on the different philosophies, care 
homes may offer different service models for people with dementia. For 
example, television viewing is a common example in the activity for residents if 
a care home applies the disengagement theory into practice (Andersson and 
Gottfries, 1991). On the other hand, physical and social activities are practices 
which may reflect activity theory (Lin and Liu, 2006a). 
The social approach emphasizes the factors influencing the experience of 
people with dementia, such as their background, health, and environment. This 
approach considers that every one of us could do things for people with 
dementia (Marshall, 2005). The social model could improve function and QOL 
for people with dementia since brain-environment interactions are involved 
(Woods, 1995). In the social environment, there are five main needs for people 
with dementia who live in care homes: flexibility; human contact; safety and 
supervision; stimulation and meaningful activity; and individualized care 
(Morgan and Stewart, 1997). In order to reduce social restrictions and barriers, 
empowerment and independence play important parts in dementia care 
(Bartlett, 2000). Moreover, people with dementia need to be treated with 
respect and warmth (Kmpers et al., 2005).Thus, it is necessary to empower 
them to be constructive for themselves, in order to retain personal identity and a 
sense of belonging, and to resist oppression and discrimination (Adams and 
Manthorpe, 2003). 
All long-term care populations with disabilities may care for themselves but they 
may not have the capacity to make purchasing decisions about the required 
services and supports (Stone, 2001). However, initial disability rights activists 
did not include people with dementia within the social model, but now they have 
involved dementia care issues, because the social model focuses on the 
remaining abilities of people with dementia rather than their impairments 
(Gilliard et al., 2005). The cognitive decline of people with dementia could be 
compensated for adaptation of the social environment, including de-stigmatizing, 
recognising, integrating social and individual needs, researching means of 
compensation, adjusting adequate modes, and supporting and maximizing their 
well-being and capacities (Dorenlot, 2005). Thus, a social model for dementia 
care should focus on abilities; and be flexible, adaptable; and modifiable to 
facilitate constant adjustments required by people with dementia to maintain 
their social rights.  
To be a person is to live in a world where meanings are shared (Kitwood, 
1997b: 87). Therefore, social intervention for people with dementia is a 
necessity. Through improving the social environment to support their social 
roles, social networks, and social support, independence and self-esteem could 
be promoted. In addition, interpersonal interaction and community interaction 
can play important roles in enhancing the QOL for people with dementia living 
in care homes since they facilitate the construction of social function for people 
with dementia. Thus, appropriate quality indicators in social care should be set 
up in the development of quality indicators for institutional dementia care 
according to the social approach. These included community interaction and 
the other interpersonal interaction activities. 
3.5 Citizenship and the construction of dementia care: The 
citizenship approach 
When the staff and institutions apply the concepts of citizenship, social justice, 
and social inclusion into their main concern, people with dementia are more 
likely to obtain higher quality of institutional care. Thus, citizenship, social 
justice, and social inclusion are crucial in dementia care in modern society.  
Citizenship is A status bestowed on those who are full members of a 
community. All who possess the status are equal with respect to the rights and 
duties with which the status is endowed (Marshall, 1950: 28-29). Hussain and 
Bagguley (2003) observe that political and social theories emphasise that 
citizenship is integration, uniformity and commonality. However, they find that 
citizenship is a universal right and duty. Therefore, their emphasis on the 
political identity of citizenship is belonging and rights, which mean people have 
to think about who they are and what rights they have (p. 15).  
Marshall (1950) divides citizenship into three elements, civil, political, and social. 
He notes that the civil element is composed of the rights necessary for 
individual freedom  liberty of the person, freedom of speech, thought and faith, 
the right to own property and to conclude valid contracts, and the right to 
justice (p. 10). Then he defines the political element as the right to participate 
in the exercise of political power, as a member of a political authority or an 
elector of the members of such a body (p. 11). Finally, he points out that the 
social element is the whole range from the right to a modicum of economic 
welfare and security to the right to share to the full in the social heritage and to 
live the life of a civilised being according to the standards prevailing in the 
society (p. 11).  
Morris (2005) identifies three concepts in medical and social care which could 
meet Marshalls three elements of citizenship, namely self-determination, 
participation, and contribution. However, social attitudes and economic and 
environmental barriers prevent disabled people from being full and equal 
citizens (Morris, 2005). Therefore, encouraging disabled people towards self-
determination, to participate in society, and to make a contribution could 
remove socially constructed barriers and lead towards social justice and full 
citizenship (Morris, 2005). 
The key concepts of citizenship in dementia care are empowerment, 
involvement, and participation (Brannelly, 2006a). Good ethics in dementia care 
requires attentiveness, responsibility, competence, and responsiveness 
(Brannelly, 2006a). It can be concluded that citizenship-based care for people 
with dementia is possible by using legislation to connect current policy with the 
experience of people with dementia and their carers (Brannelly, 2006a). 
As to social justice, Rawls (1972) suggests the concept of justice as fairness 
and ethics are the right and the good but the right is prior to the good. Rawls 
considers that each person possesses an inviolability founded on justice that 
even the welfare of society as a whole cannot override (p. 3). He states the two 
principles of justice are:  
First: each person is to have an equal right to the most extensive basic 
liberty compatible with a similar liberty for others. Second: social and 
economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both (a) 
reasonably expected to be to everyones advantage, and (b) attached to 
positions and offices open to all (Rawls, 1972:60).  
Therefore, Rawls regards social justice as requiring major social institutions to 
distribute basic rights and duties and to determine the distributive shares from 
social cooperation.  
Justiciable problems in modern society can be categorised into four key issues: 
family, homelessness, health and welfare, and economic clusters (Pleasence et 
al., 2004). Social justice plays an important role in encouraging people to act to 
resolve justiciable problems, and to deal with social exclusion. Feminism 
emphasizes social justice is true equality, equal rights, and equal distribution 
(Sevenhuijsen, 1998). Social justice perspectives on dementia are needed to 
educate and make aware that early diagnosis is important, to condense the 
disability eligibility period, to provide individual services based on integrity and 
dignity (Gero-Ed Center, 2006). Accordingly, people with dementia need to be 
able to obtain great protection, and policy needs to support and guide 
practitioners to achieve this goal (Brannelly, 2006a). In addition, the Scottish 
Executive (2000c) reports that in order to fulfil social justice, the Government 
have maximised health and social care provisions for older people who are frail, 
vulnerable, sick, or poor, in order to meet their spirit, social and cultural needs. 
With regard to social inclusion, Bartlett (2000) indicates that it is difficult to 
achieve the goal of social inclusion for people with dementia, due to cognitive 
impairment as well as discriminatory factors, such as ageism and social stigma. 
People with dementia have to face the negative stereotypes and social stigma 
of mental illness (Bartlett, 2000). The disease and peoples attitudes 
disempower people with dementia (Bartlett, 2000). In addition, the Scottish 
Office (1999) finds that poor health is one of the five specific barriers to social 
inclusion (5.22). The Government can help by putting social inclusion policy into 
practice based on integration, prevention, understanding, inclusiveness, and 
empowerment (The Scottish Office, 1999: 3.5). The action plan is co-ordinated 
and integrated effectively and it must also be monitored and evaluated regularly. 
It means that staff who work in care homes should practice good observational 
skills and take time to listen to the residents, to interpret and assess their 
wishes and to offer and respect their choices (Goldsmith, 1996).  
Repper and Perkins (2003) think that if promoting social inclusion is to be 
valued, then the staff must be clear about why they are working, how they are 
working, and the values which will empower their work. Therefore, the 
philosophy of care in social inclusion needs to be inclusive in many ways:  
Inclusive of a social perspective- the persons roles and relationships as 
well as their symptoms; inclusive of a persons strengths and abilities, and 
identifying, maintaining and promoting these; inclusive of those people 
who are important in the persons life (e.g. family, friends, employers, 
teachers) and supporting these relationships; inclusive of the way in which 
a person copes with the experience of his/her mental health problems and 
enabling him/her to take control of these difficulties; inclusive of the 
persons own aspirations and goals, and helping him/her to pursue them 
(Repper and Perkins, 2003:137) 
Marshall (2005) indicates that all the people with dementia are experts in 
dementia care, and they have the same rights and responsibilities as other 
citizens. The citizenship approach considers that people with dementia could 
contribute to society through creativity, emotional veracity, and humour 
(Marshall, 2005).  
In conclusion, researchers adopting this perspective have argued citizenship, 
social justice, and social inclusion all play crucial roles in dementia care. While 
promoting these concepts is to be valued in institutional care, people with 
dementia living in care homes should retain autonomy, fair treatment, and equal 
rights with supporting self-determination and interpersonal interaction. Since 
people with dementia are more likely to contribute their abilities to society in this 
model, the citizenship approach was considered in building up related quality 
indicators concerning the rights of people with dementia in this research. 
3.6 Good quality dementia care: The person-centred care 
approach 
Kitwood (1997b) says the characteristics of people with dementia are that whilst:  
Memory may have faded, but something of the past is known; identity 
remains intact, because others hold it in place; thoughts may have 
disappeared, but there are still interpersonal processes; feelings are 
expressed and meet a validating response (p. 69). 
A person with dementia is regarded as an individual with the same rights to 
equal and fair treatment as everyone else. Therefore, the prime task of 
dementia care is to maintain personhood in the face of failing mental powers 
(Kitwood, 1997b: 84).  
Rogers is the pioneer in client-centred therapy. He published Client-Centred 
Therapy: Its Current Practice, Implications, and Theory in 1951. He emphasises 
that the counsellor himself plays the significant role in client-centred counselling. 
In particular, the attitude and orientation of the therapist could influence therapy 
deeply (Rogers, 1951). Thus, if the client-centred therapy is applied to dementia 
care, the client would be a co-worker and the focus is on the client, and his 
voice should be listened to with respect, empathy, total understanding, 
acceptance, and reliance.  
Kitwood is the first person who offers the theoretical basis of person-centred 
care for dementia care (Brannelly 2006b). Kitwood (1997a) stresses in Living 
Well into Old Age (1986) the importance of ethical issues for people with 
dementia. He finds that the document above considers that people with 
dementia are individuals; they have the same human value, the same varied 
human needs, and the same rights as every citizen.  
Dementia is caused by many different factors. Kitwood (1993) draws up these 
factors into the equation: Dementia=NI+H+B+P+SP; NI=Neurological 
impairment; H=Heath and physical fitness; B=Biography-life history; 
P=Personality; SP= Social psychology (p. 15). He argues that in dementia care,     
Personhood is reflexive, social and developmental; it reveals interpersonal 
differences; and it is compatible with neuroscientific knowledge; it should 
be directly relevant to the predicament of people who have dementia, it 
should be capable of shedding light on the meaning of good care (Kitwood, 
1997a: 17-18).  
Brooker and Surr (2005) combine the complex ideas of Kitwood and develop 
these into a further equation: PCC (person-centred care) =V+I+P+S; V=Values 
people with dementia; I =Treats people as Individuals; P=Perspective of people 
with dementia; S=Supportive Social psychology (p. 13). 
Other views of person-centred care or personhood include that it is the 
principles of equality, social justice, and an ethic of caring (Dewing, 2002:168) 
and the concepts of legal and civil rights, independence, choice, and inclusion 
(Department of Health, 2001c). Innes et al. (2006) report that person-centred 
care is based on the philosophy of team work which focuses on the users to 
promote independence and autonomy, and to offer reliable and flexible services.  
Person-centeredness is combining the patients value history, the nurses value 
history, the knowledge and experience, and the context of the care environment 
to set up a good nurse-patient relationship (McCormack, 2003a). Moreover, 
person-centeredness can be operated based on the concepts of autonomy, 
respect, and self-determination as authentic consciousness, through five 
imperfect duties: informed flexibility, mutuality, transparency, negotiation, and 
sympathetic presence (McCormack, 2003a).  
However, person-centered care models may fail for two reasons. One is 
resource constraints such as limited budgets, bureaucratization of management 
processes, and lack of legal requirement of individualized service plans; the 
other reason is implementation gaps such as insufficient understanding of 
person-centered care, lack of resources to prevent implementation failure, and 
limitation of individual plans (Mansell and Brown, 2004). Similar viewpoints are 
expressed by Innes et al. (2006). These authors claim that the barriers to the 
delivery of person-centred care are bureaucratic structures, tighter budgets, 
restrictive commissioning of services, and Service-led, which limit frontline 
workers in exercising the person-centred care to the fullest capacity and 
providing quality care to the service users. It is particularly difficult to change 
the culture of care from an organisation/profession-centred to a patient-centred 
one (Jarvie et al., 2001). 
Nevertheless, person-centred care has sharply shifted some staffs beliefs and 
institutional culture (Tondora et al., 2006). Staff can be more adaptable in 
respecting individuals preferences, existing service capacities, interpersonal 
relationship, connections, and available resources (Tondora et al., 2006). 
Moreover, the person-centred care plan is based on a strengths-based 
assessment to value community inclusion as a desired outcome, to evaluate 
outcomes and processes, and to encourage people with dementia to take risks 
of dignity and rights (Tondora et al., 2006). In the report Creating a Patient-
led NHS (2001), the patient-led approach is considered to use new ideas and 
skills to understand patients and their needs, and encourage them to choose 
according to their preferences (Department of Health, 2001a). The National 
Service Framework for Older People (Department of Health, 2001c) notes that 
person-centred care can help to ensure that older people are treated as 
individuals and they receive appropriate and timely packages of care which 
meet their needs as individuals, regardless of health and social services 
boundaries (p. 23). Dowling et al. (2006) indicate that if the foundations of 
institutional care are built on the main beliefs of independence, choice, inclusion, 
equality, and empowerment; providing sufficient resources and appropriate 
funding; and offering training, empowering, and sufficient time for staff, then 
person-centred care could work in the care home. Overall, person-centredness 
does matter (McCormack, 2003b) and high-quality dementia care means 
person-centred care (Alzheimers Australia, 2003).  
People with dementia do not decline in their depth of feeling; therefore, they 
maintain the ability to identify the quality of person-centred care (Brooker and 
Surr, 2005). The concept of personhood consists of ethical and social-
psychological issues in dementia care (Brannelly, 2006b). Ethical issues focus 
on what we ought to do and social-psychological issues emphasize how to do it 
(Brannelly, 2006b). Thus, in order to achieve the aim of personhood, it is 
important to understand the emotion, feeling, relational capability, and moral 
solidarity of people with dementia (Brannelly, 2006b). Kitwood (1997b) also 
argues that the core psychological need for people with dementia is love and 
the components of love are comfort, identity, attachment, occupation, and 
inclusion. Thus, when those needs are met, personhood could be maintained. 
In addition, Dewing (2002) suggests that using the concept of personhood in 
dementia care should emphasize the person being with another; his past, here-
and-now, and future self and feeling.  
It has been argued that achieving true patient-centred dementia care requires a 
social model for learning and problem-solving approaches (Iliffe et al., 2006). 
Care homes for people with dementia could put person-centred care into 
practice, if the managers could consider they are a person with unique 
personhood, respect their rights, listen to their voice, empower their strengths 
and abilities, and treat them patiently (Sawdon, 2006). Moreover, the person-
centred care approach requires dynamic, supportive leadership integral to the 
organisational structure and applied to all day- to- day practices. It determined 
the requirement for staff to feel valued and be given freedom to use initiative 
within their role (Cecchin and Jarrad, 2002:5). In order to achieve the goal of 
person-centred care, care homes should change in power relations, funding 
arrangement, and training and supervision of staffs (Mansell and Brown, 2004).   
In conclusion, in order to translate the rhetoric of person-centred care into 
practice, the institution should make person-centred care a fundamental 
concern. Staff should base care on the beliefs of inclusion, respect, dignity, 
independence, choice, equality, and empowerment for people with dementia. In 
particular, the institution should provide sufficient resources and time for staff to 
practice person-centred care. Finally, institutions and staff should focus on the 
person not the disease itself or their services needs. Thus, the person-centred 
care approach concerns the aspects of management and administration, and 
human resource management, and good environment in the care home. These 
were included in the development of quality indicators for people with dementia 
living in care homes. 
3.7 Summary 
In dementia care, a treatment plan should combine medical, physical or 
pharmacological treatments; psychological therapies; and social support and 
assistance, environmental intervention (Brown and Hillam, 2004:79). Due to 
the complex needs of people with dementia in institutional care, these different 
approaches are required to fit individual differences, specific needs and care 
ethics of people with dementia. Those five approaches (bio-medical, 
psychosocial, social, citizenship, and the person-centred care) differ in 
philosophy, emphasis, and method, but they could provide different benefits in 
dementia care. Thus, this research drew on them all in the first instance to 
identify potentially relevant quality indicators for institutional dementia care 
suggested by the five approaches. 
For instance, the bio-medical approach mentions the concepts of early 
diagnosis, early assessment, and appropriate intervention to decrease 
dementia-related symptoms and behaviours. The psychosocial approach 
develops a set of psychological activities to modify cognition and behaviours of 
people with dementia. The social approach promotes social interaction to 
maintain the social functioning of people with dementia. The citizenship 
approach encourages staff and institutions to respect all who have dementia. 
The person-centred care approach considers that a person with dementia is 
regarded as an individual to be the basic core value in dementia care.  
However, people with dementia living in care homes require total care and it is 
necessary to incorporate the five approaches to the development of quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care. The TQM model is the best option for 
a total care approach at the same time because it integrates those five 
approaches to reach the ultimate goal of improvement in quality of care and 
QOL for people with dementia living in care homes. As Gaucher and Coffey 
(1993) suggest, the theory of TQM in health care is to meet and exceed 
customer requirements; to decrease the cost of poor quality; to adopt a 
customer-focused, continuous-improvement philosophy; and to empower 
employees for creating a partnership to achieve organizational goals. Thus, in 
the following chapter, I will demonstrate the core concepts of the TQM 
approach and describe how it provides the backbone to this research in the 
development of quality indicators for institutional dementia care. 
Chapter 4- Improvement of quality of care and quality 
of life for people with dementia living in care 
homes 
4.1 Introduction  
In the ideal circumstances, care homes should offer good quality of care and 
QOL for people with dementia because as Kane et al. (2003) state, care homes 
should preserve and promote QOL for residents to reach the highest quality of 
care and the best mental and physical health outcomes. However, in reality, 
high quality of care and QOL is not maintained in some care homes due to 
numerous factors, such as finance, organizational culture, staffing problems, 
and the general environment.  
The mixed needs of people with dementia ranged from assistance only with 
activities of daily living to total care, comprising physical, psychological, social, 
and spiritual needs. According to Allen et al. (1992), effort needs to be made to 
improve the physical environment, to increase qualified and trained staff, to 
develop inspection systems, to enhance care standards, to ensure resident 
security, to provide more activities and choice, to encourage resident 
participation in care home tasks, and to have community interaction in the care 
home. Fortunately, the total quality management (TQM) approach fits this aim 
and it could help this research to develop guidelines and to provide benchmarks 
for care homes in the improvement of quality of care and QOL for people with 
dementia. 
In this chapter, firstly I will present the core concepts, the TQM approach, which 
this research uses, and explain how the approach could assist care homes to 
improve quality of care and QOL for people with dementia. I will also review 
theoretical, conceptual, and methodological approaches utilized in research 
about quality of care and QOL for people with dementia living in institutions. 
Subsequently, I will look at the components of quality of care and QOL for 
people with dementia living in care homes. Finally, I will identify the 
requirements of people with dementia living in care homes.  
4.2 The total quality management approach 
The implementation of TQM is positive for the improvement of quality of care 
and QOL for people with dementia living in care homes because TQM is 
designed as a comprehensive approach to improving competitiveness, 
effectiveness and flexibility through planning, organizing and understanding 
each activity, and involving each individual at each level (Oakland, 2000: 32). 
The following sections will explore the development, definition, and key 
concepts of the TQM approach; and describe how the approach contributes to 
quality of care and QOL for people with dementia living in care homes.  
The TQM model at the macro perspective is the most efficient and effective 
strategy for institutions to improve quality of care and QOL for people with 
dementia living in care homes because the TQM approach could improve the 
quality of any product or service and it has been used widely in all types of 
organization around the world. The TQM model focuses on the customer with 
continuous-improvement, analytical knowledge and skills, interpersonal skills, 
and a structure and organization, within an internal and external culture and 
environment which is affected by leadership (Gaucher and Coffey, 1993). 
Moreover, the new management philosophy above has been widely applied to 
the health care industry (Gaucher and Coffey, 1993). 
Historically, TQM developed from inspection, quality control, and quality 
assurance (Kanji and Asheer, 1993). In 1950, Dr. Deming was the first person 
to use original concepts and techniques of TQM in the training of Japanese 
industrial experts. From then on, many more Japanese manufacturers started 
applying the principles and techniques and worldwide distribution followed after 
the success of Japanese examples. As TQM gained popularity, many practices 
and research evidence showed that TQM could be applied in any organizational 
system, including health care (Deming, 1986). By 1980 TQM was applied 
throughout Japan in numerous and various organizations (Kanji and Asher, 
1993). Subsequently, the organizations in the USA and European countries 
followed (Kanji and Asher, 1993). The concept of TQM influenced public 
services in the UK during the 1980s (Dickinson, 1997).  
Nowadays, TQM is practiced widely all over the world (Oakland, 2000). To 
reinforce the concept of TQM, many quality awards have been created to 
encourage organizational self assessment for quality improvement. In particular, 
The Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award has set up the health care criteria 
for performance excellence for health care.  
As defined by The Deming Prize Committee (2006), TQM is a set of systematic 
activities carried out by the entire organization to effectively and efficiently 
achieve company objectives so as to provide products and services with a level 
of quality that satisfies customers, at the appropriate time and price (p. 2). It 
can be usefully thought of as about continuous performance improvement, 
including individuals, groups, and organizations (Kanji and Asher, 1993: 2). 
Deming is the pioneer in TQM. Deming (1986) indicates 14 points of 
managerial philosophy for organizations to improve quality, including  
1. Create constancy of purpose for improvement of product and service; 
2. Adopt the new philosophy; 
3. Cease dependence on mass inspection; 
4. End the practice of awarding business on the basis of price tag alone; 
5. Improve constantly and forever the system of production and service; 
6. Institute training; 
7. Adopt and institute leadership; 
8. Drive out fear; 
9. Break down barriers between staff areas; 
10. Eliminate slogans, exhortations, and targets for the work force; 
11. Eliminate numerical quotas for the work force; eliminate numerical 
goals for people in management; 
12. Remove barriers to pride of workmanship; 
13. Encourage education and self-improvement for everyone; 
14. Take action to accomplish the transformation (pp. 24-90). 
Deming argues that the 14 points can be applied to nursing homes with little 
modification and potentially similar output and cost can be achieved (Deming, 
1986). For example, Dr. Batalden and Dr. Vorlicky have modified Demings 14 
points specifically for medical service (Deming, 1986). Likewise, Koch (1991) 
argues that the benefits of TQM in health care are improved service image, 
improved throughput of patients, cost reductions, reduced errors and 
inefficiency, increased consistency of excellence and good practice, improved 
management, and satisfied patients. Therefore, in order to increase clients 
satisfaction and to sustain organizations competitiveness, care homes need to 
implement the TQM for improving quality of care and QOL for residents. 
In terms of the TQM approach, three key models have been widely applied to 
health care: the structure, process, and outcome; the Balanced Scorecard 
model; and the gap model. Quality of care should include the structure, process, 
client-related outcome, and practitioner-related outcome of care because the 
structure influences the process and the outcome is affected by the process 
(Donabedian, 1980). Donabedian (1980) suggests that structure is the 
relatively stable characteristics of the providers of care, of the tools and 
resources they have at their disposal, and of the physical and organizational 
setting in which they work (p. 81); process means a set of activities that go on 
within and between practitioners and patients (p. 79); outcome indicates the 
changes in health status (p. 83). In order to enhance quality of care for 
residents, institutions should simultaneously improve quality of structure, 
process, and outcome of care. Thus, for this research, developing quality 
indicators concurrently focused on the structure, process, and outcome of care 
because any one of them individually could change quality of care for people 
with dementia living in care homes.  
On the other hand, Kaplan and Norton (1996) argue that organizational 
performance should be assessed by the measurement of financial and non-
financial performance. Thus, they propose the Balanced Scorecard model to 
evaluate organizational performance. In an attempt to set up the indicator of 
financial management, breakeven point is used in this research to assess 
financial performance. As to non-financial performance, indicators of the 
stakeholders satisfaction, including data from care staff and people with 
dementia were used in this research. 
With regard to the gap model, the key factors that influence service quality are 
the discrepancy between customers expectations and perceptions; and the 
discrepancy between the actual and ideal service delivery (Zeithaml et al., 
1990). The concepts of this gap for organizations are to understand service 
quality, to measure service quality, to diagnose the problems of service quality, 
and to solve the problems (Zeithaml et al., 1990). This research applied this 
concept of this gap to surveying and integrating the viewpoints of stakeholders 
in the development of quality indicators for institutional dementia care. Thus, it 
was expected that through developing quality indicators with quantifiable, 
measurable, and objective methods, the gaps in quality indicators between 
theoretical and empirical evidence could be observed closed, and subsequently 
given the range of stakeholders, the quality indicators that were set up following 
this research should be acceptable to most of the stakeholders in dementia 
care. The quality indicators should be suitable both in theory and in practice. 
They should be workable, not just an ideal. 
Many recommendations have been made with regard to the procedures for 
implementing the TQM. There are ten steps of quality delivery process which 
include creating a mission statement, to determine the outputs, to identify the 
customers, to define customer requirements, to develop the output specification, 
to define groups work process, to identify measurements of output, to define 
the problem, to establish a project team, and to measure customer satisfaction 
(Bank, 2000). However, Scottish Enterprise (1991) considers that there are six 
stages to implementing the TQM, consisting of preparing the ground; 
awareness and understanding; education, training and empowerment; 
involvement and participation; projects and problem solving; and integration 
and renewal (p. 92). Kanji and Asher (1993) summarise four stages for 
implementing TQM in an organization, including identification and preparation; 
management understanding and commitment; scheme for improvement; and 
new initiative, new target and critical examination. Only some procedures for 
implementing TQM are suitable for care homes. These procedures include 
deciding the outputs, defining customer requirements, managing the process of 
service delivery, solving problems, and measuring outcome and performance. 
Since its successful application worldwide, many tools and techniques of TQM 
have been developed. As Gunther and Hawkins has observed, TQM has 
quantitative, qualitative, and developmental perspectives embedded in its 
philosophical approach (1996:8). That is, organizational system is perceived as 
a context for quality development through the quantitative and qualitative 
aspects of quality improvement in TQM (Gunther and Hawkins, 1996). 
In conclusion, in institutional dementia care, the TQM approach provides a 
model for care homes to follow to improve quality of care and QOL for residents. 
The TQM model includes customer focus, total involvement, communications, 
leadership, continuous improvement, exceeding customers expectations, and 
minimizing cost. Gunther and Hawkins (1996) argue that the implementation of 
TQM could totally change the culture of organization to improve quality 
continuously. Particularly, QOL issues are determined by the effectiveness of 
service delivery process (Gunther and Hawkins, 1996). Thus, at this stage, this 
research will focus on analysing existing documents relevant to dementia care 
for the development of proposed quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional 
dementia care.  
4.3 What are quality of care and quality of life for people with 
dementia living in institutions? 
The concept of quality for residential care includes quality of care, quality of life, 
resident rights, and the physical environment (Hawes and Phillips, 2007). It is 
not easy to distinguish quality of care and QOL because quality of care 
contributes to QOL (Kane et al., 2003; Tester et al., 2004). Particularly, if there 
is no quality of care in institutional dementia care, there will be no QOL for 
people with dementia living in care homes. Thus, it is necessary to explore the 
issues in quality of care and quality of life for residents with dementia at the 
same time. 
The major goal and output of institutional dementia care is to improve quality of 
care and QOL for people with dementia. Defining quality of care and QOL will 
help institutions to understand this goal. However, quality of care or QOL is a 
broad concept. Different definitions and models of quality of care and QOL for 
different populations have been proposed. For example, Albert et al. (1996) 
suggest that QOL is defined by frequent activity and positive affect (p. 1342). 
Selai and Trimble (1999) consider that QOL is a multidimensional construct 
comprising physical, psychological, and social well-being (p. 102). Bond and 
Corner (2004) state that QOL is a collection of interacting objective and 
subjective dimensions (p. 88). Nowadays, the popular definition of QOL is 
defined by the World Health Organization Quality of Life Assessment 
(WHOQOL) group: 
Quality of life is defined as an individual's perception of their position in life 
in the context of the culture and value systems in which they live and in 
relation to their goals, expectations, standards and concerns. It is a broad 
ranging concept affected in a complex way by the person's physical health, 
psychological state, level of independence, social relationships, and their 
relationship to salient features of their environment (1993:153). 
With regard to the definition of quality of care, Koch (1991) considers that 
quality of care includes accessible, effective, acceptable, and appropriate. 
Campbell et al. (2000) define quality of care as access and effectiveness. 
Moran et al. (2006) note that quality care is about more than objective 
standards and should include the context of care or how people experience the 
service (p. 6). A high quality of care should include dignity, respect and 
autonomy for the individuals (Gibson et al., 2010). Thus, according to Innes et 
al. (2006),  
Quality care is care that: is focused on clients/users; promotes 
independence and autonomy rather than control; involves services that are 
reliable and flexible and chosen by users; and tends to be offered by those 
working in a collaborative/team philosophy (p. ix).  
The evidence above seems to indicate that there is only slight difference 
between quality of care and QOL. Thus, Mckee (1999) argues that the 
meanings of quality of care and QOL can be confusing in dementia care.  
Different theoretical models recommend different components, procedures, and 
methods to assess QOL for people with dementia living in care homes (Ready 
and Ott, 2003). In this research, during the development of quality dimensions 
for institutional dementia care, different QOL models provided the key concept 
which is that quality of care includes many different dimensions, and these 
dimensions should be appraised individually to confirm quality of care. For 
examples, Jennings (2004) summarizes that there are three philosophical 
theories of QOL for people with dementia: sensation (or hedonist), reasonable 
preference, and human flourishing theories. She argues that sensation theory 
defines QOL in terms of the individuals happiness or pleasurable experience; 
reasonable preference theory takes QOL to be included in the satisfaction of a 
persons desires or preferences; and human flourishing theory puts the 
emphasis on the fullest human capacities. Jennings concludes that there are 
four meanings of QOL: QOL as a property of the individual, a goal of care, a 
social situation, and the moral worth of a life. Jennings also suggests that the 
notion of QOL could be used to enhance social justice, respect, equity, and 
humane care for people with dementia (Jennings, 2004). Denham (1991) also 
develops a causal model (see Figure 4.1) to show that QOL depends on how 
each individual perceives his own life, and individual appraisal is influenced by 
mental health, physical environment, social interaction, physical health, and 
personality and past history. 
Figure 4.1 Factors influence quality of life: a causal model  
Source: Denham (1991: 48) 
However, Lawton (1997) argues that QOL for people with dementia living in 
care homes includes subjective and objective dimensions. Thus, Lawton 
establishes a model to measure QOL for people with dementia living in care 
homes, which includes subjective aspects of perceived QOL and psychological 
well-being, and objective aspects of behavioural competency and 
environmental quality. Nevertheless, a multidimensional approach is required to 
look after people with dementia. Thus, Hughes (1990) review of the literature 
finds that the key factors impacting on QOL for older people living in care 
homes are individual characteristics, social and physical environment, socio-
economic, personal autonomy, subjective satisfaction, and personality. In terms 
of critical social gerontology, Hughes (1990) states that QOL for older people is 
determined by social, economical, and biological factors which is the same as 
for the rest of the population. He also establishes a conceptual model to assess 
QOL for older people living in care homes, which includes subjective and 
objective criteria, theoretical dimensions, and cultural factors (see Figure 4.2). 
In addition, he suggests that the researcher should note the associations 
between the different sub-systems because they are related to one another 
either directly or indirectly.  
                Figure 4.2 A conceptual model of quality of life 
                Source: Hughes (1990: 55) 
The evidence above seems to indicate that quality of care or QOL benefits from 
individualized, reliable and flexible services that enable the individual to 
exercise independence and autonomy fully, and to be able to perceive 
satisfaction in physical, psychological, and social wellbeing. That is, there is a 
wide range of dimensions in the illustration of quality of care. Tenner and 
DeToro (1992) identify four dimensions of measures in TQM: products and 
services delivered to the users and customers, financial return for shareholders, 
job satisfaction for employees, and social impact upon the community (p. 127). 
In health care, Koch (1991) considers that the TQM approach covers eight key 
aspects of managing health care: service provision, service development, 
finance and manpower control, income generation and releasing resources, 
organisational development, internal and external relations, estate management, 
and human resource management (p. 24). Cecchin and Jarrad (2002) create a 
framework of quality dementia care that consists of five dimensions, such as 
philosophy/culture, management, leadership, staff, and environment (p. 16). 
Alzheimers Australia (2003) also states that the main characteristics of quality 
in dementia care are a culture and philosophy, leadership, staff, and an 
environment. Therefore, in the dimensions of quality care, the key aspects of 
TQM that apply to institutional dementia care could be summarised as 
management and administration, human resource management, health and 
personal care, social care, rights, and environment. 
A QOL survey for older people could use a small-scale survey, large-scale 
survey, case study, experimental evaluation, interview, participant observation, 
triangulating method, or documentary and secondary data analysis (Peace, 
1990). Moran et al. (2006) claim that there are six methods for measuring QOL 
in residential care settings for older people, comprising  
Interviews with residents and their families and friends; interviews with 
staff and managers and others; observation of daily life in the residential 
care setting and how it is managed; assessment of written policies, 
procedures and records; observation of other inspection reports (e. g. fire, 
environment etc.); and physical examination of residents where 
appropriate (p. 7).  
However, some scholars claim that since people with dementia are quite 
different from other older people, a different method is required to investigate 
their quality of care or QOL. For example, Lawton (1997) suggests self-report 
and directly observed behaviour to assess the QOL for people with dementia 
living in care homes. Other researchers recommend methods such as resident 
report, proxy report, and direct observation (Selai and Trimble, 1999; Sloane et 
al., 2005; and Scholzel-Dorenbos et al., 2006).  
A variety of instruments have been developed to assess quality of care and 
QOL for people with dementia between 1991 and 2006, including a Schedule 
for the Evaluation of Individual QOL (SEIQOL), Dementia Care Mapping (DCM), 
Albert et al.'s Affect and Activity Ratings, Alzheimer Disease Related Quality of 
Life (ADRQL), Dementia Quality of Life (DQOL), the WHOQOL-Old, Quality of 
Life-Alzheimer's Disease (QOL-AD), Cornell-Brown Scale for Quality of Life 
(CBS), Vienna List, DEMQOL, and Qualidem, and the other instruments 
(Struttmann et al.,1999; Ready and Ott, 2003; and Scholzel-Dorenbos et al., 
2006). In 2007, McCallion and McCarron also developed a set of indicators to 
measure QOL in dementia care. 
These instruments differ in domains and focuses. Ready and Ott (2003) and 
Scholzel-Dorenbos et al. (2006) argue that the important domains for QOL in 
dementia are affect, self-esteem/self-image, social contact, attachment, 
physical and mental health, enjoyment of activities, sense of aesthetics, well-
being, financial situation, security and privacy, self-determination and freedom, 
being useful/giving meaning to life, and spirituality. However, quality of care or 
QOL in dementia is a multidimensional total concept. As Ready and Ott (2003) 
argue, most QOL instruments fail to focus on both objective and subjective 
indicators simultaneously. In addition, most of these instruments emphasis the 
assessment of QOL, instead of providing solutions. Based on the TQM 
approach, many other tools and techniques have been established to assist an 
organization to accurately collect, present, and analyse its data for effective 
improvement of quality of service, care, or life. 
The tools and techniques of TQM include process flowcharting; check sheets or 
tally charts; histograms; scatter diagrams; stratification; Pareto analysis; cause 
and effect analysis and brainstorming; cause and effect diagram with addition of 
cards (CEDAC); nominal group technique (NGT); force- field analysis; 
emphasis curve; control charts; cumulative sum (cusum) charts; failure mode, 
effect and criticality analysis (FMECA); moments of truth; and statistical process 
control (SPC) (Oakland, 2000). However, the most appropriate tools and 
techniques for care homes could be check sheets, histograms, cause and effect 
analysis and brainstorming, Pareto analysis, control charts, scatter diagrams, 
and stratification, because they have been applied to health care and compared 
with the other instruments, they are more convenient for care homes to 
implement.  
4.4 The components of quality of care and QOL for people with 
dementia living in care homes 
A number of studies have investigated quality of care and QOL for people with 
dementia living in institutions. Kalis et al. (2004) observe that the QOL for 
people with dementia living in care homes are autonomy and freedom, 
individuality and lifestyle, relationship and social networks, warmth and safety 
and familiarity, developing capacities and giving meaning to life, and subjective 
experience and feelings of well-being (p. 429). Alzheimers Association (2005) 
considers that in order to achieve effective dementia care and enhance an 
individuals QOL, adequate food and fluid consumption, pain management, and 
social engagement and involvement in meaningful activities are three priority 
areas in care homes. The evidence seems to indicate that there is a range of 
components to demonstrate quality of care for people with dementia living in 
care homes.  
The components of quality of care are building, procedures, regime, medical 
care, promotion of continence, care of dementia sufferers, and services (The 
Scottish Office, Central Research Unit, 1992:6). Jackson et al. (2003) indicate 
that the principles of a good service for people with dementia living in care 
homes are: 
care staff should be trained in appropriate competencies and supported; 
residential services should be delivered in small, domestic, home-like 
settings; residential services should promote a domestic, home-like 
philosophy of care; attention should be paid to the design of the built 
environment; all services should be accessible; services should respond 
effectively in a crisis; services should be flexible and adaptable (p. 53).  
The ideal of care services for people with dementia in care homes include 
physician and dental services; physical, occupational, and speech therapy; 
skilled nursing; patient assessment; assistance with medications; supervision; 
hospice services; case management; recreation services; information and 
referral; personal care; meals; and transportation (Wikler et al., 1987). 
Alzheimers Australia (2003) also points out the ten key elements that could 
lead to best practice in quality dementia care including assessment, staff 
selection, training and education, individualised care, specialised services, 
activities, relationships, communication skills, physical environment, 
involvement of family and friends, and flexibility in routines and practices.  
According to McIntyre et al. (2007), service provision for people with dementia 
in nursing home settings are structural facilities that should meet the needs of 
people with dementia; staff should be carefully trained; an appropriate level of 
activity should be provided; the structure of the living unit should contain 
wandering paths and minimize the risk of falls; antipsychotic medications and 
physical restraints should be minimized in their use.  
Taking the above discussions into consideration, some items were employed in 
the development of quality indicators for institutional dementia care in this 
research, such as self-assessment, participation in planning services, care 
management, personal care, medical care, trained and skilled staff, recreational 
activities, rehabilitation, community interaction, physical restraint use, nutrition, 
wandering paths, and home-like environment.  
The physical environment and staff are key factors that determine quality of 
care and QOL for people with dementia living in care homes. As the Audit 
Commission (2002) notes, care homes should provide an appropriate physical 
environment; and support, advice and training for staff are the key factors for 
quality of care for people with dementia, because the two factors could help 
staff to cope better with residents problematic behaviours and to improve their 
QOL. Reilly et al. (2005) also consider that care homes for people with 
dementia should employ qualified nurses, qualified nurse managers, activity 
staff; they should have dementia care training for care staff, have regular 
supervision and appraisals to qualified nurses, have special building design 
features, have a Snoezelen room, have involved community specialists, and 
have culturally sensitive and person-centred care practice. Hence, the following 
sections will discuss the attributes of the care home environment and its staff. 
High quality services need well-designed physical environments (Muir et al. 
(2000:61). Well-designed physical environments could assist staff to offer 
services effectively. Furthermore, effective design could improve independence 
and autonomy for people with dementia, maintain their existing abilities, and 
reduce their behavioural problems. Thus, the features of the physical 
environment can benefit people with dementia, including good design, single 
bedrooms with en suite facilities, and adequate personal space (Tester, 1999). 
Utton (2007) thinks that a care home for people with dementia should be a 
homelike environment, an environment that allows individuals to be themselves 
with a sense of ease. Alzheimers Australia (2004) suggests that a care home 
for people with dementia should provide bedroom, toilet and bathroom, activity 
areas, kitchen, dining room, social space, outdoor space, and staff working 
space.  
In order to measure the physical environment, the three approaches that 
Marshall (2001) suggests are: the walk through approach, the user consultation 
approach (such as meeting people with dementia, relative or other carer, and 
staff), and the checklist approach. Both the walk through approach and the user 
consultation approach depend on an individuals perception. However, the 
checklist approach could provide a more objective standard. It is also more 
rapid and efficient compared with the other two approaches. For example, 
Hodges et al. (2006) develop a checklist for dementia design guidelines, 
including 9 dimensions and 120 items. However, this checklist is not developed 
by integrating his nine principles to every space but individualizing. Hence, it is 
difficult to check. However, a few indicators within this checklist could assist to 
evaluate the quality of a care home. Therefore, a part of these items were 
employed to be proposed quality indicators for institutional dementia care. For 
example, staff area/kitchen that allows staff to view client activities with ease, 
small quiet room/area for one on one activities for clients exhibiting 
agitation/anxiety (p. 37); multiple modes of signage indicating the location of 
the toilet (e.g. picture of toilet and the word as well), multiple modes of signage 
indicating the location of the dining room (e.g. picture of knife and fork and the 
word as well), multiple modes of signage indicating the location of the activities 
along the wandering path (e.g. picture of a tool shed/ aviary/fountain/etc and 
the word as well), signs placed at appropriate level (downcast gaze) (p. 40); a 
wandering path: a path that provides direct visual access into many different 
activity areas, a path that travels through many aesthetically different spaces, a 
path that does not have an end point, and a path that can be unobtrusively 
visually accessed by staff (p. 42); alarm signalling when a client has opened a 
door, all areas well lit to avoid falls (p. 44).  
The use of telecare can improve the QOL and increase confidence for frail older 
people (Tetley et al., 2000). According to the research of Bowes and McColgan 
(2006), smart technology is effective to promote independence, choice, and 
capacity building; and support safety and security both of the older people and 
the home. According to the advantages of smart technology, I argue that smart 
technology is also suitable for care homes to set up. Thus, electronic equipment 
for supporting safety and security of the residents, and security of the care 
home and possessions were included in quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care in this research.  
Staffing is the key factor in determining quality of care and QOL for people with 
dementia living in care homes. As Allen et al. (1992) state, good staff equals 
good business in residential care. In an article by National Economic and Social 
Forum (2005), High quality care, however, can be evident even in poor 
environmental settings, the key ingredient being high quality staff. Without this, 
quality of care cannot be achieved (p. 95). Moreover, Pollock (2003) points out 
that a bad interior can still work with good support from staff and carers and a 
good interior can fail if the care service is poor or inconsiderate (p. 37). 
Thereby, as Muir et al. (2000) write, High quality services are established on 
the foundation of appropriately trained staff (p. 61). 
Individuals play the most important role in the TQM approach; in particular, 
individuals attitudes, skills and knowledge determine the service quality 
(Thomas, 1994). Deming (1986) argues that ability to please the customer 
should be, for good management, top priority for hiring and training of 
employees (p. 192). Kitwood (1997b) states that quality of interaction is the 
core element in dementia care. Hence, the author notes that positive person 
work for people with dementia could enhance personhood, such as recognition, 
negotiation, collaboration, play, stimulation, celebration, relaxation, validation, 
holding, facilitation, creating, and giving. Jackson et al. (2003) report that good 
managerial support for staff, such as leadership, policy implementation, training, 
support services, and job security, which could enhance job satisfaction and 
produce good quality care. Thereby, as Wunderlich and Kohler (2001) say,  
Staffing levels, education and training of staff, supervision, environmental 
conditions, leadership and management, attitudes and values, job 
satisfaction and turnover of staff, salaries and benefits, and management 
and organizational capacity of the facility are all essential elements in the 
provision of quality care to residents (p. 13). 
Thus, in human resource management, the items that were used in quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care are staff ratios, staff qualification, staff 
training, staff turnover, and job satisfaction. 
It is a kind of top-down approach to explore quality of care, QOL, or care 
standards for people with dementia living in care homes in the development of 
proposed quality indicators for institutional dementia care. However, key 
stakeholders in dementia care are people with dementia. Their requirements 
should be noted. Thus, the subsequent sections will look at the requirements of 
people with dementia living in care homes. 
4.5 What are the requirements of people with dementia living in 
care homes? 
In order to satisfy customers and obtain excellent financial returns, care 
institutions should understand the requirements of customers. Kaplan and 
Norton (1996) set up a generic value-chain model (see Figure 4.3) to illustrate  
Figure 4.3 The Internal- Business- Process Perspective- The Generic Value-
Chain Model 
Source: Kaplan and Norton (1996: 96) 
the importance of understanding customers needs. The first step is to explore 
the existent and potential needs of customers, subsequently to create, to build 
and to deliver the services to meet customers needs. Finally, the post-sale 
service with superior warranty would add value for the targeted customers.  
In health care, Kitson (1989) argues that the clients needs include physical, 
psychosocial, and environmental aspects. In particular, patients need to be 
valued and respected (Henderson, 1996:80). That is, social inclusion, respect, 
and choice could improve quality of care and QOL for people with dementia 
because success in these factors would increase the possibility of the clients 
feeling their rights are equal to others. Thus, since dementia is a chronic and 
progressive disease, different care is required for people with dementia. In 
addition, the following requirements of the residents should be explored if 
quality of care and QOL, and financial returns are to be achieved. 
According to the Department of Health (2001b),  
Older people in residential care and nursing homes and those receiving 
day care should be able to participate in a range of stimulating group or 
one to one activities. These can include reminiscence, art-therapy, news-
based discussions, aromatherapy, games and quizzes, adult education 
and drama. Older people should be offered a choice of activities matched 
to their needs and preferences. An appropriate environment can also aid 
orientation and help to avoid visual and sensory confusion. This will 
involve good quality design, lighting, colour contrast and accessible 
accommodation (p. 92). 
Alzheimer Scotland (2005) notes that the main needs of people with dementia 
living in care homes are health, behaviour, stimulation, relationships, and 
spirituality and religion. Jackson et al. (2003) point out other needs including 
cultural and spiritual issues, palliative care, personal care, constant care or 
supervision of behaviour problems, nutrition, drink, and daily living activities. 
Hancock et al. (2006) also state that the needs of residents with dementia are: 
environmental and physical health needs; mental health needs; mobility needs 
and incontinence needs; and social needs (including company and daytime 
activities). People with dementia require an individualized and multimodal 
treatment plan, such as psychiatric management; specific psychotherapies and 
other psychosocial treatments; specific concerns regarding somatic treatments 
for elderly and dementia patients; treatment of psychosis and agitation; 
treatment of depression; and treatment of sleep disturbances (Rabins et al., 
1997).  
In psychological needs, Kitwood (1997b) thinks comfort, attachment, inclusion, 
occupation and identity (p. 81) are important. Therefore, institutions should 
provide psychosocial treatments for people with dementia because these 
treatments could improve their mood, behaviour, and function (Rabins et al., 
1997). The psychosocial treatments are divided into four categories, consisting 
of behaviour-oriented treatments, emotion-oriented treatments (supportive 
psychotherapy, reminiscence, validation, sensory integration, and simulated 
presence therapies), cognition-oriented treatments (reality orientation and skills 
training), and stimulation-oriented treatments (activities, recreational, and art 
therapies) (Rabins et al., 1997). 
With regard to the rights of older people in long-term care, Mangan (2002) 
suggests that they should include: 
The right to equality and non-discrimination; the right to vindication of the 
person; the right to personal liberty; family rights; the right to individual 
privacy; the right to marital privacy; the right to bodily integrity; the right to 
respect for physical and moral integrity; the right not to be tortured or ill 
treated; the right to an effective remedy; social and economic rights, 
including the right to health and social security services; the right to 
participation in decision making (pp. 5-6).  
People with dementia should be treated in the same way as any other older 
people so that they should retain all of above mentioned rights.  
In conclusion, the chronic and progressive nature of dementia means it requires 
specific care. The requirements of people with dementia are complex; ranging 
from simple assistance with activities of daily living to total care and include 
physical, psychological, social, spiritual, health, rights, and designed 
environment aspects . Moreover, based on care ethics, institutions should offer 
home-like, professional, holistic, and high quality services for people with 
dementia and their families. Thus, these requirements of people with dementia 
living in care homes should be taken seriously in the development of quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care. 
4.6 Research questions  
Thus, in view of the preceding research objectives, the key research questions 
may be stated as being: 
1. What are quality indicators for institutional dementia care with high 
reliability, validity, and credibility?  
2. What are the differences/similarities between theoretical and empirical 
evidence on quality indicators for institutional dementia care? 
3. What are the best quality indicators for care homes in Taiwan? 
4.7 Summary 
The TQM approach not only provides the key concepts, tools and techniques, 
and implementation process for care homes to improve quality of care and QOL 
for people with dementia, but also offers the main measuring aspects and items 
for this research to develop quality indicators for institutional dementia care. 
The definition of quality of care or QOL is focused on individualized, reliable 
and flexible services that enable people with dementia to experience 
independence and autonomy, and to satisfy in physical, psychological, social, 
and spiritual care. Based on the TQM approach, quality of care and QOL for 
people with dementia living in care homes could be influenced by management 
and administration, human resource management, health and personal care, 
social care, rights, and environment. The TQM approach provides the 
techniques and process for care homes to improve quality of care and QOL for 
residents. The main tools and techniques of TQM that are appropriate for care 
homes are check sheets, histograms, cause and effect analysis and 
brainstorming, Pareto analysis, control charts, scatter diagrams, and 
stratification. The process of applying the TQM in care homes is to decide the 
outputs, to define customer requirements, to manage the process of service 
delivery, to solve problems, and to measure outcome and performance.  
In order to improve quality of care and QOL for people with dementia, care 
homes could modify the existing care standards as a reference to improve the 
quality of service or implement the TQM to enhance competitiveness and 
customer satisfaction. However, due to lack of finance and human resources in 
care homes, as well as the specific requirements of people with dementia, it is 
still necessary to develop a series of quality indicators to encourage care 
homes to improve quality of care and QOL for people with dementia. 
In summary, according to the concepts of TQM, institutional dementia care 
should focus on clients and emphasize quality measurement and quality 
improvement to achieve customer satisfaction and continuous operation. From 
previous literature, those dimensions related to institutional dementia care were 
emerged and used in this thesis to frame the research. 
1. Management and administration: accident procedure, community social 
work, financial management, self-assessment. 
2. Human resource management: staff ratios, staff qualification, staff training, 
staff turnover, and job satisfaction.  
3. Health and personal care: care management, clinical record, consultation 
and referral, rehabilitation, nutrition, pressure ulcers, urinary tract infections, 
physical restraint use. 
4. Social care: behavior treatment, reminiscence therapy, cognitive retraining, 
reality orientation, skills training, recreational therapy, art therapy, festival 
activity, community interaction, spiritual care. 
5. Rights: contract, complaint procedure, participation in planning services, 
satisfaction with services.  
6.  Environment: fire safety, alarm facility, barrier-free environment, handicap 
assistance equipment, a quiet room, an endless wandering path, 
transparent cabinet, object mark, area/space indication and appropriate sign 
level, staff area/kitchen with un-visual hindrance, smart technology. 
Chapter 5- Methodology 
5.1 Introduction 
The previous chapters have identified key dimensions of quality and the 
research study aimed to refine and test these. A combination of qualitative and 
quantitative research methods were used to examine and develop quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care, in order to ensure that the quality 
indicators are not merely rhetoric but are useful and applicable in reality. In this 
chapter, I will describe how to integrate the opinions of stakeholders and to 
develop the best quality indicators for institutional dementia care for people with 
dementia via the Delphi method and questionnaire survey. Reliability, validity, 
and item analysis were conducted, in order to develop the quality indicators 
with high reliability, validity, and acceptability for enhancing quality of care for 
people with dementia living in care homes. Quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care which were developed in this research were expected to close 
the gap between theoretical and empirical evidence via conducting CFA.  
In the following sections, I will illustrate the theoretical perspective, research 
design, and research methods. 
5.2 Theoretical perspective 
This study was intended to integrate subjective and objective opinions of all 
stakeholders in institutional dementia care to make generalizations through a 
mixed-method approach. Pragmatism and TQM were employed to ground my 
work to develop a mixed-method approach to set up a series of quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care to get a full image of quality of care for 
residents with dementia. In the formulation of a theoretical perspective for 
developing quality indicators for institutional dementia care, the TQM approach 
provided a conceptual framework in the development of quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care; because it focuses on clients and involves all 
stakeholders in dementia care to continuously improve quality of care for 
people with dementia living in care homes. A pragmatic approach offered a 
useful prototype, because it considers the possibility of reaching a consensus 
on quality indicators through qualitative and quantitative research methods 
(Tashakkori and Teddlie, 1998).  
5.2.1 The TQM approach 
This research employed the TQM to develop quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care. As previously discussed in Section 4.2, the TQM approach not 
only provided the philosophy, techniques, and process for care homes to 
improve quality of care for people with dementia; but also offered the main 
measures and items for this research to develop quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care. The TQM approach in theory could improve the 
quality of any product or service and has been used widely in many types of 
organization around the world. In institutional dementia care, the TQM 
approach provides a model for care homes to follow to improve quality of care 
for residents. The model contributed the key concepts for this research to set 
up the conceptual framework, such as customer focus, total involvement, 
communications, leadership, continuous improvement, exceeding customers 
expectations, and minimizing cost. Moreover, the evidence seems to indicate 
that the TQM approach is compatible with using different research methods to 
investigate the quality of institutional dementia care. 
According to the theory of TQM in dementia care, I argue that developing 
quality indicators for institutional dementia care should focus on clients because 
when institutions put person-centred care as a central concern, it is possible to 
achieve the target of quality of care for people with dementia. In addition, the 
quality indicators cannot be built without support from all service receivers. 
Thus, I adopted a census, and involved all Taiwanese care homes for people 
with dementia.  
The opinions of stakeholders in dementia care were expected to be integrated 
via multiple methods and sources. The degree of importance of quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care might differ significantly between 
stakeholders, since these definitions and interpretations of quality care depend 
on various perceptions of stakeholders. Therefore, it was necessary to develop 
the definition and interpretation of quality of care through continuous interaction 
and communication among the stakeholders. Furthermore, in order to achieve 
the goal of establishing the consensus, it was necessary to describe, to 
compare, and to analyze the differences in expectations of quality of care 
among the stakeholders throughout the investigation. Finally, in order to 
encourage managers to implement the quality indicators, it was necessary to 
set up a series of applicable quality indicators to assist care homes to keep 
improving quality of care and to minimize cost.  
With regard to research method, Zinn et al. (1998) use questionnaires and 
secondary data to ensure that the TQM could increase nursing homes 
competitive capabilities.  Zinn et al. (1998) also observe that institutions located 
in competitive markets are more likely to implement TQM. Similarly, Castle 
(2001) uses secondary data to investigate innovation in nursing homes. Castle 
(2001) concludes that in order to enhance institutional effectiveness and 
differentiate services, nursing homes should adopt TQM early in the competitive 
nursing home markets. In Taiwan, Lin and Liu (2006a, b) apply TQM in two 
empirical studies in a home care centre and a day care centre. They use case 
studies to explore the key successful factors in the home care centre and to 
carry out participant observation in a day care centre, and to study how to build 
an integrated service model for people with dementia. The researchers 
summarized that TQM could assist an institution to increase the number of 
clients, customer satisfaction, and staff satisfaction; and achieve a financial 
break-even point to survive in competitive markets.  
In conclusion, according to the TQM approach, the goal of a high quality 
institutional dementia care could be determined by the efficiency and 
effectiveness of service delivery process. The service delivery process for 
people with dementia living in care homes is influenced by the key aspects of 
TQM in institutional dementia care, including management and administration, 
human resource management, health and personal care, social care, rights, 
and environment. The above key aspects of TQM in institutional dementia care 
could be measured by observed variables, which here constitute the quality 
indicators that are developed in this research.  
5.2.1 A pragmatic approach 
There are two polarized social science paradigms as the worldviews or belief 
systems to guide researchers: positivist/empiricist approach which underlies 
quantitative methods and constructivist/phenomenological paradigm which 
underlies qualitative methods (Tashakkori and Teddlie, 1998). However, social 
research should not be absolutely polar opposite because many social 
scientists pitch their assumptions somewhere in the range between the 
subjective and objective approaches to social science (Burrell and Morgan, 
1979). Thus, methodological pluralism should be promoted because 
quantitative and qualitative methods could be used at the same time or in a 
sequence during the research (Sechrest and Sidani, 1995). Crotty (1998) also 
supports that it is not a problem for a research to serve its purpose by 
quantitative method, qualitative method, or both. 
The pragmatist rejects the forced choice between positivism/empiricism 
(including post positivism) and constructivism/phenomenology with regard to 
epistemology, logic, and methods (Tashakkori and Teddlie, 1998). The 
pragmatist also argues that qualitative and quantitative methods are compatible 
(Tashakkori and Teddlie, 1998). That is, qualitative and quantitative methods 
can be combined and they are complementary, not alternative (Fulcher and 
Scott, 2003). In addition, it is difficult to draw a firm association between 
particular theories and methods because researchers could choose the most 
appropriate style for their research purposes and skills (Fulcher and Scott, 
2003). It can be concluded that pragmatism gives us a paradigm to use mixed 
methods and mixed models because it eschews metaphysical concepts (truth, 
reality) and it presents a very practical and applied research philosophy 
(Tashakkori and Teddlie, 1998:30).  
This research adopted a pragmatic approach to allow employing qualitative 
methods to collect subjective data and perceptions, and using quantitative 
methods to gather objective viewpoints to develop quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care which meet theoretical and empirical evidence 
simultaneously. Thus, I adopted a mixed-method survey research based on 
pragmatism to develop quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia 
care using a self-completion questionnaire. 
5.3 Research design 
This is a mixed-method study with a cross-sectional design aimed at developing 
quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia care at a particular point 
in time. The cross-sectional design enables access to larger numbers of 
population using survey techniques (Easterby-Smith et al., 1991).  
The key aim of survey design is to identify broad trends in a population 
(Creswell and Plano-Clark, 2007). In addition, the key characteristics of survey 
research are description and explanation, representation of a wide population, 
gathering numerical data, and using assessment scale and questionnaires 
(Cohen et al., 2000). Thus, despite the drawbacks of cross-sectional design, 
such as the difficulty of excluding external factors (Easterby-Smith et al., 1991), 
I argue that the cross-sectional design with survey research is suitable for this 
study to investigate the opinions of experts and service receivers on the degree 
of importance of quality indicators for institutional dementia care efficiently and 
economically.   
According to the variants, timing, weighting, and mixing of use of quantitative 
and qualitative methods, the four major types of mixed methods designs are 
the Triangulation Design, the Embedded Design, the Explanatory Design, and 
the Exploratory Design (see Table 5.1) (Creswell and Plano-Clark, 2007:59). 
Since this study attempted to develop an instrument to assess quality of care of 
people with dementia living in Taiwanese care homes, this research design is 
most similar to the exploratory design. However, none of the four types of 
mixed methods designs could perfectly fit this research purpose and answer the 
research questions. Thus, based on the framework of mixed methods design, 
the research in this thesis intended to generate a mixed methods design: firstly, 
the research used a qualitative method to develop the quality indicators; 
secondly it collected quantitative and qualitative data at the same time to revise 
the quality indicators; finally it used a quantitative method to identify the best 
quality indicators. 
Quality of care depends on an individuals subjective perception or expectation. 
Through reviewing literature, the proposed quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care can be established more objectively. As shown in Section 4.7, 
there are 6 key dimensions, and 43 items, which are suitable for examining and 
enhancing quality of care for people with dementia living in care homes. 
Moreover, as noted previously in Section 4.2, the TQM approach provided  
Table 5.1 The major mixed methods design types 
Design type Variants Timing Weighting Mixing Notation 
Triangulation  Convergence 
 Data transformation 
 Validating qualitative data 
 Multilevel 
Concurrent: 
quantitative and 
qualitative at the 
same time 
Usually equal Merge the data 
during the 
interpretation or 
analysis. 
QUAN+ 
Embedded  Embedded experimental 
 Embedded correlational 
Concurrent or 
sequential 
Unequal Embedded one type 
of data within a 
larger design using 
the other type of 
(qual) 
+QUAL 
(quan) 
Explanatory  Follow-up explanations 
 Participant selection 
Sequential: 
Quantitative 
followed by 
qualitative 
Usually 
quantitative 
Connect the data 
between the two 
phases. 
QUAN 
Exploratory  Instrument development 
 Taxonomy development 
Sequential: 
Qualitative followed 
by quantitative 
Usually 
qualitative 
Connect the data 
between the two 
phases. 
QUAL 
QUAN: Quantitative method; QUAL: Qualitative method 
Source: Creswell and Plano-Clark (2007:85) 
essential concepts relevant to the application of this research. Therefore, based 
on the TQM approach, according to the research aims, as well as to develop 
the objective, measurable and feasible quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care, I argue that the semi-structured self-report questionnaire for the 
Delphi method and the structured self-completion questionnaire for the field test 
were appropriate.  
The aim of literature review was to gather proposed quality aspects for 
institutional dementia care via a comparative analysis of dementia care policy 
and its delivery, to gain potential quality indicators through an exploration of 
philosophical approaches of dementia care, and to confirm that the inspective 
items for the quality of institutional dementia care by reviewing the TQM 
approach which could set up a seamless care model for people with dementia 
living in care homes. Except for the literature review, the research process 
included two key stages: 
 Stage 1 was using the Delphi method as a pre-test to evaluate the usefulness 
and applicability of the quality indicators gained from the research literature. 
According to the Delphi method, the quality indicators were sent to experts in 
dementia care in Taiwan and Scotland for their comments in order to develop 
the content validity of the quality indicators.  
 Stage 2 was a field test. A paper-based survey was used with the questions 
focusing on quality indicators for institutional dementia care. A pilot survey 
involving a small number of participants was conducted to identify any 
incorrect terms or confusing phrasing on the questionnaire. A revision of the 
quality indicators was made according to the pilot results for the field test.  
The detailed steps of this study can be summarized as a mixed-method 
approach to develop quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia care 
as follows: 
  Qualitative method   
  Develop instrument   
Quantitative 
method 
   Qualitative 
method 
  Interpretation 
based on the 
results of 
quantitative and 
qualitative data 
analysis 
  Revise instrument   
  Quantitative 
method 
  Overall results and 
interpretation based 
on the results of 
quantitative data 
analysis 
Figure 5.1 The mixed-method model of development of quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care 
5.4 Formulation of instrument 
Prior to the pre-test/ Delphi method, it was necessary to give every quality 
indicator an operational definition, and then to formulate the Delphi exercise 
instrument. When a care home desires to improve quality of care for residents, 
one approach is to translate management philosophy or conceptual definition of 
the TQM into operational definition and action. Additionally, it is most important 
to define the object for communicating and establishing a consensus. Therefore, 
in order to transfer the conceptual quality indicators for institutional dementia 
care obtained from the literature review into measurable variables with the 
recommendations of organizations and researchers, I gave every quality 
indicator an operational definition based on the literature review (see Table 5.2). 
In addition, in order to assess quality of care accurately, I added 
ratio/percentage estimates for the following 8 quality indicators: staff ratios, 
staff training, staff turnover, job satisfaction, pressure ulcers, urinary tract 
infection, participation in planning services, and satisfaction with services. 
5.5 Pre-test/ the Delphi method  
The Delphi method is a method for establishing consensus (Bowling, 2002). It is 
used in combination and aims to produce quantified estimates of consensus 
through the use of a mixture of quantitative and qualitative techniques (Bowling, 
2002:406). Since the proposed quality indicators for institutional dementia care 
have been selected from the literature review, reasonable reliability can be 
achieved because they are based on theory and research. However, in order to 
avoid the researchers bias, to develop quality indicators as objectively as 
possible, and to improve the feasibility of indicators, this research employed the 
Delphi method as the pre-test to invite different experts in dementia care to 
evaluate quality indicators for institutional dementia care.  
Table 5.2 Initial operational definitions of quality indicators 
Quality indicator Operational definition Reference 
Accident procedure The institution has a written procedure related to accident reporting, and all 
staff are familiar with the accident procedure. 
Ministry of the 
Interior, 2000 
Community social 
The institution involves community social service activities (e.g. home care, 
day care, respite care) in the local community. 
Financial management The institution breaks even in its finances. 
Self-assessment The institution conducts the self- performance assessment plan. 
Rehabilitation The institution offers the rehabilitation which is recommended by the 
physiotherapist to meet the needs of residents 
Festival activity The institution provides special activities for festivals, such as Christmas, 
Chinese New Year, Dragon Boat Festival, and Moon Festival. 
Contract Each resident has a written contract with the care home. 
Complaint procedure The institution implements its complaints procedure and records every 
complaint, its investigation, and outcome. 
Satisfaction with 
services 
The percentage of residents in care homes who are fully satisfied with the 
services they receive. 
Participation in 
planning services 
The proportion of residents participated in the planning and treatment. Mangan, 2002 
Staff turnover The ratio of annual staff turnover is controlled at an appropriate level. Wunderlich and 
Kohler, 2001 Job satisfaction The proportion of staff working in care homes described who themselves as 
satisfied with their job. 
Staff ratios The ratio of staff to residents on duty which meets the assessed 
requirements of residents. 
Department of 
Social Affairs, 
2007a Staff qualification The institution employs Government recognized qualified staff to care for the 
residents. 
Staff training The proportion of staff trained for specific dementia care tasks (amongst 
those who have direct contact with patients). 
Clinical record The institution records the care provided and received, and the response to 
care for each resident on a daily basis. 
Table 5.2 Initial operational definitions of quality indicators (continued) 
Consultation and 
referral 
The institution offers the appropriate medical consultation and health care 
referral for residents. 
Department of 
Social Affairs, 
2007a Fire safety The institution has passed the fire safety inspection. 
Alarm facility Every room has a call system with alarm facility and this is fully functional at 
all times. 
Barrier-free 
environment 
The institution provides a barrier-free environment. 
Physical assistance 
equipment 
Assistive aids, hoists, and adapted baths meet the needs of residents with 
physical difficulties. 
Care management There is a care management plan for every resident including assessment of 
requirements and a care plan. 
Social Services 
Inspectorate/Social 
Work Services 
Group, 1992 
Nutrition The residents Body Mass Index (BMI), weight (Kg)/ height (m
), is controlled 
between 18.5 and 24.99. 
The World Health 
Organization, 1995 
Pressure ulcers The percentage of residents in care homes with pressure ulcers. Maryland hospital 
association, 1985 Urinary tract infections The percentage of residents in care homes with urinary tract infections. 
Physical restraint use The institution has a written policy and procedure on physical restraint. 
Behavior treatment The institution employs qualified staff to provide behavior treatment, such as 
treatment for decreasing or terminating aggression, incontinence, and 
screaming, depending on the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Rabins et al., 2007 
Recreational therapy The institution may employ qualified staff to provide recreational therapy, 
such as games, pets, crafts, and gardening, depending on the outcome of a 
needs assessment. 
Art therapy The institution employs qualified staff to provide art therapy, such as art, 
music, and dance, according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Reminiscence therapy The institution employs qualified staff to provide reminiscence therapy for 
residents in need, according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Reality orientation The institution employs qualified staff to provide reality orientation for 
residents in need, according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Table 5.2 Initial operational definitions of quality indicators (continued) 
Cognitive retraining The institution employs qualified staff to provide cognitive retraining for 
residents in need, according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Rabins et al., 2007 
Skills training The institution employs qualified staff to provide skills training for residents in 
need, according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Community interaction Residents continue to maintain adequate amount of interaction with the local 
community, such as residents attending activities in the community or 
people from the community coming to visit the residents. 
McCallion and 
McCarron, 2007 
Spiritual care The institution provides spiritual activities or facilities for residents according 
to the spiritual needs of the resident. 
Jackson et al., 
A quiet room the institution provides a quiet room for residents to relax in. Hodges et al., 
2006 An endless wandering 
pathway 
The institution has an endless wandering path for the needs of residents. 
Transparent cupboard/ 
cabinet 
Transparent cupboard/ cabinet are available in the care home. 
Objects mark Significant objects have obvious identifying marks. 
Area/ space has 
appropriate signs and 
the signs are clearly 
visible 
The indications and signs assist residents to move around the building. 
Staff area/kitchen is 
designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual 
surveillance with ease 
Staff in the staff area/kitchen can directly observe resident activities with 
ease. 
Electronic equipment 
for supporting the 
security of the 
residents 
The institution sets up the smart technology, such as monitoring technology, 
open door alert system, and pressure mat, to support safety and security of 
the residents. 
Bowes and 
McColgan, 2006 
Electronic equipment 
for supporting the 
security of the care 
home and possessions 
The institution sets up the smart technology, such as video door entry 
system, to support security of the care home and possessions. 
The drawbacks of face-to-face group discussion which might have been an 
alternative are the influence of dominant individuals, irrelevant communications, 
and group pressure (Dalkey, 1967). Therefore, in order to obtain the most 
reliable opinion consensus of a group of experts by subjecting them to a series 
of questionnaires in depth interspersed with controlled opinion feedback 
(Dalkey and Helmer, 1963: 458), and to use group information more effectively, 
the Delphi method was chosen to avoid the undesirable effects of group 
interaction (Dalkey, 1969). However, if the drawbacks of focus group which 
have been argued by Dalkey (1967) could be minimized, and the time and 
budget are sufficient; a face-to-face group meeting might be another option for 
integrating experts opinions. There is also a key drawback for the Delphi 
method. Its main limitation is that the experts involved cannot interact directly 
and immediately (Dalkey, 1967). Thus, in order to minimize this problem, the 
researcher should record carefully the comments of the experts and link 
effectively between them through thorough qualitative and quantitative analysis.  
The Delphi method is a set of procedures for eliciting and refining group 
judgments, when the members of the group are generally experts or especially 
knowledgeable individuals (Dalkey, 1967). According to Dalkey (1967), the 
main features of the Delphi procedures are:  
1. Anonymity: The experts are asked to respond to the questionnaires in a 
separate and private condition to avoid the influence from other dominant 
individuals, because they do not need to face and know each other.  
2. Controlled feedback: A Delphi exercise consists of a series of interactions 
where a summary form of the results of the previous round is presented to 
the participants with carefully controlled feedback to reduce irrelevant 
communications and maintain focus on the key issues. 
3. Statistical group response: The appropriate statistical indices, namely the 
median and inter- quartile range are used. Median is the measure of the 
central tendency. Inter-quartile range is the measure of statistical dispersion. 
The smaller the inter-quartile range, the greater the representation of 
median. Therefore, these two statistical indices are used to represent the 
group opinion on the second round and to decrease group pressure for 
conformity.  
Since the Rand Corporation set up the Delphi method, it has been applied in 
many fields, including education, health, and urban growth. For example, 
Dalkey used the Delphi method to explore the factors affecting QOL in 1975. 
Power et al. (2005) conduct the Delphi technique to seek agreements among 
participants in the development of the World Health Organization quality of life 
assessment module for older adults (the WHOQOL-OLD module). In Taiwan, in 
order to develop the quality indicators of a nursing home, Wu (1999) conducted 
three rounds of the Delphi method and used basic statistical analysis to 
integrate all the experts opinions. Meyrick (2003) reviews 126 papers about the 
Delphi method from 1995 to May 2001. He concludes that the Delphi method is 
well suited to explore the related health issues, because the Delphi method 
includes three main benefits, such as acknowledged experts, anonymity, and 
flexibility. These studies all suggest the suitability of the Delphi method for this 
research, to integrate all the experts viewpoints and to establish consensus. 
The semi-structured self-report questionnaire was used at this stage, because it 
fit the key aim of the Delphi method to collect both quantitative and qualitative 
data at the same time. An e-mail-based questionnaire (see Appendices 1, 2, 4, 
and 5) was used to conduct the Delphi exercise because using e-mail-based 
system could collect data effectively and it is easily for respondents to answer 
and reply the questionnaires (Hague et al., 2004). Moreover, distance is no 
problem, since the research participant only has to be accessible by computer 
(Bryman, 2004:470).  
The Delphi procedure requires at least two rounds because consensus is 
defined as a minimum of 75% agreement with the importance on any item at 
the second round (Murry & Hammons, 1995), and consensus is mostly 
achieved between round one and two (Dalkey, 1969). Therefore, this research 
involved two rounds of questionnaires as is standard to reach consensus in a 
Delphi approach.  
5.5.1 Delphi pilot  
An initial pilot survey of the questionnaire was provided to two academics in the 
DSDC at the University of Stirling to ensure the English questions were clearly 
expressed and the dementia specialists could understand the questionnaire 
clearly. As for the Chinese version of the questionnaire, this research invited 
two practitioners, one a physician, and the other a social work practitioner to 
provide their opinions. These academics and practitioners were asked to modify 
these questions and give recommendations to improve the questionnaire. They 
suggested using simple phrases and short sentences to improve 
comprehension. Following the pilot, the researcher corrected and revised the 
questionnaire, according to the suggestions of academics and practitioners. 
5.5.2 Participants 
Institutional dementia care involves many disciplines. As Tester (1999) states, 
the stakeholders in long-term care include researchers, policy makers, service 
providers, managers, practitioners, service users, and family caregivers. Thus, 
at least one expert in each field was selected to participate in both Scotland and 
Taiwan. Dalkey (1969) suggest that 11 to 30 members are a suitable Delphi 
panel size. Therefore, at this stage, a total of 26 key informants were recruited 
including physicians, nursing staff (in practice and academia), social workers (in 
practice and academia), architects, managers, advocates, and local authorities 
in both Scotland and Taiwan. Moreover, only dementia specialists from across 
disciplines who have considerable experience working with people with 
dementia or have been teaching dementia care in universities were invited.  
Physicians selected are neurologists and psychiatrists who have considerable 
experience in looking after people with dementia. Nurses selected are the head 
of nursing or senior nurse working in dementia institutions. Social workers who 
are working in the dementia care homes were recruited for the survey. Nurses 
and social workers who have been lecturing in dementia care field were chosen 
as specialist participants as well. Those who have experience in designing 
dementia care homes were recruited as architect specialist participants. Other 
participants are managers working in dementia care homes, advocates from 
relevant dementia associations and local authorities who are the directors of the 
senior welfare service section. 
The wording of the information sheet and questionnaire has stated clearly that 
the responses were dealt with confidentially, and were reported anonymously. 
In order to encourage the expert to answer the questionnaire and to protect 
individual privacy, I sent the questionnaire to each expert individually. Moreover, 
the participant was not named, only abbreviations are used in this thesis. 
5.5.3 Methods of data collection 
This research collected the comments from the key informants with different 
kinds of expertise in dementia care in both Scotland and Taiwan. Thus, at 
Stage one of the research (the Delphi method), quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care (see Appendices 1, 2, 4, and 5) were sent to the experts in 
dementia care in Scotland and Taiwan.  
The information sheet, consent form, and questionnaire were translated into 
Chinese for Taiwanese experts to avoid problems with expressing themselves 
in a foreign language and to enable them to answer the questionnaire easily. 
The researchers first language is Chinese and therefore, translation was 
handled by the researcher himself.  
The experts were asked to rate the quality indicators on the importance scale 
and to provide their comments as the reference for modifying the quality 
indicators, and developing the content validity of the quality indicators. This 
research used the Likert 5-point scale for asking the respondents to give a 
numerical score, whereby 1 is not at all important and 5 is very important. 
Moreover, the dementia specialists were allowed to add any comments in the 
comment box. It was expected that a consensus would be reached by the 
second round of this research.    
5.5.4 Methods of data analysis 
Qualitative and quantitative and data from the questionnaires were analyzed. 
Qualitative data analysis aims to search for identifying patterns in the qualitative 
data (Neuman, 2006). However, there are no standardized analytic strategies 
for qualitative data (Neuman, 2006). Several scholars have categorized varying 
rules or procedures for the analysis of qualitative data into different analytical 
approaches. For example, Spencer et al. (2003) point out 9 main qualitative 
analytical approaches: ethnographic accounts, life histories, narrative analysis, 
content analysis, conversation analysis, discourse analysis, analytic induction, 
grounded theory, and policy and evaluation analysis. Neuman (2006) find that 
there are 7 main analytic strategies for researchers to employ to analyse 
qualitative data: the ideal type, successive approximation, the illustrative 
method, domain analysis, analytic comparison, narrative analysis, and negative 
case method (p. 467). Creswell (2007) summarizes those qualitative analytical 
approaches in five key approaches: narrative research analysis, 
phenomenological analysis, grounded theory analysis, ethnographic study, and 
case study analysis. Spencer et al. (2003) argue that in reality researchers 
develop systematic and logically rigorous strategies for the analysis of 
qualitative data in terms of basic epistemological assumptions about the nature 
of qualitative enquiry and the status of researchers accounts (p. 200). In the 
thesis, in order to organize specific details into a coherent concept, theme, or 
model more explicitly and systematically, and to allow other researchers to 
follow and validate a qualitative study, the researcher has adopted the strategy 
of careful data reading, systematic reflection and logical comparison of data in 
the light of the research questions and insights from literature, as described 
below.   
There are no standardized analytic strategies for qualitative data used in a 
Delphi exercise. The procedures for analysing qualitative data during the Delphi 
exercise in this research were most similar to analytic induction (Spencer et al., 
2003). The key ingredients of analytic induction include a rough definition and 
hypothetical explanation of research question via an iterative process to collect 
data and reformulate or redefine the hypothesis until all cases are consistent 
with the hypothetical explanation of a phenomenon (Bryman, 2004). The key 
procedures of qualitative data analysis during the Delphi exercise involved 
giving the operational definitions of quality indicators as a theme, collecting and 
presenting comments; and comparing and synthesizing the findings. That is, 
the Delphi exercise is based on the analytic process of analytic induction and 
using constant comparison which is one of the components of grounded theory 
(Bryman, 2004) for analyzing qualitative data, which were combined in a 
strategy which I called thematic comparative induction. This process was used 
to build consensus among panel members on the operational definitions of 
quality indicators gained from the literature.  
Using a quantitative approach, a numerical level of consensus is considered to 
increase objective and comparable degree of consensus (Redmond et al., 
2006). Particularly, the median and the inter-quartile range are appropriate for 
data analysis and statistical feedback for the Delphi process (Faherty, 1979). 
Thus, in round one, the experts were asked to rate their perceptions of 
importance on a 5-point Likert scale for each quality indicator. The Likert-scale 
was treated as interval data, in order to calculate and analyze the respondents 
ratings (Jillson, 1975; Clayton, 1997). Subsequently, the medians and inter-
quartile ranges were calculated for each quality indicator.  
A median score of 7.50 or greater on a 10-point scale was selected as the cut-
off point of importance, because it falls in the highest 25 per cent of the range 
(Faherty, 1979). Moreover, high consensus is considered to have been 
achieved when an item received an inter-quartile range of 2.00 or less on a ten-
point scale, because this shows a close clustering of scores (Faherty, 1979). In 
conclusion, the greater median indicates the greater importance of the quality 
indicator. The lower inter-quartile range indicates the higher consensus 
amongst the panel members. In this study, the researcher used the 5-point 
Likert scale to ask respondents to rate their perception of importance on 43 
quality indicators, whereby 1 is not at all important and 5 is very important. 
Thus, while an item achieves a suitable level of importance, the median score 
should be 3.75 or higher.  
However, in reality, the researcher asked participants to rate a whole number 
on the 5-point Likert scale in the Delphi process, according to the calculating 
formula for the median; it could only appear as a half or a whole number. Thus, 
the researcher rounded up the median score of 3.75 to 4 as the importance 
criterion in this research, which is therefore set as: a median score of 4 or 
above and an inter-quartile range of 1.00 or less. If a quality indicator met both 
of the above two criteria, it meant that the quality indicator reaches a suitable 
level of importance and consensus. 
The second-round questionnaire was revised from the first round following this 
process. In addition, the statistical results and anonymous versions of 
respondents comments from the first round were sent to the same experts. 
Those experts whose answers differed from the common responses on each 
scale were asked to justify their answers. This is a standard aspect of the 
Delphi approach (Dalkey, 1967). 
The final step was to analyse the second round responses to identify whether 
the experts comments tended to converge. When the experts opinions 
reached a 75% significant agreement on any item, consensus was considered 
to be achieved. 
5.6 Field test 
Based on the total involvement and customer focus, a field test was 
administered in all care homes in Taiwan that care for people with dementia. At 
this stage, service receivers were recruited to assess the importance of quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care on the self-completion questionnaire to 
verify that these quality indicators for institutional dementia care fit the 
requirements of people with dementia and their family members.  
Even though quality indicators for institutional dementia care which were 
developed from the Delphi method have content validity, they could not 
represent the views of service receivers, because so far the quality indicators 
have only been evaluated by dementia specialists. In order to examine whether 
quality indicators for institutional dementia care fit the requirements of major 
service receivers, this research adopted the census to involve people with 
dementia living in care homes and their family members in Taiwan. This 
research adopted a self-completion questionnaire revised following a pilot 
survey to take account of the recommendations received to collect data on all 
care homes which care for people with dementia in Taiwan.  
This research was designed to involve all the stakeholders in dementia care in 
a limited time frame. The structured self-completion questionnaire used in the 
field test not only could involve all the stakeholders in the survey, but also could 
be answered and analysed effectively. Thus, structured questionnaires were 
used in this research because the features of structured questionnaires are 
simple, specific, and closed questions (Gillham, 2000); and they are suitable for 
large samples and self-completion (Hague et al., 2004). In particular, the 
advantages of self-completion questionnaire include low costs of administration; 
speed of administration; absence of interviewer effects, interviewer variability; 
and convenience for respondents (Bryman, 2004). Self-completion 
questionnaires also allow respondents to reply confidently and anonymously 
(Hague et al., 2004).  
However, some scholars consider that a self-completion questionnaire has 
some disadvantages. Generally, it cannot follow up interesting responses and 
investigate underlying motives (Robson, 2002); specifically in this domain, 
respondents with illiteracy problems might not be able to complete the 
questionnaires by themselves. In order to minimise response errors, the 
researcher conducted a face-to-face interview to assist the respondents with 
illiteracy problems to complete the self- completion questionnaires.  
5.6.1 Pilot survey 
The aim of the pilot test was to evaluate the respondents comprehension of 
questions, their interpretation of questions, and their perceived burden of taking 
part in the test. Particularly, when the quality indicators were translated into 
Chinese, it was necessary to recruit a small number of potential respondents to 
conduct a pilot survey. Thus, the researcher selected two people with dementia 
living in care homes and their family members who consented to participate in 
the pilot survey in Taiwan to see whether they could understand the 
questionnaire clearly and to identify any incorrect terms or confusing phrasing. 
However, in order to avoid influencing the representation of any successive 
subject, potential participants who were similar to those who were employed in 
the field test, but while they took part in the pilot survey, they were not selected 
for the field test. 
A paper-based survey with the questions focusing on quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care was used to collect data from people with dementia 
living in care homes and their family members. The instrument of the pilot 
survey was the questionnaire revised from the results of the Delphi study. It 
included two main parts: demographics and main questionnaire. Prior to this 
pilot survey, the questionnaire had been translated into Chinese using simple 
phrasing instead of the academic terminology for Taiwanese participants, while 
ensuring the content remained the same.  
Thus, firstly, I translated my questionnaire into Chinese using simple phrasing, 
and then I consulted a Taiwanese researcher to get a professional appraisal on 
the feasibility of the Chinese version of the questionnaire for residents with 
dementia. The Taiwanese researcher considered the Chinese version of the 
questionnaire suitable for residents with dementia to answer, but suggested 
that prior to the field test, I should conduct face-to-face interviews with residents 
with dementia to ensure that they could answer the questionnaire with 
autonomy. The Taiwanese researcher also suggested that I should stay at 
every care home for at least one day depending on the number of participants 
in case the respondents had difficulty with literacy or required further 
explanation to complete the self-completion questionnaires. 
Prior to the survey, the information sheet and consent form (see Appendices 8 
and 9) were given to the participants. The aim of the information sheet was to 
illustrate the objectives of this research, to explain the reason why this research 
is important, and to offer guarantees of confidentiality. The consent form aimed 
to ensure that participation was were voluntary, participants consented to take 
part in the pilot, and permitted the researcher to use their views in the Ph.D. 
thesis and any subsequent publications or reports. Thus, the completion of the 
consent form was necessary for this survey. 
At the stage of pilot survey, I asked the participant to tick Yes or No to 
indicate whether s/he has any difficulty understanding or answering the 
demographic characteristics. If the participant made a response to any of the 
questions with Yes, s/he was asked to provide further explanation in the 
Comment box for the researcher to revise the question. However, the 
participant was only asked to ensure the feasibility of the demographic 
characteristics because the size and geographical distribution of the care home 
were recorded by the researcher at the stage of field test.  
With regard to the main questionnaire for the pilot survey (see Appendix 10), it 
consisted of 41 quality indicators with 6 dimensions generated from the Delphi 
method. In order to ensure that the survey form layout was appropriate and the 
questions were easy to comprehend, the researcher asked the participants to 
identify any difficulty in understanding each statement. In addition, if the 
participant made a response to any of the statements with Yes, s/he was 
asked to offer further explanation in the Comment box for the researcher to 
modify the statement. 
The feasibility of the quality indicators was verified according to the pilot results. 
That is, the participants seemed to have no difficulty in understanding each 
statement. Thus, the final version of the questionnaire for the field test was 
produced following the pilot survey. The final version of the questionnaire (in 
Chinese) is available as Appendix 11.  
Subsequent to the piloting exercise, the conduct of the field test provided its 
own opportunity for further reflection on the extent to which the questionnaire 
was understood by respondents. No clear evidence of major problems in 
understanding the questionnaire emerged, although there was some 
uncertainty about some specific terminologies. 
5.6.2 Participants 
At this stage, I turned to the customers who receive services in Taiwanese care 
homes for people with dementia because customer perception plays a crucial 
role in the development of quality indicators for institutional dementia care 
(Tester, 1999). People with mild to moderate dementia still have the ability to 
express their own thoughts about their QOL (Trigg et al., 2007). Moreover, in 
Taiwan, looking after people with dementia is the obligation of family members. 
Thus, residents and family members have rights to know the content of quality 
of care. This research selected people with dementia living in care homes and 
their representatives (normally family members) who consented to participate in 
the field test in Taiwan to see how important they think this particular measure 
is to the overall quality of care for people with dementia living in care homes.  
In order to achieve the aim of total participation and to obtain all opinions from 
the whole population, census was adopted in this research. Currently in Taiwan, 
there are 18 care homes with A or A
 grades for people with dementia which 
include special care units within the care home. The results of evaluation of 
Taiwanese care homes are available for general public access through the 
Department of Social Affairs website. This indicates that all people with mild to 
moderate dementia that could answer the questionnaire with autonomy living in 
the above 18 care homes were the population for this research; the family 
members of those people were selected at the same time. However, the exact 
number of participants could only be estimated for each care home, because in 
practice the actual number of residents with dementia varies in each care home. 
1-14 residents with dementia from each care home were used in the calculation. 
The number of respondents depended on the various sizes of the care homes. 
In order to conduct CFA and inferential statistics effectively, this research aimed 
to select at least 150 respondents, which is suggested by Hair et al. (2010) for a 
hypothesized model with seven or fewer constructs to ensure that these quality 
indicators are important, and are reflective of quality.  
The selection criteria for those residents participating in the study were those 
who were considered capable of answering the questionnaire with autonomy by 
the professional judgment of the care home staff. Only those residents and their 
family members who gave informed consents could participate. Generally, 
under this criterion, only those with mild dementia were recruited (though it is 
possible that some participants with high levels of education will be able to 
participate even though they may have more advanced dementia). The 
selection criteria should themselves serve to minimize the risk of distress 
caused by participation. The researcher was vigilant to prevent any distress to 
the respondents at all times. If any participant showed any signs of being upset 
during the survey, s/he was asked to terminate the exercise. In addition, if the 
participant felt s/he could not continue to answer the self-questionnaire even in 
the absence of distress, the survey was discontinued and it would only be 
recommenced when the participant wished to. 
The researcher personally contacted the selected care homes and asked for 
their preliminary agreement to identify the potential participants for this survey. 
Subsequently, formal research access application letters (see Appendix 6) were 
sent to these institutions to request their formal approval for recruitment. It 
provided additional support and advantages in reaching the goal toward census 
in all care homes for people with dementia. According to Taiwanese legislation, 
when formal research access application letters and ethics approval letters are 
sent to an institution to request for approval, the care home is obliged to reply 
with their decisions. 
Once access was formally granted an initial approach was made to potential 
participants. I personally contacted the respondents recruited, gave them the 
information sheets and consent forms (see Appendices 8 and 9), and requested 
their help with the study.  
5.6.3 Methods of data collection  
For the field test, the instruments were the self-completion questionnaire 
revised from the pilot survey in two main parts: demographics, and main 
questionnaire.  
The objectives of the information sheet and consent form for the field test were 
the same as those of the pilot survey. The items of personal information were 
also the same as the items in the pilot survey, but in the field test, the 
participants were asked to tick the one which described them the best. 
The classification questions were used to build a profile of samples by finding 
out their gender, age, marital status, socio-economic grade, and so on; it can 
be used to group respondents to see how they differ one from the other 
(Hague et al., 2004:102); and it is used to check that the correct quota of 
samples have been selected. Thus, participants were asked to answer key 
information on classification questions in this research. 
Demographic variables and characteristics of care home affect quality of care 
and QOL for older residents living in care homes. Previous research 
distinguishes demographic characteristics of residents and family members 
such as age, gender, marital status, education, religion, and socioeconomic 
status as significant predictors of quality of care or QOL for older people living 
in care homes (Wu, 1999; Tester, 1999; and Leung et al., 2005). However, 
views differ on how influential above factors are. Samus et al. (2005) find that 
age, gender, education are not significant correlates of QOL in care home 
residents with dementia. Sikorska-Simmons (2006) also observes that age, 
gender, and marital status of residents do not influence their perceptions of 
quality of care in care home. On the other hand, Samus et al. (2005) 
demonstrate that widowed residents have a better QOL than those who are not 
windowed, but Tu et al. (2006) discover that married residents are satisfied with 
their QOL living in Taiwanese nursing homes. In addition, older residents with a 
higher educational level living in Taiwanese nursing homes report higher scores 
on QOL (Tseng and Wang, 2001), but Sikorska-Simmons (2006) discovers that 
more educated residents are less satisfied with their care home. 
Religious belief influences quality of care for older adults in late life (Krause, 
2003). For example, Tu et al. (2006) find that Taiwanese residents with 
Buddhist/ Taoist beliefs report a significantly lower QOL score than those with 
Christian/Catholic beliefs.  
Taiwanese nursing home residents with higher socioeconomic status scored 
higher on QOL (Tseng and Wang, 2001). Chiu et al. (2001) find that family 
members with higher education levels are more likely to pay for care home 
services. Gaugler et al. (2003) also find that family members with higher income 
are more likely to choose those care homes with high quality of care because 
they could pay the high fee for the care. 
Previous research suggests that characteristics of care homes, such as size 
and geographical distribution, significantly influence quality of care for older 
people living in care homes. For example, Chou et al. (2003) observe that 
smaller care homes have higher levels of resident satisfaction because smaller 
care homes can provide more opportunities of social interaction for residents. 
Zimmerman et al. (2003) also claim that smaller care homes could offer higher 
quality of care for residents. With regard to the geographical distribution of care 
homes, Chou et al. (2003) find that an urban location has a weak association 
with better resident satisfaction.  
Although different studies draw different conclusions on the influence of 
demographical variables and characteristics of the care home, I argue that 
identity category, gender, age, marital status, religion, education, financial 
support, and size and geographical distribution of care homes are relevant to 
this study.  
In this research, the operational definitions of demographic factors were: 
1. Identity category was divided into two parts: resident and family member.   
2. Age range were 40 and under, 41 to 64, 65 to 74, 75 and over.  
3. Three possible answers of marital status: single/unmarried, 
cohabiting/married, and separated/divorced/widowed (Department of 
Statistics, 2009a).  
4. According to the Ministry of the Interior (2006), there were five principle 
categories of religion at the end of 2005 in Taiwan which includes Daoism, 
Buddhism, Christianity, Catholicism, and others. Thus, the question of 
religion consisted of these five possible answers. 
5. The education levels were illiteracy, completed primary school, completed 
junior high school, completed senior high school, and obtained an 
undergraduate or postgraduate degree (Department of Statistics, 2009b). 
6. Two possible answers of financial support were public and private funding. 
7. In terms of the Ministry of the Interior (2007), the size of the care home was 
distinguished into small (49 beds and under) and large (over 49 beds).    
8. The geographical distribution of the care home included four areas: northern, 
central, southern, and eastern Taiwan (Department of Statistics, 2009b).   
The main questionnaire for the field test (see Appendix 11) consisted of 41 
quality indicators with six key dimensions modified from the pilot survey: 
management and administration, human resource management, health and 
personal care, social care, rights, and environment. In order to answer the 
question easily and to conduct data comparison and analysis effectively, this 
research utilized the Likert 5-point scale to ask the respondents to give a 
numerical score on the importance of quality indicators for institutional dementia 
care, whereby 1 is not at all important and 5 is very important.  
5.6.4 Methods of data analysis 
The methods of data analysis were quantitative analysis at this stage of the 
research. The comments of respondents were sorted to modify the self-
completion questionnaire at the end of the pilot survey for the field test. The full 
details of the quantitative analysis were presented in Chapter 7. The data from 
the questionnaire survey were analysed with Statistical Package for the Social 
Sciences (SPSS) for Windows 16.0 revision and the Analysis of Moment 
Structures (AMOS) software 7.0 revision was used to conduct the CFA.  
5.6.4.1 Reliability, validity, and item analysis  
Reliability and validity are the two properties which constitute the essence of 
measurement or data generation of any kind (Oppenheim, 1993: 159). The 
higher coefficient of reliability indicates the higher consistency and stability. The 
higher validity means that the results of measurement have a higher accuracy. 
Nevertheless, high reliability does not mean high validity. Item analysis could be 
used to examine reliability (Nunnally, 1967). Therefore, this research undertook 
reliability, validity, and item analysis for improving the questionnaire. 
5.6.4.1.1 Reliability  
Reliability means that repeated measurements obtain the same outcomes; and 
consistency and stability of measurement (Loewenthal, 2001). Cronbach's 
alpha is the most suitable for measuring the internal consistency between all 
items in the scale (Loewenthal, 2001). This research used Cronbach's  to 
measure the internal consistency reliability of the quality indicators. The 
common acceptable criterion of Cronbach's  is over 0.7 (Hair et al., 1998; 
Loewenthal, 2001). Therefore, if the Cronbach's  of one quality indicator was 
more than 0.7, then this quality indicator was accepted.  
5.6.4.1.2 Validity  
Validity indicates the degree to which an instrument measures what it is 
supposed or intended to measure (Oppenheim, 1993:160). Content validity is 
achieved via experts judging each item for its appropriateness (Nunnally, 1967) 
and its conceptual definition (Hair et al., 1998). In the present study, quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care have been established through the 
literature review and the Delphi method. Therefore, the evidence indicated that 
the quality indicators have content validity.  
5.6.4.1.3 Item analysis  
This research adopted corrected item-total correlations to conduct item analysis 
for improving this questionnaire. The item-total correlations could show the 
correlation between scores on each item of the questionnaire, and the total 
scores on the questionnaire (Loewenthal, 2001). In addition, corrected item-
total correlation could tell us how well the item correlates with the others 
(Loewenthal, 2001:135-136). Moreover, if the coefficient of corrected item-total 
correlation is less than 0.15, then this item could be thrown out for raising alpha 
(Loewenthal, 2001). Thus, this research followed these principles to decide 
which items were retained. 
Through reliability, validity, and item analysis, it was expected that quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care were high reliability, validity, and 
acceptability.  
5.6.4.2 Descriptive and inferential statistics 
Developing the quality indicators was based on the TQM approach. Thus, in 
order to provide a reference for service providers to offer individual service and 
to ensure whether most stakeholders could accept quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care, it was necessary to conduct descriptive statistics 
and inferential statistics for examining whether different demographics cause 
different importance degree in the quality indicators.  
In this research, the frequency and percentage were utilized to analyse the 
distribution of respondents and care homes: identity category, gender, age, 
marital status, religion, education, financial support, and size and geographical 
distribution of the care home. The mean was employed to measure the central 
tendency of the quality indicators. The standard deviation was utilized to 
measure the dispersion of importance degree of the quality indicators.  
With regard to inferential statistics for this research, a cross-tabulation was 
employed to examine whether the participant distribution of gender, age, marital 
status, religion, and education groups were the same between resident and 
family member categories. The relationships between the geographical 
distribution of the care home for the participant distribution of financial support 
groups were also examined by the crosstabs analysis. 
Pearsons product-moment correlation was used to examine the relationships 
between the quality aspects. Independent- samples t-test was used to compare 
the difference between the means of two groups: identity category, gender, 
financial support, and size of the care home. A one-way analysis of variance 
(one-way ANOVA) with Scheffe test was used to compare the difference 
between the means of more than two groups: age, marital status, religion, 
education, and geographic distribution of the care home. Multiple linear 
regression analysis was performed to examine whether demographical 
variables (gender, age, marital status, religious beliefs, education, and financial 
support) and characteristics of care home (geographic distribution and size) 
could predict the six main dimensions of care quality: management and 
administration, human resource management, health and personal care, social 
care, rights, and environment. 
5.6.4.3 Confirmatory factor analysis  
Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was used to confirm the model of this 
research. Since it is not possible with principle components or factor analysis 
for a statistical test of the goodness-of-fit for the proposed confirmatory factor 
solution, the key aims of CFA are (1) to verify the proposed factor structure 
and (2) to explore if any significant modifications are needed (Hair et al., 
1998:624). The essential components, procedures, and fit indices of CFA will 
be demonstrated in the following sections. The findings of previous empirical 
research will also be presented to illustrate that CFA fits this research to 
develop quality indicators for institutional dementia care that close the gap 
between theoretical and empirical evidence. 
Structural equation modelling (SEM) is a technique to provide the proper and 
most efficient estimation method for a series of separate multiple regression 
equations estimated at the same time (Hair et al., 1998). SEM has two essential 
components: one is the structural model, and the other is the measurement 
model (Hair et al., 1998). The structural model is a kind of path analysis, which 
has only one indicator between independent and dependent variables; and the 
measurement model is a kind of factor analysis, which has many variables for 
one independent or dependent variable (Hair et al., 1998). Thus, SEM is a 
technique which integrates multiple regression and factor analysis to enable 
the researcher not only to assess quite complex interrelated dependence 
relationships but also to incorporate the effects of measurement errors on the 
structural coefficients at the same time (Hair et al., 1998:644).  
SEM is a confirmatory method which is guided by theory and it needs the 
researcher to completely specify it (Hair et al., 1998). There are six key steps 
for setting up the measurement model and the structural model:   
Stage 1: Defining individual constructs 
Stage 2: Developing the overall measurement model 
Stage 3: Designing a study to produce empirical results 
Stage 4: Assessing the measurement model validity  
Stage 5: Specifying the structural model  
Stage 6: Assessing structural model validity (Hair et al., 2010: 654-655). 
However, this research was expected to confirm whether the model developed 
from theories was valid; and to develop the standard for evaluating the quality 
of institutional dementia care in Taiwan. Thus, only the measurement model 
best met this research.  
The most important stage in developing the measurement model was to assess 
the measurement model validity. There are many different kinds of fit index for 
the goodness-of-fit tests, such as chi-square statistic (
), goodness-of-fit index 
(GFI), root mean square residual (RMR), standardized root mean square 
residual (SRMR), root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA),Tucker-
Lewis index (TLI), comparative fit index (CFI), normed fit index (NFI), 
incremental fit index (IFI), and adjusted goodness-of-fit index (AGFI) (Hair et al., 
2010).  
Both structural and measurement models should conduct absolute fit measures 
because they should assess the overall model fit (Hair et al., 1998). However, it 
depends on the objective of the researcher when choosing what kinds of 
measurement to use and how many measures are required to assess the 
goodness-of-fit of a model (Hair et al., 1998). That is, there is no absolute 
criterion for a researcher.  
In empirical studies, CFA with different fit indices has been widely applied to the 
development of different models. For example, Power et al. (1999) conduct 
CFA with the 
 and CFI to examine their hypothesized CFA model because it 
can provide a more powerful method for testing this hypothesized model. Power 
et al. (2005) also employ CFA with the 
 , RMSEA, and CFI to establish the 
WHOQOL-OLD module. Ohaeri et al. (2007) use CFA and path analysis with 
the 
, RMSEA, GFI, AGFI, and AIC (Akaike information criterion) to examine 
how well the hypothesized model which they develop fits into the WHOQOL-
BREF data of Sudanese psychiatric patients and their family carers. The above 
evidence seems to indicate that CFA fits this research to confirm whether 
quality indicators for institutional dementia care modified from pilot survey 
contribute to the six hypothetical aspects for people with dementia living in care 
homes. Thus, according to this research purposes and the previous empirical 
studies, it focused on the measurement model to select appropriate indices to 
examine the goodness-of-fit of the hypothesized model that was developed in 
this research.  
In this research, I focused on the measurement model, CFA, rather than the 
structural model and path analysis. In addition, the 
 value approximates the 
degrees of freedom, have demonstrated to be unrealistic in most SEM empirical 
research (Byrne, 2001:81) because it is sensitive to large degrees of freedom. 
The researcher could employ the alternative indices of fit and related 
confidence intervals that provided by the AMOS to be used as adjuncts to the 
statistic (Byrne, 2001). Thus, in this research, 
, df; and p-value were 
presented, but RMR, NFI, IFI, TLI, and CFI were employed to examine the 
hypothesized model fit.  
The levels of acceptable fit adopted which are recommended by Hair et al. 
(1998): the acceptable value of RMR is under 0.05; the recommended level of 
NFI, IFI, TLI, and CFI is 0.90 or higher. In addition, if all the goodness-of-fit 
measures of this measurement model reached the levels of acceptable fit, then 
this model would be accepted. That is, conducting CFA would confirm that 
quality indicators for institutional dementia care which were developed in this 
research fit theoretical and empirical evidence. 
5.7 Ethical considerations and gaining ethical approval 
The study is guided by the ethics requirements of the Economic and Social 
Research Council (ESRC) and the Department of Applied Social Science 
(DASS). Thus, when this research is conducted, it is necessary to consider the 
following issues.  
5.7.1 Ethical considerations 
This research involved all stakeholders, who include service providers, people 
with dementia and their families, local authorities concerned, and experts of the 
related fields. Due to the specific characteristics of people with dementia, it was 
necessary to consider the general research ethics and the specific ethics for 
people with dementia particularly carefully.  
The ethical issues of dementia study are autonomy, beneficence, and justice 
(Bjorneby et al., 2004). The principles of autonomy for people with dementia are 
to respect their decisions, integrity, dignity, and preferences; the principles of 
beneficence are to benefit the clients and their family members concurrently; 
and the ethical principles of justice are to treat people with dementia fairly and 
to respect their human rights (Bjorneby et al., 2004). The basic concept of 
autonomy is informed consent (Bjorneby et al., 2004). That is, it is necessary to 
provide sufficient information which includes the research purpose and 
procedure, and the use of personal data for people with dementia to decide 
whether they want to participate in a voluntary and competent way, i.e. to get 
informed consent. In addition, when conducting questionnaires for people with 
dementia, it is necessary to avoid fatigue in people with dementia and to note 
the non-verbal responses (Bjorneby et al., 2004).  
Since people with dementia still have interpersonal processes (Kitwood, 1997b), 
they can pass on their opinions about quality of care. The ethical issues of 
dementia study that are indicated by Bjorneby et al. are the same as the 
general research ethics which should be considered in all kinds of research. 
Therefore, when the research is conducted, it has to meet ethical guidelines as 
set out by the DASS and ESRC.  
Moreover, in order to encourage the participant to answer the questionnaire 
and to protect individual privacy, both anonymity and confidentiality are the 
most important issues for all styles of research (Fulcher and Scott, 2003). 
Therefore, anonymity and confidentiality of responses or comments were 
preserved at all times. That is, the data were collected only for the purpose of 
this study. In addition, consent was obtained for conducting the questionnaires 
from all participants. During the duration of this study, all data were stored in a 
lockable cabinet or on a computer network account which was only accessed 
by researchers password. When the study was completed, the data were 
destroyed.  
5.7.2 Gaining ethical approval 
This research sought ethical approval for two stages from the DASS Ethics 
Committee, because this research was divided into two stages: stage one is the 
Delphi exercise and stage two is a field test.  
The DASS Ethics Committee approved stage one of the project on the 27
March 2008 and stage one of the project, the Delphi method, was finished by 
the end of August 2008. The results of stage one were fed into the next stage. 
When each stage has finished, the ethics forms and research tools for the 
subsequent stage were submitted to meet the required ethics review procedure 
by the DASS Ethics Committee.  
The Taiwanese dementia specialists who participated in the Delphi method 
were invited by the researcher personally. That is, prior to the Delphi method, I 
had personally contacted the Taiwanese potential participants who are the 
evaluation committee for long-term care in local or central Government, or 
workers whose working institutions were evaluated with an A grade. Scottish 
potential participants were selected through the DSDC, because the DSDC has 
an overview of dementia services provision in Scotland and could assist the 
researcher identify the most significant key informants. Therefore, I gave the 
DSDC a formal research access application letter to request their approval. 
When access has been formally granted an initial approach was made via the 
DSDC to potential participants who are dementia specialists from across 
disciplines, information sheets and consent forms were sent to the experts who 
have been identified by the DSDC as potential participants requesting their help 
with the study. 
Since e-mail responses cannot be anonymous, the wording of the information 
sheet and questionnaire stated clearly that the responses were dealt with 
confidentially, and were reported anonymously. In order to encourage the 
expert to answer the questionnaire and to protect individual privacy, I sent the 
questionnaire to the expert individually. Moreover, the participant was not 
named, only abbreviations were used in this thesis. 
The proposal for the second stage was approved by the DASS Ethics 
Committee on 16
 October 2008. Subsequently, formal research access 
application letters were sent to these institutions to request their formal 
approval for recruitment.  
Once access to recruit was formally granted, the researcher personally 
approached the potential participants, i.e. residents with dementia who could 
answer the questionnaire with autonomy and their representatives (family 
members or other unpaid caregivers), and gave them the information sheets 
and consent forms and answered their queries. The researcher took the advice 
from the care home professionals concerning which residents were appropriate 
to participate in the survey. When the person (person with dementia and their 
family members) expressed his/her wish to participate in and read my 
information sheet, he/she was asked to sign the consent form.  
In order to reduce the distress of residents and inspire them to answer the 
questionnaire, the researcher used simple phrasing and short sentences to 
replace the complex questions, and invited residents with dementia and their 
family members to do the questionnaires concurrently. With regard to the 
support mechanism, prior to the survey, the researcher sought assistance from 
a member of staff whom the resident trusted or who was capable of calming 
down the resident if s/he becomes upset during the process.  
As for the confidentiality issue, the questionnaires were distributed and 
collected by the researcher, when the participants consented to take part in this 
survey. Participants were asked to finish the questionnaires on the spot or they 
could return them to the researcher at later date by post. If the latter was 
chosen, the paid envelopes were provided to them. The envelopes were 
addressed to the researchers Taiwanese correspondence address to ensure 
confidentiality. 
With regard to the reliance on the written information, some residents may have 
difficulties in understanding due to illiteracy. The family members of residents 
could read out the questionnaires to the residents if required, because residents 
with dementia and their family members were invited to do the questionnaires 
concurrently, and most Taiwanese adults younger than 50-year-old are literate 
with the official language, Chinese. However, if the family members were also 
illiterate or required further explanation to complete the self-completion 
questionnaires, the researcher was there to assist by conducting a face-to-face 
interview, because the researcher had the working experience in a Taiwanese 
care home for people with dementia, and was familiar with how to interact with 
residents at such homes. In addition, the researcher took advice from the 
Taiwanese researcher staying at every care home for at least one day 
depending on the number of participants in case the respondents had difficulty 
with literacy or required further explanation to complete the questionnaires. 
5.8 Issues in data collection 
This research adopted a mixed-method survey research to employ qualitative 
methods to collect subjective data and perceptions, and using quantitative 
methods to gather objective viewpoints to develop quality indicators for 
Taiwanese institutional dementia care. Basically, the process of data collection 
went smoothly and was completed within the time scale. However, there were 
some challenges during data collection. I will describe these challenges and 
make some recommendations for future research in the next sections. 
It was not easy to involve different disciplines in institutional dementia care in 
both Scotland and Taiwan. Fortunately, the researcher had been a member of 
the guidance committee of a care home for the Taiwanese central Government 
and had personal acquaintance with most Taiwanese potential dementia 
specialists so that prior to the Delphi process, I could personally contact and 
invite them to participate in this research. However, since I am an international 
student, except for dementia experts in DSDC, I did not know any Scottish 
potential participants. Fortunately, the DSDC has an overview of dementia 
services provision in Scotland and could assist the researcher to identify the 
most significant key informants. However, in order to increase the return rate, it 
was necessary to make a follow-up contact to those who did not return their 
completed questionnaires by the deadline that was set. That is, sufficient 
resource and an enthusiastic attitude are key success factors for the Delphi 
exercise.  
According to Taiwanese legislation, when formal research access application 
letters and ethics approval letters are sent to an institution to request their 
approval, the care home is obliged to reply their decision. In addition, the 
researcher had been a member of the guidance committee of a care home for 
the Taiwanese central Government and had personal acquaintance with most 
managers and presidents of Taiwanese care homes. These provided additional 
support and advantages in reaching the goal toward census in all care homes 
for people with dementia. 
During the field test, the managers were extremely helpful in building a rapport 
with the participants within a short timeframe because the managers played the 
most important role in helping to identify, invite, arrange, and encourage 
residents with dementia and their family members to answer the questionnaires. 
In order to avoid potential gate keeping biases, the researcher has confirmed 
that all respondents participated in a voluntary and competent way; and paid 
attention to preventing any distress to the respondents at all times. That is, the 
researcher followed the strict requirements of the DASS Ethics Committee so 
that the field test went smoothly and finished within the time scale. 
The researcher had observed that if residents with dementia had a physical 
disability problem or pessimistic/introverted personality trait, they might not 
appreciate the importance of social care due to their personal limitation. 
Likewise, if the institution did not provide social activities for people with 
dementia, residents would not value social care because they had no 
opportunity to experience the improvement the appropriate social care may 
offer. Moreover, if the care home did not build a designed environment for 
people with dementia in the first place, the residents would not realize the 
benefit from a well-designed environment because the residents may have 
adapted to the existing care home environment. Thus, future research may be 
worthwhile to further explore whether these factors affect significantly quality of 
care for people with dementia living in Taiwanese care homes. 
The researcher had also made a few observations that some care homes did 
not provide the quality care that they have claimed for people with dementia. 
For example, some care homes claimed that recreational activity was provided 
but in reality, the only activity provided was TV viewing. In another situation 
where a care worker was treating a resident in a wheelchair, the residents feet 
were misplaced while he was pushing the wheelchair. However, if the incidence 
was reported to the manager, it was most likely to be ignored or considered as 
an unimportant issue. The only way to be noticed is to report to the local or 
central Government for further investigation. 
The researcher also identified some potential problems of human resource 
management of institutions. For example, when I conducted the field test in a 
Taiwanese care home, there were instances when there was insufficient trained 
staff and a head nurse asked a family caregiver to make a complaint to the 
manager about this problem in the family meeting. This suggested that there 
was insufficient trained staff and an inadequate staff complaint procedure in the 
care home, or there was a problem with the organizational culture; otherwise, 
the head nurse did not need to ally with the family caregiver to confront the 
manager of care home. Even though the researcher knew the manager of the 
institution personally, the study process was strictly kept neutral. 
The researcher's working experience and familiarity with the dementia 
specialists, the managers and presidents of the care homes benefited the study 
progress. However, the researcher should follow the strict requirements of the 
DASS Ethics Committee to confirm that all participants wanted to take part in a 
voluntary and competent way, and seek assistant resources to calm down the 
resident if s/he became upset during the process. 
5.9 Summary 
The pragmatist and TQM approaches offer the research and conceptual 
framework for this research to conduct the Delphi method and questionnaire 
method in order to answer the research questions and to develop quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care. Actually and eventually, the evidence 
seems to be strong that these research methods are appropriate and capable 
of producing sound results. For example, through the literature review, it was 
therefore clear that quality of care for people with dementia living in care homes 
is influenced by the six main dimensions of care quality: management and 
administration, human resource management, health and personal care, social 
care, rights, and environment. All the views of experts in dementia care were 
expected to integrate via the Delphi method. Quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care were high reliability, validity, and credibility through reliability, 
validity, and item analysis. Conducting CFA would confirm that quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care which were developed in this research 
fit theoretical and empirical evidence. Conducting independent-samples t-test 
and one-way ANOVA with Scheffe test could examine any differences between 
the views of people with dementia and their family members on the quality 
indicators. Lastly, through the Delphi method and questionnaire survey, it was 
expected to develop the best quality indicators for institutional dementia care for 
people with dementia living in care homes in Taiwan.  
At the stage of development of quality indicators for institutional dementia care, 
this research involved advocates and local authorities concerned with the 
related fields. Moreover, when I finished the final version of the quality 
indicators, the quality indicators were of high reliability, validity, and applicability; 
most of the stakeholders could accept them; and they fit theoretical and 
empirical evidence concurrently.  
Chapter 6- An investigation of quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care: A Delphi study 
6.1 Introduction 
In this chapter, firstly I present the demographic characteristics of the Delphi 
panel to illustrate that the Delphi panel in this research is representative 
because I invited dementia specialists from across disciplines in both Scotland 
and Taiwan.  
Subsequently, I report rating results from Delphi method round one to show that 
all the 43 quality indicators have achieved a suitable level of importance (a 
median score of 4 or above), although 9 of the quality indicators did not reach 
consensus (IQR>1).  
Third, I divide the 43 quality indicators into three groups to discuss the results 
from each of quality indicators and to explain how I will have changed some 
operational definitions of quality indicators: quality indicators lacked consensus, 
quality indicators in percentage, and quality indicators needed improvement. I 
also explain the reason why I added three new quality indicators obtained from 
the first round to comprise the total of 46 quality indicators for the second round. 
Fourth, the results of Delphi method round two will be presented to demonstrate 
that 41 quality indicators have achieved a suitable level of importance and 
consensus. The 5 quality indicators which did not reach consensus in the 
second round were removed. The 8 quality indicators in which the results were 
expressed in ratio/percentage were confirmed to have acceptable 
ratio/percentage. There were still 2 quality indicators that needed further 
improvement.  
Finally, the conclusion of the Delphi exercise will be addressed to illustrate that 
it is an appropriate method for this research. It helps to integrate the opinions of 
dementia experts to formulate the formal questionnaire for the field test.  
6.2 Delphi method round one 
The first Delphi questionnaire and information sheets with consent forms were 
sent via email to the 26 panel members with considerable experience in 
working with people with dementia or teaching about dementia care in 
universities. These professionals were asked to complete and return their 
questionnaires within two weeks. A follow-up contact to those who did not 
return their completed questionnaires by the deadline was made. This led to 24 
of the first-round questionnaires being received, a 92 percent return rate.  
The demographic characteristics of Delphi panel were listed in Table 6.1. 
Medians and inter-quartile ranges for all quality indicators were summarized in 
Table 6.2. The comments of experts were included in Appendix 3. The following 
is a discussion of the findings from the first Delphi questionnaire. 
6.2.1 Demographics of Delphi panel 
From Table 6.1, it could be clearly seen that there were 24 experts taking part 
in the first round questionnaire, including 16 Taiwanese experts and 8 Scottish 
experts.  
  Table 6.1 Summary of participant characteristics 
Expert characteristics 
Frequency (N=24)  
Percent* 
Taiwan  Scotland  Total 
Gender  
Male 5 3 8 33  
Female 11 5 16 67 
Age range  
     below 31 years old   1 0 1 4  
     31 to 40 years old   8 1 9 38  
     41 to 50 years old   3 4 7 29 
     over 50 years old   4 3 7 29 
Field of expertise 
Physician 2 1 3 13 
Nurse in practice 2 0 2 8 
Nurse in academia 2 1 3 13 
Social worker in practice 2 1 3 13 
     Social worker in academia 2 1 3 13 
Architect 1 1 2 8 
Manager 2 1 3 13 
Advocate 1 1 2 8 
     Local authority worker 2 1 3 13 
Years experience  
below 6 years   8 1 9 38  
6 to 10 years 3 4 7 29 
over 10 years 5 3 8 33 
  * Percentages were rounded off  
There were 33% male experts (n= 8) and 67% female experts (n=16). 
There was a wide distribution in the age range. There were 37.50% experts 
(n=9) who reported their age was in the 31 to 40 age range. 7 experts (29 per 
cent) were in the 41 to 50 age range. Likewise, 7 experts (29 per cent) were 
over 50 years old. There was only one expert below 31 years old.   
Current field of expertise of the expert panel members was reported as 3 
physicians, 2 nursing practitioners, 3 nursing educators, 3 social work 
practitioners, 3 social work educators, 2 architects, 3 managers, 2 advocates, 
and 3 local authority workers. 
There were 9 experts, whose years of working experience were below 6 years, 
accounting for 38% of the expert population. One-third (n=8) of the panel had 
work experience over 10 years. There were 7 experts who had work experience 
between 6 and 10 years. 
6.2.2 Rating results from Delphi method round one 
The panel members rated, on a five-point scale, their degree of agreement with 
the importance of each of 43 quality indicators for institutional dementia care. 
According to the responses from 24 participants for round one, the researcher 
computed the rating statistics for each of the 43 quality indicators in this 
research. In Table 6.2, quality indicators were listed with medians, inter-quartile 
ranges, and an indication of importance and consensus. Median scores and 
inter-quartile ranges marked with * at the same time indicating those that 
reached a median of 4 or above and an inter-quartile range of 1.00 or less, 
were considered to be achieving an adequate level of importance and 
consensus.  
The results showed that most quality indicators have achieved a suitable level 
of importance and consensus in round one. In the first-round questionnaire, all 
the 43 quality indicators exceeded the threshold for importance in terms of 
centrality (a median score of 4 or above), and 34 quality indicators exceeded 
the threshold for a consensus on dispersion (an inter-quartile range of 1.00 or 
Table 6.2 Rating results from Delphi method round one 
Quality Indicator 
(ratings of 1-5) 
How important is 
Frequency Md IQR 
1. Accident procedure 24 5* 1* 
2. Community social work 24 5* 1* 
3. Financial management 24 4* 2 
4. Self-assessment  24 4.5* 1* 
5. Staff ratios 23 5* 0* 
6. Staff qualification 23 5* 1* 
7. Staff training 23 5* 1* 
8. Staff turnover 21 4* 1* 
9. Job satisfaction 22 5* 1* 
10. Care management 24 5* 0* 
11. Clinical record 24 5* 1* 
12. Consultation and referral 24 5* 1* 
13. Rehabilitation 24 5* 1* 
14. Nutrition 24 4* 1.5 
15. Pressure ulcers 23 5* 0* 
16. Urinary tract infections 23 5* 1* 
17. Physical restraint use 24 5* 0.75* 
18. Behaviour treatment 24 4* 1.75 
19. Recreational therapy 24 5* 1* 
20. Art therapy 24 4* 2 
21. Reminiscence therapy 24 5* 1* 
22. Reality orientation activities 23 4* 2 
23. Cognitive retraining 23 4* 2 
24. Daily living skills training 23 4* 2 
25. Festival activity 23 5* 1* 
26. Community interaction 23 5* 0* 
27. Spiritual care 23 5* 1* 
28. Contract 24 5* 0* 
29. Complaint procedure 24 5* 0* 
30. Participation in planning services 22 5* 1.25 
31. Satisfaction with services 23 5* 1* 
32. Fire safety 24 5* 0* 
33. Alarm facility 24 5* 1* 
34. Barrier-free environment 24 5* 0* 
35. Physical assistance equipment 24 5* 0* 
36. A quiet room 24 5* 1* 
37. A looped path 24 5* 1* 
38. Transparent cupboard/cabinet 24 4* 2 
39. Objects mark 24 5* 1* 
40. Area/space has an appropriate sign and the sign is 
suitable at visible level 
23 5* 0* 
41. Staff area/kitchen is designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual surveillance with ease 
24 5* 1* 
42. Electronic equipment for supporting the security of 
the residents 
24 4* 1* 
43. Electronic equipment for supporting the security of 
the care home and possessions 
24 4* 0* 
 1. The 5-point Likert scale used was 1=not at all important and 5= very important. 
 2. Md= median, IQR= inter-quartile range 
 3. Md scores marked with * were those that met the importance criterion which Md equals 4 or 
above; IQR scores marked with * were those that met the consensus criterion which IQR 
was 1.00 or less. 
less). The results indicated that 79% of the quality indicators achieved an 
acceptable degree of importance and consensus.  
However, the results seemed to reveal that the panel members did not totally 
accept these quality indicators, because 21% of the quality indicators did not 
achieve consensus and some experts have given recommendations in the 
comment section. Thus, the initial quality indicators were improved for the 
second Delphi questionnaire through the integration of the comments which 
were listed in Appendix 3 and discussed in subsequent sections. Moreover, the 
second Delphi questionnaire included three new quality indicators based on the 
additional comments of experts.  
The following is a discussion of the result from each of the quality indicators in 
three groups. I will also explain the reason I changed the operational definition 
of quality indicators according to different evidences, such as literature, experts 
comments, or policies. The operational definitions of quality indicators 
developed in this research have to meet the minimal requirements of the 
Taiwanese Act and policy. Thus, while the suggestive standards of experts 
were lower than the Taiwanese Act and policy, the Taiwanese Act and policy 
should still be taken. When there were different suggestions between literature 
and experts comments, the recommendations that could maximize the benefit 
of service receivers were chosen. 
6.2.3 Quality indicators that lacked consensus 
The following 9 quality indicators, out of 43 (21%), did not reach consensus in 
terms of the  inter-quartile range criteria: financial management (quality 
indicator 3), nutrition (quality indicator 14), behaviour treatment (quality 
indicator 18), art therapy (quality indicator 20), reality orientation (quality 
indicator 22), cognitive retraining (quality indicator 23), skills training (quality 
indicator 24), participation in planning services (quality indicator 30) (discussed 
in Section 6.2.4), and transparent cupboard/cabinet (quality indicator 38).  
The lack of consensus on the 9 quality indicators could be due to following 
reasons: 1. Some experts found the operational definitions of quality indicators 
were unclear (see Appendix 3); 2. The findings reflected highly polarized 
opinion based on rating results from Delphi method round one (IQR>1) (see 
Table 6.2); 3. The findings reflected uncertainty about how to apply the quality 
indicators to practice because some experts reported that they did not know the 
appropriate percentage of 8 quality indicators in percentage. Thus, as shown in 
Table 6.3, the researcher modified the terminology and phrasing of some 
quality indicators for the experts to understand them clearly and to allow some 
potential problems to be removed. The panel members were asked to re-vote in 
terms of the results of the first round to ensure that the quality indicators are 
suitable for evaluating quality of care for people with dementia living in a care 
home.  
Table 6.3 Change of operational definitions of quality indicators that lacked 
consensus between initial stage and round one 
Quality 
indicator 
Stage Operational definition 
3.Financial 
management 
Initial The institution breaks even in its finances. 
Round 1 The institution breaks even in its finances to ensure 
that the institution could operate continuously and 
maintain quality of care for residents 
14.Nutrition Initial The residents Body Mass Index (BMI), weight (Kg)/ 
height (m
), is controlled between 18.5 and 24.99. 
Round 1 The institution may employ the dietician to provide 
meal plans for individual resident and control the 
residents Body Mass Index (BMI), weight (Kg)/ 
height (m
) between18.5 to 24.99. 
18.Behavior 
treatment 
Initial The institution employs qualified staff to provide 
behavior treatment, such as treatment for 
decreasing or terminating aggression, incontinence, 
and screaming, depending on the outcome of a 
needs assessment. 
Round 1 The institution employs qualified staff who can 
provide behavior treatment, such as treatment for 
decreasing or terminating aggression, incontinence, 
and screaming, depending on the outcome of a 
needs assessment. 
20.Art therapy Initial The institution employs qualified staff to provide art 
therapy, such as art, music, and dance, according 
to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Round 1 The institution employs qualified staff who can 
provide art therapy, such as arts and crafts, music, 
and dance, according to the outcome of a needs 
assessment. 
22.Reality 
orientation 
activities 
Initial The institution employs qualified staff to provide 
reality orientation for residents in need, according 
to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Round 1 The institution employs qualified staff who can 
provide reality orientation activities for residents 
who are disorientated in time, place, and person, 
according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
23.Cognitive 
retraining 
Initial The institution employs qualified staff to provide 
cognitive retraining for residents in need, according 
to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Round 1 The institution employs qualified staff who can 
provide cognitive retraining for residents in need, 
according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
Table 6.3 Change of operational definitions of quality indicators that lacked 
consensus between initial stage and round one (continued) 
24.Daily living 
skills training 
Initial The institution employs qualified staff to provide 
skills training for residents in need, according to the 
outcome of a needs assessment. 
Round 1 The institution employs qualified staff who can 
provide daily living skills training for residents in 
need, according to the outcome of a needs 
assessment. 
38.Transpare
nt cupboard/ 
cabinet 
Initial Transparent cupboard/ cabinet are available in the 
care home. 
Round 1 Transparent cupboard/ cabinet are available in 
each residents private room to minimize the 
frustration of locating items. 
6.2.3.1 Financial management (quality indicator 3) 
As has been noted before, the TQM approach could assist the institution to 
operate continuously and improve quality of care for people with dementia living 
in care homes. Tenner and DeToro (1992) state that financial indicators are one 
of the key measuring items to ensure that the institution implements TQM. 
Moreover, Kaplan and Norton (1996) consider that financial performance is one 
of the core methods to assess organizational performance. For instance, if the 
institution does not break even in its finances, it cannot maintain the stability of 
care services for residents. According to Donabedian (1980), stable care 
services are the basis of care quality. In policy, the Department of Social Affairs 
asks the institution should list financial estimates of the annual income and 
expense (2007b). In practice, Lin and Liu (2006a; 2006b) discover that effective 
financial management could assist the institution to operate continuously and 
provide stable home care and day care services for people with dementia. It is 
almost certain that financial management plays the most important role in the 
full operation of institutional dementia care. Thus, in order to let the experts 
understand this quality indicator clearly and to reach consensus, a revised 
operational definition was proposed as shown in Table 6.2. 
6.2.3.2 Nutrition (quality indicator 14) 
The panel members commented that individual health involves many different 
kinds of factors, such as provision of fresh food and clean water, appropriate 
and regular exercise, and sufficient sleep (see Appendix 3). The BMI combines 
weight and height to measure individual nutritional status. In addition, 
unplanned weight change may suggest poor quality of care (Maryland hospital 
association, 1985). Thus, while residents have specific illnesses or unplanned 
weight change, as one of the panel members suggested that they require the 
dietician to assess individual needs and provide meal plans for them to 
maintain their health. The researcher revised this initial operational definition as 
presented in Table 6.2. 
6.2.3.3 Behaviour treatment (quality indicator 18), art therapy (quality 
indicator 20), reality orientation (quality indicator 22), cognitive retraining 
(quality indicator 23), and skills training (quality indicator 24)  
Psychosocial treatments, such as behaviour-oriented treatments, emotion-
oriented treatments, cognition-oriented treatments, and stimulation-oriented 
treatments could improve the mood, behaviour, and function of people with 
dementia (Rabins et al., 2007). Even though dementia is usually progressive 
and the above treatments are unlikely to provide persistent benefit for people 
with dementia, the institution should employ people who can provide these 
treatments for residents to maintain their capabilities for as long as possible. As 
a study of Lin and Liu (2006a) demonstrates, these psychosocial treatments 
could entertain people with dementia, decrease their problem behaviours, and 
sustain some of their capabilities in a day care centre for people with dementia 
in Taiwan. 
Moreover, social care activity should be assessed by specialist staff to provide 
options directly based on individual needs and interests, because specialist 
staff have licences or sufficient training to conduct social care activities and 
they can assist all staff to be helpers to provide social care activities and to 
encourage residents to attend. Thus, the original quality indicators were revised 
for clarity in Table 6.2.  
6.2.3.4 Transparent cupboard/cabinet (quality indicator 38) 
Four respondents commented on transparent cupboard/ cabinet (see Appendix 
3) and did not agree this is an important quality indicator. However, as most 
people with dementia lose their short-term memory, designing some units with 
clear safety glass is useful to help them see what kinds of things are inside the 
units (Pollock, 2007). Thus, in order to let the experts understand clearly, I 
revised the original quality indicator as listed in Table 6.2. 
6.2.4 Results of quality indicators in ratio/percentage 
With regard to the 8 quality indicators, the researcher asked the experts what 
they considered to be acceptable or typical ratios/percentages for a care home. 
The results are listed in Table 6.4 and discussed in the following sections. 
Table 6.4 Frequencies across quality indicators of two rounds 
The acceptable ratio of staff to residents during the day (Quality indicator 5) 
Staff ratios 1 to 1 
Number (%) 
1 to 2 
Number (%) 
1 to 3 
Number (%) 
1 to 4 
Number (%) 
Less than 1 to 4 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 1 (N=24) 0 (0) 0 (0) 7 (29) 10 (42) 6 (25) 1 (4) 
Staff ratios 1 to 3 
Number (%) 
1 to 4 
Number (%) 
1 to 5 
Number (%) 
1 to 6 
Number (%) 
Less than 1 to 6 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 2 (N=23) 5 (22) 8 (35) 5 (22) 2 (9) 2 (9) 1 (4) 
The acceptable ratio of staff to residents during the night (Quality indicator 5) 
Staff ratios 1 to 1 
Number (%) 
1 to 2 
Number (%) 
1 to 3 
Number (%) 
1 to 4 
Number (%) 
Less than 1 to 4 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 1 (N=22) 0 (0) 0 (0) 1 (4) 4 (17) 2 (8) 15 (63) 
Staff ratios 1 to 5 
Number (%) 
1 to 6 
Number (%) 
1 to 7 
Number (%) 
1 to 8 
Number (%) 
Less than 1 to 8 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 2 (N=23) 4 (17) 6 (26) 0 (0) 8 (35) 4 (17) 1 (4) 
The appropriate percentage of staff trained for specific dementia care tasks (Quality indicator 7) 
Staff training 96-100% 
Number (%) 
91-95% 
Number (%) 
86-90% 
Number (%) 
81-85% 
Number (%) 
80% and less 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 1 (N=24) 14 (58) 5 (21) 1 (4) 1 (4) 2 (8) 1 (4) 
Round 2 (N=23) 13 (57) 3 (13) 3 (13) 3 (13) 1 (4) 0 (0) 
Table 6.4 Frequencies across quality indicators of two rounds (continued) 
The acceptable percentage of annual staff turnover (Quality indicator 8) 
Staff turnover 0-5%   
Number (%) 
6-10% 
Number (%) 
11-15% 
Number (%) 
16-20% 
Number (%) 
21% and above 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 1 (N=23) 9 (38) 8 (35) 1 (4) 1 (4) 0 (0) 4 (17) 
Round 2 (N=23) 11 (48) 8 (35) 2 (9) 1 (4) 0 (0) 1 (4) 
The percentage of staff working in care homes who would describe themselves as satisfied with their job (Quality 
indicator 9) 
Job satisfaction 96-100% 
Number (%) 
91-95% 
Number (%) 
86-90% 
Number (%) 
81-85% 
Number (%) 
80% and less 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 1 (N=24) 1 (4) 2 (8) 1 (4) 5 (21) 13 (54) 2 (8) 
Job satisfaction 91-100% 
Number (%) 
81-90% 
Number (%) 
71-80% 
Number (%) 
61-70% 
Number (%) 
60% and less 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 2 (N=23) 3 (13) 5 (22) 6 (26) 5 (22) 3 (13) 1 (4) 
The percentage of residents in care homes who have pressure ulcers (Quality indicator 15) 
Pressure ulcers 0-5%   
Number (%) 
6-10% 
Number (%) 
11-15% 
Number (%) 
16-20% 
Number (%) 
21% and above 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 1 (N=24) 14 (58) 1 (4) 2 (8) 0 (0) 2 (8) 5 (21) 
Round 2 (N=22) 15 (65) 1 (4) 2 (9) 0 (0) 2 (9) 2 (9) 
Table 6.4 Frequencies across quality indicators of two rounds (continued) 
The percentage of residents in care homes who have urinary tract infections (Quality indicator 16) 
Urinary tract 
infections 
Number (%) 
6-10% 
Number (%) 
11-15% 
Number (%) 
16-20% 
Number (%) 
21% and above 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 1 (N=24) 9 (38) 4 (17) 2 (8) 3 (13) 1 (4) 5 (21) 
Round 2 (N=22) 8 (36) 4 (18) 2 (9) 2 (9) 4 (18) 2 (9) 
The percentage of residents who should be participating in the planning and treatment (Quality indicator 30) 
Participating in 
planning services 
96-100% 
Number (%) 
91-95% 
Number (%) 
86-90% 
Number (%) 
81-85% 
Number (%) 
80% and less 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 1 (N=24) 5 (21) 0 (0) 4 (17) 2 (8) 8 (33) 5 (21) 
Participating in 
planning services 
91-100% 
Number (%) 
81-90% 
Number (%) 
71-80% 
Number (%) 
61-70% 
Number (%) 
60% and less 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 2 (N=22) 9 (39) 5 (22) 1 (4) 2 (9) 3 (13) 2 (9) 
The percentage of residents in care homes who are fully satisfied with the services they receive (Quality indicator 
Satisfaction with 
services 
96-100% 
Number (%) 
91-95% 
Number (%) 
86-90% 
Number (%) 
81-85% 
Number (%) 
80% and less 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 1 (N=24) 0 (0) 2 (8) 3 (13) 3 (13) 13 (54) 3 (13) 
Satisfaction with 
services 
91-100% 
Number (%) 
81-90% 
Number (%) 
71-80% 
Number (%) 
61-70% 
Number (%) 
60% and less 
Number (%) 
Dont know 
Number (%) 
Round 2 (N=22) 2 (9) 7 (30) 5 (22) 4 (17) 2 (9) 2 (9) 
6.2.4.1 Staff ratios (quality indicator 5) 
The Taiwanese Government asks the institution for older people with dementia 
to have much higher staff ratios than regular institutions for normal older people 
and requests the institution to manage human resource with flexibility to 
organize staff effectively to meet the needs of residents particularly during the 
night. Department of Social Affairs (2007c) asks the institution to employ at 
least 1 care manager, 1 nurse, and 4 care workers for 12 older people with 
dementia in a special care unit.  Department of Social Affairs (2007a) also asks 
the institution for older people with dementia to employ at least one nurse on 
duty at any time and one nurse for 20 residents; at least one social worker for 
100 residents; one care worker for 3 residents during the day, one care worker 
for 15 residents during the night, and the number of care workers during the 
night could be counted together with nurses; and depending on business needs, 
the institution could employ administrative personnel, full time or contracted 
medical doctor, physiotherapist, occupational therapist, dietician, or other 
personnel. 
More than 63% of the panel members (n=15) reported that they did not know 
the acceptable ratio of staff to residents during the night. However, according to 
the above arguments and Table 6.4, it seems to indicate that in a Taiwanese 
care home for people with dementia, an acceptable ratio of staff on duty to 
residents during the day should be less than 1 to 3; and an acceptable ratio of 
staff on duty to residents during the night should be more than 1 to 8. Thus, the 
researcher revised the options to different range as shown in Table 6.4 for the 
second round. 
6.2.4.2 Staff training (quality indicator 7) 
It is a hard task to take care of people with dementia, because of their specific 
behaviour problems. However, it is more advantageous to have trained staff to 
care for people with dementia, because knowing the difference between care 
for normal residents and people with dementia can reduce frustration of staff 
and improve quality of care. That is, the appropriate percentage of staff trained 
for specific dementia care tasks should be very high. In addition a consensus 
has been reached on this quality indicator (IQR=1). Thus, I decided to keep the 
percentage in its current form (see Appendices 4 and 5).  
6.2.4.3 Staff turnover (quality indicator 8) 
The responses to the acceptable percentage of annual staff turnover were 
greatly varied (see Table 6.4). However, a consensus has been reached on this 
quality indicator (IQR=1). Less staff turnover indicates better stability of work, 
staff welfare, staff safety and staff training. Moreover, the lower staff turnover, 
the higher stable care provisions. Thus, I decided to keep the acceptable 
percentage of annual staff turnover in its current form (see Appendices 4 and 5).  
6.2.4.4 Job satisfaction (quality indicator 9) 
As shown in Table 6.2, the 9
 quality indicator (job satisfaction) achieved 
consensus (IQR=1). However, 54% of the panel members (n=13) considered 
that the percentage of job satisfaction is less than 80% in care homes. Thus, in 
response to the opinions of experts, these options were revised into a different 
range as shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.4.5 Pressure ulcers (quality indicator 15) 
Pressure ulcers should be very low in a high quality institution, because 
pressure ulcers reflect quality of care in the institution. Furthermore, since a 
consensus has been reached (IQR=0) on the 15
 quality indicator (pressure 
ulcers), I decided to keep the range of percentage in its current form (see 
Appendices 4 and 5). 
6.2.4.6 Urinary tract infections (quality indicator 16) 
From Table 6.4, it can be seen that the responses were dispersed throughout. 
Some panel members did not agree to use this indicator to evaluate quality of 
care (see Appendix 3) because urinary tract infections are caused by many 
different factors and difficult to control. However, low urinary tract infections 
reflect on quality of care in an institution. Some people with dementia do not 
know how to express thirst. If staff could provide regular fluid to keep up with 
hydration and maintain urinary tract hygiene, it could decrease urinary tract 
infections. Moreover, most experts considered that this indicator is the most 
important indicator (Md=5), and a consensus has been achieved on this 
indicator (IQR=1). This indicates that the range of percentage has been cluster 
and feasible. Thus, I decided to keep the range of percentage in its current form 
(see Table 6.4), because over half of the panel members (n=13) considered 
that the percentage of residents in care homes who have urinary tract infections 
should be 10% and less.  
6.2.4.7 Participation in planning services (quality indicator 30) 
This quality indicator of participation in planning services had not reached 
consensus (IQR=1.25) (see Table 6.2), and eight experts (33%) (see Table 6.4) 
considered that the percentage of residents who should be participating in 
planning services was 80% and less. People with severe dementia probably 
have difficulty expressing their own thoughts, but people with mild to moderate 
dementia still have the ability to express their own thoughts about their QOL 
(Trigg et al., 2007). Thus, if the residents lack capacity, the institution should 
encourage their family members to take part in the care plans to increase the 
percentage of residents (or their representatives when the residents lack 
capacity) to participate in planning and treatment. These options should be 
revised into a different range for the second round (as shown in Table 6.4). 
6.2.4.8 Satisfaction with services (quality indicator 31) 
As Tables 6.2 and 6.4 show, this quality indicator of satisfaction with services 
was reached consensus (IQR=1), but most of the panel members (n=13, 54%) 
guessed that the percentage of residents in care homes, who are fully satisfied 
with the services they receive might be 80% and less. As the previous section 
argued, some people with dementia can still express their own thoughts. 
Moreover, only while the residents lack capability to express their own thoughts, 
their family members could represent them to answer how satisfied they are 
with the services they receive. Thus, it was necessary to revise these options 
into a different range (as shown in Table 6.4). 
6.2.5 Quality indicators that needed improvement  
As has been discussed, the results showed that the remaining 34 quality 
indicators achieved an appropriate level of importance and consensus in round 
one. Nevertheless, the results seemed to demonstrate that the panel members 
did not totally accept these quality indicators, because there were many 
suggestions on these quality indicators (see Appendix 3). Thus, I followed the 
principles that I have mentioned in the end of Section 6.2.2 and took the advice 
of experts into account to revise the initial quality indicators for the second 
Delphi questionnaire (see Table 6.5). Following are discussions of the result 
from each of the quality indicators which still needed to improve. 
6.2.5.1 Accident procedure (quality indicator 1) 
Most accidents happening in the care home are fire hazard, resident falls and 
unexpected deaths. Thus, in terms of the comments of experts (see Appendix 3) 
the institution should set up a standard procedure related to accident reporting. 
According to the comments of experts (see Appendix 3), since an accident can 
be a matter of life or death, all staff should be familiar with the accident 
procedure; and each incident should be reported to relevant people, such as 
family and authority required. Therefore, the researcher revised the original 
quality indicator as shown in Table 6.4.  
6.2.5.2 Community social work (quality indicator 2) 
Offering community service activities for the local community could assist the 
institution to build up good public relations. Moreover, owing to limitations of 
institutional resources, the institution should link community resources to  
Table 6.5 Change of operational definitions of quality indicators that needed 
improvement 
Quality 
indicator 
Stage Operational definition 
1.Accident 
procedure 
Initial The institution has a written procedure related to 
accident reporting, and all staff are familiar with the 
accident procedure. 
Round 1 The institution has a standard procedure related to 
accident reporting, such as fire hazard, resident 
falls and deaths; and all staff are familiar with the 
accident procedure. Each incident should be 
reported to relevant people, such as family and 
authority required. 
2.Community 
social work 
Initial The institution involves community social service 
activities (e.g. home care, day care, respite care) in 
the local community. 
Round 1 The institution involves community social service 
activities, such as home care, day care, and respite 
care in the community. The institution also links 
social resources, such as human resource, material 
supply, and financial support, to improve the quality 
of life for residents. 
4.Self- 
assessment 
Initial The institution conducts the self- performance 
assessment plan. 
Round 1 The institution conducts the self-performance 
assessment plan which should be subsequently 
verified by an independent assessor. 
6.Staff 
qualification 
Initial The institution employs Government recognized 
qualified staff to care for the residents. 
Round 1 The institution employs Government recognized 
qualified staff who have licences or sufficient skills 
training to care for people with dementia. 
10.Care 
management 
Initial There is a care management plan for every 
resident including assessment of requirements and 
a care plan. 
Round 1 There is a care management for every resident 
including assessment of care requirements, 
development of a care plan, and delivery of the 
care plan. 
11.Clinical 
record 
Initial The institution records the care provided and 
received, and the response to care for each 
resident on a daily basis. 
Round 1 The institution records the health and personal care 
provided and received, and the response to care for 
each resident on a daily basis. 
Table 6.5 Change of operational definitions of quality indicators that needed 
improvement (continued) 
12.Consultatio
n and referral 
Initial The institution offers the appropriate medical 
consultation and health care referral for residents. 
Round 1 The institution offers the appropriate outpatient 
medical consultation and health care referral for 
residents. 
17.Physical 
restraint use 
Initial The institution has a written policy and procedure 
on physical restraint. 
Round 1 The institution has a clear documentation of the 
indications and procedure on physical restraint. The 
physical restraint use should be carefully evaluated 
by the physician and consented by the key 
caregiver. Moreover, careful observation is needed 
throughout the course of physical restraint. 
Recreational 
activity 
Initial The institution may employ qualified staff to provide 
recreational therapy, such as games, pets, crafts, 
and gardening, depending on the outcome of a 
needs assessment. 
Round 1 The institution may employ qualified staff who can 
provide recreational activities, such as games, pets, 
gardening, and cooking, depending on the outcome 
of a needs assessment and individual interests. 
27.Spiritual 
Initial The institution provides spiritual activities or 
facilities for residents according to the spiritual 
needs of the resident. 
Round 1 The institution provides spiritual activities or 
facilities for residents according to the individual 
spiritual needs of the resident. 
28.Contract Initial Each resident has a written contract with the care 
home. 
Round 1 Each resident has a written contract with the care 
home. The contract should emphasize the 
residents rights and should be signed by the 
resident (or his representative when the resident 
lacks capacity). 
32.Fire safety Initial The institution has passed the fire safety 
inspection. 
Round 1 The institution has passed the routine inspection of 
fire safety. 
33.Alarm 
facility 
Initial Every room has a call system with alarm facility and 
this is fully functional at all times. 
Round 1 Every room has a call system with alarm facility and 
this is fully functional at all times. This facility is only 
provided for residents with mild dementia who can 
understand the operation of the system. 
Table 6.5 Change of operational definitions of quality indicators that needed 
improvement (continued) 
34.Barrier-free 
environment 
Initial The institution provides a barrier-free environment. 
Round 1 The institution provides a barrier-free environment 
at all time. 
35.Physical 
assistance 
equipment 
Initial Assistive aids, hoists, and adapted baths meet the 
needs of residents with physical difficulties. 
Round 1 Assistive aids, hoists, adapted baths, and utensils 
for daily living meet the needs of residents with 
physical difficulties. 
36.A quiet 
Initial the institution provides a quiet room for residents to 
relax in. 
Round 1 The institution provides a quiet room with multi-
sensory training equipment, such as visual, 
auditory, olfactory, and tactile stimulating 
equipment, for residents to relax. 
37.A looped 
Initial The institution has an endless wandering path for 
the needs of residents. 
Round 1 The institution has a barrier-free looped path for the 
needs of residents. 
39.Object 
marks 
Initial Significant objects have obvious identifying marks. 
Round 1 Significant objects of individual resident have 
obvious identifying marks to enhance the ability of 
residents to identify their own goods. 
40.Area/ 
space has 
appropriate 
signs and the 
signs are 
clearly visible 
Initial The indications and signs assist residents to move 
around the building. 
Round 1 The institution provides the written indications and 
pictorial signage to enhance residents orientation 
and recognition around the building. 
41.Staff 
area/kitchen is 
designed to 
provide 
unobtrusively 
visual 
surveillance 
with ease 
Initial Staff in the staff area/kitchen can directly observe 
resident activities with ease. 
Round 1 Staff in the staff area can directly observe resident 
activities with ease. Same idea applies to kitchen 
area, because some residents would like to 
incorporate cooking into their daily activity, this 
activity requires supervision with unobtrusively 
visual surveillance as well. 
42.Electronic 
equipment for 
supporting the 
security of the 
residents 
Initial The institution sets up the smart technology, such 
as monitoring technology, open door alert system, 
and pressure mat, to support safety and security of 
the residents. 
Round 1 The institution sets up the smart technology, such 
as monitoring technology, open door alert system, 
and pressure mat, to support safety and security of 
the residents. Such equipment should be set up 
only after appropriate assessment, consent, and 
regular review. 
increase benefits for residents. Thus, the institution should provide options for 
community service activities for the family to chose and combine community 
resources to improve local aging care. 
In Taiwan, the Government encourages the institution to employ social workers 
to provide social care for residents. Moreover, social workers have been trained 
to utilise and link social resources effectively. As noted in Chapter 4, total 
involvement is one key concept of TQM and it could enhance the effectiveness 
of institutions. Thus, all staff should be involved in building up public relations. 
Moreover, recent commitment to corporate social responsibility is the most 
commonly used concept for the institution to play corporate citizenship to 
contribute to society in Taiwan. It is worthwhile for the institution to just merely 
provide resources for local community. Even though some comments (see 
Appendix 3) did not totally agree with this quality indicator, based on the 
benefits of residents and institution, the aim of this quality indicator is to 
enhance the institution to build up good public relations to play corporate 
citizenship to contribute to local community. Thus, the researcher revised the 
original quality indicator as shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.3 Self-assessment (quality indicator 4) 
Self-assessment can identify institutional weaknesses and strengths. In order to 
avoid the blind spot of self-performance assessment, it is necessary to invite an 
independent assessor to verify as suggested by an expert (see Appendix 3), 
because external assessors can objectively recognize which parts require to be 
improved. Thus, the researcher revised the original quality indicator as shown 
in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.4 Staff qualification (quality indicator 6) 
By law, the Department of Social Affairs (2007d) asks the institution to employ 
qualified staff with appropriate licences or sufficient training to take care of care 
home residents. In addition, the more understanding about people with 
dementia, the more skills can be applied to them, therefore the easier to care 
for them. However, as two experts commented, currently it is difficult to employ 
enough numbers of qualified staff with appropriate licences or sufficient training 
to look after people with dementia (see Appendix 3). Nevertheless, for an 
institution to survive in the competitive market, it needs to review and improve 
its quality of care. In addition, most care homes for people with dementia 
currently try to send their staff to obtain appropriate care skills training for 
looking after their residents. Thus, it could be concluded that the institution will 
employ qualified staff with appropriate licences or sufficient training to take care 
of its residents in the near future (as shown in Table 6.5). 
6.2.5.5 Care management (quality indicator 10) 
Care management is a needs-led approach and it aims to adapt services to 
individual requirements (Social Services Inspectorate/Social Work Services 
Group, 1992). Thus, care management is defined as the process of tailoring 
services to individual needs (Social Services Inspectorate/Social Work Services 
Group, 1992:10). Care management includes seven key stages, such as 
publishing information, determining the level of assessment, assessing need, 
care planning, implementing the care plan, monitoring, and reviewing (Social 
Services Inspectorate/Social Work Services Group, 1992). The evidence seems 
to be strong that implementing care management in care homes could deliver 
better outcomes and faster access to services for residents. Additionally, a total 
care assessment and plan can have more benefit for residents. Thus, the 
institution should conduct care management to meet the specific requirements 
of people with dementia (as shown in Table 6.5).  
6.2.5.6 Clinical record (quality indicator 11) 
Although it is impossible to record clinical care regularly, clinical records are the 
evidence of care. In order to avoid care dispute and to supervise quality of care, 
it is necessary to record regularly, even in a remote or mountain area. The 
institution should record the health care, personal care, and social care 
provided and received, and the response to care for each resident on a daily 
basis, because the more complete the clinical and social work record is the 
better for the care for residents, and the easier it is to manage their problems. 
Thus, in response to the comment of one expert (see Appendix 3), the 
researcher revised the original quality indicator to two quality indicators: clinical 
record and social work record (as shown in Tables 6.5 and 6.6). 
6.2.5.7 Consultation and referral (quality indicator 12) 
Perhaps it is impossible for the institution to provide the appropriate outpatient 
medical consultation and health care referral for residents. However, as noted 
in Chapter 2, during recent development of National Health Insurance program 
in Taiwan, it has increased the convenience for patients to access the health 
care system. Moreover, co-operation with appropriate medical organization is 
beneficial because chronic illnesses are common in old people with dementia. If 
the clinic or hospital can provide long-term follow up, it can keep them healthy 
and stable. Thus, in response to the comments of one experts (see Appendix 3), 
the institution should cooperate with the clinic or hospital to provide visits for 
residents depending on their needs for health care. The researcher revised the 
original quality indicator as shown in Table 6.4.  
6.2.5.8 Physical restraint use (quality indicator 17) 
Physical restraint is usually for prevention of falls, but it needs to be balanced 
with the risk of falls and the independence of residents.  However, as Horton 
(2006) states, the management of physical risk was one of the most important 
priority concerning service providers. Particularly, in Taiwan, no-fault liability is 
applied to care homes so that most Taiwanese care homes prefer the over-
protection of residents. Thus, legally, Ministry of the Interior, Taiwan (2008b) 
sets up a consent form for physical restraint use; and asks the institution to 
undertake careful evaluation by the physician or senior nurse before conducting 
physical restraint.  
In response to the comments of experts (see Appendix 3), it should be done by 
considering the right of resident and not just for the convenience of staff. That is, 
it is very important to explain the procedure clearly to residents and their family 
members for understanding why the institution uses physical restraint. In 
Taiwan, the use of physical restraint should be by consent of the key family 
caregiver because the family caregiver plays a crucial role in looking after 
people with dementia. In addition, for safety reasons, careful observation is 
needed throughout the course of physical restraint. Therefore, the researcher 
revised the original quality indicator as shown in Table 6.4.  
6.2.5.9 Recreational therapy (quality indicator 19) 
As previously discussed in Section 3.3, theory and practice demonstrate that 
recreational activities could improve mood, behaviour, and function of people 
with dementia. One expert commented that regular staff should also engage in 
activity with residents (see Appendix 3). However, conducting recreational 
activities requires professional knowledge and sufficient skills and training. 
Thus, only when staff have been trained to conduct recreational activities, they 
could provide these activities for care home residents. Thus, the researcher 
revised the original quality indicator as shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.10 Spiritual care (quality indicator 27) 
As the Scottish Executive Health Department (2002) states,  
Religious care is given in the context of the shared religious beliefs, values, 
liturgies and lifestyle of a faith community. Spiritual care is usually given in 
a one-to-one relationship, is completely person-centred and makes no 
assumptions about personal conviction or life orientation (Paragraph 3). 
Thus, spiritual care is not equal to religious care, but religious care could be 
one kind of spiritual care. In addition, the aim of spiritual care is to assist 
residents to find resolution, meaning, peace and hope for their later life. 
Therefore, in response to the comments of experts (see Appendix 3), the 
institution should respond to the spiritual needs of each resident and provide 
individualized spiritual activities or facilities for residents. The researcher 
revised the original quality indicator as shown in Table 6.4.  
6.2.5.11 Contract (quality indicator 28) 
In Taiwan, the aim of the written contract that is set up by the Ministry of the 
Interior (2008b) is to demonstrate the rights and responsibilities between the 
resident and the institution. Thus, in order to avoid care dispute, the institution 
should remind its staff to respect the rights of residents. It is the responsibility of 
family members to take care of people with dementia in Taiwan. Thus, as two 
experts commented, if the resident lacks capability to sign the contract, his 
family member could sign it (see Appendix 3). This original quality indicator was 
revised as shown in Table 6.4.  
6.2.5.12 Fire safety (quality indicator 32) 
Taiwan has a high population density of 629.23 people per square kilometer 
(see Table 2.1). Most care homes are located in one level of a business multi-
storey building. Fire safety is a public safety concern. Prevention is more 
important. In Taiwan, the local Government requires that every business multi-
storey building must pass routine fire safety inspection. Particularly in case of 
fire, it is not easy for residents to exit quickly. Thus, legally, the institution must 
pass the routine inspection of fire safety to ensure that the residents could live 
safely; otherwise, the local Government can close the care home. This is the 
reason why only Taiwanese experts emphasized this quality indicator (see 
Appendix 3). Thus, the researcher revised the original quality indicator as 
shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.13 Alarm facility (quality indicator 33) 
The aim of a call system with alarm facility in every room is to ensure prompt 
attention, because even though the institution is staffed 24-hourly by qualified 
and trained staff, but compared with Scotland, Taiwanese staff ratio is lower 
because of cost, particularly during the night. In case of an emergency, this call 
system would let all staff collaborate to response to this situation quickly. 
However, the call system with alarm facility may be confusing on people with 
moderate and serve dementia. Therefore, one expert suggested this quality 
indicator should be changed to a sensor system to detect a resident who is 
leaving bed (see Appendix 3). As for this suggestion, I had set up the 42
quality indicator. Thus, the researcher revised the original quality indicator as 
shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.14 Barrier-free environment (quality indicator 34) 
A barrier-free environment is the most important design feature for disabled 
residents. The institution should provide a barrier-free environment at all time 
because this could enable residents to move around the care home easily and 
reduce falls. Thus, in response to the comments of experts (see Appendix 3), 
the researcher revised the original quality indicator as shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.15 Physical assistance equipment (quality indicator 35) 
As the experts commented, assistive equipment is very important for daily life of 
residents because it could make life easier for disabled residents. Thus, in 
response to the comments of experts (see Appendix 3), this original quality 
indicator was revised as shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.16 A quiet room (quality indicator 36) 
A quiet room can reduce emotional disturbance for residents, because 
occasionally noise causes irritability. As one expert state, the function of a quiet 
room is to assist people with dementia to calm down but not to isolate them 
when they are agitated (see Appendix 3). Thus, this original quality indicator 
was revised as shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.17 A looped path (quality indicator 37) 
A small care unit for people with dementia could reduce wandering of the 
residents. However, currently in Taiwan, owing to the shortage of budget, it is 
very difficult for the institution to divide the care home into several small care 
units. Thus, the looped path plays an important role in a care home for people 
with dementia, because the function of a barrier-free looped path is designed 
for the needs of residents to wander. Moreover, in order to decrease aimless 
wandering of the residents, the barrier-free looped path should be designed to 
be interesting as well as practical. Thus, this original quality indicator was 
revised as shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.18 Object marks (quality indicator 39) 
Two experts made comments on this quality indicator to demonstrate that 
object marks emphasize the individuality of residents and the capacity of 
keeping personal items (see Appendix 3). Thus, this original quality indicator 
was revised as shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.19 Area/ space has appropriate signs and the signs are clearly 
visible (quality indicator 40) 
Area/ space has appropriate signs clearly visible to assist residents to 
recognize different spaces. Thus, the researcher revised the original quality 
indicator as shown in Table 6.4.  
6.2.5.20 Staff area/kitchen is designed to provide unobtrusively visual 
surveillance with ease (quality indicator 41) 
Since it is impossible for the institution to provide one by one 24 hours a day 
service for the residents, a staff area/kitchen designed to provide unobtrusively 
visual surveillance with ease becomes a most important feature. Thus, the staff 
area should be designed to observe residents without any boundary and it 
should not give residents the perception of being watched. Moreover, since 
some residents like to incorporate cooking into their daily activity, supervision 
with unobtrusively visual surveillance is required. Thus, for safety reasons, staff 
area should be designed for staff to directly observe resident activities with 
ease, and the same idea should be applied to the kitchen area. In response to 
the comments of experts (see Appendix 3), the researcher revised the original 
quality indicator as shown in Table 6.4.   
6.2.5.21 Electronic equipment for supporting the security of the residents 
(quality indicator 42) 
The aim of any electronic equipment is to support the security of the residents, 
not to control them. Thus, in response to the comment of one expert, such 
equipment should be set up only after appropriate assessment, consent, and 
regular review (see Appendix 3). The researcher revised the original quality 
indicator as shown in Table 6.4. 
6.2.5.22 Additional comments 
The reason why the quality indicator of social work record was added has been 
discussed in Section 6.2.5.6. Infectious diseases control, and storage of 
medication and dangerous goods are most important issues for Taiwanese care 
homes because it is a common situation that most care homes have crowded 
residents, and medication used in Taiwan is very common and convenient. 
Thus, in response to additional comments of experts (see Appendix 3), some 
comments have been integrated into some of quality indicators and three 
quality indicators were added to the second Delphi questionnaire as shown in 
Table 6.6.  
6.3 Conclusion of the first round  
During the first-round questionnaire, 92% of the panel members (24 of 26) 
participated in the first iteration. The median and inter-quartile range were used 
to calculate rating statistics for each of the 43 quality indicators in the study. 
According to the median and inter-quartile range scores, 21% of the quality 
indicators did not achieve an acceptable degree of importance and consensus 
Table 6.6 New quality indicators with operational definitions that gained from 
the Delphi method round one 
Quality indicator Operational definition 
Social work 
record 
The institution records the social care provided and 
received, and the response to care for each resident on a 
daily basis. 
Infectious 
diseases control 
The institution has a standard procedure for prevention, 
treatment, and notification of infectious diseases, such as 
scabies, bacterial dysentery, influenza, and others which 
commonly cause cross infection in institutional living. All 
staff are familiar with the procedure of infectious disease 
control. Effort should be made to inform relevant people, 
such as family and authority required in every incident 
Storage of 
medication and 
dangerous 
goods 
The institution has a clear indication and safe location to 
store medication and dangerous goods such as knives. 
at the same time. All the 43 quality indicators were rated as being highly 
important (a median score of 4 or above) and 34 quality indicators reached 
consensus (an inter-quartile range of 1.00 or less). However, 9 quality 
indicators did not exceed the threshold for a consensus. These were indicators 
for financial management (quality indicator 3), nutrition (quality indicator 14), 
behaviour treatment (quality indicator 18), art therapy (quality indicator 20), 
reality orientation (quality indicator 22), cognitive retraining (quality indicator 23), 
skills training (quality indicator 24), participation in planning services (quality 
indicator 30), and transparent cupboard/cabinet (quality indicator 38).  
Thus, it was necessary to review the nine quality indicators which did not reach 
consensus. It was also important to consider improving the other quality 
indicators in response to comments made on them by several of the experts. 
Through the review and modification of the quality indicators, it was therefore 
expected that consensus would be achieved on all of the quality indicators in 
round two. 
The researcher modified the terminology and phrasing of some quality 
indicators, (including those that lacked consensus and those that reached 
consensus), in response to comments made by the experts. In total, the 
researcher rephrased 32 quality indicators, out of 43. The revised indicators 
were summarized in Tables 6.3 and 6.4. 
It is necessary to employ specialist staff to conduct social care activities for care 
home residents, because conducting social care activities requires sufficient 
academic and practical training. Specialist staff is the best candidate to provide 
this, because they have licences or sufficient training and they could train other 
staff to be helpers to assist residents to join social care activities. However, it is 
impossible for some care homes to employ so many different types of specialist 
staff to conduct different social care activities, due to the budget issues. Thus, 
in the second-round questionnaire, the researcher modified the phrasing of the 
qualified staff as someone who has appropriate licences or sufficient skill 
training, in order to reduce the institutional pressure for lack of specialist staff. 
That is, the institution could send its staff to obtain social care skills and training 
to hold social care activities for residents. 
Moreover, according to the Delphi method, additional items suggested by the 
experts should be added in the next round to examine their feasibilities (Brown, 
1968). Thus, in response to the advice of experts, the researcher added three 
new quality indicators for the second Delphi questionnaire to see whether the 
Delphi panel experts would reach consensus. These covered questions on 
attention to infectious diseases control, social work record, and storage of 
medication and dangerous goods.  
The final round started with six key dimensions which included 46 quality 
indicators (see Appendices 4 and 5) to ask the panel members in terms of the 
results of the first round to re-vote on the Likert 5-point scale to ensure that the 
quality indicators are important to evaluate quality of care for people with 
dementia living in care homes. The full phrasings of the 46 quality indicators for 
the second-round questionnaire were attached in Appendices 4 and 5.  
6.4 Delphi method round two 
The round-two questionnaire was produced after analyzing the quantitative data 
and summarizing the comments of experts. The second Delphi questionnaire 
included the statistical results of the level of importance and consensus that the 
panel members rated in the first round, and the new version of the 
questionnaire that consisted of 46 quality indicators for institutional dementia 
care, which required evaluating the level of importance.  
All the 24 respondents who participated in the first round were invited to take 
part in the second round. The researcher sent the quality indicators to the 
panellists and asked them to rate these quality indicators using the same 5-
point Likert scale. The investigator also presented the median and inter-quartile 
range from round one to the experts for them to evaluate the feasibility of 
quality indicators again. If an expert rated a value outside of the inter-quartile 
range in the first round, he or she was asked to offer an explanation for being 
outside of the consensus.  
A follow-up email was sent to each expert to encourage participants to 
complete and return their questionnaires by the due date. Round two was 
finished by 23 of the 24 experts who completed round one, a 96 percent return 
rate. 
As for the 8 quality indicators, the researcher asked the panel members what 
they considered to be acceptable or typical percentages for a care home. The 
researcher treated the option of Dont know as missing data to calculate the 
Md and IQR. The Md corresponding percentage was selected as the cut-off 
point of acceptable percentage, because it indicates that at least 50% of the 
panellists accepted the percentage.  
The resulting medians and inter-quartile ranges were listed in Table 6.7. The 
following sections discuss the findings from the second Delphi questionnaire.   
6.4.1 Rating results from Delphi method round two 
The results reflected in Table 6.7 indicated that in round two, all the 46 quality 
indicators exceeded the threshold for importance (a median score of 4 or 
above). 41 quality indicators exceeded the threshold for a consensus (an inter-
quartile range of 1.00 or less). In round one, there were 9 quality indicators 
which did not exceed the threshold for a consensus, among the same 9 quality 
indicators, 4 quality indicators achieved consensus and 5 quality indicators did 
Table 6.7 Rating results from Delphi method round two 
Quality Indicator 
(ratings of 1-5) 
How important is 
Frequency Md IQR 
1. Accident procedure 23 5* 0* 
2. Community social work 23 5* 1* 
3. Financial management 23 4* 1* 
4. Self-assessment 23 4* 1* 
5. Staff ratios 23 5* 0* 
6. Staff qualification 23 5* 0* 
7. Staff training 23 5* 0* 
8. Staff turnover 23 5* 1* 
9. Job satisfaction 23 5* 1* 
10. Care management 23 5* 0* 
11. Clinical record 23 5* 0* 
12. Consultation and referral 22 5* 0.25* 
13. Rehabilitation 23 5* 1* 
14. Nutrition 23 4* 2 
15. Pressure ulcers 23 5* 0* 
16. Urinary tract infections 23 5* 1* 
17. Infectious diseases control 23 5* 0* 
18. Physical restraint use 23 5* 0* 
19. Behaviour treatment 23 5* 1* 
20. Recreational activity  23 5* 1* 
21. Art therapy 23 4* 1* 
22. Reminiscence therapy 23 5* 1* 
23. Reality orientation activity  22 4.5* 2 
24. Cognitive retraining 22 4* 1.25 
25. Daily living skills training  23 4* 2 
26. Festival activity 22 5* 0* 
27. Community interaction 23 5* 0* 
28. Spiritual care 23 5* 1* 
29. Social work record 23 5* 1* 
30. Contract 23 5* 0* 
31. Complaint procedure 23 5* 0* 
32. Participation in planning services 23 5* 1* 
33. Satisfaction with services 23 5* 0* 
34. Fire safety 23 5* 0* 
35. Alarm facility 23 5* 0* 
36. Barrier-free environment 23 5* 0* 
37. Physical assistance equipment 23 5* 0* 
38. A quiet room 23 5* 0* 
39. A looped path 23 5* 0* 
40. Transparent cupboard/cabinet 23 4* 2 
41. Objects mark 23 5* 0* 
42. Storage of medication and dangerous goods 23 5* 0* 
43. Area/space has an appropriate sign and the sign 
is suitable at visible level 
23 5* 0* 
44. Staff area/kitchen is designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual surveillance with ease 
23 5* 0* 
45. Electronic equipment for supporting the security of 
the residents 
22 5* 1* 
46. Electronic equipment for supporting the security of 
the care home and possessions 
23 5* 1* 
1. The 5-point Likert scale used was 1=not at all important and 5= very important. 
2. Md= median, IQR= inter-quartile range 
3. Md scores marked with * were those that met the importance criterion which Md equals 4 or 
above; IQR scores marked with * were those that met the consensus criterion which IQR was 
1.00 or less. 
not achieve consensus in round two. The results indicated that 89% of the 
quality indicators achieved a suitable level of importance and consensus.  
Compared with round one, in the second round, the number of quality indicators 
increased from 43 to 46, and the number of quality indicators which did not 
reach a suitable level of importance and consensus decreased from 9 to 5. 
However, 5 quality indicators still did not achieve consensus in the final round. 
The following 5 quality indicators, out of 46, did not achieve consensus (11%): 
nutrition (quality indicator 14), reality orientation activity (quality indicator 23), 
cognitive retraining (quality indicator 24), daily living skills training (quality 
indicator 25), and transparent cupboard/cabinet (quality indicator 40). 
This means that through the integration of the comments and the revision of the 
terminology and phrasing of quality indicators, most of the experts agreed that 
the 46 quality indicators were most important. However, even though the 
researcher had modified the 5 quality indicators which did not reach a suitable 
level of importance and consensus in the first round, some of the panel 
members still did not consider that the 5 quality indicators played the most 
important role in institutional dementia care. Thus, the researcher decided to 
delete all of these 5 quality indicators because according to the Delphi method, 
only when the quality indicator reached a consensus should be retained. This 
research was ahead of expert opinion so that this might be a limitation of this 
study.  
All the remaining 41 quality indicators reached a suitable level of importance 
and consensus (Md4 and IQR1). That is, the experts thought that the 41 
quality indicators are important and their definitions are feasible to evaluate 
quality of care for people with dementia living in a care home. Most experts 
supported the operational definitions of 41 quality indicators. Some experts 
suggested modification slightly, but their recommendations were insufficient to 
change operational definitions. Thus, I decided to keep them in their current 
form for the field test, but I made slight modifications for alarm facility (quality 
indicator 35) and physical restraint use (quality indicator 18) from comments of 
experts which significantly improved this quality indicator.  
6.4.2 Results of quality indicators in percentage  
For a further 8 quality indicators, the researcher asked the panellists to consider 
the acceptable or typical percentages for a care home. Since the responses on 
the 8 quality indicators were greatly varied, the median corresponding rate was 
selected as the cut-off point of acceptable percentage for the field test whether 
the acceptable or typical percentages reached consensus or not, because it 
indicates that at least 50% of the panel members accepted the percentage. 
Moreover, one of the purposes of this study was to set up a series of quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care for the local authorities concerned to 
enact evaluation standards. Thus, if the local Government sets the care 
standard too high, it could be practically impossible or financially unfeasible for 
the institution to achieve, and so will most likely be dismissed. Thus, I argue 
that the median corresponding percentage which 50% of the panel members 
accepted is the suitable percentage for a care home. The 8 quality indicators 
are as follows: 
1. Staff ratios (quality indicator 5): The appropriate ratio of staff to residents 
during the day should be at least 1 to 4, and the appropriate ratio of staff to 
residents during the night should be at least 1 to 8. 
2. Staff training (quality indicator 7): The appropriate percentage of staff 
trained for specific dementia care tasks (amongst those who have direct 
contact with patients) should be between 96% and 100%.  
3. Staff turnover (quality indicator 8): The acceptable percentage of annual 
staff turnover (percentage of the total number of leavers during past year to 
the average number of staff during past year) should be controlled between 
6% and 10%.  
4. Job satisfaction (quality indicator 9): The percentage of staff working in 
care homes would describe themselves as satisfied with their job should be 
between 71% and 80%. 
5. Pressure ulcers (quality indicator 15): The acceptable percentage of 
residents in care homes with pressure ulcers should be 5% and below.  
6. Urinary tract infections (quality indicator 16): The acceptable percentage 
of residents in care homes with urinary tract infections (both symptomatic 
and asymptomatic) should be controlled between 6% and 10%.  
7. Participation in planning services (quality indicator 32): The percentage 
of residents (or their representatives when the residents lack capacity) 
participating in the planning and treatment should be between 81% and 90%.  
8. Satisfaction with services (quality indicator 33): The percentage of 
residents (or their representatives when the residents lack capacity) in care 
homes who are fully satisfied with the services received should be between 
71% and 80%. 
6.4.3 Quality indicators that needed improvement 
According to the suggestions of experts, in total, the researcher rephrased two 
quality indicators of the final round for the field test; one is the quality indicator 
of physical restraint use, the other is the quality indicator of alarm facility.  
6.4.3.1 Physical restraint use (quality indicator 18) 
In Taiwan, sometimes it is not easy to find a physician to evaluate the physical 
restraint use for a care home in a remote or mountain area. Thus, by law, 
evaluation of physical restraint use could be carried out by the senior nurse. 
The researcher added or senior nurse to this quality indicator for the field test.  
6.4.3.2 Alarm facility (quality indicator 35) 
As one expert suggested, the toilets should also have the alarm system (see 
Appendix 3). The researcher should consider modifying this recommendation to 
set up the alarm system including inside the toilets. Thus, in view of the above 
comment, the researcher revised the quality indicator of alarm facility for the 
field test: Alarm facility: every room and toilet has a call system with alarm 
facility and this is fully functional at all times. This facility is only provided for 
residents with mild dementia who can understand the operation of the system. 
6.4.4 Additional comments 
One expert recommended that this research should consider current 
Taiwanese care situations (see Appendix 3). This research has taken into 
account this issue because one of the objectives of this research was to 
develop a set of locally appropriate institutional dementia care indicators for 
Taiwanese care homes to improve their quality of care. 
One panellist provided the details about how to build a high quality institution for 
people with dementia (see Appendix 3). However, this was beyond the scope 
for this research. The aim of this research was to set up the general guidance 
for institutional dementia care, it was impossible to cover every specific detail. 
Nevertheless, if any institution was interested to reach even higher standard of 
care, it should take the above recommendations into consideration.  
6.5 Conclusion of the second round  
Compared with round one, the number of quality indicators which did not reach 
a suitable level of consensus decreased from 9 to 5 in the second round. That 
is, 5 quality indicators still did not achieve consensus in the final round: nutrition 
(quality indicator 14), reality orientation activity (quality indicator 23), cognitive 
retraining (quality indicator 24), daily living skills training (quality indicator 25), 
and transparent cupboard/cabinet (quality indicator 40). 
After referring back to the research evidence already discussed, it was decided 
that the 5 quality indicators which did not achieve consensus in round two are 
nevertheless potentially important for people with dementia living in care homes, 
and can play a crucial role in institutional dementia care. In round one, 9 quality 
indicators did not exceed the threshold for a consensus (an inter-quartile range 
of 1.00 or less). Through the revision of the terminology and phrasing of the 9 
quality indicators, and rephrasing of 23 of the other 23 quality indicators, 5 
quality indicators which were among the same 9 quality indicators that did not 
reach consensus in the first round still did not achieve consensus in round two. 
The evidence from the Delphi exercise seems to indicate that the 5 quality 
indicators are not suitable to be used to evaluate quality of care for people with 
dementia living in Taiwanese care homes at this moment. Despite being 
potentially important, they may not be consistent indicators across contexts. 
The Delphi rules suggest those items which did not reach consensus should be 
deleted based on the results of the Delphi analysis. 
6.6 Summary 
In conclusion, the development of quality indicators for institutional dementia 
care was based on the concept of quality of care for people with dementia living 
in care homes with a theory driven approach, such as the person-centred care 
and TQM. The initial quality indicators for institutional dementia care were 
proposed after a literature review. Subsequently, the researcher conducted the 
Delphi method to invite an expert panel to rate their perception of importance 
on the 5-point scale for each quality indicator and make comments to improve 
the quality indicators. Finally, the quality indicators were refined to be the 
questionnaire for the field test in terms of the statistical results and 
recommendations of experts.  
The intention of using the Delphi process in this research was to achieve 
consensus on the importance of quality indicators for institutional dementia care. 
That is, the Delphi method was an effort to improve the quality indicators 
through refined procedures. It was expected to reach a consensus on all the 
quality indicators in round two.   
Two questionnaire interactions were finished. These achieved 92% participation 
(24 of 26) in the first iteration (a Scottish nurse practitioner and a Scottish 
neurologist did not reply); and 88% participation (23 of 26) in the second 
iteration (a Scottish local authority worker withdrew).  
Rating statistics for each of the 43 quality indicators in round one and 46 quality 
indicators in round two were calculated. The median and inter-quartile range 
were used to rate quality indicators for institutional dementia care in the study. 
The results showed that the ratings for most quality indicators had already 
stabilized. For example, in the two round surveys, all the quality indicators were 
rated as important in institutional dementia care with the median exceeding 4. 
In the first round, 79% of the quality indicators (34 quality indicators, out of 43) 
achieved an acceptable degree of importance and consensus. In round two, 
89% of the quality indicators (41 quality indicators, out of 46) achieved a 
suitable level of importance and consensus. 
Thus, results from the Delphi study helped to construct an assessment 
instrument to evaluate quality of care for people with dementia living in care 
homes. On this basis, it might be seen that the results of this stage supported 
that the Delphi method met the purpose of this stage, because the 41 quality 
indicators achieved consensus through combination of qualitative and 
quantitative data analysis based on the Delphi method.  
Therefore, according to the results of the Delphi study, the questionnaire for the 
field test consisted of 41 quality indicators (see Appendix 11) grouped into six 
dimensions (management and administration, human resource management, 
health and personal care, social care, rights, and environment). The 
participants in the field test were asked to select from a list of 41 quality 
indicators on a 5-point Likert scale-how important the quality indicator is for 
people with dementia living in care homes. The field test is described in the 
next chapter. 
Chapter 7- An empirical survey of quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care: The perceptions 
of service receivers  
7.1 Introduction 
At this stage, the attention turned to the customers who received services in 
Taiwanese care homes for people with dementia (both residents and their 
families), as customer perception plays a crucial role in the modern consumer 
market. The aim of this chapter was to analyze data on perceptions, outline the 
findings, and discuss whether the results were consistent with the previous 
research. In this chapter, firstly, the sample distributions will be presented. 
Subsequently, the descriptive relationships between variables will be explored 
and discussed. Thirdly, I will describe and discuss the results of reliability, item, 
and factor analysis. Next, I will focus on and discuss the findings of a CFA 
concerning perceptions of services. This then allows me to illustrate the 
relationship between the aspects of quality indicators. Next, the findings of 
independent-samples t-test, one-way ANOVA, and multiple linear regression 
analysis will be presented and discussed. Finally, a summary of the field test 
results will be presented. 
7.2 Sample distributions 
Resident and family member data were collected from 14 Taiwanese care 
homes (see Tables 7.1 and 7.2). The sample size of care homes ranged from 
18 beds to 168 beds. The total number of respondents was 237. Most of the 
replies were valid with very few missing values in the results of the field test. 
The reasons for missing data were likely to be due to the fact that some family 
members left before the researcher had the opportunity to ensure that they did 
not miss any questions (although some family members wanted to make some 
comments in the sealed reply paid envelopes without providing any contact 
details, it would have been poor research ethics to ask the managers to provide 
their contact details). 
Table 7.1 Sample distributions 
Gender Age 
Identity  
category 
Marital  
status 
Religion Education 
Financial  
support 
Valid 237 237 237 236 236 236 237 
Missing 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 
According to the national census (Department of Statistics, 2009c), there were 
1408 care homes providing 89,170 beds for people who needed personal care 
or nursing care in Taiwan. Lee (2005) points out that there are 85,383 people 
with dementia in Taiwan. However, as Taiwan Alzheimers Disease Association 
(2008) states, only 24 Taiwanese care homes provide 1,015 beds for people 
with dementia. Nevertheless, according to the result of telephone interviews 
conducted by the researcher, there were no residents with dementia living in 6 
of the 24 care homes. Therefore, only 18 care homes had residents with 
dementia. In addition, 4 nursing homes considered that all of their residents 
were not suitable for doing questionnaires because all of them had moderate or 
severe dementia. Thus, I could only conduct questionnaires in 14 out of 18 care 
homes. 
These relatively low numbers of placements might be explained by various 
factors. Institutional dementia care is affected by financial issues. Most 
Taiwanese care homes do not desire to take care of people with dementia 
because it will cost much more to provide a specially designed environment to 
meet the specific requirements for people with dementia. This might be 
explained by the higher cost associated with dementia care which is associated 
with the more expensive designed environment. This results in lower 
affordability to most families. On the other hand, people with dementia living in 
care homes are also affected by financial issues. Thus, Taiwanese people with 
mild dementia are looked after at home until the family members could not take 
care of them, and then move them to care homes. In this study, overall only 
14.1% (122/865) residents with dementia living in Taiwanese care homes could 
answer the questionnaire with autonomy. The result was highly similar to a 
study by Gruber-Baldini et al. in 2005. They selected 347 residents with 
dementia from 45 American care homes to investigate the prevalence and 
treatment of depression for older residents with dementia living in care homes. 
They also observed that only 13.6% of the participants had mild dementia.  
A census approach was used to recruit participants from the 14 participating 
care homes which offered services for residents with dementia. The percentage 
of residents in this study was consistent with the distribution of percentage of 
beds for people with dementia (see Table 7.2). Moreover, it can be seen that 
the distribution of number of beds for people with dementia was reasonably 
consistent with the geographical distribution of the Taiwanese population. For 
example, 43% of the Taiwanese population lived in the north region of Taiwan 
(Department of Statistics, 2009b). As shown in Table 7.2, the geographical 
distribution of Taiwanese care homes, there were five care homes providing 
416 beds for people with dementia in this region. They accounted for 48% of 
the care home beds in this study.  
237 field test questionnaires were received, which represented a response rate 
of 97 percent. From Table 7.2, it can be clearly seen that 51% of the 
participants in the study were residents with dementia (n= 122) and 49% were 
their family members (n=115). In order to reduce the distress of residents and 
inspire them to answer the questionnaire, the researcher invited residents with 
dementia and their representatives to do the questionnaires concurrently. 
However, 7 family members refused to answer my questionnaire because they 
thought the opinions of residents with dementia were more important than their 
own, and the viewpoints of residents were sufficient to represent their own 
views. This was the reason why the total number of family members was less 
than the total number of residents with dementia.  
Table 7.2 Distribution of care homes and respondents 
Geographical 
distribution of 
care home 
Size of care home  
(N=14, 865 beds) Identity category (N=237) 
Small 
Number (%*) 
Large          
Number (%*) 
Total beds 
Number (%*) 
Resident 
Number (%*) 
Family 
member 
Number (%*) 
Total 
participants 
Number (%*) 
Northern 2(40) 3(33) 416(48) 60(49) 60(52) 120(51) 
Central 0(0) 2(23) 115(13) 14(12) 14(12) 28(12) 
Southern 2(40) 3(33) 246(29) 33(27) 30(26) 63(26) 
Eastern 1(20) 1(11) 88(10) 15(12) 11(10) 26(11) 
Total 5(100) 9(100) 865(100) 122(100) 115(100) 237(100) 
* Percentages were rounded off 
7.3 Demographics of participants  
Bivariate analyses were conducted to show the frequency and percentage of 
each variable within and between all categories. I computed descriptive 
statistics of participant characteristics separating the groups of residents with 
dementia and family members, in order to examine whether the distribution of 
gender, age, marital status, religion, and education groups were the same 
across resident and family member categories. The relationships between the 
geographical distribution of care homes and the participants distribution in 
terms of financial support groups were also examined. Results were reported in 
Table 7.3. Analysis of the table suggested that there were strong associations 
between identity category and gender, age, marital status, religion, and 
education. 
7.3.1 Gender for each identity category 
There was a significant moderate positive relationship between identity 
category and gender. As set out in Table 7.3, residents with dementia were 
disproportionately male (68%) whereas family members were disproportionately 
female (63%) (Chi-square was 23.58, 2-sided significance of the correlation 
was less than 0.001, and Phi coefficient was 0.32).  
The samples were similar to previous research samples. For example, Tseng 
and Wang (2001) selected 161 residents who could complete the questionnaire 
autonomously aged 65 and over from 10 Taiwanese nursing homes to 
participate in their study about the QOL for older residents living in Taiwanese 
nursing homes. They observed that 96 or 60% of the participants were males. 
Table 7.3 Frequencies and percentages of participant characteristics for each 
identity category 
Participant 
characteristics 
Resident 
Number (%*) 
Family 
member 
Number (%*) 
 df p Phi/  
Cramer's V 
Gender 
1.Male 83(68) 42(37) 23.58 1 0.000 0.32 
2.Female 39(32) 73(63) 
Total  122(100) 115(100) 
1.40 and under 0(0) 22(19) 199.26 3 0.000 0.92 
2.41-64 6(5) 88(77) 
3.65-74 16(13) 5(4) 
4.75 and over 100(82) 0(0) 
Total 122(100) 115(100) 
Marital status 
1.single/ 
unmarried  
33(27) 12(11) 63.69 2 0.000 0.52 
2.cohabiting/ 
married  
43(35) 97(85) 
3.separated/ 
divorced/ 
widowed  
46(38) 5(4) 
Total 122(100) 114(100) 
Religion 
1.Daoism  9(7) 26(23) 39.89 4 0.000 0.41 
2.Buddhism  27(22) 51(45) 
3.Christianity  17(14) 12(10) 
4.Catholicism  6(5) 6(5) 
5.No religion  63(52) 19(17) 
Total  122(100) 114(100) 
Education 
illiteracy  31(25) 0(0) 90.32 4 0.000 0.62 
completed 
primary school  
36(30) 2(2) 
completed 
junior high 
school  
16(13) 13(11) 
completed 
senior high 
school  
22(18) 39(34) 
obtained an 
undergraduate 
or higher 
degree  
17(14) 60(53) 
Total  122(100) 114(100) 
 * Percentages were rounded off 
Tu et al. (2006) recruited 102 residents who could complete the questionnaire 
autonomously aged 65 years or over from eight Taiwanese nursing homes to 
take part in their research about the QOL for older residents living in Taiwanese 
nursing homes. They observed that 55 or 54% of the participants were males. 
As Gaugler et al. (2003) state, men with dementia are more likely to move to 
care homes earlier. This might improve the chances that most male residents 
could answer the questionnaire with autonomy. Moreover, those researchers 
and this researcher only recruited those who could understand the 
questionnaire clearly and answer the questionnaire with autonomy. For this 
reason, male residents accounted for over half of the participants in this study.  
7.3.2 Age for each identity category 
There was a wide range of ages in the sample, but a strong pattern of 
difference between age and resident category. When age group was cross-
classified by resident status (see Table 7.3), we found X
 =199.26, df=3, 
p=0.000, and Cramers V=0.92, so that there was very convincing evidence of a 
difference between the age group distribution of 40 years of age or younger, 
41-64 years of age, 65-74 years of age, and 75 years of age or older. Most 
participants were 75 years of age or older among the two identity categories.  
Frances et al. (1995) note that the incidence of dementia is about 2-4per cent in 
people aged under 65 and increases to over 20% in those aged 85. Moreover, 
older people with dementia are more likely to be placed in care homes sooner 
(Gaugler et al., 2003). In this study, there were 95% of residents with dementia 
(n=116) who reported their age was 65 and over in the field test. Thus, it could 
be concluded that the age distribution in the samples met the anticipation of the 
researcher. As stated previously, taking care of people with dementia is the 
obligation of their adult children in Taiwan. 96% of family members (n=110) 
reported their age was below 65 years old in this research. Thus, the age 
distribution in the samples appears to be a reasonable representation of current 
Taiwanese care home residents and their families. 
7.3.3 Marital status for each identity category 
There were sharp differences in the profiles of marital status between the two 
identity categories. The highest percentage (59%) of the marital status level 
was cohabiting or married category. The second largest percentage of 
participants was separated/divorced/widowed at 22%. The smallest group was 
the single or unmarried category at 19%. From Table 7.3, the results of the chi-
square test indicated significant differences among the four groups of marital 
status, X
 (2, N=236) =63.39, p<0.001, and Cramers V=0.52. Most family 
members were cohabiting/ married among the participants, whilst residents had 
more mixed patterns.  
The national census (Department of Statistics, 2009a) indicated a 52% in 
cohabiting/married category. Neither residents nor family members had a 
similar proportion; we might anticipate that family members in cohabiting or 
married status were more likely than average to look after their older relatives 
who were residents with dementia in Taiwan.  
7.3.4 Religious beliefs for each identity category 
There were dramatic differences in the numbers of each religious group 
between the two identity categories. The dominant answer given was the no 
religion category (35%), and a relatively high percentage of participants (33%) 
were Buddhist. The third largest group was Daoism at 15%, and a relatively 
high percentage of participants (12%) were Christian. Only a few participants 
were in the Catholicism category (respectively: 5 per cent) (see Table 7.3). As 
shown in Table 7.6, the Pearson chi-square test gave X2 (4, N=236) =39.89, 
p<0.001, and Cramers V=0.41, thus there was convincing evidence of a 
significant difference between identity category and religious beliefs. Most 
residents had no religion among the participants, and Buddhism constituted 
nearly one-half of participants in the family members.  
It was surprising to note that over one-third of participants had no specific 
religion. This is probably, as Ministry of the Interior (2008a) states, a 
consequence of there being no national religion in Taiwan (instead, everyone 
can choose their own religion depending on individual will). Thus, according to 
the national census in 2008, at the end of 2007, only 1,537,498 or 6.68% 
Taiwanese claimed that they had religious beliefs (Ministry of the Interior, 
2008a).  
7.3.5 Educational level for each identity category 
Education levels were sharply divergent between residents and family members. 
Table 7.3 showed that the two variables were significantly related, Pearson X
(4, N=236) =90.32, p<0.001, and Cramers V=0.62. Most family members have 
obtained an undergraduate or higher degree, in contrast to the participants. The 
Taiwanese Government has implemented a six-year compulsory education 
program nationwide since 1945, and then extended the six-year program to the 
nine-year program in 1968. For this reason, almost all adults younger than 65-
year-old in Taiwan are literate with the official language, Chinese. Moreover, 
according to the Department of Statistics (2009b), at the end of 2008, there 
were only 372,005 Taiwanese older than 15-years with illiteracy, accounting for 
3.9% of the Taiwanese population. In other words, the literacy rate of 
Taiwanese population was 96.1% at the end of 2008. Thus, the education level 
in the sample of residents with dementia (13% of the sample coded as illiterate) 
was highly inconsistent with the national census. It was interesting to note that 
the education level of the family members who participated in this field test was 
considered to be rather high. 52% of them (n=60) had obtained an 
undergraduate or higher degree, and none of them was illiterate. Therefore, 
inviting family members to participate in the fieldwork to assist and read out for 
residents (n=31) with difficulty to complete the questionnaires were useful 
measures. 
7.3.6 Geographical distribution of care home for each financial support 
There were slight differences in financial support patterns between the four 
areas. 41 residents with dementia received financial support for their care from 
public funding, accounting for 34% of the resident population. For two-thirds 
(n=81) of the residents, financial support for their care was privately funded. 
More residents with private funding lived in northern care homes, but Table 7.4  
Table 7.4 Frequencies and percentages of geographical 
distribution of care home for each financial support 
Geographical distribution of 
care home 
Financial support (N=122) 
Public funding 
Number (%) 
Private funding 
Number (%) 
Northern 19(46) 41(50) 
Central 6(15) 8(10) 
Southern 9(22) 24(30) 
Eastern 7(17) 8(10) 
Total 41(100) 81(100) 
Pearson Chi-Square= 2.38, df=3, p=0.498, Cramer's V=0.14 
showed that any such regional differences could not be confirmed as 
statistically significant (p=0.498). 
As mentioned in Chapter 2, the Taiwanese Government only provides financial 
support for very low-income people with dementia to live in care homes. For 
this reason, the majority of residents relied on private funding, particularly in the 
higher income areas, in north Taiwan, around the capital city (68%); and in 
south Taiwan, around the second largest city (73%) in terms of population size.   
This review of demographic and socio-economic measures within the 
respondent sample served several purposes. It could be seen that the 
percentage of Taiwanese care home residents with dementia in this study was 
consistent with the distribution of percentage of care home beds for people with 
dementia in Taiwan. That is, the samples in this study were representative. 
Unsurprisingly, the sample groups (residents and family carers) clearly had 
different and distinctive socio-demographic and socio-economic profiles. This 
was consistent with generational care, whereby younger, socially advantaged 
family members were more likely to secure care for older, less advantaged 
relatives. Due to the differences between the two group profiles, in subsequent 
analysis the two groups were usually kept separate.  
7.4 Reliability, item, and factor analysis 
As the chapter on methodology has demonstrated, in order to develop the 
quality indicators with high reliability, validity, and acceptability for enhancing 
quality of care for people with dementia living in care homes, in the following 
parts of this chapter, reliability, item, and factor analysis were conducted to 
improve quality indicators for institutional dementia care to meet the 
requirements of service receivers. 
A good quality indicator for institutional dementia care should have high 
reliability, validity, and applicability. The final two stages in the development of 
an attitude scale are to test for reliability and validity (Coolican, 2004). 
Additionally, as Nunnally (1967) states, in order to improve reliability, a good 
questionnaire should conduct item analysis. Therefore, Cronbachs alpha for 
reliability analysis, item-total correlations and analysing discriminative power for 
item analysis, EFA for constructing validity, and CFA for confirming that the 
research model was valid, were each conducted in order to ensure that quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care have high reliability, validity, and 
credibility.  
7.4.1 Reliability analysis 
Within the field test sample, responses on the 41 quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care demonstrated good internal consistency as 
measures of quality of care in Taiwanese care homes for people with dementia. 
Cronbachs alpha was calculated to measure the internal consistency and 
reliability of attitudinal responses. From Table 7.5, there were very few missing 
values in the dataset (all variables have missing values of 2.1%), and all means 
were within the range of 1 to 5 (this indicates that no value is mistyped). The 
table did, however, indicate that responses had high negative skew 
(disproportionate clustering around high values); this skew might well contribute 
to high levels of internal consistency. Of the response patterns, internal 
consistency and reliability for the scale items was higher than the cut-off level 
0.7 (Cronbachs alpha=0.96). Thus, it is clear that the measures had high levels 
of agreement within groups.  
As is apparent from Table 7.5, the high levels of agreement between items 
emerged to a considerable degree as a result of respondents choosing almost 
all items as important or very important (evident from the table by the high 
means and low standard deviations). It is important to remember during the 
analysis of results that the overwhelming pattern across all indicators was a 
rating of the indicator as important. Nevertheless, there was some variance in 
response patterns, and this allowed the analysis of responses to proceed below.  
7.4.2 Item analysis 
Item analysis was conducted to determine which quality indicators should be 
included or excluded from this research. Except for reliability coefficients, 
Coolican (2004) suggests that there are two main methods to increase the 
reliability of a test through item analysis: item-total correlations and analysing 
discriminative power. Green and Salkind (2008) state that the reliability 
procedure with corrected item-total correlation is conducted to examine whether 
there is a strong positive correlation between the item and the corrected total 
score, in order to select items.  
7.4.2.1 Item-total correlations 
The reliability procedure with corrected item-total correlation was performed to 
ensure that there was a strong positive correlation between the item and the 
corrected total score to select items for the following statistical analysis. All 41 
quality indicators were suitable for the research scale in these terms. As shown 
in Table 7.5, Cronbach's Alpha of the whole scale was 0.96; its value for 
subscales ranged from 0.76 (management and administration) to 0.99 (social 
care). In addition, the items and the corrected total score had moderate to 
strong positive correlations, ranging from 0.46 for community social work to 
0.96 for social work record. Thus, all 41 quality indicators were chosen to be 
included on this research scale.  
7.4.2.2 Item discrimination between extreme groups 
Item analysis for the high-low-27-percent group method is used to distinguish 
differences between the two extreme groups to examine which items have 
appropriate discriminative power (Fan, 1954). This 27% is not fixed and could 
be any percentage if desired (Coolican, 2004). However, according to Lange et 
al. (1967), using item analysis to discard items which lack appropriate 
discriminative power between the percent of participants in the upper and lower 
27% who responded to each item is more efficient to improve the discriminative
 Table 7.5 Item descriptive and reliability analysis  
Quality indicator (ratings of 1-5) N=237 
(% Missing) Mean 
Deviation 
Corrected Item-Total 
Correlation 
Cronbach's Alpha 
if Item Deleted 
Cronbach's Alpha 
of subscale 
Management and administration 0.76 
1.Accident procedure 232(2.1) 4.75 .77 .48 .75 
2.Community social work 232(2.1) 4.44 1.11 .46 .80 
3.Financial management 232(2.1) 4.71 .76 .71 .64 
4.Self-assessment 232(2.1) 4.70 .76 .69 .65 
Human resource management 0.94 
5.Staff ratios 232(2.1) 4.61 .80 .80 .93 
6.Staff qualification 232(2.1) 4.69 .74 .87 .92 
7.Staff training 232(2.1) 4.66 .75 .88 .92 
8.Staff turnover 232(2.1) 4.51 .87 .82 .93 
9.Job satisfaction 232(2.1) 4.60 .82 .83 .93 
Health and personal care 0.96 
10.Care management 232(2.1) 4.60 .85 .83 .96 
11.Clinical record 232(2.1) 4.60 .83 .89 .96 
12.Consultation and referral 232(2.1) 4.68 .74 .79 .96 
13.Rehabilitation 232(2.1) 4.68 .74 .79 .96 
14.Pressure ulcers 232(2.1) 4.72 .78 .89 .96 
15.Urinary tract infections 232(2.1) 4.69 .78 .89 .96 
16.Infectious diseases control 232(2.1) 4.76 .74 .89 .96 
17.Physical restraint use 232(2.1) 4.65 .81 .87 .96 
Table 7.5 Item descriptive and reliability analysis (continued) 
Social care 0.99 
18.Behaviour treatment 232(2.1) 4.38 1.15 .92 .99 
19.Recreational activity 232(2.1) 4.26 1.18 .93 .99 
20.Art therapy 232(2.1) 4.15 1.18 .94 .98 
21.Reminiscence therapy 232(2.1) 4.16 1.18 .95 .98 
22.Festival activity 232(2.1) 4.23 1.18 .95 .98 
23.Community interaction 232(2.1) 4.09 1.21 .93 .99 
24.Spiritual care 232(2.1) 4.17 1.19 .95 .98 
25.Social work record 232(2.1) 4.25 1.18 .96 .98 
Rights 0.96 
26.Contract 232(2.1) 4.57 .88 .93 .94 
27.Complaint procedure 232(2.1) 4.55 .87 .92 .94 
28.Participation in planning 
services 
232(2.1) 4.46 .92 .90 .95 
29.Satisfaction with services 232(2.1) 4.54 .88 .87 .96 
Environment 0.97 
30.Fire safety 232(2.1) 4.87 .48 .79 .97 
31.Alarm facility 232(2.1) 4.82 .54 .72 .97 
32.Barrier-free environment 232(2.1) 4.86 .49 .84 .96 
33.Physical assistance 
equipment 
232(2.1) 4.86 .49 .87 .96 
34.A quiet room 232(2.1) 4.68 .68 .83 .96 
35.A looped path 232(2.1) 4.73 .62 .87 .96 
36.Object marks 232(2.1) 4.70 .65 .85 .96 
Table 7.5 Item descriptive and reliability analysis (continued) 
37.Storage of medication and 
dangerous goods 
232(2.1) 4.84 .49 .86 .96 
38.Area/ space has appropriate 
signs and the signs are 
clearly visible 
232(2.1) 4.72 .63 .88 .96 
39.Staff area/kitchen is designed 
to provide unobtrusively 
visual surveillance with ease 
232(2.1) 4.72 .63 .85 .96 
40.Electronic equipment for 
supporting the security of the 
residents 
232(2.1) 4.72 .63 .83 .96 
41.Electronic equipment for 
supporting the security of the 
care home and possessions 
232(2.1) 4.69 .68 .81 .97 
Reliability statistics for all items (N=41): Cronbach's Alpha=0.96  
power of a test. Clark-Carter (1997) notes that using independent samples t-
test to compare the high and low scorers could ensure that the item has 
appropriate discriminative power, and that the researcher should only retain the 
item which reaches a significant difference between the high and low scorers. 
Thus, the independent samples t test is employed to assess the hypothesis that 
participants of the upper group rated higher scores than the lower group and to 
examine whether the critical ratio (t value) of each item is greater than the 
threshold 2 to reject the null hypothesis (Jekel et al., 2001), and therefore retain 
the appropriate quality indicators. 
In this analysis, all critical ratios (t) were higher than the threshold 2.00 and all p 
values were lower than the cut-off level 0.05 (see Appendix 13). Thus, there 
was convincing evidence of a significant difference in the population means. 
That is, all items could be discriminated between the upper 27% of group and 
the lower 27% of group. Thus, at this stage, since item responses could 
discriminate between participants who had a high score on the important scale 
and those who got a low score, it was not necessary to revise or discard any 
item and all 41 items were retained for the following statistical analyses.  
All 41 quality indicators were found to be appropriate in content because they 
could show significant differences between high and low scorers. 
7.4.3 Exploratory factor analysis  
A number of exploratory factor analysis (EFA) plots were conducted. Due to the 
high correlations between many items, certain measures did not add a 
substantial empirical pattern of difference independently to the factor structure. 
After several reviews, an effective EFA was achieved by discarding 23 of the 41 
quality indicators, leaving 18 of 41 quality indicators (see Table 7.6). These 
were grouped into 3 factors and met the criteria of EFA and were retained for 
the next stage.  
Based on the principal components extraction, EFA is conducted to group 
individual items together and to extract the number of factors where eigenvalue 
(the amount of variance of the variables accounted for by a factor) are greater 
than 1.00. A scree plot examines the eigenvalues to determine the number of 
extracted factors. Similarly, the varimax rotation method is conducted to 
maximize the factor loadings (the correlation between the variable and the 
factor) to identify each item with a single factor. The number of factor is selected 
by keeping those which explain the percentage of the total variability over 60%, 
those factors with eigenvalues above 1, and those factors before the elbow in 
the scree plot (Everitt, 1996; Green and Salkind, 2008).     
In the current study, only three principal components simultaneously met the 
criteria above. In the analysis of importance of 41 quality indicators, EFA initially 
recommended six aspects for the important scale (eigenvalue>1). As shown in 
Appendix 14, 6 principal components had eigenvalues of 16.93, 7.12, 4.06, 
2.45, 2.04, and 1.4 (i.e., above the 1.0 eigenvalue criterion). These 6 principal 
components explained 41.28%, 17.36%, 9.91%, 5.98%, 4.98%, and 3.4% of 
the variance, and the cumulative variance explained by these was 82.91%, 
meeting the criteria. However, the scree plot (see Appendix 15) had a flattening 
from the fourth factor onwards. Thus, only three principal components were 
retained to perform the factor analysis. 
A maximum likelihood factoring with promax rotation to group individual items 
together is conducted, because the maximum likelihood factoring could produce 
a chi-square goodness-of-fit test for the CFA (Everitt, 1996), and promax 
rotation is used to ensure that there are correlations between the factors in the 
survey data. This allows extraction of the 3 factors to examine whether the 
results are the same as the principal components analysis recommended. 
Moreover, in order to ensure that a quality indicator have a reasonable amount 
of variance explained by 3 factors, therefore if the communality (the amount of 
variation of each observed variable being explained by the factors extracted) 
does not reach the cut-off level 0.7, the quality indicator will be discarded. 
Round two started with 3 factors in a maximum likelihood factor analysis with 
promax rotation. Analyzing the importance of 41 quality indicators, maximum 
likelihood factoring supported the finding which was that principal components 
analysis recommended 3 aspects for the important scale. According to the 
communalities, 23 quality indicators did not work best to meet the cut-off level 
0.7, and thus these 23 indicators were discarded from the factor model.  
As shown in Table 7.6, the 3 factors explained the variation of each of the 
quality indicators extremely well because the communalities showed that 18 
quality indicators had a reasonable amount (range 0.71-0.94) of variance 
explained by 3 factors. Three factors had eigenvalues above 1. 
Table 7.6 The factor structure of 18 quality indicators  
Quality indicator Communalities Factor 
Social 
Health 
personal 
Environment 
2. Community social work 0.80 0.94 -0.05 -0.11 
18. Behaviour treatment 0.88 0.93 0.05 -0.06 
19. Recreational activity 0.88 0.93 0.01 -0.01 
20. Art therapy 0.90 0.95 -0.01 0.03 
21. Reminiscence therapy 0.92 0.95 -0.03 0.06 
22. Festival activity 0.91 0.95 0.01 -0.01 
23. Community interaction 0.89 0.93 -0.04 0.09 
24. Spiritual care 0.92 0.93 0.03 0.03 
25. Social work record 0.94 0.95 0.05 -0.02 
11. Clinical record 0.71 0.10 0.75 0.11 
14. Pressure ulcers 0.94 -0.03 0.99 -0.01 
15. Urinary tract infections 0.92 -0.01 0.96 0.01 
16. Infectious diseases 
control 
0.89 0.01 0.96 -0.08 
34. A quiet room 0.74 0.05 -0.03 0.85 
35. A looped path 0.84 -0.02 0.01 0.92 
36. Object marks 0.87 -0.02 -0.01 0.94 
38. Area/space have 
appropriate signs and the 
signs are clearly visible 
0.87 0.01 -0.03 0.94 
39. Staff area/kitchen is 
designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual 
surveillance with ease 
0.73 -0.04 0.07 0.85 
Eigenvalues 9.81 3.53 2.20 
Variance (%) 54.49 19.61 12.23 
Cumulative (%) 54.49 74.11 86.33 
Extraction Method: Maximum Likelihood.  
Rotation Method: Promax with Kaiser Normalization.  
Moreover, a very high percentage of the 18 variables retained could be 
explained by the 3 factors, because they explained 54.49%, 19.61%, and 
12.23% of the variance. That is, these 3 factors accounted for 86.33% of the 
variance among the 18 quality indicators.  
The results in Table 7.6 indicated that all the factor loadings were extremely 
high from 0.75 for clinical record (quality indicator 11) to 0.99 for pressure 
ulcers (quality indicator 14). The 18 quality indicators were fed into three key 
dimensions which were interpreted as social care (quality indicator 2 and 18-25); 
health and personal care (quality indicator 11, 14, 15, and 16); and environment 
(quality indicator 34, 35, 36, 38, and 39).  
Moreover, the three factors had weak to moderate positive correlations, ranging 
from 0.22-0.5 (see Appendix 16). This may indicate that as the degree of 
importance of one factor rises, the degree of importance of the other 
corresponding factors will tend also to increase.  
On the basis of the results above, the EFA on the scales of importance 
indicated a three-factor structure with 18 quality indicators. Thus, 3 factors and 
18 quality indicators were retained to conduct CFA. 
7.4.4 Second-order confirmatory factor model 
In this study, the CFA was conducted to confirm that the hypothesized model 
(see Figure 7.1) is an acceptable fit to the data. According to the suggestions of 
Byrne (2001), the researcher states the hypothesized model of this study as the 
following expectations: 
1. Responses to quality indicators for institutional dementia care can be 
explained by 3 first-order factors (social care, health and personal care, and 
environment), and one second-order factor (Quality of care). 
2. Each quality indicator has a nonzero loading on the first-order factor that it is 
designed to measure, and a zero loading on the other two first-order factors. 
3. Error associated with each quality indicator is uncorrelated. 
4. Covariation among the 3 first-order factors will be fully explained by their 
regression on the second-order factor. 
Through CFA, the results of three-factor CFA supported the EFA. Appendix 17 
showed that the three factors loaded onto a second order factor, representing 
quality of care for people with dementia living in care homes. The results of the 
CFA on the scales of importance indicated a three-factor structure with 18 
quality indicators. It can be seen that social care, health and personal care, and 
environment influenced the perceived quality of care. 
However, this initial model does not reach acceptable levels of fitness and it 
may be necessary to modify this model to improve fit. Particularly, if a 
parameter does not reach the significant level, 0.05, it is considered 
unimportant to the model (Byrne, 2001). In this study, the p value from the initial 
three-factor CFA model showed that the residual for social care was 0.197. This 
indicates that the residual for social care should be excluded in this model.  
In addition, the modification indices (MIs) showed that the largest MI was 55.83 
and the second largest MI was 30.23 in the covariance portion of the output 
data, which indicated that two error covariance between quality indicator 18 and 
quality indicator 2, quality indicator 18 and quality indicator 16, would reduce 
the chi-squared statistic by at least 55.83 and 30.23 if the correlations between 
the four errors were included.  
After removing the residual for social care from the model and including the 
correlations between quality indicator 18 and quality indicator 2, quality 
indicator 18 and quality indicator 16, the data presented in Table 7.7 showed 
the chi-square and df decreased from 612.19, 132 to 517.5, 131; and showed 
that other standard summary statistics RMR, NFI, IFI, TLI, and CFI reached the 
cut-off values.  
Table 7.7 Comparison of fit index between before and after modification 
Fit index 
criterion 
Before 
modification 
After 
modification 
CMIN (
) 612.19 517.5 
CMIN/DF 4.64 3.95 
RMR (<0.05) 
NFI (>0.90) 
IFI (>0.90) 0.93 0.94 
TLI (>0.90) 0.92 0.93 
CFI (>0.90) 0.93 0.94 
Figure 7.1 and Appendix 18 showed that the results of the final three-factor 
CFA model were reasonable and statistically significant, and all standard errors 
were acceptable. According to the standardized coefficients, the three factors 
had a strong effect on 18 quality indicators, ranging from 0.84 to 0.97. Moreover, 
the paths from the second-order quality of care factor to each aspect also 
reached statistical significance, regression weights were 1.00 for social care, 
0.51 for health and personal care, and 0.31 for environment. The 18 quality 
indicators were well explained by the model with 3 factors, ranging from 73% to 
93%. The covariance between quality indicator 2 and 18, and quality indicator 
18 and 16 were 0.45 and 0.39, which were significantly different from zero (p 
values less than 0.001).  
Health and
personal care
Social care
21. Reminiscence therapy
Environment
Quality of care
20. Art therapy
19. Recreational activity
.8718. Behaviour treatment
2. Community social work
22. Festival activity
23. Community interaction
24. Spiritual care
25. Social work record
11. Clinical record
14. Pressure ulcers
15. Urinary tract infections
.8816. Infectious diseases
control
34. A quiet room
35. A looped path
36. Object marks
.8738. Area/space has
appropriate signs and
the signs are clearly visible
39. Staff area/kitchen is
designed to provide
unobtrusively visual
surveillance with ease
Figure 7.1 Final model of second-order factorial structure for quality indicators 
for institutional dementia care 
After these modifications, the final model (see Figure 7.1) reflected a 
reasonable fit to the data based on the fit indices (RMR, NFI, IFI, TLI, and CFI); 
all parameters reached significance (see Appendix 18); and no other 
parameters were recommended by the MIs. Thus, there was no conventional 
requirement for any further model fitting.  
The results of three-factor CFA supported the EFA. Thus, it can be concluded 
that the 18 out of the 41 initial quality indicators, divided into 3 aspects (social 
care; health and personal care; and environment), are the most important items 
for people with dementia living in Taiwanese care home. The findings were 
summarized in Tables 7.8 (explanation of items) and 7.9 (item details). 
These results were inconsistent with the findings of the WHOQOL Group. The 
WHOQOL Group conducted CFA to develop different modules (e.g. WHOQOL-
100, WHOQOL-Bref, WHOQOL-HIV, WHOQOL-OLD) to assess QOL of 
different populations. According to Skevington et al. (2004), firstly the group 
identified the need for measures in six domains (physical health; psychological; 
levels of independence; social relationships; environment; and spirituality, 
religion, and personal beliefs), by using 100 items for the WHOQOL-100 
module. Subsequently they reduce those six domains into four (physical, 
psychological, social, and environment), using 26 items for the WHOQOL-Bref 
(Skevington et al., 2004). In addition, Power et al. (2005) developed the 
WHOQOL-Old module with six domains (sensory abilities; social participation; 
autonomy; intimacy; past, present and future activities; and death and dying) to 
assess the QOL of old adults. The differences might be explained by the fact 
that these studies normally recruited older people in 20 different national 
centers from around the world, whereas in the current study the researcher only 
recruited people with dementia living in Taiwanese care homes, and their family 
members. Thus, this discrepancy may be due to the different target samples 
and the different concerns. 
Table 7.8 The differences between arguments of theories, opinions of experts, and perception of service receivers on quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care 
Dimension  Quality indicators 
incorporated within 
dimensions (theory) 
Dimension  Quality indicators 
incorporated within 
dimensions (expert) 
Dimension Quality indicators 
incorporated within 
dimensions 
(service receiver) 
Management 
administration 
1. Accident procedure;  
2. Community social 
work;  
3. Financial 
management;  
4. Self-assessment 
Management 
administration 
1. Accident procedure;  
2. Community social 
work;  
3. Financial 
management;  
4. Self-assessment 
Human 
resource 
management 
5. Staff ratios;  
6. Staff qualification;  
7. Staff training;  
8. Staff turnover;  
9. Job satisfaction 
Human 
resource 
management 
5. Staff ratios;  
6. Staff qualification;  
7. Staff training;  
8. Staff turnover;  
9. Job satisfaction 
Health and 
personal care 
10. Care management;  
11. Clinical record;  
12. Consultation and 
referral;  
13. Rehabilitation;  
14. Nutrition;  
15. Pressure ulcers;  
16. Urinary tract 
infections;  
17. Physical restraint 
Health and 
personal care 
10. Care management;  
11. Clinical record;  
12. Consultation and 
referral;  
13. Rehabilitation;  
14. Pressure ulcers;  
15. Urinary tract 
infections;  
16. Infectious diseases 
control;  
17. Physical restraint 
Health and 
personal 
11. Clinical record;  
14. Pressure 
ulcers;  
15. Urinary tract 
infections;  
16. Infectious 
diseases control 
Table 7.8 The differences between arguments of theories, opinions of experts, and perception of service receivers on quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care (continued) 
Social care 18. Behaviour treatment;  
19. Recreational activity;  
20. Art therapy;  
21. Reminiscence 
therapy;  
22. Reality orientation;  
23. Cognitive retraining;  
24. Skills training;  
25. Festival activity;  
26. Community 
interaction;  
27. Spiritual care 
Social care 18. Behaviour 
treatment;  
19. Recreational activity;  
20. Art therapy;  
21. Reminiscence 
therapy;  
22. Festival activity;  
23. Community 
interaction;  
24. Spiritual care;  
25. Social work record 
Social care 2. Community social 
work;  
18. Behaviour 
treatment;  
19. Recreational 
activity;  
20. Art therapy;  
21. Reminiscence 
therapy;  
22. Festival activity;  
23. Community 
interaction;  
24. Spiritual care;  
25. Social work 
record 
Rights 28. Contract;  
29. Complaint 
procedure;  
30. Participation in 
planning services;  
31. Satisfaction with 
services 
Rights 26. Contract;  
27. Complaint 
procedure;  
28. Participation in 
planning services; 29. 
Satisfaction with 
services 
Table 7.8 The differences between arguments of theories, opinions of experts, and perception of service receivers on quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care (continued) 
Environment 32. Fire safety;  
33. Alarm facility;  
34. Barrier-free 
environment;  
35. Physical assistance 
equipment;  
36. A quiet room;  
37. A looped path;  
38. Transparent 
cupboard/cabinet;  
39. Objects mark;  
40. Area/space has an 
appropriate sign and the 
sign is suitable at visible 
level;  
41. Staff area/kitchen is 
designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual 
surveillance with ease;  
42. Electronic equipment 
for supporting the 
security of the residents;  
43. Electronic equipment 
for supporting the 
security of the care 
home and possessions 
Environment 30. Fire safety;  
31. Alarm facility;  
32. Barrier-free 
environment;  
33. Physical assistance 
equipment; 34. A quiet 
room;  
35. A looped path;  
36. Objects mark;  
37. Storage of 
medication and 
dangerous goods;  
38. Area/space has an 
appropriate sign and the 
sign is suitable at visible 
level;  
39. Staff area/kitchen is 
designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual 
surveillance with ease;  
40. Electronic 
equipment for 
supporting the security 
of the residents;  
41. Electronic 
equipment for 
supporting the security 
of the care home and 
possessions 
Environment 34. A quiet room;  
35. A looped path;  
36. Object marks;  
38. Area/space has 
appropriate signs and 
the signs are clearly 
visible;  
39. Staff area/kitchen 
is designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual 
surveillance with 
Table 7.9 Final set of quality indicators for institutional dementia care 
Aspects Quality indicators 
incorporated within 
aspect 
Operational definition 
Social care 2. Community social 
The institution involves community social service activities, such as home care, 
day care, and respite care in the local community. The institution also links social 
resources, such as human resource, material supply, and financial support, to 
improve the quality of life for residents. 
 18. Behaviour 
treatment 
The institution employs qualified staff who can provide behavior treatment, such 
as treatment for decreasing or terminating aggression, incontinence, and 
screaming, depending on the outcome of a needs assessment. 
 19. Recreational 
activity 
The institution employs qualified staff who can provide recreational activities, such 
as games, pets, gardening, and cooking, depending on the outcome of a needs 
assessment and individual interests. 
 20. Art therapy The institution employs qualified staff who can provide art therapy, such as arts 
and crafts, music, and dance, according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
 21. Reminiscence 
therapy 
The institution employs qualified staff who can provide reminiscence therapy for 
residents in need, according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
 22. Festival activity The institution provides special activities for festivals, such as Christmas, Chinese 
New Year, Dragon Boat Festival, and Moon Festival. 
 23. Community 
interaction 
Residents continue to maintain adequate amount of interaction with local 
community, such as residents attending activities in the community or people from 
the community coming to visit the residents. 
 24. Spiritual care The institution provides spiritual activities or facilities for residents according to the 
individual spiritual needs of the resident. 
 25. Social work record The institution records social care provided and received, and the response to 
care for each resident on a daily basis. 
Table 7.9 Final set of quality indicators for institutional dementia care (continued) 
Health and 
personal 
11. Clinical record The institution records health and personal care provided and received, and the 
response to care for each resident on a daily basis. 
 14. Pressure ulcers The acceptable percentage of residents in care homes who have pressure ulcers 
should be 5% and below. 
 15. Urinary tract 
infections 
The acceptable percentage of residents in care homes who have urinary tract 
infections (both symptomatic and asymptomatic) should be controlled between 6% 
and 10%. 
 16. Infectious diseases 
control 
The institution has a standard procedure for prevention, treatment, and notification 
of infectious diseases, such as scabies, bacterial dysentery, influenza, and others 
which commonly cause cross infection in institutional living. All staff are familiar 
with the procedure of infectious disease control. Effort should be made to inform 
relevant people, such as family and authority required of every incident. 
Environment 34. A quiet room The institution provides a quiet room with multi-sensory training equipment, such 
as visual, auditory, olfactory, and tactile stimulating equipment, for residents to 
relax in. 
 35. A looped path The institution has a barrier-free looped path for the needs of residents. 
 36. Object marks Significant objects of individual resident have obvious identifying marks to 
enhance the ability of residents to identify their own goods. 
 38.Area/ space has 
appropriate signs and 
the signs are clearly 
visible 
The institution provides written indications and pictorial signage to enhance 
residents orientation and recognition around the building. 
 39. Staff area/ kitchen 
is designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual 
surveillance with ease 
Staff in the staff area can directly observe resident activities with ease. Same idea 
applies to kitchen area, since some residents may like to incorporate cooking into 
their daily activity. This activity requires supervision with unobtrusively visual 
surveillance as well. 
7.5 Correlations between the three dimensions 
The Pearsons product-moment correlation coefficients between dimensions 
ranged between 0.23 and 0.51 (see Table 7.10). The two-tailed significance of 
the correlations was less than 0.05. It is clear that there were significant weak 
to moderate positive correlations among the 3 aspects, but they were not 
closely associated. It can be anticipated that most participants considered the 
three aspects all had a similar degree of importance for people with dementia 
living in Taiwanese care homes, but at the same time, that there were some 
differences of views.  
Table 7.10 Correlations among domain scores 
Factor 
Social 
Health and 
personal care Environment 
Social care 1.00 0.51
Health and 
personal care 
 1.00 0.23
Environment   1.00 
**. Correlation was significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 
The results of reliability, item, and factor analysis showed that quality indicators 
for institutional dementia care had high reliability, validity, and acceptability. The 
41 quality indicators for institutional dementia care demonstrated good internal 
consistency (Cronbachs alpha=0.96) to measure quality of care of Taiwanese 
care homes for people with dementia. The results of item-total correlations 
indicated that all 41 quality indicators were suitable for this research scale 
because Cronbachs alpha of subscales ranged from 0.76 (management and 
administration) to 0.99 (social care), and the items and the corrected total score 
had moderate to strong positive correlations, ranged from 0.46 for community 
social work to 0.96 for social work record. Through analysing discriminative 
power, all 41 quality indicators could be retained because they could be 
discriminated between the upper 27% of group and the lower 27% of group. 
However, EFA and CFA confirm that 18 out of 41 quality indicators are the most 
important items to assess quality of care for people with dementia living in 
Taiwanese care homes. The results of EFA were that only 18 quality indicators 
met the selected criteria of EFA and they were fed into three key dimensions: 
social care (quality indicator 2 and 18-25), health and personal care (quality 
indicator 11, 14, 15, and 16), and environment (quality indicator 34, 35, 36, 38, 
and 39). Additionally, the results of Pearsons product-moment correlation 
analysis indicated that the three factors had weak to moderate positive 
correlations, ranging from 0.22 to 0.5.   
The results of three-factor CFA served to confirm that the 18 quality indicators 
could reasonably be divided into 3 aspects: social care; health and personal 
care; and environment. In summary, the analysis suggested that the 18 quality 
indicators are the most important inspective items for people with dementia 
living in Taiwanese care homes. 
It can be concluded that all 41 quality indicators were potentially relevant, but 
only 18 quality indicators were empirically discriminating. Accordingly, there 
were gaps between experts and service receivers because the experts in this 
study considered that 41 quality indicators were suitable to evaluate quality of 
care of Taiwanese care homes, but in the views of service receivers, to focus 
on only 18 out of 41 quality indicators was adequate. Based on the person-
centred care approach, the best quality indicators for Taiwanese care homes 
for people with dementia organised into themes were those that concern social 
care (quality indicator 2 and 18-25); health and personal care (quality indicator 
11, 14, 15, and 16); and environment (quality indicator 34, 35, 36, 38, and 39). 
As mentioned in the chapter of methodology, demographic characteristics 
affected quality of care for residents with dementia living in care homes. Based 
on the customer focus of TQM approach and the person-centred approach, in 
order to provide a reference for service providers to offer individual service, in 
the following sections, inferential statistics are presented to examine whether 
different demographic factors cause differences in views on the importance of 
the quality indicators.  
7.6 Analysis of differences in ratings 
In order to examine whether different demographic factors influenced ratings on 
the quality indicators, the means of ratings were compared across identity 
category, gender, financial support, size of care home, age, marital status, 
religion, education, and geographic distribution of care home. As Table 7.5 
showed, responses had high negative skew (disproportionate clustering around 
high values) so that it seems to indicate that non-parametric tests was 
appropriate to be employed to analyze the differences between two or more 
independent groups. However, since parametric and non-parametric tests (e. g. 
Mann-Whitney U test and Kruskal-Wallis H test) gave similar results, I only 
present the results of parametric tests here. Multiple linear regression analysis 
was also performed to examine which individual measures (gender, age, 
marital status, religious beliefs, education, and financial support) and 
characteristics of care homes (geographic distribution and size) could predict 
the 3 factors (social care, health and personal care, and environment).  
7.6.1 Comparisons between groups  
In comparisons involving two categories (e.g. comparisons between gender), T-
tests were conducted to examine whether the mean score differed significantly 
between the two groups. In comparisons involving three of more categories, 
one-way ANOVA tests were conducted to examine the same question of 
whether the mean scores differed significantly between the groups. In each 
case the null hypothesis was that there was no structured (or systematic) 
difference in the ratings for each of the three aspects between the categories. If 
there was a significant difference among the categories, post hoc comparisons 
with the use of the Scheffe test was conducted to examine pair-wise differences 
among the means.  In addition, because of the importance of the resident/family 
member division, analyses were often presented on three different sample 
permutations: all respondents combined, residents only, and family members 
only.  
In general, the sample means for each of the three aspects differed according 
to the group membership categories, though this was not always statistically 
significant. As Table 7.11 indicated, in the aspects of health and personal care, 
and social care, the average degree of importance scores were higher in the 
family member category, but in the aspect of environment, the mean scores  
Table 7.11 Means analysis of three factors on identity category 
Factor Identity 
category N Mean Std. Deviation t  
Social care Resident 122 4.13 1.44 
-1.66 .098 Family 
member 
112 4.36 .54 
Health and 
personal care 
Resident 122 4.66 .95 
-.80 .427 Family 
member 
113 4.73 .39 
Environment Resident 122 4.85 .58 
3.95 .000 Family 
member 
111 4.56 .56 
were higher in the resident category. The p value from the independent 
samples t test regarding the importance of the environment was 0.000 (though 
the p-values of the other two aspects did not confirm significant differences 
between groups). Thus, there was convincing evidence of a real difference in 
the aspect of environment between resident and family member categories. 
Residents considered environmental aspect significantly more important than 
family members did. 
Hawes et al. (2003) also argue that privacy and a homelike environment is 
more likely to provide higher levels of service. In institutional dementia care, 
family members can provide historical background and continuity for residents, 
provide social support, play a proxy role in making decisions about care, and 
advocate for residents with dementia. Accordingly family members play a 
crucial role in quality of care and QOL of residents with dementia (Port et al., 
2005). However, residents with dementia living in care homes can experience 
and report on quality of care. Thus, their concern about the care environment 
matters much more than family members do.  
As shown in Table 7.12, as for all participants, in the aspects of social care and 
environment, the average degree of importance scores were higher in the 
female participant category, but in the aspect of health and personal care, the 
mean scores were higher in the male participant category. However, the results 
of t-tests showed that there was no difference in the three aspects in terms of 
rating scores between male and female participant categories.  
Table 7.12 Means analysis of three factors on gender  
Factor Gender N Mean Std. Deviation t  p 
All participants 
Social care Male 125 4.20 1.20 
-.64 .526 
Female 109 4.29 .99 
Health and 
personal care 
Male 125 4.69 .72 
.01 .991 
Female 110 4.69 .76 
Environment Male 125 4.69 .68 
-.49 .624 
Female 108 4.73 .47 
Residents 
Social care Male 83 4.15 1.42 
.21 .837 
Female 39 4.09 1.49 
Health and 
personal care 
Male 83 4.70 .82 
.64 .525 
Female 39 4.56 1.19 
Environment Male 83 4.80 .69 
-2.23 .028 
Female 39 4.97 .16 
Family members 
Social care Male 42 4.30 .54 
-.98 .329 
Female 70 4.40 .54 
Health and 
personal care 
Male 42 4.68 .45 
-1.02 .313 
Female 71 4.76 .34 
Environment Male 42 4.50 .62 
-.87 .388 
Female 69 4.59 .52 
In residents, the t test gave a p value of 0.028. It is clear that mean scores of 
importance in environment differed between male and female residents. Thus, 
the null hypothesis should be rejected in the aspect of environment, but in the 
other aspects, the null hypothesis cannot be rejected. This indicates that the 
female residents considered environmental aspect more important than the 
male residents. 
For family members, in the three aspects, the average degree of importance 
scores were higher in the female family member category, but  the results of t-
test showed that the differences in the three aspects did not reach significance 
between male and female family member categories.  
The results were not consistent with the research of Tseng and Wang (2001) 
and Tu et al. (2006) in Taiwanese nursing homes. They find that nursing home 
residents with different gender do not demonstrate any difference in QOL 
values. Since only residents with dementia have taken part in this study, 
instead of other older residents, it is likely that the female residents with 
dementia emphasized more on the care environment.    
Table 7.13 showed that for all participants, in the aspects of social care, and 
health and personal care, the average degree of importance scores were higher 
in the public funding category, but in the aspect of environment, the mean 
scores were higher in the private funding category. However, the results of t-
test illustrated that there was no significant difference in these rating scores 
between public and private funding categories. 
Focussing upon residents only, however, one pattern of difference between 
funding patterns did emerge as statistically significant. Amongst residents, the t- 
test for ratings on health and personal care gave a p value of 0.049 suggesting 
Table 7.13 Means analysis of three factors on financial support  
Factor Financial support N Mean 
Deviation t 
All participants 
Social care Public funding 72 4.43 1.06 1.80 
0.073 
  Private funding 162 4.16 1.12 
Health and 
personal care 
Public funding 73 4.76 0.55 1.16 
0.247 
  Private funding 162 4.66 0.80 
Environment Public funding 71 4.69 0.68 -0.29 
0.769 
  Private funding 162 4.72 0.55 
Residents 
Social care Public funding 41 4.39 1.32 1.51 
0.134 
  Private funding 81 3.99 1.49 
Health and 
personal care 
Public funding 41 4.85 0.57 1.99 
0.049 
  Private funding 81 4.56 1.08 
Environment Public funding 41 4.80 0.71 -0.57 
0.569 
  Private funding 81 4.88 0.51 
Family members 
Social care Public funding 31 4.48 0.58 1.38 
0.173 
  Private funding 81 4.32 0.52 
Health and 
personal care 
Public funding 32 4.65 0.50 -1.19 
0.242 
  Private funding 81 4.76 0.33 
Environment Public funding 30 4.54 0.60 -0.18 
0.855 
  Private funding 81 4.56 0.55 
a significant difference in ratings between public and private funding residents.  
In other ratings patterns amongst residents and amongst family members, 
however, patterns of difference between opinions according to public and 
private funding were not statistically significant.  
Quality of care for people with dementia living in care homes is affected by 
financial issues. Although Tu et al. (2006) find that nursing home residents with 
different socioeconomic status do not demonstrate any difference in the QOL 
attitudes, Gaugler et al. (2003) point out that family members with higher 
income are more likely to choose those care homes with high quality of care 
because they can pay a higher fee for the care. Tseng and Wang (2001) also 
indicate that Taiwanese nursing home residents who have higher 
socioeconomic status scored higher QOL.  
As stated previously, the Taiwanese Government only provides financial 
support for very low income people with dementia to live in care homes. Thus, it 
is likely that high income residents have sufficient financial support to obtain a 
high quality of health and personal care, but low income residents with 
dementia do not. This may be the reason that public funding residents think 
health and personal care is more important than the private funding residents 
Next, Table 7.14 summarized differences in ratings according to the size of the 
care home. In general, whether for all participants combined, or for residents or 
family members analyzed separately, the mean scores were different in the 
three aspects between small and large care home categories, but the results 
from the independent samples t-test showed that none of these slight 
differences by care home size could be considered to be statistically significant 
(all p values were above 0.05).  
Resident and family member data in this study were collected from 14 
Taiwanese care homes. The size of care homes in this sample ranged from 20 
beds to 165 beds. However, in order to improve and supervise quality of care, 
Taiwanese central Government categorizes care home into two sizes: those 
with the number of beds between 5 and 49 inclusive are small care homes; 
those with 50 or more beds are large care homes (Ministry of the Interior, 2007).  
Table 7.14 Means analysis of three factors on size of the care home  
Factor Size of care 
home N Mean 
Deviation t 
All participants 
Social care Small 83 4.20 1.10 -0.41 
  Large 151 4.26 1.11 
Health and 
personal 
Small 83 4.73 0.72 
0.532 
Large 
152 4.67 0.74 
Environment Small 83 4.73 0.57 0.46 
0.648 
  Large 150 4.70 0.60 
Residents 
Social care Small 42 4.10 1.46 -0.18 
0.855 
  Large 80 4.15 1.44 
Health and 
personal 
Small 42 4.74 0.96 
0.494 
Large 
80 4.61 0.95 
Environment Small 42 4.93 0.46 1.15 
0.253 
  Large 80 4.81 0.64 
Family members 
Social care Small 41 4.31 0.53 -0.82 
0.414 
  Large 71 4.39 0.55 
Health and 
personal 
Small 41 4.73 0.35 
-0.10 
0.923 
Large 
72 4.73 0.41 
Environment Small 41 4.54 0.60 -0.28 
0.779 
  Large 70 4.57 0.54 
The Taiwanese central Government also set up the different care standards for 
these two sizes of care homes. However, according to the results of this study, 
both residents with dementia and their family members had similar views of 
quality of care regardless of what size of care homes they came from.  
Previous research has indicated that smaller care homes offer higher quality of 
care for residents (Zimmerman et al., 2003). Moreover, Chou et al. (2003) 
observe that smaller care homes have higher levels of resident satisfaction 
because smaller care homes could provide more opportunities of social 
interaction for residents. On the other hand, larger care institutions are often 
able to provide particular resources and facilities not available at smaller 
institutions (Lin and Liu, 2006a). However, the results of this study did not 
suggest obvious differences between residents and family members in larger 
and smaller care homes. It is likely that in institutional dementia care Taiwanese 
residents with dementia and their family members were concerned about all 
three aspects of care regardless of what size of care home they lived in.  
Table 7.15 presented data on ratings differences by age groups. For all 
participants combined, the one-way ANOVA gave p=0.011 for the aspect of 
health and personal care and p=0.007 for the aspect of environment between 
the 4 age groups, which were below the cut-off level 0.05. Hence, there was 
evidence of some significant differences between age groups in the aspect of 
health and personal care, and environment. The Scheffe post hoc analysis 
indicated that there was a significant difference in the aspect of health and 
personal care between the age 65-74 and the other 3 age groups (mean 4.2 vs. 
4.7, 4.2 vs. 4.7, and 4.2 vs. 4.8). The participants below 41, aged 41-64, and 
aged over 74 groups considered the aspect of health and personal care to be 
significantly more important than the participants from the 65-74 age group. In 
the aspect of environment, there was a significant difference between the age 
over 74 and 41-64 group (mean 4.9 vs. 4.6), and the age over 74 and 65-74 
group (mean 4.9 vs. 4.7). The participants who were over 74 years of age 
considered the aspect of environment more significantly important than the 
participants who were 41-64 years of age or 65-74 years of age. These patterns 
of differences were largely reproduced when restricting analysis to only the 
resident or the family member, categories respectively. However, not all results
Table 7.15 Means analysis of three factors on age 
Factors Age N Mean 
Deviation F 
Scheffe 
Post hoc 
All participants 
Social care 40 and under 21 4.41 0.58 2.60 
0.053 
41-64 93 4.36 0.62 
65-74 20 3.63 1.54 
75 and over 100 4.21 1.38 
Health and personal care 40 and under 22 4.72 0.48 3.77 
0.011 
40 and under>65-74 
41-64>65-74 
75 and over>65-74 
41-64 93 4.72 0.46 
65-74 20 4.18 1.29 
75 and over 100 4.76 0.81 
Environment 40 and under 21 4.50 0.61 
0.007 
75 and over >41-64 
75 and over>65-74 
41-64 92 4.61 0.53 
65-74 20 4.67 0.52 
75 and over 100 4.86 0.62 
Residents 
Social care 41-64 6 4.04 1.49 1.14 
0.323 
65-74 16 3.63 1.73 
75 and over 100 4.21 1.38 
Health and personal care 41-64 6 4.17 1.33 3.47 
0.034 
75 and over>65-74 
65-74 16 4.19 1.42 
75 and over 100 4.76 0.81 
Table 7.15 Means analysis of three factors on age (continued) 
Environment 41-64 6 4.83 0.41 0.05 
0.953 
65-74 16 4.81 0.40 
75 and over 100 4.86 0.62 
Family members 
Social care 40 and under 21 4.41 0.58 3.91 
0.023 
40 and under>65-74 
41-64>65-74 
41-64 87 4.38 0.52 
65-74 4 3.64 0.25 
Health and personal care 40 and under 22 4.72 0.48 5.67 
0.005 
40 and under>65-74 
41-64>65-74 
41-64 87 4.76 0.32 
65-74 4 4.13 0.66 
Environment 40 and under 21 4.50 0.61 1.60 
0.206 
41-64 86 4.59 0.54 
65-74 4 4.10 0.62 
were statistically significant (likely to be influenced by small sample sizes), and 
among family members, the younger age groups considered social care to be 
more important. 
Some of these results were inconsistent with the research of Tseng and Wang 
(2001) and Tu et al. (2006) who find that Taiwanese nursing home residents 
with different age do not demonstrate any difference in the QOL. However, in 
the current study, different categories of subjects emphasized different aspects 
between different age groups. It may be hypothesised that respondents of 
different age groups systematically held different priorities on aspects of care. 
Table 7.16 showed the results of an ANOVA analysis which indicated that the 
only significant ratings difference associated with the geographical distribution 
of care homes was in the aspect of environment amongst residents, where the 
p value was 0.009. Thus, in the other aspects the null hypothesis of no 
differences in ratings by location cannot be rejected.  
Moreover, according to the Scheffe post hoc analysis, there was a significant 
difference in ratings on environmental aspects between residents living in 
northern and eastern (mean 4.9 vs. 4.4), central and eastern (mean 4.9 vs. 4.4), 
and southern and eastern (mean 5.0 vs. 4.4) locations. This indicates that the 
residents living in northern, central, and southern care homes considered 
environmental aspect to be more important than the residents living in eastern 
locations. The result was inconsistent with the research of Chou et al. (2003),
Table 7.16 Means analysis of three factors on geographic distribution of the care home  
Factors 
Geographic 
distribution of 
care home  N Mean 
Deviation F 
Scheffe 
p Post hoc 
All participants 
Social care Northern 118 4.18 1.13 
0.487 
Central 28 4.40 1.02 
Southern 63 4.36 1.01 
Eastern 25 4.05 1.32 
Health and 
personal care 
Northern 118 4.61 0.83 
0.279 
Central 28 4.70 0.58 
Southern 63 4.77 0.73 
Eastern 26 4.88 0.22 
Environment Northern 117 4.67 0.58 
0.099 
Central 28 4.79 0.43 
Southern 63 4.83 0.37 
Eastern 25 4.51 1.04 
Residents 
Social care Northern 60 4.04 1.47 
0.659 
Central 14 4.36 1.34 
Southern 33 4.31 1.35 
Eastern 15 3.87 1.64 
Table 7.16 Means analysis of three factors on geographic distribution of the care home (continued) 
Health and 
personal care 
Northern 60 4.53 1.08 
0.373 
Central 14 4.64 0.74 
Southern 33 4.73 0.98 
Eastern 15 5.00 0.00 
Environment Northern 60 4.87 0.47 4.08 
0.009 
Northern>Eastern 
Central>Eastern 
Southern>Eastern 
Central 14 4.93 0.27 
Southern 33 5.00 0.00 
Eastern 15 4.40 1.30 
Family members 
Social care Northern 58 4.32 0.58 
0.801 
Central 14 4.44 0.62 
Southern 30 4.41 0.43 
Eastern 10 4.33 0.54 
Health and 
personal care 
Northern 58 4.69 0.45 
0.503 
Central 14 4.75 0.38 
Southern 30 4.82 0.27 
Eastern 11 4.70 0.25 
Environment Northern 57 4.47 0.62 
0.419 
Central 14 4.64 0.52 
Southern 30 4.64 0.47 
Eastern 10 4.68 0.48 
who indicate that an urban location has a weak association with resident 
satisfaction.  
There was no difference between rural and urban locations of Taiwanese care 
homes for people with dementia because they were all located in urban areas. 
However, in this study there were gaps between different Taiwanese areas in 
the aspect of environment. This could be explained whereby compared with 
eastern Taiwan; other regions of Taiwan are more urbanized and 
technologically advanced. Thus, residents living in other areas emphasize the 
care home environment more than those living in eastern Taiwan. 
Appendices 19 through 21 illustrated the mean differences among the three 
aspects in demographic categories and the geographical distribution of care 
homes. However, the results of the one-way ANOVA showed that differences in 
the means in the three aspects did not reach significant difference (all p values 
are greater than the cut-off level 0.05) regardless of marital status, religious 
beliefs or educational levels. Thus, the null hypotheses of no difference in the 
means among all three aspects in marital status, religious beliefs, and 
educational levels were accepted and there was no evidence of differences 
between types of marital status, religious beliefs, and educational levels in the 
three aspects.  
In marital status, the present findings seemed to be consistent with other 
studies (Tseng and Wang, 2001; Tu et al., 2006) which find that Taiwanese 
nursing home residents with different marital status do not demonstrate any 
difference in the views on QOL. A possible explanation for this might be that all 
kinds of subjects considered the three aspects having the same importance (all 
mean scores are over 3.9).  
With regard to religious beliefs, in general, the results were consistent with the 
research of Tseng and Wang (2001) in 10 Taiwanese nursing homes. They find 
that nursing home residents with different religious beliefs do not demonstrate 
any significant difference in the perceptions of QOL. However, Tu et al. (2006) 
find that residents with Buddhist/ Taoist beliefs report a significant lower QOL 
score than those with Christian/Catholic. As shown in Appendix 20, there was 
no significant difference between residents with different religious beliefs in the 
three aspects, although residents with Buddhist/ Taoist beliefs did report a lower 
score than those with Christian/Catholic beliefs in social care. The lack of 
significant patterns might reflect that this study only recruited residents with 
dementia and their family members to participate in this research, but Tu et al. 
included normal care home residents to take part in their studies.   
Regarding differences in education level, the results of the current study were 
consistent with the research of Tu et al. (2006) who find that Taiwanese nursing 
home residents with different educational levels do not demonstrate any 
difference in the QOL. However, the findings of the current study did not 
support the previous research. For example, Chiu et al. (2001) find that family 
members with higher education levels are more likely to place people with 
dementia in care homes because they have higher ability to obtain information 
about dementia care and to pay for care home services. Sikorska-Simmons 
(2006) indicates that more educated residents are less satisfied with care home. 
However, Tseng and Wang (2001) find that Taiwanese residents aged 65 and 
older living in nursing homes with a higher educational level report higher score 
on QOL. This inconsistency might be also due to sampling error. In addition, 
compared with the other studies, the target subjects in this current study were 
residents with dementia and their family members. 
7.6.2 Analysis of relationships: regression analysis 
Multiple linear regression analysis was performed to examine the predictors of 
the 3 factors (social care, health and personal care, and environment). 
Demographic variables (gender, age, marital status, religious beliefs, education, 
and financial support) and characteristics of the care home (geographic 
distribution and size) were changed to dummy variables and employed as 
independent variables. The new variables were listed in Appendix 22. 
The results of the multiple regression analysis were presented in Appendices 
23 to 25. The percentages of the variation in each aspect of quality indicators 
could be explained by dummy variables of respondent demographics or care 
home characteristics were not high. Moreover, those predictors were not 
significantly related to each aspect of quality indicators. 
As shown in Appendices 23 to 25, 10.3%, 8.1%, and 10.6% (R square) of the 
variation in social care, health and personal care, and environment, respectively, 
could be explained by demographic dummy variables. 1.1%, 2.1%, and 2.7% 
(R square) of the variation in social care, health and personal care, and 
environment could be explained by characteristic dummy variables of care 
homes. 11.7%, 10.2%, and 12.8% (R square) of the variation in social care, 
health and personal care, and environment could be explained by dummy 
variables of respondent demographics and care home characteristics. 
Appendices 23 to 25 showed p values for model 1, model 2, and model 3 which 
were all above the cut-off level, 0.05. In the regression context, these 
differences were conventionally used to indicate which explanatory factors 
contribute more or less importantly to the parsimonious prediction of the 
outcome. As there were no significant coefficients, the analysis suggested that 
demographic variables and characteristics of the care home did not predict 
ratings on the aspect of social care, health and personal care, and environment 
to any substantial degree; that is, the influence of these measures, though 
perceptible in other statistical analyses, was not great enough to contribute to 
the parsimonious prediction of the outcome categories.  
However, as shown in Appendices 23 and 24, in model 1 and model 3, it could 
be seen that being aged 65-74 (dummy var.) had a significant negative 
influence on social care, and health and personal care. Thus, this implies that in 
model 1, if an individual was 65-74 years of age, social care, and health and 
personal care declined by 0.68 and 0.66; and in model 3, if an individual was 
65-74 years of age, social care, and health and personal care declined by 0.66 
and 0.63. As shown in Appendix 25, in model 1 and model 3, it could be seen 
that resident status (measured as a dummy variable) had a significant positive 
influence on environment. In model 2, southern location also had a significant 
positive influence on environment. Thus, this implies that in model 1, if an 
individual was a resident, environment increased by 0.54; in model 2, if an 
individual was from the south care home, environment increased by 0.31; and 
in model 3, if an individual was resident, environment increased by 0.51 
(controlling for influence of other factors). 
With regard to demographic variables, this study produced results which 
corroborated the previous findings. For example, Samus et al. (2005) find that 
age, gender and education do not significantly correlate QOL views in care 
home residents with dementia. Winzelberg et al. (2005) also state that there is 
no association between age or gender of residents and QOL. Likewise, 
Sikorska-Simmons (2006) concludes that age, gender, and marital status of 
residents do not influence their perceptions of quality of care in care homes. 
Similarly, Tu et al. (2006) observe that the socioeconomic status of nursing 
home residents could not significantly predict QOL views for older people living 
in Taiwanese nursing homes.  
However, the findings of the current study did not support previous research. 
For instance, Samus et al. (2005) find that marital status is significantly 
correlated with QOL in care home residents with dementia. Particularly, 
widowed residents have a better QOL than those with other marital status 
(Samus et al., 2005). Tu et al. (2006) also point out that material status could 
significantly predict QOL for older people living in Taiwanese nursing homes. 
Particularly, married residents are satisfied with their QOL. Moreover, as 
Krause (2003) states, the religious belief plays an important factor that 
influences quality of care for older adults in late life. Tseng and Wang (2001) 
indicate that amongst Taiwanese nursing home residents, levels of education 
and socioeconomic status have significantly correlations with views on QOL. 
In characteristics of care home, the present findings seemed to be consistent 
with other research which finds that care home size is not a significant predictor 
of QOL views in care home residents with dementia (Samus et al., 2005). 
However, the results of the current study had not been able to demonstrate that 
location of care home was significantly associated with resident satisfaction 
(Chou et al., 2003). 
It is difficult to explain the results, but it is likely that the dimensions of quality 
indicators for institutional dementia care were not only slightly affected by 
demographic variables and characteristics of care homes, but also influenced 
by other factors. For example, Sikorska (1999) points out that more satisfied 
residents living in care homes are more functionally independent. Tseng and 
Wang (2001) and Tu et al. (2006) also indicate that residents with higher levels 
of physical function have higher QOL in nursing homes. Thus, in future 
research it is necessary to further explore whether physical function significantly 
affects the perception of quality of care for people with dementia living in 
Taiwanese care homes.   
7.7 Summary 
These findings lead us to believe that this study has taken a step in the 
direction of evaluation of indicators of perceived quality of care for people with 
dementia living in Taiwanese care homes. It included 18 quality indicators 
divided into three aspects: social care, health and personal care, and 
environment.  
A census survey was employed seeking to cover all residents with dementia 
living in Taiwanese care homes. This approach means statistical results have 
intrinsic value in being representative of their population. In analyses we 
deployed inferential statistical techniques on the principle that they gave us 
further evidence about the likely strength of analytical patterns across 
hypothetical wider populations of residents and potential residents (such as 
changing populations over time).  
Two largely distinctive groups were studied in the analysis. Descriptive results 
showed that the groups of residents and family members clearly had different 
and distinctive socio-demographic and socio-economic profiles. As expected in 
advance, residents were relatively more often older, single men, with lower 
levels of education, whereas family members were relatively more often female, 
married, younger, and with higher levels of education. In additions, most 
residents had no religions, but Buddhism was followed by one-third of 
participants in the family members. Due to these anticipated differences, 
analyses often separated the responses between the two groups, though in 
practice patterns of ratings on quality of care measures often proved quite 
similar between the two groups.  
Through reliability and item analysis of respondents ratings of quality indicators, 
it was concluded that all 41 quality indicators could plausibly be retained. 
However, EFA and CFA confirmed that only 18 quality indicators are the most 
important items to assess quality of care for people with dementia living in 
Taiwanese care homes. Thus, it can be concluded that the 18 quality indicators 
could be the criteria for people with dementia and their family members to 
evaluate quality of care and select an appropriate care home. In addition, 
disaggregation of patterns in those 18 indicators was subsequently interpreted 
to suggest three distinctive themes in indicators of care quality were empirically 
most important to residents and their family members: indicators of social care; 
health and personal care; and the environment. These findings are important 
for policy purposes, such as, for the development or revision of the Taiwanese 
Government regulations intended to ensure that care homes are able to meet 
the requirements of residents. 
Further analysis was then conducted to explore how relative ratings on these 
three themes differed according to measured characteristics of the residents 
and their family members. In general, only a few strong patterns of difference 
emerged and multiple linear regression analysis suggested limited independent 
influences of socio-economic and socio-demographic differences in ratings.   
Chapter 8- Conclusion 
8.1 Introduction 
So far, there has not been any study in the development of a set of institutional 
dementia care indicators with reliability, validity, and credibility to evaluate 
quality of care and enhance the QOL for Taiwanese people with dementia living 
in care homes. This research has been the first systematic research to employ 
a mixed-method to develop quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional 
dementia care. It was divided into two key stages to collect comments from 
experts in dementia care and opinions of service receivers: the Delphi exercise 
and the fieldwork.  
As I have described, the Delphi exercise (stage one) acted as the pre-test 
involving 24 experts in dementia care in Scotland and Taiwan to evaluate the 
usefulness and applicability of quality indicators for institutional dementia care. 
It was conducted from the mid-May 2008 to the end of July 2008. The fieldwork 
(stage two) collected 237 questionnaires (from 122 residents with dementia and 
115 family members) in 14 Taiwanese care homes from November 2008 to 
mid-February 2009. The target were those customers who received services in 
Taiwanese care homes for people with dementia (which include special care 
units within care homes).  
In this chapter, firstly I will link the findings to the research questions. I will then 
discuss how this research has contributed to the knowledge in institutional 
dementia care. The subsequent section will explore the implications for 
research and policy. Finally, I will report the limitations of the research and 
make suggestions for future research.   
8.2 Review of the research questions 
Research question 1: What are quality indicators for institutional dementia care 
with high reliability, validity, and credibility?  
Initially, the proposed indicators were derived from literature review. Following 
two Delphi rounds, six key dimensions (41 quality indicators) were identified by 
consensus as the important items for use in measurement of quality of care for 
people with dementia living in care homes. The exercise indicated that the 
quality indicators had content validity. The results of reliability and item analysis 
showed that the 41 quality indicators had high reliability. Thus, I argue that the 
41 quality indicators had high reliability, validity, and credibility.  
Research question 2: What are the differences/similarities between theoretical 
and empirical evidence on quality indicators for institutional dementia care? 
The findings showed that there were differences among the literature, experts, 
and service receivers on the importance of identified quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care. Through literature review, the researcher identified 
43 quality indicators for institutional dementia care that might contribute to the 
overall assessment of quality of care. However, Scottish and Taiwanese 
experts in dementia care reached consensus on 41 of 43 quality indicators.  
Moreover, according to the perceptions of service receivers, only 18 of 41 
quality indicators incorporated within 3 aspects (social care, health care, and 
environment) were adequate to offer a valid and internally reliable standard for 
the assessment of quality of care for people with dementia living in Taiwanese 
care homes.  
Demographic characteristics of individuals and characteristics of care homes 
affected views about quality of care for residents with dementia living in care 
homes. All kinds of participants considered the three aspects (social care, 
health and personal care, and environment) as having the same importance. 
However, only a few parts of the results indicated that there were significant 
differences in the three aspects between types of identity category, gender, 
financial support, age, and geographic distribution of care home. In particular, 
the three dimensions (social care, health and personal care, and environment) 
of quality indicators for institutional dementia care were not substantially 
affected by demographic differences or the characteristics of care homes. 
Research question 3: What are the best quality indicators for care homes in 
Taiwan? 
Based on the perceptions of service receivers and through reliability, item, and 
CFA, 18 of 41 quality indicators (see Table 7.8) were identified as the best 
quality indicators for Taiwanese care homes for people with dementia in terms 
of the viewpoints of service receivers. These were described in Section 7.4. 
8.3 Contributions of the study  
The study has combined qualitative and quantitative methods to develop a set 
of quality indicators for institutional dementia care that were intended to be 
useful and applicable in practice in Taiwan. A census survey of all residents 
with dementia who could answer the questionnaire autonomously and consent 
to participate in this study, living in Taiwanese care homes, generated primary 
data for statistical analysis.  
Other strengths of this research included the use of an expert consensus panel 
to identify quality indicators to assess quality of care for people with dementia 
living in Taiwanese care homes; and the use of CFA to ensure the quality 
indicators best met the requirements of service receivers. Finally, this study 
was a helpful first step
in developing a guideline to improve the quality of 
institutional dementia care in Taiwan. 
8.3.1 Methodological contribution 
As previously discussed in Section 5.3, this research was most similar to the 
exploratory design by Creswell and Plano-Clark (2007). However, this research 
established a different mixed-method approach (see Figure 5.1) to develop 
quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia care. That is, this study 
developed new knowledge and a new way of building quality indicators for 
Taiwanese institutional dementia care. 
This study was the first study to employ the TQM approach to build up a 
conceptual structure for this research to develop and examine the quality 
indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia care. The conceptual structure 
was that quality of care includes six aspects: management and administration, 
human resource management, health and personal care, social care, rights, 
and environment. Every aspect included some facets; all six aspects 
contributed to the overall assessment of quality of care; and these six aspects 
loaded onto one single factor (quality of care).  
The Delphi method, focus group work, item generation, pilot testing, 
modification and item reduction, and field-testing are the standard WHOQOL 
methodology (Power et al., 2005). However, the methodology of this study was 
distinctive and different from the methodology of Power et al. (2005). Firstly, the 
use of a literature review in the initial development stage ensured the relevance 
of the concepts included in the quality indicators. Secondly, the use of the 
Delphi method integrated the opinions of experts. Finally, the use of field testing, 
involving all people with dementia who could answer the questionnaire 
autonomously living in Taiwanese care homes and their family members, 
ensured that the perceptions of service receivers had been taken into account.  
Institutional dementia care involves many disciplines. It is not easy to integrate 
the perceptions of all stakeholders on quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care. Since the QOL involves individuals subjective perception or 
expectation (Denham, 1991), different stakeholders have their own stances. 
Moreover, as Hawes and Phillips (2007) state, it is a challenge to achieve 
agreement on quality measures for the care home, because different models of 
care home may need diverse quality indicators to assess their quality of care.  
However, following the suggestions of Dalkey (1969) on analyzing the data 
gained from the Delphi exercise, after two Delphi rounds, there appeared to be 
a consensus about quality of care for people with dementia living in care homes. 
That is, six key dimensions (41 quality indicators) were identified by consensus 
as the important items to measure quality of care for people with dementia 
living in Taiwanese care homes. Thus, it can be concluded that the Delphi 
method could be used as a methodology for health services research. 
The field test data on these 41 quality indicators were analyzed using reliability, 
item, and CFA. Following the recommendation of Hair et al. (1998), CFA was 
used to confirm the second-order CFA model of this research. The research 
concluded that although all the quality indicators were universally agreed to be 
of high importance by all stakeholders, only 18 quality indicators incorporated 
within 3 factors (social care, health care, and environment) offered a valid and 
internally reliable standard for the assessment of quality of care for people with 
dementia living in Taiwanese care homes. That is, this research developed a 
model of second-order factorial structure for the 18 quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care (see Figure 7.1).  
This research conducted descriptive and inferential statistics to examine 
whether there was any difference between independent groups in the three 
aspects (social care, health and personal care, and environment). The results 
showed that demographic differences and characteristics of the care home 
could not significantly predict the 3 aspects. It may nevertheless be of value to 
further examine whether there are other significant factors which affect quality 
of care for people with dementia living in Taiwanese care homes. 
8.3.2 Theoretical contribution  
Combining the person-centred care and TQM approaches together has not 
been done in previous studies about institutional dementia care. The core 
concept of person-centred care is to treat people with dementia as individuals. 
The TQM approach emphasizes customer focus, total involvement, 
communications, leadership, continuous improvement, exceeding customers 
expectations, and minimizing cost to look after people with dementia. That is, 
this study was the first study to employ the person-centred care approach at 
the micro perspective and the TQM approach at the macro perspective to 
develop a seamless care model for people with dementia living in care homes.  
Different types of dementia care offer different services for people with 
dementia and their family caregivers. However, institutional care becomes more 
important in modern society due to an increase in people with dementia, 
change in family structure, and insufficient community care. The evidence 
seems to be strong that institutional care for people with dementia plays a 
significant role in the long-term care system. Institutional care could supply the 
one-door service to meet the mixed requirements of people with dementia and 
their family caregivers; and offer a wider range of services of equal or higher 
quality than community care. 
According to the person-centred care model, care home staff should work 
based on the values of autonomy, free choice, dignity, individuality, self-
determination, privacy, and citizenship to provide efficient and friendly care for 
people with dementia. Since the reasons for people with dementia moving into 
institutions are due to the deterioration of their health status, the lack of ability 
to care for themselves, the lack of carers to care for them, or limited family 
support, taking care of people with dementia requires professional and accurate 
knowledge, skills, and experience to meet their requirements.   
In Chapter 4, it was argued that in terms of the TQM approach, institutions 
should adopt the principle of partnership to integrate resources, including 
internal and external aspects, to provide total care and high quality services for 
people with dementia. From this approach, further implications can be drawn for 
the designed care home. They could offer individual care, twenty-four hours a 
day, and therapeutic activities by qualified nurses and trained staff in a specially 
designed environment. Simultaneously, in order to enhance quality of care for 
people with dementia living in care homes, the Government should offer 
sufficient resources and regular inspections to improve institutional care quality. 
To sum up, so far this research has integrated the person-centred care model 
and the TQM approach to develop a series of quality indicators to improve 
quality of care for people with dementia living in Taiwanese care homes.  
8.3.3 Practical contribution 
Since residents and family members are poorly informed when choosing a care 
home and the time to make a decision is usually limited (Castle, 2003), 
developing quality indicators for institutional dementia care as the guideline for 
service receivers to select the most appropriate care home is an important task. 
Moreover, quality indicators for institutional dementia care can assist care 
homes to improve quality of care, and facilitate policy makers to decide what 
kind of care standards best meet the requirements of service receivers.  
Incentives encourage a care home to improve quality of care and QOL for 
residents perhaps due to care standards set and forced by government, 
competitive market, and organizational commitment (Wunderlich and Kohler, 
2001). Policy leads to practice. This is particularly true in Taiwan. Thus, the 
findings of the study are very important for the objectives of policy. The 
Taiwanese Government can develop or modify existing regulations to ensure 
that care homes are able to meet the requirements of service receivers based 
on the findings of this study. For example, in order to improve quality of care for 
people with dementia living in care homes, Taiwanese social policy makers can 
learn from Scotland. That is, based on the person-centred care approach to 
develop the related social care policy because this approach is focused on 
individual needs to integrate all of the care resources to provide services 
effectively for people with dementia and to support family caregivers. In order to 
inspect Taiwanese care homes to enhance quality of care for residents with 
dementia, policy makers (e.g. Department of Social Affairs in Taiwan) can 
advocate and recommend that the 18 quality indicators can not only fit the 
needs of all stakeholders but also be accepted by most of them.  
Policy makers can also use the remaining 23 quality indicators as reference to 
set up a set of care standards, because the remaining 3 dimensions 
(management and administration, human resource management, and rights) 
are not captured by the 18 quality indicators, but are the basis of quality of care. 
Particularly, attention should be paid to employing sufficient trained staff with 
respect, concern, and compassion to look after residents with dementia. That is, 
how to employ the right staff to do the right thing is a crucial issue in institutional 
dementia care.  
In practice, since service providers and receivers reached consensus on the 18 
quality indicators that were developed from this research, I argue that using 
these measures can enhance quality of care for people with dementia living in 
Taiwanese care homes. The 18 quality indicators can benefit both service 
providers and receivers. For instance, the 18 quality indicators can be the care 
standards for care homes to self-assess quality of care to improve the QOL for 
residents with dementia. On the other hand, the 18 quality indicators can also 
be the criteria for service receivers to evaluate quality of care of a care home, 
and to select an appropriate care home.  
My goal has been to develop guidelines for dementia care in care homes. In 
institutional dementia care, the TQM approach provides the philosophy, 
techniques, and process for care homes to improve quality of care for residents. 
Care homes can employ any kind of techniques which I have noted in Section 
4.7 as a tool to improve their quality of care. The quality indicators developed in 
this study can be the care directions or standards for care homes to enhance 
quality of care for residents. The procedure of applying the TQM in care homes 
involves determining the outputs, defining customer requirements, managing 
the process of service delivery, solving problems, and measuring outcome and 
performance. 
It is possible for a care home to achieve the target of QOL for residents with 
dementia within its financial budget. As Mukamel and Spector (2000) state, 
higher quality of care is not necessarily leading to higher costs because higher 
quality of care and better outcomes could be associated with lower costs 
through care procedures and management strategies. In Taiwan, Lin and Liu 
(2006a; 2006b) apply TQM in two empirical studies: a home care centre and a 
day care centre. The researchers find that TQM could increase the number of 
clients, fulfil customer satisfaction, and staff satisfaction; and achieve a financial 
break-even point.  
A further example comes from 2009, when I conducted my field test in a 
Taiwanese care home that I had inspected before, but which had not passed 
the inspection because of its poor care in 2005. In this case, I found that quality 
of care had dramatically improved. For example, when I arrived at this care 
home, there were story-telling service in the garden area and the residents 
were happy and said hello to me. The new manager said that this was because 
the owner had changed and the focus of the care home is now on the 
requirements and preferences of residents, and different kinds of activities for 
the residents were provided every day. All these were achieved without 
spending more money to add any new facility. These examples provided an 
indication that improving QOL for residents did not necessarily incur higher cost. 
The improvements observed corresponded to quality of care indicators 
identified.  
8.4 Implications for research and policy   
Quality indicators for institutional dementia care that were developed in this 
study have many potential uses, particularly in research and policy-making. 
8.4.1 Messages for researchers  
The results of this study supported that it was possible to involve all 
stakeholders to develop quality indicators for institutional dementia care for the 
purposes for academics, practice, and policy-making simultaneously.  
This study might not allow the views of residents to influence the fundamental 
content of the indicators, but this study started the process of developing 
appropriate indicators for Taiwan by drawing on literature which already took 
into account user views. During the field test, I also provided an open-ended 
question to ask service receivers to make recommendations for improving the 
quality indicators for institutional dementia care. However, the participants 
responded that the researcher had provided useful quality indicators which 
cover wide range of topics and they did not need to make any further comments. 
During the Delphi exercise, I have invited 3 care home managers to take part in 
to provide their opinions. Nevertheless, a further study could be done to look 
further into users' perspectives in more detail. This would be especially useful to 
ascertain whether the indicators have served to improve care.  
I was aware of the possibility of gatekeeper bias which might occur in my study. 
For example, the manager might have ensured that only residents with positive 
comments were included, or they might have tried to influence what the 
residents said. Thus, I made an effort to minimize gatekeeper bias through a 
variety of strategies as below.   
Firstly, when I sent a formal research access application letter to these 
institutions to request their approval, I reassured the managers that this 
research would not evaluate their quality of care, all results would be presented 
in an aggregated and anonymised form, any individual or institution would not 
be identified, the views of participants would be held confidentially. This was 
intended to reduce the possible incentive for the gatekeepers to select positive 
respondents.  
Secondly, I invited 6 dementia specialists from 6 of the 14 Taiwanese 
institutions to participate in the Delphi exercise to confirm that the current 
research is needed. Prior to the field test, I personally contacted these care 
homes and gave them formal research access application letters to request 
their approval. The effect of this was intended to gain their cooperation to follow 
the strict requirements of research ethics and to identify the potential 
participants for this survey.   
Thirdly, once access to recruit had been formally granted, I personally 
approached potential participants (i.e. residents with dementia who could 
answer the questionnaire with autonomy and their representatives - family 
members or other unpaid carers), and gave them the information sheets and 
consent forms to request their help and to confirm that all respondents took part 
in a voluntary and competent way. Thus, the gatekeepers influence in selecting 
participants was minimised.  
It is a usual practice to respond to the complaints of service receivers in 
Taiwanese care homes, because the Taiwanese Government has obliged care 
homes to listen to service receivers voices. An inspection is performed every 
three years in Taiwan. A formal complaint procedure and regular meeting with 
residents and their family members are specifically sought out by inspectors. In 
addition, during the inspection, the inspectors may choose residents and their 
family members randomly to discuss the quality of care homes. It can be 
inferred that care home managers are accustomed to the selection of residents 
with dementia and their family members who might make complaints, as they 
experience this during inspections. Given these points, it can be seen that 
potential gate keeping biases have been minimized in the field test. 
Many measurement techniques have been developed in the past to measure 
quality of dementia care. However, different techniques and processes 
measure different perceptions. It is likely to be necessary to develop a mixed-
method approach to get a full image of quality of care to involve all stakeholders 
in institutional dementia care, including residents with dementia.   
Since institutional dementia care involves multidisciplinary fields and the Delphi 
panel members were from different fields, they might have different foci 
according to their own specific professions or experiences. The panel members 
might consider that some items were not easy to conduct or measure in 
practice. Despite being potentially important, they might not be consistent items 
across contexts. The Delphi rules suggest those items which did not reach 
consensus should be deleted based on the results of the Delphi analysis. 
However, as this happens, in this empirical project, there was no evidence of 
major difference between ratings of items, so there were no grounds to believe 
that some items have been wrongly omitted because they were not universally 
agreed upon as important.   
The Delphi method has been criticised since it was introduced by the Rand 
Corporation. Its main limitation is that the experts involved cannot interact 
directly and immediately with each other (Dalkey, 1967). Secondly, Sackman 
(1974) goes as far as to argue that the Delphi method does not meet important 
social science methodological standards, suggesting that conventional Delphi 
neglects virtually every major area of professional standards for questionnaire 
design, administration, application, and validation (p. 27). I will suggest below 
that Delphi was nevertheless fit for the purpose I intended. Thirdly, since the 
Delphi exercise recruits small numbers of participants, it cannot produce 
statistically significant results and the results cannot be inferred to a larger 
population or the other potential Delphi panel (Gordon, 1994). However, 
Clayton (1997) argues that If the objective is the identification of content based 
on expert consensus, then the Delphi technique is an appropriate choice as it 
may enhance the significant contributions of the panel (p. 382). In this study, 
the aim was indeed to do as Clayton suggests, and in order to avoid individual 
bias, to be as objective as possible, and to use group information more 
effectively, the Delphi method was designed to avoid the undesirable effects of 
group interaction (Dalkey, 1969). Thus, I argue that the Delphi method was an 
appropriate approach for this current cross-national research to reach effective 
interaction and consensus on quality indicators for institutional dementia care 
among different Scottish and Taiwanese experts in dementia care within a 
limited time frame.  
This study confirms that the Delphi method is an effective means to integrate 
the opinions of experts in different fields by the self-completion questionnaire. 
Face-to-face group discussion could lead to the influence of dominant 
individuals, irrelevant communications, and group pressure. In order to avoid 
individual bias and to be as objective as possible, and to use group information 
more effectively, it is necessary to invite different experts in dementia care to 
evaluate the feasibility of quality indicators for institutional dementia care. In this 
study, after two Delphi rounds, six key dimensions (41 quality indicators) were 
identified by consensus as the important items for use in measurement of 
quality of care for people with dementia living in Taiwanese care homes. 
According to the results of this study, it is possible to let the experts reach 
consensus within two-rounds of the Delphi exercise if the initial literature review 
is performed correctly. 
This study also concludes that the second-order CFA model shows that CFA is 
an effective technique to study the proposed factor structure and develop a 
model that met theoretical and empirical evidence simultaneously. 
There are some areas for future research in dementia care in Taiwan based on 
the field test. The questionnaire was suitable only for residents with dementia 
who could understand the questionnaire clearly and answer the questionnaire 
with autonomy. Thus, these participants with dementia in this survey may not 
represent all residents living in the care homes. That is, quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care that were developed in this study may not apply to 
the residents with dementia without autonomy. However, those residents with 
dementia in this survey were able to make decisions that are important in their 
later life living in the care homes. 
8.4.2 Messages for policy makers 
There is an apparent discrepancy between the promise and performance of 
care homes. Some care homes did not provide the care quality that they have 
claimed. Particularly, in order to enhance autonomy and dignity for people with 
dementia living in care homes, it is perhaps time for the Taiwanese 
Government to learn from Scotland and to set up a policy for justice and social 
inclusion to encourage institutions and staff to respect residents with dementia. 
Additionally, the Government should monitor care homes that look after people 
with dementia for ways to decrease maltreatment.  
As the population is increasingly aging, the care-taking responsibility for the 
working population becomes a more onerous one. Furthermore, in order to face 
the challenge of an increasing number of people with dementia and to develop 
an efficient and economic delivery system for meeting their needs, the 
Taiwanese Government should involve all stakeholders to set up a dementia 
care system that is able to balance the policy and its delivery. In addition, it 
could reach the goal of improving quality of care and QOL for people with 
dementia and their family caregivers.  
Thus, the Taiwanese system can adopt the person-centred care and joint 
service approaches to integrate care resources to make dementia care policy, 
particularly in health care, social care, and housing service. There are a number 
of issues to consider in achieving this aim based on this study. Firstly, in the 
health care system, in order to reduce health inequalities especially in the rural 
areas (e.g. eastern Taiwan), setting up a seamless service system from acute 
health care to long-term care based on a partnership approach is a crucial step.  
Secondly, on the aspect of social care, to build effective innovation care and 
care standards (e.g. using the quality indicators developed in the study). Policy 
should be based on social justice and a joint approach for providing better 
services and faster decision making. It promotes not only the principles of 
choice, safety, dignity, privacy, realising potential, equality and diversity but also 
offers self-esteem, confidence, and spirituality for people with dementia and 
their unpaid family caregivers.  
Finally, on the issue of housing, it is time for the Taiwanese Government to 
develop housing policy and to pay more attention to the design of the built 
environment for people with dementia. Particularly, the safety, security and 
homeliness of the building for the increasing number of people with dementia 
are important issues. 
8.5 Limitations of the study 
Ideally, a larger and longitudinal study should be conducted in the care homes, 
because the outcome measure of QOL in a longitudinal study may be impacted 
by various factors (Bouchet et al., 1996), and the level of importance on quality 
of care will be changed depending on the decline of physical and mental 
function. For example, as observed by Parker et al. (2004) that longitudinal 
research designs can relate changes in QOL over time to the physical 
environment (p. 942). However, this was not possible due to the limited time 
frame. The findings found the current study only represented a snapshot of the 
dynamic but small participant cohort at a single point in time. 
Secondly, useful quality indicators need to be acceptable to all stakeholders not 
just a few individuals. However, this research summarized the opinions of 
experts and service receivers to develop quality indicators for institutional 
dementia care, so that the results might not represent any particular individuals 
subjective opinion.  
Thirdly, the main limitation of the Delphi method is that Scottish and Taiwanese 
experts could not interact directly and concurrently. Thus, if the Scottish and 
Taiwanese experts had met face to face, probably there would have been more 
discussion and interaction to reach a consensus among the panel members 
about quality indicators for institutional dementia care. 
Fourthly, since the study in the field test included only residents with dementia 
and their family members who were able to answer the questionnaire 
autonomously and provide consent, the results only applied to
a selected 
subgroup of residents and it should not be generalized to the entire Taiwanese 
care home population. That is, these quality indicators might not apply to the 
residents with dementia who could not answer the questionnaire with autonomy. 
In addition, these participants with dementia in this survey might not represent 
all residents without dementia living the care homes to reflect quality of care.  
Lastly, since the focus was on the perceptions of service receivers at this stage 
of developing quality indicators for institutional dementia care, the level of 
physical disability and personality traits of residents with dementia were not 
investigated, and whether a care home had designed environment for people 
with dementia was not considered.  
8.6 Recommendations for future research 
The quality control circle has played an important role in the improvement of 
health care in Taiwan and it has employed some key techniques of TQM to 
produce some innovative ideas for hospital staff to improve quality of care (Liu 
et al., 2010). However, it has not been applied to institutional dementia care. 
The key aim of the 18 quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia 
care was to set up a basic guideline for quality improvement. The researcher 
has given generalized and minimal operational definitions for the 18 quality 
indicators to set up a basic guideline for quality improvement. Thus, future 
studies could include empirical research to focus on the 18 quality indicators 
which I have developed and use TQM techniques to investigate how these 
quality indicators influence Taiwanese institutional dementia care.  
A controlled longitudinal study is required to assess the impact of quality 
indicators developed in this study for the improvement of quality of care through 
the implementation and to observe and explore how each quality indicator may 
affect quality of care of people with dementia living in care homes.  
Most textbooks and articles usually focus on the opinions of researchers and 
scholars to explore the requirements of people with dementia and their family 
members, and service provisions of care homes for residents with dementia. 
Moreover, although quality of care could be influenced by subjective personal 
perception, physical and mental functions such as pain, limited mobility, and 
depression may also affect quality of care for people with dementia living in 
care homes. Thus, further studies on these factors may be beneficial for 
confirming the factors that influence quality of care for people with dementia 
living in Taiwanese care homes. 
As previously discussed in Section 5.6.2, demographic characteristics could 
affect the views on quality of care for residents with dementia living in care 
homes. The results showed that both demographic differences and 
characteristics of a care home did not generally correspond to significant 
differences among service receivers on the importance of the 18 quality 
indicators. For future research, it may be worthwhile to further explore whether 
there are other significant factors affecting quality of care for people with 
dementia living in Taiwanese care homes. For example, future studies can 
investigate the level of physical disability and personality traits of residents with 
dementia, and then explore whether there is a significant correlation between 
the level of physical disability and personality traits of residents with dementia 
and their opinions on the importance of dementia care. Similarly, future studies 
are required to examine whether there is a significant difference in viewpoints of 
residents on the importance of designed environment between a general care 
home and a specialised designed care home for people with dementia.  
8.7 Summary 
This research has contributed to the knowledge of institutional dementia care in 
methodological, theoretical, and practical ways. The findings could also apply to 
research, policy-making, and practice. 
In methodology, the study employed a pragmatic approach to integrate 
qualitative and quantitative methods to set up a new mixed-method model that 
was different from the previous models to develop quality indicators for 
institutional dementia care effectively and accurately. That is, the study 
suggested that the Delphi method could be as a useful methodology for 
dementia care research. This study also set up a second-order CFA model with 
a three-factor structure and 18 quality indicators. This indicates that CFA could 
be used as a statistical methodology for dementia care study.  
This study constructed a dementia care model that integrated the person-
centred care model and the TQM approach focused on institutional care. I have 
suggested that this model could assist the Taiwanese policy makers to 
construct polices in dementia care to meet the best interest of people with 
dementia and their family caregivers. 
In practice, the findings of this research developed guidelines for service 
receivers to select an appropriate care home. This study could also assist 
Taiwanese care homes to minimize cost and maximize quality of care to 
improve QOL for residents. However, the care homes should set person-
centred care and TQM as their central concern and priority before the results of 
the research can be applied. 
In conclusion, the ultimate goal of this study was to develop a set of quality 
indicators to improve quality of care and QOL for people with dementia living in 
Taiwanese care homes. It was apparent that the quality indicators were 
applicable in practice to improve quality of institutional dementia care. However, 
whether the quality indicators can be applied in reality and how they are going 
to be applied depends on the wisdom of policy makers. Thus, for institutional 
dementia care in Taiwan, this study is only the first step. The important 
subsequent action is to advocate and promote to academics, policy makers, 
and practitioners. 
References 
Adams, T. and Manthorpe, J. (2003) Dementia care. London, Arnold 
Albert, S. M. et al. (1996) Quality of life in patients with Alzheimers disease as 
reported by patient proxies. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 
44(11), pp. 1342-1347 
Allen, I., Hogg, D., and Peace, S. (1992) Elderly people: choice, participation 
and satisfaction. London, Policy Studies Institute 
Alzheimers Association. Dementia care practice recommendations for assisted 
living residences and nursing homes. Chicago, Alzheimers Association, 
Alzheimer's Australia. Quality dementia care: position paper 2. NSW, 
Alzheimers Australia, 2003 
Alzheimers Australia. Dementia care and the built environment position paper 3. 
Hawker, Alzheimers Australia, 2004 
Alzheimers Disease International. The prevalence of dementia worldwide. 
London, Alzheimers Disease International, 2008 
Alzheimer Scotland. This is my home: quality of care for people with dementia 
living in care home. Edinburgh, Alzheimer Scotland, 2005  
Alzheimer Scotland. Dementia: money and legal matters: a guide (January 
2006). Edinburgh, Alzheimer Scotland, 2006 
American Psychiatric Association. Task Force on DSM-IV. Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-IV. International version with 
ICD-10 codes. 4th ed., international version. Washington, DC, American 
Psychiatric Association, 1995 
American Psychiatric Association (2000) Behavenet-c: DSM-IV & DSM-IV-TR: 
dementia [Internet]. Virginia, American Psychiatric Association. Available: 
http://www.behavenet.com/capsules/disorders/demdis.htm [Accessed 18 
December 2006] 
Andersson, M. and Gottfries, C. G. (1991) Nursing home care: factors 
influencing the quality of life in a restricted life situation. Aging, 3(3), pp. 
229-239 
Armstrong, M. et al. (2002) Adding life to years: report of the expert group on 
healthcare of older people. Edinburgh, Scottish Executive 
Arts, W. and Gelissen, J. (2002) Three worlds of welfare capitalism or more? A 
state-of-the-art report. Journal of European Social Policy, 12 (2), pp. 137-
http://www.behavenet.com/
http://www.behavenet.com/capsules/index.htm
http://www.behavenet.com/capsules/disorders/d4class.htm
http://www.behavenet.com/capsules/disorders/dsm4tr.htm
http://www.behavenet.com/capsules/disorders/demdis.htm
Aspalter, C. (2002a) Democratization and welfare state development in Taiwan. 
Aldershot, Ashgate Publishing 
Aspalter, C. (2002b) Introduction. In: Aspalter, C. ed. Discovering the welfare 
state in East Asia, pp. 1-6. Westport, Connecticut, Praeger Publishers  
Audit Commission. Forget me not 2002: Developing mental health services for 
older people in England.  London, Audit Commission, 2002 
Bank, J. (2000) The essence of total quality management. Harlow, Pearson 
Education 
Bartlett, R. (2000) Dementia as a disability: can we learn from disability studies 
and theory? The Journal of Dementia Care, 8(5), pp. 33-35 
Bell, D. et al. (2001) Fair Care For Older People-Care Development Group 
report. Edinburgh, Scottish Executive 
Bjorneby, S. et al. (2004) Ethical considerations in the ENABLE project. 
Dementia, 3(3), pp. 297-312 
Bond, J. and Corner, L. (2004) Quality of life and older people. Maidenhead, 
Open University Press 
Bouchet, C., Guillemin, F., and Briancon, S. (1996) Nonspecific effects in 
longitudinal studies: Impact on quality of life measures. Journal of Clinical 
Epidemiology, 49 (1), pp. 15-20 
Bowes, A. and McColgan, G. (2006) Smart technology and community care for 
older people: innvoation in West Lothian, Scotland. Edinburgh, Age 
Concern Scotland 
Bowling, A. (2002) Research methods in health: investigating health and health 
services. 2
 ed. Buckingham, Open University Press 
Brannelly, T. (2006a) Citizenship and care for people with dementia. 
Birmingham, The University of Birmingham 
Brannelly, T. (2006b) Negotiating ethics in dementia care: an analysis of an 
ethic of care in practice. Dementia, 5(2), pp. 197212 
Brooker, D. and Surr, C. (2005) Dementia care mapping: principles and practice. 
Bradford, University of Bradford 
Brown, B. B. (1968) Delphi process: a methodology used for the elicitation of 
opinions of experts. California, The Rand Corporation 
Brown, J. and Hillam, J. (2004) Dementia: your questions answered. Edinburgh, 
Churchill Livingstone 
Bruce, E. et al. (2002) Moving towards a special kind of care for people with 
dementia living in care homes. Journal of Research in Nursing, 7(5), pp. 
335-347 
Bryman, A. (2004) Social research methods. 2
 ed. Oxford, Oxford University 
Press 
Buchholz, S., Hofacker, D., and Blossfeld, H. P. (2006) Globalization, 
accelerating economic change and late careers. A theoretical framework. 
In: Blossfeld, H.P., Buchholz, S., and Hofcker, D. ed. Globalization, 
uncertainty and late careers in society, pp. 1-23. London and New York, 
Routledge 
Bureau of National Health Insurance (2007) NHI starts a new chapter in 
Taiwan's history [Internet]. Taiwan, Bureau of National Health Insurance. 
Available: 
http://www.nhi.gov.tw/english/webdata.asp?menu=11&menu_id=290&web
data_id=1887 [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Burrell, G. and Morgan, G. (1979) Sociological paradigms and organisational 
analysis: elements of the sociology of corporate life. London, Heinemann 
Educational 
Byrne, B. M. (2001) Structural equation modeling with AMOS: basic concepts, 
applications, and programming. Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates 
Campbell, S. M., Roland, M. O., and Buetow, S. A. (2000) Defining quality of 
care. Social Science & Medicine, 51(11), pp. 1611-1625 
Carmel, E. (2004) Comparative research methods. In: Becker, S. and Bryman, 
A. ed. Understanding research for social policy and practice: themes, 
methods and approaches. Bristol, The Policy Press 
Castle, N. G. (2001) Innovation in nursing homes: which facilities are the early 
adopters? The Gerontologist, 41(2), pp. 161-172 
Castle, N. G. (2003) Searching for and selecting a nursing facility. 
Medical Care Research and Review, 60(2), pp. 223-247 
Castle, N. G., Degenholtz, H., and Engberg, J . (2005) State variability in 
indicators of quality of care in nursing facilities. The Journals of 
Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences, 
60(9), pp. 1173-1179 
Cecchin, M. and Jarrad, S. (2002) Personal and possible: achieving quality 
dementia care in residential aged care services. NSW, Alzheimers 
Association Australia 
http://www.nhi.gov.tw/english/webdata.asp?menu=11&menu_id=290&webdata_id=1887
http://www.nhi.gov.tw/english/webdata.asp?menu=11&menu_id=290&webdata_id=1887
Chang, M. (2003) The management handbook of day care center for people 
with dementia. Taiwan, Social welfare Committee 
Cheston, R. and Bender, M. (1999) Understanding dementia: the man with the 
worried eyes. London, Jessica Kingsley 
Chiu, L. et al. (2001) Factors determining the attitudes of family caregivers of 
dementia patients toward nursing home placement in Taiwan: 
comparisons between urban and semiurban. Public Health Nursing, 18(4), 
pp. 281-291 
Chou, S. C., Boldy, D. P., and Lee, A. H. (2003) Factors influencing residents' 
satisfaction in residential aged care. The Gerontologist, 43(4), pp. 459-
Clark-Carter, D. (1997) Doing quantitative psychological research: from design 
to report. Hove, East Sussex, Psychology Press 
Clarke, C. L. (1999) Dementia care partnerships: knowledge, ownership and 
exchange. In: Adams, T. and Clarke, C. L. ed. Dementia care: developing 
partnerships in practice. pp. 5-36. London, Bailliere Tindall 
Clarke, J., Langan, M., and Williams, F. (2001) Remaking welfare: the British 
welfare regime in the 1980s and 1990s. In: Cochrane, A, Clarke, J. and 
Gewirtz, S. ed. Comparing welfare states. 2nd ed. pp. 71-111. London, 
SAGE in association with The Open University 
Clayton, M. J. (1997) Delphi: a technique to harness expert opinion for critical 
decision-making tasks in education, Educational Psychology, 17(4), pp. 
373-386 
Cochrane, A., Clarke, J., and Gewirtz, S. (2001) Comparing welfare states. In: 
Cochrane, A, Clarke, J. and Gewirtz, S. ed. Comparing welfare states. 
2nd ed. pp. 1-27. London, SAGE in association with The Open University 
Cohen, L., Manion, L., and Morrison, K. (2000) Research methods in education. 
5th ed. London, Routledge Falmer 
Coolican, H. (2004) Research methods and statistics in psychology. 4th ed. 
London, Hodder Arnold 
Coverdale, J. et al. (2006) Ethically justified clinical strategies for promoting 
geriatric assent. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(2), pp. 
151-157 
Cox, S. (1998) Home solutions: housing and support for people with dementia. 
London, Housing Associations Charitable Trust 
Cox, S. (2006) Home solutions 2: housing, care and support for people with 
dementia. Stirling, The Dementia Services Development Centre  
Creswell, J. W. (2007) Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing 
among five approaches. 2
 ed. Thousand Oaks, CA, SAGE Publications 
Creswell, J. W. and Plano-Clark, V. L. (2007) Designing and conducting mixed 
methods research. London, SAGE Publications 
Crombie, I. K. et al. (2003) Understanding public health policy: learning from 
international comparisons. Glasgow, NHS Scotland 
Crotty, M. (1998) The foundations of social research: meaning and perspective 
in the research process. London, SAGE Publications 
Curry, A. and Stark, S. (2000) Quality of service in nursing homes. Health 
Services Management Research, 13(4), pp. 205-215 
Dalkey, N. C. and Helmer, O. (1963) An experimental application of the Delphi 
method to the use of experts. Management Science, 9 (3), pp. 458-467 
Dalkey, N. C. (1967) Delphi. California, The Rand Corporation 
Dalkey, N. C. (1969) The Delphi method: an experimental study of group 
opinion. California, The Rand Corporation 
Dalkey, N. C. (1975) A Delphi study of factors affecting the quality of life. In: 
Turoff, M. and Linstone, H. A. ed. 3
 ed. The Delphi method: techniques 
and applications. London, Addison-Wesley 
Deming, W. E. (1986) Out of the crisis: quality, productivity and competitive 
position. Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Press 
Democratic Progressive Party. A just welfare state: White paper of the DPPs 
social policy. Taipei, Democratic Progressive Party, 1993 
Denham, M. J. (1991) Assessment of quality of life. In: Denham, M. J. ed. Care 
of the long-stay elderly patient. 2nd ed. London, Chapman and Hall 
Department of Applied Social Science. Ethics handbook. Stirling, Department of 
Applied Social Science, 2008 
Department of Health (1989) Caring for People: Community Care in the next 
Decade and beyond. London, HMSO 
Department of Health (2001a) Creating a Patient-led NHS: Delivering the NHS 
Improvement Plan. London, Department of Health 
Department of Health (2001b) National Service Framework for Older People. 
London, Department of Health 
Department of Health (2001c) Valuing People: A New Strategy for Learning 
Disability for the 21st Century. London, Department of Health 
Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety (2006) The Quality 
Standards for Health and Social Care: supporting good governance and 
best practice in the HPSS. Belfast, Department of Health, Social Services 
and Public Safety 
Department of Social Affairs (1980a) Disability Welfare Act [Internet]. Taiwan, 
Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1980b) Senior Citizens Welfare Act [Internet]. 
Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1981) Regulations on Establishing Standards of 
Senior Citizens Welfare Organizations [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of 
Social Affairs. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 
March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1998a) Elderly Living Allowance for the Medium 
and Low Income Family [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. 
Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1998b) Permission Regulations on Establishing 
Senior Citizens Welfare Organizations [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of 
Social Affairs. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 
March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1998c) Permission Regulations on Establishing 
Standards of Long-term Care Organizations [Internet]. Taiwan, 
Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1998d) Plan of free health check and prevent 
health items for older people [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social 
Affairs. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 
2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1998e) Project of Promoting Care Services for 
Older People [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1998f) Project of Promoting Home Care [Internet]. 
Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1998g) Regulations on Professional Staff of 
Senior Citizens Welfare Organizations [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of 
Social Affairs. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 
March 2007] 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.%20Accessed%20March%202007
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm
Department of Social Affairs (1998h) Regulations on Promoting Senior Citizens 
Welfare Committee [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. 
Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (1999) Regulations on Takeover Private Senior 
Citizens Welfare Organizations [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social 
Affairs. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 
2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2000a) Regulations on Evaluating Senior Citizens 
Welfare Organizations [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. 
Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2000b) Regulations on Encouraging Private 
Senior Citizens Welfare Organizations [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of 
Social Affairs. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 
March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2000c) Free National Health Insurance for the 
Medium and Low Income Senior Citizens [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of 
Social Affairs. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 
March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2002a) Elderly Allowance of Special Care for the 
Medium and Low Income Family [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social 
Affairs. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 
2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2002b) Temporary Implementation Ordinance of 
Social Benefit Living Supplement Programs for Senior Citizens [Internet]. 
Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2003a) Chapter 16, Senior Citizens Housing 
Development, as provided in Design and Construction Part of Construction 
Technical Regulations [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. 
Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2003b) Regulations on General Management of 
Senior Citizens Housing [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. 
Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2003c) Senior Citizens Welfare and Policy 
[Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2003d) The Design Standard for the Basic 
Facilities and Establishments of Senior Citizens Housing [Internet]. 
Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
Department of Social Affairs (2004a) Plan of Free Home Care for Disabled 
People [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2004b) Project of Promoting Non-Governmental 
Participation in Senior Citizens Housing Development [Internet]. Taiwan, 
Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2005a) Contract Format of Care Homes [Internet]. 
Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2005b) Plan of Establishing Community Care 
Centres [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm. [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2005c) Regulations on Managing Home Care 
Provision Units [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2007a) Establishment Standards of Senior 
Citizens Welfare Institutions [Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social 
Affairs. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02_3-eng.htm [Accessed 
30 July 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2007b) Permit and management regulations for 
the establishment of private senior citizens welfare institutions [Internet]. 
Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02_4_eng.htm [Accessed 30 July 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2007c) Plan of Establishing Special Care Units for 
Older People with Dementia within Senior Citizens Welfare Organizations 
[Internet]. Taiwan, Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Social Affairs (2007d) Regulations of qualifications and training 
for professionals of senior citizens welfare service [Internet]. Taiwan, 
Department of Social Affairs. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/960807_eng.htm [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Statistics (2007) Statistical Yearbook of Interior [Internet]. 
Taiwan, Ministry of the Interior. Available: 
http://www.moi.gov.tw/stat/english/index.asp [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Department of Statistics (2009a) Population by marital status, Statistical 
Yearbook of Interior [Internet]. Taiwan, Ministry of the Interior. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/stat/year/elist.htm [Accessed 27 February 2009] 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm.
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02_3-eng.htm%20%5bAccessed%20July%202007
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02_3-eng.htm%20%5bAccessed%20July%202007
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02_4_eng.htm%20%5bAccessed%20July%202007
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02.htm%20%5bAccessed%20March%202007
http://www.moi.gov.tw/stat/english/index.asp%20%5bAccessed%203%20March%202007
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/stat/year/elist.htm
Department of Statistics (2009b) Population of 15 years and over by 
educational attainment, Statistical Yearbook of Interior [Internet]. Taiwan, 
Ministry of the Interior. Available: http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/stat/year/elist.htm 
[Accessed 27 February 2009] 
Department of Statistics (2009c) The condition of long-term nursing, nursing 
and caring organizations for the aged, Statistical Yearbook of Interior 
[Internet]. Taiwan, Ministry of the Interior. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/stat/year/elist.htm [Accessed 27 February 2009] 
Dewing, J. (2002) From ritual to relationship: a person-centred approach to 
consent in qualitative research with older people who have a dementia. 
Dementia, 1(2), pp. 157171 
Dickinson, E. J. (1997) The quality movement. In: Mayer, P. P., Dickinson, E. J., 
and Sandler, M. ed. Quality care for elderly people. London, Chapman & 
Dolowitz, D. P. and Marsh, D. (2000) Learning from abroad: The role of policy 
transfer in contemporary policy-making, Governance, 13 (1), pp. 5-23 
Donabedian, A. (1980) The definition of quality and approaches to its 
assessment. Explorations in quality assessment and monitoring, Vol. 1. 
Ann Arbor, MI, Health Administration Press 
Dorenlot, P. (2005) Applying the social model of disability to dementia: present-
day challenges. Dementia, 4(4), pp. 459-461 
Dowling, B., Powell, M., and Glendinning, C. (2004) Conceptualising successful 
partnerships. Health & Social Care in the Community, 12(4), pp. 309- 317 
Dowling, S. et al. (2006) Person-centred planning in social care: A scoping review 
[Internet]. York, Joseph Rowntree Foundation. Available: 
http://www.jrf.org.uk/bookshop/eBooks/9781859354803.pdf [Accessed 18 
December 2006] 
Downs, M. (2000) Aging update. Dementia in a socio-cultural context: an Idea 
whose time has come. Aging and Society, 20(3), pp. 369-375. 
Easterby-Smith, M., Thorpe, R., and Lowe, A. (1991) Management research: an 
introduction. London, SAGE Publications 
Ebbinghaus, B. (2005) When less is more: selection problems in large-N and 
small-N cross-national comparisons. International Sociology, 20(2), pp. 
133-152 
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990) The three worlds of welfare capitalism. Cambridge, 
Polity Press 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/stat/year/elist.htm
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/stat/year/elist.htm%20%5bAccessed%202%20February%202009
http://www.jrf.org.uk/bookshop/eBooks/9781859354803.pdf
Esping-Andersen, G. (1996) Welfare state dilemmas in a global economy. In: 
Esping-Andersen, G. ed. Welfare states in transition: National adaptations 
in global economies. London, SAGE Publications 
Esping-Andersen, G. (1999) Social foundations of postindustrial economies. 
Oxford, Oxford University 
Evans, M. & Davies, J. (1999) Understanding policy transfer: A multi-level, 
multi-disciplinary perspective. Public Administration, 77(2), pp. 361385 
Everitt, B. S. (1996) Making sense of statistics in psychology: a second-level 
course. Oxford, Oxford University Press 
Faherty, V. (1979) Continuing social work education: results of a Delphi survey. 
Journal of Education for Social Work, 15(1), pp. 12-19 
Fan, C. T. (1954) Note on construction of an item analysis table for the high-
low-27-per-cent group method. Psychometrika, 19(3), pp. 231-237 
Fearnley, K. (2006) Coping with dementia: a practical handbook for carers. 
Edinburgh, NHS Health Scotland 
Ferri, C. P. et al. (2005) Global prevalence of dementia: a Delphi consensus 
study. Lancet, 366, pp. 2112-2117 
Frances, A. et al. (1995) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 
4th ed. Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association 
Fulcher, J. and Scott, J. (2003) Sociology. 2
 ed. Oxford, Oxford University 
Press  
Gaucher, E. J. and Coffey, R. J. (1993) Total quality in healthcare: from theory 
to practice. San Francisco, Jossey-Bass 
Gaugler, J. E. et al. (2003) Caregiving and institutionalization of cognitively 
impaired older people: utilizing dynamic predictors of change. The 
Gerontologist, 43(2), pp. 219-229 
General Register Office for Scotland. The Registrar Generals Annual Review of 
Demographic Trends 151st Edition: Scotlands Population 2005. 
Edinburgh, General Register Office for Scotland, 2006 
George, V. and Wilding, P. (1976) Ideology and social welfare. London, 
Routledge & Kegan Paul 
Gero-Ed Center. Social justice and the older adult: creating an agenda for 
research, teaching, policy and practice. Chicago, CSWE Gero-Ed 
Center/AGE-SW, 2006 
Gibson, M. C. et al. (2010) Principles of good care for long-term care facilities 
[Internet]. International Psychogeriatrics, Published online by Cambridge 
University Press doi: 10.1017/S1041610210000852 [Accessed 18 July 
2010] 
Giddens, A. and Griffiths, S. (2006) Sociology. 5
 ed. Cambridge, Polity Press  
Gillham, B. (2000) Developing a questionnaire. London, Continuum  
Gilliard, J. et al. (2005) Dementia care in England and the social model of 
disability: lessons and issues. Dementia, 4(4), pp. 571586 
Goldsmith, M. (1996). Hearing the voice of people with dementia: opportunities 
and obstacles. London, Jessica Kingsley 
Goodman, R. and Peng, I. (1996) The East Asian welfare states: peripatetic 
learning, adaptive change, and nation-building. In: Esping-Andersen, G. 
ed. Welfare states in transition: national adaptations in global economies, 
pp. 192-224. London, SAGE Publications 
Gordon, T. J. (1994) The Delphi method. In: Glenn, J. C. and Gordon, T. J. 
Futures Research Methodology Version 3.0. Washington, D.C., The 
Millennium Project 
Green, S. B. and Salkind, N. J. (2008) Using SPSS for Windows and Macintosh: 
analyzing and understanding data. 5
ed. London, Prentice Hall 
Gruber-Baldini, A. L. et al. (2005) Characteristics associated with depression in 
long-term care residents with dementia. The Gerontologist, 45(Special 
Issue I), pp. 50-55  
Gunther, J. and Hawkins, F. (1996) Total quality management in human service 
organizations. New York, NY, Springer 
Hague, P. et al. (2004) Market research in practice: a guide to the basics. 
London, Kogan Page 
Hair, J. F. et al. (1998) Multivariate data analysis. 5th ed. London, Prentice-Hall 
International 
Hair, J. F. et al. (2010) Multivariate data analysis: a global perspective. 7th ed. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, Prentice Hall 
Hancock, G. A. et al. (2006) The needs of older people with dementia in 
residential care. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 21(1), pp. 
43-49 
Harding, N. and Palfrey, C. (1997) The social construction of dementia: 
confused professionals? London, Jessica Kingsley 
Hatzidimitriadou, E. and Milne, A. (2005) Planning ahead: meeting the needs of 
older people with intellectual disabilities in the United Kingdom. Dementia, 
4(3), pp. 341-359 
Hawes, C. et al. (2003) A national survey of assisted living facilities. The 
Gerontologist, 43 (6), pp. 875882 
Hawes, C. and Phillips, C. D. (2007) Definition quality in assisted living: 
comparing apples, oranges, and broccoli. The Gerontologist, 47 (suppl 1), 
pp. 4050 
Henderson, P. A. (1996) Freeport hospital health care village.  In: Gunther, J. 
and Hawkins, F. ed. Total quality management in human service 
organizations. New York, Springer  
Hill, M. and Hwang, Y. S. (2005) Taiwan: what kind of social policy regime? In: 
Walker, A. and Wong, C. K. ed. East Asian welfare regimes in transition: 
from Confucianism to globalisation, pp. 145-164, Bristol, The Policy Press 
Hodges, L., Bridge, C., and Chaudhary, K. (2006) Dementia Design Guidelines: 
Home and Community Care Capital Works Program [Internet]. Sydney, 
Home Modification Information Clearinghouse, University of Sydney. 
Available: http://www.dadhc.nsw.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/39C1876A-27F6-
4C70-ABAD-CAD56D4F64E1/2048/DementiaDesignGuidelines.pdf 
[Accessed 25 February 2007] 
Holdsworth, L. et al. (2005) National Framework for Service Change in the NHS 
in Scotland: Care of Older People Action Team Report. Edinburgh, NHS 
Scotland 
Horton, K. (2006) Balancing risk and independence in nursing older adults. In: 
Godin, P. ed. Risk and Nursing Practice. pp. 150-162. Basingstoke, 
Palgrave Macmillan 
Huang, M. N. (2006) The retrospect and prospect of long-term care for 
dementia. TADA Newsletter 12(6). Taiwan, Taiwan Alzheimers Disease 
Association 
Huber, M. et al. (2005) Long-term care for older people. Paris, Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development 
Hughes, B. (1990) Quality of life. In: Peace, S. M. ed. Researching social 
gerontology: concepts, methods and issues. pp. 46-58. London, SAGE in 
association with the British Society of Gerontology 
Hughes, C. P. et al. (1982) A new clinical scale for the staging of dementia. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 140(6), pp. 566-572  
Hunter, G. et al. (2006) Range and Capacity Review Group: Second Report the 
Future Care of Older People in Scotland. Edinburgh, Scottish Executive 
http://www.dadhc.nsw.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/39C1876A-27F6-4C70-ABAD-CAD56D4F64E1/2048/DementiaDesignGuidelines.pdf
http://www.dadhc.nsw.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/39C1876A-27F6-4C70-ABAD-CAD56D4F64E1/2048/DementiaDesignGuidelines.pdf
Hussain, Y. and Bagguley, P. (2003) Citizenship, ethnicity and identity: British 
Pakistanis after the 2001 'riots'. Leeds, University of Leeds 
Iliffe, S., Manthorpe, J., and Eden, A. (2003) Sooner or later? issues in the early 
diagnosis of dementia in general practice: a qualitative study. Family 
Practice, 20, pp. 376381 
Iliffe, S., Wilcock, J., and Haworth, D. (2006) Delivering psychosocial 
interventions for people with dementia in primary care: jobs or skills? 
Dementia, 5(3), pp. 327-338 
Innes, A. (2002) The social and political context of formal dementia care 
provision Aging & Society 22, pp. 483-499 
Innes, A., Macpherson, S., and McCabe, L. (2006) Promoting person-centred care 
at the front line [Internet]. York, Joseph Rowntree Foundation. Available: 
http://www.jrf.org.uk/bookshop/eBooks/9781859354520.pdf [Accessed 18 
December 2006] 
Jackson, J. et al. (2003) Needs Assessment Report: Dementia and Older 
People. Edinburgh, NHS Scotland  
Jacques, A. et al. (2004a) Overcoming the Obstacles to the Improvement of 
Dementia Care-Report of the Scottish Executive and Alzheimer Scotland 
Short Life Working Group. Edinburgh, Scottish Executive 
Jacques, A. et al. (2004b) Scottish Executive and Alzheimer Scotland Short Life 
Working Group: Template for Dementia Services. Edinburgh, Scottish 
Executive 
Jarvie, A. et al. (2001) Report of the Chief Nursing Officer for Scotland 's Group 
on Free Nursing Care. Edinburgh, Scottish Executive 
Jay, A. et al. (2005) Better Outcomes for Older People: Framework for Joint 
Services. Edinburgh, Scottish Executive 
Jekel, J. F. et al. (2001) Epidemiology, biostatistics, and preventive medicine. 
 ed. Philadelphia, PA, W.B. Saunders 
Jennings, B. (2004) Alzheimers disease and the quality of life. In: Doka, K. J. 
ed. Living with grief: Alzheimer's disease. Washington, DC, Hospice 
Foundation of America 
Jillson, I. A. (1975) The national drug-abuse policy Delphi: progress report and 
findings to date. In: Linstone, H. A. and M. Turoff, M. ed. 1975, 3
 ed. The 
Delphi method: techniques and applications. London, Addison-Wesley 
Kalis, A., et al. (2004) The good life for demented persons living in nursing 
homes. International Psychogeriatrics, 16 (4), pp. 429-439 
http://www.jrf.org.uk/bookshop/eBooks/9781859354520.pdf
Kane, R. A., et al. (2003) Quality of life measures for nursing home residents. 
The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical 
Sciences, 58(3), pp. 240-248 
Kanji, G. K. and Asher, M. (1993) Total quality management process: a 
systematic approach. Abingdon, Carfax Publishing 
Kaplan, R. S. and Norton, D. P. (1996) The balanced scorecard: translating 
strategy into action. Boston, MA, Harvard Business School 
Kennett, P. (2001) Comparative social policy: theory and research. Buckingham, 
Open University Press  
Kerr, D. et al. (2005) Building a Health Service Fit for the Future: A National 
Framework for Service Change in the NHS in Scotland. Edinburgh, 
Scottish Executive 
Kitson, A. L. (1989) Standards of care: a framework for quality. London, Royal 
College of Nursing 
Kitwood, T. (1993) Person and process in dementia. International Journal of  
Geriatric Psychiatry, 8, pp. 541-545 
Kitwood, T. (1997a) Personhood, dementia and dementia care. In Hunter, S. ed. 
Dementia challenges and new directions. London, Jessica Kingsley 
Kitwood, T. (1997b) Dementia reconsidered: the person comes first. 
Buckingham, Open University Press 
Koch, H. C. H. (1991) Total quality management in health care. Harlow, 
Longman 
Kraan, R. J. et al. (1991) Care for the elderly: significant innovations in three 
European countries. Colorado, Westview Press 
Krause, N. (2003) Religious meaning and subjective well-being in late life. 
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 58B (3), pp. S160-S170 
Kmpers, S. et al. (2005) A comparative study of dementia care in England and 
the Netherlands using neo-institutionalist perspectives. Qualitative Health 
Research, 15(9), pp. 1199-1230 
Kuomintang (2007) Action plan [Internet]. Taiwan, Kuomintang. Available: 
http://www.kmt.org.tw/hc.aspx?id=14&aid=1964 [Accessed 23 October 
2009] 
Ku, Y. W. (2002) Towards a Taiwanese welfare state: Demographic change, 
politics, and social policy. In: Aspalter, C. ed. Discovering the Welfare 
State in East Asia, pp. 143-167. Westport, Connecticut, Praeger 
Publishers 
http://www.psc.isr.umich.edu/people/profile/564
http://www.kmt.org.tw/hc.aspx?id=14&aid=1964
Lan, J. Y. C. (2008) The politics of Taiwanese welfare state transformation 
postindustrial pressures, regime shifts and social policy responses in the 
1990s and beyond. International Symposium on Globalization and the 
Future of the East-Asian Welfare Capitalism. Taiwan, National Chung-
Cheng University 
Lange, A., et al. (1967) Using item analysis to improve tests. Journal of 
Educational Measurements, 4(2), pp. 65-68. 
Lawton, M. P. (1997) Assessing quality of life in Alzheimer disease research. 
Alzheimer disease and associated disorders, 11(Suppl 6), pp. 91-99 
Lee, P. C. (2005) Statistic of national health insurance. Taiwan, Department of 
Health 
Lee, P. and Raban, C. (1983) Welfare and ideology. In: Loney, M., Boswell, D. 
and Clarke, J. ed. Social policy and social welfare: a reader. Milton 
Keynes, Open University Press 
Leung, K. F. et al. (2005) Development and validation of the Chinese quality of 
life instrument. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 3(26), pp. 1-19 
Lin, C. Y, and Liu, Q. Q. (2006a) A study to build an integration service model 
of dementia day care center. 2006 Talks between Community and 
Humanity International Conference, pp. 484-505. Taiwan, Meiho Institute 
of Technology. 
Lin, C. Y, and Liu, Q. Q. (2006b) The application of the total quality 
management to in-home services. 2006 Talks between Community and 
Humanity International Conference, pp. 506-526. Taiwan, Meiho Institute 
of Technology 
Lin, Y. F. (2005) Population and family. Taiwan, Department of Health 
Liu, S. C., Wu, H. H., and Chen, H. K. (2010) Improving organizational 
performance by a quality control circle: A case of medication improvement 
team at a hospital in Taiwan. Information Technology Journal, 9(4), pp. 
692-697 
Loewenthal, K. M. (2001) An introduction to psychological tests and scales. 2nd 
ed. Hove, Psychology Press 
Lung, C. H. and Lin, M. B. (2005) A Comparative Study of Long-term care 
Policy and Practice Between Taiwan and US. Proceeding to the 2005 
International Conference on Social and Health Care in Aging Society, pp. 
213-221. Taiwan, Meiho Institute of Technology 
Mabbert, D. and Bolderson, H. (1999) Theories and methods in comparative 
social policy. In: Clasen, J. ed. Comparative social policy: concepts, 
theories and methods, pp. 34-56. Oxford, Blackwell 
Mace, N. L., and Rabins, P.V. (1999) The 36-hour day: a family guide to caring 
for persons with Alzheimer disease, related dementing illnesses, and 
memory loss in later life. Maryland, John Hopkins University 
Manard, B. (2002) Nursing home quality indicators: their uses and limitations. 
Washington, D.C., The AARP Public Policy Institute 
Mangan, I. (2002) Older people in long stay care. Dublin, The Human Rights 
Commission 
Mansell, J. and Brown, B. J. (2004) Person-centred planning or person-centred 
action? policy and practice in intellectual disability services. Journal of 
Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities, 17(1), pp. 1-9 
Marshall, M. (2001) Just Another Disability: Making Design Dementia Friendly. 
Glasgow, Glasgow 1999 UK City of Architecture and Design 
Marshall, M. (2005) Perspectives on rehabilitation and dementia. In Marshall M. 
ed. Perspectives on rehabilitation and dementia. London, Jessica 
Kingsley 
Marshall, T. H. (1950) Citizenship and social class and other essays. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press 
Maryland Hospital Association (1985) International Quality Indicator Project: 
information brochure [Internet]. Maryland, Maryland Hospital Association 
Available: 
http://www.internationalqip.com/Documents/brochure.pdf [Accessed 25 
February 2007] 
McCabe, L. (2007) Translating policy and practice: day care for people with 
dementia in Kerala, India. Global Social Policy, 7(2), pp. 203-221 
McCallion, P. and McCarron, M. (2007) Perspective on quality of life in 
dementia care. Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 45(1), pp. 56
McCormack, B.  (2003a) A conceptual framework for person-centred practice 
with older people. International Journal of Nursing Practice, 9(3), pp. 202
McCormack, B. (2003b) Researching nursing practice: does person-
centeredness matter? Nursing Philosophy, 4 (3), pp. 179-188 
Mckee, K. J. (1999) This is your life: research paradigms in dementia care. In: 
Adams, T. and Clarke, C. L. ed. Dementia care: developing partnerships 
in practice. pp. 145-164. London, Bailliere Tindall 
http://www.internationalqip.com/Documents/brochure.pdf
McIntyre, S. J. et al. (2007) Training Alzheimers disease and other dementias 
of late life: a quick reference guide [Internet]. Virginia, American 
Psychiatric Association. Available: 
http://www.psych.org/psych_pract/treatg/quick_ref_guide/AlzheimersQRG
_04-15-05.pdf [Accessed 25 February 2007] 
Meyrick, J. D. (2003) The Delphi method and health research. Health Education, 
103(1), pp. 7-16 
Ministry of Health and Labour (2002) Group home for senior citizen with 
dementia: external appraisal items of service provision. Tokyo, Ministry of 
Health and Labour 
Ministry of the Interior (2000) Evaluation plan of welfare institution for older 
people. Taiwan, Ministry of the Interior 
Ministry of the Interior (2006) Interior affairs [Internet]. Taiwan, Ministry of the 
Interior. Available: http://www.moi.gov.tw/outline2007/e3.htm [Accessed 
26 June 2007] 
Ministry of the Interior (2007) Establishment standards of senior citizens 
welfare institutions [Internet]. Taiwan, Ministry of the Interior. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02_3-eng.htm  [Accessed 17 July 2008] 
Ministry of the Interior (2008a) Civil affairs [Internet]. Taiwan, Ministry of the 
Interior. Available: http://www.moi.gov.tw/outline/en_2.htm  [Accessed 28 
July 2009]  
Ministry of the Interior (2008b) Modified formal contract of assisted living (long-
term care) [Internet]. Taiwan, Ministry of the Interior. Available: 
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/97 
-970109.doc [Accessed 17 July 2008] 
Moise, P. et al. (2004) Dementia care in 9 OECD countries: a comparative 
analysis. NY, Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development 
Dementia 
Moran, D. et al. (2006) Draft national standards for residential care setting for 
older people. Dublin, Department of Health and Children 
Morgan, G. D. and Stewart, J. N. (1997) The importance of the social 
environment in dementia care. Western Journal of Nursing Research, 
19(6), pp. 740-761 
Morris, J. (2005) Citizenship and disabled people: a scoping paper prepared for 
the disability rights commission. Leeds, University of Leeds 
Muir, R. et al. (2000) Scottish Needs Assessment Programme: Huntingtons 
Disease, Acquired Brain Injury and Early Onset Dementia. Edinburgh, 
NHS Scotland 
http://www.psych.org/psych_pract/treatg/quick_ref_guide/AlzheimersQRG_04-15-05.pdf
http://www.psych.org/psych_pract/treatg/quick_ref_guide/AlzheimersQRG_04-15-05.pdf
http://www.moi.gov.tw/outline2007/e3.htm%20%5bAccessed%20June%202007
http://www.moi.gov.tw/outline2007/e3.htm%20%5bAccessed%20June%202007
http://sowf.moi.gov.tw/04/02/02_3-eng.htm
http://www.moi.gov.tw/outline/en_2.htm
Mukamel, D. B. and Spector, W. D. (2000) Nursing home costs and risk-
adjusted outcome measures of quality. Medical Care, 38(1), pp. 78-89 
Murry, J. W. and Hammons, J. O. (1995) Delphi: A versatile methodology for 
conducting qualitative research. The Review of Higher Education, 18(4), 
pp. 423- 436 
Myles, J. (2002) A new social contract for the elderly? In: Esping-Andersen, G. 
et al. ed. Why we need a new welfare state. pp. 130-172. Oxford, Oxford 
University Press 
National Economic and Social Forum. Care for Older People. Report No. 32. 
Dublin, National Economic and Social Forum, 2005  
National Institute of Standards and Technology (2007) Health care criteria for 
performance excellence [Internet]. Maryland, National Institute of 
Standards and Technology. Available: 
http://www.quality.nist.gov/PDF_files/2007_HealthCare_Criteria.pdf 
[Accessed 25 February 2007]  
Neuman, W. L. (2006) Social research methods: qualitative and quantitative 
approaches. 6
 ed. Boston; London, Pearson/Allyn and Bacon 
Nunnally, J. C. (1967) Psychometric theory. New York, McGraw-Hill 
Oakland, J. S. (2000) Total quality management: text with cases. Oxford, 
Butterworth-Heinemann 
Ohaeri, J. U. et al. (2007) Confirmatory factor analytical study of the WHOQOL-
Bref: experience with Sudanese general population and psychiatric 
samples. BMC medical Research Methodology, 7(3), pp. 1-9 
Oppenheim, A. N. (1993) Questionnaire design, interviewing and attitude 
measurement. New ed. London, Pinter  
Parker, C. et al. (2004) Quality of life and building design in residential and 
nursing homes for older people. Aging & Society, 24(6), pp. 941-962 
Payne, W. A. and Hahn, D. B. (1992) Understanding your health. London, 
Mosby-Year Book 
Peace, S. et al. (1997) Re-evaluating residential care. Buckingham, Open    
University Press 
Peace, S. M. (1990) Part two: methodological approaches tntroduction. In: 
Peace, S. M. ed. Researching social gerontology: concepts, methods and 
issues. pp. 59-61. London, SAGE in association with the British Society of 
Gerontology 
http://www.quality.nist.gov/PDF_files/2007_HealthCare_Criteria.pdf
Phillips, D. R. and Chan, A. C. M. (2002) National policies on aging and long-
term care in the Asia-Pacific issues and challenge. In: Phillips, D. R. and 
Chan, A. C. M. ed. Aging and long-term care: National politics in the Asia-
Pacific, edited. Singapore, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and 
Ottawa: International Development Research Centre 
Pleasence, P. et al. (2004) Causes of Action: Civil Law and Social Justice. 
London, The Stationery Office 
Pollock, R. (2003) Designing interiors for people with dementia. Stirling, The 
Dementia Services Development Centre 
Pollock, R. (2007) Designing interiors for people with dementia. 2
 ed. Stirling, 
The Dementia Services Development Centre 
Port, C. L. et al. (2005) Families filling the gap: comparing family involvement 
for assisted living and nursing home residents with dementia. The 
Gerontologist, 45(Special Issue I), pp. 87-95  
Power, M. et al. (1999) The World Health Organization WHOQOL-100: tests of 
the universality of quality of life in 15 different cultural groups worldwide. 
Health Psychology, 18(5), pp. 495-505 
Power, M., Quinn, K., Schmidt, S., and the WHOQOL Group (2005) 
Development of the WHOQOL-Old module, Quality of Life Research, 14 
(10), pp. 2197-2214 
Pratt, R. and Wilkinson, H. (2003) A psychosocial model of understanding the 
experience of receiving a diagnosis of dementia. Dementia, 2(2), pp. 181-
Rabins, P. V. et al. (1997) Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with 
Alzheimer's disease and other dementias of late life [Internet]. Virginia, 
American Psychiatric Association. Available: 
http://psych.org/psych_pract/treatg/pg/pg_dementia_32701.cfm 
[Accessed 18 December 2006] 
Rabins, P. V. et al. (2007) Practice guideline for the treatment of patients with 
Alzheimers disease and other dementias. 2
 ed. [Internet]. Virginia, 
American Psychiatric Association. Available: 
http://www.psychiatryonline.com/pracGuide/loadGuidelinePdf.aspx?file=Al
zPG101007 [Accessed 17 July 2008] 
Ragin, C. C. (1987) The comparative method: moving beyond qualitative and 
quantitative strategies. Berkeley, CA and London, University of California 
Press 
Ragin, C. C. (1994) A qualitative comparative analysis of pension systems. In: 
Janoski, T and Hicks, A. M. ed. The comparative political economy of the 
welfare state, pp. 320-345. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press 
http://psych.org/psych_pract/treatg/pg/pg_dementia_32701.cfm
http://www.psychiatryonline.com/pracGuide/loadGuidelinePdf.aspx?file=AlzPG101007
http://www.psychiatryonline.com/pracGuide/loadGuidelinePdf.aspx?file=AlzPG101007
Rawls, J. (1972) A theory of justice. Oxford, Clarendon Press   
Ready, R. E. and Ott, B. R. (2003) Review quality of life measures for dementia. 
Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 1(11), pp. 1-9 
Redmond, M. et al. (2006) Unipolar depression across cultures: A Delphi 
analysis of the methodological and conceptual issues confronting the 
cross-cultural study of depression. Australian e-Journal for the 
Advancement of Mental Health, 5(2), pp. 1-13 
Reilly, S. et al. (2005) Care homes for older people with dementia in the north 
west of England. Manchester, Personal Social Services Research Unit, 
University of Manchester 
Repper, J. and Perkins, R. (2003) Social inclusion and recovery: a model for 
mental health practice. Edinburgh, Bailliere Tindall 
Robson, C. (2002) Real world research: a resource for social scientists and 
practitioner-researchers. 2nd ed. Oxford, Blackwell 
Roe, W. et al. (2006) Changing lives: Report of the 21st Century Social Work 
Review. Edinburgh, Scottish Executive 
Rogers, C. R. (1951) Client-centred therapy: its current practice, implications, 
and theory. Boston, Houghton Mifflin 
Rummery, K. (2009) Healthy partnerships, healthy citizens? an international 
review of partnerships in health and social care and patient/user outcomes. 
Social Science and Medicine, 69(12), pp. 1797-1804 
Sackman, H. (1974) Delphi critique: expert opinions, forecasting, and group 
process. California, The Rand Corporation 
Samus, Q. M., et al. (2005) The association of neuropsychiatric symptoms and 
environment with quality of life in assisted living residents with dementia. 
The Gerontologist, 45(Special Issue I), pp. 19-26 
Sawdon, J. (2006) Connect with us: a resource for care home managers 
developing services for people with dementia. Newcastle, Northumbria 
University 
Scholzel-Dorenbos, C. J. M. et al. (2006) Evaluating the outcome of 
interventions on quality of life in dementia: selection of the appropriate 
scale. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22(6), pp. 511-519 
Scottish Enterprise. A guide to total quality management. Glasgow, Scottish 
Enterprise, 1991 
http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/journal/4294/home
Scottish Executive. Strategy for Carers in Scotland. Edinburgh, Scottish 
Executive, 1999 
Scottish Executive. Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000. Edinburgh, 
Scottish Executive, 2000a  
Scottish Executive. Our National Health: A Plan for Action, a Plan for Change. 
Edinburgh, Scottish Executive, 2000b 
Scottish Executive. Response to the Royal Commission on Long-term care. 
Edinburgh, Scottish Executive, 2000c 
Scottish Executive. Information for Older People Fifty Plus. Edinburgh, Scottish 
Executive, 2001a  
Scottish Executive. National Care Standards: Care home for Older People. 
Edinburgh, Scottish Executive, 2001b 
Scottish Executive. Regulation of Care (Scotland) Act 2001. Edinburgh, 
Scottish Executive, 2001c 
Scottish Executive. Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002. 
Edinburgh, Scottish Executive, 2002 
Scottish Executive. Partnership for Care- Scotlands Health White Paper. 
Edinburgh, Scottish Executive, 2003 
Scottish Executive. National Care Standards: Care home for Older  
     People. Edinburgh, Scottish Executive, 2005 
Scottish Executive (2006a) Scotland Facts [Internet]. Edinburgh, Scottish 
Executive. Available: http://www.scotland.org/about/fact-file/index.html 
[Accessed 3 March 2007] 
Scottish Executive. The Future of Unpaid Care in Scotland: Headline Report 
and Recommendations. Edinburgh, Scottish Executive, 2006b 
Scottish Executive Health Department (2002) Guidelines on chaplaincy and 
spiritual care in the NHS in Scotland [Internet]. Edinburgh, Scottish 
Executive. Available: http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/pdf/rossNHSScot.pdf 
[Accessed 17 July 2008]  
Scottish Executive Health Department (2006) Free Personal Care [Internet]. 
Edinburgh, Scottish Executive. Available: 
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Health/care/17655/9334 [Accessed 28 
November 2006]  
Scottish Executive. Joint Future Group. Report of the Joint Future Group. 
Edinburgh, Scottish Executive. Joint Future Group, 2000 
http://www.scotland.org/about/fact-file/index.html
http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/pdf/rossNHSScot.pdf
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Health/care/17655/9334.%20Accessed%20November%202006
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Health/care/17655/9334.%20Accessed%20November%202006
Sechrest, L. and Sidani, S. (1995) Quantitative and qualitative methods: Is 
there an alternative? Evaluation and Program Planning, 18(1), pp. 77-87 
Seed, P. and Lloyd, G. (1997) Quality of life. London, Jessica Kingsley 
Selai, C. and Trimble, M. R. (1999) Assessing quality of life in dementia. Aging 
& Mental Health, 3(2), pp. 101-111 
Sevenhuijsen, S. (1998) Citizenship and the ethics of care: feminist 
considerations on justice, morality and politics. London, Routledge 
Silberfeld, M. et al. (1996) Family and physicians' views of surrogate decision-
making: the roles and how to choose. International Psychogeriatrics, 8(4), 
pp. 589-596 
Sikorska, E. (1999) Organizational determinants of resident satisfaction with 
assisted living. The Gerontologist, 39 (4), pp. 450-456 
Sikorska-Simmons, E. (2006) Linking resident satisfaction to staff perceptions 
of the work environment in assisted living: a multilevel analysis. The 
Gerontologist, 46(5), pp. 590-598 
Skevington, S. M., Sartorius, N., Amir, M., and the WHOQOL Group (2004) 
Developing methods for assessing quality of life in different cultural 
settings: the history of the WHOQOL instruments. Social Psychiatry and 
Psychiatric Epidemiology, 39 (1), pp. 1-8 
Sloane, P. D. et al. (2005) Evaluating the quality of life of long-term care 
residents with dementia. The Gerontologist, 45(suppl 1), pp. 37-49 
Social Services Inspectorate/Social Work Services Group (1992) Care 
Management and Assessment: Managers Guide. London, HMSO  
Spencer, L., Ritchie, J. and OConnor, W. (2003) Analysis: practices, principles, 
and processes. In: Ritchie, J. and Lewis, J. ed. Qualitative research 
practice: a guide for social science students and researchers. London, 
SAGE Publications 
Stone, R. I. (2001) Providing long-term care benefits in cash: moving to a 
disability model. Health Affairs, 20(6), pp. 96-108 
Struttmann, T. et al. (1999) Quality-of-life assessment in the old using the 
WHOQOL 100: Differences between patients with senile dementia and 
patients with cancer. Int. Psychogeriatrics, 11(3), pp. 273-279 
http://search.books.com.tw/exep/prod_search.php?key=Ritchie%2C%20Jane%20%28EDT%29%2F%20Lewis%2C%20Jane%20%28EDT%29&f=author
Taiwan Alzheimers Disease Association (2008) Taiwanese resident home and 
nursing home for people with dementia [Internet]. Taiwan, Taiwan 
Alzheimers Disease Association. Available: 
http://60.248.108.194/index_news.php?ncid=4&nc2id=37 [Accessed 27 
February 2009] 
Tashakkori, A. and Teddlie, C. (1998) Mixed methodology: combining 
qualitative and quantitative approaches. London, SAGE Publications 
Tenner, A. R. and DeToro, I. J. (1992) Total quality management: three steps to 
continuous improvement. Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley 
Tester, S. (1999) Comparative approaches to long-term care for adults. In: 
Clasen, J. ed. Comparative social policy: concepts, theories and methods, 
pp. 136-1158. Oxford, Blackwell 
Tester, S. et al. (2004) Frailty and institutional life. In: Walker, A. and Hennessy, 
C. H. ed. Growing older: quality of life in old age. Maidenhead, Open 
University Press 
Tetley, J., Hanson, E., and Clarke, A. (2000). Older people, telematics and care. 
In: Warnes, A. M., Warren, L., and Nolan, M. ed. Care services for later 
life transformations and critiques. London and Philadelphia, PA, Jessica 
Kingsley 
The Dementia Services Development Centre (2006) The Dementia Services 
Development Centre: About us [Internet]. Stirling, The Dementia Services 
Development Centre. Available: 
http://www.dementia.stir.ac.uk/about.htm [Accessed 28 November 2006] 
The Deming Prize Committee (2006) The Deming Prize guide 2006 for 
overseas [Internet]. Tokyo, Union of Japanese Scientists and Engineers. 
Available: 
http://www.juse.or.jp/e/deming/pdf/03_demingguide2006_01.pdf 
[Accessed 25 February 2007] 
The Scottish Office. Design to Care: Renewing the National Health Service in 
Scotland. Edinburgh, The Scottish Office, 1997a 
The Scottish Office. Framework for Mental Health Services in Scotland. 
Edinburgh, The Scottish Office, 1997b 
The Scottish Office. Modernizing Community Care: an Action Plan. Edinburgh, 
The Scottish Office, 1998  
The Scottish Office. Social Inclusion- Opening the Door to a Better Scotland. 
Edinburgh, The Scottish Office, 1999 
http://60.248.108.194/index_news.php?ncid=4&nc2id=37
http://www.dementia.stir.ac.uk/about.htm
http://www.juse.or.jp/e/deming/pdf/03_demingguide2006_01.pdf
The Scottish Office, Central Research Unit. Residential homes for elderly 
people: their costs and quality. Edinburgh, The Scottish Office, Central 
Research Unit, 1992 
The Scottish Parliament. Care in the Community: Prepared for the Health and 
Community Care Committee. Edinburgh, The Scottish Parliament, 1999  
The UK Parliament. Carers (Recognition and Services) Act 1995. London, The 
UK Parliament, 1995 
The WHOQOL Group (1993) Study protocol for the World Health Organisation 
project to develop a quality of life assessment instrument (WHOQOL). 
Quality of Life Research, 2(2), pp. 153159 
The WHOQOL Group (1995) The World Health Organization quality of life 
assessment (WHOQOL): position paper from the World Health 
Organization. Social Science and Medicine, 41 (10), pp. 1403-1409 
The WHOQOL Group (1998) Development of the World Health Organization 
WHOQOL-BREF quality of life assessment. Psychological Medicine, 28(3), 
pp. 551-558 
The World Bank (2006) Key development data & statistics [Internet]. 
Washington, D.C., The World Bank. Available: 
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/DATASTATISTICS/0,,cont
entMDK:20535285~menuPK:1192694~pagePK:64133150~piPK:6413317
5~theSitePK:239419,00.html  [Accessed 3 March 2007] 
The World Health Organization. Pocket guide to the ICD-10 classification of 
mental and behavioural disorders with glossary and diagnostic criteria for 
research: ICD-10. DCR-10. Edinburgh, The World Health Organization, 
The World Health Organization. Physical status: the use and interpretation of 
anthropometry. Report of a WHO Expert Committee. WHO Technical 
Report Series 854. Geneva, The World Health Organization, 1995 
Thomas, B. (1994) The human dimension of quality. London, McGraw-Hill 
Tondora, J. et al. (2006) Implementation of person-centred care and planning: 
how philosophy can inform practice. New England, Yale University 
Trigg, R., Jones, R. W., and Skevington, S. M. (2007) Can people with mild to 
moderate dementia provide reliable answers about their quality of life? 
Age and Aging, 36(6), pp. 663-669 
Tseng, S. Z. and Wang, R. H. (2001) Quality of life and related factors among 
elderly nursing home residents in southern Taiwan. Public Health Nursing, 
18 (5), pp. 304-311  
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/DATASTATISTICS/0,,contentMDK:20535285~menuPK:1192694~pagePK:64133150~piPK:64133175~theSitePK:239419,00.html
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/DATASTATISTICS/0,,contentMDK:20535285~menuPK:1192694~pagePK:64133150~piPK:64133175~theSitePK:239419,00.html
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/DATASTATISTICS/0,,contentMDK:20535285~menuPK:1192694~pagePK:64133150~piPK:64133175~theSitePK:239419,00.html
Tu, Y. C. et al. (2006) Relationship between perceived empowerment care and 
quality of life among elderly residents within nursing homes in Taiwan: A 
questionnaire survey. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 43(6), pp 
673-680    
United Nations (1991) United Nations Principles for Older Persons [Internet]. 
New York, United Nations. Available: 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/olderpersons.htm [Accessed 23 
October 2009] 
Utton, D. (2007) Designing homes for people with dementia. London, Hawker 
Publications  
White, G. and Goodman, R. (1998) Welfare orientalism and the search for an 
East Asian welfare model. In: Goodman, R., White, G., and Kwon, H. J. 
ed. The East Asian welfare model: welfare orientalism and the state. 
London, Routledge 
Wikler, D. et al. (1987). Losing a million minds: confronting the tragedy of     
Alzheimer's disease and other dementias. Washington, DC, U.S.     
Government Printing Office 
Winzelberg, G. S., et al. (2005) Factors associated with nursing assistant 
quality-of-life ratings for residents with dementia in long-term care facilities. 
The Gerontologist, 45(Special Issue I), pp. 106-114 
Woods, B. (1995) Dementia care: progress and prospects. Journal of Mental 
Health, 4(2), pp. 115-124 
Wu, S. C. (1999) Development of nursing home quality indicators in Taiwan. 
Taiwan, Department of Health 
Wunderlich, G. S. and Kohler, P. O. ed. (2001) Improving the quality of long-
term care. Washington, D.C., National Academy press 
Zeithaml, V. A., Parasuraman, A., and Berry, L. L. (1990) Delivering quality 
service: balancing customer perceptions and expectations. New York, 
Free Press 
Zhou, Y. C. et al. (2005) A study on exploring the future needs and delivery of 
long-term services in Taiwan. Conference on the future challenges of 
Social and Health Policy. Taiwan, Kaohsiung Medical University 
Zimmerman, S. et al. (2003) Assisted living and nursing homes: apples and 
oranges? The Gerontologist, 43(Special Issue II), pp. 107-117 
Zinn, J. S., Weech, R. J., and Brannon, D. (1998) Resource dependence and 
institutional elements in nursing home TQM adoption. Health Services 
Research, 33(2), pp. 261-273 
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/law/olderpersons.htm
Appendices 
Appendix 1       
The development of quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia 
INFORMATION SHEET 
My name is Che-Ying Lin and I am a Ph.D. student in Social Work in the 
Department of Applied Social Science at the University of Stirling. I am doing 
Ph.D. research work on a project entitled The development of quality indicators 
for Taiwanese institutional dementia care.  
The aim of the study is to provide indicators as a reference for people with 
dementia and their families to help them choose suitable care homes; for 
institutions to make improvements; for the authorities concerned to enact 
evaluation standards and to enhance the quality of the entire institutional 
dementia care in Taiwan.  
I am seeking information from dementia specialists to evaluate the feasibility of 
the quality indicators for institutional dementia care. Since you have 
considerable experience in working with people with dementia or have been 
teaching about dementia care in universities, I will very much appreciated your 
participation in my survey. By participating in this study, you will help me 
tremendously in my effort to improve the quality of life for people with dementia 
living in care homes in Taiwan.  
My research is using the Delphi method. This is a confidential method for 
collecting the views of experts in dementia care. The Delphi procedure is likely to 
involve two rounds of consultation. I hope you will agree to complete an email 
questionnaire. All questions can be answered with a tick, but there are also 
opportunities for you to add your own comments. The survey may take up to 30 
minutes to complete. I very much hope you will be able to do this and that you 
will finish the first-round questionnaire by the 7
 of June 2008.  
My project has been approved by the Ethics Committee in the Department of 
Applied Social Science in the University of Stirling. Your views will be held 
confidentially. Data collected will only be used for the purposes of this study and 
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
will not be used to identify any individuals. All results will be presented in an 
aggregated and anonymised form.  
In order to assure that you are willing to take part in this study and permit the 
researcher to use your views in the Ph.D. thesis and any subsequent 
publications or reports, the completion of the attached consent form is necessary 
for this survey. Please see the next page. 
Thank you very much for your time, attention, and your help If you have any 
questions regarding this important study, please contact me at che-ying.lin@ 
stir.ac.uk. 
Yours sincerely, 
Che-Ying Lin 
Ph.D. student in Social Work  
Department of Applied Social Science  
University of Stirling 
Address: Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA 
E-mail: che-ying.lin@ stir.ac.uk 
The development of quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia 
CONSENT FORM 
Please tick the boxes to indicate that you have read and understood the 
information provided and that you are willing to take part in this study. 
1. I confirm that I have read and understood the information sheet for    
the study. ----------------------------------------------------- 
2. I know what the study is about and what taking part will involve.------- 
3. I have had the opportunity to ask questions and discuss the study.---- 
4. I know that I am free to withdraw from this study at any time without 
having to give any reason for 
withdrawing.--------------------------------------------------- 
5. I understand that this is a two round survey and that I will be notified    
by e-mail about a subsequent 
questionnaire.-------------------------------------------------- 
6. I agree to participate in this study. -------------------------------- 
7. I agree that the researcher can present my opinions in the PhD thesis     
and any related publications or reports as long as they are kept 
anonymous. 
-------------------------------------------------------------- 
Your name:              
Todays date: 
E-mail address:  
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
The questionnaire for the Delphi method round one 
The development of quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia 
I. Demographics: 
Please tick the one which describes you the best.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
I am: 
1.  male, 2.  female. 
I am: 
1.  below 31 years old, 2.  31 to 40 years old, 3.  41 to 50 years old,  
4.  over 50 years old.   
I am a(n): 
1.  physician, 2.  nurse in practice, 3.  nurse in academia,  
4.  social worker in practice, 5.  social worker in academia, 6.  architect, 
7.  manager, 8.  advocate, 9.  local authority worker. 
How long have you worked in your current job? 
1.  below 6 years, 2.  6 to 10 years, 3.  over 10 years.   
II. Questionnaire: 
In this questionnaire I would like to find out how important you think that different 
quality indicators are for influencing the quality of care for people with dementia 
living in a care home.  
The term care homes used throughout this questionnaire refer to the care 
homes for people with dementia.  
For each quality indicator described below, please rate how important you think 
this particular measure is to the overall standard of care, using the rating scale 
where  
1 is not at all important 
5 is very important 
For several of the quality indicators, I would also like to ask you what you 
consider to be acceptable or typical ratios/percentages for a care institution. 
Moreover, please add any other comments on these indicators that you would 
like to make in the Comment box.    
Quality indicator How important is  
Management and administration Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
1. Accident procedure: the institution has a written 
procedure related to accident reporting, and all staff are 
familiar with the accident procedure. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
2. Community social work: the institution involves 
community social service activities (e.g. home care, day 
care, respite care) in the local community. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
3. Financial management: the institution breaks even in 
its finances. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
4. Self-assessment: the institution conducts the self- 
performance assessment plan. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
Human resource management Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
5. Staff ratios:  
5.1. In your experience, what do you think constitutes an 
acceptable ratio of staff to residents during the day? 
1to 1, 1 to 2, 1 to 3, 1 to 4, Less than 1 to 4, 
Dont know. 
5.2. In your experience, what do you think constitutes an 
acceptable ratio of staff to residents during the night? 
1to 1, 1 to 2, 1 to 3, 1 to 4, Less than 1 to 4, 
Dont know. 
Please rate (on the right) how important you think 
appropriate ratios of staff to residents are to the overall 
standard of care.  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
6. Staff qualification: the institution employs 
government recognized qualified staff to care for the 
residents. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
7. Staff training: In your experience, what do you think 
constitutes an appropriate percentage of staff trained for 
specific dementia care tasks (amongst those staff who 
have direct contact with patients)?  
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%,  
80% and less, Dont know. 
Please rate (on the right) how important you think 
appropriate levels of staff training are to the overall 
standard of care.  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
8. Staff turnover: In your experience, what do you think 
constitutes an acceptable percentage of annual staff 
turnover (percentage of the total number of leavers in 
year to the average number of staff in post during year)?  
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%,  
21% and above, Dont know. 
Please rate (on the right) how important you think 
appropriate levels of staff turnover are to the overall 
standard of care.  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
9. Job satisfaction: In your experience, what 
percentage of staff working in care homes would you 
guess would describe themselves as satisfied with their 
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%,  
 80% and less, Dont know.  
Please rate (on the right) how important you think staff 
job satisfaction is to the overall standard of care.  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
Health and personal care Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
10. Care management: there is a care management 
plan for every resident including assessment of care 
requirements and a care plan. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
11. Clinical record: the institution records the care 
provided and received, and the response to care for 
each resident on a daily basis. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
12. Consultation and referral: the institution offers the 
appropriate medical consultation and health care referral 
for residents. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
13. Rehabilitation: the institution offers the rehabilitation 
which is recommended by the physiotherapist to meet 
the needs of residents. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
14. Nutrition: the residents Body Mass Index (BMI), 
weight (Kg)/ height (m
), is controlled between18.5 to 
24.99. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
15. Pressure ulcers: In your experience, what 
percentage of residents in care homes would you guess 
have pressure ulcers? 
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%,  
21% and above, Dont know.  
Please rate (on the right) how important you think the 
number of residents with pressure ulcers is to the overall 
standard of care.  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
16. Urinary tract infections: In your experience, what 
percentage of residents in care homes would you guess 
have urinary tract infections? 
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%,  
 21% and above, Dont know.  
Please rate (on the right) how important you think the 
number of residents with urinary tract infections is to the 
overall standard of care.  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
17. Physical restraint use: the institution has a written 
policy and procedure on physical restraint. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
Social care Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
18. Behavior treatment: the institution may employ 
qualified staff to provide behavior treatment, such as 
treatment for decreasing or terminating aggression, 
incontinence, and screaming, depending on the outcome 
of a needs assessment. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
19. Recreational therapy: the institution may employ 
qualified staff to provide recreational therapy, such as 
games, pets, crafts, and gardening, depending on the 
outcome of a needs assessment. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
20. Art therapy: the institution employs qualified staff to 
provide art therapy, such as art, music, and dance, 
according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
21. Reminiscence therapy: the institution employs 
qualified staff to provide reminiscence therapy for 
residents in need, according to the outcome of a needs 
assessment. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
22. Reality orientation: the institution employs qualified 
staff to provide reality orientation for residents in need, 
according to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
23. Cognitive retraining: the institution employs 
qualified staff to provide cognitive retraining for residents 
in need, according to the outcome of a needs 
assessment. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
24. Skills training: the institution employs qualified staff 
to provide skills training for residents in need, according 
to the outcome of a needs assessment. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
25. Festival activity: the institution provides special 
activities for festivals, such as Christmas, Chinese New 
Year, Dragon Boat Festival, and Moon Festival. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
26. Community interaction: residents continue to 
maintain adequate amount of interaction with the local 
community, such as residents attending activities in the 
community or people from the community coming to visit 
the residents. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
27. Spiritual care: the institution provides spiritual 
activities or facilities for residents according to the 
spiritual needs of the resident. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
Rights Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
28. Contract: each resident has a written contract with 
the care home. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
29. Complaint procedure: the institution implements its 
complaints procedure and records every complaint, its 
investigation, and outcome. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
30. Participation in planning services: In your opinion, 
where percentage of residents should be participating in 
the planning and treatment? 
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%,  
80% and less, Dont know.  
Please rate (on the right) how important you think the 
number of residents participating in planning services is 
to the overall standard of care. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
31. Satisfaction with services: In your experience, 
what percentage of residents in care homes would you 
guess are fully satisfied with the services they receive? 
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%,  
80% and less, Dont know.  
Please rate (on the right) how important you think the 
residents satisfaction is to the overall standard of care. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
Environment  Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
32. Fire safety: the institution has passed the inspection 
of fire safety. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
33. Alarm facility: every room has a call system with 
alarm facility and this is fully functional at all times. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
34. Barrier-free environment: the institution provides a 
barrier-free environment. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
35. Physical assistance equipment: assistive aids, 
hoists, and adapted baths meet the needs of residents 
with physical difficulties. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
36. A quiet room: the institution provides a quiet room 
for residents to relax in. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
37. A looped path: the institution has a looped path for 
the needs of residents. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
38. Transparent cupboard/cabinet: transparent 
cupboard/ cabinet are available in the care home. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
39. Object marks: significant objects have obvious 
identifying marks. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
40. Area/ space has appropriate signs and the signs 
are clearly visible: the indications and signs assist 
residents to move around the building. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
41. Staff area/kitchen is designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual surveillance with ease: staff in 
the staff area/kitchen can directly observe resident 
activities with ease. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
42. Electronic equipment for supporting the security 
of the residents: the institution sets up the smart 
technology, such as monitoring technology, open door 
alert system, and pressure mat, to support safety and 
security of the residents. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
43. Electronic equipment for supporting the security 
of the care home and possessions: the institution sets 
up the smart technology, such as video door entry 
system, to support security of the care home and 
possessions. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
III. Do you have any comments about this questionnaire?  
Please insert any comments you think might be helpful. 
THANK YOU FOR YOUR HELP 
Appendix 2  
       
(University of Stirling)
 


 



 
Delphi method

30
20084
 



 
    
 

che-ying.lin@stir.ac.uk 
 
(University of Stirling)   
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
mailto:che-ying.lin@stir.ac.uk
     

1--------------------  
2----------------------  
3----------------------  
4--------------  
5
----------------------------------------------------------------  
6----------------------------------------------  
7
--------------------------------------------------  
 
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
    
 
 
1. ; 2.     
1.31 2.31  40 3.41  50  
4.50  
1.2.3. 
4.5.6. 
7.8.9. 
 
1.6 2.6  10 3.10  
 



 
15 
/
 
           
             
------- 
1.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
2.
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
3. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
4. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
5. 
5.1
? 
11, 12, 13, 14, 14,  
5.2
? 
11, 12, 13, 14, 14,  

  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
6. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
7.
?  
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%,  
()80%,  

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
8.

?  
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%, ()21%,  

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
9.
? 
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%,  
()80%,  

  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
10.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
11.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
12.
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
13.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
14.Body Mass Index, BMI
()/(
)18.524.99 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
15.
? 
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%, ()21%,  

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
16.
? 
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%, ()21%,  

  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
17. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
18.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
19.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
20.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
21.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
22.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
23.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
24.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
25. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
26. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
27.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
28. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
29.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
30.
? 
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%, ()
80%,  

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
31.
? 
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%, ()
80%,  

1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
32. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
33.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
34. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
35.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
36. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
37. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
38. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
39. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
40.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
41.

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
42.


1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
43.
  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
 
 
Appendix 3 Comments on the Delphi method 
Comments on the Delphi method round one 
Respondent 
(code) 
Accident procedure (Quality indicator 1) 
TNT Identifying specific accident may be better 
TNP1 All staff should be familiar with the accident procedure and 
know how to respond to a real situation. 
TSWP1 Change the accident procedure into the standard accident 
procedure 
SPT and there needs to be clear reporting mechanism to a 
monitoring authority, i.e. the local authority 
SNA Promotes openness in reporting accidents. Informs staff, GPs, 
family of accident - ensures that a record is maintained of 
events leading up to and following the accident 
Respondent 
(code) 
Community social work (Quality indicator 2) 
TSWP1 To link the social resources 
TSWA2 Change this item into community service and to link social 
resources 
Respondent 
(code) 
Self-assessment (Quality indicator 4) 
SPT Not at all sure what this means 
SNA Although this should need to be checked/verified by an 
independent assessor. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Staff ratios (Quality indicator 5) 
TNP1 Care for people with dementia is different from care of other 
general aging elderly living in hostels or nursing homes. More 
staff are required in terms of looking after people with 
dementia. 
TSWP1 An acceptable ratio of staff to residents should be 1:8 
TSWP2 I think the ratio should be 1:8, but there is no such option. 
TSWA1 Please clarify whether the ratio means the staff on duty or the 
total number of staff. 
TSWA2 There will be different ratio for staff in different duty of care. You 
should divide staff into 3 groups: staff nurse, social worker, and 
care worker. 
TAT It is impossible to increase the staff ratios nowadays, because 
of the budget issue. 
TM2 There is a big gap between ideal and real staff ratio due to the 
fact that Taiwanese cannot afford it. 
SPT Care homes cover many facilities, from providing residential 
care, to nursing care to specialist care. The answer here 
depends on which type of care being provided. 
SNA Flexibility is important - the ability to employ more staff if 
patients become frail and need more care. Particularly 
important on night shift. 
SSWP It is essential to have good staffing levels for people who are in 
need of feelings of security and well being. 
SM I think staff skills and attitudes are equally important. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Staff qualification (Quality indicator 6) 
TSWP1 Change qualified staff into professional staff. 
TAT Currently in Taiwan, its more important to have experience 
than qualification. 
SPT in an ideal world all staff should have, but this would exclude a 
lot of skilled particularly part time staff who may find it difficult to 
get qualifications 
Respondent 
(code) 
Care management (Quality indicator 10) 
TSWP1 Change the care management plan into the individual care 
service plan 
TSWA2 Please add delivery of the care plan. 
SAW A useful tool when used appropriately, updated on a regular 
basis and referred to. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Clinical record (Quality indicator 11) 
TSWA1 It is necessary to combine the record of social work. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Consultation and referral (Quality indicator 12) 
TNP1 Referral to adequate tier of hospital system should be made 
depending the requirement and severity of the diseases. 
TSWP1 Change the medical consultation into the regular outpatient 
follow up. 
TSWA2 Add medical treatment 
SPT Though often depends on factors out with the homes control 
Respondent 
(code) 
Nutrition (Quality indicator 14) 
TNT There should be different requirements between different 
residents. 
TSWA2 Consider change the question to There should be a dietician 
providing meal plans for individual resident in the institution. 
SPT Many peoples normal weight lies out with this. A better 
indicator is stable weight 
SNA In reality, this is difficult as a number of factors can influence 
BMI - severity of dementia, co-morbidity, mobility 
SM Not always the only indicator for good nutritional standard 
Especially with very active residents 
SLAW I dont like the use of the phrase controlled, I would prefer to 
consider the availability of fresh produce, fruit and veg, healthy 
eating promoted but diet is a choice issue. Access to a 
dietician/ speech therapist/ dentists/ for those who lose weight/ 
experience loss of appetite/ diabetes. Exercise and activity 
should be promoted for those who are overweight within a 
choice framework. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Urinary tract infections (Quality indicator 16) 
TPT This depends on whether indwelling catheter (IDC) is used or 
whether there is a problem with urinary stasis. 
TNT Including asymptomatic urinary tract infection? Male and 
female may be different. 
TNA1 It is important to increase fluid intake and to urinate frequently 
especially in female. 
TSWA1 The number of residents with urinary tract infections should be 
zero. 
TSWA2 Problems with intervals as mentioned above 
SPT Though often routine specimens which show some bugs are 
wrongly described as having an infection in the absence of pus 
cells. 
SNA Indicator of hydration status, use of indwelling catheters. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Physical restraint use (Quality indicator 17) 
TPT Un-necessary physical restriction should be avoided at all 
times. However, when the restriction is required, firstly the 
treating physician should evaluate the possible agitation 
caused by diseases. Careful observation is needed throughout 
the course of physical restraint. 
TNP1 Be careful with consent for physical restraint as there are laws 
and regulations applied. 
TSWP1 Need to consider the consent from the family. 
TSWA2 The institution has a written policy, procedure, and record on 
physical restraint. Currently, restraint consent form is 
necessary in the new contract. As for health care, You can use 
6 long-term care indicators as a reference. Incidence of falls 
should be included. 
TM1 In contrast of restraint consent, no restraint consent is not 
available in Taiwan. From my clinical experience, no restraint 
consent can provide better care and better quality of life for 
residents. This is closely related to the understanding and 
expectation of the family. 
TAW There are assessment for restraint, protocols and records for 
using restraint. 
SPT And that it is applied This is essential 
SNA This care needs to be more fully addressed - under-reported 
and under-acknowledged. 
SAW all staff members should be aware of this 
Respondent 
(code) 
Recreational therapy (Quality indicator 19) 
TSWP1 Change qualified staff into professional staff and change 
recreational therapy into recreational activity. 
TSWA1 Change recreational therapy into recreational service 
SNA Yes, but regular staff should also engage in activity with 
patients. 
SAW very important to quality of care  doesnt happen enough/not 
enough appropriate activities which relate to individual 
interests 
Respondent 
(code) 
Reality orientation (Quality indicator 22) 
TSWP1 Change qualified staff into professional staff 
TM1 I personally suggest the word training should be replaced by 
the word activity 
TM2 Executed daily. 
SPT Im not sure what this means  specialist staff? All staff should 
develop such skills 
SNA Use with caution. Validation might be more appropriate for 
some patients. 
SLAW I dont think RO works for everyone, validation techniques and 
skilled communicators are equally important. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Skills training (Quality indicator 24) 
TSWP1 Change qualified staff into professional staff. 
TSWA2 You tend to emphasis more on the therapy. There should be 
more services for the residents to adapt their daily living and 
support their emotion. 
SPT Im not sure what this means  specialist staff? All staff should 
develop such skills. 
SNA Regular staff could also do this. Also awareness that staff can 
un-necessarily de-skill patients. 
Respondent 
(code) 
spiritual care (Quality indicator 27) 
TNP1 Taiwanese spiritual needs focus more on Daoism. It would be 
better if the institution provides spiritual activities or facilities 
for residents according to the spiritual needs of the resident. 
TNA1 There are chapel and prayer room in the institution but no 
burning of incense. 
TSWA1 Social group work and related professional development 
activities for people with dementia should be involved as well. 
SNA Staff need to be aware of different spiritual need of patients 
and who to contact to meet these needs 
Respondent Contract (Quality indicator 28) 
(code) 
TPT The key care giver could sign the written contract. 
TSWA2 Whether you should also include the equality of the contract 
and emphasis on the residential right in this question? 
SPT many residents lack capacity, so others need to hold such a 
contract on their behalf 
SNA Although some may be no longer able to read, write, 
understand, remember contract. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Participation in planning services (Quality indicator 30) 
TPT Depending on the severity of the disease, people with 
moderate or severe dementia cannot participate in their own 
care plans easily. 
TNA1 It will be better to involve the family in care plan. 
TSWA1 Family should be involved for those residents who are no 
suitable to participate in their own care plans. 
TSWA2 Problems with intervals as mentioned above. Whether 
participation from the resident and participation from the family 
should be asked together or separately? 
TM1 This question should exclude those residents who cannot 
express their own thoughts. It only includes those having the 
ability to express their own thoughts. 
TAW Since people with dementia may have difficulties to participate 
in their own care plans, the institution should encourage the 
family members to take part in the care plans.  
SPT This requires a lot of work to enable cognitively impaired 
residents make the most of what abilities they have. 
SNA As many as is possible 
SM Depends on the service and the capabilities of the residents, 
observational skills important to record resident satisfaction 
SLAW The option to participate and demonstrated means of achieving 
this are more important than the numbers who choose to take 
part. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Satisfaction with services (Quality indicator 31) 
TPT People with dementia cannot express their degree of 
satisfaction clearly. 
TNA1 The measure skill for satisfaction survey is very important. 
TSWP1 Consider adding service satisfaction survey twice per year. 
TSWA2 Whether participation from the resident and participation from 
the family should be asked together or separately? 
TM1 This question should exclude those residents who cannot 
express their own thoughts. It only includes those having the 
ability to express their own thoughts. 
TM2 There will be difficulties in understanding and expression for 
those with moderate to severe dementia. 
TAW Should consider the satisfaction from the family members as 
well. 
SPT often residents are too impaired to express views, relatives 
must be able to comment on their behalf 
SNA A good indicator of the quality of care. Although not to be used 
as sole indicator as many people do not like to complain. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Fire safety (Quality indicator 32) 
TNP1 Every effort should be made to ensure the inspection of fire 
safety. Fire hydrant shouldnt be just part of the scenery. All 
equipment should be tested regularly. 
TNA1 This is an important index. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Alarm facility (Quality indicator 33) 
TNP1 This facility should depend on the type of the institution to set 
up. Some residents with severe dementia or very elderly 
residents may not be able to use this system. 
TNA1 It is necessary to make sure that the alarm facility is fully 
functional at all time.  
TSWA2 The alarm facility should be available in every room for 
activities, beside the bed, and inside the bathrooms. 
TM2 Most people with dementia are not able to use this facility. 
TAW The call system with alarm facility may be confusion for people 
with dementia. It may even be dangerous if there are structures 
resembling wires in the system. I suggest the question should 
be changed to sensor system which can detect the resident 
who is leaving the bed or security surveillance system. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Barrier-free environment (Quality indicator 34) 
TNP1 Barrier-free environment should be designed according to the 
need of the residents at appropriate time. It should consider the 
practicality instead of just an idea. 
TNA1 Very important 
SNA Although, in reality, there will always be barriers 
Respondent 
(code) 
Physical assistance equipment (Quality indicator 35) 
TNA1 Very important 
TSWA2 Add special designed wheelchairs, utensils for daily living, such 
as special designed cups and bowls. 
SNA To be used only when required - no solely to make the staffs' 
lives easier 
Respondent 
(code) 
A quiet room (Quality indicator 36) 
TNP1 A quiet room should consider its surrounding environment. 
Minimum interference is preferred. 
SPT And ideally separate male/ female areas available too. 
SNA Where possible. Although care needs to be taken that residents 
don't become isolated. 
Respondent 
(code) 
A looped path (Quality indicator 37) 
TNA1 Barrier-free environment is required. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Transparent cupboard/ cabinet (Quality indicator 38) 
TNP1 Transparent cupboard/cabinet are not very common in Taiwan. 
Some people with dementia may feel insecure when using it. 
This item should be adjusted according to the residents and 
consider their culture appropriateness. 
TNA1 This question is unclear. 
TAW The transparent cupboard/ cabinet maybe confusion for people 
with dementia. I suggest this question should be deleted. 
SNA Useful for workers not what is in each cabinet. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Object marks (Quality indicator 39) 
TNP1 This will increase the security of the residents and enhance the 
ability of residents to identify their own goods. 
TAW Significant objects of individual resident have obvious 
identifying marks. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Area/ space has appropriate signs and the signs are 
clearly visible (Quality indicator 40) 
SM Vital for orientation and recognition, pictorial signage. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Staff area/kitchen is designed to provide unobtrusively 
visual surveillance with ease (Quality indicator 41) 
TNP1 Staff in laundry room and other working areas can directly 
observe resident activities with ease. 
TSWA2 Is it necessary to emphasis on the kitchen? 
SPT Staff should not be multitasking 
Respondent 
(code) 
Electronic equipment for supporting the security of the 
residents (Quality indicator 42) 
SNA Although not to be used without assessment, consent, review. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Additional comments  
TPT 1. Facility for people with dementia including the ratio of 
residents to the area which they can utilize, such as square 
meters per resident 
2. Whether there is backup supervision for front line workers, 
periodic re-education and regular case study. 
3. There are regular meetings for staff to discuss the problems 
of care.  
4. There is the channel and frequency of communication with 
family  
5. The frequency of physical examination by doctors 
6. Prevention, treatment and notification of infectious 
diseases, such as scabies, bacterial dysentery, influenza, 
and others which cause cross infection easily in institutional 
living. 
7. Actual notification and discussion of accidents 
TNT I think its difficult to understand what the questionnaire is 
asking for in terms of whether you want to know the current 
situation in the institution or the ideal condition that the 
institution may offer. In addition, the budget issue should be 
considered in Taiwan. 
TSWP1 Add gardening therapy and pet therapy. 
TSWA1 Professional social care in dementia care has proven to be 
extremely important and helpful. There is still very large room 
for improvement in terms of the proportion of professional staff 
to the professional training. 
TSWA2 You might feel every indicator is important since you picked 
them all. I am concerned that all the answers are very important 
when the experts finished the questionnaire. You may consider 
include somewhat less important indicators or some items 
which are present in UK but not in Taiwan. 
TAT 1. In terms of the software, providing care in small Group Living 
Care Units can incorporate care into daily living and create the 
feeling of home. In terms of the hardware, there can be facilities 
for the elderly and the local residents to interact and this may 
be resemblance of street. 
2. The institution needs to change. Severe cases need to be 
institutionalized into professional care. At the same time, other 
resources should be allocated into the community in order to 
look after those living in the community, such as day care and 
home care. 
TM1 In this questionnaire, some terminology may cause confusion 
from different translation. I suggest simple explanation for each 
terminology. In addition, there are some activities provided in 
some institution in Taiwan, such as music activity, painting 
activity, gardening activity, physical fitness activity and 
mahjong. This is upon your decision to list them individually or 
categorically. 
TAW 1. In management and administration, the institution should 
illustrate clear concept about dementia care and management. 
2. In health and personal care, the institution should sustain 
normal daily living and increase body function of residents; and 
maintain resident personal sanitation and oral hygiene. 
3. In environment, the institution has a clear indication 
regarding the storage of medication and dangerous goods such 
as knives. 
SPT Some questions I found difficult to answer as they were too 
general 
Comments on the Delphi method round two 
Respondent 
(code) 
Community social work (Quality indicator 2) 
TSWA2 Community social work also can educate local residents to 
understand the function of the institution and to promote the 
concept of community care. 
TM1 In reality, even though the institution does its best to link social 
resources, it is not enough to improve the quality of life for 
residents, because it is most commonly that only the institution 
provides home care, day care and respite care for the local 
community. 
SNA I think this is important, but it is more important for staff to 
develop a sense of community within the care setting, rather 
than relying on outside mechanisms to achieve this. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Financial management (quality indicator 3) 
SNA In order to provide high quality care, financial resources must 
be sufficient  to pay for adequate staffing levels, to ensure that 
meals use good quality food and to finance other areas of care 
such as creative and musical input, aromatherapy etc. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Self-assessment (Quality indicator 4) 
TSWA2 External assessor can train, supervise or assist assessment 
not necessary to confirm assessment. 
SPT If this is called self assessment, how can it be verified by an 
external assessor? Such a person can review, but not verify. 
SNA This is important, but should not replace regular, independent 
scrutiny in order to ensure high quality care. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Staff ratios (Quality indicator 5) 
SPT As a doctor this is not something I am totally up to date on. 
However it does vary with the level of dependence and 
behavior problems of the residents. 
SNA Staffing levels should be flexible and be responsive to 
residents needs. For example if someone is dying, an extra 
carer should be employed to attend to the person 24 hours a 
day in their last few days of life. Once the person has died, or 
once the level of need has reduced, staffing levels can be 
reduced. This takes an available, flexible work force, but is 
achievable, as my practice experience shows. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Staff qualification (Quality indicator 6) 
TAT In Taiwan, currently there are not a lot of qualified staff with 
licences, but most staff have work experience for people with 
dementia and they are being trained to get the license now. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Staff training (Quality indicator 7) 
TM2 It is very difficult to find dementia care workers in Taiwan 
especially in the time of needs. We should have enough care 
workers first and train them later.  
SPT Ideally 1:1 ratio 
Respondent 
(code) 
Staff turnover (quality indicator 8) 
SPT I find the question impossible to answer. Ideally 0 staff turnover 
SNA Not being very mathematical minded, this is tricky. But I am 
certain that in an excellent care setting, there will be a low staff 
turnover. However, people start and leave for different reasons. 
It is also important that new staff have a probationary period so 
that if they are unsuitable, they can be asked to leave.  
Respondent 
(code) 
Job satisfaction (Quality indicator 9) 
SPT Job satisfaction leads to better care and to better retention of 
staff so management should support staff in all possible ways. 
SNA In my care setting, the majority of people are very satisfied with 
their jobs, however, I know of other settings where there is a 
lots of staff content. A good work setting will produce happy, 
motivated staff and visa versa. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Clinical record (Quality indicator 11) 
TAT This is impossible in a remote or mountain area.  
TM1 Its indeed very important to keep a record but according to 
current clinical situation, there may be some difficulties to 
record daily. 
TM2 Some clinical records need to be done daily and some do not. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Consultation and referral (quality indicator 12) 
TAT This is impossible in a remote or mountain area.  
SNA Appropriate is the important word here. I have seen 
inappropriate referrals to outpatients clinics which have 
resulted in a great deal of distress for the person with dementia. 
My setting now weighs up the benefits for the person (in terms 
of the expected outcome of the visit and their well or ill-being 
during the visit), before we send people to outpatients clinics. 
An alternative would be to have clinic personnel come to the 
care setting.  
Respondent Rehabilitation (quality indicator 13) 
(code)  
SNA My reservation about this is that staff might rely solely on the 
physiotherapist to meet mobility needs of residents, when in 
fact staff should have responsibility for maintaining and 
maximising mobility. In circumstances where the expertise of a 
physiotherapist is required, this is entirely appropriate. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Nutrition (Quality indicator 14) 
TM2 BMI 18.5-24 is an important indicator. However, only residents 
with specific illnesses require assistance from the dietician. 
Therefore dieticians can be based part time. 
SPT BMI is a very weak indicator in itself. A much better measure of 
care relates to weight maintenance rather than a decreed 
starting weight. 
SNA A good, well qualified cook using good quality fresh food should 
ensure that most residents will receive a balanced diet. Staff 
should be responsible for ensuring adequate food and fluid 
intake. A dietician should only be consulted if staff have any 
concerns about a residents weight or if they develop complex 
needs (diabetes or abdominal problems etc). 
SAT Residents dietary health involves much more complex care 
issues. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Urinary tract infections (Quality indicator 16) 
TM1 UTI does affect the quality of care but there are many different 
causes of UTI. I dont recommend using UTI as an indicator for 
quality of care directly. 
TM2 It is very common to have UTI in resident with indwelling 
catheter even in those with good care.  
SPT The significance of non symptomatic UTIs is not fully 
understood; hence rate should not be taken as a measure of 
quality of care in itself. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Physical restraint use (quality indicator 18) 
TM2 Physical restraint can only be evaluated by the responsible 
nurses. It cannot to be done by physicians because it is 
impossible to find a doctor to evaluate at the time when 
residents require physical restraint.  
Respondent 
(code) 
Behaviour treatment (quality indicator 19) 
TM2 The institution provides behaviour treatment but not provided 
very frequently.  
SPT All staff should have an appropriate level of such training; it 
should not be seen as a specialist skill.  
SNA All staff should be trained to deliver high quality person-centred 
care. If a resident is behaving in challenging ways, it is more 
important to examine staff behaviours rather than to try to 
modify the residents behaviours. Often challenging 
behaviours are the result of the resident experiencing poor 
care, and it is this that needs to be addressed.  
Respondent 
(code) 
Recreational activity (Quality indicator 20) 
SPT All staff should have an appropriate level of such training; it 
should not be seen as a specialist skill. 
SNA However, this should not be the preserve of specialist staff. All 
staff should be willing and able to engage in creative ways with 
their residents. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Art therapy (quality indicator 21) 
SAT I am firmly of the belief this is very important  wide range of 
options. 
SPT All staff should have an appropriate level of such training; it 
should not be seen as a specialist skill. 
SNA However, this should not be the preserve of specialist staff. All 
staff should be willing and able to engage in creative ways with 
their residents. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Reminiscence therapy (Quality indicator 22) 
SPT All staff should have an appropriate level of such training; it 
should not be seen as a specialist skill. 
SNA However, this should not be the preserve of specialist staff. All 
staff should be willing and able to engage in creative ways with 
their residents. 
SAT This should be part of getting the family/relatives involved. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Reality orientation activity (Quality indicator 23) 
TM2 Reality orientation activity should be done daily in the 
institution, but it can only be conducted by trained staff. Its 
impossible to employ professionals. 
SPT All staff should have an appropriate level of such training; it 
should not be seen as a specialist skill. 
SNA Reality orientation must be used with caution as it can lead to 
distress. It depends on the context in which it is used  
orienting to time and place is useful, but not necessarily 
orienting the person that his/her mother, husband or wife is 
dead. 
SAT Again wider involvement than just staff. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Cognitive retraining (Quality indicator 24) 
SPT All staff should have an appropriate level of such training; it 
should not be seen as a specialist skill. 
SNA People with dementia can still learn new things, given sufficient 
time and support. If this is deemed to be a useful approach for 
someone, it should be used. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Daily living skills training (Quality indicator 25) 
TM1 I am uncertain about the definition of this training. I dont 
recommend it, if the training could cause frustration and 
helplessness in the resident. However, I suggest that if one can 
help residents to understand the environment and facility, it can 
assist them to accomplish daily living skills by themselves. 
TAW It gives the impression of this task is allocated to one specific 
person. It is better to re-write the question to the institution 
provides daily living skill training to resident in need. 
SPT All staff should have an appropriate level of such training; it 
should not be seen as a specialist skill. 
SNA All staff should be trained to support their residents to use their 
remaining abilities, and develop or rediscover new ones. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Social work record (quality indicator 29) 
SNA If you mean social activities and interaction, yes this is very 
important. It means that the institution can keep a record of the 
amount of social interaction/activity each resident receives, 
what works and for whom, changing needs and staff responses 
to changing needs. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Contract (quality indicator 30) 
TM2 In Taiwan, contract is usually signed by the representative. 
SNA This is important, but it is also important that staff are aware of 
the residents rights (not just the manager) and that care should 
uphold these rights. What is more important than a signed 
document is that the philosophy of care within the setting is 
fundamentally grounded in ensuring respect and dignity of 
residents (and staff).  
Respondent 
(code) 
Participation in planning services (Quality indicator 32) 
TM2 This is only in ideal situation, because most people with 
dementia living in care home have moderate or severe 
dementia, it usually takes some time for staff to interact with 
them to understand their needs in order to design a care plan to 
meet their needs. 
SPT All residents should be given the opportunity, taking account of 
cognitive abilities in aiding decision making. 
SNA This is important, but it is also important to check that any 
planning is implemented to meet the wishes of residents. 
SAT Yes very important if proper advocacy procedures are followed. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Alarm facility (quality indicator 35) 
TSWA2 Other rooms and the toilets should have alarm system. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Barrier-free environment (quality indicator 36) 
SNA Although this is easier in principle than practice. Locked doors 
are a barrier, but in a setting on a busy road, this might be 
present a difficult dilemma for staff and managers. 
Respondent 
(code) 
A looped path (quality indicator 39) 
TAW If the dementia institutional care can be given in the way of Unit 
Care, it can reduce wandering of the residents. Therefore, 
dementia institutional care should be done toward this direction 
to improve service and reduce resident wandering off. 
SAT It is much more important to have range of interests than just 
shape. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Transparent cupboard/cabinet (Quality indicator 40) 
TM2 Its very difficult for an institution to provide facility so 
individualized. 
SPT Such transparent cupboards are not normal, so I am not sure 
using them. 
SNA This would be useful, so long as they do not expose private 
items that the resident does not wish to have seen. Transparent 
cupboards should be an option. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Staff area/kitchen is designed to provide unobtrusively 
visual surveillance with ease (Quality indicator 44) 
TSWA2 This is a necessary design in the environment with staff 
shortage. 
SNA I have a concern that the staff area where staff can observe 
residents can become a gathering point for staff where they can 
chat together while observing residents. I would prefer to see 
staff sitting with residents and engaging with them rather than 
drifting towards the staff area. I agree that the kitchen area 
should be designed to allow for supervision of residents. 
However, if staff engage with residents while they are cooking, 
pouring themselves a drink, then this does away with the need 
to observe/supervise. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Electronic equipment for supporting the security of the 
residents (quality indicator 45) 
SNA Appropriate assessment and regular review are key here. Also, 
attention to ethical issues in the use of technology. Technology 
should not replace human contact, should not be used as a 
form of restraint and should be accepted by and acceptable for 
the resident. 
Respondent 
(code) 
Additional comments  
TAT It needs to consider the localized care conditions, and then to 
provide the high quality of care. 
SAT You may wish to consider the following environmental issues: 
ease of access to sufficient toilet facilities; adjacent floor 
finishes that are not shiny and avoid strong colour and tone 
contrasts; natural and artificial lighting levels are to a higher 
standard than normal; corridors lead to places not glazed fire 
doors; residents can participate in laundry activities as well as 
kitchen; the importance of easy access to a safe and secure 
external environment.  
Abbreviations used in the Delphi exercise 
abbreviation participant 
TPT Taiwanese psychiatrist 
TNT Taiwanese neurologist 
TNP1 Taiwanese nurse in practice No.1 
TNP2 Taiwanese nurse in practice No.2 
TNA1 Taiwanese nurse in academia No.1 
TNA2 Taiwanese nurse in academia No.2 
TSWP1 Taiwanese social worker in practice No.1 
TSWP2 Taiwanese social worker in practice No.2 
TSWA1 Taiwanese social worker in academia No.1 
TSWA2 Taiwanese social worker in academia No.2 
TAT Taiwanese architect 
TM1 Taiwanese manager No.1 
TM2 Taiwanese manager No.2 
TAW Taiwanese advocate 
TLAW1 Taiwanese local authority worker No.1 
TLAW2 Taiwanese local authority worker No.2 
SPT Scottish psychiatrist 
SNT Scottish neurologist 
SNP Scottish nurse in practice 
SNA Scottish nurse in academia 
SSWP Scottish social worker in practice 
SSWA Scottish social worker in academia 
SAT Scottish architect 
SM Scottish manager 
SAW Scottish advocate 
SLAW Scottish local authority worker 
Appendix 4  
The development of quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia 
INFORMATION SHEET 
Firstly, I deeply appreciate your participation in the first round of this study. My 
research can continue to do as a result of your help. However, as I have 
mentioned previously, this is a two round survey. Thus, I very much hope you 
will assist me to finish the second-round questionnaire. 
The aim of this survey is to offer you a summary of how all experts have ranked 
the level of importance of each quality indicator of institutional dementia care 
and provide an opportunity for you to re-evaluate the feasibility of the quality 
indicators.   
The round-two questionnaire is produced by combining your responses with 
those of others. After analyzing the quantitative data and summarizing the 
experts comments, I revised 29 original quality indicators, out of 43, for the 
second Delphi questionnaire. Moreover, three additional quality indicators were 
added to the second Delphi questionnaire in terms of the additional comments of 
experts. Thus, the second round of the Delphi survey consists of the statistical 
results and 46 quality indicators.   
As for the statistical results, they are presented by three numbers next to each 
quality indicator, including the median (Md), inter-quartile range (IQR), and your 
previous response (YS). In this research, the greater median indicates the 
greater the importance of the quality indicator. The lower inter-quartile range 
indicates the higher consensus amongst the panel members. 
The quality indicators developed in this research are not only just a policy but 
could be applied in practice in Taiwan. Thus, your knowledge and experience 
will contribute extremely well to improvement the quality of life for people with 
dementia living in care homes in Taiwan. I hope you will agree to complete the 
second email questionnaire. If you could complete the second-round 
questionnaire by the 12
 of July 2008, it would be very helpful.  
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
Thank you very much for your time and effort in assisting me with this study. If 
you have any questions about this important study or problems with your 
participation, please contact me at che-ying.lin@stir.ac.uk. 
Yours sincerely, 
Che-Ying Lin 
Ph.D. student in Social Work  
Department of Applied Social Science  
University of Stirling 
Address: Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building, University of Stirling, Stirling, FK9 4LA 
E-mail: che-ying.lin@ stir.ac.uk 
The questionnaire for the second round of the Delphi survey  
The development of quality indicators for Taiwanese institutional dementia 
For each quality indicator described below, please rate how important you think 
this particular measure is to the overall quality of care, using the rating scale 
where  
1 is not at all important 
5 is very important 
There are three numbers next to each quality indictator, including the median 
(Md), inter-quartile range (IQR), and your previous response (YS). In this 
research, the median score of 3.75 or above represents that the quality indicator 
reaches a suitable level of importance. The inter-quartile range of 1.00 or less 
stands for the quality indicator which has been reached a suitable level of 
consensus amongst the panel members. If a quality indicator meets the above 
two criteria at the same time, it means that the quality indicator reaches a 
suitable level of importance and consensus. The last number is the score you 
rated on the quality indicator in the first survey.        
In this second-round questionnaire, you can rate the same score as previous or 
elect to change. However, if you rated a value outside of the inter-quartile range 
in the first round, your previous response is marked red with an asterisk. For 
example, the median score is 4.5, the inter-quartile range is 1, and your previous 
response is 3 (not between 4 and 5), Md=4.5, IQR=1, and YS=3* are shown next 
to the quality indicator. If you consider that it is not necessary to change your 
previous response which is outside of the inter-quartile range, hopefully you 
could offer an explanation for being outside of the consensus in the Comment 
9 quality indicators were not reached consensus in the first-round questionnaire, 
such as financial management, nutrition, behaviour treatment, art therapy, reality 
orientation activity, cognitive retraining, daily living skills training, participation in 
planning services, and transparent cupboard/cabinet, the inter-quartile ranges 
are marked red with an asterisk (e.g. IQR=2*) in this second-round questionnaire. 
These 9 quality indicators have been revised for clarity through integrating your 
comments with those of others, it is expected that they could be achieved 
consensus in the second Delphi questionnaire.  
For several of the quality indicators, such as quality indicator 5, 7, 8, 9, 15, 16, 
32, and 33, I would also like to ask you what you consider to be acceptable or 
typical ratios/percentages for a care institution. 
Quality indicator How important is  
Management and administration Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
1. Accident procedure: the institution has a standard 
procedure related to accident reporting, such as fire 
hazard, resident falls and deaths; and all staff are 
familiar with the accident procedure. Each incident 
should be reported to relevant people, such as family 
and authority required. (Md=5, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
2. Community social work: the institution involves 
community social service activities, such as home care, 
day care, and respite care in the local community. The 
institution also links social resources, such as human 
resource, material supply, and financial support, to 
improve the quality of life for residents. (Md=5, IQR=1, 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
3. Financial management: the institution breaks even in 
its finances to ensure that the institution could operate 
continuously and maintain the quality of care for 
residents. (Md=4, IQR=2*, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
4. Self-assessment: the institution conducts the self- 
performance assessment plan which should be 
subsequently verified by an independent assessor. 
(Md=4.5, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
Human resource management Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
5. Staff ratios:  
5.1. In your experience, what do you think constitutes an 
acceptable ratio of staff on duty to residents during the 
1to 3, 1 to 4, 1 to 5, 1 to 6,Less than 1 to 6, 
Dont know. 
5.2. In your experience, what do you think constitutes an 
acceptable ratio of staff on duty to residents during the 
night? 
1 to 5, 1 to 6, 1 to 7, 1 to 8,Less than 1 to 8, 
Dont know. 
Please also rate (on the right) how important you think 
appropriate ratios of staff to residents are to the overall 
quality of care. (Md=5, IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
6. Staff qualification: the institution employs 
government recognized qualified staff who have licences 
or sufficient skills training to care for people with 
dementia. (Md=5, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
7. Staff training: In your experience, what do you think 
constitutes an appropriate percentage of staff trained for 
specific dementia care tasks (amongst those staff who 
have direct contact with patients)?  
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%,  
80% and less, Dont know. 
Please also rate (on the right) how important you think 
appropriate levels of staff training are to the overall 
quality of care. (Md=5, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
8. Staff turnover: In your experience, what do you think 
constitutes an acceptable percentage of annual staff 
turnover (proportion of the total number of leavers during 
past year to the average number of staff during past 
year)?  
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%,  
21% and above, Dont know. 
Please also rate (on the right) how important you think 
appropriate levels of staff turnover are to the overall 
quality of care. (Md=4, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
9. Job satisfaction: In your experience, what 
percentage of staff working in care homes would you 
guess would describe themselves as satisfied with their 
91-I00%, 81-90%, 71-80%, 61-70%,  
 60% and less, Dont know.  
Please also rate (on the right) how important you think 
staff job satisfaction is to the overall quality of care. 
(Md=5, IQR=1, YS=)  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
Health and personal care Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
10. Care management: there is a care management 
plan for every resident including assessment of care 
requirements, development of a care plan, and delivery 
of the care plan. (Md=5, IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
11. Clinical record: the institution records health and 
personal care provided and received, and the response 
to care for each resident on a daily basis. (Md=5, IQR=1, 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
12. Consultation and referral: the institution offers 
appropriate outpatient medical consultation and health 
care referral for residents. (Md=5, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
13. Rehabilitation: the institution offers rehabilitation 
which is recommended by the physiotherapist to meet 
the needs of residents. (Md=5, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
14. Nutrition: the institution employs the dietician to 
provide meal plans for individual resident and control the 
residents Body Mass Index (BMI), weight (Kg)/ height 
) between18.5 to 24. (Md=4, IQR=1.5*, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
15. Pressure ulcers: In your experience, what 
percentage of residents in care homes would you guess 
have pressure ulcers? 
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%,  
21% and above, Dont know.  
Please also rate (on the right) how important you think 
the number of residents with pressure ulcers is to the 
overall quality of care. (Md=5, IQR=0, YS=)  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
16. Urinary tract infections: In your experience, what 
percentage of residents in care homes would you guess 
have urinary tract infections (both symptomatic and 
asymptomatic)? 
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%,  
 21% and above, Dont know.  
Please also rate (on the right) how important you think 
the number of residents with urinary tract infections is to 
the overall quality of care. (Md=5, IQR=1, YS=)  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
17. Infectious diseases control: the institution has a 
standard procedure for prevention, treatment, and 
notification of infectious diseases, such as scabies, 
bacterial dysentery, influenza, and others which 
commonly cause cross infection in institutional living. All 
staff are familiar with the procedure of infectious disease 
control. Effort should be made to inform relevant people, 
such as family and authority required of every incident. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
18. Physical restraint use: the institution has a clear 
documentation of the indications and procedure on 
physical restraint. The physical restraint use should be 
carefully evaluated by the physician and consented by 
the representative. Moreover, careful observation is 
needed throughout the course of physical restraint. 
(Md=5, IQR=0.75, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
Social care Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
19. Behavior treatment: the institution employs 
qualified staff who can provide behavior treatment, such 
as treatment for decreasing or terminating aggression, 
incontinence, and screaming, depending on the outcome 
of a needs assessment. (Md=4, IQR=1.75*, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
20. Recreational activity: the institution employs 
qualified staff who can provide recreational activities, 
such as games, pets, gardening, and cooking, 
depending on the outcome of a needs assessment and 
individual interests. (Md=5, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
21. Art therapy: the institution employs qualified staff 
who can provide art therapy, such as arts and crafts, 
music, and dance, according to the outcome of a needs 
assessment. (Md=4, IQR=2*, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
22. Reminiscence therapy: the institution employs 
qualified staff who can provide reminiscence therapy for 
residents in need, according to the outcome of a needs 
assessment. (Md=5, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
23. Reality orientation activity: the institution employs 
qualified staff who can provide reality orientation 
activities for residents who are disorientated in time, 
place, and person, according to the outcome of a needs 
assessment. (Md=4, IQR=2*, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
24. Cognitive retraining: the institution employs 
qualified staff who can provide cognitive retraining for 
residents in need, according to the outcome of a needs 
assessment. (Md=4, IQR=2*, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
25. Daily living skills training: the institution employs 
qualified staff who can provide daily living skills training 
for residents in need, according to the outcome of a 
needs assessment. (Md=4, IQR=2*, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
26. Festival activity: the institution provides special 
activities for festivals, such as Christmas, Chinese New 
Year, Dragon Boat Festival, and Moon Festival. (Md=5, 
IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
27. Community interaction: residents continue to 
maintain adequate amount of interaction with local 
community, such as residents attending activities in the 
community or people from the community coming to visit 
the residents. (Md=5, IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
28. Spiritual care: the institution provides spiritual 1   2   3   4   5 
activities or facilities for residents according to the 
individual spiritual needs of the resident. (Md=5, IQR=1, 
         
Comment: 
29. Social work record: the institution records social 
care provided and received, and the response to care for 
each resident on a daily basis.  
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
Rights Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
30. Contract: each resident has a written contract with 
the care home. The contract should emphasize on the 
residents rights and should be signed by the resident (or 
his representative when the resident lacks capacity). 
(Md=5, IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
31. Complaint procedure: the institution implements its 
complaints procedure and records every complaint, its 
investigation, and outcome. (Md=5, IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
32. Participation in planning services: In your opinion, 
what percentage of residents (or their representatives 
when the residents lack capacity) should be participating 
in planning and treatment? 
91-I00%, 81-90%, 71-80%, 61-70%,  
60% and less, Dont know.  
Please also rate (on the right) how important you think 
the number of residents participating in planning services 
is to the overall quality of care. (Md=5, IQR=1.25*, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
33. Satisfaction with services: In your experience, 
what percentage of residents (or their representatives 
when the residents lack capacity) in care homes would 
you guess are fully satisfied with the services they 
receive? 
91-I00%, 81-90%, 71-80%, 61-70%,  
60% and less, Dont know.  
Please also rate (on the right) how important you think 
the residents satisfaction is to the overall quality of care. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
(Md=5, IQR=1, YS=) 
Comment: 
Environment  Not at all            Very 
important------------important 
34. Fire safety: the institution has passed the routine 
inspection of fire safety. (Md=5, IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
35. Alarm facility: every room has a call system with 
alarm facility and this is fully functional at all times. This 
facility is only provided for residents with mild dementia 
who can understand operation of the system. (Md=5, 
IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
36. Barrier-free environment: the institution provides a 
barrier-free environment at all time. (Md=5, IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
37. Physical assistance equipment: assistive aids, 
hoists, adapted baths, and utensils for daily living meet 
the needs of residents with physical difficulties. (Md=5, 
IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
38. A quiet room: the institution provides a quiet room 
with multi-sensory training equipment, such as visual, 
auditory, olfactory, and tactile stimulating equipment, for 
residents to relax in. (Md=5, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
39. A looped path: the institution has a barrier-free 
looped path for the needs of residents. (Md=5, IQR=1, 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
40. Transparent cupboard/cabinet: transparent 
cupboard/ cabinet are available in each residents private 
room to minimize the frustration of locating items. (Md=4, 
IQR=2*, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
41. Object marks: significant objects of individual 
resident have obvious identifying marks to enhance the 
ability of residents to identify their own goods. (Md=5, 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
IQR=1, YS=) 
Comment: 
42. Storage of medication and dangerous goods: the 
institution has a clear indication and safe location to 
store medication and dangerous goods such as knives. 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
43. Area/ space has appropriate signs and the signs 
are clearly visible: the institution provides written 
indications and pictorial signage to enhance residents 
orientation and recognition around the building. (Md=5, 
IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
44. Staff area/kitchen is designed to provide 
unobtrusively visual surveillance with ease: staff in 
the staff area can directly observe resident activities with 
ease. Same idea applies to kitchen area, since some 
residents may like to incorporate cooking into their daily 
activity. This activity requires supervision with 
unobtrusively visual surveillance as well. (Md=5, IQR=1, 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
45. Electronic equipment for supporting the security 
of the residents: the institution sets up the smart 
technology, such as monitoring technology, open door 
alert system, and pressure mat, to support safety and 
security of the residents. Such equipment should be set 
up only after appropriate assessment, consent, and 
regular review. (Md=4, IQR=1, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
46. Electronic equipment for supporting the security 
of the care home and possessions: the institution sets 
up the smart technology, such as video door entry 
system, to support security of the care home and 
possessions. (Md=4, IQR=0, YS=) 
1   2   3   4   5 
         
Comment: 
III. Do you have any comments about this questionnaire?  
Please insert any comments you think might be helpful. 
THANK YOU FOR YOUR HELP 
Appendix 5  
       


 


 

4329

46 

(Md)(IQR)(YS)





2008712
 

                         
che-ying.lin@stir.ac.uk  
 
(University of Stirling)    
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
    

 
15 
(Md)(IQR)
(YS) 3.75 

 1 

 


(Md)
4.5(IQR) 1(YS) 3 ( 4  5 )
 Md=4.5IQR=1YS=3*

 
 9 

(IQR)
(: IQR=2*) 9

 5789151632  33
/
 
           
             
------- 
1.

 
(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
2.

(Md=5IQR=1
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
3.
  
(Md=4IQR=2*YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
4.
(Md=4.5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
5. 
5.1
?  
13, 14, 15, 16,16,  
5.2
? 
15, 16, 17, 18, 18,  

(Md=5IQR=0YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
6.
(Md=5IQR=1
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
7.
?  
96-I00%, 91-95%, 86-90%, 81-85%,  
()80%,  

(Md=5
IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
8.
(
)?  
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%, ()21%,  

(Md=4IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
9.
? 
91-I00%, 81-90%, 71-80%, 61-70%,  
()60%,  

(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
10.
(Md=5IQR=0
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
11.
  
(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
12.
(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
13.
(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
14.
((Body Mass Index, BMI()/
 (
))18.524.99 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
(Md=4IQR=1.5*YS=) 
: 
15.
? 
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%, ()21%,  

(Md=5IQR=0YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
16.
()
0-5%, 6-10%, 11-15%, 16-20%, ()21%,  

(Md=5IQR=1YS=)   
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
17. (

)
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
18.

 
(Md=5IQR=0.75YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
19.
(Md=4IQR=1.75*YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
20.
()
(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
21.
()
(Md=4IQR=2*YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
22.
(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
23.

(Md=4IQR=2*YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
24.
(Md=4IQR=2*YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
25.
 (Md=4 
IQR=2*YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
26.(
 ) (Md=5 
IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
27.
   
(Md=5IQR=0YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
28.
(Md=5IQR=1
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
29.
  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
30.

(Md=5IQR=0YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
31.
(Md=5IQR=0YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
32.
()
91-I00%, 81-90%, 71-80%, 61-70%,  
()60%,  

(Md=5IQR=1.25*YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
33.(
)
? 
91-I00%, 81-90%, 71-80%, 61-70%,  
()60%,  

(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
             
------- 
34.(Md=5
IQR=0YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
35.

(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
36.
(Md=5IQR=0YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
37.
(Md=5IQR=0YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
38.(
)
(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
39.
(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
40.

(Md=4IQR=2*YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
41.
(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
42.
() 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
43.

(Md=5IQR=0YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
44.


(Md=5IQR=1YS=) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
45.


(Md=4IQR=1YS=)  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
46.

(Md=4IQR=0YS=)  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
: 
 
 
Appendix 6      
 
ooo  
  
  
   


 
    
 

 
 
  
 
 
              
           815  74  
           0735198710938767700                   
           che-ying.lin@stir.ac.uk  
           http://www.dass.stir.ac.uk/staff/showstaff.php?id=143 
              
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
http://www.dass.stir.ac.uk/staff/showstaff.php?id=143
Appendix 7  
       
    (University of Stirling)
 


 
    

 
 
 
 


 
30 



 
    

 

che-ying.lin@stir.ac.uk  
       
(University of Stirling)   
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
     
 
 
1------------------------  
2----------------  
3------------------------  
 
 
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
Appendix 8 
       
 
    (University of Stirling)
 


 



 

741

15
302008
1231

 
 
()

 
    

 

0938767700 
che-ying.lin@stir.ac.uk 
 
(University of Stirling)   
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
     

1----------------------  
2------  
3 41 
-----------------------------------------------  
4------------------------  
5----------------  
6----  
7      
-----------------------------------------------  
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
Appendix 9 
       
    (University of Stirling)
 


 


 

741
1
5
3020081231

 
 
()

 
    

 

0938767700 
che-ying.lin@stir.ac.uk 
       
(University of Stirling)   
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
     

1----------------------  
2------  
3 41 
-----------------------------------------------  
4------------------------  
5----------------  
6----  
7      
----------------------------------------------  
Room 3S17, Colin Bell Building 
University of Stirling 
Stirling, FK9 4LA, Scotland, UK 
Telephone: (+44) 0 1786 466307 
Facsimile:  (+44) 0 1786 466299 
Appendix 10 
 
    
 
,,
.,,
.,
,.,
 



1.:1., 2.    
():  
2.:1., 2.    
():  
3.:1.40(), 2.4164,  
3.6574, 4.75()    
   
():  
4.:1./, 2./,  
3.// 
   
():  
5.:1., 2.,3.,  
                 4., 5. 
   
():  
6.:1., 2.,3./
, 4./, 5.()
   
():  
7.:1.,2.    
():  
 


 15 
,,.
,,
., 
          



1.

 
    
(): 
2.

 
    
(): 
3.
 
    
(): 
4.
 
    
(): 
 
5.1
418
    
(): 
6.
 
    
(): 
7.96-I00%
 
    
(): 
8. (
)6-10% 
    
(): 
9.
71-80% 
    
(): 
 
10.
 
    
(): 
11.
   
    
(): 
12.
    
(): 
13.
 
    
(): 
14.5%()
    
(): 
15.(
)6-10%  
    
(): 
16. (
)

 
    
(): 
17.


    
(): 
18.

    
(): 
19.
()
 
    
(): 
20.
() 
    
(): 
21.
 
    
(): 
22.(
) 
    
(): 
23.
  
    
(): 
24.
 
    
(): 
25.
  
    
(): 
26.

 
    
(): 
27.
 
    
(): 
28.81-90%(
) 
    
(): 
29.(
)71-80% 
    
(): 
30.     
(): 
31.

    
(): 
32.     
(): 
33.
 
    
(): 
34.(
) 
    
(): 
35.
    
(): 
36.
 
    
(): 
37.
() 
    
(): 
38.
 
    
(): 
39.


    
(): 
40.

 
    
(): 
41.
  
    
(): 
 
 
Appendix 11 
 
 
 
1.:1., 2. 
2.:1., 2. 
3.:1.40(), 2.4164,3.6574, 
4.75()   
4.:1./, 2./, 3.// 
5.:1., 2.,3., 4., 5. 
6.:1., 2.,3./, 
4./,5.() 
7.:1.,2. 
 

 
 15 
           
            
------- 
1.

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
2.

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
3.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
4.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
 
            
------- 
5.
141
1  2  3  4  5 
     
 
:1., 2. 
:1., 2., 3.,4. 
6.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
7.96-I00%
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
8. (
)6-10% 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
9.
71-80% 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
 
            
------- 
10.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
11.
   
1  2  3  4  5 
     
12.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
13.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
14.
5%() 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
15.(
)6-10%  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
16. (

)
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
17.


 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
            
------- 
18.

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
19.
(
) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
20.
()
1  2  3  4  5 
     
21.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
22.(
) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
23.
  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
24.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
25.
  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
            
------- 
26.

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
27.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
28.81-90%(
) 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
29.(
)
71-80% 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
            
------- 
30. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
31.

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
32. 1  2  3  4  5 
     
33.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
34.(
)
1  2  3  4  5 
     
35.
1  2  3  4  5 
     
36.
 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
37.
() 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
38.

1  2  3  4  5 
     
39.


 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
40.

 
1  2  3  4  5 
     
41.
  
1  2  3  4  5 
     
 
 
Appendix 12 
Appendix 13 The results of the independent samples t test for the discriminative 
power analysis 
Quality indicator Group N Mean 
Deviation t df p 
1. Accident procedure Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
4.488 65 .000 
Lower 27% of group 66 4.33 1.207 
2. Community social work Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
9.204 65 .000 
Lower 27% of group 66 3.33 1.471 
3. Financial management Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.100 65 .000 
Lower 27% of group 66 4.12 1.170 
4. Self-assessment Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.367 65 .000 
Lower 27% of group 66 4.09 1.160 
5. Staff ratios Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.666 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.06 1.125 
6. Staff qualification Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.363 64 .000 
Lower 27% of group 65 4.12 1.111 
7. Staff training Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.954 64 .000 
Lower 27% of group 65 4.06 1.088 
8. Staff turnover Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
8.037 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 3.88 1.120 
9. Job satisfaction Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
8.048 64 .000 
Lower 27% of group 65 3.88 1.125 
10. Care management Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.905 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 3.97 1.195 
11.Clinical record Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
7.712 64 .000 
Lower 27% of group 65 3.91 1.142 
12.Consultation and referral Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.808 64 .000 
Lower 27% of group 65 4.12 1.038 
13.Rehabilitation Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
7.025 64 .000 
Lower 27% of group 65 4.09 1.042 
14.Pressure ulcers Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
5.953 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.11 1.197 
Appendix 13 The results of the independent samples t test for the discriminative 
power analysis (continued) 
15.Urinary tract infections Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.090 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.11 1.170 
16.Infectious diseases control Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
4.895 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.28 1.175 
17.Physical restraint use Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.658 64 .000 
Lower 27% of group 65 4.02 1.192 
18.Behaviour treatment Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
10.694 64 .000 
Lower 27% of group 65 3.11 1.427 
19.Recreational activity Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
11.818 64 .000 
Lower 27% of group 65 2.98 1.375 
20.Art therapy Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
13.908 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 2.81 1.258 
21.Reminiscence therapy Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
14.370 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 2.77 1.244 
22.Festival activity Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
12.875 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 2.89 1.311 
23.Community interaction Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
15.429 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 2.70 1.191 
24.Spiritual care Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
14.736 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 2.75 1.222 
25.Social work record Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
13.849 62 .000 
Lower 27% of group 63 2.81 1.255 
26.Contract Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
8.143 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 3.81 1.167 
27.Complaint procedure Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
8.630 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 3.80 1.115 
28.Participation in planning services Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
9.019 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 3.70 1.150 
29.Satisfaction with services Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
7.720 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 3.84 1.198 
Appendix 13 The results of the independent samples t test for the discriminative 
power analysis (continued) 
30.Fire safety Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
4.200 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.56 .833 
31.Alarm facility Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
4.490 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.53 .835 
32.Barrier-free environment Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
4.447 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.55 .815 
33.Physical assistance equipment Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
4.638 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.52 .836 
34.A quiet room Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.780 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.16 .996 
35.A looped path Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.951 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.22 .899 
36.Object marks Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.863 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.20 .929 
37.Storage of medication and 
dangerous goods 
Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
4.899 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.50 .816 
38.Area/ space has appropriate signs 
and the signs are clearly visible 
Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.993 63 .000 
Lower 27% of group 64 4.20 .912 
39.Staff area/kitchen is designed to 
provide unobtrusively visual 
surveillance with ease 
Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.775 63 .000 Lower 27% of group 
64 4.23 .904 
40.Electronic equipment for 
supporting the security of the 
residents 
Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
6.574 63 .000 Lower 27% of group 
64 4.22 .951 
41.Electronic equipment for 
supporting the security of the care 
home and possessions 
Upper 27% of group 83 5.00 .000 
7.287 63 .000 Lower 27% of group 
64 4.11 .978 
Upper 27% of group: Percentage of the highest scoring 27% of participants 
Lower 27% of group: Percentage of the lowest scoring 27% of participants 
Appendix 14 Total variance explained 
Component 
Initial Eigenvalues Extraction Sums of Squared Loadings 
Total % of Variance Cumulative % Total % of Variance Cumulative % 
1 16.925 41.281 41.281 16.925 41.281 41.281 
2 7.117 17.359 58.640 7.117 17.359 58.640 
3 4.061 9.906 68.546 4.061 9.906 68.546 
4 2.452 5.980 74.526 2.452 5.980 74.526 
5 2.040 4.976 79.502 2.040 4.976 79.502 
6 1.395 3.403 82.906 1.395 3.403 82.906 
7 .876 2.136 85.042    
8 .632 1.540 86.582    
9 .540 1.317 87.899    
10 .520 1.268 89.167    
11 .389 .949 90.116    
12 .350 .854 90.970    
13 .328 .800 91.771    
14 .321 .782 92.553    
15 .300 .731 93.283    
16 .270 .660 93.943    
17 .249 .607 94.549    
18 .217 .529 95.079    
19 .198 .484 95.563    
20 .189 .461 96.024    
21 .171 .418 96.442    
22 .159 .387 96.828    
23 .147 .359 97.187    
24 .128 .311 97.499    
25 .123 .299 97.797    
26 .118 .287 98.084    
27 .103 .251 98.335    
28 .091 .223 98.558    
29 .077 .187 98.745    
30 .071 .172 98.918    
31 .066 .162 99.080    
32 .061 .148 99.227    
33 .053 .130 99.358    
34 .050 .122 99.479    
35 .044 .106 99.585    
36 .041 .099 99.684    
37 .040 .097 99.781    
Appendix 14 Total variance explained (continued) 
38 .027 .066 99.847    
39 .023 .055 99.903    
40 .020 .049 99.951    
41 .020 .049 100.000    
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. 
Appendix 15 Scree plot of eigenvalues for 41 items 
Appendix 16 Factor Correlation Matrix 
Factor 
Social 
Health and 
personal care Environment 
Social care 1.000 .503 .299 
Health and 
personal care 
.503 1.000 .224 
Environment .299 .224 1.000 
Extraction Method: Maximum Likelihood.   
Rotation Method: Promax with Kaiser Normalization.  
Health and
personal care
Social care
21. Reminiscence therapy
Environment
Chi-square=612.185
df=132 p=.000
RMR=.035 NFI=.911 IFI=.929 TLI=.917 FI=.928
Quality of care
20. Art therapy
19. Recreational activity
.8718. Behaviour treatment
2. Community social work
22. Festival activity
23. Community interaction
24. Spiritual care
25. Social work record
11. Clinical record
14. Pressure ulcers
15. Urinary tract infections
.8916. Infectious diseases
control
34. A quiet room
35. A looped path
36. Object marks
.8738. Area/space has
appropriate signs and
the signs are clearly visible
39. Staff area/kitchen is
designed to provide
unobtrusively visual
surveillance with ease
Appendix 17 Initial path diagram of three-factor confirmatory factor analysis 
model and standardized estimates 
Appendix 18 Parameter estimates for the final three-factor confirmatory factor 
analysis model 
Parameter estimate 
Unstandardized 
estimate 
Standard 
error  
Standardized 
estimate 
Quality of care Social care .957 .056 1.000 
Quality of care Health and personal care .345 .045 .506*** 
Quality of care Environment .176 .038 .305*** 
Social care quality indicator 2 1.000  .873 
Social care quality indicator 18 1.105 .037 .934*** 
Social care quality indicator 19 1.139 .050 .935*** 
Social care quality indicator 20 1.161 .049 .950*** 
Social care quality indicator 21 1.169 .049 .957*** 
Social care quality indicator 22 1.163 .048 .957*** 
Social care quality indicator 23 1.174 .051 .939*** 
Social care quality indicator 24 1.177 .049 .958*** 
Social care quality indicator 25 1.173 .048 .966*** 
Health and personal care  
quality indicator 11 
1.000  .835 
Health and personal care  
quality indicator 14 
1.094 .052 .964*** 
Health and personal care  
quality indicator 15 
1.093 .052 .961*** 
Health and personal care  
quality indicator 16 
.993 .049 .939*** 
Environment quality indicator 34 1.000  .856 
Environment quality indicator 35 .985 .049 .918*** 
Environment quality indicator 36 1.032 .050 .931*** 
Environment quality indicator 38 1.004 .048 .933*** 
Environment quality indicator 39 .931 .053 .856*** 
Residual for health and personal care .347 .044 .256*** 
Residual for environment .302 .037 .093*** 
Error in quality indicator 2 .285 .027 .762*** 
Error in quality indicator 18 .163 .016 .872*** 
Error in quality indicator 19 .170 .017 .875*** 
Error in quality indicator 20 .134 .014 .902*** 
Error in quality indicator 21 .116 .012 .915*** 
Error in quality indicator 22 .113 .012 .916*** 
Error in quality indicator 23 .169 .017 .882*** 
Error in quality indicator 24 .113 .012 .918*** 
Error in quality indicator 25 .091 .010 .933*** 
Error in quality indicator 11 .202 .020 .697*** 
Error in quality indicator 14 .043 .006 .929*** 
Error in quality indicator 15 .046 .007 .924*** 
Error in quality indicator 16 .061 .007 .882*** 
Error in quality indicator 34 .121 .013 .733*** 
Error in quality indicator 35 .061 .007 .842*** 
Error in quality indicator 36 .055 .007 .866*** 
Error in quality indicator 38 .050 .006 .871*** 
Error in quality indicator 39 .105 .011 .733*** 
Appendix 18 Parameter estimates for the final three-factor confirmatory factor 
analysis model (continued) 
Covariance quality indicator 2 and 18 .096 .016 .445*** 
Covariance quality indicator 18 and 16 .039 .007 .392*** 
*** :p<0.001 
Appendix 19 Means analysis of three factors on marital status  
Factors Marital status N Mean 
Deviation F 
All participants 
Social care Single/Unmarried 45 4.1086 1.34412 
2.510 .083 Cohabiting/Married 138 4.3712 .85007 
Separated/Divorced/Widowed 51 4.0000 1.42621 
Health and 
personal 
Single/Unmarried 45 4.7944 .59898 
1.172 .311 Cohabiting/Married 138 4.7047 .64519 
Separated/Divorced/Widowed 51 4.5686 1.02357 
Environment Single/Unmarried 45 4.6533 .86066 
2.186 .115 Cohabiting/Married 137 4.6745 .49289 
Separated/Divorced/Widowed 51 4.8627 .52229 
Residents 
Social care Single/Unmarried 33 4.0606 1.53335 
.506 .604 Cohabiting/Married 43 4.3049 1.32872 
Separated/Divorced/Widowed 46 4.0121 1.48393 
Health and 
personal 
Single/Unmarried 33 4.8485 .61853 
.927 .398 Cohabiting/Married 43 4.5814 1.02893 
Separated/Divorced/Widowed 46 4.5870 1.06617 
Environment Single/Unmarried 33 4.6970 .91804 
1.705 .186 Cohabiting/Married 43 4.8837 .32435 
Separated/Divorced/Widowed 46 4.9348 .44233 
Family members 
Social care Single/Unmarried 12 4.2407 .60085 
2.527 .085 Cohabiting/Married 95 4.4012 .51131 
Separated/Divorced/Widowed 5 3.8889 .79737 
Health and 
personal 
Single/Unmarried 12 4.6458 .53787 
2.464 .090 Cohabiting/Married 95 4.7605 .35151 
Separated/Divorced/Widowed 5 4.4000 .51841 
Environment Single/Unmarried 12 4.5333 .69978 
1.104 .335 Cohabiting/Married 94 4.5787 .52750 
Separated/Divorced/Widowed 5 4.2000 .77460 
Appendix 20 Means analysis of three factors on religion  
Factors Religion  N Mean Std. Deviation F 
All participants 
Social care Daoism 34 4.0327 1.11532 
.971 .424 
Buddhism 77 4.2193 1.07348 
Christianity 29 4.5019 .89217 
Catholicism 12 4.5556 .50363 
No religion 82 4.2060 1.25612 
Health and 
personal care 
Daoism 34 4.6029 .75156 
.851 .494 
Buddhism 77 4.7825 .54312 
Christianity 29 4.7931 .59036 
Catholicism 12 4.7292 .40534 
No religion 82 4.6037 .94277 
Environment Daoism 34 4.5588 .56735 
.741 .565 
Buddhism 76 4.7342 .47821 
Christianity 29 4.7862 .58781 
Catholicism 12 4.6833 .48586 
No religion 82 4.7317 .70007 
Residents 
Social care Daoism 9 3.2469 1.76888 
1.543 .194 
Buddhism 27 3.8930 1.64386 
Christianity 17 4.4706 1.12459 
Catholicism 6 4.6481 .54622 
No religion 63 4.2134 1.39712 
Health and 
personal care 
Daoism 9 4.2222 1.20185 
.634 .639 
Buddhism 27 4.7778 .84732 
Christianity 17 4.7647 .75245 
Catholicism 6 4.6667 .51640 
No religion 63 4.6349 1.03646 
Environment Daoism 9 4.7778 .44096 
.655 .625 
Buddhism 27 5.0000 .00000 
Christianity 17 4.8235 .72761 
Catholicism 6 4.6667 .51640 
No religion 63 4.8254 .68485 
Family members 
Social care Daoism 25 4.3156 .59376 
1.024 .398 
Buddhism 50 4.3956 .51295 
Christianity 12 4.5463 .42761 
Catholicism 6 4.4630 .48897 
No religion 19 4.1813 .61331 
Appendix 20 Means analysis of three factors on religion (continued)  
Health and 
personal care 
Daoism 25 4.7400 .47037 
2.292 .064 
Buddhism 50 4.7850 .27669 
Christianity 12 4.8333 .24618 
Catholicism 6 4.7917 .29226 
No religion 19 4.5000 .53359 
Environment Daoism 25 4.4800 .59442 
.829 .510 
Buddhism 49 4.5878 .54376 
Christianity 12 4.7333 .32287 
Catholicism 6 4.7000 .50200 
No religion 19 4.4211 .67625 
Appendix 21 Means analysis of three factors on education  
Factors Education N Mean 
Deviation F 
All participants 
Social care Illiteracy 31 4.0789 1.52029 
.530 .713 
Completed primary school 38 4.3480 1.28417 
Completed junior high 
school 
27 4.4033 1.04511 
Completed senior high 
school 
61 4.1421 1.05607 
Obtained an undergraduate 
or higher degree  
77 4.2713 .87349 
Health and 
personal care 
Illiteracy 31 4.7097 .93785 
.136 .969 
Completed primary school 38 4.7303 .68374 
Completed junior high 
school 
27 4.6019 .89941 
Completed senior high 
school 
61 4.6844 .77849 
Obtained an undergraduate 
or higher degree  
77 4.7045 .57458 
Environment Illiteracy 31 4.8387 .73470 
1.244 .293 
Completed primary school 38 4.7842 .62968 
Completed junior high 
school 
26 4.7077 .66988 
Completed senior high 
school 
61 4.7443 .50217 
Obtained an undergraduate 
or higher degree  
77 4.6000 .53607 
Residents 
Social care Illiteracy 31 4.0789 1.52029 
.621 .649 
Completed primary school 36 4.3642 1.30705 
Completed junior high 
school 
16 4.2569 1.31326 
Completed senior high 
school 
22 3.7727 1.50971 
Obtained an undergraduate 
or higher degree  
17 4.0588 1.63021 
Health and 
personal care 
Illiteracy 31 4.7097 .93785 
.261 .903 
Completed primary school 36 4.7500 .69179 
Completed junior high 
school 
16 4.5000 1.09545 
Completed senior high 
school 
22 4.5909 1.18157 
Obtained an undergraduate 
or higher degree  
17 4.5882 1.06412 
Appendix 21 Means analysis of three factors on education (continued) 
Environment Illiteracy 31 4.8387 .73470 
.538 .708 
Completed primary school 36 4.8056 .62425 
Completed junior high 
school 
16 4.7500 .77460 
Completed senior high 
school 
22 5.0000 .00000 
Obtained an undergraduate 
or higher degree  
17 4.8824 .33211 
Family members 
Social care Completed primary school 2 4.0556 1.02138 
1.094 .355 
Completed junior high 
school 
11 4.6162 .41085 
Completed senior high 
school 
39 4.3504 .61471 
Obtained an undergraduate 
or higher degree  
60 4.3315 .49542 
Health and 
personal care 
Completed primary school 2 4.3750 .53033 
.576 .632 
Completed junior high 
school 
11 4.7500 .51235 
Completed senior high 
school 
39 4.7372 .42126 
Obtained an undergraduate 
or higher degree  
60 4.7375 .33644 
Environment Completed primary school 2 4.4000 .84853 
.285 .836 
Completed junior high 
school 
10 4.6400 .48808 
Completed senior high 
school 
39 4.6000 .58219 
Obtained an undergraduate 
or higher degree  
60 4.5200 .55748 
Appendix 22 Variables in multiple linear regression analysis 
Dummy variables Definition 
Male  If an individual is male or not 
Resident  If an individual is resident or not 
40 and under  Whether or not an individual is 40 years of age 
and younger 
41-64  Whether or not an individual is 41-64 years of 
65-74  Whether or not an individual is 65-74 years of 
Single/Unmarried  Whether or not an individual is 
single/unmarried 
Cohabiting/Married  Whether or not an individual is 
cohabiting/married 
Daoism  Daoism=1 if an individual is Daoism, and 0= 
otherwise 
Buddhism  Buddhism=1 if an individual is Buddhism, and 
0= otherwise 
Christianity  Christianity=1 if an individual is Christianity, 
and 0= otherwise 
Catholicism  Catholicism=1 if an individual is Catholicism, 
and 0= otherwise 
Illiteracy  Whether or not an individual is illiteracy 
Completed primary school  Whether or not an individual has completed 
primary school 
Completed junior high school  Whether or not an individual has completed 
junior high school 
Completed senior high school  Whether or not an individual has completed 
senior high school 
Private funding  If private or not 
Northern  A care home is located in northern 
Central  A care home is located in central 
Southern  A care home is located in southern 
Large care home  If a care home is a large care home or not 
Appendix 23 Regression of importance of social care on demographical 
variables and characteristics of care home 
Independent variable Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 
(Constant) 4.049 3.990 4.090 
Male  -.163  -.128 
Resident  .044  .020 
40 and under  .306  .342 
41-64  .172  .183 
65-74  -.681*  -.664* 
Single/Unmarried  -.044  -.119 
Cohabiting/Married  .368  .332 
Daoism  -.283  -.323 
Buddhism  -.177  -.224 
Christianity  .266  .244 
Catholicism  .316  .296 
Illiteracy  .017  .016 
Completed primary school  .272  .285 
Completed junior high school  .207  .233 
Completed senior high school  -.137  -.141 
Private funding  -.200  -.249 
Northern   .147 .008 
Central   .342 .228 
Southern   .334 .297 
Large care home   .069 -.066 
0.103 0.011 0.117 
0.082 0.626 0.120 
Dependent variable was social care 
All items entered as dummy variables   
*: p<0.05 
Appendix 24 Regression of importance of health and personal care on 
demographical variables and characteristics of the care home 
Independent variable Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 
(Constant) 4.860 4.975 5.233 
Male  -.067  -.081 
Resident  -.260  -.235 
40 and under  -.407  -.348 
41-64 -.329  -.285 
65-74  -.659*  -.634* 
Single/Unmarried  .246  .226 
Cohabiting/Married  .145  .124 
Daoism  -.010  -.013 
Buddhism  .154  .152 
Christianity  .145  .129 
Catholicism  .099  .169 
Illiteracy  -.024  -.043 
Completed primary school  .042  .082 
Completed junior high school  -.138  -.103 
Completed senior high school  -.061  -.045 
Private funding  -.023  -.129 
Northern   -.306 -.261 
Central   -.170 -.161 
Southern   -.147 -.158 
Large care home   -.109 -.230 
0.081 0.021 0.102 
0.267 0.302 0.239 
Dependent variable was health and personal care 
All items entered as dummy variables 
*: p<0.05 
Appendix 25 Regression of importance of environment on demographical 
variables and characteristics of the care home 
Independent variable Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 
(Constant) 4.285 4.530 4.163 
Male  -.144  -.112 
Resident  .537*  .508* 
40 and under  .038  .029 
41-64  .110  .096 
65-74  -.167  -.168 
Single/Unmarried  -.066  -.098 
Cohabiting/Married  .080  .070 
Daoism  -.066  -.089 
Buddhism  .069  .039 
Christianity  .035  .026 
Catholicism  -.007  -.041 
Illiteracy  -.049  -.038 
Completed primary school  -.059  -.064 
Completed junior high school  -.037  -.034 
Completed senior high school  .064  .054 
Private funding -.002  .002 
Northern   .154 .125 
Central   .275 .230 
Southern   .309* .287 
Large care home   -.020 .027 
0.106 0.027 0.128 
0.072 0.176 0.066 
Dependent variable was environment 
All items entered as dummy variables 
*: p<0.05 
