Investigating the cross-disciplinary 
components of Earthquake Early 
Warning Systems 
Thesis submitted to University College London for the degree of Doctor of 
Philosophy 
Omar Alejandro Velzquez Ortz 
UCL Institute for Risk and Disaster Reduction 
November 2020 
Declaration 
I, Omar Alejandro Velzquez Ortz confirm that the work presented in this 
thesis is my own. Where information has been derived from other sources, I 
confirm that this has been indicated in the thesis.  
Abstract 
Earthquake early warning (EEW) systems typically provide early estimates of 
earthquake magnitude, hypocentre location and/or ground-shaking estimates, 
as well as alerts ranging from a few seconds to tens of seconds, before the 
arrival of the damaging ground shaking at a target site. The warnings provided 
by these systems allow for the implementation of fast protection actions carried 
out by individuals like drop, cover, and hold-on, or the evacuation of buildings 
if the lead time is long enough. Nevertheless, the information and warning time 
provided by an EEW system could also be used by earthquake engineers as 
EEW seems to bear a powerful potential for the automatic activation of 
protection measures for infrastructure and critical systems, aiming at the 
reduction of risk due to earthquakes. Such automatic actions may include 
stopping elevators at the nearest floor, opening firehouse doors, slowing rapid-
transit vehicles and high-speed trains to avoid accidents, to mention some. 
Few are the attempts found in literature about engineering applicability of 
EEW. This scarcity might be related to the fact that the real-time estimation of 
earthquake source parameters contains considerable uncertainty that may 
lead to potential economic losses if false or missed alarms are not avoided. 
However, different state-of-the-art studies regarding decision-making 
procedures for EEW have suggested more reliable approaches that can 
potentially reduce the uncertainty in the estimates provided by the system 
(e.g., earthquake source parameters and ground shaking), reducing the 
probability of triggering missed/false alarms, and therefore minimising the 
expected losses.  
The potential of designing new real-time advanced building protection 
applications for EEW is the motivation of this thesis. Mainly, two applications 
are considered: 
1) Design of controlled structural systems using the early warning information, 
particularly, the use of semi-active devices denominated magnetorheological 
dampers. A control algorithm that governs the behaviour of the dampers is 
calibrated to obtain the most favourable response of a benchmark structure 
equipped with one damper. The results reveal that the developed EEW-based 
control algorithm can effectively reduce the expected loss of the considered 
case-study structure.  
2) Prediction of shaking demands that can be expected in mid-rise to high-rise 
buildings, using a simplified continuum building model. A series of illustrative 
examples show how the newly developed prediction models can be efficiently 
used, in a Bayesian framework, for building-specific EEW applications based 
on the (acceleration) response in buildings, such as a) early warning of floor-
shaking sensed by occupants; and b) control of elevator in buildings. 
The progress of technology and advances in the scientific understanding of 
engineering and seismology have promoted the rapid development of EEW 
systems around the world. However, their effectiveness is often limited as they 
lack the integration between their technical and social components. This thesis 
also aims at filling this gap to investigate which measures could be needed to 
increase the organisational resilience of local community stakeholders and the 
private sector. This topic is explored by implementing a mixed-method 
approach on the case study Mexico City (Mexico), that can be considered an 
area at risk due to the combination of high seismic hazard, structural and social 
vulnerabilities. 
This thesis shows the promising applicability of engineered applications of 
EEW systems and suggests a robust framework for the integration of the 
technical and societal components of EEW.  
Impact Statement 
The importance of early warnings has been highlighted in a number of 
international documents at various governmental levels. The 2015 United 
Nations Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction has recognised early 
warning systems as crucial tools for the prevention of new and reduction of 
existing disaster risk. Additionally, this framework also highlights that early 
warning systems must be a priority to improve Disaster Risk Reduction and 
have to be substantially evolved by 2030. Also, early warnings were 
emphasized within the Hyogo Framework for Action (20052015): Building the 
Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters, where they were identified 
as one (the 2nd) of the five priorities for action. 
The last years have seen the dramatic increase of the population in 
metropolitan areas that are highly exposed and vulnerable to earthquakes. 
Earthquake Early Warning Systems bear the capacity to activate mitigation 
actions to be undertaken promptly, before the arrival of ground-shaking to such 
areas. The systems also have the potential of saving lives by reducing damage 
and injuries and improving community and organisational resilience by 
enhancing business continuity operations for both the public and the private 
sectors. 
Therefore, this thesis can offer significant opportunities for impact on Society, 
Economy and Knowledge. 
Concerning the impact on Society, the results of this thesis may be used by 
local community stakeholders (e.g., civil protection) or the public sector, to 
develop guidelines for improving emergency preparedness towards 
earthquakes. Findings from this thesis can also provide emergency planners 
or managers with a better capability and insight for planning emergency rescue 
actions, based on reliably described real-time scenarios and expected 
damages. Finally, the results of this thesis also have an impact in 
strengthening a barely existent cohesion between the technical and the social 
components of EEW, in some countries where EEW systems are currently 
operating. 
In terms of impact on Economy, findings from the thesis provide opportunities 
for companies, the public, and the private sector, to design and implement 
businesses continuity and emergency plans related to EEW, as well as 
engineering applications of EEW systems. As EEW has the capacity of 
predicting the expected ground-shaking at a given location (e.g., where a 
critical infrastructure is located), in-advance planning can be developed to 
produce decision models for actions to take during an EEW, with the main goal 
of reducing earthquake damage, injuries and deaths. 
Regarding the impact on Knowledge, the cross-disciplinary approach 
presented herein promotes the interdisciplinarity for studies related to Disaster 
Risk Reduction, going beyond the state-of-art in purely physical and 
engineering approaches for modelling real-time earthquake risk reduction 
through EEW. The outcomes of this dissertation indeed illustrate that it is 
possible and viable to investigate the impact of hazards from two or more 
academic spectra. 
Acknowledgements 
The very first day I began this PhD journey, my supervisor, Prof Carmine 
Galasso, told me from this day, until you finish, I am going to be your 
academic dad in London. I think what Carmine has done during my whole 
PhD can be definitely defined as a fatherhood. I trully believe I do not have the 
words to show my appreciation and gratitude to him. His time, patience, 
understanding, and support, definitely are key factors that allowed me to 
complete this stage of my life. Muchsmas gracias, Carmine. You are definitely 
a great supervisor, but above that, a fantastic human being. 
This thesis was originally planned as a technical study, but with time and so 
many coffees, Dr Gianluca Pescaroli motivated me to address the  challenging 
social sciences perspective of EEW. Many, many thanks for all the support, 
help, and friendship that you offered to me so I could finish this thesis, 
Gianluca. I am eternally grateful for all the efforts you have made for my well-
being and for the culmination of my PhD. 
Special thanks to Prof Philippe Duffour and to Dr Gemma Cremen, for all the 
contribuitions, suggestions, and insights for the development of this thesis. 
My gratitude to the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologa (CONACYT), 
and the UCL Institute for Risk and Disaster Reduction, for the financial support 
throughout my PhD. 
During my whole life I have had four pillars that definitely help me to give my 
best every single day: my father, my mother, my older brother, and my younger 
sister. Many thanks for listening to me during the toughest moments I faced 
while being in London, and for always providing words and advice whenever I 
have needed them. You are definitely my largest source of inspiration. I love 
you like you cannot imagine. 
I need to thank all those angels I have who send me their blessings and protect 
me day by day. Since I moved to London, seven years ago, the list has 
increased, but you are always in my mind and thoughts. I miss you all a lot. 
In 2017 I met the person who became my complete support and companion in 
London. Many thanks Diana for your help, love, encourgament, and all the 
care towards me. I could not have finished this PhD without you, I am sure 
about that. 
During 7 years I have met fantastic people in London and UCL, great friends I 
have shared great and not so good moments with. It is very challenging for me 
to name you all, I might miss a name and that would be rude to do (also, this 
acknolwedments section could turn larger than an actual chapter of the 
thesis). However, thank you so much to all my friends of the UCL IRDR,  
UCL CEGE, UCL Mexican Society, and UCL Squash Society. Thanks a lot for 
the laughs, the tears, the fun, the parties, and for making me feel like at home. 
This gratitude has to be extended to all my family and friends in Mexico, that 
have been always sending me support and good wishes. 
Last but not least, many thanks to god, for allowing me to live fantastic 
experiences that have forged the Omar I am at the moment.  
Abbreviations 
ASTS Automatic Trip Systems Procedures 
BART Bay Area Rapid Transit 
BEFORES Bayesian Evidence-based Fault Orientation and Real-
time Earthquake Slip 
C Cost, Damping 
CCDF Complementary Cumulative Distribution Function 
CISN California Integrated Seismic Network 
DF Decision Function 
DI Destructive Intensity 
eBEAR Earthworm Based Earthquake Alarm Reporting 
EDAS-MAS No explanation available in the literature 
EDP Engineering Demand Parameter 
EDT Equal Differential Time 
EEW Earthquake Early Warning 
ElarmS Earthquake Alarm Systems 
EM Event Monitor 
FinDER Finite-Fault Rupture Detector 
G-FAST Geodetic First Approximation of Size and Time 
GIDS Generalised Interstorey Drift Ratio 
G-larmS Geodetic Alarm System 
GMM Ground-Motion Model 
GMPE Ground-Motion Prediction Equation 
GNSS Global Navigational Satellite System 
GPS Global Positioning Systems 
HAZUS Hazards United States  Federal Emergency 
Management Agency 
IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency 
IDA Incremental Dynamic Analysis 
IDR Interstorey Drift Ratio 
IEEWS Istanbul Earthquake Early Warning System 
IM Intensity Measure 
ITACA Italian Accelerometric Database 
JMA Japan Meteorological Agency 
K Stiffness 
KEEWS Korean Earthquake Early Warning System 
L Loss 
M Magnitude, Mass 
MCDM Mutli-Criteria Decision-Making 
MIDR Maximum Interstorey Drift Ratio 
Magnetorheological 
Organisational Resilience 
P Likelihood of Occurrence 
PBEE Performance-Based Earthquake Engineering 
PBEEW Performance-Based Earthquake Early Warning 
PDF Probability Density Function 
PEER Pacific Earthquake Research Center 
PFA Peak Floor Acceleration 
PGA Peak Ground Acceleration 
PGD Peak Ground Displacement 
PGV Peak Ground Velocity 
PLUM Propagation of Local Undamped Motion 
PRESTo PRobabilistic and Evolutionary early warning System 
PSDA Probabilistic Seismic Demand Analysis 
PSHA Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Assessment 
R Epicentral Distance 
REGARD Real-time GEONET Analysis system for Rapid 
Deformation monitoring 
RSMS Real-time Strong-Motion Monitoring System 
RTPSHA Real-Time Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Assessment 
Sa(T1) Spectral Acceleration 
SAIVD Semiactive Independently Variable Dampers 
SAS Sistema de Alerta Ssmica (Mexico) 
SASMEX Sistema de Alerta Ssmica Mexicano 
SASO Sistema de Alerta Ssmica de Oaxaca 
Sd Spectral Displacement 
SDoF Single Degree of Freedom 
SIMBAD Selected Input Motions for Displacement-Based 
Assessment and Design 
STA/LTA Short-term-average/Long-term-average 
T Fundamental period of vibration 
UNDRR United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction 
UrEDAS Urgent Earthquake Detection and Alarm System 
USGS United Stated Geological Survey 
V Voltage 
VS Virtual Seismologist 
WP Waveform Processing 
Contents 
Chapter 2. EEW Systems: physical grounds, technical concepts, 
2.5.3 EEW Systems for seismic mitigation purposes in Nuclear power 
Chapter 3. Beyond the technical components of EEW: socio-
3.4 EEW systems: physical grounds, technical concepts, methods and 
Chapter 4. A loss-based control algorithm for magnetorheological 
Chapter 5. Real-time assessment of building response for EEW 
5.2.1 Description of the considered systems and demand measures . 133 
5.4.1 Performance of the predictive models in comparison to the simplified 
5.5 Real-time application of the proposed prediction equations for EEW 
Chapter 6. A Likert Scale-Based Model for Benchmarking Operational 
6.2 General Considerations in Rating Scales, Anchoring, and Benchmarking
Chapter 7. Integrating earthquake early warnings into business 
continuity and organisational resilience: lessons learned from Mexico 
8.2.1 Integration of Semi-Active Structural Control with Earthquake Early 
8.2.2 Real-Time Assessment of Building Response for Earthquake Early 
8.2.3 Integrating earthquake early warnings into business continuity and 
List of Figures 
Figure 1. Earthquake Early Warning Systems in the world. Black-coloured 
countries indicate operative systems, that provide public warnings. Blue-
coloured words represent nations where the systems currently are under 
Figure 3. The two possible approaches to EEW. In the network-based 
approach, the lead-time is equal to the S-arrival time at the target minus 
the first-P at the network minus any processing/computation time; in the 
Figure 4. Schematic representation of the 29-stories structure (Adapted from 
Figure 5. Vulnerability of a nuclear reactor following SCRAM. Adapted from 
Figure 7. Analytical model of the variable stiffness/damping device. Adapted 
Figure 8. Benchmark highway bridge located in California. Adapted from 
Figure 9. Control algorithm for MR Dampers. Adapted from Maddaloni et al. 
Figure 10. Case-studies considered for the review: Italy, US-West Coast, 
Figure 11. Challenges in implementing EEW systems: common findings from 
Figure 12. Force-displacement (a) and force-velocity (b) loops for a small-
scale prototype MR damper for imposed harmonic cycles at different 
Figure 13. Block diagram for a passive controlled system with MR damper 
(left); Block diagram for a semi-active controlled system with MR damper 
Figure 14. Block diagram for a smart passive controlled system with MR 
Figure 15. Case-study structure (left); Modified Bouc-Wen model for MR 
Figure 16. Example of EDPs vs voltage curves and optimal voltage values for 
two generic ground motion records: (a) IDR at the first storey; (b) PFA at 
Figure 17. Fragility functions for complete damage for (a) drift-sensitive, 
generic non-structural component (in office buildings); and (b) 
acceleration-sensitive, generic non-structural component (in office 
Figure 18. (a) Example of loss vs voltage curves and optimal voltage values 
for two generic ground motion records; (b) optimal control algorithm. . 123 
Figure 19. Comparison of different control algorithms for the case-study 
Figure 21. Dependence of the lateral deformation (in terms of modal 
displacement and modal interstorey drift) on  for the first mode of 
Figure 22. Lateral deformations for the simplified continuous model proposed 
by (Miranda and Akkar, 2005): (a) flexural-type deformation; (b) combined 
Figure 23. Distribution of selected records with respect to magnitude and 
Figure 25. Standard deviations of (a) MIDR, (b) IDR (z=0.05), (c) IDR (z=0.30), 
(d) IDR (z=1.00), (e) PFA (z=0.50), and (f) PFA (z=1.00), for three values 
of lateral stiffness ratio. Functional form proposed by Bindi et al. (2009).
Figure 26. Moment Magnitude vs Residual plots for (a) MIDR, (b) IDR (z=1.00), 
and (c) PFA (z=1.00). All cases are computed adopting a period T1 = 0.75 
Figure 27. Epicentral Distance vs Residual plots for (a) MIDR, (b) IDR 
(z=1.00), and (c) PFA (z=1.00). All cases are computed adopting a period 
Figure 28. Prediction equation in terms of MIDR vs historical data. T1 = 0.75 
s, (a) 6.9 Mw Irpinia earthquake (stiff conditions,  =0.01), (b) 6.3 Mw 
LAquila earthquake (rock conditions,  =30), (c) 6.0 Mw Umbria-Marche 
Figure 29. Prediction equation in terms of IDR vs historical data. T1 = 0.75 s, 
(a) 6.9 Mw Irpinia earthquake (stiff conditions,  =0.01, z=1.00), (b) 6.3 
Mw LAquila earthquake (rock conditions,  =30, z=0.05), (c) 6.0 Mw 
Figure 30. PFA Prediction equation in terms of PFA vs historical data. T1 = 
0.75 s, (a) 6.9 Mw Irpinia earthquake (stiff conditions,  =0.01, z=1.00), 
(b) 6.3 Mw LAquila earthquake (rock conditions,  =30, z=0.05), (c) 6.0 
Figure 31. Simulation of a M6 earthquake occurring in the region covered by 
the ISNet network and results for a site in Naples (left hand side) and S. 
Angelo dei Lombardi: (a) map of the Campania region showing the ISNet 
network, the two locations and the epicentre; (b) evolution of the 
probabilistic magnitude distribution; (c), (d) evolution of the probabilistic 
distribution of source-to-site distances at the two locations; (e), (f) 
evolution of the predicted exceedance probability of PGA at both 
Figure 32. Simulation of a M6 EQ and results at the sites of Naples (left) and 
S. Angelo dei Lombardi (right): (a), (b) predicted exceedance probability 
of MIDR( =8) at the two locations (T1=3s for Naples, T1=1s for S. Angelo 
Figure 33. Simulation of a M6 EQ and results at the sites of Naples (left) and 
S. Angelo dei Lombardi (right): (a), (b) predicted exceedance probability 
of PFA( =8, z=1.00) at the two locations (T1=3s for Naples, T1=1s for S. 
Angelo dei L.); (c), (d) predicted exceedance probability of PFA ( =30, 
Figure 35. Hazard map for the Campania region showing median values of 
Figure 36. EDP map in terms of median values of MIDR for a M6 event. T1=1s, 
Figure 37. EDP map in terms of median values PFA for a M6 event. T1=0.3s, 
Figure 38. 'Q37. Are you aware of how long the warning time in case of EEW 
Figure 40. Q5. Do you think the current development of EEWs takes in 
adequate consideration how they can be integrated in organisational 
Figure 41. Q6. Do you think the local policies are adequate to support the 
integration of EWWs in your organisations practices and procedures?
Figure 42. Q7. Has your organisation developed specific plans or procedures 
Figure 43. Q8. Has the business continuity plan of your organisation been 
Figure 44. Q9. Has your organisation identified which critical 
Figure 45. Q10. Has your organisation prioritised which critical 
Figure 46. Q13. Has your organisation identified possible vulnerable 
categories that could be better protected by activating specific procedures 
Figure 47. Q23. Please rate the tools listed in Qs 19-22 from least useful to 
Figure 48. Q33. Please rate the training listed in Qs 27-32','from least useful 
Figure 49. Critical gaps in how EEW is translated into organisational resilience 
Figure 50. Non-linear Simplified Model proposed by Xiong et al. (2016). .. 213 
List of Tables 
Table 1: Estimating location, using only information from triggered stations 41 
Table 2: Estimating location, using information from both triggered and non-
Table 4: Estimating earthquake centroid, using ground motion image-
Table 6: Estimating magnitude from information in the very initial portion of 
Table 7: Estimating magnitude from information in increasing time windows of 
Table 8: Estimating magnitude from initial characteristics of a single seismic 
Table 12: Estimating spatially distributed ground shaking from ground motion 
Table 13: Estimating ground shaking from initial characteristics of multiple 
Table 14: Estimating ground shaking from initial characteristics of a single 
Table 19. Human comfort level to acceleration. Adapted from Cheng et al. 
Table 20. Bouc-Wen values for the definition of the mechanical model for MR 
Table 21. A Likert scale-based response model for benchmarking gaps in 
operational capacity, organizational resilience, and disaster risk reduction 
Table 23. Stronger correlations among the answers of the questionnaire. The 
correlations were selected only if p-value<0.01, and the correlation 
Table 24. Coefficients for Maximum Interstorey Drift Ratio, =0.1 ( is the 
Table 25. Coefficients for Maximum Interstorey Drift Ratio, =8 ( is the total 
Table 26. Coefficients for Maximum Interstorey Drift Ratio, =30 ( is the total 
Table 27. Coefficients for Interstorey Drift Ratio, =0.1 ( is the total standard 
Table 28. Coefficients for Interstorey Drift Ratio, =8 ( is the total standard 
Table 29. Coefficients for Interstorey Drift Ratio, =30 ( is the total standard 
Table 30. Coefficients for Peak-Floor Acceleration, =0.1 ( is the total 
Table 31. Coefficients for Peak-Floor Acceleration, =8 ( is the total 
Table 32. Coefficients for Peak-Floor Acceleration, =30 ( is the total 
Chapter 1. Introduction  
1.1 Background  
Natural hazards impact affects every year thousands of people around the 
world, leaving considerable economic losses and a high number of death tolls. 
According to the Natural Catastrophe Statistics Analysis Tool (NatCatService) 
of Munich RE1, from 1998 to 2018, an estimate of 1.2 million people has 
perished due to the exposure to natural hazards, along with economic losses 
worth US $3 trillion. 
At a time of global changes, with the fast evolution in technology, many 
different strategies for disaster risk reduction have been taken into 
consideration by governments and organisations around the globe, aiming for 
the reduction of human and economic losses and an increment in resilience 
towards natural hazards. In that aim, one of the rapid growing protection 
technologies currently implemented is Multi-hazard Early Warning Systems.  
An early warning is defined as an integrated system of hazard monitoring, 
forecasting and prediction, disaster risk assessment, communication and 
preparedness activities systems and processes that enables individuals, 
communities, governments, businesses and others to take timely action to 
reduce disaster risks in advance of hazardous events2. 
Also, early warnings have been worldwide recognised as a measure to reduce 
disaster risk and increase preparedness, response and recovery to multi-
hazard scenarios. In fact, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
2015-2030, emphasizes that early warnings must be a priority field for disaster 
risk reduction that has to be substantially evolved by 2030 (UNISDR, 2015). 
1 https://www.munichre.com/en/solutions/for-industry-clients/natcatservice.html 
2 https://www.preventionweb.net/terminology/view/478 
Many are the hazards that can be forecasted by an early warning system; 
some examples are earthquakes, landslides, volcanic eruptions, floods, 
droughts, and food security.  
From the list above, one of the systems that is relatively modern is Earthquake 
Early Warning (EEW), aiming for earthquake risk reduction. Although the 
concept of EEW was introduced by J.D. Cooper back in 1868 (Kanamori, 
2005; Nakamura and Tucker, 1988), it was not until 1985 when a proper 
computerised alert network was proposed by Heaton (1985). Heaton 
suggested that given the slow speed of seismic waves (compared to the 
velocity of communication-electronic waves), short-period warnings can be 
provided to trigger automatic safety response actions, once a seismic network 
has provided estimates of arrival times and intensity of shaking at different 
sites. Since 1985, with the evolution of the concept proposed by Heaton, some 
countries around the world have adopted the idea of having a seismic network 
providing EEW data. Currently, different advanced algorithms can be found in 
literature for the rapid detection of seismic parameters such as magnitude and 
location of the earthquake, providing warnings ranging from second to tens of 
seconds before the arrival of shaking S- waves. The reliable functionality of 
EEW highly depends on the accurate estimation of ground shaking intensity 
from a specific seismic source, reason why EEW has been studied mainly by 
seismologists. 
Nowadays, EEW systems are operating in different parts of the world, with 
different approaches and implementations (Figure 1). In countries such as 
Mexico (Cullar et al., 2017), the United States of America (USA)-West Coast 
(Given et al., 2018), Japan (Hoshiba et al., 2008), Turkey (Alcik et al., 2009), 
Romania (Marmureanu et al., 2011), Taiwan (Hsiao et al., 2009), South Korea 
(Sheen et al., 2017), India and China (Ji et al., 2019), and India (Kumar et al., 
2014), EEW systems provide public warnings. They are also real-time tested 
for implementation in Italy (Zollo et al., 2014a), Switzerland (Cua et al., 2009), 
Chile (Crowell et al., 2018), Israel (Nof and Allen, 2016), Nicaragua (Strauch 
et al., 2018), Spain (Pazos et al., 2015), Slovenia and Austria (Picozzi et al., 
2015a), Greece, New Zealand and Iceland (Behr et al., 2016), as well as in 
Costa Rica and El Salvador (Allen and Melgar, 2019). 
The warnings provided by the systems allow for the implementation of fast 
protection actions carried out by individuals like Drop-Cover-Hold, or the 
evacuation of buildings if the lead time is long enough. Nevertheless, the 
information provided by the system could also be used by earthquake 
engineers as EEW seems to bear a powerful potential for the immediate 
automatic activation of protection measures for infrastructure and critical 
systems, with the final objective of reducing casualties and economic losses 
due to earthquakes. The warning time available before the arrival of the 
earthquake depends on the distance between the earthquakes epicentre and 
the target area to be protected. Therefore, the activation of any automatic 
action is firmly based on the available warning time. The mitigation actions that 
can be activated might include stopping elevators at the nearest floor, opening 
firehouse doors, slowing rapid-transit vehicles and high-speed trains to avoid 
accidents, shutting down pipelines and gas lines to minimize fire hazards, 
shutting down manufacturing operations to decrease potential damage to 
equipment, saving vital computer information to avoid data losses, etc.  
Figure 1. Earthquake Early Warning Systems in the world. Black-coloured countries indicate operative systems, that provide public warnings. Blue-coloured words 
represent nations where the systems currently are under testing. 
Few are the attempts found in literature implementing and designing 
engineering applications considering EEW. Mainly, control of elevators, 
control of trains, protection of critical infrastructure (e.g., gas and oil pipelines), 
are the focus of these investigations, where the actions are triggered if the 
EEW system detects that a critical ground-shaking intensity value will be 
exceeded. The listed strategies reduce the exposure of the systems leading 
to the reduction of losses. However, they do not avert the inherent damage 
(vulnerability) due to ground shaking (Iervolino et al., 2007b). 
One of the significant reasons for which engineering applicability of EEW is so 
scarce is because the real-time estimation of magnitude and location of the 
earthquake contains considerable uncertainty, that may lead to potential 
economic losses if false or missed alarms are not avoided (for example, 
stopping high velocity trains could delay the timetable creating economic 
losses and inconvenience in passengers; shutting down a power plant after a 
false alarm might generate considerable economic losses due to business 
interruption). However, different state-of-the-art studies regarding decision-
making procedures for EEW systems have suggested more accurate/reliable 
approaches that potentially reduce the uncertainty in missed and false alarms, 
and therefore in the expected losses (e.g., loss-based approach). From an 
engineering perspective, these new decision-making procedures seem to be 
a powerful tool for the design of applications aiming for the real-time protection 
of structures/infrastructure.  
The potential of designing new real-time advanced building protection 
applications for EEW systems, based on the framework of a performance-
based model, is one of the main motivations of this project. This report will 
introduce the methodology followed to develop two new real-time structural 
engineering applications, discusses the results obtained and provides strong 
evidence for the future evolution of the applications proposed (and new ones). 
The progress of technology and advances in the scientific understanding of 
engineering and seismology have promoted the rapid development of EEW 
systems around the world. However, their reliability is often limited as they lack 
the integration between their technical and social components (Basher, 2006). 
The last chapter of this thesis aims at filling this gap, intending to investigate 
which measures could be needed to increase the organisational resilience of 
local community stakeholders and the private sector. This topic is explored in 
the last chapter of this report by implementing a mixed-method approach on 
the case-study Mexico City (Mexico), that can be considered an area at risk 
due to the combination of high seismic hazard, structural and social 
vulnerabilities. 
1.2 Scope and aims of research 
This thesis is concerned with the investigation of the cross-disciplinary 
components of Earthquake Early Warning Systems. The scope of the 
dissertation is twofold, divided in two different (but correlated) segments: 1) 
the technical applicability of EEW, focusing on an engineering/seismological 
perspective and 2) the integration of the physical/technical components of 
EEW systems with the corresponding/relevant socio-organisational 
components, adopting a perspective of the social sciences .  
The first part concerns the design of two novel real-time advanced applications 
for the protection of buildings, using the estimates provided by EEW systems. 
Application 1 looks at the feasibility of combining semi-active structural control 
with EEW, to minimise the losses in a structure about to be struck by an 
incoming earthquake. In specific, a semi-active control device known as 
Magnetorheological (MR) Damper is used for the study, as this type of device 
can generate relatively large damping forces depending on very low electric 
inputs, without inducing instability to the structure. The main aim of developing 
this application is to design an algorithm that regulates the command voltage 
of the MR damper, based on the ground shaking predicted by the EEW 
system. The novelty herein is that the algorithm is developed, adopting a 
performance-based approach in which losses govern the efficiency of the 
algorithm. The loss-based approach allows to compute the most favourable 
performance of the structure considering a combination of different 
Engineering Demand Parameters (EDP; e.g., Peak Floor Acceleration and 
Interstorey Drift Ratio), rather than classic approaches where the performance 
is based on singular EDPs  (e.g., Maddaloni et al. 2013). Application 2 refers 
to the development of a new approach for real-time building response 
assessment based on the information provided by an EEW system. EEW 
systems (particularly regional ones) typically provide early estimates of 
earthquake magnitude (M) and hypocenter location (i.e. source-to-site 
distance, R) as well as ground-motion intensity measures (IMs) at target sites 
and warning time to target users. A common approach to real-time IM 
estimation is to use ground-motion models (GMM) based on the real-time M, 
and R estimates from the EEW system. Current practice consists on triggering 
real-time earthquake mitigation actions when the expected IM, computed 
based on EEW information, exceeds a predefined IM threshold. 
Nevertheless, the shaking experienced in mid-to high-rise buildings is 
generally significantly different from that on the ground, and it also differs from 
one building to another, depending on the building (dynamic) characteristics. 
Therefore, this application proposes a set of new empirical prediction 
equations, based on Italian accelerometric data, correlating EDPs for case-
study buildings to the source- and site-specific parameters (e.g., M, R, and soil 
type). To this aim, a simplified continuum building model consisting of a 
combination of a flexural beam and a shear beam is used. By just modifying a 
few structural parameters, such a simplified model can account for a wide 
range of deformation modes in actual buildings, allowing the accurate 
estimation of lateral displacement and acceleration demands in a structural 
system. 
The second part focuses on the development of a new approach for the 
integration of the technical and the socio-organisational components of EEW. 
The aim herein is to produce a better understanding of the social components 
of EEW, and their interactions with the existing technical components 
(engineering and seismological) that are used on the field, to produce new 
practices and guidelines for increasing organisational resilience. In particular, 
the following questions are to be answered: a) What are the interactions 
between the technical components and the socio-organisational components 
of EEW? b) What could be required in the socio-organisational domains to 
have effective EEW systems? c) What information and training are needed by 
community organisations, business, and the private sector in order to respond 
and adapt more effectively to the dissemination of earthquake early warnings? 
To answer these questions, a mixed-method approach is implemented on the 
case study Mexico City (Mexico), that can be considered an area at risk due 
to the combination of high seismic hazard, structural and social vulnerabilities. 
In particular, a convergent mixed-method approach is adopted herein as it 
allows the collection and analysis of qualitative and quantitative data 
simultaneously. In order to qualitatively and quantitively assess the value of 
the Mexican EEW system to the key sectors of Mexico Citys government, 
critical infrastructure and business community, two instruments were 
considered for the collection of data: a) semi-structured interviews with 
representatives of organisations from the private or public sector based in 
Mexico City; and b) online questionnaires distributed through a convenience 
sample and with voluntary participation, targeted also at representatives of the 
public and private sector of Mexico City. For the construction of the on-line 
questionnaire, this thesis also develops a novel (Likert) scale designed for 
benchmarking questionnaires answers in the fields of disaster risk reduction, 
business continuity management, and organizational resilience. This new 
scale responds to a need of scholars and practitioners of having a simple scale 
of reference to assure consistency across disciplinary fields. Introducing 
answers from 0-3, the proposed simple-to-use tool substitutes more complex 
scales (e.g., from 1 to 7) that may be unsuitable to use on in-depth analyses 
of quantitative data.  
1.3 Thesis outline 
Chapter 2 introduces the basic functioning principle of Earthquake Early 
Warning Systems and the different types of these systems. In addition, a 
description of the current EEW systems operating around the world and their 
relevant estimation algorithms is discussed, along with a summary of the state-
of-the-art engineering applications of EEW at present in practice or proposed. 
Chapter 3 explores the current interactions between the technical and socio-
organisational components of EEW systems. This includes a discussion of 
specific evidence on the case-studies of Italy, California, Japan and Mexico, 
representing different maturity levels for EEW systems. 
Chapter 4 presents the methodology followed to evaluate the feasibility of 
designing controlled structural systems using the early warning information, in 
particular, the use of semi-active devices denominated MR dampers. An 
application referring to a simple structure is developed, comparing the seismic 
risk in two cases: a) structure equipped with MR dampers and EEW system; 
and b) structure with traditional passive control devices (e.g., seismic 
isolation). 
Chapter 5 discusses the prediction of the characteristics of shaking that can 
be expected in mid-rise to high-rise buildings, using a simplified continuum 
building model consisting of a combination of a flexural beam and a shear 
beam. In particular, new empirical prediction equations, based on Italian 
accelerometric data, are developed correlating Peak Floor Acceleration and 
peak Interstorey Drift demands, for a set of case-study buildings to 
earthquake-related parameters. A series of illustrative examples show how the 
newly developed prediction models can be efficiently used for building-specific 
EEW applications. 
Chapter 6 introduces a new-developed, simple-to-use, rating tool that can be 
used for benchmarking responses in questionnaires, to assess, for example, 
disaster risk reduction, gaps in operational capacity, and organizational 
resilience (e.g., to be implemented in questionnaires regarding the efficiency 
of EEW systems in organisational resilience). 
Chapter 7 investigates which measures could be needed to increase the 
organisational resilience of local community stakeholders and the private 
sector. Specifically, this chapter analyses the case-study of Mexico City 
(Mexico), that can be considered an area at risk due to the combination of high 
seismic hazard, structural and social vulnerabilities. Here, EEW has been 
developed by the authorities, but the need for increasing their efficiency is 
widely recognised. The goal is to provide some new and impact-oriented 
insight on the connection between their technical and social components. 
Finally, Chapter 8 summarises the final remarks derived from this thesis and 
proposes possible future lines of research and future work. 
The chapters of this thesis are developed to be mostly self-contained because 
they are published as individual journal/conference articles. Therefore, 
repetition in some chapters such as introductions and background material 
can be found throughout the thesis. Additionally, notational conventions were 
chosen to be simple and clear under the topic of each chapter, rather than for 
the thesis as a whole; consequently, the notational conventions may not be 
strictly identical for each chapter. Apologies are offered in advance for any 
confusion this might cause when reading the thesis as a continuous document. 
Chapter 2. EEW Systems: physical grounds, 
technical concepts, methods and perspectives 
2.1 Earthquake Early Warning: Principle and definitions 
Earthquake Early Warning (EEW) Systems are combinations of real-time 
seismic instruments, methodologies and data processing software that are 
able to provide rapid measures of potential ongoing earthquakes in the early 
stage of fault rupture and issue real-time warnings to public or end users in 
large urbanised areas. The alarm triggered is considered a solution to reduce 
exposure and vulnerability due to earthquake risk, improving emergency 
preparedness and minimising economic and human losses (Heaton, 1985; 
Strauss and Allen, 2016; Wieland, 2001).   
The basic functioning idea of an earthquake early warning system relies on 
the velocity of the seismic waves propagating from the rupturing fault during 
an earthquake (Satriano et al., 2011b). When the rupture occurs, P- waves 
and S- waves spread through the shallow layers of the earth (Figure 2). P- 
waves travel faster than S- waves, however S- waves, due to their large 
amplitude, are more damaging than P-waves, leading to ground shaking. An 
EEW system requires a dense seismic network deployed, close to the area 
where large earthquakes are expected, where the arrival of seismic waves are 
recorded. When the earthquake occurs, the seismic stations detect the arrival 
of P- waves and send the recordings at the speed of light to a central station, 
where data processing software calculates the estimated arrival of S- waves 
by considering the difference in velocity of the waves. The difference in arrival 
of P- waves and S- waves has been defined as lead time and tends to range 
from few to tens of seconds. The actual/effective warning time depends mainly 
on the distance of the target structure/infrastructure with respect to the 
earthquake source. This allows for real-time seismic risk-mitigating actions. 
From the engineering perspective, if an earthquake is going to strike a target 
structure (or infrastructure/infrastructure component) and induce a 
response/damage level of enough severity, then planned mitigating actions 
can be taken immediately in order to limit potential losses. For instance, 
individuals can use the alert time to Drop-Cover-Hold or move to safer 
locations within a building, reducing injuries and fatalities, or if alert time 
allows, evacuate hazardous buildings. Such a warning time also (and 
especially) allows for many types of automated actions: stopping elevators at 
the nearest floor and opening the doors, opening firehouse doors, slowing 
high-speed trains to avoid accidents/derailments, turning streetlights red - 
preventing cars from entering hazardous structures such as bridges and 
tunnels, shutting down gas pipelines to minimize fire hazards, shutting down 
manufacturing operations to decrease potential damage to equipment, saving 
vital computer information to avoid data losses, etc. This is not an exhaustive 
list but rather a snapshot of critical applications that could benefit from EEW. 
Figure 2. The basic principle of EEW 
Research and development of EEW applications have not yet been 
emphasized in the engineering community, although very rapid improvements 
of EEW are being observed in the seismology community, as also noted 
above. In practice, two fundamental problems of EEW restrict its actual 
applications: 1) short warning time, particularly in epicentral areas, and 2) large 
uncertainty on the predicted ground motion (and consequent damage/loss). 
Regarding 1), to maximize warning time, the system must minimize delays in 
data acquisition/processing, communication, and delivery of alerts (e.g., 
increasing the number and density of seismic stations). Regarding 2), EEW 
information always involves some uncertainty due to the real-time estimation 
of source parameters and traditional uncertainties involved in Probabilistic 
Seismic Hazard Analysis (or PSHA; Iervolino et al., 2006). Some EEW 
applications may produce a substantial economic loss if a false alarm occurs 
(e.g., due to business interruption), eventually affecting large communities 
(e.g., in the case of emergency stop of lifelines). On the other side, there is a 
complex trade-off between the potential costs of false (and missed alarms) 
and the available warning time: as the seismic network collects more data on 
the earthquake, predictions will improve, but the time until shaking will 
decrease (Iervolino et al., 2009). The short warning time means that 
automated decision and mitigation actions are usually the preferred (or the 
only) option. From an engineering perspective, the real-time probabilistic 
assessment of source parameters (e.g., magnitude and source-to-site 
distance) and/or earthquake-induced ground-motion IMs, is the first step from 
real-time seismology to structural performance. However, it is well known that 
the IM may be poorly informative with respect to the structural response, 
consequent damage level and expected loss: the real-time prediction of an IM 
is not a reliable basis to decide whether to issue an alarm. Hence, quantifying 
in real-time the structural response or even the loss (i.e., costs) for a structure 
of interest is a sounder basis for the warning management/alarm threshold 
setting.  
This can be done within the framework of the performance-based earthquake 
engineering (PBEE; e.g., Porter et al. (2007), as discussed in detail in Iervolino 
(2011), estimating the seismic performance of 
structure/infrastructure/engineering systems in terms of metrics of interest to 
stakeholders (i.e., dollars, deaths, and downtime), considering individual 
building/infrastructure components (structural, non-structural and contents), 
and accounting for all important sources of uncertainty. To achieve this, 
accurate yet (computationally) efficient regional structural response prediction 
methods must be coupled with real-time seismic hazard analysis to assess, in 
real-time, seismic damage and associated losses in order to trigger planned 
mitigation actions (e.g., alerting occupants, controlling elevators, etc). Some 
recent studies (e.g., Maddaloni et al., 2013; Velazquez et al., 2017) have also 
discussed the control of structures as a possible advanced structural 
engineering application of EEW, especially in areas where the available 
warning time is very short (near the so-called blind-zone). For instance, a 
building could change its dynamic properties within a few seconds (or 
milliseconds) to better withstand the approaching ground shaking. The 
combined use of EEW and structural control, particularly semi-active devices, 
may reduce the structural vulnerability (and resulting losses) of specific 
systems. For instance, critical buildings which must be operational for 
emergency management purposes right after the event (e.g., hospitals, fire 
stations, or lifelines) could benefit from such systems. 
It is worth noting that a PBEE approach can allow one to compare the 
expected losses corresponding to the three different possible outcomes of any 
EEW system: 1) performing an accurate mitigation action; 2) triggering false 
alarms; and 3) missing alarms. As discussed in Iervolino (2011), regardless of 
the applications to be designed, three essential design variables must be 
considered to assess the feasibility of implementing a given action: a) the 
required warning time; b) the false alarm acceptability; and c) the expected 
loss mitigation and related costs. 
2.2 Regional and On-site EEW systems 
According to the configuration of the networks/sensors, EEW systems can be 
conceptually classified as regional and on-site systems; Figure 3. The 
following sections describe the specific features of each system and provide a 
few examples of locations where they have been installed. 
Figure 3. The two possible approaches to EEW. In the network-based approach, the lead-time is equal 
to the S-arrival time at the target minus the first-P at the network minus any processing/computation 
time; in the single-station approach the lead-time is equal 
2.2.1 Regional EEW systems 
A regional EEW system is based on a dense sensor network covering a 
geographical area of high seismicity. When an earthquake occurs, the relevant 
source parameters (e.g., event location and magnitude) are estimated from 
the early portion of recorded signals at sensors close to the rupture; estimates 
of the source parameters are used to predict, with a quantified confidence, a 
ground-motion IM at a distant site where target structures of interest are 
located. Regional EEW system typically require a number of stations that have 
triggered the arrival of the P-wave signal to provide stable early estimates of 
earthquake location (and source-to-site distance, R), earthquake magnitude 
(M), and ground-motion distribution in terms of the selected ground-motion IM.  
It is worth noting that methodologies for regional EEW generally assume a 
point-source model of the earthquake source and isotropic wave amplitude 
attenuation. These assumptions are often inadequate to represent the 
earthquake source of large earthquakes and wave amplitude attenuation 
effects, introducing significant biases in the real-time estimation of earthquake 
location and magnitude. Within this context, new developments have been 
proposed, such as the use of continuous Global Positioning Systems (GPS) 
measurements and methodologies to estimate fault rupture extent in real time 
by classifying stations into near source and far source. Another option is a fast-
kinematic inversion of the rupture process, searching for the fault geometry, 
the focal mechanism, and the slip distribution on the fault plane. 
2.2.2 On-site EEW systems 
Site-specific, or on-site, EEW system consist of an array of sensors or a single 
sensor located in the vicinity of a single target site or structure/infrastructure 
of interest. Site-specific systems provide estimates of peak-ground-motion IMs 
(e.g., peak ground acceleration, PGA, or peak ground velocity, PGV) based 
directly on the amplitude and predominant period of the initial recorded P-wave 
signal. This is achieved by implementing empirical regressions correlating the 
measurements obtained on the P-wave recordings and the final IM. Adopting 
this type of relationships allows a user for faster computations/ warning 
issuance as independent magnitude estimates are not required, differently to 
the regional EEW approach described above.  
Generally, on-site EEW systems are threshold-based, i.e., the warning is given 
when the measured P-wave peak amplitude exceeds a pre-defined critical 
threshold that is based on the predicted S-wave peak ground-motion 
amplitude (This critical threshold is usually related to the ground acceleration 
amplitudes recorded by the EEW system, but might also be associated to the 
displacement or acceleration demands that can induce damage (losses) to the 
case-study structure/infrastructure; Zollo et al., 2014b; Velazquez et al., 2017). 
However, small-to-moderate earthquakes (M<6) might produce large 
amplitudes due to high-frequency spikes, and therefore false alarms can be 
triggered. To overcome this issue, a different approach is considered in which 
combinations of P-wave peaks and the P-wave predominant period are 
merged into a single proxy to provide more confident warnings (e.g., Wu and 
Kanamori, 2005). This idea has been furthermore updated by Colombelli et al. 
(2012a) and Zollo et al. (2010), who have proposed a threshold-based EEW 
methodology combining real-time measurements of the average period  (c) of 
the first seconds of the P- wave signal, and the peak displacement amplitude 
(Pd) of initial P- and S-wave triggers, at sensors located at incrementing 
distances away from the epicentre of the earthquake. The measured values of 
Pd and c are compared to threshold values, which are set for a specific 
minimum magnitude and instrumental intensity. Finally, at each recording site, 
an alert level is assigned based on a decisional table with four levels defined 
upon threshold values of the parameters Pd and c. 
A variant of on-site approaches also exists, denominated front-detection 
system; it resembles a fence against seismic waves, where sensors are 
strategically located between the earthquakes likely source and the target to 
be protected. This type of system is especially convenient when the seismic 
sources are at a significant distance away from the target to be protected. 
Front-detection systems provide the opportunity to maximise the warning time, 
allowing the activation of safety procedures before the arrival of ground 
shaking (Iervolino, 2011). An example of front-detection system is the one 
installed on the west coast of Mexico, that serves as a barrier-type network 
and provides warnings for Mexico City (Espinosa-Aranda et al., 2011). Mexico 
City is located, on average, 300 km away from the west coast area of the 
country, where the most significant potential seismic sources have been 
localised (Asgary et al., 2007; Lockman, 2005; Wurman et al., 2007). 
Front-detection systems issue alerts when two or more nodes of the array 
record a ground acceleration amplitude larger than a defined critical value 
(Zollo et al., 2014b). For typical regional distances, the peak acceleration at 
the fence nodes is expected to be associated with the S-wave train, so that 
the distance between the network and the target is set to maximize the lead 
time, which for this instance is the travel time of S-waves from the fence to the 
target site. Similar to the on-site systems, front-detection systems do not 
estimate earthquake source parameters (magnitude and location), as a local 
measure of the effects (e.g., the ground motion) is already available (e.g., 
Iervolino, 2011). 
P-wave-based, regional, and on-site EEW methods/systems can be integrated 
in a unique alert system, which can be used in the very first seconds after a 
moderate-to-large earthquake to determine the earthquake location and 
magnitude and to map the most probable damaged zone, using data from 
receivers located at increasing distances from the source. 
2.3 Current state-of-the-art methodologies and developments in 
This section describes the most popular current algorithms implemented for 
the real-time detection of the event, estimation of the earthquake source 
parameters and ground shaking, as well as the methodologies recently used 
for triggering alerts. The following summary is based in the studies carried out 
by Allen and Melgar (2019), Satriano et al. (2011b), Zollo et al. (2014), and 
Cremen and Galasso (2020).  
2.3.1 Event detection and estimation of the location 
The following section summarises the most popular current methods for event 
detection and EEW estimation of event locations. 
Procedures used in Point-source regional EEW systems. 
Two different approaches have been implemented for point-source systems.  
1) Estimation of location, using only the information from stations that have 
been triggered by the arrival of P-waves (Table 1). This method is theoretically 
straightforward and computationally efficient to implement, but it only uses 
information from triggered stations, which means it is less certain when 
compared to the location estimates from the procedure of Table 2. 
Table 1: Estimating location, using only information from triggered stations 
Description of Method 
Seismic arrivals at a station are detected using a picker method, such as the 
short-term-average/long-term-average STA/LTA procedure (Allen, 1978). 
Once a sufficient number of stations have triggered (in accordance with the 
underlying EEW algorithm), the location is estimated using a grid search 
routine to minimise the residuals between observed seismic phases and 
those predicted from a velocity model. 
Inputs Outputs 
P-wave arrival times at triggered stations; Velocity 
model; Seismic station locations 
Epicentre /hypocentre location 
estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
ElarmS (Allen et al., 2009a; Chung et al., 2019; Kuyuk et al., 2014; Wurman 
et al., 2007), in the USA, Chile and Israel; eBEAR (Chen et al., 2015; Hsiao 
et al., 2009; Wu and Teng, 2002) in Taiwan; and the Beijing EEW system 
(Peng et al., 2011), in China. 
2) Estimation of location, using the information from both triggered and non-
triggered stations (Table 2). Although the estimates from this procedure are 
more reliable than those of Table 1, this method is more challenging to 
implement in seismic networks that have non-uniform station telemetry delays 
(Cua et al., 2009). 
Table 2: Estimating location, using information from both triggered and non-triggered stations 
Description of Method 
When a seismic arrival is detected at the first station, the location is initially 
constrained either by the geometric surface that represents the set of all 
locations closer to the station than any other station in the network, or 
characteristics of the early waveform envelope. Once two stations have 
triggered, location uncertainty is reduced to a conditional surface based on 
the time between the P-wave detections. The location can be estimated 
directly when the third station is triggered. Alternatively, grid search routines 
are used to increasingly constrain the location after the second or third 
trigger. 
Inputs Outputs 
P-wave arrival times at triggered stations; Velocity 
model; Seismic station locations 
Epicentre/ hypocentre 
location estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
JMA (Horiuchi et al., 2005; Rydelek and Pujol, 2004), in Japan; Virtual 
Seismologist (Cua, 2005; Cua et al., 2009; Cua and Heaton, 2007), in the 
USA, Switzerland, Costa Rica, El Salvador y Nicaragua; and PRESTo 
(Satriano et al., 2008, 2011a), in Italy, Austria, Slovenia and Spain. 
On-site EEW system methodology.  
The on-site method (Table 3) is very rapid and thus useful for near-source 
target sites, however it is significantly less accurate than the rest of the 
procedures described in this section, since it relies on data from only one 
seismic station. 
Table 3: Estimating location from a single seismic station 
Description of Method 
The distance is estimated from empirical equations, which include variables 
such as the peak P-wave amplitude and an estimate of the magnitude.  
Inputs Outputs 
Required parameters for empirical equations 
(e.g. peak P-wave amplitude); 
Epicentre/Hypocentre estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
UrEDAS (Nakamura, 1988; Nakamura and Saita, 2007) in Japan; and 
EDAS-MAS (Peng et al., 2013), in China. 
Finite-fault algorithms.  
The outputs from finite-fault algorithms tend to be the most accurate in 
comparison with the point-source and on-site methodologies, however they 
typically take longer to compute. This might represent a disadvantage for EEW 
systems, as longer computation times can reduce lead times. 
Two finite-fault procedures have been implemented for constraining the 
earthquakes location: 
1) Estimating the earthquake centroid by using ground motion image-
recognition techniques (Table 4).  
Table 4: Estimating earthquake centroid, using ground motion image-recognition techniques 
Description of Method 
 An image () of the observed spatial peak ground motion amplitude 
distribution is compared to theoretical templates (), which are calculated 
from a ground-motion model for line sources of varying length. The optimum 
 is then found by minimising the misfit between  and , and the centroid 
of the corresponding line source is equivalent to the centroid of the 
earthquake. 
Inputs Outputs 
Theoretical ground motion templates, modelled from GMMs; 
Observed (high frequency) ground motion amplitudes; Seismic 
station locations 
Centroid 
estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
FinDER (Bse et al., 2012, 2015, 2018), in the USA, Switzerland, Chile, 
Costa Rica, El Salvador and Nicaragua). 
2) Estimating earthquake depth, using geodetic observations (Table 5).  
Table 5: Estimating earthquake depth, using geodetic observations 
Description of Method 
Initial estimates of earthquake depth are obtained from grid searches based 
on peak ground displacement (PGD) scaling relationships, using information 
on magnitude and pre-computed epicentral distance estimates. Final depth 
estimates are computed from a centroid moment tensor calculation, using 
static offsets from GPS data. 
Inputs Outputs 
Epicentral distance estimates (from another EEW algorithm); 
GPS displacement waveforms; Greens functions 
Depth 
estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
G-FAST (Crowell et al., 2013, 2018; Melgar et al., 2015), in the USA and 
Chile. 
Computation of uncertainties. 
Two of the point-source algorithms previously described account for 
uncertainties when calculating estimates of the events location. PRESTo 
(Table 2) computes a Probability Density Function (PDF) for the location of the 
hypocentre, that is parametrised by a mean estimate and a covariance matrix 
that captures spatial uncertainty. Virtual Seismologist (Table 2) adopts a 
Bayesian approach, in which the location and magnitude of the event are 
jointly conditioned on the already available set of ground motions, and the PDF 
represents an existing level of knowledge on relative earthquake probability. 
2.3.2 Magnitude Estimation 
This section introduces the most common procedures for estimating the 
magnitude of the event. 
Point-source methodologies. 
Two different approaches are currently being implemented for the real-time 
estimation of the magnitude of an earthquake: 
1) Estimation of magnitude from information obtained in the very initial portion 
of seismic waveforms. This method (Table 6) takes advantage of empirical 
relationships between the magnitude of the event and physical characteristics 
of its initial P-waves. The relationships used herein have been found to 
saturate for large magnitudes. 
Table 6: Estimating magnitude from information in the very initial portion of seismic waveforms 
Description of Method 
The magnitude is estimated from the amplitude (e.g. peak displacement) 
and/or the frequency content (e.g. characteristic period) of the initial few 
seconds of the incoming P-wave train, using empirical relationships. 
Estimates are typically averaged over a number of seismic stations 
Inputs Outputs 
Initial seismic waveform; Magnitude-ground motion 
empirical relationship 
Magnitude estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
ElarmS (Allen and Kanamori, 2003; Tsang et al., 2007; Wu and Zhao, 2006; 
Wurman et al., 2007), in the USA, Chile and Israel; Virtual Seismologist 
(Cua, 2005; Cua et al., 2009; Cua and Heaton, 2007) in the USA, 
Switzerland, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Nicaragua; REWS (Bse et al., 
2007; Ionescu et al., 2007; Marmureanu et al., 2011), in Rumania; eBEAR 
(Chen et al., 2015; Hsiao et al., 2009), in Taiwan; KEEWS (Sheen et al., 
2014, 2017), in South Korea; the Beijing EEW system (Peng et al., 2011), in 
China; and the EEW system for Souther-Iberia (Carranza et al., 2013), in 
Spain. 
2) Estimating the magnitude of large earthquakes by increasing time windows 
of initial seismic waveforms. This method (Table 7) uses a longer waveform 
window of that in Table 6. This is implemented to avoid saturation of the 
aforementioned relationships. 
Table 7: Estimating magnitude from information in increasing time windows of initial seismic 
waveforms 
Description of Method 
The method is similar to the procedure outlined in Table 6, except that the 
amplitude and frequency content parameters of the empirical relationships 
are measured over larger/increasingly expanding time windows, and thus 
may also incorporate information from S-waves.  
Inputs Outputs 
Initial seismic waveform; Magnitude-ground motion 
empirical relationship 
Magnitude estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
PRESTo (Colombelli et al., 2012b, 2014, 2015; Lancieri and Zollo, 2008; 
Satriano et al., 2011a; Zollo et al., 2006), in Italy, Austria, Slovenia and 
Spain; SASMEX (Cullar et al., 2017; Suarez et al., 2009), in Mexico; and 
JMA (Kamigaichi, 2004) in Japan. 
On-site EEW system methodology.  
This algorithm (Table 8) allows for a rapid computation of the magnitude at 
sites close to the epicentre. However, it is less reliable than the rest listed in 
this section, due to its dependence on the data provided by a single station. 
Table 8: Estimating magnitude from initial characteristics of a single seismic waveform 
Description of Method 
The magnitude is estimated from the amplitude (e.g. peak displacement) 
and the frequency content (e.g. the predominant period) of the initial few 
seconds of the incoming P-wave train, using empirical relationships 
Inputs Outputs 
Required amplitude and frequency parameters Magnitude estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
UrEDAS (Nakamura, 1988; Nakamura and Saita, 2007); OnSite (Bse et 
al., 2009; Kanamori, 2005), in the USA; and EDAS-MAS (Peng et al., 2013), 
in China 
Finite Fault algorithms.  
These algorithms provide the most realistic estimation of the magnitude of the 
earthquake, as they consider measurements of the entire fault plane.  
Two different implementations of finite-fault algorithms are currently operating 
in some EEW systems:  
1) Estimating the earthquake magnitude by using ground motion image-
recognition techniques (Table 9).  
Table 9: Estimating magnitude from rupture length 
Description of Method 
The magnitude is estimated from an empirical magnitude-rupture length 
equation (e.g., Wells and Coppersmith 1994). 
Inputs Outputs 
Rupture length estimate Magnitude estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
FinDER (Bse et al., 2012), in the USA, Switzerland, Chile, Costa Rica, El 
Salvador and Nicaragua. 
2) Estimating magnitude using geodetic observations (Table 10).  
Table 10: Estimating magnitude from geodetic observations 
Description of Method 
Static offsets are obtained from displacement time series that are measured 
using a geodetic data collection system, such as GPS or Global Navigational 
Satellite System (GNSS). An inversion technique recovers slip estimates 
from the static offsets, which are then used to calculate the magnitude 
Inputs Outputs 
Fault geometry estimates; GPS/GNSS displacement waveforms; 
Seismic station locations; Remaining parameters of the inversion 
method used (e.g. Greens functions, station seismograms) 
Magnitude 
estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
G-larmS, BEFORES and G-FAST (Allen and Ziv, 2011; Colombelli et al., 
2013; Crowell et al., 2009, 2012, 2016; Grapenthin et al., 2014b, 2014a; 
Minson et al., 2014; Ohta et al., 2012; Wright et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 
2014), in the USA; G-FAST (Crowell et al., 2018), in Chile; and GARD 
(Kawamoto et al., 2016, 2017) in Japan 
Computation of uncertainties. 
Different algorithms carry out the computation of uncertainties in magnitude 
estimates. PRESTo represents the magnitude as a normal PDF; the average 
value is calculated from an empirical relationship between the initial 
characteristics of the P-wave and the magnitude, and the standard deviation 
depends on errors in the coefficients of such empirical relationship, as well as 
uncertainty in the distance estimate. Virtual seismologist conditions the 
magnitude and the location on the set of observed ground motions, as 
previously described in Chapter 2.3.1. The EEW of Spain, G-FAST, OnSite, 
and EDAS-MAS, consider confidence intervals on the median of magnitude 
estimates, which are equal in width to two standard deviations of the empirical 
relationship adopted to obtain the magnitude. 
2.3.3 Ground shaking estimation 
This section presents the most common EEW approaches currently adopted 
for the real-time estimation of ground shaking. 
Ground shaking estimation in Regional EEW systems.  
Three different approaches are used to estimate ground shaking in Regional 
EEW systems. The most common IMs predicted by these algorithms are PGA 
and PGV. 
1) Estimation of ground shaking using empirical attenuation relationships. The 
estimation of ground shaking (Table 11), in terms of IMs, is typically computed 
using empirical attenuation relationships, considering the earthquake source 
parameters available after implementing the approaches previously described. 
IMs quantify the probable damage potential of an earthquake-induced ground 
motion with respect to a specific engineered system (e.g., a structure), and 
can be used to predict the associated seismic response of the system (Baker 
and Allin Cornell, 2005). 
Table 11: Estimating ground shaking from attenuation equations 
Description of Method 
Source distances to target sites of interest are first computed based on 
earthquake location estimates. Empirical attenuation relations (e.g., GMMs) 
are then used in combination with these distances and the magnitude 
estimate, to calculate spatial estimates of ground shaking. 
Inputs Outputs 
Magnitude estimate; Location estimate; Remaining 
parameters of the attenuation relationship used (e.g. site 
condition) 
Ground motion 
amplitude estimates 
Relevant algorithms and references 
ElarmS (Allen et al., 2009a), in the USA, Chile and Israel; PRESTo (Satriano 
et al., 2011a), in Italy, Austria, Slovenia and Spain; Virtual Seismologist 
(Cua, 2005), in the USA, Switzerland, Costa Rica, El Salvador and 
Nicaragua; and JMA (Kamigaichi, 2004), in Japan. 
2) Estimation of ground shaking from ground motion recordings (Table 12).  
Table 12: Estimating spatially distributed ground shaking from ground motion recordings 
Description of Method 
Recorded ground motion estimates are translated into spatially distributed 
maps of ground shaking, using interpolation procedures or information on 
ground motion spatial correlation. 
Inputs Outputs 
Ground motion recordings; Seismic station 
locations 
Ground motion amplitude 
estimates 
Relevant algorithms and references 
FinDER (Bse et al., 2012, 2018), in the USA, Switzerland, Chile, Costa 
Rica, El Salvador and Nicaragua; and ElarmS (Allen et al., 2009a), in the 
USA, Chile and Israel. 
3) Estimation of ground shaking from initial characteristics of multiple seismic 
waveforms (Table 13).  
Table 13: Estimating ground shaking from initial characteristics of multiple seismic waveforms 
Description of Method 
A first image of the seismic wavefield is obtained from the initial seismic 
waveforms recorded, using interpolation (e.g., data assimilation) 
techniques. This image is input to a physics-based wave propagation model 
to forecast final ground motion amplitudes. 
Inputs Outputs 
Spatially distributed seismic waveforms; Remaining 
parameters of the wave propagation model (e.g. Greens 
functions) 
Ground motion 
amplitude estimates 
Relevant algorithms and references 
PLUM (Hoshiba and Aoki, 2015; Kodera et al., 2016, 2018), in Japan 
Ground shaking estimation in On-site EEW systems.  
On-site systems traditionally compute rapid PGV estimates, using only the 
information from P-waves recorded at a single seismic station (Table 14). 
Similar to the estimation of earthquake source parameters, the estimates of 
ground shaking in On-site systems are less accurate as only one station 
provides seismic data.  
Table 14: Estimating ground shaking from initial characteristics of a single seismic waveform 
Description of Method 
PGV is estimated from the amplitude (e.g., peak displacement) of the initial 
few seconds of the incoming P-wave train, using empirical relationships. 
Inputs Outputs 
Initial seismic waveform PGV estimate 
Relevant algorithms and references 
Onsite (Bse et al., 2009), in the USA; PRESToPLUS (Colombelli et al., 2015; 
Zollo et al., 2010, 2014a), in Italy; and the EEW System for Southern Iberia 
(Carranza et al., 2013), in Spain 
Computation of uncertainties. 
Most of the algorithms listed in this section (e.g., PRESTo, G-FAST, OnSite, 
and EDAS-MAS) contemplate the uncertainty by considering a confidence 
interval on the estimate with width equivalent to two standard deviations of the 
empirical relationships adopted to compute ground shaking, assuming modal 
values for the source-related variables. On the other hand, Virtual 
Seismologist accounts for the complete lognormal PDF of ground shaking from 
the relevant attenuation relationship, incorporating the uncertainties quantified 
in Chapters 2.3.1 and 2.3.2. 
2.3.4 Decision module for alert notification 
Four different state-of-art criterions are currently used to decide whether or not 
triggering an alert:  
1) Decision module to trigger alerts based only on the estimated magnitude of 
the event (Table 15).  
Table 15: Triggering alerts based on magnitude 
Description of Method 
A warning is triggered if the magnitude estimate exceeds a certain threshold. 
The estimates are compared to magnitude bins previously computed that 
relate the magnitude to the potential damage that the earthquake might 
induce in each region of interest. 
Inputs Outputs 
Magnitude estimate Warning trigger (yes/no) 
Relevant algorithms and references 
SASMEX (Cullar et al., 2017; Suarez et al., 2009), in Mexico; KEEWS 
(Sheen et al., 2014, 2017), in South Korea; and the Beijing EEW system 
(Peng et al., 2011, 2013) in China 
2) Decision module to trigger alerts based on the estimated magnitude and 
epicentral distance (Table 16).  
Table 16: Triggering alerts based on magnitude and epicentral distance 
Description of Method 
Epicentral distances to target sites of interest are first computed based on 
earthquake location estimates. The magnitude and distance estimates are 
compared with magnitude-epicentral distance maps of predicted damage; if 
they lie within the portion of the map where damage is predicted, a warning 
is triggered.  
Inputs Outputs 
Magnitude estimate; Location estimate Warning trigger (yes/no) 
Relevant algorithms and references 
UrEDAS (Nakamura, 1988; Nakamura and Saita, 2007), in Japan 
3) Decision module to trigger alerts based on ground motion amplitude (Table 
Table 17: Triggering alerts based on ground motion amplitude 
Description of Method 
A warning is released if the estimated values of ground motion amplitude 
(e.g., PGA or cumulative absolute velocity) exceed a damaging critical 
threshold 
Inputs Outputs 
Ground motion amplitude estimate (e.g. PGA) Warning trigger (yes/no) 
Relevant algorithms and references 
OnSite (Bse et al., 2009), in the USA; PRESTo (Satriano et al., 2011a), in 
Italy; Virtual Seismologist (Cua, 2005; Cua and Heaton, 2007) in the USA 
and Switzerland; Compact UrEDAS (Nakamura, 2004, 2008; Nakamura and 
Saita, 2007), in Japan; and IEEWS (Alcik et al., 2009; Erdik et al., 2003; Oth 
et al., 2010), in Turkey 
4) Decision module to trigger alerts based on calculated seismic intensity 
(Table 18). Seismic intensity represents the most common decision variable 
among the methods included in this section.   
Table 18: Triggering alerts based on calculated seismic intensity 
Description of Method 
Seismic intensity is calculated from characteristics of the event waveform 
(e.g., peak ground motion amplitude) observed at seismic stations, using 
empirical equations. Warnings are triggered in a region if the estimated 
seismic intensity exceeds a certain value on the corresponding seismic 
intensity scale. 
Inputs Outputs 
Ground motion/seismic waveform 
information (e.g. PGV) 
Seismic intensity estimate; Warning 
trigger (yes/no) 
Relevant algorithms and references 
ElarmS (Allen et al., 2009a; Allen and Melgar, 2019; Elizabeth Cochran et 
al., 2018; Ruhl et al., 2019; Wald et al., 1999; Wurman et al., 2007), in the 
USA; PRESToPLUS (Colombelli et al., 2012a, 2013; Picozzi et al., 2015b; 
Zollo et al., 2010, 2014a), in Italy; JMA and PLUM (Hoshiba et al., 2008; 
Kamigaichi, 2004; Kubo et al., 2011; Liu and Yamada, 2014), in Japan; 
eBEAR (Chen et al., 2015), in Taiwan; and REWS (Bse et al., 2007), in 
Rumania. 
The idea of implementing decision modules based on losses and damage has 
also been proposed by different authors. Examples include multi-criteria 
decision making approaches to select a trigger threshold for probable 
damaged bridges (Le Guenan et al., 2016), alerts based on losses quantified 
as casualties due to people trapped in elevators (Wu et al., 2016), and the 
performance-based EEW (PBEEW) approach (Iervolino, 2011; Iervolino et al., 
2006, 2007a).  
2.4 Limitations of the current EEW State-of-the-art algorithms 
Considering the algorithms and methodologies introduced in Chapter 2.3 of 
this report, it is noticeable that currently EEW systems release warnings 
without considering damage/loss/harm metrics (Cremen and Galasso, 2020), 
rather the thresholds are calibrated in terms of estimated earthquake source 
parameters and/or ground shaking. Therefore, the warnings are triggered 
relying mainly on engineering judgment and not on explicit damage/loss 
analysis. This represents a substantial limitation, totally associated with 
decision-making procedures (e.g., activation of automatic procedures), that 
can be divided in three components: 
- The general assumption that a given level of ground shaking will result in a 
specific level of damage. Regional EEW systems that release warnings based 
on estimations of ground shaking do not account for varying levels of structural 
fragilities across the affected area. It has been shown that damage probability 
and severity for a given level of ground motion considerable fluctuate across 
different types of structure/infrastructure/systems. In addition, it has been 
highlighted that the relationship between ground shaking and damage at a 
target site is highly uncertain (Cremen and Baker, 2019). Finally, failure to 
account for the uncertainties just mentioned tends to increase the potential of 
releasing false and missed alarms (Cremen and Galasso, 2020). 
- Lack of losses metrics in the decision-making procedure. Accounting for 
losses is an important variable for decision-making, as decision-makers are 
more interested in measuring the value of an alert based on its ability to assure 
business continuity, rather than just being aware of the probable cost of 
physical damage to the site (Cremen and Galasso, 2020). This idea has also 
been introduced by Moehle and Deierlein (2004), providing results in terms of 
economic losses, casualties and downtime, is more meaningful for decision 
makers and stakeholder groups, rather than structural damage in terms of an 
Engineering Demand Parameter (EDP). 
- The alerts released by the system in terms of engineering parameters are 
difficult for the public to understand (Allen and Melgar, 2019; Velazquez et al., 
2020). Confusing alerts make the public less likely to take preventative action 
(Goltz, 2002), which contrasts the actual function of the warning. To maximise 
the benefits of EEW alerts, they should contain robust messages (Cochran 
and Husker, 2019), which is best achieved using risk-orientated decision 
metrics (Cremen and Galasso, 2020). 
2.5 Recent development in engineering applications of EEW. 
As mentioned in chapter 1, and as it can be seen in chapter 2.3, the research 
regarding EEW has been the main goal for seismologists since the concept 
was formulated. Nevertheless, potential applications of these systems can be 
designed for real-time seismic mitigation and risk management or different 
critical structures and infrastructures. 
The most reasonable measures seem to be automated safety procedures 
rather than triggering alert to the population, as sometimes warning times are 
not enough for individuals to carry out protection actions (drop, cover, and 
hold-on or move to a safer location). 
Few are the designed applications available in the literature. This chapter 
provides a brief summary of some of the methodologies proposed by different 
authors, their main goals and the results achieved. 
2.5.1 Control of Elevators in tall buildings  
Automatically stopping elevators in high-rise buildings is one of the 
applications that have been designed to perform emergency response actions. 
This methodology has been applied by Kubo et al. (2011) on a 29-stories high-
rise building located in the Shinjunku campus of Kogakuin University, in Tokyo 
(Figure 4). Through a Real-time Strong-motion Monitoring System (RSMS), P- 
waves and S- waves arrival times are detected and the expected JMA intensity 
is estimated (chapter 3.5.3). Then, using a simplistic lumped mass model of 
the building (Kubo et al., 2008), displacement and acceleration demands for 
each floor of the structure can be obtained. For this particular building, a 
threshold of 2.1 cm in the displacement response of the building is defined, 
therefore, an alarm would be provided, and elevators would be stopped at the 
nearest floor, if this critical value is exceeded.  
Figure 4. Schematic representation of the 29-stories structure (Adapted from Kubo et al. 2011). 
Cheng et al. (2014) follow in general the same principle previously described, 
but differently, the method is based on a Performance-based Earthquake Early 
Warning (PBEEW) approach. The study is carried out for 29 different buildings 
located in the State of California, where a seismic sensing device must be 
installed in any single elevator, according to the state law. Considering the 
PBEEW framework, once the EEW system provides estimates of the 
earthquake source parameters, the first step is to calculate intensity expected 
demands (PGA) by applying existing Ground Motion Prediction Equations 
(e.g., Boore and Atkinson 2008). Then, the response of the building of interest 
is assessed by adopting a simplified structural continuum model proposed by 
Miranda & Taghavi (2005). Different warning messages are triggered by the 
system and elevators are stopped immediately at the nearest floor if the mean 
value of Peak Floor Acceleration (PFA) exceeds a critical value of PFA 
previously defined (Table 19). 
Table 19. Human comfort level to acceleration. Adapted from Cheng et al. 2014. 
acceleration 
Comfort level 
Early warning 
message 
<0.5% g Not perceptible No shaking 
0.51.5% g 
Threshold of 
perceptible 
Minor shaking 
1.55% g Annoying Moderate shaking 
>5% g Very annoying Strong shaking 
2.5.2 Real-time Assessment of train railways 
Esposito & Emolo (2014) proposed a feasibility study for the real-time 
assessment of the Circumvesuviana Napoli Railway, based on a classical 
PBEE approach. 
The Napoli Railway is composed of six lines which provide transportation to 
about 38 million passengers. Among the six branches, special interest is given 
to the Napoli-Baiano line, due to its proximity to the active fault system where 
the epicentre of the 1980 Mw 6.9 Campania-Lucania Earthquake was located.  
Damages induced by earthquakes in Railway Systems include examples such 
as, the stoppage of operations on a fraction of the system, permanent 
ground/railways deformations produced by fault displacements, ground failure 
effects, derailment of trains due to the ground acceleration. Within the 
Circumvesuviana network, the elements of the system that are more 
vulnerable to earthquake forces are: Viaducts, embankments and tracks. 
Viaducts are mainly damaged by permanent ground deformations, 
embankments by acceleration and velocity of the tremor, and tracks by ground 
failure effects such as liquefaction or falling of rocks. Line number six is 
deployed minimally on ground and the majority of its structure is settled on 
viaducts. 
The larger sources of losses in a railway system can be listed as follows: 
derailment of trains, collision of incoming trains, and falling of trains from 
significant heights. Therefore, alarms thresholds for this section of the system 
were calibrated considering two actions if an alarm is triggered: Stop trains 
and carry out a deep and careful inspection of the railway or reducing the 
velocity of the trains and perform a fast inspection of the railways. 
For earthquakes with Mw < 5.5, the impact on triggering false alarms is 
investigated. It is concluded that, in terms of induced losses due to the action 
taken, false alarms represent minimum losses in comparison with the benefits 
of triggering alarms. In addition, considering that passengers in the area 
expect occasional delays up to one hour every two years, delayed trains by 
one hour, due to a false alarm, might not represent a considerable impact. On 
the other hand, for earthquakes Mw > 5.5, users of the network might 
understand long inspection times as the damage in the system can be quite 
high (even if a false alarm is triggered). 
2.5.3 EEW Systems for seismic mitigation purposes in Nuclear power 
plants 
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) defines automatic SCRAM 
trip systems procedures (ASTS) as a potential seismic mitigation strategy 
against earthquakes (IAEA, 2011). ASTS seismic mitigation efforts related to 
EEW include actions such as: shutdown of reactors, turbines or generators 
systems, evacuation of the premises, fast access to fire-station tools, etcetera.  
According to Cauzzi et al. (2016), shutting down a reactor is a delicate 
procedure that requires long time to be performed, during which many pieces 
of the system will be operational and some not, including safety systems. 
Therefore, if the shutting down is performed during a seismic event, the 
vulnerability level will be considerable higher than the one that would be 
expected under normal full operations (Figure 5). This concept leads to the 
idea that shutting down a power plant due to seismic forces is a mitigation 
action that has to be performed before the arrival of shaking waves to the site 
of interest, which leads to the main concept of EEW. 
Figure 5. Vulnerability of a nuclear reactor following SCRAM. Adapted from Cauzzi et al. 2016. 
The decision-making process that defines whether to trigger an alarm or not 
for power plants may be defined considering a benefit-cost ratio, where an 
action with cost (C) would prevent losses (L), with a likelihood of occurrence 
(P) (Woo, 2013).  
The Swiss Seismological Service and the French Geological Survey, studied 
the feasibility of implementing EEW on Nuclear Power Plants (Cauzzi et al., 
2016). Based on the cost-benefit approach previously defined, four Nuclear 
Power Plants operating by Swissnuclear3 were tested by considering a 
historical earthquake catalogue of Switzerland. Earthquake demands provided 
by the EEW system were obtained by implementing the Virtual Seismologist 
approach (Cua and Heaton, 2007). The study concludes that EEW systems 
might be a potential tool for the protection of power plants, but triggering 
unnecessary false alarms is a very important issue that has to be properly 
studied. Cauzzi et al. (2016) shows that triggering a false alarm in Switzerland 
represents: 1) the reduction of the reactors lifetime, 2) economic losses from 
power sales, 3) time issues for the application to restart the plant, and 4) high 
costs for repowering up. In monetary terms, the losses related to no sales is, 
3 https://www.swissnuclear.ch/en/home.html 
for Switzerland, USD 1 million every day, and the applications cost to restart 
the plant is worth USD 250 million per SCRAM. 
An actual implementation of EEW for the protection of a Nuclear Power Plant 
in Lithuania is introduced by Wieland et al. (2000). Based on an on-site 
system, the network consists of six seismic stations (each with a three stations 
subsystem) surrounding the power plant, with a plant-station and station-
station distance of 30 km. In addition, a seventh station is installed in the main 
body of the power plant, in case the epicentre of the earthquake is within the 
protected 30 km radius. To prevent the core of the reactors from meltdown, 
two seconds are enough to perform the protection actions. Considering that 
an earthquake occurs outside the seismic fence protecting the plant, and that 
the velocity of S- waves is 3.5  4 km/s on average, a warning of 8.5s can be 
provided, which is much more than the time required to isolate the reactors. 
An alarm vote is considered when one of the stations record accelerations 
larger than 0.025g. Once 2 of the 3 substations have provided a vote, the 
seismic alarm is declared positive, and the reactors are shut down. 
2.5.4 EEW for the protection of natural gas networks 
As described by Zulfikar (2014), the Natural Gas Network of Istanbul has 
developed an approach that aims at preventing economic and human losses 
triggered by natural gas disasters due to earthquakes (e.g., fires due to broken 
pipelines and gas leakage). One of the goals of the project is the use of the 
Istanbul EEW system for the protection of the natural gas system of Istanbul.  
Designed as on-site system, and considering that short warning alerts are 
available, the unique but effective mitigation action that can be adopted in the 
network is the automatic shut-off of gas flow. The automatic shut-down is 
implemented if pre-defined threshold values in term of PGA or PGV are 
exceeded. In addition, damage maps of the affected areas of the network are 
instantly drawn and can be rapidly detected, so special engineering teams are 
sent to check and fix the possible affectations, reducing the risk of future non-
desired consequences. 
2.5.5 Integration of structural control and EEW  
Changing the dynamic properties of buildings (e.g., damping and/or stiffness) 
using isolators or dampers is an attractive seismic mitigation for the reduction 
of vulnerability and damages in these structures. Passive and semi-active 
strategies combined with EEW have been designed to accomplish the 
reduction of induced vibrations to buildings before the arrival of the oncoming 
tremor. Chapter 2.5.5 summarises the studies done so far in this matter. 
Seismic isolation using air bearings.  
Fujita et al. (2011) studied the implementation of air bearings as an isolation 
device for structures. By using this methodology, a thin air film is produced 
between the ground and the structure, isolating the building on a flat surface 
separated from any induced vibration coming from the ground (Figure 6). The 
activation of the floating mechanism can be triggered by any wind load, or 
small load, therefore, the system requires specific earthquake information, so 
it is not activated in wrong conditions. The information relevant of an 
earthquake is obtained by EEW (i.e., the EEW system managed by the JMA, 
chapter 3.5.3). According to the information provided by the system, the 
algorithm decides whether the building has to float or not. If the oncoming 
ground shaking activates the floating mechanism, the building would keep 
floating until the event is over. Once the earthquake has finished, the 
mechanism is off and the structure lands back on its original position. In the 
worse-case scenario of malfunctioning of the floating mechanism, the air 
bearings function as friction bearing pads, absorbing some of the seismic 
waves. 
The validation of this methodology is carried out on an isolated carbon steel 
frame with weight equal to 636kg. Four air bearing are located on all the 
corners of the frame, each with a bearing capacity of 235 kg. Sinusoidal waves 
are induced to the system on a shaking table during 16s with variated 
frequency between 1-10 HZ. The result of the test proves that the air bearings 
reduced the acceleration demand on the structure, leading to a positive 
isolation outcome. However, as the author mentions, adopting this 
methodology presents the following disadvantages: 
- The acceleration on the system is reduced significantly, nevertheless, the 
horizontal displacement generated during the flotation is considerable large. 
Considering a real structure, this effect could promote pounding events during 
a seismic event.  
- The system is complicated in assembling and operation in comparison with 
conventional isolation systems. In addition, the size of the components of the 
systems requires considerable space.  
- In case of an electric cut, which is high likely during large earthquakes, the 
air compressor would not work, avoiding the full operation of the air bearings.   
Figure 6. Air bearing isolation system. Adapted from Fujita et al. 2011. 
Semi-active independently Variable Dampers and EEW. 
De Iuliis and Faella (2013) developed a strategy to combine semi-active 
structural control with EEW. By calculating the frequency content of the 
recorded acceleration histogram at every station of any network, semi-active 
independently variable dampers (SAIVD) are activated adding damping and 
stiffness forces to the protected structure. The SAIVD, developed by 
Nagarajaiah and Narasimhan (2006), is composed by four linear visco-elastic 
spring-dashpot elements positioned in a rhombus configuration (Figure 7). The 
forces generated on the damper depend on the real-time variation of angle of 
the spring-dashpot elements or the aspect ratio of the rhombus configuration. 
This variation of angles is performed by a mechanical actuator that is 
calibrated to be activated according to the estimates of the EEW System. 
Figure 7. Analytical model of the variable stiffness/damping device. Adapted from De Iuliis and Faella 
2013. 
The device is tested on an isolated five degree of freedom system proposed 
by Johnson et al. (1998), that has been studied previously for the application 
of different structural control strategies. This structure is a lumped parameter 
model considered to have minimum effects given nonlinearities on the system 
dynamics. The effectiveness of the proposed methodology is tested by 
considering two sets of recorded ground motions: a set of earthquakes with 
signals with high energetic content unfavourable for isolated structures, and 
one set of unscaled records from Europe. Simulating an EEW procedure, for 
each event the Fast Fourier Transform of the acceleration signal of the 
oncoming earthquake is computed, obtaining the frequency content of the 
event. This information is used to estimate the seismic demand of the building, 
and accordingly the SAIVD is activated to add the required damping and 
stiffness to the structure. The overall results of the system reveal significant 
reduction of Drift Ratios on the structure, reducing the risk of global collapse. 
However, Peak Floor Accelerations showed to be significantly amplified in the 
superstructure (in the order of 1.6 compared to the results obtained with the 
uncontrolled structure), increasing the possibility of damage on non-structural 
elements. 
The fact of considering linear behaviours on the performance of the SAIVD 
and the response of the structure might represent a conservative approach for 
the test of isolation systems attached to structures. The demands obtained 
after the analysis may not represent accurately the predictions in terms of 
structural response and the dampers could be activated (or not) when it is not 
necessary.  
Variable Viscous Dampers and EEW 
Iervolino et al. (2010) tested a single degree of freedom system considering 
braces equipped with variable viscous dampers, as semi-active links. The 
devices, for comparison reasons, are set on passive on and controlled 
modes, as explained in chapter 4. 
Incremental Dynamic Analyses (IDA) were performed on the aforementioned 
structure, considering 21 European ground motion records, scaled from 0.1 g 
to 1 g, to obtain the probabilistic relationships between IMs and EDPs. The 
EDPs considered to assess the damage in the structure are Interstorey Drift 
Ratio (IDR) and PFA. 
This study concluded and proved, that the drift and the peak acceleration at 
the top floor of the structure may be reduced if EEW triggers structural control 
conditioned to the results given by Real Time Probabilistic Seismic Hazard 
Analysis (RTPSHA; explained in chapter 4). 
2.5.5.4 Magnetorheological dampers and EEW 
Maddaloni et al. (2013) , investigated the seismic response of a bridge located 
in Orange County, California (Figure 8), equipped with MR dampers (fully 
described in chapter 4). 
Figure 8. Benchmark highway bridge located in California. Adapted from Maddaloni et al. 2013. 
The study describes the methodology followed to design a calibrating 
algorithm of MR dampers given the information provided by EEW, aiming for 
the seismic protection of the bridge. The algorithm was calibrated by running 
non-linear time history analyses feeding the MR dampers with a different value 
of voltage, ranging from 0 to 10 V with a step of 25mV. The response of the 
structure was assessed considering three different EDP (peak base shear, 
peak base moment and peak mid-span displacement). For each EDP, a 
diagram correlating the value of voltage correspondent to that EDP was drawn 
and for each diagram the optimal value of voltage leading to the minimum 
value of EDP was found. The optimal voltage and the spectral acceleration (
S (t )
) representative of each earthquake were plotted and through a trial and 
error procedure, a hyperbolic tangent function was obtained. This function was 
the algorithm defining the optimal value of voltage that had to be applied to the 
MR damper in order to get the optimal response of the structure. 
Figure 9. Control algorithm for MR Dampers. Adapted from Maddaloni et al. 2013. 
Once the algorithm was defined, the effectiveness of the proposed system was 
compared with active, passive and semi-active control methodologies for 
seismic protection of the bridge. The evaluation was carried out by performing 
Non-linear Time History Analyses taking into consideration 16 ground motions, 
with moment magnitudes ranging from 5.75 to 7.62. 
This study concluded that the proposed system represents the best option for 
seismic protection of the bridge among all the techniques tested. 
Nevertheless, few limitations can be identified in this study: 
It is concluded that the uncertainties involved with the PGA estimates provided 
by the EEW system do not propagate to the seismic response of the structure. 
Following the methodology proposed by Iervolino et al. (2009), the dominating 
uncertainty in the real-time hazard analysis is that of the ground motion 
prediction equation. Thus, this uncertainty is still involved in the prediction of 
structural response. Therefore, the uncertainties in the prediction of PGA 
cannot be neglected as their impact in structural response is considerable. 
The optimal control algorithm of the MR dampers was designed by 
contemplating a single EDP. The designed algorithm should provide the 
optimal value of the voltage that would provide the optimal structural response 
considering a combination of the EDPs of interest (i.e., optimal peak base 
shear, peak base moment and peak mid-span displacement responses, 
simultaneously). Given that various EDPs have different measure 
units/variables, alternative methodologies (i.e., losses) must be used to 
provide a final algorithm able to incorporate the representative contribution of 
all the EDPs taken into consideration. 
2.6 Limitations of the current engineering applications of EEW 
As mentioned in Chapter 2.4, current practice for EEW is to activate mitigation 
actions when a given IM (e.g., PGA) exceeds a pre-defined IM critical 
threshold. For building-specific applications, this also represents a limitation 
as mitigation actions such as shutting down a power plant (Wieland et al., 
2000) or closing gas pipelines (Zulfikar, 2014) require to be activated in more 
certain scenarios. An attractive idea proposed in this thesis is to evolve the 
classic approach based on just one IM, to a framework that involves the 
combination of two or more Engineering Demand Parameters (e.g., IDR and 
PFA), that can effectively provide a better assessment of a 
structure/infrastructure during an earthquake. Furthermore, the approach 
introduced in this thesis is updated for application 1 (Chapter 4) in which the 
EDPs are computed in terms of losses (i.e., monetary costs). This strategy 
allows for the recognition of the most favourable performance of a structure in 
terms of two (or more) combined EDPs, different to other studies where the 
assessment is carried out by singular EDPs (e.g., Maddaloni et al. 2013). 
Some of the applications introduced in Chapter 2.5, control of elevators in tall 
buildings, for example, do set thresholds in terms of an EDP (i.e., PFA). 
However, the evaluation of EDPs still depends on the computed values of 
PGA. This is also a significant limitation as it has been shown that PGA might 
not be the best variable of choice as tall buildings are more sensible to long-
period acceleration (short frequency) and PGA is controlled by high-frequency 
components of the ground motion (Malhotra, 2006). The approach proposed 
for application 2 (Chapter 5), based on the computation of EDPs, represents 
a more efficient methodology as EDPs are directly conditioned on the 
earthquake source parameters estimated by an EEW.  
Chapter 3. Beyond the technical components of 
EEW: socio-organisational aspects 
3.1 Introduction and motivations 
In recent decades, there has been an increased tendency in the literature to 
investigate both the technical and the social-science-related aspects of 
disaster prevention/mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. Events 
such as the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, and the 2011 Tohoku 
(Japan) earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear meltdown, have raised awareness 
about the various domains/disciplines involved in risk 
forecasting/management strategies and the need to develop holistic 
approaches to early warning methods at a broader scale. According to the 
definition proposed by United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction 
(UNDRR), early warning systems can be defined as An integrated system of 
hazard monitoring, forecasting, disaster risk assessment, communication and 
preparedness activities, that enable individuals, communities, governments, 
businesses and others, to take timely action to reduce disaster risks in 
advance of hazardous events (UNDRR, Terminology updated February 
2017)4. The official definition also differentiates between early warning 
systems and multi-hazard early warning systems, suggesting the creation 
(where possible) of new platforms that could address several hazards and/or 
their impacts, increasing efficiency and coordination (UNISDR, 2017).  
The topic of early warnings has acquired considerably more interest also in 
practice, which is reflected in various policies and international guidelines. In 
2015, the member states of the United Nations endorsed the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR, 2015), where it is specified 
that early warning must be a priority and early warning systems have to be 
substantially evolved by 2030 (UNISDR, 2015). Early warning systems can 
also play a crucial role in mitigating highly complex events, such as cascading 
and interacting hazards and risks (Pescaroli et al., 2018). In 
4 https://www.preventionweb.net  
https://www.preventionweb.net/
particular, Pescaroli and Alexander (2018) suggested that researchers should 
better integrate the technical components of early warning with practices of 
organisational resilience, for supporting the management of decisional 
uncertainties. Common training with these systems, including simulation 
exercises/drills, are also essential. 
This chapter specifically focus on earthquake early warning (EEW) systems. 
These systems combine real-time seismic instruments, fast telemetry 
capability, data processing software and methodologies/models/algorithms 
that can 1) provide real-time seismic-source information (e.g., rupture location 
and magnitude) and/or the ground-shaking intensity of ongoing earthquakes 
in the early stage of fault rupture; and 2) issue (based on some decisional rule) 
real-time warnings to the public or other end users in large urbanised areas 
before they experience the strong shaking that might cause damage/loss. The 
warning triggered by an EEW system can be considered a tool to improve 
emergency preparedness/rapid response and ultimately to minimise economic 
and human losses during earthquakes (e.g., Heaton, 1985; Strauss and Allen, 
2016; Wieland, 2001). In the specific case of EEW, even recent review studies, 
such as the one by Allen and Melgar (2019), tend to focus on the technical 
aspects of EEW systems, without providing a full and systematic description 
of the multi- and cross-disciplinary challenges associated with EEW operation. 
Herein, cross-disciplinarity is considered as the fact of addressing one 
discipline from the perspective of another, without crossing techniques or 
ideas. On the other hand, multi-disciplinarity is defined as the combination of 
two or more disciplines working together, each contributing from their 
disciplinary knowledge5. 
Implementation of EEW systems should always consider local specificities, for 
instance in terms of risk perceptions at both individual and community levels, 
governance and institutional arrangements (Twigg, 2003). New EEW 
methodologies (and their practical implementations) require a process of 
outreach and capacity building that should go beyond the seismology (and 
5 https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1007%2F978-1-4419-1428-6_1476 
engineering) community (Allen et al., 2009b). EEW failures are not just 
technical in nature, such as missed or false alarms, but may be due to 
organisational weaknesses at the institutional level, i.e., lack of response 
training to end users/community by official bodies, such as civil protection. 
According to Herovic et al. (2019), there are still open questions on how 
societal drivers (such as the understanding of local culture and organisational 
needs), interact with both technological choices (such as decision support 
platforms and uncertainty modelling/communication) and information delivery 
(practices and policies needed for action). A better understanding on how 
decisional uncertainties in the warning process could influence preparedness 
or mitigation strategies, for example, in terms of differences in the available 
lead time and expected ground shaking in specific regions, is urgently needed 
(Wald, 2020). 
This chapter aims to develop a state-of-the-art review of both technical 
(seismology and engineering) and socio-organisational (social science, policy 
and management) components of EEW, in order to understand common gaps 
for research and practice. This chapter aims to address some key questions 
that have had limited examination previously, such as: 1) What interactions, if 
any, exist between the technical and the socio-organisational components of 
EEW? 2) What improvements are required in the socio-organisational 
components to make EEW systems more effective? 3) What lessons can be 
learned from EEW systems implemented around the world?  
This review will focus in particular on case studies of Italy, United States West 
Coast, Japan, and Mexico. The choice of these case studies will be explained 
in the methodology section, while the common lessons learned will be 
integrated with other evidence from worldwide cases in the discussion section. 
The conclusions will highlight directions for future research. 
It is worth noting that throughout this chapter, alert and warning will be used 
as synonyms to indicate an alarm signal or message coupled with a 
recommendation or order to take action such as mobilize or evacuate 
(Alexander, 2002). 
3.2 Beyond the technical components of EW systems 
The first challenge of approaching EEW systems from a multi- and cross-
disciplinary perspective is deciding which components to include in the review, 
and how they interact which each other. The Third International Conference 
on Early Warning held in 2006 (UNISDR, 2006) defined the overall conceptual 
framework of early warning systems, highlighting the need to integrate four 
inter-related elements in their development. Effective end-to-end and 
people-centred early warning systems should include: 1) disaster risk 
knowledge, based on the systematic collection and understanding of data on 
the dynamic interrelations of exposure, hazards, and vulnerabilities; 2) 
detection, monitoring, analysis and forecasting of the hazards and possible 
consequences; 3) dissemination and communication, by an official source, of 
authoritative, timely, accurate and actionable warnings and associated 
information on likelihood and resulting impact. Multiple channels must be 
identified and used to reach the exposed population/users, defining simple 
messages and useful information; and 4) preparedness at all levels to respond 
to the warnings received. This should include emergency planning and 
community awareness education. These four interrelated elements need to be 
coordinated within and across sectors/disciplines for an early warning system 
to work effectively and to include a feedback mechanism for continuous 
improvement. Failure in one element or a lack of cross-component 
coordination could lead to failure of the whole system. 
Moreover, the document by UNSIDR (2006) pointed out some cross-cutting 
issues, including the need for effective governance and institutional 
arrangements to support the development and implementation of early 
warning systems (including the legal and regulatory frameworks), and the 
involvement of the local community to activate bottom-up strategies for 
vulnerability reduction (UNISDR, 2006). According to Lindell et al. (2007), an 
essential element of warnings is that the communication has to produce a 
response action, so the information must be received and understood. 
Therefore, the technical elements cannot be considered alone but strategic 
decisions must be made on how the dissemination process is developed, 
defining appropriate communication mechanisms (e.g., television broadcasts 
and social media) according to the time of the day, and which elements of local 
culture, risk perceptions and people behaviours can influence this process. 
Similarly, Smith and Petley (2009) highlighted that warnings are more useful 
when information on upcoming hazards is combined with advice on short-term 
actions, such as the activation of evacuation procedures (if the warning time 
allows). 
Various authors have suggested that the implementation of the technical 
components of early warning systems may be inadequate on its own (e.g., 
Allen and Melgar, 2019; Basher, 2006; Kelman and Glantz, 2014; Quarantelli, 
1984). A classic work by Quarantelli (1984) defined very clearly that the 
reactions to warning for imminent threats are generally driven by factors such 
as institutional development and type of dissemination (formal vs. informal), 
perceived relevance, content (specific vs general), proximity to the hazard, 
previous experience and validation (e.g., interactions with others). Effective 
early warning systems should not rely on a top down approach in which the 
emergency planning choices are imposed on the citizens; instead, these 
choices should be socially embedded. Patterns of inadequate engagement in 
the design and development of an early warning system could lead to a 
perceived lack of ownership, with consequent mistrust in the 
authorities/experts managing it and weaker political and economic support 
for further developments (Basher, 2006). Kelman and Glantz (2014) pointed 
out that the best approach to the design and implementation of an early 
warning system should be one where communities/end users are involved 
from the early phases of development rather than towards the end, in order to 
keep the technical tools oriented to their needs and specificities.  
Describing specifically EEW systems, Allen and Melgar (2019) highlighted 
three main categories of users that need to be considered: a) individuals that 
undertake personal decisions and actions; b) automated response 
applications that need an institutional and company/organisation background 
on how to implement the process (e.g. automatic stop to railroads); and c) 
individuals and institutions/organisations that use the information for 
situational awareness. In each context, users are likely to behave differently, 
and some categories may be more prominent than others. It has also been 
highlighted that early warning systems need to integrate mechanisms to 
incorporate feedback and experience from users to improve the effectiveness 
of how a warning is translated into action (e.g., Allen and Melgar, 2019; 
Basher, 2006). Moreover, when dealing with utility services and infrastructure, 
early warning systems should be considered/integrated into new practices of 
organisational resilience, defined as the ability of an organisation to 
anticipate, prepare for, and respond and adapt to incremental change and 
sudden disruptions in order to survive and prosper (BS 65000:2014)6. 
3.3 Methodology 
This chapter develops a traditional or narrative literature review, according 
to the methodological criteria proposed by King et al. (1994) and Cronin et al. 
(2008). 
First, this chapter provides a brief overview of the technical components of 
EEW systems, on which most of the existing literature has concentrated, 
highlighting how they work, and the various challenges faced in EEW 
implementation. Secondly,  the literature centred on the socio-organisational 
components of EEW is explored, to understand how various related drivers 
can influence the effectiveness of the technical tools. This chapter conducts 
the review through an in-depth analysis of four case studies covered by most 
of the literature, and then discuss it with the support of other worldwide 
evidence available. The case studies selecteded represent different levels of 
6 https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/about-bsi/media-centre/press-
releases/2014/november/Organizational-resilience-standard-published/  
https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/about-bsi/media-centre/press-releases/2014/november/Organizational-resilience-standard-published/
https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/about-bsi/media-centre/press-releases/2014/november/Organizational-resilience-standard-published/
advancement in the technical implementation of EEW systems, as explained 
by Allen and Melgar (2019):  
- Italy, where EEW is technically advanced and subjected to real-time testing 
in the Campania region, but it is not open to the wider public;                                                                
- United States West Coast, where EEW is disseminated publicly to a fraction 
of the population (i.e., California). Selected end users receive alerts in areas 
where warnings are not public, and the development of a full public system is 
still in progress;  
- Japan and Mexico, which have the most developed public alert distribution 
systems that disseminate alerts via multiple channels. EEW is available 
nationwide in Japan and is well integrated in safety procedures and practices, 
such as those for critical infrastructure management. In Mexico, EEW remains 
more fragmented and less integrated holistically into organisational resilience.  
It should be noted that the selection of documents involved a replicable 
process to assure the consistency of this work and the possibility of future 
updates (Berg, 2001). An in-depth screening of scholarly literature was 
undertaken using both Google Scholar7 and Scopus8, because the databases 
of the two research engines have different characteristics. Indeed, Google 
Scholar covers any document with a seemingly academic structure, including 
for example, conference proceedings, while Scopus comprises a database of 
documentsmainly journal papers-from approximately 5,000 publishers that 
have been selected by an independent committee.  
The study implements a cross-reference approach between the identified 
documents to select additional publications of interest. A final check of gray 
documentation, such as policy reports, and open-source peer-reviewed 
papers/reports was performed on PreventionWeb9, the knowledge platform for 
Disaster Risk Reduction of the United Nations. 
7 https://scholar.google.com/intl/en/scholar/about.html  
8 https://www.elsevier.com/en-gb/solutions/scopus  
9 https://www.preventionweb.net  
https://scholar.google.com/intl/en/scholar/about.html
https://www.elsevier.com/en-gb/solutions/scopus
https://www.preventionweb.net/
It was decided to focus the review primarily on literature published after 2004, 
i.e., in the period between 2005 and 2020, for the following reasons: 
- Events, such as the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, have 
significantly boosted the technical and non-technical development of early 
warning in general (and specifically EEW) since 2005;  
- The technological evolution of society, associated with the widespread use 
of the internet, social media, and smartphones in the early 2000s, radically 
changed the components of disaster risk and the context of early warning 
systems, including EEW (Pescaroli and Alexander, 2018). This means that 
older papers will no longer contain valid concepts/lessons. 
The key words used for the research were: earthquake early warnings 
systems, social sciences and early warnings, organisational resilience. 
The first round of documents was then selected by searching for non-technical 
words/phrases in the abstract or title, including: social 
component/driver/sphere; organisational component/driver/sphere; 
operational component/driver/sphere; political component/driver/sphere; 
cultural component/driver/sphere; community; lessons learned; framework; 
review; state-of-the-art. The results in Scopus reflected the predominant focus 
of the literature on the technical components of EEW systems. Most of the 
work approximately 1,700 papers- was concentrated in engineering, earth 
and planetary sciences, and computer sciences. Research in the domains of 
social sciences, medicine, business and management, decision sciences, arts 
and humanities, psychology, and economics comprised a total of 175 papers 
in English. However, many of these documents were not relevant for this 
study, because, for example, they focused on generic early warning systems 
or their technical components. Thus, the abstracts were filtered again to 
determine which papers: a) were focused on the socio-organisational aspects 
of EEW worldwide, with a particular focus on reactions to warnings or 
integration in policies; and b) supported the description of the case studies of 
interest. 
3.3.1 Considered domains 
Each case study will be introduced by providing a general description of the 
local context and technical details of the EEW system implemented in the 
region. Then, relevant literature will be discussed with respect to different 
domains or spheres, i.e., operational, political and governance, social and 
behavioural, and organisational. Framing the discussion through the lens of 
the various spheres facilitates communication to a multidisciplinary audience. 
It is worth noting that some topics/findings can be seen as cross-cutting 
between different spheres, as discussed in the following sections; hence, the 
spheres should not be interpreted as rigid divisions. 
Operational Sphere 
This category includes tactical elements and tools that influence how EEW is 
developed and disseminated, such as social media/sirens, information on lead 
times (the time available before the arrival of the strong ground shaking at 
target sites) and expected impacts, including level of uncertainties in the 
predictions (when considered). In other words, the operational sphere includes 
what Alexander (2002) refers to as the technological processes of conveying 
the message (i.e., communication systems).  
Political and Governance Sphere 
This category includes contents associated with political and legislative issues, 
such as the legal framework in which EEW systems are implemented/operate, 
or accountability for dissemination and strategic decision making.  
Social and Behavioural Sphere 
This category includes peoples knowledge/understanding, perception, and 
opinion on EEW systems. The sphere is closely linked to the local context in 
which EEW systems operate, including the local culture, existing trust in 
institutions, local knowledge and experience with the considered hazard, 
informal training, household preparedness, community networks and 
vulnerability factors such as resource distribution.  
Organisational Sphere  
This sphere refers to organisations, such as civil protection, public utilities, and 
enterprises, that incorporate actions associated with EEW. The aim is to 
understand the internal procedures of these organisations (if any) with respect 
to EEW, such as the activation of business continuity plans. 
3.4 EEW systems: physical grounds, technical concepts, methods 
and perspectives  
To avoid repletion and for brevity purposes, the reader must refer to chapter 2 
of this report for an explanation of the technical components of EEW systems. 
3.5 Case-studies analysis: Italy, US-West Coast, Japan, and 
Mexico 
Four case studies have been considered for this state-of-the-art review: Italy, 
United States-West Coast, Japan, and Mexico (Figure 10). The technicalities 
of each system are explained and a description of the operational, political, 
socio-behavioural and organisational spheres is provided, as described in 
Considered Domains. 
Figure 10. Case-studies considered for the review: Italy, US-West Coast, Japan, and Mexico. 
3.5.1 Italy  
The EEW system in Southern Italy has been implemented since 2005 due to 
the high seismicity in the Southern Apennine area directly affecting the 
Campania-Lucania region, where large urbanised cities, like Naples, are 
located. According to Zollo et al. (2014a), the system relies on the Irpinia 
Seismic Network (ISNet), which is formed of 31 seismic stations distributed in 
the Campania-Lucania region. The system is regional, and is based on a 
methodology that predicts the source parameters of the ongoing earthquake 
using various algorithms that are loaded into the main software platform called 
PRobabilistic and Evolutionary early warning SysTem (or PRESTo; Emolo et 
al., 2016).  
PRESTo estimates the hypocentre location of an earthquake using the 
RTLoc approach proposed by Satriano et al. (2008), which is based on the 
equal differential time formulation introduced in Regional Early Warning 
Systems. The magnitude of an earthquake is estimated by PRESTo according 
to the RTMag algorithm proposed by Lancieri and Zollo (2008). With location 
and magnitude defined, GMMs for the Campania-Lucania region are 
implemented to estimate the expected values of PGA, PGV, and instrumental 
intensity (or even macroseismic intensity) at the sites of interest (Satriano et 
al., 2011a).  
Several performance tests have been carried out on the system, using large 
and small historical earthquakes. If a dense seismic network is deployed 
around the fault region, PRESTo can provide reliable estimations of the 
location and magnitude of the event, as well as ground-motion intensities, 
within 5-6 seconds from the event origin time (Zollo et al., 2014a). In addition, 
Picozzi et al. (2015a) considered the whole of Italy in a feasibility study to 
explore the potential of implementing a nationwide EEW system based on the 
PRESTo framework. The authors explained that reliable messages about 
large earthquakes could be provided to the community with lead times of the 
order of 25 s in several urbanized areas. This means the alarm could reach 
hundreds of municipalities in enough time, and residents could be supported 
by related education and training on basic protective actions (e.g., Drop-
Cover-Hold On). However, despite the advanced, state-of-the-art algorithms 
used in PRESTo, public warnings are still not fully operational in the Campania 
Region. 
Operational sphere 
When PRESTo issues an alarm, this is shared to a list of recipients (mainly 
researchers) that have been selected as beta testers by the system 
developers. These recipients have access to estimated earthquake 
parameters registered at every station in the network, estimates of the location 
and magnitude of the earthquake as well as arrival time, estimates of PGA, 
PGV, and other IMs at target sites, and theoretical P- and S-wave propagation 
paths. Users can adjust the threshold for triggering a warning alarm, which is 
disseminated via the Internet and SMS (Satriano et al., 2011a).  
Political and governance sphere 
At the political and governance levels, there have been preliminary attempts 
to publicly operate an EEW system in Campania. However, the Italian 
Department of Civil Protection has prioritised different earthquake risk 
mitigation actions above EEW, such as reduction of the vulnerability of critical 
infrastructures and improved public seismic risk awareness (Clinton et al., 
2016). More attention has been given to tsunami warning systems in which 
seismic detection, location, and magnitude estimations are integrated together 
(Bernardi et al., 2015). 
Social and behavioural sphere 
There is no specific study addressing the development of a holistic and bottom 
up EEW system in Italy with explicit focus on the general public. This research 
gap is particularly pertinent in the context of this case study, given that 
previous work has highlighted a strong need for improving training and 
information practices of (general) earthquake preparedness in Italy (e.g., 
Pescaroli et al., 2012). 
Organisational sphere 
Literature on the organisational sphere is very limited for Italy. Esposito and 
Emolo (2014) carried out a study to address the feasibility of adopting the 
Campania EEW system for the Circumvesuviana Napoli railway system. 
Although the research was quite preliminary in nature, the authors conclude 
that there is potential for EEW to be applied to the railway system in the region, 
in line with evidence of other case studies such as California.  
Different authors have addressed the possibility of equipping existing seismic 
networks/stations with EEW capabilities for the entire Campania region. Emolo 
et al. (2016) presented a region-wide (Campania) case study that focused on 
public schools. The study finds that 3-5 s are enough for well-trained students 
to find shelter and protect themselves before the arrival of earthquakes. The 
authors ultimately conclude that implementing EEW systems for schools in the 
examined region would be effective, given that the largest concentration of 
residents in Campania is located in coastal areas away from where the most 
damaging earthquakes occur along the Apennine chain. The aforementioned 
work was motivated by a smaller case study presented by Picozzi et al. 
(2015b), in which the EEW system of the Campania Region was tested in a 
specific school located in the Irpinia region. For this very particular case, it was 
shown that alerts can be provided to occupants of the school 13 s before the 
arrival of strong shaking in line with the historic M 6.9 1980 Irpinia event. 
3.5.2 US  West Coast 
A prototype regional EEW system for California was proposed by Allen and 
Kanamori (2003) as a mitigation strategy to reduce potential impacts from 
earthquakes in the region of Southern California. The practical implementation 
of the system was initiated in 2007, funded mainly by the United States 
Geological Survey (USGS) and the following academic institutions: the 
California Institute of Technology (Caltech); the University of California, 
Berkeley (UC Berkeley); the University of Washington; the University of 
Oregon; the University of Southern California; and the Swiss Federal Institute 
of Technology (Bse et al., 2014; Kohler et al., 2018). The system, named 
CISN ShakeAlert, makes use of the existing California Integrated Seismic 
Network (CISN) that includes approximately 380 broadband and strong-
motion stations across California. The stations detect ground motions coming 
from the high-potential seismic regions nearby, such as the San Andreas 
Fault, the Hayward Fault and the Cascadia subduction zone (Calkins and 
Lieberman, 2014; Given et al., 2018; Johnson et al., 2016; Strauss and Allen, 
2016). The production prototype (v1.0) of ShakeAlert was established for 
California in early 2016 (Kohler et al., 2018). A newer version (v1.2) was 
established in 2017 for the West Coast states of Washington, Oregon and 
California and provided earthquake notifications that were distributed to a 
group of local beta users. 
The system was originally equipped with three different EEW algorithms (Bse 
et al., 2009; Chung et al., 2019) that worked simultaneously in order to 
estimate earthquake source parameters: 1) Onsite (Wu and Kanamori, 2005); 
2) ElarmS (Allen et al., 2009a); and 3) Virtual Seismologist (Cua and Heaton, 
2007). 
In 2017, an evaluation of the ElarmS and Onsite algorithms resulted in a single 
unified point-source algorithm known as EPIC (Earthquake Point-source 
Integrated Code) that is primarily based on the most updated version of 
ElarmS, ElarmS-3 (E3) (Given et al., 2018). E3 was chosen as the basis of the 
system as it proved to be the fastest and most accurate algorithm of the three 
introduced above (Chung et al., 2019). In addition to EPIC, a second event 
source-detection algorithm called FinDer (Finite-fault Detector) has been 
included in the ShakeAlert platform. This finite-fault algorithm was proposed 
by Bse et al. (2012) to overcome the magnitude saturation challenges of 
point-source EEW approaches, as discussed in Regional Earthquake Early 
Warning Systems. 
ShakeAlert combines information from the EPIC and FinDer algorithms 
through a decision module DM (Kohler et al., 2018). The DM receives event 
notifications from the EEW algorithms, which include the estimated 
earthquake location, magnitude and ground shaking, and creates alerts using 
a weighted average of the reporting algorithms (Chung et al., 2019).  
The first public EEW in the West Coast of the United States was launched in 
Los Angeles in January 2019 (Hobbs and Rollins, 2019). Introduced as a 
smartphone application, and named ShakeAlertLA, this system provides 
warnings to 800,000 subscribers. Initially, the app alerted users if a magnitude 
5.0+ was detected, but it was soon updated to provide warnings for Los 
Angeles county if earthquakes with magnitude 4.5+ were estimated. The 
California-wide EEW MyShake mobile application was launched in October 
2019, as a collaboration between Caltech, UC Berkeley, USGS, and the 
Californian Office of Emergency Services (Allen et al., 2019). Both 
ShakeAlertLA and MyShake are intended to deliver warnings by receiving a 
real-time earthquake feed from the ShakeAlert platform. 
Operational sphere 
MyShake is designed to release a warning if a magnitude 4.5 earthquake, or 
bigger is detected by the system (Allen et al., 2019). The contents of the 
warning message include the earthquakes time of arrival at a given location, 
as well as its location and magnitude. When it comes to individuals, warning 
messages include advice on how to prepare for an earthquake, such as Drop-
Cover-Hold On. Aside from delivering messages, the app also works as a 
seismic sensor, allowing crowdsourcing of information, by storing motion and 
location data (for the recording mobile phone) that are immediately sent to the 
developers for further research and improvement of the apps algorithms. 
Additionally, MyShake can be downloaded anywhere in the world, to obtain 
information about earthquakes that have occurred anywhere and to share 
individuals post-earthquake feedback (e.g., experiences and observations); 
however, EEW alerts are exclusively for Californian events. As mentioned by 
the developers10, the system is still a prototype, but it is a considerable 
advancement towards a public EEW system in California.  
Political and governance sphere 
MyShake represents a first attempt at a public EEW system for California. 
Obstacles to accomplishing more advanced and comprehensive EEW 
operability include the lack of essential related funding (e.g., Federal 
Government contributions). However, some researchers have shown that 
implementing a complete EEW system in California would be a cost-effective 
strategy for reducing human and economic losses due to earthquakes in the 
state. Strauss and Allen (2016) developed a cost-benefit analysis to 
understand the possible advantages of developing an EEW for the West Coast 
10 https://eps.berkeley.edu/news/myshake-release-first-statewide-earthquake-early-warning-
system  
https://eps.berkeley.edu/news/myshake-release-first-statewide-earthquake-early-warning-system
https://eps.berkeley.edu/news/myshake-release-first-statewide-earthquake-early-warning-system
of the United States. The study pointed out that the annual cost of operating a 
public EEW system for the entire United States-West Coast would be repaid if 
it saved just three lives, warned two semiconductor plants, slowed one rapid 
transit train to avoid derailments, reduced 1% of non-fatal injuries, and led to 
a 0.25% decrease in gas-related fire damage triggered by an earthquake. 
Legislative action requirements present some additional challenges to 
achieving a fully operational EEW service in the state of California. Johnson 
et al. (2016) pointed out that representatives from 24 organisations 
(representing 14 important sectors of the states infrastructure and economy) 
declared some concerns about the levels of liability associated with decisions 
based on warnings given by the system, particularly those related to actions 
undertaken as a consequence of false warnings. Similarly, participants of the 
study perceived a strong relation between EEW systems and life safety, 
raising financial, political and equity concerns that need to be addressed in the 
early stages of the systems implementation. Access to the physical 
infrastructure of the system and the information it provides, as well as ensuring 
a stable governance structure and the reliability of continuous state-wide 
funding are key points that study participants included in the list of concerns 
(Johnson et al., 2016). It was argued that the inclusion of partners and 
stakeholders could improve the performance of broadcast notifications for 
EEW. Johnson et al. (2016) highlighted that representatives of the electric, 
telecommunications and information technology sectors should be included in 
the California EEW system Implementation Steering Committee, in addition to 
the government bodies and academic institutions already involved. 
Social and behavioural sphere 
The social perceptions of EEW in California and the West Coast of the United 
States strongly suggest that there is common public agreement on the need 
to implement the service. A survey conducted by the Probolsky Research 
Group in 2016 (Allen and Melgar, 2019) indicated that 88% of respondents 
(out of a total of 1,000) agreed that the state government should fund the 
warning system, and also expressed their willingness to pay small taxations to 
improve it11. Similar findings have been identified by Dunn et al. (2016), who 
performed a 2,595-participant study in the states of Washington, Oregon and 
California, suggesting again that the perceived benefits of EEW systems were 
enough to justify some ad-hoc small tax contributions. The survey by Johnson 
et al. (2016) found that availability of EEW to the wider public and local 
communities was viewed by relevant stakeholders as a credible way to 
improve earthquake educational levels, as well as to raise related awareness 
and preparedness of both individuals and organisations. Strauss and Allen 
(2016) highlighted that a West Coast EEW system could reduce injuries in 
earthquakes by more than half. This is because actions such as Drop-Cover-
Hold On could be done in advance of strong shaking, mitigating the impact of 
non-structural falling hazards that accounted for 50% of the injuries in cases 
such as the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake (Allen and Melgar, 2019). In 
addition, Porter (2016) showed that if the whole San Francisco Bay Area 
community were properly trained to carry out Drop-Cover-Hold On and a public 
EEW system was operational in the area, any advance warning that allows the 
implementation for Drop-Cover-Hold On would be enough for 19,000 people 
to avoid injuries or death. The literature identifies a further potential benefit of 
a publicly available West Coast EEW, which is the enhancement of 
psychological resilience to earthquakes. For example, the information 
provided by a warning may reduce anxiety and other mental disorders 
triggered by sudden unexpected ground shaking, as discussed by Johnston et 
al. (2016). 
Organisational sphere  
The United States-West Coast case study lacks associated research on the 
organisational sphere of EEW. However, the survey by Johnson et al. (2016) 
provides some insights that could be used as the basis for further analysis. A 
first point that emerges from the survey is that some private 
11 https://www.moore.org/article-detail?newsUrlName=poll-nearly-nine-out-of-ten-california-
voters-support-earthquake-early-warning-system  
https://www.moore.org/article-detail?newsUrlName=poll-nearly-nine-out-of-ten-california-voters-support-earthquake-early-warning-system
https://www.moore.org/article-detail?newsUrlName=poll-nearly-nine-out-of-ten-california-voters-support-earthquake-early-warning-system
companies/organisations are already investing in their own EEW systems, and 
it is worth investigating whether these private efforts can be redirected to 
improve and sustain a public service. Indeed, the 24 organisations that 
participated in the survey indicated that a state-wide EEW system would be a 
beneficial risk mitigation measure, as a few seconds of advance warning could 
make a positive difference to the success of measures such as Drop-Cover-
Hold On. The results of the survey highlighted consensus among stakeholders 
that EEW could be used for increasing the safety of employees by reducing 
the time needed to address life-safety issues and complete life-safety 
assessments by directly informing people so they can take preventative 
actions (Johnson et al., 2016). Interviewees felt that EEW could enhance 
business continuity management by facilitating faster organisational 
movement and efforts, allowing a more efficient restoration of operations. It 
could therefore reduce organisational downtime, economic losses, and 
disruptions, which would benefit end users and residents that avail of the 
services provided by those organisations. A final point that emerged from the 
survey of Johnson et al. (2016) is the need to tailor risk-mitigation actions to 
different target sectors, given variations in life and safety concerns. For 
example, larger companies might have different social dynamics (i.e., 
behaviours of groups resulting from the interactions of individual group 
members) when compared to smaller ones, requiring distinct EEW trainings or 
scenarios that integrate some considerations of external factors such as the 
period of the day or night in which an earthquake occurs and its implications 
for working timetables or shifts. Moreover, it was evident that implementation 
of the EEW system requires the definition of practices and training that must 
be properly explained and understood, involving improved communication 
between the companies and first responders.  
One of the partners involved in ShakeAlert is the Bay Area Rapid Transit 
(BART) network (trains) in San Francisco, which has implemented an 
automated train-braking mechanism that is triggered by the EEW system. It 
takes 24 s to bring a train travelling at 112 km/h to a stop; during peak 
commuting times, about 64 trains are in operation across the BART network-
each carrying approximately 1,000 passengers-and up to 45 trains travel at 
112 km/h at any one time. Even one derailment at such a speed would be 
devastating. Moreover, minimizing earthquake damage to trains and tracks 
results in faster resumptions of services, which in turn supports the post-event 
restart of regional businesses. The BART system responded successfully to 
the EEW alert before the arrival of the M 6.0 South Napa Earthquake in 2014. 
Despite the fact that no trains were running at the time (3:20 am), the right 
procedures/protocol were in place (Strauss and Allen, 2016; Tajima and 
Hayashida, 2018). 
3.5.3 Japan  
The original on-site EEW system of Japan (developed in 1960) is considered 
the oldest implementation of EEW worldwide. This system was designed to 
offer protection against earthquakes for high-speed trains managed by the 
Japanese Railway System (Nakamura and Saita, 2007). Nakamura (1988) 
improved the initial platform by developing the Urgent Earthquake Detection 
and Alarm System (UrEDAS), a front-detection algorithm to detect the arrival 
of P-waves and estimate earthquake source parameters. Based on 3 s of the 
incoming P-wave train at a single station, UrEDAS calculates the magnitude 
of the event, the amplitude of the recorded motion and the epicentre of the 
earthquake (Nakamura and Saita, 2007). Compact UrEDAS is a 
complementary on-site EEW approach for the protection of Japanese 
Railways, estimating the expected destructiveness of the earthquake 
immediately from the earthquake motion just 1 s after the station has 
registered the P-wave arrival. In addition to train lines, Compact UrEDAS 
became operational in metro systems across Japan in 1998, following the 
Kobe earthquake in 1995 (Allen et al., 2009b).  
A nationwide EEW system has been operating in Japan since 2006, which is 
managed by the Japanese Meteorological Agency (JMA) (Doi, 2011). The 
network is formed of 1,000 seismic stations deployed around the Japanese 
territory, spaced 20-25 km apart (Brown et al., 2011). The system follows a 
step-by-step algorithm that improves the estimations of earthquake magnitude 
and location as time passes (i.e., as more stations record the ground motion 
in time). 
The hypocentre of the earthquake is determined using the approach proposed 
by Horiuchi et al. (2005), which geometrically constrains the location using 
geographical information on stations that have and have not yet recorded the 
arrival of P-waves (Nakamura et al., 2009), similar to the RtLoc algorithm 
mentioned in Italy. The magnitude of the event is calculated using separate 
scaling relationships between magnitude and the displacement amplitudes of 
the recorded P- and S-waves (Kamigaichi et al., 2009); the appropriate 
relationship to implement at a given time step (i.e., P- or S-wave one) is 
determined based on the expected arrival time of the S-wave.  
The magnitude and location estimates of the nationwide system are then used 
to predict the value of PGV on bedrock at each location of interest, according 
to the GMM proposed by Si and Midorikawa (2000). Site amplification factors 
are used to convert the calculated amplitudes to peak velocities at the surface, 
which are finally translated to JMA seismic intensities via an empirical model 
(Kamigaichi, 2004). A warning is released whenever the value of predicted 
JMA intensity is larger than 3 (for advanced users, such as elevators operators 
and factory managers) or larger than 4 (for the general public) (Hoshiba, 2014; 
Hoshiba et al., 2008).  
Operational sphere 
In Japan, warnings are disseminated to users that fall into two main categories 
(Hoshiba, 2014; Hoshiba et al., 2008): the first category includes online limited 
advanced users (organisations) that receive the warning through internet or 
dedicated telephone lines, which facilitates automatic actions related to their 
businesses (i.e., control of elevators) (Doi, 2011; Kamigaichi et al., 2009); this 
warning is intended for offices, schools, industry companies and critical 
facilities. The second group of users is the public that receive the warning and 
decide themselves on the optimal non-automated actions (depending on their 
circumstances) to be performed to mitigate their risk (Hoshiba et al., 2008). 
The second category of users receives the warning via media such as radio, 
e-mail, SMSs and the internet (Doi, 2011; Wald, 2020). The Fire and Disaster 
Management Agency also distributes warnings via speakers spread 
throughout different Japanese municipalities (Allen et al., 2009b), using a 
satellite communication system (J-Alert).  
The contents of the warning messages differ for both categories: 1) advanced 
users receive the estimated magnitude and location of the epicentre, and lead 
time and predicted seismic intensities upon request (Doi, 2011); 2) the general 
public receives the earthquakes origin time, the epicentral region name, and 
the names of subprefectural areas where the estimated JMA intensity is equal 
to or greater than four (Kamigaichi et al., 2009). 
Previous work indicates that real-time warnings in Japan help to reduce 
seismic damage and losses for both factories/industrial facilities and critical 
infrastructure. For example, advanced warning facilitated by EEW enabled an 
electronics company located in the Miyagi Prefecture to cut the supply of 
chemicals in its factory 12 s before the arrival of ground shaking from the M 
6.8 2007 Chuetsu-oki earthquake (Kamigaichi et al., 2009). During the same 
event, infants in a nursery located in the Fukushima prefecture moved into a 
safe zone 30 s before the earthquake hit the area. Offices, schools, shopping 
malls, and other factories also benefitted from the warning (Kamigaichi et al., 
2009).  
Political and governance sphere  
The JMA has provided training to the population of Japan since 2007, when 
the system was launched publicly (Tajima and Hayashida, 2018) . When an 
estimation is performed at a seismic station, the resulting values of earthquake 
source parameters and expected ground shaking are transmitted to the JMA 
on a real-time basis. JMA is then responsible for nationally disseminating the 
message, through disaster management organisations and broadcast 
companies (Doi, 2011). Also, many local governments (e.g., Tokyo) have 
installed EEW systems in public schools (Hoshiba, 2014). Kamigaichi et al. 
(2009) adds that implementing EEW in Japanese public facilities is a decision 
taken by the facility manager. JMA develops and disseminates public 
guidelines and manuals to understand the operability and capabilities of an 
EEW system put in place. These guidelines are also available to the public on 
the JMAs website (in Japanese only).  
Social and behavioural sphere 
After the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake, JMA collected 2,820 survey responses 
from the general public of Iwate, Miyagi, and Fukushima, aiming to understand 
whether these people found EEW useful in general. The results of the survey 
indicated that 87% of the respondents were familiar with EEW systems and 
found them useful (Fujinawa and Noda, 2013). Positive public reaction and 
agreement toward EEW implementations in Japan can be also found in 
Hoshiba (2014), Nakayachi et al. (2019), and Santos-Reyes, (2019). In 
addition, Fujinawa and Noda (2013) highlighted that the warning issued during 
the 2011 minor tremor provided people with a valuable chance to prepare for 
the strong incoming shaking. Users expressed a positive attitude toward false 
alarms after the Tohoku earthquake, arguing that they represented an 
opportunity to practice protective actions after the alarm is triggered (Allen et 
al., 2017). Ohara (2012) also carried out a survey in the Tokyo area to 
understand EEW awareness, before and after the 2011 Tohoku earthquake. 
The results present a remarkable increase in awareness toward EEW and the 
useful pre-event actions it accommodates. In addition, the results showed that 
after the 2011 event, people were more familiar with the technical limitations 
of the warning system and agreed that they prefer having a system that might 
provide false alarms than not having one at all (Ohara, 2012).  
Warnings in Japan have clearly provided the population with enough time to 
implement risk-prevention strategies in past events, but Nakayachi et al. 
(2019) carried out a survey that revealed a possible practical issue: users tend 
to primarily react mentally and not physically, and therefore remain still once 
a warning is issued, without taking any kind of protection actions (Nakayachi 
et al., 2019). The reasons why most of the interviewees did not react after the 
alert mostly include: 1) I expected small intensity, so I thought it was not 
necessary to do anything; 2) I thought the place I was in was safe, and 3) I 
did not know what to do. Reason 1) seems to be related to the fact that the 
warning just indicated strong shaking incoming without any specific 
information about the available warning time nor the actual intensity expected 
at the area (Nakayachi et al., 2019) (for instance in the case of EEW delivered 
via speakers). It is of great concern for the JMA that individuals do not know 
what has to be done once the alarm is triggered (Doi, 2011). For these 
reasons, JMA has distributed brochures and videos among the Japanese 
population highlighting various scenarios that explain the best way to get 
prepared before the arrival of the incoming shaking (Doi, 2011). On the other 
hand, it has been noted that advanced users (i.e., organisations) have a clear 
understanding of the actions to be taken when an EEW is released (Doi, 2011).  
Organisational sphere 
Public and organisational training on various EEW risk-mitigation actions has 
been put in place across different companies and institutions in Japan. Drills 
are performed nationally to exercise actions that can be taken once the EEW 
is triggered (Dai, 2011; Doi, 2011; Fujinawa and Noda, 2013; Yamasaki, 
2012). Different levels of organisations and individuals participate in drills 
across the year, including: 1) organisations (private and public ones) across 
the country that carry out regular mandatory drills for their employees; 2) 
students, who are required to participate in a drill on the first day of each 
academic year; and 3) the general public, who participate in a nationwide drill 
on National Disaster Prevention Day, in collaboration with local 
governments. 
Hospitals are a key piece of critical infrastructure that could benefit from EEW 
in Japan, according to previous research. Horiuchi (2009) analysed potential 
EEW-related actions that could be performed to protect patients, staff and 
delicate equipment, in a research project carried out at the National Hospital 
Organisation Disaster Medical Centre in Tokyo. By considering a scenario in 
which a patient is in the middle of a surgery when an earthquake occurs, the 
study provides a series of actions-both manual and automatic-that can be 
performed before the arrival of the tremor. Stopping elevators and opening all 
the doors of the premises are the main automatic actions identified for efficient 
evacuation of people once the EEW alarm is triggered. Interrupting medical 
procedures to prevent surgical errors on the patient due to shaking is the main 
manual EEW strategy discussed. A full list of the processes proposed can be 
found in Horiuchi (2009).  
Finally, both UrEDAS and Compact UrEDAS provide warnings in about 90 
locations along the lines of the Tokaido Shinkansen fast train, which travels 
with an average velocity of 360 km/h (Ashiya, 2004). If an alarm is triggered, 
trains are stopped if possible, or else run at low speeds to reduce potential 
damages. 
3.5.4 Mexico  
The Mexican EEW system was proposed by the Science and Technology 
National Council (CONACyT, Spanish acronym) and the Mexican National 
Research Council in 1986, as an urgent mitigation strategy against earthquake 
risk, given the M 8.1 1985 Michoacn earthquake that hit Mexico City with 
significant effects in terms of economic and human losses (Cullar et al., 2017; 
Espinosa-Aranda et al., 2009, 2011). In August 1991, financed by Mexican 
City authorities, the Seismic Alert system (SAS) for Mexico City was deployed 
in the south-west of the country and had 12 seismic stations in the early stages 
of its implementation. In 1999, the state of Oaxaca, Mexico, experienced a 
catastrophic M 6.7 earthquake, which triggered the construction of the Seismic 
Alert System of Oaxaca (SASO), consisting of a network formed of 37 front-
detection seismic stations.  
Encouraged by the effective alerts of the two warning systems (SAS and 
SASO), the governments of Mexico City and Oaxaca decided to work together 
to create the Seismic Alert System of Mexico (SASMEX) in 2005. Designed as 
a front-detection system, the Mexican EEW system provides between 60 and 
120 s of warning time to Mexico City (Cullar et al., 2018), which is significantly 
longer than the lead time provided in other countries (e.g., the Campania 
region, in Italy, where the maximum lead times are on the order of 15-20 s). A 
large warning time is possible with SASMEX, given that the distance between 
the network and Mexico City is 320 km (on average). The government of 
Mexico City financially funded the extension and update of SASMEX in 2010 
to improve its performance, ultimately resulting in a total number of 97 stations 
within the network. SASMEX seismic sensors and alarms are currently located 
in seven states of Mexico (Jalisco, Michoacn, Colima, Guerrero, Oaxaca, 
Puebla, and Mexico City), (Cullar et al., 2017).  
The detection and classification of large earthquakes performed by SASMEX 
is based on the 2 (ts - tp) algorithm (where ts refers to the arrival time of the S-
wave, and tp to the arrival time of the P-wave) (Cullar et al., 2017). A second 
algorithm defined as tp + 3 was added to SASMEX in 2018, to calculate warning 
times for in-slab earthquakes that are located within the subducted Cocos 
Plate beneath central Mexico (Cullar et al., 2018). This algorithm does not 
consider S-wave arrivals, as historical events have shown that S-wave triggers 
result in the release of alerts that coincide with the arrival of ground shaking 
(no actual warning time delivered). SASMEX has proved to be an efficient and 
reliable system for the provision of long lead time warnings for Mexico City. In 
addition, it has been recognised as the first system in the world to provide 
public EEW (Lee and Espinosa-Aranda, 2003). 
Operational sphere 
SASMEX warnings are issued through speakers located across Mexico City, 
and also disseminated through media messages via national television and 
radio broadcasts (Espinosa-Aranda et al., 2009; Santos-Reyes, 2019; Suarez 
et al., 2009). However, the speakers do not fully cover all 16 counties of the 
urban area in Mexico City, leaving some regions without any alert and with 
fragmented information about incoming earthquakes. Other services are 
available, such as private repeaters or speakers, but they require private 
investments in order to be accessed. The thresholds to issue an alert were 
updated for all cities that receive warnings in April 2019. Three different 
threshold cases have been established for triggering the alarm: 1) the 
estimated magnitude is larger than five and the estimated epicentre is within 
250 km away of the target city; 2) the estimated magnitude is larger than 5.5 
and the estimated epicentre is within 350 km of the target city; and 3) the 
estimated magnitude is larger than six and the estimated epicentre is outside 
a radius of 350 km.  
A major concern highlighted by local media in Mexico12, is the ineffective 
distribution of warning devices across the states that are equipped with EEW 
capabilities. In 2010-11, Mexico Citys government and the federal 
government funded the extension of the countrys EEW system, paying for 
88,000 extra alarming receivers. However, 60% of these devices are either 
stored, stolen/lost, installed excessively in some public buildings (e.g., 48 
devices installed in buildings that only require 1) or simply missing in places 
where alarms are required, and some can even be purchased in e-shops. In 
addition, most of the installed speakers and receiver devices are located in the 
capitals of the seven states that receive alerts, such that few or no warnings 
are issued in other cities or towns that have been damaged in the past by 
ground shaking. For example, no speakers nor alarming devices were installed 
at the time of the September 7, 2017 earthquake in Juchitn, which was the 
Oaxacan town that registered the greatest number of casualties during the 
event. 
A critical issue that commonly emerges in the literature is that the warning is 
limited to an alert about the incoming shaking, and does not provide any 
12 https://www.animalpolitico.com/2017/09/gobierno-compra-alertas-sismicas-desaparecen-
bodegas/  
https://www.animalpolitico.com/2017/09/gobierno-compra-alertas-sismicas-desaparecen-bodegas/
https://www.animalpolitico.com/2017/09/gobierno-compra-alertas-sismicas-desaparecen-bodegas/
additional information about its characteristics, such as estimated arrival time 
and expected intensity/magnitude (Suarez et al., 2009). This incomplete 
information represents a major challenge, as indicated by a survey conducted 
after the September 2017 events in Mexico (Santos-Reyes, 2019), in which 
2,400 residents of Mexico City expressed a preference for knowing the 
available lead time. 
Political and governance sphere  
The government has consistently lacked a clear strategy for disseminating 
SASMEXs operational and warning procedures to end users. In addition, the 
system lacks efficient planning/coordination with first responders, and does 
not benefit from inter-agency coordination between local and federal 
governments (Suarez et al., 2009). Different issues have been highlighted in 
the analysis: first, the number of users is too low, considering the large 
population of Mexico City. Only a very small fraction of schools, first 
responders, critical service suppliers, and hospitals have access to the alerts 
(Suarez et al., 2009)13. Secondly, EEW systems are not exclusively managed 
by governmental bodies, presenting both advantages and shortfalls. Private 
organisations have developed mobile applications that provide warnings to the 
public located outside the range of SASMEX, improving the distribution of 
warnings but also creating possible sources of conflict. Reddy (2019) 
concludes that the most common of these applications, called SkyAlert might 
jeopardise the functionality of the official Mexican EEW system. It has been 
noted that predictions from SkyAlert do not always match those of SASMEX, 
which can cause issues in terms of the reliability of both sources (Allen et al., 
2017). Santos-Reyes (2019) suggested that decision makers, such as the civil 
protection department of Mexico City, should strengthen their policies and 
efforts to raise awareness of the capabilities (and limitations) of SASMEX. This 
need was clearly demonstrated during the M 7.1 earthquake on September 
19, 2017. For this event, the EEW alert was issued in Mexico City at the same 
13 https://www.seismosoc.org/news/mexicos-early-warning-system-perform-recent-
earthquakes/  
https://www.seismosoc.org/news/mexicos-early-warning-system-perform-recent-earthquakes/
https://www.seismosoc.org/news/mexicos-early-warning-system-perform-recent-earthquakes/
time as strong shaking occurred, which confused residents who commonly 
believed that EEW would always provide 60 s of warning time between the 
signal and the arrival of the strong shaking (Santos-Reyes, 2019). Users of 
SASMEX found it less useful after this event than they had before (Santos-
Reyes, 2019). 
Finally, the system does not provide coverage to all areas of the country that 
have experienced significant damage in previous earthquakes. Neither the 
state of Veracruz, where the second deadliest earthquake (1920) recorded in 
Mexico was located (Surez and Novelo-Casanova, 2018), nor the state of 
Merelos, where the M 7.1 September 19, 2017 earthquake occurred, receive 
alerts from SASMEX.  Other states of Mexico that have experienced the 
effects of earthquakes and do not receive EEW alerts include Estado de 
Mxico and Tlaxcala14 . Finally, it has been shown that a denser seismic 
network in Mexico City could have resulted in a warning time of more than 20 
s for the M 7.1 September 19, 2017 earthquake, instead of the 0-6 s lead time 
that actually occurred (Cullar et al., 2018; Santos-Reyes, 2019; Tajima and 
Hayashida, 2018). 
Social and behavioural sphere 
The lack of policies on delivering EEW-related training to the public is reflected 
in the socio-behavioural sphere. There is general agreement among the public 
that EEW is useful, but the majority of end users lack adequate training or tend 
to ignore the appropriate protection procedures to follow before, during and 
after an earthquake (Santos-Reyes, 2019; Suarez et al., 2009). Different 
analyses indicate that decision makers in Mexico need to improve 
communication and education practices among the residents of Mexico City, 
so that they react more efficiently to warnings and have a better understanding 
of the capabilities and limitations of SASMEX (Espinosa-Aranda et al., 2011; 
Santos-Reyes, 2019). Finally, it is important to note that residents from Mexico 
City view false and short-notice alarms as useful opportunities to conduct 
14 https://www.milenio.com/estados/cuantos-estados-cuentan-con-alertas-sismicas  
https://www.milenio.com/estados/cuantos-estados-cuentan-con-alertas-sismicas
additional exercises (i.e., drills) on evacuation procedures (Allen et al., 2017, 
2018; Reddy, 2019).  
Organisational sphere 
All strategic buildings like hospitals, security buildings and offices, are legally 
required to contain devices for receiving EEW alerts in Mexico City (Surez et 
al., 2018). Since 2015, more than 12,000 warning EEW speakers and devices 
have been installed across the city to broadcast alerts to different 
organisations and the general public (Santos-Reyes, 2019). However, the 
clear lack of training and information about response actions discussed 
previously is a major issue at the organisation level, as it reduces the potential 
benefits of EEW for business continuity management (Suarez et al., 2009)13. 
A lack of communication between organisations and local and federal 
governments means that there is no formal strategy for identifying and 
prioritising critical infrastructure, lifelines, and institutions to receive EEW 
alerts (Suarez et al., 2009).  
On the other hand, drills are widely organised to practise the various risk-
mitigation actions facilitated by the long warning times of SASMEX. For 
example, schools carry out these training procedures regularly (Surez et al., 
2018) and some critical facilities in Mexico City undertake EEW evacuation 
drills as part of their organisational procedures. A nationwide drill has been 
carried out once a year since 198615, when the National System of Civil 
Protection was launched in Mexico following the 1985 earthquake16. Two more 
annual national drills (Macrosimulacros) were initiated in 2020. 
Finally, EEW has been integrated into the organisational resilience of the 
Mexico City Metro (subway) (Cullar et al., 2014). Using radio receivers, the 
manager of the EEW system notifies train operators when it is necessary to 
stop trains and open the doors at the nearest station, so passengers can look 
15 https://verne.elpais.com/verne/2017/09/27/mexico/1506531283_511876.html  
16 https://mvsnoticias.com/noticias/estados/realizara-cnpc-macrosimulacro-de-sismo-en-
septiembre/ (in Spanish). 
https://verne.elpais.com/verne/2017/09/27/mexico/1506531283_511876.html
https://mvsnoticias.com/noticias/estados/realizara-cnpc-macrosimulacro-de-sismo-en-septiembre/
https://mvsnoticias.com/noticias/estados/realizara-cnpc-macrosimulacro-de-sismo-en-septiembre/
for earthquake protection. However, the passengers do not receive the alarm 
while inside the carriage when the train is moving (Espinosa-Aranda et al., 
2011).  
3.6 Discussion 
From the technical perspective, engineering-related research and 
development of EEW applications have not yet been emphasized, although 
very rapid improvements of EEW are being observed in the seismology 
community, as also noted in Earthquake Early Warning Systems: Physical 
Grounds, Technical Concepts, Methods, and Perspectives. An advanced, 
real-time PBEE framework is recommended for the design of structure-specific 
applications of EEW as an improved means of reducing casualties, economic 
and functionality losses due to earthquakes. Such a PBEE framework would 
require 1) accurately characterising EEW-related uncertainty through an 
evolutionary and probabilistic approach for real-time seismic source and 
ground shaking modelling; 2) developing innovative computational building 
models for seismic alert and rapid damage assessment; and 3) pioneering 
technological and methodological solutions for interfacing real-time 
earthquake monitoring and engineering applications. This framework could 
additionally be unified with multi-criteria decision-making tools, to create an 
advanced engineering-oriented decision support system for EEW that 
explicitly accounts for end-user preferences toward expected consequences 
associated with each potential action. The final goal of this type of system 
would be to enable end users to determine optimal real-time risk mitigating 
actions within the context of appropriately propagated and dynamically 
quantified uncertainties. This would ultimately increase the effectiveness of 
EEW within the continuum of technical risk-mitigation strategies that currently 
exist for earthquakes (Wald, 2020).  
The four considered case studies highlight various common lessons learned 
from existing EEW systems. An interesting finding from countries with public 
EEW (i.e., Japan and Mexico) is that there is a clear tendency by residents to 
accept and tolerate false alarms (Allen et al., 2017, 2018; Reddy, 2019; Wald, 
2020), which provide an opportunity to perform some additional evacuation 
exercises to those already implemented by institutions and governments. This 
evidence is in line with additional existing literature (Goltz, 2002), which 
indicates that false alarms can be perceived as unscheduled, inexpensive, 
evacuation exercises or drills. Finally, it has also been found in both Mexico 
and Japan that users prefer to receive false alarms from an implemented EEW 
system rather than not having any public EEW installed. However, no case 
study addresses possible negative mental health consequences that might be 
triggered in individuals given a false alarm. This is a significant gap in the state-
of-the-art, as negative mental health effects could be particularly detrimental 
for people of vulnerable categories, such as those affected by Post-Traumatic 
Stress Disorder, which is the most common mental condition among 
earthquake survivors (Farooqui et al., 2017). As indicated by McBride et al. 
(2020), releasing too many false alerts can significantly reduce the publics 
trust in a public EEW alert system, potentially endangering people if they 
consequently fail to take fast protective actions when necessary. To enhance 
trust in EEW, all of its limitations should be clearly communicated to end users 
and the public, including the potential for false alerts as well as very short 
warning times in specific areas (Wald, 2020). 
A further element to consider in the discussion is the opinion of the public 
regarding EEW warnings across the case-studies. Public opinion of EEW 
warnings is a product of cultural or social features and is therefore region-
specific. In Japan, most of the literature shows that residents of the country 
agree with the implementation of EEW and find it useful. However, Nakayachi 
et al. (2019) highlight that this is not always the case. In some regions of the 
country, the public does not believe that EEW alerts are effective, given their 
lack of detailed information about the strength of the incoming ground shaking 
and the expected arrival time. Related to the Mexican case-study, there is a 
common desire expressed by the public to receive more detailed information 
on the incoming event, so that the optimal risk-mitigation action can be 
undertaken (Santos-Reyes, 2019). This desire is shared worldwide, including 
by over 200 participants (organisations) of a survey that assessed the factors 
influencing organisational acceptance and use of EEW systems in California 
(Goltz, 2002). Tajima and Hayashida (2018) conclude that some types of 
information that can be used to determine the most appropriate actions to take, 
such as the arrival time, should be also be considered. In particular, the survey 
respondents in the study by Goltz (2002) indicated that mitigation actions such 
as moving away from falling objects or shutting off gas lines are the most 
appropriate measures in a short warning time (10 s), while evacuating to an 
outside area or shutting down hazardous materials are more effective 
options when a longer warning time is available (50 s). However, positive 
opinion on the use of detailed EEW alerts is not shared by other authors. For 
instance, Allen and Melgar (2019), Shrivastava (2003), and WMO (2017) 
argue that the processing of many details can delay responses, while simple 
warnings facilitate direct actions such as Drop-Cover-Hold On. Lindell et al. 
(2007) also indicates that warnings should be simple, clear and non-
ambiguous, using appropriate language in a diverse environment. Finally, 
studies in the United States (Dunn et al., 2016) and Iran (Asgary et al., 2007) 
have identified public willingness to pay small taxations to contribute to the 
funding of EEW systems. 
Official bodies, such as civil protection departments, are consistently regarded 
as crucial actors for the delivery of EEW training and education to the 
population (Gasparini et al., 2011), across all case studies examined. 
Concerns about the lack of effective political and organisational leadership 
related to EEW has been expressed in Mexico. For example, Santos-Reyes 
(2019) suggested that decision makers, such as the civil protection department 
of Mexico City, should increase their efforts to coordinate good practices of 
response to warnings, for instance through drills. This gap between EEW and 
monitoring services (civil protection and geological surveys) in Mexico has also 
been highlighted by Alexander (2015). Strong organisational links with 
representatives of official bodies and first responders are also required to 
make EEW a successful tool for enhancing business continuity in critical 
infrastructure such as energy, utilities, food supply, communications, and 
banking (Gasparini et al., 2011). As indicated by Tajima and Hayashida 
(2018), EEW systems are only effective if the resilience, strength, and 
operations of the system are ensured before ground shaking occurs. 
Public transport systems, hospitals and schools are the most typical 
institutional beneficiaries of EEW (Gasparini et al., 2011). In all case studies 
examined, the transportation sector (i.e., the Circumvesuviana railway system 
in Naples, the BART system in San Francisco Bay Area, the Shinkansen train 
system in Japan and Mexico Citys Metro) has particularly clear potential to 
significantly benefit from EEW implementation. When a warning is released, 
these utilities can rapidly activate procedures to slow the traffic and to stop 
carriages to prevent likely damage and allow evacuation of occupants, if 
feasible. Similarly, it has been shown that schools can benefit from EEW 
because the consequences of false alarms will not be costly, but the alarms 
may have significant benefits for safety and support long term public education 
(Goltz, 2002). When it comes to hospitals, Horiuchi (2009) has listed a 
comprehensive series of protection/safety actions that can be carried out to 
safeguard the public, staff, equipment and materials, and the facilities 
themselves (e.g., operating rooms). These actions might reduce injuries and 
deaths of hospitals users and can allow a quick recovery and maintenance of 
facilities after an earthquake.  
Figure 11 synthesises the evidence derived from this discussion and 
summarises the general findings for each sphere, considering all the case 
studies. The operational sphere, the political and governance sphere, the 
social and behavioural sphere, and the organisational sphere provide 
complementary considerations for the design and implementation of the 
technical components. This design and implementation process also requires 
a deep understanding of the local context as well as the prevailing application 
of legislative procedures, organisational standards and compliance 
assessments.  
The next section will introduce some open questions for future research and 
practice.  
Figure 11. Challenges in implementing EEW systems: common findings from the case studies, across 
all examined spheres. 
3.7 Conclusions 
This chapter developed a state-of-the-art review of the technical and socio-
organisational components of EEW systems. This included a detailed 
discussion of specific evidence from case studies of Italy, California, Japan 
and Mexico, where EEW systems have reached varying levels of maturity. The 
overall aim was to highlight improvements that are necessary to increase the 
effectiveness of the technical aspects of EEW in terms of their implications on 
the operational, political, social, behavioural, and organisational drivers. 
From the technical perspective, EEW systems have benefitted from extensive 
seismology-related research and development and are now capable of rapidly 
yielding source characteristics/expected shaking estimations to a high degree 
of accuracy. However, engineering applications of EEW, which have the 
potential to significantly improve risk predictions (and therefore decision-
making on the triggering of EEW alerts) for incoming events, rarely feature in 
the literature and are not used in real-life EEW implementations. Some studies 
have proposed to integrate the PBEE mathematical framework with EEW to 
quantitatively link seismological parameter estimations with structural 
performance consequences in real-time, while explicitly tracking all related 
uncertainties. Further work has suggested combining PBEE with multi-criteria 
Operational 
Sphere
 There is an open 
discussion about the 
information that needs to 
be included in EEW alerts. 
 EEW alerts should be 
transmitted to all areas that 
are affected by strong 
earthquake ground 
shaking.
Political & Governance 
Sphere
 Official bodies, such as civil 
protection, should provide 
response training to the 
community.
 Accountability and liability 
procedures should be 
addressed within the EEW 
system implementation.
Social & Behavioural
Sphere
 Most users find alerts 
useful.
 False alarms are tolerated 
by the population and are 
seen as additional drill 
opportunities.
 Users prefer to know the 
available warning time, 
expected shaking, and 
what to do when they 
receive an alert.
Organisational 
Sphere
 Schools, hospitals, and 
transport systems can 
highly benefit from EEW 
systems.
 Effective EEW systems 
require strong 
organisational links with 
first responders and official 
EEW bodies.
Challenges in EEW implementation
decision-making (MCDM) techniques, to explicitly account for end-user 
preferences when determining real-time optimal risk-mitigation actions. A 
unified PBEE-MCDM approach would transform EEW into a powerful end-
user-driven risk-management strategy for supporting seismic resilience.  
In addition to significant technical improvements, there has been an increased 
awareness since the early 2000s around topics such as people-centred EEW 
systems. However, many multi- and cross-disciplinary aspects of EEW remain 
relatively unexplored, which could compromise EEWs overall goal of 
increasing resilience and capacity.  
First, the review has highlighted some open issues in the operational and 
socio-behavioural spheres. Most users find alerts useful and tolerate false 
alarms, viewing them as additional drill opportunities. However, there is an 
open discussion about the information that needs to be included in EEW alerts. 
The literature suggests that a simple warning (e.g., no provision of the 
available warning time nor the characteristics of the incoming earthquake-
induced ground shaking) is typically not preferred by users. Instead, they 
desire to know the available warning time, expected shaking, and what to do 
when they receive an alert. Similarly, organisations need information to 
facilitate the activation of prudent/cautious mitigation actions together with 
alert signals. It is worth noting that some literature argues that simple warning 
message may be enough and optimal as the processing of many details can 
delay responses, while simple warnings facilitate direct actions such as Drop-
Cover-Hold On. This leads to open questions such as: What type of 
information is necessary to be communicated in EEW alert messages, to 
maximise their effectiveness? How should alert thresholds be determined, 
considering false alarm tolerance levels? How can a company perform 
shutdown operations if the time before the arrival of the shaking is unknown? 
What are the circumstances in which individuals evacuate, in a highly 
uncertain scenario?  
Secondly, this review indicates that the effectiveness of EEW can be reduced 
by negative reactions within the political and governance sphere, and the 
organisational sphere. There is often little or no coordination between official 
bodies that provide warnings, and those organisations that may benefit from 
reliable EEW. For example, even where the technical components of EEW are 
perceived as useful, a lack of integration in operational functions and 
procedures can hamper their positive impact. The technical component may 
also be negatively influenced by the local context in terms of legislation, 
standardisation, compliance, and management culture. Information and action 
on the political and governance sphere require special consideration when 
implementing EEW systems (Gasparini et al., 2011; Goltz, 2002). 
Complementary assessments should investigate questions such as Who is 
accountable for activating emergency procedures, following an alert, within an 
organisation? Who is accountable for issuing alerts? What are the legal 
liabilities of disseminating false alerts?  
All the examined case studies indicated that EEW is perceived as beneficial 
for critical infrastructure resilience. This review showed that hospitals, public 
transportation, and schools have particular potential to undertake risk 
mitigation actions when an EEW alert is received, assuming that the warning 
time is enough. However, Wald (2020) argues that there are only a limited 
number of EEW applications to critical infrastructure that have been well 
documented in the literature, many of which are hypothetical. In conclusion, 
further research is needed to understand if critical infrastructure should really 
be a priority target for EEW?  
While this work is not exhaustive, it has leveraged a few pertinent case studies 
to provide important insight on the technical and socio-organisational 
components of EEW, and how their integration may be improved for more 
effective promotion of seismic resilience. 
Chapter 4. A loss-based control algorithm for 
magnetorheological dampers combined with 
4.1 Introduction and Motivation 
In practice, two fundamental problems in EEW restrict its applications: short 
warning time, particularly close to the epicentre, and considerable uncertainty 
on the predicted ground motion (Iervolino et al., 2009). EEW information 
always involves some uncertainty, and some EEW applications may lead to a 
substantial economic loss if a false alarm occurs (Iervolino et al., 2006). 
Therefore, deciding whether to take mitigation actions should be based on an 
advanced loss analysis. Moreover, as the available warning time is short, 
human intervention would likely take too long for any actions from being 
activated promptly. Therefore, automated decision and mitigation actions are 
favoured. 
Some studies (e.g., Iervolino et al., 2010) have discussed the semi-active 
control of structures as a possible advanced engineering application of EEW, 
especially in areas where the available warning time is very short (near the so-
called blind-zone). In this scenario, a building can change its dynamic 
properties within a few seconds (or milliseconds) to better withstand the 
approaching ground shaking. The combined use of EEW and structural control 
may reduce the structural vulnerability (and resulting losses) of specific 
systems, for example, critical infrastructure such as hospitals, fire stations, 
networks, etc., which have to be operational for emergency management 
purposes during or right after the event. As earthquakes often affect power 
supplies, semi-active devices are a sensible option for seismic mitigation as 
they can easily operate on back-up power. However, one of the key issues in 
using EEW with semi-active control is to properly account for the uncertainty 
in the EEW-based estimation of the event features: the effectiveness of such 
applications greatly depends on the quality of the pre-arrival ground motion 
information provided by the EEW system. 
In this chapter, MR dampers are proposed to change the mechanical 
properties of a hosting structure according to information on an incoming 
earthquake provided by an EEW system. In particular, this chapter proposes 
a loss-based probabilistic framework to derive an optimum structural control 
strategy minimizing potential losses from an incoming earthquake.  
The present chapter is organized as follows. First, the basic concepts of (1) 
Real-Time Probability Seismic Hazard Analysis (RTPSHA) for EEW 
applications; and (2) structural control, with special focus on MR dampers, are 
provided. Next, the proposed loss-based control algorithm for MR dampers 
combined with EEW is described, followed by the description of the illustrative 
example used in the chapter. The final sections discuss the results and offer 
some conclusions. 
4.2 Background 
4.2.1 Real-Time Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Analysis (RTPSHA) 
A regional EEW system is based on a dense sensor network covering a 
geographical area of high seismicity. When an earthquake occurs, the relevant 
source parameters (event location and magnitude) are estimated from the 
early portion of recorded signals (initial P- waves) at sensors closest to the 
epicentre. The estimated source parameters can then be used to predict, with 
quantified confidence, a ground motion IM at a distant site where a target 
structure of interest is located. Specifically, recent efforts of real-time 
seismology on rapid assessment of earthquake magnitude and location (Zollo 
et al., 2014b) enable to provide an estimate of the events features from a few 
seconds to a few tens of seconds before the ground motion arrives at a target 
site. When an event occurs, probabilistic distributions of magnitude (M) and 
source-to-site distance (R) are available, conditional on some parameters 
measured in the early portion of the P- (and sometimes S-) wave trains at a 
number of near-source stations. These parameters are generally associated 
with the low-frequency content of the data, which is sensitive to the seismic 
moment, and can be related to the maximum amplitude, the dominant 
frequency or the energy released by the event (Zollo et al. (2014b), for a 
comprehensive review of these parameters and related EEW models). The 
prediction of different IMs, conditional on those parameters, may be performed 
by analogy to the well-known probabilistic seismic hazard analysis (PSHA) but 
in real-time (Convertito et al., 2008; Iervolino et al., 2006) as formulated in Eq. 
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )IM,n IM M R
f IM | ,s f IM | m,r  f m |  f r | s  dm dr =                   (1) 
where ( )Rf r | s  is the PDF of R conditional on the sequence according to which 
n stations triggered (at a given time t),  ns s ,s ,...,s= 1 2 , ( )Mf m |  is the PDF 
of M conditional on the measures from the n stations triggered (at t), 
 n, ,...,   = 1 2 , and can be expressed analytically using Bayes' theorem 
(Iervolino et al., 2006); ( )IMf IM | m,r  is the PDF of the considered IM 
conditional on M and R, e.g., from a ground motion prediction equation 
(GMPE). The vector  n, ,...,   = 1 2  may include any possible parameter 
estimated from the early portion of recorded signal. It was shown in (Iervolino 
et al., 2007a) that ( )Mf m |  depends on the measures only via the summation 
of the logs, ( )
ln 
 and n. The modal value of R alone may adequately 
represent its PDF due to the negligible uncertainty involved in the earthquake 
location rapid estimation methods. Therefore, because the GMPE is a static 
piece of information (not depending on the real-time measures), the RTPSHA 
integral may be computed offline for all possible values of the 
 and R pair, 
and the result has only to be retrieved in real-time without the need for 
computing it. This is an attractive feature of the proposed approach (Iervolino, 
2011). 
Eq. (1) results time-dependent hazard curves which may be used as a support 
tool for automated decision-making to reduce the expected loss of specific 
structures/infrastructures in the framework of PBEE, even in those cases 
where limited lead-time renders evacuation unfeasible. However, real-time 
IMs predictions are performed in very uncertain conditions linked to both the 
real-time estimation of source parameters and the traditional uncertainties 
involved in PSHA (e.g., (Baker, 2008). 
4.3 Structural Control 
Structural control is an additional tool that can be used to meet desired 
performance objectives within the framework of PBEE. Over the past decades, 
several control devices and algorithms have been proposed to mitigate the 
dynamic response of a structure during extreme events such as earthquakes 
and strong winds (Soong and Spencer Jr, 2002). 
There are mainly three classes of control devices. Passive devices, which 
require no external power, are reliable and never destabilize the structure. 
Such devices reduce the seismic demand on the structure either by increasing 
the energy dissipation potential (i.e., increasing structural damping) and/or by 
changing its fundamental oscillation period moving it away from the most 
energetic frequency content of ground motion (e.g., seismic base isolation). 
However, they have low adaptability if the actual external loading conditions 
or usage patterns are different from those they were designed for. This makes 
integrating EEW with passive control systems difficult. 
On the other hand, active control devices are adaptive to varying usage 
patterns and loading conditions. Such devices supply control forces based on 
feedback from sensors (located near to/on the structure) that measure the 
excitation and/or the actual response. The recorded measurements from the 
response and/or excitation are processed by a controller which, based on an 
algorithm, operates actuators producing the forces. However, generating 
control forces by electromechanical or hydraulic actuators requires power 
sources of the order of tens of kilowatts for small structures and may reach 
several megawatts for large structures. This, together with their stability 
problems and overall reliability, are still major concerns to engineers. 
Moreover, active control strategies are usually based on information about the 
full waveform or structural response which cannot be predicted by EEW. 
Semi-active devices, combining the versatility and adaptability of the active 
devices and the reliability of the passive devices, have attracted considerable 
attention for the seismic protection of structures in recent years (Dyke et al., 
1996; Pohoryles and Duffour, 2015; Soong and Spencer Jr, 2002; Spencer 
and Nagarajaiah, 2003). These devices develop control forces based on the 
feedback from sensors that measure the excitation and/or the response of the 
structure and do not input energy to the structure (so, they usually do not 
induce an adverse effect on the stability of the structure). The stiffness and/or 
damping properties of a structure can be adjusted according to the 
instantaneous (measured) response of the hosting structure (feed-back) 
and/or to the instantaneous (measured) properties of the earthquake input 
(feed-forward). In both cases, a control algorithm describes the relationship 
between the observed quantities (e.g., displacements/velocities/accelerations 
of the structure, accelerations of the ground) and the corresponding optimal 
values of stiffness and damping (which can be changed employing electrical 
signals) of the adjustable devices. The energy required for the modification of 
the basic parameters of a semi-active device is small compared to that needed 
to operate conventional actuators (generally approximately tens of watts, so 
simple batteries can supply it - e.g., to open/close a valve).  
Several strategies have been proposed to control the behaviour of semi-active 
devices (e.g., Spencer and Nagarajaiah, 2003). Each of the proposed control 
strategies has its own merits and limitations depending on the specific 
application and desired performance. Comparative studies are needed to 
evaluate the performance of each control method. As an example, Barroso 
and Winterstein (2002) described a methodology, referred to as probabilistic 
seismic control analysis, for the development of probabilistic seismic demand 
curves for structures with supplemental control devices. The proposed 
methodology is applied to case-study structures (3- and 9-storey) equipped 
with three different control systems, namely (i) base isolation (passive), (ii) 
linear viscous brace dampers (passive); and (iii) active tendon braces. Results 
from this chapter indicated that no single control strategy is the most effective 
for all the hazard levels/return periods. 
4.3.1 MR dampers 
One of the most promising semi-active devices is the MR damper. These are 
semi-active damping devices first investigated in the context of civil 
engineering by Dyke et al. (1996). A magnetorheological fluid is an oily liquid 
containing iron micro-filings. When no magnetic field is present, the iron 
particles are randomly dispersed in the fluid and affects little its underlying 
viscosity. When the MR fluid is subjected to a magnetic field, the iron micro-
particles align and form linear chains which increase the fluid viscosity by 
several orders of magnitude. Like conventional viscous dampers, MR dampers 
consist of a fluid-filled cylindrical chamber along which a tightly fitting piston 
moves. In this case, however, the chamber is filled with MR fluid and is 
wrapped within an electric coil. Supplying the coil with a current induces a 
magnetic field in the fluid and changes its viscosity. By varying the current in 
the coil (through an input voltage), the magnitude of the force developed in the 
damper can be controlled. MR dampers adapt with very fast response times 
(i.e., < 1s including trigger and set up time (Occhiuzzi et al., 2003) over a broad 
temperature range and have low power requirements. They are relatively 
inexpensive to manufacture and maintain. During the last few decades 
researchers have investigated both numerically and experimentally the 
behaviour of MR dampers and semi-active control algorithms associated with 
these types of dampers for earthquake hazard mitigation (Wang and Liao, 
2011). Figure 12 shows the force-displacement and force-velocity loops for a 
small-scale prototype MR damper subjected to harmonic cycles (constant 
amplitude of 1.5 cm and frequency of 2.5 Hz) for varying input voltage levels. 
It is clear from these graphs that MR damper behaviour is highly nonlinear and 
voltage-dependent. 
Figure 12. Force-displacement (a) and force-velocity (b) loops for a small-scale prototype MR damper 
for imposed harmonic cycles at different current levels. 
For structural control MR dampers can be used either in passive or semi-active 
mode. In passive mode, illustrated in the block diagram shown in Figure 13, a 
constant current is supplied to the MR damper. No feedback data are required, 
and the damper force is generated passively by the movement of the damper. 
In the remainder of the chapter, passive-on and passive-off controls refer to 
the cases when the maximum and no current, respectively, are supplied to the 
damper.  
The semi-active controlled system shown in Figure 13 uses feedback data, 
requiring the use of sensors (e.g., accelerometers, load cells, displacement 
transducers), and a controller to determine the damper control force.  
A basic semi-active control algorithm is based on the simple on/off command 
current rule. The state of the structure is assessed, and the controller 
determines if increasing the damper force is beneficial to reduce the response 
of the structure. If so, the semi-active controller inputs the maximum current 
(i.e., on-mode) to the damper to maximize the benefit. Otherwise, it just inputs 
the minimum current (i.e., off-mode). 
Figure 13. Block diagram for a passive controlled system with MR damper (left); Block diagram for a 
semi-active controlled system with MR damper (right; adapted from (Chae et al., 2013). 
More sophisticated control algorithms can be used to control MR dampers 
(e.g., decentralized bang-bang Control, Maximum Energy Dissipation, 
Clipped-Optimal Control, Jansen and Dyke, 2000). Following Maddaloni et al. 
(2013), this study uses MR Dampers in a passive smart mode: the 
mechanical properties of the device are set just before the arrival of a seismic 
event at a site, according to the IM estimate of the incoming earthquake 
provided by the geographically relevant EEW system (Figure 14). This 
adjustment is supposed to only happen once, keeping the device control 
parameter unaltered for the whole duration of the seismic event. Herein, this 
control strategy is referred as SA+EEW. Later in the chapter it will be 
compared to the passive strategy (coil fed with the maximum voltage) and a 
semi-active strategy proposed by (Pohoryles and Duffour, 2015) called the 
Improved-Clipped Algorithm ('SA ICA'). 'SA ICA' represents an improvement 
of the clipped-optimal control algorithms for MR dampers introduced by Dyke 
et al. (1996) and Yoshida and Dyke (2004).  
Figure 14. Block diagram for a smart passive controlled system with MR damper combined with EEW. 
It is worth noting that the study presented in Maddaloni et al. (2013) has 
several limitations which are addressed here: PGA is used as the selected IM 
in their study, stating that the research to reliably predict the complete elastic 
spectrum is still in progress, not considering the study of Convertito et al. 
(2008); only 16 ground motion records were used in the calibration of the 
control algorithm based on EEW, with low statistical significance of the 
presented results; the uncertainty analysis performed to investigate the 
sensitivity of the results to uncertainty in the EEW real-time estimates is based 
on simplified assumptions/models; the control algorithm is based on the 
reduction of peak response quantities of a benchmark highway bridge rather 
than in terms of expected loss. This last point is particularly important: the 
designed algorithm should provide the optimal value of voltage that would 
provide the optimal structural response considering all the EDPs of interest. 
Given that different EDPs represent different physical quantities (with different 
units) and show different trends as function of the input voltage in the MR 
damper, a loss-based algorithm is the only option able to incorporate the 
representative contribution of all the EDPs taken into consideration. 
4.4 Loss-Based Control Algorithm for MR dampers 
The loss estimation approach used in this chapter is primarily based on the 
simplified storey-based building-specific loss estimation method proposed by 
Ramirez and Miranda (2009). To develop a building-specific relationship 
linking ground motion with an intensity level of IM to the expected economic 
monetary loss (L), Eq. (2) can be used: 
    ( )   ( )E L | IM E L | NC,IM P NC | IM E L |C P C | IM= +             (2) 
where  E L | NC,IM  is the expected loss in the building given that collapse 
has not occurred at the given IM level;  E L |C  is the expected loss given that 
the building has collapsed (i.e., cost of removal of debris from the site plus 
replacement value); ( )P NC | IM  is the probability that the building does not 
collapse at the given IM level; and ( )P C | IM  is the probability the building 
does collapse at the given IM level (which is complementary to ( )P NC | IM , 
i.e., ( ) ( )P NC | IM P C | IM= 1 ). ( )P C | IM  can be quantified by using 
nonlinear structural simulation (e.g., Haselton and Deierlein (2008); in this 
chapter, ( )P C | IM  is determined using the results of nonlinear dynamic 
analysis by establishing a collapse criteria based on maximum Interstorey Drift 
Ratio (MIDR), i.e., collapse occurs if MIDR is larger than 10%. At this level of 
deformation, it is assumed that the building will not be able to recover a stable 
position and side-sway collapse will be initiated.   
 E L | NC,IM  in Eq. (2) can be computed using a storey-based approach by 
grouping individual component losses per storey and pre-computing estimated 
damage using assumed cost distribution of the total storey value, Eqs. (3) to 
# story
E L | NC,IM E L | NC,IM
=     
( )i ,k i ,k k k k
E L | NC,IM E L | NC,EDP dP EDP edp | NC,IM=                   (4) 
i ,k k i ,k j j k
E L | NC,EDP E L | DS ds P DS ds | NC,EDP
 = = =     
In Eq. (4), 
E L | NC,IM    is the expected loss (eventually normalized by the 
original cost of the component or its replacement value) at the i-th storey for 
the k-th component category given that collapse has not occurred at the given 
IM level; 
i ,k k
E L | NC,EDP    is the expected loss (normalized by the original 
cost of the component) at the i-th storey for the k-th component category 
conditional on non-collapse and the EDP associated with the k-th component 
category ( )kEDP ; and ( )k kP EDP edp | NC,IM  is the complementary 
cumulative distribution function (CCDF) of 
EDP  conditional on non-collapse 
and the given IM level and can be computed by using nonlinear structural 
simulation (e.g., Jalayer and Cornell, 2009). In Eq. (5), 
i ,k j
E L | DS ds =   is 
the expected loss (eventually normalized by the original cost of the 
component) at the i-th storey for the k-th component category given that 
collapse has not occurred at the given damage state ( )jds ; 
( )j kP DS ds | NC,EDP=  is the probability of being at (or exceeding) a damage 
state 
ds  conditional on the EDP level associated with the k-th component 
category (i.e., component-specific fragility functions, see Aslani and Miranda 
(2005).  
The seismic demand (in terms of an EDP) due to seismic excitation can be 
estimated by performing a Probabilistic Seismic Demand Analysis (PSDA) on 
a computational model of the building. One possible approach in PSDA (used 
in this chapter) is to apply a series of earthquake ground motion time histories 
to the building model and to estimate the peak responses at different levels 
along the building height. For the purpose of loss estimation described above, 
the structural response has to be evaluated at all stories in terms of the EDPs 
that have the closest correlation with the damage in the components. Three 
broad categories of components are considered here: (1) drift-sensitive 
structural components; (2) drift-sensitive non-structural components; and (3) 
acceleration-sensitive components. Hence, an inventory of components and 
their location within the structure is required.  
The main output from PSDA is the probability distribution of the structural 
response, namely IDR and PFA, at different locations and at different levels of 
intensity. For each category of components, fragility functions can be used to 
estimate the probability that a particular building component will reach or 
exceed different damage states as a function of the EDPs. The repair or 
replacement cost of a component can finally be estimated by itemizing the 
tasks that need to be accomplished after the occurrence of each of the 
damage states.  
The main objective of the approach proposed here is to set the input voltage 
u to the MR damper, within the range 0-umax, according to a given control 
algorithm u(IM) so as to obtain the minimum expected loss during the seismic 
excitation. The given IM value to input into the control algorithm can be the 
expected value of the real-time distribution of the considered IM (derived 
through the RTPSHA).  
To calibrate the u(IM) algorithm, a set of nonlinear time-history analyses can 
be performed using a set of (unscaled) ground motion records; for each ground 
motion record, the MR damper is fed with a range of voltage values (0-umax 
with a given step u), always keeping the input voltage constant for the whole 
duration of the event. For each ground motion, the value of the different EDPs 
is computed (for each voltage) and the optimal value of voltage uopt  the one 
leading to the minimum expected loss  is recorded. Eq. (5) is used to estimate 
each component expected loss (at each storey) as a function of the EDP 
(corresponding to a given ground motion record - characterized by a given IM 
and voltage value) and to select uopt for the given IM. Robust regression can 
be finally used to fit an analytical control model to the obtained (IM, uopt) values.  
Eqs. (3) and (4) can be used to estimate the component expected loss (at 
each storey) and the total expected loss as a function of the level of intensity 
IM. This result can be used to compare the expected loss for different control 
strategies for different hazard levels and test the effectiveness of the proposed 
integration between smart passive MR damper and EEW. 
4.5 Case-study 
A numerical example is presented in this section to illustrate how to implement 
the loss-based control algorithm for MR dampers combined with EEW, as 
discussed above. The numerical example consists of a scaled three-storey 
building structures modelled in Simulink as a simple three-degree-of-
freedom shear frame. It is fitted with an MR damper connecting the ground 
and first floor (Figure 15). The location(s) for the control devices in the 
structure could be changed to optimize the structural performance but the 
particular topology shown in Figure 15 is adopted because it has been widely 
used by other researchers testing different control strategies employing MR 
dampers in the past (e.g., Pohoryles and Duffour, 2015). The structure has a 
fundamental period T equal to 0.2s and its fundamental structural properties, 
mass (M), damping (C), and stiffness (K) are: 
  
98 3 0 0
0 98 3 0
0 0 98 3
          (6) C
=  
  
175 50 0
50 100 50
0 50 50
K . . .
=  
  
12 6 84 0
10 8 84 13 7 6 84
0 6 84 6 84
The MR damper used in this chapter is a small-scale 3000N prototype similar 
to the one used in Spencer et al. (1997). It is based on a commercially 
available device. Although small by civil engineering standards, experimental 
test data and model validation studies are available in the literature (e.g. 
Pohoryles and Duffour (2015), which could be used to calibrate the model. The 
input current for the considered damper is 0-1 amp, which is proportional to an 
applied voltage input of 0-3V. The MR damper and control model used in this 
chapter have a maximum voltage of 2.25V (0.75 amp) as the experimental 
data available suggests saturation above this value.  
The modified Bouc-Wen model shown diagrammatically in Figure 15 is a 
general parametric mathematical model that allows general hysteresis 
behaviours to be simulated. Many previous studies on MR dampers have 
shown that it can model accurately their hysteretic behaviour (Jansen and 
Dyke, 2000); therefore, it was chosen in this chapter to simulate the device. 
The model parameters of the MR damper governing equations are a function 
of the applied voltage, u.  
The equations governing the Bouc-Wen system are displayed as follows, 
according to Dyke et al. (1996): 
The MR damping force is calculated from 
f c y k ( x x )= + 
1 1 0
where x
 is the initial deflection of the spring, c
 is a dashpot that introduces 
the nonlinear roll-off in the force-velocities loops at low velocities, k
stiffness accumulator, and y  is the internal velocity of the piston given by: 
  y z c x k ( x y )
= + + 
Here, the damping observed at high velocities is represented by c
 is the 
initial displacement of spring k
. The term k
 controls the stiffness in the 
damper at larger velocities and z is an evolutionary variable to account for 
hysteresis: 
z x y z z ( x y ) z A( x y ) 
=     + 
where A ,  ,  , c0 ,   and n  are parameters that give to the hysteresis loop 
characteristic shape and scale. 
The following relationships define the dependence of the force on the voltage 
applied to the current driver and the resulting magnetic current: 
u  = +  (12) 
c c c u= +
1 1 1
c c c u= +
0 0 0
All the a  subscripted variables are obtained considering voltage values equal 
to 0 V and u  is obtained from the applied command voltage v , and   , 
related to the response time of the current driver: 
u (u v )=    (15) 
Details on the MR damper parameters used in this simulation are those shown 
in Table 20. Force-Displacement and Force-Velocity plots of the Bouc-Model 
were shown in Figure 12. 
Table 20. Bouc-Wen values for the definition of the mechanical model for MR dampers (Dyke et al., 
1996). 
Physical 
parameters 
Value Unit 
Shape 
parameters 
Value Unit 
 21 Ns/cm   363 cm-2 
 3.5 Ns/(cmV)   363 cm-2 
 46.9 N/cm A  301  
 283 Ns/cm n  2  
 2.95 Ns/(cmV)   190 s-1 
 5 N/cm 
 14.3 cm 
  140 N/cm 
  695 N/(cmV) 
A set of 150 unscaled ground motion records from the SIMBAD database 
(Selected Input Motions for Displacement-Based Assessment and Design 
(Smerzini et al., 2014), is used as input for the nonlinear dynamic analysis of 
the case-study structure. SIMBAD includes a total of 467 tri-axial 
accelerograms, consisting of two horizontal (X-Y) and one vertical (Z) 
components, generated by 130 worldwide seismic events. The database 
includes shallow crustal earthquakes with moment magnitudes (M) ranging 
from 5 to 7.3 and epicentral distances R  35 km. The specific subset of 
records considered here provides a statistically significant number of strong-
motion records of engineering relevance for the applications presented in this 
chapter. Those records cover a wide range of magnitudes, source-to-site 
distance and soil types and are selected by first ranking the 467 records in 
terms of their PGA values (by using the geometric mean of the two horizontal 
components) and then keeping the component with the largest PGA value (for 
the 150 stations with highest mean PGA).  
Figure 15. Case-study structure (left); Modified Bouc-Wen model for MR dampers (right). 
The spectral acceleration at the fundamental period of the hosting structure, 
( )aS T1 , was the selected IM to calibrate the proposed loss-based control 
algorithm. To this aim, in each time-history analysis (i.e., for a given ground 
motion input), the MR damper is fed with a range of voltage values, always 
keeping the input voltage constant for the duration of the motion. Ten 
command voltages from 0 V to 2.25 V in 0.25 V steps are considered. Around 
1,500 dynamic analyses are performed in total. For each analysis, 9 different 
EDPs are recorded (for each voltage) and the optimal value of voltage uopt  
the one leading to the minimum expected loss as computed using Eq. (5)  is 
identified. The EDPs considered are: 1) peak displacement (over time) for 
each storey; 2) peak Interstorey Drift Ratio (over time) for each storey, as the 
largest difference between the lateral displacements of two adjacent floors, 
divided by the height of the storey (denoted as IDRi for storey i-th); and 3) peak 
acceleration (over time) for each storey (denoted as PFAi for storey i-th).  
Figure 16 shows how the EDPs  IDR at the first storey (Figure 16a) and PFA 
at the third storey (Figure 16b) vary with the input voltage for two generic 
ground motion records. As could be anticipated, each EDP has a specific 
variation with the input voltage so that the voltage value minimizing each EDP 
is not necessarily the same for all EPDs. From the simulation results obtained, 
the optimum voltage value in terms of IDR is usually the maximum possible 
voltage (umax) as shown in Figure 16a. However, the dependence of PFA with 
the input voltage is quite variable and the optimum voltage is strongly IM-
dependent as illustrated in Figure 16b. By combining these conflicting 
demands into a single performance variable, the proposed loss-based 
approach offers a powerful control tool.  
The storey-based approach defined in Eqs. (3-5) requires 1) that the 
replacement value of the entire building can be distributed among each storey 
and each type of building components in the structure; and 2) damage 
functions relating the EDPs to the monetary loss of the entire storey. 
Regarding point 1), for the case-study building used here, assumptions are 
made on how the replacement value is distributed among its stories and 
components. Specifically, it is assumed that the total value is uniformly 
distributed across all the stories (Ramirez and Miranda, 2009). Each storey's 
value is distributed into the three categories of components described above 
assuming the following value breakdown: (1) 0% for drift-sensitive structural 
components (for simplicity); (2) 50% for drift-sensitive non-structural 
components; and (3) 50% for acceleration-sensitive components. Regarding 
point 2), the first step is to define the damage states associated with the 
component. Definition of damage states is based on the courses of action that 
need to be taken after observing that damage state in the component. Fragility 
functions for each category of component are based on HAZUS (Hazards 
United States  Federal Emergency Management Agency). For illustrative 
purposes, only one damage state, corresponding to complete damage, is 
considered for generic non-structural components in office buildings. The 
fragility functions used for these components are shown in Figure 17a (drift-
sensitive) and 6b (acceleration-sensitive). 
Figure 16. Example of EDPs vs voltage curves and optimal voltage values for two generic ground 
motion records: (a) IDR at the first storey; (b) PFA at the third storey. 
Figure 18a shows how the normalized expected loss ratio for two generic 
ground motion records varies witht the input voltage. From these curves, a 
single optimum input voltage can clearly be identified and recorded for each 
ground motion (and associated IM); Figure 18b shows the optimal voltage as 
function of ( )aS T1 . The curve shown is obtained by fitting the cloud of points 
by robust regression. Each point represents the loss-optimum voltage value 
for a given ground motion (i.e. IM). This graph is key to calibrate the optimal 
control algorithm. It shows that for this particular case-study, for events with 
( )aS T1   0.25g, the loss-optimum voltage to drive the MR damper is the 
minimum value (0 V). For 0.25g < ( )aS T1  < 0.7g, the optimum values are fitted 
to the relationship indicated in the figure, whereas for ( )aS T1   0.7g, the loss-
optimum voltage input should be the maximum value (2.25 V). 
Figure 17. Fragility functions for complete damage for (a) drift-sensitive, generic non-structural 
component (in office buildings); and (b) acceleration-sensitive, generic non-structural component (in 
office buildings). 
Figure 18. (a) Example of loss vs voltage curves and optimal voltage values for two generic ground 
motion records; (b) optimal control algorithm. 
Figure 19 shows the loss ratio in terms of ( )aS T1  for the three different control 
strategies described in Chapter 4.3. It illustrates how a loss-estimation 
framework allows control algorithms to be compared. For this case-study, the 
best performing control strategy (in terms of loss) for all IM is the 'SA+EEW' 
one (red line). The 'SA ICA' (blue line) is a fairly close second, whereas the 
passive mode (green line) performs much more poorly. Therefore, the 
proposed methodology ('SA+EEW') provides the best response of the 
structure (in terms of losses) compared to the chosen semi-active and passive 
strategies.  
Figure 19. Comparison of different control algorithms for the case-study structure in terms of loss ratio 
vs IM. 
4.6 Conclusions 
This chapter shows how MR dampers can be integrated with an EEW system 
to control just-in-time the dynamic characteristics of a structure to achieve an 
optimal response against seismic forces. The smart-passive strategy sets 
the voltage to a constant optimum value for the duration of a given event. It is 
shown how this optimum value for a given event can be obtained in advance 
through a calibration process carried out once and for all using ground motion 
records. These are used as input for nonlinear dynamic analyses of the 
structure fitted with MR dampers. By varying the input voltage and recording 
relevant EDPs, the loss associated with a given ground motion and input 
voltage can be estimated, and the loss-optimum input voltage to the MR 
damper can be identified. 
The methodology is illustrated on a case-study based on a three-floor shear 
frame fitted with one MR damper between the ground floor and the first floor. 
It is shown how the loss estimation framework allows an overall optimum 
voltage value to be identified even though different voltage values can 
minimize each EDP.  
The new SA+EEW strategy is proved to perform better (in terms of losses) 
against traditional control methodologies, leading to future potential research 
on the feasibility of the proposed control algorithm. 
Chapter 5. Real-time assessment of building 
response for EEW applications 
5.1 Introduction and motivation 
The goal of a regional earthquake early warning (EEW) system is to detect 
earthquakes in the early stages of fault rupture, rapidly predict the 
intensity/impact of the subsequent ground shaking at various source-to-site 
distances (i.e., target sites) and warn end users before they experience strong 
shaking that can potentially cause damage and losses. The most damaging 
shaking is usually caused by seismic shear (or S-) and surface waves, 
travelling at about half the speed of the fastest waves (primary waves; or P-
waves), and much slower than an electronic warning signal (which travel at 
nearly the speed of light). EEW systems use P-waves (or early portions of S-
waves) to detect strong shaking in the near fault and transmit alerts at target 
sites/end users ahead of the damaging S-waves (Zollo et al., 2014b). EEW 
systems can provide up to a few tens of seconds of warning before the arrival 
of damaging ground shaking at a target site. The warning time (or lead time) 
depends on the distance to the earthquake rupture (e.g., Wald, 2020). This 
lead time allows for real-time earthquake risk-mitigating actions, including 
alerting people to drop, cover, and hold-on" or move to safer locations 
within/or outside a building (depending on the available warning time), as well 
as many types of automated actions such as stopping elevators at the nearest 
floor, opening firehouse doors, slowing rapid-transit vehicles and high-speed 
trains to avoid accidents/derailments, shutting down gas pipelines to minimize 
fire hazards, shutting down manufacturing operations to decrease potential 
damage to equipment, saving vital computer information to avoid data losses, 
etc. This is not an exhaustive list but rather a snapshot of critical applications 
that could benefit from EEW (e.g., Porter, 2020). From an earthquake 
engineering perspective, knowledge that an earthquake may imminently 
induce severe seismic demand on a target structure (or 
infrastructure/infrastructure component) enables specific planned mitigating 
actions (alerting occupants, controlling elevators, etc.) to be taken immediately 
by relevant end users, for limiting potential losses, particularly in terms of 
injuries and casualties. 
In practice, two fundamental issues related to the concept of/methods 
employed in EEW restrict its applications: short warning time, particularly close 
to the rupture, and large uncertainty on the predicted ground-motion field (e.g., 
Iervolino et al., 2009), which translate in the potential for false and missed 
alarms. Some EEW applications may lead to a substantial economic loss (e.g., 
business interruption) if a false alarm occurs (Iervolino et al., 2006). Therefore, 
deciding whether to take mitigation actions should be based on an advanced 
probabilistic seismic loss analysis (also accounting for losses due to false 
alarms) rather than simply using ground-motion Intensity Measures (IM) (e.g., 
Iervolino et al., 2007). More in general, as the available warning time is short, 
human intervention would likely take too long for any actions from being 
activated promptly. Therefore, automated decision and mitigation actions are 
generally favoured. 
A regional EEW system, the focus of this chapter, is based on a dense sensor 
network covering a geographical area characterized by high seismicity. When 
an earthquake occurs, the relevant source parameters (event location and 
magnitude) are estimated from the early portion of recorded signals (initial P- 
and S-waves) at sensors closest to the rupture. The estimated source 
parameters can then be used to predict, with quantified confidence, 
earthquake-induced ground-motion IMs at a distant site where a target 
structure/infrastructure of concern is located. Specifically, when an event 
occurs, probabilistic distributions of magnitude (M) and source-to-site distance 
(R) can be computed in real-time, conditional on some parameters measured 
in the early portion of the P- (and sometimes S-) waves at a number of near-
source stations. For instance, the real-time estimation of the earthquake 
magnitude is generally based on empirical relationships relating the 
earthquake size to parameters obtained in the early fraction (3-4 s) of P- and 
S-wave signals. These parameters are generally associated with the low-
frequency content of the ground-motion data, which is sensitive to the seismic 
moment, and can be related to the maximum amplitude, the dominant 
frequency, or the energy released by the event (e.g., Cremen and Galasso, 
2020, for a comprehensive review of these parameters and related EEW 
methodologies/models/algorithms). The prediction of different IMs, conditional 
on those parameters, may be performed by analogy to the well-known 
framework provided by probabilistic seismic hazard analysis (PSHA; Cornell, 
1968) but in real-time (RTPSHA; e.g., Convertito et al., 2008; Iervolino et al., 
2006) as formulated in Eq. (16). 
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )IM IM M R
f im | ,s f im | m,r  f m |  f r | s  dm dr =               (16) 
where ( )Rf r | s  is the probability density function (PDF) of R conditional on the 
sequence according to which n stations triggered (at a given time t), 
 ns s ,s ,...,s= 1 2 , ( )Mf m |  is the PDF of M conditional on the measures from 
the n stations triggered (at t),  n, ,...,   = 1 2 , and can be expressed 
analytically using Bayes' theorem (e.g., Iervolino et al., 2006); ( )IMf im | m,r  is 
the PDF of the considered IM conditional on M and R, e.g., from a ground-
motion model (GMM). The vector  n, ,...,   = 1 2  may include any possible 
parameter estimated from the early portion of recorded signal. The real-time 
IMs predictions are performed in very uncertain conditions linked to both the 
real-time estimation of source parameters (e.g., uncertainty in the empirical 
relationship between M and ) and the traditional uncertainties involved in 
PSHA; see Iervolino et al., 2009 for a comprehensive discussion on these 
issues. Eq. (16) results in real-time-dependent hazard curves, which may be 
used in a decision-support system for real-time earthquake mitigation action 
in/at target structures/infrastructures. For instance, a simple decisional rule 
could consist of issuing the alarm if the probability that a critical IM value for 
the given asset (IMcr) is exceeded at the site (i.e.,  EEW crPr IM IM , [where 
IM  is the EEW-based prediction of the considered IM, through Eq. (16)], is 
larger than a predefined threshold (Pcr); or alternatively, if the expected value 
of the predicted IM from the EEW system is larger than IMcr (Iervolino, 2011), 
i.e.,  EEW crE IM IM . 
For structure-specific applications of EEW, the prediction of structural 
response in terms of an Engineering Demand Parameter (EDP), such as 
Interstorey Drift Ratio (IDR) or Peak Floor Acceleration (PFA), rather than the 
prediction of a ground-motion IM, may be of larger interest and usefulness. 
This is because, the shaking experienced in mid- to high-rise buildings is 
generally significantly different from that on the ground and it also differs from 
one building to another, depending on the building dynamic characteristics. It 
is also well acknowledged that EDPs are better proxies than IMs for the 
prediction of earthquake-induced building damage (e.g., Shome et al., 1998).  
Therefore, this chapter proposes a set of new empirical prediction equations 
correlating EDPs for case-study buildings to source- and site-specific 
parameters (e.g., M, R, and soil type). Based on the newly-proposed 
equations, Eq. (16) can be modified as in Eq. (17), where ( )EDPf edp | m,r  is 
the PDF of the considered EDP conditional on M and R, from the proposed 
empirical models: 
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )EDP EDP M R
f edp | ,s f edp | m,r  f m |  f r | s  dm dr =                   (17) 
In addition, this approach can be extended further to predict the expected loss 
(or the loss distribution) in a structure conditional on the measures of the 
seismic sensors, and this would contain the highest level of information for 
decision making about alarm issuance (e.g., Iervolino et al., 2007). 
It is worth noting that an alternative approach to that illustrated in Eq. (17) is 
to perform Probabilistic Seismic Demand Analysis (PSDA; e.g., Shome et al., 
1998), coupling RTPSHA with a probabilistic seismic demand model (PSDM). 
PSDMs offer a relationship between EPDs and the selected ground-motion IM 
based on nonlinear analysis of structural response using ground-motion 
records (e.g., Jalayer and Cornell, 2009) to obtained the conditional 
distribution of EDP given IM, i.e., ( )EDPf edp | im  though statistical inference 
methods (e.g., linear regression in the case of cloud analysis). However, the 
proposed approach of Eq. (17) represents a more efficient formulation for the 
computation of EDPs in real-time, as proposed in this chapter.  
The present chapter is organized as follows. First, the simplified building model 
used in this chapter is introduced. Next, the methodology for the calibration of 
EDP prediction equations is described, followed by their implementation in an 
illustrative EEW application. The final section provides some conclusions 
drawn from the results of the study. 
5.2 Simplified building model considered in this chapter 
Different studies have developed simplified structural models able of 
accurately estimating lateral displacements of structures subjected to dynamic 
loadings (e.g., Hoenderkamp and Snijder, 2000; Iwan, 1997; Saiidi and Sozen, 
1981). These simplified models can be employed in rapid earthquake 
response assessment of large building portfolios for the purpose of assessing, 
at a regional scale, earthquake damage and losses in real time or in the 
minutes following an event (i.e., near real-time). 
One of these simplified models, widely used in several earthquake engineering 
applications (e.g., Cheng et al., 2014; Cremen and Baker, 2018; Galasso et 
al., 2013), consists of a flexural cantilever beam coupled with a shear 
cantilever beam that form an equivalent continuum structure (e.g., Miranda, 
1999). Both beams are assumed to be linked by an infinite number of axially 
rigid members transmitting horizontal forces; therefore, the flexural and shear 
cantilevers in the combined system are subjected to the same lateral 
deformation at all heights. Floor mass and lateral stiffness are assumed to 
remain constant along the height of the building. Modifications for nonuniform 
mass and stiffness distribution over the height of the building have been 
proposed in the literature (Miranda and Taghavi, 2005), although those studies 
concluded that in many cases, using the dynamic characteristics of uniform 
models could provide reasonable approximations to the dynamic 
characteristics of nonuniform models.  
This conceptual model is a viable tool to approximate the behaviour of real 
buildings, especially those tall, ranging from moment-resisting frames to shear 
wall systems, and for which the higher-mode contributions may become 
important. Moreover, it permits rapidly obtaining estimates of seismic 
response of multistorey buildings with only three parameters: T1, , and , that 
are, the fundamental period of the structure, the critical damping ratio at the 
first mode of vibration, and a non-dimensional quantity controlling the degree 
of contribution of flexural and shear deformations in the system total 
deformation, respectively. Figure 20 illustrates the simplified model previously 
introduced. 
Lateral deformations of the equivalent structure are governed by the 
dimensionless parameter  (Reinoso and Miranda, 2005). Eq. (18) defines the 
parameter introduced, where H is the height of the building, GA is the shear 
modulus of the material, and EI is the flexural stiffness of the flexural beam. 
 =                   (18) 
By modifying the value of the dimensionless parameter , the contributions of 
the flexural and shear beams to the overall lateral deformation of the 
equivalent structure are controlled. Consequently, low values of , particularly 
close to zero, correspond to purely flexural-type deformation structures, while 
large values of , larger than 8, represent shear-type deformed shapes of the 
structure. Dual systems could then be defined with values of  between 2 and 
8, where contributions from both systems can be represented. 
To illustrate the impact of changing the value of , the curves in Figure 21 
show the normalised fundamental modal shapes and corresponding 
interstorey drift as a function of the nondimensional height z=x/H, for  equal 
to 0.1, 8 and 30. By simulating a structure that behaves as a flexural cantilever 
beam (=0.1), or as a buildings where lateral shear deformations 
predominate over lateral flexural deformations (=30), the peak interstorey 
drift occurs at large heights or near the ground storey, respectively. In addition, 
a schematic representation of the impact that different values of  have in 
structural response (in terms of deformation shapes) is shown in Figure 22. 
Figure 20. Simplified continuous model used in this study. 
Figure 21. Dependence of the lateral deformation (in terms of modal displacement and modal 
interstorey drift) on  for the first mode of vibration. 
Figure 22. Lateral deformations for the simplified continuous model proposed by (Miranda and Akkar, 
2005): (a) flexural-type deformation; (b) combined flexural-shear deformations; (c) shear-type 
deformation 
Previous studies have provided closed-form/analytical solutions of the fourth-
order partial differential equation describing the combined shear and flexural 
beams for: (1) lateral static loading to approximate the maximum roof and 
interstorey drift demands of first-mode dominated structures (e.g., Miranda, 
1999); (2) computing the approximate dynamic structural behaviour (in terms 
of lateral displacements and peak floor accelerations) by using up to the first 
three modes of vibration and real records (e.g., Miranda and Taghavi 2005); 
and (3) estimating generalized drift spectrum (e.g., Miranda and Akkar, 2006). 
Evaluation of the results presented in the previously mentioned studies 
indicates that this analysis tool provides relatively accurate results not only in 
terms of peak values of response parameters but also, in general, in terms of 
response histories. 
In particular, assuming uniform mass and uniform stiffness along the height of 
the structure, Miranda and Akkar (2006) and Reinoso and Miranda (2005) 
derived analytical functions for the computation of Interstorey Drift Ration (Eq. 
19), Generalized Interstorey Drift Ration (Eq. 20) and Peak Floor Acceleration 
(Eq. 21): 
i i i
IDR(j ,t ) ' ( x )D (t )
 
where IDR( j,t )  is the Interstorey Drift Ration at the j-th storey, at time t, m is 
the number of modes of vibration, 
  is the modal participation factor 
corresponding to the i-th natural mode, 
' ( x )  is the first derivative of the 
mode shape 
( x ) , and 
D (t )  is the displacement of a single degree of 
freedom system, characterised by its own natural frequency  and the modal 
radio i.  
max i i i
IDR max ' D (t )
where  
IDR  is the maximum IDR computed along the normalized height of 
the structure, defined as Generalized Interstorey Drift Ration (GIDS). 
i i g i i t
PFA( x,t ) ( x ) u (t ) ( x )A (t )     +  
  1 1
1           (21) 
where PFA( x,t ) is the Peak Floor Acceleration at time t and at normalized 
height x, 
A (t )  is the absolute acceleration time history of a single degree of 
freedom system, and 
u (t ) is the acceleration time history of the input ground 
motion. 
The most notable limitations of the simplified model are related to assuming a 
linear elastic behaviour and a classical damping in the building. Hence, the 
method is aimed at the estimation of seismic demands at performance levels 
corresponding to elastic behaviours, with very limited levels of nonlinearity.  
5.2.1 Description of the considered systems and demand measures 
In order to investigate the dynamic response of a wide range of simplified 
building models, a number of continuum systems as described above are 
selected, including: (1) 15 (fundamental) oscillation periods (T1), between 0.1s 
and 5s; (2) three shear to flexural deformation ratios () to represent 
respectively shear walls structures ( = 0.1), dual systems ( = 8), and 
moment-resisting frames ( = 30); (3) the normalised height (z) of the 
simplified model has been discretised in 101 points, considering a step 
between points equal to 0.01. The period range is sampled with a 0.1s step 
from 0.1s to 0.5s, with a step of 0.25s between 0.5s and 1s, and with a step of 
0.5s between 1s and 5s. Two approximations for the analysis are considered: 
(1) equal damping ratios of 5% for all modes; (2) only the first six modes of 
vibration are taken into account so that the sum of their effective modal 
masses contains more than 90% of the system total mass (Reinoso and 
Miranda, 2005). 
Three main EDPs are considered in the chapter: the peak (over time) IDR, 
defined as the difference in lateral displacements between two consecutive 
floors normalized by the interstorey height; the maximum (over all stories) 
peak inter-storey drift ratio (denoted as MIDR); and PFA. These EDPs have 
demonstrated to be well correlated to both structural and non-structural 
damage, which contribute a major share of the total loss in an earthquake. 
It is worth noting that, for a given value of T1, the total height of the model is 
computed using the relationship (in metric units) suggested for steel moment-
resisting frames in ASCE 7-16 (ASCE, 2016), Eq. (22). 
T . H H
=  =
0 8 10 8
0 0724
0 0724
where H is the height of the building (in meters) and T1 is the structures period 
of oscillation.  
A series of MATLAB scripts has been developed by the author to implement 
the closed-form/analytical solutions for the fourth-order partial differential 
equation describing the considered model. 
5.3 Calibration of the proposed prediction equations 
The methodology followed to calibrate the proposed EDP prediction equations 
for case-study building models consists of performing nonlinear regression to 
establish empirical models between earthquake and site features (i.e., M, R, 
soil type) and each selected EDP, particularly IDR and PFA. The main steps 
of the methodology implemented here are introduced in the following sub-
sections. 
5.3.1 Ground motion database selection 
A subset of two-component ground-motion records from the Italian 
Accelerometric Archive (or ITACA v1.0; Pacor et al., 2011  as implemented 
in REXEL 3.5; Iervolino et al., 2010) is used as input for the numerical 
simulations of the simplified building model described above.  
ITACA (version 1.0) includes a total of 3,995 three-component accelerograms, 
consisting of two horizontal (X-Y) and one vertical (Z) components, generated 
by about 1,800 earthquakes located in Italy between the 1972 and 2009. The 
database mainly includes events associated with normal faults, with 
magnitude up to 6.9 (based on local magnitude for events smaller than 4, and 
moment magnitude for stronger events), and recording sites characterized by 
epicentral distances within 200 km (with a large portion of records within 100 
km). For the soil classification of the recording sites, the Eurocode 8 (or EC8 - 
European Commitee for Standardization, 2004) classification is considered, 
consisting of five soil types (A,B,C,D,E) on the basis of the average value of 
the shear wave velocity within the first thirty meters of soil deposit at the site.  
Within the scope of the present chapter, 589 two-component records from 39 
events have been selected, considering free-field records corresponding to 
earthquake moment magnitude equal or greater than 5 and epicentral distance 
equal or less than 200km; 49% of the selected ground-motions were caused 
by the rupture of normal faults, 33% by thrust faults, and 18% by strike-slip 
faults. 46% of the recording stations were situated in soil class A (rock), 29% 
in soil class B (very stiff clay), 17% in soil class C (stiff clay), and the remaining 
8% in soil classes D and E (soft and alluvium). Figure 23 shows the distribution 
of the selected records in relation to magnitude and epicentral distance (Repi), 
while Figure 24 illustrates the number of records corresponding to their 
respective M and Repi. Repi has been selected for this chapter upon more 
accurate distance metrics, such as Joyner Boore (RJB) or Rupture Plane 
(RRUP), as the computation in real-time of Repi is faster, allowing for larger lead 
times provided by an EEW system. Additionally, the calculation of RJB and 
RRUP require information relevant to the extent of the fault rupture in real-time, 
which is a feature that is still in development and currently available in few 
EEW systems worldwide (Cremen and Galasso, 2020). 
Figure 23. Distribution of selected records with respect to magnitude and epicentral distance. 
Figure 24. Histograms of M and R (589 GMs). 
5.3.2 Model specification and estimation algorithm  
Nonlinear regression analysis is carried out for the calibration of the proposed 
EDP prediction equations. To this aim, the first step is to define the model 
specification, i.e., the selection of the functional form to represent the output 
from the structural simulations as a function of the considered explanatory 
variables.  
As the new prediction equations are going to be integrated in an EEW 
framework, real-time (EEW-based) predictions of the explanatory variables 
considered in the proposed functional form need to be available, based on a 
given EEW algorithm. In addition, a simple and efficient functional form should 
be selected, mainly for two reasons: 1) in an EEW context, longer computation 
times reduce the available lead time for the implementation of mitigation 
actions; 2) As explained in section 5.2, EEW systems (regional) generally 
estimate only earthquake source parameters and ground shaking, the systems 
do not usually estimate information such as type of faulting. Therefore, a 
functional form that depends on the style of faulting is not within the scope of 
this chapter, and the parameters of preference herein are only earthquake 
magnitude, epicentral distance and soil type. 
Based on these considerations, the functional form selected in this chapter is 
the same of the GMM for Italy proposed by Bindi et al. (2009), adapted from 
the functional form introduced by Sabetta and Pugliese (1996). The selected 
functional form is shown in Eq. (23); it relates the geometric mean of each 
considered EDP (dependent variable) to the independent variables of 
magnitude (M), Epicentral Distance (Repi), and soil amplification (Fs), as 
follows: 
epi s A
log Y b b M b log R b b S b S = +  + + + + +
10 1 2 3 10 4 5 6
In Eq. (23), Y is the EDP of interest (MIDR, IDR or PFA) dependent of the 
values of T1 and  (and z, for PFA); b ,b ,b ,b1 2 3 4  are the regression coefficients; 
M is the moment magnitude, R is the epicentral distance (in km); Ss and SA 
are dummy variables taking into account site effects and assuming the value 
of 1 for stiff and soft types of soil, respectively, and zero otherwise; and   is 
the resulting fractional number of standard deviations.  
5.4 Results and discussion 
The estimates for the regression coefficients for MIDR, IDR and PFA 
prediction equation have been obtained by using a nonlinear least-squares 
regression algorithm implemented on Matlab. The corresponding values of 
the coefficients, together with the estimated standard deviations of the 
residuals (or root-mean-square errors) can be found in Appendix #1. 
The calibration of the regressions is evaluated by analysing statistical 
parameters obtained from the model, such as the root-mean-square-errors 
and the multiple correlation coefficient (R2). For example, the variation of the 
standard deviation values versus the fundamental period is analysed for each 
EDP and different values of . Figure 25a shows the standard deviation 
associated with MIDR. Figure 25b, Figure 25c, and Figure 25d present the 
standard deviation associated with IDR (z=0.05), IDR (z=0.30), and IDR 
(z=1.00), for three different values of  (0.1, 8, and 30). Figure 25e and Figure 
25f illustrate the standard deviation associated with PFA(z=0.50) and 
PFA(z=1.00). In general, the standard deviation plots in Figure 25 display a 
stable trend for fundamental periods larger than 1s with an average value of 
0.35. These results suggest that the standard deviation is not affected by 
fundamental periods or by the selected values of the lateral stiffness ratio. In 
a similar work, Neam and Taghikhany (2016) derived a new prediction 
equation for MIDR considering near-fault ground motions, where larger values 
of standard deviations (0.5 to 0.6) were obtained. 
Figure 26 and Figure 27 illustrate the distribution of residual values against M 
and R, corresponding to a structure with natural period T1 = 0.75 s and MIDR 
( = 8), IDR (z=1.00,  = 8), and PFA (z=1.00,  = 30). A careful analysis of 
the graphs allows to conclude that the scatter plot is equally and randomly 
spread across the horizontal axis (Residual = 0), throughout the range of fitted 
values. Similar patterns have been also found for the rest of periods and 
heights of the simulated structures, which suggests that the derived equations 
have produced unbiased estimates.  
Another statistical measure obtained from the regression analyses is the 
coefficient of determination (R2), which measures the proportion of variance in 
the response that is explained by the regression. The average R2 values of the 
regressions in this chapter are in the range of 70 to 75%, which suggests an 
acceptable fit of the data. 
Figure 25. Standard deviations of (a) MIDR, (b) IDR (z=0.05), (c) IDR (z=0.30), (d) IDR (z=1.00), (e) 
PFA (z=0.50), and (f) PFA (z=1.00), for three values of lateral stiffness ratio. Functional form proposed 
by Bindi et al. (2009).  
Figure 26. Moment Magnitude vs Residual plots for (a) MIDR, (b) IDR (z=1.00), and (c) PFA (z=1.00). 
All cases are computed adopting a period T1 = 0.75 s.  
The values of the root-mean-square errors , the residual plots, and the 
coefficients of determination indicate a good agreement in the estimation of 
MIDR, IDR, PFA., which demonstrates that the new developed equations can 
be implemented in the following sections of the chapter.  
Figure 27. Epicentral Distance vs Residual plots for (a) MIDR, (b) IDR (z=1.00), and (c) PFA (z=1.00). 
All cases are computed adopting a period T1 = 0.75 s. 
5.4.1 Performance of the predictive models in comparison to the 
simplified model 
This section presents a series of comparisons (in terms of MIDR, IDR and 
PFA) between the results obtained through the new predictive models and the 
observed response of the considered case-study structures computed by 
implementing the simplified model described in section 5.2, under historical 
ground motions. 
The comparison was carried out for a single fundamental period, T1 = 0.75 s, 
and for three values of alpha (0.1, 8 and 30).Three strong earthquakes (Mw 
>= 6) were selected from the 39 set for the testing of the predictive models, 
considering different types of soil classes to illustrate soil effects in the 
computation of the EDPs.: Mw 6.9 1980 Irpinia Earthquake, stiff soil, Mw 6.3 
2009 LAquila earthquake, rock soil, and Mw 6.0 1997 Umbria-Marche 
earthquake, soft soil.   
Figure 28, Figure 29, and Figure 30 show the comparison (for MIDR, IDR and 
PFA) of the building response predicted by the new predictive models and the 
response of the structures subjected to historical seismic events. As a general 
trend, the plots clearly show that most of the computed historical response 
data fall within the region defined by the +/- one standard deviation, 
corroborating again the precision of the new predictive equations. 
In addition, it can be noted that the observed values of MIDR, IDR and PFA 
are located in the area increased by one standard deviation for short and long 
epicentral distances, suggesting that the models are able to capture with good 
agreement the distance variability. 
Moreover, the models estimations do not seem to be affected by the variation 
of values of alpha. The values of z and alpha selected herein tend to result in 
peak demands of IDR and PFA in the structure (e.g., large values of alpha 
usually derive in peak IDR demands at low heights of the structure), however 
the model captures such peaks within the envelope formed by the standard 
deviations. 
Finally, the plots illustrate that the gaps between the computed responses 
associated with a given soil type and median trend relative to that soil type are 
generally shorter than those observed when other soil typologies are 
assigned. The majority of outliers in Figure 28, Figure 29, and Figure 30, are 
those points in which the events soil conditions are different to those of the 
sensors that recorded such event, suggesting that the prediction models tend 
to be considerably sensitive to soil conditions. 
Figure 28. Prediction equation in terms of MIDR vs historical data. T1 = 0.75 s, (a) 6.9 Mw Irpinia 
earthquake (stiff conditions,  =0.01), (b) 6.3 Mw LAquila earthquake (rock conditions,  =30), (c) 
6.0 Mw Umbria-Marche earthquake (soft conditions,  =8) 
Figure 29. Prediction equation in terms of IDR vs historical data. T1 = 0.75 s, (a) 6.9 Mw Irpinia 
earthquake (stiff conditions,  =0.01, z=1.00), (b) 6.3 Mw LAquila earthquake (rock conditions, 
=30, z=0.05), (c) 6.0 Mw Umbria-Marche earthquake (soft conditions,  =8, z=0.30). 
Figure 30. PFA Prediction equation in terms of PFA vs historical data. T1 = 0.75 s, (a) 6.9 Mw Irpinia 
earthquake (stiff conditions,  =0.01, z=1.00), (b) 6.3 Mw LAquila earthquake (rock conditions, 
=30, z=0.05), (c) 6.0 Mw Umbria-Marche earthquake (soft conditions,  =8, z=0.30). 
5.5 Real-time application of the proposed prediction equations for 
EEW applications in the Campania region, Italy 
This section describes an actual application for RTPSHA of equation (16), but 
in terms of EDPs (Eq. 17). The simulation of a Mw 6 earthquake with epicentre 
in the Campania region (Italy), is adopted for the computation of building 
response, in particular urbanised areas of the aforementioned region. The 
dominant network that provides estimates of magnitude and epicentral 
distances for Campania is ISNet, consisting of 29 seismic networks deployed 
in the region that are all equipped with EEW capability. Originally, the 
simulation of the event has been implemented by Iervolino et al. (2009), who 
focused on the real-time hazard analysis in terms of PGA for the cities of 
Naples, located 124km away from the epicentre of the earthquake, and S. 
Angelo dei Lombardi, which is located 60km away. 
Figure 31b illustrates the evolution of the predicted magnitude distribution 
when sensors detect the arrival of P- waves. Four instants of time after the 
earthquakes origin have been considered, namely t = 7s, t = 9s, t = 13s and t 
= 18s, corresponding to 2, 9, 18 and 29 seismic sensors of the network 
progressively triggered. It is worth noting that the first estimate, after 7 s from 
the origin of the event (when only 2 stations have detected the earthquake), 
underpredicts the magnitude value since it is mainly based on the a priori 
probabilistic distribution (which assigns higher probability of occurrence to 
small-scale events) as Iervolino et al. (2006) observed. Gradually, as more 
stations are triggered, the prediction becomes stable and closer to the actual 
value selected. 
The source-to-site distance estimation is derived from the triggering sequence 
of stations, taking into account the P- wave velocity. Figure 31c and Figure 
31d show the evolution of the probabilistic distribution of distance, for the sites 
in Naples and S. Angelo dei Lombardi respectively, as time passes. A few 
seconds after the earthquakes origin, these distributions are already stable 
and centred on the actual values of source-to-site distance (124 km for Naples 
and 60 km for S. Angelo dei Lombardi). 
Figure 31e and Figure 31f illustrate, for the locations of Napoli and S. Angelo 
dei Lombardi respectively, the evolution of the exceedance probability of PGA. 
Clearly, the curves obtained attain higher values in the case of S. Angelo dei 
Lombardi since this site is characterised by a predicted source-to-site distance 
much shorter than that one for Naples.  
Figure 31. Simulation of a M6 earthquake occurring in the region covered by the ISNet network and 
results for a site in Naples (left hand side) and S. Angelo dei Lombardi: (a) map of the Campania 
region showing the ISNet network, the two locations and the epicentre; (b) evolution of the probabilistic 
magnitude distribution; (c), (d) evolution of the probabilistic distribution of source-to-site distances at 
the two locations; (e), (f) evolution of the predicted exceedance probability of PGA at both locations. 
The prediction is carried out on the basis of the information gathered from 18 
seismic stations (i.e. 13s after the earthquakes origin), as it is sufficiently close 
to the one relative to the instant of time in which all the stations have estimated 
with reliable accuracy the location of earthquake and the magnitude of the 
event and , as Iervolino et al. (2009) observed for PGA. 
To explore the application of the prediction equations derived previously, 
exceedance probability curves for MIDR and PFA have been computed 
(Figure 32 and Figure 33). The simulation was performed by adopting two 
values of  , 8 and 30, for both the sites of Naples and S. Angelo dei Lombardi, 
and by selecting fundamental periods equal to 3 s in Naples (considering, for 
instance, the high-rise buildings located in the newly developed business area 
of the city; Figure 34) and 1s in S. Angelo dei Lombardi (considering mid-rise 
RC buildings).  
Figure 32. Simulation of a M6 EQ and results at the sites of Naples (left) and S. Angelo dei Lombardi 
(right): (a), (b) predicted exceedance probability of MIDR( =8) at the two locations (T1=3s for Naples, 
T1=1s for S. Angelo dei L.); (c), (d) predicted exceedance probability of MIDR ( =30). 
Figure 33. Simulation of a M6 EQ and results at the sites of Naples (left) and S. Angelo dei Lombardi 
(right): (a), (b) predicted exceedance probability of PFA( =8, z=1.00) at the two locations (T1=3s for 
Naples, T1=1s for S. Angelo dei L.); (c), (d) predicted exceedance probability of PFA ( =30, z=1.00). 
Figure 34. Newly developed busi ness district of Naples. 
As expected, the building response in terms of MIDR and PFA predicted at the 
location of S. Angelo dei Lombardi is higher than that characterising Naples, 
for the particular event simulated, as demonstrated by the curves plotted in 
Figure 32 and Figure 33. 
Also, it can be observed that the exceedance probabilities of the building 
response parameters are subjected to only very small variations when different 
values of lateral stiffness ratio are considered. The latter is consistent with 
Miranda (1999), who pointed out that variations of   mainly affect the location 
along the height of the structure at which maximum interstorey drift ratios and 
peak floor accelerations are attained, rather than the maximum values they 
actually reach, which are quite stable. 
The second part of the simulation consists in the generation of real-time 
seismic hazard and building response maps of the Campania region in terms 
of PGA, MIDR and PFA, computed by adopting the new predictive model 
developed. Similarly, the Mw 6 earthquake scenario previously introduced is 
considered. 
The maps illustrated in Figure 35, Figure 36, and Figure 37, show the median 
values of PGA, MIDR and PFA, for particular values of T1 and  , and refer to 
the real-time seismic hazard in terms of ground acceleration and building 
response, computed after 13s from the earthquakes origin. This time window 
was chosen to be in line with Iervolino et al. (2009), who found that after 13s 
from the origin of the seismic event (i.e. 18 stations triggered out of 29), the 
prediction of the seismic hazard at a site is sufficiently stable and further 
information from the remaining stations does not provide significant 
improvements to the real-time estimate. 
The maps illustrated in Figure 35, Figure 36, and Figure 37 can then be 
adopted for the activation of real-time mitigation actions, that can be related to 
the demands in buildings in terms of IDR or PFA. Some examples of these 
actions might include: 1) stopping elevators at the nearest floor if a pre-defined 
critical PFA value is exceeded, to allow occupants to evacuate; or 2) real-time 
assessments of the floor-shaking sensed by occupant, to explore their levels 
of comfort before the arrival of the earthquake. 
Figure 35. Hazard map for the Campania region showing median values of PGA for a M6 seismic 
event. 
Figure 36. EDP map in terms of median values of MIDR for a M6 event. T1=1s,  =8. 
Figure 37. EDP map in terms of median values PFA for a M6 event. T1=0.3s, z=1.00,  =8. 
5.6 Conclusions 
The chapter presented herein represents the first approach for real-time 
building response assessment based on the information provided by EEW, 
rather than current practice based on Intensity Measures (i.e., Peak Ground 
Acceleration). 
A simplified continuous model, consisting of a combination of a flexural beam 
and a shear beam, was adopted for the computation of EDPs (IDR and PFA), 
for a broad variety of building typologies. By just modifying two parameters 
(the lateral stiffness ratio,  , and the natural period of oscillation of the 
building, T1), different lateral load resisting systems (from shear wall systems 
to moment resisting frames systems) and different height of buildings (from 
low-rise buildings to high-rise buildings) could be simulated. 45 different 
structures were modelled, considering three values of   and 15 natural 
periods of oscillation.  
Numerical simulations were performed for the 45 structures, subjecting them 
to a set of 589 ground motions recorded in the Italian region. The criteria for 
the selection of the events was as follow: a) minimum magnitude of the event 
equal to 5 Mw, and b) epicentral distances shorter than 200km. At this point, 
the powerful advantages of the continuous model adopted were visible. A total 
of 53,010 analyses were carried out in a considerable short period of time. It 
is important to highlight that fast analyses were necessary as a large database 
was essential for the calibration of the new Building Response Prediction 
Equations.  
The results from the simulations, in terms of MIDR, IDR and PFA, were 
collected and organised, so multilinear regressions could be performed for 
each EDP. A functional form proposed for the Italian region was considered in 
this study. The coefficients given by the regression were statistically analysed 
(standard deviations, residuals and p-values), showing reliable results. 
The new building response prediction equations have proved to reliably 
correlate and fit the seismic demand in terms of MIDR, IDR and PFA, with the 
earthquake source parameters (epicentral distance and magnitude of the 
earthquake). 
The new predictive models have shown their efficiency on a real-time EEW 
example applied in the Campania Region. Two outcomes were obtained from 
this application: 1) Real-time Exceedance probability curves in terms of 
Engineering Demands Parameters and 2) Real-time Building Response maps. 
Considering Performance-Based Earthquake Engineering, future works and 
development of the approach presented herein might include a further 
extension of equation (17), to predict the expected loss in a structure 
conditional on the measures given by the seismic sensors (Iervolino, 2011). 
This information can then contain information on the interest of stakeholders 
and insurance agencies, for decision making about alarm issuances. This can 
be achieved by including two more integrals into Eq. (17), conditioning 
Damage Measures (DM) on EDP ( )dm | edp , and conditioning the losses (L) 
on DM ( )l | dm , for instance. The new equation can then be implemented in 
a structure specific EEW design procedure to calibrate alarm thresholds, that 
are optimal for the reduction of losses, including scenarios of the costs related 
to false and missed alarms. 
Chapter 6. A Likert Scale-Based Model for 
Benchmarking Operational Capacity, 
Organizational Resilience, and Disaster Risk 
Reduction  
As explained in Chapter 1.2 of this thesis, this reports is intended as a cross-
disciplinary study of EEW, combining technical (e.g, engineering and 
seismology) and social perspectives of EEW. Chapter 4 and 5 focused on the 
EEW technical components, while Chapter 6 and 7 approach EEW from a 
socio-organisational point of view.  
Chapter 6 introduces a novel Likert-scale that was required for the 
implementation of the methodological approach presented in Chapter 7. It is a 
simple and replicable scale that responds to the needs of practicioners and 
academics for adapting qustionnaires to local contexts, which might be helpful 
for benchmarking gaps analyses and resilience assessments, as well as 
operational research. This scale was developed with the aim of being 
implemented in surveying materials related to EEW and organisational 
resilience in Mexico City, as explained in Chapter 7. 
6.1 Introduction 
Organizations and societies are increasingly challenged by complex and 
systemic disaster risk, in which leaders must undertake strategic decisions in 
conditions of high uncertainty. In order to increase the flexibility of response 
and preparedness to concurrent, interacting, interconnected, and cascading 
events, cultural adjustments are required in both research and practice 
(Pescaroli and Alexander, 2018). Authors such as Linkov et al. (2013) and 
Helbing (2013) have highlighted the need for new approaches that could help 
the assessment process to evolve, in order to be more suitable for applications 
in multiple domains and disciplines. Since then, the state-of-the-art has 
evolved significantly in terms of both theory and applications. A critical step 
was the increased prominence given to the understanding of risk and 
complexity as described in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
20152030 (UNISDR, 2015). This international agreement promoted further 
developments at the interface between academia, research, and practice. For 
example, UNDRR released a series of practical guides to support the 
implementation of consistent measurements and datasets, including, for 
example, the Words into Action guidelines on National Risk Assessment 
(UNISDR, 2017), and the Resilience Scorecard for Cities (UNISDR, 2017). 
Similarly, new standards on continuity management and organizational 
resilience, such as the ones by the British Standards Institution, International 
Organization for Standardization, and National Fire Protection Association 
included new elements such as those that assess interdependencies and 
cascading effects (BSI 65000:2014; NFPA1600:1900; ISO 22316:2017; ISO 
22301:2019). This has improved the principles used in benchmarking.  
This is a fast-evolving field because tools such as resilience-measurement 
scales are the most basic source of interaction between academia, 
practitioners, and policymakers (Cutter and Derakhshan, 2019). The academic 
literature proposes a range of methodologies that are available for measuring 
disaster risk, resilience, vulnerability, or climate change impact practices, 
including choices of variables and measurements, depending on the field of 
reference (Beccari, 2016; Birkmann et al., 2014; Frazier et al., 2013; Gentile 
et al., 2019; Kelman et al., 2016; Linkov et al., 2013; Twigg, 2015). However, 
the need for better standardization of indicators and reporting scales faces 
limitations, in particular in terms of what should be measured, how often, and 
by whom (Cutter and Derakhshan, 2019). For example, stakeholders working 
on interconnected risks have suggested the need for cross-disciplinary 
improvements in defining operational and decision-making thresholds 
(Pescaroli, 2018). The billion gigabits available online via channels such as 
social media have raised further challenges to the achievement of reliable 
quality standards (Alexander, 2015; Kostkova et al., 2003). Moreover, end-
user oriented early warning systems, multi-criteria decision support systems, 
and the scenario-building methods are some of the applied research fields in 
which updated benchmarking can make a difference and can help manage 
complexity (Cremen and Galasso, 2020; Pescaroli and Alexander, 2018). 
Despite the progress that has been made, the current body of literature seems 
to lack a simple-to-use model that could provide benchmarking between 
different forms of assessment. In other words, the state-of-the-art is extensive, 
but it is missing a simple alternative framework of reference for cross-
disciplinary assessments in those contexts in which existing scales and 
standards may be unsuitable, challenging, or impossible to be applied. This 
chapter started with explicitly stating the real-world need that emerged in 
research on integrating organizational resilience and earthquake early 
warnings in Latin America. Further evidence and justification of need came 
from the experience of collaborating with stakeholders in Europe and Japan 
on operational resilience to cascading and interconnected risk. The following 
sections briefly review the methodological background and propose a rationale 
for a new Likert scale based on a response model for the assessment of 
operational gaps, organizational resilience, and disaster reduction capacity, as 
reported in Chapter 6.3. The principal goal of this chapter is to propose a 
simple-to-use, replicable, and adaptable tool that could be used as a 
benchmark across studies for anchoring information and assessing it in the 
field of data collection against benchmarks in a context distinguished by low 
levels of knowledge, training, or awareness. 
6.2 General Considerations in Rating Scales, Anchoring, and 
Benchmarking 
Research and practice need reliable data. The literature has extensively 
discussed the role of quantitative and qualitative methodologies for collecting 
and analysing evidence, with particular attention to the replicability of the data 
collection process (Bryman, 2016). Similarly, planning and designing a study 
is an essential aspect of the development of mixed-method approaches 
(Creswell, 2014). The common ground across the disciplines is the need to 
anchor questionnaires and surveys to realistic points of reference in relation 
to the context in which the data are collected (see, for example, Ahmed et al. 
2016; Alexander 2015; Gentile et al. 2019; Hernndez-Moreno and Alcntara-
Ayala 2017; Pescaroli 2018; Yore and Walker 2019). In the field of business 
continuity, a questionnaire is often the most important tool for gathering 
information in order to conduct a business impact analysis and assess the 
level of organizational resilience (BSI 2014; ISO 2019). Similarly, 
questionnaires are used to identify possible performance gaps or capacity 
gaps that could be reflected in the existence of perceived inadequate or 
undesirable organizational or operational states (Channon and Sammut-
Bonnici, 2014; UNISDR, 2017) 
There are two common steps to consider in this process, independent of the 
field or discipline. First, the questions have to be carefully thought through to 
assure their consistency and clarity, and to be safeguarded, as much as 
possible, against bias (Bryman, 2016; Creswell, 2014). Secondly, each 
answer has to be anchored to a rating scale, which can be defined as a 
closed-end question whose answer alternatives are graduated or organized to 
measure a continuous construct, such as an attitude, opinion, intention, 
perception, or preference (Peterson, 2013). At this point, scholars, 
researchers, and practitioners have to consider a scale of reference, which 
may be straightforwardly to use a Likert scale (Bryman, 2016; Croasmun and 
Ostrom, 2011). The next step would involve looking at benchmarking 
examples such as those given by Brown (2010) and Vagias (2006). Something 
similar may happen in fieldwork, for example, when it is necessary to assess 
emergency response capacity, develop a business impact analysis, or 
benchmark organizational resilience at large (Alexander, 2000, 2015; BSI 
2014; ISO 2017).  
However, in some cases, contextual limitations would suggest the need to shift 
the analysis to an approach that differs from the most commonly used scales. 
Indeed, in some fieldwork, Likert scales from 1 to 5 or 1 to 7 are simply not fit 
for the local cultural or social environment, or they cannot be reported in labels 
that use ordinary language or common idioms. Similarly, it is important to 
consider the qualitative and explanatory nature of the options available in the 
questionnaires that have to be considered complementary to the numerical 
values provided in the scales: different interpretation of the numbers can 
generate some confusion among respondents if not supported by a qualitative 
rationale, as for example was identified by the National electronic Library for 
Health project assessing the quality of evidence base (Kostkova et al., 2003; 
Wiseman et al., 2008). For instance, the process of collecting data about 
capacity, impacts, or preparedness in operational contexts (such as local 
councils) may be hindered by lack of resources, or failure to embed the 
process. Thus, anything more complex than what is strictly necessary might 
not be welcome. In such cases, the solution could be to implement scales from 
1 to 3, or use binary answers such as yes or no. However, this approach 
risks oversimplification, which might compromise the outcome of the project 
(Bryman, 2016; Croasmun and Ostrom, 2011). In addition, experience in the 
field and dialogue with stakeholders suggest the need to move to a hybrid 
approach that prioritizes clarity, replicability, and consistency across different 
sectors. The point of the next section is to introduce a 03 scale, which could 
be more easily accessible to respondents, while it reduces the possibility of 
bias in responses and assures consistency across different measurements 
and research domains of disaster risk reduction, operational capacities 
measurement, and organizational resilience. 
6.3 A New Scale-Based Assessment Model 
A novel Likert scale-based assessment model for measuring organizational 
resilience and gaps in operational and disaster risk reduction capacities is 
reported in Table 21. It is organized according to the following structure: 
Value. The numerical value chosen is from 0 to 3, with the additional inclusion 
of the category dont know as a possible option. The value of the primary 
assessment criteria is reported in both the disaster resilience scorecard 
(UNISDR, 2017), and some examples of Likert scales offered by Brown (2010) 
and Vagias (2006). While developing this value scale, it was recognized that 
answers may be affected by high uncertainty and low knowledge, and 
responders may have the tendency to choose the middle value in the ranking. 
As suggested in the review by Croasmun and Ostrom (2011), the risk of a 
biased response could be mediated by providing a neutral response option, 
allowing respondents not to take an opinion if they do not have one. This risk 
was mediated in the scale proposed herein by including the category dont 
know as an additional choice. Finally, the numerical value is supported by a 
visual association with the standard traffic light colour scheme that is also 
used in the dissemination of warnings in order to harmonize the meaning of 
the numbers for people in different backgrounds and disciplines (Kostkova et 
al., 2003; Wiseman et al., 2008). 
Category labels. This section provides some generic examples of descriptive 
attributes that could be used to develop qualitative answers and ratings that 
are complementary to the numerical values of the scale. This has been 
intended as a partial and synthetic list that is derived from the descriptive 
categories reported by Brown (2010), Vagias (2006), and from a review carried 
out of the attributes in the categories used by UNISDR (2017) and BSI (2014). 
In other words, the proposed scale provides enough evidence to be taken as 
a reference, independent of the question that has been formulated. It does not 
pretend to be comprehensive. 
Gap outcome. The gap outcome in Table 21 is intended as a support for the 
consistency of the outcomes and results of gap analyses, that are defined in 
this chapter as the processes of assessing and comparing one organizations 
objectives and their expected outcomes to understand possible differences in 
the performance that has been delivered (Channon and Sammut-Bonnici, 
2014). This is presented in terms of inadequate/adequate or 
undesirable/desirable operational or organizational states (Watkins et al., 
2012). First, the states are identified according to the numerical values 
obtained on the scale. Second, they are anchored to qualitative examples of 
the Likert scale such as those given by Brown (2010) and Vagias (2006). They 
can also be anchored to percentages reported in the resilience scorecards by 
UNISDR (2017). In this case, the numerical thresholds must be considered as 
generic reference points, and they need to be grounded in a specific context, 
which may either confirm or challenge their validity. 
Capacity levels. This label provides a qualitative description of the capacity 
levels that have been derived from the maturity model integration of Chrissis 
et al. (2003). This is integrated into the disaster resilience scorecards 
approach UNISDR (2017).  Capacity is intended as the combination of all the 
strengths, attributes and resources available within an organization, 
community or society, to manage and reduce disaster risks and strengthen 
resilience (UNDRR terminology, updated 2017).17 
Resilience levels. The resilience levels have been simplified and adapted 
from the corresponding maturity levels reported in BS65000:2014 (BSI 2014), 
shifting from a 05 scale to a simplified 03 scale. In the present work, the 
term resilience is defined as the ability of an organization to absorb and 
adapt in changing environment to enable it to deliver its objectives and to 
survive and prosper (ISO 2017, p. 4). 
Table 21. A Likert scale-based response model for benchmarking gaps in operational capacity, 
organizational resilience, and disaster risk reduction capacity 
17 https://www.preventionweb.net/terminology/view/7831 
Value 
0 1 2 3 
Dont 
Category 
labels 
No; little/no; 
few/no; not at 
all; never; 
inadequate; 
very little. 
Basic; limited; 
lacking; seldom; 
occasional; 
partial; 
occasionally; 
under-
resourced; not 
actively 
promoting or 
pursuing 
improvements. 
Limited or sparsely 
present; in 
progress; 
applied/developed/ 
validated with 
inconsistencies; 
but not updated; 
actively promoting 
or pursuing 
improvements. 
Mostly or 
completely 
present; 
comprehensive; 
complete; fully 
integrated; full 
compliance; full 
validation; 
applied 
consistently 
across; well 
established; 
applied and 
regularly 
updated; well 
established 
across sectors; 
constantly 
improving; 
higher 
proportion. 
Dont 
outcome 
Undesirable or 
critical state. 
Significant and 
diffused gaps; 
application in 
less than 20% 
of cases. 
Moderately 
undesirable 
state. Existence 
of some gaps. 
Applied and 
present in more 
than 2025% of 
cases. 
Somewhat 
desirable state. 
Few gaps, subject 
to improvements. 
Applied between 
50 and 75%of 
cases. 
Desirable state. 
No substantial 
gaps have been 
perceived. 
Applied in up to 
100% of cases. 
Capacity 
levels 
Non-existent or 
to a large extent 
incomplete 
capacity, 
processes are 
not performed 
or only partially 
Limited initial 
capacity, 
processes 
performed, 
some metrics 
have been 
developed but 
are still 
fragmented. 
Some defined 
capacity is 
available. 
Processes are 
identified and 
tailored to the 
organization, 
metrics are 
collected and 
applied. Some 
inconsistencies 
may still be 
present. 
Comprehensive 
capacity. 
Processes are 
well developed 
and consistently 
measured or 
assessed. 
Baselines are 
established and 
measured, 
problems are 
identified and 
fixed. 
Resilience 
levels 
No measures 
have been 
implemented in 
organization, 
lack of 
coherence, no 
innovation or 
flexibility. 
(BS65000:2014: 
Immature) 
measures have 
implemented 
but most of the 
practices 
remains 
informal with 
limited 
coordination 
and fragmented 
actions. 
(BS65000:2014: 
Basic and 
Managed) 
Strategic 
directions have 
been set, with 
understandings of 
the internal and 
external context, 
including its 
dynamics. 
Programs and 
practices are not 
fully coherent and 
consistent, but 
there are steps in 
place for 
improving. 
(BS65000:2014: 
Established) 
Strategies have 
been developed 
consistently, 
and good 
practices have 
been applied 
across 
departments. 
Activities have 
been measured 
and assessed 
regularly. A 
process of 
continual 
improvement 
has been 
established and 
is ongoing. The 
organization 
demonstrated 
innovation and 
flexibility. 
(BS65000:2014: 
Predictable, 
Optimizing) 
6.4 Conclusions 
The scale introduced herein provides a replicable, direct model for 
benchmarking answers, built on the real needs of stakeholders and the 
feedback obtained from the field. However, like other tools and methodologies 
that represent the current state of the art, it has some characteristics and 
limitations that need to be taken into account if it is to be applied effectively. It 
should be noted that the scale has been developed to provide a flexible 
assessment for contexts in which there are constraints that prevent one from 
conducting a wider and more complex analysis. In other words, the rationale 
of the approach is to maximize the reliability of answers by sacrificing, to some 
extent, the level of detail when anything more sophisticated is not achievable. 
This implies that the achievable level of accuracy of the results is lower. In this, 
there are two complementary considerations. In the first place, ideally, the 
scale should be used as a basis for developing a more complex form of 
analysis. In the practice of assessing resilience, this may be derived from 
guidelines such as those mentioned previously (BSI 2014; European Centre 
for Disease Prevention and Control 2017; UNISDR 2017). In multidisciplinary 
research, optimal results may require broader scales, such as one in the range 
1 to 7 or 1 to 10 (Croasmun and Ostrom, 2011). Second, a possible alternative 
to compensate for the reduction in accuracy of the scale when compared to 
alternatives may be to plan carefully the integration of questionnaires with semi 
structured interviews or focus groups. This could profitably follow guidelines 
for mixed-method research such as those provided by Bryman (2016). 
In conclusion, this approach does not pretend to be exhaustive, but it provides 
a practical and flexible reference method for benchmarking that can be 
adapted to the context in which it is used. For example, in some cases, 
category labels may require both language translation and changes to reflect 
sensitivity to cultural variations in the use of terminology. Instead of a limitation, 
these elements could be seen as an additional strength that could be used to 
promote testing and further evolution of the model, according to new 
experiences derived from research and practice. The result could be extended 
to different disciplines. 
Chapter 7. Integrating earthquake early 
warnings into business continuity and 
organisational resilience: lessons learned from 
Mexico City. 
7.1 Introduction 
In the first half of 2020, we have seen new complex scenarios developing 
across the globe. Earthquakes, as well as other natural-hazard events, 
occurred concurrently to the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic, challenging 
emergency response in countries such as the United States, Mexico, Croatia 
or China. However, this is not new and requires a broader vision of the 
implementation of new disaster risk reduction strategies and the optimisation 
of such mitigation measures. In 2015, the member states of the United Nations 
endorsed the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 
(UNISDR, 2015). This document aims to prevent new and reduce existing 
disaster risk, highlighting that early warning systems should become a priority 
and evolve substantially by 2030 (UNISDR, 2015). According to the United 
Nations terminology, early warning systems can be intended as An integrated 
system of hazard monitoring, forecasting, disaster risk assessment, 
communication and preparedness activities processes that enable individuals, 
communities, governments, businesses and others, to take timely action to 
reduce disaster risks in advance of hazardous events (UNISDR, Terminology 
updated February 2017)18. New early warning methodologies for complex 
events should integrate an improved understanding and modelling of hazards, 
end-to-end and people-centred decision-support systems/tools, and risk-
informed practices and policies needed for the delivery of warnings, and the 
promotion of common and consistent training for end-users (Pescaroli et al., 
2018).  
Some research fields related to early warning are more mature than others, as 
widely discussed in the previous chapters. For example, physical-science and 
18 https://www.preventionweb.net  
https://www.preventionweb.net/
engineering modelling and social sciences have already been integrated to 
model early warning and evacuation in coastal areas, supported by climate 
change adaptation efforts (Hissel et al., 2014). Regarding EEW systems, much 
less interdisciplinary works have been developed to date. The technical 
components of EEW, particularly seismological ones, have been widely 
reviewed and debated by authors such as Allen and Melgar (2019) and 
Cremen and Galasso (2020). Yet, there is an urgent need to integrate new 
technology, engineering modelling, risk drivers, and practices of dissemination 
of warnings (Herovic et al., 2019; Velazquez et al., 2020). It can be noted that 
some scholarly literature on EEW has progressed in recent years, 
investigating peoples needs and perceptions towards EEW, and contributed 
to the understanding of EEW using a community perspective (e.g., Nakayachi 
et al., 2019; Santos-Reyes, 2019). However, the interaction between 
organisational needs, priorities, management, and practices, remains mostly 
fragmented (Velazquez et al., 2020). For example, Blyth (2009) discussed the 
role of warnings for business continuity and specifically focused on measures 
for earthquakes; however, the study has only marginally explored how EEW 
could be used for orienting organisational processes and practices. Studies 
such as the one by Whitman et al. (2014) analysed organisational resilience 
(OR) within the context of specific events, but omitted EEW as it is not currently 
a system available in New Zealand. However, this is not just an issue 
associated with the limited diffusion of EEW systems. In Japan, Maruya (2013) 
analysed lessons learned from the Great East Japan Earthquake (2011) for 
improving business continuity without mentioning specifically the possible use 
of EEW, while other studies investigated just sectorial applications, such as in 
hospitals (Horiuchi, 2009). In California, other studies such as the one by Goltz 
(2002) or Johnson et al. (2016) focused on possible anticipated  benefits for 
organisations, by extending the list of mitigation actions that can be triggered 
given the warnings provided by the EEW system of California, rather than 
investigating business continutiy or resilience. This is confirmed by the general 
gaps in the thematic literature, not tending to bridge the two topics.  Authors 
such as Burnard and Bhamra (2019) highlighted that Operational  Resilience 
could be seen as a dynamic capability composed of both active (adjustment 
of a system to create a change) and passive (actionless ability to absorb 
disturbances) forms of resilience, and further research should address how 
the different components of OR are integrated together. This implies to 
identify/analyse the gaps, such as operationalising the concept of OR, and the 
integration of research insights among disciplines, including the analysis of 
engineering sciences and socio-political systems (Linnenluecke, 2017). In 
other words, OR could be analysed and applied within different frameworks 
(e.g., social and technical) that could make the difference for future 
applications (Pescaroli and Alexander, 2018).  
This chapter aims at investigating, by adopting a cross-disciplinary approach, 
the possible gaps and operational criticalities limiting the integration of the 
technical components of EEW into practices of OR. In particular, this chapter 
intends to explore what the public and the private sector need information and 
training on in order to respond and adapt more effectively to the dissemination 
of EEW, improving when possible OR.  
In this chapter,  OR is defined as the ability of an organization to anticipate, 
prepare for, and respond and adapt to incremental change and sudden 
disruptions(BS 65000:2014). It is intended as a holistic process that includes 
elements such as adaptive capacity, leadership and culture, having different 
levels of maturity depending on the implementation status of the measures 
adopted (BS 65000:2014). One of the essential operational steps for building 
and improving OR is developing practices of business continuity, intended as 
the capability of an organization to continue the delivery of products and 
services within acceptable time frames at predefined capacity during a 
disruption (ISO 22301:2019).  This rely on the implementation of a response 
structure that enables adequate warning and communications, by providing 
effective business continuity plans that can be defined as the documented 
information that guides an organization to respond to a disruption and resume, 
recover and restore the delivery of products and services consistent with its 
business continuity objectives (ISO 22301:2019).  
In the next sections, an empirical analysis of the case study of Mexico City 
(Mexico) is proposed. Here, EEW has been developed by the authorities (local 
and national), but the need for increasing the effectiveness of the system is 
widely recognised (Santos-Reyes, 2019; Suarez et al., 2009). A mixed-method 
approach is developed to derive qualitative and quantitative evidence, bridging 
the social-science and technical (e.g., seismological, engineering) fields. The 
discussion reflects the lessons learned for improving practices of OR, 
emergency preparedness and business continuity, and are contextualised in 
the state-of-the-art on disaster risk reduction and OR, but also following ISO 
standards19. The conclusions suggest possible implications for mitigating 
complex scenarios and the next steps for future research. 
7.2 Case study: Mexico City 
Mexico City is the capital of Mexico and one of the main economic hubs of 
Latin America. It has approximately nine million inhabitants, 21 million20 
considering its metropolitan area, which are exposed to socio-economic 
vulnerabilities, such as population growth and urban development, as well as 
to natural hazards, such as earthquakes, floods and heatwaves. In particular, 
its recent history has been distinguished by some major earthquakes causing 
vast human and economic losses, including the M8.1 Michoacn earthquake 
of 1985, that led to the early development of the Mexican EEW system (Cullar 
et al., 2017; Espinosa-Aranda et al., 2009, 2011), and the M7.1 Puebla-
Morelos earthquake of 2017.  
Since 1985, the Mexican EEW system has evolved significatively, achieving 
three important milestones: a) in 2005, the governments of Mexico City and 
Oaxaca created the Seismic Alert System of Mexico (SASMEX), that has the 
capacity to provide warnings between 60 and 120 seconds to Mexico City 
(Cullar et al., 2018); b) in 2010, the government of Mexico City funded a 
19 https://www.iso.org/home.html 
20 https://www.gob.mx/conapo/documentos/delimitacion-de-las-zonas-metropolitanas-de-
mexico-2015 
further extension and update of the system, that counts now with 97 stations 
within SASMEX. Here the warning is publicly disseminated across the city both 
using fixed speakers and traditional media such as national television and 
radio broadcasters (Espinosa-Aranda et al., 2009; Santos-Reyes, 2019; 
Suarez et al., 2009); c) in 2019, the warning thresholds have been updated to 
include different scenarios that could trigger an alarm, including a magnitude 
threshold ranging from 5 to 6 depending on the proximity of the target city to 
the epicentre (Velazquez et al., 2020). In the sole Mexico City, more than 
12,000 warning speakers and repeating devices have been installed since 
2015 to improve the dissemination of alerts to different organisations and the 
general public (Santos-Reyes, 2019). The current legislation requires that 
critical infrastructure, such as hospitals, schools and government buildings, 
must install EEW devices to receive alerts, integrate them in the emergency 
and mitigation procedures, and carry out regular drills and exercises (Surez 
et al., 2018). 
However, there are still various shortfalls associated with the organisational 
and societal implementation of EEW in the city. First, the public service 
remains fragmented as not all the urban areas of Mexico City are sufficiently 
covered with sirens and speakers that disseminate the warning (Velazquez et 
al., 2020). In addition, private services are available using special receivers 
that require a paid subscription, but the number of registered users is low 
(Velazquez et al., 2020). The existence of additional EEW mobile applications 
represent both an opportunity and a shortfall: although they increase the 
accessibility of the service, they also can somehow jeopardise the functionality 
of the official EEW, and therefore create conflicting sources of 
forecast/information (Reddy, 2019). Similarly, it has been argued the existence 
of common gaps in education, training, and governance. Although the system 
is reliable (rarely providing false alarms), the seismic network around Mexico 
City could be denser with practical implications in terms of variability of 
predictions (Tajima and Hayashida, 2018), reducing the number of possible 
missed alarms. At the time of the M7.1 event of the 19th September 2017, a 
common belief among the citizens of Mexico City was that - in all cases - they 
would have had 60 seconds between the warning and the arrival of the ground 
shaking (Santos-Reyes, 2019). When the EEW system instead provided no 
warning, this created confusion and affected trust. Santos-Reyes (2019) 
argued the critical need for further development of governance, in particular in 
terms of training and procedures to follow before, during and after an 
earthquake (Santos-Reyes, 2019; Suarez et al., 2009). 
7.3 Methodological approach 
This chapter adopted a replicable mixed-method approach (Creswell, 2014), 
using together semi-structured interviews and questionnaires. The target 
group was focused on representatives of organisations from the local public 
and private sectors (including experts from academia) in Mexico City, recruited 
through a convenience sample and with voluntary participation. The data 
collection assured the anonymity of participants, assuring that no personal 
data about individuals was stored/captured. Specifically, a sequential data 
collection was developed by using first qualitative and then quantitative 
methods, for the purpose of response to the research questions and 
hypothesis testing (Palinkas et al., 2011). This process aimed at maximising 
the complementarity between the interviews and questionnaires, using 
qualitative data to provide open-ended/in-depth understandings, and 
quantitative data to provide a significant statistical analysis (Palinkas et al. 
2010; Creswell 2014). The main hypothesis aimed at testing one of the 
research gaps highlighted by Velazquez et al. (2020); if organisations are 
aware of the EEW system but they have a limited integration in OR, then it 
was expected that the answers would indicate: 
- High levels of perceived utility of the technical tools (providing EEW), 
but lack of integration in organisational needs and gaps in practices of 
business continuity; 
- Gaps in the definition of some critical information (e.g., the contents of 
the warning messages) or dissemination practices (e.g., who should 
have access to more complex warning messages, including lead times, 
for example); 
- Existing issues in terms of jurisdiction, coordination, and accountability; 
- The fact that the dissemination of warnings requires additional training 
and educational measures to integrate EEW into OR.  
The empirical literature was reviewed for deriving questions for the data 
collection and analysis, using as initial references those reported in Velazquez 
et al. (2020). The development of the contents included in the questionnaire 
integrated further considerations on the indicators considered in the United 
Nations Office for disaster risk reduction scorecards (UNISDR, 2017), British 
Standards on OR (BS 65000:2014) and the International Standards on 
Business Continuity (ISO22301:2019).  
A first draft of the semi-structured interviews and online questionnaires was 
initially derived in English, then translated into Spanish, and codified in this 
language before the discussion. A careful process of reviewing and piloting 
was conducted to assure the accessibility of the questions, to corroborate the 
rationale and fluidity along the questionnaire, and to guarantee that the 
language and format were contextualised in a local perspective. This was done 
involving some Mexican staff and students working or studying in the field of 
disaster risk reduction based at University College London. The results 
included 15 semi-structured interviews and 78 valid questionnaires that were 
analysed in sequence and then connected in the discussion (Creswell 2014; 
Palinkas et al. 2010). The next sections describe in detail the criteria used for 
developing the data collection and analysis. 
7.3.1 Semi-structured interviews 
The interviews explored the information and training gaps perceived by the 
organisations in the public and private sector, in order to respond and adapt 
better to the dissemination of an EEW. The interviews were also targeted 
considering different expertise and using the authors professional network to 
contact respondents in the following fields: Local Government, Civil Protection, 
Private Sector, Academia, disaster risk reduction governmental agencies, 
NGOs and Civil Societies. The methodological process followed the one 
described by Harrell and Bradley (2009), defining a replicable protocol for data 
collection and analysis. The format was such that each interview was expected 
to last approximately one hour, including four main sections: 1) how do public 
and private organisations use Earthquake Early Warnings?, including pros 
and cons of the system and improvements needed; 2) what information and 
training are available to integrate EEW in organisational procedures?; 3) has 
the link between business continuity management, organisational resilience 
and EEW been established and developed?; 4) other priorities and needs, 
such as personal comments from the interviewees. Each question integrated 
approximately four-to-five sub-questions that worked as facilitators for the 
interviewer. The fieldwork took place in January 2020, 13 of 15 interviews were 
interrogated in-situ, then two were followed up via videoconference. The 
anonymity of each interviewee was assured by following a two steps process: 
a first anonymization happened at the time of recording, and no specific 
reference to the names, organisation, or date of interview were associated with 
the files. Then, the interviews were transcribed allocating random numeric 
codes from 0 to 30 during the analysis, which were then reassigned during the 
answers analysis process (Saunders et al., 2015). A content analysis was 
developed without the support of software following the methodology by 
Weber (1990). The process aimed at exploring the existence and frequency of 
concepts associated with four categories of themes described in the study by 
Velazquez et al. (2020):  
 Operational Sphere, including tactical elements and tools that influence 
how EEW is developed and disseminated, such as information on lead 
times and expected impacts, and the use of tools such as sirens. 
 Political and Governance Sphere, including aspects associated with the 
legal framework in which EEW systems are implemented. 
 Social and Behavioural Sphere, associated with aspects such as local 
culture, local knowledge and experience with the considered hazard, 
trust in institutions, and community-based resilience. 
 Organisational Sphere associated with procedures and practices that 
integrate EEW actions into business continuity plans and practices. 
These must be intended as indicative categories, that are constantly 
overlapping and interacting each other.  
The preliminary outcome was further divided into two sub-themes for 
comparisons, namely strengths and opportunities and weaknesses and 
open issues. Deductive analysis was used to confirm or refute the previous 
hypotheses and results. In contrast, inductive analysis was carried out to 
obtain more unknown relationships or issues that emerged from the data 
gathered in each interview. For the inductive analysis, an unbiased coding and 
indexing process was carried out following the process described by Weber 
(1990) in order to identify and classify keywords, phrases and sentences that 
would determine the most common topics raised during each interview.  
7.3.2 Online questionnaires 
Online questionnaires were used complementarily to interviews to support the 
quantitative assessment of OR maturity and existing gaps in business 
continuity. The topics investigated were derived from the existing literature 
such as Alexander (2015); Johnson et al. (2016); Nakayachi et al. (2019); 
Ohara (2012); Porter( 2016); Santos-Reyes (2019); Suarez et al. (2009). A 
consistency cross-check was carried out with the critical aspects highlighted 
in the review Velazquez et al. (2020). This process resulted in 42 questions, 
divided in four main sections, a) Perception of EEW systems; b) Current 
status of planning for mitigating disruptions; c) Training needs related to 
EEW; d) Background. The items are reported in their English version in 
Table 22. The majority of the answers used a Likert scale-based model for 
benchmarking operational capacity, organizational resilience, and disaster risk 
reduction developed within the project and explained in Pescaroli et al. (2020). 
The numerical values of the items varied from 0 to 3, were 0 was associated 
to an undesirable state, insufficient capacity, and low resilience maturity; and 
3 represented a desirable state, comprehensive capacity and higher resilience 
maturity (Pescaroli et al., 2020). The quantitative values were supported by 
qualitative descriptive attributes to assure consistency, and the option dont 
know was available to avoid discretionary answers on intermediate values.  
The on-line questionnaire was distributed through the University College 
Londons Web-Based Survey Tool Opinio21, and was available to be 
answered between mid-February 2020 and March 2020. The questionnaires 
were disseminated within the network of the Department of Geography at the 
Universidad Nacional Autnoma de Mxico (UNAM), and it was supported by 
ARISE MX22 (Alianza del Sector Privado para Sociedades Resilientes ante 
Desastres en Mxico). The latter is a national network of the private sector 
aimed to support disaster resilience within the aegis of the United Nations 
Office for Disaster risk reduction.   
Approximately 100 questionnaires were collected. A threshold of 50% or more 
answers was used to consider them valid for analysis, reducing the dataset to 
78 questionnaires. This was considered a significant result, as the total 
organisations affiliated to ARISE are approximately 200 in the whole country. 
The analysis of the answers of each questionnaire was carried out by 
performing a non-parametric correlation Spearmans Rho test, using SPSS 
V.19 (IBM Corp. Released 2019) and Matlab. This type of analysis was 
chosen as the input variables obtained from the questionnaires answers are 
of type categorical (discontinuous) and therefore not normally distributed, 
preventing the adoption of traditional correlation methodologies (e.g., Pearson 
correlation). 
21 https://www.ucl.ac.uk/isd/services/learning-teaching/e-learning-services-for-staff/e-
learning-core-tools/opinio 
22 https://arise.mx/ 
Table 22. Questions (Q) included in the survey 
Section 1. Perception of EEW Systems 
Q 1. How relevant is EEW for your organisation? 
Q 2. Do you consider EEW as a useful service when considering its current state of 
development? 
Q 3. To what extent do you know what to do in case of an EEW? 
Q 4. Do you think EEW could be useful to limit the disruption of critical services such as 
communication and transportation? 
Q 5. Do you think the current development of EEW takes in adequate consideration how 
they can be integrated in organisational needs? (E.g. operational functions, day to day 
activities) 
Q 6. To what extent do you think that local policies are adequate to support the integration 
of EEW in your organisations practices and procedures? 
Section 2. Current status of planning for mitigating disruptions 
Q 7. Does your organisation have developed specific plans or procedures to undertake in 
case of an EEW? (e.g., stop a production process, empty the cash register, close the gas 
mains) 
Q 8. Has the business continuity plan of your organisation been updated in the last 18 
months?  
Q 9. To what extent your organisation identified which critical functions/activities could be 
protected using EEW?  
Q 10. To what extent your organisation prioritised which critical functions/activities could be 
protected using EEW?  
Q 11. To what extent your organisation identified internal responsibilities/liabilities for 
activating procedures and actions associated with an EEW? 
Q 12. Is your organisation aware of the official institutions that provide EEW in Mexico City? 
Q 13. To what extent your organisation identified possible vulnerable categories that could 
be better protected by activating specific procedures following an EEW? 
Q 14. Do you consider useful to know the available warning time, before the arrival of the 
ground shaking at your location? (Specially to activate organisational procedures). 
Q 15. Considering the Mexican EEW system has included the available lead time in the 
warning message, has your organisation identified the mitigation actions likely to be 
activated for short warnings (e.g., 10 seconds), or large warnings (e.g., 60 seconds)? 
Q 16. Do you consider the Mexican EEW system can initiate beta testing in which warnings 
include the available warning time? The beta testing would only include those organisations 
with appropriate structures and capacity to deal with such warnings. 
Q 17. Do you consider that false alerts can trigger interruption of business continuity, and 
therefore create economic losses, within your organisation? 
Q 18. How often your organisation practice drills for both short and long warnings?  
How helpful do you think the following tools could be to improve the use of EEW for your 
organization? 
Q 19. a) Guidance about good practices and procedures to follow for integrating EEW in 
your organisation 
Q 20. b) Legislations that clarify responsibilities associated with actions to undertake when 
an EEW is released 
Q 21. c) Guidance on what to do according to the possible time intervals between an EEW 
and the arrival of the ground shaking at your location (e.g., distinguishing between short 
warning, long warning and common actions) 
Q 22. d) Assistance in defining the best continuity strategies for your organisation in case 
of an EEW 
Q 23. Please rate the tools enlisted in Qs 19-22, from less useful to more useful, according 
to their relevance in your organisation. 
Q 24. Is there anything else that has not been mentioned above that you may find useful? 
Section 3. Training needs related to EEW 
Q 25. Have you received enough training to understand the applications of EEW for limiting 
the disruptions/ helping the continuity of your organisation? 
Q 26. Did your training (if any) include the implications of EEW for preparedness, response, 
and recovery? 
How useful do you think the following training might be?  
Q 27. Courses to understand how to integrate the EEW into the daily activities of your 
organisation 
Q 28. A free short course on how to respond to an EEW in organisation provided by the 
local authorities  
Q 29. Roundtable events or tabletop exercises held in the local authorities/community or 
business organisations 
Q 30. Freely available guidelines  
Q 31. On-line free lessons 
Q 32. Webinars and on-line videos with basic instructions to undertake in the case of an 
Q 33. Please rate the training enlisted in Qs 27-32, from less useful to more useful, 
according to their relevance in your organisation. 
Q 34. Is there anything else that has not been mentioned that you may find useful to support 
training on EEW?  
Section 4. Background 
Q 35. Does your organisation have access/is registered to EEW?     
Q 36. Have you ever participated in training sessions or workshops on how to use efficiently 
an EEW in your organisation?  
Q 37. Are you aware of how long the warning time in case of EEW is? 
Q 38. What is your opinion about false alerts? 
Q 39. What is your level of education? 
Q 40. What is your affiliation? 
Q 41. What is your gender? 
Q 42. Do you have any other comments?  
7.4 Interview results 
This section introduces the findings of the interviews regarding the operational, 
political and governance, social and behavioural, and organisational spheres 
described in the methodology of this chapter. As a general comment, it is 
possible to note a general agreement among the respondents on the strength 
of the technological component of the EEW system in contrast with the 
weakness of some political, social, and organizational aspects.  
7.4.1 Operational Sphere 
All the interviews (15/15) pointed out that the Mexican EEW system had good 
technical reliability. For example, the respondent (R) 02 highlighted that 
technically, the system works well, and few false alerts have been released 
since it was launched (1986). All respondents agreed on the fact that the 
system is technically reliable, with no significant issues observed. The 
problems are mostly associated with the implementation and translation of an 
EEW into action. As a substantial downfall within the operational sphere, all 
the respondents noted a lack of full geographic coverage, which was 
associated with limited resources available. R30 suggested very clearly that 
the potential for the (Mexican) EEW system to grow and have larger coverage 
is huge, but everything relies on the funding from the local, regional and federal 
government. An element directly connected to this was that lack of speakers 
deployed across the city, which implied gaps in the public dissemination of the 
alerts. According to the direct experience of R21, during the January 2020 
drill, we did not even hear the simulated EEW. 
Similarly, R03 highlighted that many places in Mexico City, where shaking 
has been quite intense during past events, do not have any speaker. People 
located in these areas do not have access to the alerts. Similarly, all the 
respondents were concerned about the low number of users that, in 
accordance to the Mexican law, must receive the warnings, raising the point 
that the operational and governance/political spheres are strictly interlinked. 
As R05 highlighted it is unbelievable that not all the schools, hospitals and 
offices in the city have access to the warning, why not?. According to Surez 
et al. (2018), all strategic buildings like hospitals, security buildings and offices, 
are legally required to contain devices for receiving EEW alerts in Mexico City. 
It was highlighted the need of supporting the understanding of organisations 
about the realistic possibility of having false alerts, that instead are still not 
perceived as a possible outcome of the EEW and were orienting the trust in 
the technical system. R04 pointed out the Mexican EEW system (in Mexico 
City) is not helpful for organisations because it is not even effective for 
individuals. If you carry out a study on individuals, you will realise that people 
do not believe in the system. Even drills are now considered just a nice time 
to catch up and chat with colleagues, people do not believe in them anymore. 
This was complementary to the issue perceived by the majority of the 
respondents about the lack of a clear strategy to disseminate operational 
procedures to end users, thus reducing the capacity of the EEW and its 
corresponding warnings to influence individual behaviours. All the 
respondents agreed also that there was a lot of potential for operational 
improvements, in particular by including the available warning time between 
the release of the alert and the arrival of the shaking at a given location. This 
was considered an essential piece of information to be included among all the 
interviews but needed to be supported by the complementary development of 
training strategies. 
7.4.2 Political and Governance Sphere 
All the respondents agreed about the existence of significant opportunities for 
implementing new policies and legislation on EEW in Mexico, with potential for 
fostering collaborations between academia and practices. In particular, R07 
and R11 argued that research institutes and universities are quite open to 
collaborations with the government, especially when it comes to disaster risk 
reduction. However, there was concern among all the respondents that 
nobody was taking the lead in activating the implementation of such 
collaboration process.  
A common element of criticality was the lack of interaction between 
governmental bodies and academic institutions. All respondents agreed that 
during previous governments (prior to 2018), the local Civil Protection 
Department and similar bodies ignored the advice given by research institutes 
with expertise in disaster risk reduction. According to some respondents, and 
in particular R11 and R21, it was possible to note some more collaborations 
between some academic institutions and the local Civil Protection developed 
since the elections of 2018 and the change of government. However, the 
respondents from academia generally pointed out the need for higher 
involvement of research institutions for achieving optimal results in disaster 
risk reduction. Academics also pointed out that the capacity of the Civil 
Protection may have been undermined by a lack of adequate funding. As 
pointed out by R04 in a country where security is an everyday concern at any 
governmental scale, focusing funds for disaster risk reduction might not be the 
priority. Similarly, it was pointed out that the fragmentation of rules, scopes, 
and goals towards disaster risk reductions and mitigation actions, between the 
local, regional, and national administration could affect the local Civil 
Protection.   
It was also highlighted by all the respondents the lack of a consistent 
governance approach and specific policies to develop an EWW culture that 
could support the population and organisations, communication and 
knowledge transfer of lessons learned after an event, and assuring the 
inclusion of vulnerable categories. R03 and R05 pointed out in particular the 
potential to inform people about the nature of earthquakes and their impacts, 
the EEW system, and disaster risk reduction strategies, which are topics that 
have always been received minor attention by the government. For example, 
the 2017 earthquake created a window of opportunity to develop some 
knowledge transfer with the public that was highly receptive, but 2 years have 
passedand this was a very badly missed chance (R03). In December 2019, 
three earthquake national drills or exercises were integrated into policies for 
gathering data and improving evacuation protocols. However, most of the 
respondents suggested concerns about the actual outcomes due to an 
approach that limited the achievement of collecting useful feedback, mainly 
due to inefficient organisation and coordination efforts when the drills were 
performed. For example, R12 highlighted that we have expressed many times 
that there is a lack of feedback among the drills; we are told there will be 
feedback, but this never happened. This is not a good practice as every single 
drill is the same as previous ones, and people get bored, not taking seriously 
future drills. 
Finally, for all the participants, it was clear that the warning providers 
(SASMEX) are not in charge of the public and organisational training. 
However, it was highlighted the lack of consistent governance on 
accountability, particularly through two aspects that need to be addressed:  
1) the liability of releasing the warnings. In the interviews, R30 
highlighted as a critical point that: this is a system that is likely to fail, 
this is normal, and everyone needs to understand it. There are many 
uncertainties involved in the EEW process, and triggering false alerts 
might be not avoided. However, when false alerts lead to losses, there 
should be a political body paying for them. This covers individual 
aspects (like a heart attack) or economics losses due to interruption of 
business continuity (for organisations).  
2) Resolving the conflict between public and private EEW systems. All 
respondents agreed that only the official EEW system should provide 
alerts and releasing alerts without the consent of those in charge of the 
system should be penalised. R04 in particular, stated that the number 
of alerts (false) triggered by private systems sometimes is even 
dangerous. Once I was walking in the corridor of my institution and 
many people were concerned as their private app alerted them about 
an incoming earthquake. There was no warning actually and the official 
system did not warn anything at all. These private apps just induce 
panic in the community. However, private systems were seen very 
positively by all the respondents as a tool that could add functions to 
the official system and might be quite helpful for organisations and the 
public once synchronised with the official alerts. 
7.4.3 Social and Behavioural Sphere 
The presence of some widespread issues in the political and governance 
sphere do not seem to compromise the presence of positive aspects from the 
social and behavioural perspectives. All the respondents pointed out that the 
population of Mexico City learned from previous experience; The population 
was aware of some of the basics (of EEW) at the individual and collective 
levels, using surprisingly positively social media for the dissemination of 
correct information R(04). Specifically, R25 indicated that the use of social 
media in the aftermath of the 19 September2017 earthquake allowed the 
dissemination of true information (and slightly prevented fake news to be 
spread). The population accessed more non-governmental media efforts that 
gained a lot of credibility as the content shared helped a lot in the recovery 
and response phases of the disaster. It was also highlighted the potential for 
developing good practices at the local level, in particular, building on the will 
to cooperate and receive training demonstrated by the population during past 
events. However, better strategies for communication and education among 
residents were needed. According to R06 governmental bodies talk about a 
culture of prevention, that is a concept completely unknown by residents in 
Mexico City and even by (some of) those bodies that try to teach it. For all the 
respondents this was associated in particular with the lack of clear differences 
corresponding to the behaviours to undertake before, during and after events. 
These actions require a strong and targeted action, and not the release of 
more complicated communication messages that will not be properly 
understood by the public as they do not have appropriate training and 
education strategies (R04). 
Similarly, actions were needed to tackle the common public idea that false 
alerts were mostly useful to provide the chances of extra drills without being 
aware that they could also be the manifestation of some technical problems 
(and produce losses). Indeed, R11 highlighted that if the system is not 
working, people need to know it is not working. What the public need to accept 
is that the system can fail. A critical issue that could cause problems is related 
to the fact that people are confused about who officially issues warnings, which 
is consistent with some of the political and governance issues reported in the 
previous section. R06 argued that earthquakes is a topic being covered by so 
many institutions and private companies in Mexico that people are confused 
about who actually triggers the alerts. People are so confused that they do not 
even know whom to blame in case of a false alert. On the positive side, 
common thinking among the respondents was that all these aspects created 
the conditions to introduce some standard disaster risk reduction education 
across the country, starting from a young age (6-12), and including training on 
individual actions related to the actions to undertake considering different 
warning times. R25 pointed out that volunteers could represent a vital added 
value for high-magnitude events as the response of the community and 
organised civil societies was a key factor for the emergent response and 
recovery after the 2017 earthquakes. The government did not have the 
capacity to deal with the disaster, it was quite clear.  
A critical point highlighted by all the respondents was that the population was 
suffering of widespread lack of trust in political bodies, such as Civil Protection, 
and sometimes in the EEW system, which may even hamper positive efforts 
in the implementation of new measures. Unfortunately, this was associated 
with the common believe that corruption is a key factor that slows down the 
development of a disaster risk reduction culture in Mexico and more actions 
are needed to produce a societal change on this regard.  
7.4.4 Organisational Sphere 
All respondents suggested that public and private organisations could be 
essential actors to improve the entire EEW planning and response process: 
they could build on what they have already developed/achieved, such as 
evacuations plans, to achieve optimal levels of resilience. R15 highlighted that 
organisations can be benefited from the EEW system; however, there has 
been minimal information on how to implement the alerts. I believe there is a 
great opportunity to start the integration of organisations and the EEW by 
registering and training key organisations. Procedures could be tested with the 
registered users, and then guidelines could be launched to the rest of the 
organisations that did not register. Similarly, some respondents were 
sceptical about the guidelines and training provided by government actors, 
such as the Civil Protection, in particular for the availability of qualified 
personnel. R08 commented that she/he would never allow Civil Protection 
experts to come and design any protocols within her/his company. I do not 
trust their technical expertise. R09 and R14 raised doubts about the 
availability of technical and cross-disciplinary expertise within the staff of the 
organisations involved in preparedness and response (e.g., Civil Protection). 
The academic sector had some additional points associated with training and 
education. First, they noted that the private sector was not well involved in the 
implementation of protocols for business continuity provided by governmental 
bodies. Therefore the private sector has to invest in getting their own training 
and updated protocols (as they have the finance to do it). Second, that the 
expertise and knowledge about procedures to be activated after the issuance 
of an EEW is already available in universities, but it has not been used (see 
points in the previous spheres). In conclusion, it is clear an overall lack of 
consistency on business continuity planning, which is not included sufficiently 
in EEW alerts. According to some interviewees, most of the organisations do 
not know that they can implement actions. For example, R06 brought the 
example of hospitals, where staff are more concerned about evacuating 
people and themselves, rather than protecting dangerous items/materials. 
This was also confirmed by some non -academic respondents. R08 clarified 
that the actions implemented once the warning is released are a consequence 
of protocols that have been designed without keeping in mind particular EEW 
aspects. It is just a coincidence. 
Some respondent from the public and private sector had similar concerns, 
including both specific and general elements. R01 reinforced the message of 
a current lack of training for organisations about options of response actions, 
including essential factors such as the impact of protection/repair works (if 
possible) before evacuation. R01 believed that there should be an emergency 
protocol for the protection of pieces in museums. To be honest, I do not 
understand why we do not have one. The same respondent also manifested 
concerns about a general lack of specific organisational procedures that 
targeted vulnerable societal categories.  
The actual status of things portraited by R03 was that in schools, during the 
2017 earthquakes, the teachers were asking the kids to run away from 
buildings during the earthquake (rather than drop, cover and hold on). Not 
even the people who are educated know the basic rules to be followed during 
shaking. In conclusion, the lack of clear accountability between the 
public/private components of EEW reported in the previous spheres had 
consequences at the operational level. Having different institutions delivering 
alerts confuse organisations and do not allow the implementations of 
emergency protocols. R13 suggested that no single organisation will 
implement any kind of emergency protocols (following the alert), if they do not 
know the available time to carry out a particular action. It is extremely 
dangerous (in terms of economic losses) to carry out emergency actions 
blindfolded; it does not make any sense. 
7.5 Questionnaire results 
This section summarises the findings and results obtained from the 78 
questionnaires considered as valid (50% answered at least) in this chapter. 
7.5.1 Background of the respondents 
The respondents formed a mixed background of organisations that had access 
or were registered to the EEW service (27%). 39% had no access or had not 
registered yet, and the remaining third of them did not know the answer. In 
general, the level of training was inadequate among all respondents. A solid 
majority never participated in training sessions or workshops on how to use 
efficiently EEW in their organisation (64%), nearly 24% received training but 
not in the last 18 months, and just 12% were trained and updated in the last 
18 months. Most people believed that there was a given constant time 
between the release of the warning and the arrival of the shaking (overall 
69%). In comparison, one third (31%) was aware of the existence of variability 
(Figure 38). 
Figure 38. 'Q37. Are you aware of how long the warning time in case of EEW is? 
The majority of the respondents had a strongly negative perception of false 
alerts, and they found them unacceptable (61%). Their affiliations included a 
well-balanced mix of the public and private sector, with some particular spread 
among education institutions that could be referred to both public and private 
sectors (Figure 39). 
Figure 39. Q40. What is your affiliation? 
Finally, the respondents had a very good level of education, as 91% of them 
had some form of academic degrees, and there was a balance among the 
gender of the respondents, males and female (both 48%), while other 4% 
defined themselves as other or preferred not to answer. 
7.5.2 Perceptions of the EEW system 
Nearly all the respondents agreed that EEW is relevant for their organisations 
(84%). The majority of the respondents considered it a useful service that 
needed improvements (63%). At the same time, less than a third recognised 
it is useful in its actual form (22%), and a minority suggested that its 
development was insufficient (11%). Just 4% argued that the service was not 
useful at all. 66% of the respondents knew what to do in the case of an alert, 
and 30% suggested that they knew it, but they need more information/training. 
The vast majority of respondents suggested that the development of the EEW 
considered the integration with organisational needs, such as operational 
functions (Figure 40). However, a total of 58% highlighted that there were 
substantial deficiencies, or these needs were insufficiently addressed.  
Figure 40. Q5. Do you think the current development of EEWs takes in adequate consideration how 
they can be integrated in organisational needs? 
The answers tended to be polarised, even assessing the status of local 
policies to support the integration of EEW in organisation practices and 
procedures (Figure 41). What emerges is that the majority of respondents 
suggested the existence of a supporting local legal framework (14%), that has 
though deficiencies and gaps in 67% of the cases. However, it can be noted 
that the negative component associated with a total lack of implementation 
(17%) was stronger that in Question 5 (Figure 40).  
Figure 41. Q6. Do you think the local policies are adequate to support the integration of EWWs in your 
organisations practices and procedures? 
7.5.3 Status of planning for mitigating disruptions 
The current status of planning was too fragmented. Most of the organisation 
had some specific plans or procedures to undertake in case of EEW (79%), 
however, it was possible to observe a distinction between elementary plans 
(31%) and specific ones (34%), as reported in Figure 42.  
Figure 42. Q7. Has your organisation developed specific plans or procedures to undertake in case of 
EEWs? 
Similarly, there was a split between organisations that did not have continuity 
plans updated (Figure 43) in the last 18 months (37%), organisations that 
updated them in the last 18 months (36%), and respondents that did not know 
the answer (27%). The situation in terms of identifying and prioritising critical 
functions and activities was distinguished again by a fragmentation of 
answers. Figure 44 shows insufficient levels of identified critical activities 
(42%), and equivalent levels between fully positive answers (30%), in which a 
dominant component of responses was in all cases suggesting the need for 
updates (28%).  
Figure 43. Q8. Has the business continuity plan of your organisation been updated in the last 18 
months? 
Figure 44. Q9. Has your organisation identified which critical functions/activities could be protected by 
using EEWs? 
Instead, organisations had fully prioritised (30%) which critical 
functions/activities could be protected by using the alerts provided by the 
EEW, though in some cases updates were required (31%). 15% of the 
organisations were not able to prioritise the critical functions that can be 
protected, while 19% recognised they did carry out the prioritisation process 
but inadequately, as reported in Figure 45. 
The situation was better than expected, considering the identification of 
internal responsibilities/liabilities for activating procedures and actions 
associated with EEW. The majority of the organisations indicated that they are 
aware of those individuals responsible (and accountable) of activating 
mitigation actions following an alert (58%), while 42% could not recognise the 
people in charge. 
Figure 45. Q10. Has your organisation prioritised which critical functions/activities could be protected 
by using EEWs? 
The levels of awareness about which official institutions release EEW in 
Mexico City were surprisingly fragmented, as 49% of the respondents 
indicated to be aware, 19% were not aware, and 32% did not know. However, 
considering that the respondents had the open possibility to write down who 
provides the warnings, it was realised that in fact, 45% of those that 
mentioned being aware were actually wrong. For example, some responses 
indicate fire fighters or civil protection as alerts providers, that instead are 
end users of EEW. These results unequivocally highlight confusion in this 
regard. 
The majority of respondents indicated a lack of a consistent approach for 
protecting vulnerable categories within their organisations in case of EEW, 
highlighting a clean split between positive and negative values (Figure 46). 
Despite, there was a total agreement among the respondents about the 
perceived utility of knowing the available warning time before the arrival of 
ground shaking (90%).  
Figure 46. Q13. Has your organisation identified possible vulnerable categories that could be better 
protected by activating specific procedures following the release of EEWs? 
The absence of a clear warning time in the alert message likely induced 
fragmented answers, with a thin majority of organisation not identifying 
mitigation actions likely to be activated for short warnings or long warnings 
(27%), insufficiently identifying them (22%), while planning had to be updated 
in organisations to activate the procedures (24%), and just 15% of 
organisations did identify the actions consistently; 12% of respondents did not 
know. Complementary to this point, most of the respondents agreed that it 
would be useful to run a beta test for organisations where warnings would 
include the available warning time (87%). There was a clear perception that 
false alerts could impact business continuity, creating economic losses. 
However, more uncertainty was associated with the magnitude of the possible 
impact, which was not known (33%), or needed to be re-evaluated (33%). It 
was clear just for a minority of responses (10%). EEW drills were practised 
mostly once in some organisations (40%), or three times a year (40%). A small 
minority practised more than three times a year (12%), and nearly nobody did 
do it at all (6%). 
7.5.4 Training needs related to EEW 
All the measures suggested for improving the use of EEW in organisations 
were mostly perceived as very useful, with similar values associated with 
guidance about good practices, legislations, guidance on what to do according 
to possible warning times, and assistance in defining the best continuity 
strategies. The most useful tool was considered the guidance about good 
practices and procedures to follow for integrating EEW in the respondents 
organisation, followed by guidance on what to do according to the possible 
time intervals between the signal and the arrival of the shakes (Figure 47) .  
Figure 47. Q23. Please rate the tools listed in Qs 19-22 from least useful to most useful 
The majority of respondents (64%) did not receive enough training to 
understand the applications of EEW for limiting the disruption of their 
organisations. To those who did receive training, their courses did not include 
the implications of EEW related to preparedness, response, and recovery 
(37%). All the actions were included in 21% of cases, and 8% in some of the 
options available. A significant number of respondents chose I do not know 
(34%), that was the suggested option for those who had received no training 
at all on the subject.  
Most of the training options available were judged very positively. When asked 
to prioritise from the most useful to least useful, the respondents prioritised 
courses to understand how to integrate the EEW into the daily activities of their 
organisation, and the availability of free short courses on how to respond to 
EEWs in organisations, provided by local authorities (Figure 48). 
Figure 48. Q33. Please rate the training listed in Qs 27-32','from least useful to most useful 
This section had some active comments on what the respondents may find 
more useful, and in particular the following aspects were included: include 
social media for training in organisations, involving tv and radio messages. 
Most of the people indicated the need to ban private systems if not coordinated 
with the central/official EEW system.  
7.5.5 Correlations among answers 
The analysis highlighted a substantial number of correlations among the 
answers to the questions reported in Table 22. Particular focus was assigned 
on those correlations in which p-values where less than 0.01, as this value (or 
smaller) rejects the null hypothesis that states that the pair of answers being 
compared are not related (i.e., their empirical correlation coefficient is not 
significantly different from zero). Then, the correlation coefficients for each pair 
of answers (with p-value<0.01) were computed, selecting those pairs with 
correlation coefficients closer to -1 or 1 (values close to -1 indicate negative 
correlations and values close to 1 indicate positive correlations; coefficients 
close to 0 express no correlation between the variables tested). For the 
particular case of the database used for this analysis, all the correlation 
coefficients resulted positive. Table 23 enlists the stronger correlations (larger 
than 0.3) found after the analysis, and the description between such 
correlations is explained below:  
 The stronger values were between Q 30 (guidelines), Q 31 (online 
lessons), Q 32 (webinars). This result indicated that the vast majority of the 
participants require/want/need the training listed in Q 30, 31 and 32. 
 Q 9 (identification of critical functions) was positively correlated with Q 10 
(prioritisation of critical functions).  
 Q 13. (identify vulnerable categories) was positively correlated with Q 15. 
(identification of the mitigation for short and long warnings).  
 Q 19. (Guidance about good practices) was positively correlated with Q 21 
(Guidance on what to do according to the possible time intervals), 
highlighting organisations that needed guidance, either related to general 
and specific information.  
 Q 25. (received enough training) was positively correlated with Q 26. 
(implications of EEW).  
 Q7 (developed specific plans or procedures) was positively correlated with 
both Q10 (prioritisation of critical functions) and Q 11 (identification of 
responsibilities). This confirms and reinforces the rationale already 
proposed for the relation between Q 9 and Q 10. 
 Q 10. (prioritised of critical functions) was positively correlated with Q 17 
(impact of false alerts).  
 A strong correlation was found between Q 9 (identification of critical 
functions) and Q17 (false alerts as sources of disruptions).  
 The training options had strong values that were correlated among each 
others (Q 27-31). 
 The development of specific plans or procedures to undertake in case of 
EEW (Q 7) was strongly correlated with many other variables.  
 Q 12 (awareness of the official institutions) was also positively correlated 
with Q30 (Participation to training session and workshops).  
 Finally, there is a strong correlation between Q 11 (identification of internal 
responsibilities) and Q 16 (beta testing in organisations). 
Surprisingly, there was not any correlation between gender and education that 
often have some influence on levels of risk perceptions. Moreover, no 
correlations were found between the size of the organisations, while we may 
have argued that larger organisations had higher maturity levels. Affiliation 
categories were also not significant, while we were expecting some differences 
between sectors, but in this case, they may have simply been invisible by the 
fragmentation of the categories included in the analysis. Further 
considerations derived by the correlations will support the discussion section 
of this chapter. 
Table 23. Stronger correlations among the answers of the questionnaire. The correlations were 
selected only if p-value<0.01, and the correlation coefficient was larger than 0.3. 
#Q #Q p-value 
Correlation 
Coefficient 
30 31 0.0000 0.754 
31 32 0.0000 0.750 
9 10 0.0000 0.692 
13 15 0.0000 0.645 
19 21 0.0000 0.606 
25 26 0.0000 0.594 
7 10 0.0000 0.553 
7 11 0.0000 0.549 
10 17 0.0000 0.494 
9 17 0.0003 0.43 
27 31 0.0010 0.394 
12 30 0.0017 0.376 
11 16 0.0079 0.322 
7.6 Discussion 
The analysis of the results validated that organisations are aware of the EEW 
system. However, they have a limited integration in OR, providing new insights 
for understanding the existing gaps and needs in EEW practices. In line with 
what was expected, the analysis showed that organisations in Mexico City 
were generally aware of the EEW system and considered it a handy tool. 
However, this was associated with low-to-medium levels of resilience maturity 
following the benchmarking scale proposed by Pescaroli et al. (2020), and the 
need of improvements in how warnings are translated in practices of business 
continuity. The general perceptions of EEW reported in the questionnaires and 
interviews reflect the idea that this tool, when available, can play an essential 
role in ensuring effective disaster response. However, higher maturity levels 
are dependent both on the development of the technical tools (seismological 
algorithms, decision-support systems, etc.) and its access/coverage to all 
community and stakeholders groups, as suggested for example in the case of 
multi-hazard early warnings in the resilience scorecards for cities (UNISDR, 
2017). The analysis also verified that some answers to the questionnaires 
were entirely wrong. It is argued that specific organisations may have started 
a process of integration between the operational practices and the EEW, but, 
due to different causes, such as lack of adequate training, they may have 
proceeded unintentionally in the wrong direction. This point is supported by 
the high number of answers in the responses indicating that respondents find 
all the measures listed in the previous section as possible points for 
improvements. 
The data obtained defines some gaps that can be considered the intersections 
between the field of disaster risk reduction, emergency planning, business 
continuity and organisational resilience. Business continuity and emergency 
management plans are normally perceived as useful by organisations 
representatives, but need to be frequently practised (e.g., Whitman et al., 
2014). The data presented here for Mexico City highlights a tendency of 
organisations to consider the integration between EEW and their operational 
functions but suffering some substantial deficiencies and fragmentation in 
practices associated with their operational context, including some critical 
gaps in policies and training. This is a common problem across all the 
organisation fields that participated in the interviews/questionnaires. Despite 
being a well-established point in the state-of-the-art and in policies, such as 
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Reduction, integrating the technical and 
organisational components is often neglected in the current practices of EEW 
across the world (Allen and Melgar, 2019; Velazquez et al., 2020).  
The next sections analyse three overlapping gaps that emerge when 
considering the data collected in the perspective of OR and business continuity 
(Figure 49). Indeed, a wider reflection can be drawn using literature and 
standards that do not refer specifically to EEW, but includes guidance on the 
general principles and enabling properties for  developing organisational 
resilience as a holistic process, such as the ones proposed by BS65000:2014, 
and  Burnard and Bhamra (2019) .    
Figure 49. Critical gaps in how EEW is translated into organisational resilience in Mexico City 
7.6.1 Accountability, governance, and jurisdiction 
Gaps in Governance, accountability, and jurisdiction include aspects such as 
coordination between the public and the private actors of EEW. For 
organisations, this can be associated with the components of situational 
Governance, 
accountability, and 
liability
Standardisation 
of plan and 
procedures
Training, 
education, and 
exercises
awareness and the levels of a consistent strategy in terms of governance (BS 
65000:2019). However, it refers also to more general components of framing 
organisations in their operational context, including third parties and 
stakeholders (ISO 220301:2019). The interviews showed that the public and 
private EEW systems in Mexico City have complementarities that could be 
exploited for developing a better and more effective service. However, these 
are undermined by the lack of a clear accountability and liability strategy 
related to how the message is issued, disseminated, and how policies are 
implemented. This gap reveals more directly the structural challenges of 
disaster risk reduction (Alexander, 2000), and the gaps of the operational 
capacity of local authorities in Mexico City (Alexander, 2015). However, it can 
also be associated with system dynamics affecting the resilience of individual 
organisations (Burnard and Brahma, 2020). Operational activities should be 
aligned and developed coherently considering aspects such as assets 
management and risk, and collaboration management, to enable both active 
and passive resilience (Burnard and Bhamra, 2019). 
The data evolve the picture about the need for stronger accountability and 
liability policies, also provided by studies such as the ones by Suarez et al. 
(2009) or Alexander (2015). Indeed, there is a need to increase efforts to 
enhance coordination among actors such as the EEW providers and local 
authorities (Civil Protection, for example) (Alexander, 2015; Santos-Reyes, 
2019). There is a clear issue of coverage and in fact, the questionnaires 
pointed out that 39% of the respondents were not registered to the EEW 
service, and another third were not aware of the answer. Similarly, the 
questionnaires highlight a diffused lack of awareness about which official 
institutions release an EEW in Mexico City (Q 12), including a surprising 45% 
of the respondents that thought to know the answer and instead identified the 
wrong institutions. In other words, as suggested in the interviews, there is a 
lack of clear accountability between the public/private components of EEW, 
and this challenges the planning and management assumptions at the 
operational level. This includes practical questions such as the compensation 
in case of false alerts, but also implies the need for a clear definition of who 
has to do what (identification of duties), and how risk is owned both at the 
governmental level, among the management of the private EEW systems, and 
at the level of organisations. Indeed, the definition of interested parties and 
legal and regulatory requirements are among one the first steps needed for 
understanding the organisation and its context for business continuity 
purposes (ISO 22301:2019). Effective governance is essential to encourage 
innovations and investments, while legal and regulatory constraints can act as 
limits of the desirable outcomes and actions of an organisation (BS 
65000:2014). A critical point for all the respondents to the interviews was that 
the population was suffering of widespread lack of trust in political bodies, 
including recurrent challenges such as corruption and management. This 
cannot be considered a surprise. Alexander (2000) defined this as one of the 
existing negative pieces of evidence that could undermine the effectiveness of 
disaster risk reduction strategies, including early warnings. Issues associated 
with inter-agency coordination and the need for a clear strategy for 
disseminating operational procedures may be rooted in how the system itself 
has been structured and how the responsibility for managing it has been 
attributed both within organisations and in the governance domain. The 
Japanese experience on EEW and organisational resilience has highlighted 
further the need to enforce the process of accountability as a whole, both in 
the public and private sector, integrating bottom-up and top-down perspectives 
(Maruya, 2013; Velazquez et al., 2020). In general, the Japanese experience 
showed that: if a local government does not have a business continuity plan, 
there are concerns that companies acting in the area are not evaluated 
properly by the government and it would be a restrictive factor in the diffusion 
of such planning. Therefore, public and private organizations should advance 
simultaneously to strengthen their business continuity ability (Maruya, 2013). 
A better involvement of scientific and academic actors may represent a further 
potential for many interviewees, in line with the suggestions of the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster risk reduction (UNISDR, 2015). 
7.6.2 Standardisation of plans and procedures 
The gaps in standardisation of plans and procedures involve considerations 
on the larger domain of business continuity, and the need of different internal 
and external communication procedures (ISO 22301:2019). This could be 
referred in particular to the needs associated with bringing coherence in terms 
of prioritising and informing operational activities and ensuring business 
continuity (BS 65000:2014; ISO 22301:21019). The qualitative and 
quantitative responses derived a fragmented scenario about how EEW is 
integrated into planning and procedures, with high polarisation between 
responses. In line with the perceptions of the high utility of EEW, most of the 
respondents to the questionnaires undertake some sort of protection actions 
when an EEW alarm is released, but these were inadequate or needed 
updates. The many correlations between Q 7 and other variables confirmed 
the understanding of continuity management as a process that needs to be 
updated and supported by policies. In particular, it was possible to see Q 7 
(development of specific plans or procedures ) being related to Q 8 (Business 
continuity plans-updates), Q 9 (identification of critical functions), Q 10 
(prioritisation of critical functions), and Q 13 (identification of vulnerable 
categories). The answers of Q 9 (identification of critical functions) and Q 10 
(prioritisation of critical functions) provide an interesting outcome as more 
positive values were attributed to the prioritisation of critical functions, that is 
a step that follows and is dependent on how critical functions are identified. 
The rationale of those questions was assessing the steps needed for 
developing a business impact analysis (ISO 22301:2019), which is one of the 
cornerstones of business continuity. In other words, it is likely that a significant 
number of organisations developed the process wrongly, or overplayed their 
own maturity level, as is already visible in the answers collected from the 
questionnaires. This may create some serious problems in how critical risk is 
recognised, as well as in the organisations capacity to adapt to evolving 
conditions (BS65000:2014). The correlations between Q 9 and Q 10 also 
suggest that there could be a lack of awareness of the issues that could be 
rooted if wrong training processes are undertaken. 
Similarly, the correlations between planning and prioritisation of critical 
activities (Q 7, Q 11) may be associated with the implementation of the 
planning process as a whole but this may be simply have been implemented 
wrongly. The interviews help further to define the picture, suggesting the 
possibility that the shortfall may be specific to the implementation phase where 
some generic protocols have been designed without considering the 
implications of EEW, or the understanding of the specific differences between 
business continuity and emergency planning. Better use of drills and exercises 
may also be supporting this process (Blyth, 2009). Indeed, resilience is 
enhanced and achieved through steps such as developing business continuity 
and updated business continuity plans.  Warnings, including EEW, have to 
maintain procedures that include communicating both internally and 
externally, coordinating with stakeholders and other interested parties (ISO 
223019:2019). This aspect can also be referred to the challenges of 
operational emergency planning (Alexander, 2015), and business continuity 
(Blyth, 2009).  
The integration of vulnerable categories remains a neglected topic for the 
organisations interviewed, though this is generally aligned with how this topic 
is integrated into emergency planning at large (Alexander, 2015). However, 
the interesting correlation between Q 13 (identification of vulnerable 
categories) and Q 15 (identification of the possible mitigation actions for short 
and long warnings) supports the idea that the identification of vulnerable 
categories implies a focused action that could be in general associated with 
higher organisational maturity levels and scenarios. Indeed, the 
standardisation of practices and procedures is a critical element to address 
when facing the decisional uncertainties associated with EEW, on which the 
results both confirm and diverge with the existing state-of-the-art. In parallel, 
the qualitative and quantitative data suggest that more information about the 
lead time is urgently needed at least in terms of beta testing. Adding the 
available time to the warning may orient the capacity to identify more effective 
mitigation actions, including those for vulnerable categories. This confirms that 
the perception of organisations on the need for available time is similar to the 
one of the general public, as pointed by Santos-Reyes (2019) and Velazquez 
et al. (2020). According to Blyth (2009), the limited time available implies that 
the initial response to a warning must therefore be well practised and proven 
in order to be effective. However, there are also some differences with the 
existing state-of-the-art. First, the picture that can be derived by both 
interviews and questionnaires suggest that the use of lead time may depend 
on the maturity levels of each organisations. The analysis showed a correlation 
between the identification of internal responsibilities and the option of beta 
testing, suggesting that organisations that could be considered more mature 
could also do a better use of additional information (available lead time). This 
data would confirm and expand what was already noted by Johnson et al. 
(2016): implementation actions have to be targeted to different groups, and 
large companies may have different social and organisational dynamics 
requiring tailoring solutions. Secondly, the majority of the responses had a 
strongly negative perception of false alerts. The correlations between the 
identification of critical function and the perception of false alerts highlights that 
more mature organisations in the resilience scale see clearly false alerts as 
sources of disturbance rather than a potential. This result is divergent from the 
literature that analyses the general population, where it is suggested that the 
tendency to accept and tolerate false alarms where the system is public is 
acceptable and even a chance for additional exercises (Allen et al., 2017, 
2018; Goltz, 2002; Herovic et al., 2019; Reddy, 2019). This is a very relevant 
remark, adopting an organisational and economic perspective because it 
points out the existence of different needs for targeting groups that need to be 
considered for specific strategies and policies, for example in terms of liability 
and training. The correlations between Q 10 (prioritisation of critical functions) 
and Q 17 (impact of false alerts) implies that prioritisation of critical functions 
leads to better awareness on how organisations may be affected economically 
by a false alert. However, if this is done completely or partially wrong, also the 
impact may be misunderstood. 
7.6.3 Training, education and exercises 
Training and education focused on organisations needs, including expertise 
from science and the need for developing different services. This could be 
referred to the need of activating practices for strengthening the organisations 
(BS65000:2014) and has to be framed in a broader collaborative approach 
between the public and private sector (Alexander, 2000; 2015; Blyth 2009). 
There is no doubt that this training, education, and exercising are the pillars of 
building effective business continuity and organisational resilience (Blyth, 
2009), and for developing organisational resilience (Gibson and Tarrant, 
2010). Indeed, practical training and education are essential for enabling the 
flexibility of response (BS 65000:2019). They have to be seen as part of the 
process that organisations have to undertake for creating competencies that 
are needed for minimise disruptions (ISO 22301:2019). By adopting a broader 
perspective on disaster risk reduction, they can act as positive or negative 
feedback loops (Alexander, 2000).  
It is interesting to note that, according to the questionnaires, a strong majority 
of the respondents knew what to do in case of an alert. However, the semi-
structured interviews were less optimistic and suggested to look more carefully 
to the data. The vast majority of respondents to the questionnaires wrongly 
believed in a given time between the issuance of the warning and the arrival 
of the shaking. At the same time, just one third was aware of the existence of 
variability. Similarly, it was already mentioned in the previous sections the 
existence of possible misunderstandings and wrong information about how 
EEW should be integrated in organisational resilience (e.g. Q 9-Q 10, Q 12). 
Additionally, the substantial majority of respondents did not receive enough 
training to understand all the applications of EEW for their organisations. Less 
than one-third of the respondents participated in training sessions on how to 
use EEW efficiently in their organisations, and these were not happening 
frequently nor updated. As argued by Johnson et al. (2016), it is essential that 
the implementation of the EEW system is supported by training strategies and 
practices that are not self-standing, but must be properly explained and 
understood, assuring communication and information sharing between the 
companies and first responders.  
The use of drills and exercises evidenced in the questionnaires seems quite 
frequent, though it could be simply associated to the yearly drill promoted by 
the national government. The semi-structured answers pointed out that may 
be a problem of quality more than quantity, as their use becomes routinely or 
not used adequately to define gaps in practices. However, it is known that a 
proper use of drills and exercise (both simulations, tabletop, and integrated) 
could make the difference for testing planning and strategies (Blyth, 2009; 
Maruya, 2013; Alexander, 2015). The case study may be distinguished then 
by a wrong perception of reaction capacity, associated with the combination 
of inadequate protocols, improper use of drills, and training. The statistical 
correlations show how these could have negatively and positively influenced 
the overall picture. The awareness of official institutions towards EEW (Q 12), 
in which a consistent percentage of the answers was wrong, was correlated 
with participation in training sessions and workshops (Q 30). 
Similarly, higher levels of training received was associated with better self-
awareness about implications of EEW, as expected, considering that less 
training also implies fewer explanations about the implications of EEW for the 
business continuity process. All the responses collected in the study suggest 
a cross-cutting need for new training with priority for Q 30 (guidelines), Q 31 
(online lessons), and Q 32 (webinars), that may highlight the need for 
independent training with more flexibility for learning, structured to reinforce 
and consolidate the existing capacity. This is not a surprise, as Alexander 
(2000) highlighted how training and education are some of the measures that 
could be used to mediate negative feedback loops in disaster risk reduction. 
7.7 Conclusions 
The analysis and discussion defined that integrating EEW into organisational 
resilience, business continuity, and disaster risk reduction is not just a 
technical issue nor cannot be limited to the need for disseminating information. 
Instead, it implies taking actions both on internal and external drivers of 
resilience. The case study suggests taking actions and filling the gaps in three 
critical domains: 1) Governance, accountability and liability; 2) Standardisation 
of plans and procedures; 3) Training and education. These can be considered 
clear overlapping areas between the field of organisational resilience and 
disaster risk reduction, where possible gaps have to be understood in the 
socio-political-operational context of reference (Alexander, 2000, 2015; 
Annarelli and Nonino, 2016; Linnenluecke, 2017; Burnard and Brahma, 2019; 
Pescaroli and Alexander, 2018) 
Although the results must be considered context-depended, the integration of 
standards on business continuity and organisational resilience give the basis 
for further generalisations and replicability on other case studies.  
This study does not pretend to be exhaustive, but it aims to provide a first step 
to fill an existing gap of research on EEW. The author also recognises the 
existence of many limitations, that could be considered the starting point for 
future cross-disciplinary studies in the sector. First, we recognise that some 
correlations between the answers in the dataset were limited by the lack of 
participation of certain infrastructure providers, such as the water provider 
network, or the limited access of small and informal enterprises outside the 
ARISE domain. Secondly, it was decided to focus the analysis on the planning 
components of organisational resilience more than exploring the wider 
dimension of strategic management. Further studies should use additional 
resources to promote a better understanding of how priorities and needs may 
vary across organisational sectors, and, as suggested, depending on the 
maturity level of organisations. This should include a focus on the role of 
leadership in promoting a culture of organisational resilience, that have not 
been analysed at all in the state-of-art. Finally, for a matter of feasibility, this 
study focused on specific aspects of business continuity more than including 
a wider reference to part of the management process, including recovery. We 
would argue that new studies focused on the use of EEW and their applicability 
in complex scenarios should be conducted systematically to understand better 
possible differences between institutional and cultural contexts, supporting the 
creation of safer societies in the future. 
Chapter 8. Conclusions and Final Remarks 
8.1 Main findings 
The present report introduces the final dissertation report of the PhD project 
of the author, Investigating the cross-disciplinary components of earthquake 
early warning systems. 
Chapter 2 describes in detail the basic functioning principle of EEW and 
provides a thorough description of the EEW systems and their relevant state-
of-the-art algorithms currently operating around the world.  
In summary, Earthquake Early Warnings are tools already operating in 
different areas of the world that are heavily affected by earthquakes. The EEW 
algorithms equipped in the seismic networks are capable of providing highly 
accurate real-time estimations of the earthquakes source parameters 
(magnitude and location), and thus reliable estimates of ground motion 
shaking (or Intensity Measures) at different target points of interest, by 
adopting Real-time Ground Motion Prediction Models (e.g., the RTPSHA 
approach proposed by Iervolino et al. 2009). Then, the estimates of IMs 
available before the arrival of the earthquake, allow structural-earthquake 
engineers for the design of applications aiming for the protection and 
assessment of structures in real-time and, if feasible, for the evacuation of 
people from buildings if necessary. The technical review presented in this 
chapter represents strong evidence for the technical and engineering contents 
of this project, the design of two applications that are based in the information 
given by an EEW system. 
Chapter 3 refers to the review of the social-organisational components of 
EEW. This was not a task that was initially thought to be addressed, but as the 
project advanced, it was recognised the high importance of the integration of 
the social, behavioural and organisational domains in an EEW study.  
Chapter 3 breaks down the interactions between the technical and socio-
organisational elements of EEW in the public and private sector, looking at 
four countries where EEW systems are operating, with different levels of 
maturity. Italy, California, Japan and Mexico were the benchmark case-studies 
considered to understand the local context and the technical details of each 
system. To this aim, four categories that describe the challenges for effective 
EEW in the socio-organisational domains were defined to support the 
understanding of the state-of-art for each case: Operational, Political and 
Governance, Social and Behavioural, and Organisational Sphere.  
The analysis of each case-study and their relevant spheres followed an 
extensive and in-depth narrative literature review, that allowed the 
understanding of how each sphere can influence the efficiency and 
effectiveness of EEW in the socio-organisational context. In summary, it has 
been shown that despite the consistent technical progress of EEW across the 
case-studies, some of the cross-disciplinary aspects of the Operational, 
Political, Socio-Behavioural and Organisational spheres remain marginally 
integrated in practice, which lead to conclude that the idea of creating or 
having people-centred EEW systems is far from reality. 
One of the major findings highlighted in this chapter is the lack of a strong 
cohesion between the official bodies that emit EEW and those organisations 
that might be beneficiated by a strong, reliable and accountable EEW. This 
also suggested that further efforts are required to promote legislations and 
policies about accountability and liability procedures, linked to the legal 
concerns triggered by the release of false alarms, for instance. The opens 
questions that emerge from this issue, such as who is accountable for issuing 
alerts?, and What are the legal liabilities of disseminating earthquake 
warnings?, motivated the further investigation of the topic, leading to the 
research and work showed in chapter 6 of this report. 
Chapter number 4 introduced the preliminary results of the first application 
designed. This chapter proposed the use of MR dampers in smart passive 
mode (e.g., by changing their mechanical properties according to some IM of 
the incoming earthquake forecasted by an EEW system) to control just-in-time 
the dynamic characteristics of a structure, to achieve its optimal response 
against seismic forces. The change is supposed to happen only once, just 
before the ground shaking hits the target structure, according to an estimate 
of the anticipated spectral acceleration at the fundamental period of the 
hosting structure. 
A storey-based building-specific loss estimation method was implemented to 
calibrate the MR damper control algorithm, so the losses expected, by setting 
a value of voltage into the damper, are the minimum according to the IM 
estimated by the EEW system. This methodology represents the first of its 
type, where an optimal algorithm for the control of structures is designed in 
terms of expected losses, allowing the combination of different improved 
performance requirements (e.g., deformation, acceleration, etc.), different 
from available studies in literature, where efforts focus only in the optimisation 
of a single engineering demand parameter. 
In order to calibrate the algorithm, a set of 150 unscaled ground motion records 
was used as input for the nonlinear dynamic analysis of a simple three-degree-
of-freedom shear frame fitted with one MR damper connecting the ground and 
first floor; for each ground motion record, the MR damper was fed with a range 
of voltage values (0-2.25 volts), always keeping the input voltage constant for 
the whole duration of the event. For each ground motion input, the value of the 
different Engineering Demand Parameters was recorded (for each voltage) 
and the optimal value of voltage leading to the minimum expected loss was 
computed. 
The results from the analyses proved that, for the simplified structure 
considered, the algorithm derived for the calibration of MR dampers, based on 
the information provided by the EEW system, provides the best response of 
the structure subjected to earthquakes in comparison with traditional structural 
control systems (passive and semi-active).  
Chapter 5 described the procedure followed for the calibration of Engineering 
Demand Parameters Prediction Equations, and their application on Real-Time 
Assessment of Building Response, based on the information provided by an 
EEW system. The new equations represent a change from traditional Intensity 
Measure Prediction equations, given that Intensity Measures, as Peak Ground 
Acceleration, have proven to be poor proxies for the estimation of building 
response and building damage due to earthquakes. The calibration was 
carried out by performing multilinear regressions on a large database 
containing the response of buildings in terms of Interstorey Drift Ratio (IDR) 
and Peak Floor Acceleration (PFA). 
A simplified continuous model, consisting of a combination of a flexural beam 
and a shear beam, was adopted for the computation of Engineering Demand 
Parameters (IDR and PFA), for a broad variety of building typologies. By just 
modifying two parameters (the lateral stiffness ratio,  , and the natural period 
of oscillation of the building, T), different lateral load resisting systems (from 
shear wall systems to moment resisting frames systems) and different height 
of buildings (from low-rise buildings to high-rise buildings) could be simulated. 
45 different structures were modelled, considering three values of   and 15 
natural periods of oscillation.  
Numerical simulations were performed for the 45 structures, subjecting them 
to a set of 589 ground motions recorded in the Italian region. The criteria for 
the selection of the events was as follows: a) minimum magnitude of the event 
equal to 5 Mw, and b) epicentral distances shorter than 200km. At this point, 
the powerful advantages of the continuous model adopted were visible. A total 
of 53,010 analyses were carried out in a considerable short period of time. It 
is important to highlight that fast analyses were necessary as a large size of 
the database was essential for the calibration of the new Building Response 
Prediction Equations.   
The results from the simulations, in terms of IDR and PFA, were collected and 
organised, so multilinear regressions could be performed for each EDP. A 
simplified functional form, proposed for the Italian region, was considered in 
this chapter. The coefficients given by the regression were statistically 
analysed (standard deviations, residuals and p-values) showing reliable 
results. 
Once the equations were derived, for each EDP, a real-time simulation was 
implemented for the Campania region, in Italy. The efficiency of the new 
models was tested for the creation of exceedance probability curves (in terms 
of EDPs) and for the construction of real-time maps (in terms of EDPs, as well). 
The results of the simulation proved that the new proposed equations 
represent a powerful tool for the real-time evaluation of damage in buildings 
due to earthquakes and motivated for a future evolution of the application. 
This chapter represents the first attempt for the application of Engineering 
Demand Prediction Equations for the real-time assessment of buildings, 
conditioned to the estimates given by Earthquake Early Warnings.  
Chapter 7 investigates how EEW can be integrated into practices of 
organisational resilience, business continuity and disaster risk reduction. In 
particular, this chapter explores what information and training are needed by 
the public and the private sector in order to respond and adapt more effectively 
to the dissemination of EEW, improving when possible organisational 
practices. 
A mixed method approach is used to analyse the case study of Mexico City 
(Mexico), an area at high seismic risk due to the combination of high seismic 
hazard, social and physical exposure and vulnerability. The dataset includes 
evidence from 15 semi-structured interviews with representatives of the public 
and private sectors (e.g., schools, governments, industry), together with 78 
valid questionnaires compiled by local organisations, including civil protection, 
education institutions, and enterprises. The structure of the questionnaires and 
interviews has been grounded in the academic state-of-the-art and in 
standards such as the ones by the International Standardisation Organisation. 
The Likert-scale introduced in Chapter 6 is implemented for the development 
of the questionnaires, as a preliminary pilot study in Mexico City showed that 
different available Likert-scales would leave gaps in the responses of all those 
who could answer the questionnaire. The scale proposed in Chapter 6 allows 
for the adaptation of questions and answers to a local context, bringing more 
clarity and insight about all the data collected. 
The results highlight a discrepancy between well-established technical 
methods/algorithms and their integration in organisational resilience, business 
continuity management, and disaster risk reduction. The discussion points out 
gaps in three domains: governance, accountability and liability; 
standardisation of plans and procedures; training and education. The 
conclusions propose new steps for developing new practices of EEW for 
complex scenarios while highlighting open challenges for future researches.  
8.1.1 Final remarks 
This thesis represents the first attempt to assess the potential benefits that 
EEW might incorporate to organisational resilience, supplying researchers and 
practitioners with a framework that can be adapted to different 
cities/regions/countries where EEW are currently available or operational. 
This thesis has presented a wide overview of EEW systems in a technical 
(e.g., seismological and engineering) and social perspectives. What can be 
drawn in general terms is that EEW has the maturity and potential to offer 
reliable warnings to al those who might receive an alarm, but many difficulties 
(exclusive to every city/region/country where the systems operate) exist for the 
accomplishment of their complete/full applications in the socio-organisational 
context.  
This thesis also promotes the, so-far very limited, engineering applicability of 
EEW. Chapter 4 and 5 introduce two novel real-time applications which aim at 
motivating different researchers to invest efforts in this field. The two 
applications presented show the potential that EEW can offer for the activation 
of automatic actions which main goal is the assessment of likely damage 
and/or the mitigation of losses, given the estimates provided by the systems. 
Developing automatic actions based on the estimates provided by EEW 
represent an opportunity for the reduction of economic and human losses in 
those places where lead times do not allow the evacuation or the activation of 
human responses. Even in those areas where lead times are large enough, 
automatic procedures can cover those functions carried by individuals, 
conceding important seconds for the implementation of different protection 
measures by those who receive the alarm.   
In the social spectrum, chapter 3 and 7 provide a clear picture of the social-
organisational barriers that currently avoid the applicability of the potential 
benefits that EEW can bring into the socio-organisational cohort. The work 
contained in these chapters indicate the tools that might be required to improve 
such applicability. The results and recommendation of these chapters might 
be useful for those EEW systems that have advanced technology but have not 
been successful (or have never implemented) at boosting the benefits at the 
socio-organisational level. PRESTo, in Italy, is a good example; the system is 
state-of-the art, even implemented in other countries around the world given 
its reliability, but its implementation in the Italian society has never been put in 
place. Mexico on the other hand has the experience related to EEW for more 
than 30 years, but the lessons learned have not been feedbacked socio-
organisationally.  
One of the main goals of this thesis was to study the interdisciplinarity of EEW, 
from a technical and a social point of view. It is not common to find in the 
academic literature studies on natural hazards that combine the efforts from 
these two fields of expertise. This project has demonstrated that such 
approach is feasible, and that the results offer wider perspectives for a most 
exhaustive comprehension of natural hazards, or EEW in this particular case. 
8.2 Future Work 
8.2.1 Integration of Semi-Active Structural Control with Earthquake Early 
Warnings 
Given that the case-study adopted is very unique and cannot represent the 
behaviour of different configurations and types of buildings, future work in this 
matter aims to extend the study modifying the numerical model into a Single 
Degree of Freedom System that can account for different heights and different 
levels of non-linearity. By doing this, the expectation is to obtain different 
responses of the structure, according to the value of damping added to the 
structure by the MR damper (by increasing or decreasing the electrical current 
induced to the damper), and given the level of non-linearity adopted in the 
building. The model of the SDOF with different values of natural period of 
oscillation and different levels of non-linearity has been already designed and 
implemented by different authors (e.g., Karavasilis and Seo, 2011). In addition, 
the scaled MR damper adopted for the chapter can be replaced for a full-scale 
MR damper (e.g., Cha et al., 2014), able to create damping forces up to 200kN, 
different from the maximum damping able in the small MR damper, 3kN. 
8.2.2 Real-Time Assessment of Building Response for Earthquake Early 
Warning Applications 
For the second application described in the chapter, the following 
improvements are proposed for further developments: 
Adopting an inelastic simplified model for the numerical simulations. The 
model used for the computation of EDPs carries out elastic analyses, which 
provides conservative responses of the building in terms of IDR or PFA. By 
adding flexural springs and shear springs in the correspondent beams (e.g., 
Xiong et al., 2016), non-linear behaviours of the structure can be computed 
(Figure 50). 
Figure 50. Non-linear Simplified Model proposed by Xiong et al. (2016). 
The creation of 3 Dimensions EDPs maps, rather than 2D (chapter 5.6), where 
the expected EDP is estimated not only for a specific area of interest, but for 
every single storey within a selected building stock (Figure 51). These maps 
could help for the implementation of safety measures in buildings. For 
instance, warnings to occupants based on human comfort or control of 
elevators in tall buildings, are applications that can be designed based on the 
predictions of PFA. The maps could also be used after the event for the 
classification of damage within each structure, labelling the in-safety of each 
building according to the damage computed in the 3D map. 
Figure 51. 3D map of building damage 
8.2.3 Integrating earthquake early warnings into business continuity and 
organisational resilience: lessons learned from Mexico City. 
First of all, as indicated in Chapter 7, the number of organisations interviewed 
and that answered the questionnaire represent a limited sample of Mexico 
City, and Mexico as a whole. Perhaps more needs and requests might appear 
if more local organisations in Mexico City provide their thoughts and 
perspectives about how to incorporate and use EEW for business continuity 
practices and operational resilience. In addition, Mexico City is not the only 
region in the country that receives EEW; performing the same study in any of 
the other six states that receive alarms in Mexico is an attractive research 
effort that might yield different answers, or reinforce the findings and results of 
Chapter 7. 
It is then clear that a potential work that can be done is the application of the 
approach proposed in Chapter 7 to other countries where EEW is currently 
available or operational. The different socio-organisational arrangements of 
other nations definitely would show different results and new knowledge that 
can work as feedback for other systems around the world to improve business 
continuity and operational resilience. 
9. Publications and awards 
Publications 
Velazquez, O., Galasso, C., and Duffour, P. (2017). A loss-based control 
algorithm for magnetorheological dampers combined with earthquake early 
warning. 16 World Conference on Earthquake Engineering  Proceedings. 
Velazquez, O., Pescaroli, G., and Galasso, C. (2020). A review of the 
technical and socio-organisational components of earthquake early warning 
systems. Frontiers in Earth Science 8 (2020): 445. 
Pescaroli, G., Velazquez, O., Alcantara-Ayala, I., Galasso, C., Kostkova, P., 
Alexander, D. (2020). A Likert scale-based model for benchmarking 
operational capacity, organizational resilience, and disaster risk reduction. 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Science. 
Salas, C., Ps, O., Sanchez, G., Velez, J., Todd, N., Velazquez, O., Alvarez-
Monjaras., M. (2020). Toolkit de Estrategias de Afrontamiento (in Spanish) [In 
press]. Publicaciones Universidad Iberoamericana.  
Awards 
2015-19. Scholarship awarded by CONACYT-Mexico for PhD studies. 
2015. Student/Young award granted by the ECGS & ESC/EAEE Joint 
Workshop: Earthquake and Induced Multi-Risk Early Warning and Rapid 
Response, Luxembourg 2015. 
2016. Grant awarded by the Fukushima Prefecture Government, for a Fieldtrip 
to the area affected by the Fukushima- Daiichi nuclear power plant incident in 
the Fukushima Prefecture, on the 5th Anniversary of the Tohoku Earthquake.  
2017. UCL Grand Challenges Doctoral Students' Small Grants Scheme. 
Fieldtrip to the area affected by the 2017 Amatrice sequence. Central Italy. 
2019-20. EEFIT Research Grant. Integrating socio-behavioral and technical 
components of Earthquake Early Warnings. Caste-study, Mexico City. 
2019-20. British Academy  Leverhulme Small Research Grant. Integrating 
socio-behavioral and technical components of Earthquake Early Warnings. 
Caste-study, Mexico City. 
2019. PhD student Annual Prize for outstanding contribution to the UCL 
Institute for Risk and Disaster Reduction. 
Outreach 
2017. Live interview on Mexican Television (RT) to discuss the performance 
of the Mexican Earthquake Early Warning System during the September 2017 
Earthquakes. 
10. Appendix 1 
Appendix #1 contains the values of the coefficients obtained after performing 
the nonlinear regression analysis in Chapter 5. 3 tables for each EDP (MIDR, 
IDR, and PFA) have been included for the reader, corresponding to the 3 
values of   used in the study (0.1, 8, and 30). For simplicity, only 10 values 
of z (the normalised height of the structure) have been included for the tables 
of IDR and PFA (the rest of the values can be provided upon request). 
Table 24, Table 25, and Table 26 summarise the coefficients obtained for 
MIDR.  
Table 24. Coefficients for Maximum Interstorey Drift Ratio, =0.1 ( is the total standard deviation) 
Period 
b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6  
0.1 -2.030 0.578 -2.113 -14.433 0.275 0.214 0.408 
0.2 -2.130 0.617 -2.014 -16.024 0.305 0.242 0.406 
0.3 -2.758 0.658 -1.781 -13.815 0.315 0.271 0.378 
0.4 -3.177 0.698 -1.659 -13.329 0.306 0.274 0.373 
0.5 -3.522 0.735 -1.584 -13.112 0.324 0.261 0.371 
0.75 -4.246 0.812 -1.452 -11.376 0.383 0.269 0.368 
1 -4.656 0.855 -1.399 -10.751 0.417 0.291 0.365 
1.5 -5.154 0.897 -1.306 -10.384 0.413 0.302 0.372 
2 -5.453 0.917 -1.257 -9.338 0.390 0.295 0.369 
2.5 -5.521 0.909 -1.233 -9.288 0.366 0.294 0.364 
3 -5.615 0.918 -1.238 -9.717 0.367 0.278 0.364 
3.5 -5.690 0.927 -1.254 -10.082 0.366 0.274 0.362 
4 -5.745 0.929 -1.260 -10.018 0.359 0.270 0.358 
4.5 -5.808 0.936 -1.272 -10.069 0.360 0.260 0.359 
5 -5.894 0.946 -1.281 -9.988 0.369 0.265 0.360 
Table 25. Coefficients for Maximum Interstorey Drift Ratio, =8 ( is the total standard deviation) 
Period 
b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6  
0.1 -2.125 0.582 -2.079 -14.189 0.280 0.216 0.403 
0.2 -2.214 0.620 -1.988 -15.694 0.306 0.241 0.400 
0.3 -2.761 0.652 -1.769 -13.530 0.316 0.264 0.370 
0.4 -3.103 0.689 -1.679 -13.212 0.325 0.266 0.364 
0.5 -3.381 0.721 -1.619 -13.034 0.338 0.256 0.367 
0.75 -4.032 0.785 -1.483 -11.452 0.378 0.274 0.364 
1 -4.444 0.823 -1.410 -10.188 0.399 0.295 0.364 
1.5 -4.891 0.866 -1.336 -10.639 0.403 0.300 0.367 
2 -5.199 0.896 -1.303 -9.800 0.392 0.292 0.369 
2.5 -5.332 0.902 -1.286 -9.550 0.390 0.289 0.369 
3 -5.450 0.908 -1.274 -9.692 0.410 0.296 0.373 
3.5 -5.513 0.914 -1.287 -10.189 0.404 0.297 0.374 
4 -5.588 0.916 -1.274 -10.061 0.389 0.294 0.371 
4.5 -5.762 0.933 -1.258 -9.483 0.391 0.292 0.372 
5 -5.906 0.952 -1.260 -9.454 0.381 0.287 0.373 
Table 26. Coefficients for Maximum Interstorey Drift Ratio, =30 ( is the total standard deviation) 
Period 
b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6  
0.1 -2.117 0.586 -2.063 -14.093 0.283 0.218 0.400 
0.2 -2.208 0.622 -1.970 -15.435 0.306 0.242 0.398 
0.3 -2.752 0.653 -1.755 -13.347 0.318 0.265 0.372 
0.4 -3.107 0.694 -1.669 -13.086 0.326 0.270 0.367 
0.5 -3.397 0.724 -1.598 -12.883 0.332 0.258 0.369 
0.75 -4.139 0.803 -1.465 -11.237 0.381 0.272 0.366 
1 -4.494 0.835 -1.402 -10.586 0.406 0.300 0.362 
1.5 -5.034 0.887 -1.315 -10.411 0.407 0.300 0.368 
2 -5.344 0.916 -1.283 -9.652 0.392 0.291 0.370 
2.5 -5.516 0.922 -1.249 -9.357 0.390 0.297 0.370 
3 -5.591 0.924 -1.246 -9.964 0.391 0.291 0.372 
3.5 -5.722 0.937 -1.245 -10.094 0.392 0.289 0.374 
4 -5.845 0.948 -1.241 -9.790 0.382 0.286 0.373 
4.5 -5.962 0.960 -1.242 -9.800 0.375 0.283 0.376 
5 -6.014 0.964 -1.249 -10.045 0.371 0.282 0.372 
Table 27, Table 28, and Table 29 show the coefficients computed for IDR. 10 
values of z have been selected for illustrative purposes. 
Table 27. Coefficients for Interstorey Drift Ratio, =0.1 ( is the total standard deviation) 
 Period 
b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6  
z=0.05 
0.1 -3.000 0.583 -2.081 -14.233 0.280 0.216 0.403 
0.2 -3.118 0.623 -1.984 -15.737 0.308 0.243 0.402 
0.3 -3.750 0.667 -1.762 -13.660 0.314 0.273 0.377 
0.4 -4.154 0.703 -1.637 -12.996 0.299 0.271 0.372 
0.5 -4.478 0.739 -1.569 -12.888 0.320 0.260 0.371 
0.75 -5.118 0.807 -1.455 -11.140 0.391 0.266 0.360 
1 -5.438 0.841 -1.418 -10.599 0.428 0.291 0.360 
1.5 -5.794 0.866 -1.340 -10.142 0.405 0.296 0.361 
2 -6.000 0.875 -1.299 -9.183 0.376 0.290 0.352 
2.5 -5.944 0.856 -1.293 -9.412 0.358 0.284 0.348 
3 -5.955 0.855 -1.305 -9.720 0.351 0.271 0.353 
3.5 -5.979 0.863 -1.340 -10.564 0.352 0.274 0.351 
4 -6.011 0.867 -1.351 -10.512 0.348 0.271 0.347 
4.5 -6.060 0.875 -1.367 -10.805 0.357 0.263 0.345 
5 -6.103 0.877 -1.372 -10.270 0.359 0.264 0.343 
z=0.10 
0.1 -2.709 0.582 -2.084 -14.250 0.279 0.216 0.404 
0.2 -2.826 0.623 -1.987 -15.765 0.308 0.243 0.402 
0.3 -3.460 0.666 -1.764 -13.696 0.314 0.273 0.378 
0.4 -3.873 0.704 -1.638 -13.053 0.300 0.271 0.373 
0.5 -4.204 0.740 -1.569 -12.958 0.320 0.261 0.372 
0.75 -4.871 0.811 -1.450 -11.205 0.389 0.266 0.363 
1 -5.209 0.847 -1.410 -10.660 0.429 0.292 0.362 
1.5 -5.605 0.876 -1.327 -10.185 0.410 0.297 0.364 
2 -5.844 0.889 -1.281 -9.161 0.377 0.291 0.356 
2.5 -5.808 0.870 -1.272 -9.374 0.360 0.287 0.351 
3 -5.835 0.871 -1.282 -9.720 0.353 0.274 0.355 
3.5 -5.874 0.880 -1.314 -10.548 0.354 0.275 0.353 
4 -5.914 0.884 -1.323 -10.404 0.346 0.271 0.351 
4.5 -5.969 0.892 -1.339 -10.755 0.354 0.263 0.349 
5 -6.017 0.895 -1.345 -10.245 0.357 0.263 0.347 
z=0.20 
0.1 -2.430 0.581 -2.090 -14.289 0.278 0.216 0.405 
0.2 -2.543 0.622 -1.993 -15.827 0.307 0.243 0.403 
0.3 -3.182 0.666 -1.768 -13.766 0.315 0.273 0.378 
0.4 -3.610 0.705 -1.640 -13.176 0.300 0.274 0.375 
0.5 -3.961 0.744 -1.567 -13.070 0.319 0.263 0.374 
0.75 -4.684 0.821 -1.438 -11.340 0.383 0.267 0.369 
1 -5.068 0.861 -1.393 -10.838 0.428 0.293 0.366 
1.5 -5.551 0.900 -1.301 -10.420 0.419 0.298 0.370 
2 -5.868 0.921 -1.245 -9.221 0.382 0.291 0.365 
2.5 -5.881 0.906 -1.226 -9.429 0.359 0.291 0.361 
3 -5.951 0.909 -1.230 -9.772 0.356 0.280 0.362 
3.5 -6.017 0.920 -1.259 -10.515 0.354 0.275 0.361 
4 -6.067 0.922 -1.263 -10.276 0.347 0.270 0.359 
4.5 -6.133 0.932 -1.280 -10.610 0.346 0.265 0.360 
5 -6.191 0.937 -1.289 -10.331 0.348 0.261 0.358 
z=0.30 
0.1 -2.278 0.580 -2.096 -14.327 0.277 0.215 0.405 
0.2 -2.389 0.621 -1.998 -15.883 0.307 0.243 0.404 
0.3 -3.031 0.664 -1.771 -13.815 0.316 0.274 0.378 
0.4 -3.472 0.706 -1.642 -13.295 0.301 0.276 0.376 
0.5 -3.842 0.747 -1.567 -13.182 0.320 0.265 0.376 
0.75 -4.632 0.831 -1.427 -11.468 0.375 0.267 0.377 
1 -5.064 0.877 -1.376 -11.096 0.424 0.293 0.374 
1.5 -5.644 0.926 -1.271 -10.620 0.427 0.298 0.379 
2 -6.011 0.954 -1.213 -9.411 0.388 0.287 0.376 
2.5 -6.098 0.944 -1.184 -9.345 0.366 0.291 0.372 
3 -6.183 0.947 -1.182 -9.715 0.361 0.282 0.370 
3.5 -6.233 0.951 -1.202 -10.202 0.355 0.271 0.368 
4 -6.280 0.951 -1.209 -10.072 0.351 0.267 0.363 
4.5 -6.324 0.954 -1.225 -10.134 0.353 0.266 0.362 
5 -6.361 0.960 -1.250 -10.202 0.352 0.262 0.359 
z=0.40 
0.1 -2.182 0.579 -2.101 -14.360 0.277 0.215 0.406 
0.2 -2.291 0.620 -2.003 -15.929 0.306 0.242 0.404 
0.3 -2.934 0.663 -1.773 -13.827 0.316 0.273 0.379 
0.4 -3.382 0.706 -1.645 -13.394 0.303 0.277 0.377 
0.5 -3.769 0.749 -1.568 -13.265 0.321 0.267 0.378 
0.75 -4.616 0.841 -1.421 -11.619 0.367 0.269 0.386 
1 -5.088 0.891 -1.362 -11.437 0.412 0.294 0.384 
1.5 -5.746 0.949 -1.248 -10.898 0.429 0.299 0.390 
2 -6.139 0.977 -1.185 -9.819 0.397 0.283 0.385 
2.5 -6.290 0.977 -1.157 -9.403 0.382 0.287 0.380 
3 -6.424 0.985 -1.154 -9.273 0.370 0.279 0.378 
3.5 -6.421 0.975 -1.163 -9.602 0.363 0.268 0.377 
4 -6.423 0.965 -1.169 -9.718 0.356 0.271 0.371 
4.5 -6.450 0.964 -1.184 -9.778 0.346 0.266 0.365 
5 -6.489 0.970 -1.209 -9.590 0.339 0.258 0.362 
z=0.50 
0.1 -2.118 0.579 -2.105 -14.386 0.276 0.215 0.407 
0.2 -2.224 0.619 -2.007 -15.967 0.306 0.242 0.405 
0.3 -2.865 0.662 -1.776 -13.825 0.316 0.273 0.378 
0.4 -3.310 0.705 -1.649 -13.432 0.304 0.277 0.377 
0.5 -3.696 0.748 -1.572 -13.326 0.323 0.266 0.377 
0.75 -4.556 0.842 -1.425 -11.663 0.369 0.271 0.387 
1 -5.056 0.895 -1.362 -11.420 0.403 0.295 0.390 
1.5 -5.736 0.956 -1.246 -11.087 0.423 0.301 0.395 
2 -6.151 0.987 -1.181 -9.890 0.397 0.285 0.389 
2.5 -6.305 0.985 -1.149 -9.382 0.386 0.289 0.385 
3 -6.520 1.007 -1.147 -9.257 0.382 0.273 0.385 
3.5 -6.500 0.994 -1.160 -9.612 0.370 0.268 0.385 
4 -6.506 0.984 -1.163 -9.448 0.354 0.261 0.378 
4.5 -6.541 0.984 -1.178 -9.618 0.341 0.262 0.375 
5 -6.589 0.985 -1.187 -9.471 0.335 0.259 0.371 
z=0.60 
0.1 -2.076 0.578 -2.109 -14.406 0.275 0.214 0.407 
0.2 -2.180 0.618 -2.010 -15.993 0.306 0.242 0.405 
0.3 -2.816 0.660 -1.778 -13.825 0.316 0.272 0.378 
0.4 -3.252 0.702 -1.653 -13.403 0.305 0.276 0.375 
0.5 -3.622 0.743 -1.577 -13.266 0.324 0.265 0.375 
0.75 -4.437 0.831 -1.433 -11.523 0.376 0.270 0.379 
1 -4.917 0.881 -1.371 -11.021 0.411 0.294 0.379 
1.5 -5.569 0.941 -1.262 -10.706 0.417 0.302 0.390 
2 -5.964 0.972 -1.204 -9.634 0.390 0.292 0.386 
2.5 -6.086 0.967 -1.172 -9.433 0.376 0.296 0.380 
3 -6.269 0.984 -1.167 -9.595 0.377 0.282 0.380 
3.5 -6.330 0.986 -1.180 -10.104 0.375 0.272 0.377 
4 -6.372 0.984 -1.183 -10.011 0.364 0.262 0.373 
4.5 -6.411 0.986 -1.202 -10.217 0.357 0.259 0.372 
5 -6.497 0.994 -1.213 -10.059 0.359 0.260 0.372 
z=0.70 
0.1 -2.050 0.578 -2.111 -14.420 0.275 0.214 0.408 
0.2 -2.152 0.618 -2.012 -16.011 0.305 0.242 0.405 
0.3 -2.784 0.659 -1.780 -13.820 0.316 0.272 0.378 
0.4 -3.212 0.700 -1.656 -13.366 0.306 0.275 0.374 
0.5 -3.569 0.739 -1.581 -13.189 0.324 0.263 0.373 
0.75 -4.338 0.821 -1.442 -11.447 0.380 0.269 0.373 
1 -4.786 0.868 -1.384 -10.851 0.416 0.293 0.371 
1.5 -5.377 0.921 -1.282 -10.534 0.416 0.304 0.381 
2 -5.752 0.951 -1.228 -9.498 0.388 0.296 0.380 
2.5 -5.890 0.948 -1.188 -9.323 0.363 0.301 0.379 
3 -6.033 0.961 -1.188 -9.885 0.369 0.287 0.378 
3.5 -6.144 0.974 -1.202 -10.430 0.367 0.275 0.378 
4 -6.209 0.977 -1.206 -10.465 0.358 0.266 0.375 
4.5 -6.284 0.984 -1.221 -10.561 0.358 0.258 0.375 
5 -6.387 0.995 -1.227 -10.576 0.363 0.260 0.375 
z=0.80 
0.1 -2.036 0.578 -2.112 -14.429 0.275 0.214 0.408 
0.2 -2.137 0.618 -2.013 -16.020 0.305 0.242 0.405 
0.3 -2.766 0.658 -1.781 -13.817 0.315 0.271 0.378 
0.4 -3.188 0.698 -1.658 -13.342 0.306 0.274 0.374 
0.5 -3.538 0.736 -1.583 -13.139 0.324 0.262 0.372 
0.75 -4.277 0.815 -1.449 -11.403 0.382 0.269 0.369 
1 -4.701 0.860 -1.394 -10.784 0.417 0.292 0.367 
1.5 -5.233 0.905 -1.297 -10.447 0.414 0.303 0.375 
2 -5.566 0.930 -1.246 -9.392 0.390 0.296 0.373 
2.5 -5.665 0.925 -1.215 -9.299 0.365 0.298 0.370 
3 -5.794 0.936 -1.215 -9.742 0.367 0.281 0.370 
3.5 -5.894 0.949 -1.230 -10.244 0.365 0.276 0.370 
4 -5.973 0.955 -1.236 -10.277 0.356 0.270 0.369 
4.5 -6.057 0.965 -1.251 -10.422 0.355 0.262 0.372 
5 -6.164 0.977 -1.256 -10.387 0.361 0.265 0.374 
z=0.90 
0.1 -2.031 0.578 -2.113 -14.432 0.275 0.214 0.408 
0.2 -2.131 0.617 -2.014 -16.024 0.305 0.242 0.406 
0.3 -2.759 0.658 -1.781 -13.816 0.315 0.271 0.378 
0.4 -3.178 0.698 -1.658 -13.331 0.306 0.274 0.374 
0.5 -3.524 0.735 -1.584 -13.115 0.324 0.261 0.371 
0.75 -4.250 0.812 -1.452 -11.380 0.383 0.269 0.368 
1 -4.663 0.856 -1.399 -10.756 0.417 0.291 0.365 
1.5 -5.166 0.898 -1.304 -10.397 0.414 0.302 0.372 
2 -5.470 0.919 -1.255 -9.347 0.390 0.295 0.369 
2.5 -5.543 0.912 -1.230 -9.288 0.366 0.295 0.365 
3 -5.644 0.921 -1.235 -9.719 0.367 0.278 0.365 
3.5 -5.723 0.930 -1.250 -10.106 0.366 0.274 0.363 
4 -5.784 0.934 -1.255 -10.055 0.358 0.270 0.360 
4.5 -5.852 0.941 -1.267 -10.114 0.359 0.260 0.361 
5 -5.943 0.952 -1.276 -10.061 0.368 0.265 0.363 
z=1.00 
0.1 -2.030 0.578 -2.113 -14.433 0.275 0.214 0.408 
0.2 -2.130 0.617 -2.014 -16.024 0.305 0.242 0.406 
0.3 -2.758 0.658 -1.781 -13.815 0.315 0.271 0.378 
0.4 -3.177 0.698 -1.659 -13.329 0.306 0.274 0.373 
0.5 -3.522 0.735 -1.584 -13.112 0.324 0.261 0.371 
0.75 -4.246 0.812 -1.452 -11.376 0.383 0.269 0.368 
1 -4.656 0.855 -1.399 -10.751 0.417 0.291 0.365 
1.5 -5.154 0.897 -1.306 -10.384 0.413 0.302 0.372 
2 -5.453 0.917 -1.257 -9.338 0.390 0.295 0.369 
2.5 -5.521 0.909 -1.233 -9.288 0.366 0.294 0.364 
3 -5.615 0.918 -1.238 -9.717 0.367 0.278 0.364 
3.5 -5.690 0.927 -1.254 -10.082 0.366 0.274 0.362 
4 -5.745 0.929 -1.260 -10.018 0.359 0.270 0.358 
4.5 -5.808 0.936 -1.272 -10.069 0.360 0.260 0.359 
5 -5.894 0.946 -1.281 -9.988 0.369 0.265 0.360 
Table 28. Coefficients for Interstorey Drift Ratio, =8 ( is the total standard deviation) 
 Period 
b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6  
z=0.05 
0.1 -2.572 0.588 -2.050 -14.006 0.285 0.219 0.398 
0.2 -2.665 0.624 -1.960 -15.324 0.305 0.241 0.395 
0.3 -3.183 0.655 -1.759 -13.344 0.310 0.263 0.367 
0.4 -3.505 0.691 -1.673 -12.867 0.325 0.262 0.362 
0.5 -3.773 0.722 -1.614 -12.725 0.336 0.251 0.367 
0.75 -4.410 0.787 -1.489 -11.613 0.371 0.270 0.360 
1 -4.817 0.826 -1.419 -10.364 0.399 0.292 0.361 
1.5 -5.236 0.862 -1.339 -10.730 0.396 0.301 0.359 
2 -5.544 0.894 -1.308 -9.875 0.387 0.282 0.360 
2.5 -5.674 0.899 -1.287 -9.691 0.381 0.280 0.357 
3 -5.746 0.898 -1.280 -10.041 0.399 0.286 0.357 
3.5 -5.769 0.898 -1.293 -10.494 0.403 0.292 0.361 
4 -5.848 0.900 -1.279 -10.037 0.386 0.286 0.359 
4.5 -5.960 0.907 -1.262 -9.824 0.383 0.288 0.357 
5 -6.103 0.926 -1.261 -9.630 0.377 0.280 0.354 
z=0.10 
0.1 -2.346 0.587 -2.055 -14.036 0.284 0.218 0.399 
0.2 -2.440 0.623 -1.964 -15.380 0.305 0.241 0.396 
0.3 -2.968 0.656 -1.760 -13.374 0.309 0.263 0.368 
0.4 -3.297 0.691 -1.672 -12.919 0.325 0.263 0.362 
0.5 -3.575 0.724 -1.611 -12.754 0.335 0.251 0.367 
0.75 -4.231 0.791 -1.483 -11.615 0.371 0.270 0.362 
1 -4.650 0.831 -1.414 -10.460 0.399 0.294 0.364 
1.5 -5.110 0.872 -1.326 -10.779 0.396 0.303 0.363 
2 -5.468 0.910 -1.290 -9.957 0.385 0.284 0.366 
2.5 -5.627 0.918 -1.269 -9.807 0.381 0.283 0.364 
3 -5.735 0.921 -1.256 -10.154 0.398 0.288 0.366 
3.5 -5.772 0.921 -1.267 -10.659 0.400 0.292 0.369 
4 -5.872 0.926 -1.252 -10.168 0.386 0.285 0.368 
4.5 -6.004 0.934 -1.229 -9.855 0.384 0.287 0.366 
5 -6.155 0.953 -1.227 -9.682 0.376 0.280 0.364 
z=0.20 
0.1 -2.175 0.584 -2.068 -14.125 0.282 0.217 0.401 
0.2 -2.272 0.622 -1.976 -15.556 0.305 0.241 0.398 
0.3 -2.834 0.657 -1.762 -13.476 0.308 0.264 0.370 
0.4 -3.176 0.693 -1.668 -13.066 0.322 0.265 0.364 
0.5 -3.490 0.729 -1.601 -12.787 0.334 0.254 0.369 
0.75 -4.184 0.801 -1.469 -11.611 0.370 0.270 0.367 
1 -4.618 0.843 -1.402 -10.681 0.401 0.299 0.369 
1.5 -5.156 0.890 -1.297 -10.588 0.400 0.304 0.370 
2 -5.536 0.932 -1.265 -10.232 0.382 0.289 0.371 
2.5 -5.725 0.943 -1.242 -9.676 0.380 0.284 0.371 
3 -5.855 0.949 -1.228 -10.068 0.400 0.290 0.374 
3.5 -5.916 0.951 -1.236 -10.615 0.396 0.290 0.378 
4 -6.038 0.957 -1.217 -10.207 0.388 0.282 0.379 
4.5 -6.206 0.972 -1.200 -9.649 0.382 0.282 0.376 
5 -6.331 0.985 -1.201 -9.581 0.374 0.282 0.377 
z=0.30 
0.1 -2.112 0.582 -2.085 -14.244 0.279 0.216 0.404 
0.2 -2.217 0.622 -1.991 -15.779 0.306 0.241 0.401 
0.3 -2.822 0.660 -1.766 -13.633 0.310 0.268 0.374 
0.4 -3.189 0.697 -1.663 -13.297 0.317 0.270 0.368 
0.5 -3.540 0.736 -1.589 -12.946 0.333 0.258 0.371 
0.75 -4.262 0.813 -1.458 -11.684 0.373 0.269 0.371 
1 -4.700 0.854 -1.386 -10.726 0.405 0.297 0.370 
1.5 -5.228 0.900 -1.292 -10.427 0.414 0.305 0.371 
2 -5.585 0.935 -1.251 -10.027 0.389 0.294 0.370 
2.5 -5.765 0.944 -1.228 -9.665 0.375 0.288 0.369 
3 -5.869 0.948 -1.224 -9.661 0.388 0.288 0.374 
3.5 -5.919 0.947 -1.228 -9.968 0.384 0.290 0.376 
4 -5.973 0.949 -1.231 -10.152 0.375 0.284 0.374 
4.5 -6.127 0.959 -1.207 -9.782 0.372 0.280 0.373 
5 -6.293 0.982 -1.212 -9.755 0.366 0.278 0.374 
z=0.40 
0.1 -2.093 0.579 -2.104 -14.375 0.276 0.215 0.407 
0.2 -2.199 0.619 -2.007 -15.975 0.306 0.242 0.404 
0.3 -2.835 0.661 -1.776 -13.800 0.314 0.271 0.378 
0.4 -3.251 0.701 -1.655 -13.429 0.307 0.275 0.374 
0.5 -3.619 0.742 -1.579 -13.187 0.327 0.263 0.373 
0.75 -4.394 0.825 -1.443 -11.519 0.378 0.269 0.374 
1 -4.843 0.870 -1.375 -10.922 0.408 0.291 0.374 
1.5 -5.393 0.917 -1.281 -10.417 0.425 0.303 0.376 
2 -5.705 0.939 -1.230 -9.365 0.393 0.295 0.375 
2.5 -5.815 0.935 -1.202 -9.337 0.375 0.287 0.368 
3 -5.963 0.952 -1.215 -9.644 0.376 0.282 0.367 
3.5 -6.029 0.955 -1.224 -9.461 0.370 0.276 0.368 
4 -6.030 0.947 -1.227 -9.557 0.361 0.272 0.366 
4.5 -6.065 0.947 -1.235 -9.677 0.358 0.273 0.365 
5 -6.174 0.957 -1.236 -9.670 0.360 0.275 0.366 
z=0.50 
0.1 -2.096 0.575 -2.127 -14.519 0.273 0.213 0.410 
0.2 -2.176 0.613 -2.026 -16.034 0.303 0.240 0.407 
0.3 -2.778 0.649 -1.793 -13.834 0.318 0.269 0.378 
0.4 -3.194 0.691 -1.676 -13.391 0.315 0.272 0.372 
0.5 -3.547 0.731 -1.601 -13.136 0.322 0.258 0.373 
0.75 -4.312 0.810 -1.455 -11.472 0.374 0.272 0.371 
1 -4.773 0.858 -1.388 -10.567 0.399 0.292 0.374 
1.5 -5.385 0.918 -1.295 -10.735 0.411 0.299 0.377 
2 -5.718 0.945 -1.250 -9.807 0.396 0.292 0.377 
2.5 -5.880 0.944 -1.204 -9.241 0.381 0.290 0.375 
3 -6.059 0.959 -1.194 -9.690 0.390 0.291 0.376 
3.5 -6.154 0.969 -1.209 -10.315 0.379 0.283 0.375 
4 -6.236 0.974 -1.208 -10.139 0.362 0.268 0.375 
4.5 -6.370 0.989 -1.214 -9.884 0.359 0.267 0.376 
5 -6.443 0.995 -1.223 -10.084 0.354 0.271 0.377 
z=0.60 
0.1 -2.114 0.571 -2.157 -14.656 0.269 0.212 0.415 
0.2 -2.138 0.602 -2.055 -16.094 0.297 0.235 0.409 
0.3 -2.663 0.629 -1.827 -13.862 0.315 0.262 0.377 
0.4 -3.025 0.670 -1.729 -13.533 0.318 0.264 0.368 
0.5 -3.331 0.706 -1.662 -13.186 0.322 0.252 0.370 
0.75 -4.017 0.772 -1.508 -11.643 0.361 0.272 0.363 
1 -4.455 0.818 -1.440 -10.822 0.382 0.291 0.364 
1.5 -5.023 0.876 -1.346 -10.802 0.399 0.294 0.366 
2 -5.377 0.910 -1.303 -10.007 0.391 0.286 0.370 
2.5 -5.574 0.922 -1.272 -9.863 0.392 0.291 0.371 
3 -5.731 0.929 -1.248 -9.867 0.411 0.299 0.374 
3.5 -5.809 0.936 -1.254 -10.155 0.400 0.297 0.374 
4 -5.929 0.943 -1.237 -10.057 0.385 0.288 0.371 
4.5 -6.050 0.953 -1.225 -9.937 0.377 0.284 0.371 
5 -6.207 0.973 -1.227 -10.046 0.362 0.283 0.370 
z=0.70 
0.1 -2.143 0.565 -2.198 -14.817 0.263 0.210 0.421 
0.2 -2.098 0.589 -2.096 -16.136 0.289 0.229 0.414 
0.3 -2.545 0.610 -1.876 -14.009 0.308 0.253 0.379 
0.4 -2.853 0.648 -1.790 -13.746 0.313 0.254 0.369 
0.5 -3.100 0.680 -1.736 -13.562 0.320 0.245 0.372 
0.75 -3.739 0.741 -1.583 -12.234 0.353 0.270 0.362 
1 -4.199 0.785 -1.488 -10.978 0.360 0.287 0.364 
1.5 -4.764 0.843 -1.386 -11.177 0.381 0.292 0.368 
2 -5.173 0.887 -1.335 -10.411 0.390 0.285 0.371 
2.5 -5.450 0.916 -1.311 -10.430 0.398 0.290 0.374 
3 -5.657 0.930 -1.277 -10.307 0.414 0.300 0.382 
3.5 -5.766 0.938 -1.269 -10.837 0.406 0.304 0.384 
4 -5.940 0.953 -1.248 -10.638 0.402 0.301 0.382 
4.5 -6.118 0.965 -1.216 -9.812 0.395 0.294 0.383 
5 -6.292 0.987 -1.214 -9.830 0.376 0.290 0.382 
z=0.80 
0.1 -2.155 0.556 -2.269 -15.095 0.254 0.208 0.433 
0.2 -2.048 0.574 -2.159 -16.323 0.277 0.223 0.422 
0.3 -2.434 0.592 -1.947 -14.333 0.299 0.245 0.386 
0.4 -2.699 0.626 -1.863 -14.046 0.307 0.245 0.375 
0.5 -2.888 0.654 -1.816 -14.027 0.317 0.239 0.378 
0.75 -3.470 0.709 -1.664 -12.920 0.346 0.265 0.361 
1 -3.939 0.751 -1.549 -11.192 0.346 0.279 0.364 
1.5 -4.508 0.811 -1.440 -11.740 0.361 0.292 0.368 
2 -5.005 0.868 -1.374 -10.798 0.372 0.286 0.377 
2.5 -5.289 0.895 -1.335 -10.610 0.390 0.288 0.377 
3 -5.515 0.917 -1.311 -11.029 0.419 0.303 0.385 
3.5 -5.732 0.940 -1.290 -11.149 0.414 0.299 0.388 
4 -5.926 0.957 -1.262 -10.954 0.414 0.296 0.385 
4.5 -6.117 0.973 -1.237 -10.276 0.414 0.297 0.387 
5 -6.297 0.994 -1.228 -10.195 0.395 0.294 0.391 
z=0.90 
0.1 -1.991 0.537 -2.440 -16.080 0.233 0.202 0.459 
0.2 -1.934 0.555 -2.268 -16.850 0.260 0.215 0.437 
0.3 -2.292 0.572 -2.046 -14.949 0.288 0.236 0.398 
0.4 -2.543 0.605 -1.953 -14.509 0.298 0.237 0.386 
0.5 -2.674 0.627 -1.912 -14.780 0.312 0.235 0.389 
0.75 -3.217 0.676 -1.747 -13.600 0.337 0.260 0.364 
1 -3.669 0.714 -1.620 -11.647 0.338 0.271 0.362 
1.5 -4.164 0.767 -1.515 -12.028 0.361 0.284 0.360 
2 -4.620 0.819 -1.448 -11.000 0.377 0.282 0.366 
2.5 -4.908 0.843 -1.390 -10.323 0.381 0.285 0.367 
3 -5.125 0.863 -1.358 -10.467 0.407 0.298 0.371 
3.5 -5.361 0.893 -1.340 -10.611 0.404 0.303 0.377 
4 -5.499 0.903 -1.314 -10.486 0.396 0.305 0.377 
4.5 -5.674 0.918 -1.287 -9.958 0.399 0.302 0.378 
5 -5.848 0.939 -1.277 -9.837 0.389 0.297 0.381 
z=1.00 
0.1 -1.527 0.506 -2.699 -18.239 0.203 0.194 0.500 
0.2 -1.842 0.544 -2.355 -17.349 0.247 0.210 0.448 
0.3 -2.196 0.560 -2.116 -15.427 0.282 0.231 0.408 
0.4 -2.442 0.591 -2.015 -14.913 0.292 0.233 0.394 
0.5 -2.553 0.612 -1.974 -15.309 0.308 0.234 0.398 
0.75 -3.103 0.659 -1.793 -14.026 0.330 0.257 0.368 
1 -3.565 0.698 -1.656 -11.978 0.332 0.267 0.364 
1.5 -4.044 0.749 -1.549 -12.191 0.357 0.278 0.358 
2 -4.483 0.799 -1.481 -11.219 0.376 0.279 0.362 
2.5 -4.759 0.821 -1.418 -10.329 0.382 0.282 0.362 
3 -4.963 0.840 -1.387 -10.427 0.408 0.294 0.364 
3.5 -5.199 0.869 -1.365 -10.450 0.406 0.302 0.370 
4 -5.313 0.876 -1.340 -10.354 0.395 0.305 0.369 
4.5 -5.480 0.892 -1.317 -9.866 0.394 0.298 0.371 
5 -5.644 0.912 -1.306 -9.723 0.387 0.295 0.374 
Table 29. Coefficients for Interstorey Drift Ratio, =30 ( is the total standard deviation) 
 Period 
b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6  
z=0.05 
0.1 -2.225 0.587 -2.054 -14.042 0.284 0.219 0.399 
0.2 -2.324 0.623 -1.960 -15.309 0.306 0.242 0.397 
0.3 -2.861 0.654 -1.749 -13.242 0.317 0.265 0.371 
0.4 -3.209 0.695 -1.666 -12.988 0.325 0.270 0.366 
0.5 -3.503 0.726 -1.595 -12.854 0.328 0.258 0.369 
0.75 -4.243 0.805 -1.463 -11.196 0.381 0.272 0.366 
1 -4.573 0.833 -1.403 -10.608 0.405 0.299 0.361 
1.5 -5.112 0.887 -1.319 -10.629 0.406 0.300 0.365 
2 -5.397 0.913 -1.289 -9.732 0.391 0.286 0.365 
2.5 -5.547 0.914 -1.252 -9.199 0.388 0.292 0.364 
3 -5.602 0.913 -1.250 -9.844 0.388 0.288 0.367 
3.5 -5.719 0.925 -1.253 -9.956 0.385 0.284 0.367 
4 -5.827 0.935 -1.250 -9.614 0.378 0.287 0.367 
4.5 -5.936 0.943 -1.242 -9.525 0.371 0.286 0.370 
5 -5.966 0.944 -1.253 -9.806 0.366 0.282 0.366 
z=0.10 
0.1 -2.132 0.586 -2.060 -14.078 0.283 0.218 0.400 
0.2 -2.230 0.623 -1.965 -15.380 0.306 0.242 0.398 
0.3 -2.776 0.654 -1.751 -13.283 0.316 0.266 0.371 
0.4 -3.130 0.695 -1.667 -13.062 0.324 0.270 0.367 
0.5 -3.435 0.728 -1.593 -12.880 0.328 0.259 0.370 
0.75 -4.196 0.809 -1.459 -11.265 0.380 0.273 0.368 
1 -4.555 0.841 -1.397 -10.682 0.403 0.299 0.366 
1.5 -5.158 0.902 -1.302 -10.662 0.406 0.302 0.371 
2 -5.483 0.933 -1.269 -9.815 0.386 0.284 0.372 
2.5 -5.686 0.939 -1.225 -9.284 0.387 0.293 0.371 
3 -5.748 0.938 -1.223 -10.035 0.390 0.289 0.375 
3.5 -5.892 0.952 -1.221 -10.006 0.390 0.283 0.375 
4 -6.011 0.962 -1.218 -9.697 0.382 0.283 0.373 
4.5 -6.139 0.973 -1.209 -9.582 0.374 0.281 0.377 
5 -6.203 0.978 -1.216 -9.761 0.368 0.277 0.373 
z=0.20 
0.1 -2.092 0.583 -2.081 -14.219 0.280 0.216 0.403 
0.2 -2.187 0.620 -1.985 -15.640 0.305 0.242 0.401 
0.3 -2.765 0.654 -1.759 -13.456 0.314 0.267 0.373 
0.4 -3.134 0.695 -1.668 -13.228 0.321 0.271 0.369 
0.5 -3.471 0.731 -1.589 -12.827 0.331 0.260 0.371 
0.75 -4.221 0.811 -1.456 -11.433 0.377 0.269 0.370 
1 -4.620 0.848 -1.389 -10.697 0.404 0.296 0.368 
1.5 -5.200 0.904 -1.296 -10.646 0.413 0.303 0.371 
2 -5.533 0.936 -1.262 -9.831 0.387 0.292 0.376 
2.5 -5.759 0.947 -1.220 -9.335 0.383 0.293 0.373 
3 -5.838 0.949 -1.222 -10.055 0.384 0.290 0.380 
3.5 -5.951 0.956 -1.216 -10.021 0.383 0.289 0.381 
4 -6.082 0.968 -1.211 -9.711 0.375 0.286 0.380 
4.5 -6.205 0.979 -1.209 -9.567 0.369 0.284 0.382 
5 -6.284 0.987 -1.214 -9.903 0.362 0.280 0.378 
z=0.30 
0.1 -2.082 0.579 -2.104 -14.372 0.276 0.215 0.407 
0.2 -2.178 0.618 -2.007 -15.942 0.305 0.242 0.404 
0.3 -2.789 0.655 -1.772 -13.681 0.313 0.269 0.376 
0.4 -3.183 0.696 -1.666 -13.364 0.314 0.272 0.371 
0.5 -3.523 0.732 -1.588 -12.946 0.330 0.259 0.371 
0.75 -4.248 0.810 -1.460 -11.474 0.378 0.268 0.368 
1 -4.672 0.850 -1.391 -10.666 0.410 0.296 0.367 
1.5 -5.212 0.900 -1.302 -10.398 0.411 0.307 0.374 
2 -5.575 0.933 -1.254 -9.764 0.385 0.296 0.377 
2.5 -5.727 0.934 -1.220 -9.349 0.367 0.297 0.376 
3 -5.876 0.950 -1.222 -10.051 0.373 0.284 0.378 
3.5 -5.993 0.962 -1.231 -10.386 0.382 0.287 0.379 
4 -6.075 0.967 -1.231 -10.476 0.370 0.278 0.379 
4.5 -6.219 0.983 -1.231 -10.522 0.367 0.276 0.383 
5 -6.321 0.994 -1.236 -10.700 0.366 0.274 0.382 
z=0.40 
0.1 -2.098 0.576 -2.123 -14.483 0.273 0.213 0.410 
0.2 -2.186 0.614 -2.023 -16.056 0.304 0.241 0.407 
0.3 -2.803 0.653 -1.789 -13.777 0.314 0.268 0.378 
0.4 -3.213 0.693 -1.670 -13.373 0.308 0.274 0.372 
0.5 -3.548 0.727 -1.592 -13.007 0.327 0.261 0.370 
0.75 -4.314 0.812 -1.457 -11.179 0.376 0.266 0.370 
1 -4.715 0.850 -1.393 -10.725 0.410 0.293 0.367 
1.5 -5.216 0.896 -1.314 -10.151 0.417 0.299 0.371 
2 -5.523 0.919 -1.264 -9.577 0.388 0.288 0.368 
2.5 -5.693 0.926 -1.236 -9.402 0.370 0.293 0.372 
3 -5.795 0.934 -1.240 -9.608 0.371 0.287 0.371 
3.5 -5.892 0.945 -1.250 -9.790 0.369 0.279 0.369 
4 -5.985 0.950 -1.246 -9.860 0.364 0.285 0.375 
4.5 -6.074 0.959 -1.251 -9.937 0.351 0.278 0.374 
5 -6.102 0.957 -1.253 -10.321 0.357 0.280 0.373 
z=0.50 
0.1 -2.127 0.571 -2.148 -14.575 0.269 0.211 0.414 
0.2 -2.177 0.606 -2.046 -16.043 0.299 0.239 0.409 
0.3 -2.722 0.638 -1.820 -13.909 0.317 0.262 0.378 
0.4 -3.107 0.677 -1.709 -13.354 0.316 0.269 0.371 
0.5 -3.389 0.707 -1.639 -13.262 0.319 0.259 0.368 
0.75 -4.161 0.790 -1.496 -11.293 0.370 0.264 0.365 
1 -4.573 0.829 -1.421 -10.532 0.392 0.295 0.366 
1.5 -5.174 0.892 -1.335 -10.586 0.405 0.299 0.372 
2 -5.514 0.920 -1.283 -9.876 0.393 0.296 0.376 
2.5 -5.815 0.945 -1.237 -9.770 0.380 0.294 0.377 
3 -5.960 0.956 -1.229 -10.317 0.383 0.291 0.381 
3.5 -6.085 0.968 -1.230 -10.418 0.378 0.287 0.383 
4 -6.231 0.979 -1.217 -10.217 0.378 0.282 0.385 
4.5 -6.394 0.998 -1.215 -10.401 0.371 0.281 0.386 
5 -6.469 1.002 -1.215 -10.984 0.375 0.280 0.387 
z=0.60 
0.1 -2.167 0.566 -2.185 -14.694 0.264 0.208 0.420 
0.2 -2.147 0.593 -2.086 -16.103 0.290 0.234 0.413 
0.3 -2.601 0.617 -1.872 -14.042 0.314 0.254 0.379 
0.4 -2.943 0.654 -1.771 -13.462 0.319 0.260 0.372 
0.5 -3.180 0.684 -1.716 -13.698 0.315 0.253 0.367 
0.75 -3.861 0.748 -1.554 -11.661 0.362 0.268 0.358 
1 -4.243 0.788 -1.486 -10.923 0.376 0.290 0.357 
1.5 -4.800 0.849 -1.402 -11.018 0.393 0.293 0.362 
2 -5.179 0.885 -1.344 -9.862 0.390 0.289 0.368 
2.5 -5.384 0.896 -1.302 -9.760 0.385 0.299 0.371 
3 -5.543 0.906 -1.277 -10.056 0.393 0.302 0.374 
3.5 -5.745 0.930 -1.264 -10.194 0.383 0.294 0.374 
4 -5.893 0.946 -1.259 -10.063 0.377 0.291 0.379 
4.5 -6.010 0.959 -1.258 -10.091 0.368 0.287 0.381 
5 -6.111 0.967 -1.252 -10.222 0.370 0.282 0.378 
z=0.70 
0.1 -2.233 0.559 -2.247 -14.867 0.256 0.206 0.431 
0.2 -2.100 0.576 -2.153 -16.296 0.277 0.226 0.420 
0.3 -2.469 0.592 -1.944 -14.271 0.306 0.246 0.386 
0.4 -2.767 0.631 -1.860 -13.955 0.316 0.253 0.381 
0.5 -2.958 0.655 -1.803 -14.300 0.314 0.246 0.374 
0.75 -3.663 0.719 -1.620 -12.129 0.346 0.268 0.360 
1 -4.062 0.756 -1.528 -11.355 0.347 0.287 0.361 
1.5 -4.691 0.831 -1.437 -11.272 0.375 0.292 0.367 
2 -5.132 0.877 -1.370 -10.604 0.380 0.284 0.375 
2.5 -5.413 0.900 -1.325 -10.339 0.398 0.298 0.379 
3 -5.614 0.920 -1.306 -10.894 0.403 0.305 0.385 
3.5 -5.848 0.941 -1.269 -10.606 0.406 0.305 0.385 
4 -6.060 0.960 -1.240 -9.977 0.400 0.304 0.388 
4.5 -6.204 0.978 -1.243 -10.289 0.390 0.296 0.385 
5 -6.313 0.986 -1.232 -10.566 0.382 0.291 0.385 
z=0.80 
0.1 -1.632 0.510 -2.676 -17.803 0.206 0.192 0.501 
0.2 -1.811 0.540 -2.375 -17.580 0.243 0.210 0.450 
0.3 -2.148 0.550 -2.130 -15.447 0.288 0.230 0.410 
0.4 -2.427 0.591 -2.037 -15.176 0.304 0.243 0.404 
0.5 -2.577 0.609 -1.970 -15.647 0.311 0.237 0.396 
0.75 -3.245 0.664 -1.756 -13.276 0.328 0.258 0.370 
1 -3.624 0.698 -1.647 -12.478 0.328 0.275 0.366 
1.5 -4.274 0.774 -1.532 -12.324 0.361 0.289 0.364 
2 -4.798 0.829 -1.438 -10.948 0.370 0.276 0.373 
2.5 -5.126 0.861 -1.387 -10.815 0.385 0.298 0.377 
3 -5.380 0.887 -1.351 -11.017 0.397 0.302 0.382 
3.5 -5.643 0.916 -1.318 -11.061 0.403 0.304 0.386 
4 -5.848 0.931 -1.281 -10.365 0.403 0.312 0.388 
4.5 -6.035 0.952 -1.264 -10.234 0.394 0.301 0.390 
5 -6.182 0.967 -1.249 -10.498 0.389 0.302 0.387 
z=0.90 
0.1 -3.421 0.600 -1.948 -12.515 0.309 0.227 0.382 
0.2 -2.997 0.587 -1.976 -13.325 0.272 0.219 0.386 
0.3 -2.845 0.586 -1.974 -13.317 0.307 0.234 0.386 
0.4 -2.807 0.605 -1.987 -14.175 0.318 0.240 0.395 
0.5 -2.903 0.623 -1.945 -14.467 0.315 0.231 0.392 
0.75 -3.208 0.641 -1.798 -13.008 0.330 0.254 0.371 
1 -3.427 0.662 -1.720 -12.781 0.325 0.261 0.364 
1.5 -3.890 0.719 -1.633 -12.714 0.346 0.272 0.361 
2 -4.342 0.766 -1.541 -11.511 0.354 0.273 0.366 
2.5 -4.651 0.791 -1.468 -10.940 0.362 0.292 0.368 
3 -4.909 0.817 -1.418 -11.145 0.374 0.296 0.373 
3.5 -5.206 0.855 -1.392 -11.067 0.383 0.301 0.378 
4 -5.445 0.880 -1.355 -10.383 0.378 0.300 0.382 
4.5 -5.630 0.901 -1.335 -10.283 0.383 0.293 0.384 
5 -5.740 0.908 -1.314 -10.350 0.386 0.297 0.384 
z=1.00 
0.1 -2.875 0.589 -2.046 -13.937 0.287 0.220 0.397 
0.2 -2.910 0.618 -1.962 -15.074 0.302 0.239 0.394 
0.3 -3.311 0.636 -1.777 -12.970 0.317 0.257 0.366 
0.4 -3.553 0.668 -1.716 -12.594 0.322 0.256 0.362 
0.5 -3.704 0.685 -1.668 -12.836 0.331 0.246 0.362 
0.75 -4.213 0.738 -1.562 -11.146 0.380 0.259 0.352 
1 -4.360 0.748 -1.517 -10.745 0.376 0.277 0.347 
1.5 -4.663 0.783 -1.471 -10.968 0.382 0.289 0.351 
2 -4.911 0.811 -1.442 -10.071 0.365 0.283 0.356 
2.5 -5.063 0.816 -1.396 -9.889 0.369 0.291 0.356 
3 -5.131 0.820 -1.389 -10.624 0.369 0.294 0.364 
3.5 -5.335 0.848 -1.384 -10.727 0.374 0.300 0.367 
4 -5.475 0.863 -1.369 -10.427 0.362 0.292 0.371 
4.5 -5.665 0.884 -1.345 -10.128 0.365 0.289 0.373 
5 -5.762 0.893 -1.335 -10.247 0.366 0.288 0.373 
Table 30, Table 31, and Table 32 display the coefficients computed for PFA. 
10 values of z have been selected for illustrative purposes. 
Table 30. Coefficients for Peak-Floor Acceleration, =0.1 ( is the total standard deviation) 
 Period 
b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6  
z=0.05 
0.1 -1.371 0.620 -1.840 -12.229 0.317 0.235 0.370 
0.2 -1.373 0.620 -1.838 -12.218 0.317 0.235 0.370 
0.3 -1.371 0.620 -1.839 -12.209 0.316 0.235 0.370 
0.4 -1.370 0.620 -1.840 -12.226 0.318 0.234 0.370 
0.5 -1.368 0.620 -1.841 -12.266 0.318 0.235 0.370 
0.75 -1.371 0.620 -1.841 -12.244 0.317 0.235 0.370 
1 -1.367 0.620 -1.841 -12.255 0.317 0.234 0.370 
1.5 -1.365 0.619 -1.840 -12.309 0.317 0.236 0.370 
2 -1.385 0.621 -1.838 -12.196 0.318 0.235 0.370 
2.5 -1.375 0.621 -1.840 -12.356 0.319 0.236 0.370 
3 -1.374 0.620 -1.839 -12.373 0.318 0.235 0.369 
3.5 -1.397 0.621 -1.831 -12.258 0.318 0.235 0.369 
4 -1.403 0.622 -1.832 -12.323 0.319 0.237 0.369 
4.5 -1.407 0.623 -1.835 -12.365 0.320 0.238 0.369 
5 -1.425 0.624 -1.828 -12.263 0.321 0.238 0.369 
z=0.10 
0.1 -1.353 0.619 -1.844 -12.193 0.317 0.234 0.371 
0.2 -1.364 0.619 -1.838 -12.140 0.315 0.234 0.369 
0.3 -1.355 0.618 -1.840 -12.091 0.314 0.234 0.369 
0.4 -1.347 0.618 -1.844 -12.141 0.316 0.230 0.369 
0.5 -1.335 0.618 -1.849 -12.319 0.317 0.234 0.371 
0.75 -1.344 0.619 -1.849 -12.196 0.318 0.235 0.372 
1 -1.326 0.618 -1.851 -12.260 0.314 0.235 0.372 
1.5 -1.327 0.616 -1.847 -12.365 0.313 0.237 0.369 
2 -1.375 0.623 -1.842 -12.046 0.315 0.234 0.371 
2.5 -1.347 0.621 -1.850 -12.425 0.319 0.238 0.370 
3 -1.318 0.620 -1.859 -12.690 0.315 0.234 0.370 
3.5 -1.362 0.622 -1.845 -12.518 0.313 0.235 0.367 
4 -1.380 0.620 -1.832 -12.353 0.318 0.239 0.369 
4.5 -1.375 0.620 -1.836 -12.415 0.313 0.241 0.368 
5 -1.431 0.628 -1.833 -12.184 0.319 0.240 0.369 
z=0.20 
0.1 -1.307 0.617 -1.854 -12.218 0.318 0.233 0.372 
0.2 -1.351 0.618 -1.836 -12.113 0.311 0.234 0.368 
0.3 -1.339 0.615 -1.836 -11.752 0.308 0.231 0.368 
0.4 -1.273 0.612 -1.855 -11.901 0.305 0.220 0.369 
0.5 -1.226 0.612 -1.877 -12.389 0.307 0.226 0.372 
0.75 -1.191 0.610 -1.881 -12.315 0.321 0.238 0.378 
1 -1.173 0.616 -1.899 -12.508 0.307 0.237 0.382 
1.5 -1.152 0.604 -1.873 -12.843 0.296 0.234 0.371 
2 -1.235 0.616 -1.863 -12.236 0.310 0.239 0.372 
2.5 -1.207 0.620 -1.882 -12.818 0.316 0.233 0.371 
3 -1.210 0.622 -1.883 -13.224 0.312 0.231 0.378 
3.5 -1.298 0.632 -1.864 -13.199 0.311 0.240 0.372 
4 -1.296 0.622 -1.841 -12.947 0.318 0.243 0.368 
4.5 -1.356 0.627 -1.830 -12.774 0.317 0.245 0.363 
5 -1.435 0.636 -1.820 -12.576 0.320 0.247 0.364 
z=0.30 
0.1 -1.224 0.616 -1.881 -12.573 0.316 0.233 0.375 
0.2 -1.307 0.620 -1.846 -12.519 0.306 0.236 0.369 
0.3 -1.352 0.616 -1.820 -11.461 0.303 0.228 0.367 
0.4 -1.223 0.609 -1.854 -11.764 0.291 0.211 0.369 
0.5 -1.148 0.608 -1.884 -12.190 0.295 0.218 0.373 
0.75 -1.034 0.606 -1.923 -12.648 0.323 0.240 0.385 
1 -1.044 0.619 -1.945 -13.051 0.315 0.244 0.393 
1.5 -1.057 0.604 -1.881 -13.519 0.285 0.239 0.372 
2 -1.219 0.617 -1.844 -12.664 0.309 0.245 0.368 
2.5 -1.291 0.630 -1.841 -12.888 0.316 0.239 0.367 
3 -1.320 0.636 -1.842 -13.243 0.324 0.231 0.378 
3.5 -1.502 0.652 -1.799 -12.881 0.326 0.243 0.373 
4 -1.554 0.652 -1.778 -12.921 0.328 0.244 0.363 
4.5 -1.621 0.655 -1.763 -12.825 0.331 0.250 0.357 
5 -1.710 0.655 -1.731 -12.175 0.340 0.256 0.355 
z=0.40 
0.1 -1.058 0.610 -1.927 -13.062 0.309 0.231 0.380 
0.2 -1.215 0.621 -1.866 -13.093 0.306 0.239 0.374 
0.3 -1.341 0.618 -1.806 -11.512 0.298 0.229 0.365 
0.4 -1.252 0.614 -1.828 -11.516 0.280 0.207 0.368 
0.5 -1.147 0.610 -1.866 -12.058 0.289 0.211 0.371 
0.75 -1.032 0.613 -1.920 -12.632 0.329 0.239 0.386 
1 -1.049 0.625 -1.934 -13.231 0.329 0.251 0.397 
1.5 -1.170 0.621 -1.854 -13.639 0.298 0.251 0.375 
2 -1.394 0.630 -1.780 -12.338 0.303 0.247 0.364 
2.5 -1.471 0.644 -1.785 -12.748 0.310 0.240 0.358 
3 -1.515 0.649 -1.783 -12.886 0.320 0.234 0.363 
3.5 -1.639 0.659 -1.755 -12.660 0.337 0.246 0.363 
4 -1.751 0.670 -1.736 -12.311 0.334 0.237 0.356 
4.5 -1.837 0.676 -1.720 -12.245 0.339 0.243 0.354 
5 -1.853 0.673 -1.712 -12.046 0.343 0.245 0.353 
z=0.50 
0.1 -0.842 0.600 -1.983 -13.520 0.298 0.225 0.388 
0.2 -1.080 0.623 -1.901 -13.866 0.308 0.240 0.383 
0.3 -1.356 0.627 -1.791 -11.814 0.296 0.235 0.364 
0.4 -1.352 0.627 -1.786 -11.385 0.275 0.212 0.364 
0.5 -1.270 0.621 -1.811 -11.913 0.286 0.210 0.363 
0.75 -1.194 0.626 -1.861 -12.188 0.339 0.239 0.380 
1 -1.202 0.637 -1.882 -12.906 0.342 0.256 0.393 
1.5 -1.380 0.643 -1.811 -13.446 0.323 0.265 0.377 
2 -1.598 0.649 -1.740 -12.156 0.303 0.253 0.366 
2.5 -1.679 0.652 -1.715 -12.103 0.295 0.247 0.358 
3 -1.696 0.650 -1.709 -12.464 0.298 0.234 0.353 
3.5 -1.795 0.662 -1.705 -12.246 0.325 0.241 0.352 
4 -1.867 0.674 -1.712 -12.082 0.353 0.245 0.348 
4.5 -1.943 0.683 -1.709 -11.634 0.358 0.246 0.350 
5 -1.969 0.688 -1.716 -11.479 0.349 0.243 0.354 
z=0.60 
0.1 -0.630 0.590 -2.036 -13.912 0.287 0.220 0.396 
0.2 -0.928 0.624 -1.942 -14.728 0.310 0.240 0.392 
0.3 -1.390 0.640 -1.777 -12.429 0.301 0.249 0.366 
0.4 -1.527 0.648 -1.732 -11.517 0.280 0.226 0.359 
0.5 -1.552 0.648 -1.728 -11.674 0.293 0.215 0.356 
0.75 -1.536 0.652 -1.764 -11.418 0.358 0.241 0.366 
1 -1.496 0.657 -1.800 -11.794 0.348 0.256 0.380 
1.5 -1.476 0.646 -1.782 -12.628 0.322 0.258 0.372 
2 -1.529 0.638 -1.752 -11.896 0.325 0.259 0.367 
2.5 -1.584 0.647 -1.752 -12.229 0.310 0.249 0.362 
3 -1.557 0.645 -1.765 -12.753 0.311 0.241 0.365 
3.5 -1.614 0.650 -1.760 -12.804 0.312 0.244 0.365 
4 -1.727 0.657 -1.734 -12.454 0.327 0.242 0.350 
4.5 -1.805 0.663 -1.721 -12.042 0.328 0.243 0.351 
5 -1.880 0.672 -1.718 -11.836 0.333 0.244 0.349 
z=0.70 
0.1 -0.432 0.581 -2.087 -14.271 0.279 0.216 0.404 
0.2 -0.745 0.621 -1.988 -15.596 0.308 0.242 0.401 
0.3 -1.397 0.653 -1.779 -13.380 0.309 0.264 0.374 
0.4 -1.749 0.676 -1.676 -12.246 0.290 0.252 0.363 
0.5 -1.957 0.692 -1.634 -11.884 0.307 0.235 0.358 
0.75 -2.175 0.709 -1.615 -10.388 0.375 0.245 0.347 
1 -2.105 0.703 -1.657 -10.176 0.367 0.255 0.357 
1.5 -1.885 0.673 -1.698 -10.897 0.324 0.248 0.367 
2 -1.640 0.643 -1.750 -11.002 0.324 0.251 0.374 
2.5 -1.538 0.643 -1.800 -11.828 0.311 0.241 0.375 
3 -1.393 0.630 -1.837 -12.830 0.322 0.240 0.381 
3.5 -1.355 0.631 -1.859 -13.602 0.318 0.242 0.381 
4 -1.371 0.629 -1.851 -13.732 0.321 0.240 0.371 
4.5 -1.486 0.640 -1.835 -13.317 0.319 0.243 0.366 
5 -1.548 0.638 -1.806 -12.841 0.325 0.249 0.365 
z=0.80 
0.1 -0.256 0.575 -2.133 -14.565 0.272 0.213 0.411 
0.2 -0.547 0.614 -2.031 -16.153 0.303 0.241 0.408 
0.3 -1.284 0.652 -1.793 -13.847 0.314 0.269 0.378 
0.4 -1.761 0.689 -1.674 -13.299 0.307 0.269 0.372 
0.5 -2.140 0.723 -1.602 -12.881 0.323 0.255 0.367 
0.75 -2.812 0.780 -1.492 -10.718 0.379 0.257 0.356 
1 -3.003 0.790 -1.479 -9.461 0.383 0.259 0.349 
1.5 -2.914 0.765 -1.506 -8.726 0.363 0.248 0.358 
2 -2.449 0.715 -1.629 -8.936 0.336 0.240 0.369 
2.5 -2.059 0.679 -1.726 -9.644 0.306 0.225 0.380 
3 -1.727 0.648 -1.804 -10.908 0.312 0.230 0.397 
3.5 -1.519 0.637 -1.871 -11.918 0.301 0.227 0.396 
4 -1.268 0.606 -1.913 -12.677 0.296 0.229 0.391 
4.5 -1.198 0.604 -1.939 -13.022 0.290 0.231 0.391 
5 -1.199 0.606 -1.943 -13.110 0.297 0.236 0.388 
z=0.90 
0.1 -0.107 0.570 -2.172 -14.775 0.266 0.211 0.417 
0.2 -0.360 0.604 -2.065 -16.236 0.300 0.237 0.411 
0.3 -0.992 0.629 -1.833 -13.766 0.308 0.256 0.377 
0.4 -1.338 0.653 -1.732 -12.584 0.296 0.249 0.364 
0.5 -1.546 0.670 -1.688 -12.488 0.308 0.236 0.357 
0.75 -1.880 0.701 -1.646 -11.359 0.371 0.251 0.350 
1 -2.012 0.712 -1.640 -11.186 0.379 0.273 0.359 
1.5 -2.198 0.719 -1.604 -11.556 0.357 0.278 0.354 
2 -2.393 0.721 -1.555 -10.482 0.351 0.277 0.351 
2.5 -2.462 0.727 -1.564 -10.950 0.338 0.268 0.349 
3 -2.471 0.724 -1.572 -11.301 0.333 0.254 0.354 
3.5 -2.553 0.728 -1.566 -11.171 0.340 0.257 0.352 
4 -2.622 0.732 -1.561 -11.094 0.349 0.255 0.342 
4.5 -2.678 0.736 -1.565 -10.817 0.342 0.249 0.343 
5 -2.742 0.740 -1.560 -10.317 0.346 0.251 0.341 
z=1.00 
0.1 0.022 0.565 -2.206 -14.938 0.261 0.209 0.423 
0.2 -0.202 0.596 -2.093 -16.272 0.297 0.235 0.414 
0.3 -0.767 0.613 -1.864 -13.630 0.302 0.248 0.378 
0.4 -1.034 0.631 -1.779 -12.322 0.287 0.235 0.366 
0.5 -1.133 0.639 -1.756 -12.464 0.296 0.225 0.358 
0.75 -1.300 0.660 -1.751 -11.620 0.356 0.238 0.359 
1 -1.292 0.662 -1.769 -11.744 0.351 0.258 0.372 
1.5 -1.321 0.655 -1.744 -12.045 0.322 0.256 0.364 
2 -1.336 0.646 -1.730 -11.382 0.322 0.253 0.363 
2.5 -1.328 0.650 -1.748 -11.694 0.310 0.243 0.361 
3 -1.251 0.644 -1.773 -12.329 0.316 0.237 0.366 
3.5 -1.260 0.643 -1.774 -12.570 0.323 0.240 0.365 
4 -1.264 0.642 -1.777 -12.707 0.331 0.243 0.359 
4.5 -1.386 0.657 -1.767 -12.271 0.329 0.243 0.357 
5 -1.444 0.657 -1.746 -11.802 0.333 0.246 0.356 
Table 31. Coefficients for Peak-Floor Acceleration, =8 ( is the total standard deviation) 
 Period 
b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6  
z=0.05 
0.1 -1.367 0.620 -1.841 -12.243 0.318 0.235 0.371 
0.2 -1.374 0.620 -1.837 -12.216 0.316 0.234 0.369 
0.3 -1.375 0.620 -1.836 -12.208 0.317 0.235 0.369 
0.4 -1.379 0.621 -1.838 -12.221 0.318 0.234 0.370 
0.5 -1.373 0.620 -1.840 -12.307 0.318 0.236 0.370 
0.75 -1.382 0.621 -1.837 -12.334 0.317 0.236 0.370 
1 -1.398 0.622 -1.834 -12.295 0.320 0.236 0.370 
1.5 -1.443 0.627 -1.829 -12.397 0.322 0.238 0.369 
2 -1.492 0.629 -1.813 -12.314 0.324 0.240 0.367 
2.5 -1.518 0.631 -1.809 -12.374 0.325 0.243 0.367 
3 -1.587 0.637 -1.798 -12.138 0.326 0.241 0.365 
3.5 -1.623 0.640 -1.790 -12.070 0.321 0.243 0.364 
4 -1.626 0.637 -1.784 -12.078 0.323 0.239 0.363 
4.5 -1.651 0.636 -1.774 -11.901 0.323 0.239 0.361 
5 -1.665 0.638 -1.776 -11.915 0.321 0.242 0.360 
z=0.10 
0.1 -1.328 0.618 -1.850 -12.255 0.319 0.234 0.372 
0.2 -1.353 0.618 -1.836 -12.184 0.312 0.233 0.369 
0.3 -1.364 0.619 -1.835 -12.107 0.316 0.237 0.368 
0.4 -1.365 0.620 -1.838 -12.044 0.316 0.231 0.369 
0.5 -1.351 0.621 -1.848 -12.278 0.318 0.237 0.371 
0.75 -1.360 0.618 -1.837 -12.275 0.317 0.239 0.370 
1 -1.365 0.620 -1.839 -12.297 0.317 0.236 0.370 
1.5 -1.427 0.630 -1.839 -12.611 0.318 0.238 0.367 
2 -1.527 0.633 -1.802 -12.451 0.324 0.241 0.368 
2.5 -1.621 0.644 -1.793 -12.757 0.333 0.253 0.368 
3 -1.724 0.652 -1.775 -12.753 0.339 0.256 0.362 
3.5 -1.912 0.671 -1.743 -12.561 0.337 0.264 0.364 
4 -1.994 0.676 -1.723 -12.590 0.336 0.260 0.365 
4.5 -2.096 0.681 -1.697 -12.382 0.331 0.257 0.358 
5 -2.190 0.684 -1.671 -12.230 0.333 0.262 0.354 
z=0.20 
0.1 -1.169 0.612 -1.893 -12.602 0.315 0.232 0.376 
0.2 -1.203 0.613 -1.866 -12.680 0.297 0.232 0.371 
0.3 -1.294 0.617 -1.839 -12.192 0.311 0.235 0.366 
0.4 -1.263 0.617 -1.847 -12.090 0.315 0.230 0.368 
0.5 -1.268 0.626 -1.870 -12.552 0.314 0.235 0.372 
0.75 -1.281 0.617 -1.837 -12.421 0.315 0.240 0.368 
1 -1.348 0.624 -1.825 -12.178 0.317 0.243 0.372 
1.5 -1.415 0.636 -1.833 -13.311 0.316 0.250 0.363 
2 -1.606 0.645 -1.770 -12.304 0.330 0.248 0.366 
2.5 -1.703 0.654 -1.757 -12.969 0.332 0.252 0.361 
3 -1.831 0.659 -1.720 -12.479 0.339 0.254 0.362 
3.5 -2.017 0.675 -1.685 -12.381 0.345 0.261 0.357 
4 -2.146 0.690 -1.674 -12.286 0.338 0.263 0.355 
4.5 -2.224 0.691 -1.648 -12.089 0.347 0.265 0.353 
5 -2.310 0.698 -1.639 -11.922 0.347 0.260 0.351 
z=0.30 
0.1 -0.950 0.604 -1.954 -13.168 0.304 0.228 0.383 
0.2 -1.013 0.609 -1.907 -13.371 0.290 0.232 0.379 
0.3 -1.186 0.613 -1.840 -12.561 0.296 0.232 0.365 
0.4 -1.195 0.616 -1.838 -12.401 0.312 0.238 0.365 
0.5 -1.259 0.636 -1.862 -12.968 0.319 0.234 0.371 
0.75 -1.388 0.634 -1.799 -12.562 0.330 0.247 0.364 
1 -1.570 0.645 -1.753 -11.804 0.328 0.252 0.364 
1.5 -1.646 0.652 -1.743 -12.761 0.318 0.250 0.355 
2 -1.843 0.667 -1.715 -12.108 0.336 0.250 0.355 
2.5 -2.026 0.679 -1.672 -11.599 0.346 0.254 0.356 
3 -2.093 0.680 -1.657 -11.781 0.346 0.259 0.351 
3.5 -2.265 0.700 -1.646 -12.006 0.362 0.265 0.356 
4 -2.434 0.722 -1.633 -11.849 0.355 0.269 0.359 
4.5 -2.559 0.727 -1.599 -11.477 0.359 0.270 0.359 
5 -2.629 0.728 -1.585 -11.558 0.359 0.277 0.354 
z=0.40 
0.1 -0.734 0.594 -2.009 -13.544 0.293 0.223 0.392 
0.2 -0.862 0.609 -1.944 -14.036 0.291 0.232 0.388 
0.3 -1.138 0.616 -1.836 -12.940 0.291 0.235 0.365 
0.4 -1.222 0.622 -1.808 -12.594 0.313 0.246 0.362 
0.5 -1.353 0.651 -1.829 -13.182 0.330 0.240 0.365 
0.75 -1.629 0.662 -1.737 -12.216 0.336 0.245 0.359 
1 -1.777 0.662 -1.684 -11.450 0.336 0.258 0.353 
1.5 -1.897 0.675 -1.679 -12.080 0.322 0.256 0.350 
2 -2.029 0.690 -1.684 -12.150 0.347 0.254 0.352 
2.5 -2.211 0.703 -1.655 -11.718 0.355 0.263 0.356 
3 -2.280 0.701 -1.634 -11.416 0.358 0.267 0.360 
3.5 -2.422 0.708 -1.598 -11.378 0.356 0.267 0.352 
4 -2.540 0.720 -1.588 -11.905 0.355 0.282 0.351 
4.5 -2.663 0.728 -1.567 -11.671 0.365 0.282 0.350 
5 -2.799 0.738 -1.549 -11.318 0.360 0.283 0.349 
z=0.50 
0.1 -0.550 0.586 -2.056 -13.901 0.284 0.218 0.400 
0.2 -0.747 0.610 -1.973 -14.719 0.295 0.234 0.395 
0.3 -1.162 0.625 -1.818 -13.097 0.291 0.240 0.367 
0.4 -1.334 0.634 -1.763 -12.434 0.310 0.244 0.360 
0.5 -1.506 0.665 -1.772 -12.968 0.334 0.245 0.357 
0.75 -1.819 0.684 -1.692 -11.635 0.346 0.243 0.354 
1 -1.945 0.680 -1.645 -11.079 0.341 0.257 0.351 
1.5 -2.011 0.684 -1.654 -11.299 0.336 0.259 0.349 
2 -2.086 0.698 -1.677 -11.691 0.334 0.251 0.359 
2.5 -2.121 0.689 -1.653 -11.618 0.345 0.257 0.353 
3 -2.169 0.689 -1.654 -11.477 0.355 0.260 0.351 
3.5 -2.284 0.697 -1.637 -11.176 0.361 0.270 0.355 
4 -2.401 0.711 -1.625 -11.149 0.353 0.269 0.360 
4.5 -2.436 0.709 -1.614 -11.564 0.349 0.272 0.360 
5 -2.497 0.715 -1.617 -11.799 0.345 0.275 0.354 
z=0.60 
0.1 -0.402 0.580 -2.094 -14.244 0.278 0.215 0.405 
0.2 -0.665 0.613 -1.997 -15.349 0.302 0.237 0.401 
0.3 -1.212 0.634 -1.799 -13.175 0.298 0.251 0.370 
0.4 -1.462 0.650 -1.725 -12.508 0.300 0.246 0.359 
0.5 -1.639 0.672 -1.710 -12.585 0.325 0.238 0.353 
0.75 -1.940 0.696 -1.662 -11.574 0.370 0.250 0.351 
1 -2.079 0.702 -1.638 -10.822 0.363 0.259 0.355 
1.5 -2.119 0.696 -1.634 -11.443 0.334 0.270 0.349 
2 -2.176 0.694 -1.631 -11.154 0.345 0.262 0.353 
2.5 -2.261 0.705 -1.641 -11.383 0.348 0.265 0.357 
3 -2.306 0.707 -1.638 -12.002 0.351 0.261 0.362 
3.5 -2.435 0.716 -1.622 -11.933 0.350 0.265 0.359 
4 -2.555 0.727 -1.613 -12.323 0.348 0.269 0.357 
4.5 -2.770 0.743 -1.571 -11.668 0.352 0.281 0.354 
5 -2.944 0.755 -1.537 -11.126 0.349 0.285 0.356 
z=0.70 
0.1 -0.287 0.576 -2.125 -14.501 0.273 0.213 0.410 
0.2 -0.575 0.614 -2.023 -15.939 0.304 0.240 0.406 
0.3 -1.234 0.644 -1.800 -13.627 0.311 0.263 0.375 
0.4 -1.601 0.669 -1.697 -12.677 0.298 0.257 0.365 
0.5 -1.852 0.690 -1.646 -12.218 0.314 0.238 0.358 
0.75 -2.189 0.719 -1.604 -10.878 0.372 0.245 0.347 
1 -2.252 0.721 -1.610 -10.538 0.381 0.268 0.350 
1.5 -2.243 0.714 -1.627 -10.976 0.356 0.263 0.359 
2 -2.220 0.696 -1.620 -10.645 0.339 0.265 0.361 
2.5 -2.158 0.681 -1.630 -11.261 0.327 0.264 0.353 
3 -2.147 0.681 -1.655 -11.779 0.334 0.258 0.351 
3.5 -2.208 0.688 -1.659 -12.122 0.346 0.255 0.356 
4 -2.307 0.704 -1.668 -12.068 0.335 0.252 0.360 
4.5 -2.388 0.706 -1.647 -12.117 0.339 0.257 0.358 
5 -2.474 0.711 -1.631 -12.228 0.350 0.263 0.353 
z=0.80 
0.1 -0.207 0.573 -2.147 -14.612 0.270 0.213 0.413 
0.2 -0.453 0.607 -2.047 -16.101 0.299 0.237 0.408 
0.3 -1.100 0.635 -1.819 -13.863 0.310 0.260 0.375 
0.4 -1.506 0.665 -1.711 -12.952 0.316 0.260 0.366 
0.5 -1.787 0.692 -1.666 -12.815 0.332 0.248 0.359 
0.75 -2.298 0.727 -1.555 -10.774 0.359 0.249 0.348 
1 -2.431 0.733 -1.551 -10.062 0.369 0.263 0.342 
1.5 -2.365 0.720 -1.585 -10.531 0.365 0.264 0.351 
2 -2.284 0.711 -1.626 -10.677 0.359 0.257 0.361 
2.5 -2.230 0.699 -1.642 -10.939 0.354 0.260 0.366 
3 -2.205 0.690 -1.647 -11.288 0.356 0.265 0.366 
3.5 -2.249 0.690 -1.642 -11.521 0.343 0.265 0.364 
4 -2.318 0.700 -1.651 -12.033 0.331 0.270 0.364 
4.5 -2.369 0.700 -1.642 -12.182 0.329 0.274 0.361 
5 -2.488 0.706 -1.618 -12.130 0.327 0.273 0.359 
z=0.90 
0.1 -0.158 0.572 -2.160 -14.609 0.269 0.212 0.415 
0.2 -0.345 0.599 -2.065 -15.965 0.293 0.234 0.408 
0.3 -0.893 0.618 -1.854 -13.980 0.304 0.250 0.375 
0.4 -1.233 0.645 -1.763 -13.130 0.314 0.254 0.366 
0.5 -1.476 0.672 -1.730 -13.226 0.331 0.244 0.360 
0.75 -2.019 0.713 -1.616 -11.799 0.365 0.258 0.353 
1 -2.392 0.740 -1.551 -10.715 0.373 0.278 0.352 
1.5 -2.683 0.755 -1.502 -10.905 0.359 0.279 0.349 
2 -2.896 0.769 -1.486 -10.718 0.364 0.273 0.346 
2.5 -2.999 0.771 -1.480 -10.032 0.376 0.273 0.342 
3 -3.015 0.770 -1.499 -10.252 0.385 0.275 0.340 
3.5 -3.076 0.776 -1.510 -10.641 0.394 0.274 0.344 
4 -3.131 0.777 -1.504 -10.458 0.381 0.270 0.350 
4.5 -3.204 0.783 -1.508 -10.729 0.377 0.276 0.352 
5 -3.235 0.780 -1.508 -10.686 0.377 0.280 0.344 
z=1.00 
0.1 -0.123 0.570 -2.169 -14.582 0.267 0.212 0.417 
0.2 -0.268 0.594 -2.079 -15.765 0.288 0.231 0.409 
0.3 -0.729 0.605 -1.880 -13.769 0.296 0.243 0.376 
0.4 -0.981 0.625 -1.808 -12.785 0.306 0.244 0.367 
0.5 -1.114 0.642 -1.797 -12.909 0.316 0.235 0.362 
0.75 -1.356 0.659 -1.738 -12.091 0.344 0.239 0.357 
1 -1.528 0.666 -1.693 -10.917 0.340 0.254 0.357 
1.5 -1.548 0.667 -1.706 -11.765 0.333 0.254 0.355 
2 -1.625 0.668 -1.692 -11.424 0.341 0.257 0.358 
2.5 -1.696 0.675 -1.692 -11.823 0.345 0.264 0.360 
3 -1.745 0.676 -1.686 -11.989 0.348 0.260 0.358 
3.5 -1.890 0.690 -1.671 -11.832 0.350 0.261 0.359 
4 -2.027 0.703 -1.648 -11.903 0.344 0.262 0.361 
4.5 -2.120 0.710 -1.637 -12.110 0.346 0.279 0.358 
5 -2.267 0.720 -1.609 -11.908 0.348 0.277 0.357 
Table 32. Coefficients for Peak-Floor Acceleration, =30 ( is the total standard deviation) 
 Period 
b1 b2 b3 b4 b5 b6  
z=0.05 
0.1 -1.353 0.620 -1.844 -12.259 0.319 0.235 0.371 
0.2 -1.373 0.619 -1.834 -12.240 0.315 0.234 0.369 
0.3 -1.388 0.620 -1.830 -12.105 0.319 0.236 0.369 
0.4 -1.381 0.622 -1.839 -12.358 0.319 0.235 0.369 
0.5 -1.397 0.624 -1.836 -12.376 0.321 0.235 0.370 
0.75 -1.443 0.626 -1.824 -12.335 0.322 0.241 0.369 
1 -1.513 0.632 -1.811 -12.464 0.326 0.243 0.368 
1.5 -1.630 0.638 -1.782 -12.108 0.327 0.246 0.364 
2 -1.710 0.643 -1.764 -11.963 0.324 0.244 0.361 
2.5 -1.763 0.645 -1.754 -11.927 0.325 0.246 0.358 
3 -1.808 0.645 -1.740 -11.620 0.325 0.245 0.357 
3.5 -1.850 0.652 -1.744 -11.585 0.330 0.239 0.358 
4 -1.828 0.648 -1.752 -11.598 0.331 0.243 0.359 
4.5 -1.815 0.648 -1.760 -11.734 0.328 0.236 0.359 
5 -1.799 0.645 -1.763 -11.722 0.330 0.237 0.360 
z=0.10 
0.1 -1.274 0.616 -1.864 -12.333 0.318 0.233 0.373 
0.2 -1.319 0.619 -1.844 -12.355 0.307 0.232 0.369 
0.3 -1.362 0.620 -1.830 -11.913 0.316 0.234 0.367 
0.4 -1.321 0.621 -1.852 -12.518 0.314 0.235 0.368 
0.5 -1.348 0.625 -1.849 -12.461 0.318 0.229 0.371 
0.75 -1.409 0.625 -1.824 -12.389 0.322 0.245 0.369 
1 -1.482 0.632 -1.812 -12.690 0.324 0.247 0.369 
1.5 -1.677 0.647 -1.772 -12.686 0.339 0.256 0.363 
2 -1.924 0.669 -1.727 -12.567 0.335 0.260 0.365 
2.5 -2.168 0.691 -1.689 -12.613 0.332 0.267 0.361 
3 -2.409 0.702 -1.620 -12.069 0.334 0.271 0.355 
3.5 -2.597 0.721 -1.598 -12.035 0.342 0.270 0.356 
4 -2.804 0.736 -1.560 -11.408 0.353 0.278 0.352 
4.5 -2.921 0.746 -1.545 -11.179 0.354 0.270 0.353 
5 -3.033 0.757 -1.534 -11.100 0.353 0.269 0.351 
z=0.20 
0.1 -1.044 0.608 -1.929 -12.894 0.309 0.230 0.381 
0.2 -1.086 0.611 -1.895 -13.187 0.294 0.230 0.375 
0.3 -1.219 0.616 -1.846 -12.297 0.304 0.234 0.365 
0.4 -1.219 0.623 -1.861 -12.944 0.310 0.235 0.366 
0.5 -1.279 0.632 -1.855 -12.811 0.315 0.229 0.375 
0.75 -1.437 0.640 -1.810 -12.751 0.329 0.251 0.364 
1 -1.578 0.641 -1.750 -12.179 0.331 0.254 0.364 
1.5 -1.820 0.668 -1.731 -12.714 0.338 0.258 0.358 
2 -2.097 0.690 -1.676 -12.301 0.336 0.260 0.357 
2.5 -2.316 0.704 -1.631 -11.922 0.347 0.258 0.352 
3 -2.492 0.713 -1.594 -11.474 0.358 0.265 0.352 
3.5 -2.624 0.722 -1.569 -11.346 0.361 0.269 0.350 
4 -2.782 0.736 -1.550 -11.109 0.361 0.268 0.349 
4.5 -2.838 0.742 -1.560 -11.064 0.360 0.271 0.350 
5 -2.925 0.743 -1.533 -10.551 0.362 0.272 0.348 
z=0.30 
0.1 -0.817 0.598 -1.988 -13.347 0.298 0.225 0.389 
0.2 -0.914 0.609 -1.933 -13.831 0.292 0.233 0.384 
0.3 -1.141 0.617 -1.848 -12.782 0.297 0.237 0.364 
0.4 -1.233 0.629 -1.836 -12.882 0.311 0.241 0.363 
0.5 -1.312 0.640 -1.826 -12.943 0.323 0.233 0.373 
0.75 -1.570 0.656 -1.761 -12.738 0.341 0.251 0.359 
1 -1.767 0.659 -1.686 -11.417 0.334 0.256 0.360 
1.5 -1.970 0.679 -1.674 -12.202 0.345 0.261 0.356 
2 -2.301 0.712 -1.633 -11.657 0.352 0.270 0.358 
2.5 -2.498 0.725 -1.594 -11.679 0.351 0.264 0.358 
3 -2.717 0.736 -1.551 -11.322 0.363 0.280 0.356 
3.5 -2.912 0.752 -1.520 -11.245 0.366 0.290 0.357 
4 -3.108 0.768 -1.491 -11.090 0.366 0.289 0.357 
4.5 -3.241 0.782 -1.487 -11.274 0.362 0.286 0.360 
5 -3.438 0.799 -1.457 -10.751 0.365 0.290 0.361 
z=0.40 
0.1 -0.628 0.589 -2.036 -13.711 0.288 0.220 0.397 
0.2 -0.795 0.610 -1.962 -14.425 0.293 0.234 0.391 
0.3 -1.148 0.623 -1.832 -13.101 0.295 0.239 0.365 
0.4 -1.303 0.638 -1.797 -12.826 0.313 0.245 0.359 
0.5 -1.441 0.655 -1.784 -12.885 0.332 0.241 0.367 
0.75 -1.774 0.681 -1.716 -12.488 0.343 0.251 0.355 
1 -2.004 0.684 -1.636 -11.268 0.349 0.262 0.351 
1.5 -2.224 0.705 -1.622 -12.169 0.349 0.273 0.354 
2 -2.580 0.745 -1.597 -11.655 0.351 0.273 0.357 
2.5 -2.794 0.749 -1.537 -11.082 0.353 0.281 0.353 
3 -3.000 0.760 -1.499 -10.821 0.353 0.282 0.357 
3.5 -3.171 0.773 -1.473 -11.099 0.355 0.281 0.356 
4 -3.381 0.794 -1.451 -11.015 0.370 0.290 0.357 
4.5 -3.499 0.803 -1.441 -10.802 0.363 0.285 0.358 
5 -3.663 0.817 -1.419 -10.614 0.372 0.279 0.355 
z=0.50 
0.1 -0.479 0.583 -2.074 -14.034 0.281 0.216 0.403 
0.2 -0.702 0.611 -1.986 -15.021 0.299 0.237 0.397 
0.3 -1.173 0.630 -1.815 -13.243 0.293 0.244 0.367 
0.4 -1.386 0.647 -1.762 -12.843 0.307 0.244 0.358 
0.5 -1.547 0.665 -1.743 -12.752 0.331 0.240 0.360 
0.75 -1.885 0.692 -1.681 -12.013 0.352 0.250 0.353 
1 -2.110 0.697 -1.612 -10.841 0.357 0.260 0.348 
1.5 -2.239 0.704 -1.608 -11.416 0.360 0.277 0.356 
2 -2.455 0.727 -1.601 -11.659 0.351 0.270 0.353 
2.5 -2.667 0.740 -1.561 -11.174 0.355 0.271 0.353 
3 -2.818 0.747 -1.539 -11.100 0.355 0.277 0.355 
3.5 -2.920 0.751 -1.523 -11.369 0.357 0.283 0.353 
4 -3.107 0.764 -1.491 -11.057 0.363 0.282 0.350 
4.5 -3.241 0.777 -1.483 -11.208 0.364 0.289 0.354 
5 -3.379 0.792 -1.476 -11.054 0.367 0.288 0.354 
z=0.60 
0.1 -0.359 0.579 -2.105 -14.302 0.276 0.214 0.407 
0.2 -0.633 0.613 -2.006 -15.527 0.304 0.239 0.403 
0.3 -1.215 0.638 -1.801 -13.349 0.298 0.253 0.371 
0.4 -1.498 0.658 -1.723 -12.894 0.301 0.250 0.360 
0.5 -1.709 0.677 -1.686 -12.560 0.322 0.236 0.354 
0.75 -2.072 0.711 -1.638 -11.562 0.365 0.244 0.351 
1 -2.273 0.719 -1.591 -10.798 0.369 0.262 0.351 
1.5 -2.414 0.721 -1.581 -11.283 0.371 0.284 0.350 
2 -2.640 0.743 -1.564 -10.994 0.347 0.275 0.359 
2.5 -2.782 0.749 -1.541 -11.644 0.338 0.269 0.356 
3 -3.036 0.770 -1.515 -11.519 0.359 0.287 0.360 
3.5 -3.230 0.789 -1.499 -11.199 0.345 0.279 0.366 
4 -3.448 0.807 -1.467 -10.978 0.344 0.290 0.365 
4.5 -3.594 0.816 -1.441 -10.900 0.342 0.285 0.369 
5 -3.802 0.834 -1.411 -10.918 0.346 0.289 0.371 
z=0.70 
0.1 -0.265 0.575 -2.131 -14.529 0.272 0.213 0.411 
0.2 -0.544 0.612 -2.029 -15.952 0.303 0.239 0.406 
0.3 -1.196 0.642 -1.806 -13.658 0.309 0.261 0.376 
0.4 -1.585 0.670 -1.701 -12.854 0.301 0.256 0.365 
0.5 -1.836 0.689 -1.644 -12.389 0.310 0.239 0.356 
0.75 -2.261 0.728 -1.588 -11.140 0.372 0.246 0.346 
1 -2.410 0.735 -1.572 -10.665 0.385 0.265 0.350 
1.5 -2.588 0.744 -1.558 -10.876 0.377 0.281 0.355 
2 -2.724 0.745 -1.541 -10.821 0.357 0.286 0.354 
2.5 -2.836 0.745 -1.517 -10.843 0.338 0.276 0.352 
3 -2.922 0.749 -1.518 -11.465 0.346 0.285 0.355 
3.5 -3.047 0.761 -1.515 -11.791 0.344 0.275 0.352 
4 -3.262 0.782 -1.497 -11.325 0.354 0.274 0.353 
4.5 -3.381 0.794 -1.494 -11.437 0.355 0.277 0.352 
5 -3.505 0.798 -1.467 -10.888 0.369 0.279 0.352 
z=0.80 
0.1 -0.197 0.572 -2.149 -14.654 0.270 0.213 0.413 
0.2 -0.435 0.604 -2.047 -16.014 0.297 0.236 0.407 
0.3 -1.061 0.631 -1.824 -13.873 0.311 0.258 0.375 
0.4 -1.461 0.663 -1.724 -13.198 0.316 0.260 0.364 
0.5 -1.753 0.689 -1.669 -12.604 0.323 0.244 0.362 
0.75 -2.291 0.730 -1.563 -11.275 0.351 0.254 0.350 
1 -2.518 0.743 -1.532 -10.532 0.377 0.269 0.341 
1.5 -2.631 0.749 -1.541 -10.872 0.386 0.278 0.349 
2 -2.784 0.763 -1.548 -10.696 0.364 0.270 0.357 
2.5 -2.878 0.757 -1.521 -10.653 0.360 0.277 0.355 
3 -2.986 0.755 -1.497 -10.671 0.357 0.290 0.357 
3.5 -3.061 0.757 -1.494 -10.938 0.345 0.289 0.356 
4 -3.225 0.771 -1.475 -11.040 0.338 0.291 0.355 
4.5 -3.314 0.782 -1.484 -11.488 0.333 0.287 0.358 
5 -3.519 0.807 -1.470 -11.364 0.334 0.283 0.357 
z=0.90 
0.1 -0.161 0.571 -2.158 -14.662 0.269 0.212 0.414 
0.2 -0.353 0.598 -2.059 -15.881 0.293 0.232 0.408 
0.3 -0.901 0.619 -1.853 -13.943 0.304 0.252 0.374 
0.4 -1.239 0.645 -1.763 -13.276 0.309 0.253 0.364 
0.5 -1.490 0.671 -1.722 -12.965 0.322 0.242 0.362 
0.75 -2.074 0.722 -1.618 -12.110 0.360 0.260 0.353 
1 -2.447 0.744 -1.541 -10.787 0.371 0.276 0.352 
1.5 -2.909 0.777 -1.468 -10.894 0.371 0.291 0.354 
2 -3.321 0.813 -1.424 -10.490 0.371 0.292 0.358 
2.5 -3.607 0.838 -1.400 -10.191 0.372 0.282 0.361 
3 -3.810 0.852 -1.381 -10.486 0.380 0.293 0.362 
3.5 -3.957 0.859 -1.366 -10.691 0.386 0.294 0.364 
4 -4.174 0.883 -1.359 -10.644 0.388 0.283 0.365 
4.5 -4.305 0.890 -1.347 -10.636 0.393 0.293 0.365 
5 -4.456 0.897 -1.324 -10.042 0.399 0.302 0.363 
z=1.00 
0.1 -0.147 0.570 -2.162 -14.650 0.268 0.212 0.415 
0.2 -0.322 0.595 -2.064 -15.738 0.291 0.231 0.408 
0.3 -0.815 0.611 -1.867 -13.817 0.301 0.249 0.375 
0.4 -1.102 0.633 -1.786 -13.047 0.303 0.247 0.364 
0.5 -1.288 0.653 -1.757 -12.759 0.314 0.234 0.362 
0.75 -1.656 0.682 -1.685 -12.031 0.345 0.247 0.352 
1 -1.843 0.688 -1.637 -10.990 0.353 0.259 0.352 
1.5 -2.016 0.703 -1.630 -11.745 0.364 0.272 0.354 
2 -2.293 0.728 -1.599 -11.243 0.359 0.275 0.360 
2.5 -2.450 0.735 -1.572 -11.406 0.350 0.276 0.357 
3 -2.659 0.749 -1.539 -11.395 0.355 0.284 0.358 
3.5 -2.812 0.759 -1.518 -11.331 0.352 0.286 0.358 
4 -3.053 0.780 -1.481 -10.961 0.355 0.289 0.360 
4.5 -3.171 0.793 -1.480 -11.089 0.357 0.288 0.359 
5 -3.343 0.810 -1.464 -10.988 0.355 0.286 0.360 
11. References 
Ahmed, B., Kelman, I., Fehr, H. K., and Saha, M. (2016). Community resilience 
to cyclone disasters in coastal Bangladesh. Sustainability 8, 805. 
Alcik, H., Ozel, O., Apaydin, N., and Erdik, M. (2009). A study on warning 
algorithms for Istanbul earthquake early warning system. Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 36, 35. doi:10.1029/2008GL036659. 
Alexander, D. (2000). Confronting catastrophe: new perspectives on natural 
disasters. Oxford University Press Available at: 
https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Confronting_Catastrophe.html?i
d=bFfkHK4kka8C&redir_esc=y [Accessed September 12, 2019]. 
Alexander, D. E. (2002). Principles of emergency planning and management. 
Oxford University Press on Demand. 
Alexander, D. E. (2015). Evaluation of civil protection programmes, with a case 
study from Mexico. Disaster Prev. Manag. 24, 263283. 
doi:10.1108/DPM-12-2014-0268. 
Allen, R., Cochran, E., Huggins, T., Miles, S., and Otegui, D. (2018). Lessons 
from Mexicos Earthquake Early Warning System. Eos (Washington. DC). 
99. doi:10.1029/2018eo105095. 
Allen, R. M., Brown, H., Hellweg, M., Khainovski, O., Lombard, P., and 
Neuhauser, D. (2009a). Real-time earthquake detection and hazard 
assessment by ElarmS across California. Geophys. Res. Lett. 36, 16. 
doi:10.1029/2008GL036766. 
Allen, R. M., Cochran, E. S., Huggins, T., Miles, S., and Otegui, D. (2017). 
Quake warnings, seismic culture. Science (80-. ). 358, 1111. 
doi:10.1126/science.aar4640. 
Allen, R. M., Gasparini, P., Kamigaichi, O., and Bse, M. (2009b). The status 
of earthquake early warning around the World: An introductory overview. 
Seismol. Res. Lett. 80, 682693. doi:10.1785/gssrl.80.5.682. 
Allen, R. M., and Kanamori, H. (2003). The potential for earthquake early 
warning in southern California. Science 300, 786789. 
doi:10.1126/science.1080912. 
Allen, R. M., Kong, Q., and Martin-Short, R. (2019). The MyShake Platform: A 
Global Vision for Earthquake Early Warning. Pure Appl. Geophys., 114. 
doi:10.1007/s00024-019-02337-7. 
Allen, R. M., and Melgar, D. (2019). Earthquake Early Warning: Advances, 
Scientific Challenges, and Societal Needs. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 
47. doi:10.1146/annurev-earth-053018-060457. 
Allen, R. M., and Ziv, A. (2011). Application of realtime GPS to earthquake 
early warning. Geophys. Res. Lett. 38. 
Allen, R. V (1978). Automatic Earthquake Recognition and Timing From Single 
Traces. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 68, 15211532. 
Annarelli, A., and Nonino, F. (2016). Strategic and operational management 
of organizational resilience: Current state of research and future 
directions. Omega 62, 118. 
ASCE (2016). Minimum design loads and associated criteria for buildings and 
other structures. ASCE Stand. ASCE/SEI 716 (in Prep. Reston, VA Am. 
Soc. Civ. Eng. 
Asgary, A., Levy, J. K., and Mehregan, N. (2007). Estimating willingness to 
pay for a hypothetical earthquake early warning systems. Environ. 
Hazards 7, 312320. doi:10.1016/j.envhaz.2007.09.003. 
Ashiya, K. (2004). Earthquake Alarm Systems. J. Japan Assoc. Earthq. Eng. 
4, 112117. 
Aslani, H., and Miranda, E. (2005). Fragility Assessment of Slab-Column 
Connections in Existing Non-Ductile Reinforced Concrete Buildings. J. 
Earthq. Eng. 9, 777804. doi:10.1080/13632460509350566. 
Baker, J. W. (2008). An introduction to Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Analysis 
(PSHA). Stanfordedu, 172. Available at: 
http://www.stanford.edu/~bakerjw/Publications/Baker_(2008)_Intro_to_P
SHA_v1_3.pdf [Accessed June 29, 2016]. 
Baker, J. W., and Allin Cornell, C. (2005). A vectorvalued ground motion 
intensity measure consisting of spectral acceleration and epsilon. Earthq. 
Eng. Struct. Dyn. 34, 11931217. 
Barroso, L. R., and Winterstein, S. (2002). Probabilistic seismic demand 
analysis of controlled steel moment-resisting frame structures. Earthq. 
Eng. Struct. Dyn. 31, 20492066. doi:10.1002/eqe.201. 
Basher, R. (2006). Global early warning systems for natural hazards: 
Systematic and people-centred. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. 
Sci. 364, 21672182. doi:10.1098/rsta.2006.1819. 
Beccari, B. (2016). A comparative analysis of disaster risk, vulnerability and 
resilience composite indicators. PLoS Curr. 8. 
Behr, Y., Clinton, J. F., Cauzzi, C., Hauksson, E., Jnsdttir, K., Marius, C. G., 
et al. (2016). The Virtual Seismologist in SeisComP3: A new 
implementation strategy for earthquake early warning algorithms. 
Seismol. Res. Lett. 87, 363373. 
Berg, B. L. (2001). Qualitative research methods for the social sciences. Allyn 
and Bacon Available at: 
https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Qualitative_Research_Methods_
for_the_Soc.html?id=9SRHAAAAMAAJ [Accessed September 12, 2019]. 
Bernardi, F., Lomax, A., Michelini, A., Lauciani, V., Piatanesi, A., and Lorito, 
S. (2015). Appraising the Early-est earthquake monitoring system for 
tsunami alerting at the Italian Candidate Tsunami Service Provider. Nat. 
Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 15, 20192036. doi:10.5194/nhess-15-2019-
2015. 
Bindi, D., Luzi, L., Pacor, F., Sabetta, F., and Massa, M. (2009). Towards a 
new reference ground motion prediction equation for Italy: Update of the 
Sabetta-Pugliese (1996). Bull. Earthq. Eng. 7, 591608. 
doi:10.1007/s10518-009-9107-8. 
Birkmann, J., Kienberger, S., and Alexander, D. (2014). Assessment of 
vulnerability to natural hazards: a European perspective. Elsevier. 
Blyth, M. (2009). Business continuity management: building an effective 
incident management plan. John Wiley & Sons. 
Boore, D. M., and Atkinson, G. M. (2008). Ground-motion prediction equations 
for the average horizontal component of PGA, PGV, and 5%-damped 
PSA at spectral periods between 0.01 s and 10.0 s. Earthq. Spectra 24, 
99138. 
Bse, M., Allen, R., Brown, H., Gua, G., Fischer, M., Hauksson, E., et al. 
(2014). CISN ShakeAlert: An earthquake early warning demonstration 
system for California. Early Warn. Geol. Disasters, 4969. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-12233-0_3. 
Bse, M., Felizardo, C., and Heaton, T. H. (2015). Finite-fault rupture detector 
(FinDer): Going real-time in californian shakealert warning system. 
Seismol. Res. Lett. 86, 16921704. doi:10.1785/0220150154. 
Bse, M., Hauksson, E., Solanki, K., Kanamori, H., Wu, Y. M., and Heaton, T. 
H. (2009). A new trigger criterion for improved real-time performance of 
onsite earthquake early warning in Southern California. Bull. Seismol. 
Soc. Am. 99, 897905. doi:10.1785/0120080034. 
Bse, M., Heaton, T. H., and Hauksson, E. (2012). Real-time Finite Fault 
Rupture Detector (FinDer) for large earthquakes. Geophys. J. Int. 191, 
803812. doi:10.1111/j.1365-246X.2012.05657.x. 
Bse, M., Ionescu, C., and Wenzel, F. (2007). Earthquake early warning for 
Bucharest, Romania: Novel and revised scaling relations. Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 34, 16. doi:10.1029/2007GL029396. 
Bse, M., Smith, D. E., Felizardo, C., Meier, M. A., Heaton, T. H., and Clinton, 
J. F. (2018). FinDer v.2: Improved real-time ground-motion predictions 
forM2-M9 with seismic finite-source characterization. Geophys. J. Int. 
212, 725742. doi:10.1093/gji/ggx430. 
Brown, H. M., Allen, R. M., Hellweg, M., Khainovski, O., Neuhauser, D., and 
Souf, A. (2011). Development of the ElarmS methodology for earthquake 
early warning: Realtime application in California and offline testing in 
Japan. Soil Dyn. Earthq. Eng. 31, 188200. 
doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.03.008. 
Brown, S. (2010). Likert scale examples for surveys. ANR Progr. Eval. Iowa 
State Univ. USA. 
Bryman, A. (2016). Social research methods. Oxford university press. 
BSI (British Standards Institutions) (2014). Guidance on organizational 
resilience BS 6500:2014. London: BSI Standards Limited. 
Burnard, K. J., and Bhamra, R. (2019). Challenges for organisational 
resilience. Contin. Resil. Rev. 
Calkins, A., and Lieberman, E. (2014). The benefits and costs of an 
earthquake early warning system in Washington State. Seattle Evans 
Sch. Rev. Univ. Washingt. 
Carranza, M., Buforn, E., Colombelli, S., and Zollo, A. (2013). Earthquake 
early warning for southern Iberia: AP wave thresholdbased approach. 
Geophys. Res. Lett. 40, 45884593. 
Cauzzi, C., Behr, Y., Le Guenan, T., Douglas, J., Auclair, S., Woessner, J., et 
al. (2016). Earthquake early warning and operational earthquake 
forecasting as real-time hazard information to mitigate seismic risk at 
nuclear facilities. Bull. Earthq. Eng., 118. doi:10.1007/s10518-016-9864-
Cha, Y. J., Agrawal, A. K., Phillips, B. M., and Spencer, B. F. (2014). Direct 
performance-based design with 200kN MR dampers using multi-objective 
cost effective optimization for steel MRFs. Eng. Struct. 71, 6072. 
doi:10.1016/j.engstruct.2014.04.023. 
Chae, Y., Ricles, J. M., and Sause, R. (2013). Modeling of a large-scale 
magneto-rheological damper for seismic hazard mitigation. Part II: Semi-
active mode. Earthq. Eng. Struct. Dyn. 42, 687703. 
doi:10.1002/eqe.2236. 
Channon, D., and Sammut-Bonnici, T. (2014). Gap analysis. Wiley Encycl. 
Manag. 12: 13. 
Chen, D. Y., Hsiao, N. C., and Wu, Y. M. (2015). The earthworm based 
earthquake alarm reporting system in Taiwan. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 
105, 568579. doi:10.1785/0120140147. 
Cheng, M. H., Wu, S., Heaton, T. H., and Beck, J. L. (2014). Earthquake early 
warning application to buildings. Eng. Struct. 60, 155164. 
doi:10.1016/j.engstruct.2013.12.033. 
Chrissis, M. B., Konrad, M., and Shrum, S. (2003). CMMI guidlines for process 
integration and product improvement. Addison-Wesley Longman 
Publishing Co., Inc. 
Chung, A. I., Henson, I., and Allen, R. M. (2019). Optimizing earthquake early 
warning performance: ElarmS-3. Seismol. Res. Lett. 90, 727743. 
doi:10.1785/0220180192. 
Clinton, J., Zollo, A., Marmureanu, A., Zulfikar, C., and Parolai, S. (2016). 
State-of-the art and future of earthquake early warning in the European 
region. Bull. Earthq. Eng. 14, 24412458. doi:10.1007/s10518-016-9922-
Cochran, E. S., and Husker, A. L. (2019). How low should we go when warning 
for earthquakes? Science (80-. ). 366, 957958. 
Colombelli, S., Allen, R. M., and Zollo, A. (2013). Application of realtime GPS 
to earthquake early warning in subduction and strikeslip environments. 
J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 118, 34483461. 
Colombelli, S., Amoroso, O., Zollo, A., and Kanamori, H. (2012a). Test of a 
Threshold-Based Earthquake Early-Warning Method Using Japanese 
Data. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 102, 12661275. doi:10.1785/0120110149. 
Colombelli, S., Caruso, A., Zollo, A., Festa, G., and Kanamori, H. (2015). A P 
wavebased, onsite method for earthquake early warning. Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 42, 13901398. 
Colombelli, S., Zollo, A., Festa, G., and Kanamori, H. (2012b). Early magnitude 
and potential damage zone estimates for the great Mw 9 Tohoku-Oki 
earthquake. Geophys. Res. Lett. 39, n/a-n/a. 
doi:10.1029/2012GL053923. 
Colombelli, S., Zollo, A., Festa, G., and Picozzi, M. (2014). Evidence for a 
difference in rupture initiation between small and large earthquakes. Nat. 
Commun. 5, 15. 
Convertito, V., Iervolino, I., Zollo, A., and Manfredi, G. (2008). Prediction of 
response spectra via real-time earthquake measurements. Soil Dyn. 
Earthq. Eng. 28, 492505. doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2007.07.006. 
Cornell, C. A. (1968). Engineering Seismic Risk Analysis. Bull. Seismol. Soc. 
Am. 58, 15831606. 
Cremen, G., and Baker, J. W. (2018). Quantifying the benefits of building 
instruments to FEMA P-58 rapid post-earthquake damage and loss 
predictions. Eng. Struct. 176, 243253. 
Cremen, G., and Baker, J. W. (2019). A Methodology for Evaluating 
Component-Level Loss Predictions of the FEMA P-58 Seismic 
Performance Assessment Procedure. Earthq. Spectra 35, 193210. 
Cremen, G., and Galasso, C. (2020). Earthquake Early Warning: Recent 
Advances and Perspectives. Earth-Science Rev., 103184. 
Creswell, J. W. (2014). A concise introduction to mixed methods research. 
SAGE publications. 
Croasmun, J. T., and Ostrom, L. (2011). Using Likert-Type Scales in the Social 
Sciences. J. Adult Educ. 40, 1922. 
Cronin, P., Ryan, F., and Coughlan, M. (2008). Undertaking a literature review: 
a step-by-step approach. Br. J. Nurs. 17, 3843. 
doi:10.12968/bjon.2008.17.1.28059. 
Crowell, B. W., Bock, Y., and Melgar, D. (2012). Realtime inversion of GPS 
data for finite fault modeling and rapid hazard assessment. Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 39. 
Crowell, B. W., Bock, Y., and Squibb, M. B. (2009). Demonstration of 
earthquake early warning using total displacement waveforms from real-
time GPS networks. Seismol. Res. Lett. 80, 772782. 
Crowell, B. W., Melgar, D., Bock, Y., Haase, J. S., and Geng, J. (2013). 
Earthquake magnitude scaling using seismogeodetic data. Geophys. 
Res. Lett. 40, 60896094. 
Crowell, B. W., Schmidt, D. A., Bodin, P., Vidale, J. E., Baker, B., Barrientos, 
S., et al. (2018). GFAST earthquake early warning potential for great 
earthquakes in Chile. Seismol. Res. Lett. 89, 542556. 
Crowell, B. W., Schmidt, D. A., Bodin, P., Vidale, J. E., Gomberg, J., Renate 
Hartog, J., et al. (2016). Demonstration of the Cascadia GFAST geodetic 
earthquake early warning system for the Nisqually, Washington, 
earthquake. Seismol. Res. Lett. 87, 930943. 
Cua, G. B. (2005). Creating the Virtual Seismologist: developments in ground 
motion characterization and seismic early warning. 
Cua, G., Fischer, M., Heaton, T., and Wiemer, S. (2009). Real-time 
Performance of the Virtual Seismologist Earthquake Early Warning 
Algorithm in Southern California. Seismol. Res. Lett.  80, 740747. 
doi:10.1785/gssrl.80.5.740. 
Cua, G., and Heaton, T. (2007). The Virtual Seismologist (VS) Method: a 
Bayesian Approach to Earthquake Early Warning, in Earthquake Early 
Warning Systems (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg), 97
132. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-72241-0_7. 
Cullar, A., Espinosa-Aranda, J. M., Surez, R., Ibarrola, G., Uribe, A., 
Rodrguez, F. H., et al. (2014). The Mexican Seismic Alert System 
(SASMEX): Its Alert Signals, Broadcast Results and Performance During 
the M 7.4 Punta Maldonado Earthquake of March 20th, 2012, in 
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg), 7187. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-12233-0_4. 
Cullar, A., Surez, G., and EspinosaAranda, J. M. (2018). A Fast Earthquake 
Early Warning Algorithm Based on the First 3 s of the PWave Coda. Bull. 
Seismol. Soc. Am. 108, 20682079. doi:10.1785/0120180079. 
Cullar, A., Surez, G., and Espinosa Aranda, J. M. (2017). Performance 
evaluation of the earthquake detection and classification algorithm 2 (tS-
tP) of the seismic alert system of Mexico (SASMEX). Bull. Seismol. Soc. 
Am. 107, 14511463. doi:10.1785/0120150330. 
Cutter, S. L., and Derakhshan, S. (2019). Implementing disaster policy: 
exploring scale and measurement schemes for disaster resilience. J. 
Homel. Secur. Emerg. Manag. 16. 
Dai, A. (2011). Early warning and emergency management in earthquakes. 
ICEMMS 2011 - Proc. 2011 2nd IEEE Int. Conf. Emerg. Manag. Manag. 
Sci., 1720. doi:10.1109/ICEMMS.2011.6015608. 
De Iuliis, M., and Faella, C. (2013). Effectiveness analysis of a semiactive base 
isolation strategy using information from an early-warning network. Eng. 
Struct. 52, 518535. doi:10.1016/j.engstruct.2013.03.025. 
Doi, K. (2011). The operation and performance of Earthquake Early Warnings 
by the Japan Meteorological Agency. Soil Dyn. Earthq. Eng. 31, 119126. 
doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.06.009. 
Dunn, P. T., Ahn, A. Y. E., Bostrom, A., and Vidale, J. E. (2016). Perceptions 
of earthquake early warnings on the U.S. West Coast. Int. J. Disaster Risk 
Reduct. 20, 112122. doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2016.10.019. 
Dyke, S. J., Spencer, B. F., Sain, M. K., and Carlson, J. D. (1996). Modeling 
and control of magnetorheological dampers for seismic response 
reduction. Smart Mater. Struct. 5, 565575. doi:10.1088/0964-
1726/5/5/006. 
Elizabeth Cochran, B. S., Aagaard, B. T., Allen, R. M., Andrews, J., Baltay, A. 
S., Barbour, A. J., et al. (2018). OFR 2018-1131: Research to Improve 
ShakeAlert Earthquake Early Warning Products and Utility. Open-File 
Rep. doi:10.3133/ofr20181131. 
Emolo, A., Picozzi, M., Festa, G., Martino, C., Colombelli, S., Caruso, A., et al. 
(2016). Earthquake early warning feasibility in the Campania region 
(southern Italy) and demonstration system for public school buildings. 
Bull. Earthq. Eng. 14, 25132529. doi:10.1007/s10518-016-9865-z. 
Erdik, M., Fahjan, Y., Ozel, O., Alcik, H., Mert, A., and Gul, M. (2003). Istanbul 
Earthquake Rapid Response and the Early Warning System. Bull. Earthq. 
Eng. 1, 157163. doi:10.1023/A:1024813612271. 
Espinosa-Aranda, J., Cuellar, A., Garcia, A., Ibarrola, G., Islas, R., Maldonado, 
S., et al. (2009). Evolution of the Mexican Seismic Alert System 
(SASMEX). Seismol. Res. Lett. 80, 694. doi:10.1785/gssrl.80.5.694. 
Espinosa-Aranda, J. M., Cullar,  a., Rodrguez, F. H., Frontana, B., Ibarrola, 
G., Islas, R., et al. (2011). The seismic alert system of Mexico (SASMEX): 
Progress and its current applications. Soil Dyn. Earthq. Eng. 31, 154162. 
doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.09.011. 
Esposito, S., and Emolo, A. (2014). Final report for Feasibility studies on EEW 
application to the Circumvesuviana Napoli Railway. Strateg. Tools Real 
Time Earthq. Risk Reduction, REAKT. Available at: 
http://www.reaktproject.eu/deliverables/REAKT-D7.4.pdf [Accessed 
August 25, 2016]. 
European Commitee for Standardization (2004). Eurocode 8: Design of 
structures for earthquake resistance - Part 1: General rules, seismic 
actions and rules for buildings. Eur. Comm. Stand. 1, 231. doi:[Authority: 
The European Union per Regulation 305/2011, Directive 98/34/EC, 
Directive 2004/18/EC]. 
Farooqui, M., Quadri, S. A., Suriya, S. S., Khan, M. A., Ovais, M., Sohail, Z., 
et al. (2017). Posttraumatic stress disorder: a serious post-earthquake 
complication. Trends Psychiatry Psychother. 39, 135143. 
doi:10.1590/2237-6089-2016-0029. 
Frazier, T. G., Thompson, C. M., Dezzani, R. J., and Butsick, D. (2013). Spatial 
and temporal quantification of resilience at the community scale. Appl. 
Geogr. 42, 95107. 
Fujinawa, Y., and Noda, Y. (2013). Japans earthquake early warning system 
on 11 March 2011: Performance, shortcomings, and changes. Earthq. 
Spectra 29, 325. doi:10.1193/1.4000127. 
Fujita, S., Minagawa, K., Tanaka, G., and Shimosaka, H. (2011). Intelligent 
seismic isolation system using air bearings and earthquake early warning. 
Soil Dyn. Earthq. Eng. 31, 223230. doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.06.006. 
Galasso, C., Zhong, P., Zareian, F., Iervolino, I., and Graves, R. W. (2013). 
Validation of groundmotion simulations for historical events using MDoF 
systems. Earthq. Eng. Struct. Dyn. 42, 13951412. 
Gasparini, P., Manfredi, G., and Zschau, J. (2011). Earthquake early warning 
as a tool for improving societys resilience and crisis response. Soil Dyn. 
Earthq. Eng. 31, 267270. doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.09.004. 
Gentile, R., Galasso, C., Idris, Y., Rusydy, I., and Meilianda, E. (2019). From 
rapid visual survey to multi-hazard risk prioritisation and numerical fragility 
of school buildings. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. Discuss. 19, 1365
1386. 
Gibson, C. A., and Tarrant, M. (2010). A conceptual models approach to 
organisational resilience. Aust. J. Emerg. Manag. 25, 6. 
Given, D. D., Allen, R. M., Baltay, A. S., Bodin, P., Cochran, E. S., Creager, 
K., et al. (2018). Revised technical implementation plan for the ShakeAlert 
systemAn earthquake early warning system for the West Coast of the 
United States. Open-File Rep. doi:10.3133/ofr20181155. 
Goltz, J. D. (2002). Introducing earthquake early warning in California: A 
summary of social science and public policy issues. 
Grapenthin, R., Johanson, I. A., and Allen, R. M. (2014a). Operational real
time GPSenhanced earthquake early warning. J. Geophys. Res. Solid 
Earth 119, 79447965. 
Grapenthin, R., Johanson, I., and Allen, R. M. (2014b). The 2014 Mw 6.0 Napa 
earthquake, California: Observations from realtime GPSenhanced 
earthquake early warning. Geophys. Res. Lett. 41, 82698276. 
Harrell, M. C., and Bradley, M. A. (2009). Data collection methods. Semi-
structured interviews and focus groups. Rand National Defense Research 
Inst santa monica ca. 
Haselton, C. B., and Deierlein, G. G. (2008). Assessing Seismic Collapse 
Safety of Modern Reinforced Concrete Moment-Frame Buildings. Civ. 
Eng., 481491. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)ST.1943-541X.0000318. 
Heaton, T. H. (1985). A model for a seismic computerized alert network. 
Science 228, 987990. doi:10.1126/science.228.4702.987. 
Helbing, D. (2013). Globally networked risks and how to respond. Nature 497, 
5159. 
Hernndez-Moreno, G., and Alcntara-Ayala, I. (2017). Landslide risk 
perception in Mexico: a research gate into public awareness and 
knowledge. Landslides 14, 351371. 
Herovic, E., Sellnow, T. L., and Sellnow, D. D. (2019). Challenges and 
opportunities for pre-crisis emergency risk communication: lessons 
learned from the earthquake community. J. Risk Res. 0, 116. 
doi:10.1080/13669877.2019.1569097. 
Hissel, F., Morel, G., Pescaroli, G., Graaff, H., Felts, D., and Pietrantoni, L. 
(2014). Early warning and mass evacuation in coastal cities. Coast. Eng. 
87, 193204. doi:10.1016/j.coastaleng.2013.11.015. 
Hobbs, T., and Rollins, C. (2019). Earthquake early warning system 
challenged by the largest SoCal shock in 20 years. Temblor. 
doi:10.32858/temblor.035. 
Hoenderkamp, J. C. D., and Snijder, H. H. (2000). Approximate analysis of 
highrise frames with flexible connections. Struct. Des. tall Build. 9, 233
Horiuchi, S., Negishi, H., Abe, K., Kamimura, A., and Fujinawa, Y. (2005). An 
automatic processing system for broadcasting earthquake alarms. Bull. 
Seismol. Soc. Am. 95, 708718. doi:10.1785/0120030133. 
Horiuchi, Y. (2009). Earthquake early warning hospital applications. Spec. 
Issue Early Warn. Nat. disaster mitigation. 4, 237241. Available at: 
http://www.fujipress.jp/finder/xslt.php?mode=present&inputfile=DSSTR0
00400040005.xml. 
Hoshiba, M. (2014). Review of the Nationwide Earthquake Early Warning in 
Japan during Its First Five Years. Elsevier doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-
394848-9.00019-5. 
Hoshiba, M., and Aoki, S. (2015). Numerical shake prediction for earthquake 
early warning: Data assimilation, realtime shake mapping, and simulation 
of wave propagation. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 105, 13241338. 
Hoshiba, M., Kamigaichi, O., Saito, M., Tsukada, S., and Hamada, N. (2008). 
Earthquake early warning starts nationwide in Japan. Eos (Washington. 
DC). 89, 7374. doi:10.1029/2008EO080001. 
Hsiao, N. C., Wu, Y. M., Shin, T. C., Zhao, L., and Teng, T. L. (2009). 
Development of earthquake early warning system in Taiwan. Geophys. 
Res. Lett. 36, 37. doi:10.1029/2008GL036596. 
IAEA (2011). Earthquake Preparedness and Response for Nuclear Power 
Plants. Vienna, Austria. 
Iervolino, I. (2011). Performance-based earthquake early warning. Soil Dyn. 
Earthq. Eng. 31, 209222. doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.07.010. 
Iervolino, I., Convertito, V., and Giorgio, M. (2006). Real-time risk analysis for 
hybrid earthquake early warning systems. J. Earthq., 120. Available at: 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13632460609350621. 
Iervolino, I., Galasso, C., and Cosenza, E. (2010a). REXEL: computer aided 
record selection for code-based seismic structural analysis. Bull. Earthq. 
Eng. 8, 339362. 
Iervolino, I., Galasso, C., and Manfredi, G. (2010b). Preliminary investigation 
on integration of semi-active structural control and earthquake early 
warning. Early Warn. Syst. Transp. lines Work., 16197399. 
Iervolino, I., Giorgio, M., Galasso, C., and Manfredi, G. (2009). Uncertainty in 
early warning predictions of engineering ground motion parameters: What 
really matters? Geophys. Res. Lett. 36, 16. doi:10.1029/2008GL036644. 
Iervolino, I., Giorgio, M., and Manfredi, G. (2007a). Expected loss-based alarm 
threshold set for earthquake early warning systems. Earthq. Eng. Struct. 
Dyn. 36, 11511168. doi:10.1002/eqe.675. 
Iervolino, I., Manfredi, G., and Cosenza, E. (2007b). Earthquake Early 
Warning and Engineering Application Prospects, in Earthquake Early 
Warning Systems (Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg), 233
247. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-72241-0_12. 
Ionescu, C., Bse, M., Wenzel, F., Marmureanu, A., Grigore, A., and 
Marmureanu, G. (2007). An early warning system for deep Vrancea 
(Romania) earthquakes, in Earthquake Early Warning Systems 
(Springer), 343349. 
ISO (International Organization for Standarization) (2017). ISO 22316:2017. 
Security and resilience - Organizational resilience - Principles and 
attributes. Geneva: ISO. 
ISO (International Organization for Standarization) (2019). ISO 22301:2019. 
Security and resilience - Business continuity management systems - 
Requirements. Geneva: ISO. 
Iwan, W. D. (1997). Drift spectrum: measure of demand for earthquake ground 
motions. J. Struct. Eng. 123, 397404. 
Jalayer, F., and Cornell, C. A. (2009). Alternative non-linear demand 
estimation methods for probability-based seismic assessments. Earthq. 
Eng. Struct. Dyn. 38, 951972. doi:10.1002/eqe.876. 
Jansen, L. M., and Dyke, S. J. (2000). Semi-Active Control Strategies for MR 
Dampers: A Comparative Study. J. Eng. Mech. 126, 795803. 
doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9399(2000)126:8(795). 
Ji, J., Gao, Y., Lui, Q., Wu, Z., Zhang, W., and Zhang, C. (2019). Chinas early 
warning system progress. Science (80-. )., 332.1-332. 
doi:10.1126/science.aay4550. 
Johnson, E. a, Ramallo, J. C., Spencer, B. F., and Sain, M. K. (1998). 
Intelligent Base Isolation Systems. Second World Conf. Struct. Control, 
110. 
Johnson, L. A., Rabinovici, S., Kang, G. S., Mahin, S. A., Curry, C., Arba, R., 
et al. (2016). California Earthquake Early Warning System Benefit Study. 
CSSC Publ., 1604. 
Kamigaichi, O. (2004). Jma Earthquake Early Warning. J. Japan Assoc. 
Earthq. Eng. 4, 134137. doi:10.5610/jaee.4.3_134. 
Kamigaichi, O., Saito, M., Doi, K., Matsumori, T., Tsukada, S., Takeda, K., et 
al. (2009). Earthquake Early Warning in Japan: Warning the General 
Public and Future Prospects. Seismol. Res. Lett. 80, 717726. 
doi:10.1785/gssrl.80.5.717. 
Kanamori, H. (2005). Real-Time Seismology and Earthquake Damage 
Mitigation. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. 33, 195214. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.earth.33.092203.122626. 
Karavasilis, T. L., and Seo, C. Y. (2011). Seismic structural and non-structural 
performance evaluation of highly damped self-centering and conventional 
systems. Eng. Struct. 33, 22482258. 
doi:10.1016/j.engstruct.2011.04.001. 
Kawamoto, S., Hiyama, Y., Ohta, Y., and Nishimura, T. (2016). First result 
from the GEONET real-time analysis system (REGARD): the case of the 
2016 Kumamoto earthquakes. Earth, Planets Sp. 68, 190. 
Kawamoto, S., Ohta, Y., Hiyama, Y., Todoriki, M., Nishimura, T., Furuya, T., 
et al. (2017). REGARD: A new GNSSbased realtime finite fault modeling 
system for GEONET. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 122, 13241349. 
Kelman, I., Gaillard, J. C., Lewis, J., and Mercer, J. (2016). Learning from the 
history of disaster vulnerability and resilience research and practice for 
climate change. Nat. Hazards 82, 129143. 
Kelman, I., and Glantz, M. H. (2014). Early Warning Systems Defined, in 
Reducing Disaster: Early Warning Systems For Climate Change 
(Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands), 89108. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-
8598-3_5. 
King, G., Keohane, R. O., and Verba, S. (1994). Designing Social Inquiry: 
Scientific Inference in Qualitative Research. Contemp. Sociol. 24, 424. 
doi:10.2307/2076556. 
Kodera, Y., Saitou, J., Hayashimoto, N., Adachi, S., Morimoto, M., Nishimae, 
Y., et al. (2016). Earthquake early warning for the 2016 Kumamoto 
earthquake: performance evaluation of the current system and the next-
generation methods of the Japan Meteorological Agency. Earth, Planets 
Sp. 68, 202. 
Kodera, Y., Yamada, Y., Hirano, K., Tamaribuchi, K., Adachi, S., Hayashimoto, 
N., et al. (2018). The Propagation of Local Undamped Motion (PLUM) 
method: A simple and robust seismic wavefield estimation approach for 
earthquake early warning. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 108, 9831003. 
Kohler, M. D., Cochran, E. S., Given, D., Guiwits, S., Neuhauser, D., Henson, 
I., et al. (2018). Earthquake early warning shakealert system: West coast 
wide production prototype. Seismol. Res. Lett. 89, 99107. 
doi:10.1785/0220170140. 
Kostkova, P., Mani-Saada, J., Madle, G., and Weinberg, J. (2003). Agent-
based up-to-date data management in national electronic library for 
communicable disease, in Applications of Software Agent Technology in 
the Health Care Domain (Springer), 105124. 
Kubo, T., Hisada, Y., Horiuchi, S., and Yamamoto, S. (2008). Application of 
Earthquake Early Warning System and Real-time Strong-motion 
Monitoring System to Earthquake Disaster Mitigation of a High-Rise 
Building in Tokyo, Japan. in (Beijing, China: 14th World Conference on 
Earthquake Engineering (14WCEE), Beijing, China, (2007)). 
Kubo, T., Hisada, Y., Murakami, M., Kosuge, F., and Hamano, K. (2011). 
Application of an earthquake early warning system and a real-time strong 
motion monitoring system in emergency response in a high-rise building. 
Soil Dyn. Earthq. Eng. 31, 231239. doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.07.009. 
Kumar, A., Mittal, H., Chamoli, B. P., Gairola, A., Jakka, R. S., and Srivastava, 
A. (2014). Earthquake early warning system for northern India. in 15th 
symposium on earthquake engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Roorkee, 1113. 
Kuyuk, H. S., Allen, R. M., Brown, H., Hellweg, M., Henson, I., and Neuhauser, 
D. (2014). Designing a network-based earthquake early warning 
algorithm for California: ElarmS-2. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 104, 162173. 
doi:10.1785/0120130146. 
Lancieri, M., and Zollo, A. (2008). A Bayesian approach to the real-time 
estimation of magnitude from the early P and S wave displacement peaks. 
J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 113, 117. doi:10.1029/2007JB005386. 
Le Guenan, T., Smai, F., Loschetter, A., Auclair, S., Monfort, D., Taillefer, N., 
et al. (2016). Accounting for end-user preferences in earthquake early 
warning systems. Bull. Earthq. Eng. 14, 297319. 
Lee, W. H. K., and Espinosa-Aranda, J. M. (2003). Earthquake Early Warning 
Systems: Current Status and Perspectives. Early Warn. Syst. Nat. 
Disaster Reduct., 409423. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-55903-7_53. 
Lindell, M. K., Prater, C. S., and Peacock, W. G. (2007). Organizational 
Communication and Decision Making for Hurricane Emergencies. Nat. 
Hazards Rev. 8, 5060. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)1527-6988(2007)8:3(50). 
Linkov, I., Eisenberg, D. A., Bates, M. E., Chang, D., Convertino, M., Allen, J. 
H., et al. (2013). Measurable resilience for actionable policy. 
Linnenluecke, M. K. (2017). Resilience in business and management 
research: A review of influential publications and a research agenda. Int. 
J. Manag. Rev. 19, 430. 
Liu, A., and Yamada, M. (2014). Bayesian approach for identification of 
multiple events in an early warning system. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 104, 
11111121. 
Lockman,  a. B. (2005). Single-Station Earthquake Characterization for Early 
Warning. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 95, 20292039. 
doi:10.1785/0120040241. 
Maddaloni, G., Caterino, N., Nestovito, G., and Occhiuzzi, A. (2013). Use of 
seismic early warning information to calibrate variable dampers for 
structural control of a highway bridge: evaluation of the system 
robustness. Bull. Earthq. Eng. 11, 24072428. doi:10.1007/s10518-013-
9510-z. 
Malhotra, P. K. (2006). Smooth spectra of horizontal and vertical ground 
motions. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 96, 506518. 
Marmureanu, A., Ionescu, C., and Cioflan, C. O. (2011). Advanced real-time 
acquisition of the Vrancea earthquake early warning system. Soil Dyn. 
Earthq. Eng. 31, 163169. doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.10.002. 
Maruya, H. (2013). Proposal for improvement of business continuity 
management (BCM) based on lessons from the Great East Japan 
Earthquake. J. JSCE 1, 1221. 
McBride, S. K., Bostrom, A., Sutton, J., de Groot, R. M., Baltay, A. S., Terbush, 
B., et al. (2020). Developing post-alert messaging for ShakeAlert, the 
earthquake early warning system for the west coast of the United States 
of America. Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct., 101713. 
Melgar, D., Crowell, B. W., Geng, J., Allen, R. M., Bock, Y., Riquelme, S., et 
al. (2015). Earthquake magnitude calculation without saturation from the 
scaling of peak ground displacement. Geophys. Res. Lett. 42, 5197
5205. 
Minson, S. E., Murray, J. R., Langbein, J. O., and Gomberg, J. S. (2014). Real
time inversions for finite fault slip models and rupture geometry based on 
highrate GPS data. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 119, 32013231. 
Miranda, E. (1999). Approximate seismic lateral deformation demands in 
multistory buildings. J. Struct. Eng. 125, 417425. 
doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9445(1999)125:4(417). 
Miranda, E., and Akkar, S. (2005). Rapid Assessment of Building Response 
Using Generalized Interstory Drift Spectra. 107121. doi:10.1007/1-4020-
3812-7_7. 
Miranda, E., and Akkar, S. D. (2006). Generalized Interstory Drift Spectrum. J. 
Struct. Eng. 132, 840852. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0733-
9445(2006)132:6(840). 
Miranda, E., and Taghavi, S. (2005). Approximate floor acceleration demands 
in multistory buildings. I: Formulation. J. Struct. Eng. 131, 203211. 
Moehle, J., and Deierlein, G. G. (2004). A framework methodology for 
performance-based earthquake engineering. Proc. 13 th World Conf. 
Earthq. Eng., 38123814. doi:10.1061/9780784412121.173. 
Nagarajaiah, S., and Narasimhan, S. (2006). Seismic control of smart base 
isolated buildings with new semiactive variable damper. Earthq. Eng. 
Struct. Dyn. 36, 729749. doi:10.1002/eqe. 
Nakamura, H., Horiuchi, S., Wu, C., Yamamoto, S., and Rydelek, P. A. (2009). 
Evaluation of the real-time earthquake information system in Japan. 
Geophys. Res. Lett. 36, 36. doi:10.1029/2008GL036470. 
Nakamura, Y. (1988). On the urgent detection and alarm system (UrEDAS). 
Ninth World Conf. Earthq. Eng., 673678. doi:ISBN 4-89580-010-5. 
Nakamura, Y. (2004). UrEDAS, urgent earthquake detection and alarm 
system, now and future. 13th World Conf. Earthq. Eng. Available at: 
http://sv.sdr.co.jp/papers/13wcee_uredas.pdf%5Cnpapers3://publication/
uuid/7E3C6B07-3A47-4133-A36C-863FFF40811F. 
Nakamura, Y. (2008). First actual P-wave alarm systems and examples of 
disaster prevention by them. 14th World Conf. Earthq. Eng. 
Nakamura, Y., and Saita, J. (2007). UrEDAS, the earthquake warning system: 
Today and tomorrow. Earthq. Early Warn. Syst., 249281. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-72241-0_13. 
Nakamura, Y., and Tucker, B. E. (1988). Japans earthquake warning system: 
Should it be imported to California? National Emergency Training Center. 
Nakayachi, K., Becker, J. S., Potter, S. H., and Dixon, M. (2019). Residents 
Reactions to Earthquake Early Warnings in Japan. Risk Anal. 
doi:10.1111/risa.13306. 
Neam, A. S., and Taghikhany, T. (2016). Prediction equations for generalized 
interstory drift spectrum considering near-fault ground motions. Nat. 
Hazards 80, 14431473. 
Nof, R. N., and Allen, R. M. (2016). Implementing the ElarmS earthquake early 
warning algorithm on the Israeli seismic network. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 
106, 23322344. 
Occhiuzzi, A., Spizzuoco, M., and Serino, G. (2003). Experimental analysis of 
magnetorheological dampers for structural control. Smart Mater. Struct. 
12, 703711. doi:10.1088/0964-1726/12/5/306. 
Ohara, M. (2012). A Study on People`s Awareness of Earthquake Early 
Warning before and after the 2011off the Pacific Coast of Tohoku 
Earthquake, Japan. in 15th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering 
(15WCEE) (Lisboa). 
Ohta, Y., Kobayashi, T., Tsushima, H., Miura, S., Hino, R., Takasu, T., et al. 
(2012). Quasi realtime fault model estimation for nearfield tsunami 
forecasting based on RTKGPS analysis: Application to the 2011 Tohoku
Oki earthquake (Mw 9.0). J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 117. 
Oth, A., Bse, M., Wenzel, F., Khler, N., and Erdik, M. (2010). Evaluation and 
optimization of seismic networks and algorithms for earthquake early 
warningthe case of Istanbul (Turkey). J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 115. 
Pacor, F., Paolucci, R., Ameri, G., Massa, M., and Puglia, R. (2011). Italian 
strong motion records in ITACA: Overview and record processing. Bull. 
Earthq. Eng. 9, 17411759. doi:10.1007/s10518-011-9295-x. 
Palinkas, L. A., Aarons, G. A., Horwitz, S., Chamberlain, P., Hurlburt, M., and 
Landsverk, J. (2011). Mixed method designs in implementation research. 
Adm. Policy Ment. Heal. Ment. Heal. Serv. Res. 38, 4453. 
Pazos, A., Romeu, N., Lozano, L., Colom, Y., Lpez Mesa, M., Goula, X., et 
al. (2015). A regional approach for earthquake early warning in south west 
Iberia: A feasibility study. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 105, 560567. 
Peng, C., Zhu, X., Yang, J., Xue, B., and Chen, Y. (2013). Development of an 
integrated onsite earthquake early warning system and test deployment 
in Zhaotong, China. Comput. Geosci. 56, 170177. 
doi:10.1016/j.cageo.2013.03.018. 
Peng, H., Wu, Z., Wu, Y.-M., Yu, S., Zhang, D., and Huang, W. (2011). 
Developing a Prototype Earthquake Early Warning System in the Beijing 
Capital Region. Seismol. Res. Lett. 82, 394403. 
doi:10.1785/gssrl.82.3.394. 
Pescaroli, G. (2018). Perceptions of cascading risk and interconnected failures 
in emergency planning: Implications for operational resilience and policy 
making. Int. J. disaster risk Reduct. 30, 269280. 
Pescaroli, G., and Alexander, D. (2018). Understanding Compound, 
Interconnected, Interacting, and Cascading Risks: A Holistic Framework. 
Risk Anal. 38, 22452257. doi:10.1111/risa.13128. 
Pescaroli, G., Nones, M., Galbusera, L., and Alexander, D. (2018). 
Understanding and mitigating cascading crises in the global 
interconnected system. Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 30, 159163. 
doi:10.1016/J.IJDRR.2018.07.004. 
Pescaroli, G., Pietrantoni, L., and Saccinto, E. (2012). Behavioural reactions 
to the Emilia-Romagna earthquake and implications for risk management. 
Auton. locali e Serv. Soc. XXXV, 505514. doi:10.1447/73567. 
Pescaroli, G., Velazquez, O., Alcantara-Ayala, I., Galasso, C., Kostkova, P., 
and Alexander, D. (2020). A Likert scale-based model for benchmarking 
operational capacity, organizational resilience, and disaster risk 
reduction. Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci. 
Peterson, R. A. (2013). Constructing effective questionnaires. Sage 
Publications Thousand Oaks, CA. 
Picozzi, M., Elia, L., Pesaresi, D., Zollo, A., Mucciarelli, M., Gosar, A., et al. 
(2015a). Trans-national earthquake early warning (EEW) in north-eastern 
Italy, Slovenia and Austria: first experience with PRESTo at the CE3RN 
network. Adv. Geosci 40, 5161. 
Picozzi, M., Emolo, A., Martino, C., Zollo, A., Miranda, N., Verderame, G., et 
al. (2015b). Earthquake Early Warning System for Schools: A Feasibility 
Study in Southern Italy. Seismol. Res. Lett. 86, 398412. 
doi:10.1785/0220140194. 
Picozzi, M., Emolo, A., Martino, C., Zollo, A., Miranda, N., Verderame, G., et 
al. (2015c). Earthquake Early Warning System for Schools: A Feasibility 
Study in Southern Italy. Seismol. Res. Lett. 86, 398412. 
doi:10.1785/0220140194. 
Pohoryles, D. A., and Duffour, P. (2015). Adaptive control of structures under 
dynamic excitation using magnetorheological dampers: an improved 
clipped-optimal control algorithm. J. Vib. Control 21, 25692582. 
doi:10.1177/1077546313510543. 
Porter, K. A. (2016). How Many Injuries can be Avoided through Earthquake 
Early Warning and Drop , Cover , and Hold On? 
Porter, K. A. (2020). Best Practices for Earthquake Early Warning: A 
Compendium. SPA Risk LLC, Denver CO, 50 p. Available at: 
www.sparisk.com. 
Porter, K., Kennedy, R., and Bachman, R. (2007). Creating Fragility Functions 
for Performance-Based Earthquake Engineering. Earthq. Spectra 23, 
471489. doi:10.1193/1.2720892. 
Quarantelli, E. L. (1984). Emergent Citizen Groups in Disaster Preparedness 
and Recovery Activities. Available at: 
http://udspace.udel.edu/handle/19716/1206 [Accessed September 12, 
2019]. 
Ramirez, C. M., and Miranda, E. (2009). Building-Specific Loss Estimation 
Methods & Tools for Simplified Performance-Based Earthquake 
Engineering. 370. 
Reddy, E. (2019). Crying Crying Wolf: How Misfires and Mexican Engineering 
Expertise are Made Meaningful. Ethnos 1844. 
doi:10.1080/00141844.2018.1561489. 
Reinoso, E., and Miranda, E. (2005). Estimation of floor acceleration demands 
in high-rise buildings during earthquakes. Struct. Des. Tall Spec. Build. 
14, 107130. doi:10.1002/tal.272. 
Ruhl, C. J., Melgar, D., Chung, A. I., Grapenthin, R., and Allen, R. M. (2019). 
Quantifying the Value of RealTime Geodetic Constraints for Earthquake 
Early Warning Using a Global Seismic and Geodetic Data Set. J. 
Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 124, 38193837. 
Rydelek, P., and Pujol, J. (2004). Real-time seismic warning with a two-station 
subarray. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 94, 15461550. 
doi:10.1785/012003197. 
Sabetta, F., and Pugliese, A. (1996). Estimation of Response Spectra and 
Simulation of Nonstationary Earthquake Ground Motions. Bull. Seismol. 
Soc. Am. 86, 337352. 
Saiidi, M., and Sozen, M. A. (1981). Simple nonlinear seismic analysis of R/C 
structures. J. Struct. Div. 107, 937953. 
Santos-Reyes, J. (2019). How useful are earthquake early warnings? The 
case of the 2017 earthquakes in Mexico city. Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct., 
101148. doi:10.1016/j.ijdrr.2019.101148. 
Satriano, C., Elia, L., Martino, C., Lancieri, M., Zollo, A., and Iannaccone, G. 
(2011a). PRESTo, the earthquake early warning system for Southern 
Italy: Concepts, capabilities and future perspectives. Soil Dyn. Earthq. 
Eng. 31, 137153. doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.06.008. 
Satriano, C., Lomax, A., and Zollo, A. (2008). Real-time evolutionary 
earthquake location for seismic early warning. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 98, 
14821494. doi:10.1785/0120060159. 
Satriano, C., Wu, Y. M., Zollo, A., and Kanamori, H. (2011b). Earthquake early 
warning: Concepts, methods and physical grounds. Soil Dyn. Earthq. 
Eng. 31, 106118. doi:10.1016/j.soildyn.2010.07.007. 
Saunders, B., Kitzinger, J., and Kitzinger, C. (2015). Anonymising interview 
data: Challenges and compromise in practice. Qual. Res. 15, 616632. 
Sheen, D.-H., Lim, I.-S., Park, J.-H., and Chi, H.-C. (2014). Magnitude scaling 
relationships using P waves for earthquake early warning in South Korea. 
Geosci. J. 18, 712. 
Sheen, D., Park, J., Chi, H., Hwang, E., Lim, I., Seong, Y. J., et al. (2017). The 
first stage of an earthquake early warning system in South Korea. 
Seismol. Res. Lett. 88, 14911498. 
Shome, N., Cornell, C. A., Bazzurro, P., and Carballo, J. E. (1998). 
Earthquakes, records, and nonlinear responses. Earthq. Spectra 14, 469
Shrivastava, P. (2003). Principles of Emergency Planning and Management. 
Risk Manag. 5, 6767. doi:10.1057/palgrave.rm.8240152. 
Si, H., and Midorikawa, S. (2000). New Attenuation Relations for Peak Ground 
Acceleration and Velocity considering Effects of Fault Type and Site 
Condition. 12th World Conf. Earthq. Eng. Auckland, New Zel., 18. 
Smerzini, C., Galasso, C., Iervolino, I., and Paolucci, R. (2014). Ground motion 
record selection based on broadband spectral compatibility. Earthq. 
Spectra 30, 14271448. doi:10.1193/052312EQS197M. 
Smith, K., and Petley, D. N. (2009). Environmental hazards. Assessing risk 
and reducing disaster. Routledge, London. 
Soong, T. T., and Spencer Jr, B. F. (2002). Supplemental energy dissipation: 
state-of-the-art and state-of-the- practice. Eng. Struct. 24, 243259. 
doi:10.1016/S0141-0296(01)00092-X. 
Spencer, B. F. J., Dyke, S. J., Sain, M. K., and Carlson, J. D. (1997). 
Phenomenological Model for Magnetorheological Dampers. J. Eng. 
Mech. 123, 230238. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9399(1997)123:3(230). 
Spencer, B. F. J., and Nagarajaiah, S. (2003). State of the Art of Structural 
Control. J. Struct. Eng. 129, 845856. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)0733-
9445(2003)129:7(845). 
Strauch, W., Talavera, E., Tenorio, V., Ramrez, J., Argello, G., Herrera, M., 
et al. (2018). Toward an earthquake and tsunami monitoring and early 
warning system for Nicaragua and Central America. Seismol. Res. Lett. 
89, 399406. 
Strauss, J. A., and Allen, R. M. (2016). Benefits and Costs of Earthquake Early 
Warning. Seismol. Res. Lett. 87, 765772. doi:10.1785/0220150149. 
Surez, G., Espinosa-Aranda, J. M., Cullar, A., Ibarrola, G., Garca, A., 
Zavala, M., et al. (2018). A dedicated seismic early warning network: The 
mexican seismic alert system (SASMEX). Seismol. Res. Lett. 89, 382
391. doi:10.1785/0220170184. 
Surez, G., and Novelo-Casanova, D. A. (2018). A pioneering aftershock 
study of the destructive 4 January 1920 Jalapa, Mexico, earthquake. 
Seismol. Res. Lett. 89, 18941899. doi:10.1785/0220180150. 
Suarez, G., Novelo, D., and Mansilla, E. (2009). Performance Evaluation of 
the Seismic Alert System (SAS) in Mexico City: A Seismological and a 
Social Perspective. Seismol. Res. Lett. 80, 707716. 
doi:10.1785/gssrl.80.5.707. 
Tajima, F., and Hayashida, T. (2018). Earthquake early warning: what does 
seconds before a strong hit mean? Prog. Earth Planet. Sci. 5. 
doi:10.1186/s40645-018-0221-6. 
Tsang, L. L. H., Allen, R. M., and Wurman, G. (2007). Magnitude scaling 
relations from Pwaves in southern California. Geophys. Res. Lett. 34. 
Twigg, J. (2003). The Human Factor in Early Warnings: Risk Perception and 
Appropriate Communications, in Early Warning Systems for Natural 
Disaster Reduction (Berlin, Heidelberg), 1926. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-
55903-7_4. 
Twigg, J. (2015). Disaster risk reduction. Overseas Development Institute, 
Humanitarian Policy Group London. 
UNISDR (2006). Developing Early Warning Systems: A Checklist. Third Int. 
Conf. Early Warn., 113. 
UNISDR (2015). Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 - 2030. 
Geneva, Switzerland doi:A/CONF.224/CRP.1. 
UNISDR (2017). Disaster resilience scorecards for cities  Preliminary level 
assessment. Geneva, Switzerland Available at: 
https://www.unisdr.org/files/58158_unisdr2017annualreport.pdf. 
Vagias, W. M. (2006). Likert-type scale response anchors. Clemson Int. Inst. 
Tour. Res. Dev. Dep. Park. Recreat. Tour. Manag. Clemson Univ. 
Velazquez, O., Galasso, C., and Duffour, P. (2017). A loss-based control 
algorithm for magnetorheological dampers combined with earthquake 
early warning. 16 WCEE - Proc. 16th World Conf. Earthq. Eng. 
Velazquez, O., Pescaroli, G., Cremen, G., and Galasso, C. (2020). A review 
of the technical and socio-organisational components of earthquake early 
warning (EEW) systems. Front. Earth Sci. Geohazards Georisks 8, 445. 
Wald, D. J. (2020). Practical limitations of earthquake early warning. Earthq. 
Spectra, 8755293020911388. 
Wald, D. J., Quitoriano, V., Heaton, T. H., Kanamori, H., Scrivner, C. W., and 
Worden, C. B. (1999). TriNet ShakeMaps: Rapid generation of peak 
ground motion and intensity maps for earthquakes in southern California. 
Earthq. Spectra 15, 537554. doi:10.1193/1.1586057. 
Wang, D. H., and Liao, W. H. (2011). Magnetorheological fluid dampers: a 
review of parametric modelling. Smart Mater. Struct. 20, 023001. 
doi:10.1088/0964-1726/20/2/023001. 
Watkins, R., West Meiers, M., and Visser, Y. (2012). A guide to assessing 
needs: Essential tools for collecting information, making decisions, and 
achieving development results. The World Bank. 
Weber, R. P. (1990). Basic content analysis. Sage. 
Wells, D. L., and Coppersmith, K. J. (1994). New empirical relationships 
among magnitude, rupture length, rupture width, rupture area, and 
surface displacement. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am., 9741002. 
Whitman, Z., Stevenson, J., Kachali, H., Seville, E., Vargo, J., and Wilson, T. 
(2014). Organisational resilience following the Darfield earthquake of 
2010. Disasters 38, 148177. 
Wieland, M. (2001). Earthquake Alarm, Rapid Response, And Early Warning 
Systems: Low Cost Systems For Seismic Risk Reduction. Zurich, 
Switzerland: Electrowatt Engineering Ltd. 
Wieland, M., Griesser, L., and Kuendig, C. (2000). Seismic early warning 
system for a nuclear power plant. Proc. 12th World Conf. Earthq. Eng. 
(WCEE 2000), 18. Available at: 
http://www.geosig.com/files/2000_WLD_12WCEE_INPP_early_warning
_and_alarm_system.pdf. 
Wiseman, S., Jawaheer, G., Kostkova, P., and Madle, G. (2008). Specialist 
Digital LibrariesNational Resource for Infection Control (NRIC)
Information overload or underload?(www. nric. org. uk). 
WMO (2017). Multi-hazard Early Warning Systems: A Checklist. Outcome first 
Multi-hazard Early Warn. Conf. 
Woo, G. (2013). Deliverable: 6.3 Guidelines to establish quantitative protocols 
for decision-making in Operational Earthquake Forecasting. 151. 
Wright, T. J., Houli, N., Hildyard, M., and Iwabuchi, T. (2012). Realtime, 
reliable magnitudes for large earthquakes from 1 Hz GPS precise point 
positioning: The 2011 TohokuOki (Japan) earthquake. Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 39. 
Wu, S., Cheng, M. H., Beck, J. L., and Heaton, T. H. (2016). An engineering 
application of earthquake early warning: ePAD-based decision framework 
for elevator control. J. Struct. Eng. 142, 4015092. 
Wu, Y., and Kanamori, H. (2005). Rapid Assessment of Damage Potential of 
Earthquakes in Taiwan from the Beginning of P Waves. Bull. Seismol. 
Soc. Am. 95, 11811185. doi:10.1785/0120040193. 
Wu, Y. M., and Teng, T. liang (2002). A virtual subnetwork approach to 
earthquake early warning. Bull. Seismol. Soc. Am. 92, 20082018. 
doi:10.1785/0120010217. 
Wu, Y., and Zhao, L. (2006). Magnitude estimation using the first three 
seconds Pwave amplitude in earthquake early warning. Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 33. 
Wurman, G., Allen, R. M., and Lombard, P. (2007). Toward earthquake early 
warning in northern California. J. Geophys. Res. 112, B08311. 
doi:10.1029/2006JB004830. 
Xiong, C., Lu, X., Guan, H., and Xu, Z. (2016). A nonlinear computational 
model for regional seismic simulation of tall buildings. Bull. Earthq. Eng. 
14, 10471069. doi:10.1007/s10518-016-9880-0. 
Yamasaki, E. (2012). What We Can Learn From Japans Early Earthquake 
Warning System. Momentum 1, 2. 
Yore, R., and Walker, J. F. (2019). Microinsurance for disaster recovery: 
Business venture or humanitarian intervention? An analysis of potential 
success and failure factors of microinsurance case studies. Int. J. Disaster 
Risk Reduct. 33, 1632. 
Yoshida, O., and Dyke, S. J. (2004). Seismic Control of a Nonlinear 
Benchmark Building Using Smart Dampers.pdf. J. Eng. Mech. 130, 386
392. doi:10.1061/ASCE0733-93992004130:4386. 
Zhang, Y., Wang, R., Zschau, J., Chen, Y., Parolai, S., and Dahm, T. (2014). 
Automatic imaging of earthquake rupture processes by iterative 
deconvolution and stacking of highrate GPS and strong motion 
seismograms. J. Geophys. Res. Solid Earth 119, 56335650. 
Zollo, A., Amoroso, O., Lancieri, M., Wu, Y.-M., and Kanamori, H. (2010). A 
threshold-based earthquake early warning using dense accelerometer 
networks. Geophys. J. Int. 183, 963974. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
246X.2010.04765.x. 
Zollo, A., Colombelli, S., Elia, L., Emolo, A., Festa, G., Iannaccone, G., et al. 
(2014a). An integrated regional and on-site Earthquake Early Warning 
System for Southern Italy: Concepts, methodologies and performances, 
in Early Warning for Geological Disasters (Springer), 117137. 
Zollo, A., Festa, G., Emolo, A., and Colombelli, S. (2014b). Source 
Characterization for Earthquake Early Warning. Encycl. Earthq. Eng., 1
11. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-36197-5. 
Zollo, A., Lancieri, M., and Nielsen, S. (2006). Earthquake magnitude 
estimation from peak amplitudes of very early seismic signals on strong 
motion records. Geophys. Res. Lett. 33, L23312. 
doi:10.1029/2006GL027795. 
Zulfikar, C. (2014). Risk assessment and initial implementation efforts for using 
EEW to protect the IGDAS Natural Gas Network, Istanbul. Strateg. Tools 
Real Time Earthq. Risk Reduction, REAKT. 
