This thesis has been submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for a postgraduate degree 
(e.g. PhD, MPhil, DClinPsychol) at the University of Edinburgh. Please note the following 
terms and conditions of use: 
This work is protected by copyright and other intellectual property rights, which are 
retained by the thesis author, unless otherwise stated. 
A copy can be downloaded for personal non-commercial research or study, without 
prior permission or charge. 
This thesis cannot be reproduced or quoted extensively from without first obtaining 
permission in writing from the author. 
The content must not be changed in any way or sold commercially in any format or 
medium without the formal permission of the author. 
When referring to this work, full bibliographic details including the author, title, 
awarding institution and date of the thesis must be given. 
The Interpretation of the Crystal Structures of 
Transition Metal Compounds and Complexes 
Matthew G Reeves 
A thesis submitted in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree 
of Doctor of Philosophy to the School of Chemistry, 
University of Edinburgh 
Declaration 
I declare that this Thesis has been written by me and that the work carried out is my 
own, or I have made a substantial contribution towards it except where specific 
reference is made to another. This work has not been submitted for another degree 
or professional qualification. 
Matthew G. Reeves 
List of Publications 
1. Reeves, M., Wood, P. and Parsons, S., Automated oxidation-state assignment for 
metal sites in coordination complexes in the Cambridge Structural Database. Acta 
Crystallographica Section B Structural Science, Crystal Engineering and Materials, 2019 75 
(6), 1096-1105. 
2. Reeves, M., Wood, P. and Parsons, S. MrPIXEL: Execution of PIXEL Calculations 
via the MERCURY Interface. Journal of Applied Crystallography, 2020, 53 (4), 1154-
1162. 
3. Reeves, M., Tailleur, E., Wood, P., Marchivie, M., Chastanet, G., Guionneau, P., and 
Parsons, S., Revealing Cooperativity Pathways in Spin Crossover Complexes, In 
preparation. 
Abstract 
The Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) contains over half a million structures 
containing transition metal compounds. The wealth of data available from these 
structures is enormous and the potential knowledge and insight that be gained from 
these structures is of great benefit to the field of inorganic and organometallic 
chemistry.  
Searching through these structures is facilitated by the CSD software Conquest, 
which allows users to filter results to desired metals and ligand motifs. However, 
some aspects are not currently possible through the Conquest GUI, while others, 
such as oxidation state data, require the value to be explicitly mentioned by the 
author in the assigned chemical name. The introduction of the CSD Python 
Application Programming Interface (API) has allowed users to interpret, retrieve, and 
manipulate data in new ways, and now presents an avenue to introduce new data to 
CSD entries and user structures alike. 
A highly reliable automated workflow for oxidation-state assignment in transition-
metal coordination complexes has been developed with CSD Python API scripts. 
These scripts implement the bond-valence sum (BVS) method as well complementary 
techniques. The strengths and limitations of these methods are discussed and the 
application of confidence banding for improved assignment confidence is explored. In 
total, four complementary techniques have been implemented in this study. The 
resulting workflow overcomes the limitations of the BVS approach, widening the 
applicability of an automated procedure to more CSD entries. Assignments are 
successful for 99% of the cases where a high consensus between different 
methodologies is observed.  
Further exploiting the capabilities of the CSD Python API, and specifically the 
integration with the Mercury software, a program has been developed for the direct 
execution of PIXEL-CLP calculations from the Mercury interface. The PIXEL method 
is a semi-empirical procedure for the calculation of intermolecular interaction and 
lattice energies based on undistorted ab initio molecular electron densities.  Following 
initial set up of a crystallographic model, the MrPIXEL software package assigns 
atom types and writes necessary input files, submits the required electron density 
calculation either locally or to a remote server, downloads the results and submits 
the PIXEL calculation itself. Full lattice energy calculations can be performed for 
structures with up to two molecules in the crystallographic asymmetric unit, for more 
complex cases molecule-molecule energies are calculated only.  
Finally, the MrPIXEL software has been used to determine lattice and interaction 
energies for structures of spin-crossover (SCO) complexes in the CSD. The results 
of which have been studied in order to determine their influence and role in the 
abruptness of spin-state transitions for the Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 family of SCO 
complexes. The change in interaction energies between spin-states is found to 
correlate with the abruptness of transition, with more abrupt transitions being 
associated with much larger changes in interaction energies between spin-states. The 
interaction energies, along with the changes in energies, are visually displayed in 
Mercury using a new method developed for producing energy frameworks, similar to 
those used in CrystalExplorer. 
Lay Summary 
Within the field of solid-state chemistry, the physical structure of molecules is 
recorded from x-ray crystallographic data.  For molecules which contain carbon, a 
comprehensive database of these structures is available in the Cambridge Structural 
Database (CSD), which contains over a million entries. The wealth of knowledge 
available from data already submitted in the CSD has proved invaluable to the field of 
organic chemistry, where it enables users to search, retrieve, and analyse current 
solid structures, particularly in areas such as the pharmaceuticals industry. 
The CSD is also home to nearly half a million structures containing transition metal 
atoms. In comparison to the purely organic structures, the transition metal structures 
have received less attention in post deposition analysis. This is in part due to aspects 
of transition metal chemistry remaining missing or underdiscussed in the CSD data. 
For instance, the formal charge of the transition metal atom, known as oxidation 
state, is often missing from uploaded data, making searching and retrieval of relevant 
structures difficult. To rectify this, new procedures and programs have been 
developed to add more data to transition metal containing entries within the CSD. 
This has been facilitated through the Python based Application Programming Interface 
(API). 
Building on this work, new tools have also been developed to study the interactions 
between molecules in the solid-state. These tools have been used extensively in 
discussing the physical and chemical properties of organic materials in the past, such 
as in rationalizing the bioactivity and solubility of drug compounds, though their use 
in coordination compounds (containing transition metal atoms) has been more 
limited. By producing new programs that automate computational methods for the 
calculation of intermolecular interaction energies, it is hoped that their application 
towards transition metal containing structures will become commonplace. 
Finally, and as a demonstration of the benefits of discussing intermolecular interaction 
energies in the context of coordination complex structures, the software discussed 
previously has been used to rationalize the magnetic behaviour of a series of 
coordination complexes. 
Acknowledgements 
Thanks must first be expressed to Simon Parsons, who, as personal supervisor over 
this PhD has provided an excellent tutor and mentor, patiently suffering through my 
terrible grammar and spelling, as well continuing to offer advice and guidance that has 
been essential to the successes achieved here. 
The ever-changing faces of Office 85, whether that be the fantastic Post-Docs, Gary 
the technician, the undergraduate Masters students, or of course the many great 
fellow PhD students. All of which have provided fantastic contributions and company 
which fuelled and aided in many of the topics and results discussed. 
To my parents, who have been essential in supporting me through the last four years. 
Individually, my father, who took it upon himself to understand what I do to a level 
often beyond that of my own comprehension, discussing the science for many hours 
and offering staggeringly more input than he realizes. And my mother, who patiently 
put up with listening to the previously mentioned hours of conversation, completely 
none the wiser to any of it, suffering from what I can only assume was mind numbing 
boredom, yet still gladly proof-read the completed article. 
To the often overlooked, and generally underappreciated technical and support staff 
whose advice and hard work kept everything running smoothly and provided facilities 
key to the results achieved here. Crucially they provided an outlet and a welcome 
distraction when writing began to overwhelm and infuriate. 
A surprisingly large thanks goes to the many undergraduates who offered ideas, input, 
and support that often proved as, if not more valuable than that of more senior 
colleagues and staff. 
Lastly, I must thank those, regrettably no longer around, who if anything, were 
perhaps the most instrumental in me getting to this point. 
Table of Contents 
1. Introduction: The Application of Semi-Empirical Calculations for the Interpretation of 
1.4.1. Traditional Quantum-Mechanical Approaches to Intermolecular Energies .. 31 
2. Automated Oxidation-State Assignment for Metal Sites in Coordination Complexes in 
2.3.3. Demonstration of oxidation state specific data: the Jahn-Teller effect in Cu 
1. Introduction: The Application of Semi-
Empirical Calculations for the Interpretation of 
Interactions in Crystal Structures  
1.1. Thesis Background 
Coordination complexes containing transition metals display many properties and 
characteristics that are of immense interest in commercial and practical applications. 
In the solid-state for example, variable behaviours in terms of magnetism, colour, and 
conductivity may be tuned and altered using environmental changes, either through 
temperature, pressure, or light, potentially offering new materials for use in switching 
and sensory applications. 
Despite the wide-reaching interest in this field, many aspects of the mentioned 
characteristics are not fully understood, thus making predictions of material 
behaviour difficult from structural data alone. In addition, this inhibits the use of 
crystal engineering, the growing field in which new solid structures are designed and 
retro-synthesized for the properties expected and desired.  
Thus, it is essential that further work is done to understand the various properties of 
coordination complexes, based on structural data currently available. The Cambridge 
Structural Database (CSD) already contains nearly half a million transition metal 
containing compounds, providing a significant volume of data ready to be analysed in 
the quest to determine trends between structural properties and physical 
characteristics. Indeed Olga Kennard, founder of the Cambridge Structural Database 
(CSD), stated that: 
"collective use of data would lead to the discovery of new knowledge which 
transcends the results of individual experiments"1 
However, while the volume of information within the CSD continues to grow at a 
near exponential rate, many structures are lacking key information that is otherwise 
essential to the efficient searching and filtering of data. For transition metal 
complexes, this issue is most noticeable in terms of oxidation state information. In 
2016, oxidation state data was missing from over half the entries deposited (Figure 
1.1). 
Figure 1.1: Number of transition metal containing entries in the CSD by year in black 
with the number of those entries containing oxidation state data in red. Data from 
2016. 
This problem is compounded by the restrictions of the current CSD searching 
system. Structure retrieval is currently performed using the CSD software Conquest, 
which allows a user to search for structures using a variety of approaches, which may 
be combined, as necessary. This includes drawing molecular fragments, inputting 
chemical names or formulas, or restricting searches to specific crystallographic 
settings. While the array of search parameters provides an excellent set of tools for 
retrieving relevant and desired organic structures, they are lacking certain features 
which are of major benefit when looking for transition metal structures. Oxidation 
states for example, cannot be explicitly defined in the search parameters, and instead 
must be defined only by their presence (in roman numeric form) in the chemical 
name. E.g. must contain in the chemical name: iron(iii) when searching for iron 3+ 
structures. 
While this issue urgently needs addressing to improve the efficiency and ease of 
retrieving relevant structures, the structural data is already present for further 
analysis to take place. For the crystalline structures of molecular solids, this focuses 
on the intermolecular interactions between the ordered arrangement of molecules.  
1.2. Intermolecular Interaction Energies 
1.2.1. Intermolecular Interactions 
In crystalline solids, the ordered arrangement of intermolecular interactions is a 
consequence of the geometry and electronic structure of the individual ions, atoms 
or molecules. The strength and vibrational characteristics of these interactions 
defines the physical characteristics of the solid, as well as structural changes that 
occur when the material is subjected to changes in temperature and pressure. 
Intermolecular interactions are invoked when interpreting and analysing crystal 
structures in the context of their stability and physical properties. For example, in 
pharmaceuticals, the intermolecular forces are considered in relation to solubility and 
bioavailability, as well as in the formulation of co-crystals with optimum properties 
for tabletting. In coordination chemistry, these interactions influence electronic 
properties such as magnetism. By considering intermolecular interactions in their role 
in structure formation, the rapidly growing field of crystal engineering aims to 
synthesize new structures with desired properties.  
Provided that no covalent effects are involved, intermolecular interactions can be 
considered in terms of four fundamental energy contributions that describe the 
various forms of stabilizing and destabilizing forces that occur. These energy terms 
arise from electrostatic (or Coulombic), polarisation (or induction), dispersion (or 
van der Waals or London) and Pauli (or short-range) repulsion effects.  
1.1.1. Electrostatic interactions 
Electrostatic interactions are caused by the attractive forces of opposing charges and 
repulsive forces of like charges. The influence of these forces, the electrostatic energy 
(EElec), is expressed by Coulombs Law: 
4 
Where q1 and q2 are the point charges separated by distance r12 and 0 is the vacuum 
permeability. Where the signs of q1 and q2 are the same, EElec is positive, and repulsive, 
while opposite signs result in a negative EElec and a stabilizing contact.  
In molecular systems electrostatic interactions are caused by the variation of the local 
charge density distribution in a molecule, which forms positive (+) or negative () 
regions depending on the electronegativity of the atoms present and the overall 
charge if the species is an ion. Interactions that are predominantly electrostatic in 
nature are often identifiable by the proximity of atoms with significantly different 
electronegativities, as in the case for hydrogen-bonding illustrated in Figure 1.2 by 
interactions in the crystal structure of -glycine. 
Figure 1.2: Example of an electrostatic dominant interaction in -glycine between  
oxygen atom and + RNH3
+ proton.2 
1.1.2. Polarisation Interactions 
When a point charge approaches a spherical cloud of electron density around an 
atom, the electron density will distort to produce a stabilising polarisation of the 
charge (Figure 1.3 i. and ii.).  Polarisation interactions are always stabilising.  The 
magnitude of the polarisation energy (EPol)  is dependent on distance (varying as r
the approaching charge and the polarizability () of the electron cloud, which 
measures its deformability.  In molecular interactions this relationship is expressed 
by Equation 1.2 where  is the dipole moment of an approaching molecule, and r12 is 
the separation between molecules 1 and 2.  
   
The value of the polarizability depends on the distance from the electrons from the 
nucleus. Larger atoms will have larger polarizabilities, allowing for a greater 
deformation of electron density, whereas smaller atoms, in which the nuclear 
attraction is higher, will be less susceptible to approaching point charges and have a 
lower polarizability, illustrated for the noble gases in Figure 1.3 iii.  In practice, the 
+  
contribution of the polarisation term in molecular crystal structures is often smaller 
than other terms.  In the hydrogen bond formed between the glycine molecules 
shown in Figure 1.2, the electrostatic energy is 105.8 kJ mol1, while the polarisation 
contribution is 7.6 kJ mol1, as determined by CrystalExplorer.3 
Figure 1.3: i. Neon atom electron clouds as spheres with no introduced external 
charge. ii. Neon cloud deformation with introduction of positive point charge. 
Electron Density shift denoted by colour gradient. iii. Increase in polarizability with 
increasing atomic size for noble gasses. 
1.1.3. Dispersion Interactions 
While polarisation interactions are produced by permanent dipole moments in 
neighbouring molecules, instantaneous fluctuations in electron density also occur 
which produce instantaneous atomic and molecular dipoles. This polarisation of 
electron density causes further deformation of electron density in neighbouring 
molecules. As with polarisation interactions, these are proportional to the 
polarizability of the atoms involved and their separation.  
As was the case for polarisation, dispersion interactions are always stabilising, and 
also vary as r6, declining rapidly with distance.  The dispersion energy, EDisp, is 
approximated with the London Dispersion Equation: 
   
( +  )
0 25 50 75 100 125
Atomic Number, z
Ne Ne 
The ionisation energies of the interacting atoms (I1 and I2) were introduced by London 
to represent the frequency of charge oscillations. The dependence on polarisabilities 
mean that EDisp increases with increasing atomic size and electron density. 
Dispersion interactions are maximised when strongly polarisable groups lie in close 
proximity to one another in crystal structures, optimising a large contact surface 
between polarisable regions of electron density.  As is the case with aromatic ring (-
) stacking, which can be identified by inspection of a crystal structure packing 
diagram.  Other dispersion interactions lack a characteristic geometrical signature, 
and this has sometimes led to their importance remaining unrecognised.  By contrast 
to electrostatic interactions, they are often better understood in terms of whole 
molecule  whole molecule (as opposed to atom-atom) contacts which take into 
account the overall topology of the molecular contact surface.   
Electrostatics and dispersion are usually found to be the dominating stabilising terms 
in molecular crystal structures, although the former generally dictate the orientation 
of molecules within the structure rather than the latter. This can be exemplified using 
Hirshfeld surfaces of the -glycine example, shown in Figure 1.2, where the surfaces 
are coloured according to electrostatic potential (red is negative, blue is positive). 
Figure 1.4 shows how the packing of molecules is arranged such as to maximize the 
contact between opposingly charged areas of each molecule. This is also the case for 
molecules with dispersion dominant interactions, such as in the crystal structure of 
benzene, where the packing of molecules is arranged such to optimise electrostatic 
interaction, with the + hydrogen atoms pointing into the centre of  aromatic rings.  
Figure 1.4: Hirshfeld Surfaces with electrostatic potentials mapped for first 
coordination sphere of -glycine (left) and benzene (right). Positive regions are blue, 
negative regions red. A full description of Hirshfeld Surfaces is available in Section 
1.3.3.2,4 
1.1.4. Repulsion Interactions 
The Pauli repulsion term is quantum mechanical in origin, is always destabilising, and 
diminishes even more rapidly with distance than the polarisation and dispersion 
energies.  The Pauli Exclusion Principle forbids the overlap of electrons with the same 
spin state occupying the same space. This differs from the electrostatic term, which 
is charge based repulsion of the corresponding electron clouds. As two atoms or 
molecules approach each other their electron clouds begin to overlap. As a result, 
the electron density is deformed away from the contact partially exposing the 
positively-charged nuclei leading to development of a destabilizing energy, ERep.  
The repulsion energy varies as r-12, but beyond this it is difficult to calculate accurately, 
and it is often approximated with an empirical relationship, such as that shown in 
Equation 1.4, where it is made proportional to a constant D. 
Pauli and electrostatic repulsion are the only destabilising terms in the model of 
intermolecular interactions described here. Within a first molecular coordination 
sphere both can combine to make some interactions destabilising overall, with the 
influence of Pauli repulsion becoming very important at high pressure. This can be 
seen for glycine (Figure 1.5) where repulsion terms increase significantly with 
increasing pressure. Their contribution to the total interaction energies can be shown 
with the shortest contact. At ambient pressure, the shortest contact in -glycine has 
a total interaction energy of -166.9 kJ mol-1, and a repulsion term of 40.8 kJ mol-1. For 
the structure at 6 GPa, the total interaction energy is 183.2 kJ mol-1, with a repulsion 
term of 78.0 kJ mol-1. However, the sharp decline of the repulsion term with distance 
means that beyond the first coordination sphere there are only electrostatic 
interactions, which vary as r1, remaining to balance other stabilising terms.     
Figure 1.5: Repulsion energy term for short interactions in -glycine with increasing 
pressure. Values determined using the PIXEL-CLP method.5,6 
1.1.5. Example: Intermolecular Interactions in -Glycine 
The use of the four terms described above in practical crystal structure analysis can 
be illustrated with -glycine (Figure 1.6).  Interactions for which the Pauli repulsion 
energy is greater than zero identify the first molecular coordination sphere, which 
contains seven pairs of crystallographically unique interactions. The total coordination 
number is fourteen, making the structure topologically related to body-centred cubic 
packing of hard spheres.  The interaction energies can be calculated using many of 
the methods discussed later in this Chapter, but here they were obtained using 
CrystalExplorer. 
3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0
Centroid-Centroid Distance ()
Ambient Pressure 6 GPa
Figure 1.6: First coordination sphere of -glycine with unique interactions to a central 
molecule coloured in CrystalExplorer. A breakdown of the calculated interaction 
energies is available in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Breakdown of interaction energies as calculated by CrystalExplorer for first 
coordination sphere of -glycine. Colours match molecules in Figure 1.6. Note that 
due to crystal symmetry, each contact has an equivalent (as grouped by colours). 
Colour 
Indicator 
Sym. Op. 
 R EElec EPol EDis ERep ETot 
 () kJ mol1 
x, y, z+1  5.47 105.8 27.6 9.6 56.2 105.9 
x,y,z1  5.47 105.8 27.6 9.6 56.2 105.9 
  y,1+xy,2/3+z  5.37 35.8 12.5 7.7 8.8 48.4 
  1x+y,x,2/3+z  5.37 35.8 12.5 7.7 8.8 48.4 
  x+y,x,2/3+z  5.64 23.1 12.0 6.7 8.6 33 .9 
  y,xy,2/3+z  5.64 23.1 12.0 6.7 8.6 33 .9 
  1x+y,1x,1/3+z  4.27 23.7 33.9 14.6 51.9 30.8 
  1y,xy,1/3+z  4.27 23.7 33.9 14.6 51.9 30.8 
  1x+y,1x,2/3+z  5.31 9.8 5.2 3.9 1.4 4.0 
  1y,xy,2/3+z  5.31 9.8 5.2 3.9 1.4 4.0 
  y,xy,1/3+z  4.68 29.9 30.3 13.8 35.3 19.1 
  x+y,x,1/3+z  4.68 29.9 30.3 13.8 35.3 19.1 
  y,1+xy,1/3+z  4.34 47.1 8.8 11.1 6.7 37.8 
  1x+y,x,1/3+z  4.34 47.1 8.8 11.1 6.7 37.8 
Of the seven unique contacts in the first coordination sphere, four are stabilizing and 
three are destabilising, showing the assumption that short intermolecular interactions 
always stabilise a crystal structure can be incorrect. The source of the destabilisation 
is usually electrostatic repulsion, but in one case Pauli repulsion is the dominating 
term.    
In most cases the electrostatic term is the largest term, as would be expected in the 
crystal structure of a zwitterionic species such as glycine. Indeed, hydrogen bonds are 
present in all four of the stabilizing interactions. In particular, the strongest interaction 
(translations along the c axis, 105.9 kJ mol1) are those that contain a short charge-
assisted NHO hydrogen bond, which contributes to the dominant electrostatic 
term (105.8 kJ mol1). 
The presence of hydrogen bonding cannot be considered indicative of a stabilizing 
molecule-molecule contact however, as the second most destabilizing interactions 
(19.1 kJ mol-1) also contain a short NH3O distance with ideal hydrogen bonding 
parameters (NHO = 1.95 , <NHO =178.6, <COH = 135.4). The contact 
is destabilizing overall due to the proximity of neighbouring NH3
+ groups. 
The most repulsive interaction occurs between molecules in the same orientation 
and is dominated by a large electrostatic term (47.1 kJ mol-1). This is in part due to 
short contact distances between neighbouring COO- groups, and neighbouring NH3
groups. 
1.3. Intermolecular Interactions with Distance 
Equations 1.1-1.4 show that inter-atomic and -molecular distances affect the 
magnitudes of each energy term. At an infinite distance the interaction energy 
between two molecules is 0. As the distance decreases, the energy tends towards an 
energy minimum, before the repulsion energy term dominates at short-range. This 
relationship is modelled with the Lennard-Jones potential (VLJ, Equation 1.5).
 = 
where rm is the optimal interaction distance (energy minimum), r is the separation, 
and  is the depth of the potential energy well. Equation 1.5 describes an anharmonic 
curve where the energy turns significantly positive and repulsive when moving closer 
than the minimum, while gradually tailing off to 0 with increasing separation away 
from the minimum (Figure 1.7). 
Figure 1.7: Typical anharmonic curve as seen for a -glycine contact in Figure 1.2.2 
The curve follows the expression of Equation1.5. The depth of the energy well,  = 
107.2 kJ mol1 and optimal separation rm = 5.5 . The blue points are intermolecular 
interaction energies as determined by PIXEL-CLP.8 
Anharmonicity applies to all instances where an attractive force is present in both for 
atomic and intermolecular interactions (i.e. all bound interactions). In addition to the 
optimal distance and energy of the interaction, which are given by the position of the 
minimum, the curvature of the function (second derivative of the curve) defines the 
rigidity, or resistance to change in distance. This information yields the force constant 
and hence the vibrational frequency, a steep curve resulting in a smaller vibrational 
amplitude, and a higher vibrational frequency.  
4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Centroid-Centroid Distance ()
LJ Potential
PIXEL-CLP
Energy
1.3.1. Analysis of Intermolecular Interactions using Distance 
The anharmonic relationship between distance and interaction strength discussed 
above is key to the use of van der Waals (vdW) radii in interpreting intermolecular 
interactions. Van der Waals radii are used to define the typical separation between 
atoms, supposing each atom as a sphere that may overlap another atomic sphere, and 
thus interact strongly. The curve from Figure 1.7 has an energy minimum at a certain 
separation between atoms (rm). For the noble gasses, i.e. non-metallic monoatomic 
structures, the van der Waals radius, rvdW, is equal to  rm, while for metals  rm 
represents the metallic radius, and for a homonuclear single covalent bond it 
represents the covalent radius.   
For an intermolecular contact involving two atoms, an indication of the strength of 
the interaction can be obtained by comparing the contact distance with the sum of 
van der Waals radii of the two atoms. Where the contact is shorter than the sum of 
the van der Waals radii the energetic interaction between atoms is considered to be 
stabilising, whereas beyond this distance the interaction is taken to be weak. This 
viewpoint is strongly argued by Desiraju, who suggests that in the majority of 
situations where short-contacts are observed, the interaction is both stabilizing and 
instrumental in the structural arrangement.9 Thus contacts with distances within the 
sum of the van der Waals radii are considered to direct the packing arrangement of 
the crystal structure.   
Values for the van der Waals radii of atoms have been determined empirically from  
crystal structures, most notably by Bondi, whose tabulated values dating from 1964 
still form the basis of many structural analyses today.10 More recent studies have 
extended values of van der Waals radii to the whole periodic table, for example 
Alvarez in 2013 derived 99 values fitted to structural data across the whole 
Cambridge Database.11  
Alvarez determined the distribution of interatomic distances for different element-
oxygen pairs, finding a general trend (Figure 1.8i) consisting of two peaks, illustrated 
for SrO interactions in Figure 1.8ii. 
Figure 1.8: i. General trend of interatomic distances for atom pairs A1 and A2 in crystal 
structure data, ii. Distribution of SrO interatomic distances in CSD structures. 
Figures reproduced from study by Alvarez. et al.11 
The first peak corresponds to the sum of covalent radii (RcovA1 + RcovA2) at around 2.8 
, followed by a distance range devoid of contacts, termed the van der Waals gap, 
and then a second peak for van der Waals contacts. Beyond the second peak, a 
random distribution is found with increasing distance for non-interacting contacts. 
The second peak, dmax is comprised of a mixture of van der Waals interactions and 
interactions from the tail of the random distribution. The sum of van der Waals radii, 
dw (rvdWA1 +  rvdwA2), is defined at half the peak height of dmax, assuming a Gaussian 
distribution, where  is the width of the peak at half-height. The van der Waals radius 
for oxygen was determined from OO contacts as 1.50 , slightly shorter than 
Bondis value of 1.52 . This acts as a reference value which can be used to obtain 
the van der Waals radii for all other elements when applied to other elementO 
contacts. For the SrO example discussed above, dw = 4.34 , therefore the van der 
Waals radius for Sr: 4.34   1.50  = 2.84  (Equation 1.6).  
 =  (  )    1.6 
The use of van der Waals in interpreting crystal structure packing provides a quick 
assessment of intermolecular contacts in the context of other, similar, interactions. 
A visual indication of van der Waals contacts can be produced in the CSD program 
Mercury ( 
Figure 1.9). 
Figure 1.9: Short SS contacts in L-Cysteine polymorph-II with atom-atom contacts 
shorter than sum of van der Waals radii shown as blue tie-lines within CSD Mercury 
program.12 
For example, if a structure contains a SS contact of 3.58 , then the information 
that 2xrvdW(S) = 3.6  shows quickly that this is likely to be structurally important 
without needing to carry out geometric analysis of similar interactions.  
Although it is fast and convenient, there are some limitations and weaknesses in using 
van der Waals radii as the sole method to interpret crystal structures.  Firstly, it 
works best for interactions based on specific atom-atom contacts, such as OH 
hydrogen bonds and aromatic ring stacking, but neglects contacts which are better 
understood as whole-molecule  whole-molecule interactions. Indeed, some 
structures occur without any contacts shorter than the sum of van der Waals radii 
at all. Figure 1.10 shows the relative frequencies for the number of intermolecular 
contacts formed by small organic molecules within the CSD. There is a distribution 
with a maximum at 5 contacts, but a sizable number of structures contain no contacts 
(5,771 structures, 3%). 
Figure 1.10: Distribution of number of intermolecular contacts for small (< 50 atoms) 
organic molecules within the CSD. Red bar highlights structures without any contacts 
shorter than van der Waals radii. 
Secondly, analyses based on van der Waals radii give no quantification of the relative 
strengths of interactions in a structure. This can be seen from the -glycine structure 
discussed previously, where five short contacts are identifiable as hydrogen-bonds 
that, based on distances alone, would suggest a series of similar stabilising interactions. 
In contrast, computational techniques reveal very different energies for these 
contacts, 1 including, as discussed above, one destabilising interaction, ranging from 
105.8 to +19.1 kJ mol-1. 
Finally, van der Waals are anisotropic, Nyburg et al. showed that the distance of the 
van der Waals radius around an atom is not always constant and therefore instead of 
being considered spherical should be thought of as elliptical in shape.13 This is 
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
Number of Intermolecular Interactions
particularly true for halogen atoms, where, when bonded to carbon, have a 
significantly shorter van der Waals radii along the C-X vector (known as polar-
flattening). 
In the light of these problems, there is growing interest in evaluating intermolecular 
energies in crystal structures. These methods range from the rigorous but slow 
application of quantum mechanics, to the semiempirical methods such as molecular 
mechanics, which are very fast but may be limited in applicability to a range of related 
materials.    
1.3.2. The Bond-Valence-Sum Method 
The analysis of crystal structures based on interatomic distances can be taken further 
by incorporating concepts from Paulings rules for the rationalization of ionic 
structures.14 Originally derived from the ionic model, the Bond Valence-Sum method 
for crystal structure analysis determines relative bonding strengths from interatomic 
distances and empirical parameter values for specific atomic pairs. A summation of 
bond valences, or Bond Valence Sum (BVS) around a given atom gives the atomic 
oxidation state (Equation 1.7). 
 =   1.7 
where VAtom is the valence of the atom in question, and vi corresponds to the valence 
of each bond formed around the central atom. Brown et al. derive a two-parameter 
approximation for the experimental bond strength (Equation 1.8).15  
 = 
  
Where Rij is the bond length, and R0 and B are the parameters specific to the cations 
and anions at a given charge. The values of R0 and B are tabulated from experimental 
structure data, with B typically a constant of 0.37 , although larger values are 
determined for more polarisable atoms.15  Bond Valence Sums, as defined by Equation 
1.8, can be applied out to any distance from the central atom, although in practice 
values drop to zero between 3 and 4 , dependant on the atoms present. Therefore, 
BVS calculations typically focus on the first intramolecular coordination sphere 
around an atom. 
The most common use of the BVS method is in validating and interpreting inorganic 
and metal-organic structures with respect to the intramolecular bonds of metal 
centres. This is often exploited in the determination of metal oxidation states. 
However, the BVS method may be used in interpreting specific contacts within crystal 
structures. Like the van der Waals model, the BVS model proposes that short 
contacts are stronger than long ones. By determining the specific valence of the 
contact using the interatomic distance (Rij) and parameters (R0 and B) in Equation 1.8, 
valences are produced which are comparable between different bonding pairs. This 
approach is employed when looking at perovskite ABX3 structures, where relative 
bond strengths calculated from BVS can be used to compare AX and BX contacts 
within the structure. For example, in the perovskite Ba(MnTi)O3, BVS was used to 
determine the preferential sites for the Mn and Ti ions, supposing higher bond 
valences equate to preferable positions.16 Table 1.2 shows the preferential site for 
both metals is M(1) due to the highest valences calculated. Ti-O bonds produce higher 
valences for all sites and thus it is suggested that the M(1) site is occupied 
preferentially by Mn atoms, while the M(2) and M(3) sites are occupied by Ti atoms. 
Table 1.2: Calculated bond valences for Mn-O and Ti-O at metal sites M1-M3 in 
Ba(MnTi)O3 structure.
Metal Site 
M(1) M(2) M(3) 
SMn-O 3.98 3.49 3.24 
STi-O 4.70 4.13 3.83 
However, there are some issues with BVS. The correlation between bond valence 
and bond length, as defined by 1.8, fits an exponential curve, becoming much steeper 
with decreasing bond distance. Therefore with increasing cation valence, and thus 
shortening bond lengths, the bond valences are much more sensitive to small changes 
in length with increasing atomic charges and decreasing bond lengths. Figure 1.11 
shows the distribution of Mn-O bond lengths in the CSD for Mn(2+), Mn(3+) and 
Mn(4+). As expected, the bond lengths decrease with increasing charge. The lower 
plot shows the effect of bond length on calculated bond valence using the parameters 
for each oxidation state. The curves are very similar between oxidation states, 
showing a steepening curve with decreasing bond distance. Therefore for the higher 
oxidation states where bonds are typically shorter, the calculated bond valence is 
considerably more sensitive to the quality of crystal structure and the accuracy of the 
atomic positions in question.17,18 
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0
 Interquartile range = 50% of data
 Interquartile range = 75% of data
 Median
r ()
Figure 1.11: (top), Box plot for distribution of Mn-O bond lengths in the CSD by Mn 
valence, and (bottom), influence of Mn-O bond length on bond valence, Sij as 
determined using the parameters R0 and B compiled by Brown.
19 Note slightly 
different curves for different valences due to the subtle change in the parameter R0 
between Mn2+ (blue), Mn3+ (green) and Mn4+(orange). Boxes represent lower and 
upper quartiles (Q1-Q3 (50% of data), while whiskers represent range encompassing 
75% of data.  
1.3.3. CrystalExplorer for Structural Analysis 
The CrystalExplorer software developed by Spackman et al. provides a suite of novel 
tools for interpreting interactions within crystal structures.3 The interactions are 
visualized by mapping various parameters to Hirshfeld Surfaces so that prominent 
contacts can be readily identified from the structure displayed. The Hirshfeld 
Partitioning Scheme generates a surface around a molecule at a boundary point 
between monomers. The surface is plotted where the conditions are satisfied: 
where rA/rB and RA/RB are the vector distances and van der Waals radii respectively  
between atoms A and B in two molecules. The result is a 3D globular shape that aids 
in both describing the packing of molecules in the solid structure, and the specific 
contacts observed (Figure 1.12). The specific contacts between molecules can be 
visualized and described using multiple surface property options. 
Figure 1.12: Hirshfeld Surface generated by CrystalExplorer for -glycine using default 
settings. Coloured shading represents dnorm value. which highlights the contacts 
between molecules. 
This is often determined using the normalized contact distance (dnorm) value which 
displays where molecules become closer than the van der Waals radii separation of 
molecular atoms (Equation 1.10). 
  
  
Where di is the distance between the nearest atomic nucleus, i, and the Hirshfeld 
surface and de is the distance between the surface and the nearest atomic nucleus, e, 
in an adjacent molecule, and ri
vdW and re
 are the van der Waals radii of atoms i and 
e respectively. This geometrical analysis can be enhanced by utilising ab initio or semi-
empirical calculations executed with Gaussian or Tonto.20,21 This allows for the 
mapping of various electronic properties such as the electrostatic potential (Figure 
1.13). 
Figure 1.13: Electrostatic Potential mapped onto a Hirshfeld Surface of -glycine in 
CrystalExplorer. Energy calculations carried out with Gaussian using HF-STO-3G 
level of theory. 
With this data it is possible to interpret the nature and packing of molecules within 
the crystal structure using computational electronic values over simple geometric 
data with visual results. Therefore one can appreciate the influence of factors such as 
molecular charge distribution in the formation of crystal structures and in specific 
contact orientations (Figure 1.14). 
Figure 1.14: Packing of -glycine as shown in Figure 1.2 with Hirshfeld Surfaces. 
Shading relates to the electrostatic potential and demonstrates the optimal contact 
orientation between opposing charges. 
1.4. Analysis of Intermolecular Interactions using Computational Methods 
1.4.1. Traditional Quantum-Mechanical Approaches to Intermolecular Energies 
In principle, the interaction energy for a molecular dimer, such as that shown in the 
example for glycine in Figure 1.2, can be evaluated straightforwardly using a quantum 
mechanical method such as MllerPlesset (MP) perturbation theory or Density 
Functional Theory (DFT). One or two calculations are carried-out to evaluate the 
energy or energies of the monomer of a homo-molecular contact (EA + EA) or 
monomers for a hetero-molecular contact (EA + EB). A further calculation is carried 
out for energy of the dimer (Edimer).  The interaction energy, Eint is then given by 
Equation 1.11. 
 =       1.11 
There are a number of caveats that need to be applied to this simple procedure.  The 
first is that density functional methods do not account for dispersion interactions.22,23  
Since these are very important in intermolecular interactions, this is a serious 
shortcoming.  In DFT-D methods, an empirical dispersion term similar to that used 
in molecular mechanics is simply added to the DFT energy.  This simple solution has 
been remarkably successful as shown by Grimme et al.24-27 These studies showed that 
results comparable to the S22 dataset (see below) could be produced, with the 
method also being applicable to larger macromolecular structures.  
A second problem arises when the dimer is taken from a crystal structure.  Small 
experimental measurement errors can have a larger effect on the calculated energies 
than the dimerization energy itself. This is a particular problem for compounds 
containing hydrogen, the positions of which are systematically in error when 
determined from X-ray data. The problem can be reduced by optimising the 
geometry of the crystal structure by periodic DFT methods and carrying out the 
calculation on this structure rather than the experimental one.  
Finally, the calculations themselves also produce erroneously more positive monomer 
energies, which erroneously produce more stable dimerization energies. This is due 
to the larger number of basis functions employed for the dimer, which enables more 
flexibility and therefore a lower energy.  The monomer-dimer energy difference is 
thus over-estimated, an effect known as known as the Basis Set Superposition Error 
(BSSE).28-30 To overcome this, empty ghost-orbitals may be added to the monomer 
calculation basis sets. In this way, comparative values from the monomer and dimer 
calculation are produced and the difference between monomer/dimer energies is 
closer to the interaction energies expected by higher level calculations. 
Table 1.3: S22 dataset of calculated dimer energies. SAPT and CLP-PIXEL methods 
included for comparison. 
Dimer S22 SAPT PIXEL 
kJ mol-1 
2-pyridoxine 2aminopyridine complex 69.91 71.42 64.8 
Adenine thymine complex stack 51.17 53.97 37.2 
Adenine thymine Watson-Crick 
complex 
68.49 69.33 72.4 
Ammonia dimer 13.26 12.22 17.6 
Benzene - Methane complex 6.28 5.82 4.8 
Benzene ammonia complex 9.83 9.20 10.2 
Benzene dimer parallel displaced 11.42 11.97 4.6 
Benzene dimer T-shaped 11.46 11.97 8.9 
Benzene HCN complex 18.66 18.54 20.0 
Benzene water complex 13.72 12.76 16.8 
Ethene dimer 6.32 5.40 7.4 
Ethene ethyne complex 6.40 5.65 7.4 
Formamide dimer 66.78 64.68 55.1 
Formic acid dimer 77.86 76.61 70.9 
Indole benzene complex stack 21.84 21.71 9.7 
Indole benzene T-shape complex 23.97 23.68 26.8 
Methane dimer 2.22 2.05 2.0 
Phenol dimer 29.50 29.33 33.3 
Pyrazine dimer 18.49 18.62 13.0 
Uracil dimer h-bonded 85.65 82.97 79.7 
Uracil dimer stack 41.34 43.60 30.9 
Water dimer 21.00 19.29 28.5 
Some benchmark dimer energies have been collated in databases such as the S22 
dataset (Table 1.3), which contains 22 small molecule dimer reference energies.31,32 
To produce these datasets without issues arising from the BSSE, monomer and dimer 
energies were calculated using basis sets that satisfy convergence to the theoretical 
infinite limit, known as the Complete Basis Set (CBS) limit. This limit is determined 
by extrapolating data produced by running several calculations over a range of basis-
sets of increasing size (Figure 1.15).33 
Figure 1.15: Extrapolation of reference basis-set values (blue markers) to find the 
basis-set necessary (red marker) with satisfactory tolerance of CBS limit (black 
dashed line). 
This approach becomes very computationally expensive for routine calculations or 
for calculations involving larger molecules. In practice, a single methodology, which is 
known from the literature or previous work to produce accurate results for similar 
systems, is applied. 
While datasets such as the S22 database provide accurate benchmark and reference 
energies, generating a new series of dimer energies using the same approach used to 
form this dataset is not an ideal process. As already discussed, the computational time 
involved is prohibitive for larger molecules and an increasing number of dimers. 
Additionally, the energy produced is not broken down into the constituent terms 
(electrostatic, polarisation, dispersion, and repulsion) and therefore gives very little 
insight into the nature of the interaction studied. 
More intensive ab initio methods have been developed that give an accurate 
breakdown of energy terms, with perhaps the most successful being Symmetry-
Adapted Perturbation Theory (SAPT).  
CBS Limit
Increasing Basis-Set Size
1.4.2. Symmetry Adapted Perturbation Theory 
Symmetry-Adapted Perturbation Theory (SAPT) provides an energy breakdown into 
the four terms discussed in Section 1.1. The sum of these terms forms the total dimer 
interaction energy. The theory behind SAPT is often noted for its complexity, and a 
detailed description has been produced by Jeziorski et al.34-36 SAPT is performed by 
perturbating the wavefunctions of each monomer with respect to each other. The 
separate energy terms are obtained from the second order perturbation (known as 
SAPT0). Higher SAPT calculations are possible, in the form of SAPT2, SAPT2+, and 
SAPT2+3, which incorporate a greater level of perturbation which adds higher order 
components, such as second order intramonomer electron correlation.37,38 Higher 
levels of SAPT are necessary for accurate results when dealing with structures 
containing large electrostatic terms (e.g. dimers with hydrogen bonding), though the 
computational cost increases rapidly with the size of the molecules forming the 
dimer.38 
As an advantage over the quantum mechanical approaches described previously, 
which calculate the interaction energy from separate monomer and dimer energies 
using Equation 1.11, SAPT determines the interaction energy through the 
perturbation of the entire system, removing the possibility of BSSE.39 
SAPT provides nearly unrivalled accuracy in the determination of dimer energies, 
matching some of the highest levels of theory feasible using the traditional quantum 
mechanical approaches discussed in Section 1.4.1 at a fraction of the computational 
cost (Figure 1.16).  
Figure 1.16: Computational time of various computational methods with increasing 
size of system as produced by Li et. al.40 
Though the improvement in computational time over high level DFT and MP methods 
is considerable, as with the previous methods, SAPT computation times on current 
hardware become substantial with larger molecules. This makes the calculation of a 
full lattice energy (i.e. all dimers out to a convergence point, where the contribution 
of each individual dimer is effectively 0), prohibitive for most structures. As a result, 
semi-empirical methods provide a faster, computationally lighter process at the 
expense of an acceptable decrease in accuracy. 
1.4.3. The CLP-PIXEL Method for Structural Analysis 
CLP-PIXEL developed by Gavezzotti, is a suite of software for the semi-empirical 
evaluation of intermolecular interactions in solid-state structures.8 Like SAPT, PIXEL 
breaks interaction energies down into components (electrostatic, polarisation, 
dispersion, and repulsion). Results include lattice energies that accurately reproduce 
enthalpies found in organic and metal-organic solids  (Figure 1.17) at a fraction of the 
computation cost needed for higher level calculations such as SAPT and DFT.41 
Figure 1.17: Comparison of experimental sublimation energies for a range of organic 
compounds compared to values obtained by PIXEL. The trend line has equation 
Hsub(Expt) = 1.0118 Hsub(PIXEL), and the correlation coefficient is 0.90.
PIXEL calculations are carried out using electron density values of each isolated 
molecule in the gas-phase usually calculated at the MP2/6-31G** or B3-LYP/6-31G** 
levels of theory.20 The results are a 3 dimensional grid of electron density cubes with 
a standard size of 0.08 3 (default step-size). To reduce the computational load, these 
pixels are clustered into n x n x n Super-Pixels, where n is known as the 
condensation level and has a typical value of 4, so as to produce a grid of super-pixel 
electron densities, each with dimensions 0.32 . The accuracy of PIXEL results may 
be improved by decreasing the condensation level, effectively increasing the 
resolution. The trade-off is an exponentially increasing computational time with 
decreasing condensation value, n. Super-pixels with charge densities below a 
threshold (10-6 electrons) are set to 0, with their electron density being distributed 
between remaining super-pixels. This reduces the number of pixel-pixel calculations 
needed. The density map is transformed using the crystal symmetry operations to 
produce a cluster of energy density out to a user-defined radius (typically  18  for 
small organic molecules).  Calculations are carried out on each combination of super-
pixel pairs between molecules (Figure 1.18). 
Figure 1.18: Illustrative process of PIXEL calculations on a dimer of -glycine. Electron 
density grids are overlaid on reference molecule (black) and dimer molecule (blue 
fill). With first pixel (blue) and last pixel (red fill) highlighted to show transformation 
of initial density grid to the dimer molecule. First two pixel-pixel calculations (i1 and 
i2) are displayed. 
Each component is calculated separately using the fundamental energy calculations as 
laid out below. 
The electrostatic term, is formed as the sum of pixel-pixel, pixel-nucleus, and nucleus-
nucleus calculations using the Coulombs law described in Section 1.1.1 (Equation 
1.1). Note that for PIXEL, q1 and q2 refer to the respective charges of each super-
pixel, and r is the separation distance between the centre of each super-pixel. In cases 
where monomer pixel grids overlap, producing an infeasibly short distance r, the 
distance is reset to half the pixel-step size in what is known as the collision-avoidance 
procedure. 
The polarizability term is determined by assigning each pixel, i, to an atom in the 
molecule, as determined by the atom that gives the smallest ratio of distance to 
atomic radius. The corresponding polarizability for the pixel is approximated using 
the following equation: 
  1.12 
Where atom is the polarizability of the atom as defined by PIXEL, Zatom is the charge 
on the atom, and q1 is the charge of the pixel. From this, a polarisation term for the 
pixel can be determined using the total electric field exerted by surrounding 
molecules, i, in the equation: 
 =  
   1.13 
Like the electrostatic term, the polarisation term is subject to the collision avoidance 
procedure which removes instances where overlapping pixels result in interaction 
energies that tend to infinity. In addition to this, for the polarisation term there is a 
dampening criterion which compensates for the effective shift in electron density 
caused by the pixel-pixel distance reset. 
The dispersion term is calculated as the summation of pixel-pixel (Ai,Bj) components: 
 ( ) =  () 
(4 ) ( )
Where EOS is the oscillator strength as determined from the formal ionisation 
potential, Ii in Equation 1.15. In order to compensate for the drop in ionisation 
potential with increasing distance from the atomic nucleus, the formal ionisation 
potential is calculated from the ionisation potential of the free atom, I0, the atomic 
nucleus-pixel distance, Ri, and the fitted parameter  1.16. The final component, f(R) 
is defined using 1.17 and adjustable empirical parameter, D. 
 = (  )  1.15 
 =  exp ( ) 1.16 
() = exp
  1
The molecule-molecule dispersion can now be calculated as the sum of pixel-pixel 
dispersion values. 
The final term, repulsion, is calculated from the overlap of charge densities, and 
equates as: 
 =  () () 
Where i and j are the electron charge densities for molecules A and B respectively, 
and V is the pixel volume. In contrast to the other terms, the repulsion component 
is calculated using the uncondensed electron density results from Gaussian and is thus 
unaffected by condensation level but strongly influenced by electron density step-size. 
As with the polarisation term, each pixel is assigned to a nucleus in the molecule, and 
so the repulsion is determined as its contribution from atom pairs m and n for 
molecules A and B respectively: 
 ( ) = (   )  1.19 
 ( ) =   ( ) 1.20 
where K1 and K2 are positive disposable parameters, and mn is the difference in 
Pauling electronegativity. The total interaction Energy, Etot can now be equated as the 
summation of the electrostatic, polarisation, dispersion, and repulsion terms 1.21. 
The summation of interaction energies out to the cluster radius gives the lattice 
energy ELat. 
 =  +  +  +   1.21 
Figure 1.19: Comparison of S22 dataset values with SAPT2+3 (left) and CLP-PIXEL 
(right). All PIXEL calculations were based on MP2/6-31G** electron densities and 
condensation level 4. 
While PIXEL does not reproduce values from the S22 dataset as closely  as SAPT 
(Figure 1.19), it produces results at a fraction of the computational cost, with lattice 
energy values within chemical accuracy (Figure 1.17). Moreover, the relative strengths 
of dimer energies are consistent with the higher level calculations, and the breakdown 
of individual energy terms, while not matching exactly with SAPT, agree about the 
physical nature of an interaction. 
1.4.4. Interaction energies from CrystalExplorer 
As with CLP-PIXEL, CrystalExplorer facilitates the calculation of intermolecular 
interaction energies in solid state structures with a breakdown of energies into the 
same components (EElec, EPol, EDisp, and ERep). CrystalExplorer also makes use of ab 
initio processes such as MP2 and DFT, either  through Gaussian or Tonto programs.  
The electrostatic term is calculated to the classical approach of monomer charge 
interactions, similar to PIXEL. The same is true of the polarisation energy, which is 
estimated over the sum of all atom-atom interactions, as determined using Equation 
1.13. The dispersion term is generated from Grimmes D2 correction summed over 
all atom-atom interactions.43 The final term, repulsion, comes from Su & Lis method 
using the antisymmetric product of monomer spin orbitals.44 
y = 0.9957x
R = 0.999
-100.00
-80.00
-60.00
-40.00
-20.00
-100.00 -50.00 0.00
S22 (kJ mol1)
y = 0.9139x
R = 0.9788
-100.00
-80.00
-60.00
-40.00
-20.00
-100.00 -50.00 0.00
S22 (kJ mol1)
The relative sizes of each term, and the summed total interaction energy do not relate 
well to higher level calculations such as SAPT, and therefore scaling factors (kterm) are 
added to each of the terms which are fitted from comparisons between the above 
process and higher level calculations for 232 molecular dimers.45-47 The interaction 
energy is thus produced using Equation 1.22. 
 =   +   +   +    
The interaction energies and individual breakdown of energy terms closely resemble 
those from PIXEL-CLP, with a similar level of accuracy and computational expense. 
These results can be displayed pictorially using energy frameworks where the relative 
strengths of interactions in the crystal structure are clearly visible (Figure 1.20).3 
Frameworks can also be generated for each of the separate terms. This can be used 
to determine the first coordination sphere from repulsive terms for example, or in 
quickly assessing the dominating terms across the crystal structure.  
Figure 1.20: Energy framework for -glycine as displayed by CrystalExplorer. Strut 
thickness represents relative molecule-molecule interaction strengths. Blue struts 
represent stabilizing (< 0 kJ mol-1) interactions, where yellow struts represent 
destabilizing interactions (> 0 kJ mol-1).  
1.5. Thesis Aims 
The previous section has demonstrated many approaches that may be taken to study 
intermolecular interactions in solid-state materials. It has emphasised the value of 
computational techniques which allow the user to describe interactions both in terms 
of nature and quantifiable strengths. 
The use of computational techniques for organic structures is already well established, 
with software such as PIXEL and CrystalExplorer being widely used in the 
rationalization and description of their crystal packing and properties. Use of these 
methods on transition metal containing compounds is less common, in part due to 
the difficult of searching for oxidation state spesific structures as described in Section 
1.1. In addition, while CrystalExplorer provides a simply interface and process for 
setting up computaional calculations, it restricts the user to using local computational 
resources, which become prohibitivly slow when looking at larger systems such as 
co-ordination complexes. PIXEL, on the other hand, facilitates the passing of 
computational tasks to external clusters with greater computational power, but has 
no intuitive interface, which increases calculation set-up time due to the need to 
manually create input files, and introduces the potential for significant user-error. 
This thesis aims to improve the accesability of CSD based structural analysis, and 
demonstrate the spesific value of this approach to coordination compounds. To 
achieve these aims, this thesis will first aim to improve the situation regarding missing 
oxidation states in the CSD, incoperating techniques such as BVS to develop an 
automated procedure for oxidation state determination. 
 To further ease the analysis of crystal structures, the second task is to develop a new 
interface and process for the automation of PIXEL calculations within the CSD 
software Mercury.  
Lastly, and in order to facilitate the second aim of demonstrating the value of 
intermolecular interaction analysis towards coordination compouds, PIXEL will be 
used to investigate and rationalize the role of intermolecular interactons in the 
behavior of spin-crossover matierals. 
1.6. References 
(1) Kennard, O. From Private Data to Public Knowledge In: Butterworth, I ed.  The Impact of 
Electronic Publishing on the Academic Community.; Portland Press Ltd., 1997. 
(2) Kvick, A.; Canning, W. M.; Koetzle, T. F.; Williams, G. J. B. An experimental study of 
the influence of temperature on a hydrogen-bonded system: the crystal structure of 
[gamma]-glycine at 83 K and 298 K by neutron diffraction. Acta Crystallographica 
Section B 1980, 36 (1), 115. 
(3) Mackenzie, C. F.; Spackman, P. R.; Jayatilaka, D.; Spackman, M. A. CrystalExplorer 
model energies and energy frameworks: extension to metal coordination 
compounds, organic salts, solvates and open-shell systems. IUCrJ 2017, 4 (5), 575. 
(4) Bacon, G. E.; Curry, N. A.; Wilson, S. A.; Spence, R. A crystallographic study of solid 
benzene by neutron diffraction. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. 
Mathematical and Physical Sciences 1964, 279 (1376), 98. 
(5) Langan, P.; Mason, S. A.; Myles, D.; Schoenborn, B. P. Structural characterization of 
crystals of [alpha]-glycine during anomalous electrical behaviour. Acta Crystallographica 
Section B 2002, 58 (4), 728. 
(6) Dawson, A.; Allan, D. R.; Belmonte, S. A.; Clark, S. J.; David, W. I. F.; McGregor, P. 
A.; Parsons, S.; Pulham, C. R.; Sawyer, L. Effect of High Pressure on the Crystal 
Structures of Polymorphs of Glycine. Crystal Growth & Design 2005, 5 (4), 1415. 
(7) Jones, J. E.; Chapman, S. On the determination of molecular fields. II. From the 
equation of state of a gas. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing 
Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character 1924, 106 (738), 463. 
(8) Angelo, G. Calculation of lattice energies of organic crystals: the PIXEL integration 
method in comparison with more traditional methods. Zeitschrift fr Kristallographie - 
Crystalline Materials 2005, 220 (5-6), 499. 
(9) Thakur, T. S.; Dubey, R.; Desiraju, G. R. Intermolecular atom-atom bonds in crystals 
- a chemical perspectiveThis essay and that by Lecomte et al. (2015) comment on 
Dunitz (2015). IUCrJ 2015, 2 (2), 159. 
(10) Bondi, A. van der Waals Volumes and Radii. The Journal of Physical Chemistry 1964, 
68 (3), 441. 
(11) Alvarez, S. A cartography of the van der Waals territories. Dalton Trans 2013, 42 
(24), 8617. 
(12) Harding, M. M.; Long, H. A. The crystal and molecular structure of l-cysteine. Acta 
Crystallographica Section B 1968, 24 (8), 1096. 
(13) Nyburg, S. C.; Faerman, C. H. A revision of van der Waals atomic radii for molecular 
crystals: N, O, F, S, Cl, Se, Br and I bonded to carbon. Acta Crystallographica Section B 
1985, 41 (4), 274. 
(14) Pauling, L. THE PRINCIPLES DETERMINING THE STRUCTURE OF COMPLEX 
IONIC CRYSTALS. Journal of the American Chemical Society 1929, 51 (4), 1010. 
(15) Brown, I. D. The Chemical Bond in Inorganic Chemistry: The Bond Valence Model; Oxford 
University Press, 2016. 
(16) Keith, G. M.; Kirk, C. A.; Sarma, K.; Alford, N. M.; Cussen, E. J.; Rosseinsky, M. J.; 
Sinclair, D. C. Synthesis, Crystal Structure, and Characterization of 
Ba(Ti1/2Mn1/2)O3: A High Permittivity 12R-Type Hexagonal Perovskite. Chemistry 
of Materials 2004, 16 (10), 2007. 
(17) Brown, I. D. Recent Developments in the Methods and Applications of the Bond 
Valence Model. Chemical Reviews 2009, 109 (12), 6858. 
(18) Brown, I. D. The Chemical Bond in Inorganic Chemistry: The Bond Valence Model; Oxford 
University Press, 2006. 
(19) Brown, I. D.  IUCR, 2016; Vol. 2019. 
(20) Frisch, M. J.; Trucks, G. W.; Schlegel, H. B.; Scuseria, G. E.; Robb, M. A.; Cheeseman, 
J. R.; Scalmani, G.; Barone, V.; Petersson, G. A.; Nakatsuji, H.et al.  Wallingford, CT, 
2016. 
(21) Jayatilaka, D.; Grimwood, D. Tonto: A Fortran Based Object-Oriented System for Quantum 
Chemistry and Crystallography, 2003. 
(22) Kristyn, S.; Pulay, P. Can (semi)local density functional theory account for the 
London dispersion forces? Chemical Physics Letters 1994, 229 (3), 175. 
(23) Prez-Jord, J.; Becke, A. D. A density-functional study of van der Waals forces: rare 
gas diatomics. Chemical Physics Letters 1995, 233 (1), 134. 
(24) Grimme, S.; Antony, J.; Ehrlich, S.; Krieg, H. A consistent and accurate ab initio 
parametrization of density functional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 
elements H-Pu. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2010, 132 (15), 154104. 
(25) Grimme, S.; Ehrlich, S.; Goerigk, L. Effect of the damping function in dispersion 
corrected density functional theory. Journal of Computational Chemistry 2011, 32 (7), 
1456. 
(26) Kovcs, A.; Cz. Dobrowolski, J.; Ostrowski, S.; Rode, J. E. Benchmarking density 
functionals in conjunction with Grimme's dispersion correction for noble gas dimers 
(Ne2, Ar2, Kr2, Xe2, Rn2). International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 2017, 117 (9), 
e25358. 
(27) Moellmann, J.; Grimme, S. DFT-D3 Study of Some Molecular Crystals. The Journal of 
Physical Chemistry C 2014, 118 (14), 7615. 
(28) Jansen, H. B.; Ros, P. Non-empirical molecular orbital calculations on the protonation 
of carbon monoxide. Chemical Physics Letters 1969, 3 (3), 140. 
(29) Boys, S. F.; Bernardi, F. The calculation of small molecular interactions by the 
differences of separate total energies. Some procedures with reduced errors. 
Molecular Physics 1970, 19 (4), 553. 
(30) Meunier, A.; Lvy, B.; Berthier, G. Corrlation lectronique et effets de base dans 
l'tude de la liaison hydrogne: le dimre mixte ammoniac-eau. Theoretica chimica acta 
1973, 29 (1), 49. 
(31) Rezac, J.; Jurecka, P.; Riley, K.; ern, J.; Valds, H.; Pluhkov, K.; Berka, K.; ez, 
T.; Pitok, M.; Vondrasek, J.et al. Quantum Chemical Benchmark Energy and 
Geometry Database for Molecular Clusters and Complex Molecular Systems 
(www.begdb.com): A Users Manual and Examples. Collection of Czechoslovak Chemical 
Communications 2008, 73, 1261. 
(32) Jureka, P.; poner, J.; ern, J.; Hobza, P. Benchmark database of accurate (MP2 and 
CCSD(T) complete basis set limit) interaction energies of small model complexes, 
DNA base pairs, and amino acid pairs. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2006, 8 
(17), 1985. 
(33) Vasilyev, V. Online complete basis set limit extrapolation calculator. Computational 
and Theoretical Chemistry 2017, 1115, 1. 
(34) Stone, A. J. The theory of intermolecular forces. 2013. 
(35) SAPT: a program for many-body symmetry-adapted perturbation theory calculations of 
intermolecular interaction energies, 1993. 
(36) Perturbation theory approach to intermolecular potential energy surfaces of Van der 
Waals complexes. Chemical reviews. 1994, 94, 1887. 
(37) Hohenstein, E. G.; Sherrill, C. D. Efficient evaluation of triple excitations in symmetry-
adapted perturbation theory via second-order MllerPlesset perturbation theory 
natural orbitals. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2010, 133 (10), 104107. 
(38) Parker, T. M.; Burns, L. A.; Parrish, R. M.; Ryno, A. G.; Sherrill, C. D. Levels of 
symmetry adapted perturbation theory (SAPT). I. Efficiency and performance for 
interaction energies. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2014, 140 (9), 094106. 
(39) Szalewicz, K. Symmetry-adapted perturbation theory of intermolecular forces. WIREs 
Computational Molecular Science 2012, 2 (2), 254. 
(40) Li, A.; Muddana, H. S.; Gilson, M. K. Quantum Mechanical Calculation of Noncovalent 
Interactions: A Large-Scale Evaluation of PMx, DFT, and SAPT Approaches. Journal of 
Chemical Theory and Computation 2014, 10 (4), 1563. 
(41) Chickos, J. S.; Gavezzotti, A. Sublimation Enthalpies of Organic Compounds: A Very 
Large Database with a Match to Crystal Structure Determinations and a Comparison 
with Lattice Energies. Crystal Growth & Design 2019, 19 (11), 6566. 
(42) van Gerwen, P. MChem Report. 2017. 
(43) Grimme, S. Semiempirical GGA-type density functional constructed with a long-range 
dispersion correction. Journal of Computational Chemistry 2006, 27 (15), 1787. 
(44) Su, P.; Li, H. Energy decomposition analysis of covalent bonds and intermolecular 
interactions. The Journal of Chemical Physics 2009, 131 (1), 014102. 
(45) Turner, M. J.; Grabowsky, S.; Jayatilaka, D.; Spackman, M. A. Accurate and Efficient 
Model Energies for Exploring Intermolecular Interactions in Molecular Crystals. The 
Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2014, 5 (24), 4249. 
(46) Acree, W.; Chickos, J. S. Phase Transition Enthalpy Measurements of Organic and 
Organometallic Compounds. Sublimation, Vaporization and Fusion Enthalpies From 
1880 to 2015. Part 1. C1  C10. Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 2016, 
45 (3), 033101. 
(47) Acree, W.; Chickos, J. S. Phase Transition Enthalpy Measurements of Organic and 
Organometallic Compounds and Ionic Liquids. Sublimation, Vaporization, and Fusion 
Enthalpies from 1880 to 2015. Part 2. C11C192. Journal of Physical and Chemical 
Reference Data 2017, 46 (1), 013104. 
2. Automated Oxidation-State Assignment for 
Metal Sites in Coordination Complexes in the 
Cambridge Structural Database
2.1. Introduction 
The Cambridge Structural Database (CSD)1 currently contains over 400,000 
structures of coordination complexes, but only about half of these entries specify the 
metal oxidation state, and this is reported in the compound name field.  Although the 
current system of incorporating oxidation states in the entry compound name 
provides some scope for filtering entries, it would be much more advantageous to 
associate specific oxidation states with individual transition metal sites. In this way it 
would be possible to distinguish specific oxidation states in polynuclear complexes as 
well as quickly filter entries by both metal and associated valence. 
As the CSD moves to a new data structure which includes oxidation state as an 
atomic property, new processes are needed to generate and assign individual 
valences. Given the number of transition metal-containing entries, it would be 
impractical to attempt manual identification and curation of current, as well as future, 
entries. Automated processes that can distinguish individual atomic valences are 
therefore highly desirable.  
Past studies have identified and validated transition metal oxidation states using a 
combination of Bond Valence Sum (BVS) and ligand templating processes, 
implementing a two-step process in oxidation state assignment and validation.2 An 
initial oxidation state was estimated using a ligand templating method whereby an 
algorithm was trained to recognise common ligand templates surrounding a metal 
centre, and then apply the charge associated with each ligand to determine the 
corresponding charge of the metal. Having achieved this, BVS was applied to the 
structure using parameters associated with the oxidation state interpreted from the 
results of the ligand template method. 
This method was applied to a subset of 743 manually-verified copper (+1) and (+2) 
structures, with 98% successful assignment. While these results are extremely 
promising, the procedure relied on appropriate coverage of ligand templates and BVS 
parameters to produce a confident assignment. Where either the template or BVS 
method deviated from the expected value, manual inspection was required to check 
the assignments made. 
The BVS method has also been applied to inorganic compounds in the ICSD with the 
aim of predicting the formation of likely oxidation states in the presence specific 
anions 3. 
Presented here are new methods that can be broadly applied to molecular 
coordination complexes, in most cases without the need for manual intervention. As 
in previous work, oxidation states are assigned using the BVS method, but without 
the need to assume or derive an initial oxidation state estimate. The BVS calculations 
are supported by assignment of ligand charges, but avoid the definition of templates 
(in most cases, open-shell ligands are an exception). The combination of these 
methods provides a confidence-scored oxidation state for each metal atom present 
in a complex.  All calculations make use of the CSD Python API (application 
programming interface), which has been distributed alongside the CSD since 2015.  
2.2. Methodology 
2.2.1. Assignment of oxidation states using the bond valence method 
In the bond valence method each metal(i)-ligand(j) bond is assigned a valence, Sij, based 
on its length and two empirical parameters, R0 and B. The sum of the valences of the 
bonds formed by the metal is its oxidation state 4.  Bond valence parameters depend 
on the metal, its oxidation state and the identity of the bonded ligand atom.   
The parameters R0 and B are taken from the database compiled by I. D. Brown,
5 and 
bonds are defined using the default CSD chemical connectivity cut-offs.  The 
calculation is carried out for all available bond valence parameters provided that, for 
each metal-ligand bond in the molecule, parameters exist for all common oxidation 
states.  An oxidation state was considered common if it applied to more than 15% 
of a metals assigned entries in the CSD (a list is given in the SI (Table S2.1); this 
choice of cut-off gives a listing broadly similar to that in Housecroft and Sharpes 
popular textbook 6).  The value of Sij is calculated for each of the oxidation states for 
which values of R0 and B are available in Browns database (Equation 2.1, where Rij is 
the metal-ligand bond distance). 
 =   2.1 
For example, for the chromium compound HIQYAJ contains the 
[Cr(oxalate)2(H2O)2] anion.
7 The common oxidation states for Cr are +2 and +3, 
and so unless parameters for Cr-O bonds for both are available no attempt is made 
to assign the oxidation state at all. In fact parameters are available for Cr-O bonds in 
all oxidation states from Cr(+2) to Cr(+6), and all of these are considered in the 
oxidation state assignment procedure. 
For each oxidation state, the values of Sij are summed to give a total trial oxidation 
state, Vt. The value of BVS is compared to the oxidation state (Vp) corresponding to 
the bond valence parameters used to calculate them.  
 =      2.2 
The oxidation state of the metal is taken as the one which yields the smallest value 
of , that is, the oxidation state which is most consistent with the parameters used 
to calculate it (Equation 2.2). 
For example, in the four co-ordinate cobalt complex KUYHES 8 there are two Co-N 
bonds with distances 2.042 and 2.053  and two Co-Cl bonds measuring 2.219 and 
2.217 .  Cobalt has two common oxidation states, +2 and +3, and Co-N and Co-Cl 
bond valence parameters are available for both.  Using the Co(+2)-N and Co(+2)-Cl 
bond valence parameters to calculate the bond valences of the Co-N and Co-Cl 
bonds yields a total trial valence (Vt) of 1.987.  The difference, , between this and 
the reference oxidation state used to select the bond valence parameters (Vp) is 
|1.987  2| = 0.013.  Using the bond valence parameters for Co(+3)-N and Co(+3)-
Cl bonds yields Vt = 2.014 and  = |2.014  3| = 0.986.   Since 0.013 < 0.986, the 
oxidation state of the cobalt is taken as +2. 
If the minimum value of  is greater than 0.5 a warning is added to the assignment. 
Warnings are used in confidence scoring (see Section 2.2.3). 
For many bond types, R0 and B have been determined multiple times.  Different 
parameters may apply to different spin states, e.g. high and low spin Fe(+2)-N, or be 
derived from different classes of compound or data-sets of different sizes.  Each 
available set of parameters was used to calculate a value of , with the smallest value 
being used to assign the oxidation state of the metal.  The procedure, which was 
found to reproduce known oxidation states more reliably than using the parameters 
designated most reliable in Browns database, is exemplified in detail in the SI for 
the KUYHES example of the previous paragraph (Table S2.2, S2.3).  
2.2.2. Assignment of oxidation states using ligand charges  
Ligand charge assignment procedure  
As an alternative to the bond valence method, likely ligand charges were also 
determined using the very fast semi-empirical electronic structure package MOPAC 
9. The overall charge on a complex can be derived from the sum of the formal atomic 
charges that are stored in the CSD as atomic charge properties. Therefore, the metal 
oxidation state can be assigned as (the sum of the stored formal atomic charges)  
(sum of the ligand charges). 
In the first stage of the procedure the metal centre is removed, leaving the ligand 
fragments for charge assignment. This process only considers ligands directly 
connected to the metal centre of interest. Where a salt occurs in the database, formal 
atomic charges are added to the metal centre by the scientific editors at the CCDC 
to achieve a charge-neutral structure.  
For each ligand fragment the total number of electrons is determined assuming 
charge-neutrality. For ligands with an even number of electrons, possible charges 
were taken to be +4 to 8 in steps of 2e; for those with an odd number of electrons 
possible charges were +3 to 9, also in steps of 2e. This procedure does not consider 
the possibility that a ligand has an open-shell (i.e. a radical) electron configuration. 
Radicals are discussed below, along with further comments on cationic ligands.  For 
each charge, a single-point electronic structure calculation (MOPAC) is carried out 
using the crystal structure geometry and the PM7 method 10.  Each calculation yields 
a heat of formation and a Parr and Pople hardness parameter as well as the energies 
of the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals.   The charge is 
assigned on the basis of the formation energy and the hardness parameter. 
Parr & Pople hardness charge assignment 
The hardness parameter quantifies the resistance to changes in the electron 
configuration 11, and the charge on the ligand was taken as the one yielding the largest 
hardness parameter. Hardness values typically fall into the range 0-10 eV. Any charges 
yielding a hardness outside this range are disregarded. A warning is issued if the 
difference in hardness is less than 1eV. 
Charge assignment using formation energy 
The charge on the ligand was taken as the one yielding the most negative formation 
energy. As an example, the energy versus charge plot for a ligand with formula NO3 
is shown in Figure 2.1. There is a clear minimum for a charge of 1, indicating that 
the ligand is NO3.  
-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Ligand Charge (n)
Figure 2.1: Heat for formation (kJ mol1) versus ligand charge (n) for NO3
n. Energies 
calculated in single-point energy calculations in the crystal structure geometry using 
MOPAC. 
For some structures, a ligand fragment may produce a set of formation energies with 
a shallow minimum, making charge assignment ambiguous. Experience showed that 
ambiguities arose when the energy difference between charges was lower than 150 
kJ mol1.  Values lower than this could, for example, lead to assignment of different 
charges for identical ligands in different crystal structures. Where energy differences 
do suggest a shallow minimum, a warning is added to the fragment assignment, and 
this is carried forward when considering overall assignment confidence. 
Assignment of oxidation states using hydrogen placement algorithms 
The CSD Python API has a built-in molecular editing tool for automatic hydrogen 
placement which can be used to determine the charge of the ligand following removal 
of the metal atoms (as in Section 2.2.1).  The number of H-atoms in a ligand is first 
recorded. The H-atoms are all removed and then replaced using the H-atom 
generation routine assuming charge neutrality. The difference between the number 
of H-atoms before and after this procedure is the charge.  For example, the 
methoxide ligand CH3O contains three H-atoms. Removal of these followed by 
automatic H-atom placement generates methanol, CH3OH, containing four H-atoms. 
The charge on the original CH3O fragment is therefore 1 since addition of one 
proton is required to generate a neutral molecule.  Having determined the ligand 
charges in this way the oxidation state of the metal is assigned following the 
procedure of the previous sections. 
Radicals 
The ligand charge calculation is carried out in steps of 2e because the problems 
associated with shallow minima become much more common if charges are sampled 
in steps of 1e.   The number of structures containing radical ligands is quite small, 
<2% of structures in the test-set used in this work for method validation (Section 
3.1). For common radical species, these ligands can be identified beforehand from 
their SMILES formulae and are added manually to an SQLite database in the form of 
an exceptions list look-up table, which pre-assigns a ligand fragment charge before 
any determination processes are carried out. This procedure is similar to the 
templating method used by Shields et al. in their work.12  
Cationic ligands 
Cations can be readily identified in entries from the CSD by the systematic presence 
of positive symbols in the SMILES formulae generated by the CSD Python API, so that 
the charge of the fragment is determined by simply summing the number of positive 
symbols and subtracting the number of negative symbols within the SMILES formula. 
As SMILES-based charge labelling requires specifically ionic atomic sites, this process 
cannot be used to distinguish between neutral and anionic ligands, where the metal-
ligand bond is typically considered as neutral.  
Where a ligand is zwitterionic, there is an ambiguity as to how ligands have been 
labelled. In the Zn2+ complex CSD refcode EGAPOR,13 zwitterionic N-n-
propylsalicylaldimine-O ligands are identified in the CSD entry, with ligating atoms 
denoted with a negative charge and the protonated imine nitrogen atom with a 
positive charge. By contrast, in the Cu(+2)-containing refcode CICWIU,14 only the 
positive charge on a terminal ammonium moiety is identified in the SMILES formula 
N(=C\c1ccccc1O)/CCNCCNCC[NH3+], suggests a +1 cation, rather than the 
true neutral overall ligand.  In order to address these issues, assignments made using 
this method are only accepted providing the closed shell requirement described 
earlier is still obeyed. Where this is not the case, a warning is displayed, and the 
corresponding assignment of metal oxidation state is aborted. 
Oxidation state assignment based on ligand charges. 
The metal oxidation state is determined for mononuclear complexes from the total 
charge of the ligands and the overall charge on the complex to achieve a net neutral 
crystal structure. 
The same approach can be applied to polynuclear complexes where there is a single 
metal atom in the asymmetric unit and assuming charge-order so that the overall 
charge is split evenly between each metal atom present in the overall structure. As 
an example, the dimeric Cu complex SAVRIQ01  is located on an inversion centre so 
that the asymmetric unit contains a single copper atom.15 Assigning all ligand charges 
in the complex gives an overall charge of +4. Using the assumption that each 
asymmetric unit has the same valence, the valence of each copper atom is equal to  
(i.e. 1/n asymmetric units that make up a complete molecule) times the overall charge 
= +2. 
In other polynuclear complexes the total ligand charge can only be used to obtain the 
sum of the metal oxidation states, and the BVS is the only method capable of assigning 
the oxidation states of individual metal atoms. The total ligand charge is used instead 
for validating the BVS assignments. 
2.2.3. Oxidation state assignment and confidence scoring 
The preceding sections have described four methods for oxidation state assignment: 
a BVS approach and three ligand charge-based methods using minimum energy, 
maximum hardness and the number of H-atoms.  It is only strictly necessary to apply 
these methods to a new CSD entry in cases where an author-supplied oxidation state 
is not available, though it is recommended that they could also be used to validate 
author-assignments.  
Where named valences are not available, assignments are made using a combination 
of all methods described. In ideal cases, all four methods should agree on the assigned 
oxidation state. In cases where the methods disagree, the oxidation state assignment 
is attempted using the BVS method as this is the only method that can be applied to 
both the mononuclear and polynuclear complexes. Where BVS cannot be applied, 
the assignment is made based on the maximum hardness method for ligand charge 
assignment. The reliability of this method is very similar to the energy assignment 
method but during testing there were found to be fewer ambiguous cases (see above) 
than for the energy method. 
Following oxidation state assignment, a confidence score is determined based on the 
success rate of each method, the agreement between different methods, and the 
occurrence of any warnings. A numeric score is determined using a summation of 
values from Table 2.1.  Each assignment may have an overall score between 0 (no 
assignment) and 17 (all assignments agree without error). For simplicity, these are 
banded into letter grades (A-D) as in  
Table 2.2, with A indicating the highest level of confidence and D indicating the lowest 
level of confidence.  
The confidence bands have been defined on the basis of experience, based on which 
methods were most effective at predicting the correct oxidation state. Examples are 
given below. 
Table 2.1: Confidence scoring values for each assignment method. Scores are given 
for agreement with the most reliable method.  
Method 
Method Agrees with 
Assignment 
(without errors/warnings) 
Bond Valence Sum 5(+1) 
Mopac Ligand Assignments by Hardness 4(+1) 
Mopac Ligand Assignments by Energy 3(+1) 
Ligand Assignments by Hydrogen Placement 2 
Table 2.2: Confidence score grade bandings. The reliability is based on the results of 
Section 2.3.1. 
Score Band Values Description Reliability 
0 U Unassigned 0% 
0-5 D Very unreliable 18% 
6-8 C Quite unreliable 56% 
9-12 B Reliable 98% 
>12 A Very reliable >99% 
2.2.4. Ligand database 
The three charge assignment methods described above have been used to generate 
an SQLite database of ligands, their frequency in the CSD and the assigned charge.  
The database can be accessed, updated and added to through the SQLite3 Python 
Module 16.  
The database contains the SMILES formula for each ligand in the CSD and the number 
of times it has been encountered.  The number of entries is currently 12,939. Most 
ligands appear in multiple CSD entries, yielding a distribution of charges for each of 
the three methods described in Section 2.2.  For each ligand the modes (i.e. the most 
common values) and standard deviations of the each of the three distributions is 
stored in the database.  These data enable a proposed charge assignment to be 
checked against previous assignments for the same ligand, while also providing a 
measure of confidence in the comparison. 
The database facilitates the ability to over-ride potentially incorrect charge 
assignments where the value disagrees with previous values. In order to achieve this, 
for each ligand fragment encountered, the mode of previous assignments is compared 
to the currently determined value. If the value does not match the most common 
charge determined in the database, the database value is used instead, with a warning 
generated, reducing the confidence score by 1. 
2.2.5 Confidence scoring examples 
Example 1:  In the entry AMIRAR 17 where Cu(+1) is coordinated to a acetonitrile 
and a thiopyridazine scorpionate ligand in which both the N and B atoms are bound 
to the Cu.  The BVS method could not be applied because Cu-B parameters are 
unavailable.  As a result, only the ligand charge methods can be applied.  Application 
of the minimum energy method yields an oxidation state of +3, the hardness method 
a value of +1 and the H-atom placement method a value of +1; no errors were issued 
in any of these procedures. The value selected is taken from the hardness method, 
correctly assigning a valence of +1.  The confidence score is the sum of 0 for the BVS 
method, 5 for the hardness method (4 + 1 for no errors in assignment), 0 for the 
energy since this disagrees with the results from the method with highest reliability, 
and 2 for H-placement method. For both ligands there are previous assignments 
available in the SQLite database, and for all methods the mode charge agrees with the 
current assignment.  The total score is 7: this C-grade assignment should be 
considered quite unreliable. 
Example 2: In chloro-bis(N-phenylbenzohydroxamato)-(triphenylphosphine)-
rhodium(3+) (refcode: CAFSEI 18), BVS assignment is not possible due to a lack of Rh-
P/Rh-Cl parameters and assignment must be made using ligand charge methods only. 
For the chloride and triphenylphosphine ligands, the hardness method correctly 
assigns charges of 1 and 0, respectively. However, the N-phenylbenzohydroxamato 
ligands are incorrectly given a charge of +1. This ligand is listed in the ligand database 
with 9 previous assignments, with a (correct) mode of 1.  The database value charge 
(1) replaces that determined by the hardness method, and a warning associated with 
the hardness method. The hardness confidence score is therefore 5  1 = 4.  The 
energy and hydrogen placement methods both yield the correct charge of 1, and so 
all 3 methods produce the correct valence of Rh(3+) for this structure, the final 
confidence therefore is a sum of the scores for BVS (0), energy (4), hardness (4) and 
hydrogen placement (2) = 10, lying in the B confidence band. This B-grade assignment 
should be considered quite reliable. 
2.3. Discussion 
2.3.1. Success rate of oxidation state assignment  
The aim of the present study was to determine the oxidation states of transition 
metals in coordination complexes using an automated procedure and to devise a 
measure of the confidence in the assignments.   Compounds containing metal-carbon 
bonds, nitrosyl ligands or metal-ligand multiple bonds have been excluded, and the 
methods described apply to classic coordination complexes only, and not to 
organometallic compounds. The focus on coordination complexes in part simply 
reflects the lack of bond valence data for organometallic compounds, but oxidation 
state assignment in organometallic chemistry is also ambiguous: even so fundamental 
a compound as ferrocene may be considered to contain Fe(0) or Fe(+2).  
Two approaches were used in oxidation state assignment, (i) the bond valence 
method, and (ii) calculation of ligand charges. The bond valence method is applicable 
to any complex whether it is mono- or poly-nuclear, but it depends on the availability 
of suitable parameters. Ligand charges were derived using three methods: from the 
minimum of energy versus charge plots, from Pearsons principle of maximum 
hardness and from automated hydrogen placement routines. Once the ligand charges 
are known they can be applied to assign the oxidation state of a metal in a 
mononuclear complex, but they only yield the total of all the metal oxidation states 
in polynuclear complexes.  
In order to validate and optimise the different methods an initial testing set was 
generated which contained entries with predefined valences. Suitable entries were 
extracted from the CSD November 2018 release by scanning for compound names 
containing a string comprising the name of a transition metal followed by a Roman 
numeral in parentheses [e.g. nickel(ii)]. In addition to entries containing one metal, 
this approach can be applied to multiple metal structures where more than one 
valence is specified, provided that only one valence is present for each metal name.  
The methods described in this chapter are intended to be applicable to coordination 
complexes, and entries containing the organometallic moieties listed in the first 
paragraph of this section were omitted.  3D co-ordinates were required to be present 
for all atoms, and disordered structures and structures containing errors were 
omitted. Entries with missing hydrogen atoms were omitted as well as those where 
the number of hydrogen atoms present differed from the figure calculated using the 
CSD structure-editing tools. Where more than one structure is available in a single 
refcode family, the structure with the lowest R-factor was selected.  
The final test-set contained 54,999 unique metal environments across 47,716 
molecular components, from 43,423 entries. This set contained entries from all 
transition metals, with a minimum number of 52 environments for scandium and 
maximum number of 13,259 environments for copper.  The test was run twice, first 
to populate the ligand database with fragment results, and then again to enable the 
charge validation to be incorporated into the confidence scores. 
The overall success rates of each of the four methods for oxidation state assignment 
are summarised in Table 2.3, where, in order to accommodate both mono- and poly-
nuclear complexes, the entries are based on reproduction of the total metal oxidation 
state. It should be noted that while application of the ligand charge methods was 
achieved successfully for nearly all entries, bond valence assignments were reliant on 
the availability of parameters and so has only been applied for 82.50% of components. 
The ligand charge methods based on hardness and energy are as effective as the 
traditional BVS approach, and can be applied to all complexes.   
Table 2.3: Breakdown of assignment results by method against test-set entries. 
Method 
Summed Component Valence Assignments 
Correct Incorrect % 
Correct 
Not Applied 
BVS 35419 3950 89.97% 8347 
Energy 44418 3298 93.09% 0 
Hardness 44367 3349 92.98% 0 
Hydrogen-Placement 41802 5914 87.6% 0 
Overall Assignment 43220 4496 90.58% 0 
The applicability of the BVS method varies significantly across the periodic table, with 
fewer parameters being available for the second and third row transition metals than 
for the first row (Figure 2.2). The figures in the first row of Table 2.3 are thus 
weighted towards complexes of the 3d metals.  The BVS method is always needed 
for assignment of individual metal sites in polynuclear complexes, and the applicability 
of the methods described in this chapter therefore becomes quite patchy for 
polynuclear complexes of the second and third row metals. Of the complexes in Table 
2.3, BVS could not be applied to the metal atoms in 8,347 components.  Where these 
components are polynuclear complexes no assignment can be made at all, meaning 
that no assignment was made for 3,113 metal sites in the test set (amounting to 5.7% 
of the set). This situation should improve as bond valence parameters are determined 
for more element bond types in a range of oxidation states, the results obtained here 
illustrating the importance of research in this area. The oxidation states of the 
remaining 8,347  3113 = 5,234 mononuclear complexes could all be assigned using 
the ligand charge methods.  
Figure 2.2: Application of the Bond Valence Sum Method by metal to test-set entries. 
Bars show relative success/failure and applicability of BVS for each of the 1st, 2nd and 
3rd row transition metal atoms. BVS is not applicable when metal-ligand specific 
parameters are lacking for the common oxidation states of that metal.  
Some measure of confidence in an oxidation state assignment can be obtained from 
(i) the agreement between different methods and (ii) whether any alerts are 
generated. The success in reproducing author-assigned oxidation states increases 
substantially over the data presented in Table 2.3 for the cases where an A or B 
confidence grade is obtained. Of the 36,080 entries with A assignment author-
assigned oxidation states were reproduced in 99% of cases, with most of the 
incorrect assignments identifying structural or naming errors in the CSD (Figure 
2.3). 
Figure 2.3: The success rate of oxidation state assignment grouped by confidence 
score bands. The raw data for this figure are available in the SI (Table S2.4).  
2.3.2. Examples 
Mononuclear complexes 
In the Jahn-Teller distorted 6-coordinate Cu(2+) complex [diaqua-bis(pyrazine-2-
carboxylato-N,O)-copper(II)], (refcode: BEYRAY03 19, Figure 2.4.i) BVS parameters 
are available for Cu-O and Cu-N bonds for oxidation states +1, +2 and +3.  As this 
covers the common copper oxidation states found in the look-up table, BVS is carried 
out and determines the oxidation state to be +2 with no warnings or errors. The 
aquo ligand is found to have a charge of zero, and the pyridine-carboxylate ligand a 
charge of 1 by all three ligand charge methods. When the charges are compared to 
the fragment charge database no discrepancies are found. No errors or warnings are 
issued in the ligand charge-assignment procedure and the total ligand charge of 2 is 
consistent with the oxidation state assigned by the BVS method.  The oxidation state 
of the Cu is thus assigned to +2 with a confidence score of 17 (A). 
A similar process is observed for the nickel complex [bis(2-aminoacetato)-nickel(II) 
monohydrate] (refcode: LEPYOV 20, Figure 2.4.ii), where BVS can be applied to both 
the common (+2), as well as the less common (+3) oxidation states. A BVS valence 
of +2 is determined, and the total ligand charge calculations are consistent with this 
for all methods. This assignment is awarded the highest confidence score: 17 (A) with 
no discrepancies between these and previous ligand specific assignments. 
Figure 2.4: Oxidation state assignment examples. Boxes illustrate individual ligand 
fragments with corresponding SMILES notation and assignment method results 
demonstrated. Note only asymmetric unit metal-ligand atoms labelled for clarity. (i) 
Refcode: BEYRAY03; a copper(2+) structure with Jahn-Teller distortion. (ii) refcode: 
LEPYOV; a planar nickel(2+) complex. (iii) refcode: CUAQAC01; copper(2+) acetate 
with Cu-Cu bond as depicted in the CSD. (iv) refcode: KEKVIF; a family of Fe(2+) 
compounds that exhibit spin cross-over behaviour.  
Metal-metal bonds 
The identification of metal-ligand bonds has been based on inbuilt CSD functions for 
defining bonded atoms. The algorithm also generates bonds for short metal-metal 
distances.  Metal-metal bonding is a widely-studied area of organometallic chemistry, 
but entries containing metal-carbon or metal-ligand multiple bonds were excluded 
from this study, and so many entries with metal-metal bonds would have been 
omitted on this basis. Nevertheless the CSD bonding criteria generate metal-metal 
bonds in coordination complexes such as the copper acetate dimer [tetrakis(2-
acetato)-diaqua-di-copper(+2),(refcode CUAQAC01,Figure 2.4.iii) in which the 
CuCu distance is 2.619 . While metal-metal bond formation does not affect the 
ligand-charge procedures, the BVS method would fail because metal-metal bonds are 
not present in the bond valence parameter database used in this study. 
Short metal-metal distances in coordination compounds are usually the result of the 
geometric demands of bridging ligands rather than genuine metal-metal bonding. M-
M bonds have simply been omitted from the BVS calculations.  The BVS calculation 
can then proceed as usual, yielding in the case of refcode CUAQAC01 a value of +2 
for the copper oxidation state.  The assignment is supported by each of the ligand 
charge methods. The confidence score is 17(A). 
Spin cross-over complexes 
The adoption of a high or low spin configuration affects metal-ligand bond distances 
and can influence oxidation state assignment via the BVS method.  The crystal 
structures of many materials of interest in terms of spin cross-over (SCO) behaviour 
have been determined in multiple spin states, and occur in the CSD as refcode 
families where entries have the same six letter code but differ in the last two digits. 
While this test has focused on a single entry from each refcode family (see Section 
3.1), to understand the role of SCO on oxidation state assignment, the process has 
been applied to a family of structures with both spin states present. 
Complexes of Fe(+2) with nitrogen ligands have been widely investigated, and in this 
case both high spin and low spin bond valence parameters are available.  For example, 
the refcode family for the iron complex [cis-bis(isothiocyanato)-bis(1,10-
phenanthroline-N,N')-iron(+2)] (refcode: KEKVIF, Figure 2.4.iv), contains nine entries 
with atomic co-ordinates. The ligand charge assignment methods produce the same 
result in each case, determining the thiocyanate and phen ligands to have charges of 
1 and 0, yielding a metal oxidation state of +2. While the BVS method assigns an 
incorrect oxidation state of +3 for the low-spin entries the un-rounded values are all 
above 3.5 which generates a warning message.  As a result of the discrepancies 
between BVS and ligand charge assignment methods, along with the warning in the 
BVS assignment, the low-spin complexes (such as Refcode: KEKVIF02) have a very 
low confidence score of 5(D). This situation occurs commonly with SCO families, 
and as such, SCO families are identifiable by large differences in confidence between 
entries.  
For future assignments an extra parameter has been added to the confidence score 
which warns of potential refcode family issues. Where an entry is part of a refcode 
family, metal-bond distances are checked across the whole family when assigning 
oxidation states. If metal-ligand bond distances vary by more than 0.1  within the 
same refcode family, the confidence score is reduced by 4 and a warning issued. 
Mixed valence polynuclear complexes 
The assignment of oxidation states in polynuclear complexes is based on a 
combination of BVS and ligand charge methods.  The Mn complex in Figure 2.5 
(refcode: ZAVMEQ)21 contains six unique metal centres with oxidation states 
between +2 and +4. The BVS method matched the literature values for all six metal 
centres, with no warnings or errors. The summation of ligand charges was 34 for 
all methods, which is consistent with the BVS total +34.  In the ligand charge 
calculation for the pyridinyl-methanimine ligand there is a small (< 1 eV) difference in 
the hardness for charges of 1 and 3, which generates a warning. A warning is also 
produced for shallow energy curves for some fragments. The confidence score is 
15(A). 
Figure 2.5: Mn12 structure (refcode: ZAVMEQ) containing six unique metal centres. 
Mn(2+) yellow, Mn(3+) blue, Mn(4+) green. H atoms omitted for clarity. 
The CSD compound-naming conventions mean that a complex containing a single 
metallic element in multiple oxidation states would not have been part of the test 
data-set, and instead the procedures were validated manually by comparing 
assignments with those given in the corresponding publications.  Approximately 50 
complexes were examined over the course of this work and four errors were 
identified. In each case, the total of BVS assigned oxidation states did not match the 
ligand charge assignment methods and therefore all received a low confidence of 5/6.  
Complexes with open-shell ligands  
The closed-shell restriction applied during the ligand-charge calculations means that 
ligands with odd numbers of electrons are incorrectly treated.  Complexes containing 
radical ligands were identified in the test data-set by comparing the author-assigned 
oxidation states with the allowed closed-shell charges for all ligands. A radical ligand 
is present if the named oxidation state does not match possible open shell charges. 
This was found to be the case for fewer than 2% of structures.  Moreover, most of 
the instances involved a small set of common radicals. The SMILES formulae of 
identified radicals have been added to the ligand SQLite database.  For example, 
nitroxide radicals are identified from SMILES string segments CN([O])C, 
cN([O])c, cN([O])C  and  CN([O])c.  It is additionally possible to add complete 
ligand specific SMILES manually for individual radical ligands where needed. 
There is a tendency, in the case of open-shell ligands, for the energy and hydrogen 
placement charge-assignments to suggest values of 1, while hardness routinely 
suggests a charge of +1. BVS assignments are usually correct.  This disagreement 
results in low confidence scores (typically D) where radical containing complexes are 
encountered for the first time.  For example in the dinuclear 1,2,3,5-diselenadiazolyl 
nickel(+2) complex BARXID, BVS correctly assigns the oxidation state as +2 for both 
metal sites. The radical is given a charge of 1 according to energy and H-placement 
and +1 according to hardness. Overall the confidence score is 6 (C): 6 for the BVS 
method and 0s for all the ligand-charge criteria.  
2.3.3. Demonstration of oxidation state specific data: the Jahn-Teller effect in Cu 
complexes 
With atom specific valences now available, it is possible to limit some common 
geometric searches to specific oxidation states with relative ease.  For example, the 
availability of atom-specific oxidation state data enables rapid collation of a list of Cu-
ligand bond distances in Cu(+2) sites. Figure 2.6 shows a histogram of the distances 
obtained from copper sites with at least six short (>3.5 ) CuN/O contacts where 
the oxidation state assignment has a confidence of A or B. The expected bimodal 
distribution between 1.8 and 2.8  shows elongation of M-L bond lengths for axial 
ligands. The plot enables an upper limit of about 2.8  to be placed on a Jahn-Teller 
axis in these complexes. A similar pattern is observed for Mn(3+) structures, with a 
bimodal distribution suggesting the same Jahn-Teller distortion out to 2.5 .  
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4
Cu(2+)...N/O Distance ()
2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
Mn(3+)...N/O Distance ()  
Figure 2.6: Distributions of Cu(2+)-N/O (left) and Mn(3+)-N/O (right) interatomic 
distances from the CSD. 
2.4. Conclusions 
The aim of the methods described in this chapter is to automate assignments of 
oxidation states to metal sites in mononuclear and polynuclear coordination 
complexes in the CSD. Each assignment is given a confidence score. Assignments with 
scores of A or B appear to be very reliable, yielding the correct assignment for 99% 
of cases during testing. Assignments with scores of C and D often represent special 
electronic or bonding situations, such as non-innocence associated with redox-active 
ligands, spin-state ambiguity or open-shell ligands. These cases still require manual 
checking.  Experience over the course of this project suggests that the ultimate aim 
of completely automated oxidation state assignment without any manual intervention 
at all would be difficult or impossible to meet when based only on structural data.  
The methods developed and investigated here will be implemented as part of the 
curation process of the CSD by expert scientific editors at the CCDC. In this manner, 
oxidation states where there is reliability in the assignment and/or clear pre-
assignment by the author will be transferred straightforwardly into the curated CSD 
entry. The focussed attention from Scientific Editors can then be applied to the 
structures where the assignment is less reliable or indicates some very interesting or 
unusual chemistry.  
A project is also currently underway to evolve the format of the CSD database and 
this will allow automated transfer of oxidation states from the compound in the entry 
(current) to be an atomic property on individual metal sites (future). The approaches 
described here will certainly help in that translation as well.  
The availability of site-specific oxidation states as searchable criteria in the CSD 
should enable more targeted applications of the database in transition metal and 
materials chemistry.  It should be possible, for example, to investigate how a metal 
and its oxidation state determines the deformability or structural flexibility of 
coordination; such information could be helpful in the design of metal templating 
reactions. Complexes with sites exhibiting unusual geometries might be susceptible 
to modification by high pressure or irradiation. The combination of oxidation-specific 
searching with motif-searching tools such as the Crystal Packing Feature in Mercury  
may find uses in research aiming to establishing the relationship between topology 
and magnetic properties.22,23  Finally, the SQLite ligand database could be extended to 
include a variety of properties such as conformational flexibility, pKa, number of donor 
sites etc. that may be helpful in ligand design.  
2.5. Available Stand-Alone Software 
Although the methods described above are designed to work with curated entries in 
the Cambridge Database, a stand-alone script, named MRMOX, can be downloaded 
from the link http://www.crystal.chem.ed.ac.uk/software/mrmox.  The script works 
through the MERCURY API to assign oxidation states with input from users own 
cifs.  A short set of installation and usage instructions is available in a read_me file in 
the download. The program will only work under WINDOWS with a fully functional 
version of MERCURY.  
2.6. References 
(1) Groom, C. R.; Bruno, I. J.; Lightfoot, M. P.; S. C. Ward. The Cambridge Structural 
Database. Acta Cryst. 2016, B72, 171. 
(2) Shields, G. P.; Raithby, P. R.; Allen, F. H.; Motherwell, W. D. S. The assignment and 
validation of metal oxidation states in the Cambridge Structural Database. Acta Cryst. 
2000, B56 (3), 455. 
(3) Davies, Daniel W.; Butler, K. T.; Isayev, O.; Walsh, A. Materials discovery by chemical 
analogy: role of oxidation states in structure prediction. Faraday Discussions 2018, 
211 (0), 553. 
(4) Brown, I. D. The Chemical Bond in Inorganic Chemistry: The Bond Valence Model; Oxford 
University Press, 2016. 
(5) Brown, I. D.  IUCR, 2016; Vol. 2019. 
(6) Housecroft, C. E.; Sharpe, A. G. Inorganic Chemistry; 3rd ed.; Pearson Prentice Hall: 
Harlow, Essex, UK, 2008. 
(7) Cherif, I.; Abdelhak, J.; Zid, M. F.; Driss, A. Imidazolium trans-
diaquadioxalatochromate(III) dihydrate. Acta Cryst. 2013, E69 (12), m667. 
(8) Akbarzadeh Torbati, N.; Rezvani, A. R.; Safari, N.; Saravani, H.; Amani, V. 
Dichlorido(6,6'-dimethyl-2,2'-bipyridine-[kappa]2N,N')cobalt(II). Acta Cryst. 2010, 
E66 (10), m1284. 
(9) Stewart, J. J. P., 2016. 
(10) Stewart, J. J. P. Optimization of parameters for semiempirical methods VI: more 
modifications to the NDDO approximations and re-optimization of parameters. 
Journal of Molecular Modeling 2013, 19 (1), 1. 
(11) Pearson, R. G. The principle of maximum hardness. Acc. Chem. Res. 1993, 26 (5), 250. 
(12) Shields, G. P.; Raithby, P. R.; Allen, F. H.; Motherwell, W. D. S. The assignment and 
validation of metal oxidation states in the Cambridge Structural Database. Acta 
Crystallographica Section B 2000, 56 (3), 455. 
(13) Torzilli, M. A.; Colquhoun, S.; Doucet, D.; Beer, R. H. The interconversion of 
dichlorobis(N-n-propylsalicylaldimine)zinc(II) and bis(N-n-
propylsalicylaldiminato)zinc(II). Polyhedron 2002, 21 (7), 697. 
(14) Rotondo, E.; Cusmano Priolo, F.; Bombieri, G.; Bruno, G. (N-{2-[2-(2-
Ammonioethylamino)ethylamino]ethyl}salicylideneaminato-
O,N,N',N'')perchloratocopper(II) perchlorate, [Cu(ClO4)(C13H22N4O)].ClO4. 
Acta Cryst. 1984, C40 (6), 960. 
(15) Mezei, G.; Raptis, R. G. Effect of pyrazole-substitution on the structure and nuclearity 
of Cu(II)-pyrazolato complexes. Inorg. Chim. Acta. 2004, 357 (11), 3279. 
(16) Hipp, D. R.; 3.29.0 ed., 2019. 
(17) Holler, S.; Tchler, M.; Belaj, F.; Veiros, L. F.; Kirchner, K.; Msch-Zanetti, N. C. 
Thiopyridazine-Based Copper Boratrane Complexes Demonstrating the Z-type 
Nature of the Ligand. Inorg. Chem. 2016, 55 (10), 4980. 
(18) Das, A.; Basuli, F.; Peng, S.-M.; Bhattacharya, S. Oxidation of Rhodium(I) by 
Hydroxamic Acids. Synthesis, Structure, and Electrochemical Properties of 
Bis(hydroxamate) Complexes of Rhodium(III). Inorg. Chem. 2002, 41 (2), 440. 
(19) Wang, G.-H.; He, R.-L.; Meng, F.-J.; Hu, N.-H.; Xu, J.-W. A polymorph of 
diaquabis(pyrazine-2-carboxylato-[kappa]2N1,O)copper(II). Acta Cryst. 2009, E65 
(12), m1511. 
(20) Wang, Z.-L. A monoclinic polymorph of bis(2-aminoacetato)nickel(II) monohydrate. 
Acta Cryst. 2006, E62 (10), m2546. 
(21) Alexandropoulos, D. I.; Manos, M. J.; Papatriantafyllopoulou, C.; Mukherjee, S.; 
Tasiopoulos, A. J.; Perlepes, S. P.; Christou, G.; Stamatatos, T. C. Squaring the 
clusters: a MnIII4NiII4 molecular square from nickel(ii)-induced structural 
transformation of a MnII/III/IV12 cage. Dalton Trans. 2012, 41 (16), 4744. 
(22) Macrae, C. F.; Bruno, I. J.; Chisholm, J. A.; Edgington, P. R.; McCabe, P.; Pidcock, E.; 
Rodriguez-Monge, L.; Taylor, R.; van de Streek, J.; Wood, P. A. Mercury CSD 2.0 - 
new features for the visualization and investigation of crystal structures. J. Appl. Cryst. 
2008, 41 (2), 466. 
(23) Childs, S. L.; Wood, P. A.; Rodrguez-Hornedo, N.; Reddy, L. S.; Hardcastle, K. I. 
Analysis of 50 Crystal Structures Containing Carbamazepine Using the Materials 
Module of Mercury CSD. Cryst Growth Des. 2009, 9 (4), 1869. 
3. MrPIXEL: Execution of PIXEL Calculations via 
the MERCURY Interface 
3.1. Introduction 
3.1.1. Intermolecular Interactions in Crystal Structures  
Intermolecular interactions control an enormous diversity of chemical and physical 
properties in solid materials including the phase adopted under a given set of applied 
conditions, the solubility and melting point, and thermodynamic properties such as 
lattice energy, hardness, thermal expansion, heat capacity and so on.   The principal 
aim of many crystal structure determinations, particularly in fields such as crystal 
engineering and polymorphism research, is to understand relative phase stability and 
the significance of specific intermolecular contacts including structure directing 
interactions such as the carboxylic acid dimer, nitro-iodo, and acid-pyridine contacts.1  
Use of these synthons has been exploited in, for example, formation of co-crystals 
with active pharmaceutical ingredients with the aim of generating crystalline forms 
with improved performance.2  
Intermolecular interactions are most commonly identified and ranked by assuming 
that short interatomic interactions characterise stabilising interactions, with the 
shortness of a contact defined relative to the sum of the van der Waals radii of the 
atoms in question.  This method is not only quick and amenable to graphical 
visualisation, but use of a common set of radii such as Bondis 3,4 prehistoric 5 
compilation or Alvarezs more recent and much more extensive set,6 provides a 
unifying framework for discussion of intermolecular contacts.  
Use of interatomic distances for interpreting crystal structures will tend to bias 
analyses towards those contacts in which interactions are mediated by specific atom-
atom interactions.  While hydrogen bonds, halogen bonds and the growing catalogue 
of related interactions are readily identifiable, stabilising contacts between non- or 
weakly- polar molecules, which are better understood in terms of whole molecule 
interactions, are harder to identify. The lack of a distinctive interatomic signature in 
van der Waals interactions (i.e. those dominated by dispersion) has led to their 
significance being unrecognised 7.  For example, the crystal structure of MeNSOF2 
contains no interatomic contacts at all when judged using van der Waals radii, yet still 
it is a solid with intermolecular energies similar to those found for medium-strength 
hydrogen bonds and a lattice energy of a similar magnitude to acetic acid (62 & 69 
kJ mol1, respectively).8,9  Focussing on prominent interactions can also give a 
misleading impression of the nature of an overall intermolecular contact. For example, 
out of 14 molecule-molecule contacts within the first coordination sphere of -
glycine, six are destabilising, including two which are linked by hydrogen bonds.10 
When considering thermodynamic stability, there are obvious advantages to working 
in Joules rather than ngstroms, and there is a growing interest in interpreting crystal 
structures using whole molecule - whole molecule energies.11-13 Quantum mechanical 
methods enable interaction energies to be computed to a very high level of accuracy, 
as illustrated by the ab initio calculation of the sublimation energy of benzene, can be 
very time consuming for large molecules.14 While most quantum mechanical methods 
provide a single intermolecular energy, some, including symmetry adapted 
perturbation theory 15,16 break the energy down into constituent electrostatic, 
polarisation, dispersion and Pauli repulsion terms providing insight into the physical 
nature of an interaction.  Though these methods are a gold standard in the field, they, 
too, are time consuming for large molecules when applied at the most accurate level. 
3.1.2 CLP-Pixel 
The Pixel method, which was originally devised by Gavezzotti,17-19 adopts a semi-
empirical approach in which molecules in a crystal structure are represented by 
blocks of electron and nuclear density sub-divided into small cubic volume elements 
referred to as pixels. The molecular electron densities are calculated ab initio using 
Gaussian 20 at the MP2 or B3LYP level, commonly with the 6-31G** basis set using a 
grid of spacing 0.08 . To save computer time the grid is condensed into a coarser 
one, typically of dimension 0.32 . The electrostatic energy between two molecules 
can then be calculated by applying Coulombs law to pairs of pixels from each 
molecule and then summing the values.  A similar approach can be used for the 
polarisation, dispersion and repulsion terms, to achieve a total intermolecular energy 
broken down into physically meaningful contributions. Application of this approach 
to a cluster of molecules surrounding a central reference molecule enables the lattice 
energy to be evaluated. The most appropriate cluster radius depends on the size and 
nature of the molecules, but is typically between 12 and 20 . The accuracy of the 
methods has been discussed by Chickos and Gavezzotti by comparing calculated 
sublimation energies with a large database of the experimental values.21 Overall, the 
performance of the Pixel method is similar to periodic density functional theory in 
estimating sublimation enthalpies of organic solids, but at a fraction of the cost in 
terms of computing time.22  
The Pixel method has been applied to numerous systems, such as in the quantitative 
investigation and description  of synthons for crystal engineering.7 Recent work using 
Pixel helped elucidate the role of intermolecular interactions and lattice energies for 
polymorphs of 5-methyl-2-[(2-nitrophenyl)-amino]-3-thiophenecarbonitrile 
(colloquially known as ROY) at high  pressure.23 Pixel has also been used to identify 
and rationalise the metastable form of glycolide,24 explain the effect of chemical 
substitution on halogen bonding 25 and identify the features of racemic and homochiral 
polymorphs that make them thermodynamically competitive.26   
The workflow of a Pixel calculation is shown in Figure 3.1: Process diagram for a Pixel 
calculation using the Pixel-C program within the CLP-Pixel package starting from the 
results of a crystal structure determination.  Green boxes show files and blue boxes 
show processes. Intermolecular energies are sensitive to H-atom positions, and if the 
crystal structure was determined using X-rays the distances involving hydrogen atoms 
should be normalised to the more accurate typical values seen by neutron diffraction. 
Certain other modifications may also be necessary (see Section 2.1. below).  The 
atomic positions, their type (e.g. sp2 or sp3 C etc.) and the space group symmetry is 
defined in an initial set-up file (.oeh). A routine (Pixmt3) generates both the Pixel 
calculation file (.inp), and Gaussian job input file (.gjf) necessary to determine the 
electron density. Gaussian may be run locally or remotely to produce a cube-format 
electron density file (.den). Parameters for the calculation, e.g. those that control the 
pixel size and other parameters are stored in a separate .par file. The results of each 
calculation are stored in plain text .pri and .mlc files which report overall calculation 
results and individual dimer results, respectively.   
The aim of this chapter is to describe a set of Python scripts that automate the 
process described above directly from the interface of the Mercury structure 
visualisation software which is distributed with the Cambridge Structural Database 
(CSD). The scripts described make use of the CSD Python API.  Pixel calculations are 
also accessible via the recently described MiCMoS package of computer programs, 
which brings together the AA-CLP, CLP-Pixel and CLPDyn procedures.27 In addition, 
a procedure based on periodic electron densities is available in the program q-GRID.28 
Graphical visualisation of Pixel results can be accomplished with the processPIXEL 
procedure.29  
Figure 3.1: Process diagram for a Pixel calculation using the Pixel-C program within 
the CLP-Pixel package starting from the results of a crystal structure determination.  
Green boxes show files and blue boxes show processes. 
The Program MrPIXEL consists of two elements. The first, SetupPixel, is executed 
from within Mercury, interprets the crystal structure and generates the input files 
required for the Pixel calculation. The second, MrPIXEL Console, handles all 
processes after initial file setup and displays the status of calculations through a 
graphical interface. A supplementary program, MrPIXEL Settings, is used to define 
default settings, file locations and so on. 
3.2. Procedure 
3.2.1. Modification of the Crystal Structure. 
Before generating the necessary input files, structures may require some modification 
in order to satisfy the requirements of the Pixel program. The number of molecules 
in the asymmetric unit (Z) is limited to two, and these must comprise complete 
molecules. Therefore, where a molecule occupies a special position, the space group 
symmetry of the crystal structure should be reduced to a description in which the 
asymmetric unit consists of whole molecules. The CSDs Mercury software can be 
used for this purpose, using the Change Spacegroup to Subgroup tool found in the 
Edit menu. For example, in the crystal structure of 2,2'-bipyridyl (CSD Refcode: 
BIPYRL), the molecule occupies the inversion centre in space group P21/c with an 
asymmetric unit that consists of half the molecule. By reducing the space group to 
either Pc or P21 the inversion centre is removed, and the asymmetric unit contains a 
complete molecule. It should be noted however that in cases where Z = 1.5, 
reduction of the symmetry results in Z = 3, which cannot be accommodated in a 
Pixel lattice energy calculation. For example, in benzidine form III (CSD Recode: 
BENZIE02 also P21/c) one molecule occupies a general position and the other an 
inversion centre, and no choice of reduced symmetry will satisfy the conditions for 
Pixel 30. In cases where symmetry lowering involves an origin shift it is advantageous 
to use a non-standard setting of the lower-symmetry space group to ensure that 
intermolecular relationships that do not involve the symmetry operations lost in the 
symmetry lowering are preserved exactly. There are, in short, a number of alternative 
strategies that may be used to lower symmetry, and for this reason no attempt has 
been made to implement a general procedure.  
In addition, Pixel does not handle disordered structures.  Where disorder is present, 
an ordered model should be constructed which contains just one component. Again, 
this is not handled automatically as users will usually wish to select which disorder 
component to keep.  The required editing can be accomplished with the Edit 
Structure tool under the Mercury edit menu. Because the CSD Python API reads 
crystal structures upon loading into the window, the edited structure should be saved 
as a .cif and reloaded after any changes are made. 
Once any necessary editing has been carried out, the SetupPixel script can be run 
from the Mercury CSD Python API menu. Upon selecting SetupPixel, the structure is 
read and interpreted, and the user is then prompted for some Pixel calculation 
parameters. This includes a calculation name (defaulted to the .cif title), whether to 
normalise hydrogen positions (required for conventionally-modelled structures 
derived from X-ray data), and the charge and spin-multiplicity of each component. 
3.2.2. Generating the .oeh input file. 
The user is given the option to generate the initial Pixel files only or pass the task 
onto MrPIXEL Console so that the entire calculation can be run automatically. In 
either case, SetupPixel first generates the Pixel input .oeh file. Information relating to 
crystal symmetry, cell parameters, and atomic positions are taken from the structure 
as interpreted by Mercury. Atomic type indicators, as defined by Pixel (see SI Table 
S3.1), use similar definitions as the Tripos .mol2 SYBYL typing. These atomic type 
indicators can therefore be determined by a translation of SYBYL to Pixel types using 
a look-up table. This is particularly important for carbon atoms, where Pixel assigns 
atomic polarisabilities based on the bonding environment. SYBYL assignments are 
based on the results of the CSD auto_edit structure tool, which adds atom and bond-
type descriptors to the structure. To store this information, and to allow users to 
inspect the assignments, the resulting structure is saved as a .mol2 file.  
It is also possible at this stage to select the level of theory and basis set for the 
Gaussian calculations. For organic molecules containing atoms with atomic numbers 
up to bromine, MP2/6-31G** is usually used; B3LYP/6-31G** is used for first row 
transition metal complexes.  Different levels of theory as well as additional Gaussian 
set-up settings, are stored as a history that allows the user to select the correct job 
line as required.  
3.2.3. Running Pixmt3 
Once written, the .oeh file is passed to the CLP-Pixel Pixmt3 routine which generates 
input files for Gaussian and Pixel. The electron density step size and van der Waals 
radius parameter (rvdw) values may be in specified here or left as a default value set 
in the settings. The electron density step size denotes the dimensions of each pixel 
cube calculated in Gaussian. The default values work well for elements up to bromine, 
but the step size should be reduced to 0.06  or lower for structures involving 
heavier atoms 25. To reduce computational time, Pixel calculations are run using 
super-pixels of n3 pixels, where n is known as the condensation level; n usually set 
to 4 so that a step size of 0.08  produces super-pixel cubes of dimension 0.32 . 
For most purposes this condensation level is adequate, but it can be changed in the 
MrPIXEL Settings.  Any necessary changes to the file output by Pixmt3, e.g. to the 
basis set, are made by MrPIXEL Console at this stage.  
3.2.4. Generating Gaussian electron density files 
MrPIXEL Console accommodates Gaussian calculations performed both locally and 
on remote cluster installations. For remote jobs, MrPIXEL Console interfaces with 
clusters through the Python SSH module Paramiko.  Paramiko enables the scripts to 
connect securely to remote clusters via an SSH key combination. The username and 
password are needed only for initial set-up of the key files on both the local and 
remote locations. Future connections match these key files.  The details of submission 
and retrieval depend on local cluster type and administration policy. The scripts used 
in Edinburgh are included in the MrPIXEL package but it is expected that these will 
usually need some modification in other locations.   
The cluster address and folder locations can be specified in the MrPIXEL Settings.  In 
the system implemented in Edinburgh Gaussian jobs are submitted using a Bash script, 
and a template Bash file should be included in the PIXEL\Batch\ folder on the local 
system. MrPIXEL Console produces an edited copy of this for each calculation, 
replacing the entry Name.gjf to the job file name. Calculations are checked 
periodically when running MrPIXEL Console and the density files downloaded when 
Gaussian jobs are complete. A job is deemed complete when the required electron 
density cube file is retrieved. 
3.2.5. Running the Pixel calculation 
Following retrieval of the density file, the Pixel calculation is called by MrPIXEL. Pixel 
calculations are carried out using the Pixel-C module of the CLP-Pixel suite, using all 
available CPU resources on a single core. It is not recommended to run calculations 
concurrently that equal or exceed the core count on a users machine. The user may 
therefore specify in the settings a maximum number of cores available to Pixel-C 
tasks in the settings menu, which will result in MrPIXEL queueing tasks that exceed 
this limit until a free core is available. MrPIXEL Console reports the completion of 
Pixel tasks in the GUI and provides functionality to view the interactions as sorted 
tables in a text viewer under the MrPIXEL Console -> Structure menu. 
3.3. Examples 
3.3.1. The First Coordination Sphere of -Glycine 
A straightforward calculation may be demonstrated using the structure of -glycine 
determined by neutron diffraction (CSD Refcode GLYCIN16) 31. The structure 
contains one molecule in the asymmetric unit which occupies a general position in 
the space group P32. No modifications to the H-atom positions or space group are 
necessary, and SetupPixel can be called without any manual modification (Figure 3.2). 
Figure 3.2: SetupPixel window for the GLYCIN16 CSD structure showing typical 
settings. 
The SetupPixel menu defines settings for the Pixel calculation. The first line describes 
the job title and may be changed as required; the default is taken from the structure 
data title in the CIF. For CSD entries this comes from the CSD refcode. The next 
line defines the job type. If Z  2 this will be a standard Pixel calculation. Where 
more than two molecules occupy the asymmetric unit, a series of separate Pixel 
calculations are carried out with pairs of components (see below). The user then 
selects whether to normalise hydrogen positions (as is typical for X-ray data).  In this 
example, GLYCIN16 was determined using neutron data and so normalisation is not 
needed. The next option determines whether the cluster radius should be as 
determined by Pixmt3 or defined by the user. For the present calculation, our interest 
is only in the dimer energies of the first co-ordination sphere, and the Pixmt3 cut-off 
(14 ) is more than adequate. Finally, the charges and spin multiplicity values are 
required for each molecule. In this case the defaults (charge = 0, spin multiplicity = 1) 
are correct for the glycine molecule.  
The calculation is passed to MrPIXEL.  The user is prompted for the electron density 
grid size for the cube-format file generated in the Gaussian calculation.  A Gaussian 
job is then submitted, and its progress monitored; when complete the cube file is 
downloaded and the Pixel calculation initiated.  
Pixel returns a lattice energy of 235.9 kJ mol1 , though it should be noted that 
glycine is zwitterionic in the solid state and contact energies at the cut-off radius of 
14  still have interaction energies in excess of 2 kJ mol1 as a result of long range 
electrostatic interactions.  The experimental lattice energy of glycine is between 136 
and 139 kJ mol1, the large difference with the calculated value reflecting the transfer 
of a proton between the ammonium and carboxylate groups which occurs in the gas 
phase.9  The lattice energy of glycine neglecting the proton transfer has been 
estimated to be 290(8) kJ mol1.32 
Molecules in the first coordination sphere can be identified from non-zero values of 
the repulsion or dispersion energies, which are very short-range interaction terms. 
There are 14 molecules in the first coordination sphere (Table S3.2), the strongest 
interaction being the head-to-tail H-bond formed between the ammonium and 
carboxylate groups which forms a C(5) chain along the c-axis. The interaction is 
dominated by the electrostatic term (119.2 kJ mol-1), with a smaller contribution 
from dispersion, as is typical for H-bonds.  The pattern of interactions can also be 
visualised with the ProcessPixel software.29 
3.3.2. The Lattice Energy of Ethylene 
The space group of the crystal structure of ethylene (ETHLEN10) is P21/n with the 
molecule located on an inversion centre (Z = ) 33.  The space group symmetry 
needs to be reduced to a Z = 1 description, either in P21 or Pc.   This step should be 
carried out before setting up the Pixel calculation and can be accomplished in Mercury 
as described above (Section 2.1).  The updated structure should be saved as a CIF 
which can be opened within the same Mercury window before running SetupPixel.   
The structure was determined using X-rays, and so H-atoms should be normalised.  
The influence of the cut off radius on the lattice energy and number of interactions is 
shown for ethylene in Figure 3.3. The lattice energy hardly changes beyond 10  
because the influence of electrostatic contributions is very low. In practice validation 
of the cut off can be carried out after Pixel calculation is complete by checking that 
interaction energies at the longest distances are zero. 
Figure 3.3: Influence of cluster radius on lattice energy for ETHLEN10 as calculated 
by Pixel (black).  The red points show the number of interactions considered at each 
choice of cluster radius. 
The calculated lattice energy is 22.4 kJ mol1, which compares to experimental 
values of between 20.2 and 25.2 kJ mol-1.  The breakdown of the contributions to 
the lattice energy are (in kJ mol1) 5.8 for the electrostatic energy, 1.5 for 
polarisation, 27.6 for dispersion and 12.5 for repulsion. The first coordination 
contains 12 contacts, the interactions having a fairly uniform distribution of energies.   
-25.00
-20.00
-15.00
-10.00
-5.00
2.0 7.0 12.0 17.0 22.0
Cluster Radius ()
PIXEL-C Lattice Energy Number of Interactions
3.3.3. A Transition Metal Complex 
Parameterisation and application of the Pixel method to transition metal complexes 
has been carried out using electron densities calculated using B3LYP/6-31G** 
calculations,34,35 and this is specified when running SetupPixel as shown in Figure 
S3.1.iii in the SI.  
For the low-spin Mn(+3) containing salt [Mn(cyclam)(CN)2]ClO4 (AFAROO) the spin 
multiplicity is 3 for the cation, while the charges on the cation and anion are +1 and 
1.36 The energies from Pixel are classified according to whether they are cation-
cation, cation-anion, anion-cation and anion-anion interactions.  The composition of 
the first coordination sphere of the cation is shown in Table S3.4 and in Figure 3.4.i, 
where the central cation, labelled M, makes contacts to ten other cations and six 
perchlorate anions, labelled A1, A2 etc. Cations M3 to M8 are distributed in a 
distorted cube about the central cation.  The interactions are dominated by 
dispersion with total energies in the range 9.1 to 19.1 kJ mol1. Two pairs of anions 
lie at the edges of cube, with the remaining two anions (A3 and A4) occupying the 
opposite faces. Topologically it is similar to the CoO structure.37 The strongest 
contacts (66.5 kJ mol1) are formed to two cations (M1 and M2) located in the top 
and bottom faces of the cube, connected by pairs NHNC H-bonds between the 
cyclam and cyano ligands (Figure 3.4.ii).   Unusually for an ionic material, electrostatics 
appear to play a minor role, while the most strongly stabilising electrostatic 
interaction (to M1 and M2) is formed between two cations. These results reflect the 
distribution of a single positive charge over a relatively large cation and the retention 
of a significant negative electrostatic potential in the region of the cyano ligand, which 
Mulliken analysis shows to carry a charge of approximately 0.5 e. 
Figure 3.4. (i) The first coordination sphere of the cations in the Mn complex 
AFAROO. The dashed line shows the top face of the distorted cube referred to in 
the text. (ii) H-bonding forming chains of cations. 
3.3.4. Pixel Calculations when Z > 2  
For structures with more than two molecules in the asymmetric unit, a standard Pixel 
calculation is not possible (see Section 2.1). It is, however, possible to run multiple 
Pixel calculations to obtain individual dimer energies in the structures by 
consideration of substructures consisting of all possible pairs of molecules in the 
asymmetric unit. SetupPixel will recognise such structures, as shown in S.I. Figure 
S3.1iv., notifying the user, and run iterations of Pixel to generate all the dimer energies 
out to the set cut-off range. The setup of calculations is the same as usual, but the 
output folder will contain calculation files for each possible combination of molecules.  
Note that the lattice energies obtained in these calculations are meaningless, and so 
only relatively short cut off radii are required.   
This process can be applied to the structure of acetoxime (CSD refcode ACEOXM01, 
Me2C=NOH),
38 which has three molecules in the asymmetric unit in space group 1P
. The output for this example contains three Pixel-C calculation results 
(corresponding to interactions between molecules labelled a and b, a and c and b and 
c). The structure, which at 220 K has unit cell dimensions a = 7.01, b = 10.48, c = 
10.58 ,  = 60.5,  = 79.6,  = 83.5 appears to be a distorted version of a 
hexagonal room temperature phase which forms in P63/m with dimensions a = 10.61, 
c = 7.02  39. The first coordination sphere of each of the three molecules in the 
asymmetric unit contains 12 molecules, consisting of a central layer in which each 
molecule is surrounded by six others generated by lattice translations. Layers above 
and below are related to the central molecule by inversion operations and to each 
other by lattice translations along a (Figure 3.5).  Overall the arrangements have the 
characteristic ABAB layer stacking of hexagonal close packing.    The HCP topology 
allows equivalent contacts to be identified and compared (Table S3.5).  The HCP 
arrangement is distorted in the parent phase by the non-spherical geometry of the 
molecules and H-bonding between the members of the asymmetric unit, but each of 
the contacts in horizontal rows in Table S3.5 would have been equivalent in the parent 
phase and show still further variation.   The H-bonds in the first two rows of the table 
are dominated by the electrostatic contribution and show less variation than the 
interactions between the layers (bottom six rows) which are dominated by 
dispersion, illustrating the flexible character of dispersion interactions. The sums of 
the contacts in the three ETOT columns are 124.8, 125.3 and 125.5 kJ mol
demonstrating the mutual compensation of the distortions that occur about each 
molecule.  
Figure 3.5: The first coordination sphere of molecule a in acetoxime shown in green 
with molecules b and c shown in blue and red. The central reference molecule is 
labelled 0, with other contacts being labelled in the same order as Table S3.5. 
Molecule 7 and 10 etc. superimpose in this projection along a. 
3.4. Conclusions and Program Availability 
The availability of accurate, semi-empirical methods such as PIXEL and 
CrystalExplorer 13 for the calculation of intermolecular interaction energies in crystal 
structures provides thermodynamic insight into the intermolecular interactions which 
drive and determine crystal structure formation.  They can be used to help interpret 
individual crystal structures, to compare the structures of different polymorphs, 
cocrystals and solvates and to quantify the effect of chemical substitution on 
interactions in a series of related materials.  They are broadly applicable to a range of 
different compounds, rather than being limited to certain classes as are some 
molecular mechanics methods.  Compared to fully ab initio quantum mechanical 
methods, they are not only very extremely fast, but they also provide a breakdown 
of intermolecular energies into chemically meaningful terms.  
Long-standing methods for understanding crystal structures, such as the use of van 
der Waals radii to identify stabilising contacts, provide a way to identify atom-atom 
contacts and instantly place their distances in the context of similar interactions.40  
While the speed of such calculations is likely to ensure they will remain the first step 
of most crystal structure analyses, the calculation of energies is highly complementary 
and enriches the information content of a crystal structure.  By emphasising molecule-
molecule over atom-atom interactions it also simplifies the analysis of crystal 
structures by simply reducing the volume of numerical data that need to be 
considered.   
The aim of MrPIXEL is to facilitate the development of a purely structural view of 
intermolecular interactions and crystal packing into a more fundamental 
thermodynamic one. Once the program is installed and set up the entire process of 
a PIXEL calculation can be carried out with the minimum of effort from the interface 
of Mercury. The code is open source and freely available from 
http://www.crystal.chem.ed.ac.uk/software/mrpixel. The package includes the 
programs Pixel-C and Pixmt3 from Pixel-CLP, the full version of which can now be 
downloaded from http://www.crystal.chem.ed.ac.uk.   
3.5. References 
(1) Mukherjee, A. Building upon Supramolecular Synthons: Some Aspects of Crystal 
Engineering. Cryst. Growth Des. 2015, 15 (6), 3076. 
(2) Aakery, C. B.; Chopade, P. D.; Desper, J. Avoiding Synthon Crossover in Crystal 
Engineering with Halogen Bonds and Hydrogen Bonds. Cryst. Growth Des. 2011, 11 
(12), 5333. 
(3) Bondi, A. van der Waals Volumes and Radii. J. Phys. Chem. 1964, 68 (3), 441. 
(4) Bondi, A. van der Waals Volumes and Radii of Metals in Covalent Compounds. J. Phys. 
Chem. 1966, 70 (9), 3006. 
(5) Gavezzotti, A. The sceptical chymist: intermolecular doubts and paradoxes. 
CrystEngComm 2013, 15 (20), 4027. 
(6) Alvarez, S. A cartography of the van der Waals territories. Dalton Trans 2013, 42 
(24), 8617. 
(7) Dunitz, J. D.; Gavezzotti, A. Supramolecular Synthons: Validation and Ranking of 
Intermolecular Interaction Energies. Cryst. Growth Des. 2012, 12 (12), 5873. 
(8) Mews, R.; Parsons, S. Comparison of intermolecular interactions in two phases of 
MeNSOF2. Zeitschrift fr Kristallographie - Crystalline Materials 2014, 229. 
(9) Chickos, J. S.; Acree, W. E. Enthalpies of Sublimation of Organic and Organometallic 
Compounds. 19102001. J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 2002, 31 (2), 537. 
(10) Moggach, S. A.; Marshall, W. G.; Rogers, D. M.; Parsons, S. How focussing on 
hydrogen bonding interactions in amino acids can miss the bigger picture: a high-
pressure neutron powder diffraction study of -glycine. CrystEngComm 2015, 17 (28), 
5315. 
(11) Dunitz, J. D.; Gavezzotti, A. Molecular Recognition in Organic Crystals: Directed 
Intermolecular Bonds or Nonlocalized Bonding? Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition 2005, 44 (12), 1766. 
(12) Dunitz, J. Intermolecular atom-atom bonds in crystals?This essay is commented on 
by Thakur, Dubey & Desiraju [IUCrJ (2015), 2, 159-160] and Lecomte, Espinosa & 
Matta [IUCrJ (2015), 2, 161-163]. IUCrJ 2015, 2 (2), 157. 
(13) Mackenzie, C. F.; Spackman, P. R.; Jayatilaka, D.; Spackman, M. A. CrystalExplorer 
model energies and energy frameworks: extension to metal coordination 
compounds, organic salts, solvates and open-shell systems. IUCrJ 2017, 4 (5), 575. 
(14) Yang, J.; Hu, W.; Usvyat, D.; Matthews, D.; Schtz, M.; Chan, G. K.-L. Ab initio 
determination of the crystalline benzene lattice energy to sub-kilojoule/mole 
accuracy. Science 2014, 345 (6197), 640. 
(15) Hohenstein, E. G.; Sherrill, C. D. Wavefunction methods for noncovalent 
interactions. WIREs Computational Molecular Science 2012, 2 (2), 304. 
(16) Szalewicz, K. Symmetry-adapted perturbation theory of intermolecular forces. WIREs 
Computational Molecular Science 2012, 2 (2), 254. 
(17) Gavezzotti, A. Calculation of lattice energies of organic crystals: the PIXEL integration 
method in comparison with more traditional methods. Zeitschrift fr Kristallographie - 
Crystalline Materials 2005, 220 (5/6), 499. 
(18) Gavezzotti, A. Efficient computer modeling of organic materials. The atomatom, 
CoulombLondonPauli (AA-CLP) model for intermolecular electrostatic-
polarization, dispersion and repulsion energies. New J. Chem. 2011, 35 (7), 1360. 
(19) Gavezzotti, A. Molecular Aggregation; Oxford University Press: Oxford, U.K., 2007. 
(20) Frisch, M. J.; Trucks, G. W.; Schlegel, H. B.; Scuseria, G. E.; Robb, M. A.; Cheeseman, 
J. R.; Scalmani, G.; Barone, V.; Petersson, G. A.; Nakatsuji, H.et al.  Wallingford, CT, 
2016. 
(21) Chickos, J. S.; Gavezzotti, A. Sublimation Enthalpies of Organic Compounds: A Very 
Large Database with a Match to Crystal Structure Determinations and a Comparison 
with Lattice Energies. Cryst. Growth Des. 2019, 19 (11), 6566. 
(22) Maschio, L.; Civalleri, B.; Ugliengo, P.; Gavezzotti, A. Intermolecular Interaction 
Energies in Molecular Crystals: Comparison and Agreement of Localized Mller
Plesset 2, Dispersion-Corrected Density Functional, and Classical Empirical Two-
Body Calculations. J. Phys. Chem. A 2011, 115 (41), 11179. 
(23) Funnell, N. P.; Bull, C. L.; Ridley, C. J.; Capelli, S. Structural behaviour of OP-ROY at 
extreme conditions. CrystEngComm 2019, 21 (30), 4473. 
(24) Hutchison, I. B.; Delori, A.; Wang, X.; Kamenev, K. V.; Urquhart, A. J.; Oswald, I. D. 
H. Polymorphism of a polymer precursor: metastable glycolide polymorph recovered 
via large scale high-pressure experiments. CrystEngComm 2015, 17 (8), 1778. 
(25) Carlucci, L.; Gavezzotti, A. A quantitative measure of halogen bond activation in 
cocrystallization. PCCP 2017, 19 (28), 18383. 
(26) Dunitz, J. D.; Gavezzotti, A. Proteogenic Amino Acids: Chiral and Racemic Crystal 
Packings and Stabilities. J. Phys. Chem. B 2012, 116 (23), 6740. 
(27) Gavezzotti, A.; Lo Presti, L.; Rizzato, S. Mining the Cambridge Database for 
theoretical chemistry. Mi-LJC: a new set of Lennard-JonesCoulomb atomatom 
potentials for the computer simulation of organic condensed matter. CrystEngComm 
2020, DOI:10.1039/D0CE00334D 10.1039/D0CE00334D. 
(28) de Klerk, N. J. J.; van den Ende, J. A.; Bylsma, R.; Grancic, P.; de Wijs, G. A.; Cuppen, 
H. M.; Meekes, H. q-GRID: A New Method To Calculate Lattice and Interaction 
Energies for Molecular Crystals from Electron Densities. Cryst. Growth Des. 2016, 16 
(2), 662. 
(29) Bond, A. processPIXEL: a program to generate energy-vector models from 
Gavezzotti's PIXEL calculations. J. Appl. Cryst. 2014, 47 (5), 1777. 
(30) Rafilovich, M.; Bernstein, J. Serendipity and Four Polymorphic Structures of Benzidine, 
C12H12N2. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128 (37), 12185. 
(31) Kvick, A.; Canning, W. M.; Koetzle, T. F.; Williams, G. J. B. An experimental study of 
the influence of temperature on a hydrogen-bonded system: the crystal structure of 
[gamma]-glycine at 83 K and 298 K by neutron diffraction. Acta Cryst. 1980, B36 (1), 
(32) Raabe, G. The Use of Quantum Chemical Semiempirical Methods to Calculate the 
Lattice Energies of Organic Molecular Crystals. Part I: The Three Polymorphs of 
Glycine Z. Naturforsch. 1999, A54, 611. 
(33) Nes, G. J. H.; Vos, A. Single-crystal structures and electron density distributions of 
ethane, ethylene and acetylene. III. Single-crystal X-ray structure determination of 
ethylene at 85 K. Acta Cryst. 1979, B35 (11), 2593. 
(34) Maloney, A. G. P.; Wood, P. A.; Parsons, S. Intermolecular interaction energies in 
transition metal coordination compounds. CrystEngComm 2015, 17 (48), 9300. 
(35) Maloney, A. G. P.; Wood, P. A.; Parsons, S. Use of the PIXEL method to investigate 
gas adsorption in metalorganic frameworks. CrystEngComm 2016, 18 (18), 3273. 
(36) Mossin, S.; Sorensen, H. O.; Weihe, H. trans-Bis(cyano-[kappa]C)(1,4,8,11-
tetraazacyclotetradecane-[kappa]4N)manganese(III) perchlorate, a low-spin 
manganese(III) complex. Acta Cryst. 2002, C58 (4), m204. 
(37) Tombs, N. C.; Rooksby, H. P. Structure of Monoxides of some Transition Elements 
at Low Temperatures. Nature 1950, 165 (4194), 442. 
(38) Parsons, S.; Pu, W.; Ramage, R.; Wood, P. A. CSD Communication 2004. 
(39) Bierlein, T. K.; Lingafelter, E. C. The crystal structure of acetoxime. Acta Cryst. 1951, 
4 (5), 450. 
(40) Thakur, T. S.; Dubey, R.; Desiraju, G. R. Intermolecular atom-atom bonds in crystals 
- a chemical perspectiveThis essay and that by Lecomte et al. (2015) comment on 
Dunitz (2015). IUCrJ 2015, 2 (2), 159. 
4. Revealing Cooperativity Pathways in Spin 
Crossover Complexes 
4.1.  Introduction  
In octahedral complexes in which the metal has a d4-d7 electronic configuration, the 
occupation of eg and t2g orbitals is directed by the nature of the ligand field. Weak 
field ligands result in a small energy difference between t2g and eg orbitals (O), while 
strong field ligands lead to a larger O. This leads to the possibility of two electron 
distributions dependant on the size of O relative to the spin pairing energy (EP). 
Where Ep is greater than O, d-electrons are distributed between the t2g and eg 
orbitals before pairing electrons to form a high spin configuration (HS). In contrast, 
where Ep is smaller than O, electrons pair in the t2g orbitals before occupying the 
higher energy eg orbitals in a low spin (LS) state. 
In spin crossover (SCO) complexes, the values of O and Ep energies are similar, 
allowing a complex to exist as either HS or LS dependent on the amount of energy 
applied to a system in the form of temperature, pressure, or light. Such complexes 
can be reversibly switched between spin states, resulting in different magnetic, optical 
or structural properties. In thermally promoted spin crossover the low-spin state is 
enthalpically favoured at low temperature, whereas the high spin state is entropically 
favoured at high temperature. SCO do not typically occur at a sharp, well-defined 
temperature, and instead occur over a range of temperature. Moreover, even when 
a transition is first order, its sharpness depends on the compound and its phase. The 
transition temperature (T), where the occupancies of molecules in the HS and LS 
states are equal, can be measured by several techniques including magnetic 
susceptibility, Mssbauer and Raman spectroscopies.3-5 The abruptness of the 
transition, also known as the transition width, represents the temperature range over 
which the crossover occurs and has been defined as the difference between the 
temperatures at which the HS state is 20 and 80% occupied (T60, Figure S4.1 in the 
SI).6,7 The abruptness of the transition is strongly related to the notion of 
cooperativity, that represents the capability of one SCO centre to directly influence 
the spin state of a neighbouring one within the material.  
An abrupt spin crossover transition is often a first step toward hysteretic behaviours. 
A commonly adopted picture links this abruptness to the strength of intermolecular 
interactions cooperativity whereby a spin transition in one molecule promotes a 
transition in a neighbouring molecule, leading to a sharp spin crossover transition. 6,8-
14 The nature of a transition thus depends not only on the identity of a complex, but 
also on its crystal structure.15 The nature of the intermolecular interactions can 
strongly differ from one compound to another and several of them can coexist at the 
same time. For instance, it has been suggested that subtle interactions such as HH 
contacts could play a crucial role in SCO phase transitions, even when they are 
partially repulsive.16 Recent work has applied Hirshfeld surface analysis to obtain an 
overview of all intermolecular contacts in SCO crystals, which provides a description 
of the intermolecular topology of SCO structures, especially where a single 
commonly identifiable or prominent interaction cannot be established.17 This is 
particularly true in the case of polymorphs.  
The complexity of the intermolecular interaction topology requires a more complete 
description. Not only for a better view of this network but also to give new hints to 
chemists for the synthesis toward a better control of this interacting network. This 
chapter tackles this challenge, focusing on a specific SCO family exhibiting 
polymorphism and various types of intermolecular interaction and which has already 
been used to establish structure - SCO properties relationships: the [Fe(PM-
L)2(NCS)2] family of complexes (Scheme 4.1). 
In this family, transition abruptness T60 can vary between 5 and 97 K. Moreover, 
differing behaviour is seen for polymorphs as for example for [Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2] 
(PM-BiA = N-(2-pyridylmethylene)-4-aminobiphenyl).7,18 The abruptness of 
transitions has been associated with a short SH-C intermolecular contact in the 
crystal structures of the HS forms (Figure 4.1.i): where this contact is short the spin 
transition tends to be sharp 6 (Figure 4.1 .ii), suggesting that the strength of this 
interaction leads to increased cooperativity. While the trend is applicable to many 
members of the PM-L family generally, it does not apply to Fe(PM-NeA)2(NCS)2 (NeA 
= naphthalene-1-ethynyl-anilino), which has short SH-C contacts (SC = 3.438 ) 
but a very gradual transition (T60 = 97 K).
In this chapter, intermolecular packing energy calculations are applied to the crystal 
structures of the Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 family of spin crossover complexes with the aim 
of obtaining a more systematic overview of the energies of the intermolecular 
interactions which define the cooperativity pathways in these structures. The 
calculations have been performed with the PIXEL method,20 in which molecule-
molecule (as opposed to atom-atom) energies are calculated semi-empirically using 
ab initio molecular electron densities. The calculations yield not only a total lattice 
energy, but also its breakdown into individual molecule-molecule contributions. Each 
molecule-molecule energy is further decomposed into electrostatic, polarisation, 
dispersion and Pauli repulsion terms, providing insight not only on the strength, but 
also on the physical nature of the intermolecular interactions.   
Scheme 4.1: Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 Complex. PM-L Ligands for studied structures.  
Figure 4.1: i. Shortest SH-C (measured as S...C) interaction in Fe(PM-AzA)2(NCS)2. 
ii. Relationship between C...S interaction distance, in the HS structures and SCO 
width in Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 in Scheme 1. Two points are plotted for PeA which has 
slightly different values of T60 in the forward and reverse transitions between spin 
states. BiA-I and BiA-II correspond to different polymorphs. The values plotted are 
available in Table S4.3.  
4.2. Methodology 
4.2.1. Structural Data 
Four spin crossover complexes were investigated (Scheme 1).  Of these, the PMBiA 
derivative exists in two polymorphic forms.  
[Fe(PM-AzA)2(NCS)2] has a gradual SCO transition with T60 = 61 K. Structures are 
available on the Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) for the HS form at 290 K 
(CSD Refcode: XECNAU35) and the LS form at 110 K (XECNAU07).  The 
orthorhombic form-I of [Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2] (HS, 290 K, RONPIT01; LS 140 K, 
RONPIT02) has an abrupt spin transition (T60 = 5 K),
21 while  the monoclinic phase-
II  (HS, 290 K  RONPIT04, LS 120 K RONPIT05) has a much more gradual transition 
(T60 = 81 K).
7 The temperature induced spintransition of [Fe(PMPeA)2(NCS)2] is 
accompanied by a phase transition upon heating/cooling from LS Pccn (140 K, 
NOWBIK) to HS P21/c (290 K, NOWBIK01) with a relatively small T60 of 30 K in 
the HS -> LS direction and 37 K for LS -> HS.22 The average of these values (33.5 K) 
was used in the analysis below. [Fe(PM-NeA)2(NCS)2]  has the most gradual 
temperature-induced SCO transition found in the PM-L family (T60 = 97 K). 
Structures for both HS (290 K, COMQUR) and LS (120 K, COMQUR01) forms are 
available.19 As all complexes do not crystalize with the same lattice symmetry, 
equivalent asymmetric units for HS and LS structures were obtained in P21/c space 
group with the aid of the EQUIVSTRU utility on the Bilbao Crystallographic Server.23-
25 The coordinates used for the calculations are available in the SI.  
4.2.2. PIXEL calculations 
Lattice energies and intermolecular interaction energies were calculated using the 
semi-empirical computational technique PIXEL.20,26,27 PIXEL calculates energies by 
modelling each molecular component as a grid of small cubes (pixels) of electron 
density. Interactions are calculated between a central reference molecule and other 
molecules within a cluster generated from the crystallographic space group symmetry. 
Intermolecular energies are calculated from the sum of electrostatic, polarisation, 
dispersion and (Pauli) repulsion terms accumulated from each pixel-pixel combination 
in a dimer. The sum of all cluster interaction energies gives the lattice energy. In this 
study the cluster radius was 20 , and the molecular electron densities were obtained 
in steps of 0.08  from GAUSSIAN-09 with the 6-31G** basis set at the B3LYP level 
of theory.28 The PIXEL calculations themselves were accomplished with the CLP-
PIXEL suite within the MrPIXEL interface29 using a condensation level of 4 (i.e. the 
original pixels from GAUSSIAN were combined into 444 blocks of dimension 0.32 
).30  The parameters applied to the transition metals were those derived by Maloney 
et al.31 CH distances were reset to 1.089  to correct for the systematic shortening 
of bonds involving hydrogen in X-ray crystal structures.    
4.2.3. Visualisation of results 
Intermolecular interactions were visualised in Mercury32 using energy frameworks, 
originally devised by Spackman and co-workers for implementation in the 
CrystalExplorer software.33,34  The width and colour of the struts drawn between 
molecules represent the intermolecular energy. In the Figures below green struts 
represent stabilising interactions (energy < 0), while pink struts define destabilising 
interactions (energy > 0). The thickness represents the strength of the interaction.  
Figure 4.2: Example of strut construction showing new atoms placed between 
Molecule Ma and Mb and bonds between newly placed atoms. Magnitude of hexagons 
dictated by energy over value n where E/n produces a sensible strut size. 
The frameworks were generated using the CSD Python API (application programming 
interface).  A vector Ma-Mb defined between the molecular centroids of each 
interaction identified in a PIXEL calculation (Figure 4.2).  An atom (radium or 
meitnerium for stabilising and destabilising contacts, respectively) is placed at the mid-
point of the vector, Mp. Six deuterium atoms are placed orthogonal to the vector Ma-
Mb and at a distance E/n from both Ma and Mb. E is the energy of the interaction in kJ 
mol1 and n determines the diameter of the struts of the framework.  Direct visual 
comparisons between frameworks can be made provided the same value of n is used; 
in this work n was chosen to be 200. The struts are then constructed by representing 
the atom at Mp as a hexagonal prism with the vertices at the deuterium atoms. The 
updated structure is saved as a MOL2 format file, which can then be visualised in 
Mercury.  As has been described by Spackman, frameworks may be generated for 
each separate component of the interaction energy (electrostatic, polarisation, 
dispersion, repulsion) or as the total.  
In addition, comparisons can be made between isostructural crystal structures, or 
those where interactions may be mapped from one structure to another, by 
calculating difference frameworks where the strut sizes are related to the energy 
difference (E) between the interactions in each structure. In this case a value of n = 
25 has been used.  The scripts for producing these plots are available from 
www.crystal.chem.ed.ac.uk. 
Figure 4.3: Stacking layers in Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 polymorph-II with layers (separated 
by redhashed lines) parallel to the layeraxis, viewed along a (i.), b(ii.) and c(iii.) 
axes respectively. reference molecule is unlabelled and in the centre of each 
perspective (in the background overlapped with C in (ii)). First coordination sphere 
contacts to initial molecule are labelled beside molecule. Where molecules are in 
background, labels are denoted with *. 
4.3. Results 
4.3.1.  Crystal Packing in Fe(PML)2(NCS)2 Structures 
The crystal structures in the Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 family can be described in terms of the 
formation of layers in which the molecules are arranged so that a molecular axis 
drawn between the metal atom and the molecular centroid is parallel to the layer 
(Table S4.1 ).35   The unit cell contains two offset layers in which the molecular axes 
point in opposite directions leading to an alternating stacking sequence. The closest 
layer spacing (0.78 ) occurs for the HS form of Fe(PM-NeA)2(NCS)2, the negative 
sign indicating that there is some interpenetration between the layers (Figure S4.3). 
The largest (1.4 ) occurs in Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2-I LS (Figure S4.4).  
The general features of packing and the pattern of intermolecular interactions in this 
family of spin crossover complexes can be illustrated using Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 in 
polymorph-II of its high spin form (CSD Refcode RONPIT04, Figure 4.3). Within a 
layer, each molecule makes energetically significant contacts with eight other 
molecules, labelled A-H in 4.3 .i and shown individually with their energy breakdowns 
in Table S4.2 in the SI. The shortest centroid-centroid distances (8.719 ) occur along 
chains which run parallel to the c-axis, interactions A and B in 4.3 .i. The molecule-
molecule energy of these interactions is 97.9 kJ mol1, and the shortest atom-atom 
contacts formed involve the thiocyanate sulfur atoms in one molecule and hydrogen 
atoms in the next (S1H19, 2.86 ). These interactions have large electrostatic and 
dispersion components. Adjacent chains in the same layer related by lattice 
translations along b interact more weakly (C/D, 20.9 kJ mol1). The inter-chain 
contacts formed diagonally to molecules E/F and G/H in Figure 4.3 .i have energies of 
14.6 kJ mol1 and 22.6 kJ mol1, respectively. The largest contributing energy term 
in the inter-chain interactions (C to H contacts in figure 4.3.i) is dispersion. 
In Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 polymorph-II there are seven interlayer interactions (Figure 
4.3 .ii), in other members of the family (such as the complexes with PM-AzA, PM-PeA  
and PM-BiA  polymorph-I) there are eight, giving total molecular coordination 
numbers of 15 or 16. The seven contacts in Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2-II (labelled I-O) vary 
in energy between 80.7 and 27.4 kJ mol1. The strongest interactions, I and J, are 
formed across inversion centres and involve electrostatic thiocyanateH and 
dispersion-dominated  interactions, respectively. In other contacts, the 
electrostatic term is largest where the closest atom-atom contacts involve the 
thiocyanate ligands; where the contact is between rings, dispersion dominates. The 
shortest CS contact (part of interaction denoted O), which has been implicated in 
controlling the SCO transition width in previous work (see above), forms diagonally 
between molecules in adjacent layers (as shown in Figure 4.3 .iii) for all structures, 
with thiocyanate group in one molecule pointing directly towards the phenyl H-atoms 
in the other.  
Further inter-layer interactions occur where the thiocyanate is orientated towards 
an aromatic ring, creating an Saromatic ring contact that is dominated by the 
electrostatic term. The strength of this interaction varies considerably between 
structures and spin-states (see Section 4.3.2), with the CS distance varying between 
3.41 and 3.55 .  The correlations involving CS interactions developed in previous 
work have been based on the distance measured in the crystal structure of the 
complex in its HS configuration. As these distances change across a SCO transition 
their influence on cooperativity also changes, so that the interactions which govern 
cooperativity in the HS to LS transition may be different from those in the LS to HS 
transition. 
It is thought that strong intermolecular contacts, of the type described above, are the 
source of cooperativity in spin crossover transitions.12,36 The following sections aim 
to show how the overall view of intermolecular interaction energies provided by the 
PIXEL results can help to pin-point the structural features which determine transition 
abruptness in the Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 family of complexes.  
4.3.2. Relating SCO behaviour to structural parameters and PIXEL energies 
The shortest CS Interaction 
The suggestion that spin transition abruptness is related to the strength of the 
intermolecular interactions containing the short CS contacts may be analysed in 
terms of interaction energies using the PIXEL results for interaction O  (see Figure 
4.3 .iii) and its analogues in other structures (see also Table S4.3). While there are 
substantial differences in intermolecular interaction energies in these systems, no 
simple trend can be identified between the transition abruptness T60  and either the 
total dimer energy in the high or low spin forms or the change in dimer energy 
between spin states (Figure 4.4 .i). The results suggest that SCO behaviour cannot be 
fully described or predicted from the energy of the CS interaction, and therefore 
the investigation moves to focus on whether parameters such as lattice energy or 
inter-layer spacing, which are features of the whole crystal structure, might be more 
effective. 
Lattice Energies 
The lattice energies calculated using PIXEL are available for each structure and are 
listed in Table S4.4. The lattice energy change between spin-states at 110 and 290 K 
is in the order of 20 to 50 kJ mol1 for all complexes, with the two polymorphs of 
Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 having very similar lattice energies for both spin states (EL(HS) 
and EL(LS), respectively). This may explain why both polymorphs are observed under 
ambient conditions, though the energies are too similar to state with confidence 
which is the more stable form.  From these results there is no clear correlation 
between transition width and the lattice energies of either the HS or LS structures. 
Neither is there a correlation with change in lattice energy between spin-states for 
the HS  LS transition, defined as EL = EL(LS)  EL(HS) (Figure 4.4 .ii). 
Layer Spacing 
Previous studies find no clear trend relating to the isotropic cell contraction (VSC) 
and the SCO characteristics, but do point towards the anisotropy of the cell 
contraction as a parameter relating to the abruptness of transition.6 The change in 
layer spacing is a component of the anisotropic cell volume contraction and thus 
provides information on the nature of crystal packing changes in relation to SCO 
behaviour for Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 with this layered packing. Although there is no 
apparent trend between the level of interpenetration of the layers described above 
and the abruptness of transition, the change in layer separation between spin-states 
does suggest that large negative changes in layer separation correlate with sharper 
SCO (Figure 4.4 .iii), though this correlation does not extend to the broader 
transitions.  
Figure 4.4: i. SCO transition width against the shortest C..S interaction distances and 
PIXEL interaction energies. Data for both HS and LS forms are plotted. ii. SCO 
transition width against HS/LS PIXEL lattice energies. iii. SCO transition width against 
HS and LS layer spacing. 
Energy Frameworks 
Energy frameworks were devised by Spackman and co-workers as a way of rapidly 
visualising intermolecular interactions in a crystal structure.34 The framework is 
constructed by linking pairs of molecules with struts, where the width of a strut is 
proportional to the intermolecular energy: thick struts correspond to strong 
interactions. Energy frameworks have been shown to be helpful in explaining the 
source of physical properties such as the role of - stacking and hydrogen bonding 
in 1-hydroxypyrene crystal morphology, and in exploring polymorphism in small 
organic molecules such as glycine.33,37 
Figure 4.5: Comparison of HS (top) & LS (bottom) energy frameworks for Fe(PM-
BiA)2(NCS)2  polymorph I  viewed along a axis (left) and c axis (right).   
The differences between the intermolecular interactions in the high and low spin 
states are not obvious from a simple comparison of their energy frameworks, as 
shown for the PM-BiA-I structures in Figure 4.5. As an alternative it is possible to 
produce an energy difference framework in which each strut represents a dimer 
interaction with a width proportional to its change in energy E across the HS  LS 
transition, E = E(LS)  E(HS).  
HS>LS interaction energy changes 
viewed along a axis between 
alternating layers.  
HS>LS interaction energy changes viewed 
along c axis down multiple layers. 
HS>LS interaction energy changes 
viewed along b axis between 
alternating layers.  
HS>LS interaction energy changes viewed 
along c axis down multiple layers. 
Figure 4.6: Energy difference frameworks for polymorphs of Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2. For 
clarity, struts are only shown for the intermolecular first molecular coordination 
sphere (i.e. first nearest neighbours) where the interaction energy changes by more 
than 2.5 kJ mol1. The same criteria apply to the other difference frameworks shown 
in this chapter. 
The difference frameworks for the two polymorphs of Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 are shown 
in Figure 4.6.  Green struts correspond to interactions where the energy becomes 
more stabilising (i.e. E < 0) during the HS to LS transition. Pink struts show 
interactions which are destabilised (i.e. E > 0).  The magnitude of the energy change 
is shown by the thickness of the strut, as usual. The difference framework of BiA-I, 
which has a very sharp transition, is characterised by thick stabilising (green) and 
destabilising (pink) struts.  In this structure interactions C, D, M and N are stabilised 
by over 10 kJ mol1 over the course of the HSLS transition, while interactions A 
and B, consisting of close S..H contacts, are destabilised (see Tables S4.5 and S4.6 in 
the SI). These changes are largely electrostatic in origin and are a result of the 
reorientations and changes in SH and Saromatic ring intermolecular contact 
distances. By contrast the difference framework of BiA-II, which has a broad SCO 
transition, has much thinner stabilising struts and no destabilising changes.  
A similar pattern emerges in other structures. Figure 4.7 .i shows the energy 
difference framework for Fe(PM-AzA)2(NCS)2 in which the generally thin green struts 
and the absence of pink struts correctly suggests that it should, like Fe(PM-
BiA)2(NCS)2 form II, have a broad SCO transition. 
ii. P
iii. N
Figure 4.7 i. Energy difference framework for Fe(PM-AzA)2(NCS)2 along a axis and c 
axis respectively. ii. Energy difference framework for Fe(PM-PeA)2(NCS)2 along c axis 
and a axis respectively. iii. Energy difference framework for Fe(PM-NeA)2(NCS)2 along 
a axis and c axis respectively. 
The energy differences framework for Fe(PM-PeA)2(NCS)2 shows much larger energy 
changes between spin-states, with both stabilizing and destabilizing changes (Figure 
4.7 .ii), though these are less than in the transition for Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2-I.  The 
transition is therefore expected to be more abrupt than for the AzA complex, but 
less so than for BiA-I.  The Fe(PM-NeA)2(NCS)2 complex undergoes the most gradual 
transition (97 K) in the PM-L family. As expected, the energy difference framework 
for this complex demonstrates much smaller energy changes between spin states, as 
shown in Figure 4.7 .iii. 
The presence of prominent stabilising and destabilising energy changes over the HS 
 LS transition is seen to be associated with a sharp SCO transition, while smaller 
changes and the absence of significant destabilising changes are seen to be associated 
with broad spin crossover transition.  The relationship can be quantified in a plot of 
the sum of the magnitudes of all the interaction energy changes (| | = the sum 
of the widths of the struts shown in Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7) against T60, which is 
linear (Figure 4.8) with a correlation coefficient (r) equal to 0.94.  The correlation 
coefficient is negative because T60 decreases as the energy changes increase. It is 
worth noting that this linear trend is observed on the whole PM-L family, including 
the[Fe(PM-NeA)2(NCS)2] complex that did not follow the previous general trend 
based on the HS SH contact distance. It underlines the relevance of exploring the 
whole interaction map instead, as facilitated by the energy frameworks approach. 
Figure 4.8: The transition width (T60) plotted against the sum of the of absolute total 
interaction energy changes for Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 SCO complexes (black squares) and 
three other SCO complexes (red trianges, see Section 4.4). The line is fitted against 
the PM-L family of structure only, and has an equation of  y = 0.8339x + 119.54. 
Linear trends are also seen for the most positive and most negative total interaction 
energy changes for each structure (Table S4.7), corresponding to the thickest pink 
and green struts in the energy frameworks, and even to the magnitudes of the 
contributing energy terms themselves (Figure S4.5), such as the sum of electrostatic 
energy magnitudes (  ( ) ,  = 0.84), the most positive total energy changes 
(  ,  = 0.92), and the most stabilizing total energy change (  ,  =
0.93). The most linear correlation (r = 0.97) is seen for the most positive 
electrostatic energy change. These correlations are much stronger than those found 
for the sum of the signed values (i.e. where signs of changes are taken into account, r 
= 0.42). This is consistent with the absence of a correlation between T60 and the 
change in lattice energy (Figure 4.4 .ii).  
The difference seen for the analysis of magnitudes and sums of energies may seem 
paradoxical, but abrupt SCO transitions are associated with the presence of thick 
struts in the energy frameworks which can correspond to large positive or negative 
energy changes. When signed energies are summed, large positive and negative 
energy changes can cancel each other out and their influence is lost in the total energy. 
The implication is that an abrupt transition is one in which the intermolecular 
interactions are able to accommodate the strain generated by the change in volume 
of the SCO complex in a flexible way, which may change individual terms substantially, 
but does not necessarily incur a large overall change in total energy. 
4.4. Application beyond the Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 Family 
The results discussed so far have focussed on a single family of SCO complexes. 
Although the complexes are not strictly isostructural, the crystal packing and 
intermolecular interactions are consistent across the series, allowing direct 
comparisons of interactions. The quantitative correlation shown in Figure 4.8 would 
not be expected to extend generally, beyond the PM-L family, because different 
classes of SCO material will differ in polarity, molecular size and contacts, so that the 
scale of the intermolecular interaction energy changes will also be different.     
The difference frameworks for three complexes from beyond the PM-L family are 
shown in Figure 4.9, with energy data available in Table S4.8.  The complex 
[Fe(Phen)2(NCS)2] (Phen, CSD Refcodes HS:KEKVIF, LS:KEKVIF01) is similar to the 
PM-L family in having thiocyanate ligands, but the phenanthroline ligands are smaller 
and better suited for graphitic stacking. The difference framework (Figure 4.9 .i) 
consists of prominent green and pink struts which are consistent with its abrupt SCO 
transition (T60 = 10 K), but in Figure 4.8 the point for this complex lies close to, but 
not on, the PM-L correlation line.   
In the cobalt complex PUYROS (Co, HS: PUYROS01, LS: PUYROS) the metal binds 
to aromatic imines which are similar in some respects to PM-L ligands, but 
thiocyanates are absent. In common with most Co(+2) complexes its SCO transition 
is very broad (T60 is quoted as > 100 K, for the purposes of plotting T60 = 100 K).  
Accordingly, its difference framework (Figure 4.9 .ii) is virtually featureless. 
By contrast, Fe(Tet-Phen)2(NCS)2 (Phen-Tet, HS:QIDJET, LS:QIDJET01), which 
contains phenanthroline ligands substituted with anionic tetrazolyl groups, has a very 
abrupt transition (T60 = 6 K), again in line with the prominent green and pink struts 
found in its difference framework, but it does not fit the PM-L correlation at all (Figure 
4.8). 
The value of T60 for QIDJET is similar to that of Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 form I, but its 
framework (Figure 4.9 .iii) lacks the prominent green and pink struts which 
characterise the plot for PM-BiA complex in Figure 4.6 .i.  Nevertheless, what the 
two plots do have in common is that both contain stabilising green and destabilising 
pink struts of similar width. This observation is consistent with the trends seen in the 
PM-L family, in which prominent struts of both types are present in the fast-
transitioning complexes. The plot for Fe(PM-AzA)2(NCS)2 may contain prominent 
green struts, but the pink struts are much thinner, and the SCO transition is relatively 
broad.  
Figure 4.9: Energy difference frameworks for i. Fe(phen)2(NCS)2, ii. bis(10-((pyridine-
2-yl)diazenyl)phenanthrene-9-olato)-cobalt and iii. Fe(phen-Tetrazol)2. All metals are 
in the +2 oxidation state. 
It seems that an abrupt transition requires both prominent stabilising and destabilising 
changes to be present. This follows the conclusion that an abrupt transition needs 
intermolecular interactions that are able to accommodate the strain generated by the 
change in volume of the SCO complex. Although the scale of these changes varies 
with the ligands, a plot of T60 against the range of energy changes (Range ETot) 
normalised by dividing by the magnitude of the maximum interaction energy change 
(i.e. the thickest strut) (Figure 4.10) shows that fast and slow transitioning complexes 
cluster in two different regions.  
Figure 4.10: Transition width (T60) against the quotient of the difference between 
largest destabilizing and stabilizing changes (Range ETot /max |ETot|) for 
Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 SCO complexes (black squares) and other SCO complexes (red 
trianges). Range ETot is defined as |most +ve ETot||most ve ETot|.  
Such a normalisation fully addresses the non-fitting compounds in the SCO 
abruptness versus energy changes representation leading to two distinct regions in 
the diagram (Figure 4.10) showing that this approach based on global evaluation of 
intermolecular interactions can be applied to numerous SCO compounds even if they 
do not belong to the same family.  
4.5. Conclusions 
The aim of this work has been to explore the relationship between the abruptness of 
spin-crossover transitions and intermolecular interactions. Only crystalline solids 
have been considered. The study has concentrated on the PM-L family of Fe(+2) 
complexes. The packing is consistent within this series of crystal structures, enabling 
direct comparisons to be made between different members of the family.  A full set 
of structural and magnetic data is also available for both HS and LS forms of all 
complexes.  The crystal structures can also be described with one molecule in the 
asymmetric unit, making them suitable for lattice energy calculations using PIXEL.   
No correlation was found between abruptness and lattice energy, the intermolecular 
energy involving shortest HS CS contact, or the changes in layer stacking which 
occur across an SCO transition.  A more consistent trend emerges by considering 
the changes in individual intermolecular interaction energies, and there is a linear 
variation in T60 with the sum of the magnitudes of the interaction energy changes 
within the first molecular coordination sphere (Figure 4.8). These changes can be 
visualised in energy difference frameworks, which could also be considered as 
illustrating the cooperativity pathways of an SCO transition. 
Abrupt spin-crossover transitions require some large stabilising and destabilising 
changes in intermolecular energies.  It does not seem to matter which interactions 
are involved: the largest positive and negative energy changes depend on the 
structure, and, despite the packing similarities across the PM-L family, there is no 
consistency in which interaction shows the largest energy change.   
The quantitative trend established for the PM-L family does not directly extend to 
other classes of SCO complexes, and it is suspected that this is because the scale of 
the energy changes which occur are strongly dependent on the ligands present.  
Instead, it is necessary to assess the significance of individual contact energy changes 
in the context of the overall magnitude of the changes taking place. A clear correlation 
was found, independent of the chemical family, when normalized interaction energy 
changes were used against the abruptness of the transition. Fast and slow transitioning 
complexes cluster together in different regions of a plot of T60 against Range ETot 
/max |ETot| (Figure 4.10).   
These results suggest that the abruptness of an SCO transition is related to the 
accommodation of strain which is generated as the volumes of individual molecules 
change with spin state.  Large changes could indicate that strain is being 
accommodated in specific, flexible interactions instead of needing to be propagated 
through the entire structure, destabilising changes being compensated for by 
stabilising changes. For gradual transitions, the small energy changes and lack of 
compensating energy changes appear to cause a slower propagation of spin transitions 
through the system.  
4.6.  References 
(1) Goodwin, H. A. Spin Transitions in six-coordinate iron(II) complexes. Coordination 
Chemistry Reviews 1976, 18 (3), 293. 
(2) Gtlich, P., Berlin, Heidelberg, 1981; p 83. 
(3) Gtlich, P.; Gaspar, A. B.; Garcia, Y. Spin state switching in iron coordination 
compounds. Beilstein Journal of Organic Chemistry 2013, 9, 342. 
(4) Gtlich, P.; Link, R.; Trautwein, A. Mssbauer spectroscopy and transition metal 
chemistry; Springer-Verlag, 1978. 
(5) Wolny, J. A.; Schnemann, V.; Nmeth, Z.; Vank, G. Spectroscopic techniques to 
characterize the spin state: Vibrational, optical, Mssbauer, NMR, and X-ray 
spectroscopy. Comptes Rendus Chimie 2018, 21 (12), 1152. 
(6) Guionneau, P.; Marchivie, M.; Bravic, G.; Letard, J.-F.; Chasseau, D. Structural Aspects 
of Spin Crossover  Example of the [FeIILn(NCS)2] Complexes. ChemInform 2005, 
36 (47). 
(7) Marchivie, M.; Guionneau, P.; Letard, J.-F.; Chasseau, D. Towards direct correlations 
between spin-crossover and structural features in iron(II) complexes. Acta 
Crystallographica Section B 2003, 59 (4), 479. 
(8) Khler, C. P.; Jakobi, R.; Meissner, E.; Wiehl, L.; Spiering, H.; Gtlich, P. Nature of 
the phase transition in spin crossover compounds. Journal of Physics and Chemistry of 
Solids 1990, 51 (3), 239. 
(9) Nemec, I.; Herchel, R.; Trvnek, Z. The relationship between the strength of 
hydrogen bonding and spin crossover behaviour in a series of iron(iii) Schiff base 
complexes. Dalton Transactions 2015, 44 (10), 4474. 
(10) Guionneau, P. Crystallography and spin-crossover. A view of breathing materials. 
Dalton Transactions 2014, 43 (2), 382. 
(11) Halcrow, M. A. Structure: Function Relationships in Molecular Spin-Crossover 
Materials. Spin-Crossover Materials: Properties and Applications 2013, 
DOI:10.1002/9781118519301.ch5 10.1002/9781118519301.ch5, 147. 
(12) Spiering, H. In Spin Crossover in Transition Metal Compounds III; Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004, DOI:10.1007/b95427 10.1007/b95427. 
(13) Haddad, M. S.; Lynch, M. W.; Federer, W. D.; Hendrickson, D. N. Spin-crossover 
ferric complexes: curiosities observed for unperturbed solids. Inorganic Chemistry 
1981, 20 (1), 123. 
(14) Kambara, T. Theory of highspinlowspin transitions in transition metal compounds 
induced by cooperative molecular distortions and lattice strains. The Journal of 
Chemical Physics 1981, 74 (8), 4557. 
(15) Collet, E.; Guionneau, P. Structural analysis of spin-crossover materials: From 
molecules to materials. Comptes Rendus Chimie 2018, 21 (12), 1133. 
(16) Tailleur, E.; Marchivie, M.; Negrier, P.; Denux, D.; Massip, S.; Mondieig, D.; Chastanet, 
G.; Guionneau, P. Using polymorphism to master the spin crossover mechanism in 
[Fe(PM-PeA)2(NCSe)2]. CrystEngComm 2019, 21 (41), 6246. 
(17) Guionneau, P. Crystallography and spin-crossover. A view of breathing materials. 
Dalton transactions (Cambridge, England : 2003) 2013, 43. 
(18) Tao, J.; Wei, R.-J.; Huang, R.-B.; Zheng, L.-S. Polymorphism in spin-crossover systems. 
Chemical Society Reviews 2012, 41 (2), 703. 
(19) Ltard, J.-F.; Kollmansberger, M.; Carbonera, C.; Marchivie, M.; Guionneau, P. 
Structural, magnetic and photomagnetic study of the [Fe(PMNEA)2(NCS)2] spin 
crossover complex. Comptes Rendus Chimie 2008, 11 (10), 1155. 
(20) Gavezzotti, A. Calculation of lattice energies of organic crystals: The PIXEL 
integration method in comparison with more traditional methods. Z. Krist. 2005, 
220, 499. 
(21) Ltard, J.-F.; Guionneau, P.; Rabardel, L.; Howard, J. A. K.; Goeta, A. E.; Chasseau, D.; 
Kahn, O. Structural, Magnetic, and Photomagnetic Studies of a Mononuclear Iron(II) 
Derivative Exhibiting an Exceptionally Abrupt Spin Transition. Light-Induced Thermal 
Hysteresis Phenomenon. Inorganic Chemistry 1998, 37 (17), 4432. 
(22) Ltard, J.-F.; Guionneau, P.; Codjovi, E.; Lavastre, O.; Bravic, G.; Chasseau, D.; Kahn, 
O. Wide Thermal Hysteresis for the Mononuclear Spin-Crossover Compound cis-
Bis(thiocyanato)bis[N-(2-pyridylmethylene)-4-(phenylethynyl)anilino]iron(II). Journal 
of the American Chemical Society 1997, 119 (44), 10861. 
(23) Perez-Mato, J.; Orobengoa, D.; Tasci, E.; De la Flor Martin, G.; Kirov, A. 
Crystallography Online: Bilbao Crystallographic Server. Bulgarian Chemical 
Communications 2011, 43, 183. 
(24) Aroyo, M. I.; Perez-Mato, J. M.; Capillas, C.; Kroumova, E.; Ivantchev, S.; Madariaga, 
G.; Kirov, A.; Wondratschek, H. Bilbao Crystallographic Server: I. Databases and 
crystallographic computing programs. 2006, 221 (1), 15. 
(25) Aroyo, M. I.; Kirov, A.; Capillas, C.; Perez-Mato, J. M.; Wondratschek, H. Bilbao 
Crystallographic Server. II. Representations of crystallographic point groups and 
space groups. Acta Crystallographica Section A 2006, 62 (2), 115. 
(26) Gavezzotti, A. Molecular Aggregation - Structure Analysis and Molecular Simulation of 
Crystals and Liquids; 1st ed.; Oxford University Press: New York, 2007. 
(27) Gavezzotti, A. Efficient computer modeling of organic materials. The atomatom, 
CoulombLondonPauli (AA-CLP) model for intermolecular electrostatic-
polarization, dispersion and repulsion energies. New J. Chem. 2011, 35 (7), 1360. 
(28) Frisch, M. J.; Trucks, G. W.; Schlegel, H. B.; Scuseria, G. E.; Robb, M. A.; Cheeseman, 
J. R.; Scalmani, G.; Barone, V.; Petersson, G. A.; Nakatsuji, H.et al.  Wallingford, CT, 
2016. 
(29) Reeves, M. G.; Wood, P. A.; Parsons, S. MrPIXEL: automated execution of Pixel 
calculations via the Mercury interface. Journal of Applied Crystallography 2020, 53 (4), 
1154. 
(30) Gavezzotti, A. In Zeitschrift fr Kristallographie - Crystalline Materials, 2005; Vol. 220. 
(31) Maloney, A. G. P.; Wood, P. A.; Parsons, S. Intermolecular interaction energies in 
transition metal coordination compounds. CrystEngComm 2015, 17 (48), 9300. 
(32) Macrae, C. F.; Sovago, I.; Cottrell, S. J.; Galek, P. T. A.; McCabe, P.; Pidcock, E.; 
Platings, M.; Shields, G. P.; Stevens, J. S.; Towler, M.et al. Mercury 4.0: from 
visualization to analysis, design and prediction. Journal of Applied Crystallography 2020, 
53 (1), 226. 
(33) Mackenzie, C. F.; Spackman, P. R.; Jayatilaka, D.; Spackman, M. A. CrystalExplorer 
model energies and energy frameworks: extension to metal coordination 
compounds, organic salts, solvates and open-shell systems. IUCrJ 2017, 4 (5), 575. 
(34) Turner, M. J.; Thomas, S. P.; Shi, M. W.; Jayatilaka, D.; Spackman, M. A. Energy 
frameworks: insights into interaction anisotropy and the mechanical properties of 
molecular crystals. Chemical Communications 2015, 51 (18), 3735. 
(35) Bryant, M. J.; Maloney, A. G. P.; Sykes, R. A. Predicting mechanical properties of 
crystalline materials through topological analysis. CrystEngComm 2018, 20 (19), 2698. 
(36) Senthil Kumar, K.; Ruben, M. Emerging trends in spin crossover (SCO) based 
functional materials and devices. Coordination Chemistry Reviews 2017, 346, 176. 
(37) Gajda, R.; Domaski, M. A.; Malinska, M.; Makal, A. Crystal morphology fixed by 
interplay of -stacking and hydrogen bonds  the case of 1-hydroxypyrene. 
CrystEngComm 2019, 21 (11), 1701. 
5. Concluding Remarks 
The use of computational methods in interpreting intermolecular interactions within 
crystal structures has garnered increasing interest over the last decade. This is 
particularly true for small organic systems, where extensive work has already been 
done in rationalizing the crystal packing of structures using software such as PIXEL-
CLP and CrystalExplorer. The use of these techniques when discussing the structures 
of coordination compounds has also grown all-be-it more slowly, in-part due to the 
increased computational resources needed, and the complexity based entry barrier 
to setting up calculations. With the introduction of the CSD Python API, it is now 
possible to automate the setup and execution of many of these calculations and 
demonstrate some of the invaluable insight the results can give towards the 
properties of inorganic crystal structures. 
The first task, in implementing an automated BVS methodology within the CSD 
program Mercury, has resulted in a process that automates oxidation state 
assignment to structures in the CSD, as well as user-structures. This process has 
validated the reliability of BVS, showing that the correct oxidation state can be 
assigned using this method for 90% of entries, while also introducing new methods 
for increased confidence. The combination of techniques resulted in a process that 
can automatically assign oxidation states for over 80% of entries due to a near perfect 
accuracy when all methods agree. Ultimately, this has helped the Cambridge 
Structural Data Centre to retrospectively add over 50,000 oxidation state values to 
CSD entries over the last few years and aided them in ensuring this data is included 
in newly deposited structures. Additionally, it opens up the capability to add oxidation 
states as atom specific information, further improving the user experience of the 
From here it has been possible to automate other computational techniques, with a 
specific aim to produce scripts that execute PIXEL-CLP from within Mercury. As 
previously alluded to, PIXEL calculations have been used extensively for organic 
structures, and with the recent parameterisation of transition metal atoms, it is now 
possible to extend its use to inorganic systems. The development of MrPixel, a 
software package designed to both set-up and run the PIXEL procedure on structures 
from the Mercury interface, has enabled users to quickly gain more information on 
the intermolecular interactions within their crystal-structures. MrPixel has simplified 
the manually intensive process of setting up Pixel calculations, enabling it to become 
a routine process that can be employed on multiple structures simultaneously. This 
has already received significant interest, with many users already utilizing MrPixel and 
thus the PIXEL-CLP software in their structural analysis. 
It is this development that has allowed PIXEL to be practicably employed on spin-
crossover complexes. The various magnetic and electronic characteristics of SCO 
structures have long been a topic of debate, with differing behaviours between 
seemingly similar inorganic complexes being difficult to rationalize from the geometric 
data alone. By introducing computational techniques such as PIXEL-CLP, 
intermolecular energies can now be used to discuss and compare the differences 
between structures and spin-states, revealing trends between intermolecular 
interactions and the abruptness of spin-transition, and providing further evidence and 
understanding of the commonly discussed co-operativity pathways. This work 
opens a significant avenue of further investigation for SCO chemistry and may be of 
significant benefit to those interested in designing new materials with desired 
properties. 
This work demonstrates that determination of intermolecular energies for inorganic 
structures can provide a wealth of chemical and physical information. Each process 
has exemplified the use of the CSD Python API, which has proved invaluable in 
automating processes for crystal structure analysis. It is hoped that the results 
displayed further encourage users to explore the capabilities of both PIXEL and the 
CSD Python API, with the potential to add to and complement the vast functionality 
of the CSD package.  
The Interpretation of the Crystal Structures of 
Transition Metal Compounds and Complexes 
Thesis Supplementary Information 
Matthew G Reeves  
Contents 
SI.2 Automated oxidation-state assignment for metal sites in coordination complexes 
Table S2.1: Thresholds for common oxidation states. True values are those where >15% entries 
in the CSD have that named value. Bold are common while blue are those observed as defined by 
Table S2.2: Possible bond valence combinations for Co(II) assumed valence in CSD Refcode 
Table S2.3: Possible bond valence combination for Co(III) assumed valence in CSD Refcode 
Table S2.4: Breakdown of confidence scores for oxidation state assignment in the test dataset. . 7 
Table S3.1: Pixel identifiers for different atom types. Mol2 format SYBYL notations are included, 
as well as some custom labels denoted by * assigned by SetupPixel.  This table is based on that in 
Figure S3.1: Example menus of SetupPixel and MRPixel. (i). SetupPIXEL for GLYCIN16 
structure, (ii) symmetry lowering for ethylene, (iii) a two-component system where the cation is a 
Table S3.2: Breakdown of Pixel-C results for first coordination sphere of -glycine (GLYCIN16 
CSD structure). Note small discrepancy (0.1 kJ mol-1 difference) in the pair of interactions at a 
Table S3.3: Breakdown of Pixel results for first coordination sphere of ethylene (ETHLEN10 
Table S3.4: The first coordination sphere of the cations in AFAROO. M = central reference 
Table S3.5: Comparison of strongest interaction energies in the crystal structure of acetoxime. 
Figure S4.1: Aspects of temperatureinduced SCO behaviour for a SCO material exhibiting a 
transition with hysteresis. Arrows show direction of spin transition. In case of hysteresis, two 
values of T1/2 exist, corresponding to the ascending () and descending () branches. The 
hysteresis width is usually denoted T1/2 (where T1/2 = T1/2  T1/2). The abruptness of the 
transition represents the temperature difference between the 20 and 80% HS state rate and is 
denoted T60. Where a hysteresis is present, two values of T60 exist according to the sharpness 
of the transition during the cooling and the warming modes. Here only the HS>LS transition 
Figure S4.2: Example of strut construction showing new atoms placed between Molecule Ma and 
Mb and bonds between newly placed atoms. Magnitude of hexagons dictated by energy over value 
Figure S4.5: Stacked bargraph of interaction energy changes from HS to LS structures for 
PML complexes, broken down by separate energy components. The total energy changes are 
shown as black bars: destabilising changes which appear as pink struts in the framework plots of 
Figs. 5 and 6 are located above the zero-energy; the stabilising changes represented as green 
Table S4.1: Layers in SCO structures. Values determined using the topological analysis scripts 
Table S4.2: First coordination sphere interactions (in kJ mol1) for HS Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 
Table S4.4: Overall PIXEL lattice energies (in kJ mol1) for the Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 family of SCO 
Table S4.5: Interactionenergy changes (in kJ mol1) in the HS  LS transition of Fe(PM-
L)2(NCS)2 structures. The figures in the top and bottom rows are plotted in Fig.7 in the main text.
Table S4.6: PIXEL-C interaction energy changes (HS>LS) for first intermolecular co-ordination 
Table S4.7: Correlations for PIXEL energy terms with respect to T60 for PM-L Structures 
studied. Note that the magnitude of all energies is not equivalent to the magnitude of all total 
energies because total energies take into account the sign of each energy term, where the 
Table S4.8: Interaction Energy changes for some non PM-L complexes. i. Fe(phen)2(NCS)2, (CSD 
Refcodes HS:KEKVIF, LS:KEKVIF01) ii. bis(10-((pyridine-2-yl)diazenyl)phenanthrene-9-olato)-
cobalt(ii) (CSD Refcodes HS: PUYROS01, LS: PUYROS), iii. Fe(Phen-Tetrazol)2 , (CSD Refcodes 
SI.2 Automated oxidation-state assignment for metal sites in 
coordination complexes in the Cambridge Structural Database. 
Table S2.1: Thresholds for common oxidation states. True values are those where >15% entries 
in the CSD have that named value. Bold are common while blue are those observed as defined by C. 
Housecroft & A. Sharpe 1. 
Threshold 
Valence 
i ii iii iv v vi vii Viii 
Sc FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Ti FALSE FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
V FALSE FALSE TRUE TRUE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Cr FALSE TRUE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Mn FALSE TRUE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Fe FALSE TRUE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Co FALSE TRUE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Ni FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Cu TRUE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Zn FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Y FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Zr FALSE FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Nb FALSE FALSE FALSE TRUE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Mo FALSE FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE 
Tc FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Ru FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Rh TRUE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Pd FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Ag TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Cd FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Hf FALSE FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Ta FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
W FALSE TRUE FALSE TRUE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE 
Re TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Os FALSE TRUE FALSE TRUE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE 
Ir TRUE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Pt FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Au TRUE FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
Hg FALSE TRUE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE FALSE 
For a full description of how BVS applied to all possible oxidation states, the process is demonstrated here for the four-co-ordinate cobalt complex KUYHES 
1. Application of BVS to each valence is described with a separate table showing how multiple bond valence sums are produced from each of the parameter 
values available. Each table shows top to bottom combinations which result in seperate bond valence sum values. For each bond encountered, all possible 
parameters are applied, producing multiple bond valence results. As we iterate through each sucessive bond, a new set of possible pond valences is produced 
and so  a new possible bond valence sum value is also determined. The best bond valence sum value, along with the parameter path taken to arrive at it 
are highlighted in green. Note the single set of parameters available for Co(III) in this case, and therefore the single route and BVS value available in Table S3.  
Table S2.2: Possible bond valence combinations for Co(II) assumed valence in CSD Refcode KUYHES.  
Co-Cl1 r 2.219 
R0 Parameter 2.033 2.010 
Result 0.605 0.568 
Co-Cl2 r 2.227 
R0 Parameter 2.033 2.010 2.033 2.010 
Result 0.592 0.556 0.592 0.556 
Co-N1 r 2.042 
R0 Parameter 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 
Results 0.419 0.303 0.419 0.303 0.419 0.303 0.419 0.303 
Co-N2 r 2.053 
R0 Parameter 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 1.720 1.600 
Results 0.407 0.294 0.407 0.294 0.407 0.294 0.407 0.294 0.407 0.294 0.407 0.294 0.407 0.294 0.407 0.294 
Bond Valence 
Sum 2.022 1.910 1.906 1.794 1.987 1.874 1.871 1.758 1.986 1.873 1.870 1.757 1.950 1.838 1.834 1.721 
Delta 0.022 0.090 0.094 0.206 0.013 0.126 0.129 0.242 0.014 0.127 0.130 0.243 0.050 0.162 0.166 0.279 
Table S2.3: Possible bond valence combination for Co(III) assumed valence in CSD Refcode 
KUYHES. 
Co-Cl1 r 2.219 
R0 Parameter 2.050 
Result 0.633 
Co-Cl2 r 2.227 
R0 Parameter 2.050 
Result 0.620 
Co-N1 r 2.042 
R0 Parameter 1.690 
Results 0.386 
Co-N2 r 2.053 
R0 Parameter 1.690 
Results 0.375 
Bond Valence Sum 2.014 
Delta 0.986 
Table S2.4: Breakdown of confidence scores for oxidation state assignment in the test 
dataset. 
Confidence Correct Incorrect Total % Correct 
0 0 3113 3113 0.00% 
4 8 56 64 12.50% 
5 533 2399 2932 18.18% 
6 1184 1781 2965 39.93% 
7 425 124 549 77.41% 
8 891 63 954 93.40% 
9 1130 34 1164 97.08% 
10 2740 85 2825 96.99% 
11 3407 55 3462 98.41% 
12 873 18 891 97.98% 
13 1106 6 1112 99.46% 
14 2363 19 2382 99.20% 
15 6203 35 6238 99.44% 
16 13038 56 13094 99.57% 
17 13171 83 13254 99.37% 
Total 47072 7927 54999 85.59% 
Summary: 
Band Correct Incorrect Total % Correct 
A 35881 199 36080 99.45% 
B 8150 192 8342 97.70% 
C 2500 1968 4468 55.95% 
D 541 2455 2996 18.06% 
SI.3 MrPIXEL: Execution of PIXEL Calculations via the MERCURY Interface  
Table S3.1: Pixel identifiers for different atom types. Mol2 format SYBYL notations are included, as well as some custom labels denoted by * 
assigned by SetupPixel.  This table is based on that in the Pixel manual. 
Atom descriptor .mol2 
SYBYL 
notation 
.oeh indicator Atomic 
Polarizability (3) 
Ionization 
Potential (a.u.) 
Space diffusion 
Parameter 
H-bond 
Propensity 
hydrogen    radius 1.10   0.39 0.5   
acetylene CH H.1 1   0.6 0.2 
=CH2, arom.CH H.2 2   0.62 0.1 
aliphatic 
CH, CH2, CH3 
H.3 3   0.64 0.05 
R-OH, R-SH alcohol, thiol H.5 5   0.75 0.99 
COO-H acid H.6 6   0.8 0.99 
CON)-H amide H.am 7   0.8 0.9 
R2NH, RNH2,  (R3N+)H H.8 8   0.8 0.99 
H2O (water) H2.o 9   0.8 0.99 
unnormalized hydrogen atom 
from Cambridge files 
carbon                   1.77    0.414 1 0 
carbonyl C=(O) C.O 10 1.05    
C- C.1 11 1.35    
sp2 or allene C C.2, C.ar 12 1.35    
sp3 C C.3 13 1.05    
aromatic core C C.Core 14 1.9    
nitrogen                1.64   0.95 0.534   
(RnH4-n)N+ N.4 16   0.63 0 
(RnH3-n)N N.3 17   0.63 -0.97 
arom.N, R=N(H) N.ar,N.pl3 18   0.58 -0.99 
-CN,-N=N N.2 19   0.7 -0.7 
Atom descriptor .mol2 
SYBYL 
notation 
.oeh indicator Atomic 
Polarizability (3) 
Ionization 
Potential (a.u.) 
Space diffusion 
Parameter 
H-bond 
Propensity 
nitro N N.1 20   0.63 0 
amide N (CONH,CONH2) N.am 21   0.63 -0.85 
oxygen                    1.58   0.75 0.5   
-O- O.3 23   0.45 -0.9 
H2O (water) O.1 24   0.7 -0.99 
C=O, COO- O.co2, 
O.4,O.2 
27   0.5 -0.99 
(C=O)-OH O.car 28   0.5 -0.9 
R-OH O.al 29   0.45 -0.99 
N=O O.2 30   0.5 -0.95 
S=O O.2 31   0.75 -0.9 
P=O O.3 32   0.75 -0.9 
sulfur                  1.81   3 0.381   
-S- S.3 34   2 -0.5 
(C)=S S.1 35   2 -0.5 
(O)=S S, S.o2 36   2.5 0 
R-S(H) S.2 37   2 -0.5 
heteroatoms       
P                          1.9 P 38 1.54 0.386 3 0 
As                      1.8 As 39 3.5 0.4 5 0 
Se                         1.8 Se 40 3.5 0.4 6 0 
F                           1.46 F.0 41 0.55 0.64 0.2 0 
Cl                         1.76 Cl.0 42 2.5 0.477 2.4 -0.2 
Br                         1.87 Br.0 43 3.27 0.434 1.5 0 
I                            2.03 I.0 44 5 0.384 5 0 
B                          1.70 B 46 1.6 0.305 1 0 
Si                          2.00 Si 47 2 0.28 1 0 
transition 
metals 
Ti Ti 51 4.18 0.25 0.8 -0.5 
Atom descriptor .mol2 
SYBYL 
notation 
.oeh indicator Atomic 
Polarizability (3) 
Ionization 
Potential (a.u.) 
Space diffusion 
Parameter 
H-bond 
Propensity 
V V 52 3.31 0.25   
Cr Cr, Cr.oh, 
Cr.th 
53 2.86 0.25   
Mn Mn 54 2.93 0.27   
Fe Fe 55 2.81 0.29   
Co Co, Co.oh 56 2.62 0.29   
Ni Ni 57 2.61 0.28   
Cu Cu 58 2.81 0.285   
Zn Zn 59 3.63 0.345   
positive ions       
Li+ Li 61 0.1 1 0.2 0 
Na+ Na 62 0.2 0.85 0.3  
K+ K 63 0.3 0.7 1.5  
Rb+ Rb 64 0.4 0.5 3  
Cs+ Cs 65 0.3 0.45 5  
Ca+ Ca 66 0.7 0.7 1.5  
negative ions       
F- F.-1 67 0.4 0.75 0.5  
Cl- Cl.-1 68 2.5 0.65 3  
Br- Br.-1 69 3.27 0.5 4  
I- I.-1 70 5 0.4 5  
Figure S3.1: Example menus of SetupPixel and MRPixel. (i). SetupPIXEL for GLYCIN16 
structure, (ii) symmetry lowering for ethylene, (iii) a two-component system where the cation 
is a transition metal complex, and (iv) a system for which Z = 3.   
Table S3.2: Breakdown of Pixel-C results for first coordination sphere of -glycine (GLYCIN16 CSD structure). Note small discrepancy (0.1 kJ 
mol-1 difference) in the pair of interactions at a distance of 4.389  is due to rounding errors.  
Symmetry operation Centroid-centroid distance () 
EElec 
(kJ mol-1) 
(kJ mol-1) 
EDISP 
(kJ mol-1) 
(kJ mol-1) 
(kJ mol-1) 
x,y,z-1 5.473 119.2 38.6 14.3 66.3 105.8 
x,y,z+1 5.473 119.2 38.6 14.3 66.3 105.8 
-x+y,-x-1,z+ 5.458 37.5 11.2 8.1 9.5 47.5 
-y+1,x-y,z- 5.458 37.5 11.2 8.1 9.5 47.5 
-x+y,-x-1,z- 4.450 49.7 8.7 10.5 7.1 37.7 
-y+1,x-y,z+ 4.450 49.7 8.7 10.5 7.1 37.7 
-y+1,x-y,z- 4.389 28.3 41.0 18.5 54.4 33.4 
-x+y+1,-x+1,z+ 4.389 28.3 41.0 18.5 54.4 33.3 
-y,x-y,z+ 5.437 23.6 11.0 7.2 10.2 31.6 
-y,x-y,z- 5.437 23.6 11.0 7.2 10.2 31.6 
-x+y,-x,z+ 4.424 29.7 33.7 17.1 33.3 12.2 
-y,x-y,z- 4.424 29.7 33.7 17.1 33.3 12.2 
-y+1,x-y,z+ 5.408 11.0 4.4 3.6 1.0 4.0 
-y+1,x-y+1,z- 5.408 11.0 4.4 3.6 1.0 4.0 
Table S3.3: Breakdown of Pixel results for first coordination sphere of ethylene (ETHLEN10 CSD structure). 
Symmetry operation 
Centroid-centroid 
distance () 
EElec 
(kJ mol-1) 
(kJ mol-1) 
EDISP 
(kJ mol-1) 
(kJ mol-1) 
(kJ mol-1) 
  x,y, z1   4.067 -1.4  -0.4  -5.8  3.0  -4.7 
  x,y, z+1   4.067 -1.4  -0.4  -5.8  3.0  -4.7 
 x+,y,z+ 4.441 -0.4  -0.2  -4.7  2.1  -3.2 
 x+,y+,z+ 4.441 -0.4  -0.2  -4.7  2.1  -3.2 
 x,y,z 4.441 -0.4  -0.2  -4.8  2.1  -3.3 
 x,y+,z 4.441 -0.4  -0.2  -4.8  2.1  -3.3 
 x,y,z+ 4.600 -1.4  -0.3  -2.9  1.7  -3.0 
 x,y+,z+ 4.600 -1.4  -0.3  -2.9  1.7  -3.0 
 x+,y,z 4.600 -1.5  -0.3  -2.9  1.7  -3.1 
 x+,y+,z 4.600 -1.5  -0.3  -2.9  1.7  -3.1 
  x1,y, z     4.626 -0.7  -0.2  -3.5  1.8  -2.6 
  x+1,y, z     4.626 -0.7  -0.2  -3.5  1.8  -2.6 
Table S3.4: The first coordination sphere of the cations in AFAROO. M = central reference cation, M1, M2 are cations related by the 
operations listed. A1, A2 etc are anions. 
Contact 
(see Fig. 4) 
Symmetry operation Centroid-Centroid 
distance () 
EElec 
(kJ mol-1) 
(kJ mol-1) 
EDISP 
(kJ mol-1) 
(kJ mol-1) 
(kJ mol-1) 
M...M1   x1,y,z     6.760 60.6   33.2 36.7  64.0 66.5 
M...M2   x+1,y,z     6.760 60.6   33.2 36.7  64.0 66.5 
M...M3  x, y,z+3/2 8.668  8.1    4.8 15.0   8.8 19.1 
M...M4  x,y+,z+3/2 8.668  8.1    4.8 15.0   8.8 19.1 
M...M5   x,y+,z+2   8.502   0.2    4.2 13.8   5.4 12.4 
M...M6   x+,y+,z+2   8.502   0.2    4.2 13.8   5.4 12.4 
M...M7   x,y,z+2   9.442  1.6    1.1 10.5   3.8  9.4 
M...M8   x+,y,z+2   9.442  1.6    1.1 10.5   3.8  9.4 
M...M9  x+1,y,z+3/2 8.900  0.0    2.3 15.8   9.0  9.1 
M...M10 x+1,y+,z+3/2 8.900  0.0    2.3 15.8   9.0  9.1 
M...A1   x,y,z     5.359 14.7    8.2 26.5  33.0 16.3 
M...A2  x+,y,z+ 5.371 11.5    6.9 27.1  29.7 15.8 
M...A3  x,y,z+3/2 6.546  0.6    1.8 14.8   7.6  9.7 
M...A4  x,y+,z+3/2 6.928  0.0    1.3 13.2   6.5  8.0 
M...A5   x+1,y,z     6.632  1.1    0.8 10.2   3.5  8.5 
M...A6  x,y,z+ 6.327  2.7    1.7 14.9   9.4  9.9 
Table S3.5: Comparison of strongest interaction energies in the crystal structure of acetoxime. Energies are in kJ mol1. 
Molecule a Molecule b Molecule c 
Dimer Distance 
Dimer Distance 
Dimer Distance 
b 5.935 28.1 c 5.942 27.6  a 5.964 28.3 
c 5.964 28.3 a 5.935 28.1  b 5.942 27.6 
b[ x,y1,z] 6.077  4.4 c[x,y+1,z1] 6.187  4.1  a[x,y,z+1] 6.102  4.3 
c[x,y,z1] 6.102  4.3 a[x,y+1,z] 6.077  4.4  b[x,y1,z+1] 6.187  4.1 
b[x,y,z1] 6.274  3.7 c[x,y+1,z] 6.170  4.5  a[x,y1,z+1] 6.238  4.0 
c[x,y+1,z1] 6.238  4.0 a[x,y,z+1] 6.274  3.7  b[x,y1,z] 6.170  4.5 
b[x1,y,z] 5.033  7.4 c[x1,y1,z+1] 4.631 10.8  a[x1,y1,z] 5.354  6.7 
a[x1,y1,z] 4.649 10.3 b[x1,y,z] 5.356  7.5  c[x1,y1,z+1] 4.540 10.6 
c[x1,y1,z] 5.354  6.7 a[x1,y,z] 5.033  7.3  b[x1,y1,z+1] 4.631 10.8 
b[x,y,z] 5.394   7.1  c[x,y1,z+1]    5.137    7.4 a[x,y1,z  ] 4.565   11.3 
a[x,y1,z] 4.754   9.2  b[x,y,z  ]    4.299   12.8 c[x,y1,z+1] 5.543    5.9 
c[x,y1,z  ] 4.565  11.3  a[x,y,z  ]   5.394    7.1 b[x,y1,z+1] 5.137    7.4 
SI.4 Revealing Cooperativity Pathways in Spin Crossover 
Complexes 
Figure S4.1: Aspects of temperatureinduced SCO behaviour for a SCO material exhibiting 
a transition with hysteresis. Arrows show direction of spin transition. In case of hysteresis, 
two values of T1/2 exist, corresponding to the ascending () and descending () branches. The 
hysteresis width is usually denoted T1/2 (where T1/2 = T1/2  T1/2). The abruptness of the 
transition represents the temperature difference between the 20 and 80% HS state rate and 
is denoted T60. Where a hysteresis is present, two values of T60 exist according to the 
sharpness of the transition during the cooling and the warming modes. Here only the HS>LS 
transition abruptness T60 is shown. 
Figure S4.2: Example of strut construction showing new atoms placed between Molecule 
Ma and Mb and bonds between newly placed atoms. Magnitude of hexagons dictated by energy 
over value n where E/n produces a sensible strut size. 
Packing in the crystal structures of Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 complexes 
Shown here are high-spin Fe(PM-NeA)2(NCS)2 and Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 polymorph-II which 
correspond to the smallest and largest layer separation respectively. Quantitative values of 
layer spacing are displayed in Table S1. 
Figure S4.3: View of the layer structure of HS Fe(PM-NeA)2(NCS)2 along c. 
Figure S4.4: View of the layer structure of HS Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 polymorph-II along b. 
Figure S4.5: Stacked bargraph of interaction energy changes from HS to LS structures for 
PML complexes, broken down by separate energy components. The total energy changes 
are shown as black bars: destabilising changes which appear as pink struts in the framework 
plots of Figs. 5 and 6 are located above the zero-energy; the stabilising changes represented 
as green struts in are below the axis.  
Table S4.1: Layers in SCO structures. Values determined using the topological analysis 
scripts developed by Bryant et. al.3  
Structure Refcode Slip Plane 
[h,k,l] 
Layer Spacing 
Fe(PM-AzA)2(NCS)2 HS XECNAU35 [0,1,0] 0.10 
Fe(PM-AzA) 2 (NCS) 2 LS XECNAU07 [0,1,0] 0.02 
Fe(PM-BiA) 2 (NCS) 2I HS RONPIT01 [0,2,0] 0.12 
Fe(PM-BiA) 2 (NCS) 2I LS RONPIT02 [0,2,0] 1.40 
Fe(PM-BiA) 2 (NCS) 2II HS RONPIT04 [1,0,0] 0.92 
Fe(PM-BiA) 2 (NCS) 2II LS RONPIT05 [1,0,0] 1.06 
Fe(PM-PeA) 2 (NCS) 2 HS NOWBIK01 [0,1,0] 0.10 
Fe(PM-PeA) 2 (NCS) 2 LS NOWBIK [2,0,0] 0.50 
Fe(PM-NeA)2(NCS)2 HS COMQUR [0,1,0] 0.78 
Fe(PM-(NeA)2(NCS)2 LS COMQUR01 [0,1,0] 0.74 
Table S4.2: First coordination sphere interactions (in kJ mol1) for HS Fe(PM-BiA)2(NCS)2 polymorph-II. 
Interaction Centroid-
Centroid 
Distance 
Symmetry EElec EPol EDisp ERep ETot Description Figure 
IntraLayer 
A/B 8.719 x,y+,z 
x,y+,z+  
57.4 28.8 80.4 68.6 97.9 Interaction along chain 
in a single layer with 
overlap of NCS and 
PMX ligands 
C/D 12.602 x,y1,z 
x,y+1,z 
9.6 5.9 44.2 19.6 20.9 Adjacent complexes in 
same layer with same 
orientation of ligands 
and molecular axis. 
E/F 15.996 x,3/2y, 
z1/2 
x,3/2y, 
z+1/2 
6.5 5.0 11.5 8.4 14.6 Diagonal complexes in 
same layer with same 
molecular axis and 
opposite ligand 
orientations.   
G/H 14.621 x,y1/2,z+1
x,y1/2,z1
9.1 7.2 18.8 12.6 22.6 Diagonal complexes in 
same layer with same 
molecular axis and 
opposite ligand 
orientations. Typically, 
shorter than E/F 
contacts. 
InterLayer 
I 12.318 1x, y,1z 39.0 8.0 12.6 7.9 51.7 Diagonal contact 
between layers with 
thiocyanate ligands 
pointing away from 
the contact vector. 2 
short NCSPM 
contacts (4.035 ). 
J 9.833 x, y, z 27.7 14.7 77.7 39.4 80.7 Adjacent interlayer 
contact with large 
overlap of PMR 
group aromatic rings, 
resulting in a strong 
dispersion term. 
K/L 12.090 x, y+1/2, 
1/2z 
x, y1/2, 
1/2z 
34.2 12 21.3 20.1 47.5 Diagonal contact 
between layers with 
short NCSR group 
contacts. 
M/N 10.171 1x, y1/2, 
1/2z 
1x, y+1/2, 
1/2z 
17.2 11.1 44.6 28.2 44.7 Adjacent interlayer 
contact similar to 
Interaction J but with 
poorer aromatic ring 
stacking. 
O 13.145 1x, 1y, 
14.8 12.6 23.5 23.5 27.4 Diagonal contact 
across layers with 
NCS groups 
orientated along the 
contact vector. 
Shortest C...S 
interaction. 
Table S4.3: Shortest CS contact distances and energies in the HS forms. 
Table S4.4: Overall PIXEL lattice energies (in kJ mol1) for the Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 family of SCO complexes. 
Group T60 (K) 
PIXEL Lattice Energies (40  Cutoff) 
HS ELattice LS ELattice  ELattice 
BiAI 5 300.5 327.8 27.3 
PeA 33.5 300.4 351.9 51.5 
AzA 60 319.3 342.6 23.3 
BiAII 81 297.9 327.8 29.9 
NeA 97 352.8 372.7 19.9 
Group 
Shortest 
HS CS 
Distance 
Shortest 
LS  CS 
Distance 
HS Symmetry 
Operation 
HS Interaction 
Energy 
(kJ mol1) 
LS Interaction 
Energy 
(kJ mol1) 
ELSHS 
(kJ mol1) 
BiAI 5 3.417 3.436 2x,y,z 37.8 40.6 2.8 
PeA 33.5 3.447 3.585 2x,1y,z 21.0 42.0 21.0 
AzA 60 3.484 3.411 1x,y,z 20.0 20.1 0.1 
BiAII 81 3.541 3.450 1x,1y,1z 27.4 31.8 4.4 
NeA 97 3.438 3.445 x,1y,1z 31.6 33.7 2.1 
Table S4.5: Interactionenergy changes (in kJ mol1) in the HS  LS transition of Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 structures. The figures in the top and bottom rows 
are plotted in Fig.7 in the main text. 
Parameter Structure 
BiA-I PeA AzA BiA-II NeA 
T60 (K) 5.0 33.5 60.0 81.0 97.0 
Interaction Energy Changes ETOT (kJ mol1) 
A 14.6 9.6 8.8 1.3 6.9 
B 13.0 12.1 8.8 1.3 6.9 
C 14.3 5.1 0.6 3.0 1.7 
D 14.3 5.1 0.6 3.0 1.7 
E 3.7 10.0 3.6 2.9 2.0 
F 3.3 10.2 3.6 2.9 2.0 
G 3.3 4.9 3.9 3.7 0.5 
H 3.3 4.8 3.9 3.7 0.5 
I 2.7 12.8 1.0 6.6 4.9 
J 2.3 0.3 1.6 5.9 1.4 
K 2.4 2.9 3.2 5.9 1.8 
L 2.4 3.6 3.2 5.9 1.8 
M 23.0 6.5 4.1 0.6 1.9 
N 22.9 7.2 4.1 0.6 1.9 
O 2.8 21.0 0.1 4.4 2.1 
|ETot| 128.3 116.1 51.1 51.7 38.0 
Table S4.6: PIXEL-C interaction energy changes (HS>LS) for first intermolecular co-ordination sphere contacts of Fe(PM-L)2(NCS)2 complexes and other 
structures studied. 
State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1 
A HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.804 58.8 28.1 80.5 59.2 108.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 9.140 49.0 28.9 72.6 57.0 93.5 
LSHS                         0.336 9.8 0.8 7.9 2.2 14.6 
B HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.805 58.8 28.1 80.5 61.1 106.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 9.141 49.0 28.9 72.6 57.3 93.2 
LSHS                         0.336 9.8 0.8 7.9 3.8 13.0 
C HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 12.949 14.2 4.9 33.4 10.3 13.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 12.370 9.4 7.4 57.9 27.7 28.1 
LSHS                         0.579 4.8 2.5 24.5 17.4 14.3 
D HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 12.949 14.2 4.9 33.4 10.3 13.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 12.370 9.4 7.4 57.9 27.7 28.1  
                        0.579 4.8 2.5 24.5 17.4 14.3 
E HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 15.659 7.4 5.5 12.3 7.9 17.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 15.381 11.3 8.6 15.6 14.6 20.9 
LSHS                         0.278 3.9 3.1 3.3 6.7 3.7 
F HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 15.659 7.4 5.5 12.3 7.9 17.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 15.381 11.1 8.4 15.5 14.6 20.5 
LSHS                         0.278 3.7 2.9 3.2 6.7 3.3 
G HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 15.659 7.4 5.5 12.3 8.0 17.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 15.381 11.1 8.4 15.5 14.5 20.5 
LSHS                         0.278 3.7 2.9 3.2 6.5 3.3 
H HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 15.659 7.4 5.5 12.3 7.9 17.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 15.381 11.1 8.4 15.5 14.5 20.5  
                        0.278 3.7 2.9 3.2 6.6 3.3 
I HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0.5 0.5 10.000 19.4 11.2 48.3 30.0 48.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0.5 0.5 9.703 21.6 14.8 53.3 38.2 51.6 
LSHS                         0.297 2.2 3.6 5.0 8.2 2.7 
State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1 
J HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 10.000 19.4 11.2 48.3 30.0 48.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 9.703 21.6 14.9 53.3 38.2 51.5 
LSHS                         0.297 2.2 3.7 5.0 8.6 2.3 
K HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 10.000 19.4 11.2 48.3 30.1 48.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 9.703 21.6 14.9 53.3 38.6 51.2 
LSHS                         0.297 2.2 3.6 5.0 8.4 2.4 
L HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0.5 0.5 10.000 19.4 11.2 48.3 30.1 48.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0.5 0.5 9.703 21.6 14.8 53.3 38.5 51.2  
                        0.297 2.2 3.6 5.0 8.4 2.4 
M HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 12.870 27.8 3.2 4.1 0.2 34.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 12.494 45.3 10.4 12.5 10.3 57.9 
LSHS                         0.376 17.5 7.2 8.4 10.1 23.0 
N HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 1 0 12.870 27.8 3.2 4.1 0.2 34.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 1 0 12.494 45.1 10.2 12.7 10.3 57.8 
LSHS                         0.376 17.3 7.0 8.6 10.1 22.9 
O HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 12.870 23.7 16.6 28.4 30.9 37.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 12.494 28.6 16.3 25.6 29.9 40.6 
LSHS                         0.376 4.9 0.3 2.8 1.0 2.8 
PeA State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1 
A HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1.5 0.5 8.477 57.5 30.5 76.6 66.5 98.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1.5 0.5 8.724 53.1 33.7 71.9 70.1 88.5 
LSHS                         0.247 4.4 3.2 4.7 3.6 9.6 
B HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1.5 0.5 8.477 57.5 30.5 76.6 66.5 98.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1.5 0.5 8.724 53.1 33.7 71.9 72.7 86.0 
LSHS                         0.247 4.4 3.2 4.7 6.2 12.1 
C HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 15.657 6.5 3.7 32.2 12.4 17.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 14.357 8.2 4.7 46.7 21.1 22.2 
LSHS                         1.300 1.7 1.0 14.5 8.7 5.1 
D HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 15.657 6.5 3.7 32.2 12.4 17.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 14.357 8.2 4.7 46.7 21.1 22.2  
                        1.300 1.7 1.0 14.5 8.7 5.1 
E HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1.5 0.5 18.193 9.3 5.6 14.7 11.1 18.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1.5 0.5 16.800 10.1 9.6 29.9 21.1 28.5 
LSHS                         1.393 0.8 4.0 15.2 10.0 10.0 
F HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1.5 0.5 18.193 9.3 5.6 14.7 11.1 18.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1.5 0.5 16.800 10.1 9.6 29.9 21.0 28.7 
LSHS                         1.393 0.8 4.0 15.2 9.9 10.2 
G HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1.5 0.5 17.408 6.5 7.9 26.3 16.1 24.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1.5 0.5 16.800 10.2 9.6 30.5 20.8 29.5 
LSHS                         0.608 3.7 1.7 4.2 4.7 4.9 
H HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1.5 0.5 17.408 6.5 7.9 26.3 16.1 24.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1.5 0.5 16.800 10.2 9.6 30.5 21.0 29.4  
                        0.608 3.7 1.7 4.2 4.9 4.8 
I HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 2 0 11.597 48.6 19.5 35.4 28.3 75.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 2 0 12.255 42.3 15.5 23.6 19.1 62.4 
LSHS                         0.658 6.3 4.0 11.8 9.2 12.8 
J HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 13.511 23.5 11.5 23.4 16.5 41.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 12.255 30.2 20.0 30.5 38.6 42.2 
PeA State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1 
LSHS                         1.256 6.7 8.5 7.1 22.1 0.3 
K HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0.5 0.5 9.382 19.5 11.3 52.8 31.0 52.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0.5 0.5 10.292 21.6 13.1 50.0 35.0 49.7 
LSHS                         0.910 2.1 1.8 2.8 4.0 2.9 
L HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0.5 0.5 9.382 19.5 11.3 52.8 31.0 52.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0.5 0.5 10.292 21.6 13.1 50.0 35.7 49.0  
                        0.910 2.1 1.8 2.8 4.7 3.6 
M HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 12.250 17.8 10.1 41.7 27.6 42.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 10.292 21.5 13.1 49.7 35.7 48.5 
LSHS                         1.958 3.7 3.0 8.0 8.1 6.5 
N HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 12.250 17.8 10.1 41.7 27.6 42.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 10.292 21.5 13.1 49.7 35.0 49.2 
LSHS                         1.958 3.7 3.0 8.0 7.4 7.2 
O HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 1 0 12.766 9.4 11.3 22.1 21.8 21.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 1 0 12.255 29.7 20.0 31.0 38.7 42.0 
LSHS                         0.511 20.3 8.7 8.9 16.9 21.0 
AzA State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1 
A HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.569 59.8 31.4 76.5 68.4 99.4 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.368 71.7 38.0 84.3 85.8 108.2 
LSHS 
0.201 11.9 6.6 7.8 17.4 8.8 
B HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.569 59.8 31.4 76.5 68.4 99.4 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.368 71.7 38.0 84.3 85.8 108.2 
LSHS 
0.201 11.9 6.6 7.8 17.4 8.8 
C HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 15.121 4.3 3.5 38.0 13.7 23.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 14.998 3.4 4.6 43.7 20.7 24.1 
LSHS 
0.123 0.9 1.1 5.7 7.0 0.6 
D HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 15.121 4.3 3.5 38.0 13.7 23.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 14.998 3.4 4.6 43.7 20.7 24.1              
0.123 0.9 1.1 5.7 7.0 0.6 
E HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 17.759 8.4 5.5 13.7 11.4 16.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 17.529 11.7 6.8 16.3 15.1 19.8 
LSHS 
0.230 3.3 1.3 2.6 3.7 3.6 
F HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 17.759 8.4 5.5 13.7 11.4 16.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 17.529 11.7 6.8 16.3 15.1 19.8 
LSHS 
0.230 3.3 1.3 2.6 3.7 3.6 
G HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 16.995 5.7 7.7 23.4 15.0 21.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 16.813 8.4 9.9 28.1 20.7 25.7 
LSHS 
0.182 2.7 2.2 4.7 5.7 3.9 
H HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 16.995 5.7 7.7 23.4 15.0 21.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 16.813 8.4 9.9 28.1 20.7 25.7              
0.182 2.7 2.2 4.7 5.7 3.9 
I HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 13.315 30.5 14.9 28.9 28.3 46.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 13.037 30.2 16.9 31.5 33.6 45.0 
LSHS 
0.278 0.3 2.0 2.6 5.3 1.0 
J HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 11.657 55.3 22.8 35.2 38.0 75.4 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 11.431 55.8 24.8 40.5 44.1 77.0 
AzA State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1 
LSHS 
0.226 0.5 2.0 5.3 6.1 1.6 
K HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 9.319 17.7 12.3 54.2 32.0 52.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 9.270 23.4 15.4 56.9 40.2 55.4 
LSHS 
0.049 5.7 3.1 2.7 8.2 3.2 
L HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 9.319 17.7 12.3 54.2 32.0 52.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 9.270 23.4 15.4 56.9 40.3 55.4              
0.049 5.7 3.1 2.7 8.3 3.2 
M HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.896 14.4 9.3 42.2 23.2 42.7 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.726 20.3 11.7 49.1 34.3 46.8 
LSHS 
0.170 5.9 2.4 6.9 11.1 4.1 
N HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.896 14.4 9.3 42.2 23.2 42.7 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.726 20.3 11.7 49.1 34.4 46.8 
LSHS 
0.170 5.9 2.4 6.9 11.2 4.1 
O HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 12.825 8.3 11.3 21.9 21.5 20.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 12.530 10.9 12.8 23.8 27.4 20.1 
LSHS 
0.295 2.6 1.5 1.9 5.9 0.1 
State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1 
A HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.719 57.4 28.8 80.4 68.6 97.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.551 61.0 34.4 88.0 84.2 99.2 
LSHS 
0.168 3.6 5.6 7.6 15.6 1.3 
B HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.719 57.4 28.8 80.4 68.6 97.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.551 61.0 34.4 88.0 84.2 99.2 
LSHS 
0.168 3.6 5.6 7.6 15.6 1.3 
C HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 12.602 9.6 5.9 44.2 19.6 20.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 12.362 9.6 6.8 51.3 24.6 23.9 
LSHS 
0.240 0.0 0.9 7.1 5.0 3.0 
D HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 12.602 9.6 5.9 44.2 19.6 20.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 12.362 9.6 6.8 51.3 24.6 23.9              
0.240 0.0 0.9 7.1 5.0 3.0 
E HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1.5 0.5 15.996 6.5 5.0 11.5 8.4 14.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1.5 0.5 15.568 8.6 6.1 13.8 11.0 17.5 
LSHS 
0.428 2.1 1.1 2.3 2.6 2.9 
F HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1.5 0.5 15.996 6.5 5.0 11.5 8.4 14.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1.5 0.5 15.568 8.6 6.1 13.8 11.0 17.5 
LSHS 
0.428 2.1 1.1 2.3 2.6 2.9 
G HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 14.621 9.1 7.2 18.8 12.6 22.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 14.475 10.3 9.4 22.8 16.2 26.3 
LSHS 
0.146 1.2 2.2 4.0 3.6 3.7 
H HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 14.621 9.1 7.2 18.8 12.6 22.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 14.475 10.3 9.4 22.8 16.2 26.3              
0.146 1.2 2.2 4.0 3.6 3.7 
I HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 12.318 39.0 8.0 12.6 7.9 51.7 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 12.091 46.8 12.1 15.5 16.0 58.3 
LSHS 
0.227 7.8 4.1 2.9 8.1 6.6 
J HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 9.833 27.7 14.7 77.7 39.4 80.7 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 9.750 35.3 19.5 86.7 54.8 86.6 
LSHS 
0.083 7.6 4.8 9.0 15.4 5.9 
K HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 12.090 34.2 12.0 21.3 20.1 47.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.774 42.0 17.2 26.4 32.2 53.4 
LSHS 
0.316 7.8 5.2 5.1 12.1 5.9 
L HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 12.090 34.2 12.0 21.3 20.1 47.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.774 42.0 17.2 26.4 32.2 53.4              
0.316 7.8 5.2 5.1 12.1 5.9 
M HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 10.171 17.2 11.1 44.6 28.2 44.7 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 10.090 19.2 13.2 44.8 33.0 44.1 
LSHS 
0.081 2.0 2.1 0.2 4.8 0.6 
N HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 10.171 17.2 11.1 44.6 28.2 44.7 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 10.090 19.2 13.2 44.8 33.0 44.1 
LSHS   
0.081 2.0 2.1 0.2 4.8 0.6 
O HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 13.145 14.8 12.6 23.5 23.5 27.4 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 12.752 22.0 15.3 25.6 31.0 31.8 
LSHS 
0.393 7.2 2.7 2.1 7.5 4.4 
NeA State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1 
A HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.124 52.7 27.4 90.5 64.6 106.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 7.878 61.7 34.0 98.6 81.4 112.9 
LSHS                         0.246 9.0 6.6 8.1 16.8 6.9 
B HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.124 52.7 27.4 90.5 64.6 106.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 7.878 61.7 34.0 98.6 81.4 112.9 
LSHS                         0.246 9.0 6.6 8.1 16.8 6.9 
C HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 16.489 6.3 3.8 51.0 16.3 32.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 16.510 4.6 4.7 58.5 24.7 34.0 
LSHS                         0.021 1.7 0.9 7.5 8.4 1.7 
D HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 16.489 6.3 3.8 51.0 16.3 32.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 16.510 4.5 4.7 58.5 24.7 34.0  
                        0.021 1.8 0.9 7.5 8.4 1.7 
E HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 18.419 10.6 6.6 23.4 15.7 24.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 18.281 12.3 8.3 27.5 21.3 26.8 
LSHS                         0.138 1.7 1.7 4.1 5.6 2.0 
F HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 18.419 10.6 6.6 23.4 15.7 24.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 18.281 12.3 8.3 27.5 21.3 26.8 
LSHS                         0.138 1.7 1.7 4.1 5.6 2.0 
G HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 18.344 13.1 8.3 42.3 25.8 37.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 18.305 15.7 9.9 45.9 34.0 37.4 
LSHS                         0.039 2.6 1.6 3.6 8.2 0.5 
H HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 18.344 13.1 8.3 42.3 25.8 37.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 18.305 15.7 9.9 45.9 34.0 37.4  
                        0.039 2.6 1.6 3.6 8.2 0.5 
I HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 13.742 12.8 12.0 24.5 27.8 21.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 13.452 17.4 14.8 26.7 32.3 26.5 
LSHS                         0.290 4.6 2.8 2.2 4.5 4.9 
J HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 12.075 39.4 14.8 37.9 22.4 69.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 11.899 46.0 18.2 39.3 32.3 71.2 
NeA State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1 
LSHS                         0.176 6.6 3.4 1.4 9.9 1.4 
K HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 13.646 21.6 12.5 49.2 35.3 48.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 13.653 26.2 17.3 55.4 49.1 49.8 
LSHS                         0.007 4.6 4.8 6.2 13.8 1.8 
L HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 13.646 21.6 12.5 49.2 35.3 48.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 13.653 26.2 17.3 55.4 49.1 49.8  
                        0.007 4.6 4.8 6.2 13.8 1.8 
M HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 9.537 4.5 9.8 44.8 20.0 39.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 9.432 5.9 11.4 47.3 23.5 41.0 
LSHS                         0.105 1.4 1.6 2.5 3.5 1.9 
N HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 9.537 4.5 9.8 44.8 20.0 39.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 9.432 5.9 11.4 47.3 23.5 41.0 
LSHS                         0.105 1.4 1.6 2.5 3.5 1.9 
O HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 14.889 5.7 4.0 45.6 23.7 31.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 14.767 9.1 6.5 55.2 37.0 33.7 
LSHS                         0.122 3.4 2.5 9.6 13.3 2.1 
Table S4.7: Correlations for PIXEL energy terms with respect to T60 for PM-L Structures 
studied. Note that the magnitude of all energies is not equivalent to the magnitude of all total 
energies because total energies take into account the sign of each energy term, where the 
magnitude of all energies is from absolute values (see Equation S4.1). 
|| = | | + | | +  +    Equation S4.1 
Feature Symbol 
Correlation 
co-efficient 
(with 
respect to 
T60) 
Number of Electrons  0.54 
Sum of all centroid-centroid distance changes ()  0.53 
Magnitude of all centroid-centroid Distance changes ()  0.52 
Magnitude of all energies (kJ mol1) |E| 0.84 
Magnitude of all electrostatic terms (kJ mol1) |EElec| 0.84 
Magnitude of all polarisation terms (kJ mol1) |EPol| 0.58 
Magnitude of all dispersion terms (kJ mol1) |EDisp| 0.82 
Magnitude of all repulsion terms (kJ mol1) |ERep| 0.32 
Magnitude of all total energy changes (kJ mol1) |ETot| 0.94 
Most positive electrostatic term change (kJ mol1) Max. +ve   0.97 
Most positive polarisation term change (kJ mol1) Max. +ve   0.59 
Most positive dispersion term change (kJ mol1) Max. +ve   0.79 
Most positive repulsion term change (kJ mol1) Max. +ve   0.55 
Most positive total interaction energy change (kJ mol1) Max. +ve   0.92 
Most negative electrostatic term change (kJ mol1) Max. ve   0.85 
Most negative polarisation term change (kJ mol1) Max. ve   0.64 
Most negative dispersion term change (kJ mol1) Max. ve   0.87 
Most negative repulsion term change (kJ mol1) Max. ve   0.74 
Most negative total interaction energy change (kJ mol1) Max. ve   0.93 
Largest magnitude electrostatic term change (kJ mol1) Max. | | 0.85 
Largest magnitude polarisation term change (kJ mol1) Max. | | 0.64 
Largest magnitude dispersion term change (kJ mol1) Max. | | 0.87 
Largest magnitude repulsion term change (kJ mol1) Max. | | 0.55 
Largest magnitude total interaction energy change (kJ mol1) Max. | | 0.93 
Sum of all electrostatic term changes (kJ mol1) EElec 0.50 
Sum of polarisation term changes (kJ mol1) EPol 0.11 
Sum of dispersion term changes (kJ mol1) EDisp 0.42 
Sum of repulsion term changes (kJ mol1) ERep 0.78 
Sum of total interaction energy changes (kJ mol1) ETot 0.42 
Table S4.8: Interaction Energy changes for some non PM-L complexes. i. Fe(phen)2(NCS)2, (CSD Refcodes HS:KEKVIF, LS:KEKVIF01) ii. 
bis(10-((pyridine-2-yl)diazenyl)phenanthrene-9-olato)-cobalt(ii) (CSD Refcodes HS: PUYROS01, LS: PUYROS), iii. Fe(Phen-Tetrazol)2 , (CSD 
Refcodes HS:QIDJET, LS:QIDJET01). 
i. Phen State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 8.314 25.6 22.2 68.0 44.5 71.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 8.138 30.9 27.8 74.4 54.4 78.7 
LSHS 
0.176 5.3 5.6 6.4 9.9 7.4  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 8.314 25.6 22.2 68.0 44.4 71.4 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 8.138 30.9 27.8 74.4 54.2 78.9 
LSHS 
0.176 5.3 5.6 6.4 9.8 7.5  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 8.314 25.6 22.2 68.0 44.5 71.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 8.138 30.9 27.8 74.4 54.2 78.9 
LSHS 
0.176 5.3 5.6 6.4 9.7 7.6  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 8.314 25.6 22.2 68.0 44.4 71.4 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 8.138 30.9 27.8 74.4 54.1 79.0              
0.176 5.3 5.6 6.4 9.7 7.6  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0.
8.752 56.0 23.0 46.0 32.9 92.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0.
8.626 63.0 27.2 50.9 38.8 102.3 
LSHS 
0.126 7.0 4.2 4.9 5.9 10.2  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0.5 8.752 56.0 23.0 46.0 32.9 92.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0.5 8.626 63.0 27.2 50.9 38.8 102.4 
LSHS 
0.126 7.0 4.2 4.9 5.9 10.3  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 0 11.877 27.9 6.4 11.8 12.0 34.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 0 11.639 31.8 7.3 11.8 11.8 39.2 
LSHS 
0.238 3.9 0.9 0.0 0.2 5.0  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 1 11.877 27.9 6.4 11.8 12.0 34.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 1 11.639 31.8 7.3 11.8 11.8 39.2              
0.238 3.9 0.9 0.0 0.2 5.0 
i. Phen State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroid 
Distances 
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 0 11.877 27.9 6.4 11.8 12.0 34.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 0 11.639 31.8 7.3 11.8 11.7 39.2 
LSHS 
0.238 3.9 0.9 0.0 0.3 5.0  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 1 11.877 27.9 6.4 11.8 12.0 34.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 1 11.639 31.8 7.3 11.8 11.7 39.2 
LSHS 
0.238 3.9 0.9 0.0 0.3 5.0  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 10.163 26.9 7.8 12.8 6.1 41.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 10.090 30.5 9.2 13.5 7.4 45.8 
LSHS 
0.073 3.6 1.4 0.7 1.3 4.5  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 10.163 26.9 7.8 12.8 6.1 41.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 10.090 30.5 9.2 13.5 7.4 45.8              
0.073 3.6 1.4 0.7 1.3 4.5  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0 12.264 6.2 2.7 8.8 4.1 1.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0 12.074 7.0 4.0 10.9 6.7 1.2 
LSHS 
0.190 0.8 1.3 2.1 2.6 0.0  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 1 12.264 6.2 2.7 8.8 4.1 1.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 1 12.074 7.0 4.0 10.9 6.7 1.2 
LSHS 
0.190 0.8 1.3 2.1 2.6 0.0  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 1 12.264 6.2 2.7 8.8 4.1 1.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 1 12.074 7.0 4.0 10.9 6.7 1.2 
LSHS 
0.190 0.8 1.3 2.1 2.6 0.0 
State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroi
Distance
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 7.223 25.5 14.2 113.3 66.7 86.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 7.101 31.3 15.4 123.1 80.4 89.4 
LSHS 
0.122 5.8 1.2 9.8 13.7 3.1  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 1 8.567 27.8 12.3 123.4 61.6 101.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 1 8.557 27.2 17.1 128.2 71.0 101.5 
LSHS 
0.010 0.6 4.8 4.8 9.4 0.4  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 1 10.884 1.5 9.3 82.5 36.4 53.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 1 10.921 4.9 8.3 87.4 44.2 56.3 
LSHS 
0.037 6.4 1.0 4.9 7.8 2.4  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 10.562 8.0 3.4 44.2 16.5 39.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 10.555 9.1 3.8 47.3 20.9 39.5              
0.007 1.1 0.4 3.1 4.4 0.4  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 10.562 8.0 3.4 44.2 16.5 39.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 10.555 9.1 3.8 47.3 20.9 39.5 
LSHS 
0.007 1.1 0.4 3.1 4.4 0.4  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0.5 9.640 7.4 3.1 36.7 12.7 34.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0.5 9.672 8.6 3.7 38.7 16.0 35.0 
LSHS 
0.032 1.2 0.6 2.0 3.3 0.5  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0.5 9.640 7.4 3.1 36.7 12.7 34.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0.5 9.672 8.6 3.7 38.7 16.0 35 
LSHS 
0.032 1.2 0.6 2.0 3.3 0.5  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0.5 13.12 2.5 2.0 16.7 11.4 9.9 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0.5 12.992 3.1 2.8 18.4 14.5 9.7              
0.128 0.6 0.8 1.7 3.1 0.2  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 0.5 14.094 1.2 1.8 15.1 8.3 9.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 0.5 14.038 2.6 2.1 16.7 11.3 10.1 
LSHS 
0.056 1.4 0.3 1.6 3.0 0.3 
State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector Centroi
Distance
EElec EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 0.5 14.094 1.2 1.8 15.1 8.3 9.8 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 1.5 0.5 14.038 2.6 2.1 16.7 11.3 10.1 
LSHS 
0.056 1.4 0.3 1.6 3.0 0.3  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 12.393 2.6 1.3 17 4.7 16.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 12.290 3.4 1.7 18.4 6.9 16.6 
LSHS 
0.103 0.8 0.4 1.4 2.2 0.3  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 12.393 2.6 1.3 17 4.7 16.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 12.290 3.4 1.7 18.4 6.9 16.6              
0.103 0.8 0.4 1.4 2.2 0.3  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1.5 10.548 4.1 1.0 14.1 1.8 9.3 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1.5 10.587 2.3 1.0 14.6 2.8 10.5 
LSHS 
0.039 1.8 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.2  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0 13.693 1.1 0.2 5.0 0.4 3.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0 13.554 0.7 0.3 5.3 0.5 4.4 
LSHS 
0.139 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.8  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0 13.693 1.1 0.2 5.0 0.4 3.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0.5 0.5 0 13.554 0.7 0.3 5.3 0.5 4.4 
LSHS 
0.139 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.8 
State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector 
Centroi
Distance
EElec 
EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.402 26.7 22.5 78.9 51.6 76.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.369 29.9 24 74.3 52.3 75.9 
LSHS 
0.033 3.2 1.5 4.6 0.7 0.7  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.402 26.7 22.5 78.9 51.5 76.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.369 29.9 24 74.3 52.3 75.9 
LSHS 
0.033 3.2 1.5 4.6 0.8 0.7  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.402 26.7 22.5 78.9 51.5 76.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.369 29.3 23.8 73.6 52.8 73.9 
LSHS 
0.033 2.6 1.3 5.3 1.3 2.7  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.402 26.7 22.5 78.9 51.4 76.6 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 8.369 29.3 23.8 73.6 52.8 73.9              
0.033 2.6 1.3 5.3 1.4 2.7  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 8.583 46.5 18.4 57.0 28.0 94.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 8.330 49.1 20.6 67.2 38.1 98.8 
LSHS 
0.253 2.6 2.2 10.2 10.1 4.8  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 8.583 46.5 18.4 57.0 28.0 94.0 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 8.330 48.6 20.6 67.1 38.2 98.1 
LSHS 
0.253 2.1 2.2 10.1 10.2 4.1  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.559 27.4 6.5 8.5 3.2 39.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.311 28.4 6.0 8.0 2.6 39.9 
LSHS 
0.248 1.0 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.559 27.4 6.5 8.5 3.2 39.2 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 0.5 11.311 28.4 6.0 8.0 2.6 39.9              
0.248 1.0 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 11.559 27.4 6.5 8.5 3.2 39.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 11.311 28.3 6.1 8.1 2.6 40.0 
LSHS 
0.248 0.9 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.9 
State Interaction Transformation Matrix and Vector 
Centroi
Distance
EElec 
EPol  EDisp ERep ETot 
() kJ mol1  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 11.559 27.4 6.5 8.5 3.2 39.1 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 0.5 11.311 28.3 6.1 8.1 2.6 40.0 
LSHS 
0.248 0.9 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.9  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 9.226 30.7 8.7 13.1 2.9 49.7 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 9.372 30.5 9.2 13.3 3.2 49.7 
LSHS 
0.146 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.3 0.0  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 9.226 30.7 8.7 13.1 2.9 49.7 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 9.372 30.5 9.2 13.3 3.2 49.7              
0.146 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.3 0.0  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 1.5 12.447 6.1 1.8 6.9 1.2 1.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 1.5 12.284 6.5 1.8 7.2 1.3 1.3 
LSHS 
0.163 0.4 0.0 0.3 0.1 0.2  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 1.5 12.447 6.1 1.8 6.9 1.2 1.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0.5 1.5 12.284 6.5 1.8 7.2 1.2 1.3 
LSHS 
0.163 0.4 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.2  
HS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 1.5 12.447 6.1 1.8 6.9 1.1 1.5 
LS 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0.5 1.5 12.284 6.5 1.8 7.2 1.3 1.3 
LSHS 
0.163 0.4 0.0 0.3 0.2 0.2 
SI.5  References 
 (1) Housecroft, C. E.; Sharpe, A. G., Inorganic Chemistry. Pearson Prentice Hall: 2001. 
(2) Akbarzadeh Torbati, N.;  Rezvani, A. R.;  Safari, N.;  Saravani, H.; Amani, V., 
Dichlorido(6,6'-dimethyl-2,2'-bipyridine-[kappa]2N,N')cobalt(II). Acta Crystallographica 
Section E 2010, 66 (10), m1284. 
 (3) Bryant, M. J.; Maloney, A. G. P.; Sykes, R. A. Predicting mechanical properties of 
crystalline materials through topological analysis. CrystEngComm 2018, 20 (19), 2698. 
