WestminsterResearch
http://www.westminster.ac.uk/westminsterresearch
Universal Health Coverage by 2030, or the Right to Health? The 
continued relevance of the Alma Ata principles of voice and 
equity, through an intersectoral approach, to reducing global 
inequalities
Keith, R.
This is an electronic version of a PhD thesis awarded by the University of Westminster. 
 Ms Regina Keith, 2021.
The WestminsterResearch online digital archive at the University of Westminster aims to 
make the research output of the University available to a wider audience. Copyright and 
Moral Rights remain with the authors and/or copyright owners.
Universal Health Coverage by 2030, or the Right to Health? The continued relevance of the 
Alma Ata principles of voice and equity, through an intersectoral approach, to reducing 
global inequalities.   
Universal Health Coverage by 2030 or the 
Right to Health? The continued relevance 
of the Alma Ata principles of voice and 
equity, through an intersectoral approach, 
to reducing global inequalities. 
SCHOOL OF LIFE SCIENCES 
UNIVERSITY OF WESTMINSTER  
Student number: W 1708715 
Supervisor: Dr. Ihab Tewfik  
PhD Nutrition by Published Work  
A thesis submitted to the University of Westminster 
in partial fulfilment of requirements for the degree 
of PhD Nutrition by Published Work 
PhD awarded: March 30th, 2021 
Regina Murphy Keith 
Acknowledgements 
There are many people that have created the enabling environment, for me to achieve this 
PhD. Firstly, I must thank my mother, who brought me up to fight for justice, she gave me 
an amazing name, and the belief that I could change the world. I am so proud to be her 
daughter.  
Special thanks to my husband Andy, and my children Grace and Seamus, for always being 
supportive of my dreams, I love you very much. For my sisters Patricia, Clare, Theresa, Hope, 
Monica and my brother Stephen, thank you for your prayers and encouragement. Sincere 
thanks to God, for giving me the opportunities to use my skills and my voice to make a 
difference in the world.  
A special note of thanks to my supervisors: Dr. Ihab Tewfik and Dr. Draper, for being so 
supportive and for Dr. Stephen Getting, for enabling my PhD application. Special thanks also 
to Dr. Maria Woloshynowych for her friendship and encouragement.  
Thanks to the Maddens, Sr. Angela, Robert, Jana, Amanda, Joy and Gail for your 
encouragement. A special note of thanks to Peter Bonfield, and the PhD society online 
writing group, for your encouragement. To all my students, who have enriched my life since 
2012, thank you.  
The COVID 19 pandemic has affected us all this year. In December 2020 my mother-in-law, 
Betty Keith, died, while I was finishing my thesis. I could not attend her funeral however she 
will be remembered.   
To all of you I say: It mattered to methank you, there is still lots to be changed in this 
wonderful world, I look forward to working with you all, to make the world a better place, 
and to continue to fight for the progressive realization of the right to health for all, as set out 
in the 1978 Alma Ata Declaration 
Contents 
2.2 Summary of individual published works methodologies and the chapters their evidence 
Chapter three: Key finding one: Health policies and services promote equity through proving 
3.2 Moving away from user charges of any kind at point of access promotes equity and more 
4.3 Intersectoral investment in social determinants of health: focusing on nutrition, food security, 
Chapter five: Finding three: Active community engagement, prioritising the most vulnerable, 
Chapter six: Finding six: good governance and leadership support positive health outcomes, even 
Declaration 
SCHOOL OF LIFE SCIENCES  
UNIVERSITY OF WESTMINSTER 
I hereby declare that this PhD is a result of my own original independent work except where 
I have indicated my credit to other sources.  
I hereby declare that this PhD thesis has not been presented or accepted for any academic 
award or degree. 
Title of Course: PhD Nutrition by Published Work 
Students Name: Regina Murphy Keith 
University Registration Number: W 1708715 
Students Signature:  
Supervisors Signature:  
Supervisors Name: Dr. Ihab Tewfik 
Award date: March 30th, 2021 
Acronyms 
BMJ  British Medical Journal 
CFA                    Commission for Africa 
CMEH  Commission on Macroeconomics and Health 
CPHC  Comprehensive Primary Health Care 
CSO  Civil Society Organisation 
DALY  Disability Adjusted Life Years 
DFID  Department for International Development 
GAVI  Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisations 
GFATM Global Fund to Fight AIDS TB and Malaria 
GHWA  Global Health Workforce Alliance 
GNT                   Global Nutrition Targets 
GUFP  Grow Up Free from Poverty  
HSS  Health Systems Strengthening 
HPN  Health Nutrition and Population (World Bank) 
IHP  International Health Partnership 
MDG  Millennium Development Goal 
MCH  Maternal and Child Health 
MMR  Maternal Mortality rate 
NGO  Non-Government Organisation 
PHC  Primary Health Care 
PMNCH Partnership for Maternal Neonatal and Child Health 
PMTCT  Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission (of HIV) 
PPPY                  Per person per year 
SBA     Skilled Birth Attendant  
SC UK  Save the Children UK 
SDG                   Sustainable Development Goal 
SHI   Social Health Insurance 
SMI  Safe Motherhood Initiative  
SOWC  State of the Worlds Children Report 
SPHC  Selective Primary Health Care 
SSA  Sub-Saharan Africa 
SUN  Scaling Up Nutrition 
U5MR  Under Five Mortality Rate 
UCI  Universal Childhood Immunisations 
UHC  Universal Health Coverage 
UN               United Nations  
UNGA      United Nations General Assembly  
UNICEF United Nations International Childrens Education Fund 
VSO  Voluntary Service Overseas 
WB  World Bank 
WDR  World Development Report 
WHO  World Health Organization  
WHR  World Health Report 
WVI  World Vision International 
Glossary 
Advocacy: the process of influencing those who make policy decisions, write the laws and 
regulation and distribute resources that affect peoples lives (Save the Children 2012). 
Advocacy strategy: sets out the policies and actions that need to be changed, who has the 
power to make those changes. and how can you influence those decision makers (Save the 
Children 2012). 
Accountability a system which ensures that governments are answerable to their people for 
the way they run the country (and public services) (CFA 2005). 
Alma Ata Declaration was signed in 1978 at the WHO and UNICEF Primary Health Care 
Conference in Alma Ata, with 136 countries committing to achieve the right to health for all 
by 2000, using Primary Health Care principles of equity, participation through an 
intersectoral approach (WHO 1978). 
Astana Declaration: In October 2018, WHO in partnership with UNICEF and the Ministry of 
Health of Kazakhstan, hosted the Global Conference on Primary Health Care, 40 years after 
the adoption of the Declaration of Alma-Ata. Ministers, health workers, academics, partners 
and civil society recommitted to primary health care, as the cornerstone of Universal Health 
Coverage, in the new Declaration of Astana. The Declaration renewed political commitment 
to primary health care, focusing on achieving Universal Health Coverage by 2030 (WHO 
2020)  
Basic Health Care includes simple cost-effective interventions to promote health such as 
immunisations, care of ill children with fever, pneumonia and antenatal care (Keith 2009 b). 
Cash Transfers are social protection measures to protect the most vulnerable. They can be 
conditional (where a mother must attend classes or education sessions) or unconditional 
(when the mother can decide how best to spend the extra resources). A system review 
carried out by Owusu Addo et al in 2018 confirmed that when utilised to support vulnerable 
mothers and children in sub-Saharan Africa these were effective in improving health, 
nutrition and food security outcomes. 
Child Health Now: World Vision Internationals first global campaign launched in 2009. 
Written by author, from evidence from six months of field research to develop the global 
report, encouraging country specific country advocacy (Keith 2009 b). 
Community: people who live in a defined geographic area and or who share a sense of 
identity or common concerns (Baum 2015). 
Community Health Workers any health worker carrying out functions related to health 
care delivery; trained in some way in the context of the intervention; and having no formal 
professional or paraprofessional certificated or degreed tertiary education (Lewin et al., 
2005). 
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/primary-health/declaration/gcphc-declaration.pdf
Community Health Interventions: health care interventions that are delivered by 
community health workers at the household or health clinic level linking homes to health 
system (Keith 2009 b). 
Community participation: (as set out by the Alma Ata) is the bottom-up approach of 
communities to analyse their own health situations and be actively involved in planning 
solutions to addressing them through community interventions (Alma Ata WHO 1978). 
Critical theory: focuses on critiquing and understanding inequities in society seeking to 
change them as a result (Crotty 1998). 
Citizens Voice and Action is a series of community activities that train communities groups 
to know their rights and how to run community programmes to feed their voices into 
policies and plans that affect them (Keith 2009 b). 
Development: is the achievement of progress in wellbeing and living standards, specifically 
reaching the most disadvantaged populations in a community (Werner and Saunders 
1997). 
Decade of Nutrition from 2015-2025, established by the UN SG to encourage countries to 
focus on eradicating malnutrition globally (UN 2012). 
Efficiency measures whether healthcare resources are being used to get the best value for 
money. Efficiency is concerned with the relation between resource inputs (costs, in the form 
of labour, capital, or equipment) and either intermediate outputs or final health outcomes 
(Palmer et al 1999).  
Empowerment: is the process by which disadvantaged populations work together to take 
control on the factors that determine their health and their lives. One cannot empower 
someone else, it is taken (Scott et al 1985). Empowerment aims to reduce the number who 
are powerless (WHO 2008). 
Equity: is a subjective concept, which has been defined in many ways. One common 
understanding is that everyone should have access (both financial and geographical) to 
health services, according to their needs rather than ability to pay (Witter and Keith 2005). 
Equity orientated development places social justice principles before economic growth 
principles. Health and wellbeing of a population relies on fair and equal distribution of 
resources and power, not only the money generated (Werner and Saunders 1997). 
Essential Health Care: usually includes all basic health services and preventative health care 
along with essential lifesaving treatment. Every country defines what they consider essential 
health care (Keith 2005).  
Every Woman, Every Child: is the UN SGs Global Strategy for Woman and Childrens Health 
launched in 2010 at the UN GA in New York USA (UN 2010). 
Exclusive breastfeeding: % of infants 0-5 months given only breastmilk, with no other food 
or fluids (UNICEF 2013). 
Fragile states: are those countries that will not or cannot provide basic services for their 
populations (DFID 2005). 
Global Nutrition Targets: set in 2012, at the World Health Assembly, to address 
malnutrition in all its forms, to be achieved by 2025. There are six main targets to reduce 
acute and chronic malnutrition, halting the prevalence of childhood obesity, increasing the 
number of children exclusively breastfed, while reducing anaemia in women of childbearing 
age and the number of infants born with low birth weight (WHO 2012). 
Global Health Governance: a fair and equitable global governance system based on a 
democratic distribution of political and economic power (Keith 2011). 
Governance the ability of government and the public services to create robust economic, 
social and legal systems which will encourage economic growth and allow the poor to 
participate in it (it needs systems to collect voices, capacity to respond and accountability) 
(CFA 2005). 
Health: is a state of complete physical mental and social wellbeing not merely the absence 
of disease or infirmity (WHO 1978). 
Health inequalities: The progressive realization of the right to health involves a 
concerted and sustained effort to improve health across all populations and reduce 
inequities in the enjoyment of health. Inequities are inequalities that are judged to be 
unfair, that is, both unacceptable and avoidable. Equity must be reached both between 
and within countries (WHO 2020). 
Health insurance: a form of health financing, which pools risks across patients and across 
time. The objective is to increase equity and protect against catastrophically expensive 
illnesses (WHO 2010). 
Health systems: are all organisations, people, and actions whose primary intent is to 
promote restore or maintain health. This includes efforts to influence determinants of 
health as well as more direct health improving activities (WHO 2000). 
Health workers: are all people engaged in the promotion protection or improvement of 
health of the population (WHO, 2006). 
Intersectoral: this relates to a combination of essential sectors needed for social 
development such as health, education, water, sanitation, agriculture, and social welfare 
(Werner and Saunders 1997). 
Low birthweight: is defined as a weight of less than 2.500 grams at birth (UNICEF 2013). 
Making Poverty History: a global campaign to end poverty through more aid & debt 
cancellation (Oxfam 2013). 
Malnutrition inadequate nutrition for health (underweight, micronutrient deficiency and 
obesity or overweight) (UNICEF 2013). 
Millennium Development Goals: established at the UN General Assembly in 2000, 
governments committed to achieving eight goals by 2015: eradicating extreme poverty and 
hunger, achieving primary education, promoting gender equality and empowering women, 
reducing child mortality, improving maternal health, combating HIV and AIDS, malaria, and 
other disease, ensuring environmental sustainability, and developing a global partnership 
for development (CFA 2005).  
Non-governmental organisation (NGO) An organisation that is not part of a government. 
NGOs are usually not-for-profit organisations. See also civil society (CFA 2005) 
Nutrition specific interventions have a direct impact on malnutrition such as 
supplementation or fortification or treatment of acute malnutrition (Keith et al 2015) 
Nutrition sensitive interventions indirectly impact nutrition by targeting the underlying 
causes of malnutrition across a wide number of sectors such as social protection and gender 
(Keith et al 2015)  
Positivism aims for definition of objective truth and reduces all relationships to a statistical 
level (Crotty 1998) 
Participatory Learning in Action community activities to assess health and other sectoral 
situations, trends and causal factors, leading to the development of action plans for change 
(Keith, 2000) 
Poverty the number of people living below the international poverty line of $1.25 per day as 
per 2005 prices (UNCEF 2013) and under $1.75 in 2015 (UNICEF 2015) 
Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) Initiated by the boards of the World Bank and 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), a poverty reduction strategy should describe a countrys 
macroeconomic, structural, and social policies and programmes to promote growth and 
reduce poverty, as well as associated external financing needs. PRSs are expected to be 
prepared by governments through a participatory process involving civil society and 
development partners, including the World Bank and IMF, and are required for countries 
seeking to obtain concessional lending and debt relief under the enhanced Heavily Indebted 
Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative (CFA 2005). 
Power over refers to the ability of a relatively powerful actors action to affect the 
actions and thought of the relatively powerless. 
Power to is about being able to act. It can begin with the awareness that it is possible to act, 
and can grow in the process of acting, developing skills and capacities, and realising that one 
can effect change. 
Power with describes collective action or agency and includes both the psychological and 
political power that comes from being united. Power with is often used to describe how 
those faced with overt or covert domination can act to address their situation: from joining 
together with others, through building shared understandings, to planning and taking 
collective action. 
Power within describes the sense of confidence, dignity and self-esteem that comes from 
gaining awareness of ones situation and realising the possibility of doing something about 
it. Power within is a core idea in gender analysis, popular education, psychology and many 
approaches to empowerment. 
Powerless is the inability to get what one wants or needs and the inability to influence 
others effectively to further your own interests (Parenti 1978)  
Primary Health Care: as laid out in the Alma Ata Declaration, is a normative concept, which 
implies accessibility for all, community participation, and the importance of equity, the 
promotion of health through an intersectoral approach to the production of health (WHO 
1978). 
Rational Health Policy process: follows an evidence informed logical process to determine 
the most effective solution to a population health problem (WHO 2020). 
Right to Health: the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard 
of physical and mental health was incorporated in article 12 of the International Covenant 
on Economic social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) agreed in 1976. (UNOHC 1976) It is a core 
component of the 1946 WHO constitution, the Alma Ata Declaration of 1978 and the Astana 
Declaration of 2018.  
Scaling up Nutrition (SUN): a global movement founded on the principle that all people 
have the right to food and good nutrition. It brings together governments, civil society, 
donors, businesses, researchers, and the UN agencies in a collective effort to tackle 
malnutrition (Keith et al 2015) 
Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM): is defined as the % of children aged 6- 59 months whose 
weight for height is below minus 3 standard deviations from the median of the WHO Child 
Growth Standards, or by mid upper arm circumference less than 115 cms, with or without 
nutritional oedema (UNICEF 2013).  
Skilled birth attendant (SBA): an accredited health profession such as a midwife, doctor or 
nurse who has been education and training to proficiency in the skills needed to manage 
normal (uncomplication pregnancies, childbirth and the immediate post-natal period and in 
the identification, management and referral of complications in women and new-borns) 
(WHO 2004)  
Solidarity for global health infers that the countries of the world would agree on a common 
global health charter or framework convention for global health which sets out global 
priorities as well as national and international responsibilities (Keith and Ooms 2011).  
Social Health Insurance: is a mandatory taxation that is specifically for health care, usually 
an extra tax which allows members access to an agreed set of health services, usually incurs 
a co-payment and often implemented with a tax funded mechanism to support the most 
vulnerable (Morel and Keith 2008) 
Social Justice: indicates the achievement of social, economic, cultural, civil and political 
rights (Klugman 2011). 
Social protection mechanisms: policies and practices that are intended to protect people 
against shocks that could push them deeper into poverty; make poor people less vulnerable 
to these shocks; protect people against extreme poverty and its effects on wellbeing; and 
protect wellbeing at vulnerable periods of the life cycle such as childhood (Witter 2005 a). 
Measures include cash transfers, free health and education services and subsidise social 
costs for housing etc. 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): 17 goals set in 2015 to be achieved by 2030 with 
SDG 3 focusing on health and universal health coverage and SDG 2 focusing on food security 
and nutrition (UN 2015). 
Stunting: chronic malnutrition (% of children 0-59 months height for age below minus two 
or minus three below the standard deviation from the median of WHO Child Growth 
Standards) (UNICEF 2013). 
Structural adjustment:  controversial reform programmes, introduced by the World 
Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the late 1980s to rebalance budgets and 
deal with the build-up of national debt. Common guiding principles included export-led 
growth; privatisation and liberalisation; and the efficiency of the free market. In the health 
sector, they led to cuts in public expenditure and an associated rise in cost-recovery 
mechanisms such as user fees (Witter and Keith 2005). 
Tax Based Health Financing health services funded through mandatory taxation, the public 
funds are managed and allocated by the Ministry of Finance. The taxes should be 
progressive (taxing luxury items) rather than regressive (taxing essential goods like staple 
foods) (Yates 2004). 
Universal Health Coverage: all individuals and communities receive the health services they 
need without suffering financial hardship. It includes the full spectrum of essential, quality 
health services, from health promotion to prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, and 
palliative care (WHO 2020). 
User fees: are fees charged to those using public services such as health, education, water 
and other infrastructure services (CFA 2005). 
User Fees for health: Direct payments for services at the point of use by patients, which 
cover some or all of the costs of the service. These payments are officially sanctioned but 
may nevertheless not be fully accounted for (Witter and Keith 2005). Co-payments, if 
collected at time of consultation, are still a form of user fee (Keith 2020).  
Under five mortality rate: the probability of dying between birth and 5 years of age per 
1,000 live births (UNICEF 2013). 
Wasting: acute malnutrition (% of children 0-59 months whose weight for height is below 
minus two or minus three below the standard deviation, from the median of the WHO Child 
Growth Standards) (UNICEF 2013). 
Vulnerability Susceptibility to poverty, hunger, and destitution because of crisis, because of 
inability to access services or call on informal support (CFA 2005). 
World Bank (Group) Frequently used shorthand for the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), one of the original Bretton Woods institutions. The 
World Bank group consists of the IBRD, as well as the International Development 
Association (IDA); the International Finance Corporation (IFC); the Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA); and the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment 
Disputes (ICSID). (CFA 2005). 
Zero Hunger Challenge: launched in 2012, by the UN SG at the Rio +20 Conference on 
Sustainable Development, as a call to achieve zero hunger for all. The five pillars of this 
challenge are to achieve 100% access to adequate food all year, abolish chronic malnutrition 
(stunting) in under two-year olds, sustainable food systems, increased small holder farming 
productivity and income and zero food waste or loss. It supports the Global Nutrition 
Targets set in 2012 at the World Health Assembly and the Decade of Nutrition established 
by the UN SG from 2015 until 2025 (UN SG, 2012) 
Authors foreword and comments from health policy experts on work 
The published works included in this thesis are the product of ten years of research carried 
out by the author. The research reports were developed and presented at strategic times to 
influence global decision making on health policies, strategies or resources. The published 
work builds upon forty years of work by the author in the health sector at all levels, from 
villages in Africa, to Global Health policy formation, at the World Health Assembly. Working 
with International Aid Agencies enabled the author to use the research and her practical and 
lived experiences, to feed evidenced based knowledge and marginalised voices, into global 
health policy discourse. The most significant impact from the work was the change to global 
perceptions on the role of direct payments for health care. The research led to global policy 
changes in the UK, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Zambia and China. The work demonstrates that 
progress is possible in fragile contexts when certain factors, such as equity and voice, are 
addressed through an intersectoral focus on nutrition, social protection and food security. 
The author used the research to call for more systematic engagement of communities and 
civil societies in health planning and policy making. Changes have occurred in this area at a 
global level, but there is a long way to go to offset the power, that global health stakeholders 
and donors have, over decisions that affect the timely access to health care for around 2 
billion people around the world. To strengthen validity, I have included some comments from 
colleagues I have worked with to promote the progressive realisation of the right to health: 
"Regina has been a powerful and effective voice in the global campaign for universal health 
coverage for many years. I would emphasise her role as one of the leading exponents of the 
removal of health care user fees from the early 2000s when many of the leading 
health agencies had meekly gone along with the free-market policies being enforced by the 
likes of the IMF and the World Bank. Regina was one of the leading academics and CSO 
activists who challenged this orthodoxy with research evidence and working effectively with 
others helped to revise global health policy to promote publicly financed UHC" Rob Yates, 
Director Universal Health Coverage Chatham House UK 
Regina Keiths evidence briefs for decision makers on the serious negative effects of fees for 
health services, and the benefits of making services free, and her passionate and articulate 
statements on this in fora such as the World Health Assembly contributed to drawing attention 
to this important area, which is now a key area of attention in the context of Universal Health 
Coverage. Dr. Chandra- Mouli Venkatraman, World Health Organisation, Geneva 
Speaking about voice and equity issues in health, Regina has had a prominent role in the 
years I have been her colleague, from the days she was with Save the Children until now, 
speaking up from her academic position. Claudio Schuftan, Peoples Health Movement and 
the World Public Health Nutrition Association, Vietnam 
Regina Keith, author of Child Health Now, was my inspiration for our maternal and child 
health advocacy initiative in Armenia. She has exceptional leadership and capacity building 
skills motivating you to seek changes in reducing inequalities Naira Gharakhanyan MD MPH 
Armenia Child Health Now Campaign Leader 2009 
Abstract 
Introduction: In 1978, the Alma Ata Declaration pledged global solidarity towards the 
progressive realisation of the right to health for all by the year 2000. The strategy was to be 
achieved using the principles of Primary Health Care, such as the promotion of equitable 
access to health, through an intersectoral lens with the active engagement of communities. 
This target was not achieved, due to the lack of political commitment. In 2015 seventeen 
new Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were established to reduce global inequities by 
2030. We need to learn lessons from the past and focus on creating a more just global 
health system. The COVID 19 pandemic will have long term economic and social 
consequences, which could reduce health system resources and capacity. However, 
promoting the right to health could lead to a more equitable and peaceful global society. 
Ensuring timely access to essential effective health care services is a key priority for the third 
Sustainable Development Goal, with Universal Health Coverage as a specific target.  
Aim: The aim of this research was to present the significant contribution of original 
knowledge that the selected published works contributed to global health policy discourse, 
on the factors required for improving timely access to health services, especially in fragile 
contexts.  There were three research questions answered: what are the factors needed to 
improve timely health service utilisation in fragile contexts? Is Universal Health Coverage the 
same as the right to health, as set out in the Alma Ata? Can Social Health Insurance alone 
achieve Universal Health Coverage to meet Sustainable Development Goal three? 
The literature: Nine peer reviewed published papers were selected, covering publications 
from 2008 to 2018. All papers were reviewed by academic and professional peers, along 
with organisational or journal editors. Six papers resulted from primary research, published 
by either the contracting organisation, or a peer reviewed journal. One paper was a 
scholarly comment published in a peer reviewed journal and one publication was the result 
of a scoping review, published by Save the Children. 
Methodology and theoretical framework: A mixed method participatory action approach 
was used for seven of the nine papers. These seven published research papers combined 
secondary data collection and analysis, with the collection of primary qualitative research. 
The former was analysed through excel files and the qualitative findings were analysed 
through thematic analysis and workshops with participants. One briefing report resulted 
from a scoping review or peer reviewed material and health financing grey papers.  All 
research was carried out with a critical enquiry approach using evidence to reduce health 
inequities. An adapted theoretical framework approach was used to analyse the 
publications to support the overall commentary. The framework utilised merged the 
Primary Health Care principles of equity, voice and governance through an intersectoral lens 
with Gaventas four expressions of power. This adapted framework captured the critical 
enquiry approach of the collective evidence, to support change in health policy and practice. 
Evidenced based health and nutrition advocacy can strengthen the power with and to those 
with unequal access to health. Each publication was published at key moments, to 
encourage change.  
Findings: The original research demonstrated that Universal Health Coverage is not the 
same as the right to health, as health requires concurrent investment in multiple sectors 
such as social protection, food security, nutrition, water and sanitation and quality 
education. However, it could be an effective stepping stone for the progressive realisation 
of the right to health. The research found no evidence to support Social Health Insurance 
alone could achieve Universal Health Coverage. Where it was implemented successfully it 
used public taxation funds to cover health for the poorest. Even in these situations the co-
payments led to delays in timely health seeking. Overall, four factors were identified as 
essential to ensure timely health service utilisation, especially in fragile contexts: (i) Health 
services provided free at the point of access, through publicly funded taxation, were more 
equitable than social health insurance or user changes. (ii) Concurrent investment in social 
protection, food security, nutrition, water and sanitation and quality education with 
community health services, could prevent 2.5 million under five-year-old child deaths 
annually. (iii) Services are more effective when there is active engagement with 
communities. (iv) Good governance has resulted in reductions in under five morality rates, 
however, the lack of financial support for the World Health Organisation has resulted in 
fragmented global health governance, which must be urgently addressed.  
Further research is needed to support the strengthening of resilient health systems, free at 
point of access, through national taxation systems.  
Key words: Alma Ata, Right to Health, Equity, Nutrition, Voice, Global Health Governance, 
Fragile contexts, Astana Declaration and Universal Health Coverage  
Chapter one: Global Policies and Targets to Promote the Right to Health for All from 1978 
The thesis reflects the significant contribution of original knowledge that the selected nine 
published works contributed to global health policy discourse, focusing on the factors 
required for improving timely access to health services, especially in fragile contexts. The 
commentary calls for renewed commitment to the Alma Ata principles of equity and voice, 
through an intersectoral lens, for the progressive realisation of the right to health for all. 
The Alma Ata quote below is particularly relevant in todays pandemic-affected world, 
where inequities are rising, and peace seems to be a distant dream. 
What the Alma Ata promised: 
 The promotion and protection of the health of the people, is essential to sustained 
economic and social development, and contributes to a better quality of life and to 
world peace Alma Ata Declaration (Alma Ata Declaration, WHO 1978).  
1.1 Introduction  
This thesis is being submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the attainment of 
a PhD in Nutrition, by published work, to the School of Life Sciences, at the University of 
Westminster. The nine publications included in the PhD were published between 2008 and 
2019. Seven papers were peer reviewed by academic and professional peers, along with 
organisational or journal editors, two by the journals peer reviewers. Six of the papers 
resulted from primary qualitative research supported by secondary data collection, 
published by either the contracting organisation, or a peer reviewed journal. One paper was 
a scholarly comment published in a peer reviewed journal and one publication was the 
result of a scoping review, published by Save the Children.  Chapter one presents the global 
health policy context, from 1978 to the present, with a focus on the factors that influenced 
the success of the Alma Ata target of health for all, by the year 2000, and subsequent global 
health targets set.  
1.2 Background: Global Solidarity to achieve Health for All by the Year 2000 
Werner and Saunders (1997) state that solidarity is not an act of charity. It is an act of unity 
between allies fighting on different terrains towards the same objective.  As we fight 
against a new pandemic, perhaps it is time that we decide global solidarity for health is a 
worthwhile target. Just as diseases can spread across borders, so too can solutions.  Over 
forty years ago, 134 health ministers decided that health for all was a worthy and achievable 
goal. Inspired by an evidenced based, rational policy process, led by WHO and UNICEF, they 
signed the Alma Ata Declaration (WHO 1978). This was the first ever global health policy, a 
commitment that acknowledged that health was a right for all, and identified Primary 
Health Care (PHC), as the strategy to achieve the vision, of Health for All, by the year 2000. 
The Alma Ata defined health as a state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing, and 
not merely the absence of disease or infirmity and stated that health was an important world-wide 
social goal whose realization requires the action of many other social and economic sectors in 
addition to the health sector (WHO 1978). The evidence presented by the World Health 
Organisation (WHO) and UNICEF inspired the principles of the newly agreed strategy. These 
were: equity of access to comprehensive primary health care services, including the 
prevention, promotion and treatment of illnesses. The services were to be locally 
determined, through active community engagement, and implemented concurrently with 
interventions addressing issues such as food security, nutrition, social protection, water, 
sanitation and quality education (WHO 1978, Werner and Saunders 1997).  The design was 
built on the experience of good health at low cost in countries like Sri Lanka, Cuba, Guyana 
and places like Kerala in India (Scott et al. 1985). Good health was assessed through the 
achievement of universal health coverage of services, with sustained reductions in 
preventable maternal and child deaths (Scott et al 1985).  However, the countries had 
common factors such as a clear political commitment to the equitable provision of health 
for all, supported by active engagement from communities to identify and address local 
problems that affected health, such as lack of access to clean water, sanitation and food 
security (Scott et al 1985, Werner and Sanders 1997, Mehrota and Jolly 1998, Fustukan et al 
2003, Mc Nay et al 2004, Keith et al 2009, Balabanova et al 2011).  All the countries had 
invested in strong community health systems that linked formal health services to 
households, with concurrent investment in education (especially for girls), nutrition and 
social protection for marginalised populations (Scott et al 1985 and Mehrota and Jolly 1998, 
Balabanova et al 2011). Kerala, in India, invested 14% of its budget on health and Cost Rica 
abolished its armed forces in 1948, spending its money on social development (Scott et al 
1985). The participants of the Alma Ata Conference returned home with renewed hope for a 
future where everyone had equitable access to health care. That hope was quickly 
dampened by a lack of funding to implement the ambitious policy. Funding agencies, like 
the World Bank and the Rockefeller Foundation, felt the policy was too expensive and 
suggested that the comprehensive PHC vision be reduced to a more manageable set of four 
interventions. This resulted in a focus on four interventions focusing on reducing childhood 
deaths:  growth monitoring, breastfeeding promotion, oral rehydration solution and 
childhood immunisations. They became known as the GOBI interventions. These GOBI 
interventions were supported by health education messages, using top-down approaches to 
the selected priorities, an approach divergent from the agreed Alma Ata principles of 
primary health care (Werner and Saunders 1997).  As countries implemented the GOBI 
interventions, a global recession occurred in the 1980s, which reduced the resources 
available to support health and other essential social spending (Werner and Saunders 1997).  
Leaders in many newly independent countries had been elected on the promise of free 
health and education services. However, they did not have the resources to implement 
these promises.  Many of these countries borrowed money from the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF), which had strict conditions, set out in structural adjustment policies. These 
conditions required them to reduce social sector spending and implement policy changes, 
such as implementing charges for accessing health care, to ensure that they could repay 
their loans and maintain fiscal stability (Werner and Saunders 1997). Other conditionalities 
were introduced, such as increasing inflation and devaluing local currencies. These 
measures had devastating impacts on the ability of countries to implement their new 
Primary Health Care (PHC) policies, based on the right to health for all (Werner and 
Saunders 1997, Baum 2015). Although many countries included comprehensive PHC in their 
health policies they only had resources, mostly from donors, to implement the selective 
disease specific interventions. These disease specific programmes did not adhere to the PHC 
principles and Health for All by the year 2000, was not achieved (Werner and Saunders 
1997).  The right to health focus was increasingly replaced by a new focus on child survival 
(Grant 1984), with words like community compliance, focusing on disease specific 
interventions and behaviour change communication, rather than the development of more 
robust community health services, addressing local health and social problems (Kent 1991, 
Schuftan 1990 and Werner and Saunders 1997).  Although 12 million under-fives were dying 
from preventable causes each year, at this time, the focus on selective disease specific 
interventions led to fragmentation of the health services and lack of investment in human 
resources and other sectors such as water, sanitation and education (Save the Children and 
Medact 2001).  
1.3 Millennium Development Goals and Making Poverty History  
Despite the failure to achieve the Alma Ata target of health for all by the year 2000, there 
was increasing global advocacy that urgent action was needed to address growing global 
inequalities in health and education. At the start of the new millennium global leaders 
agreed to work together to address some of these inequities. As over 12 million children 
under five were dying from preventable causes and millions of children were going to bed 
with little chance of formal education, they agreed on eight global goals, to be achieved by 
2015 (See figure one) (UN 2000). Three of these goals were focused on health: Millennium 
Development Goal (MDG) four (4), focused on reducing the number of under five-year-old 
children dying from preventable causes and MDG five (5), focused on reducing maternal 
deaths, while MDG six (6), focused on halting the growing prevalence of HIV, Tb and Malaria 
(UN 2000).  Despite setting these global commitments there was little change to how health 
was being implemented, with a continued focus on disease specific interventions (Save the 
Children 1996, Werner and Saunders 1997, Save the Children and Medact 2001). In 2003 the 
Grow up Free from Poverty Coalition (GUFP) carried out research which predicted that the 
MDGs for maternal and child health (MDG 4 and 5) would not be met for another 150 years 
in Sub Saharan Africa, resulting in 80 million maternal and child preventable deaths by 2015 
(Fustukan, Keith and Penrose 2003). The GUFP report was launched at the UK Parliament, by 
the Secretary of State, Baroness Amos. The report encouraged organisations to develop 
more robust evidence to support the Make Poverty History Campaign, which aimed to halve 
poverty by doubling aid, in 2005. 
Figure one: Millennium Development Goals 2000  2015 
Source : UN 2020 (www.un.org)  
Save the Children UK (SC UK) launched their Cost of Coping with Illness in East and Central 
Africa series in 2005, to support the global call for more action. The research was based on a 
peer reviewed mixed method research programme exploring the barriers to timely access to 
health care, in seven countries (Ethiopia, Sudan, Uganda, Tanzania, DRC, Rwanda and 
Burundi).  This five-year longitudinal study was commissioned by Save the Children, to 
follow up the findings from the 2001 Bitterest Pill report, which highlighted the collapse of 
health systems in parts of Sub-Saharan Africa. The longitudinal study found that in the seven 
countries included in the study, one third of the research population, could not afford to 
seek health care, while a further third of the population was pulled into poverty, due to 
selling finite capital assets, to pay for health care (Russell 2002, Cadge and Keith 2005 
a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h, Witter 2005 a, b).  This research supported the increasing global recognition 
regarding the negative impact that health user charges were having on health care service 
utilisation. Evidence had been growing since the 1990s when the World Bank and the IMF 
started aggressively promoting their use, as conditions linked to their of structural 
adjustment plans (Gilson et al 1995, Creese and Kutzin 1996, Russell 1996, Gilson 1997, 
Woodward 1997, Kutzin 2001, Russell 2002, Keith and Shackleton 2006 b, James et al 2005, 
Witter and Keith 2005, James et al 2006, Yates 2006, Keith 2007, Keith 2009 b, Keith and 
Cadge 2010). Innovative research in 2005, by the author and Save the Children UK, 
estimated how much it would cost to abolish these user charges in 20 of the UKs priority 
countries in Africa. The results were published in the British Medical Journal (BMJ), 
estimating that abolishing health care fees in these countries could prevent the death of 
233,000 children under five at a cost of 1.75 per person per year (James and Keith et al 
2005). Tony Blair, the UK Prime Minister, used the research in the Labour Party Manifesto 
for the May 2005 General Election. He promised, if elected, to support 12 countries to move 
away from health user fees by 2015 (Keith and Shackleton 2005). The UK supported 10 
countries, to move away from user fees for health over the next  
 ten years, which led to increases in health spending in these countries by about 40 % 
(Oxfam 2013). It also galvanised a growing coalition of civil society advocates to call for their 
abolition, to promote more equitable access to health for the poorest. In countries like 
Liberia child mortality rates were halved from 235 under five-year-old deaths per 1000 live 
births in 1990 to 111 under five-year-old deaths per 1000 live births in 2009 (Keith, Cadge 
2010).  The Make Poverty History campaign succeeded in encouraging world leaders to 
promise to double aid to half poverty (Oxfam 2013). 
In 2005, The World Health Organisation invited partners to a consultation on the 
development of their new World Health Report: Making every mother and child count 
(WHO 2005). The WHO Director General raised concerns about the 100,000 people who 
were forced into poverty each year through paying for health (WHO 2005). Her presentation 
was supported by the research from the author and others, such as Gilson et al 1995, Creese 
and Kutzin 1996, Gilson 1997, Gilson et al 2001, Fustukian et al 2003, Keith 2005, Cadge and 
Keith 2005 a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h. When the 2005 World Health Report was released, it advised 
that countries should return to the principles of Alma Ata and move away from user fees at 
point of service (WHO 2005a). The importance of health systems, pro- poor health financing 
and trained supported health workers were also included in the report: cited as 
fundamental for achieving the health related MDGs, echoing findings from the Fustukian et 
al 2003 research (WHO 2005 a).  At the May 2005 World Health Assembly 189 Ministers of 
Health agreed to two new resolutions (WHA 58.31 and 33), which focused on strengthening 
maternal and child health systems, working with communities more and moving towards 
pro poor health financing systems (WHA 2005 a, b).  However, most low income and fragile 
countries did not have the resources or the capacity to move towards more equitable health 
financing mechanisms without external support (Keith 2005). Fragile states are those 
countries that will not, or cannot, provide basic services for their populations (DFID 2005). 
See annex 3 for a list of fragile states and those included in research publications presented. 
These countries are either too poor to invest in local services, or they are rebuilding their 
country following conflict or disaster, or they decide not to support health and social 
spending for political reasons. Sometimes as a tool in conflict. Although this renewed 
interest in global health led to new resources, much of these resources were spent through 
new global private public partnerships, which again were disease specific and vertical in 
nature. This resulted in less than 3% of the new resources strengthening national health 
systems (Heaton and Keith 2002, Starling et al 2002, Keith 2003, 2005, 2007, Keith and 
Cadge 2010). In 2010 there were 320 million children living in fragile states, but resources 
were not being invested in the countries with the greatest need. In 2009, donor aid for 
maternal and child health, accounted for only 3%, of international aid (Keith and Cadge 
2010). The impact of these globally led vertical programmes (delivered as disease specific 
single intervention programmes, not integrated into routine health services), along with 
growing national debt and recession, resulted, in the collapse of rural health systems in 
many low-income countries, especially those struggling with high levels of poverty, debt and 
conflict (Save the Children 1996, Werner and Saunders 1997, Save the Children and Medact 
2001, Fustukian et al 2003, Action Aid 2005, Action for Global Health 2008). Resources were 
not reaching health systems and the impact of the HIV pandemic was placing more strain on 
health and economic systems in the poorest countries, especially in Africa (Heaton and Keith 
2002, Starling et al 2002, Fustukian et al 2003, Keith 2009) and there was a global shortage 
of health workers, with a minimum of 4 million extra needed (WHO 2006, Blanchet et al 
2006). In 2008, on the 30th anniversary of the Alma Ata Declaration, WHO released the 
World Health Report, focusing on the need to return to the principles of Primary Health 
Care (WHO 2008 b). As anticipated by Save the Children and the Grow up free from Poverty 
coalition research  2015 arrived, and the health related MDGs for maternal and child health 
were not achieved. Although the MDGs were not met, some progress was achieved, with 
721 million fewer people living in poverty and 2.6 billion people having access to improved 
water and 53% fewer children dying from preventable causes (UNICEF 2015). 
1.4 Sustainable Development Goals and the 2018 Astana Declaration 
In 2015, seventeen new global targets were agreed (the Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs). Many of the goals are linked to health and nutrition with SDG two (2) focusing on 
food security and nutrition while SDG three (3) focuses on improving global health. SDG 3 
also includes a commitment to achieving Universal Health Coverage (UHC) by 2030. Many 
right to health advocates were concerned that the focus on UHC would halt the progressive 
realisation of the right to health for all (Peoples Health Movement 2015, Baum 2015, Keith 
2018). On the 40th anniversary of the Alma Ata Declaration in 2018, a global conference on 
PHC was held in Astana and the Astana Declaration was signed. The author was part of a 
senior working group selected from the health information for all group to feed into the 
Astana declaration. The author also used research included in this thesis to feed into the 
new Declaration, publishing an article in World Nutrition in August 2018 on the importance 
of the Alma Ata principles (Keith 2018). The final Astana Declaration (see annex six) included 
many of the PHC principles, including the right to health and the importance of reducing 
inequities. However, Universal Coverage of Health Services does not fully address the social 
determinants of health or the full progressive achievement of right to health as set out in 
the Alma Ata Declaration (Keith 2018). See annex five, six and seven with more details of 
each of the declarations and the differences between them. With under ten years to go, 
until 2030, the world is not on track to meet the SDGs for health and nutrition. Malnutrition 
levels are increasing globally, with 800 million people going to bed hungry and 2 billion 
people who do not have access to essential health services when they need them (GNR 
2020).  There are still 5 million under five-year-olds dying from preventable causes (WHO 
2020) so there is still a long way to go to achieve Health for All. Unless we learn lessons from 
the past 40 years and re-orient global health systems, in line with the Alma Ata principles, 
we may be reflecting on another failed set of targets in 2030. The present COVID pandemic 
has highlighted the devastating consequences of health service inequities throughout the 
world. Health systems, and economies, are stretched, even in high income nations. We are 
at a pivotable moment in time. This is a good time to recommit to implementing the 
evidenced based Alma Ata principles of equity and voice, through an intersectoral approach, 
to ensure the progressive realisation of the right to health for all (Keith 2018).   
Figure two: Sustainable Development Goals 2015  2030  
(Source: UN 2020)  
1.5 Aim and main findings from collection of published works 
The aim of this research was to present the significant contribution of original knowledge 
that the selected published works contributed to global health policy discourse on the 
factors required for improving timely access to health services, especially in fragile contexts.  
There were three research questions addressed: what are the factors needed to improve 
timely health service utilisation in fragile contexts? Is Universal Health Coverage the same as 
the right to health, as set out in the Alma Ata? Can Social Health Insurance alone achieve 
Universal Health Coverage to meet Sustainable Development Goal three?  The collective 
body of published works, included in this thesis, presents evidence to support the continued 
relevance of the Alma Ata principles of voice and equity, through an intersectoral approach, 
to reducing global health inequalities especially for mothers and under five year old 
children. The thesis presents four key findings, set out in individual chapters 3, 4, 5 and 6. 
These chapters present the pledges in Alma Ata and the origional evidence the publications 
have added to the discourse on what are the essential factors needed to improve timely 
utilisation of health care services, especially in fragile contexts. The evidence uses case 
studies from 40 countries (see annex three). The four key findings or factors needed for 
improving timely access to health services are: 
1. Political commitment to provide essential health care services free at the point of 
access, promotes equity and reduces delays in timely access of health care. (Chapter 
three)  
2. Concurrent investment in sectors, such as food security, nutrition, social protection, 
water, sanitation and quality education (especially for girls), with essential 
community-based health services. These services could prevent 2.5 million under 
fiver year old deaths annually.  (Chapter four) 
3. Active community engagement prioritising the most vulnerable reduces inequalities 
and increases timely health service utilisation. (Chapter five) 
4. Good governance and strong leadership can deliver positive health outcomes even in 
fragile contexts. However, global health solidarity and governance must be invested 
in to achieve the health and nutrition SDGs (Chapter six) 
1.6 Thesis structure 
Chapter one introduces the context of forty years of global health policies, promises and 
targets focusing on the progressive realisation of the right to health and the challenges 
encountered by countries trying to achieve it. The aim of the commentary from the 
collection of published work is presented along with the four key findings. Chapter two 
presents a summary of the methodology used for the nine individual publications and the 
theoretical framework used for the reflection and thesis commentary. More details on the 
individual papers can be found in table one and annex one and seven. Chapter three 
presents the significant contribution of new evidence, around how equity can be achieved, 
to promote the timely utilisation of health services. Chapter four presents new evidence on 
how concurrent investment in sectors, such as food security, nutrition, water, sanitation and 
quality education, with essential health interventions, could prevent over 2.5 million child 
deaths each year. Chapter five demonstrates the impact of active community engagement, 
using experiences from the case study countries. Chapter six presents the evidence, which 
supports the positive impact of governance and leadership in fragile states, that has led to 
reductions in maternal and child deaths, between 2008 and 2018. The conclusions and 
further research suggestions are set out in Chapter seven. Annex one presents the impact of 
the collected works, while annex two sets out the critical pathway leading to the portfolio of 
work. Annex three presents a table of fragile states, highlighting those used in the nine 
publications as case studies. There is also a map of fragile states. Annex five contains the 
Alma Ata Declaration and Annex six presents the Astana Declaration. Annex seven presents 
the differences between the two declarations. Annex eight highlights the peer review and 
publication process for each paper. The nine publications are all uploaded as individual pdfs, 
in line with new graduate school instructions, due to the COVID lock down.   
Chapter two: Methodology of the published works and theoretical framework  
Chapter two sets out a short summary of the methodology used in each of the selected publications 
and table one presents the aim and impact of each of the published works. This is supported by 
annex one presenting the impact of the publications and annex eight sets out more details on the 
peer review and publication process for each paper. The chapter also presents the adapted 
theoretical framework, used to reflect on the collective published works, as an integrated 
programme of research, and a table presenting the 40 countries included as case studies in 
the research. A table highlighting which papers supports each finding is also included in this 
chapter.  
2.1 Introduction to the methodology of the collected published works 
A mixed method participatory action approach was used for seven of the nine papers. These 
seven published research papers combined secondary data collection and analysis, with the 
collection of primary qualitative research. The former was analysed through excel files and 
the qualitative findings were analysed through thematic analysis and workshops with 
participants. One briefing report resulted from a scoping review or peer reviewed material 
and health financing grey papers.  All research was carried out with a critical enquiry 
approach using evidence to reduce health inequities. Dean et al (1993) and Crotty (1998) 
robustly contend that including qualitative and quantitative research is essential and any 
conflict between these two methodologies is dysfunctional. In health research positivist 
research has been favoured as more robust and effective truth to inform health policies and 
plans. Crotty (1998) defines positivist research as seeking an objective truth and reduces all 
relationships to a statistical level. Statistics help us to identify what health problems exist, 
where and how they change over time. This can support health planning and assessment; 
however, as health is socially constructed and influenced by a persons or a populations 
perception, it is essential for health planners and policy makers to gain a greater 
understanding of what influences a person or a populations health practice. Qualitative 
research does not present an objective truth, but it presents an in-depth subjective window 
in time. Reason (1988) presents constructivism as the joint creation of knowledge between 
the researcher and the researchedtruths are socially constructed, and that reality is specific 
to time place and culture.   Chambers (1997) and Keith (2000) both agree on the 
importance of local knowledge when planning solutions and the process of working with 
communities to determine their needs, their influences and their perceptions, can help to 
create trust within a community, between health care workers and communities. Evidence 
is clear that when communities are involved in decisions that affect their lives adherence to 
changes is more robust, the communities often use reflections and discussions to inform 
changes in their own practices and perceptions. Crotty (1998) suggests that critical theory 
focuses on critiquing and understanding inequities in society, seeking to change them as a 
result. All the publications included in this PhD were created through a such a process of 
critical theory, some may consider the methodology as a participatory action research 
approach, as set out by Green and Thorogood (2004). As all the papers have been written by 
the same author, they are part of a social construct, validated through voices and data from 
40 countries (see table two) to improve the reliability of the research. The research was not 
commissioned by the same organisation, but they do all build upon the learning from 
previous research carried out by the author (annex two presents a more detailed reflective 
journal to support this knowledge creation journey). Annex one sets out the impact of the 
papers included.  All papers were peer reviewed and published between 2008 and 2019. 
Paper nine was accepted for publication by World Nutrition, in August 2018, and therefore 
qualifies to be included in this decade of selected work. Annex eight presents a table, setting 
out the peer review and publication process, for each paper. The publications were all open 
access and distributed free of charge.  All publications targeted specific advocacy moments, 
to maximise the impact of the evidence presented, such as the annual World Health 
Assembly. In total there are nine publications included in the PhD. The author was the lead 
author for seven of the research publications except for paper two on Social Health 
Insurance, however, the author did commission and co-authored this paper. She also co-
authored paper seven (What works for Nutrition), having written the chapter on Kenya, as 
well as the introduction and conclusion of the publication. See 2.2, table one, annex one and 
eight for more details on individual publications. As part of the limitations of research 
reports being used to target policy makers, the fully methodology of the research is not 
always included in the advocacy papers or policy briefings. As more aid organisations and 
health professionals work with academic partners, the robustness of research publications is 
improving. Many donors are now encouraging partnerships between academics and 
practitioners to strengthen the collection of evidence from operational research. Each of the 
research collaborations in this thesis have both such partners involved.  
2.2 Summary of individual published works methodologies and the chapters their evidence 
supports 
Paper one: Keith R (2008) Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission (PMTCT): Global 
Policy Implications: reflecting on progress and challenges in three countries (Malawi, 
Nigeria and Zambia) (Chapters 3, 4, 5, 6) This was a participatory action research exploring 
the progress of Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission of HIV programmes in three 
countries with different health system capacity. Field visits were carried out involving direct 
observation, review of secondary data, 55 key informant interviews and 20 focus group 
discussions with health workers, carers and communities of mothers living with HIV (around 
200 participants). The data were analysed using excel for the quantitative data analysis and 
a thematic analysis to pull out the themes and sub themes from participants. Themes were 
presented in country workshops and finalised in a UK workshop. The focus groups had 
common themes presented back to them for verification. The finding revealed that the 
PMTCT HIV /AIDS programmes, using an opt out testing approach, were more successful in 
getting mothers to sign up for HIV treatment. Those living with HIV were doing so positively 
in Zambia and Malawi where the health services were functioning, and services were free at 
the point of access. Participants in the Nigerian research reported more challenges around 
the lack of access to health care and treatment free at the point of access and high levels of 
stigma. The report fed into national and global policy dialogue for HIV and more equitable 
access to health services.  
Paper two: Morel C, Keith R (2008) Policy Briefing: Social Health Insurance (Chapter 3) 
A scoping review of literature was carried out using pub med to identify peer reviewed 
literature on the impacts of social health insurance systems, on pro poor health financing. 
This was supported by a grey literature review of countries utilising social health insurance, 
to assess the effectiveness and equity of social health insurance, to achieve universal health 
coverage. Out of pocket expenditure and utilisation rates were assessed for the selected 
countries as proxy indicators. The evidence was collated, and gaps identified as well as the 
urgent debates. These formed the basis for a policy briefing shared with participants of the 
2008 World Health Assembly. The research found that no country had used social health 
insurance to provide universal coverage without adding additional tax-based funds to cover 
the poor. Even high-income countries required additional tax-based resources to protect the 
poor from catastrophic health payments. The review fed into the health financing dialogue 
in Ghana and globally. Co-payments required with social health insurance systems also 
determined timely health service utilisation. 
Paper three: Keith R (2009) All mothers matter: Human Resources for Health (HRH) in 
fragile states Merlin UK (Chapters 3,4,5,6) A participatory action research using mixed 
methods was used to determine the barriers to improving maternal health, focusing on 15 
fragile states. Secondary data collection from four MERLIN programmes in Afghanistan, 
Liberia, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Nepal, combined with 45 key informant 
interviews. The data were analysed using excel for the quantitative data analysis and a 
thematic analysis to identify the themes and sub themes from participants, these were 
presented and agreed in a UK workshop. The paper identified that competency-based 
training for community midwives was essential, and the report recommended increased 
investment in health workers for fragile states, estimating that 2.71 per person per year 
was needed to increase skilled attendants in the fragile states (see Annex three) that 
accounted for over two thirds of maternal deaths (189,000) each year.  The report called for 
a standardised set of competencies and definitions for community midwives and 1 skilled 
attendant per 175 mothers to increase the number of women delivered by a skilled 
attendant to reduce maternal deaths. The report also highlighted the fact that many 
maternal deaths occurred in countries that have been involved in conflict, with inadequate 
investment in health or aid from donors. 
Paper four: Keith R et al (2009) Child Health Now World Vision International London UK 
(Chapters 3, 4, 5, 6) The aim of the research was to raise awareness and resources to 
increase attention on the 9 million annual preventable deaths of under five-year-olds in 
2009. The Child Health Now report used a participatory action mixed method approach 
analysing secondary data from 30 countries supported by qualitative data from 62 key 
informant interviews, 6 focus group discussions with over 140 participants during two field 
visits. Secondary data were also obtained from 1600 community health programmes in 120 
countries. The report focused on the countries where most under five child deaths occurred. 
The data were analysed using excel for the quantitative data analysis and a thematic 
analysis was used to identify the themes and sub themes from participants voices, these 
were presented in country workshops and finalised in a UK workshop. A set of critical 
community interventions was presented which could save 2.5 million under fiver year old 
lives each year. Nutrition was a key theme highlighted by the research which needed to 
have increased investment and support.  
Paper five: Keith R, Cadge N (2010) Unlocking Progress in Fragile States Save the Children 
UK (Chapters 3, 4, 5, 6) The research aim was to identify what was working in fragile states. 
A participatory mixed method approach was used analysing secondary data, 45 key 
informant interviews, direct observation, and four community conversations in Liberia and 
Sierra Leone with over 50 participants. The data were analysed using excel for the 
quantitative data analysis and a thematic analysis to identify the themes and sub themes 
from participants voices. Themes were presented in country workshops and finalised in a UK 
workshop. Save the Children created a position paper on fragile states using the research 
findings. The research fed into the UK governments prioritisation of aid resources to 
increase support for fragile states and WHO invited Liberia president to WHA to speak.  
Paper six: Keith R and Ooms G, (2011) Improving Global Health Governance: technical 
briefing paper for the Child Health Now Campaign World Vision International, UK (Chapter 
6) The aim of this research was to feed into the reorganisation of global health governance 
being discussed in 2011.  A review of secondary data analysis was supported by 38 high level 
key informant interviews with health policy makers. The data were analysed using a 
thematic analysis to identify the themes and sub themes from participants. Themes were 
presented in a debate at the WHO Executive Board meeting in Geneva, which informed the 
final report recommendations. The research report was launched at the WHA with 100 
delegates held at the World Health Assembly in May 2011. 
Paper seven: Keith R et al (2015) What works for nutrition? Case studies from Vietnam, 
Uganda and Kenya Results, Concern and University of Westminster published by Results 
UK (Chapter 4, 5, and 6) The aim of this research was to determine the factors influencing 
progress in achieving the global nutrition targets in three countries. A critical theory enquiry 
carried out using mixed methods of secondary data analysis combined with data from 45 
key informant interviews with nutrition and health stakeholders and Scaling Up Nutrition 
(SUN) members supported by 3 focus group discussions with NGOs working in the sector 
and three field trips. The data were analysed using a thematic analysis to identify the 
themes and sub themes from participants, which was agreed at a workshop between the 
three organisations, in UK. The report was launched at the UK Parliament, prior to the UK 
governments decision on the focus and scale of its nutrition aid and used to influence the 
Rio +20 summit on sustainable development and 2016 Nutrition for Development (N4D) 
meeting. The government increased nutrition funding and its support for nutrition sensitive 
interventions. 
Paper eight: Keith R (2018) From Alma Ata to Astana: can renewed commitment to Health 
for All by the 2030 be committed to in October 2018? World Nutrition Journal 10 August 
2018 (C1,3,4,5,6) The aim of this article was to feed evidence into the preparation of the 
Astana Declaration through discussions and participation in the high-level working group. A 
scholarly commentary based on the authors research. Most of the authors 
recommendations were included however it focused on Universal Health Coverage (UHC) 
rather than right to health. See annex 5,6 and 7 for more details on the declarations and the 
differences between them.  
Paper nine: Keith R et al (2019) Understanding practices and perceptions of infant and 
young child feeding (IYCF) in Tower Hamlets borough, London UK World Nutrition Journal 
(Chapter 3,4,5,6) The aim of this research was to review the early childhood services in 
Tower Hamlets. This is paper one based on research carried out in 2017 and accepted for 
publication in August 2018. This was a critical theory research using a mixed method 
approach of secondary data collection supported by 36 key informant interviews and 18 
focus group discussions with 144 participants including mothers, parents and service 
providers. The data were analysed using a thematic analysis to identify the themes and sub 
themes from participants. The results were presented to 50 health workers in a workshop to 
agree priorities and recommendations, to improve health and nutrition in the borough.  The 
report resulted in more nutrition support in the health service team, continued support for 
IYCF baby friendly services and more nutrition and oral health information on website, as 
well as an increased contact for pregnant women and mothers with health visitors.  
Table one: Published work with aim, methods and impacts related to main four findings 
P Title Study type and 
methods  
Research Aim Significance of the 
publications outcomes 
Findings 
1 Prevention of Mother 
to Child Transmission 
(PMTCT): Global 
Policy Implication: 
reflecting on progress 
and challenges in three 
countries (Malawi, 
Nigeria and Zambia) 
Mixed method with 3 
country visits, 20 
FGDs, qualitative 55 
key informant 
interviews and 
secondary data 
collection. Data 
analysed using excel 
and thematic analysis 
Explore the 
progress and 
challenges to 
increasing roll out 
of HIV PMTCT 
services 
Fed into global PMTCT 
programming on opt out 
testing and positive 
impact of free treatment 
on uptake of testing in 
Sub Saharan Africa 
(SSA). 
1,2,3,4 
2 Policy Briefing: 
Social Health 
Insurance 
Scholarly scoping 
review 
Role of SHI in 
UHC for poor 
Fed into Global Policy 
Dialogue 
3 All mothers matter: 
HRH in fragile states  
Mixed method 
participatory research 
including quantitative 
and 45 KII qualitative 
voices. Data analysed 
using excel and 
thematic analysis 
Identifying 
successful health 
worker strategies 
to improve 
coverage of 
maternal health 
care in fragile 
states 
ICM and ICN developed 
new competency-based 
training for Community 
Midwives 
4 Child Health Now Mixed method 
participatory research 
including quantitative 
and 62 KIIs 6 FGDs 
with 140 participants 
collecting qualitative 
voices. Data analysed 
using excel and 
thematic analysis 
Aim was to 
increase global 
attention on 
preventable 
deaths and call for 
interventions in 
nutrition and 
health 
$1.5 billion invested into 
MNCH by WVI and  
Global evidence used for 
UN SG EWEC and 
country advocacy on 
importance of PHC 
approach and free health 
care.  
1,2,3,4 
5 Unlocking Progress in 
Fragile States 
Mixed method 
participatory research 
including quantitative 
and 45KIIs, FGDs 50 
people. Data analysed 
using excel and 
thematic analysis 
Identifying 
effective 
interventions to 
MNCH outcomes 
in fragile states 
Liberia invited to the 
WHA and increased 
funding from fragile 
states from UK 
government.  
1,2,3 
6 Improving Global 
Health Governance: 
technical briefing paper 
for the Child Health 
Now Campaign 
Critical theory with 38 
key informant 
interviews (KIIs) Data 
analysed using 
thematic analysis. 
Feeding into the 
WHO discussion 
on priorities and 
global health 
governance role 
in 2012 
WHO added governance 
to its official agenda and 
is presently 
implementing the 
changes 
7 What works for 
nutrition? Case studies 
from Vietnam, Uganda 
and Kenya  
Mixed method 
participatory research 
including 45 KIIs & 3 
FGDs with 120 people 
and four workshops. 
Data analysed using 
thematic analysis 
Exploring the 
factors resulting 
in progress in 
nutrition 
outcomes in high 
performing 
countries 
Resulted in UK 
continuing to invest in 
nutrition and increasing 
investment in NS 
interventions 
8 The importance of the 
Alma Ata principles of 
equity and voice 
through intersectoral 
investment  
Scholarly Commentary 
in World Nutrition 
Exploring the role 
of PHC in 
achieving UHC 
by 2030 
Fed into Astana 
Declaration (Alma Ata 2) 
1,2,3,4, 
9 Understanding 
perceptions and 
practices on infant and 
young child feeding 
and oral health in 
Tower Hamlets 
Borough 
Mixed method 
participatory research 
including 36 KIIs and 
18 FGDs with 144 
people. 1 workshop. 
Data analysed using 
thematic analysis 
Exploring the 
perceptions and 
practices of IYCF 
oral health  
Resulted in 14 
recommendations being 
approved and 
implemented by Tower 
Hamlets (TH) Public 
Health team 
2, 3,4 
2.3 Theoretical framework 
An adapted theoretical framework was created from the Alma Ata Primary Health Care 
framework (Werner and Saunders 1997, WHO 1978) and Gaventas expressions of power 
(Gaventa, 2006) (see figure three). The components of the Alma Ata framework included 
the principles of equity (of access to health care services) and voice (active engagement of 
communities in health programme and policy development and implementation) and 
governance, through an intersectoral approach (addressing the social determinants of 
health). However, as all the publications were created to bring about change in inequalities, 
it was necessary to recognise the importance of power in the construction and the use of 
the papers in global and national policy discourse. Each of the research reports attempted 
to bring the voices of the marginalised into the health policy arena. To do this, campaigns 
were established, and evidence collected to strengthen the validity of the voices presented. 
Robust research informed by lived experience can strengthen the power of those whose 
voices are usually overlooked (Chambers 1997). The inclusion of Gaventas (2006), 
expressions of power, into the adapted framework, recognises the intention of the author 
and the organisations commissioning the research, to strengthen the power with and the 
power to the marginalised, over those who normally have power over them.  Gaventas 
(2006) four expressions of power are:  
Power over refers to the ability of the powerful to affect the actions and thought of 
the powerless. The power to is important for the capacity to act; to exercise agency 
and to realise the potential of rights, citizenship or voice. Power within often refers 
to gaining the sense of self-identity, confidence and awareness that is a precondition 
 Power 
 Power 
within
 Power 
 Power 
Voice Equity
Governance 
leadership
Intersectoral 
investment
for action. Power with refers to the synergy which can emerge through partnerships 
and collaboration with others, or through processes of collective action and alliance 
building.  
The agencies who commissioned the research intended for the research to strengthen the 
power of citizens to and with others by creating enabling environments and partnerships. 
Creating safe spaces for communities to feed into decisions that affect them can help to 
bring change and reduce the power over populations by their governments or others. By 
engaging in the campaigns, the communities strengthened the power within.  
Figure three: Theoretical framework used to reflect on collected publications (Keith 2021). 
Adapted from WHO (1978) Primary Health Care Framework and Gaventas (2006) 
expressions of power.  
Table two presents the 40 countries that were involved in the collective research 
Afghanistan Gambia Myanmar Togo 
Angola Guinea  Nepal Uganda 
Burundi Guinea Bissau Nigeria UK 
Cambodia Haiti Niger Vietnam 
Cameroon India Pakistan Yemen 
Chad Indonesia Rwanda Zambia 
CAR Kenya Sierra Leone Zimbabwe 
Cote d Ivoire Lao Somalia  
DR Congo Liberia South Africa  
Ethiopia Malawi South Sudan  
Eritrea Mali Sudan  
Chapter three: Key finding one: Health policies and services promote equity through 
proving essential health care services free at the point of access 
Chapter three supports key finding one, which demonstrates that equity of access was 
achieved through health services provided free at the point of access, through tax based or 
aid supported financing. It also provides evidence that co-payments and social health 
insurance systems, unless concurrently supported by tax-based funding for the poor, do not 
provide pro-poor health financing or equitable access to health. These findings support the 
Alma Ata principle below.  
What the Alma Ata promised:  
Inequality in health status of the peopleis politically socially and 
economically unacceptable and is therefore a common concern to all 
countries (Alma Ata, WHO 1978) 
Earlier research evidence by the author:  
Abolishing fees at point of access, in just 20 SSA countries, could prevent the death 
of 233,000 under five-year-olds every year, costing only 1.75 per person per year 
(Keith 2005, James et al 2005) 
On average, around a third of families in Ethiopia, Tanzania, Sudan, DRC, Burundi 
and Rwanda, in 2005, did not seek care due to cost of health care, while another 
third was pulled into poverty paying for health care. A 12-year-old Ethiopian girl said: 
Its simple. If you have money, you will be cured, if you do not have money you will 
die. If my mother is alive, I will be alive. If my mother dies, what will become of me? 
(Cadge and Keith 2005 a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h) 
The countries with the highest levels of inequity also had the highest levels of 
mortality (Fustukan, Keith and Penrose 2003)  
Promises made:  
..countries need to move away from user fees for health care WHO 2005 Resolution 
58.31 and 33 WHA 
  ..we promise to support 12 countries to move away from user fees by 2015 Blair 
New evidence from Papers one, three, four and five on what promotes equity of access 
Services provided universally, free at the point of access, funded by public 
progressive taxation, reach the poor (Keith 2008 b, 2008c, 2009 a,20009 b, 2010). 
There was no evidence that countries using social health insurance systems were 
able to protect the poor without adding extra taxed based resources. As Ghana now 
does. (Keith 2008). 
Thousands of lives were saved by making health care, free at the point of access. 
Countries like Uganda, Nepal, Malawi, Zambia, Ghana, South Africa, and Burundi 
have all increased health service utilisation, by making services free at the point of 
access, DFID invested resources as promised to support countries to move away from 
user fees (Keith and Cadge 2010).  
 Thank you. yesterday I was ill with malariaI went to the clinic and got medicine, 
without needing money and now I am back at school Liberian schoolgirl (Keith 2010) 
3.1 What is equity and how can it be achieved in low-income and fragile contexts?   
WHO (2020) defines equity as a fair opportunity for everyone to attain their full health potential, 
regardless of demographic, social, economic or geographical strata. The papers covered in this 
thesis focus on two specific areas of equity: equity due to the cost of services, and their availability 
due to the strength of health systems and human resources. Scott et al (1985) contends that 
equity requires strong organised demand for accountability of government by the people. 
In many fragile contexts holding governments to account may place populations at risk, 
hence the use of power with other organisations can protect marginalised groups, while still 
sharing their voices (Keith 2010).  
Many of the things we need can wait. The child cannot. Right now, is the time his 
bones are being formed, his blood is being made and his senses are being developed. 
To him we cannot answer Tomorrow. His name is Today Gabriela Mistral in 
Saunders and Carver 1985 
Gabriela Mistral used her voice to call for greater attention to be focused on children. They 
may be our future, but if we do not invest in them today then we are reducing their chance 
to achieve their potential. Latin and Central America counties have a long history of using 
their voices to call for change. Paulo Freire (Werner and Saunders 1997) called the rising of 
people against those with power over them as conscientizing, there are numerous examples 
of populations using their voices to fight against inequity. In 1983 UNICEF moved away from 
using the word equity, replacing it with universal coverage, and replacing active community 
engagement with social mobilisation and compliance (Werner and Saunders 
1997).Increasing attention was given in health information messages and child health days 
attempting to get children immunised in large scale coverage programmes, rather than 
working with communities to ensure routine health services were used in a timely way for 
prevention (though immunisations) and care of illness such as malaria. In 1984 James Grant 
presented a paper on the need to use more social marketing strategies in child survival 
(Grant 1984). The world was changing from a bottom-up focus on the right to health, using 
comprehensive PHC, to more selective vertical interventions focusing on individual 
responsibility for health. These approaches were neo-liberal in ideology, vastly different to 
the principles that led to the creation of the Alma Ata Declaration (Werner and Sanders 
1997). This led to increased global investment in interventions such as immunisations and 
food aid instead of working with governments to strengthen health systems and human 
resources for health (Werner and Saunders 1997).  In 1993, the World Bank introduced their 
DALY (Disability Adjusted Life Years) analysis which helped countries decide which cost 
effective interventions to prioritise (WB 1993). This DALY analysis tool helped countries 
decided what health interventions to focus on and the economic analysis prioritised keeping 
the most economically productive population, the twenty-year-old men, active and working. 
This led to the prioritisation of HIV TB and Malaria interventions over health system 
strengthening for child or maternal health services.  Although pneumonia, diarrhoea, 
malaria and malnutrition were the major killers of under five-year-old children (Werner and 
Saunders 1997, Keith 2008 d, 2009 b).  The research which fed into the 2009 Child Health 
Now research publication clearly demonstrated the negative impact of decades of 
underinvestment in health systems. The report highlighted the silent emergency of 
preventable child deaths which a daily death toll of 24,000 children each day. The report 
was launched by the author at the United Nations General Assembly in New York with the 
Assistant UN Director General to call for urgent action and investment in maternal and child 
health. The UN Secretary General subsequently launched the Global Strategy on Women 
and Childrens Health in 2010, which had new pledges of $40 billion for maternal and child 
health from countries, donors and other stakeholders. The CHN report (paper four) 
illustrated that those countries with the highest inequalities, like India and Nigeria, also had 
the highest death rates. While countries where health services were free at the point of 
access had halved their child death rates, even in fragile states. Liberia reduced their under-
five death rates from 235/1000 live births to 111/1000 live births between 1990 and 2007, 
despite a ten-year civil conflict (Keith 2009 b and Keith 2010). In paper one, the PMTCT 
research publication (Keith 2008 d) illustrated that dramatic progress had been made in the 
coverage of services for HIV positive mothers, since treatment was made free at the point of 
access. Keith (2008 d) presented evidence that people living with HIV increased their health 
seeking behaviour, adherence to treatment, and had enhanced health outcomes, despite 
their HIV positive diagnosis, due to the provision of free treatment (Keith 2008 d). Free 
health care has been great for increasing the numbers coming to the clinics Health worker, 
Malawi (Keith 2008 d) 
In paper five, Keith (2010) demonstrated that Liberia had halved its child death rates by 
increasing government expenditure on health to 20% and keeping services free at the point 
of access. However, in paper nine Keith (2019) notes that even when services are free at the 
point of access, as they are in the UK, other barriers, such as language, can reduce service 
utilisation. In five of the papers, Keith (2008 b, 2009 b, 2010, 2015 and 2019) demonstrates 
the importance of health systems being close to the community to link households to the 
health centre. Populations needed to trust the services, staff need to be skilled and have the 
resources they need to deliver quality services (Keith 2001, Keith 2003, Keith 2005, Keith 
2009 b, Keith 2010, Keith 2019).  The Alma Ata and Astana declarations both capture the 
need for stronger health systems and investment in health workers (WHO 1978 and 2018). 
See annex five and six. 
The author demonstrated in papers one, three, four, five, and nine (Keith 2008 a, 2009 b, 
2010 and 2019) that when there are not enough health workers, deadly delays can occur in 
service utilisation. WHO in 2006 estimated that to provide 80% of the population with 
essential health care you needed 2.3 health workers per 1,000 people (WHO 2006).  In this 
research papers (Keith 2008 b, 2009a, 2009 b, 2010, 2015 and 2019) it was clearly 
demonstrated that when countries fall below this level, services do not reach the poorest. In 
paper three (Keith 2009 b) the link between maternal deaths and conflict was presented 
with 13 of the 15 countries accounting for two thirds of maternal deaths recovering from or 
presently engaged in conflict. All these countries had fewer than 2.3 health workers per 
1000 populations and 13 countries having fewer than 1, health worker per 1,000 
population. The report estimated that investing an extra 2.71 per person per year could 
double equitable access to skilled attendants, for pregnant mothers, in these fragile 
countries. The report also included solutions to increasing capacity in fragile contexts 
through the creation of a new cadre of community midwives (Keith 2009 a).  
There is now global agreement that user fees at the point of access are regressive and result 
in deadly delays to timely health seeking care (WHO 2005b, WHO 2010, WB 2013, Keith 
2018). However, there is increasing pressure on low- and middle-income nations to move 
towards social health insurance systems, rather than tax funded services, free at the point 
of access (Keith 2018). Actors such as the world bank and ministers of health see the value 
in double taxation systems which ensure a sustained income for health.  
3.2 Moving away from user charges of any kind at point of access promotes equity and more 
timely use of services in fragile contexts 
Research led by the author over five years (from 2000 until 2005) in seven countries 
(Tanzania, Ethiopia, Uganda, DRC, Rwanda, Burundi and Sudan) indicated that the 
introduction of user fees reduced timely utilisation of services, while raising less than 5% of 
service costs (Cadge and Keith 2005 a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h). When Uganda abolished user fees in 
2001, this resulted in an increased utilisation of services by 25% in 2001 and a 55% increase 
by 2002. Madagascar also showed a 25% increase in service utilisation following fee 
abolition. These positive impacts were balanced by the evidence of the negative impact of 
user fee introduction such as a 52% reduction of service utilisation in Vietnam when fees 
were introduced in 1989, and a 35% reduction in service use in Zambia in 1982 when they 
introduced fees. In Niger, the introduction of fees resulted in 41% reduction of utilisation 
and in Kenya by 52% (SC 2008). This evidence was fed into global health policy fora and into 
the development of the UN SGs action plan for improving maternal and child health. In 
2013, the Director General, of the World Bank, Jim Kim, speaking at the World Health 
Assembly, advised countries to move away from regressive user fees for health, despite 
countries being forced by the WB to implement these (Kim 2013, Keith 2013).  
3.3 Social Health Insurance (SHI) does not protect the vulnerable, without extra tax funded 
resources 
While evidence against the use of user fees increased, more countries were encouraged to 
move towards pooled funding, through either taxes or insurance. Most countries had 
limited tax-based funds and were encouraged to develop social health insurance (SHI) 
options as a way of sustainably funding health (Keith 2011, Oxfam 2013). However, there 
was no evidence that SHI would protect the poorest. The author commissioned a scoping 
review to explore the evidence supporting the use of social health insurance to protect the 
poorest to achieve universal health coverage. Paper two (Morell and Keith 2008) was shared 
with ministers of health at the World Health Assembly to share this evidence with them. 
However, as the World Bank provides significant technical and financial support for health 
financing most countries have agreed to set up social health insurance systems. Ministers of 
Health are enticed by the ability to have more control over their resources. However, as SHI 
systems generally only cover those in formal employment, not the poorest, they often result 
in more people being pulled into poverty when paying for health, unless the country 
chooses to fund free care for the poorest (often through tax-based funding). When the 
government of Ghana decided to pursue SHI, Oxfam (2011) carried out an analysis which 
illustrated that the poorest majority were not covered, Ghana then changed its policy and 
decided to support the rural poor through tax funds. If more countries were supported to 
strengthen their tax-based systems, to progressively cover a comprehensive essential health 
package, long-term gains could be made in maternal and child health outcomes (Morel and 
Keith 2008). Social Health Insurance may provide coverage of health care, but it does not 
protect the poorest from impoverishment without concurrent tax-based financing, which 
will reduce the efficiency of the SHI programme. No country has succeeded in using a SHI 
approach for UHC without adding tax-based funds to cover the poor. Fees at the point of 
service leads to deadly delays in seeking care and they can also pull families into further 
poverty (Morel and Keith 2008, Keith and Cadge 2005).  
All nine research papers presented evidence that pro-poor health financing and community 
health workers, like community midwives, are important factors in improving equity in the 
countries reviewed. Case studies presented also illustrated those low incomes countries can 
reduce inequities by making health care free at the point of access, to achieve good health 
at low cost as has been found in Cuba, Costa Rica, Sri Lanka and Uganda (Keith 2009 b, 
2010). In paper three (All-mothers matter), 100% of respondents in the DRC cited cost as a 
barrier, and 81% of the population were unable to pay for health services (Keith 2009). The 
indirect costs of seeking health care, such as the lack of time, transport, cultural or gender 
related concerns, were also barriers to timely utilisation (Keith 2009, 2019).   Other social 
safety nets, such as cash transfers, were found to be the most empowering for health and 
nutrition when targeting the poorest mothers (Keith 2009, Owusu Adde et al 2018).  Cash 
transfer programmes give mothers money to help offset the impact of poverty. They can be 
conditional (like the Progressa programme in Mexico requiring mothers to attend schools 
and clinics) or they can be unconditional such as the Brazil programme. Evidence indicates 
these programmes improve health nutrition and food security outcomes for the poorest 
(Owsu Adde et al 2018). This is in line with research from Garret et al (2009) and WHO 
(2010). Equity does not just mean providing services free at the point of access it also means 
that all people should have access to the health care they need. However, 1 billion people in 
the world will never see a health worker, and 2 billion do not have access to essential health 
care (Keith 2018). People living in low-income countries or contexts, where health care is 
not available or is too expensive, are not able to seek the care they need. This results in 
unnecessary or preventable suffering and deaths, the avoidance of which often means 
people must sell finite assets to fund the cost of care and treatment, pulling them, and their 
families, (further) into poverty (Keith 2010). In 2009 fragile states were spending on average 
around $9 per person per year for health care despite WHO estimating that $40 per person 
per year was needed by 2015 to meet the health related MDGs (Keith 2009 b). In 2020, 
WHO estimates that $60 per person per year is now necessary to ensure essential health for 
all. Many countries still invest less than 25 per person per year (WHO 2020). Thirteen of 
the fifteen countries with the highest rates of maternal death have also endured violent 
conflict as shown in paper three (Keith 2009 b).  Despite hosting only 8% of the global 
population these countries account for 35% of maternal deaths (Keith 2008 d). Many of 
these countries had fewer than 1 health worker per 1,000 population to reach at least 80% 
of the population with essential health care. Inadequate funding, lack of health workers and 
insecurity, can all reduce timely health-seeking behaviour (Keith 2009 b). Fragility does not 
simply exist in post-conflict countries; populations living in areas of high deprivation can also 
be deterred from seeking care as presented in paper nine (Keith et al 2019). Following a 
decade of austerity in the UK, Keith (2019) highlighted the negative impact of reducing 
public health budgets, with some London boroughs suffering funding cuts of over 2 million, 
translating directly into reductions in maternal and child services. Boroughs cut their health 
and nutrition staff, resulting in reduced access for vulnerable groups, such as those for 
whom English is not a second language, and young inexperienced mothers (Keith et al 
2019). Ensuring that data is collected, and inequities are recognised and addressed, is one of 
the most important functions of a robust health system. Most health systems do not collect 
this information effectively, which results in many vulnerable groups being missed (Keith 
2019). In fragile contexts, resources, services and trust are often stretched, resulting in 
deadly delays in populations seeking care (Keith 2009b, 2010, 2019).  
Chapter four: Finding two: Concurrent investment in sectors such as nutrition, water, 
sanitation and quality education, with essential community-based health services could 
prevent 2.5 million under five-year-old deaths annually.  
Chapter four addresses key finding two, that concurrent investment in sectors such as food security, 
nutrition, water, sanitation, social protection and quality education can lead to reductions in 
maternal and child deaths and illnesses, even in fragile contexts. Although set out as a clear principle 
in the Alma Ata, the concurrent investment in these sectors has not occurred universally, especially 
in fragile contexts.  
What the Alma Ata promised:  
Primary health care is essential health care based on practical, scientifically sound 
and socially acceptable methods and technology made universally accessible (Alma 
Ata WHO 1978) 
Primary Health Care (PHC) includes preventing illness, promoting food supply and 
nutrition, safe water and sanitation, immunisation, disease prevention and 
management (WHO 1978) 
New evidence from selected works: 
Paper three demonstrated that fragile countries can strengthen health services through the 
investment in a cadre of competent community midwives. Including the community in the 
selection criteria and planning of programmes, can increase the trust between the health 
system and the community. Midwives must be equitably distributed, and international aid 
must reach the most marginalised health systems and populations. The paper called for 
global health funds and partnerships to invest 50% of their available funding into health 
systems strengthening (HSS) to offset the impact of vertical programmes. Rapid scaling up of 
skilled attendants (doubling the number of health workers) would cost 2.71 per person per 
year in fragile states. This would include one skilled birth attendant (SBA) for every 175 
pregnant women, providing free maternal health care, in accessible health facilities.  
Paper four demonstrated that 2.5 million under five-year-old lives could be saved annually, 
through 18 interventions delivered at community level. Services must be delivered free at 
the point of access and there must be well-resourced and supported community health 
workers, linked to the health system. These community health workers need standardised 
training and should have a minimum of nine years of primary education, without which, 
they will not effectively retain complex health messages and will usually require extra 
training and support on site. The report highlighted the importance of improving infant 
nutrition to reduce child death rates in the first two years.  
Paper nine demonstrated the negative impact of ten years of austerity on local UK 
government funding, which had led to reduced services for the most marginalised in 
London, resulting in only 1% of mothers still breastfeeding at six months, from the over 80% 
of mothers, who start breastfeeding at birth. Mothers needed more support in the first six 
weeks. Health workers suggested that societal change was needed to promote 
breastfeeding. Urgent changes were also needed in NHS units, to ensure policies are 
implemented such as not giving bottles breastfed babies. Training is taking place but is not 
being effectively implemented, coordination between providers was weak and mixed 
messages were common, leading to confusion and misperceptions (Keith et al 2019). Paper 
nine also demonstrates that the provision of additional support does work, the Tower 
Hamlets borough has 13% higher levels of breastfeeding after six weeks than the rest of 
London, due to its support of mothers through peer counsellors (Keith et al 2019). 
4.1 Community level intersectoral interventions can prevent 2.5 million under five deaths 
The Alma Ata Declaration was developed through an evidenced based policy process from 
countries that had implemented universal health care by addressing the social determinants 
of health (Werner and Saunders 1997, Baum 2105, Keith 2018). Research conducted by the 
author in 2003 estimated that MDG 4 and 5 would not be achieved by 2015, without more 
investment in health systems and health workers. The author then commissioned and co-
authored a paper that explored how Sri Lanka achieved good health at low cost. The paper 
determined that services were delivered close to populations, communities had a voice in 
its focus, and staff were given incentives to work in rural areas. Services were free at the 
point of access (Mc Kay, Keith and Penrose 2004). The report also demonstrated that the 
government had invested in education and water and sanitation at the same time as 
strengthening health services. When the author wrote paper four (Child Health Now) (Keith 
2009 b), previous research was considered as well as field evidence from 1,600 community 
health programmes in 120 countries across the world. The evidence supported previous 
research, that access to health, free at the point of access, along with social protection 
measures, nutritious and balanced diets, quality education, water, sanitation and economic 
empowerment opportunities for women, were all key factors for improving health 
outcomes for mothers and their children under five. The author calculated that 2.5 million 
childrens lives could be saved through 18 low-cost interventions (Keith 2009b): such as 
sleeping under a bed net to prevent malaria, protecting children with immunisations, 
supporting safe delivery of infants with skilled birth attendants and ensuring all children 
with diarrhoea are given oral rehydration solution (fortified with zinc). These interventions 
were all reflected in the Lancet Nutrition series in 2008 and 2013, and in the 2008 World 
Bank report on scaling up nutrition in 2009 (Black et al 2013 and WB 2009). The report was 
launched, simultaneously, in Kenya, India, Indonesia and Geneva. World Vision International 
was invited to be part of the UN SGs Commission on Information and Accountability for 
Woman and Childrens Health, ensuring that marginalised voices would be involved in the 
monitoring of the UN SGs Every Woman and Every Child campaign. Since 2009, the number 
of children dying from preventable causes has reduced by around 4 million (WHO 2020). 
Paper four was supported by a global campaign which helped to bring power with other 
maternal and child health stakeholders while also bringing power to the country 
programmes who needed simple data that could be used for local level advocacy (WV 
2016). In 2010, WHO focused the World Health Report on health financing, reminding the 
countries of their 2005 pledge to move away from user fees for health care, and increased 
levels of civil society engagement in health service planning cycles. Publication four (Keith 
2009 b) also called for a redefinition of health systems, to incorporate family and 
community-level care, supported by increased public investment in social sectors such as 
water and sanitation and nutrition in line with evidence and the principles of PHC. Countries 
that paid for these services through public taxation were more pro-poor, reducing national 
inequities (Keith 2009). The report identified nutrition as a key sector that required more 
investment especially investment into supporting exclusive infant and young child feeding 
practices and the integration of malnutrition programmes into national health systems.   
Babies who are not breastfed are 6 times more likely to die before the age of two 
months than children who are not (Keith 2009 b).  
The report gave essential evidence to countries (strengthening power within and to) to hold 
governments to account for more investment and attention on nutrition and food security.  
The Scaling up Nutrition (SUN) global campaign was launched in 2010. In 2012 the UK 
hosted the Nutrition for Development conference resulting in $4 billion worth of pledges for 
nutrition interventions globally. Tracking the impact of these extra investments, in paper 
seven, Keith et al (2015) demonstrated that when countries invest in nutrition, gains were 
made in improving nutrition and health outcomes. Sadly, many countries remain focused on 
behaviour change messages without strengthening community health systems (Keith et al 
2015).  Integrated programming was also presented in paper five (Keith 2010) 
demonstrating that community health services delivered free at the point of access, by 
community health workers, can achieve enhanced health outcomes, even in fragile states. 
The author was invited to a high-level planning meeting, in Sierra Leone, in 2010 at the 
Presidents office, which resulted in free services being implemented for under five-year-
olds and health worker strengthening programmes being supported by the UK government. 
This investment and change in policy approach resulted in halving the child mortality rate, 
before the devastating impact of the Ebola, led to reversal in health outcomes. In paper 
three (Keith 2009 b) an ambitious call for increased investment into doubling health care 
workers in fragile states was ignored which would have only cost 2.71 per person per year. 
This amount would include the cost of training community midwives, paying them and 
facilitating the provision of essential maternal health care services free at the point of 
access. The calculation called for 1 skilled attendant per 175 pregnant women, 4 health 
facilities per 500,000 people providing basic emergency obstetric health care and 1 facility 
that could provide comprehensive emergency obstetric ealth care. Paper three (Keith 2009 
b) presented Afghanistans maternal health programme as an example, where the number 
of women delivered by skilled attendants had increased from six per cent in 2002 to 19.9 
per cent in 2006, despite ongoing conflict and instability. This has been achieved by 
investing in a new cadre of health worker, called community midwives. The midwives all had 
nine years primary schooling and then 18 months training. The programme was supported 
by a Provincial Health Officer from the Ministry of Health demonstrating the importance of 
leadership. The community were integrally involved in the criteria for selection of the 
midwives. This increased the trust and resulted in increased utilisation.   
more women are choosing to deliver in the health centre as they know they will 
have a trained midwife looking after them Afghanistan community midwife. (Keith 
2009 a) 
4.3 Intersectoral investment in social determinants of health: focusing on nutrition, food 
security, social protection, water, sanitation, and quality education improves health 
Seven of the nine reports (papers one, three, four, five, seven, eight and nine)  demonstrate 
evidence of the positive impact of addressing other sectors concurrently, specifically female 
education, social protection, nutrition, water and sanitation and food security. Keith (2008 
d, 2009 a, 2009 b, 2010, 2015 and 2018) presented evidence that although there is 
recognition of the importance of the social determinants, there is a significant lack of 
concurrent investment and although policies were developed and staff were being trained, 
they were not being implemented. A second common challenge was the lack of coordinated 
intersectoral programming, specifically the collection of disaggregated data reporting the 
impact on health of other sectors. More investment is required to address this gap. 
However, paper nine (Keith 2019) demonstrated that even with these challenges, progress 
can happen when leadership prioritises health and nutrition.  
Chapter five: Finding three: Active community engagement, prioritising the most 
vulnerable, reduces inequalities 
Chapter five supports key finding three that active community engagement promotes more 
effective health services and outcomes. It presents evidence from seven of the nine papers 
(1,3,4,5,7,8,9) on the positive impact of active engagement in health planning and policy 
determination by communities and health workers. The work also demonstrates the 
negative impact of forty years of top-down social mobilisation programmes that do not 
create safe spaces for communities to share their voice and feed into the development of 
sustainable solutions for their contexts. This has also broken the trust between communities 
and health services (Keith 2018, Gilson and Adyepong 2018).  
What the Alma Ata promised:  
people have the right and duty to participate individually and collectively in the 
planning and implementation of their health care PHC relies, at local and referral 
levels, on health workers.to work as a health team and to respond to the expressed 
health needs of the community (Alma Ata, WHO 1978) 
New evidence from published works: 
Papers one, three, four, five, seven eight and nine demonstrate that investing in 
active community engagement, even in fragile contexts, increases trust and increases 
the timely use of preventive and curative care (Keith 2008a, 2009 a, 2009b, 2010, 
2015, 2018, 2019). As these papers all led to change, they also demonstrate that 
collecting voices, stories and evidence, and feeding it into political planning 
processes, can also lead to change. Strengthening the power with and to.  Examples 
included maternal health programmes in Afghanistan with husband-and-wife teams 
increasing safe maternal health in deliveries (Keith 2009), and in Zambia the 
community support for HIV and nutrition programmes to support HIV positive 
mothers (Keith 2008).   
Paper four presented examples on the impact of Citizens Voice and Accountability 
interventions from thirty countries demonstrating that the active engagement with 
communities can increase health service utilisation and community ownership of 
community health programmes in countries like Armenia, India, Indonesia, Kenya, 
Peru, Brazil Uganda and Ethiopia (Keith 2009 b). 
When inequalities become too oppressive, populations or citizen groups use their agency to 
call for change. Joining together creates increased power with and power to so that 
populations can reduce the power over them. Political action for change is not new. In the 
UK in 1819 there was a massacre in Lancaster due to increasing poverty and poor living 
conditions, these riots led to the first Public Health Act in 1848 revised in 1875 to include 
investment in water supply, sanitation, housing and education (Saunders and Carver 1985). 
Riots in rural China on the cost of health care led to policy change in 2008 while the Make 
Poverty History campaign raised millions for development in Africa, as civil societies joined 
together to call for a change resulting in G8 pledges to double aid to halve poverty (Oxfam 
2013). Paper three, four and five all demonstrated that creating mechanisms for 
communities to have a voice in health planning and policy determination can also lead to 
increased trust and more timely access of health services (Keith 2009a, 2009 b and 2010).  
5.1 Community Participation and Social Mobilisation  
Kent (1991) asserted that the UNICEF watered down approach to community participation, 
which was replaced by compliance and mobilisation, was used as a recruiting strategy to get 
communities or other actors to support a top-down neoliberal-based agenda. Social 
marketing communication strategies replaced active engagement of communities in their 
own community analysis and planning for change. This has reduced trust between 
communities and health systems (Gilson 2005, Keith 2009 b, Keith 2018, Gilson and 
Adyepong 2018). Community Health Workers were treated as the lowest level of the health 
system, given simple tasks rather than seen as agents of change (Kent 1991, Werner and 
Saunders 1997). PHC was implemented as a top-down approach rather than supporting 
empowerment, where communities encouraged to diagnose their own problems and plan 
their own solutions and priorities (Werner and Saunders 1997). In paper one (Keith 2008 d) 
enhanced health outcomes was combined by increased social cohesion when communities 
were involved and supported, as occurred with HIV programmes in Malawi and Zambia. In 
papers one, three, four and five Keith (2008 d, 2009 a, 2009 b, 2010) demonstrated 
examples of positive impacts of active engagement which echoed evidence previously 
presented by Chambers (1983), Werner and Saunders (1997), Gilson (2005). 
Timothy was a taxi driver who used to wait outside when his wife was pregnant, she 
was found to be HIV positive. Timothy and his two other children all had HIV as well. 
 I learn that I am HIV positive, my two children were HIV positive. In addition, even 
my unborn child may be positive. I knew my life had come to an end but I was 
wrong today my youngest child does not have HIV and the rest of the family are 
living positively with HIV on ARVs. The children are being supported to go to school 
and I take computer classes while my wife takes the sewing classes, and we are 
saving up to buy a small shop for her to sell her clothes.1 PLWA Jos Nigeria (Keith 
2008 d) 
5.2 Community Voice and Accountability  
Although the Alma Ata used the term community participation, the author has used voice 
and accountability in this paper, due to the impact of forty years of top-down replacement 
of active engagement of communities in the own solutions to a focus on increased focused 
on compliance with behaviour change programmes focusing on knowledge rather than 
creating enabling environments for change. Paper four presented numerous examples of 
how active Community voice and accountability seeks to ensure that safe spaces are created 
for communities to feed actively into health plans and policies. However, even this term has 
now become a checklist to be completed by many organisations, rather than an active 
collaboration between communities and health systems (Keith 2009b). In my MSc thesis in 
Nigeria my research demonstrated how communities increase ownership of community 
health programmes when they are involved with the determination of the problems and 
planning solutions (Keith 2000). This was also demonstrated in papers one and five (Keith 
2008 d and Keith 2010). Between 2001 and 2008 the author actively advocated for the 
creation of civil society platforms for the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisations 
(GAVI), The Global Fund to Fight AIDs Tb and Malaria (GFATM), and the World Bank Health 
Nutrition and Population (HPN) Unit.  These platforms were established. The author sat on 
many of the steering committees but, after eight years, the voices on these platforms had 
ceased to be authentic. Many of the participants were directly supported by the hosts of the 
platforms, reducing the ability of those participants to reflect accurate lived experience due 
to power over them. New mechanisms must be explored where the voices of all people can 
feed into the policies created at local and national level, perhaps harnessing the power of 
technical innovations as mentioned in the Astana Declaration can lead to new ways to bring 
marginalised voices into the health policy and planning arena. The HIV community 
conversations have been highly successful in creating safe spaces (as presented in paper one 
and four) however even within this group of stakeholders a few voices became the voice of 
all communities.  The present pandemic is demonstrating that social media may be one way 
of sharing voices, however, it can also be used to spread inaccurate messages, so more work 
is needed to implement accountability measure seven from the UN SGs Women and 
Children Global Health Strategy (PMNCH 2012). It states that all countries need to create a 
functioning mechanism to collect voices of all, listen to them and act upon them. So far, no 
country has succeeded in achieving this target (Keith 2020) due to lack of political 
commitment to do however there are several positive pilots presented in the CHN report 
(Keith et al 2009) illustrating what can work and how impactful they can be. Such as child 
parliaments in India and community score cards in India and Armenia. The WHO WCGH 
group are also tracking progress on this indicator, but more urgency is required. Also, it 
helps when a donor or an influential advocate supports the target.   At present non-
governmental organisations and community organisations are helping to create safe spaces 
for community voices to be harnessed.  
5.3 Evidence of the impact of community voice and accountability 
Five of the nine reports included in the thesis present strong case studies of how voice was 
used to hold governments to account. The Bjorkman et al (2009) Power to the People paper, 
implemented a randomised control trial to demonstrate the impact that the voice of the 
communities can have to increase service utilisation and reduce morbidity rates. Chamber 
(1983), Werner and Saunders (1997), Rosato et al (2008) and Keith (2008, 2009, 2010, 2015, 
2018, 2019) all demonstrate increased trust in health services when populations are 
included in planning and implementation of services.  
Trust was earned through community dialogues and involving the community in 
development and implementation of the community midwife programme Keith 2009 b 
Chapter six: Finding six: good governance and leadership support positive health 
outcomes, even in fragile contexts. 
Chapter six supports key finding four and presents evidence from papers one, three, four, 
five, six, seven and nine on the important role that governance and leadership plays at local, 
national and global levels. It presents evidence to demonstrate that when a country 
commits to health and equity then progress can occur even in the poorest contexts. The 
chapter also demonstrates that global health governance is essential to achieve the right to 
health for all and the SDGS.  
What the Alma Ata promised: 
Governments have a responsibility for the health of their people which can be fulfilled 
only by the provision of adequate health and social measures... Primary health care is 
the key to attaining this target as part of development in the spirit of social justice. 
(Alma Ata WHO 1978) 
PHC requires that all aspects of national and community development, in particular 
agriculture, animal husbandry, food, industry, education, housing, public works, 
communications and other sectors; and demands the coordinated efforts of all those 
sectors (Alma Ata WHO 1978)  
 All countries should cooperate in a spirit of partnership and service to ensure 
primary health care for all people, since the attainment of health by people in any 
one country directly concerns and benefits every other country. (Alma Ata, WHO 
1978). 
New evidence from published works:  
The new global partnerships are raising resources, but they are not reaching health 
systems and the most vulnerable populations are missing out from effective 
investment (Keith 2009, 2010, 2018) 
In paper three the fifteen countries with the highest maternal mortality rate (Sierra 
Leone, Afghanistan, Niger, Chad, Angola, Somalia, Rwanda, Liberia, Burundi, DRC, 
Guinea Bissau, Malawi, Nigeria, Cameroon and Central African Republic) account for 
184,290 maternal deaths (in 2008) received only $81 million dollars in aid for 
maternal health (Keith 2009).  
Paper three demonstrated that Global Health Partnerships do not always strengthen 
health systems and often place extra work on stressed staff through parallel vertical 
programmes and structures. They should invest 50% of their resources to strengthen 
health systems.  
Papers three four and five demonstrate that concurrently investment in food 
security, nutrition, sanitation, clean water, universal education (especially of girls), 
womens empowerment, and social protection measures (like cash transfers for the 
poorest) has achieved and maintained good health at low cost, in low income and 
fragile contexts (Keith 2009, 2010) 
Liberia struggled with ten years of conflict which resulted in high levels of maternal 
and child deaths. However, the implementation of pro-poor policies (such as a focus 
on district health systems and staffing, joint assessments of services and services 
free at the point of access) along with concurrent investment in water and sanitation 
resulted in the country halving its under-five mortality rate by 2010 (Keith 2010).  
Paper six demonstrated that the lack of coordination of global health is resulting in 
lost lives. WHO has the mandate but not yet the resources or authority to coordinate 
and lead global health actions. To meet the MDGs for global health $42 billion was 
needed but not provided. Little of what was provided was invested in fragile states 
or health systems. Global health investment needs to prioritise health systems (Keith 
2011). 
6.1 Global Health Governance  
Global governance for health is achieved when we obtain a fair and equitable global 
governance system based on a more democratic distribution of political and 
economic power that is socially and environmentally sustainable (Otterson et al 
2014 in Baum 2015). 
Today there are more than 100 organisations working in global health. Over 90 global health 
partnerships, 20 global and regional health funds, 26 UN agencies as well as more than 40 
bilateral donor agencies (Keith 2011). There is no effective mechanism to coordinate these 
actors, and accountability differs according to each global health stakeholder. The 2005 
Paris Agreement on Aid Effectiveness, and the Accra Agenda for Change, both attempted to 
increase national ownership, and harmonisation with national plans and priorities, through 
mutual accountability, but progress has been slow in moving these principles into action 
(DFID 2007). The International Health Partnership, established by Gordon Brown, to bring all 
country level actors together has had some impact in countries such as Ethiopia, Nepal and 
Mozambique, but is it not consistently being implemented (Keith et al 2011). The complexity 
of harmonising this group while maintaining the voice of people is a challenge, and one that 
World Vision and other civil society actors were increasingly concerned with, as more 
private public partnerships answered to their donors rather than to the countries where 
they worked (Keith et al 2011). In 1946 the World Health Organisation was given the 
mandate to act as the directing and coordinating authority in international health work, 
however, for the last thirty years WHO has only received 20% of the planned funding for its 
normative work. This has resulted in its inability to complete all its roles effectively. To be 
given responsibility without power, resources, or authority, was a challenge that the WHO 
DG asked the member states to consider in 2011. The DG stated that WHO could no longer 
attempt to complete all the roles given to it without significant changes to their resources 
and clarification of their role. Ministers of health from the 193 countries assembled, agreed 
they wanted the WHO to continue to coordinate and lead global health governance. For this 
paper Global Health Governance is about the action and means adopted by global society 
to improve health and to achieve equity in health worldwide (Keith et all 2011)  
For WHO to be able to effectively take up this renewed authority, changes are needed. As 
part of the Child Health Now Campaign, WVI sought to ensure that the voices of civil society 
and the poorest communities were represented in any new processes established to 
strengthen global health governance. Keith et al (2011) carried out a critical theory 
approach, including debates and 38 key informant interviews, to respond to the points 
presented to the assembly by the WHO DG.  Paper six supported the role given to WHO but 
called for more robust systems to ensure that voices from civil society and the poorest 
populations could be gathered effectively to feed into local national and global health 
planning and policy determination (Keith et al 2011). This is in line with the principles of the 
right to health in the WHO constitution and included in the Alma Ata Declaration. The paper 
suggested that a normative framework was required that would use the right to health as 
the underlying principles, recognising that most countries would achieve this through 
progressive realisation. To be able to lead global health effectively, WHO would need to be 
given the authority from all global health actors, not just member states. This would require 
the setting up a global health framework convention, or charter, where all actors would 
agree their roles and responsibilities and resources galvanised with at least $42 billion 
dollars by 2015. The spending on global health would also need to be better allocated 
towards those in most need such as in fragile states, and further strengthening health 
systems and human resources (Keith et al 2011). The debate continues, but as COVID has 
clearly shown, not enough investment has been placed into WHO to ensure it can do its job 
and until there is global solidarity on what its role is governance will be difficult. Equally 
challenging is the underinvestment in health systems, we expect to have access to health 
when we need it but fail to invest in the health workers or the systems, we need to provide 
6.2 Leadership can reduce inequities and promote progress even in fragile contexts 
If Global Health Governance is complicated, so too is leading a country. Many leaders have 
failed to prioritise health until there is a significant problem. The lives lost through the 
delayed acknowledgment of the problem of HIV in Southern Africa or Cholera in Zimbabwe 
are poignant examples. When leaders do engage and use their voice, they can bring about 
significant impact in the health of the people. Again, we can see clearly from the impact of 
leadership in the present pandemic. The Prime Minister of New Zealand acted quicky and 
effectively contained the virus, while other leaders failed to implement the public health 
measures required to save lives (WHO WP 2021).  
The last global pandemic the world had to deal with was HIV/ AIDS. Although it affected 
many countries it devasted five countries in Southern Africa. Malawi is a small country 
which was already struggling with issues around poverty and human resources to deliver 
essential care to its population. When HIV began to take hold, the President spoke out, 
sharing his grief at the loss of his own brother. He established a multi sectoral AIDS unit in 
the office of the president and included a unit for nutrition, recognising how important 
nutrition is to health and fighting the HIV pandemic.  
I have no apologies for making this known to Malawians. We should be 
open and break the silence about HIV/AIDS. The fight against the killer 
disease can only succeed if we break the barriers of silence, stigma and 
discrimination 2004 President Bakili Mulizi to Malawians re: brothers 
death from AIDS (Keith 2008 d) 
He approved an HIV/AIDS budget and strategy and set up a national HIV /AIDS partnership 
for voices of people living with HIV to be listened to (Keith, 2008 d).  
 Before ARVs became free the government offered an incentive of 5,000 Kwachas 
(5) to all HIV+ civil servants to disclose their status to offset the cost of treatment 
(Keith 2008) 
In paper seven Keith et al (2015) several factors were presented as essential for progress in 
achieving nutrition outcomes such as national leadership, prioritisation of nutrition and an 
active Scaling Up Nutrition partnership that was linked to the Ministry of Health. However, 
one voice from a young girl in Liberia remains with me until today 
thank you for making our treatment free  (Keith 2010). 
Chapter seven:  Conclusion and recommendations 
Overall, the integrated programme of research presented demonstrates a significant 
contribution of original knowledge by answering the three research questions, using 
evidence from the published papers. Universal Health Coverage is not the same as the right 
to health, as health requires concurrent investment in other social sectors. There was no 
evidence supporting the role of Social Health Insurance alone to ensure Universal Health 
Coverage, many countries using this system need to provide tax-based resources to protect 
the protect the poorest. The four key findings required to achieve more timely use of health 
systems (especially in fragile contexts) were presented in chapters 3,4,5 and 6 demonstrated 
that:  
1. Equity is supported through essential services provided free at the point of access, 
not through insurance or direct payment systems. Equity of access is one of the most 
essential factors to timely utilisation. Countries permitting user charges and using 
health insurance systems, are not reaching the most vulnerable citizens unless they 
implement tax-based funding for the poorest.  
2. Progress will only be possible if concurrent investment in food security, nutrition, 
social protection, water, sanitation and quality education (especially of girls) occurs. 
3. Active community engagement is essential to rebuilding trust for sustainable 
solutions at community level. Top-down social mobilisation approaches should be 
avoided.  
4. Good governance and leadership can support progress in fragile contexts, but global 
solidarity needs to be prioritised, and invested in, to support a robust and resilient 
global health governance system.  
These key findings were augmented by specific original knowledge to support global change: 
Paper three calculated that the 15 fragile states used as case studies in the report, could 
double their health worker capacity through spending an extra 2.71 per person per year to 
ensure all women were delivered by a competent skilled community midwife. Paper four, 
that presented eighteen community interventions to prevent 2.5 million deaths each year. 
Paper four also highlighted that an increased focus on nutrition was essential for progress. 
Specific interventions that delivered the highest impact, were those addressing 
malnutrition, especially regarding poverty reduction and increasing the number of 
exclusively breastfed children, while ensuring the early identification and treatment of 
severe acute malnutrition through government services.  
The work provides evidence about how essential it is for communities to have a voice and to 
be supported to build on their power with to balance the overt power over national and 
global health decisions, that governments and global health partnerships currently enjoy. 
More investment is required to strengthen community voices, creating enabling 
environments for them to use their power with to reduce inequalities.  
7.1 What still needs to be done?  
We need more investment in strengthening equitable resilient health systems, supported by 
active community engagement systems. More research needs to be done to link the health 
delivery mechanisms with other sectors such as nutrition, food security, water, sanitation 
and social protection. More research would also help regarding infant and young child 
feeding in relation to the formation of a healthy microbiome and how this links to ill health 
and increased morality and malnutrition through the life cycle. Progress is possible in fragile 
states or contexts with high level political commitment to deliver essential health services 
free at the point of access through community health workers supported by robust and 
resilient health systems.  
Papers 1, 3, 4, 5 and 7 demonstrate that we can achieve health for all, but that it will require 
more intersectoral resources, which reduce inequity, and more health workers, reaching 
communities with essential services, free at the point of care. WHO (2020) estimate that 
essential health services can reach 80% of the population through a minimum investment of 
$60 per person per year. However, some countries spend a lot more on health care without 
reaching the poorest.  A greater focus on social development and social justice is required 
(Keith 2018). We need to create enabling environments for communities and health workers 
to have their voices heard determining their health and nutrition priorities.  
This decade 2008- 2018 has been a highly active period for global health and nutrition. The 
previous decade from 1990 until 2000 focused on more selective primary health care 
interventions such as immunizations and polio. While the recession of the 80s dramatically 
reduced social sector spending for health and education. The recent health campaigns have 
given some communities a voice, especially around disease specific issues like HIV, increased 
resources for community engagement led to greater impact of programmes. When power is 
harnessed with communities and the organisations supporting them it can have positive 
impact on health and nutrition outcomes, but also on community resilience and peace. 
These concepts were also captured in the Alma Ata and when fragmented support occurs is 
undermines community development and resilience. This can result in the loss of power 
especially for marginalised groups. There has been enhanced community and organisation 
collaboration in global health and nutrition in the last decade which has strengthened some 
communities power to, their power with and even their power within. However, global 
health is still a positivist top-down, club with increasing corporate influence, that wants a 
stronger voice over agenda setting in global health. The COVID pandemic offers us a chance 
to reflect on our future and implement the evidenced based Alma Ata principles, focusing 
on equity and voice through intersectoral investment. These principles are still relevant in 
the 21st century, even in fragile contexts. The 2018 Astana Declaration, while keeping many 
aspects of the Alma Ata, made Universal Health Coverage the goal, rather than the right to 
health. There is also no specific target for achieving health for all. This is a paradigm shift, 
from addressing health in its fullness, which is determined socially, to the focus on health 
intervention services and their financing, rather than robust, resilient, people centred, 
health and nutrition. The Astana Declaration includes lots of excellent promises for the next 
decade, however, we need to encourage government leaders and donors to increase 
political commitment to implementing promises such as equity and voice through an 
intersectoral lens, as there is evidence that this can work. There are fewer than ten years 
left until the SDGs must be achieved. Although we are off track, the impact of the COVID 
pandemic may create a window of opportunity for global change and a recommitment to 
the Right to Health.  
Annex one: Environment impact of publications  
Paper one: Keith R (2008) Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission (PMTCT): Global 
Policy Implication: reflecting on progress and challenges in three countries (Malawi, 
Nigeria and Zambia) Tearfund UK Report was commissioned by Tearfund and required 
three field visits to each of the countrys meetings with Tearfund partner organisations, 
health workers and mothers living with HIV in the three countries. The report fed into policy 
dialogue on changing the Voluntary Counselling and Testing approach to an opt out 
approach as that which was being used in Malawi and Zambia. This is now the 
recommended approach for PMTCT programmes. Also, the voice of the participants 
regarding the value and importance of free health care on their quality of life and adherence 
to timely health service utilisation strengthened the global call for more attention to be 
given to making health carefree at the point of access for all essential health interventions.  
Paper two: Morel C, Keith R (2008) Policy Briefing: Social Health Insurance Save the 
Children UK Following the adoption, 2005, at the World Health Assembly, resolutions 58.31 
and 58.33, it had become clear that there was a misperception that the WHO was 
supporting social health insurance, as the mechanism to achieve pro-poor health financing. 
A scoping review of evidence on the role of social health insurance in protecting the poorest 
was considered essential to feed into World Health Assembly discussions taking place in 
2009, and to feed into the 2010 World Health Report on Universal Health Coverage. At the 
time the WHO had considered closing their health financing department due to the lack of 
normative funding. The policy briefing report was used to stimulate dialogue which resulted 
in the UK government agreeing to support the WHO financing department for two years. 
However, the World Bank were pushing social health insurance very strongly at country 
level, where the WHO did not have the capacity or the research to support evidenced based 
policy dialogue. More research on how to support low-income countries to strengthen tax-
based finances to support health services.  
Paper three: Keith R (2009) All mothers matter: HRH in fragile states Merlin UK  
This research used field experience to develop strong messages on human resources and 
community health workers in fragile contexts. The publication was launched as part of the 
Hands up for Health Workers Campaign and used to promote increased investment in 
health workers. The Global Health Workforce Alliance convened a meeting to discuss the 
role of CHWs and establish a standardised set of competencies and definitions for 
community health workers. The GHWA held a meeting in Indonesia and developed a 
standardised definition for CHWs and called for all CHWs to be integrated into health 
systems and paid.  
Paper four: Keith R et al (2009) Child Health Now World Vision International London UK  
The report was launched at a side event in New York at United Nations, in September 2009, 
with Jon Sopel, the Assistant UN SG and the CEO of World Vision.  At the launch World 
Vision pledged $1.5 billion dollars to support maternal and child health which stimulated 
global support into MNCH funding pledges for the UN SGs Women and Child Global Health 
Strategy (Every woman, every child). As the Scaling up Nutrition was also launched at this 
UN GA increased commitment to Nutrition was also pledged. The report was also launched 
in India and Kenya and Geneva. In Geneva, the Director General of the WHO, Dr. Margaret 
Chan, stated the publication was excellent and would support the achievement of the MDGs 
in the poorest countries. World Vision was elected to be on the Interagency Monitoring 
committee for the UNSGs WCSH implementation. The report was also presented at the 
World Health Assembly in May 2010 and at the Women Deliver Conference in 2010 held in 
Washington, when regional advisers from WVI took part in advocacy training and 
presentations.   
Paper five: Keith R, Cadge N (2010) Unlocking Progress in Fragile States Save the Children 
UK Report released to target UK decisions on prioritising support for fragile states, which 
the UK government did prioritise. The report also led to the WHO inviting the Liberian 
president to attend the World Health Assembly, to discuss how Liberia had achieved a 50% 
reduction in under five child mortality rates.  
Paper six: Keith R, Ooms G, (2011) Improving Global Health Governance: technical briefing 
paper for the Child Health Now Campaign World Vision International, UK  
The research publication was launched at the World Health Organisations executive board, 
in 2011, to call for Global Health Governance to be added to the 2012 WHA agenda. A 
debate was held as a side session with Ministers of Health and other key informants which 
had over 100 delegates attending.  The Armenian chair of the WHO Executive Board did add 
governance to the WHA agenda and in the May 2012 World Health Assembly all 193 
countries called for WHO to continue to lead in Global Health Governance and tracking 
health trends across the world. However, there was a call for WHO to make efficiency 
changes to support countries better, to diversity staff competencies and to take the lead on 
health emergencies.  
Paper seven: Keith R et al (2015) What works for nutrition? Case studies from Vietnam, 
Uganda and Kenya Results, Concern and University of Westminster published by Results 
UK Launched at the UK Parliament in a debate led by MPs, prior to the government decision 
on national support for nutrition aid. The main call from the report, for sustained 
investment in nutrition and increases for nutrition sensitive spending were both 
implemented by the UK government.  
Paper eight: Keith R (2018) From Alma Ata to Astana: can renewed commitment to Health 
for All by the 2030 be committed to in October 2018? World Nutrition Journal 10 August 
2018 A commentary based on PhD publications, written to feed into the Astana declaration 
planning process, the author was part of a global task force feeding into the draft of the 
Astana declaration. The Astana declaration maintained the focus on PHC and right to health 
but placed UHC as the overall goal rather than the right to health for all.  
Paper nine: Keith R et al (2019) Understanding practices and perceptions of infant and 
young child feeding in Tower Hamlets borough, London UK World Nutrition   
Article one from the 2017 research Keith R et al (2017) Understanding perceptions and 
practices of infant and young child feeding and oral health in Tower Hamlets Borough, 
London University of Westminster. This research was completed in time to feed into the 
development of the five-year strategy and spending review for Tower Hamlets Public Health 
Team. A workshop was held with all senior health and nutrition staff where results were 
shared, this fed into the report and a separate paper on recommendations for the council. 
All recommendations (except one) were implemented. The infant and young child feeding 
programme was continued as a priority, a new nutrition role was created, and the capacity 
of health visiting team was increased for nutrition.  
Annex two: Pathway of learning from earlier research & publications 
It mattered to me. 
One day a man walked along a beach and saw a boy throwing star fish into the sea. 
He asked what he was doing and the responded that the starfish would die if they 
could not get back into the water. The old man saw that there were thousands of star 
fish on the beach and remarked that the boy could not make a difference to them all. 
The boy threw another star fish into the sea and stated: it mattered to that one Eisley 
L (1969). 
This PhD by Publications is a subjective view of a window in time, my constructed view of 
over 39 years of engagement in health system strengthening and research. I was brought up 
in a single parent household, in New York and Ireland. My lived experience planted seeds of 
the importance of using a collective voice to speak against inequalities and to fight for 
justice. I trained as Registered General Nurse in Cork 1982, in Ireland, I wanted to work in 
public health with communities, so I moved to England in 1985 to train as a midwife in 
Essex. I learned early in my career the power of research. Using research, I was able to 
assess certain admission practices, such midwives wearing hats and giving all mothers an 
enema on admission. I was able to use the evidence from the research to bring about 
changes to admission practices, improving the mothers experience in delivery. Health in the 
UK was changing, and the world was changing with a famine in Ethiopia, this awakened in 
me an urgent need to use my skills in Africa. I accepted a PHC management role to work in 
West Africa.  
Health Practitioner days as a nurse midwife in Europe and Africa (1982  1999) 
In 1988 I joined VSO (Voluntary Services Overseas) and worked a Primary Health Care Nurse 
Manager, in the Gambia, for three years, from 1988 until 1991. One research I took part in 
was an MRC intervention RCT study on the effectiveness of using insecticide treated bed 
nets to reduce the burden of malaria (Alonso et al 1991). The research indicated dramatic 
reduction in malaria when women and children slept under nets before ten pm at night. In 
my intervention sites the mothers were happy to use the nets as when they placed the wet 
nets on their beds, the insecticide killed the scabies mites, which led to severe irritation in 
their children. Understanding why populations change their practices and perceptions is 
essential for health care practitioners and researchers. Twenty years after this successful 
research, I would reflect, with concern, that so few (less than 2%) under-fives year olds slept 
under a bed net in 2009, despite malaria causing over 800,000 under five deaths (Keith 2009 
b). The translation of knowledge into action has always fascinated me. My lived experience 
has repeatedly demonstrated that knowledge alone was not enough to bring about change 
in practices and perceptions regarding timely use of health services, there were many 
barriers that needed to be identified and addressed. Working in the Gambia I was able to 
see how Primary Health Care could be effective, bringing essential health care closer to 
populations, working with communities, their leaders, teachers and health workers. This 
PHC programme resulted in over 90% coverage of immunisations and skilled birth attendant 
deliveries, despite most of the population living on less than $1 a day (Murphy 1989). The 
effective detection and treatment of malnutrition was also integrated into the programme 
combined with community programmes to improve water and sanitation and food security 
(Murphy 1990). The programme was a clear and functioning health programme using the 
Alma Ata principles to ensure the right to health (Murphy 1989). One of the biggest bottle 
necks was the lack of resources such as trained skilled health workers and commodities such 
as medicines and dressings. There was less than 1 health worker per 1,000 population. In 
2006 WHO estimated that 2.5 health workers were required to deliver basic health care to 
80% of the population. In 2020 they estimate that 4.5 health workers are required (including 
community health workers (WHO 2020). The 12 general nurses trained in the three years I 
worked there all secured work in Europe and migrated with weeks of graduating with their 
registered nursing degree. A clear health system barrier, resulting in community health 
workers having their roles expanded, often without resources or supervision. 
My time in Gambia finished, I returned home to work as a Practice Nurse team leader in 
1991, in a busy GP clinic in Edinburgh, Scotland. To improve the care of the large population 
I developed the Practice Nurse role, creating expanded protocols to carry out health 
promotion clinics for those with asthma and chronic illnesses like heart disease and 
diabetes, as well as family planning and reproductive health clinics and smoking cessation 
programmes (Murphy 1992). These expanded roles improved patient care and trust within 
the community. These roles are now part of the NMC register and practice nurse training is 
formalised in the UK. The practice had the highest number of HIV positive cases in Europe, 
we carried out research on drug adherence and care of HIV AIDs patients in the community. 
This experience was to be help me in my future roles in Africa. We also piloted research into 
the use of inhaled pentamidine as a way of slowing the progression from HIV to full blown 
AIDS, but adherence was a challenge. A second important lived experience at the surgery, 
was the role out of the new measles mumps and rubella vaccine. The community were very 
unsure about the need and safety of the new vaccine. We addressed these fears through 
clear messages and community meetings and clinics with health visitors. The importance of 
trust in community health care is essential. Identifying these barriers to timely health 
service utilisation here supported me throughout my research in future years.  The 
importance of voice and working with communities to determining and overcome barriers 
to health care utilisation, is essential, as set out in the Alma Ata.  
In 1994 I moved to work in Botswana, as a midwife, and a newly appointed baby friendly 
hospital adviser, for infant and young child feeding. It was a tumultuous time in southern 
Africa with political change and the increasing impact of HIV and AIDS in Botswana. As a 
new mother, delivering my first child in Botswana, without effective health care was a 
challenge. Breastfeeding without support and the lack of post-natal care moved theoretical 
knowledge, from my Maggie Myles textbook, into lived experienced. Using my experiences 
and my training I worked as a midwife and then a health practitioner in Gaborone.  Working 
for the USA Embassy health unit, I won a grant to carry out health promotion work on HIV 
and nutrition with young mothers in Gaborone. Many young mothers were being 
encouraged not to breastfeed their infants due to the risk of transmitting HIV through the 
breastmilk, however there was not a clean supply of water and infant formula was 
expensive. Mothers watered down the feeds, resulting in under nourished infants and a rise 
in infections. Their children all died by the age of one and all twenty mothers died within 
three years. There was no treatment yet for HIV and although Botswana did provide free 
health care, being diagnosed with HIV led to pensions and insurances being halted which led 
many people to refuse to be tested.  A few years later UNAIDS (1995) published research 
findings on the negative impact of mixed feeding on children born to HIV positive mothers. 
Today this research informs the global Infant and Young Child Feeding guidelines globally to 
exclusively breastfeed all infants until six months (including HIV positive infants). However, 
the earlier communications about the risk of breastfeeding your infants have been hard to 
change, with only 12% of infants exclusively breastfed in South Africa in 2009. Trust once 
lost is hard to reclaim. I left Africa in 1996 and returned to Scotland to have my second child, 
another valuable lived experience followed by a sisters role in a cottage hospital emergency 
room. Working nights, with two young children, helped enrich my lived experience again, 
regarding the importance that time and childcare had on timely health service utilisation. 
Especially when the mothers are sleep and nutrient deprived.   
My experience in the emergency room was to be well used in my next posting in Northern 
Nigeria, from 1997 until 1999 when I worked in a state, with a population of 10 million 
people, where 90% of the population were living in poverty.  Health systems were under 
funded and although there were skilled health workers available, insecurity and weak local 
level management of services, like the cold chain disruptive effective service provision, 
which reduced trust and timely utilisation of services. Supply side failures were addressed 
through rapid health facility assessments and the determination of demand side barriers 
was carried out using participatory learning in action sessions. In community meetings 
where the health team worked closely with communities to determine priorities, barriers 
and develop community action plans. A six-month qualitative research programme, using a 
naturalist enquiry approach, focused on exploring the communities perceptions of quality, 
in relation to community health workers (Keith 2000). Despite the health workers being 
trained to value local knowledge, they often believed they had more knowledge than the 
rest of the community and at times looked down at the community. Despite being trained to 
work in the community, many wanted to work at the health centre. It was interesting to 
learn that despite participatory training they valued working at the clinic more that in the 
communities (Keith 2000). It was time to add more theory to my experience and I enrolled 
for an MSc programme. 
Save the Children Head of Health: Health systems and human resources 2000- 2008 
I decided to do my MSc in International Health at the Centre for International Health in 1999 
in Edinburgh. The core reader, The Politics of Primary Health Care, was eye opening to me 
like the missing piece in my twenty years of experience (Saunders D & Werner D 1997). It 
introduced me to the importance of politics and power in relation to health. After 
graduating with my MSc in 2000, I was appointed as the first female and non-medical, Head 
of Health for Save the Children UK. Bringing my 18 years of experience to my role I used my 
new voice to ensure other voices were heard and led the investment of over 100,000 into 
innovative research into demand side barriers to health care access in Africa (Keith, 2001, 
2003 a, b, Save the Children 2001). I was able to invest in both global and field research to 
inform our policy positions and advocacy positions. Within a year we released a research 
report with MEDACT on negative impact of structure adjustment policies and under 
investment in Africas health systems: The Bitterest Pill of All: the collapse of Africas health 
systems was launched in 2001 (Save the Children and MEDACT 2001). The new millennium 
introduced new global public private partnerships, many health experts were concerned 
about their impact on the ground and so I commissioned the London School of Hygiene and 
Tropic Medicine to carry out a four-country study, on the impact of the new Global Alliance 
for Vaccines and Immunisations. I was concerned that the programme did not include much 
money for health systems, focusing only on new vaccines, not essential vaccines such as 
measles which killed around 900,000 children in 2001. The research report, New Products 
into Old Systems, was launched at the WHA Executive Board in Jan 2002, calling again for 
more investment in immunisation cold chain and health systems like managing waste. 
(Starling et al 2002 and Heaton and Keith 2002). The head of UNICEF attended the launch, 
NORAD established set up a health system working group and GAVI agreed to a more 
inclusive civil society group to feed into the implementation of their strategic plan. GAVI 
also added a data quality audit to their M and E systems to enhance the robustness of their 
DPT 3 indicator. However, they also held a high-level meeting in New York and used their 
power to get the Minster of Health Ghana to refute the messages in the report, I learned a 
valuable lesson on power and voice when working with vastly different groups, power 
always matters. In 2002 when we launched the GAVI report a new partnership was 
established, the Global Fund to Fight AIDs TB and Malaria. Kofi Annan (the UN SG addressed 
the World Health Assembly in May 2002 and announced the fund for HIV, he had just 
returned from South Africa where HIV and AIDs was devastating communities. A lot of the 
barriers picked up in our GAVI report were fed into the setting up of the GFATM board and 
Save the Children were appointed as the Northern NGO alternate voice.  We held meetings 
regularly with 45 organisations, to feed in their voices into the GFATM planning cycle, 
however the politics were at play again and much of the first ten years resources failed to 
reach the health systems. It was not until the US pledged $15 billion dollars to HIV and this 
supported the GFATM funds that HIV programmes were able to make HIV treatment free at 
the point of access. The 3 by 5 Campaign, set up in 2003, to get 3 million HIV people one 
treatment by 2005 was ambitious. Only 600,000 people were on treatment in 2003. Until 
then much of the HIV treatment was reaching only men who could afford to pay for the 
treatment. When the treatment was made free at the point of access, communities began 
to seek testing and treatment. In 2005 The President of Nigeria called for the prevention of 
mother to child transmission to be given increased support and within three years antenatal 
programmes began to integrate opt out programmes to test pregnant women placing them 
on treatment and adding nutrition to strengthen their health outcomes (Keith 2009 d).   
In 2000 Gordon Brown set up the Grow up free from Poverty Coalition to bring together 
NGOs and faith-based groups to tackle child poverty. In 2003 I led the coalition to complete 
field informed research into the progress of world in achieving the MDGs 4 and 5 for 
maternal and child health. The report (80 million lives) called for more investment into 
health systems, especially health workers and recurrent costs. It also called for health 
workers and communities to feed into health programme and policy decisions. The report 
was launched by Baroness Amos the Secretary of State in the Parliament. Voices from staff 
in the field were included in the launch to bring the reality of the field into the policy fora. 
(Fustukian, Keith and Penrose 2003) The next research commissioned needed to present a 
solution and in 2004 I commissioned another research report with Queen Margarets 
University to identify how Sri Lanka was able to achieve good health at low cost. The 
research demonstrated that when the Alma Ata principles are adhered to good health 
outcomes can be achieved at low cost. The key reasons for this were equity of health care 
(with all essential services free at the point of access) combined with a concurrent 
investment in water sanitation education and food security and an investment in human 
resources. [Mc Nay, Keith and Penrose 2004]. The presentation of a possible solution was 
welcome in the health policy fora and I was asked to present our research in Mexico at the 
Global Health Research Conference Mexico in 2003 and then at the World Banks reaching 
the poor conference in Washington DC in 2004 (Keith 2003, 2004). These networking 
opportunities led to collaborations with WHO and other organisations such as the Peoples 
Health Movement. 
While these global research projects were underway, I supported longitudinal field research 
over 5 years, from 2000 until 2005, in seven of our country programmes, in Africa (Uganda, 
Tanzania, Sudan, Rwanda, Burundi, DRC and Ethiopia). Liberia was also included in the 
research, but due to the war the research had to be halted. The volcanic eruption in DRC 
also resulted in the loss of essential data. The research series was entitled: The cost of 
coping with illness and we ensured that each country had a steering group of health 
professionals supported by academic leads. Each country carried out a household survey to 
determine the health seeking practices and this was supported by a Household Economic 
Analysis to determine the impact of health care costs on household budgets. These tools 
were supported by seasonal calendars and interviews and focus group discussions with 
health workers and communities. The research demonstrated that the biggest barrier to 
timely use of health care was the direct and indirect cost of health care, this resulted in over 
a third not seeking care, the research also demonstrated that the cost of health care also 
pulled around a third of families into poverty as they sold finite resources to pay for health 
care. Summary papers were developed from each country and a synthesis paper created to 
feed into the Making Poverty History campaign and field advocacy programmes (Cadge, 
Keith 2005 a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, Save the Children 2005 and Witter 2005 a, b). I commissioned 
a review on user fees Witter S, Keith R (2005) which I then developed into a new Save the 
Children user fee position paper (Keith 2005b) and Save the Children (2005) used the results 
to feed into the global advocacy to halve poverty through doubling aid. The Making Poverty 
History campaign succeeded in gaining more money for developing countries. A new ask 
was needed. I collaborated with James, Morris and Taylor to work out how much abolishing 
user fees in 20 SSA countries would cost, and how many lives could be saved. Our research 
was published in the British Medical Journal in 2005 (James et al 2005) and was used by 
Tony Blair in his election manifesto, stating that if elected the Labour government would 
support 12 countries to move away from user fees to support the saving of 285,000 under 
five lives. The UK also agreed to change its policy on user fees. In May 2005, at the World 
Health Assembly, two resolutions were passed (58.31 and 33) which called for countries to 
move away from user fees (WHA 2005 a, b). 
Many organisations joined the global call to move away from user charges, but Save the 
Children, Oxfam and MSF were the most supportive. The World Health Report in 2005 
focused on achieving the MDGs for maternal and child health and I was invited to 
participate in a meeting on whether to separate the mother and the child, the consultation 
resulted in keeping both together. We developed a new report which looked at the negative 
human impact of paying for health care in Sierra Leone (Keith 2006 b). Neonates were 
largely ignored the Lancet included my letter calling for free maternal health (Keith 2006 a). 
Also, in 2005 to strengthen maternal and child health advocacy a new group was established 
(the Countdown to 2015 core group included WHO, UNICEF, Save the Children, LSHTM and 
the Bellagio group. The first meeting held in the UK was a success in 2005 and the reports all 
contained two-page country profiles for the countries where the most children and mothers 
were dying.  Richard Horton, from the Lancet, became a key partner with the maternal new 
born and child health advocacy group to ensure that research was published in the Lancet to 
correspond with key moments. Another partnership was formed (The Partnership for 
Maternal New-born and Child Health) which brought together key child and maternal health 
stakeholders to establish a global united voice to achieve the MDGS for maternal and child 
health.  The following year the WHO focused their World Health Report on health workers, 
and we also commissioned research to explore why so many health workers were leaving 
Africa [Blanchet K, Keith R and Shackleton P (2006). I coordinated a two-day conference with 
THET and had Minsters of Health from Malawi and Ghana attend to discuss the challenges 
they faced in raising human resources for health (Keith R 2006 c) these reports were 
presented at the World Health Assembly. The Global Health Workforce Alliance explored 
how the world would find 4 million health workers before 2015. In May of 2007, I attended 
the Meeting of the Commonwealth Health Minsters to advocate for them to move away 
from user fees, writing an article in the annual report (Keith 2007 a).  
In 2007 my earlier work in Nigeria came into good use when we applied for, and won, a 40 
million pound programme to strengthen immunisations in Northern Nigeria (PRINN). Many 
of the states had a 0% coverage rate. In 2008, before leaving Save the Children, to set up my 
own consultancy company, I travelled to China to take part in a high-level conference on 
improving equity of access to health care. The presentation generated a lot of interest and 
DFID supported a pilot to explore the impact of free rural health care in two districts. China 
revised their health financing policy for rural areas since then. 
World Vision, Merlin, IRC, Tearfund, VSO, Cara International Consulting Ltd 2008- 2012 
In 2007 I was appointed as a special adviser for maternal health to the UK Parliament 
International Development Committee for their maternal health enquiry. WHO contracted 
me to carry out a stakeholder consultation to feed into the UK IDC maternal health enquiry 
and one to feed into the Women Deliver meeting (Keith 2007 b and c). In 2008 I left Save 
the Children to set up my own company (Cara International Consulting Ltd.). I was 
contracted by IRC to assess an EU programme on health system strengthening in Sierra 
Leone (Keith 2008 b) and an evaluation of the Myanmar Thai border IDP programme (2008 
c). Both evaluations were carried out using mixed methods resulting from field trips which 
again highlighted the importance of voice in health systems planning especially from 
community elders. The global health policy world was crowded with many stakeholders that 
hold little experience in the field as new resources became available more actors crowded 
the arena. In 2008 I was contracted by VSO to collaborate on their new Health strategy, it 
was an honour to be feeding into future volunteer roles (Keith 2008 a) and then I was 
requested to carry out a three-country research field trip to Nigeria, Malawi and Zambia to 
assess the impact of the Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission programme for HIV 
(Keith 2008 b). The main finding from this research was the importance of opt out strategy 
for mothers attending antenatal clinics, with all mothers tested for HIV and they could opt 
out from getting the results. It was great seeing the positive impact of HIV treatment and 
resources, in the three countries and although more women were getting tested and put 
onto free treatment, there was now a problem getting men to get tested. Zambias 
innovative couples testing programme was innovative and delivering social and health 
impacts. My next research programme was developing a critical enquiry into maternal 
health in fragile contexts. For Merlin to feed into their hands up for health workers 
campaign (Keith 2009 a). This research showed the importance of investing in a 
standardised 18 months of training of community midwives who have a least nine years of 
formal education and the importance of including communities in setting the criteria for the 
selection of the community midwives. 
Later in 2009, I was asked to write a report for World Vision International to inform their 
first global health campaign. The report, Child Health Now, forms part of this PhD (Keith 
2009 b). The research utilised information from 120 countries and 1600 community 
programmes as well as key informant interviews and field trips to ensure the results were 
from the community. The report was launched in New York at the UN GA in September 2009 
and fed into the implementation of the UN SGs Every woman and every child strategy. 
World Vision International invested $1.5 billion into MNCH at launch of the report and was 
given a role on the global tracking secretariat for Every Woman Every Child. Regional 
briefings were developed to support regional launches of the campaign and many countries 
developed CHN strategies and reports (Keith 2009 c, d, e, f). While completing this research 
I was also contracted by Save the Children UK to develop a report on what was working to 
improve health in fragile states (Keith and Cadge 2010). World Vision then hired me to work 
with them from 2010 until 2012 to strengthen health system and advocacy capacity across 
their programmes. In 2012 I commissioned and co-authored research into Global Health 
Governance, as the WHO had been under funded for over two decades resulting in many 
normative roles being side lined for more global partnership roles which were funded (Keith 
and Ooms 2012). We held a debate in Geneva and worked with strategic partners to get 
WHO to place governance on the agenda for the WHA in 2012.  
University of Westminster and a focus on Global Public Health Nutrition (2012 until 2020)  
I joined the University of Westminster in 2012 as a visiting lecturer as I continued to 
complete research for Cara International Consulting. I also continued to mentor civil society 
actors on how to engage with WHA and WHO and the UK government. In 2013 I developed 
a one-week short course on strengthening health systems, which many NGO staff attended, 
although the cost and five days was hard for many to commit to. To use the birth of a new 
Prince in the UK I wrote an article for BMJ on Breastfeeding to coincide with world 
breastfeeding week (Keith 2013). In 2015 I collaborated with Results and Concern on a 
three-country research programme exploring what works for Nutrition. The report was 
completed in 2015 launched at the UK Parliament (Keith et al 2015). The report fed into the 
policy decisions on nutrition aid. In 2017 I was contracted by Tower Hamlets Public Health 
team to carry out an evaluation of their infant and young child feeding programmes in the 
borough to feed into a strategic policy analysis. Five students collected their MSc thesis data 
along with two graduates hired as researchers to collect the data from the 99 participants 
(Keith et al 2017, 2019). The report fed into Tower Hamlets budget and priority decisions in 
2017 with all, but one recommendation implemented. In 2018 it was 40 years since the 
Alma Ata was agreed and I was invited to take part in a working group to feed into the 
development of the new Astana declaration (Keith 2018). Many of my points were 
implemented by the right to health was weakened by aligning it to Universal Health 
Coverage. 
 I was contracted in 2018 to also evaluate a school holiday food and activity programme to 
assess the impact on learning. The programme increased confidence, willingness to learn 
and aspirations and a policy brief was developed and shared with the public health team. I 
was also asked to present the report findings to city hall in 2019. In 2020 with the impact of 
COVID I wrote an article on the history of school meals for the Conversation (Keith 2020 a) 
and another in June on the impact of poor nutrition on long term health and education 
outcomes (Keith 2020 b). These were to support the UK advocacy to continue free school 
meals, which was achieved more through Marcus Rusford than my article which did have 
over 14,000 reads. 
I am presently carrying out research on the impact of COVID-19 on food security in England 
and looking at research into global food security and severe acute malnutrition in Africa.  
It has been an amazing forty years and there is still so much to learn I feel so privileged to 
have played a small role in improving the access to health services for some of the most 
marginalised populations, but there is still lots of work to do.  
 Annex three:  Fragile states  
Table three: Fragile states in 2016 (Source: Foreign Policy (2016) Fragile States Index 2016) 
1 Somalia * 11 Iraq 21 Cote D Ivoire* 
2 South Sudan* 12 Guinea * 22 Cameroon * 
3 CAR * 13 Nigeria * 23 Uganda * 
4 Sudan * 14 Pakistan * 24 Ethiopia * 
4 Yemen * 15 Burundi * 25 Libya 
6 Syria 16 Zimbabwe * 26 Myanmar * 
7 Chad * 17 Guinea Bissau* 27 Liberia * 
8 DR Congo* 18 Eritrea* 28 Mauritania 
9 Afghanistan * 19 Niger * 29 Mali* 
10 Haiti 20 Kenya * 30 North Korea 
* Fragile states research included in the publications 
Figure four:    The worlds most fragile states in 2019 (2019 Fragile States Index)  
(Source: https://www.statista.com/chart/19070/results-of-the-fragile-states-index/) 
Annex four: Alma Ata Declaration 
International Conference on Primary Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR, 6-12 September 1978  
 The International Conference on Primary Health Care, meeting in Alma-Ata this twelfth day of 
September in the year Nineteen hundred and seventy-eight, expressing the need for urgent action 
by all governments, all health and development workers, and the world community to protect and 
promote the health of all the people of the world, hereby makes the following   
 Declaration:   
The Conference strongly reaffirms that health, which is a state of complete physical, mental and 
social wellbeing, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity, is a fundamental human right 
and that the attainment of the highest possible level of health is a most important world-wide social 
goal whose realization requires the action of many other social and economic sectors in addition to 
the health sector.   
The existing gross inequality in the health status of the people particularly between developed and 
developing countries as well as within countries is politically, socially and economically unacceptable 
and is, therefore, of common concern to all countries.   
Economic and social development, based on a New International Economic Order, is of basic 
importance to the fullest attainment of health for all and to the reduction of the gap between the 
health status of the developing and developed countries. The promotion and protection of the 
health of the people is essential to sustained economic and social development and contributes to a 
better quality of life and to world peace. IV The people have the right and duty to participate 
individually and collectively in the planning and implementation of their health care.   
Governments have a responsibility for the health of their people which can be fulfilled only by the 
provision of adequate health and social measures. A main social target of governments, international 
organizations and the whole world community in the coming decades should be the attainment by 
all peoples of the world by the year 2000 of a level of health that will permit them to lead a socially 
and economically productive life. Primary health care is the key to attaining this target as part of 
development in the spirit of social justice.   
Primary health care is essential health care based on practical, scientifically sound and socially 
acceptable methods and technology made universally accessible to individuals and families in the 
community through their full participation and at a cost that the community and country can afford 
to maintain at every stage of their development in the spirit of self-reliance and self-determination. 
It forms an integral part both countrys health system, of which it is the central function and focus, 
and of the overall social and economic development of the community. It is the first level of contact 
of individuals, the family and community with the national health system bringing health care as 
close as possible to where people live and work and constitutes the first element of a continuing 
health care process.   
Primary health care:   
1. reflects and evolves from the economic conditions and sociocultural and political 
characteristics of the country and its communities and is based on the application of the 
relevant results of social, biomedical and health services research and public health 
experience.   
2. addresses the main health problems in the community, providing promotive, preventive, 
curative and rehabilitative services accordingly.   
3. includes at least: education concerning prevailing health problems and the methods of 
preventing and controlling them; promotion of food supply and proper nutrition; an 
adequate supply of safe water and basic sanitation; maternal and child health care, 
including family planning; immunization against the major infectious diseases; prevention 
and control of locally endemic diseases; appropriate treatment of common diseases and 
injuries; and provision of essential drugs.   
4. involves, in addition to the health sector, all related sectors and aspects of national and 
community development, in particular agriculture, animal husbandry, food, industry, 
education, housing, public works, communications and other sectors; and demands the 
coordinated efforts of all those sectors.   
5. requires and promotes maximum community and individual self-reliance and participation 
in the planning, organization, operation and control of primary health care, making fullest 
use of local, national and other available resources; and to this end develops through 
appropriate education the ability of communities to participate.   
6. should be sustained by integrated, functional and mutually supportive referral systems, 
leading to the progressive improvement of comprehensive health care for all, and giving 
priority to those most in need.   
7. relies, at local and referral levels, on health workers, including physicians, nurses, midwives, 
auxiliaries and community workers as applicable, as well as traditional practitioners as 
needed, suitably trained socially and technically to work as a health team and to respond to 
the expressed health needs of the community.   
All governments should formulate national policies, strategies and plans of action to launch and 
sustain primary health care as part of a comprehensive national health system and in coordination 
with other sectors. To this end, it will be necessary to exercise political will, to mobilize the country's 
resources and to use available external resources rationally.   
All countries should cooperate in a spirit of partnership and service to ensure primary health care for 
all people since the attainment of health by people in any one country directly concerns and benefits 
every other country. In this context the joint WHO/UNICEF report on primary health care constitutes 
a solid basis for the further development and operation of primary health care throughout the 
world.   
An acceptable level of health for all the people of the world by the year 2000 can be attained 
through a fuller and better use of the world's resources, a considerable part of which is now spent 
on armaments and military conflicts. A genuine policy of independence, peace, dtente and 
disarmament could and should release additional resources that could well be devoted to peaceful 
aims and to the acceleration of social and economic development of which primary health care, as 
an essential part, should be allotted its proper share.   
The International Conference on Primary Health Care calls for urgent and effective national and 
international action to develop and implement primary health care throughout the world and 
particularly in developing countries in a spirit of technical cooperation and in keeping with a New 
International Economic Order. It urges governments, WHO and UNICEF, and other international 
organizations, as well as multilateral and bilateral agencies, nongovernmental organizations, funding 
agencies, all health workers and the whole world community to support national and international 
commitment to primary health care and to channel increased technical and financial support to it, 
particularly in developing countries. The Conference calls on all the to collaborate in introducing, 
developing and maintaining primary health care in accordance with the spirit and content of this 
Declaration.    
Annex five: Astana Declaration 
Global Conference on Primary Health Care: From Alma-Ata towards universal 
health coverage and the Sustainable Development Goals. Astana, Kazakhstan, 
25 and 26 October 2018 
We, Heads of State and Government, ministers and representatives of States 
and Governments1, participating in the Global Conference on Primary Health 
Care: From Alma-Ata towards universal health coverage and the Sustainable 
Development Goals, meeting in Astana on 25 and 26 October 2018, 
reaffirming the commitments expressed in the ambitious and visionary 
Declaration of Alma-Ata of 1978 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, in pursuit of Health for All, hereby make the following 
Declaration. 
We envision 
Governments and societies that prioritize, promote and protect peoples 
health and well-being, at both population and individual levels, through 
strong health systems. 
Primary health care and health services that are high quality, safe, 
comprehensive, integrated, accessible, available and affordable for everyone 
and everywhere, provided with compassion, respect and dignity by health 
professionals who are well-trained, skilled, motivated and committed. 
Enabling and health-conducive environments in which individuals and 
communities are empowered and engaged in maintaining and enhancing their 
health and well-being. 
Partners and stakeholders aligned in providing effective support to national 
health policies, strategies and plans. 
We strongly affirm our commitment to the fundamental right of every 
human being to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health 
without distinction of any kind. Convening on the fortieth anniversary of the 
Declaration of Alma-Ata, we reaffirm our commitment to all its values and 
principles, to justice and solidarity, and we underline the importance of 
health for peace, security and socioeconomic development, and their 
interdependence. 
We are convinced that strengthening primary health care (PHC) is the most 
inclusive, effective and efficient approach to enhance peoples physical and 
mental health, as well as social well-being, and that PHC is a cornerstone of 
a sustainable health system for universal health coverage (UHC) and health-
related Sustainable Development Goals. We welcome the convening in 
2019 of the United Nations General Assembly high-level meeting on UHC, to 
which this Declaration will contribute. We will each pursue our paths to 
achieving UHC so that all people have equitable access to the quality and 
effective health care they need, ensuring that the use of these services does 
not expose them to financial hardship. 
We acknowledge that despite remarkable progress over the last 40 years, 
people in all parts of the world still have unaddressed health needs. 
Remaining healthy is challenging for many people, particularly the poor and 
people in vulnerable situations. We find it ethically, politically, socially and 
economically unacceptable that inequity in health and disparities in health 
outcomes persist. 
We will continue to address the growing burden of noncommunicable 
diseases, which lead to poor health and premature deaths due to tobacco 
use, the harmful use of alcohol, unhealthy lifestyles and behaviours, and 
insufficient physical activity and unhealthy diets. Unless we act 
immediately, we will continue to lose lives prematurely because of wars, 
violence, epidemics, natural disasters, the health impacts of climate change 
and extreme weather events and other environmental factors. We must not 
lose opportunities to halt disease outbreaks and global health threats such 
as antimicrobial resistance that spread beyond countries boundaries. 
Promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative services and palliative care 
must be accessible to all. We must save millions of people from poverty, 
particularly extreme poverty, caused by disproportionate out-of-pocket 
spending on health. We can no longer underemphasize the crucial 
importance of health promotion and disease prevention, nor tolerate 
fragmented, unsafe or poor-quality care. We must address the shortage and 
uneven distribution of health workers. We must act on the growing costs of 
health care and medicines and vaccines. We cannot afford waste in health 
care spending due to inefficiency. 
We commit to: 
Make bold political choices for health across all sectors 
We reaffirm the primary role and responsibility of Governments at all levels 
in promoting and protecting the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the 
highest attainable standard of health. We will promote multisectoral action 
and UHC, engaging relevant stakeholders and empowering local 
communities to strengthen PHC. We   will address economic, social and 
environmental determinants of health and aim to reduce risk factors by 
mainstreaming a Health in All Policies approach. We will involve more 
stakeholders in the achievement of Health for All, leaving no one behind, 
while addressing and managing conflicts of interest, promoting 
transparency and implementing participatory governance. We will strive to 
avoid or mitigate conflicts that undermine health systems and roll back 
health gains. We must use coherent and inclusive approaches to expand 
PHC as a pillar of UHC in emergencies, ensuring the continuum of care and 
the provision of essential health services in line with humanitarian 
principles. We will appropriately provide and allocate human and other 
resources to strengthen PHC. We applaud the leadership and example of 
Governments who have demonstrated strong support for PHC. 
Build sustainable primary health care 
PHC will be implemented in accordance with national legislation, contexts 
and priorities. We will strengthen health systems by investing in PHC. We 
will enhance capacity and infrastructure for primary care  the first contact 
with health services  prioritizing essential public health functions. We will 
prioritize disease prevention and health promotion and will aim to meet all 
peoples health needs across the life course through comprehensive 
preventive, promotive, curative, rehabilitative services and palliative care. 
PHC will provide a comprehensive range of services and care, including but 
not limited to vaccination; screenings; prevention, control and management 
of noncommunicable and communicable diseases; care and services that 
promote, maintain and improve maternal, newborn, child and adolescent 
health; and mental health and sexual and reproductive health2. PHC will 
also be accessible, equitable, safe, of high quality, comprehensive, efficient, 
acceptable, available and affordable, and will deliver continuous, integrated 
services that are people-centred and gender-sensitive. We will strive to 
avoid fragmentation and ensure a functional referral system between 
primary and other levels of care. We will benefit from sustainable PHC that 
enhances health systems resilience to prevent, detect and respond to 
infectious diseases and outbreaks. 
The success of primary health care will be driven by: 
Knowledge and capacity-building. We will apply knowledge, including 
scientific as well as traditional knowledge, to strengthen PHC, improve 
health outcomes and ensure access for all people to the right care at the 
right time and at the most appropriate level of care, respecting their rights, 
needs, dignity and autonomy. We will continue to research and share 
knowledge and experience, build capacity and improve the delivery of 
health services and care. 
Human resources for health. We will create decent work and appropriate 
compensation for health professionals and other health personnel working 
at the primary health care level to respond effectively to peoples health 
needs in a multidisciplinary context. We will continue to invest in the 
education, training, recruitment, development, motivation and retention of 
the PHC workforce, with an appropriate skill mix. We will strive for the 
retention and availability of the PHC workforce in rural, remote and less 
developed areas. We assert that the international migration of health 
personnel should not undermine countries, particularly developing 
countries, ability to meet the health needs of their populations. 
Technology. We support broadening and extending access to a range of 
health care services using high- quality, safe, effective and affordable 
medicines, including, as appropriate, traditional medicines, vaccines, 
diagnostics and other technologies. We will promote their accessibility and 
their rational and safe use and the protection of personal data. Through 
advances in information systems, we will be better able to collect 
appropriately disaggregated, high-quality data and to improve information 
continuity, disease surveillance, transparency, accountability and 
monitoring of health system performance. We will use a variety of 
technologies to improve access to health care, enrich health service 
delivery, improve the quality of service and patient safety, and increase the 
efficiency and coordination of care. Through digital and other technologies, 
we will enable individuals and communities to identify their health needs, 
participate in the planning and delivery of services and play an active role in 
maintaining their own health and well-being. 
Financing. We call on all countries to continue to invest in PHC to improve 
health outcomes. We will address the inefficiencies and inequities that 
expose people to financial hardship resulting from their use of health 
services by ensuring better allocation of resources for health, adequate 
financing of primary health care and appropriate reimbursement systems to 
improve access and achieve better health outcomes. We will work towards 
the financial sustainability, efficiency and resilience of national health 
systems, appropriately allocating resources to PHC based on national 
context. We will leave no one behind, including those in fragile situations 
and conflict- affected areas, by providing access to quality PHC services 
across the continuum of care. 
Empower individuals and communities. 
We support the involvement of individuals, families, communities and civil 
society through their participation in the development and implementation 
of policies and plans that have an impact on health. We will promote health 
literacy and work to satisfy the expectations of individuals and communities 
for reliable information about health. We will support people in acquiring 
the knowledge, skills and resources needed to maintain their health or the 
health of those for whom they care, guided by health professionals. We will 
protect and promote solidarity, ethics and human rights. We will increase 
community ownership and contribute to the accountability of the public 
and private sectors for more people to live healthier lives in enabling and 
health-conducive environments. 
Align stakeholder support to national policies, strategies and plans. 
We call on all stakeholders  health professionals, academia, patients, civil 
society, local and international partners, agencies and funds, the private 
sector, faith-based organizations and others  to align with national policies, 
strategies and plans across all sectors, including through people-centred, 
gender-sensitive approaches, and to take joint actions to build stronger and 
sustainable PHC towards achieving UHC. Stakeholder support can assist 
countries to direct sufficient human, technological, financial and 
information resources to PHC. In implementing this Declaration, countries 
and stakeholders will work together in a spirit of partnership and effective 
development cooperation, sharing knowledge and good practices while 
fully respecting national sovereignty and human rights. 
We will act on this Declaration in solidarity and coordination between 
Governments, the World Health Organization, the United Nations Childrens 
Fund and all other stakeholders. 
All people, countries and organizations are encouraged to support this 
movement. 
Countries will periodically review the implementation of this Declaration, in 
cooperation with stakeholders. 
Together we can and will achieve health and well-being for all, leaving no 
one behind. 
Annex seven: Comparative table between Alma Ata and Astana 
Declarations 
Table four: Comparing the Alma Ata and Astana Declarations 
Focus Alma Ata  Astana 
Right to Health Health, which is a state of complete 
physical, mental and social wellbeing, and 
not merely the absence of disease or 
infirmity, is a fundamental human right 
Commitment to the fundamental right of every human being to the 
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health 
Voice Communities will be involved in active 
planning  
We will protect and promote solidarity, ethics and human rights. We will 
increase community ownership and contribute to the accountability of the 
public and private sectors for more people to live healthier lives in enabling 
and health-conducive environments. 
Community 
engagement 
Active engagement in health We support the involvement of individuals, families, 
communities and civil society through their 
participation in the development and 
implementation of policies and plans that have an 
impact on health. We will promote health literacy 
and work to satisfy the expectations of individuals 
and communities for reliable information about 
health. We will support people in acquiring the 
knowledge, skills and resources needed to maintain 
their health or the health of those for whom they 
care, guided by health professionals.  
Target 
An acceptable level of health for all the 
people of the world by the year 2000 can 
be attained through a fuller and better 
use of the world's resources,  
We will address economic, social and environmental determinants of health 
and aim to reduce risk factors by mainstreaming a Health in All Policies 
approach. We will involve more stakeholders in the achievement of Health 
for All 
Health systems PHC focus We will strengthen health systems by investing in PHC.  
Human 
resources 
Strengthen health workers and referral 
systems 
We will create decent work and appropriate compensation for health 
professionals and other health personnel working at the primary health care 
level to respond effectively to peoples health needs in a multidisciplinary 
context. We will continue to invest in the education, training, recruitment, 
development, motivation and retention of the PHC workforce, with an 
appropriate skill mix 
Harmonisation Support national plans and priorities Align stakeholder support to national policies, 
strategies and plans. 
Inequality The existing gross inequality in the health 
status of the people particularly between 
developed and developing countries as 
well as within countries is politically, 
socially and economically unacceptable 
and is, therefore, of common concern to 
all countries.  The promotion and 
protection of the health of the people is 
essential to sustained economic and social 
development and contributes to a better 
quality of life and to world peace 
We   will address economic, social and environmental determinants of health 
and aim to reduce risk factors  
Multisectoral 
approach 
Education concerning prevailing health 
problems and the methods of preventing 
and controlling them; promotion of food 
supply and proper nutrition; an adequate 
supply of safe water and basic sanitation; 
maternal and child health care, including 
family planning; immunization against 
the major infectious diseases; prevention 
and control of locally endemic diseases; 
appropriate treatment of common 
diseases and injuries; and provision of 
essential drugs.   
Health in All Policies approach. We will involve more stakeholders in the 
achievement of Health for All 
Annex eight: Peer review and publication details for publications 
Table five: Published work with peer review and publication details 
P Title Peer review process  Publication details 
1 Prevention of Mother to Child 
Transmission (PMTCT): Global 
Policy Implication: reflecting on 
progress and challenges in 
three countries (Malawi, 
Nigeria and Zambia) 
UK Academic and 
professional reviewers, as 
well as country steering 
committees and 
organisational editors 
Published by Tearfund and 
distributed at the GFATM 
HIV partners meeting 2009 
2 Policy Briefing: Social Health 
Insurance 
Academic and professional 
reviewers, as well as editors 
Published by Save the 
Children UK and distributed 
at the World Health 
Assembly 2008 
3 All mothers matter: HRH in 
fragile states  
UK Academic and 
professional reviewers, as 
well as country steering 
committees and 
organisational editors 
Published by Merlin Hands 
Up for Health workers 
campaign 
4 Child Health Now UK Australia Canada Kenya 
and USA Academic and 
professional reviewers, as 
well as country steering 
committees and 
organisational editors. Child 
Health Now academic 
review board.  
Published by WVI CHN 
team and launched at the 
UN General Assembly in 
2009 and at the 2010 
World Health Assembly  
5 Unlocking Progress in Fragile 
States 
UK Academic and 
professional reviewers, as 
well as country steering 
committees and 
organisational editors 
Published by Save the 
Children and distributed at 
the World Health Assembly 
6 Improving Global Health 
Governance: technical briefing 
paper for the Child Health Now 
Campaign 
UK Australia Canada Kenya 
and USA Academic and 
professional reviewers, as 
well as country steering 
committees organisational 
editors. Child Health Now 
academic review board. 
Published by WVI CHN 
team at the World Health 
Assembly 2011 
7 What works for nutrition? Case 
studies from Vietnam, Uganda 
and Kenya  
UK Uganda Cambodia and 
Kenyan academic and 
professional reviewers, as 
well as country steering 
committees and 
organisational editors. . 
Published by Results and 
launched at a Parliament 
debate with all three 
organisations and with MP. 
Also launched at University 
of Westminster.  
8 The importance of the Alma 
Ata principles of equity and 
voice through intersectoral 
investment  
World Nutrition peer 
review process 
Published in World 
Nutrition in August 2018 
9 Understanding perceptions and 
practices on infant and young 
child feeding and oral health in 
Tower Hamlets Borough 
Workshop with health 
professions on LBTH, Tower 
Hamlets council workshop 
with 50 health care 
workers. World Nutrition 
peer review process 
Published by World 
Nutrition team at the 
World Health Assembly 
References 
Action Aid (2005) Where is the money? Towards transparency in UK Aids expenditure 
London UK 
Action for Global Health (2008) Healthy Aid: why Europe must deliver aid better spend to 
save the health MDGs Action for Global Health 
Acosta A M (2011) Analysing success in the fight against malnutrition in Peru IDS working 
papers vol 2011 367 May 2011 page 2-49  
Alonso PL, Lindsay SW, Armstrong JR, Conteh M, Hill AG, David PH, Fegan G, de Francisco A, 
Hall AJ, Shenton FC (1991) The effect of insecticide-treated bed nets on mortality of Gambian 
children. Lancet. 1991 Jun 22;337(8756):1499-502. 
Balabanova D, Mc Kee M., Mills A (2011) Good Health at low cost 25 years on: what makes a 
successful health system? London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 2011 
Baum F (2015) The New Public Health fourth edition Oxford University Press Australia and 
New Zealand 
Bjorkman M, Svensson J (2009) Power to the People: evidence form a randomised field 
experiment on community-based monitoring in Uganda The Quarterly Journal of Economics 
124, 2 2009 pp 735-69 
Blanchet K, Keith R and Shackleton P (2006) One Million More: Mobilising the African 
Diaspora healthcare professionals for capacity building in Africa Save the Children UK 
Cadge N, Keith R (2005a) The Cost of Coping with Illness: Burundi, Briefing Paper Save the 
Children  
Cadge N, Keith R (2005b) The Cost of Coping with Illness: Ethiopia, Briefing Paper Save the 
Children 
Cadge N, Keith R (2005c) The Cost of Coping with Illness: Uganda, Briefing Paper Save the 
Children 
Cadge N, Keith R (2005d) The Cost of Coping with Illness: Sudan, Briefing Paper Save the 
Children 
Cadge N, Keith R (2000e) The Cost of Coping with Illness: Rwanda, Briefing Paper Save the 
Children 
Cadge N, Keith R (2005 f) The Cost of Coping with Illness: Tanzania Briefing Paper Save the 
Children  
Cadge N, Keith R (2005 g) The Cost of Coping with Illness in DRC Briefing Paper Save the 
Children UK 
Cadge N, Keith R (2005 h) East and Central Africa Synthesis Briefing Paper: The Cost of 
Coping with Illness in ECA Save the Children UK 2005 
Cadge N, Keith R (2010) Policy Briefing: Fragile States Save the Children UK  
Chambers R (1983) Rural Development: Putting the last first John Wiley and Sons New York 
Chambers R (1997) Whose reality counts: putting the first last Practical Action Printing UK 
Coles TJ (2019) Privatised Planet: Free trade as a weapon against democracy, healthcare, 
and the environment New Internationalist Publications Ltd Oxford UK  
Commission for Africa (CFA) (2005) Our common Interest Report of the Commission for 
Africa 
Creese A and Kutzin J (1996) Lessons from cost recovery in Health in Marketing education 
and health in developing countries Claredon Press, Oxford 
Crisp N (2007) Global Health Partnerships the UK contribution to health in developing 
countries 
Crotty M (1998) Foundations of Social research meaning and perspective in the research 
process Allen and Unwin St Leonards NSW 
Department for International Development (2005) Fragile states   
Department for International Development (2006) Eliminating World Poverty: making 
governance work for the poor DFID UK 
Department for International Development (DFID) (2007) The International Health 
Partnership Launched on September 5th, 2007, UK 
De Ferranti D (1985) Paying for health services in developing countries an overview World 
Bank Staff working paper 721 WB Washington DC  
EQUINET (2007) Reclaiming the resources for health: a regional analysis of equity in health 
in East and Southern Africa Kampala Regional Network on Equity fin Health in Southern 
Africa 2007 
Fustukian S, Keith R, Penrose A (2003) 80 million lives: meeting the health related MDGs for 
child and maternal survival Save the Children UK and CAFOD for the Grow Up Free from 
Poverty Coalition 
Garret J, Basset L, Marini A (2009) Designing Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) programmes to 
improve nutritional impact: principles evidence and examples Hunger free Latin America 
and the Caribbean Initiative working paper FAO Santiago Chile 2009 
Gavanta J (2006) Finding the spaces for change: a power analysis IDS Bulletin Vol 37 No. 6 
November 20016 
Gilson L and Adyepong A (2018) Strengthening Health System leadership for better 
governance: what does it take? Health Policy and Planning 33. 2008 111-114 
Gilson, L (1997). The lessons of user fee experience in Africa. 
Health Policy and Planning, 12, 273285. 
Gilson, L (2005). Editorial: Building Trust and Value in Health Systems in Low- and Middle-
Income Countries. Social Science and Medicine, In press. 
Gilson, L et al (2001). The equity impacts of community financing activities in three African 
countries. International Journal of Health Planning and Management, 15, 291317. 
Gilson, L and Russell, S (1997). User fee policies to promote health service access for the 
poor: A wolf in sheeps clothing? International Journal of Health Services, 27, 359379. 
Gilson, L, Russell, S and Buse, K (1995). The political economy of user fees with targeting: 
Developing equitable health financing policies. Journal of International Development, 7(3), 
69401. 
Global Health Workforce Alliance (GHWA) (2008) Health Workers for all and all for health 
workers: the Kampala Declaration and Agenda for global action: first global forum on 
Human resources Health Kampala Uganda 
Global Forum for Health Research (2004) 10/90 Report on Health Research 2003-2004. In 
Davey S (ed) Global Forum for Health research Geneva 
Gottret, P and Schieber, G (2006) Health Financing Revisited: A Practitioners Guide. 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
Grant J (1984) Marketing Child Survival UNICEF Assignment Children Vol 65/66 p. 3 
Green J and Thorogood N (2004) Qualitative Methods for Health Research Sage Publication 
Heaton A and Keith R (2002) A long way to go: a critique of Global Alliance of Vaccines and 
Immunisations (GAVI)s initial impact Save the Children UK Briefing Analysis paper based on 
New Products into Old Systems research  
Hone T, Macinko J, Millett C (2018) Revisiting Alma-Ata: what is the role of primary health 
care in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals? Lancet 2018; 392: 146172 
International Council of Nurses (2013) Going, going gone: the nursing presence in the WHO: 
A fact sheet for the National Nurses Associations ICN Geneva Switzerland 2013 
James C, Morris S, Keith R, Taylor A (2005) Impact on child mortality of removing user fees: 
simulation model BMJ 2005; 331 September 2005 
James CD, Hanson K, McPake B, Balabanova D, Gwatkin D, Hopwood I, Kirunga C, 
Knippenberg R, Meessen B, Morris SS, Preker A, Souteyrand Y, Tibouti A, Villeneuve P, Xu 
K.(2006) To retain or remove user fees?: reflections on the current debate in low- and 
middle-income countries Appl Health Econ Health Policy. 2006;5(3):137-53 
Kawabata K, Xu K, Carrin G (2002) Preventing impoverishment through protection against 
catastrophic health expenditure Bulletin of the WHO 80:612 WHO Geneva Switzerland 
Keith R (2000) Perceptions of Quality: an assessment of community health workers in 
Kaduna Northern Nigeria Queen Margaret University Edinburgh MSc thesis unpublished 
research 
Keith R (2001) Letters: Chancellor must call for more support for Health Systems the 
Guardian Feb 26th, 2001  
Keith R (2003 a) Special Report: WHO should focus on improving health systems The 
Lancet 2003; 361:5  
Keith R (2003 b) Bucking the trend: good health at low cost: Presentation at the Global 
Health Research Conference Mexico Save the Children UK 
Keith R (2004) Bucking the Trend: Good Health at Low-cost presentation at the 2004 World 
Bank Conference on Reaching the Poor in Washington DC USA  
Keith R (2005 a) UNICEF: suggestions for change Lancet pg. 292-3 Issue 9456 Vol 365 Jan 22, 
Keith R (2005 b) Neonatal health and the child survival agenda The Lancet Correspondence 
Vol 365 Issue 9474 P1845 May 2005 
Keith R (2005 c) User fees: Paying for health services at the point of use Position Paper for 
Save the Children UK Make Poverty History London UK  
Keith R and Shackleton P (2006 b) Paying with their lives: the cost of illness for children in 
Africa Save the Children UK  
Keith R (2006 c) Whose Charity? Africas aid to the NHS Policy briefing report Save the 
Children UK  
Keith R (2007 a) Can the Commonwealth Nations lead the way towards universal coverage 
Commonwealth Health Ministers Book 2007 Commonwealth Secretariat London UK  
Keith R (2007 b) UK International Development Committee: Maternal Health: WHO Making 
Pregnancy Safer stakeholder consultation report Submission to the IDC committee on behalf 
of WHO to feed into IDC UK Maternal Health Inquiry Cara International Consulting Ltd 
London UK 
Keith R (2007 c) WHO Making Pregnancy Safer: Stakeholder Consultation to feed into the 
Women Deliver Meeting 2008 Cara International Consulting Ltd London UK  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17132029/
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17132029/
http://www.thelancet.com/search/results?search_mode=cluster&search_area=cluster&search_cluster=thelancet&search_sort=date&restrictname_author=author&restricttype_author=author&restrictterm_author=keith0r&restrictdesc_author=Regina%20Keith
Keith R (2008 a) Increasing VSOs impact in health development: background paper on 
International Health Context Cara International Consulting on Behalf of VSO London UK 
Keith R (2008 b) IRC EU evaluation of health system strengthening programme Cara 
International Consulting Ltd for IRC Sierra Leone 
Keith R (2008 c) IRC EU evaluation of Thai Burma IDC programme Cara International 
Consulting Ltd for IRC London UK 
Keith R (2008 d) Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission (PMTCT): Global Policy 
Implication: reflecting on progress and challenges in three countries (Malawi, Nigeria and 
Zambia) Cara International Consulting Ltd for Tearfund UK  
Keith R (2009 a) All mothers matter: HRH in fragile states Hands Up for Health Workers 
Merlin UK 
Keith R et al (2009) Child Health Now World Vision International London UK 
Keith R (2009 c) Africa facts and Statistics Child Health Now Fact Sheets for Launch World 
Vision International London UK  
Keith R (2009 d) Asia Pacific facts and Statistics Child Health Now Fact Sheets for Launch 
World Vision International London UK  
Keith R (2009 e) Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) facts and Statistics Child Health Now 
Fact Sheets for Launch World Vision International London UK  
Keith R (2009 f) Middle East, Eastern Europe & South Asia facts and Statistics Child Health 
Now Fact Sheets for Launch World Vision International London UK  
Keith R, Cadge N (2010) Unlocking Progress in Fragile States Save the Children UK 
Keith R, (2011) Improving Global Health Governance: summary paper for the WHA World 
Vision International, UK  
Keith R (2013) How to prevent 804,000 children dying British Medical Journal August 6th2013 
Keith R et al (2015) What works for nutrition? Case studies from Vietnam, Uganda and 
Kenya Results, Concern and University of Westminster published by Results UK  
Keith R et al (2017) Understanding perceptions and practices on infant and young child 
feeding and oral health in Tower Hamlets Borough, London University of Westminster  
Keith R (2018) The importance of the Alma Ata principles of equity and voice through 
intersectoral investment and leadership in achieving the health and nutrition sustainable 
development goals by 2030 World Nutrition Journal Vol 10 August 2018 
Keith R et al (2019) Understanding infant and young child feeding practices in Tower 
Hamlets Borough London UK World Nutrition Journal Vol 11 2019  
Keith R (2020) Free school meals the lifelong impact of food poverty The Conversation 
https://theconversation.com/profiles/regina-keith-1126415 
Keith R (2020) History of School Meals in the UK Conversation June 2020 
https://theconversation.com/marcus-rashford-a-brief-history-of-free-school-meals-in-the-
uk-140896 
Kent G (1991) The Politics of Childrens Survival Prager New York  
Klugman B (2011) Effective social justice advocacy: a theory of change framework for 
assessing progress Reproductive Health Matters 2011:19 (38):146-162 
Korten D (1995) When corporations rule the world Earthscan London 
Kutzin J (2001) A descriptive framework for country level analysis of health care financing 
arrangements Health Policy 2001 56:171:204 
Kutzin J (2008) Health financing policy: a guide for decision makers Health financing policy 
paper Copenhagen WHO Regional Office for Europe  
Lancet (2008) Alma Ata 30 years on: Health for all need not be a dream buried in the past 
Volume 372 Number 9642 PG 863-1008 September 13-19, 2008 
Kutzin J (2013) Health Financing for universal coverage and health systems performance 
concepts and implications for policy Bulletin of the World Health Organisation June 2013 
Lucas H, Nuwagaba A (1999) IDS working paper 86: Household coping strategies in response 
to the introduction of user changes for social services: a case study on Uganda April 1999 
IDS UK 
Lehmann U and Sanders D (2007) Community health workers: What do we know about 
them? The state of the evidence on programmes, activities, costs and impact on health 
outcomes of using community health workers School of Public Health University of the 
Western Cape Evidence and Information for Policy, Department of Human Resources for 
Health Geneva, January 2007 
McIntyre D, Thiede M, Dahlgren G, Whitehead M (2006) What are the economic 
consequences for households of illness and of paying for health care in low- and middle-
income country contexts? Soc Sci Med. 2006 Feb;62(4):858-65 
Mc Nay K, Keith R, and Penrose A (2004) Bucking the trend: how Sri Lanka has achieved 
good health at low cost: challenges and policy lessons for the 21st Century Save the Children 
Mehrota S and Jolly C (1998) Development with a Human Face: experiences in Social 
Achievement and Economic Growth Oxford University Press Oxford  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16099574/
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16099574/
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16099574/
Merlin (2007) Reducing the Burden: of maternal mortality in Afghanistan: Merlins 
community midwifery education programmes in Takhar June 2007 Merlin UK 
Merlin (2008a) Merlins work in supporting human resources for health July 2008 
Merlin (2008b) Human Resources for Health Merlin Health Policy Paper developed 
September 2008 Merlin UK 
Merlin (2008c) Draft reproductive health policy and background information 
Merlin (2009) Liberia country profile: what Merlin is doing in Liberia accessed on Feb 7th, 
2009 via: www.merlin.org.uk/where-we-work/Liberia.aspx 
Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (2002). Uganda Participatory 
Poverty Assessment Report  Learning from the Poor Kampala: MoFPED. 
Morel C, Keith R (2008) Can Social Health Insurance work in Sub Saharan Africa: briefing 
paper Save the Children UK  
Murray CJL, Evans D (2003) Health systems performance assessment: debates methods and 
empiricism Chapter 18: Monitoring Health financing function WHO Geneva Switzerland 
Murray S F (1996) The cost of adjustment: user changes for maternity care in Midwives and 
Safe Motherhood, International Perspectives on Midwifery Vol 1. 1996 
Murphy R (1989) Marakissa Health Programme Report VSO The Gambia West Africa 
Murphy R (1990) Marakissa Health Programme Report VSO The Gambia West Africa 
Murphy R (1992) Practice Nurse Audit: Muirhouse Medical Group Edinburgh Scotland 
Nabyonga, J, Desmet, M, Karamagi, H, Kadama, P, Omaswa, F G and Walker, O (2005) 
Abolition of cost-sharing is pro-poor: Evidence from Uganda, Health Policy and Planning, 
20(2), pp 100108 
Nabyonga Orem J, Mugisha F, Kirunga C, Macq J, Criel B (2011) Abolition of user fees: the 
Uganda paradox Health Policy Planning 2011 Nov;26 Supplement 2: ii 41-51 
NORAD (2010) Putting the Global Strategy for Women and Childrens Health into Action the 
Global Campaign for the Health Millennium Development Goals NORAD, UN and PMNCH   
Nyonator, F and Kutzin, J (1999). Health for some? The effects of user fees in the Volta 
region of Ghana. Health Policy and Planning, 14, 329341. 
OECD DAC (2005) Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness High Level forum, Paris 2005 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22027918/
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22027918/
OECD (2007) Ensuring fragile states are not left behind: fact sheet December 2007 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development), Eurostat, and WHO 
(World Health Organization) (2011) A System of Health Accounts OECD 2011 Paris France 
ODI (2007) Budget monitoring and policy influence: lessons from civil society budget analysis 
and advocacy initiatives ODI London UK 
Ooms G, Keith R (2011) Improving Global Health Governance: technical briefing paper for 
the Child Health Now Campaign World Vision International, UK  
Owusu  Addo, E, Renzcho, AMN, Smith, BJ (2018) The impact of cash transfers on social 
determinants of health inequalities in SSA: a systematic review Health Policy and Planning 
Vol 33, Issue 5, June 2018 pg. 675-698 
Oxfam (2011) Achieving a shared goal: free universal health care in Ghana Oxfam, Isodec, 
Essential Services Platform Ghana and ARHR Oxfam International UK  
Palmer S, Torgerson D (1999) Economic notes: definitions of efficiency British Medical 
Journal April 24th, 1999, 318 7197 pg. 1136 
Pearson, M (2004). Issues Paper: The Case for Abolition of User Fees for Primary Health 
Services London: DFID Health Systems Resource Centre. 
Pearson M (2009) Achieving the MDGs: at what cost? Technical approach paper HLSP 
Institute Feb 2009 London UK 
Peoples Health Movement (2012) Final Call to Action Peoples Health Movement Cape Town  
Poletti, T (2003). Healthcare Financing in Complex Emergencies: A background issues paper 
on cost-sharing London: London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. 
Rannan-Eliya RP (2001) Strategies for improving the health of the poor: The Sri Lankan 
experience Institute of Policy Studies Health Policy Programme Colombo Sri Lanka 
Rannan-Eliya RP and Somanathan A (2006) Equity in Health and Health Care systems in Asia  
in Jones AM (ed.),The Elgar Companion to Health Economics, chapter 19, Edward Elgar 
Publishing. 
Reason P (1988) Human inquiry in action: development in new paradigm reason SAGE 
publications  
Roberts Judy (2007) Human resources for Health Merlin UK  
Rosato Mickey et al (2008) Alma Ata: Rebirth and Revision 5: Community participation: 
lessons for maternal newborn and child health Lancet September 13th, 2008 Volume: 
372:962-71  
https://ideas.repec.org/b/elg/eebook/3572.html
Rowden R (2013) The Ghosts of user fees past: exploring accountability for victims of a 30-
year economic policy mistake Health and Human Rights June 2013 Vol 15 No 1 
Russell S (1996) Ability to pay for health care: concepts and evidence Health Policy and 
Planning Vol 11 No. 3 1996 
Russel S and Gilson L (1997) User fee policies to promote health services access: a wolf in 
sheeps clothing International Journal of Health services Vol 27 No 2 
Russell, S and Abdella, K (2002). Too poor to be sick: Coping with the costs of illness in East 
Hararghe, Ethiopia London: Save the Children UK. 
Saunders D, Carver R (1985) The Struggle for Health: Medicine and the Politics of 
Underdevelopment Macmillan Education Ltd. London and Basingstoke 
Sanders D, Labonte R, Baum F, Chopra M (2004) Making research matter: a civil society 
perspective on health research Bulletin of WHO 82, 757-758 
Save the Children UK (1996) Poor in Health Save the Children  
Save the Children & Medact (2001) The Bitterest Pill of all: the collapse of Africas health 
systems Save the Children UK  
Save the Children (2005c) Killer Bills: Make Child Poverty History  abolish user fees Policy 
briefing to feed into Make Poverty History Campaign 2005 Save the Children UK 
Save the Children UK (2006) Whose charity counts: Africas Aid to the NHS Save the Children 
Save the Children (2008) Freeing Health care: a guide to removing user fees Save the 
Children UK  
Save the Children (2010) State of the Worlds Mothers: women on the front lines of health 
care Save the Children International UK and USA offices 
Save the Children (2011) No child out of reach: time to end the health worker crisis No child 
born to die Save the Children UK  
Save the Children (2012) Health sector budget advocacy: a guide for civil society 
organisations Save the Children London UK 
Sen A (2011) Learning from others Lancet 2011 377(9761)200-1 
Schuftan, C. (1990) The Child Survival Revolution: a critique Family Practice Vol 7 No. 4 p 329 
Scott B, Halsted J A, Walsh K and Warren S (1985) Good Health at Low-Cost Rockefeller 
Foundation New York USA pg. 42-43 
Starling M, Brugha R, Walt G, Heaton A, Keith R (2002) New Products into Old systems: the 
initial impact of the GAVI from a country perspective LSHTM and Save the Children UK   
Stigler FL, Macinkon J, Pettigrew, Kumar R, van Weel C (2016) No universal health coverage 
without primary health care The Lancet Vol 387 April 30, 2016 
UNFPA (2007) Investing in midwives and others with midwifery skills to save the lives of 
mothers and newborns and improve their health UNFPA 
United Nations (2000) Millennium Declaration. General Assembly Resolution 55th session 
document A/RES/55/2. September 8th, 2000 United Nations New York USA 
United Nations (2010) Every Woman every child: the UN SGs Global Strategy for women and 
childrens health UN GA New York USA 
United Nations (2012) Decade of Nutrition UN SG New York USA 
United Nations (2015) The UN Sustainable Development Goals United Nations  
United Nations (UN) (2020) Sustainable Development Goals New York USA.  
UNICEF (1989) State of the Worlds Children New York USA 
UNICEF (1993) State of the World Children New York USA 
UNICEF (2009) Infant and Young Child Feeding Programme Review: Sri Lanka UNICEF NY 
June 2009 
UNICEF (2013) Improving child nutrition: the achievable imperative for global progress 
UNICEF NY USA 
UNICEF (2015) For every child a fair chance: the promise of equity UNICEF New York USA 
UNOHC (1976) Declaration of the (ICESCR) International Covenant on Economic Social and 
Cultural Rights drafted in 1966 and ratified in 1976 United Nations office of the high 
commissioner UN General Assembly resolution 2200 UN NY USA 
Van Doorslaer et al (2005) Paying for health care in Asia catastrophic and poverty impact: 
Equitap working paper number 2, Colombo Sri Lanka Equitap project  
Van der Meer J (1998) The health impact of economic policies WEMOS 1998 Netherlands 
Europe 
Wagstaff A (2010) Benefit Incidence Analysis: Are Government Health Expenditures More 
Pro-Rich Than We Think? Policy Research Working Paper 5234. Development Research 
Group, World Bank, Washington, DC.  
Werner, D and Bower, B (1982) Helping Health workers to learn Hesperian Foundation pg. 
Werner D and Saunders D (1997) Questioning the Solution: The Politics of Primary Health 
Care and Child Survival with an in-depth critique of oral rehydration therapy Healthwrights 
publication USA 
Witter, S (2005 a) The Unbearable Cost of Illness: Poverty, ill-health, and access to 
healthcare evidence from Lindi Rural District, Tanzania, London: Save the Children UK 
Witter, S (2005 b). Ability to pay for health care in Khartoum State: Results of a household 
survey Khartoum: Save the Children UK. 
Witter, S and Keith, R (2005) An Unnecessary evil? User fees for health care in low-income 
countries Make Poverty History Save the Children UK  
World Bank (1987). Financing health services in developing countries: An agenda for 
reform Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank (1993) World Development Report: Investing in Health World Bank Washington 
DC USA 
World Bank (2003). Issue brief: user fees Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank (2004a). Sustainable financing of health, nutrition and population 
interventions. In Health, Nutrition and Population Strategy for Sub-Saharan Africa 
Washington, DC: World Bank. 
World Bank (2004 b) Citizen report cards: a note on the concepts and methodology Social 
development Notes: participation and civic engagement Note. 91 World Bank USA 
World Bank (2012) Creating evidence for better health financing decisions: a strategic guide 
for the institutionalization of National Health Accounts World Bank Washington USA 
WHO WB and USAID (2003) Guide to producing National Health Accounts with special 
applications for low income and middle-income countries WHO Geneva Switzerland 
World Health Assembly (2005a) Resolution 58.31: Making every mother and child count and 
Resolution Notes from the 58th World Health Assembly Geneva World Health Organisation  
World Health Assembly (2005b) Resolution 58.33 Sustainable health financing, universal 
coverage and social health insurance World Health Assembly WHO Geneva Switzerland 
World Health Organization (1978) Declaration of Alma Ata. International conference on 
primary health care. Alma-Ata, USSR   World Health Organisation Sept 612:1978  
World Health Organization (2000). World Health Report 2000  World health systems: 
Improving performance WHO Geneva Switzerland 
World Health Organization and Ministry of Health (2002). The effects of abolition of cost-
sharing in Uganda: Report on the findings for 2001 Kampala: World Health Organization 
and Ministry of Health. 
World Health Organisation (2004) Making pregnancy safer: the critical role of the skilled 
attendant: A joint statement by WHO, ICM and FIGO, World Health Organisation, Geneva. 
World Health Organisation (2005) Making every mother and child count: World Health 
Report 2005 World Health Organisation Switzerland  
World Health Organisation (2006) World Health Report: Working together for health WHO 
Geneva 
World Health Organisation (2007) Commission of the Social Determinants of Health: 
challenging inequities through health systems Final report Knowledge network on Health 
Systems: WHO Geneva 
World Health Organisation (2008 a) CSDH: Closing the gap in a generation: health equity 
through action on the social determinants of health Final report on the CSDH WHO Geneva 
World Health Organisation (2008 b) Primary Health Care: now more than ever World Health 
Report April 2008 World Health Organisation Switzerland  
World Health Organisation (2010) World Health Report 2010: Health systems financing: the 
path to universal coverage World Health Report WHO Geneva Switzerland  
World Health Organisation (2012) Resolution WHA 65.6 Comprehensive implementation 
plan on maternal infant and young child nutrition (Global Nutrition Targets) May 2012 WHO 
Geneva 
WHO (2018) Astana Declaration from the International Conference on Primary Health Care 
World Health Organisation (2020) Universal Health Coverage: Key facts WHO Geneva 
Switzerland 
WHO Western Pacific (2021) New Zealand takes early and hard action to tackle COVID-19 
(who.int) 
WHO /UNICEF (2010) Countdown to 2015-decade report (2000-2010) Taking stock of 
maternal newborn and child survival Geneva World Health Organisation Switzerland 
Woodward, D (1997). User charges for health services in developing countries: An 
approach to analysing the effects on utilisation and health outcomes London: Overseas 
Development Agency. 
Xu K et al (2005) Designing Health Financing Systems to reduce catastrophic health 
expenditure: technical briefs for policy makers WHO Geneva Switzerland  
https://www.who.int/westernpacific/news/feature-stories/detail/new-zealand-takes-early-and-hard-action-to-tackle-covid-19
https://www.who.int/westernpacific/news/feature-stories/detail/new-zealand-takes-early-and-hard-action-to-tackle-covid-19
Xu K, Evans D, Kadama P, Nabyonga J, Ogwang P, Ogwal P, Nabukhonzo P, Maylena Aguilar 
A (2006) Understanding the impact of the elimination of user fees: utilisation and 
catastrophic health expenditures in Uganda Social Science and Medicine 2006 62:866-876 
Yates, R (2006) International experiences in removing user fees for health services: 
Implications for Mozambique, DFID Health Resource Centre, June 2006. 
Yates, R (2004). The Ugandan health SWAP: Improving efficiency and equity.  
Yoder, R (1989). Are people willing and able to pay for health services? Social Science and 
Medicine, 29, 3542. 
Zwi A, Macrae J, Ugale A (1992) Children and War the Kangaroo: Bibliographic archives for 
maternal and child health in developing countries Vol 1 No 1  
