Pax  terra  Mariqve: 
Rhetorics of Roman victory, 
50 B.C.  A.d. 14 
Hannah Cornwell 
Brasenose College 
A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, in the Faculty of Classics, 
Sub-faculty of Ancient History, 
University of Oxford 
Acknowledgements 
The present work would not have been possible without the help and support of a great 
many people.  
Above all thanks must go to my supervisor, Josephine Crawley Quinn, without whose 
support, criticism, encouragement and perseverance I would likely have given up long 
ago. Her thorough critiques and discussions of my arguments and ideas, at all stages of 
this process, not only have helped me to clarify my own thinking, but also have taught 
me how to write and present that thinking. She has also provided invaluable support in 
suggesting people with whom to discuss various aspects my work, conferences to 
attend, and career development beyond the production of this thesis. 
Particularly thanks go to my examiners for confirmation of status, Ed Bispham and 
Anna Clark, who offered me new perspectives on my work and helped me to consider 
in detail the overarching themes of the work. A great debt of gratitude must go to 
Jonathan Prag for his help and clarification, on more than one occasion, on dedicatory 
inscription on the arch at Segusio. Others who have contributed to the development of 
this work through discussion and suggestions are: Kurt Raaflaub, who kindly allowed 
me to read a transcript on a talk he had delivered on Roman peace; David Mattingly for 
discussing ideas on imperialism;  Janet DeLaine, made me think carefully about 
justifying my analysis of the ara Pacis and the remains of the Parthian arch; Lydia 
Matthews, for allowing me to read a chapter of her doctoral thesis; Jane Masseglia, 
Saskia Stevens and Rob Bennett for each providing me with expert opinions in their 
respective fields of body language, the pomerium of Rome and numismatic 
iconography; and to those who have provided me with insightful and thoughtful-
provoking questions at graduate work-in-progress and conferences, in particular Boris 
Chrubasik, Andy Stiles, and Wolfgang Havener (Universitt Konstanz), James Thorne, 
John Rich and Philip de Souza. 
Of course this project would not have been possible without financial support from the 
Arts and Humanities Research Council, Brasenose College, in the form of a Senior 
Hulme Scholarship, Graduate Research Allowance and Completion Grant, and the 
University of Oxford Vice-Chancellors Fund and Andrew Smith Memorial Foundation 
award enabled me to carry out and focus on my research, whilst support from both the 
Craven Committee and All Souls College, E.O. James Bequest allowed me to carry out 
fieldwork and research abroad which I otherwise would not have been able to do. 
Special thanks go to those who have helped me with field research: Sophie Binninger, 
for kindly showing me around the Trophy monument at La Turbie, discussing her 
research on the monument, and providing me with several of her publications;  Federico 
Barello, for allowing me access to the archives of the Soprintendenza per Beni 
Archeologici del Piedmonte, in Torino and providing me with copies of images from 
the photographic archive; and Maria Pia, at the British School at Rome for seeing that I 
had permessi for archaeological sites and museums in Rome. Thanks as well go to the 
BSR and the Irish Institute of Hellenic Studies in Athens for residency during my 
fieldwork. 
Thanks must also go to my parents for bravely shouldering the task of proof-reading my 
thesis, and all errors, inaccuracies and imperfections which remain are mine alone. 
Final thanks go to Louise Pavey for starting me on the path of Classics, and to those 
who first instilled a passion for Roman history in me: Liv Yarrow and Simon Price. 
PAX TERRA MARIQVE: RHETORICS OF ROMAN VICTORY, 
50 B.C.   A.D. 14 
Hannah Cornwell 
Brasenose College 
A thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, in the Faculty of Classics, 
Sub-faculty of Ancient History. 
University of Oxford 
Trinity Term 2012 
ABSTRACT 
This thesis focuses on a short period of time between 50 B.C. to A.D. 14, which 
is marked by the increased prominence of pax as a central concept within the victory 
rhetoric of the period.  The period is one of immense political and social upheaval and 
change that was to dictate the power structures of the Roman world, and one of the 
ways in which this change was conceptualised was through the language of peace.  
In this thesis I examine pax as a concept within the Roman empire and as part of 
an discourse on the nature of Roman imperialism.  This examination considers not just 
the development of pax as a concept over time, but also how it was variously 
conceptualised and presented to different audiences and in different locations. This 
focuses the examination of pax on understanding what the term as an expression of 
Romes imperium meant to various peoples within the Roman empire, how it was 
expressed and for what reasons. As David Mattingly has recently emphasised the nature 
of Roman imperialism changed radically over time (Imperialism, Power, and Identity: 
Experiencing the Roman Empire (2011)). This study of the different rhetorics of peace 
offers new insight into this changing nature. 
Beyond the specific examination of pax as a part of imperial discourse within 
the late Republic and early Principate, this study raises questions about the way we 
think about concepts in the ancient world. Rather than talking about a single 
development or evolution over time, we should rather consider concepts as constantly 
active and changing in time. Our view of the ancient world and the way in which it was 
conceptualised should not be a static one, but one where the meaning and value of 
words give us insights into how individuals and communities expressed and explained 
changing social and political conditions.  
Table of Contents 
PART I 
CHAPTER ONE 
QUOD PACEM FECIT: PAX AND VICTORY RHETORIC DURING THE 
CHAPTER TWO 
SECTION TWO - A PRESENTATION OF PAX TERRA MARIQUE IN THE EAST: OCTAVIANS VICTORY 
SECTION THREE  - AN ALTERNATIVE PERSPECTIVE ON VICTORY: CORNELIUS GALLUS AT 
PART II 
CHAPTER THREE 
PAX WITH PARTHIA: VICTORY RHETORIC OF THE PARTHIAN 
CHAPTER FOUR 
VICTORY AND PACIFICATION: COMMEMORATING THE WESTERN 
SECTION THREE - PROVINCIAL PERSPECTIVES IN THE WEST: ALTERNATIVES TO PEACE? - 278 - 
Abbreviations 
Abbreviations of ancient authors and classical texts follow the conventions of the 
Oxford Classical Dictionary. 
AE   L'Anne pigraphique revue des publications pigraphiques relatives 
 lantiquit romaine (Paris: Ernest Leroux; Presses universitaires de 
France, 1888-). 
BMC Pont    Catalogue of Greek Coins: Pontus, Paphlagonia, Bithynia, and the 
Kingdom of the Bosphorus, W. Wroth, ed. R.S. Poole (London: 
British Museum, 1889). 
BMC Thessaly Catalogue of Greek coins in the British Museum: Thessaly to Aetolia, 
P. Gradner, ed. R. S. Poole (London: British Museum 1883). 
CAH   Cambridge Ancient History, 2
 edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1961-); 1
 edn. (Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press, 1923-). 
CIL   Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum, ed. T. Mommsen et al. (Berolini: G. 
Riemerum, 1862). 
Documents illustrating the reigns of Augustus and Tiberius, 2
with addenda, ed. V. Ehrenberg and A. H. M. Jones (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1976). 
IG  Inscriptiones Atticae aetatis quae est inter Euclidis annum et Augusti 
tempora. ed. Ulricus Koehler and Johannes Kirchner (Berolini, Apud 
G. Reimerum, 1877-1895). 
ILS   Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae, ed. H. Dessau (Beroini: Apud 
Weidmannos, 1954-1955). 
InsDelos Inscriptions de Dlos: dcrets postrieurs  166 av. J. C. (nos 1497-
1524), ddicaces postrieurs a 166 av. J.C. (nos. 1525-2219), ed. P. 
Roussel and M. Launey (Paris: H. Champion, 1937). 
Inscr. Ital.   Inscriptiones Italiae Academicae Italicae Consociatae ediderunt. 
Volumen XIII, ed. A. Degrassi (Rome: Libreria dello Stato, 1937-
1967). 
IRT The Inscriptions of Roman Tripolitania, ed.J. M. Reynolds and J. B. 
Ward Perkins (Roma, London: British School at Rome, 1952). 
LIMC   Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae, ed. H.-C. 
Ackermann and J.-R. Gisler (Zrich, Artemis, 198199). 
LSJ A Latin Dictionary: founded on Andrews edition of Freunds Latin 
Dictionary, C.T. Lewis and C. Short (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1879). 
Neue Pauly Der Neue Pauly Enzyklopdie der Antike, ed. H. Cancik, H.Schneider, 
(Stuttgart: J. B. Matzler, 2000). 
NSc Notizie degli Scavi di antichit (Roma: R. Accademia dei Lincei, 
1876-). 
OCD Oxford Classical Dictionary, 3
 ed. revised, ed. S. Hornblower and 
A. Spawforth (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003). 
OLD Oxford Latin Dictionary, ed. P.G. Glare (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1982). 
RE   Paulys Real-Encyclopdie der klassichen Altertumswissenschaft, ed. 
G. Wissowa, E. Kroll et al., (Stuttgart; Muchen: J. B. Metzler; Alfred 
Drunkenmuller, 1894). 
RIC   The Roman Imperial Coinage, vol I: Augustus to Vitellius, H. 
Mattingly and E. A. Sydenham, (London: Spink & Son, 1923). 
RPC   Roman Provincial Coinage, Vol. I, A. Burnett, M. Amandry, and P. P. 
Ripolls, (1992). 
RRC   Roman Republican Coinage, 2 vols., M. H. Crawford (London: 
Cambridge University Press, 1974). 
SIG Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum, ed. G. Dittenberger (Lips: apud S. 
Hirzelium, 1883). 
Graphs and Tables 
GRAPH 1: THE OCCURRENCES OF THE WORDS PAX, CONCORDIA AND OTIUM IN CICEROS 
CORRESPONDENCE (50-43 B.C.). - 31 - 
TABLE 1: OCCURRENCES OF CONCEPT WORDS IN CICEROS PHILIPPICS. - 44 - 
TABLE 2: THE FINDSPOTS OF THE INSCRIPTION FRAGMENTS FROM THE NICOPOLIS 
MONUMENT - 106 - 
TABLE 3: LAYOUT OF THE FASTI CAPITOLINI AS DEVISED BY NEDERGAARD (2001). - 182 - 
- 1 - 
Introduction 
This thesis examines diverse perspectives on the concept of pax within the 
Roman rhetoric of victory over a relatively short, but nevertheless intense period of 
political, social and cultural change: 50 B.C. to A.D. 14. The development and diverse 
uses of pax as a concept in the Roman world were part of the wider discourse through 
which individuals and communities understood Romes empire. I will investigate here 
how pax was used as part of an ever-changing discourse on the nature of Roman 
imperialism and how it was used to conceptualise socio-political relationships and 
identities within the Roman world.
The period from the late Republic to the early Empire involves changes in the 
notion of imperialism.
 In recent years the relevance of peace (which carries 
connotations of tranquillity and freedom from suffering in English) to discussions of the 
changing nature of Roman imperialism in this period has received some attention: 
Woolf, Roman Peace (1993); Rich, Augustus, War and Peace (2003); Rosenstein, 
War and Peace, Fear and Reconciliation at Rome, and Barton, The Price of Peace in 
Ancient Rome in Raaflaubs edited volume War and Peace in the Ancient World 
(2007); de Souza, Parta victoriis pax: Roman emperors as peacemakers (2008), 
Parchami, Hegemonic Peace and Empire: The Pax Romana, Britannica and Americana 
 For general discussions on the change of imperial discourse from the Republic to the Empire see: Fuchs 
(1926) 182-205; Sordi (1985); Valvo (1985); Woolf (1993); Barton (2007); Parchami (2009); see de Souza 
(2008) for the development of Imperial peace-making from 31 B.C.  A.D. 400. 
 In this thesis Empire refers to the historical period starting from, and including, the Augustan 
Principate, whilst empire refers to the sphere of Roman influence and control, usually territorial, in 
both the Republican and Imperial periods. Likewise, Imperial refers to the period of the Empire, whilst 
imperial refers to Romes control and domination over her empire under both the Republic and 
Empire. 
- 2 - 
(2009). Yet a full study of the role and nature of peace as a part of Roman imperial 
discourse has yet to be produced, and indeed Raaflaub has noted that this area of 
research has been far from exhausted.
The role of peace within the changing perceptions of Roman imperial ideology 
is very clearly presented in Greg Woolfs essay Roman peace. In it he discusses the 
shifting ideologies of imperialism from the Republic to the Empire through an 
examination of the concepts of war and peace. During the Republic the discourse on 
war and peace focused on the distinction between the two spheres of activity: domestic 
(domi) and military/foreign (militiae).
 One clear demonstration of this distinction is 
seen in the assumption and setting aside of military garb (paludatus) at the pomerium as 
a visual show of the transition between the two spheres of activity:  
togulae lictoribus ad portam praesto fuerunt; quibus illi acceptis sagula 
reicereunt, catervam imperatori suo novam praebuerunt.
Short gowns were ready for the lictors at the gate, which they took, and laid 
aside their military cloaks, and so formed a new crowd for their imperator. 
By adopting a civilian dress, the lictors demonstrate that they are now part of the 
imperium domi, rather than the imperium militiae. These Republican notions of space 
marked the conceptual divide between the sphere of activity associated with war, and 
 Raaflaub (2007) 23 n. 25. 
 Woolf (1993) 175: this dichotomy is not exactly equivalent to our distinction between war and peace. 
But the two spheres were truly and consistently opposed, each acquiring its characteristics from the 
other. See also Rosenstein (2007) 229-230. 
 Cic. Pis. 55. 
- 3 - 
that concerned with civic affairs. They were in many respects replaced or superseded 
under the Empire by new ideas about peace and war: 
A difference emerges then between Republic and imperial values. 
Roman emperors were no less warlike than their Republican predecessors 
but the importance of territorial aggrandizement shifted from doxa to 
opinion, out of the universe of the undiscussed (because undisputed) in the 
Republic, into the universe of the discussed under the Empire. It was now 
possible to challenge Republican values, or to put it another way, there was 
now a plurality of positions on the issue.
Woolf delineates a big change from the Republic to Empire
 as regards imperialism, 
and is mostly concerned with the Imperial concept of pax Romana, as a justification for 
imperialism and the Empire. In this thesis I do not examine the pax Romana because as 
a concept in Roman writing it appears too late for the period that I examine here (50 
B.C.  A.D. 14).
 Instead, I am interested in examining the period of transition between 
the Republic and Empire more closely. 
Woolf highlights the distinction between a Republican peace and an Imperial 
peace, and emphasises how the ideological construct of peace illustrates changes in 
 Woolf (1993) 183-184. It is clear from the context of this quotation that Woolf uses imperial to refer 
to the period of the Empire; see n. 2 above for my use of the terms imperial and Imperial. 
 Woolf (1993) focuses on the first and second centuries in his discussion of the Empire. 
 Sen. Prov. 4.14, Clem. 1.4.2; Plin. HN 27.3; the phrase de pace Romana is used by Livy 36.29.11, where 
it means pax cum Romanis, see Sordi (1985) 12 n.12. The pax Romana is often used by scholars as a 
blanket term to refer to that state of peace and power achieved over the empire from the period of 
Augustus to the end of the second century A.D.: Sordi (1985) 13 on the correlation of the phrase pax 
Romana with the concept of imperium Romanum; see also Fuchs (1926) 193-205; Waddy (1950); Petit 
(1967); Zampaglione (1973); Levi (1985); Woolf (1993); de Souza (2008); stenberg (2009b); Parchami 
(2009) 15-16, 24-57; Neue Pauly 9: 454-455; RE 18.4 2432. The term has become a by-word for a nexus 
of ideas on the nature of Roman imperialism, and is even applied to the Republic: Eckstein (2006) 572ff 
applies the term to Romes expansion in the Mediterranean from the late third century B.C. onwards, 
distinguishing the pax Romana of the Republic from that of the Empire. 
- 4 - 
the nature of imperialism. His broad diachronic analysis opens up the possibility of 
examining in detail the beginnings of the transition and change from the Republic to the 
Empire. Scholarship has linked the change in ideas of peace and war with changing 
political, social and cultural conditions.
 Parchami is correct, in a sense, when he states 
that under the Republic it was war that was stressed, whereas under the Empire, peace 
was emphasised more strongly.
 However, during the late Republic and early 
Principate the stress was constantly changing according to context, author and audience. 
Indeed, I believe that we can push Woolfs idea of a plurality of positions on the 
nature of Roman imperialism further and apply it to the short period of time between 
the late Republic and early Principate.  
It is not the aim of this thesis to reconsider peace in broad terms, particularly 
as much work has already been done on this.
 The notion of peace as something that 
indicates tranquillity and freedom from suffering was not associated with the Roman 
concept pax until the end of the Republic, when the political institutions of the state 
began to collapse. Our modern understanding of peace is more apparent in the Roman 
concepts of concordia (agreement; harmony) and otium (inactivity; leisure; rest), 
which were associated with civil harmony and internal tranquillity respectively.
This thesis instead examines one manageable aspect of the wider story of peace 
(and war) over the period of the last decades of the Republic to the end of the Augustan 
Principate: pax. At this point a discussion of the Latin word pax is necessary. The 
 Woolf (1993) 176; Barton (2007) 246: by the period of the Roman civil wars and early 
Empire...increasingly pax will display its docile and eirenic aspects...The gradual suppression of the 
darker side of pax, in the Roman world  as in ours  was an evolution that revealed, one might say, the 
price of peace. 
 Parchami (2009) 19. 
 Fuchs (1926); Waddy (1950); Zampaglione (1973); Sordi (1985); Woolf (1993); Rich (2003); Raaflaub 
(2007); de Souza and France (2008); Parchami (2009). 
 On concordia Weinstock (1960) 74; Jal (1961); Weinstock (1971) 260-269; Rosenstein (2007) 231-232; 
on otium: Wirszubski (1960) 92-93; Valvo (1985) 155; Milani (1985) 25; Narducci (1991) 183-188; Barton 
(2007) 251. 
- 5 - 
standard translation of pax is peace,
 although some scholars have argued that it 
should be translated pacification.
 The problem we face is that pax encompassed a 
number of different meanings, at different times, and for different persons. As a basis 
for interpretation in my period, I will briefly consider the origins of the word and its 
meaning in the Republican period.
The root of pax is pak- / pag- , which also forms the root of the verb pacere (to 
come to an agreement).
 Milani has defined pax as designating the act of stipulating a 
convention between two (warring) parties.
 In this respect pax was part of the ritual 
practice of concluding conflict and brought Romes enemies and allies into a 
relationship and contract with Rome.
 pax, in this context, is appropriately translated as 
pact as something this is ostensibly negotiated. This pact not only encompasses that 
act of agreement, but also the state of being achieved through that: the absence of 
conflict as a state of peace. In this respect pax defines the relationship established 
between Rome and her (former) opponents as a state of being, achieved through the 
negotiation of a pact.
 However, it was often the case that this state of being was 
imposed by the Romans on their enemies from a position of superiority, and bound the 
defeated in a contractual relationship with Rome.
 Certainly, Varros and Gellius 
 Barton (2007); Parchami (2009) 1. 
 DeBrohun (2007) 257; Syme (1989) 116. My thanks to Greg Rowe for discussing this translation of pax 
with me. 
 Flower (2010) for the concept of multiple Roman Republics. 
 Fuchs (1926) 182-183; Milani (1985) 24-25; Neue Pauly vol.9. 454; OLD s.v. pacere, pax; LSJ s.v. pax. 
 Milani (1985) 25. 
Milani (1985) 25 argues that because of the concrete meaning of the root (pak-/pag-) it is possible 
that in origin pax indicated something concrete; Sordi (1985) 146-147 associates pax struck with the 
gods with the physical act of striking a nail into a door (cf. Livy 7.2-3); see also Fuchs (1926) 184; Sordi 
(1985) 13; Woolf (1993) 176; Rosenstein (2007) 227; Barton (2007) 247-251; Rich (2008); Parchami 
(2009) 15-16. 
 The transitive verb pacare (to bring into a state of peace: LSJ s.v. pacare; to impose a settlement 
upon: OLD s.v. pacare) formed from pax articulates the agency involved in defining the relationship. 
 Fuchs (1926) 184-186, 193-205; Raaflaub (2007) 13; Rosenstein (2007) 236-240;Rich (2008). As a 
comparative study to this unequal relationship expressed by pax, Liv Yarrow, in an unpublished paper, 
- 6 - 
accounts of the letter sent to Carthage telling them to choose between pax and bellum 
(symbolised by the caduceus and hasta respectively) illustrates that even when pax was 
offered instead of bellum (as opposed to a result of it), Rome was still the one offering 
(and imposing) pax: 
Q. Fabius, imperator Romanus, dedit ad Carthaginieneses epistulam. Ibi 
scriptum fuit populum Romanum misisse ad eos hastem et caduceum, signa 
duo belli aut pacis, ex quis, utrum vellent, eligerent, quod elegissent, id 
unum ut esse missum existimarent. Carthaginienses res ponderunt neutrum 
sese eligere, sed posse, qui adtulissent, utrum mallent, relinquere; quod 
reliquissent, id sibi pro electo futurum.
The Roman general, Quintus Fabius, gave the Carthaginians a letter. There 
it was written that the Roman people sent to them a spear and a staff, the 
two signs of war and peace, and that they might chose from these whichever 
they wished; and regard the one which they had chosen as sent to them by 
the Roman people. The Carthaginians replied that they would chose neither, 
but those who had brought them could leave behind whichever they 
preferred; that which they left behind, they would consider as the one they 
themselves had chosen. 
has emphasised that concordia expresses social hierarchy among the orders, and that the concept 
implies an unequal partnership. 
 Gell. NA 10.27.3-4; Gell. NA 10.27.5 indicates that Varro also gave an account of the embassy. Gellius 
uses that story to show that Carthage were equals and rivals in power to Rome, as their refusal to 
choose illustrates. 
- 7 - 
Even with the absence or removal of war, imposing a treaty or pact was a sign of 
military strength and authority; to accept defeat signalled weakness. As Rosenstein has 
articulated it, peace not only beyond its boundaries but also within the empires 
confines depended ultimately on the perception of Romes military might.
 In such 
contexts the translation pacification may also seem applicable, although this 
translation does not highlight the contractual relationship designated by pax during the 
Republic. What this understanding of the term pax illustrates is the distinction between 
what a word formally means (essentially here a pact), and what it may imply or come 
to imply. 
In the instances where I have translated pax, I have attempted to bring out the 
appropriate nuance of the word, depending on the context of its use; however in many 
cases I have retained the Latin word. Throughout this study pax refers to the concept 
under discussion. When the first letter is capitalised (Pax), a personified form of the 
concept or a title, such as the Ara Pacis Augustae or the colony Pax Iulia, is referred to. 
The whole word is capitalised only when it refers to a coin legend (PAXS/PAX).  
At this point it is also worth briefly discussing the distinction between the 
Roman concept pax and the Greek concept . Whilst this thesis is not concerned 
with the Greek concept in itself,
 the term is relevant for its use as the Greek 
translation of the term pax. As a translation of the Latin pax,  presents us with a 
problem of analysing how this Greek presentation of the Roman concept was actually 
understood.  is much closer to the English concept peace than the Latin pax,24 
 Rosenstein (2007) 228; see also Harris (1979) 35; Parchami (2009) 15-17. 
 A separate thesis could be written on the Greek concept in this period. For a general discussion on the 
meanings and applications of the term  see Fuchs (1926) 167-181; Sordi (1985). 
 Fuchs (1926) 184: [Die] Tatsache, da die Lage als geschaffen gilt und da sie auf zweiseitiger 
Anerkennung beruht, unterscheidet sie grundstzlich von der griechischen , die, zunchst einseitig 
und ohne Rcksicht auf die Bedingungen ihres Eintretens betrachtet, den Zustand des Friedens und der 
Wohlfahrt bedeutet. 
- 8 - 
and the meaning of the Greek word must affect the way in which a Greek speaking 
audience understood the Roman concept pax when translated into Greek, as a passage 
from the Res Gestae Divi Augusti illustrates: 
Ianum Quirinum, quem claussum esse maiore nostri voluerunt, cum per 
totum imperium populi Romani terra marique esset parta victoriis pax.
Our ancestors wanted Ianus Quirinus to be closed when peace had been 
achieved by victories on land and sea throughout the whole empire of the 
Roman people. 
 ,          
<>     .26 
The Gate of War, which our ancestors desired to be closed once all land and 
sea was at peace under the Romans. 
Here the Latin text presents pax as understood through its causal relationship with 
victory. In the Greek text there is a conspicuous absence of victory as an expression of 
the peace achieved.  is not presented as a condition achieved through victory as in 
the Latin text, or as an expression of totum imperium populi Romani but it is 
nevertheless a condition of Roman hegemony.
 The message of pax/ given by 
and to a Greek speaking audience was, in this particular instance, fundamentally 
 RG 13. 
 RG 13. 
 See Cooley (2009) 27-28 on the translation into Greek of this phrase signifying the territorial extent of 
Roman imperium. 
- 9 - 
different from the presentation at Rome at Augustus request.
 This illustrates both a 
distinction in what each word meant and in how they were used and understood. The 
Greek  does not encompass either the contractual relationship of pax or the 
associations with victory. 
 The study of pax in this thesis involves an examination of Roman victory 
rhetoric, as pax (as a pact) was, during the Republic, associated with a victorious 
outcome in war. Gruen and Rich have argued however that the development of the 
rhetoric of victory during the Augustan period was not overly concerned with the 
concept of pax.
 As I will illustrate in this thesis, the relationship between pax and 
victory in the period examined here was in fact a fluid one, with pax assuming 
prominence within the different interpretations and presentations of victory. Just as the 
understanding of pax changed and varied depending on the context of its use, so too did 
the relationship between pax and victory vary. In the Republican period the relationship 
may be characterised as causal, in that victory in war brought about the state and 
condition of pax. However, as I will show, as political conditions changed, pax could be 
seen as an alternative to victory, and then even as a reason for victory celebrations in 
itself. My examination of pax as a part of a discourse on the nature of Roman 
imperialism will consider a number of victory commemorations (by which I mean any 
act or display that records and commemorates victory, from triumphal processions seen 
at Rome, to monumental inscriptions and visual displays, such as coins and monuments, 
throughout the empire) to construct a picture of the role and position of pax within 
Roman victory rhetoric. 
 See Cooley (2009) 18-19,  26-30 on the Greek version of the RG. 
 Gruen (1982); Rich (2003). 
- 10 - 
The notion of pax as victory, rather than as a result of victory, is interesting for a 
study of imperial discourse not just for its presence, but also for its absence in certain 
commemorations. pax expressed the existence of a relationship between two parties, but 
more than that it articulated the balance of power within that relationship, negotiated (or 
rather imposed) from the victors view point. That is not to say that the absence of pax 
means the absence of a relationship; silence on pax is also an expression of Roman 
imperialism and the relationship being articulated. The choices made to celebrate, or not 
celebrate victory in terms of pax, give an insight into what pax, as an expression of 
Romes imperium, meant to various peoples within the Roman empire, how it was 
expressed and for what reasons. As Mattingly has recently emphasised the nature of 
Roman imperialism changed radically over time.
 Examining the ways in which the 
concept pax was used and changed is also to examine the broader context of the 
changing conditions within the period under discussion. The Greek historian 
Thucydides understood well the idea that conceptual change was dependent on 
changing conditions:            
.31  Political, social or cultural change is, in effect, acted out or expressed 
through the use of concepts in language. As the political scientist James Farr states: to 
understand conceptual change is in large part to undertand political change, and vice 
versa. And such understanding must of necessity be historical.
 The period 50 B.C. to 
A.D. 14 is one of important and intense political, social and cultural change and 
 Mattingly (2011) 271. 
 Thuc. 3.82.4: To fit in with the change of events, words, too, had to change their usual meanings. 
Price (2001) 41 has taken this passage to mean not that the words have changed their meanings, but 
that a societys values have changed: Thucydides means that during stasis words retain their agreed-
upon meaning but the value assigned to them, that is, how their meanings were enacted in society, 
changes. cf. p. 7 above on the distinction between a words formal meaning and its implication. 
 Farr (1989) 24-25; see also Skinner (1989). 
- 11 - 
transition, which is reflected in the fluidity of the concept pax.
 The plurality of 
positions that Woolf suggests existed on the nature of imperialism and Roman peace 
under the Empire is just as much true for the late Republic.  
This thesis tells the story of how pax acquired its central role in imperial 
ideology, and its central role in the many different meanings and complexities of ideas 
that were debated and expressed within Roman victory rhetoric.
 pax did not just 
develop or evolve over time, but was an active, changing and varying concept in time. 
pax could still in the late Republic and early Principate mean a pact or treaty, as it had 
done earlier, but it also acquired new meanings and was used to express different 
concerns, depending on the context of its use. 
In this way, this study raises questions about the ways in which we think about 
concepts in the ancient world. Rather than talking about a single development or 
evolution over time, we should rather consider concepts as constantly active and 
changing in time. Our view of the ancient world and the ways in which it was 
conceptualised should not be a static one, but one where the meaning and value of 
words gives us insights into how individuals and communities expressed and explained 
changing social and political conditions.
 Farr (1989) 24 succinctly summarised this issue of conceptual change: constant change appears to be 
the only true constant thing about our political concepts. 
 Raaflaub (2007) 23 states that in Rome, at various times the issue of peace elicited an intense 
discourse. 
 My thanks to Lydia Matthews for allowing me to consult chapter two of her Oxford DPhil thesis 
Roman Constructions of fortuna pp. 100-152. In this chapter Matthews examines the meanings of 
fortuna in the literary sources, and particularly emphasises that a range of meanings were employed by 
any given author. fortuna had different functions in the text depending on the context of its use. 
McDonnell (2006) 5-9 touches on the idea of the quality virtus both changing over time and being used 
in various and contradictory ways at any given time. 
- 12 - 
Thesis structure 
 The thesis examines four different events from the period 50 B.C. to 
A.D. 14, for which substantial islands of evidence are available. I also give a brief 
commentary on the years between these islands, which both allows a wider contextual 
understanding of the role of pax within this period, articulating when pax was, and 
when it was not, prominent in discourses on the nature of Roman imperialism, and also 
highlights the limitations of our evidence for these missing years. 
50 B.C. is taken as the point at which civil war between Caesar and Pompey 
appeared inevitable and Ciceros concern for pax emerged in his letters. The thesis is 
divided into two parts. Part I (chapters one and two),pax and the civil wars, examines 
the ways in which the civil wars influenced the use of pax within political discourses of 
the 40s down to 29 B.C; Part II (chapters three and four), pax and the empire, 
examines the role of pax as an expression of Roman imperium in different discourses on 
the nature of the Roman empire concerning the events in 20-19 B.C. and 13 B.C.  In 
Part I, I refer to Octavian, whilst in Part II, I refer to Augustus, as the discussion is 
concerned with the period after 27 B.C. The end date of A.D. 14 was chosen in part as it 
offers a complete view of Augustus principate, and in part as it marks the publication 
of the Res Gestae Divi Augusti (the final version of which was written in A.D. 13/14),
which is examined here as a commemoration of Roman imperialism.
Chapter one examines the various uses of pax from 50 to 40 B.C. by both the 
senate and individual politicians at Rome, in order to establish the ways in which pax 
continued to be an important concept of negotiation, conflict and victory rhetoric, at the 
same time as new meanings and nuances were being added to the older concept. The 
 RG 35.2; Cooley (2009) 3-6,42-43, 276. 
 See pp. 8-9 above for a discussion of the terms pax and  in the RG. 
- 13 - 
chapter starts with a brief discussion of the role of pax during the late Republic in order 
to establish the application and understanding of the term prior to the civil wars of the 
40s. The chapter then examines the period in three main sections: pax as a desired state 
in contrast to victory (predominantly concerning the period from 50-48 B.C. through an 
examination of Ciceros correspondence), pax as achieved through victory, and finally 
the concept of pax as victory in itself. The political developments during the civil wars 
of the 40s explain why and how pax became an expression of agreement and political 
stability between Romans, as opposed to with external enemies. pax was a major 
concept for the articulation of relationships of power in the 40s. Yet the concept itself 
was still fluid, given over to interpretation and reinterpretation by the political actors 
who employed it, depending on the political ideals and aspirations of the actors. Cicero 
and Caesar, for instance, use the term pax in different ways, both in their 
correspondence and in their public speeches and published works, to convey their 
notions of victory and reconciliation in the context of civil conflict. This comparison of 
ostensibly public and private discourse in this thesis is only possible in the period of 
the 40s B.C., thanks to the survival of Ciceros letters. Whilst we should be wary of 
stressing too great a distinction between public and private discourse, it is useful to 
consider the different contexts within which such discourse takes place: Cicero for 
example expresses quite a different interpretation of pax in his Philippics in 43 B.C. 
from his stance on negotiating a pact between Caesar and Pompey in the early 40s, as 
seen in his correspondence.
 Such a comparison is not possible for the following three 
chapters, where only public discourse survives. The comparison of different contexts 
for discourse in chapter one serves to highlight the variety of discourses occurring at the 
 See pp. 22, 29-48 below. 
- 14 - 
start of our period, and as a reminder of the limits of our perspectives for the rest of the 
period. 
By 36 B.C. pax was, for the first time, celebrated without the need for an 
opponent or opposing party. This usage of pax reoccurred in 29 B.C. after the end of the 
civil wars. Chapter two considers this development of victory rhetoric in the 
commemorations of 29 B.C., in comparison to those of 36 B.C., from a number of 
different perspectives: the celebrations made by the senate and by Octavian at Rome in 
29 B.C., the victory display Octavian erected on the site of his camp above Actium, and 
a victory stele set up by Octavians first praefectus Aegypti, Cornelius Gallus, to 
commemorate his own achievements in Egypt. With Octavians position within the 
state confirmed, the victory celebrations are for the most part concerned with blurring 
the lines between foreign and civil conflicts. pax was used selectively by Octavian, not 
to express his position of power over his political opponents, but rather as an assertion 
of his command over an empire, as his display at Nicopolis for his Actian victory 
demonstrates. What this chapter also highlights is that the meaning of pax, as a part of 
victory rhetoric, was not accepted or used by everyone. The senate appears to have 
chosen not to fully employ a rhetoric of pax in this period,
 possibly because the word 
still maintained some connotation of an agreement or settlement between two parties: a 
concept that now could no longer stand in respect of internal politics. In a similar way, 
Gallus display at Philae was not dependent on a concept of pax: the message of victory 
was presented and manipulated to accord with the views of the various audiences, and 
that Roman idea of pax was not a part of the ideology of victory within the context of 
the display at Philae.  
 The Ara Pacis Augustae, dedicated in 9 B.C., shows that the senate later chose to employ a rhetoric of 
- 15 - 
Chapter three focuses on the pax made with Parthia in 20 B.C. (pax 
Parthorum)
 and how this pax was presented and conceptualised as a political tool for 
the expression of empire. The diplomatic act of the return of Romes standards 
illustrates how pax (as a pact, without the need for war) made with an external enemy 
was treated as a victorious concept, and the culmination of Romes victories.  I examine 
the different rhetorics of pax and victory used by the senate and by Augustus in 20-16 
B.C. and then turn to consider how the event was commemorated later in the Forum 
Augustum c. 2 B.C. This later display reinforced the relationship aspect of pax, as an 
agreement between two parties, redefining the arena in which such negotiation took 
place. Finally, I consider the presentation of the pax Parthorum in provincial displays, 
where the event is predominantly treated as a victory and as an example of Romes 
imperium and pacification of her empire. The Parthian settlement illustrates how 
Roman victory rhetoric adapted in order to be able to treat a pact with an external 
enemy not as the result of victory, but as a victory in itself.  
Whilst chapter three examines the different ways in which a form of pact was 
celebrated and expressed in the Augustan Principate, chapter four examines different 
conceptualisations of pacification in the West after 13 B.C. The first section considers 
the commemorations set up at Rome both by the senate (the Ara Pacis Augustae) and 
by Augustus in 9 B.C. The altar is, as far as the surviving evidence and our literary 
sources indicate, the first monumental display directly associated with the personified 
form of Pax (the earliest personification from the surviving material was a coin minted 
in 44 B.C.)
. In the commemoration at Rome pax was also qualified as Augustan, and 
this may be seen as one of the first steps to pax becoming an Imperial virtue. The 
 Flor. 2.34. 
 See pp. 33-35 below. 
- 16 - 
second section looks at how the senate commemorated the pacification of the West in 
the Alps, with the Alpine Trophy at La Turbie. The contrast between the senates 
display of pax Augusta at Rome and the display of pacification and subjugation in the 
Alps highlights how the discourse of pax was dependent on the context of display. pax 
at Rome and pax in the newly conquered territory were expressed as two very different 
things. The third section looks at yet another interpretation of the pacification from the 
perspective of a local Alpine dynast: the arch at Segusio in North Italy (modern day 
Susa). The concept of pax Augusta was accepted and disseminated among Roman 
colonies in the West, but in the newly conquered Alpine regions there was no direct 
reference to the concept. Instead the pacification was understood as a moment of 
integration into the Roman world, achieved through a pact.  
Map 1 gives the locations of all the major monuments examined. 
- 17 - 
PART I 
pax and civil war
- 18 - 
Chapter One 
Quod pacem fecit: pax and victory rhetoric during 
the civil wars 
The Fasti Triumphales Capitolini list the Roman triumphs and ovations from 
Romulus over the Caenineses in 753 B.C. down to L. Cornelius Balbus over Africa in 
19 B.C.
 The Fasti follow a standard formula over two lines with the names of the 
general, his office and the ethnic groups (de) or geographical area (ex) he conquered,
occupying the left side of the field, whilst the year and the day of the triumph is 
recorded on the right side of the field. Ovations (minor triumphs)
 are distinguished 
from triumphs by the addition of the word ovans.
 Amidst this vast sea of conquest and 
victory over peoples and places are two rather striking entries for 40 B.C. (Figure 1): 
 See chapter three, pp. 171-186 below for a full discussion of the Fasti Capitolini (Fasti Triumphales 
and Fasti Consulares). 
 The use of ex along with a place name only appears from the mid third century onwards, starting from 
the entry for 257 B.C. and the triumph of A. Atilius Caiatinus ex Sicilia de Poeneis. This development 
marks a distinction between ethnic groups and geographical territories. 
 Gell. NA 5.6.20-21: Ovalis corona murtea est, ea utebantur imperatores, qui ovantes urbem 
introibant. Ovandi ac non triumphandi causa est, cum aut bella non rite indicta neque cum iusto hoste 
gesta sunt aut hostium nomen humile et non idoneum est, ut servorum piratarumque, aut deditione 
repente facta inpulverea, ut dici solet, incruentaque victoria obvenit (The ovation crown is made of 
myrtle, it was worn by imperatores who entered the city in an ovation. The cause of an ovation, and not 
a triumph, is when either wars have not been declared with the proper rites and so have not been 
waged with a legitimate enemy, or when the enemy is of low or unsuitable name, as in the case of 
slaves and pirates, or when because of a quick surrender, the victory was dustless, as the saying goes, 
and bloodless); for the ovation as a minor triumph see Plin. NH 15.19; Dion. Hal. 8.67.10; Dio Cass. 
19.16.11; Serv. Aen. 4.543; RE 18. 1890-1903; Neue Pauly 9. 110; OCD 1084; Versnel (1980) 166-171. 
 In the Fasti Barberiniani, which also record the triumphs for the years 43-21 B.C (though they do not 
record the years, only the days), triumphatores are marked with the additional triumphavit, ovations 
with ovans, whilst all the entries terminate with palmam dedit, except that for the 15
 August 
celebrating the triumph over Egypt: see Inscr. Ital. XIII 1.343; Beard (2007) 303-305; Bastien (2007) 54-
- 19 - 
Imp. Caesar Divi f. C. f. IIIvir r(ei) p(ublicae) c(onstituendae) ov[vans, an 
DCCXIII ] / quod pacem cum M. Antonio fecit, [---] 
M. Antonius M. f. M. n. IIIvir r(ei) p(ublicae) c(onstituendae) ovan[s, an 
DCCXIII] / quod pacem cum Imp. Caesare feci[t,---].
Imperator Caesar son of the deified (Julius), son of Gaius, triumvir for the 
reconstitution of the res publica celebrated an ovation because he made a 
pact with Marcus Antonius. 
Marcus Antonius son of Marcus, grandson of Marcus, triumvir for the 
reconstitution of the res publica celebrated an ovation because he made a 
pact with Imperator Caesar. 
These are the only two entries in the Fasti which record a celebration not for the 
conquest over a people or place, but because pax was made between two Roman 
magistrates and generals.
 The entries are striking not just because of their justification 
for the ovations (that a pact was made, rather than the conquest of an enemy), but also 
because pax is now made between two Romans, as opposed to with (or imposed upon) 
an external enemy, and that this in itself is a cause for an ovation. Clearly, the pact 
made between Octavian and Antony at Brundisium in 40 did not justify a full triumph 
as no great defeat of an enemy had taken place; indeed, the ovation was a victory 
 Inscr. Ital.XIII 1.87, frag. XL of the Fasti Triumphales Capitolini. It is striking that for the entry of 40 
B.C., as for the entry of 36 B.C., Octavian has two filiations: son of the deified (Julius), son of Gaius. In 
addition it should be noted that for both the entries of 40 and 36 B.C. the second filiation C. f. has been 
carved over an erasure. Beard (2007) 302 has suggested that this may be a result of trying to deal with 
and express Octavians adoption by Caesar both in his divine aspect and in his human aspect.  
 pax is here appropriately translated as pact, as something that is ostensibly negotiated between 
Rome and her enemies. However, it was often the case that this pact was imposed by the Romans on 
their enemies from a position of superiority, and bound the defeated in a contractual relationship with 
Rome: Fuchs (1926) 184-186, 193-205; Raaflaub (2007) 13; Rosenstein (2007) 236-240;Rich (2008). 
- 20 - 
celebration granted when a general could not be awarded a full triumph.
 It is 
nevertheless striking that a victory celebration is chosen to commemorate the making of 
a pact (an act which traditionally followed victory over an enemy), and a pact between 
two Romans at that.
 This celebration of a pact with an ovation, as a form of victory celebration, is in 
sharp contrast to Ciceros perspective, given in his correspondence, of the relationship 
between pact and victory during the early civil wars of the 40s: pace opus est. ex 
victoria cum multa tum certe tyrannus exsistet.
 pax was a desirable alternative, in 
Ciceros opinion, to victory in civil war. 
 The range of possibilities for the meaning and understanding of pax within the 
context of victory rhetoric was dependent on the political circumstances of each 
application. The intensity of conflict and political divisions that arose amongst the 
Romes leading men during the 40s produced a variety of perspectives on the nature of 
pax, how it related to victory, and how it was to be achieved. In this chapter I examine 
the role of pax in the civil wars of the 40s, and the influence that those wars had on the 
meaning and use of the term. The application of the term pax to relations between 
Romans, as opposed to with external enemies, is a vital component of the political 
language of the 40s. 
 See n. 44 above. 
 An ovation for pax was awarded to Manlius Volso for the establishment of a 40 year treaty with the 
Veii: RE 18.1896; whilst Livy 2.54 records that Manlius conducted no war (Manlio Veientes provincia 
evenit; non tamen bellatum; indutiae in annos quadraginta petentibus datae frumento stipendioque 
imperato. Paci externae confestim continuatur discordia domi: The Veientines fell to Manlius as his 
province. There was no war, however, a forty years truce was granted on their request, and they were 
ordered to provide food and money. Peace abroad was at once followed by discord at home), Dion. 
Hal. 9.36.3 states that Manlius received the ovation because he put an end to the war:    
   ,         ,  (And Manlius, 
coming to the city, requested and received an ovation for having put an end to the war). The ovations 
of 40 B.C. are most striking for their celebration of a pact between two Roman magistrates: RE 18.1896. 
 Cic. Att. 7.5.4: A pact is needed. Out of victory comes both many evils and certainly tyranny. Since 
Cicero here sets up pax and victoria in opposition is seems most appropriate to take pax to mean the 
act of negotiation, to balance to act of successfully concluding military engagement. 
- 21 - 
The numerous civil conflicts between different groups throughout the 40s 
(Caesar against Pompey; Caesar against the Republicans; Antony against Caesars 
assassins; Antony against Octavian and the consuls; Antony and Octavian against 
Brutus and Cassius; and Octavian against Antony) meant that political and military 
discussions focused on what was the desirable outcome of civil war, and the different 
ways in which this might be achieved. This chapter will illustrate how pax, over the 
course of the 40s, was used increasingly to express relations between Romans, as 
opposed to between Romans and external opponents. I will examine the use of the 
concept of pax within political discourse of the period, in order to illustrate how that 
discourse was a crucial step in the development of the concept of pax from Republic to 
Empire.
 I will not only show the new nuances that the term pax was acquiring as a 
response to the changing political circumstances, but I will also argue that different 
political players took different stances on the ways in which pax fitted into their vision 
of the political landscape.  
In order to understand the different perspectives and practices concerning pax, 
victory rhetoric and civil stability within the period, I will first briefly examine the 
position and usage of pax in the late Republic, in order to establish the role of pax prior 
to the 40s (section one). I will then turn to consider the different attitudes towards pax 
during the civil wars of the 40s.  
Whilst pax maintained its meaning of a pact between parties, its relationship to 
victory was dependent on individual politicians understanding of how political power 
should be achieved and maintained. In section two, I will consider pax as a desired state 
in opposition to victory at the conclusion of civil conflict. This interpretation of pax is 
 On this transition from Republic to Empire see Woolf (1993). 
- 22 - 
seen most clearly in Ciceros correspondence during the early 40s, though also to some 
extent in Caesars commentarius on the civil war. 
Next, I will examine the notion of pax as achieved through victory. This follows 
the traditional interpretation of pax as the outcome of war or conflict, achieved after 
victory. What is striking about this understanding of the term is that it was now used to 
express and justify the power relations between Romans. 
Finally I will turn to examine the concept of pax as victory in itself, as the 
celebrations of 40 B.C. illustrate. Now pax could be the cause of victory 
commemoration. This understanding of pax demonstrates the dependence of the 
concept on the political situation: that a pact between the two leading magistrates and 
generals could be celebrated as a form of victory. 
Whilst the structure of this chapter is not primarily driven by chronology, 
certain events do highlight the discourse on pax, owing to the effect they have on the 
political situation. Caesars assassination for example provides an occasion for a 
renewed discussion about pax, and in the year that follows we may observe in Ciceros 
stance on pax a manipulation of the concept to fit with what he considers politically 
expedient, and this marks a rather different interpretation of the concept from that of his 
letters in the early 40s. For Cicero the political situation had changed: whereas in the 
early 40s he only voiced his options and desire for pax in his correspondence, by 44/43 
he engaged publicly (as well as in his correspondence) in a discussion of what pax with 
Antony would mean.  
This chapter will use evidence from sources which are ostensibly public, such as 
political speeches, published works and coins, and from sources which are ostensibly 
- 23 - 
private, such as Ciceros correspondence.
 Both public and private discourse offers 
a similar range of possibilities for the interpretation and use of the term pax and a 
similar dependency on the political ideas of the authors. It is not necessarily easy or 
useful to divide our material into solely public or private discourse, particularly 
given the highly political lives of individuals such as Caesar and Cicero. However, it is 
interesting and useful to note the various viewpoints held by the same individuals on the 
nature of pax, depending on the context of the discourse. Caesar, for example, expresses 
two different viewpoints on pax in his letters, and in his de bello civili and coinage 
during the early 40s. Publicly, he indicated a desire to bring stability to the state through 
reconciliation, and suggested that it was his opponents rejections of pax that had 
caused the violence of the early 40s, whilst in his correspondence he shows a lack of 
concern for any real negotiation. A comparison of the different contexts in which the 
discourse on pax took place will illustrate how the understanding of the term was 
dependent on the authors (often changing) political situation and outlook. This 
suggests the malleability and manipulation of the term pax, which was closely bound to 
the political upheaval of the 40s and the need to establish oneself politically in the 
collapse of the res publica. 
 A diverse understanding and application of the term pax is clear from an examination of Ciceros 
letters. Cicero himself makes a clear distinction in his letters between what he says in the senate (i.e. his 
public discourse) and what he personally and privately believes and thinks: Cic. Att. 7.6.2: dices quid tu 
igitur sensurus es? non idem quod dicturus. Sentiam enim omnia facienda ne armis decertetur, dicam 
idem quod Pompeius, neque id faciam humili animo (You will ask me what line I shall take in the House. 
Not the same as in my own mind. There I shall vote for peace at any price, but in the House I shall echo 
Pompey, and I shall not do it in a spirit of subservience either; cf. Cic. Att. 7.3.5: Illud ipsum quod ais, 
quid fiet cum erit dictum dic, M. Tulli?: , Cn. Pompeio adsentior. Ipsum tamen Pompeium 
separatim ad concordiam hortabor (As for your question What will happen when the word comes 
Speak, Marcus Tullius?, tout court I agree with Cn. Pompeius. Pompey himself however I shall 
privately urge to concord). Although Cicero here refers to concordia rather than pax, what is important 
is his distinction between his public opinion and his private opinion concerning action during this period 
of political instability. 
- 24 - 
Section One 
pax in the late Republic 
pax in the mid- and late Republic was understood and conceptualised as the act of 
agreement and the state achieved through negotiating and imposing conditions on the 
defeated after the cessation of conflict, and was a result of Romes victory over her 
enemies.
Whilst pax was conceptualised as the result of victory, it was understood, at least 
by certain authors of the late Republic, as a sphere of activity separate from war.
states that bellum was announced through the fetiales, whereas pax was made through 
the caduceatores:
 bellum and pax had separate officials to oversee them being 
achieved and announced. The heralds wand, the caduceus from which the 
caduceatores derived their name, symbolised the position of the herald as a sacrosanct 
messenger and negotiator of pax.
 See pp. 5-7 above. 
 On these two seperate spheres of activity and the discourse of war and peace in the late Republic 
see Woolf (1993). 
 Serv. Aen. 4.242 (referencing Livy: unde secundum Livium): sicut enim per fetiales, a foedere, bella 
indicebantur, ita pax per caduceatores fiebat (for thus through the fetiales, by an agreement, wars 
were declared, and so a pact was made through caduceatores); cf. Serv. Aen. 8.138: caduceum illi ideo 
adsignatur, quod fide media hostes in amicitiam conducat. It is worth noting that the caduceus was 
used, according to Varro to symbolise pax (as a pact) in opposite to war (symbolised by a hasta) in an 
embassy that Rome sent to Carthage: Gell. NA 10.27.5 records that in Varros account of an embassy to 
the Carthaginians two tiles with the simulacra of a hasta and caduceus were sent; cf. Gellius 10.27.3: 
populum Romanum misisse ad eos hastam et caduceum, signa duo belli aut pacis (the Roman people 
sent them a spear and a heralds staff two signs of war and peace). Varro himself uses the phrase signa 
pacis ac belli: Res Rustica 3.16. pax clearly could be offered instead of war (see Livys accord of Manlius 
Volso pax with the Veii, n. 49 above), but Rome still dictated the terms. 
 Heralds were deemed to be protected under the ius gentium, see Curt. 4.1.15: quos Tyrii contra ius 
gentium occisos; 4.2.17: inter haec, caduceatores interfectos, gentium iura violata, referebat. See also 
Moore (forthcoming). 
- 25 - 
The caduceus symbolised the pact made at the cessation of conflict, as the coin 
commemorating the unification of Italy and Rome illustrates. On the reverse Italia 
holds a cornucopia with a winged caduceus to her left, and joins hands in concord with 
Roma, who holds a sceptre and places her foot on a globe (Figure 2).
 Whilst the coin 
demonstrates the unification of Italy and Rome it also alludes to the military might of 
Rome, and Italys acquiescence to her after the social war. Indeed, the caduceus, as a 
symbol of the negotiation and pact dependent on the victory achieved, was also an 
attribute of the victor: in 48 B.C., L. Hostilius Saserna minted coins celebrating 
Caesars victories in Gaul, depicting a Victory holding a trophy and caduceus (Figure 
 I will discuss later the association of pax with victory, through the use of the 
caduceus on coinage during the 40s.
 I now turn to consider the role of pax within the 
political discourse of Rome during the late Republic, and its relationship to other 
concepts concerned with political stability. 
Besides the use of the caduceus on coinage, pax was not personified or given a 
physical presence within the city of Rome;
 it was rather the concepts of internal 
stability, such as concordia, that received temples and commemorations.
 Concordia 
 RRC 403/1. Weinstock (1960) 45 has suggested that the coin may indicate that pax was being used as 
a political slogan: if it was, it was a message of agreement and pact that prevailed. 
 RRC 448/1a. An earlier coin minted by Sulla on the move in 82 B.C. (RRC 367), depicting him as 
imperator driving a quadriga and holding a caduceus whilst being crowned by Victory, suggests that the 
caduceus as an attribute of the victor was in use at least in the second quarter of the first century B.C. 
Crawford (1974) 387 argues that the caduceus may be taken to indicate that victory is hoped for rather 
than achieved. 
 See pp. 30, 38, 48 and 52 below. 
 It is notable that pax most likely did not receive a cult until the Ara Pacis Augustae: see Clark (2007) 9. 
For a cult of Pax under Caesar see Clark (2007) 8 n.15, 105-106; Weinstock (1960) 46-47. 
 The temple of Concordia was built in 304 B.C. Temples of the mid-Republic tended to celebrate 
victories and qualities associated with Romes military strength (e.g. Mars (390), Victoria (305), Bellona 
(296), Iuppiter Victor (295), Iuppiter Stator (294), Fors Fortuna (293), Hercules Invictus (292-269/6), 
Honos (233), Honos et Virtus (222)), or qualities associated with the safety of the state (e.g. Salus (311), 
Concordia (304), Spes (258/7, or 254-249), Fides (258/7 or 254-249); Fortuna Publica (241; Fortuna 
Publica (240-219) : see Ziolkowski (1992) 17-189.  
- 26 - 
first appeared as a personification or deity on the coinage in 62 B.C. (Figure 4),
following the year of Ciceros consulship and the Catilinarian conspiracy. In his 
speeches of 63 B.C. Cicero emphasised the importance of the concept of concordia 
between the senate and the equestrian order in order to ensure the stability of the state,
and further emphasised this point by holding the debate on the fate of the conspirators 
in the temple of Concordia.
 Cicero emphasised the power and abilities of the 
statesman, who strives for civil peace and harmony, compared with those of the dux and 
imperator (and here he is thinking of Pompey), who pacifies external threats: 
Nulla enim est natio quam pertimescamus, nullus rex qui bellum populo 
Romano facere possit; omnia sunt externa unius virtute terra marique 
pacata; domesticum bellum manet: intus insidiae sunt, intus inclusum 
periculum est, intus est hostis. [...] Huic ego me bello ducem profiteor, 
Quirites.
For there is no nation which we fear, there is no king who can make war 
against the Roman people; all external threats are brought into a state of 
peace by land and sea by the virtue of one man; domestic war remains: the 
traps are on the inside, the danger is shut within, the enemy is inside the 
gates. [...] Here I acknowledge myself as your leader in war, Quirites. 
 RRC 415 and 417; see appendix I below. 
 Cic. Cat. 4.15: quos ex multorum annorum dissensione huius ordinis ad societatem concordiamque 
revocatos hodiernus dies vobiscum atque haec causa coniungit (whom this day and this cause now 
reunites with you in alliance and harmony with your body reconciled after a disagrrement of many 
years). 
 Cic. Cat. 3.21. 
 Cic. Cat. 2.11. 
- 27 - 
During his consulship Cicero stressed that it was the togatus, rather than the dux 
and imperator, who was able to achieve civil peace and stability. This reflects Ciceros 
attempts to prove his own abilities as consul, and not a military man, to ensure the 
stability of the Roman state.
 His concern is for the preservation of the Roman political 
state, and to express this fully he uses the terms concordia, otium
 and pax, if not 
interchangeably, at least in tandem and to suggest different aspects of the same issue: 
Qua re qui possum non esse popularis, cum videam haec omnia, Quirites, 
pacem externam, libertatem propriam generis ac nominis vestri, otium 
domesticum, denique omnia quae vobis cara at atque ampla sunt in fidem et 
quodam modo in patrocinium mei consulatus esse conlata?
How could I not be a man of the people, when I see all these things, 
Quirites, an external state of peace, freedom that is the preserve of your race 
and name, domestic peace, and finally everything which is dear and great to 
you entrusted to good faith, as it were, to the protection of my consulship? 
Whilst Ciceros qualification of pax as externa may suggest the possibility that pax 
could also be considered interna or domestica, his intention here is to highlight two 
 Cic. Cat. 3.23: sine caede, sine sanguine, sine exercitu, sine dimicatione togati me uno togato duce et 
imperatore vicistis (without murder, without blood, without an army, without fighting you, as civic 
men, have conquered having me, a civic man, as your leader and general); see Narducci (1991) 166-
 otium was used more emphatically by Cicero after 57 B.C. and most strikingly in Pro Sest. 97 (cum 
dignitate otium) where he identifies otium with the preservation of political order. For Ciceros use of 
otium as a political slogan see: Narducci (1991) 183-188. On the use of otium in political discourse in 
general see Wirszubski (1960) 92-93; Valvo (1985) 155; Milani (1985) 25; Barton (2007) 251. 
 Cic. Leg. agr. 2.9. 
- 28 - 
different spheres of activity: foreign and domestic.
 Cicero here characterises pax as 
external, whilst otium, which is always associated with domestic affairs, he emphasises 
as domesticum, to deliberately heighten the contrast between the two spheres of 
activity.
 Likewise, in the passage from In Catilinam 2 given above, Cicero sets up a 
contrast between externa pacata and domesticum bellum: here external affairs are made 
peaceful, as one would expect. It is war that is unusually characterised as being internal. 
The ways in which Cicero emphasises and in some cases plays with the spheres within 
which pax and bellum are acted out possibly foreshadows the ways in which pax and 
bellum are later used as rhetorical tools against ones political opponents: Cicero would 
later compare Antony to Romes former enemies, with whom Rome made pax.
During the period of growing civil conflicts and violence of the late Republic 
the concern for political stability, and with that political dominance, became 
increasingly prevalent. The concept of pax was used in public discourse of the late 
Republic, though primarily still in regard to external conditions. It was at times 
associated with more traditional aspects of internal harmony, such as concordia and 
otium. This may be due to the increasing instability of Roman politics and the fact that 
stable conditions abroad allowed greater attention to internal politics (as Ciceros 
speeches against Catiline suggest), but perhaps also to the fact that rhetoric traditionally 
 In Leg. agr. 2.102 Cicero does set pax alongside qualities of civil peace: nihil esse tam populare id 
quod ego vobis in hunc annum consul popularis adfero, pacem, tranquillitatem, otium. However, he 
does primarily associate the concept of pax in this speech with external peace, or as the balance and 
contrast of war: pacem externam (2.9); vinculum pacis et monumentum belli (2.49); pacis ornamentum, 
subsidium belli (2.80). On these two different spheres of activity see p. 2 above. 
 Whilst otium was predominantly concerned with the internal harmony of the state, see Wirszubski 
(1954) 4 n. 29 for otium as the opposite of bellum where bellum is understood in terms of civil war, cf. 
Cic. Caecin. 43; Att.1.30.5, 4.6.2; Caes. B Civ 2.36.1; Livy 3.32.4 
 Cic. Phil. 4.14; see p. 46 below. Cicero also characterises Catiline as a hostis: see n. 65 above. A similar 
rhetoric of using pax and bellum to suggest that ones political opponent is to be viewed as an external 
enemy can be seen in Sallusts Histories: nam bellum atque arma, quamquam vobis invisa, tamen quia 
Lepido placent, sumunda sunt, nisi forte cui pacem praestare et bellum pati consilium est (Oratio Philippi 
in senatu 2: For even though you may detest war and arms, yet you must take them up because it is the 
will of Lepidus, unless perhaps anyone is disposed to grant him peace and at the same time to suffer 
war). 
- 29 - 
used in respect of external enemies was being employed by statesmen against their 
political opponents.
As the political situation at Rome changed so too did the way in which concepts 
and political language were used. In the next section I turn to consider the effect that the 
outbreak of civil war in 50/49 had on the use of the concept of pax, and how it was 
employed to express relations between Romans. 
 See n. 71 above. 
- 30 - 
Section Two 
pace opus est 
In early 49, after Caesars act of violence against the res publica (crossing the 
Rubicon and marching on Rome), Cicero wanted a resolution of the hostilities through 
negotiations of pax, and was one of the strongest voices for reconciliation between 
Caesar, and Pompey and the senate. Between the period from 50 to 46 Cicero stressed a 
conceptualisation of pax as an alternative to civil war and victory.
 Yet his drive for 
pax in this period is only really seen in his private correspondence. In public he chose 
initially to follow Pompeys position, which was a firm stance on fighting Caesar,
later withdrew from the public scene until 46.
Cicero in his letters spoke several times of the condiciones pacis,
 indicating 
that he conceptualised pax as a pact or agreement to be reached between two opposing 
sides. Strikingly, this was a pact between two Romans, instead of between Rome and an 
external enemy. Furthermore this was not a pact to be made at the end of war, but in 
order to prevent one: Equidem ad pacem hortari non desino; quae vel iniusta utilior est 
quam iustissimum bellum cum civibus.
 As Graph 1 illustrates, whilst Cicero did talk of 
 The concept of pax as an alternative to foreign wars is seen in Varros account of the Roman embassy 
to Carthage, where the Carthaginians were told to choose between a caduceus and a hasta: see n. 55 
above). 
 Cic. Att. 7.6.2: dices quid tu igitur sensurus es? non idem quod dicturus. Sentiam enim omnia facienda 
ne armis decertetur, dicam idem quod Pompeius, neque id faciam humili animo (You will ask me what 
line I shall take in the House. Not the same as in my own mind. There I shall vote for peace at any price, 
but in the House I shall echo Pompey, and I shall not do it in a spirit of subservience either). 
 See p. 39 below. 
 Cic. Att. 8.8.1, 458.12.2, 11.25.3, Fam. 5.21, 6.4. 
 Cic. Att. 7.14.1: I continue to urge for a pact. Even an unjust pact is better than the most just wars 
against ones countrymen. Ciceros desire for achieving peace between the two political leaders even 
prompted him to request from Atticus a work by a contemporary Greek scholar, Demetrius of 
Magnesia, entitled  : Att. 8.11.7; 8.12.6; 9.9.2. 
Graph 1: The occurrences of the words pax, concordia and otium
 used by Cicero in his correspondence (50-43 B.C.). 
 The occurrences of otium here are only counted when the meaning of term refers to political (in)activity; otium is used in this sense a total of 29 times by Cicero. The 
word is also used in Ciceros correspondence  to refer to leisure time and free time; otium is used in this sense a total of 9 times by Cicero. 
50 BC 49 BC 48 BC 47 BC 46 BC 45 BC 44 BC 43 BC 
pax 3 38 0 5 7 2 8 9 
concordia 3 8 0 0 0 0 0 3 
otium 2 5 1 0 9 0 11 1 
Occurrences of pax, concordia and otium in Cicero's correspondence (Cicero 
as author) 
- 32 - 
concordia (14 times) and otium (29 times) during the 40s,
 his focus in his discussions 
of the instability the res publica faced in 49 B.C. was on pax. His focus on pax during 
this period was as an alternative to war, achieved through negotiation.  
Caesar also understood pax as a form of pact between two opposing political 
sides: 
Atque haec Caesar ita administrabat ut condiciones pacis dimittendas non 
existimaret ac tametsi magnopere admirabatur Magium, quem ad 
Pompeium cum mandatis miserat, ad se non remitti.
And so Caesar saw to it that negotiations for a pact were not set aside; but 
even so he was very surprised that Magius, whom he had sent to Pompey 
with mandates, had not been sent back to him. 
This rhetoric of condiciones pacis was echoed in the symbols of concordia (clasped 
hands)
 and pax (caduceus), which Caesar depicted on his coinage in 48 B.C., together 
with the deity Pietas (Figure 5).
 Caesar was clearly taking part in a discourse on pax as something that was to be 
negotiated without the need for war in order to achieve civil harmony. It is noteworthy 
 In fact, at the start of the conflict between Caesar and Pompey, Cicero initially used the term 
concordia (Att. 7.3.5; 7.4.2) before also bringing in the theme of pax (Att. 7.5.4). In Att. 9.11a.1 Cicero 
refers to all three concepts together: de otio, de pace, de concordia civium. Concordia was an important 
concept for Cicero in 63 B.C., and he later identified otium with the preservation of political order from 
57 B.C. onward, most strikingly in Pro Sest. 97 (cum dignitate otium) where he identifies otium with the 
preservation of political order. For Ciceros use of otium as a political slogan see: Narducci (1991) 183-
188. On the use of otium in political discourse in general see Wirszubski (1960) 92-93; Valvo (1985) 155; 
Milani (1985) 25; Barton (2007) 251. 
 Caes. B Civ. 1.26, cf.  1.85, 3.10, 3.17. 
 Cic. Att. 7.1.4: Ubi illae sunt densae dextrae?; see Shackleton Bailey (1965-70) vol. 3, 279; cf. Cic. Verr. 
2.5.104: ubi fides, ubi exsecrationes, ubi dextrae complexusque?; Sen. Contr. 3.8: ubi hospitales invicem 
dexterae?  
 RRC 450/2.  
- 33 - 
that whilst both Cicero and Caesar use the term pax quite frequently,
 they do not use 
the transitive verb pacare in the context of civil war. The use of the concept pax during 
the civil conflicts between Romans was concerned with articulating the relationship 
between two political parties and ostensibly neither side claimed a position of 
superiority through which to bring the other side into a state of peace (unlike the 
pacification of external enemies)
Caesar however did use the discourse on pax to express his opinion that it was his 
opponents rejection of his offers of a peace that made them responsible for the civil 
 For example, when a meeting between the two sides, set up for negotiations by 
the river Apsus, was disturbed by missile fire, T. Labienus is reported to have 
proclaimed: desinite ergo de compositione loqui; nam nobis nisi Caesaris capite relato 
pax esse nulla potest.
 The idea of what pax comprised is being played with here. The 
subversive nature of Labienus taunt amidst peace negotiations aimed to show that 
Caesars enemies will only accept pax through civil war and violence (and in their own 
understanding, through victory over him). Caesar was propagating a discourse on pax, 
which he used to manipulate and dictate the terms of war (i.e. who is in the right and 
who is in the wrong). 
Whilst Cicero and Caesar make use the same language of pax to talk about 
making a pact, Cicero saw Caesars actions against Pompey (beseiged at Brundisium) 
as a clear indication that Caesar had rejected pax (as Cicero understood the term): 
 Caesar uses pax 23 times: B Civ. 1.11, 1.26 (x2), 1.74, 1.85 (x5), 3.10 (x3), 3.17, 3.18, 3.19 (x6), 3.57 
(x2), 3.90. He never uses concordia. 
 The verb is used by Caesar four times (B Civ. 1.7, 1.39, 1.85, 3.73), but always in the context of Gaul, 
Spain and Germany. 
 Caes. B Civ. 1.26, 3.10, 3.18, 3.19, 3.57, 3.90; see also Jal (1961) 212. 
 Caes. B Civ 3.19.8: Then let us stop talking about a settlement. As far as we are concerned, unless 
Caesars head is bought back, there is no possibility of peace. 
- 34 - 
Ecce tibi eodem die Capua litteras accepi ad Q. Pedio Caesarem ad se 
pridie Idus Martias hoc exemplo: Pompeius se oppido tenet. nos ad portas 
castra habemus. conamur opus magnum et multorum dierum propter 
altitudinem maris. sed tamen nihil est quod potius faciamus. ab utroque 
portus cornu moles iacimus, ut aut illum quam primum traicere quod habet 
Brundisi copiarum cogamus aut exitu prohibeamus. ubi est illa pax de qua 
Balbus scripserat torqueri se? ecquid acerbius, ecquid crudelius?
Look, the same day I received from Capua, from Q. Pedius, a letter that 
Caesar had sent to him on 14
 March, stating: Pompey holds himself in the 
town. We have set up camp at the gates. We are faced with a hard task for 
many days due to the depth of the sea. But nevertheless there is nothing 
better we can do. We are building a mole at both ends of the harbour, so that 
either we compel him to transfer what forces he has in Brundisium as soon 
as possible, or we prevent him from leaving. Where is that pact about 
which Balbus wrote that he was torturing himself? What indeed is more 
bitter, what more cruel? 
Cicero believed that the correspondence demonstrated Caesars insincerity for 
the message of pax and reconciliatio that Balbus tried to illustrate by sending Cicero 
copies of Caesars letter on the subject: ex quibus perspicere poteris, quam cupiat 
concordiam suam et Pompei reconciliare.
 Cicero might indeed have grounds for 
concern: Caesar states in that letter that he sees this reconciliation as a means to a new 
 Cic. Att. 9.14.1-2. 
 Cic. Att. 9.7b: From which you will see how eager he is for reconciliation between himself and 
Pompey. 
- 35 - 
style of conquest.
 He might be using the language of pax and reconciliation, but the 
aim is nevertheless for victory over his political opponents, although a victory presented 
in new terms.
Cicero himself emphasised that pax and victory are two very different aims, and 
he expressed his desire for pax through its relation to the idea of victory: pace opus est. 
ex victoria cum multa mala tum certe tyrannus exsistet.
 Victory was not something to 
aim at, whereas a pact was. Ciceros conception of pax in the circumstances of the early 
40s is contrary to the traditional Republican understanding, which depends on the 
causal relationship between victory and pax. Here, Cicero understands pax as an 
alternative to war and victory. Ciceros reasoning for this must lie in the fact that 
victory in civil war would involve the defeat and subjugation of Romans.
 Only a pact 
between the two political sides could bring about a stable res publica. 
Whilst pax was still being used to examine and express the relations between 
two opposing sides, it was now applied in this respect to express the relations between 
two opposing Roman sides. pax was clearly discussed a good deal in the early 40s, yet 
it is striking to note that it is not personified on a coin until 44 B.C. (Figure 6),
 almost 
twenty years after Concordia first appears on the coinage. The first appearance of 
 Cic. Att. 9.7c.1. 
 This letter will be discussed below pp. 50-51 in the examination of pax as victory. 
 Cic. Att. 7.5.4: Peace is needed. Out of victory comes both many evils and certainly tyranny; cf. Att. 
8.1.3. 
 Cic. Att. 7.14: equidem ad paceni hortari non desino; quae vel iniusta utilior est quam iustissimum 
bellum cum civibus. Sed haec ut fors tulerit (For my part, I never cease urging peace, which, however 
unfair, is better than the most just war in the world. But this is in the hands of fortune); Fam. 2.16: nihil 
maluisse quam pacem, ea desperata nihil tam fugisse quam arma civilia (I have preferred peace to 
everything: when that was given up in despair, my first object was to avoid actual civil war); Cic. Fam. 
9.6: tum vero extremum malorum omnium esse civilis belli victoriam (then, that the most dreadful evil 
of all was victory in a civil war); cf. Att. 8.11d.6; 10.4.2-3; 11.12.3. 
 RRC 480/24; Gruen (1982) 52; Fears (1981) 773-804. Woolf (1993) 176 and Parchami (2009) 17 both 
state that pax, as a coin legend, occurs from Sulla onwards, although Parchami (2009) 17 n.11 does 
concede that the identity of the female deity on Sullas coin is contested. The caduceus, a symbol of 
pax, does appear on some of Sullas coinage (RRC 366 and 367), however PAX as an identifying legend 
does not appear on Sullas coinage (see RRC 366), and is first attested on the coin minted by Buca in 44 
B.C. (RRC 480/24). 
- 36 - 
Concordia as a personification on the coins in 62 clearly reflects the prominence of the 
concept in the political troubles of late 63.
 It is plausible too that the appearance of 
Pax in 44 may reflect a similar prominence, and that before this time there was not a 
need or desire to represent the quality of Pax on the coinage.  
The coin minted by L. Aemilius Buca in 44 was the first attestation of pax being 
represented by a female bust, and is agreed to represent the personification of the 
quality pax rather than a cultic figure.
 pax had undergone a qualitative change in 
Caesars presentation of the concept, associating the term not just with a condition 
achieved, but also with a quality beneficial to the security of the Roman state. It is 
notable that the coin links pax with the clasped hands of concordia on the reverse of the 
coin, echoing Caesars earlier coinage of 48 (Figure 5),
 and indicates that pax was 
associated with ideas of internal security. The restoration of a stable res publica was 
further commemorated in the same year with voting of the temple of Concordia Nova in 
honour of Caesar by the senate:          
 .97  
The presence of the personified form of pax on the coinage of 44 confirms the 
importance of the term within contemporary politics and public display (comparable to 
the appearance of Concordia after the political turmoil of 63). The idea of pax 
continued to dominate political discourse in the 40s, and was used as a tool to secure 
power and political dominance, in the name of (re)establishing the res publica securely. 
 In his speeches of 63 B.C. Cicero emphasised the importance of the concept of concordia between the 
senate and the equestrian order in order to ensure the stability of the state; Cic. Cat. 4.15: quos ex 
multorum annorum dissensione huius ordinis ad societatem concordiamque revocatos hodiernus dies 
vobiscum atque haec causa coniungit (whom this day and this cause now reunites with you in alliance 
and harmony with your body reconciled after a disagreement of many years). 
 Pax as a goddess, rather than a concept or quality, had no history in the Republic: see Clark (2007) 8-9 
and n. 15, 159-161; Weinstock (1971) 260-269. 
 See p. 30, n. 81 above. 
 Dio Cass. 44.4.4: They also resolved to build a temple of Concordia Nova, on the grounds that it was 
through his efforts that they enjoyed peace. 
- 37 - 
After Caesars assassination in March 44 B.C. the res publica was once again unstable, 
with opposing factions trying to establish themselves in a position of power. During this 
period the concept of pax continued to be used to manipulate politicians positions 
within the state and in relation to their opponents. I will now turn to examine the 
discourse of pax following the assassination of Caesar, which illustrates the use of pax 
(as a pact) to establish positions of power. 
After 15
 March steps were being taken by Antony and Lepidus to secure their 
positions by publicly discussing the need for negotiation and a pact, and by establishing 
an alliance or pact with Caesars assassins.
 Cicero later described Antony as having 
given his son as a pacis obses to promote negotiations with the assassins.
 Antony 
further asserted his position through the ratification of Caesars acta on 17
 March.
Cicero accepted the ratification of the acta for the sake of political expediency and the 
hope for stability for the res publica; but he did not approve of them.
 Indeed, writing 
to Atticus at the start of May 44 he emphasised how Antony was using the rhetoric of 
pax to manipulate the political situation: quamquam istos ferre non possum qui, dum se 
pacem velle simulant, acta nefaria defendunt.
 It seems probable that Cicero is 
referring to the defence and use of, and addenda made to, Caesars acta: by late April 
 Cic. Phil. 1.31; App. B Civ. 2.130-131 records a debate in the Forum concerning peace, where both 
Antony and Lepidus question the nature of the peace sought. For the aftermath of the assassination see 
Dio 44.23-34; Frisch (1946) 42-62; Scullard (1982) 154; van der Blom (2003) 50-57. 
 Cic. Phil. 1.31. 
 Cic. Phil. 1.1-3, 1.16-17, 1.31-32; Att. 14.6.2, 14.9.2; App. B Civ. 2.128-129, 2.135; Frisch (1946) 55-56; 
Manuwald (2007a) 11. 
decrevimus. Fecimus id quidem temporibus cedentes, quae valent in re publica plurimum (So the res 
publica lies in this chaos, which Caesar hurled it into... Indeed, we have so decreed. We did it, yielding 
to the state of affairs at the time which carries a great deal of weight in politics). 
 Cic. Att.14.15.2: Yet I cannot bear those who, while they pretend they desire a peace, in fact defend 
nefarious acts. Shackleton Bailey (1967) 369 suggests that istos refers to certain individuals mentioned 
by Atticus.  
- 38 - 
Antony was clearly making use of the ratification of the acta to gain further power 
himself.
 Cicero publicly spoke little of pax in the time between the assassination of 
Caesar and his Philippics, although it does appear from his letters to have been a 
concern of his.
 His concern for the internal stability of the state is most clear in his 
aforementioned discussion of the acta of Caesar. He hoped to influence the consul of 
44, Dolabella, the consuls-elect for 43, Hirtius and Pansa, as well as Caesars heir, 
Octavian, in order to protect the res publica from what he saw as tyranny.
 However, 
Antony consolidated his power over the course of the summer, outmanoeuvring Brutus 
and Cassius,
 and by the end of August any veil of compromise between them had 
slipped: Brutus and Cassius sailed to the East, but not before laying down a threat 
concerning the termination of Caesars reign and the need to secure the safety of the res 
publica.
Despite the limited evidence for a discussion about pax during the first half of 
44, in the conflicts that followed it is clear that the ideal of achieving a pact or 
agreement with Antony was at the forefront in Ciceros political discourse, owing to 
 Cic. Fam. 12.1.2 (dated to 3
 May 44 B.C.); Phil. 5.10; Manuwald (2007a) 12-13; Frisch (1946) 74, 95. 
Already in April Cicero had labelled Antony a tyrant: Att. 14.5.2, 14.9.2, 14.12.1, 14.13.6, 14.14.2. 
 Cic. Att. 14.20.4: [Pansa] is plane mihi probabat se bene sentire et cupere pacem ([Pansa] quite 
convinced me of the soundness of his views and his desire for peace); 15.1.3: [Pansam] seduxi enim et 
ad pacem sum cohortatus. non paterat scilicet negare se velle pacem (For I took [Pansa] aside and 
exhorted him earnestly to preserve the peace. He could not of course say that he did not wish for 
peace); see also Cic. Att. 14.15.2, 15.7. 
 Dolabella: Cic. Att. 14.15.1, 14.16.2, 14.17.4, 14.17a, 14.18.1, 14.20.4, 14.21.4; Hirtius and Pansa: Cic. 
Att. 14.9.2, 14.11.2, 14.20.4, 14.22.1; Octavian: Cic. Att. 14.11.2, 14.12.2, 14.21.4, 15.12.2. For Ciceros 
activity from March-August 44 B.C. see van der Blom (2003) 290-299. 
 On Brutus and Cassius commission for the supervision of the corn supply: Cic. Att. 15.9.1, 15.1.1-2; 
Frisch (1946) 101-105. 
 Cic. Fam. 11.3 (Brutus and Cassius to Antony): tu etiam atque etiam vide, quid suscipias, quid 
sustinere possis, neque quamdiu vixerit Caesar, sed, quam non diu regnarit, fac cogites. Deos 
quaesumus, consilia tua rei publicae salutaria sint ac tibi: si minus, ut salva atque honesta re publica tibi 
quam minimum noceant, optamus (and so you indeed have a mind as to what you are undertaking and 
what you are able to sustain, and make sure you recognise not how long Caesar lived, but rather how 
long he reigned. We beseech the gods, that your counsels may be beneficial for the state and yourself: if 
not, we pray that they may harm you as little as possible as with a sound and honest Republic). 
- 39 - 
Antonys position as consul, and later as proconsul at the head of several legions. 
During 44-43, Cicero used the concept of pax in a different way from that of his letters 
in the early 40s. He manipulated the use and also the meaning of the term pax, in order 
to persuade his audience to remove Antony from power. The term still retained its 
concept as a pact, yet Cicero presents pax achieved through pactio (negotiation) as 
slavery to Antony, and argues that it is only through victoria over him that real pax and 
peace can be established.
The rhetoric of pax discussed in this section articulated the relations between 
Romans in terms of reconciliation and an absence of war and victory. In the following 
section I will continue to examine how relations between Romans were expressed 
through the use of pax, but pax achieved through victory. Whilst this interpretation of 
the concept is reminiscent of the traditional Republican usage, in that there existed a 
causal relationship between pax and victory, now pax was being won over fellow 
Romans.  
 This interpretation of pax is fully explored below pp. 40-48. 
- 40 - 
Section Three 
pax through victory 
The association of the caduceus, as a symbol of pax, with victory continued to 
be used during the civil wars of the 40s to promote the hopes and aspirations of certain 
political factions. Whilst Caesar used the caduceus together with the symbol of 
concordia (Figure 5) to promote a message of pax achieved through negotiation and 
internal agreement, Caecilius Metellus Pius Scipio was minting coins portending pax 
achieved through victory. In Africa, in 47-46, Scipio minted a coin depicting Victory 
with a shield and caduceus, whilst the G(enius) T(errae) A(fricae) was depicted on the 
reverse (Figure 7).
 Another coin of Scipio depicts a turreted head of a city goddess 
with an ear of corn and caduceus on the obverse, and a trophy between a lituus and jug 
(Scipio was a pontifex) on the reverse (Figure 8).
 The presence of the caduceus, 
carried by Victory on one coin, and associated with a trophy on another, suggests that 
pax, here alluded to by the caduceus, would be established with his (future or potential) 
victory against Caesar. The presence of the Genius of Africa and the city goddess ties 
the victory of Scipio to Africa, where he was based.
 RRC 460/4. 
 RRC 460/3. 
 Interestingly, whilst Scipio demonstrated the hope of pax through victory, Cicero writing in 47 B.C. 
about the strong Republican position in Africa, did not view victory as a possible outcome: confirmari 
cotidie magis ad condicionis spem quam victoriae:(Cic. Att. 11.12.3). Shackleton Bailey (1965-70) vol. 5, 
281: spem seems to refer to the sentiments of the republicans. If we understand so as to arouse the 
hope (in us), victoriae has to be regarded as zeugmatic; for neither Atticus nor Cicero hoped for a 
republican victory at this stage. 
- 41 - 
 Pax achieved as a result of victory in war was the traditional understanding of 
the concept.
 However, during the 40s that concept now was used to articulate power 
relations between Roman politicians and for signifying ones political opponents. The 
taunt of Labienus recorded in Caesars de bello civili was used to demonstrate that 
Caesars opponents would only accept pax through war and violence, playing on the 
rhetoric of Caesars opponents, that pax could only be secured through victory over 
Caesar.
 Indeed, Caesars de bello civili, in which he often emphasises his desire for pax, 
was a justification for his actions and proof of his right to victory over his opponents.
This rhetoric of pax achieved through Caesars victory in the civil war was taken up by 
Cicero in 46 B.C., in the speech by which he claimed to return to public life,
 the Pro 
Marcello: 
Ipsam victoriam vicisse videris, cum ea, quae illa erat adepta victis 
remisisti; nam cum ipsius victoriae condicione omnes victi occidissemus, 
clementiae tuae iudicio conservati sumus. Recte igitur unus invictus es, a 
quo etiam ipsius victoriae condicio visque devicta est.
You seem to have vanquished Victory herself, since you have surrendered 
to the vanquished all that Victory had gained. For when all of us vanquished 
 pax in the mid and late Republic had stood for the state achieved through negotiating and imposing 
conditions on the defeated, and was a sign of Romes victory over her enemies. 
  Caes. B Civ 3.19.8; see p. 31 above. 
 In Caesars letters he presents his desire to be the victor which he claims can be achieved through 
reconciliation, but suggests that he will hold the position of superiority over his opponents: Cic. Ad. Att. 
9.7c.1, see p. 32 above and p. 51 below. 
 Cic. Marcell. 1-3; Fam.4.4. 
 Cic. Marcell. 12; Caelius exaltation of Caesar as in victoria is echoed in Pro Marc. 8: animum vincere, 
iracundiam cohibere, victoriam temperare. 
- 42 - 
were undone by the condition of victory itself, we were preserved by the 
judgement of your clemency. Therefore you are rightly unconquerable, 
whereby the condition and strength of Victory herself has been conquered. 
Ciceros acceptance of Caesars rhetoric about his victory serves as a confirmation of 
the state of affairs that Caesar had achieved  namely, as Cicero hoped, the revival of 
the res publica
 through the restoration of the advocates of peace: qui vero victor 
pacis auctores diligit, is profecto declarat se maluisse non dimicare quam vincere.
The word order strengthens the idea of Caesar as the victor of the pact (victor pacis), 
which Cicero illustrated by Caesars desire not to conquer his fellow Romans. Cicero is 
taking up the language of the victor, yet still emphasising the importance of pax in his 
conceptualisation of the preservation of the res publica. It is plausible that this speech 
acts as a reminder, if not a warning,
 of the stance Caesar advertised during the war.
Cicero was certainly well aware of the double-edged nature of Caesars victory: in 49, 
after Cicero still proved non-committal to Caesars cause, Caelius then emphasised the 
threat of Caesars victory instead: si existimas eandem rationem fore Caesaris in 
 Cic. Fam 4.4: ita mihi pulcher hic dies visus est, ut speciem aliquam viderer videre quasi reviviscentis 
rei publicae (this day appeared to me to be so fair that I seemed to be seeing some shadow of a 
reviving Republic). In Phil 5.38-39 Cicero in fact contrasts Lepidus clementia and service to the state 
(5.39: restituti civitati, maximum ornamentum rei publicae, clarissimum monumentum clementiae suae) 
to the actions of Caesar (5.39: quodsi eadem ratio Caesaris fuisset in illo taetro miseroque bello...). See 
Picone (2008) for the Pro Marcello as diffusing a potentially damaging situation to the stability of the res 
publica. 
 Cic. Marcell. 15: Who indeed, as victor, cared for the advocates of peace (pact), surely declares that 
he would have preferred not to fight than to conquer. 
 On the purpose of the Pro Marcello see: Cipriani (1977); Dyer (1990); Lassandro (1991); MacKendrick 
(1995) 404-421; Winterbottom (2002); Konstan (2005); Marchese (2008). 
 See pp. 30 - 32 above.  
- 43 - 
dimittendis adversariis et condicionibus ferendis, erras: nihil nisi atrox et saevum 
cogitat atque etiam loquitur.
 Perhaps the most striking example of pax achieved through victory during the 
40s is the use Cicero makes of the term in his speeches against Mark Antony in 44-43. 
In his Philippics Cicero rejects any form of a pact with Antony achieved through 
pactio, and instead argues for pax achieved through victory over Antony. Ciceros 
stance in 44-43, seen in both his political speeches and letters,
 marks a departure 
from his position found in his letters of the early 40s, where he strove for pax as an 
alternative to war and victory over Romans.
 The Philippics, delivered between 2
 September 44 B.C. and 21
 April 43 B.C., 
chronicle Ciceros arguments concerning pax between Antony and the senate, and 
promote Ciceros own desire for the declaration of war.
 The prevalence of the term 
pax in the Philippics (Table 1), and the central focus of the speeches on the role of pax 
within the current political climate demonstrates that pax was an important part of 
Ciceros political rhetoric.
 The first Philippic, delivered notably at a meeting of the 
senate in the temple of Concordia, is aimed at maintaining a stable res publica 
established after the negotiations of 17
 March,
 and stresses the stability and peace
 Cic. Fam. 8.16: If you think that Caesar will maintain the same policy in letting his adversaries go and 
offering terms, you are mistaken. His thoughts, even his words, forebode nothing but severity and 
cruelty. 
 Cic. Fam. 10.6: aut positis armis pacem petere debent aut, si pugnantes eam postulant, victoria pax, 
non pactione parienda est (either they should seek peace when they have set aside their arms or, if 
they demand it through fighting, peace must be won through victory, not by making terms). 
 See pp. 29-33 above. 
 For an overview of the Philippics see Shackleton Bailey, et al. (2009a); Shackleton Bailey, et al. 
(2009b); Stevenson and Wilson (2008); Frisch (1946) 119-192. 
 The term pax is used a total of 118 times in the Philippics; in contrast concordia is used 25 times, 8 of 
which are in connection with the templum concordiae. On the use of the Philippics for understanding 
the social and political ideals of the period see Stevenson and Wilson (2008) esp. 14. 
 Cic. Phil. 1.31-32. See Clark (2007) 173-175 on the potency of using the temple of Concord as the 
location of Philippics 1 and 2, esp. 173 for the potential richness of the temple in the undelivered 
second speech; also Jal (1961) 227-228. 
Table 1: Occurrences of concept words in Ciceros Philippics. 
CONCEPT 
bellum concordia felicitas fidelis hostis libertas otium pactio pax pietas salus spes* tumultus victoria 
Phil.1 1 2 0 0 0 2 1 0 6 0 3 1 0 0 
Phil.2 20 3 3 1 7 8 2 0 9 2 3 4 0 1 
Phil.3 4 3 3 3 7 17 0 0 0 0 3 3 0 2 
Phil.4 1 3 1 2 16 10 0 0 3 0 1 3 0 1 
Phil.5 3 6 3 1 9 11 1 0 4 1 6 8 2 0 
Phil.6 11 1 0 3 0 4 1 0 2 1 1 1 2 1 
Phil.7 10 1 0 2 11 5 0 0 24 0 2 7 0 0 
Phil.8 31 1 0 3 5 4 3 0 13 1 1 3 12 1 
Phil.9 5 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 3 1 1 0 0 
Phil.10 7 1 0 1 1 16 2 0 2 0 2 3 0 0 
Phil.11 39 1 0 4 15 5 3 0 1 0 3 3 0 2 
Phil.12 13 0 0 5 8 4 0 2 31 0 4 9 1 5 
Phil.13 25 3 1 6 15 9 1 1 21 5 4 0 0 0 
Phil.14 16 0 6 3 34 7 0 0 2 3 7 4 0 14 
186 25 17 36 128 102 14 3 118 16 41 50 17 27 
 concordia here refers to the aedes concordiae 8 out of its 25 occurances. 
 the term felix (11) is included in the concept catergory of felicitas, and the terms fides(14) and fidus (3) are included in the concept category of fidelis 
* spes occurs with the genitive 32 times: most notably with pacis (6); with libertatis (5); with victoriae (3); with salutis (2); with virtutis (2); with res 
publicae (1), and with general restoration (2). 
- 45 - 
(as agreement and pact) that was achieved in the initial period after Caesars 
assassination.
The third Philippic, delivered on the 20
 December 44, marks a change in 
Ciceros political thought concerning the conflict,
 since Octavian was now at hand 
with several legions behind him to provide military force against Antony.
Furthermore, despite the fact that Antony was legally (however dubiously in Ciceros 
opinion) proconsul of Cisalpine Gaul,
 Decimus Brutus was intent on holding the 
province in the control of the senate and the people against Antony. By the end of 
November Antony had marched against Brutus at Mutina. The siege which followed 
lasted until 27
 April 43 B.C: roughly the same period of time covered by Philippics 3-
 The concern on behalf of the majority of the senate for a peaceful conclusion to 
the siege was marked by the two embassies (one actual, the other planned but never 
sent).
Cicero ridiculed Antonys supposed desire for peace and reconciliation in his 
eighth Philippic, quoting Antonys demands: 
 Cic. Phil. 1.1-3, 1.16-17; Ramsey (2003) 118-119 on the use of pax and otium to account for the 
ratification of Caesars acta on 17
 March.  
 Ciceros second Philippic resulted in a clear break between Antony and Cicero: Harries (2006) 216; 
Frisch (1946) 127ff; van der Blom (2003) 302-304. 
 Frisch (1946) 144-159; Gotter (1996) 131; van der Blom (2003) 300-308, esp. 307-308; Manuwald 
(2007b) 305 states that the third Philippic gives the impression of urgency and that action was to be 
taken immediately.  
 Harries (2006) 204ff; Frisch (1946) 94-100; Cic. Att. 14.4.4; Phil. 1.8; 8.27; Livy Per. 117. 
 Cic. Fam. 10.30 for Galbas report of the victory at Forum Gallorum against Antony on 15
 April: 
Aquilae duae, signa LX. Sunt relata Antonii: res bene gesta est; Fam. 11.9 for the second defeat of 
Antony at Mutina. 
 The first embassy was debated on 1st January 43 B.C.: Cic. Phil. 5; Manuwald (2007b) 536ff. Q. Fufius 
Calenus proposed an embassy of the senate to Antony: Phil. 5.1, 5.4, 10.3. Cicero names Ser. Sulpicius 
Rufus as the author of the embassy: Phil. 9.9. The majority of the senate appears to have been in favour 
of an embassy and peace: Phil. 6.3. See Gotter (1996) 149-155 on the debate about the embassies; 155-
172 on the opinion of the senate. On Ciceros agreement to be part of the second embassy see Hall 
(2008). 
- 46 - 
At quam modesta mandata Ferrei sumus, patres conscripti qui quicquam 
huic negemus. Utramque provinicam, inquit remittto, exercitum depono 
privatus esse non recuso. Haec sunt enim verba. Redire ad se videtur 
Omnia obliviscor, in gratiam redeo. Sed quid adiungit? si legionibus 
meis sex, si equitibus, si cohorti praetoriae praemia agrumque dederitis. 
Iis etiam praemia postulat, quibus ut ignoscatur si postulet, 
impudientissimus iudicetur.
And what modest demands We are hardhearted men, conscript fathers, if 
we refuse anything to this man. I give up both provinces, I disband my 
army, I am not unwilling to become a private citizen. For these are his very 
words. He seems to be coming to himself. I am willing to forget 
everything; to be reconciled to everybody. But what does he add? If you 
give booty and land to my six legions, to my cavalry, and to my praetorian 
cohort. He even demands rewards for those men for whom, if he were to 
demand pardon, he would be thought the most impudent of men. 
As Cicero presents it, Antony was using the possibility of a pact as a political tool to 
assert his position and establish rewards for his troops. Cicero himself, throughout 
Philippics 3-14, argues against negotiation and peace terms.
 Cicero emphasises that pax had been a desirable state for the res publica 
throughout the history of its civil conflicts, even if it had not been achieved: 
 Cic. Phil. 8.25. 
 In fact on 1
 January 43 B.C., when the embassy was being discussed in the senate, Cicero proposed 
that imperium and the title of propraetor be given to Octavian, in a move to set him and his troops fully 
against Antony, with the backing of the senate: Phil 5.42-51. Ciceros stance on pax in 43 B.C. is in sharp 
contrast to his private stance in 49-48 B.C., when he strove for reconciliation between Pompey and 
Caesar: see n. 52 and p. 29, n. 74 above. 
- 47 - 
pacem cum Scipione Sulla sive faciebat sive simulabat, non erat 
desperandum, si convenisset, fore aliquem tolerabilem statum civitatis. 
Cinna si concordiam cum Octavio confirmare voluisset, hominum in re 
publica sanitas remanere potuisset. proximo bello si aliquid de summa 
gravitate Pompeius, multum de cupiditate Caesar remisisset, et pacem 
stabilem et aliquam rem publicam nobis habere licuisset.
Whether Sulla made an agreement with Scipio, or pretended to, there was 
no reason to despair, if an agreement had been reached, that there would be 
some tolerable political condition. If Cinna had been willing to confirm a 
concord with Octavius, the safety of men in the Republic could have 
remained in place. In the latest war, if Pompey had put aside any of his 
extreme severity, and if Caesar had put aside much of his desire, it would 
have been possible for us to have a stable state of peace and some form of a 
Republic. 
However, despite the role he gives to pax as the potential means for securing the 
stability of the res publica in the past, he urges the senate to reject Antonys appeal for 
a pact.
 Indeed, the importance of pax within Ciceros Philippics in part rests on 
Antonys appeal for a state of peace: the most numerous attestions of pax are 
concentrated in books 7, 12 and 13 which are concerned with the first and second 
embassies to Antony. He uses Antonys letter to Hirtius and Octavian to illustrate 
 CIc. Phil. 13.2. 
 Cic. Phil. 7.9: cur igitur pacem nolo? quia turpis est, quia periculosa, quia non potest (so why do I say 
no to a pact? Because it is a disgrace, because it is dangerous, because it is not possible).  
- 48 - 
Antonys lack of regard and desire for negotiation and reconciliation.
 Cicero had 
done exactly the same with Caesars letters in 49,
 but he had only expressed his 
belief that Caesars desire for pax was false privately. Now in 43 Cicero manipulates 
Antonys very use of pax to set him up as the enemy of the state; in the fourth Philippic 
Cicero contrasts Antony to the old enemies of Rome, with whom the Romans could 
make pax and foedera which were adhered to: 
cum eo hoste res erat, qui haberet...rationem aliquam, si ita res tulisset, 
pacis ac foederis...pacis vero quae potest esse cum eo ratio, in quo est 
incredibilis crudelitas, fides nulla?
There was a need to deal with an enemy, who had some considerations, if 
there was a need, of a pact and a treaty...But as to a pact, what consideration 
can there be with this man, who possesses incredible cruelty and no loyalty? 
Cicero questions the very possibility of Antony being brought into a state of peace 
(poteritne esse pacatus Antonius?)
. He did not use pacare in the early 40s to 
articulate relations between Romans, as pax was meant to stress an equal relationship 
(and so somewhat distinct from a pax between Rome and her enemies). Now in 43 
Cicero only uses the verb to emphasise that Antony cannot even be understood on the 
traditional lines of Romes enemies.  
 Cic. Phil. 13.22-48. 
 See p. 34 above. 
 Cic. Phil. 4.14. See Manuwald (2007b) 528-530. 
 Cic. Phil. 7.24. The transitive verb pacare is used only twice in the Philippics, both times as a past 
participle used to describe Antony or his character (Phil. 5.24) 
- 49 - 
Even though Cicero rejects Antonys offers of a pact, he still argues for pax, but 
won and defined on different terms: 
an vos A. Hirtius...C. Caesarem...quorum epistulas spem victoriae 
declarantes in manu teneo, pacem velle censetis? Vincere illi expetunt 
pacisque dulcissimum et pulcherimum nomen non pactione, sed victoria 
concupiverunt.
Do you think that A. Hirtius and C. Caesar, whose letters declaring the hope 
of victory I hold in my hand, want a pact? They seek to conquer and they 
have desired the sweetest and most beautiful name of pax not through 
negotiation, but by victory. 
Ciceros rejection of pactio marks a departure from his personal philosophy and 
position during the civil wars of the early 40s, where he was constantly urging for 
negotiations and a pact, and emphasises the growing association of victory with pax in 
the internal conflicts of the late Republic.
 He refers to pactio three times in the 
Philippics (12.9; 12.14; 13.2), always in the context of pax. He twice equates pactio to 
slavery (12.14, 13.2) and once contrasts it to victory (12.9). By the late 40s Cicero had 
come to the opinion that war, and the defeat of Antony, was the only way to save the 
state: ego omnia ad libertatem quae sine pace nulla est. pace ipsam bello atque armis 
effici posse arbitrabar.
 For Cicero, victory over the enemy was now the route to the 
restoration of the state, and this meant that at times the focus of his language on victory 
 Cic. Phil.12.9, cf. Fam. 10.6. 
 Cic. Att. 8.11.2: ullam pactionem fieri potuisse? See pp. 29-37 above. 
 Cic. Ad Brut. 2.5: I was all for freedom, which is nothing without peace. I thought peace could be 
achieved through war and arms. For libertas in the Philippics see Cowan (2008).  
- 50 - 
was a rejection of the name (rather than his own concept)
 of pax: pacis nomen...id est 
desperationem victoriae.
 In the rhetorical context of his Philippics, Cicero saw 
victory as the process through which pax could be achieved. But this pax had to be a 
vera pax against Antony, whom Cicero depicted as even worse than an enemy of 
Rome.
 pax as a state achieved through victory is clearly reminiscent of the Republican 
idea of pax as a pact or agreement concluded after a victory. The difference is that now 
the victory could be over a Roman.
 The rhetoric of pax achieved through the defeat 
of Romans was adopted by the triumvirs against Brutus and Cassius. Coins minted on 
behalf of the triumvirate continued the union of concordia and pax that had appeared on 
Caesars coinage in the early 40s, and associated these concepts with symbols of control 
over the empire (sceptre, globe etc.), as well as demonstrating the prosperity that their 
resulting victory would bring (Figure 9).
 Brutus and Cassius had not accepted 
Caesars rhetoric of pax in 44 B.C., and continued to oppose the messages of pax and 
victory used by the triumvirs with their own discourse on the concept of libertas (Figure 
 Cic. Phil. 14.20: ut ego, qui omni tempore verae pacis auctor fuissem, huic essem nomini pestiferae 
pacis inimicus (so that I, who have always been an advocate of real pax, was hostile to this name of 
pestilent pax); cf. Cic. Att. 7.8.4; 14.15. For the idea of a false pax see also Tac. Ann. 1.10.3: imagine 
pacis... pacem sine dubio post haec, verum cruentam. 
 Cic. Phil. 12.10. See Zampaglione (1973) 150-151: his ideas were too often blunted by expedience 
and by the need to adopt solutions dictated by political convenience, which meant war more often than 
peace. 
 See p. 46 above; Gotter (1996) 133: ...hoffte Cicero eine dauerhafte Einheit gegen Antonius und des 
Parole ,,Rache fr Caesar zu bewirken  und mehr noch: eine gnzliche Abwendung von der 
caesarianisch-popularen Tradition. Ein Sieg dieser Vorstellungen war das, was er unter ,,echtem 
Frieden verstand. 
 Antony and Lepidus were in fact declared hostes of the Roman state: Cic. Fam. 12.10. 
 Concordia: RRC 494/10-12; cornucopia: RRC 494/13-15; cornucopia with Victory: RRC 494/32-33; 
caduceus and cornucopia: RRC 494/4 (with sceptre), 494/5 (with globe), 494/39 (with rudder and globe): 
see also appendix I. 
 RRC 498/1, 499/1, 500/1, 501/1, 508/3. The evidence from Ciceros letters suggests that Brutus and 
Cassius employed the concepts of concordia and libertas rather than pax: Cic. Fam. 11.3, 11.13a, see 
also Fam 12.15 (Lentulus to the SPQR) for Dolabellas use of the rhetoric of libertas. 
- 51 - 
pax was the promise of the triumvirs for political stability at Rome. The ways in 
which this was to be achieved were dependent on the political context and the 
individuals involved in the discourse. The association of pax with victory over ones 
opponents transferred the traditional rhetoric of the term onto the power relations 
between Roman politicians. The need to maintain certain relations, such as the alliance 
between Antony and Octavian, led to another development in the use of the term pax 
during the civil wars of the 40s: pax itself was not an outcome of victory, but was to be 
celebrated as a victory in itself. 
- 52 - 
Section Four 
pax as victory 
As I have discussed above, the causal relationship between pax and victory 
continued during the 40s. Yet there is also evidence to suggest that pacts, negotiations 
and reconciliation were treated as a means to victory. 
Whilst Caesar promoted a desire for peace and reconciliation with Pompey in 49 
B.C., his letter to Balbus, in which he talks of his desire to be reconciled, places a 
strong emphasis on the language of victory: 
Constitueram ut quam lenissimum me praeberem et Pompeium darem 
operam ut reconciliarem. Temptemus hoc modo si possimus omnium 
voluntates recuperare et diuturna victoria uti, quoniam reliqui crudelitate 
odium effugere non potuerunt neque victoriam diutius tenere praeter unum 
L. Sullam, quem imitaturus non sum. Haec nova sit ratio vicendi ut 
misericordia et liberalitate nos muniamus.
I decided that I should show myself as moderate as possible, and that I 
should work hard to reconcile myself with Pompey. Let us try by this means 
to see if we can recover the hearts of all and enjoy a lasting victory, since 
the rest have not been able by cruelty to escape hatred nor to hold on to an 
enduring victory, except L. Sulla alone, whom I am not going to imitate.  
 Cic. Att. 9.7c.1.   
- 53 - 
Let this be a new style of conquest so that we are defended by mercy and 
generosity. 
For Caesar, to be reconciled with Pompey was an opportunity to secure victory, and 
certainly Caesars treatment of Pompeys prefects who were sent to treat for peace 
suggests that Caesar aimed at a position of superiority from which he could dictate the 
terms of the agreement.
 Indeed, his treatment of Pompeys envoys suggests a rather 
different understanding and application of pax and negotiation from that which Caesar 
professed in his de bello civili. Caesar redefines the concept of victory, avoiding the 
image of a Roman victor imposing defeat and destruction on fellow Romans, as Sulla 
had done.
 Instead he proposes a victory that allows him to demonstrate his clemency 
to his opponents. 
Certainly, the role of pax within victory rhetoric was a fluid one during the 40s, 
dependent on the position within the state (either held or aimed at) of the individuals 
using the term. As I highlighted in the previous section, Cicero manipulated the usage 
and meaning of pax in his Philippics to justify his arguments for removing Antony from 
his position within the state.
 Victory over Antony was, in Ciceros opinion, the only 
way of securing peace and stability for the res publica. Yet pax was also used as a 
justification for claiming victory.  
 Balbus sends Cicero two letters of Caesars: the first (Cic. Att. 9.7c) was sent to Cicero on 11
 or 12
March 49 B.C., and dates to shortly before this; the second (Cic. Att. 9.13a) was sent to Cicero on about 
 March, and in it Caesar reports on the events of 9
 March, i.e. the siege of Brundisium.  In the 
second letter Caesar refers to N. Magius, whom Pompey sent to treat for peace (misit ad me N. Magium 
de pace), whilst in his first letter (Att. 9.7c) he tells us that he captured Magius (deprehendi), but set him 
free immediately (meo instituto usus sum). Caesars actions, in capturing a prefect who came in the 
capacity of a caduceator as it were, does not preclude his desire for pax or reconciliation, but they 
suggest that the position from which he wishes to achieve this is as the dominant party, as the victor: 
cum in spem venero de compositione aliquid me conficere, statim vos certiores faciam (Cic. Att. 9.13a). 
 Caesars rejection of the Sullan model may be a reply to Ciceros concerns, voiced at least to Atticus, 
of Pompeys desire for Sullan despotism: genus illud Sullani regni iam pridem appetitur (Cic. Att.8.11.2); 
mirandum enim in modum Gnaeus noster Sullani regni similtudinem concupivit (Cic. Att. 9.7.3). 
 See pp. 41 -48 above. 
- 54 - 
The importance of pax (as a pact) to the concept of the restoration of the 
political order (rei publicae constituendae) is perhaps best illustrated by the 
celebrations of the pact between Antony and Octavian in 40.
 The pact established 
between Octavian and Antony at Brundisium was confirmed and strengthened by the 
marriage of Antony to Octavians sister.
 A quinarius carrying the legend IIIVIR RPC 
with a female bust on the obverse, and two hands clasped around a caduceus with the 
legend M. ANTONIVS C. CAESAR on the reverse affirms the pact established between 
Antony and Octavian (Figure 11).
 Even more illuminating are the entries in the Fasti 
Triumphales. These are unusual in the context of the continuous history of Roman 
triumph, yet they testify to the prominence of pax in the public discourse of 40 (Figure 
In 40 B.C. pax as a harmonious pact between Romans was celebrated not only 
in the ovations at Rome, but also in Virgils fourth Eclogue, where the poet speaks of 
the world at peace (pacatum orbem), and the harmonious Fates (concordes Parcae), 
emphasising the aspects of civil peace, as opposed to victory celebration.
At Casinum, 
on the Via Latina, the duoviri celebrated the pact by restoring a signum Concordiae, 
along with a pedestal and altar, on 12
 October.
 This last commemoration illustrates 
how a former monument of Concord was deemed appropriate to revive after Antony 
and Octavian had come to an agreement. The pax Antony and Octavian made was an 
indication of the civil harmony (concordia) achieved. What is perhaps most striking in 
 Osgood (2006) 191. 
 Plut. Ant. 31; App. B Civ. 5.50-66; Dio Cassius 48.30-31.4. 
 RRC 529/4b. 
 See pp. 17-18 above. 
 Verg. Ecl 4.17 and 4.47 respectively. 
 ILS 3784: M(arcus) Papius M(arci) f(ilius) L(ucius) Matrius L(uci) f(ilius) / duoviri i(ure) d(icundo) / 
signum Concordiae ex c(onscriptorum) c(onsulto) restituendum / coeraverunt eidemq(ue) dedicarunt / et 
basim gradum aram sua pecunia / faciunda coer(averunt) eidemq(ue) probaver(unt) / a(nte) d(iem) IIII 
Eid(us) Oct(obres) Cn(aeo) Domit(io) C(aio) Asinio co(n)s(ulibus); see Osgood (2006) 193; Syme (2002) 
217 n. 4. 
- 55 - 
the commemoration of this year is that whilst pax was once again associated with 
concordia, as it had been during the civil wars earlier in the decade, it was now also the 
cause of victory celebrations.
 The causal relationship between victory and pax had 
almost been completely overturned. 
 Dio Cassius 48.31.3:              ,   
       .(then they brought the two leaders into the city 
mounted on horses as if at a triumph, and bestowed upon them the triumphal dress just as upon those 
who celebrated triumphs). 
- 56 - 
Summary 
This chapter has examined the variety of perspectives concerning pax, civil 
stability and victory rhetoric from 50-40 B.C. In the period of unrest leading up to the 
civil war between Caesar and Pompey there had been a clear concern for a stable 
internal state, which was usually spoken about in terms of concordia and otium.
Whilst pax is certainly part of the discourse of these years, its main function was still 
associated with external threats and external stability, as it had been in middle and late 
Republic; Cicero deliberately emphasises the external nature of pax, in order to 
heighten the concern for domestic peace. 
The concern for an active pact (condiciones pacis) was far more prominent in 
our written sources from 50 B.C. than a concept of an ongoing state of concordia.
Both Caesar in his published work (de bello civili) and Cicero in his correspondence 
engage in a discourse on the condiciones pacis. However, the ways Cicero and Caesar 
understood pax and interpreted how it was to be accomplished clearly differed. In his 
letters Cicero repeatedly emphasises his desire for pax without, and more importantly, 
instead of victory.
 This serves to show that Ciceros concept of pax in this civil war 
is very different from an externa pax in foreign war, where victory was an essential 
component of the process. For Cicero pax was to retain its aspect of negotiation, but be 
free from any victory which would result in tyranny for the defeated. This desire for pax 
was something that Cicero pushed for greatly in his correspondence, although in public 
he appears to have backed Pompeys policies. Caesar professed a desire for pax as 
 See pp.24-27 above. 
 Caesar never refers to concordia in his de bello civili, but refers to pax eight times in book 1 (1.11, 
1.26, 1.74, 1.85 (x5)), and thirteen times in book 3 (3.10 (x3), 3.17, 3.18, 3.19 (x6), 3.57, 3.90). He also 
uses pax and its cognate verb pacare in reference to provinces (1.7, 1.39, 1.85, 3.57, 3.73).  
 See p. 33. above esp. n. 92. 
- 57 - 
reconciliation both in his de bello civili and his coins, but in his correspondence he 
showed another understanding of pax. For Caesar, reconciliation would result in 
victory, and certainly from his treatment of Pompeys envoys he was aiming to impose 
a pact on Pompey from a position of superiority.
 The fluidity of the meaning of pax 
in the early period of the civil wars is apparent in the varied ways in which both Cicero 
and Caesar choose to understand and apply the concept. Whilst pax was set up as the 
end goal by both, the ways in which it was to be achieved were dependent on their 
political agenda.  
The representation of the personified quality Pax for the first time, on the 
coinage in 44 B.C., is an indication of the prominence that the concept now held in the 
public debate concerning political stability. Prior to 44 B.C., the idea of pax in external 
affairs had been symbolised by the caduceus, either as an attribute or adjunct in the 
numismatic field. Now Caesar publicly attested to the presence of Pax within the 
Roman state, accomplished in his ending the civil wars and dealing with Romes 
external threats. Yet this promise of security did not last, and clearly certain members of 
the senate disagreed with Caesars proclamation of pax. In the year following Caesars 
assassination pax continued to be a prominent feature of the senatorial debate, at least 
as far as Ciceros Philippics are concerned. In a completely different stance from the 
one he took privately at the start of the decade, Cicero now publicly rejected the idea of 
pax, as a pact, with Antony. Indeed, he used and (re)defined pax in order to persuade 
the senate to remove Antony from power. At the same time, it seems plausible that 
Antony was using the promise of pax, as a pact and negotiation, to try and secure his 
position within the state.
 Once again, Ciceros understanding of pax is in fact 
 See p. 51 above. 
 See p. 44 above. 
- 58 - 
determined by what he saw as the necessary steps needed to save the res publica. In 49 
that had been reconciliation between two political opponents; in 44-43 pax was not to 
be achieved as a pact, but through victory over Antony.
The concept that pax could be achieved through victory over other Romans was 
continued by the triumvirs in their fight against Cassius and Brutus, who in turn 
rejected the concept of pax as the symbol of restoring the res publica, preferring the 
concept of libertas. Yet the concept of pax continued to be a fluid one. The instability 
of the alliance between Antony and Octavian meant that their reconciliation in 40 was 
celebrated as a victory, and both were awarded ovations. Osgood has argued that peace 
through diplomatic concord was civil wars equivalent to peace through victory.
Clearly this is true in certain instances, but in others peace was to be accomplished in 
civil war through victory, as Ciceros Philippics, and the triumvirs defeat of Brutus and 
Cassius indicate. The idea of associating pax with victory in the context of a fellow 
Roman opponent could now result either from pax as a pact, or pax achieved through 
actual victory in civil war.  
During the 40s pax, whilst always translatable as pact (with or without war),
was understood and interpreted in different ways by different political players in order 
to articulate their relations to, and positions of, power within the state. In the following 
chapter I will consider the new development of the idea of pax without an opponent, 
seen both in Octavians victory celebrations after his defeat of Sextus Pompeius in 36, 
and more extensively after his defeat of Antony, as a prominent part of Octavians 
victory rhetoric. 
* * * 
 See p. 48 and n 145 above. 
Osgood (2006) 191. 
 Contained within this concept of a pact is the state of peace achieved through negotiation: see pp. 
5-6 above.  
- 59 - 
 Before turning to examine this development in the conceptualisation of pax, I 
will first add a brief commentary on the years between 40 and 36. Specific evidence for 
the use of pax in these years is slight, nevertheless we can gain an insight into the role 
that pax played in the political manoeuvrings of the period. 
 Despite the great show that was made of the pact established between Antony 
and Octavian in 40 at Brundisium, and the renewal of their office of triumvirs in 37, the 
conflict between Antony and Octavian continued. Furthermore, pax for the stability of 
the state did not just concern Antony and Octavian. Although Brutus and Cassius had 
been removed from the scene, Pompeys son Sextus who had control of Sicily and a 
fleet at his command presented the triumvirs with another threat to their promoted 
vision of stability. The triumvirs made a pact with Sextus in 39 at Misenum, but despite 
the very real hopes that this was to be a lasting peace,
 by the following year he and 
Octavian were at war.
 Disagreement between Antony and Octavian, mainly driven by 
the need for forces and a fleet with which to fight Sextus, almost brought about further 
conflict and war between the two triumvirs. Only the meeting at Tarentum in 37, and a 
renewal of their triumviral power maintained the peace.
 The constant renewal of messages of pax as a justification of actions in war 
from 40-37 illustrates the real fragility of the pacts and agreements made during the 
period, and highlights the fact that stability was not achieved. Osgood has noted that 
Appian ends his commentary of the civil wars with the death of Sextus Pompeius, 
instead of the battle of Actium, as he had originally outlined in his introduction.
has pointed to a similarity between Appians division between civil and external wars 
and that of contemporary literature from the period, where associations of peace 
 My thanks to Kathryn Welch for discussing this with me. 
 Pelling (1996) 21-24. 
 Pelling (1996) 24-27;
Scullard (1982) 162-163. 
 App. B Civ. intro. 6. 
- 60 - 
through victory replaced the fears and concerns of civil wars.
 Octavians 
commemoration of his Sicilian campaign against Sextus does not, as I will discuss 
below, linger on civil war. 
 Osgood (2006) 347-348. 
- 61 - 
Chapter Two  
pax won by land and sea: concluding the civil wars 
Octavians defeat of Sextus Pompeius at Naulochus in 36 B.C. was celebrated 
by an ovation over Sicily rather than Sextus himself,
 and the erection of a columna 
rostrata in the Roman Forum to commemorate his naval success (Figure 12).
Appian 
records that the column was accompanied by an inscription which read:   
        .176 In this instance , 
which must surely be a translation of pax, cannot retain the sense of a pact as there is no 
opponent. It is best to translate here the concept of peace as a state of being (as both 
absence of war and security of the empire). Octavian was able to celebrate the 
achievement of pax without even the need to refer to an opponent or contractual 
partner.
Tacitus cynically tied the pax achieved after the battle of Actium to Octavians 
position as sole leader of the Roman state: postquam bellatum apud Actium atque 
omnem potentiam ad unum conferri pacis interfuit.
 Indeed, the pax celebrated in 29 
B.C., like that of 36 B.C., was, in certain respects, different from pax during the civil 
wars of the 40s. As discussed in the previous chapter, pax during the civil wars of the 
 Inscr. Ital. XIII 1.87 and 343. See Pelling (1996) CAH X
34-36 for the conflict between Octavian and 
Sextus. 
 The first naval victory column was erected in the forum to Duilius, for his victory over the 
Carthaginian navy. See pp.76-83 below for a full discussion of rostral victory display at Rome. 
 App. B Civ. 5.130: he restored the peace which was for a long time in disarray, by land and sea. 
 The historical and physical context of Octavians columna rostrata is discussed in detail in relation the 
celebrations of 29 B.C.: see pp. 77-82 below. 
 Tac. Hist. 1.1: It was important for peace, after the battle of Actium, that all power was conferred on 
one man. 
- 62 - 
late Republic was interpreted and understood in a variety of ways, and was a part of the 
rhetoric that existed concerning the security of the state and the positions of the leading 
politicians within it. Whilst the concept of pax continued to be a part of this rhetoric, in 
36 and 29 B.C. it was not made with anyone, but was celebrated as a condition of 
empire. Octavian as sole ruler of the empire (after his defeat of Antony) could celebrate 
pax without an opponent to make a pact with. However, he still had to tread the thin 
line between the language of civil and foreign war. 
There was a friction between the conflicts of 31-30 B.C. as a war between 
Octavian and Cleopatra on the one hand, and as a war between Octavian and Antony on 
the other.
 This double aspect of the war was to affect the ways in which victory 
rhetoric during the period was employed. The war, as conceptualised between Octavian 
and the Queen of Egypt, was an achievement of Roman victory over an external enemy; 
the conflict between Octavian and Antony was a matter of an internal power struggle, 
which had been temporarily resolved in 40 B.C. with a declaration and celebration of a 
pact between the two men. Lange argues that the peace established after the battles of 
Actium and Alexandria should be understood as a form of civil harmony,
 yet the 
victory commemorations after the final civil wars of the late Republic merge ideas of 
civil and foreign war, and once again our understanding of the concept of pax is 
dependent on the context of the celebration. 
A near contemporary poem of Propertius lists the achievements of Octavian, 
intermingling civil and foreign wars: 
bellaque resque tui memorarem Caesaris, et tu 
 Lange (2009) Chapter 2 and p. 79ff, esp. 85 on the perception of the Actian and Alexandrian battles 
as both civil and foreign wars; contra Gurval (1995) 15-16, 28 on Augustus perception of Actium. 
 Lange (2009) 131, 191. 
- 63 - 
Caesare sub magno cura secunda fores. 
nam quotiens Mutinam aut civilia busta Philippos 
aut canerem Siculae classica bella fugae, 
eversosque focos antiquae gentis Etruscae, 
et Ptolomaeei litora capta Phari, 
aut canerem Aegyptum et Nilum, cum attractus in urbem 
septem captivis debilis ibat aquis, 
aut regum auratis circumdata colla catenis, 
Actiaque in Sacra currere rostra Via; 
te mea Musa illis semper contexeret armis, 
et sumpta et posita pace fidele caput:
I would recall the wars and deeds of your Caesar, and you [Maecenas] 
would be my second concern after great Caesar. For how many times I 
would sing of Mutina or Philippi, the civic sepulchre, or the naval battles of 
the Sicilian rout, and the ruined fires of the ancient Etruscan race, and the 
captured shores of Ptolemaic Pharos, or I would sing of Egypt and the Nile, 
when dragged into the city he went weeping with his seven captive streams, 
or the necks of kings hung round with gold chains, and the Actian prows on 
the Sacra via. My Muse would always weave you into those wars, your 
mind loyal in commending as in rejecting a pact. 
Propertius mentions are clearly understood as civil wars (quotiens Mutinam aut civilia 
 Prop. 2.1.25-34. See Camps (1997) 1 for the dating of Elegies Book 2 to the period 28-25 B.C. 
- 64 - 
busta Philippos). He is subtler in his allusions to the civil wars with Sextus (Siculae 
fugae) and the destruction of Perusia (gentis Etruscae), and groups them together with 
the conquest of Egypt (Ptolomaeei Phari). The final set refers again to the conquest of 
Egypt and the battle of Actium, but these are represented as the triumphal displays at 
Rome, rather than the harsh realities of the actual wars.
 Propertius presents a 
spectrum of civil and foreign wars, all of which are associated with the making and 
rejecting of pax. His reference to the sumpta et posita pax
 suggests that pax, as a 
pact, was a constantly fluctuating state of being during these wars. This practical 
application of pax during these wars is furthermore reflected in the victory rhetoric of 
the period: I will argue below that there were times when the use of pax was considered 
appropriate and necessary, and times when it was not. This chapter will show that the 
use of pax in the commemorations of 29 B.C. was selective. The absence of pax as 
much as its presentation in this period informs us about the use of the concept to 
express ideas of political stability, individuals positions with the state, and the idea of 
empire. 
 This chapter considers the effects of the civil wars of the late 30s on the ways in 
which victory rhetoric was used by different agents, and argues that pax, as victory, was 
used selectively by Octavian to articulate his victory and authority, whilst blurring the 
lines between civil and foreign war, since pax was celebrated without the need for an 
opponent. pax appears as only a secondary concern to the senate in their celebrations at 
Rome, perhaps because of the use made of the term previously in respect of domestic 
politics. It is almost entirely absent in the victory commemoration set up by Octavians 
prefect in Egypt. 
 Butler and A. (1933) 188-190; Camps (1997) 69-70. 
 Camps (1997) 70, on the coining of the phrase from that of sumere arma. 
- 65 - 
I will first briefly outline the events of the years 36-31 B.C., before turning to 
examine in section one the victory celebrations set up at Rome by both the senate and 
Octavian. I will show that whilst the display at Rome was set up ostensibly in 
celebration of victory over external enemies and threats to the state, the 
commemorations also involved subtle allusions to Octavians defeat of Antony and his 
position over him within the state. pax is not explicitly present in the victory displays at 
Rome, except in the act of closing the Gates of Ianus, which symbolised the 
establishment of pax and was associated with the defeat of foreign enemies and the 
cessation of all wars rather than the kind of pax established between Octavian and 
Antony in 40 B.C.
In section two I will consider Octavians victory commemoration above 
Nicopolis. The monument presents a very explicit message of pax won by land and sea, 
set over the Greek East, which found itself newly under Octavians control. The display 
at Nicopolis is reminiscent of Octavians victory monument set up in 36 B.C. (the 
columna rostrata). Both monuments use the concept of pax to commemorate a victory 
in civil war, yet by imposing this message on Nicopolis in Epirus, as opposed to the 
Roman Forum, where the display of 36 B.C. was set up, Octavians message is not just 
of pax for Rome, but of pax as a victory for the empire.  
Finally I will examine the trilingual inscription of C. Cornelius Gallus from 
Philae, in Egypt, which demonstrates that whilst Octavian was propagating his message 
of pax terra marique, his prefect and the priests of Philae were not required to impose 
such a motif on his presentation of victory to the different audiences of his monument at 
the first Cataract of the Nile. It seems that in 29 B.C. the celebration of pax terra 
 Dio Cass. 51.20.4-5; Livy 1.19.2. See pp. 88-92 below for a full discussion of the closing of the Gates 
of Ianus. 
- 66 - 
marique was the preserve of Octavian and he was selective with where he chose to 
commemorate this. After his victories in both a foreign and civil war, he established the 
idea of victorious pax as an emblem of his position in the new political system that was 
emerging. 
* * * 
I now turn to examine briefly the years between 36 and 31 B.C. The evidence 
does not provide us with a very full picture on the use of pax during these years, but as 
before we can gain insight into the political manoeuvrings of the period and the role of 
pax therein.  
With the defeat of Sextus at Naulochus Octavian had effectively ended the civil 
 yet the power struggle between him and Antony continued.
 Whilst Antony 
was campaigning unsuccessfully in the East against Parthia, Octavian still needed to 
maintain his power base in the West, which rested predominantly with his army, now 
forty-five legions strong.  However, his commemoration of his Sicilian victory as the 
end of civil war left him potentially vulnerable to demands from his soldiers for 
retirement. The need to retain an army for potential or future engagement with Antony 
necessitated a campaign with which to occupy them. In Appians presentation of events, 
Octavian uses an implied threat from the Illyrians to the peace which had been 
established in the wake of the civil war: 
 App. B Civ. 5.128, 132. 
 See Pelling (1996) 36-67 for a narrative of events from the defeat of Sextus down to the defeat of 
Antony and Cleopatra. 
- 67 - 
      ,    ,    
   ,     .187 
He said, also, that he would not engage them in any more civil wars, which 
had fortunately come to an end, but in war against the Illyrians and other 
barbarous tribes, who were disturbing the peace which had been gained with 
so much difficulty. 
The focus in these years was ostensibly on foreign campaigns, with a series of triumphs 
held by both Octavians and Antonys men.
 Both leaders were commanding their 
armies against external threats to the Roman state, Octavian with greater success than 
Antony: in 34 B.C. he retrieved the standards lost to the Dalmatians, and set them up at 
Rome in 33 B.C.
 Whilst external threats to the state were emphasised, the political divide between 
the two men continued; their triumviral power was not renewed in 33 B.C. and could 
hardly remain tenable with civil war ostensibly ended and pax re-established. The 
breakdown finally came in 32 B.C. when, after an attack by the Antonian consul Sosius, 
Octavian entered a senate meeting with an armed guard. The consuls and a large 
number of the senate fled to Antony, leaving Italy in Octavians hands. In the conflict 
that followed Octavian presented himself as the defender of Italy, receiving a personal 
oath of allegiance from all of Italy and the western provinces.
 Antony on the other 
hand had much of the senate on his side. Both could claim to be fighting for the res 
 App. B Civ. 5.128. 
 Pelling (1996) 46-48. 
 See pp. 71-73 below for a discussion of Octavians Dalmatian triumph and the return of the 
standards. 
 RG 25.2. 
- 68 - 
publica. The stability of the Roman state was to be achieved through the victory of one 
Roman leader over the other. It was indeed not only important but also necessary for 
pax and stability that one man rule.
 Tac. Hist. 1.1.  
- 69 - 
Section One 
The Senates and Octavians Commemorations at Rome  
In 31/30 B.C. a series of commemorations were voted by the senate to Octavian 
upon the news of his victories at both Actium and Alexandria, as recorded by Dio. It is 
worthwhile giving Dios account in full, since it outlines not only the honours voted to 
Octavian, but sets them alongside the removal of Antony from the public displays in the 
city of Rome: 
              
   .     ,    
,            
           
   ,     , 
              
,              
             
      ,       
 ,          
 . 
      (     
      ),    <>   
  ,          
http://www.tlg.uci.edu/help/BetaManual/online/SB2.html
http://www.tlg.uci.edu/help/BetaManual/online/SB2.html
- 70 - 
,         , 
             
           
 ,       , .       
  ,           
  .192 
During this time and still earlier the Romans at home had passed 
many resolutions in honour of Caesars naval victory. Thus they granted 
him a triumph over Cleopatra, an arch adorned with trophies at Brundisium 
and another in the Roman Forum. Moreover, they decreed that the 
foundation of the shrine of Julius should be adorned with the beaks of the 
captured ships and that a festival should be held every four years in honour 
of Octavian; that there should also be a thanksgiving on his birthday and on 
the anniversary of the announcement of his victory; also that when he 
should enter the city the Vestal Virgins and the senate and the people with 
then, the senate not only voted him these honours but also either took down 
or effaced the memorials of Antony, declared the day on which he had been 
born accursed, and forbade the use of the praenomen Marcus by any of his 
When, however, they learned of Antony's death, the news of which 
came while Cicero, the son of Cicero, was consul for a part of the year, 
some held that it had come to pass not without divine direction, since the 
 Dio Cass. 51.19.1-3, 5-6. 
- 71 - 
consul's father had owed his death chiefly to Antony; and they voted crowns 
and thanksgiving to Caesar in great number and granted him the privilege of 
celebrating another triumph, this time over the Egyptians. For neither on the 
previous occasion nor at this time did they mention by name Antony and the 
other Romans who had been vanquished with him and thus imply that it was 
proper to celebrate their defeat. The day on which Alexandria had been 
captured they declared a lucky day, and directed that in future years it 
should be taken by the inhabitants of that city as the starting-point in their 
reckoning of time.  
Dios account highlights that in one respect the honours illustrate the traditional display 
of victory over an enemy (Cleopatra and Egypt), whilst the civil war aspect of the 
commemoration is left unmentioned ( ).193 However, Dio also indicates 
that there was a deliberate effort by the senate to remove Antonys monuments and also 
to delete his birthday and name from the records. These acts, whilst claiming to remove 
Antony from memory, left behind physical marks of his hostility towards the res 
publica.
 These two different aspects (the glorification of Octavian and the damnatio 
memoriae of Antony) are apparent in several of the Fasti records. 1
 August is 
celebrated as a day for Spes, because Octavian freed the res publica from the most bitter 
danger (tristissimum periculum),
 whilst Antonys birthday, 14
 January, is 
 Reminiscent of the victory rhetoric in 36 B.C.: Appian B Civ. 5.130; Dio Cass. 49.15. 
 For the defacement of Antonys monuments see the discussion of the Rostra in the Forum 
Romanum, pp. 81-82 below. For the deletion of Antonys name and birthday from the records see EJ
45, January 14. 
49, August 1, Fasti anni Praenestini: [Aegypt]us in potestatem po[puli Romani redacta]. Victoriae 
Virgini in Palatino. Spei in foro holitorio. Fer. [ex s.c.] q. e. d. Imp. Caes[ar rem publicam tristissimo 
periculo liberavit];  acta Arvalium: [Spei] in foro holit. f. ex s.c. [q. e. d. Imp. Caesar rem pu]blic. tristiss. 
periculo [libera]vit., Fasti anni Amiternini: feriae ex s.c. q. e. d. Imp. Caesar divi f. rem public. tristissimo 
periculo liberat, Fasti anni Antiates: Spei.  Aug. Alexan(driam) recepit; see also Dio Cass. 51.19.6. 
- 72 - 
condemned: vitiosus.
 The victory commemoration at Rome in 29 B.C. comprised 
both the honours to Octavian and the highly visible removal of Antony. By removing 
Antony the ostensible message of civil war was one of silence; yet such a physical 
deletion also allowed the senate and Octavian to play on the competition between 
Octavian and Antony. Octavian was to be seen and understood not only as the victor in 
a foreign war for the safety of the state, but also as victor in his struggle with Antony 
for control of the state. 
 In this section I will first examine the honours voted to Octavian by the senate 
the triple triumph and the rostral display in the Forum  alongside a display attributed to 
Octavian alone  the Tarentine Victory  and discuss the role and agenda of both the 
senate and Octavian within these displays. I will examine what these displays were 
intended to achieve in order to understand how the pax was conceptualised, if at all, in 
relation to the civil and foreign aspects of the wars. Indeed, explicit references to pax 
are for the most part absent in these displays, suggesting perhaps a difficulty in 
expressing or employing pax as a central aspect of victory commemoration in what was 
in many respects a civil war. 
I will then turn to consider the closing of the Gates of Ianus, as the one 
commemoration at Rome that specifically relates to the concept of pax. The notion of 
pax is not overtly prominent in the celebrations of 29 B.C. at Rome, at least in the 
senatorial rhetoric, which focuses on the victory over external enemies and the 
cessation of war  a Republican pax as it were. Octavian promoted himself as the 
triumvir who had achieved the remit of his office, alluding to his success over that of 
Antony. The closing of the Gates of Ianus in 29 B.C. did not speak of any peace or 
agreement made between Roman factions, but rather it indicated the victory and 
45, February 14, Fasti Verulani: [dies vi]tiosus [ex s.]c. An(tonii) natal.; Fasti Oppiani: vitiosus. 
- 73 - 
dominance of Rome, through the figurehead of Octavian, over external threats. Civil 
harmony was achieved, but it was understood in terms of the stability of the empire. 
Triple Triumph 
 On 13
 and 15
 August 29 B.C., Octavian celebrated three triumphs over 
Dalmatia, Actium and Alexandria.
 I will examine the celebration of the three 
triumphs to show that the ephemeral displays of these spectacles focused on the foreign 
aspect of the victory, and that the civil nature of the victory does appear to have been 
for the most part avoided. 
 The first triumph on 13
 August was that over Dalmatia,
 which can only be 
understood in terms of a foreign war. The victory over Dalmatia was actually achieved 
in 34 B.C.,
 when Octavian retrieved the captured Roman military standards. These 
standards were captured after the defeat of Gabinius and his fifteen cohorts in 48 B.C. 
by the Illyrians,
 and possibly also after the defeat of Baebius and his five cohorts in 
44 B.C.
 The triumph was deferred: most probably because given the unstable 
situation with Antony, Octavian was busy on other campaigns to fortify his position in 
the West.
 The victory was celebrated with more permanent displays in the Porticus 
 Suet. Aug. 22: curulis triumphos tris egit, Delmaticum, Actiacum, Alexandrinum, continuo triduo 
omnes; Dio Cass. 51.21.5-7; Livy Per. 133: unum ex Illyrico, alternum ex Actiaca victoria, tertium de 
Cleopatra. RGDA 4.1: tris egi curulis triumphos; Inscr. Ital. XIII 1.343 (Fasti Triumphales Barberiniani): 
Imp. Caesar de Dalma[t]is eid. Sext. / triumph(avit), palmam dedit / Imp. Caesar ex A[egy]pto XIIX k. 
Sept. / triump<h>avit. 
 Dio Cass. 51.21.5; Suet. Aug. 22; Fasti Triumphales Baberiniani (Inscr. Ital. XIII 1.341-343). Livy Per. 
133 refers to the triumph as ex Illyrico. 
 Dio Cass. 49.38.1 places the victory in 34 B.C. (consulship of Antony and L. Scribonius Libo); App. Ill. 
28 dates it to 33 B.C. (consulship of Octavian and L. Volcatius Tullus). The Fasti Venusini (Inscr. Ital. XIII 
1.255) has an entry for 34 B.C. of a bellum Hiluricum; the Fasti Triumphales Barberiniani (Inscr. Ital. XIII 
1.343) also used Hilurico instead of Illurico, which is recorded in the Fasti Triumphales Capitolini, for 
Vatinius triumph of 42 B.C.: Bastien (2007) 51, 55 and 58. 
 App. Ill. 12 states that the Illyrians killed virtually all fifteen of Gabinius cohorts however, in Ill. 25 
and Ill. 28 he refers to five cohorts of Gabinius. 
 App. Ill. 13. 
 Gurval (1995) 26 on the deferral of the triumph. 
- 74 - 
Octaviae of the standards and spoils of the war set up in 33 B.C.
 This earlier display 
alluded to the political tensions between Octavian and Antony. 
The capture of the standards in Dalmatia in 48 B.C. is reminiscent of the terrible 
defeat suffered by Crassus in 53 B.C. at the hands of the Parthians.
 Antonys legions 
suffered further defeats in Parthia in 40 and 36 B.C., for which Antony was attempting 
to exact revenge on Parthia in 34 B.C.
 Octavians display of victory set up in the 
Porticus Octaviae in 33 B.C. served to emphasise his success over an enemy who had 
posed a threat to the res publica; in the same year Antony was still in the East, reporting 
success,
 although with little actual proof.
 Dio claims that Octavian had found out 
the truth behind Antonys dispatch reports, but did not reveal anything to the public.
However, such a display of Octavians own success, coupled with the absence of 
Antony, no doubt helped to promote Octavian over and above his political rival. This 
subtle allusion to Octavians success in comparison to Antonys would again arise in 29 
B.C: that year began not just with the ratification of Octavians acts, but also with the 
inclusion of his name in hymns because of his negotiations with the Parthians.
 In this 
respect, Octavian had achieved what Antony could not: a form of pax with the 
Parthians, and again proved his credentials over Antony in terms of preserving the res 
publica.
 Dio Cass. 49.43.8. 
 Dio Cass. 40.16.30. 
 Dio Cass. 49.22.1-33 esp. 25.5. Lange (2009) 52 on the campaigns of Octavian and Antony from 37 to 
33 B.C. 
 Dio Cass. 49.32.1. 
 Success had come previously in 38 B.C. when Antonys general Ventidius celebrated a triumph over 
Parthia: Fasti Triumphales Capitolini: Inscr. Ital. XIII 1.87. 
 Dio. Cass. 49.32.2. 
 Dio Cass. 51.20.1. 
 Lange (2009) passim, esp. 14-48, 181-190, 191-202 for Octavians fulfilment of his triumviral 
assignment: res publica constituenda. 
- 75 - 
 The celebrations of 33 B.C. emphasised Octavians success, and alluded to the 
absence of any such display by Antony. Yet, whilst the returned standards were most 
likely carried in the procession on 13
 August, the allusions that their original display 
in the Porticus Octaviae created would have been mostly lost amidst the display of 
captives and hostages.  The first day of the triumph in 29 B.C. was a show of the 
defeated nations emphasising Octavians victories in external conflicts.
 The choice to celebrate the Dalmatian triumph together with the Actian and 
Alexandrian triumphs does not solely represent the chronology of the victories of 
Octavian from 34-30 B.C. The victory of 34 B.C., from a period when Octavian and 
Antony were not openly in contention, had no explicit reference to the civil wars and 
could therefore set the precedent for the days to follow: the illusion of solely foreign 
enemies could be maintained.
 All three triumphs set out a message of victory 
presented as achieved in bella externa, echoing the ovatio Octavian had received in 36 
B.C. which was awarded ex Sicilia.
 This is in sharp contrast to the ovations of 
Octavian and Antony in 40 B.C., which unprecedentedly commemorated the compact 
of pax between the triumvirs. 
 Furthermore, the triumph emphasised Octavians conquest terra marique.
Pompey had of course triumphed over the orbis terrarum in 61 B.C., parading amongst 
his many trophies a colossal representation of oikumene.
 Caesar had also presented, 
 Dio Cass. 51.21. Gurval (1995) 25-28 on the martial aspects of the Illyrian triumph. 
 Dio Cass. 51.21.4:        (as if the defeated had all been 
foreigners). See stenberg (2009a) 130-1, 142-144, 145-148 for the display of foreign hostages in the 
triumph. 
 The fact that the victory in 36 B.C. was a result of civil war is alluded to in the voting of an ovation 
rather than a triumph: Cooley (2009) 121. 
 stenberg (2009a) 223, 231, 234-5, 287-289 for the representations of foreign lands, rivers and the 
conquest of the world. 
 Dio Cass. 37.21.2; stenberg (2009a) 284-286. 
- 76 - 
over five triumphs in 46-45 B.C., the vast extent of his conquests over the world.
display of Octavians triple triumph depicted victories over both land, through the 
parade and representation of conquered peoples and foreign rivers,
 and sea, through 
the ships and bronze prows from Actium.
 By presenting his triumphs as being over 
the orbis terrarum, Octavian avoided the issue of civil war, whilst promoting his 
position as the first man of the state. 
 Not only were the triumphs organised chronologically, and with a precedent-
setting first day, they also culminated with a show-stopper. According to Dio, the final 
day (15
 August) was the pinnacle of the display:     
   .219 The show of wealth from Egypt placed the emphasis 
on foreign conquest with an effigy of Cleopatra carried in the triumph, which stood as a 
symbol of foreign power against which Octavian had triumphed. Furthermore the 
display of Egypts wealth also asserted Octavians legitimacy for command, after the 
crisis he faced with settling veterans in 30 B.C., by showing the injection of capital the 
state had received.
 We should note that more permanent memorials of the triple triumph hint at the 
concerns of the civil war aspects of the victories of 31-30 B.C.  The Fasti Triumphales 
Barberiniani preserve the entry for 29 B.C.: 
Imp. Caesar de Dalma[t]is eid. Sext. / triumph(avit), palmam dedit. 
Imp. Caesar ex A[egy]pto XIIX k. Sept. / triump<h>avit.
 stenberg (2009a) 287. 
 Verg. Aen. 8.714-28. 
 Prop. 2.1.31-34. 
 Dio Cass. 51.21.7. 
 Suet. Aug. 41.1; Cooley (2009) 175. 
 Inscr. Ital. XIII 1.343; Bastien (2007) 55. 
- 77 - 
Imperator Caesar triumphed over the Dalmatians on 13
 August, he 
dedicated his (victory) palm. 
Imperator Caesar triumphed over Egypt 15
 August. 
There is no entry for the Actian triumph. One suggestion has been simply that the stone-
carver missed out the Actian triumph due to carelessness and the triple repetition of 
Imp. Caesar.
 Certainly, the carving of the Fasti Triumphales Barberiniani is far less 
regular and polished than its Capitoline counterpart. The letter sizes across the 
fragments we have vary considerably from entry to entry (Figure 13).
 Even within 
the two entries cited above we can observe the lack of uniformity in presentation: in the 
first entry triumphavit is abbreviated to allow palmam dedit to fit at the end of the line, 
whilst in the second entry triump<h>avit is given in full, but the carver has missed out 
the h and there is no palmam dedit.  
 Another suggestion has been that the Actian and Egyptian triumphs have been 
elided into one.
 It is possible that the two celebrations were understood as a two-fold 
display of Octavians victories over Cleopatra (at least as the formal enemy). The nature 
of the Actian triumph was to celebrate a specific naval battle, which was to be presented 
as a triumph over Cleopatra (   )225, whilst the final day was to 
celebrate the subjugation of the whole of Egypt, wherein Cleopatras role was both as 
the enemy leader and as the embodiment of the foreign power of the Egyptian 
kingdom.
 The triumph over Egypt was certainly easier to conceptualise as a foreign 
victory, than the single battle at Actium. If the author of the Fasti Triumphales 
 Inscr. Ital. XIII 1.343; Gurval (1995) 32. 
 Bastien (2007) 55; Gurval (1995) 55 n.23. 
 Gurval (1995) 32. 
 Dio Cass. 51.19.1. 
 Dio. Cass. 51.21.7-8. Livy Per. 133 has the third triumph as specifically de Cleopatra, as opposed to 
Egypt (Dio; Fasti Triumphales Barberiniani) or Alexandria (Suet.  Aug. 41.1). 
- 78 - 
Barberiniani was deliberately silent on the Actian triumph it may reflect an implicit 
association of the two triumphs as being over Cleopatra, and therefore Egypt,
 or as 
Mary Beard has suggested it may illustrate the removal of the battle with the greatest 
association of civil war from the records.
 Beard has pointed out that the lack of 
palmam dedit in the entry for the Egyptian triumph may suggest that Octavian did not 
dedicate his victory palm on that occasion.
 There is certainly room on the stone for 
palmam dedit to be inscribed. However, whilst it is tempting to associate the lack of 
palm with the potential cover-up of the civil war battle of Actium, we should note that 
the palmam dedit is recorded for Octavians ovation ex Sicilia, which was in fact a civil 
conflict with Sextus Pompeius. Furthermore, it would be strange, although we cannot 
preclude it, if Octavian did not dedicate his victory palm for the victory over Egypt. If 
the Fasti Triumphales Barberiniani leave us uncertain as to their intended presentation 
of the triumphs of 29 B.C., they do at least hint at the issues that may have been 
encountered in the creation of permanent records concerned with the victories of civil 
Indeed, it is with the permanent monumental displays set up at Rome that 
Octavian and the senate could subtly allude to Octavians victories in civil war, as well 
as foreign conflicts. The tangible presence of the Actian prows in the Forum Romanum, 
voted by the senate in 30 B.C., not only created a permanent reminder of the Actian 
victory, which long outlasted the display of 14
 August 29 B.C., but also alluded to 
Octavians competition with Antony.  
 Gurval (1995) 33. 
 Beard (2007) 303-304. 
 Beard (2007) 303, n. 32, and 304, fig. 37; she also points out that there is uncertainty as to whether 
this omission was deliberate or a mistake. 
- 79 - 
Actia rostra 
In 36 B.C. Octavian had set up the prows from his Sicilian victory on a column 
in the Roman Forum, accompanied by an inscription which celebrated the restoration of 
pax by land and sea.
 In 29 B.C. ship prows, set up on the podium of the temple of 
Divus Iulius (           
) 231 , were also a prominent part of the senates honours to Octavian. 
However they do not appear to express a clear message of pax as the earlier display had 
done. I will first consider the role of rostral display in the Forum prior to the Actian 
display in order to understand the tradition within which the honour decreed by the 
senate was intended to work and to show that the victory of Actium was understood as 
part of Romes historical naval achievements. I will then look at the actual placement of 
the prows from Actium and consider how they relate to both the historical precedents 
and the overall visual landscape of the Forum. The display of the Actian prows in the 
Forum tacitly emphasised Octavians victory over Antony, through a dialogue that was 
set up between the Rostra at the west end of the Forum and the new display on the 
podium of the temple of Divus Iulius, and so pronouncing Octavians complete military 
and political control.   
The earlier display of naval victory ex Sicilia (Figure 12)
 was not new nor did 
it stand alone in the Forum.
 Livy records the first dedication of rostra in the Roman 
Forum in 338 B.C., for the naval victory over Antium, and states that the speakers 
platform (suggestus) received the name Rostra on this occasion: rostrisque earum 
 See p. 59 above. 
 Dio Cass. 51.19.2: Moreover, they decreed that the foundation of the shrine of Julius should be 
adorned with the beaks of the captured ships. 
 See p. 59 above. 
 Rostral displays were not confined to the Forum Romanum: Cic. Phil. 2.68 records the rostra 
displayed in Pompeys vestibule.  Such a display is mimicked by Petronius Trimalchio, Sat. 2.30.1-2., see 
also Prag (2006) 542-543. 
- 80 - 
suggestum in foro exstructum adornari placuit.
 However, the most famous rostral 
display in the Forum, prior to the flurry of activity from 44 B.C. onwards, was the 
renowned columna rostrata of C. Duilius. 
The inscription of this monument commemorates Duilius naval victory over 
Carthage in 260 B.C., listing the amount and quantity of spoils he brought back to 
Rome.
 The remains of the inscription were found in the Forum in 1565 at the foot of 
the Capitoline hill in the location of the extant Speakers platform (the Rostra) at the 
west end of the Forum (Figure 14).
 The elogium of Duilius from the Forum 
Augustum states that a column with a statue of Duilius on top was erected pr[ope 
a]ream Vulc[ani], which stood at the foot of the Capitol.
 The relocation of the 
Speakers platform in 44 B.C. to the west end of the Forum, away from the Comitium, 
meant that the column of Duilius stood in closer relation to the platform after this 
date.
 However, the epigraphic remains are an Augustan restoration (made in Cararra 
marble) of the third century monument.
 Livy 8.14.12: It was decided to adorn the speakers platform, built in the forum, with their prows. 
See also Varro Ling. Lat. 5.155: ex hostibus capta fixa sunt rostra; Flor. 1.5: in suggestu fori capta 
hostium classe suffixit. 
 Kondratieff (2004) remarks on both the triumphal and beneficial nature of Duilius inscription. 
 ILS 65; Serv. Georg. 3.29 records one of Duilius columns as in rostris; Plin. HN 34.20 and Quintillian 
1.7.12 record the column as in foro; Picard (1957) 137-140, esp. 138. For the location of the Rostra near 
the Curia Iulia after 44 B.C. see: Asc. Mil. 12; Diod. Sic. 12.26; Plin. HN 7.212. 
 Inscr. Ital. XIII 3.13: [---] | navis oc[toginta et Macellam] | [oppidum c]epit. pri[m]us d[e Poeneis 
n]aval[em | trium] | [phum egit. h]uic per[mis]sum est u[t ab e]pulis domum | [cum tibici]ne e[t f]unali 
rediret. [ei s]tatua c[um] | [columna] pr[ope a]ream Vulc[ani p]os[i]t[a est.] | [aedem apud foru]m 
ho[litorium ex spoliis Iano fecit.] Kondratieff (2004) 8-9 on this location, which overlooked the Rostra, 
Comitium, Curia and the Sacra via. 
 Kondratieff (2004) n. 31 points out that Servius identification in rostris must be a result of the 
removal of the Rostra from the Comitium to its Caesarian location at the west end of the Forum. See pp. 
81- 82 below for the relocation of the Rostra. 
 For an Augustan date see Solin (1981) 113; Bleckmann (2002) 119-121; see also Chioffi (1993); 
Shelmeyer (2002) 221. 
- 81 - 
The Augustan date for the restoration of the Duilius monument indicates an 
interest and concern on Octavians part to maintain the monument of Duilius.
Shelmeyer has suggested that Octavian set up a second column commemorating 
Duilius naval victory at the time of his restoration of the first.
 Whilst Shelmeyers 
suggestion on the second column must remain speculation, it is certainly tempting to 
see Octavians restoration of Duilius monument in rostris in relation to his own 
columna rostrata display of 36 B.C., particularly as Duilius victory was de Sicul(eis) et 
classe Poenica, and Octavians ovation of 36 B.C. was ex Sicilia.
 Of course, the date 
of the Augustan restoration is problematic. Augustus certainly carried out restoration 
work to the Speakers platform at the west end of the Forum, and his restoration of the 
Duilius monument may be connected to this event, rather than his erection of his own 
columna rostrata. Duilius original monument may still have been intact in 36 B.C., 
and the restoration only a result of the fire of 14 or 9 B.C.,
 which was when the 
Forum was repaved.
 We may conclude from this that if the restoration occurred after 
36 B.C., the desire to emphasise the correlation between the two columna rostrata 
clearly remained, even after the Augustan restoration of the Speakers platform.
 It is 
necessary to point out here that the location of Octavians columna rostrata is 
unknown, although it seems highly plausible that it too stood in relation to the platform 
 The presence of Duilius elogium in the Forum Augustum is not surprising given his position as the 
first naval triumphator (C. Duilius M. f. M. n. Cos primus an. CDXCIII / navalem de Sicul(eis) et classe 
Poenica egit), but it does indicate his relevance to Augustus programme: see chapter three, pp. 200-
 Shelmeyer (2002) 221. This is based on the testimony of Servius, who refers to two columns of 
Duilius, one on the Rostra, and the other in the entranceway of the Circus (Servius Georg. 3.29: e 
quibus unam in rostris, alteram ante circum videmus a parte ianuarum). Indeed, the elogium appears to 
mention only one column, which may indicate that the second mentioned by Servius was not original. 
 Roller (2009) 221-222 on the columna rostrata of Duilius as a model for that of Octavian. 
 14 B.C.: Dio Cass. 54.24.2; 9 B.C.: Dio Cass. 55.8.5. 
 Coarelli (1985) 252-255 argues that the repaving of the Forum occurred after the Augustan 
rebuilding of the Rostra, which he places between 29-14/9 B.C. However, Giuliani and Verduchi (1987) 
47 argue that the Rostra and the pavement were built at the same time, and date this restoration to 
after the fire of 14 B.C. 
 See n. 253 below. 
- 82 - 
at the west end of the Forum, since this was the traditional place for the dedication and 
display of monuments to men who had served the res publica.
 Thus it seems likely 
that Octavians columna rostrata was intended to be seen in direct relation to that of 
Duilius.
Certainly, by playing on the associations with the Duilius monument, both in 
terms of monumentality and the geography of conquest, Octavian can already be seen to 
be setting his naval victory within the history of naval display in the Forum. Indeed, the 
emphasis in Duilius inscription on the victory over such a famous enemy of Rome as 
Carthage, together with Octavians emphasis on peace by land and sea in the inscription 
on his own columna rostrata, suggests that the rostral display of 36 B.C. underplayed 
any reference to civil war, and instead sought to promote Octavians ability to establish 
peace over the empire. These two monuments of historic and recent naval victories 
demonstrate Octavians desire to propagate his naval victories as part of the great 
historical achievements of the past, and show that even before 29 B.C. his association 
with rostral display within the Forum was prominent. 
The Actian prows on the temple of Divus Iulius not only interacted with these 
older rostral displays, but also with the Speakers platform, relocated from the outer 
edge of the old Comitium to next to the Curia Iulia on the main axis of the Forum 
Cic. Phil. 9.16: Cum talis vir ob rem publicam in legatione mortem obierit, senatui placere Ser. Sulpicio 
statuam pedestrem aeneam in rostris (when such a man died, when he was legate, on behalf of the res 
publica, the senate decided to set up a bronze pedestal statue to Ser. Sulpicius on the Rostra in 
compliance with the resolution of this order), cf. Dig. 1.2.2.43; Livy 8.13: Legatorum qui Fidenis caesi 
erant statuae publice in Rostris positae sunt (statues of the legates, who had died at Fidenae, were set 
up on the Rostra); Vell. Pat. 2.61: Eum senatum honoratum equestri statua, quae hodieque in Rostris 
posita aetatem eius scriptura indicat, qui honor non alii per CCC annos quam L. Sullae et Cn. Pompeio et 
C. Caesari contigerat (The senate honoured him with an equestrian statue, which also today set on the 
Rostra indicates by the inscription its age, which honour pertained to no other for 300 years than L. 
Sulla and Cn. Pompeius and C. Caesar); Plin. HN 34.24: senatus statuam poni iussit quam oculatissimo 
loco, eaque est in rostris (the senate ordered that the statue be set up in the most visible location as 
possible, and that is on the Rostra; Dio Cass. 49.43.1:          
 (and on [the Rostra] the statues of Sulla and Pompey were restored). 
 Roller (2009) 23; Bleckmann (2002) 121; Shelmeyer (1999) 256. 
- 83 - 
proper in 44 B.C.
 It is important to note that the Rostra at the east end of the Forum, 
attached to the Podium of the temple of Divus Iulius, was a new platform (Figure 
 Whilst not exactly parallel to the Rostra at the west end, both platforms enclosed 
the ends of the Forum, and stood in relation to each other (Figure 16). 
Dio records the relocation of the Republican Rostra from the centre of the 
Forum to its present position at the very start of 44 B.C: 
              
,          .     
    ,           
   .250 
And the Rostra, which formerly was in the middle of the Forum, was moved 
to its present position, and on it the statues of Sulla and of Pompey were 
restored. And for this Caesar received praise, and also because he yielded to 
Antony both the glory of the work and the inscription on it. 
 Claridge (1998) 81; Giuliani and Verduchi (1987) 182-183, esp. fig. 257 and 258 on the articulation of 
the Forum space. 
 There is debate in the scholarship was to whether the prows were directly attached to the podium 
(see Steinby (1987) 155ff) or to a platform in front (see Coarelli (1985) 313ff; Torelli (1982) 82ff). Gros 
(1976) 86-87, Gros (1996) 118 concludes that we cannot be certain whether the tribunal was properly 
separate from the temple podium. See also Richardson (1973) 228ff. 
 Dio Cass. 43.49.1. Coarelli (1985) 239, 244, Coarelli (1999) 213 dates the dismantlement of the 
republican Rostra to 45-44 B.C., and the completion of the Caesarian model to the start of 44 B.C.; 
Claridge (1998) 81 ties the Rostra into Caesars new plans for the Forum, begun in 46 B.C. The fact that 
Antony was involved in the rebuild (n. 250 below) removes, in some respects, the concern for the 
project to have been completed before Caesars death in March 44 B.C., although Richardson (1992) 
336 confusingly sees Caesar watching the Lupercalia in February from the new Rostra, but also states 
that the Rostra Augusti represents the rebuilding of the old Rostra that Caesar had dismantled but not 
rebuilt (335). 
- 84 - 
Dios account records that Antony was involved in the rebuilding of the Rostra, and 
most notably, that it was his name that appeared on the dedicatory inscription (  
 ). The presence of Antonys name on the Rostra is particularly 
interesting considering that the two tribunals faced each other. The two platforms were 
linked spatially and visually across the Forum space, and so Octavians rostral display 
before the temple of Divus Iulius stood directly opposite, and in direct competition to 
Antonys Rostra. 
 However, as discussed above,
 on hearing of Octavians success at Actium the 
senate decreed that the displays of Antony were to be taken down or defaced (   
     )252. If this was the case Antonys name 
will have been erased from the Rostra at the west end of the Forum.  This, together with 
the marking of Antonys birthday as vitiosus, did not in fact eradicate Antony from 
public view, but served to mark him out as an opponent of both the state and 
Octavian.
 The message of the Actian rostra and their relationship to the Rostra of Antony 
must also be read with the message of Octavians columna rostrata, which celebrated a 
naval victory in terms of peace won. The monument of 36 B.C., together with its 
 See p. 70 above. 
 Dio Cass. 51.19.3. 
 Lange (2009) 85-86, 126, 136-140. It should be noted that Antonys Rostra was later rebuilt and 
extended by Octavian: Dig. 1.2.2.43: hic cum in legatione perisset, statuam ei populus Romanus pro 
rostris posuit, et hodieque exstat pro rostris Augusti (As he had died on an embassy, the Roman people 
set up a statue to him before the Rostra, and even today the statue exists before the Rostra of 
Augustus). The remains of the Rostra near to the Curia Iulia preserve two different structures: a curved 
concrete core 13m long and 3.50m high, with five or six curving steps at the back (Claridge (1998) 81; 
Coarelli (1999); Richardson (1992) 336). In front of this curving structure is a rectangular brick face 
platform, which measured 23.80m long (Verduchi (1999); Claridge (1998) 82; Coarelli (1985) 253; Nash 
(1970) 276). The rectilinear structure was constructed after the semi-circular structure (Coarelli (1985) 
254 shows that the lower cornice of the rectilinear structure was placed over the cornice of the semi-
circular structure, contra Van Deman (1909) and Shipley (1930)). Giuliani and Verduchi (1987) 46, 49 fig. 
45 and 46 date the construction of the Augustan Rostra to the same period as the Augustan repaving of 
the Forum., which they date to around 14 B.C., based on the inscription of L. Naevius [L. f. Surdi]nus 
Pr(aetor) (CIL VI 37068). It is plausible then that the Caesarian/Antonian Rostra was visible from 44  14 
B.C. Two later successive phases of the Rostra follow the Augustan rebuilding. 
- 85 - 
Duilian counterpart, stood in close proximity to Antonys monument, so that the display 
of Octavians Actian and Sicilian victories faced and bordered, respectively, the 
memorial of Antonys presence in the Forum.  The message of pax re-established over 
land and sea, inscribed in 36 B.C., could now be read alongside the new Actian 
celebration, and Octavians ability to establish peace over the empire though the defeat 
of Antony was thus visualised at the centre of Romes political and forensic life.  The 
prows in the Roman Forum evoked a permanent reminder of stability achieved through 
military victory. 
 The subtle insinuation of Antonys defeat was also echoed in Octavians own 
celebrations in the building adjacent to the Rostra of Antony: the Curia Iulia and the 
dedication of the statue of Victory.  I will now turn to consider this presentation of 
Octavians victory over Antony. 
The Tarentine Victory 
Octavian commemorated his victory by the dedication of a statue of Victory in the 
Curia Iulia in 29 B.C.: 
            , ,  ,  
         ,     
          .254 
In the Curia he set up the statue of Victory which still now exists, 
signifying, as seems likely, that he obtained command from her.
255 The 
 Dio Cass. 51.22.1. 
 I have translated  here as command, given that Dio uses it in 51.21.6 to refer to Octavians 
position as imperator:            (since the 
- 86 - 
statue had belonged to the people of Tarentum, from where it was conveyed 
to Rome, and set in the meeting house and decked out in the Egyptian 
spoils. 
The connection of this Victory to Augustus is emphasised by the suggestion, recorded 
by Suetonius, that the Victoria quae est in curia should proceed his funeral bier.
seems likely that the Victory was intended to play a special part in the laudis ornamenta 
of the deceased.
 By the time of his death the Victory had become the physical form 
of Augustus military and political achievements on behalf of the state  thus laudis 
ornamenta. Yet notably the Victory was not an honour awarded by the senate, but was a 
personal dedication by Octavian. Indeed, Dio does not include the dedication in his list 
of honours voted by the senate.
 Furthermore, it seems likely that the statue of Victory 
was related to the ara Victoriae dedicated in the Curia on 28th August: hoc die ara 
Victoriae in Curia dedicata est.
 Whilst the year of dedication is not recorded, 
Simpson has speculated that the dedication of the altar in the Curia Iulia (which could 
not itself be dedicated) would have been used to mark the completion of the Curia, 
credit of the victory properly belonged to his position as supreme commander), see Freyburger-Galland 
(1997) 203 on this passage. Dio uses  to mean empire in a geographical sense, and imperium or 
command as an expression of power: for a discussion of these different aspects see Freyburger-
Galland (1997) 32-33, 53-55, 221-222. 
 Suet. Aug. 100. 
 Cicero Leg. 2.60: Quae et recte tolluntur, neque tollerentur nisi <in usu> fuissent. Ne sumptuosa 
respersio, ne longae coronae nec acerrae praetereantur. Illa iam significatio est laudis ornamenta ad 
mortuos pertinere, quod coronam virtute partam et ei qui peperisset et eius parenti sine fraude esse lex 
inpositam iubet. (And what it is right to be removed, and they would not be removed, useless it had 
been <in use>. Neither expensive sprinkling, nor long garlands nor caskets should be omitted. Obviously 
the principle on which these provisions are based is that only the rewards which have been bestowed as 
a mark of honour belong to the dead, for the law provides that a garland earned by bravery may be 
worn with impunity by the man who earned it and also by his father). 
 Dio Cass. 51.19.1-20.5. 
51, Fasti Maffeiani: h.d. ara Victoriae in curia dedic. Est; Fasti Vaticani: feria[e h.d.] q. de[ae Vict. 
ara] de[d]icata est. 
- 87 - 
which Dio places after the triumphs of 13
 August 29 B.C.
 Certainly, a passage 
of Herodian suggests that, at least by the second century A.D., offerings were made by 
the senators at the statue of Victory.
 It is thus probably that in August 29 B.C. 
Octavian dedicated the ara Victoriae together with the Victory commemorating the 
conquest of Egypt, in the wake of his triumphs. 
 There are few descriptions of the form that the Victory took, although it seems 
from a passage in the Historia Augusta that she was a winged Victory: vidit alis se 
Romanae Victoriae quae in senatu, ad caelum vehi.
 Likewise Prudentius describes 
her as golden, winged and barefoot.
 It is now commonly held that this Victory also 
stood on a globe.
 Whilst there is no literary testimony, scholars have taken the 
numismatic evidence to support this view. A coin depicting a building, which carries 
the legend IMP. CAESAR on the architrave shows a winged Victory on a globe at the 
apex of the pediment, and on either side a figure holding a spear, with the right hand 
figure possibly holding an anchor (Figure 17).
 The building has been identified as the 
Curia Iulia,
 with the four columns at the front representing the Chalcidicum.
course, this Victory is on the Curia rather than in it, and Gurval has rightly pointed out 
the regular usage of the preposition  should not be strained to fit the numismatic 
 Dio Cass. 51.22.1; Simpson (1998). 
 Hdn. 5.5.7: the statue of Victory before which each senate burns frankincense and pours a libation 
of wine upon entering the chamber. 
 SHA Alex. Sev. 14.2: he saw himself carried to the heavens on the wings of the Roman Victory, which 
is in the senate house. 
 Prudent C. Symm. 2.27-38; Pohlsander (1969) 590. 
 Hlscher (1967) 6-17; Hafner (1989); Reinach (1913) 25-29. 
 RIC Aug. 266. Shelmeyer (2002) 224 links the anchor to the Actium celebrations. 
 Sutherland (1976) 153-154, n. 19; Sutherland (1984) 60, n. 266; Tortorici (1993) 333; Shelmeyer 
(2002) 223. 
 For the Chalcidicum as a portico of the Curia Iulia: Richardson (1992) 81; Shelmeyer (2002) 223; see 
also Hlscher (1967) 8; Sutherland (1976) 153-154, n.19; Tortorici (1993) 333; Fentress (2005) 221-225. 
- 88 - 
picture as Sutherland suggested.
 Instead, as Suetonius, Herodian and the writer of the 
Historia Augusta record, the Victory was set up inside the Curia. 
Certainly, the image of Victory on a globe was being introduced on the coinage 
of the period.
 Again, we are faced with dating issues, as the legends do not provide a 
year, but merely give the title CAESAR DIVI F.
 Furthermore, Victory was depicted in 
numerous ways  standing, on a prow and in a biga.
 However, the depiction of 
Victory on a globe does appear to be associated with Octavian, and not with Antony or 
Cleopatra. The best example of this comes from Cyrenaica in 31 B.C., when the 
governor Scarpus started the year minting coins for Antony, before going over to 
Octavians side. Antonys coins show Victory holding a wreath and palm branch 
(Figure 18).
 Octavians also use this image, but some have Victory on the globe 
(Figure 19).
 Reinach has even suggested that the bronze statue of a winged Victory 
on a globe from Pompeii, now in the Museum of Naples (Figure 20) was modelled on 
the statue of Victory originally at Tarentum.
 Again, the image of Victory on the 
globe continued to appear on coins throughout the Augustan period
 and in other art 
forms, such as on the Boscorale cup where Venus hands Victory to Augustus, who 
holds out the globe to receive her (Figure 21),
 and a 3m tall statue of a winged 
Victory on a globe holding up a shield, found in the south-west corner of the library of 
Hadrian in Athens, thought to have been originally set up in the Roman Agora to 
 Gurval (1995) 62, contra Sutherland (1976) 154 n. 19. 
 RRC 546/4-7; RIC Aug. 254.5, 266, 268; RPC 2004, 3904-5.  
 Gurval (1995) 50-52, 64-65 criticises the narrow dating ranges for the coin types CAESAR DIVI F. 
(conventionally 36-29 B.C.) and IMP CAESAR (conventionally 29-27 B.C.). 
 Standing: RRC 545/1-2, 546/2a-3c, 546/8; RPC 1304, 2005, 2006, 4457, 4772, 4776, 4782; standing 
on prow: RIC Aug 263-264; biga: RIC Aug 260-1; standing on cista mystica: RIC Aug 276; held by 
Octavian: RIC Aug. 270. 
 RRC 546/2a-3c. 
 Standing: RRC 546/8; on globe: RRC 546/4-7. 
 Reinach (1913) 25-26.  The statue is 0.50m in height; Pohlsander (1969) 591. 
 RIC Aug. 121-22. 
 Kuttner (1995). 
- 89 - 
commemorate the return of the Parthian standards (Figure 22).
 It is certainly 
tempting to view the Victory that Octavian set up in the Curia as standing on a globe,
symbolising the achievement won terra marique. This would echo the display outside 
the Curia and, on the numismatic evidence, the depiction of terra marique on the 
pediment (spear and anchor).
As Dio states the Victory was to carry a display of the conquest and triumph 
over Egypt, yet it is interesting that he adds the details of its origins. Reinach has 
argued, mainly on numismatic evidence, that the only occasion for a Victory to be 
erected at Tarentum would have been to celebrate the victory of Pyrrhus and the 
Tarentines over the Romans at Herakleia in 280 B.C.
  It is however unknown when 
the statue was removed from Tarentum,
 and Dios Greek does not make it clear 
whether this occurred just before the dedication, or whether the statue had been 
removed to Rome previously. Pohlsander puts forward three possibilities: 272 B.C., 209 
B.C., and c. 40 B.C.
 The first two dates refer to Roman conquests of Tarentum. 
These moments of conquest would be a suitable time at which to appropriate the 
enemys victory monument and make it ones own  particularly fitting if the 
monument originally celebrated the Tarentine victory over Rome. There is, however, no 
testimony prior to Dios account of 29 B.C. which mentions this Victory. This does not 
of course preclude the possibility that the statue had already come to Rome, yet if it has 
it clearly maintained some association with Tarentum. Pohlsanders final date allows us 
 Choremi-Spetsieri and Tigginaga (2008) 126-127; Choremi-Spetsieri (1996). 
 Hafner (1989) 557 suggests that the globe was in fact one of the spoils from Egypt which adorned the 
Victory, cf. Dio Cass. 51.22.2. 
 SHA Alex. Sev. 14.2-3 sees the Victory as symbolising imperium caeli terraque. 
 Reinach (1913). A bronze tablet from the sanctuary at Dodona (SIG 203) records Pyrrhus and the 
Tarentines celebration of victory over the Romans: ] [  / ]   / 
   [ ] /  [ (King Pyrrhus and the Epirotes and the Tarentines [took 
these] from the Romans and their allies [and dedicated them] to Zeus Naios). 
 Hafner (1989) 554. 
 Pohlsander (1969) 589-590. 
- 90 - 
to consider both the treaty made between Antony and Octavian for the renewal of their 
friendship in 40 B.C., and more importantly the treaty and renewal of triumviral status 
made at Tarentum in 37 B.C.
 The associations made in 29 B.C. with Tarentum by the 
dedication of the Tarentine Victory suggest that the statue celebrated not only the 
triumph over Egypt, but also subtly alluded to Octavians victory over Antony and his 
accomplishment of his share of the renewed mandate as IIIvir rei publicae 
constituendae. As Dio says,     .284 Octavian had won victory 
on behalf of the state and command over Romes military forces. 
 The commemorations at Rome in 29 B.C. (the triple triumph, the rostral display, 
and the Tarentine Victory) focused on the promotion of Octavians position within the 
state in terms of victory over external threats. The issue of pax is far less prominent, and 
although the rostral displays in the forum reaffirm the message of pax restored by land 
and sea, the only direct reference may be seen in the closing of the Gates of Ianus. 
Index Pacis et Belli 
 Augustus records in his Res Gestae that the senate had voted for the Gates of 
Ianus Quirinus to be closed three times: cum per totum imperium populi Romani terra 
marique esset parta victoriis pax.
 This concept of pax concerns not only civil 
harmony, but the imperium of the Roman state; that is, Romes ability to command and 
control her empire. Livys first book, published 27-25 B.C.,
 refers solely to the first 
closing of the Gates in 29 B.C.: post bellum Actiacum ab imperatore Caesare Augusto 
 App. B Civ. 5.95; Dio Cass. 48.54.6; Plut. Ant. 35.5.3-4. 
 Dio Cass. 51.22.2: he obtained the command from her. 
 The Gates were first closed under Augustus in 29 B.C. in commemoration of the conclusion of the 
war against Antony and Cleopatra (Fasti Praenestini = Inscr. Ital. XIII 2.113, 395). The Temple of Ianus 
was located between the Forum Romanum and the Forum Iulium, on the Argiletum: Ov. Fast. 1.258; 
Livy 1.19.2; Muller (1943); Richardson (1992) 207-; Taylor (2000). See Green (2000); DeBrohun (2007) 
for the opening and closing of the Gates. 
 Foster (1976) 69 n.1; Luce (2009) 17. 
- 91 - 
pace terra marique parta.
 The phrase pax achieved by land and sea, echoes the 
columna rostrata that was voted for Octavian in 36 B.C., which although it spoke of 
pax re-established (after the civil war against Sextus),
 was tied to the ovation ex 
Sicilia, promoting the idea of civil harmony restored through conquest of an external 
enemy. An examination of Livys commentary on the Gates of Ianus will shed light on 
the transition from pax civilia to parta victoriis pax : 
Ianum ad infimum Argiletum indicem pacis bellique fecit, apertus ut in 
armis esse civitatem, clausus pacatos circa omnes populos significaret.
He built the shrine of Ianus at the bottom of the Argiletum as an indicator of 
peace and war, for when it was open it signified that the citizen body had 
taken up arms, and when it was shut that all the neighbouring peoples had 
been made peaceful. 
Two things are noteworthy about Livys account. Firstly, he appears to be the first 
writer we have to connect the word pax to the temple of Ianus. Varro, who is the 
earliest extant source we have for the closing of the Gates, quotes the annalist L. 
Calpurnius Piso Frugi (cos. 133 B.C.), who stated that a ius was established so that the 
Gates of Ianus would always be open except when there was no war: nisi cum bellum sit 
nusquam.
 Of course, one can argue that pax was the absence of war,
 and Varros 
 Livy 1.19.3: [the Gates were closed] after the Actian war by Imperator Caesar, with pax achieved by 
land and sea. 
 App. B Civ. 5.130:            (He 
restored the peace, which has been for a long time in disarray, by land and sea). 
 Livy 1.19.2. 
 Varro Ling. Lat. 5.165; DeBrohun (2007) 259 on Varros negative expression. 
 This matches the conception of Republican pax defined by Gruen (1982) 53 as respite from war. 
- 92 - 
account of the symbols of the pax and bellum (the caduceus and hasta) sent to 
Carthage, suggest a choice between two different states.
 However, besides the fact 
the Varro (and Piso) chose to speak in terms of bellum rather than pax, Livys use of the 
term pax appears different from a concept concerned with the absence of war. Livy 
qualifies the pax which is symbolised by the closing of the Gates not as the cessation of 
war or even as civil harmony, but as the conquest and pacification of Romes 
neighbours: pacatos circa omnes populos. Livys account of the Gates of Ianus 
indicates a victorious expression of the defeat and submission of peoples previously 
outside Roman control. The closing of the Gates intimates victory over circa omnes 
populi. Interestingly though, Livy relates this to the battle of Actium, which carried 
allusions to civil as well as foreign war.  
 There are indications that Livys interpretation of the closing of the Gates of 
Ianus may have been influenced by Octavians own victory display set up at Nicopolis 
in Greece in 29 B.C., which also refers to pax. The monumental inscription, which I 
will discuss in detail in section two below, has the concept of pax parta terra marique 
at its centre, and the dedication of the victory monument bearing this inscription must 
have been public knowledge at Rome when Livy was writing.
 On this reading Livys 
account may reflect Octavians rhetoric rather than necessarily that of the senate. 
 Dio, in contrast, relates the closing of the Gates in 29 B.C. to the termination of 
all wars: 
  Gell. NA 10.27.5; see pp. 5- 6, and n. 55 above. 
 Suet. Aug. 18.2: Suetonius account of the monument suggests familiarity with the inscription, see 
pp. 94 and 109 below. 
- 93 - 
             
The senate closed the gates of Ianus, as if all their wars had ceased 
completely...nor did the Romans think that they were then at war. 
It is important to note that Dio records this event after the ratification of all of 
Octavians acts in the wars of the late 30s, and after the receipt of his letter reporting on 
relations with the Parthian nation.
 All wars, actual or potential, are deemed to be over 
thanks to Octavian. Dios account implies that by the start of 29 B.C. the senate wished 
to commemorate and legitimise Octavians acts during the war, and the closing of the 
Gates of Ianus demonstrated the security of the empire both from civil discord, and 
from external threats. Indeed, the senates involvement in legitimising Octavians acta 
is illustrated further by the fact that it is they who close the gates in 29 B.C. (), 
whilst Octavian is still abroad. The act confirms symbolically the ratification of 
Octavians actions in the war.
 On Dios account, the closing of the Gates in 29 B.C. 
symbolises the cessation of war; this is far closer to Varros presentation of the Gates of 
Ianus (cum bellum sit nusquam), than Livys association with pax as pacification and 
victory. 
The idea of parta victoriis pax appears to be instigated by Octavian (and mainly 
at Nicopolis)
 rather than the senate. There was no explicit display of pax in the 
 Dio Cass. 51.20.4-5. 
 Dio Cass. 51.20.1:              
,          (They confirmed all his acts on the first 
of January by oaths, and also when the letters concerning the Parthians came). 
 By contrast Dio Cass. 53.26.5 records that in 25 B.C. Augustus himself closed the gates 
(...). 
 See chapter two, section two, pp. 94ff below. 
- 94 - 
triumphal procession in August 29 B.C. which the senate granted to Octavian. Whilst 
the conflict of 40 B.C. could be celebrated with ovations of the achievement of pax,
and the rostral display in 36 B.C., the wars of 31-30 B.C., conceptualised as between 
Cleopatra and Octavian, gave full rein to a form of triumphalism that permitted little 
show of pax as a pact with an external enemy. In Dios opinion Octavian, although he 
had given Cleopatra  , wanted the queen to be a captive subdued against her 
will,
 and indeed with the defeat and removal of Antony there was no one to make 
pax with. Romes military superiority over the external enemy is expressed, but without 
the need or reference to the concept of pax. Neither did pax play a prominent role as an 
expression of the stability of the state, as it had done in 36 B.C. It is possible that by 29 
B.C. the facade of the pax of 36 B.C. had slipped. 
* * * 
In 36 B.C. Octavian had been able to commemorate the restoration of pax and 
an end to the civil wars without the need for an opponent with whom to make a pact, 
but for such a pax to be possible and permanent there needed to be only one man 
standing, and no challenge to his authority.
 The issue of how to commemorate the 
clear defeat of one Roman general and the unchallenged rule of the other was still 
apparent in the commemorations of 29 B.C. The victories were most clearly over a 
foreign enemy, and yet allusions to the predominance of the remaining triumvir were 
certainly present. 
 See pp. 18 and 51 above. 
 Dio Cass. 51.11.3:           . (in order to 
make use of her as a captive and to a certain extent as subdued against her will). 
 Tac. Hist. 1.1, see n. 178 above. 
- 95 - 
The impetus for victory celebrations at Rome after the wars of 31-30 B.C. 
ostensibly resided with the senate, who granted extensive honours to Octavian, honours 
which emphasised the victory over foreign nations and Octavians position within the 
state.
 Yet they also made a display of visibly removing the memorials of Antony so 
that the remembrance of his defeat was still carved out in the public spaces of the 
Forum Romanum. 
 If pax was celebrated at Rome in 29 B.C. it was in the senates act of closing of 
the Gates of Ianus. This act recalled the traditional concept of the cessation of war, and 
yet Livys account interprets the pax of closing the Gates as signifying omnes circa 
populi pacati.
 Livys use of the phrases pax terra marique parta and bellum 
Actiacum suggest a strong identification of the accomplishment of pax with Octavians 
victory monument set up on the site of his campsite at Actium. It was only outside 
Rome that Octavian employed pax as a centre tenet of his victory commemoration. 
 Dio Cass. 51.19.1-6. 
 Livy 1.19.3. 
- 96 - 
Section Two 
A Presentation of pax terra marique in the East: Octavians 
Victory City 
Through the act of closing the Gates of Ianus in 29 B.C. the senate appear to have 
acted not only to confirm the cessation of conflict, but also to ratify Octavians acta in 
the wars of the late 30s. As I discussed in the previous section, the concept of pax terra 
marique parta is only associated with the Gates of Ianus by Livy, whose account may 
plausibly be influenced by Octavians own victory display at Nicopolis. Details of the 
monument were certainly known to Suetonius: 
Quoque Actiacae victoriae memoria celebratior et in posterum esset, urbem 
Nicopolim apud Actium condidit ludosque illic quinquennales constituti et 
ampliato vetere Apollini templo locum castrorum, quibus fuerat usus, 
exornatum navalibus spoliis Neptuno ac Marti consecravit.
And to extend the fame of his victory and perpetuate the memory of it, he 
founded the city Nicopolis, and set up games there to be celebrated every 
five years; he enlarged the ancient temple of Apollo, and having adorned 
the site of the camp which he had used with naval spoils, he consecrated it 
to Neptune and Mars. 
 Suet. Aug. 18.2. 
- 97 - 
 In this section I will examine the victory display at Nicopolis in order to 
understand Octavians conceptualisation of his victory and the central message of pax 
to the monument. I will first consider the history of creating Victory cities, and 
examine Octavians own practice of this at both Actian Nicopolis and Alexandrian 
Nicopolis, in order to understand the purpose of their foundations and place within the 
victory rhetoric. I will then turn to consider the monumental trophy that Octavian set 
above the city of Nicopolis in the Epirus (Actium), before looking at the monument 
within its wider context. I will show how the monument was designed as a testament to 
the newly established communitys dependency on the pax which Octavian had won. 
pax at Nicopolis did not require an opponent as in the sense of a pact. Instead it 
represented Octavians imperium and control of the empire. 
Cities of Victory 
The foundation of victory cities was an eastern practice associated with 
Alexander the Great, who founded a Nicopolis in Northern Syria on the Cilician border 
to celebrate his victory at Issos.
 Pompey followed the precedent of Alexander and 
founded a Nicopolis either on or near the actual site of his battle against Mithridates
Both Octavians cities of Victory at Actium and Alexandria were founded on sites 
directly associated with the battles (     /     
)306 and Dio draws out the relationship between the two by emphasising that the 
Alexandrian city was given the same name and the same quinquennial games as the first 
 RE 17. 535-536. 
 Strabo 12.3.28; App. Mith. 105, 115; Dio Cass. 36.50.3, 49.39.3; RE 17. 536-537.   
 Dio Cass. 51.3.1, 18.1. 
- 98 - 
city i.e. that at Actium.
 Both cities should be understood as commemorating 
Octavians accomplishments in their respective areas. 
The site in the Epirus has been associated with a colony by both Tacitus and 
Pliny. Tacitus refers to a Nicopolis Romana colonia in connection to the visit of a 
Roman governor in 31/32 A.D.,
 although earlier in his work he refers to Germanicus 
visit in 18 A.D. to Octavians and Antonys campsites, and mentions only urbis 
Achaiae Nicopolis.
 Pliny in fact appears to distinguish between a colonia Augusti 
Actium, which may have been sited on the southern Actian promontory, and a civitas 
libera Nicopolitana.
 Ruscu has suggested the possibility of a Roman settlement in 
conjunction with the Greek city,
 and certainly the Nicopolis founded by Pompey in 
the East was said to be a mix of colonists and local communities.
 However the 
evidence from Strabo suggests that, at least at its foundation, it was solely a Greek city: 
           
    ,       
           
    ,     ,   
 Dio Cass. 51.18.1; cf. Dio Cass. 51.1.2; Strabo 7.7.6. Schfer (1993) 243 has argued we should not 
necessarily date the establishment of the quinquennial games and the inauguration of the city directly 
with the victory monument, and sees the monument as the highest priority in terms of building projects 
at Nicopolis 
 Tac. Ann. 5.10.3-4.  
 Tac. Ann. 2.53.1. 
 Plin. HN 4.5 links the colonia Augusti with the temple of Apollo which stood on the southern 
promontory (in ore ipso colonia Augusti Actium cum templo Apollonis); Lange (2009) 103-104 esp. n.41 
suggests the southern Actian promontory as a possible site for a Roman colony.  
 Ruscu (2006). Whilst Jones (1987) 103 pointed out that no archaeological evidence supports a colony 
at either Actium or Nicopolis, further excavations may yet prove the question either way: during a visit 
to Preveza in September 2010 I was told that Athenian archaeologists were excavating on the Actium 
side of the promontory. 
 Dio Cass. 36.50.3. 
- 99 - 
          
 ,      .313 
The Macedonians and later also the Romans destroyed Cassope and other 
cities through constant war because of their disobedience. Then finally 
Augustus, when he saw that the cities had utterly collapsed, settled them as 
one city on this gulf. He named it Nicopolis, after his victory, which he won 
in a naval battle over Antony at the mouth of this gulf, and also over the 
Egyptian queen Cleopatra, who too was present at the battle. 
Strabo does not mention a Roman colony, but indicates that Nicopolis was formed by a 
process of synoikismos.
 Indeed, a stone base found in 1913 at the site of the city 
clearly attests a Greek polis:      /  /   (the 
council and the assembly of the Nikopolitans out of goodwill [give this]).
 The act of synoikismos in the commemoration of victory and consolidation of 
power was not a new phenomenon, but had been a practice of the Greek world since the 
mid-fourth century and was later employed by Pompey in his reorganisation of the 
East.
 Whilst Gurval is right to point out that Octavians foundation of the city by 
synoikismos was a practical endeavor, a deliberate and serious response to an urgent 
 Strabo 7.7.6. 
 Likewise Dio Cass. 51.3.1:        ,      
  , ,     (Indeed, he founded a city on the site of 
his camp, and having gathered together some of the neighbouring communities and having 
transplanted others, he gave it the name Nicopolis); see also Pausanias 7.18.8. See Jones (1987) 104-
105; Gurval (1995) 67-74; Lange (2009) 99-106. 
 Philadelpheus (1913) 106: the base is a 0.75m x 0.75m x 0.75m, and the letters are described as 
regular and beautiful. The inscription was found south of a peristyle building excavated near to the 
reservoir of the city, commonly known as . 
 Jones (1987) 104-105. 
- 100 - 
local problem,
 Strabos account suggests that this was prompted by the victory of 
Actium itself, which gave Octavian the command to carry out such a feat (   
     ,     ). Octavian had 
take advantage of his victory on the Ambracian Gulf and founded his city of Victory. 
Octavian, like Pompey before him, linked himself with Alexander the Great, most 
notably by wearing a signet ring depicting the Macedonian conqueror,
 and by 
founding another Nicopolis commemorating the capture of Alexandria itself.
The decision to found Nicopolis in the vicinity of Alexandria, not only marked 
the battle Octavian had won, but also associated him with Alexander the Great through 
the foundation of a city of Victory, which clearly related phyiscally and culturally to 
the city of Alexander himself: 
             
            
          
           
 .320  
Inside the canal, were both the Sarapium and other ancient sacred places, 
which are now almost abandoned because of the erection of temples at 
Nicopolis; for there is an amphitheatre and stadium there, and quinquennial 
 Gurval (1995) 68. 
 Suet. Aug. 50; Pliny NH 37.10. 
 Octavian famously viewed the corpse of Alexander after his conquest of the city: Suet. Aug. 18.1; Dio 
51.16.5; see also Gurval (1995) 70-72; Gruen (1982) 68-72. 
 Strabo 17.1.10. 
- 101 - 
through the Hippodrome, one comes to Nicopolis, which has a settlement 
on the sea no smaller than a city; it is thirty stadia
 from Alexandria. 
Strabos remarks about the abandonment of the old rituals and temples of Alexandria in 
favour of the new site at Nicopolis indicate that at least during Strabos and Octavians 
own time, the Alexandrian Nicopolis fulfilled a role as a sacred site orientated around 
the commemoration of Octavians victories, most notably with quinquennial games. 
The intention may also have been to remove religious and cultural focus from the 
practices associated with Cleopatra and Antony in Alexandria, and refocus them on the 
new ruler of Egypt.
However, we have little evidence with which to properly analyse the settlement 
at Alexandria, in contrast to the wealth of archaeological evidence from Actium.
Whilst we can acknowledge that Alexandrian Nicopolis, with its quinquennial games, 
was undoubtedly a commemoration of Octavians victory, we are unable to examine the 
specifics of that commemoration. The different natures of both sites, geographically, 
politically and socially, which must have influenced Octavians displays, indicate that a 
detailed comparison between the two would only be profitable if we had more 
information on Alexandrian Nicopolis.  
For Alexander the battle of Issos had given him control of the Persian empire; 
likewise for Pompey, although Mithridates had escaped him, the foundation of 
 Joseph BJ 4.11.5 gives the distance as twenty stadia. 
 It is difficult to determine the success of Nicopolis after its initial foundation period: Josephus BJ 
4.11.5 refers to Nicopolis, however Plin. HN 6.102 mentions a Iuliopolis situated on the same canal and 
the same distance from Alexandria; see also Gurval (1995) 72-73. 
 On the lack of evidence from Alexandrian Nicopolis: Gurval (1995) 72; on the archaeological evidence 
from Actian Nicopolis: Zachos (1995), Zachos (1997), Zachos (2001a), Zachos (2001b), Zachos (2003), 
Zachos (2007); Tsakoumis (2007); Malacrino (2007); Ruscu (2006); Chrysostomos, et al. (2005); Murray 
and Petsas (1989); Petsas (1974); Oliver (1969); Gag (1932); Rhomaios (1925); Philadelpheus (1913). 
- 102 - 
Nicopolis symbolised his control over the area.
 For Octavian, Actian Nicopolis 
designated not only the victory at Actium, but also symbolised his consolidation of 
power in the East. It is to Actian Nicopolis that we must turn to fully understand how 
this one city of Victory presented Octavians victory over Antony and Cleopatra.   
Victoriae memoria 
It is clear from Suetonius that Octavian created a complex of memorials at 
Actium, in celebration of his victory. It was the complex of city, games (along with 
their accompanying structures), temple of Apollo and the dedication of ten ships, and 
the spolia monument on the site of his camp that formed the victoriae memoria.
this section I will examine the monument through its inscription, display of rostra and 
sculptural reliefs, and show that the relationship between these presented a celebration 
of pax as the accomplishment of Octavians victory.  
The site of Octavians monument is located on the hillside above the ancient 
city of Nicopolis, 7km north from the modern city of Preveza (Map 2).
 Dio records 
the situation of the site:      ,      
  .327 The initial excavations yielded the foundations of a structure 
measuring 62m x 45m, along with thirteen fragments of a monumental inscription  
 Dio Cass. 36.50.3 for Mithridates flight. Dio also notes that the city was comprised of wounded 
Roman soldiers and inhabitants of local communities. 
 See p. 94 above. 
 The site of Nicopolis, and the remains of the sacred grove complex at the foot of the hill (Michalitsi) 
were identified in 1805 by Col. W. M. Leake: see Murray and Petsas (1989) 13-14, n. 14. For the 
excavations of the site: Philadelpheus (1913); Rhomaios (1921), Rhomaios (1925); Gag (1936); Petsas 
(1974); Murray and Petsas (1989) Zachos (1995), Zachos (1997), Zachos (2001a), Zachos (2001b), 
Zachos (2003), Zachos (2007).  
 Dio Cass. 51.1.3: and the place in which he had encamped, he finished with a foundation of square 
stones and decorated it with captured prows. 
- 103 - 
nine uncovered in 1913, four in 1922.
 The structure was later interpreted as the south 
retaining wall and east side wall of a podium, which supported an upper terrace with a 
 shaped stoa.329 The podium facade has now been shown to measure 63m, and the 
upper terrace 62m x 50m (Figure 23).
 By 1926 a further twelve inscription fragments 
were found when the area at the east end of the podium wall was excavated.
 Gag, in 
his 1936 article, presented a thorough analysis of the monument. From the ancient 
sources he argued that we should view the monument as a sort of peribolos, decorated 
with the rostra, whilst he deduced that the inscription most likely was set up on the 
principal facade of the monument, because of the length of the fragments already 
recovered.
 Indeed, this theory was confirmed by Murray and Petsas, who 
demonstrated that the inscription belonged to the irregular ashlar podium wall, because 
they identified two of the blocks as headers.
 A further seven blocks of the inscription 
course have since been uncovered, five of which are inscribed.
Later excavations uncovered a series of socket holes along the podium facade 
(Figure 24). These anchor-shaped sockets appear to have held the bronze ship-rams 
mentioned by Dio, displayed in decreasing size from left to right (west to east) across 
 Philadelpheus (1913) 87; Rhomaios (1925).  Philadelpheus presentation of the fragment blocks is 
confusing: MPERAT  C. REGIO  IO  OC  F  VICT  AC. VM  PA  PARTA.  See below pp.103 - 112 for 
a detailed discussion of the fragments. 
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 14 n. 15. It seems likely that Philadelpheus had also worked on the upper 
terrace: Zachos (2003) 66; Petsas (1974) 79-88, pl. 60-70; the Turkish invasion of Cyprus brought the 
excavations of 1974 to a halt; Murray and Petsas (1989) 77-93. 
 Zachos (2003) 77. 
 The excavators finds were unpublished, and known only from correspondence mentioned in an 
epigraphic note, Gag (1936) 98-100. 
 Gag (1936) 55-58 rejected Philadelpheus suggestion that the inscription adorned a temple on its 
different sides. 
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 72-74. In addition to the inscribed headers, the varying widths of the 
irregular backs of the blocks suggest that they were part of the masonry, intended to be set into the 
hillside, with little attention paid to their unseen sides. 
 Zachos (1997). A publication of the revised version of the text has been promised by William M. 
Murray and K. Zachos during the course of the coming year (correct as of a conversation with William 
M. Murray, Feburary 2010). 
- 104 - 
the podium facade.
 Fragmentary remains of sculptural triumphal reliefs were found 
on the upper terrace of the monument, along with a monumental altar (6m x 22m), and 
three statue bases.
 From the excavations of the site, the design and layout of the monument can be 
reconstructed. Travelling up the main road out of the city, past the building complex for 
the Actian Games at the foot of the hill, the viewer approached the monument from the 
south. First to come into view was a vast retaining wall, above which could be seen the 
limestone ashlar masonry facade of the podium, measuring 63m in length, with 
sidewalls receding into the hillside. On the facade was a row of 36 bronze rams, 
displayed in decreasing size from west to east. Above the rams, running across the 
length of the facade wall, was a monumental inscription, dedicating the spoils of war to 
Neptune and Mars.
 On the upper terrace was a -shaped stoa, open on the south side. 
The inner courtyard, measuring 38m x 38m, held a monumental altar, decorated with 
sculptural reliefs, some of which depicted the Roman triumphal procession, and three 
statue bases. From this vantage point one can see the Ambracian Gulf and, on a clear 
day, the Actian promontory, where Octavian enlarged the temple to Apollo and 
dedicated the enemy ships. Octavians campsite thus commands a view over land and 
sea (Figure 25). 
 It is clear from the fragments that the inscription was carved in situ because 
some of the letters are carved over the block joins.
 The blocks have decorative bands 
 These holes, twenty-three of which were uncovered in 1974, were described as shaped like 
enormous bass-viols by Eugene Vanderpool (Murray and Petsas (1989) 18 n. 32.), and were numbered 
1-18, and then A-E with a gap of 5.35m betwen n. 18 and A (Murray and Petsas (1989) 34-57). Later 
excavations by Zachos uncovered a further two socket holes between 18 and A (Zachos (1997). 
 Malacrino (2007); Zachos (2007) 413 suggests that one of one base post-dates the other two. Zachos 
(2001b), Zachos (2003), has labelled the monument the Actian Tropaeum. 
 Suet. Aug. 18.2; see p. 108 below. 
 The presence of an earlier inscription is visible of the fragment blocks CREGI/ON. In the upper half of 
the epigraphic field, cut into by the inscription, the letters CAIO/IV are visible. This inscription must have 
- 105 - 
carved at the top and bottom, measuring 16cm and 15cm respectively (Figure 26), and 
the letter height is c. 30cm (i.e. one Roman foot = 29.6cm). If one pictures the ashlar 
podium facade, potentially over 7m in height above the base course (only four courses 
now survive),
 the carved decorative bands on the inscription blocks would have 
framed the inscription within the masonry, and the use of the tabula ansata on an 
uninscribed inscription block further articulates this (Figure 27).
 I will now consider 
the fragmentary blocks to restore a reading of the inscription.  
The Latin Inscription 
 Over the course of the excavations some thirty inscribed and three un-inscribed 
fragments have been found. Ten of these blocks are now lost. Table 2 shows all the 
known blocks and their find spots. Miliadis excavation east of socket 18 uncovered 
several blocks next to the wall, suggesting that they fell and remained close to their 
original position on the facade.
Murrays 1989 restoration of the inscription reads: 
read CAIOIVLIO (Rhomaios (1925) 2 the two inscriptions on these two blocks clearly demonstrate that 
the blocks where joined and that the second block must read ON, and not IO as Philadelpheus (1913) 
thought (see n. 328 above)). An A also seems to be engraved at the start of the fragment block INHAC. 
It seems that there was an earlier dedicatory inscription was set up to Octavian in the dative case. The 
letters are smaller than those of the inscription proper, perhaps half the size, and the upper band of the 
inscription course has cut through the tops of these letters. For what reason this earlier inscription was 
abandoned is unclear, although it does seem likely that this inscription was also carved in situ, since the 
two blocks carry two sequential parts of inscription (i.e. CAIO/IV and CREGI/ON). 
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 29 for the surviving courses of the podium facade; 57-59 for construction 
of the wall, including the insertion of the rams. 
Height of the facade: Zachos (2003) 74; Tabula ansata: Zachos (2003) 76.  
 The find spots must be explained by the sizes of the blocks, the smallest of which travelled the 
furthest, moved either by human hand or geological shifts on the hillside. See Murray and Petsas (1989) 
73, Table 5 for the measurements of 14 blocks and their find-spots. 
- 106 - 
Table 2: The findspots of the inscription fragments from the monument above Nicopolis. 
Approx. order 
of the 
fragments as 
regards 
current 
reconstruction 
Fragment 
Description 
Find spot 
Gag (1936) 
numbering 
system 
1 tabula ansata unclear from reports G28 
2 uninscribed 5.2 m out from socket 5 G27 
3 uninscribed eastern end of lower terrace G26 
4 R DIV c.10m from west corner of podium G1 
5 F VICT 0.5 m out from socket 6  G2 
6 OR BEL between sockets 4-6 G29 
7 O Q at socket 8  G11 
8 VOD following after 7  G12 
9 PRO unclear from reports G14 
10 bLIC 5.85m out from socket 8 G15 
11 t IN HAc 4.8m out from socket 11 G19 
12 tA C adjacent to 10 G17 
13 C REGI 5.4m out from socket 13  G13 
14 ON  very near 12  G10 
15 VL following after 13  G4 
16 MPERAT following after 14  G3 
17 SE  south of the retaining wall G30 
18 PTIM following after 15  G5 
19 VM Pa 3.4m out from socket 17  G6 
20 AC 25-28m from SW corner of podium  G7 
21 E PARTA 25-28m from SW corner of podium  G8 
22 A TERRA 25-28m from SW corner of podium  G9 
23 QVIBV between sockets 18-21 G22 
24 TVNO adjacent to 21 G20 
25 TI NEP  ? 7.5m out from socket 21 ? G31 
26 ASTRA at socket 22 G21 
27 RT Adjacent to 24 G24 
28 SEQ Adjacent to 25 G23 
position within restored inscription uncertain 
29 IMP [I]          
SE side of podium, where greatest 
damage has occurred to the wall 
30 V[S]              
SE side of podium, where greatest 
damage has occurred to the wall 
31 IS unclear from reports G16 
32 GES south of the retaining wall G18 
33 ESSV unclear from reports G25 
- 107 - 
vacat  mp   Caesa r    iv i    uli   f   vict oriam   consecutus   bell o   quod   
pro    r  []p[u]blic[a]  ges[si]t  in  hac  region[e  cons]ul [ quintum  
i]mperat[or  se]ptimum  pace [] parta  terra [ marique  Nep]tuno [ et   
Ma]rt[i  c]astra [ ex ] quibu[s  ad hostem  in]seq[uendum egr]essu[s  
est  navalibus  spoli]is [ exorna]ta  c[onsacravit vacat
Imperator Caesar son of the divine Julius, following the victory in the war, 
which he waged on behalf of the res publica in this region, consul for the 
fifth time, imperator for the seventh time, with peace won by land and sea, 
consecrated to Neptune and Mars the camp, from which he set out to attack 
the enemy, decorated with naval spoils. 
Since new fragments of the inscription have been discovered since 1989, I will 
examine, question and in some cases correct, Murrays restoration.
 The position of the titulature at the beginning of the inscription, apparent from 
the location of RDIV and FVICT, found at the west end of the podium wall, and in the 
nominative case (CAESA]R), immediately informs the viewer who is responsible for the 
monument.
 Murrays restoration of Iuli is plausible, but by no means certain.
Firstly, the size of the gap between RDIV and FVICT is not known and there may have 
existed either a long block of approximately 1m or more carrying the letters VIIVLI,
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 76. 
 See n. 334 above for Murrays forthcoming revised text. 
 Oliver (1969) and Carter (1977) restore the beginning of the inscription with Neptuno et Marti. This is 
unlikely based on the find spots: see Table 2. 
 Schfer (1993) 240-241. 
 The V of divi was carved over the block join, as was the F of f(ilius) so a single long block carrying six 
letters and two interpuncts would measure approximately 1m. 
- 108 - 
or a header carrying only VI.
 Secondly, IVLI is not always given in Octavians 
titulature of the period: whilst an inscription found in the Roman Forum in the sixteenth 
century, now lost, names Octavian as Divi Iuli f(ilius),
 other inscriptions and coins 
merely record him as divi f(ilius).
 Of course, the distinction between the use of Iuli 
and its non-use must be largely influenced by the amount of space available,
given the length of the podium facade (63m) it is quite possible that there was space to 
inscribed IVLI. 
 The titulature is followed by a clear reference to victory, and this is certain 
because of the fragment FVICT.  A problem arises, however, because of a fragment 
found by Zachos, between sockets 4-6, reading ORBEL (Figure 28).
 The find spot 
and the blocks size (approx. 1m) suggests that it has not moved far from its original 
position, meaning we can plausibly place it between FVICT (found 0.5m out from 
socket 6) and OQVOD (found at socket 8). This is the position which has been restored 
by Murray to read f. vict[oriam consecutus bell]o quod. However, I will argue that the 
new fragment should replace the restoration of vict[oriam consecutus.   
 I have found two other fragmentary inscriptions which attest or bel; the first 
possibly reads [ob vi]ctor(iam) belli.
 The second, however, appears more appropriate 
to our inscription at Nicopolis, as it is a fragment of an elogium from the Forum 
 Such a fragment would be very similar to the header block carrying RT. 
 See p. 109 and n. 365 below. 
For example ILS 82, dated to 27 B.C., from Arelate: senatus populusque Romanus Imp. Caesari divi f. 
Augusto cos. VIII dedit clupeum virtutis clementiae iustitiae pietatis erga deos patriamque; RIC Aug. 476 
a cistophoric tetradrachm of 28 B.C. from Asia Minor: Imp Caesar divi f. cos VI libertatis P. R. Vindex. See 
also ILS 78-80, 85-94. 
 Thus smaller inscriptions and coins drop the Iuli; however an aureus of 38 B.C. from Gaul records the 
legend Imp. Divi Iuli f. ter. IIIvir. RRC 534/1, see also RRC 534/3. 
 Zachos (1997) 576, this block was found together with an un-inscribed fragment which Zachos 
identifies as a header. 
 AE 1989 n. 166: ob vi]ctor(iam?) belli [---] / [Be]neventi et [---] / d(ecreto) d(ecurionum) postulatu 
pop[uli ---] / et praecipua annon[---] / munificentia st[---] / in orchestram lect[---] / ut modestiae suae [---
] / IIviro q(uin)q(uennale) quaest(ore) sa[; the phrase ob victoriam  is found most frequently with an 
adjective such as Parthicam  (CIL VI 41143) or Germanicam (CIL VI 41141), in the high Empire. 
- 109 - 
Romanum, which reads: [---]no cum / [---]tor belli / [---]+ctus / ------ (Figure 29).
The possibility of either a genitive plural or victor(iam) belli as a reading is unlikely as 
abbreviations in the elogia are extremely rare. The possible restorations given by 
Granino Cercere are dictator, triumphator and victor.
 The phrase de manubiis 
Cimbris et Teuton. Aedem Honori / et Virtuti victor fecit, occurs in the elogium of 
Marius from the Forum Augustum,
 and in the RGDA, Augustus twice refers to 
himself as victor.
 It may then be possible to read victor bel[lo for our inscription. It 
should be noted that whilst FVICT ends clearly at the block join, the new fragment is 
damaged at both ends. On its left hand side the stone has broken around the O, which is 
intact, whilst of the right hand side the top of the L is lost, although in the lower part the 
block join may possibly be discerned (Figure 28). Given the size of the block and the 
number of letters inscribed it seems unlikely that any letters from either end have been 
lost, and rather the stone has fractured and broken around the extremities.  
 If we accept the reading victor bello (Figure 30), then the fragment OR  BEL 
must have joined another block that began LO. Given that fragment O. Q., although 
damaged at the edges a bit, clearly shows the block joins, it cannot directly proceed 
ORBEL (Figure 31).
 However, we cannot ascertain the exact space between victor 
bel and -]o quod. Nevertheless, a gap there clearly was, and now that I have shown the 
reading may plausibly be victor bello, rather than victoriam consecutus bello, a 
replacement may be considered for Murrays restoration. The phrase bello Actiaco or 
the like might be acceptable. Indeed, Livy who appears to echo the central phrase of the 
 CIL VI 40921; Granino Cecere (1996) 122-124. 
 Granino Cecere (1996) 123. Imperator would fit, though it does appear abbreviated in the elogia: ILS 
 ILS 59. 
 RG 3 and 24. 
 Furthermore, fragment O.Q. was joined to the preceding block with an iron clamp, of which there is 
no evidence on the fragment ORBEL, although the damage to the upper right hand side of the block 
may have destroyed this.  
- 110 - 
inscription (pace parta terra marique) in his account of the 29 B.C. closing of the Gates 
of Ianus, refers to the event which initiated it: bellum Actiacum, demonstrating the 
contemporary usage of the phrase for the commemoration of victory attached to the 
site.
 This restoration would require eight new letters, most likely inscribed over two 
blocks. These blocks may have measured up to just under 1m each, given that A and O 
are particularly wide letters. 
It is plausible to maintain Murrays restoration of the word bello preceding the 
phrase quod pro re publica gessit.
 However, it should be noted that the fragment 
which Murray identified as E[]P has now been fully excavated by Zachos, and in fact 
reads TINEP.
 This indicates that the inscription should read Marti Neptunoque rather 
than Neptuno et Marti. It would seem that commentators have previously been keen to 
put Neptune first owing to the direct correlation between the inscription and the course 
of rams,
 as well as Suetonius account of the monument dedication Neptuno ac 
Marti.
 Whilst Neptune is honoured in respect to the sea battle won, the victory had 
been won explicitly over land and sea. Mars is the generic figure for triumph in battle, 
and it must be remembered that the monument marks the site of Octavians land camp 
(made emphatic by the word c]astra), where the army of Antony surrendered, allowing 
for victory terra marique. The placement of Mars first echoes the pattern of that phrase. 
 Livy 1.19.3, and see p. 89 above for a discussion of the influence of the monumental inscription on 
Livys presentation of the closing of the Gates in 29 B.C.; for other examples of bellum Actiacum see: 
Macrob. Sat. 2.4.27: Actiaco bello. 
 The phrase quod pro re publica gessit is also attested on the arch of Trajan at Lepcis Magna where Q. 
Pomponius Rufus is named prae(fectus) orae marit(imae) Hispan(iae) Citer(oris) Gallia[e] / 
Narbon(ensis) bello qu[od] Imp. G[a]lba pro [re p(ublica)] gessit (IRT 537; Romanelli (1940) 99). 
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 64; Zachos (1995) 426. 
 Carter (1977) 229 argues along these lines for his restorations of vict[oriam ma]rit[imam.  
 Suet. Aug. 18.2. 
- 111 - 
Carter has argued that to end with the dating formula and pace parta terra 
marique is more effective than ending with an innocuous main verb.
 His argument 
relies on the passage of Livy, which concludes pace terra marique parta,
 and on the 
contemporary inscription found in the Roman Forum in the sixteenth century: 
Senatus populusque Romanus Imp. Caesari divi Iuli f(ilius), co(n)s(ul) 
quinct(um) co(n)s(ul) design(atus) sext(us) Imp(erator) sept(imum) re 
publica conservata.
The senate and the Roman people [erected this] to Imperator Caesar son of 
the divine Iulius, consul for the fifth time, consul designate for the sixth 
time, Imperator for the seventh time, since the res publicae had been 
preserved. 
Livy is commenting on the war and its outcome for Rome, rather than the dedication of 
spoils. The inscription which commemorates Octavians generic accomplishments on 
behalf of the state has an implied main verb of dedication. As the Nicopolis inscription 
does not abbreviate words such as consul, (-VL), imperator (-MPERAT-), and septimum 
(SE-PTIM-VM) which are usually abbreviated, as the above inscription from Rome 
demonstrates, it is plausible that the main verb of dedication was also included, and 
would have ended the inscription.
 As Murray has pointed out, the passage from 
Suetonius, which actually describes the monument, is far more appropriate: locum 
 Carter (1977) 230. 
 See n. 358 above. 
 ILS 81. 
 Spolia or trophy monuments often have a verb of dedication: see ILS 1, 3, 12, 14, 16, 17, 36; NSc 
1956, 20; CIL I
622; CIL VI 701, 702. 
- 112 - 
castrorum, quibus fuerat usus, exornatum navalibus spoliis Neptuno ac Marti 
consecravit.
 The conclusion of the inscription with the main verb consecravit is in 
fact highly suitable for an inscription of dedication, and also when considered in 
relation to the monument, which I will discuss below. 
The order of the first half of the inscription is relatively assured: 
Vacat Imp  Caesa]r  div[i Iuli ] f  victor  bel[lo  Actiac?]o  quod pro 
[re pu]blic[a]  ges[si]t  in  hac  region[e  cons]ul [ quinctum?  
I]mperat[or ] septimum pace [] parta terra [ marique].
Murray estimated the length of the inscription at c. 56m based on the number of letters 
in his inscription.
 His analysis of 13 blocks of known size and location gives a total 
inscribed length of 10.4m for 41 letters, which gives on average c.0.253m per 
character.
 If we apply this to the first half of the inscription given above, the length 
would be approximately 30.85m, suggesting that (including the vacat at the start and 
end of the inscription) the central section of the whole inscription would be pace parta 
terra marique. Indeed, block VM  PA was found 3.4m south out from socket 17.
direct centre of the facade is socket 18. 
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 87. 
 Although consul, imperator and septimum are not abbreviated, I have followed Murrays restoration 
of Imp. Caesar, on the basis that the filiation divi. f. is also in abbreviated form, although it is possible 
that Imperator was given in full at the start of the inscription. Zachos (1995) 426 found a fragment 
which reads IM-P[I], which might suggest a restoration of Impe[rator], but it was found at the south-
east corner of the podium wall, and so was more likely to have come from the second half of the 
inscription. I have used quinctum as opposite to quintum on the basis of ILS 81, n. 365. 
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 74. 
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 73 do not include the interpuncts in his calculations because in all but one 
case they seem not to occupy a full letter space. I have followed Murrays practice for consistency.  
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 73, Table 5; Rhomaios (1925) 2 says that fragments VMP, AC, E PART, and 
ATERRA were found 25-28m from the west corner. 
- 113 - 
 The second half of the inscription is at present more fragmentary, but likely 
consists of the following: 
Ma]rti  Neptuno[que  c]astra [---] quibu[s  ad hostem  in]seq[uendum 
egr]essu[s? ---  navalib]us [ spoli]is [exorna]ta  c[on]se[cravit. 
It should be noted that whilst Murrays restoration of ad hostem insequendum egressus 
is tempting and makes use of two fragments, -seq and essu, we cannot be certain of the 
reference solely to hostem, rather than a named group or individuals. 
Murray noted the similarities between the Nicopolis inscription and the 
inscription on the base of the obelisk set up at Rome in 10/9 B.C. as a solar median: 
Imp. Caesar divi f(ilius) / Augustus / Pontifex Maximus / Imp(erator) XII, 
co(n)s(ul) XI, trib(unicia) pot(estate) XIV / Aegupto in potestatem / populi 
Romani redacta / Soli donum dedit.
Imperator Caesar Augustus son of the divine, Pontifex Maximus, Imperator 
for the twelfth time, consul for the eleventh time, holding tribunician power 
for the fourteenth time, gave [this as] a gift to Sol, since Egypt had been 
brought under the power of the Roman people.  
Both inscriptions consist of the same grammatical units: 1) the title (the clause quod pro 
republica gessit may be included here as it is dependent on victor bello), 2) the dating 
formulae, 3) the reason for the dedication in the ablative absolute (pace parta and 
 CIL VI 701 and 702. 
- 114 - 
Aegupto redacta), 4) the dedicatee, and finally 5) the main verb of 
dedication/consecration to end the sentence. We can be certain of the overall order and 
sense of the grammatical units in the Nicopolis inscription, and in some cases the 
relation between these units.  
 We must deal with the issue of date. Only one numeral of the dating formula has 
survived: septimum. Some scholars have argued that septimum can be taken equally 
with consul as with imperator, dating the dedication to 27 B.C.
  However, their aim 
has been to date the first Actian games rather than to date the inscription.
 As Schfer 
has noted, there is no place after the filiation for the name Augustus, which was 
awarded to Octavian on 16
 January 27 B.C., so unless the monument was dedicated 
between 1-16
 January 27 B.C. it seems unlikely that we should read consul 
septimum.
 Octavian received his seventh appellation of imperator after his victory at 
Alexandria (1
 August 30 B.C.), and did not receive his eighth until 25 B.C.
 If, on 
the absence of Augustus after his filiation, we exclude a date after 16
 January 27 B.C. 
then we have a possible date range of 1
 August 30 B.C.  16
 January 27 B.C. The 
correlation of the central phrase pace parta terra marique with Livys account of the 
closing of the Gates of Ianus in 29 B.C. makes it tempting to indeed read consul 
quinctum immediately beforehand, thus placing the inscription in 29 B.C. I will now 
turn to consider the relationship of the inscription to the spolia monument. 
Gag (1936) 100; Moretti (1953) 205-206; Tidman (1950); Rieks (1970) 106. 
 Schfer (1993) 242. 
 Schfer (1993) 246-247. 
 Rich (1996) 95-96; Lange (2009) 110-111, esp. n. 75. 
- 115 - 
The prows and the sculptural display 
All the ancient authors who describe the site of Octavians campsite and 
monument mention the setting up and displaying of the bronze rams: exornatum 
navalibus spoliis Neptuno ac Marti consecravit (Suet. Aug. 18.2);      
,          (Dio 
51.1.3);        (Plut. Ant. 65.3);    
     ,         
  (Strabo 7.7.6);  ,   ,/  
   (Philippus of Thessalonica, Ant. Pal. 6.236).377  The spolia 
were intended to demonstrate the naval power of the victor, both by illustrating the 
impressive nature of the fleet he had captured and destroyed, and by alluding therefore 
to his own naval strength in the visual display of the captured prows.
The first ram socket starts 2.785m from the west end of the podium wall. If we 
assume a rough symmetry at the other end, the ram display takes up roughly 57.5m of 
the 63m facade. Murray has calculated that if the inscription was centred over the rams 
then there would be a vacat at each end of c.3m.
 This would allow the first word of 
the inscription to be located over the first ram.
 This means the audience starts reading 
the inscription in correlation to viewing the rams. As the inscription is concerned with 
the dedication of these objects, this simple, but visually striking linear relationship is 
highly effective. It is certainly fitting that the last word of the inscription, consecravit, 
 Anth. Pal. 6.236: bronze tongued rams, the voyage-loving armour of ships / we are set up as 
witnesses of the Actian war. 
 The display of the rams above Nicopolis was a balance to the ships dedicated across the promontory 
at Actium. Murray (2007) for the reconstruction of the prows. 
 So far four un-inscribed blocks from the inscription course have been found, one the tabula ansata 
from the start of the inscription, which measures c.0.46m and is a header block. Another block 
measures 0.85m (Murray and Petsas (1989) 73, Table 5). The measures of the other two blocks are not 
given. 
 Murray and Petsas (1989) 74. 
- 116 - 
would then rest above the last ram, thus visually demonstrating the completion of the 
dedication with the completion of the display of spolia.  
In this respect, more attention must be paid to the inscription, and not just the 
literary sources. In an attempt to reconcile the claim of Strabo, that the hill was sacred 
to Apollo, and that of Dio, that Octavian dedicated a       
, with the archaeological evidence, Zachos has argued that the monument may 
have been a hierarchical structure: the facade honoured Mars and Neptune, whilst the 
upper terrace, with its monumental altar, belonged to Apollo.
 However, Strabo 
directs his remarks towards the complex below the monument, where the Actian games 
were celebrated.
 At present, the evidence from the inscription does not support the 
involvement of Apollo in the monumental display. Indeed, Suetonius separates the 
temple of Apollo at Actium from the campsite consecrated to Neptune and Mars: 
exornatum spoliis Neptuno ac Marti consecravit.
 There is no explicit evidence that 
Apollo received special attention on the upper terrace: it rather follows the rhetoric of 
the inscription and celebrates peace won terra marique by the victor (and 
triumphator),
 as the fragmentary sculptural relief in Pentelic marble found on the 
upper terrace, around the monumental altar illustrates.
The fragmentary marble remains were most likely decorated that monumental 
altar, with two registers: the lower depicting armours, weapons, and ship parts,
 Zachos (2003) 83. 
 Dios comment is ambiguous for he could mean that the  belongs to Apollo (Dio Cass. 51.1.3). 
 Suet. Aug. 18.2. 
 However, see Lange (2009) 119-120, Zachos (2003) 70-71 on the possibility of a statue () of Apollo 
either in front of the lower terrace, where a large base (possibly post-dating the main monument) is 
attested, or on the upper terrace. 
 Zachos (2003) 83ff; Zachos (2007), Zachos (2009).  
 Zachos (2009) 282-284. The dimensions of the fragments make it plausible that they were placed on 
the lower register. 
- 117 - 
upper depicting a triumphal procession (Figure 32).
 Fragments of decorative 
vegetation in the form of acanthus leaves, rosettes and flowers were also found, and 
most likely decorated pilasters or other architectural elements of the altar (Figure 33).
The display of the spolia and weapons (Figure 34) reaffirms the rhetoric of terra 
marique in the inscription, and this theme is carried through to the triumphal frieze. One 
fragment depicts a ship prow being carried in the procession (Figure 35 & Figure 37) 
emphasising the importance of the naval victory both to Octavians triumph at Rome 
and in the context of the friezes display, above the bronze rams on the podium facade. 
The fragments of the procession frieze depict trumpeters (Figure 36), the parade of 
spoils such as ships, ship beaks, and possibly trophies carried on trestles (Figure 37) the 
parade of captives (Figure 38), the sacrificial victims (Figure 39), lictors (Figure 40) 
non-Roman cavalry men (Figure 41), the triumphal chariot, led by a slave, carrying 
Octavian and two children (Figure 42),
 and behind the chariot the procession of 
dignitaries and senators (Figure 43). The reliefs were most probably made in a neo-attic 
workshop, given their high quality and classical style.
 The subject matter of the 
frieze, the Roman triumphal procession, serves to illustrate, along with the Latin 
inscription, that the establishment of pax terra marique rests in the hands of Rome and 
Octavian. The frieze articulates the meaning of the pax of the inscription: that of Roman 
victory over the world, and the place of the defeated and allies within it. 
 Zachos (2009) 285-303. 
 Zachos (2009) 284. 
 Zachos (2009) 299-300 discusses the possible identity of the two children: one possibility, Julia and 
either Tiberius or Marcellus seems unlikely as Suet. Tib. 6 records that both boys rode on the horses of 
the chariot, although the sculptural decoration at Actium does not appear to depict riders on these 
horse. The other possibility is the children of Antony and Cleopatra: Alexander Helios and Cleopatra 
Selene, although Dio 51.21.8 tells us that they were among the captives that proceeded Octavians 
chariot. 
 Zachos (2009) 300 states that the sculptural reliefs mark the acceptance of the classical Hellenistic 
style by the new political power. 
- 118 - 
It is no coincidence that the central section of the inscription draws attention to 
the physical site: in hac region[e cons]ul [quinctum? I]mperat[or ]septimum pace 
parta terra [marique] The site affords a commanding view (emphasising its suitable 
position as a castra), surveying the land and sea (terra marique). The inscription tells 
the audience to look at the spoils in the actual geographical context of the victory. The 
views the site commands encompass the Actium promontory, where Octavian marked 
the defeat of the enemy with the dedication of the actual ships and enlarged the ancient 
temple of Actian Apollo. Thus, the two sites set up a visual dialogue of conquest and 
victory across the entrance of the Ambracian Gulf, using the theme of naval spoils 
throughout. The importance of viewing the wider physical landscape of the monument 
is emphasised strongly by the whole complex as a victoriae memoria.
The 1
 century A.D. writer Philippus of Thessalonica perceived the display at 
Actium as the indicator of peace:    /    .392 
The display of the rams together with the inscription speaks of a celebration of 
pax/  as the accomplishment of the victory.   
In hac regione...pace parta terra marique 
The theme of pax terra marique was central to the inscription and message of 
the monument at Nicopolis, and plausibly influenced Livys presentation of the 
event.
 This idea is also represented on a cistophorus from Ephesus dated to 28 B.C. 
The obverse depicts the wreathed head of Octavian, accompanied by the legend: IMP 
CAESAR DIVI F. COS VI LIBERTATIS P. R. VINDEX. On the reverse a female figure 
 Suet. Aug. 18.2. 
 Anth. Pal. 6.236: for he (Octavian) instructed the weapons of the enemy to nurture the fruits of 
peace. See also Prop. 2.1.34-36. 
 p. 89-93 above. 
- 119 - 
holding a caduceus and standing on a parazonium is accompanied by the identifying 
legend PAX, with a cista mystica in the background, and a wreath encircling all (Figure 
 In contrast to the coinage minted by the city of Nicopolis, which depicts a Nike 
with Greek legends (Figure 45),
 the cistophorus minted at Ephesus focuses on the 
concept of victorious Pax (trampling the sword). The Latin legends combine the idea of 
pax and the libertas populi Romani, which is further emphasised by the depiction of the 
cista mystica, alluding to Bacchus, the liberator. The cista mystica may also allude to 
Octavians success over Antony who had drawn comparisons with Bacchus on his 
eastern coinage.
 The coin seems to be addressing a multitude of audiences: the 
legend referring to the libertas p.R. suggest a Latin speaking and Romano-centric 
audience, whilst the use of the Greek monetary system (cistophoric tetradachm)
imagery (the cista mystica) suggest  that the message of pax should be understood in the 
East, as much as at Rome. It is interesting to note that denarii were also struck in Asia 
during the civil wars of the Late Republic and down to 18 B.C., yet Octavian chose this 
Greek coinage to put forth his message of pax and victory. It seems that Octavian put 
his own silver coinage into circulation as a display of his authority in the area, now that 
Antony, who had also minted cistophori in Asia, had been defeated.
 Whether the 
coins were minted to pay troops or went towards public expenditure, the language of 
the coin together with the coinage itself suggests multiple audiences,
 similar to that 
of the monument at Nicopolis.  
 RIC Aug. 476. 
 RPC 1364. 
 RPC 2201, 2202. A coin of Octavians also depicts a Victory holding a palm branch and standing on 
the cista mystica (RIC Aug. 276). 
 The cistophorus was the main silver currency of Asia, and became equivalent to three denarii during 
the period 49-18 B.C., when denarii were also being minted in Asia: RPC p.6, 369-370; Sutherland (1984) 
6, 35 n.3. 
 Sutherland (1984) 35. 
 Howgego (1995) 62-87. 
- 120 - 
The monument, which declared pax parta terra marique on behalf of the 
respublica, was displayed within the context of a Greek city of Victory. The axis of 
the south-west gate, ran up through the city to the north-west gate, passed through the 
north necropolis, between the stadium and gymnasium, and ended at the west side of 
the monument (Figure 46).
 Since the community and monument are tied thus 
together, I will now consider how this relationship affects questions of language and 
audience, and will argue that the use of a monumental Latin inscription was the one 
element of the monument that would not have been familiar to the Greek community, in 
the context of the sanctuary display. Given the central message of pax within the 
inscription, it is important to understand how the inscription functioned within the 
wider context of the community. 
As I have already discussed above, Nicopolis appears to have been created by 
the synoecism of the surrounding communities,
 and Octavian marked this creation of 
a new centre of the Greek world in the Epirus by gathering the statuary of Aetolia and 
Acarnaia together at Nicopolis: 
           ,  
     .402 
And likewise so many other images from Aetolia and from the Acarnanians, 
many of these were carried to Nicopolis. 
 Tsakoumis (2007) 397-398; Zachos (2003) 69. This axis would also bring the viewer to the start of the 
inscription and rams on the west side. 
 See p. 97 above. 
 Paus. 7.18.9. 
- 121 - 
Nicopolis represented Octavians consolidation of power in the East through his 
ability to form a new community from the many surrounding ones and start a new 
cultural centre, where the quinquennial pan-hellenic games were hosted, in the 
sanctuary on the hill, sacred to Apollo.
 The monument itself, with its open-air 
temenos, comprising a  shaped stoa and monumental altar facing out over the 
landscape is reminiscent of Late Hellenistic sanctuary complexes, such as the 
Asclepieion at Kos, but also sanctuaries of the Late Republic in Italy, such as those at 
Tibur and Praeneste.
 There is fragmentary evidence of Greek inscriptions, indicating 
that Greek-speakers were using the complex (Figure 47).
 Furthermore, the coinage 
and public inscriptions of Nicopolis were Greek.
 The presence of a monumental 
Latin inscription within this ostensibly Greek sanctuary complex is then striking.
Using Latin within a Greek sanctuary was a rhetorical tool, seen most notably in 
Aemilius Paullus pillar monument at Delphi.
 That inscription commemorated 
Paullus victory over Perseus of Macedonia, reusing the pillar that Perseus was said to 
have been erecting:
L. Aimilius L. f. inperator de rege Perse // Macedonibusque cepet.
 Dio Cass. 51.18.1; Strabo 7.7.6; Suet. Aug. 18.2; Gag (1936) 92-100; Gurval (1995) 74-81; Zachos 
(2007) 431; Lange (2009) 97-98 
 Zachos (2003) 67-70. 
 Zachos (2001a) 39, fig. 19; however these fragments appear to be unpublished. One fragment may 
contain the word hieron. 
 Coins: RPC 1364; Lange (2009) 104-106; Inscriptions: AE 1994 n. 1597ff; Bergmann (1998) 89. 
 Lange (2009) 114-115 on the little commented-upon fact of the inscription being in Latin. 
 On the monument in general: Pomtow (1921) 179 esp. n.1; Courby (1922-27) 302 ff; Colin (1922-
1985); Jacquemin and Laroche (1982) 207-218;Themelis (1983); Bommelaer (1991); on frieze: Homolle 
(1897); Khler (1965); Jacquemin and Laroche (1982)  211-212; Pollitt (1986) 155-158; on the 
inscription: CIL I 622; Colin (1922-1985) 29ff. 
 Poly. 30.10.1-2; Livy 45.27.5-7; Plut. Aem. Paul. 28.1-2, 4.  
 CIL I 622: Lucius Aemilius, son of Lucius, imperator took (this) from king Perseus and the 
Macedonians. 
- 122 - 
As with the monument above Nicopolis, the pillar of Perseus is fundamentally a spolia 
monument that employs not only the pillar itself, but also the location within the 
sanctuary and relationship to other pillar monuments, to emphasise Paullus victory 
over Perseus.
 Paullus monument at Delphi both partakes in the traditional 
Hellenistic ruler display within the sanctuary, and also celebrates his victory over an 
Hellenistic ruler. Indeed, his Latin inscription was inscribed over an earlier Greek 
Paullus depicted his conquest of the East by using Latin on a Greek monument 
originally designed for the Macedonian king. Lange has argued that Paullus does not 
mention Rome and the res publica; he only mentions Paullus and the enemy. This is 
Roman imperialism, whereas Octavian [at Nicopolis] stresses victory and peace, but no 
enemy.
 Whilst Lange has rightly stressed the difference in language between Paullus 
and Octavian, he suggests that Octavians display is not Roman imperialism. In fact, 
what the display at Nicopolis demonstrates is how Roman imperialism could now be 
expressed through the concept of pax terra marique, not just to a Roman audience, but 
also to the Greek East. 
Yet Lange has argued that the display at Nicopolis was a Roman monument for 
Romans, relying on the evidence of not only the Latin inscription but also the Roman 
building technique of opus reticulatum.
 However, whilst the opus reticulatum 
 For others pillars erected to Hellenistic kings Eumenes II and Prusias in the Delphic sanctuary see: 
Courby (1922-27) 267 ff;Colin (1922-1985) 117 ff; Bommelaer (1991) 175; see also Hurwit (1999) 171-
172 on the pillars of Eumenes II and Attalos II on the Athenian Acropolis. 
 Jacquemin and Laroche (1982) 210 n. 77. I was unable to make out this earlier Greek inscription in 
the Delphi Museum, however the inscription is placed on a side wall at ground level, with a gap of less 
than 1m between it and the display of the frieze of the pillar. This makes a proper viewing of the 
inscription very difficult, which is not aided by the lighting in the Museum. 
 Lange (2009) 116. The fragmentary nature of the inscription does mean that we are at present 
unable to say whether the defeated were mentioned at all. 
 Lange (2009) 116-117, 120-123; Malacrino (2007) esp. 377-378; see Murray and Petsas (1989) 126-
130 for a proposed timetable of construction of the monument. 
- 123 - 
indicates that the monument was designed and built with Roman techniques, the 
appearence and decoration of the monument was something completely familiar to a 
Greek audience as well.
 As with Paullus monument at Delphi, the monument 
commemorating Roman victory is part of a Hellenistic sanctuary. Whilst the form of the 
monument was approachable and accessible to a Greek audience, the use of Latin 
emphatically stamps Roman presence in the East.
The monument becomes a reminder of why Octavian founded his city of 
Victory. Whilst the inscription records that Octavian was victor in the war pro re 
publica, the central aspect is the celebration in hac regione of pax terra marique. The 
monuments site affords views over the land and the Ambracian gulf, thus both 
contextualising the victory, and emphasising the extent of the pax achieved.   
* * * 
The commemorations of the sites of Octavians victory at both Alexandria and 
Actium emphasised the re-articulation of space around the newly founded Nicopoleis. 
The site in Egypt appears to have mainly served as a new cultural and religious centre 
for the Alexandrians, thus focusing the religious practices of the city around a site that 
commemorated Octavian as the new ruler of Egypt. This new religious centre may have 
 Zachos (2003), Zachos (2007). 
 The cultural relationship between two languages within a (bilingual) society is discussed by Wallace-
Hadrill (1998) 84: the term code-switching is applied to the relationship between two languages in a 
society, one of which is the dominant, expected language, the choice of which is unmarked, whilst the 
other is the non-dominant, unexpected language, the use of which illustrates a marked choice. The 
significance of switching between the unmarked and marked languages represents a negotiation of 
power. It should be noted that in discussions on code-switching the unmarked language is normally 
the language of dominant power, however at Nicopolis the use of Latin, the marked language, 
illustrates the articulation of Latin as the language of power. See also Quinn (2010) esp. 59ff for a 
discussion of multilingualism, localism and juxtaposition in Roman Lepcis. 
- 124 - 
also served to demonstrate Octavians rejuvenation of Alexandrias religious sites after 
Cleopatras alleged desecration.
The city of Victory near the Actian promontory presents a fuller picture of the 
physical aspects of Octavians victory commemoration. As with the city near 
Alexandria, there appears to have been a deliberate attempt to create a display that was 
compatible with local practices. Although Nicopolis was, as it were, an artificially 
created city, it was still a Greek city which celebrated pan-hellenic games. The 
foundation of Nicopolis demonstrated that Octavians victory had brought about the 
security and re-population of the Epirus. Of course, the monument that stood above the 
city emphasised that this stability was the result of Roman victory, and that this area of 
the world now partook in the Roman pax won by land and sea. Here, at the site of 
Octavians victory, and above the Greek city, the concerns of the civil war were not an 
issue, as they were at Rome. The pax that Octavian conceptualised was not concerned 
with civil pax or harmony between Roman generals, but was the conceptualisation and 
expression of Octavians imperium won over an empire. 
 Dio Cass. 51.17.6. 
- 125 - 
Section Three 
An Alternative Perspective on Victory: Cornelius Gallus at 
Philae 
 On the island of Philae, above the First Cataract of the Nile, C. Cornelius Gallus 
erected a victory stele in 29 B.C. The stele, made of Aswan granite, measures c. 165cm 
x 116cm x 35cm, with a rounded pediment, typical of most near-eastern stelai. In the 
pediment is depicted a winged solar disk with two uraei, underneath which (and 
separated by a dividing line) is a rider charging down an enemy, who is in the act of 
raising his shield. Either side of this relief are three columns of hieroglyphic text: the 
three on the right refer to the main gods of Egypt, whilst the three on the left refer to 
local deities. Beneath the relief are three further inscriptions: the first in Hieroglyphs, 
the second in Latin, and the third in Greek (Figure 48).
 Whilst the stele underwent re-use in the foundations of the altar of the temple of 
Augustus in 12/13 B.C. at the north end of the island, it dates from 29 B.C. and its 
original context has been convincingly argued by Hoffmann et al. to be the temple 
complex of Isis (Figure 49).
 The re-use of the stele has been interpreted as damnatio 
memoriae after the disgraced Gallus was forced to commit suicide,
 though there are 
some fourteen years between Gallus removal and the foundation of the temple to 
Augustus, and Hoffmann et al. have interpreted the re-use as rather owing to the fact 
 Bernand (1969) 35ff; Gordon (1983) 97-99; Hoffmann, et al. (2009) gives the first full treatment of all 
three inscriptions, together with the reliefs. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 10, 16-18. 
 Dio Cass. 53.23.5-7. 
- 126 - 
that after Gallus death the stele had become meaningless.
 The steles relevance to 
the current discussion is that it offers another perspective on victory in 29 B.C., set up 
to commemorate not only Octavian, but also his official. The steles three inscriptions 
illustrate the complex levels of communication that could take place, and how each 
message depended on its intended audience. 
 In this section I will examine the victory stele of Gallus in order to understand 
how the commemoration, and indeed the meaning of victory were dependent not only 
on the intentions of the author, but also on their relationship with the audience. Gallus 
victory stele is a personal display of his success as a military commander and governor, 
yet also a display by the priests at Philae which places both Gallus and Octavian within 
a traditional Egyptian framework of governance and administration. The display at 
Philae demonstrates that the commemoration of victory was not always dominated by 
the message of pax terra marique which Octavian propagated in the East and to a 
certain extent at Rome, and that it was still possible for an individual to define himself 
and his victory within the specific geographical and cultural context of his display. 
The Obelisk and the Stele 
 After the conquest of Alexandria, Octavian made Egypt pay tribute to Rome, 
and made Cornelius Gallus, the equestrian who had helped him to secure Alexandria, 
the first praefectus of Egypt.
 Gallus position in Egypt was emphasised when he 
erected an obelisk as praefectus fabrum in the Forum Iulium in Alexandria: 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 18. 
 Dio Cass. 51.9.1-4, 17.1; Suet. Aug. 66; Gordon (1983) 97-98; Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 119-120. 
- 127 - 
Iussu Imp(eratoris) Caesari Divi f. C. Cornelius Cn. f. praef(ectus) fabr(um) 
Caesaris Divi f. Forum Iulium fecit.
On the order of Imperator Caesar, son of the divine (Iulius), Gaius 
Cornelius, son of Gnaeus, praefectus fabrum of Caesar son of the divine 
(Iulius) built the Forum Iulium. 
It should be noted that the inscription has been reconstructed from the clamp holes for 
the letters, since the base was re-carved and dedicated to the deified Augustus and 
Tiberius (Figure 50).
 Degrassi has questioned the likelihood of Gallus using the title 
praefectus fabrum, on the grounds that it is very unlikely that the prefect of Egypt 
would only state his office as praefectus fabrum.
 Indeed, whilst Syme has suggested 
that Gallus was praefectus fabrum under Pollio in Gallia Cisalpina,
 it does not seem 
possible that he would have held this post in 30 B.C. when he took over Scarpus troops 
and held Paraetonium against Antony.
 It might be possible to read something like 
PRAEFECT., though Magis reconstruction of PRAEFFABR appears a likely reading 
based on the clamp-holes (Figure 51). What is more important to the current discussion 
is the way in which Gallus presents his position as dependent on Caesar: not only is he 
following the orders of Octavian, his prefecture is also defined in relation to Octavian: 
praefectus fabrum Caesaris Divi f. This deference to Octavian, as the true ruler of 
Egypt, is echoed in the inscription from Philae.
n. 374 = AE 1964 n.255. 
 ILS 115 = CIL VI 882: divo Caesari divi Iulii f. Augusto / Ti. Caesari divi Augusti f. Augusto / sacrum. See 
Magi (1963) for the restoration of the text, esp. tav. VII-XII. 
 Degrassi (1971) 156; Reynolds (1971) 146. 
 Syme (2002) 252; Boucher (1966) 24. 
 Dio Cass. 51.9.1. See Boucher (1966) 27-32, esp. 30-31 for Gallus campaigns in Egypt. 
 See pp. 131 and 136 below. 
- 128 - 
 The erection of a single obelisk followed the Ptolemaic tradition and articulated 
Gallus creation of the Forum Iulium for an Egyptian audience, accustomed to 
Ptolemaic rule.
 Notably however, in comparison to the obelisks which Octavian later 
brought to Rome,
 the one erected by Gallus does not have any hieroglyphics. Thus 
whilst visually the monument blends in with the typical display of power in Egypt, the 
context of the new space and the sole use of Latin to record the commemoration 
demonstrates the establishment of Roman power within the region.
 In contrast to this display, the victory stele erected at Philae employs three 
different languages, which each record a different message, along with a visual display 
that had its roots in both Egyptian and Hellenistic art.
 The winged solar disk was 
accompanied by an inscription on the right, proclaiming the Master of Mesen, great 
god, master of the heavens, multicoloured-plumaged, who comes out of the skies (i.e. 
Horus), and on the left The one of Edfu, great god, master of the heavens, 
multicoloured-plumaged, who comes out of the skies.
 This representation, 
dominating the top section of the stele, asserts the position of Horus and sets the stele 
within traditional Egyptian cult display (Figure 48). The smaller, central relief of the 
horseman charging down the enemy is typically found in Greek, Roman and Near 
Eastern art, most notably on gravestones for the deceased, and as statues 
commemorating the living (though only senators in the Greek East).
 In Egyptian art 
the Pharaoh is often depicted in battle, smiting his enemy, though rarely on 
 McKenzie (2007) 79: obelisks performed a protective function for monuments and symbolised 
stability. 
 CIL VI 701, 702; Rehak (2006) 90-92; Wirsching (2000) 274. 
 It is unclear whether the Forum Iulium was set up in Alexandria or nearby Nicopolis: McKenzie (2007) 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 16: The stele is exceptional for Egyptian art in that no god is visually 
represented, although the winged solar disk is a representation of Horus of Edfu. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 65-6: the left inscription is heavily reconstructed.  
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 22-25 for a discussion of whether Octavian or Gallus is represented. 
- 129 - 
horseback.
 For a Roman or Greek audience the associations of the victorious rider 
with Gallus, who was named first in both the Latin and Greek texts, would be apparent; 
for an Egyptian audience the motif of the Pharaoh killing the enemy of Egypt was 
combined with an accompanying inscription, which appears to have marked out the 
figure as Gallus (the ruler of Egypt, of Upper and Lower Egypt, Gallus (?), the deputy 
of the son of Re, whom the son of Re, Romaios, has chosen)
, whilst the entire scene 
was enclosed by invocations to the gods of Egypt and Philae: Osiris, Isis and Horus are 
invoked in the three columns to the right of the rider relief, whilst Khnum, Anukis and 
Satis are invoked in three columns to the left.
 The victory in the relief is thus 
depicted as sanctioned by the gods. 
The location, and probable setting of the stele  that of the sanctuary of Isis on 
Philae  places Gallus commemoration within an Egyptian religious context, most 
likely overseen by the priests of the complex.
 The stele was also set up on the 
southern boundary of the newly formed Roman province (Map 3), thus demonstrating 
the extent of Roman control over Egypt, and the extent of Roman protection from 
external threats. I will now turn to the three inscriptions and consider how they offer 
different messages of victory in Egypt. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 26-30, the Raphia decree (Cairo CG 31088 and 50048) depict a rare instance 
of the Pharaoh as a rider charging the enemy (27-29). 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 33-40 for the hieroglyphic inscription under the rider relief.  
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 32-34, 46-47, 66-69. Khnum was the ancient creator god of the Elephantine, 
whose name means Moulder, associated with the annual inundation of the Nile. He is accompanied by 
Anukis (his wife and goddess of the First Cataract of the Nile) and Satis (a goddess associated with the 
falling waters of the Nile): see Bunson (1991) 27, 99-100, 137, 234. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 31, 42-43, 167-168, 174-176 on the rider relief. The name Romaios referred 
to Octavian as examples from  Dendera and Kalabscha demonstrates: Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 37. 
- 130 - 
The Trilingual Inscription of Gallus 
It is necessary to consider what the stele actually aimed to commemorate. The 
rhetoric of the visual display discussed above is of victory over an enemy. The question 
to ask though is what this victory meant (and who the enemy was) for the different 
audiences of the stele. 
 The order and relative sizes of the inscriptions are indicative of the relative 
importance, within the steles context, of each. In contrast to the obelisk in the Forum 
Iulium, and the monument above Nicopolis, where Latin is the sole language within a 
non-Latin speaking area, the primary language of the stele is the sacred script of the 
subjugated nation. The hieroglyphic text takes up a total of 49.5cm of the stele, with 
line height at c. 5.2-4cm. The Latin text, which is normally the dominant text in a 
bilingual inscription,
 comes second, measuring 32cm in total, with a line height of c. 
4-3cm. The Greek text covers 25cm in total, with a line height of 2-1cm. It is only with 
Hoffmann et al.s recent commentary on the stele that all three inscriptions have been 
treated together. I will first examine the structure of the hieroglyphic text,
 before 
comparing it to the messages of the Latin and Greek texts. 
 It is appropriate here to set out a translation of the hieroglyphic text, based on 
the German translation given by Hoffmann et al.: 
(1) Government of Year One, Month four of the winter season (= 
Pharmuthi), day twenty under the majesty of Horus: perfect young man, 
shall live forever. There was a powerful ruler in the Two Lands (= Egypt), 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 167. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 69-118 for a full treatment of the text. 
- 131 - 
with a slaughtering (?) / grabbing (?) arm, who takes, as general, (2) who 
spreads [terror] among [the]... He has made Egypt safe, he who floods 
Egypt with his perfection; he has shown kindness to Egypt. [He has 
taken/captured (?) the Troglo]dytes (?); he has taken hold of the inhabitants 
of foreign lands; an archer, strong in the turmoil of battle, (3) a splendid 
hero. He has destroyed in rage, he who strikes at the enemy. [He (?)] sent 
(?) [- -]  ..., the one who brings first-class products such as Horus, who 
promises the wonderful products from Punt, (4) to whom the Nubians and 
Indians go in praise with (?) the (?) beautiful (?) [things] (?), to whom (?) 
one should (?) the secret[s
West (or similar); he conquered (or similar) the ar]ea (or similar) as far as 
the borders of the East; he attacked the East of the Two Lands, he took (= 
conquered) (5) as far as the land of Manu (= the West). They are the 
Phoenicians (and) Libyans. He built a temple, he let the temple prosper, 
[he] satisfied [the gods (?)], [he (?) produced (?)] statues of the gods, he 
bestowed on the gods of both spring-sources beneficial things, where he 
established a monument, of the great excellent one (=Khnum). (6) He 
calculated what was to be determined of the whole country while instigator, 
so that the offering for Khnum, the Great, is beneficial.  [He] praised [all] 
(?) the gods (?)] in the piling up of gifts, (so that) Hapi
 springs up for his 
  He in turn supplied [each (?)] city. Now he continues to do so to 
show good, by the banks of the lands (7) of Horus (= Egypt/ the Temple of 
Egypt) by seeing/knowing his love (and) he did (it) beneficially, (and) he 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 85, the sense is inaccessible. 
 Bunson (1991) 99, 105:  the personification of the Nile. 
 Bunson (1991) 130: term for a spiritual essence, which existed alongside the physical human entity 
and yet was considered individual from it; see Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 94 for Gallus Ka. 
- 132 - 
renewed Upper and Lower Egypt. (There) were enemies ...[far away] to 
destroy. He went against the enemy, (he,) strong in arm on the day of the 
meeting, he who seized the bodies (?) to [...,] (8) without stopping at 
...of...Bigge
 (?). He brought the great people of the Kush to peace, [he] 
disturb[ed (?) the plans (?) of] the great ones of the archer people of the 
Bedouin. He honoured Isis of Renu,
 great in space at Philae. He 
calculated (9) the ... of the Two Lands.  <He> ordered their things to Isis of 
Nenet,
 the Golden one. [He] satisfied Os[iris (or similar), he set the 
income (or similar) for the temple (or similar) of the Master (or similar) of 
Calming (= Osiris), namely the Abaton
 with its hidden shape (= Osiris), 
before the officials of Upper and Lower Egypt. [He (?) has (?) collected 
gifts [through] (10) (his) power, (and) one should give to the master of the 
treasury (?) [for (?) ma]ny (?) [years (?)], so that Egypt is rich in/under the 
live forever.
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 102 on the geographical location of Bigge in Greco-Roman times, which was 
part in Egypt and part in Nubia. 
 A toponym. 
 Another toponym. 
 The burial place of Osiris. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 49- 50: 1) Regierungsjahr 1, 4. Monat der Winterjahreszeit (= Pharmuthi), Tag 
[den Pta]h [erwhlt hat], Kaisaros)|, er lebe ewig.  Er war ein mchtiger Frst in den Beiden Lndern 
(gypten), mit schlachtendem (?) / packendem(?)  Arm, der  ergreift als Herr,  
2) der [Schrecken] verbreitet unter [den..]...Er hat gypten  wohlbehalten sein lassen, der gypten mit 
seiner Vollkommenheit berflutet; Er hat gypten Gutes erwiesen.  [Er hat die Troglo]dyten(?)  
[ergriffen (?)/ erbeutet (?)]; er hat die Fremdlandbewohner gepackt; ein Bogen<schtze>, Starker im 
Kampfgewhl,  
Erstklassiges herbeibringt wie Horus, der die wunderbaren Erzeugnisse von Punt verheit;  
 4) zu dem die Nubier und Inder in Lobpreis fahren mit (?) den (?) schnen (?) (Dingen) (?), dem  (?) Soll  
das Geb]iet (o.) bis zu den Grenzen des Ostens; Er griff den Osten der Beiden Lnder an, er packte 
(=eroberte) 
 5) bis zum Land von Manu (=Westen).  Sie sind die Phnizier (und) Libyer.  Er errichtete einen 
Tempel, er lie einen Tempel gedeihen,[ er] stellt[e die Gtter (?)] zufrieden,[ er  (?) stellte (?)] 
- 133 - 
 The inscription opens with the first year of the new government (29 B.C.), 
which is qualified as under the majesty of Horus, whose solar disk dominates the 
pediment of the stele. The new regal calendar is attributed to Caesar the ruler of 
rulers..., who shall live forever. This epithet was traditionally applied to the ruler of 
Egypt,
 who is also understood as the incarnation of Horus himself.
 Thus Octavian, 
as the prince of Egypt, and Horus incarnate are placed above Gallus both in the text, 
and in the visual display (Horus solar display is set above the rider relief). Gallus is 
introduced in line two as a powerful ruler (mchtiger Frst) in command of the Two 
Lands (i.e. Egypt). Lines 2-7 focus on the military strength of Egypt under Gallus 
command (2-4, 6), and Egypts place within the world as demonstrated by their receipt 
of tribute from foreign nations (5-6), before focusing the attention on the gods of the 
First Cataract of Philae (7). It is notable that the text emphasises Egypts receipt of 
tribute and power over foreign nations, when Octavian had subjugated Egypt herself to 
Gtterbilder [her ?)], er schenkte den Gttern der beiden Quellcher Ntzliches, wobei er ein Denkmal 
des, groen Ach/Trefflichen (=Chnum) errichtete.  
6)  Er berechnete das zu Bestimmende des ganzen Landes beim Veranlassen, da das Opfer fr Chnum, 
den Groen, ntzlich ist.  [Er] pries [all]e (?) [Gtter (?)] beim Aufhufen von Gaben, (so da) Hapi fr 
seinen Ka hervorquillt.  Er (= Gallus) wiederum versorgte[ jede (?)] Stadt.  Nun blieb er (also) dabei, 
Gutes zu erweisen, indem die Uferlnder  
7) des Horus (=gypten/Tempel gyptens) seine Liebe sahen, (und) er tat Ntzliches,(und) er erneuerte 
(er,) stark an Arm am Tage des Zusammentreffens, der die Leiber packt (?) zu [...,]  
8) ohne damit aufzuhren beim...von...Bigge (?).  Er befriedete die Groen von Kusch, [er] str[te (?) die 
Plne (?) der ] Groen des Bogen(volkes) der Beduinen. Er ehrte die Isis von Renu, gro an Sttte in 
Philae.  Er berechnete  
9) die ... der Beiden Lnder. <Er> befahl ihre Dinge an Isis von Nenet, die Goldene.  [Er] stellte zufrieden 
Os[iris (o..), er setzte die Einknfte fest (o..) fr den Tempel (o..) des Herrn (o..)] des Ruhens (= 
Osiris),( nmlich) das Abaton Dessen mit verborgener Gesalt ( = Osiris), vor den Beamten von Ober- 
und Untergypten. [Er (?) hat (?) Gaben eingezogen [durch]  
10) (seine) Macht, (und) man soll <an> den Herrn der Kasse (?) geben [whrend (?) vi]eler (?) [Jahre (?)], 
so da gypten reich ist in/unter den (?) Lndern (?) entsprechend [dem (?), was (?) befohlen (?) hat 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 72. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 70. 
- 134 - 
give tribute to Rome. The presentation of Egypt under the rule of Octavian, as managed 
by Gallus, speaks of her dominant position in the world, and of her prosperity. 
 The second half of the inscription (8-10) demonstrates Gallus protection of 
Egypt from external threat, thus referring back to the relief sculpture, and his 
maintenance of the cult at Philae, and records the tribute to be paid for this protection to 
Octavian, whilst still emphasising the wealth of Egypt. The text ends with another 
reference to Caesar, who shall live forever.  
From the perspective of the hieroglyphic inscription the stele commemorates the 
restoration of Egypt under Octavian and Gallus, with particular reference to the cult of 
the First Cataract gods at Philae, thus maintaining the local, cultic associations. Such a 
presentation of Egypt under Octavians and Gallus rule is in sharp contrast to the 
obelisk later erected at Rome by Octavian, which declared Romes dominion over 
Egypt.
 At Philae, the hieroglyphic text speaks to an Egyptian audience, and it is 
plausible that it is in fact the priests of Philae who are responsible for the hieroglyphic 
text,
 depicting Octavians rule as a continuation of the traditional Pharaonic rule, 
which Gallus demonstrates through both military and financial successes.  
The strong cult associations of the hieroglyphic text are only briefly referred to in 
both the Latin and Greek texts as the ending dedication: patrieis et Nil[o adiut]ori 
d(onum) d(edit) /  [, [  . However, the 
importance of the location of the dedication remains evident in these two texts.
focus of both texts is the two victories that Gallus achieved during the revolt of Thebes: 
 See p. 142 below. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 116, 167-168; Bagnall (2012) 281. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 165-167. 
- 135 - 
C(aius) Cornelius Cn(aei) f(ilius) Gallu[s eq]ues Romanus, post reges  / a 
Caesare deivi f(ilio) devictos praefect[us Alex]andreae et Aegypti primus, 
defectioni[s] / Thebaidis intra dies XV, quibus hostem v[icit, bis a]cie 
victor, V urbium expugnator, Bore[se]-/ os, Copti, Cermaices, Diospoleos 
Meg[ales, Op]hieu, ducibus earum defectionum inter[ce]-/ptis, exercitu 
ultra Nili catarhacte[n transd]ucto, in quem locum neque populo / Romano 
neque regibus Aegypti [arma s]unt prolata, Thebaide communi omn[i]- / 
um regum formidine subact[a], leg[atis re]gis Aethiopum ad Philas auditis, 
eo[dem] / rege in tutelam recepto, tyrann[o] Tr[iacontas]choe(ni) in fine 
Aethiopiae constituto die[is] // patrieis et Nil[o adiut]ori d(onum) d(edit).
Gaius Cornelius Gallus, son of Gnaeus, Roman knight, after the kings had 
been conquered by Caesar son of the divine (Iulius), first Prefect of 
Alexandria and Egypt, Conqueror in two battles of the defection of Thebes, 
in the space of fifteen days, during which time he defeated the enemy, 
captor of five cities: Boreseis, Coptos, Keramike, Diospolis Magna, 
Ophieum, with the leaders of these defections intercepted, with the army led 
to the far side of the Cataract of the Nile, into which place neither the 
Roman people, nor the kings of Egypt had (before) borne weapons. With 
Thebes, the common fear of all kings, subdued, with the legates of the king 
of Ethiopia given audience at Philae, with the same king received into 
protection, with a tyrant of the Triakontaschonios at the limits of Ethiopia, 
to the ancestral gods and the Nile, the helper, gives this gift. 
 Bernand (1969) 36-37; Gordon (1983) 98; Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 119-120. 
- 136 - 
[] ,  , [, ] ,    
 /      [ ]   
,   -/     [ 
]   ,    -/   
, [  ]    ,    [] / 
, , , [, ] , ,  
   -/  ,   [  ]  
 ,   [] /      
[],      -/     
 [, ]    [] /   
 ,  [, ]  .455 
Gaius Cornelius Gallus, son of Gnaeus, Roman knight, after the destruction 
of the kings of Egypt, the first set up over Egypt by Caesar, having 
conquered by force two times in battle engagement, in fifteen days, Thebes, 
which had revolted, with the capture of the leaders of the defections, he 
took five cities, some by assault, others by seige: Boresis, Koptos, 
Keramike, Diospolis Magna, Ophieum, and with the army he crossed the 
Cataract, that place inaccessible to armies before this, and he subjected all 
Thebes, which had not been subjugated by the kings, he set up a tyrant of 
the Triakontaschoinos which formed only one district, thanks-offerings to 
the ancestral gods, and to the Nile, the helper. 
Whilst the hieroglyphic inscription focused on what were perceived as external threats, 
such as the Kush and the Bedouin peoples (line 8), the Latin and Greek records the 
 Bernand (1969) 36-37; Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 120-121. 
- 137 - 
internal revolts of the cities above the First Cataract. These victories enable Gallus to 
march his army over the First Cataract, a feat he claims has not before been 
accomplished.
 It is fitting then that the stele was set up on Philae, just above the 
Cataract -  the southern boundary of Egypt - to mark the extent of Egypt under him.  
The hieroglyphic text is an account of Gallus rule of Egypt, his military 
achievements, his fiscal administration and his reverence of the state and local gods. In 
some respects the Latin and Greek texts are much briefer summaries of his military 
achievements and diplomatic relationships with neighbouring kingdoms. However, they 
are more detailed in respect to the particulars of Gallus victories against Thebes. Such 
details of internal political stability do not appear in the hieroglyphic text, but rather 
Octavians rule and Gallus administraion is presented as a continuation of the great 
Egypt state. The Latin and Greek texts serve to mark out the new rule and 
administration under Augustus after the defeat of the kings (post reges a Caesare deivi 
f. devictos /       ). 
 Bernand remarked on the distinction between the Latin and Greek texts: the 
Latin was a document public  la glorie de lEmpire, whilst the Greek was a 
concession  la langue de ladminstration ptolmaque et  la population vaincue.
Certainly, the Greek text is in the less dominant position, subordinated to both the 
hieroglyphic and Latin texts. Its purpose appears to be to present Gallus to a Greek 
speaking audience in similar tones to that of the official Latin text. However, one 
notable difference between the Latin and Greek texts is in the role of Octavian. In the 
Latin text he is credited with the conquest of the kings (of Egypt): post reges / a 
Caesare deivi f(ilio) devictos. However, whilst this event is recorded in the Greek text, 
 The language is reminiscent of Augustus own accounts in RG 26, 31, 32. 
 Bernand (1969) 46. 
- 138 - 
Octavians role is as appointer of Gallus as the first Prefect of Egypt:    
 /      [ ]   .458 The 
Greek text, perhaps as the official administrative language of the province, emphasises 
Gallus official appointment through Octavian. The Latin text instead starts from 
Octavians victories, which must be seen to enable Gallus own victories. Indeed, the 
Latin inscription is the only one that properly makes reference to Octavians role as the 
conqueror of Egypt, perhaps echoing the commemoration of the event by both Octavian 
and the senate.
 Yet it must also be noted that neither text speaks of pax, which was so 
prominent in Octavians own display in the East, and to a far lesser extent at Rome.
The phrase pax terra marique at Nicopolis, and later at Rome through Livys account of 
the Gates of Ianus, suggests his monopoly on the concept in victory display. Certainly, 
only Octavian could claim to have achieved such a feat. The stele is a record of Gallus 
own achievements rather than those of Octavian, and Gallus has not chosen, neither 
presumably was he obliged, to record the pax established by Octavian. 
Both Latin and Greek texts refer solely to reges/, thus avoiding any 
reference to the Roman civil war (Antony),
 and do not name Cleopatra as the 
deposed Queen of Egypt.
 This event is completely absent from the hieroglyphic text, 
which does not mention the internal instability of Egypt. The enemies of Octavians 
victory are only vaguely sketched, although the reference would not have been lost to 
an audience with knowledge of real, political events of the civil wars; the enemies of 
Gallus, on the other hand, are far more vividly imagined. The stele is a demonstration of 
 after the destruction of the kings of Egypt, the first set up over Egypt by Caesar. 
 Dio  Cass. 51.19.1 ff; CIL VI 701, 702; RG 4.3.   
 The Gates of Ianus, see pp 88-90 above. 
 See pp. 69, 82 and 120 n. 413 above. 
 The plural may refer both to Antony and Cleopatra, but also Cleopatras children: Hoffmann, et al. 
(2009) 127-128. This is reminiscent of Propertius references in 2.1.33: aut regum auratis circumdata 
colla catenis. 
- 139 - 
Gallus personal victories as praefectus Aegypti et Alexandriae, though they are placed 
in the overall context of Octavians rule over Egypt.  
The date of the stele, 16
 April 29 B.C.,
 places the monument in the wake of 
the victories over Actium and Alexandria, and after the senates celebration of the 
cessation of war with the closing of the Gates of Ianus in January that year. The 
monument pre-dates the return of Octavian to Rome, and the final celebrations of the 
triple triumph, though it may be contemporary with the monument Octavian himself 
dedicated at Actium.
 The steles primary function is to commemorate, in several 
different ways, to different audiences, Gallus successes against the enemies of Egypt 
(or over the new province of Egypt, as the Latin and Greek texts intimate). Whilst pax 
is never mentioned, the conclusion of all three inscriptions is that of the security of the 
province through Gallus victories.
 These victories serve to present Roman control 
over Egypt within a traditional Egyptian framework for an Egyptian, cultic audience (as 
the message protection of the First Cataract gods and prosperity of Egypt indicates), a 
Latin-speaking audience (following on from Octavians destruction of the kings, Gallus 
secures the province of Egypt and extends diplomatic relations beyond the Cataract), 
and a Greek speaking audience. Gallus official position in the province is proven by 
his appointment by Octavian, and by his own accomplishments. 
* * * 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 70. 
 See p. 112 above. 
 The hieroglyphic text does appear to refer to the pacification of the Kush (s tp), though it is likely 
that pacification by force is meant, particularly as the following reference speaks of Gallus 
disturbing/violating (sn) the Beduin Plains: Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 102-103. 
- 140 - 
The context of Gallus commemoration at an Egyptian cultic site had strong 
repercussions for the primary language and display of his stele: it was first and foremost 
celebrating at a local level the accomplishments of Gallus for the cults of the island: 
Khnum, Anukis (goddess of the First Cataract), and Satis, who were paralleled or 
echoed by Osiris, Isis (at whose Temple the stele was most likely erected) and Horus as 
the main gods of Egypt. The fundamental differences between the hieroglyphic text, 
and the Latin and Greek texts, and the presentation of Octavian and Gallus within the 
hieroglyphic document makes Hoffmann et al.s argument for the priests of Philae as 
the authors of the hieroglyphic text  highly plausible.
 The importance of integrating 
the victory into the context of the site is clear. The display at Philae is certainly in 
contrast to the Roman setting of Gallus Latin-inscribed obelisk, and yet he appears to 
have been responsible for communicating his achievements in both Latin and Greek.
This speaks of a desire not only to communicate to the widest possible audience, but 
also to be seen to be doing so. In this way Gallus victories were presented as beneficial 
not just from the perspective of local Egyptians, but also the administrative structure of 
the province, and to the wider empire. 
Gallus victory stele is a display of his success as a military commander and 
governor. The monument works within the wider commemoration of the period, yet 
demonstrates the ways in which an individual was able to promote himself and his 
victory in spite of the celebrations centred around Octavian at Nicopolis and at Rome. 
The stele does not present an opposing perspective on the victory of 29 B.C. to that set 
up at Rome by the senate, or by Octavian at Nicopolis, but illustrates the diverse ways 
in which victory could still be expressed. Whilst the hieroglyphic text does at one point 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 116, 167-168; Bagnall (2012) 281. 
 Hoffmann, et al. (2009) 165-172; Bagnall (2012) 281. 
- 141 - 
mention the pacification of the people of the Kush,
 none of the three inscriptions 
promotes pax or its equivalents as the main focus of the commemoration. The 
celebration of victory at Philae in 29 B.C. did not need to correspond directly to the 
message of pax terra marique that was played out at Actium by Octavian, and to a 
certain extent by the senate at Rome. The specific context of the location prompted the 
Priests at Philae to direct the primary text to the cult of the First Cataract and the 
religious centre of the island, and to display the ways in which Gallus achievements 
had guaranteed their prosperity. Yet Gallus himself strove to record his achievements in 
Latin and Greek, and present two different accounts from that of the hieroglyphic text. 
Perhaps the one constant of the stele is the rider relief, which emphasised to all 
audiences his position as victor and defender of Egypt.  
What Gallus victory stele at Philae illustrates is the dependency of a victory 
display on an audience, and how the message of victory could be manipulated 
accordingly. Furthermore, the monument demonstrates that whilst Octavian was 
pressing forward with an ideology of pax terra marique, the beneficial aspects of 
victory could still be expressed to different peoples without recourse to that specific 
motif. 
 See n. 465 above. 
- 142 - 
Summary 
 This chapter has examined the different victory commemorations of Octavians 
defeat of Antony and Cleopatra at Actium and Alexandria in order to understand the use 
and conceptualisation of pax within these victory displays. 
It is clear that languages of victory emerged from the celebrations of the 30s 
B.C., which commemorated the successes of the winning faction during the civil wars. 
The silence about the civil enemy in the triumphal celebrations, along with the concept 
of pax terra marique as established both within the empire and over circa populi, 
suggests how the idea of victorious pax as an emblem of the emerging political system 
was accomplished. pax had of course been prominent in the victory displays of 40 B.C., 
when Octavian and Antony made peace. Yet now in 29 B.C. Octavian was sole 
commander of Romes armies and leader of the state; the pax he celebrated was not 
concerned with reconciliation with his fellow triumvir, but rather became an assertion 
of his command terra marique. 
 For the audience at Rome, the closing of the Gates of Ianus heralded the new 
year, demonstrating the end of all wars (both real and potential, as the fear of Parthia 
demonstrated). The celebrations of a stable situation achieved in external affairs, as 
symbolised by the closing of the Gates, may have played on Octavians earlier display 
in the Roman Forum of his columna rostrata of 36 B.C., which also celebrated the re-
establishment of pax/ after the end of war, without reference to an opponent. In 36 
B.C. Sextus was not alluded to: the ovation was over Sicily and the columna rostrata 
celebrated pax without an opponent.  
- 143 - 
The celebrations of 29 B.C. blurred the line between victory in foreign war and 
in civil war, yet Antony was still alluded to. Octavians position within the state was 
affirmed by the erasure of Antony from the Forum display, alongside Octavians 
promotion. What the displays at Rome illustrate is the continual blurring of civil and 
foreign aspects of war and victory commemoration in 29 B.C. This appears to have 
been a particular concern of the senate, for whom pax was not important, or was at least 
secondary to the issue of the foreign/civil aspects of the victory. Once Octavian was 
established as the sole victor, the concept of pax terra marique could be applied to both 
the restoration of civil harmony (although there was no one to make pax with as there 
had been during the 40s and early 30s) and the stability achieved over Romes empire. 
Indeed, the two were in fact co-dependent. Yet the rhetoric of pax was moving away 
from the discourses of the civil war, and becoming an expression of Roman imperium 
over an empire, as the victory monument at Nicopolis illustrates. 
 It is notable that the phrase pax terra marique (which Appian indicates was 
inscribed on the columna rostrata of 36 B.C.) was again employed in the monument 
above Nicopolis in 29 B.C. The use of a monumental Latin inscription within a Greek 
sanctuary is a testimony to the dependency of the newly established community on a 
concept of pax. The relationship between the monument and the city is clear, with the 
main axis of the citys gates binding it to the Roman trophy on the hillside. The pax of 
the monument assured stability in Epirus, which was reliant on Octavian and the victory 
won pro re publica. The pax of the Roman victory was integrated into the Greek 
community, in order to articulate the area as part of the Roman world. This appears to 
be a discourse that was easier to carry out away from Rome, since the civil war and 
political rivalry were not concerns. As with Octavians columna rostrata of 36 B.C., 
pax was here expressed without the need for an opponent. 
- 144 - 
 Gallus victory stele at Philae offers another view on victory in 29 B.C. That is 
not to say that the display contradicts or opposes those at either Rome or Nicopolis, but 
demonstrates now that the message of victory did not have to be dominated by the 
message of pax terra marique established by Octavian. The monument illustrates the 
freedom of expression with which the priests at Philae and Gallus could articulate his 
achievements to different audiences, although in all three cases, his position is clearly 
shown to be under Octavians command, and as a result of his victory over Egypt. 
Gallus stele is a balanced display that addresses a multitude of audiences with different 
interpretations of victory, in order to promote his, and Octavians, position and control 
within Egypt.  
It is possible to understand the use of the phrase pax terra marique as a message 
and display specific to Octavians achievements in the wars of 36 and 31-30 B.C., 
appropriate for expressing his control over the East at Nicopolis, and for articulating his 
position within the state at Rome, but not necessarily in a victory display of his prefect 
of Egypt, who need only emphasise Octavian as the ruler of rulers and conqueror of 
kings. 
 Finally it is worthwhile considering how the events of 31-30 B.C. were later 
depicted at Rome, in the context of pax augusta, and how the evolving conception of 
pax can be seen to manipulate the representation of past wars and victories. In 10/9 B.C. 
Augustus erected his solar meridian on the Campus Martius, and dedicated the obelisk 
(the gnomon of the monument) to Sol. The inscription on the monuments base 
recorded the subjugation of Egypt to the potestas populi Romani.
 The meridian was 
visually and spatially linked to the altar of Pax Augusta, which was dedicated on the 
Campus in 9 B.C. By the time of the erection of the Ara Pacis Augustae, Augustus 
 See p. 132 above. 
- 145 - 
could re-establish his victory over Egypt as an exemplum of his continued role as the 
bringer of pax terra marique through his military success.
 By 9 B.C. the victory of 30 
B.C. was understood solely as a victory of pax augusta; any civil aspects of the war had 
long since been removed. 
* * * 
 In Part II of this thesis I consider the role of pax within different discourses on 
the nature of Roman imperialism, as regards the interactions of Rome with specific 
areas and peoples. The following two chapters examine two different aspects of pax as 
a part of Roman victory rhetoric during the Augustan principate. I first examine how 
the pax established with Parthia through diplomacy was commemorated to express 
Romes imperium (chapter three), and then how military victory in the West was 
expressed in terms of pax established (chapter four). 
Before turning to examine these examples of pax as expressions of Roman 
imperialism, I will briefly discuss the intervening period from 28 B.C. down to the 
Parthian settlement in order to understand what is happening then to the concept of pax. 
In 28 B.C. Octavian claimed to have restored the laws and rights to the Roman people 
(leges et iura p. R. restituit), as a coin minted in that year shows (Figure 52).
Although Octavian, or Augustus as he was now to be known, ostensibly returned 
control of the provinces to the people of Rome at the start of 27 B.C., in actuality he 
 The relationship between the solar meridian and the Ara Pacis Augustae will be discussed in detail in 
chapter four, pp. 247-249 below. 
 British Museum accession number CM 1995.4-1.1. Rich and Williams (1999); Rich (2003) 346; RG 
34.1: in consulatu sexto et septimo, postquem bella civilia exstinxeram, per consensum universorum 
potens rerum omnium, rem publicam ex mea potestate in senatus populique Romani arbitrium transtuli 
(In my sixth and seventh consulships, after I had put an end to civil wars, although by everyones 
agreement I had power over everything, I transferred the state from my power to the judgement of the 
senate and the people of Rome). 
- 146 - 
retained control of the main military provinces, the two Spains, the two Gauls, Syria, 
and Egypt, thus providing a solid basis for his military and political predominance. Rich 
has argued convincingly that Augustus justified his control of these provinces through 
the rhetoric of the pacification of an empire,
 a tactic similar to that used to retain his 
legions after his defeat of Sextus in 36 B.C, once he declared pax had been restored, yet 
pacification was still required.
 Between the years of 27 and 24 B.C. Augustus was away from Rome, 
campaigning in Spain, and in 25 B.C. he closed the Gates of Ianus for a second time as 
a testimony to the pax he achieved within and over the empire.
 Yet Augustus was 
still faced with the supposed Parthian threat to the establishment of a pacified empire. It 
is to his diplomatic pact with Parthia that I now turn in order to examine the different 
rhetorics of pax and victory that were used to conceptualise Romes imperium and 
relationship to her empire at this point. 
 Rich (2003) 346-348; Dio 53.12.2. 
 See pp. 65-65 above. 
 RG 13; Dio Cass. 53.26.5. Spain would contain to be a problem until 16 B.C. when it was finally 
pacified, see chapter four, p. 218 below. 
- 147 - 
PART II 
pax and the empire 
- 148 - 
Chapter Three 
Pax with Parthia: victory rhetoric of the Parthian 
settlement 
In 20 B.C. Augustus received from King Phraates IV of Parthia the Roman 
soldiers and military standards lost in 53, 40 and 36 B.C.
 This had been the condition 
on which Augustus, in 23 B.C., had returned Phraates son to him.
 Augustus had held 
him as a , a pledge of negotiations, after Phraates defeat of Tiridates, king of 
Armenia.
 In 23 B.C. an embassy from Phraates and Tiridates himself arrived in 
Rome to argue their disagreement before Augustus. After this debate Augustus saw fit 
to return his  on the condition that Phraates would return the standards and 
soldiers. This arrangement was doubtless engineered by Augustus to correspond with 
his campaign to arrange affairs in the East the following year.
 Certainly Dio suggests 
Phraates finally returned the standards three years later owing to the threat he felt from 
Augustus presence.
 The completion of the pact in the East in 20 B.C. meant that 
Augustus was able to return to Rome with the standards.
The ovations of 40 B.C. were held because pax was made between two Roman 
generals, whilst after the civil wars with Antony, Octavian developed a rhetoric of pax 
 Dio Cass. 48.25, 49.24.5; Plut. Ant. 37.2, 38.5-6, 40.6. 
 Dio Cass. 53.33.2. 
 Dio Cass. 51.18.3. The use of a son as a hostage for pax is also attested in the peace established 
between the assassins of Caesar and Antony: Cic. Phil. 2.90: pacem haberemus, quae erat facta per 
obsidem puerum nobilem. 
 Dio Cass. 54.6.1, 54.7.1-54.10.2; Vell. Pat. 2.92.1-2; RG 11. 
 Dio Cass. 54.8.1. 
 Rich (1998) 72. It was in fact Tiberius who was sent to receive the standards from Phraates, whilst 
Augustus was in Syria: Suet. Tib. 9; Vell. Pat. 2.94. 
- 149 - 
that was not constructed in relation to an opponent, but was rather an expression of his 
imperium and position within the state. Following the civil wars of the 30s and the 
military campaigns of pacification in the West which began in 27 B.C.,
 Augustus 
Parthian campaign marked a decidedly different approach to controlling the empire, 
given the history of Romes conflicts with Parthia and the need for Augustus to succeed 
where others had failed. At Rome, the diplomatic act of returning the standards, 
essentially a form of pact (pax) with Parthia,
 was celebrated by Augustus and the 
senate as the culmination of Romes victories. Roman imperialism was celebrated as 
victorious pax and a new age founded on the subservience of the Parthians.  
 This chapter examines how the specific act of making pax (here pact, without 
the need for war) with the Parthians was interpreted and commemorated as a political 
tool for the expression of empire. This is also to consider the ways in which this form of 
pax became a justification of Roman imperialism, and to understand how Parthia, as a 
nation, fitted into Romes rhetoric of Imperial pax. The Parthian settlement illustrates 
how this form of pax was presented and conceptualised in order to express Romes 
relations to her empire: in 19 B.C. the victory displays at Rome combined the ideas of 
pax as a diplomatic agreement and as an expression of imperium to celebrate the 
prosperity and authority of the Roman state over its empire (imperium domi 
militiaeque). The acceptance by Parthia of Romes supremacy through the return of the 
 The campaigns in Spain and Gaul continued down to 16 B.C., whilst the Alpine regions were pacified 
between 17 and 14 B.C: see chapter four, p. 218 below 
 Livy Per. 141: Pax cum Parthis facta est signis a rege eorum, quae sub Crasso et postea sub Antonio 
capta erant, redditis; Florus 2.34: pax Parthorum...Parthi quoque, quasi victoriae paeniteret, rapta clade 
Crassiana signa ultro rettulere. Sic ubique certa atque continua totius generis humanis aut pax fuit aut 
pactio (The peace of the Parthians...The Parthians too, as though they repented their victory, returned 
the standards, seized in the defeat of Crassus, of their own accord. Thus everywhere there was a certain 
and continous peace or agreement of all mankind). 
- 150 - 
standards and her submission to the amicitia of Rome and Augustus was used to 
illustrate the full control and authority of the state with Augustus at its head.
 I will first examine here the conceptualisation of Parthia at Rome both prior to 
and after 20 B.C. in order to understand what effect the pax had on Romes perception 
of Parthia as a part of her empire, and how this pax was interpreted as part of the 
rhetoric of empire. 
In section one, I will examine the presentations at Rome of the pax established 
with Parthia to show how Augustus and the senate celebrated the settlement as a form 
of victory, and how both linked the return of the standards with victory displays specific 
to Rome: the rare act of dedicating the spolia opima, and the triumph respectively. The 
displays at Rome further emphasised what the achievement of pax with Parthia meant: 
the stability of Romes internal politics and the preservation of her domestic offices, 
and served as an indication of the novum saeculum. 
In section two, I will examine how, some 20 years later, the return of the 
standards continued to serve as an emblem of the pax Rome established with Parthia 
within the context of the Forum Augustum. Whilst in 19 B.C. the commemorations 
used the single example of the Parthian pax as an expression of Romes control over her 
empire, in 2 B.C. the Parthian standards served as one (albeit unusual) example 
amongst many in a display of the pacified orbis terrarum. The Forum space became a 
new arena in which foreign dignitaries came to seek pax with Rome, and the context of 
this negotiation promoted a message of Romes victory over an empire.  
 RG 29: Parthos trium exercitum Romanorum spolia et signa reddere mihi supplicesque amicitiam 
populi Romani petere coegi (I compelled the Parthians to return the spoils and standards of the three 
Roman armies to me and as supplicants to seek the friendship of the Roman people); Hor. Epist. 
1.12.27-28: ius imperiumque Phraates / Caesaris accepit genibus minor (Phraates accepted the right 
and authority of Caesar on his knees). See also stenberg (2009b) 64-66. 
- 151 - 
In the final section, I will examine how the pax with Parthia was presented in 
the provinces, by the Imperial mints, Roman colonies and local communities. Augustus 
settlement with Parthia is treated predominantly as a victory over Parthia and as a 
demonstration of Romes control over the East, although there are references to the 
association of Parthian victory and the Ludi Saeculares in the numismatic displays in 
Spain, which are possible to understand in the context of disseminating a message to the 
Roman colonies in the area via the Imperial mints. There is little conceptualisation in 
the provinces of Romes dealings with Parthia in terms of pax. At Rome there existed a 
more complex series of displays as regards what the pax with Parthia meant, through 
which the senate linked the return of the Parthian standards to the new age (novum 
saeculum) and the triumph of imperium domi, as well as celebrating it as a victory. 
* * * 
Romes first contact with Parthia dates to the diplomatic relations established 
between Sulla, then praetor of Cilicia, and the Parthian king, Mithridates II, in 92 B.C. 
Further encounters occurred during the Mithridatic Wars, when Lucullus in 69-68 and 
then Pompey in 66 came into contact with the Parthian king.
 As Lerouge has pointed 
out, the sources for these early relations with Parthia all themselves date to after the 
events at Carrhae, at which point the Parthians began to occupy a place of importance in 
the literature of the period.
 Nevertheless, even in the wake of the defeat of Crassus, 
the senates response to the possible Parthian threat to the eastern provinces appears to 
be surprisingly indifferent and limited: Cicero, fearing an invasion of his province of 
 Ziegler (1964); Ball (2001) 8-15; Lerouge (2007) 42ff. 
 Plut. Sull. 5; Luc. 30; Pomp. 33; Lerouge (2007) 44; Campbell (1993) 214. 
- 152 - 
Cilicia in 50 B.C.,
 infers from Caelius letters to him that the senate did not show due 
concern regarding Parthia.
 The literary evidence suggests that the Parthians became a focal point in Roman 
thought only from the period of the Augustan principate onwards.
 Despite the 
frequency with which the Parthians are treated in the literature of the period there is 
little evidence of any real ethnographic knowledge of them.
 Rome was less 
concerned with an ethnographic reality than with setting Parthia within an ideological 
framework. The narrative of Romes early contact with Parthia is retrospective and 
projects the rhetoric and ideology of the Augustan principate onto the past. 
The Augustan representation of the Parthians and their relations to Rome falls 
into two separate periods: before and after Augustus restoration of the standards in 20 
B.C. Prior to 20 B.C. the theme of revenge and Romes portented victory in battle 
against Parthia was dominant. Virgil in his Georgics, published in 29 B.C., refers to war 
on the Euphrates,
 whilst Horace in his Odes 1-3, published in 23 B.C., reflects the 
attitude of Augustus campaign, planned against Parthia in the same year.
 Livy does 
allude in his ninth book (published 27-25 B.C.)
 to the defeat of the Romans by the 
Parthians (equitem, sagittas, saltus impeditos) without any reference to the concept of 
vengeance, but he does attempt to negate the force of Romes defeat by emphasising 
 Cic. Ad. Att. 6.1.14: bellum Parthicum impendet; Ad Fam.15.1; 15.2; 15.3; 15.4. 
Cic. Ad Fam. 8.10: sed de Parthorum transitu nuntii varios semones excitarunt (but news concerning 
the movement of the Parthians has given rise to various suggestions) see also Cic. Ad Fam. 15.4; 
Lerouge (2007) 84-85; Campbell (1993) 216-217; Sherwin-White (1990) 292: Ciceros letters reveal a 
remarkable indifference at Rome to the possible consequences of the Parthia victory. 
 Lerouge (2007) 32; Campbell (1993) 216-227. 
 Drijvers (1998) 291; Lerouge (2007) 22-44, 361-363; Schneider (2007) 58-60; Schneider (1998). 
 Verg. G. 1.509. 
 Hor. Carm. 1.12.53-6, 1.19.11-12, 2.13.17-18, 3.2.3-4. See also Prop. 3.4.3-7, 3.5.47-48, 3.9.54-56, 
3.12.3-12, 4.3.35-36, 4.3.67-68. 
 Luce (2009) 17. 
- 153 - 
with the repetition of numquam that Rome has never been defeated by infantry, in open 
battle, or on favourable ground: 
Absit invidia verbo et civilia bella sileant: nunquam ab equite hoste, 
numquam a pedite, numquam aperta acie, numquam aequis, utique 
nunquam nostris locis laboravimus: equitem, sagittas, saltus impeditos, 
auia commeatibus loca gravis armis miles timere potest. Mille acies 
graviores quam Macedonum atque Alexandri avertit avertetque, modo sit 
perpetuus huius qua vivimus pacis amor et civilis cura concordiae.
I trust that I shall not give offence when I say that, leaving aside the civil 
wars, we have never found an enemys cavalry or infantry too much for us, 
when we have fought in the open field, on ground equally favourable for 
both sides, still less when the gournd has given us an advantage. Cavalry, 
arrows, difficult passes and regions that afford no road to convoys, may 
well occasion fear in the heavy armed soldier. But he has repulsed a 
thousand armies more formidable than those of Alexander and his 
Macedonians, and will repulse them in the future if only the love of peace 
and the civil concorn for concord, which we now enjoy, reamains 
undisturbed for all the years to come. 
 Livy 9.19.15-17. Luce (2009) 36 argues that this passage must date to before 23 B.C. when initial 
negotiations for the return of the standards and Augustus campaign were planned. 
- 154 - 
Livys reference to pax in this context is concerned with the internal stability of the 
Roman state, achieved at the end of civil wars, rather than any concept of a pact 
established with an external enemy. 
Prior to 20 B.C. Romes relations with Parthia were characterised in terms of 
military conquest and defeat; it was only with the diplomatic retrieval of the standards 
that Romes relations with Parthia was qualified in terms of pax.
 The very act of 
making a pact with Parthia brought the concept of pax into Augustan victory rhetoric 
regarding Parthia. Augustus later stated that he compelled the Parthian king to seek the 
amicitia of the Roman people.
 By treating the pax made with Parthia as a form of 
victory Augustus, the senate and Roman writers illustrated the power of Rome to 
control and dictate terms to the Parthians.  
Roman literature prior to 20 B.C. reveals the Romans self-awareness of the 
ignominy of the captured Roman standards and the need for revenge.
 This sentiment 
is picked up by the later Greek writer Strabo. Strabo is the only author to depict a 
Parthian viewpoint  or what Strabo assumed to be a Parthian perspective  of the 
military standards as spoils taken from the Romans in war, and accordingly displayed to 
celebrate Parthian victory:  ...    .497 In this 
way Strabo emphasies that Parthia is an empire that possibly rivals Rome,
yet he 
 Hor. Epist. (published in 20 B.C.) 1.12.27-28, 1.18.56-57; Carm. 4.5.25-7, 4.15.5-12, 4.15.33 
(published in 13 B.C. may also reflect the consecration of the Ara Pacis Augustae). Verg. Aen. (published 
19 B.C.) 7.601-6, 8.726-8. Campbell (1993) 226-227; Gruen (1982) 63-67 for a discussion of references to 
Parthia in the literary sources. On the presentation of Roman imperialism in relation to the Parthians 
see Gruen (1990) 415-416; Isaac (1990) 21-22. 
 RG 29, see n. 483 above. 
 Hor. Carm. 4.15.5-8; Ov. Fast. 5.585ff; Prop. 3.4.3ff. 
 Str. 16.1.28. The only evidence of the Parthians own celebration of the victory over Rome that 
survives for us is the overstriking of Antonys coinage by Phraates IV: Sellwood (1971) 146. 
 Str. 11.6.4: The supremacy of the Romans and that of the Parthians has disclosed considerably more 
knowledge than that which had previously come down to us by tradition; see also 1.2.1; 6.4.2; 11.9.2, 
11.13.2; Clarke (1999) 226-228. 
- 155 - 
also articulates Romes
victory and power over Parthia through her ability to compel 
Parthia to return the very trophies of victory they had erected. 
The image of Parthia as a rival to Rome also appears in the contemporary work 
of Pompeius Trogus,
 and possibly Timagenes of Alexandria.
 Clearly, there was an 
awareness during the late Republic and Augustan principate of the Parthians as a 
powerful force in the East. Yet Livy strongly criticises this viewpoint, which he 
assigned to the silliest of Greeks.
 Dueck has argued that Strabo consciously 
presented both the official concept (that of Roman superiority over Parthia, as 
Augustus Res Gestae emphasises)
 in order to present the official Roman image of 
the oikoumene, and an anti-Roman concept of a rivalry of power between the two states, 
in order to highlight the presence of other powers on the periphery of the empire.
Certainly for Strabo much of the geographical knowledge he describes is dependent on 
the conquests and imperium of Rome, and in this respect he is influenced by Roman 
politics.
 Strabo depicts the two currents of literary thought on the Parthians which 
existed during the time of Augustus principate,
 both of which should be seen as 
valid and relevant. The growing importance of Parthia in Roman imperial ideology and 
foreign policy is clear from the continued attempts to conquer it in the last decades of 
 Just. Epit. 41.1.1: Parthi, penes quos velut divisione orbis cum Romanis facta nunc Orientis imperium 
est, Scytharum exules fuere (The Parthians, who now have the rule of the East, as if there was a division 
of the world with the Romans, were exiles of the Scythians); 41.1.7; 41.6.8. 
 Livy 9.18.6 refers to the anti-Roman remarks made, scholars assume, by the Greek rhetorican and 
historian Timagenes: levissimi ex Graecis, qui Parthorum quoque contra nomen Romanum gloriae favent 
(the silliest of Greeks, who exalt the reputation of even the Parthians against the Romans); Dueck 
(2000) 114, 135-136. 
 See n. 500 above. 
 RG 32. 
 Dueck (2000) 114-115. 
 Dueck (2000) 85-115; Clarke (1999) 294-295, 341-342. 
 Strabos Geography appears to have been written between A.D. 18-24, though with research and 
collection of sources taking place during the Augustan principate, since most of Strabos contemporary 
references related to the period after the assassination of Caesar down until c. 7 B.C.: See Dueck (2000) 
145-151 for the dating of Strabos Geography. Dueck (2000) 151 refers to the Geography as a Tiberian 
work chronologically, but an Augustan one thematically. 
- 156 - 
the Republic. Whilst the strength of Parthia may indeed have been emphasised by those 
seeking to depict a challenge to Romes imperium, the presentation of the Parthians as a 
rival power also helps to highlight the achievement of Augustus in prompting their 
supplication to him. 
* * * 
 In chapter one I examined how pax between two Roman generals was celebrated 
as a form of victory; now with Augustus firmly established as the head of state pax 
could be understood as the cause of victory over an external enemy. The second century 
author Florus, who compiled his history from Livy,
 appears to reflect this 
presentation of pax brought about through the return of the Parthian standards as a form 
of ultimate victory: 
Parthi quoque, quasi victoriae paeniteret, rapta clade Crassiana signa ultor 
rettulere. Sic ubique certa atque continuae totius generis humanis aut pax 
fuit aut pactio, aususque tandem Caesar Augustus septigentesimo ab urbe 
condita anno Ianum geminum cludere, bis ante se clusum sub Numa rege et 
victa primum Carthagine.
The Parthians also as if they regretted their victory, of their own accord 
returned the standards of Crassus, which were seized in defeat. So on all 
sides there was certain and continuous pact or accord for the people of 
 Epitome de T. Livio Bellorum omnium annorum DCC Libro duo. 
 Flor. 2.34. 
- 157 - 
every race, and at length Caesar Augustus dared, in the 700
the citys foundation, to shut (the Gates of ) Ianus Geminus, which had 
twice before been shut under king Numa and after the first defeat of 
Carthage. 
It is striking that Florus chooses the diplomatic negotiations with the Parthians (pax 
Parthorum)
 as his concluding account of the sum of all Romes wars, despite the fact 
that his account earlier deals with wars that occur after 20 B.C.
 The pax Parthorum 
represented the victory of pax for the empire. Furthermore, although Florus account of 
Romes pacification of the totus orbis dates to the second century A.D.,
 it is possible 
that he was in fact following Livys account of the episode, since the Periochae also 
state that pax was made with the Parthians on receipt of the standards.
 It is perhaps 
indicative of the link between the pax Parthorum and Augustus imperium over the 
empire that both Velleius Paterculus and Florus correlate the return of the standards 
with the taking of the name of Augustus, although the name was awarded to him seven 
years before the return of the standards.
I now turn to examine the celebrations at Rome which commemorate the pax 
established with Parthia in 20 B.C. as a form of victory. Rose has argued that the 
representation of the Parthians on the commemorative arch set up in the Forum after 20 
 Florus is clearly rounding down to 700 years, since the Gates of Ianus were closed in 29 B.C. (a.u.c. 
725) and in 25 B.C. (a.u.c. 729); RG 13 and Suet. Aug. 22.1 mention a third closure, but the date is 
uncertain. 
 This is the heading given for the final chapter of Florus work (2.34). However, the chapter headings 
were most likely margin references which were inserted into the text, and in some manuscripts are in 
part or completely absent: Jal (1967)  xiv-xviii. Nevertheless, the emphasis in the final chapters of Florus 
work is on the pacification of, and the establishment of peace in all regions of the empire (2.33-34). 
 Florus report of Augustus foreign wars (2.22-34) show a disregard for chronology, instead focusing 
on the geographical spread of conquest and pacification. 
 Flor. 1.intro.: Deinceps ad Caesarem Augustum CC anni, quibus totum orbem pacavit (then the 
period of 200 years down to Caesar Augustus, which saw the pacification of the whole world). 
 Livy, Per. 141: see n. 482 above. 
 Vell. Pat. 2.91.1; Flor. 2.34. 
- 158 - 
B.C. allowed the development of a very new conception of the peace that accompanied 
victory;
 in the following section I emphasise rather the victory that accompanied the 
establishment of pax. 
 Rose (2005) 35. 
- 159 - 
Section One 
The Presentations at Rome 
The return of the standards presents us with an instance wherein pax with an 
enemy, achieved without recourse to war,
 was commemorated at Rome as if it were a 
military victory. Whilst Augustus later referred to the establishment of amicitia with 
Phraates through the return of the standards and soldiers and by the giving of 
pignora,
 the evidence for the commemorations planned at Rome demonstrate a 
transmutation of a diplomatic negotiation into a victory celebration: 
              
  ,          
 .            
,       ,     
     ,       
      .      
  
...     .           
           
 Livy Per. 141; Florus 2.34. Other instances of pax achieved without the need for war include Livys 
account of Manlius Volsos establishment of pax with the Veii (Livy 2.54), although Dion. Hal. 9.36.3 
states that Manlius had ended the war: see 49 above; and Octavian and Antonys pax of 40 B.C., 
although war is not entirely absent from this establishment of pax, seeing as it takes place suring a long 
period of civil war: see chapter two above. 
 RG 29; 32. Velleius treats the return of the standards (Vell. Pat. 2.91.1) separately from the giving of 
hostages (Vell. Pat. 2.94.4. obsides), which he attributes to fear on the part of Phraates. Str. 16.1.28 
treats both together, although he connects the return of  ...    
 to the desire for amicitia and the giving of pledges () as Phraates protecting himself 
against threats to his throne. 
- 160 - 
,     (    )  
            
 .            
 ,     .517 
He (Augustus) received them (the standards) as if he had conquered the 
Parthians in a war; for he thought it a great accomplishment, saying that he 
had recovered what was previously lost in battle without a fight. Of course, 
he gave orders that both sacrifices for these things and a temple of Mars the 
Avenger on the Capitoline, in emulation of that of Jupiter Feretrius, with a 
view to the display of the standards, be voted and he saw that it was done, 
and moreover he both entered the city on horseback and was honoured with 
an arch bearing trophies. Now these things were done later to commemorate 
the event...and he himself hurried into Rome (19 B.C.). And, on account of 
these things and the other things which had been accomplished during his 
absence, many various honours were voted to him; of which he accepted 
none, except that an altar be set up to Fortune the Returner (for this was 
what they called her) and the day on which he returned be numbered among 
the festivals and be called Augustalia. Since the magistrates and the others 
had made advance preparations to go to meet him, he entered the city by 
night.   
In this section I examine what the commemorations surrounding the returned 
standards tell us about how the pax Parthorum was conceptualised at Rome between 
 Dio Cass. 54. 8.2-4, 10. 2-3. 
- 161 - 
20-16 B.C., and what this in turn can tell us about how pax, even without the usual and 
expected military conflict, could be understood during the principate of Augustus as if it 
were a victory. This is also to consider how such a form of pax was used to justify 
Roman imperialism. I first examine Dios account to make clear the specific victory 
commemorations which were awarded as a result of the pax, before turning to consider 
Augustus planned commemorations, and then the senatorial response and display in the 
Forum Romanum. The displays at Rome emphasise the accomplishment of the pax 
established, treating it as a form of victory over Parthia, and thus fulfilling the desire for 
victory over Parthia that was seen in the literature prior to 20 B.C.
Dios account outlines the different commemorations planned in 20 B.C. on 
receipt of the news, and later in 19 B.C. on Augustus return: sacrifices, the temple of 
Mars Ultor to display the standards, an ovation, a commemorative arch, and the altar to 
Fortuna Redux.
 In Dios account, both Augustus (  ) and the senate 
(...    ) choose to commemorate the return of the 
standards, and, even though no victory had actually taken place, both saw the 
achievement as a form of victory celebration or triumph (      
...          ). These 
displays illustrate how an act of diplomacy prompted a series of victory 
commemorations to be decreed. 
Dios account in 54.8.2-4 deals with the immediate reaction to the return of the 
standards in 20 B.C. His narrative suggests that a dispatch sent to the senate by 
Augustus communicated the return of the standards and treated it as a victory. Such 
dispatches were common practice in the Republic after a victory, and supplicationes 
 See pp. 148-151 above. 
 The temple to Mars Ultor for the display of the standards and the altar will be discussed in details 
below pp. 160- 163, and 188-193. 
- 162 - 
were usually sought in response to the dispatch and a triumph requested from the 
general in person.
 Of course, Augustus had already been awarded triumphs in 
absentia after his victories over Antony and Cleopatra at Actium and Alexandria. It is 
likely that Augustus dispatch in 20 B.C. requested a supplicatio and a place for the 
dedication of the standards:    . Dios phrase   
introduces the additional honours decided on by the senate: to enter the city on 
horseback and a commemorative arch. 
Dios two accounts of the Parthian honours and the later honours on Augustus 
return in 19 B.C. present a problem of consistency. The account of Augustus return to 
the city   implies that an ovation was awarded by the senate, yet he is known 
to have only held two ovations (in 40 and 36 B.C.) and a triple triumph (in 29 B.C.).
Rich argues that Dio misconstrued the initial decision of 20 B.C. for an ovation as a 
commemoration that actually took place,
 when in fact Augustus returned to the city 
by night not on horseback.
 Due to the discrepancy between Dios account of the 
honours voted in 20 B.C. and Augustus actual return in 19 B.C., where he is said to 
 On dispatches of victory see Beard (2007) 201-203, n. 44 for laurelled letter petitioning for 
triumphs; Rich (1998) 76; Cic. ad. Fam. 15.1, 15.2.On the request of a supplicatio see Cic. ad. Fam 15.4, 
15.5; Bastien (2007) 304-309. 
 RG 4.1. bis ovans triumphavi. Tris egi curulis triumphos; Suet. Aug. 22.1: bis ovans ingressus est 
urbem, post Philippense et rursus post Siculum bellum. triumphos tris egit Delmaticum, Actiacum, 
Alexandrinum, continuo triduo omnes. See also Fasti Triumphales and the Fasti Barberiniani: (Degrassi 
(1947) 86-87, 568-570. Cassiod. Chron. 385 states that in 19 B.C. Augustus was voted a chariot with a 
golden crown, but that he did not mount the chariot (Caesari ex provinciis redeunti currus cum corona 
aurea decretus est, quo ascendere noluit). 
 Rich (1998) 77-78. 
 It is worth noting that Dio does not make explicit reference to triumphal honours ( ) as 
he does with the ovations of Antony and Octavian in 40 B.C. (48.31.3) and of Drusus in 11 B.C. (54.33.5). 
His two other accounts of entering the city   are also explicitly tied to triumphal honours: the 
ovation ex monte Albano of Caesar in 44 B.C. after the feriae Latinae, which comes from a list of 
triumphal honours (44.4.3), and the honour afforded to Domitian, as the grown-up son of the 
triumphator, to ride in his fathers triumph (66.12.1a). Traditionally, a general celebrating an ovation 
would have entered the city on foot however, the development of entering on horseback was relatively 
new, and appears to have begun with Caesars special privilege in 44 B.C.: Beard (2007) 62-63,267; Rich 
(1998) 77 n. 26; Bastien (2007)  124-125, 268-269. 
- 163 - 
refuse all honours (  ) except the altar,524 some scholars have argued 
that the monuments intended to commemorate the return of the standards were never 
actually erected.
Certainly, from the accounts of these two sets of celebrations planned in 20 
B.C., there is no record that the implied ovation happened. However, this does not 
necessarily mean that the other honours did not actually take place. Rich, indeed, allows 
for the possibility of the supplicatio,
 although he rejects the other three honours, on 
the basis of Dios later account. Yet whilst Dios treatment of the Parthian honours is 
specifically tied to the report of Augustus Parthian victory, the honours later voted to 
Augustus, which he rejects, are for his resolution of the consulship for 19 B.C. and  
      . Whilst it can be argued that    
included the honours voted in 20 B.C., I do not think that we need to reject the actual 
erection of monuments celebrating the Parthian victory. Dio states in 54.8.4:   
   ; in this way he separates them from the honours he later 
records in reference to Augustus resolution of the internal problems of state. Indeed, 
the focus of Dios later account is on the political stability and the consular elections, 
which Augustus twice had to deal with during his absence.
 From Dios narrative of 
the political situation in Rome during Augustus eastern campaign, it is clear that his 
return to the city is the reason for celebration, because it indicates the return of political 
 Cooley (2009) 153 points out that Augustus account of his return differs from that of Dio. Augustus 
implies the altar was voted on his return from Syria, and that the senate then honoured him with a 
deputation from some praetors, tribunes of the plebs and the consul Q. Lucretius, sent to meet him in 
Campania. Dio states that the altar was the result of Augustus nomination of Q. Lucretius as consul, 
after an embassy, including Lucretius, was sent to him in Athens. 
 Simpson (1992) 840-842; Rich (2003) 340-341.; Rich (1998) 73-115. 
 Rich (1998) 76-77. On the likelihood that Augustus assumed his ninth imperial acclamation on this 
occasion see Simpson (1992) 838 n. 14; Barnes (1974) 21; Syme (1958) 310. 
 In 21 B.C. he appointed Agrippa as consul in his place (Dio Cass. 54.6.1-7.1), and in 19 B.C. he 
appointed Q. Lucretius as consul after an embassy from the senate (Dio Cass. 54.10.1-3): see n. 524 
above. 
- 164 - 
stability. Augustus himself, in his later account of his accomplishments, treats his return 
to the city after his campaigns separately from his military victories and 
achievements.
Whatever Augustus reasons for not celebrating the awarded ovatio on his return, 
in 20 B.C. he clearly had requested and planned his own commemoration of the pax he 
had achieved over Parthia: the temple to Mars Ultor on the Capitoline. I now turn to 
consider this commemoration of the pax Parthorum. 
Augustus commemorations 
From the passage of Dio, which records the commemorations voted for in 20 
B.C., Augustus had planned to build a temple to Mars Ultor (  ) on 
the Capitoline, as an imitation of the temple of Jupiter Feretrius, in order to display the 
standards. Whilst there is no archaeological evidence for a temple to Mars Ultor on the 
Capitoline (the standards were finally deposited in the temple of Mars Ultor in the 
Forum Augustum),
 it seems from the numismatic and literary evidence that, at the 
very least, a temple to house the standards was planned.
 The numismatic depictions 
from both Spain and Pergamum (19-18 B.C.) of the temple to Mars Ultor depict a 
circular temple with either Mars holding an aquila, or the standards displayed on their 
own, both with the legend MAR. ULT (Figure 53).
 However, the small temple of 
 RG 11-13 deal with his returns to Rome and the political stability he represents; RG 26-27, 29 deal 
with his foreign conquests and the return of military standards. 
 RG 29. See Rich (1998) 79-97 on the temple of Mars Ultor on the Capitoline; also Geiger (2008) 53. 
 Rich (1998) 86 argues that Augustus rejected the proposal for the temple, but Dio Cass. 54.8.3 
intimates that it was Augustus who originally planned the monument. 
 RIC Aug. 39b, 68, 69b, 72, 105a-b, 507. Mars Ultor was undoubtedly chosen to commemorate the 
revenge Augustus had taken on the Parthians for the past Roman defeats. There are also depictions of a 
round temple containing a chariot (e.g. RIC 115): see Rich (1998) 115-124 on the chariot and Augustus 
Parthian honours. 
- 165 - 
Jupiter Feretrius on the Capitoline was, according to Dionysius, rectangular.
 It thus 
seems plausible that the temple of Mars was to emulate that of Jupiter Feretrius in 
purpose rather than necessarily plan.
As Livy demonstrates in his first book, there was clearly, by 20 B.C., a tradition 
and ideology of the temple of Jupiter Feretrius as the first temple at Rome and the 
repository for the spoils from the enemy leader: 
 uppiter Feretri inquit, haec tibi victor Romulus rex regia arma fero, 
templumque his regionibus quas modo animo metatus sum dedico, sedem 
opimis spoliis quae regibus ducibusque hostium caesis me auctorem 
sequentes posteri ferent. Haec templi est origo quod primum omnium 
Romae sacratum est.
Jupiter Feretrius he said, I, king Romulus, as victor bring you these royal 
arms, and I dedicate a temple in these regions, which I have marked off in 
my mind, as a seat to the spolia opima which the successive generations, 
following my example, will bring when the kings and leaders of the enemy 
have been killed. This is the origin of the temple which was the first of all 
consecrated at Rome. 
The standards were not technically the arms of the enemy leader, nor had the 
Parthian king been killed in battle; rather a diplomatic exchange, resulting in pax, had 
 RRC 439; Dion. Hal. Rom. Ant. 2.34.4:            
     . (Indeed, ancient traces of it still remain, of which the longest sides are 
less than fifteen feet). 
 Bastien (2007) 72-74. 
 Livy 1.10. 
- 166 - 
taken place over three years.
 Nevertheless, as Dio highlights, Augustus viewed the 
success as if it were a victory and he had defeated the Parthians in battle, and it seems 
likely that this is how he presented the event to the senate in his dispatch, requesting 
certain honours.
 Obviously the signa recepta could not be dedicated officially as the 
spolia opima, but Augustus intended, in his request for the temple of Mars Ultor, to 
draw parallels and allusions to the spolia opima and the temple of Jupiter Feretrius. The 
Augustan programme would then have sought to establish the signa as a new form of 
spolia opima, and to link the display to the oldest victory dedication in Rome.
Augustus would later boast that the Parthian king had sought the amicitia of the Roman 
people after Augustus had compelled him to return the standards.
  Augustus 
planned commemoration of the dedication of the standards in a temple to Mars Ultor 
articulated his achievement of pax as a demonstration of his defeat of the Parthian king. 
If Augustus intended to display the actual standards as a form of spolia opima, 
linking himself to Romulus as the first victor, the senatorial display of the arch in the 
Forum set a statuary display of the return of the standards within a context where 
Romulus was depicted as the first in a long line of triumphatores. I now turn to consider 
the senatorial commemoration of pax Parthorum as a possibly response to Augustus 
own planned commemorations. The victory commemoration of the Parthian arch 
illustrates an idea of the cessation of triumphs because Augustus has achieved the 
ultimate victory: that of pax which, resting on past victories and triumphs of the res 
 stenberg (2009b) 59-64.  
 See pp. 157-160 above. 
 Augustus never dedicated the spolia opima himself, but prevented M. Licinius Crassus from 
dedicating the arms of Deldo, the chieftain of the Basternae, whom Crassus had defeated and killed 
whilst proconsul of Macedonia in 29 B.C. Augustus claimed that Crassus could not dedicate the spolia 
opima as he did not killed Deldo under his own imperium and auspices, and he also seems to have 
falsified evidence to prove that Aulus Cornelius Cossus had been consul in 437 B.C., rather than military 
tribune, when he dedicated the spolia opima won from the king of Veii. See Livy 4.20.5-11; Luce (2009) 
19-26. 
 RG 29, 32-33. 
- 167 - 
publica, brings a new age where there is only the need to record the domestic offices of 
the state. 
The Parthian Arch 
 As I stated above, I do not think we need reject the actual erection of 
monuments commemorating the return of the standards. Indeed, a passage from the 
Veronian scholiast of Virgils Aeneid, commenting on the phrase Parthos resposcere 
signa (Aen. 7.606) states: 
quae Licinio Crasso interfecto interceperant Parthi:  haec reportavit 
Augustus. huius facti notae repraesentantur in arcu, qui est iuxta aedem 
divi Iulii.
The Parthians had captured these after Licinius Crassus was killed; 
Augustus recovered them. Tokens of this deed are represented on the arch, 
which is next to the temple of Divus Iulius. 
Clearly, there was an arch in the Roman Forum that was associated with the Parthian 
victory of 20/19 B.C., and the phrase huius facti notae seems comparable to Dios 
trophy-bearing arch. Indeed, Rich concedes on the evidence of this text and on coin 
evidence, which I will discuss below, that at the very least the Parthian trophies were 
commemorated on an arch in the Forum. However, he argues that rather than the 
 Rich (1998) n. 91: notae was the emendation of the first editor for the word nitae. Following Hagens 
editions of 1902, subsequent discussions on the text replace this with nicae. Rich argues that it is 
unlikely that a Greek, rather than Latin word, would be used. See also Simpson (1992) 838 n. 14 on the 
implausibility of nicae in the scholiasts notice. Serv. Aen. 7.606 does not mention an arch: parthosque 
reposcere signa. Hoc in honorem Augusti posuit, quo regnante a Parthis repetit sunt signa. 
- 168 - 
erection of a  arch for the return of the standards, Augustus allowed a 
compromise whereby the older arch, voted after his victory at Actium, was remodelled 
and rededicated for the Parthian achievement. For Rich, this compromise allowed for a 
commemoration that was neither excessive [n]or inappropriate as the new arch would, 
he argues, have been.
 Richs arguments do not detract from the arch in the Forum as 
a commemoration of the Parthian standards, for a rededication of the arch would in fact 
reconceptualise the message of the display.
I will consider the material evidence for a  Parthian arch, as one of 
the main visual commentaries, which I understand to be senatorial in initiative, on 
Augustus Parthian campaign (  ).542  It is important to establish 
the visual rhetoric of the arch in order to consider what it contributes to our 
understanding of how the achievement of pax was conceptualised at Rome after the 
Parthian settlement. The arch interprets the pax achieved over Parthia as an expression 
and celebration of the offices of the Roman state which hold imperium (consul and 
triumphator, as a dux and imperator). 
I will first examine the numismatic evidence for the arch. Whilst the numismatic 
evidence is not proof alone for the actual erection of an arch, at the very least it 
demonstrates the ideology and conception behind the honour voted.
 In fact, the 
dating of some of the coins to after 18 B.C. suggests, more likely than not, that an 
Rich (1998) 114. 
 Rich (1998) 114 himself states that this endowed the arch itself with new and broader significance. 
Furthermore, although Rich argues that the modification of the earlier arch would serve to play down 
any overt triumphalism of the event, if he is correct that the Actian arch was rededication for the 
Parthian standards then surely the context of an arch that already has clear references to the triumph 
would in fact play up the victory of the Parthian settlement. See p. 181 below. 
 The numismatic evidence discussed below shows that the arch was dedicated by the senate and 
people of Rome: see p. 166 below. 
 Rich (1998) 101 argues that the Pergamum coin (RIC Aug. 510) would antedate Augustus refusal of 
an arch and thus merely commemorates the senates vote for it. See also Simpson (1992) 839. 
- 169 - 
actual arch existed, since as Rich argues, it seems unlikely that coins would continue to 
be minted after 18 B.C. if Augustus had refused the honour.
I will then turn to consider the archaeological evidence for such an arch in the 
Forum, and will argue that the monument from which the Fasti Capitolini come is the 
arch which commemorates the Parthian standards. The relation of the Fasti to the 
Parthian arch shows that the senate conceptualised a diplomatic settlement in a 
triumphal fashion. The Fasti articulated the achievement of pax through the 
continuation of Romes political offices, contextualised within a display of Romes 
victorious military history.  
Finally, I will examine the Parthian arch in the visual landscape of Rome, and 
compare it with Augustus planned commemoration.
 There is a distinction to be 
made between the commemorations of the senate and those of Augustus, and the ways 
in which they both presented the return of the standards. Augustus associations of the 
standards with the spolia opima promotes a display of the spoils of the enemy king, 
conquered in war  Augustus stressed the militaristic nature of his achievement. The 
senate on the other hand sought to tie the return of the standards to the perpetuation of 
the office of consul and the cessation of the triumph. The Parthian arch illustrates how 
an act of pax, achieved without the need for war or cessation of conflict, was still 
presented in terms of Roman military victory, and as an expression of Roman 
imperialism, yet one that also emphasised the continued importance of the consulship to 
the state. 
 Rich (1998) 109. 
 See pp. 160-162 above. 
- 170 - 
Signa recepta: the numismatic commemoration 
 The numismatic evidence for the arch commemorating the signa recepta comes 
from three different mints across the empire. Silver cistophori from Pergamum dated to 
19-18 B.C. depict a single arch, with quadriga statuary on the attic, and the returned 
standards decorating the archs pillars. The architrave of the arch carries the legend 
IMP. IX. TR. POT. IV,
 whilst S. P. R. / SIGNIS / RECEPTIS is engraved in the 
archway (Figure 54).
Aurei and denarii from both Colonia Patricia and Tarraco in Spain dated to 
between 18-16 B.C. depict a triple arch, with a central quadriga group and single 
standing lateral figures raising up the standards - the right hand figure also holds a bow, 
a suitable depiction of a Parthian archer.
 The legend CIVIBVS ET SIGN. MILIT. A 
PARTH. RECVP. runs around the coin in an anti-clockwise direction. The obverse 
depicts the bust of Augustus surrounded by the legend: S. P. Q. R. IMP. CAESARI 
AVG. COS. XI. TR. POT. VI (Figure 55).
Finally, denarii of L. Vinicius minted at Rome and dated to 16 B.C. depict a 
triple arch with a quadriga group on the central arch, and on the lateral arches two 
single standing figures holding a bow and raising up the standards.
 On the architrave 
of the central arch is the legend S. P. Q. R. / IMP. CAE., whilst VINICIVS is engraved 
below the arch. The obverse shows the head of Augustus without a legend (Figure 
 Whilst the Vinicius coin does not specifically identify the arch with the return of 
 Later coins carry the legend: IMP. IX. TR. POT. V: Sutherland (1984) 82. 
 RIC. Aug. 508 dates to 19 B.C., Aug. 509-510 to 18 B.C. The same legend is found on the obverse 
around the bust of Augustus. 
 For the Parthians as archers: Hor. Carm. 2.13.17-18; Verg. Aen 12. 856-7; Prop. 3.9.54, 3.12.11, 
4.3.67-68; Ov. Fast. 5.593-596; Livy 9.19.16. 
 RIC Aug. 132-137. 
 Rich (1998) 128 Addendum, for confirmation of the legionary eagle halfway up by the right hand 
figure. 
 RIC Aug. 359. 
- 171 - 
the standards, the figures of the lateral arch have been convincingly identified as 
Parthians by the conical cap and bow held by the left figure.
 The date ascribed to the 
coin, based on other coins minted by Vinicius in Augustus seventh and eighth 
tribunate, would also suggest that it represents the near contemporary Parthian arch.
 Given the variation in the depictions of the arches it is debatable whether they 
actually depict the same arch. Most notably the Pergamum coins depict a single arch 
(perhaps minted before the arch was actually erected),
 whilst the other two a triple 
arch, and even in the case of these two coins, the realisation of the arch is quite 
different. Nevertheless, it is explicit from the legends that the Pergamum coin and the 
Spanish coin commemorate the return of the standards. As has been discussed above, 
the Vinicius coin does not explicitly make reference to the return of the Parthian 
standards, but the visual field certainly suggests it as the likely commemoration.  
All three issues emphasise the prominent role of the senate: on the Pergamum 
and Rome issues the role of the senate and people is directly linked to the arch, whilst 
on the Spanish issue the dedicatory role of the S.P.Q.R. is explicit in the obverse legend, 
serving to illustrate the honorary aspect of the dedication in relation to Augustus. 
Certainly, Degrassi has suggested that the obverse and the reverse legends of the 
Spanish coin made up the dedicatory inscription of the arch.
 It seems highly plausible 
that the three issues offer us different interpretations of the same monument, based on 
the date and location of their issue and the knowledge of the arch an audience was 
expected to have. 
 Nedergaard (1994-95) 51-53; Rich (1998) 110. 
 Rich (1998) 100; RIC Aug. 67-68; see Carnabuci (1991) 318 for arguments that the coin represents the 
Actian arch. 
 Rich (1998) 110 suggests that the single arch maybe depict the central archway only as a matter of 
convenience. 
 Degrassi (1945) 100; also Taylor (1951a) 94 n. 39. 
- 172 - 
Another common feature of all three issues is the quadriga display on the top of 
the arch. This group is understood to represent a currus triumphalis and thus imply that 
the arch commemorates a triumph.
 The quadriga was associated with the triumphator 
and his victory on the coins of the late Republic, from 101 B.C. onwards,
associations of the quadriga with victory went back as far as the late third century B.C. 
and the minting of the quadrigatus.
 There was clearly an allusion to victory and 
triumph when the quadriga was used on arches. Yet scholars have argued that it would 
not be appropriate or correct to have a triumphal chariot on an arch when no triumph 
was celebrated.
 Rich has suggested, on these grounds, that the arch on the coins of 
19-16 B.C. was originally the Actian arch, commemorating the triumph of 29 B.C., to 
which statuary commemorating the Parthian standards was later added.
 The issue 
here is whether an arch had to celebrate a triumph to be surmounted by a currus 
triumphalis.
 Kleiner (1989) 199 has argued that it would be difficult to conceive of the Parthian arch without a 
triumphal chariot; see also Simpson (1992) 837. 
 RRC 326/1 C. Fundanius (101 B.C.); 358/1, Laterens (83 B.C.); 367, Sulla (82 B.C.), Crawford notes that 
the coin advertises Sullas expected victory (Crawford (1974) 387); 402, Pompey (71 B.C.). 
 RRC 28/3,-4; 29/3-4; 30; 31; 32;33; 34; RRC pp. 103-105. Victory in a quadriga appears again in 211-
208 B.C. from a mint in Luceria (RRC 97/23), which may correspond to the second Punic war. From 144 
B.C. onwards, possibly corresponding to the fall of Carthage and Corinth in 146 B.C., the quadriga 
frequently appeared on the reverses of coins, normally with Jupiter and/or a Victory, although other 
deities also appear: Victory: 249/1; 253/1; 275/1; 280/1; 283/1; 352/1; 364/1; 366/1-3; 464/5; 465/3-5; 
Jupiter: 221/1; 227/1; 238/1; 241/1; 248/1; 256/1; 257/1; 273/1; 276/1; 279/1; 285/1; 310/1; 311/1;  
325/1; 350A/1; 420/1-2; 422/1; Jupiter and Victory: 271/1; Juno crowned by Victory: 223/1; 240/1; 
Mars: 236/1; 290/6; Mars with trophy: 252/1; Hercules with trophy (255/1); Libertas crowned by 
Victory: 270/1; Libertas (266/1; Minerva with trophy and Victory: 342/4-6; Minerva: 354/1; Sol: 250/1; 
309/1; Saturn (317/2-3; Apollo: 236/1). Victory also frequently appears with a biga: RRC 225/1; 226/1; 
228/1-4; 245/1;247/1;  260/1;  261/1; 269/1; 274/1; 284/1; 289/1;300/1; 302/1; 313/1; 318/1; 322/1; 
323/1; 324/1;  328/1; 337/1-4;  345/1; 360/1; 366/4;383/1;  387/1; 391/1;  464/4; 473/3; 479/23; 
485/2; 494/40;  and less frequently a triga 299/1; 382/1. 
 Rich (1998) 108; Simpson (1992) 837ff. 
 Rich (1998) 108. Livy 33.27.4-5: ne temptata quidem triumphi spe; Gurval (1995) 38. 
 Simpson (1992) 842 questioned how necessary were the celebrations of a triumph for the erection of 
what is referred to as a triumphal arch; see also Taylor (1950b) 94. The term arcus triumphalis is first 
attested in Amm. 21.16.15, and in late inscriptions from North Africa: CIL VIII 7094-98, 14728, 14817; 
see Beard (2007) 45-46 and Gurval (1995) 37-39 for discussions the term triumphal arch. The term 
triumphalis was however applied to a gate (porta) in the late Republic and Empire, which appears to 
have been used for entering the city in triumph: Cicero Pis. 55; Tac. Ann. 1.8; Suet. Aug. 100.2; Dio Cass. 
- 173 - 
Aurei and denarii from Spain depict a Victory behind Augustus in a quadriga 
and in a biga drawn by elephants, surmounting a double arch, on a viaduct (Figure 
 The legends indicate that the coins commemorate Augustus repair of the roads, 
and are understood to represent arches erected at Ariminum and at the Milvian Bridge, 
commemorating the restoration of the via Flaminia in 27 B.C.
 Certainly, the arches 
themselves do not commemorate Augustus triumphs in 29 B.C., although the message 
of victory is clear.
 From these examples it is clear that the currus triumphalis need 
not determine that a triumph be understood behind the commemoration of the arch. As 
Mary Beard states: the important fact is not that such arches regularly commemorated 
triumphs (though some did), but  in a sense, the other way round  that they used the 
imagery of triumphal celebrations as part of their own rhetoric of power.
 What is 
relevant to our understanding of the depictions of the Parthian arch is that, whether or 
not the arch originally commemorated Augustus victories and triumphs in 29 B.C., 
contemporary representations of the arch emphasise the triumphal character of the 
monument, even through a triumph was not commemorated.
The arch at Rome was a triumphal monument which also commemorated a new 
age (novum saeculum) as the accomplishment of the pax achieved. This is clear from 
other coins minted by the IIIviri monetales of 16 B.C. from Rome.
 The coins focus 
on the Ludi Saeculares, but also on the public vote for Augustus safe return from Gaul, 
56.42.1. There is much debate as to whether one specific gate designated as triumphalis actually existed 
or whether it was applied to different arches as the ceremony required: Beard (2007) 96-101; Bastien 
(2007) 319-321; Hlkeskamp (2006) 484; Versnel (1980) 132-163, esp. 134; Makin (1921) 29-33; see also 
Phillips (1974) n.6. 
 RIC 140, 141, 143-145. 
 Dio Cass. 53.22.1-2; De Maria (1988) 101-3, 260-2, 269; Rich (1998) 113. 
 Beard (2007) 295-296. 
 Beard (2007) 46; see also Gurval (1995) 37-39. 
 It is also worth remembering that Dio refers to all three of the arches voted to Augustus as trophy 
bearing (Dio Cass. 49.15.1; 51.19.1; 54.8.4). In this respect, the senate had envisaged all three arches as 
a celebration of Augustus victories in the same way. 
 The wider context of commemoration in the Pergamum and Spanish coinage will be discussed below 
in section three pp. 208-213. 
- 174 - 
and his road-building programme (Figure 58 & Figure 59).
 The place of the Parthian 
arch within this visual programme of 16 B.C. seems to tie it firmly to the celebrations of 
the novum saeculum.
 Rich has suggested that the coinage from Rome plays down 
the Parthian theme, because the standards are not as pronounced on the depiction of the 
arch, as they are on the Spanish coinage.
 Rather than playing down the Parthian 
theme, the coin of Vinicius contextualises the Parthian arch as a monument that relates 
the Parthian victory to an establishment of the new age and the Ludi Saeculares in 
Rome. This relationship between the Ludi Saeculares and the Parthian arch as 
suggested by the numismatic programme is a theme that is also reflected in the physical 
monument itself.
I will now turn to discuss the remains of a triple arch located between the temple 
of Divus Iulius and the temple of Castor in the Romanum Forum, which I argue 
belonged to the Parthian commemoration. I will also discuss the possibility put forward 
by Rich that the structure was originally the Actian arch, rededicated for the Parthian 
standards.
 I will then consider the relationship of the arch to the remains of the Fasti 
Capitolini. This will illustrate how the concept of pax with Parthia was conceptualised 
at Rome as the cessation of triumphs and the accomplishment of the ultimate victory of 
pax over and above all of Romes past victories. 
 RIC Aug. 350-369. 
Rich (1998)110; Nedergaard (2004) 94-99. 
 On the emphatic role of the standards on the Spanish depiction of the arch see p. 209 below. 
 Nedergaard (2004)94-99; Nedergaard (2001) 121; Taylor (1951a) 73; Taylor (1950a) 514; Holland 
(1946) 55-56; see also Taylor (1946) 2 n. 5; Bastien (2007) 66 n. 56. 
 Rich (1998) 97-115. 
- 175 - 
The trophy-bearing arch and the Fasti Capitolini 
Wallace-Hadrill has stated that [t]he date and context are crucial for 
understanding the symbolic value of the Fasti.
 I argue in this section that the context 
of the Fasti is an integral part of the Parthian arch in the Roman Forum, set up to 
commemorate the pax established with Parthia through the return of the standards and 
the commemoration of the Ludi Saeculares, which took place in 17 B.C. This has 
important implications for our understanding of the way in which the specific pax of 
20/19 B.C. was conceptualised at Rome. The Fasti together with the association of the 
Ludi Saeculares found on the inscription set the victory celebrations of the pax 
Parthorum within the context of Romes great military victories since Romulus, and yet 
also emphasise the cessation of triumphs and the continuation of the domestic offices of 
the state. For the senate, the pax Augustus established with Parthia enabled a 
celebration of a new age for Roman imperialism, which reaffirmed the position of the 
consuls within the state.  
 The remains of a triple arch have been identified in the space between the 
temple of Divus Iulius and the temple of Castor and Pollux (Figure 60).
 Sculptural 
remains of large worked stones of trophies of barbarians, shields, daggers, helmets and 
other ornaments were found together with the Fasti Capitolini in the sixteenth century 
near the temple of Castor.
 Architectural fragments of both the Doric and Corinthian 
 Wallace-Hadrill (1987) 224. 
 Nedergaard (1993); Nedergaard (1999); Carnabuci (1991) 315-328; Holland (1946); Gatti (1945). 
 Onofrio Panvinio Fastorum Libri V, 1558, praefectio: Pauli III pontificis maximi felcissimo principatu 
anno 1547; Metellus, Cod. Vat. 6039, f. 210f.: reperta Romae in foro Romano proper tres columnas illic 
erectas pone Capitolium, aliis saxis eodem loco repertis iisque ingentibus et adfabre levigatis inveniuntur 
tanquam tropae quaedam barbarorum, scuta, pugiones et galeae et alia ornamenta ([the Fasti] were 
found at Rome in the Forum Romanum near the three columns which stand behind the Capitolium (i.e. 
the temple of Castor). They were found with other stones in the same place, which were large and 
smoothed in a workman-like fashion, such as certain trophies of barbarians, shields, daggers, helmets 
and other ornaments). Onofrio Panvinio, Fastorum Libri V, 1558, praefectio, also records the decorative 
elements founds: in quibus quaedam barbara et penitus inepta ornamenta, avium florum 
- 176 - 
orders were found between the temple of Castor and the temple of Divus Iulius in 1871-
1872 by Pietro Rosa.
 It seems very plausible that all these remains came from the 
arch located between the two temples in that area, which has been identified as either 
the Actian arch or the Parthian arch.
 Indeed, Nedergaard states that amongst the 
architectural remains were three right-hand corners of a pediment in the Doric order, 
which suggests that the building from which they came contained at least three 
pediments  these would conform to the pediments depicted on the lateral arches on the 
coin of Vinicius (Figure 56).
 Dio refers to both arches as ,579  which 
would fit well with the sculptural remains found. The Veronian scholiast also refers to 
the Parthian arch as depicting notae of the return of the standards.
 Nedergaard has shown that the arch has a terminus ante quem of A.D. 6, at 
which time the temple of Castor was rebuilt.
 The lateral steps of the temple join the 
southern lateral archway although the arch has a different orientation to the temple, 
indicating that the construction of the temple steps was deliberately orientated to fit into 
pentagonorum quos nodos Salomonis vocant, et similia incisa erant (among which were incised certain 
barbarian and thoroughly tasteless decorations, of birds, flowers and pentagons, which they call the 
knots of Salomon, and similar). See Nedergaard (2001) 107ff for the history of the excavations of the 
Forum area between the temple of Castor and the temple of Divus Iulius. 
 Nedergaard (1988a) 39; Nedergaard (1994-95) 53-54; Nedergaard (1993); Nedergaard (2001) 115-
 Nedergaard (1993); Nedergaard (1999); Rich (1998) 100-107; Chioffi (1996) 24-26; Carnabuci (1991) 
315-328; Degrassi (1945); Holland (1946). Coarelli (1985) 275, 296 argues that the remains belong to an 
arch on the north side of temple of Divus Iulius, which he identifies as the Parthian arch. However, 
Nedergaard (1994-95) 50-63 has convincingly argued that Coarellis reconstruction is structurally 
impossible, particularly since the size of the Doric columns (from the remains found) would not have 
reached the same height as the Tuscan columns of the Basilica; Nedergaard (2001) 122; De Maria (1988) 
97; Kleiner (1989) 198-9; Rich (1998) 105; Bastien (2007) 64-66; see also p. 175 below on Coarellis 
misinterpretation of Ligorios description of the find-spot of the Fasti Capitolini. 
 Nedergaard (2001) 116, 119-120: the structure would contain four such pediments in total  two on 
each side of the building. 
 Dio Cass. 51.19.1; 54.8.4; cf. also 49.15.1 for the arch commemorating Octavians victory at 
Naulochus. 
 See p. 163 above. 
 Nedergaard (2001) 116. 
- 177 - 
the pre-existing space articulated by the arch (Figure 60).
 Nedergaard also argues that 
the relationship between the northern side of the arch and the podium of the temple of 
Divus Iulius, where the podium blocks were reworked when the arch was constructed, 
gives a terminus post quem of 29 B.C., since the arch must have been constructed after 
the temple podium.
 Rich, however, has pointed out that whilst the temple was 
dedicated on 18
 August 29 B.C., the podium must have been constructed well in 
advance of this date: the foundations were supposedly started in 42 B.C.
 Rich uses 
this possible earlier terminus post quem as support for his identification of the arch as 
that voted after Actium in 31 B.C.  
Rich only makes brief mention of the relationship between fragments of the 
Fasti Capitolini and the architectural and sculptural fragments found in the same area 
and he discounts them from his discussion of the triple arch between the temples of 
Castor and of Divus Iulius, because of disputes over the original location of the Fasti.
Locations suggested include the Fornix Fabianus,
 the Regia,
 and the triple arch in 
the Forum, identified as either the Actian or Parthian arch.
 Nedergaard (1988a) 41-42; Scott (2000) 184. The A.D. 6 rebuilding increased the dimensions of the 
temple from the 117 B.C. Metellan temple on a ratio of 7:6 (Nilson and Persson (2008b) 75, 95f; Nielsen 
and Poulsen (1992) 113), thus the new podium cut into the area in front of the southern lateral arch: 
Nielsen (1993). The relation between the temple of Castor and Pollux, and the triple arch will be 
discussed below p. 194. 
 Nedergaard (1988a) 41-42. 
 Rich (1998) 107; Dio Cass. 47.18.4 records the laying of the foundations of the temple in 42 B.C.:  
              (they also laid the foundation of a 
shrine to him in the Forum and on the place where he was cremated). In 29 B.C. the senate decreed the 
podium be decorated with the rostra, suggesting that the foundations were likely to have been already 
completed (Dio Cass. 51.19.1). For the consecration of the temple see Dio Cass. 51.22.2; Inscr. Ital. XIII 
2.497 = EJ
 p. 50. 
 Rich (1998) 104, 106. 
 Steinby (1987) 163ff. 
 Simpson (1993); Bastien (2007) 58-59. 
 Bastien (2007)59-66. For the Actian arch: Gatti (1945); Degrassi (1945). For the Parthian arch: Taylor 
(1950b); Taylor (1951a); Nedergaard (1994-95); Nedergaard (2001); Schneider (2007). 
- 178 - 
Arguments against the Fasti belonging to a triumphal arch focus on the fact that 
lists of magistrates were usually maintained in templa,
 and so the Regia or the 
Temple of Divus Iulius might be appropriate locations.
 However we should consider 
the potential precedent of the Fornix Fabianus in connection with triumphal 
inscriptions. The arch, originally built in 121 B.C., was later restored by Q. Fabius 
Maximus in 57 B.C., whose restoration was inscribed on the arch, along with the 
triumphal records of L. Aemilius Paullus and P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus: 
Q. Fabius Q. f. Maxsumus / aed. cur. 
L. Aem[il]ius L. f. Paullus / co[s II], cens., augur / tr[i]umphatvit 
P. Cornelius Paulli f. Scipio / Africanus cos. II, cens. / augur, 
triumphavit II.
The use of the arch to commemorate the triumphal successes of the Fabii may indeed 
have suggested a model for inscribing the triumphal history of the Roman state on a 
triumphal monument.
I will now turn to consider Nedergaards studies, which indicate that the Fasti 
formed an integral part of the triple arch in the Forum. I will also discuss below the 
possibility of Richs suggestion that the Actian arch was rededicated for the Parthian 
commemoration, although I argue that the evidence supports the identity of the Parthian 
arch. The senates presentation of the pax with Parthia through the integration of the 
 Simpson (1993) 63. 
 My thanks to Janet Delaine for bringing this issue more fully to my attention. 
 CIL I 607 = ILS 43; see Chioffi (1996) 26ff for a discussion of the arch and the inscriptions. 
 Chioffi (1996) 47. The ideology of the Fasti Triumphales and Consulares on the Parthian arch will be 
discussed below, pp. 184-186. 
- 179 - 
Fasti into the arch uses the context of a victory celebration to enforce an idea that the 
pax with Parthia has brought an end to triumphs, and enabled a new age for Romes 
political offices and the exercise of imperium. 
The Fasti Capitolini consist of two lists: the Fasti Consulares and the Fasti 
Triumphales. The Fasti Consulares record the consuls from the start of the Republic 
down to A.D. 13, inscribed in two columns on four tablets, 2.34m in height, each 
flanked by two small Corinthian pilasters, with the list continuing on the wall to the 
right of the fourth tablet (the so-called fifth tablet).
 The Fasti Triumphales, which 
record the triumphal ceremonies from the first regal year of Romulus to 19 B.C.,
inscribed on four Doric pilasters measuring 3.265m in height (Figure 61). The Fasti are 
carved on blocks of solid marble 0.50m thick, and thus it is likely in the case of the 
larger fragments that they were not found far from their original site.
 Whilst 
Panvinio, who says that the third tablet was found in situ,
  and Ligorio record that the 
fragments were found ante templum Faustinae, far too much has been made by scholars 
of the accuracy of their reference points in relation to the find-spot of the fragments. 
Coarelli, for example, relies heavily on Ligorios statement that the ianus structure, 
from which he reports the fasti romani came, was situated over the via Sacra.
However, Coarelli fails to take into account that Ligorio believed the via Sacra to run 
 Nedergaard (2001) 108. 
 Taylor (1951a) 77 regarding the first regal year. 
 Nedergaard (2001) 117; Simpson (1993) 67, 71; Taylor (1946) 2; Degrassi (1947) 17. Michelangelos 
design for display of the Fasti in the Capitoline Museum meant that the blocks had been cut back: 
Nedergaard (2004) 84.  It is worth nothing that whilst the majority of the fragments were found in the 
Forum, some were discovered further afield: Degrassi (1947) 17. From Onofrio Panvinios testimony in 
Panvinio (1558) praefectio it is clear that much of the monument and its remains had been broken 
down to make lime: bona aerum pars in calcem fuerat decocta, haud enim longe ab eo loco calcis fornax 
inventa fuerat (a good part of them was boiled down into mortar (lime), for not far from that place a 
lime kiln had been found). 
 Panvinio (1558), praefectio: In quibus quae ex tertia tabula supersunt fragmenta loco antiquo adhuc 
mota non fuerant (among which, the fragments survived from the third tablet, fragments which had 
not been moved from their original location). 
 Coarelli (1985) 269-308. 
- 180 - 
straight across the Forum from the Arch of Titus to the Arch of Septimus Severus,
instead of following a path close to the north side of the forum.
It is necessary to consider the testimonies from the sixteenth century to figure 
out the precise location of the Fasti Capitolini: 
Ea enim, quae cladibus superfuerant fragmenta, ruderibus ante templum 
Faustinae inter forum et sacram viam...egestis, casu inventa sunt.
For these, the fragments which survived the devastations of the city, were 
found by chance with the ruins discarded before the temple of Faustina 
between the forum and the via Sacra. 
le inscrittoni de Magistrati nouvamente trouvate...siano state trovate 
dirimpetto al tempio di Faustina, vicinio allangolo del Palatino, in un 
luogo dove facevan capo pi strade.
The inscriptions of the Magistrates recently found...were found before the 
temple of Faustina, near the corner of the Palatine, in a place which is the 
head of several roads. 
reperta Romae in foro Romano proper tres columnas illic erectas pone 
Capitolium.
 Burns (1988) 35; Coffin (2004) 11, 19; Nedergaard (1994-95) 60. 
 Scott (2000). 
 Panvinio (1558), praefectio. 
 Ligorio (1553) f. 31. 
 Metellus, Cod. Vat. 6039, f. 210f. 
- 181 - 
[The Fasti] were found at Rome in the Roman Forum near the three 
columns, which stand behind the Capitoline. 
Coarelli labelled the testimony of Metellus, who identifies the find-spot as close to the 
then unidentified columns of the temple of Castor, as vaguer than the locations given by 
Ligorio and Panvinio.
 However, even a brief examination of depictions of the campo 
vaccino from the 16
 to early 19
 centuries shows how prominent a visual reference 
both the columns and the temple of Faustina were within the space of the Forum 
(Figure 62 & Figure 63).
 The combined use of these two points of visual reference, 
together with Ligorios mention of the angolo del Palatino and the misconceived 
location of the via Sacra, thought to run across the Forum, suggest a location in the area 
between the temples of Castor and Divus Iulius.
 I will now discuss the relationship 
between the Fasti Consulares and the Fasti Triumphales on the section found in situ, 
and how this supports the identification of their monument being the triple arch in the 
Forum. 
 The course blocks of the third and fourth tablets are the same height, but do not 
correspond to the height of the blocks from tablet one and two, suggesting that the two 
sets of tablets came from different walls. The section found in situ in 1547 is the lowest 
course of the wall which comprised tablet three, flanked by the first and second 
 Coarelli (1985) 274-5. 
 Wilton-Ely (1994) v.1, n. 233; Keaveney (1988) 138ff for views of the Roman Forum from the 16
early 19
 centuries. 
 Nedergaard (1994-95) 60-63 has argued from the orientations of the ianus in Ligorios drawings that 
the location described is in fact that between the temples of Castor and Divus Iulius. 
- 182 - 
pilasters.
 Nedergaard has shown that the third and fourth pilasters must have flanked 
either the first or second tablet, since fragment XL (the second course of the fourth 
pilaster), which measures c. 55cm, conforms to the height of the second course of these 
tablets, 54.8cm (Figure 64).
 On this evidence Nedergaard has suggested that the first tablet came from the 
same wall as, though opposite side to, tablet two, whilst the third and fourth tablets 
came from opposite sides of another wall (Figure 65).
 The structural arrangement of 
the Fasti suggested by Nedergaard is as follows: 
Fasti Wall Side 
Fasti Consulares tablet 1 1 1 
Fasti Consulares tablet 2 1 2 
Fasti Triumphales pilaster 3 1 2 
Fasti Triumphales pilaster 4 1 2 
Fasti Consulares tablet 3 2 1 
Fasti Triumphales pilaster 1 2 1 
Fasti Triumphales pilaster 2 2 1 
Fasti consulares tablet 4 (+ 5) 2 2 
Table 3: layout of the Fasti Capitolini as devised by Nedergaard (2001). 
 Fragment XLV provides further insight into the architectural arrangement of the 
Fasti. Nedergaard has shown that the vertical line and rough working which covers 
26.5cm of the fragment to the right of the inscribed surface was originally covered by a 
 Nedergaard (2001) 117; Nedergaard (2004) 84; Degrassi (1947) 17ff; Coarelli (1985) 276. Nedergaard 
(2001) 118 has shown that the block heights of the pilasters are the same as the block heights of the 
third tablet. 
 Nedergaard (2001) 119; Nedergaard (2004) 88. 
 Nedergaard (2001) 116-119; Nedergaard (2004) 87-88. 
- 183 - 
corner column, and that the remains of a three-quarter Doric column, found south of the 
temple of Divus Iulius, was cut to fit the corner of the wall of which fragment XLV was 
part (Figure 66).
 This means that the fourth tablet (along with the section of wall 
inscribed with the so-called fifth tablet) was flanked by Doric three-quarter columns, 
and it seems plausible that the first tablet would be likewise flanked. 
 The relationship between fragment XLV and the Doric three-quarter column 
fragment highlights the suitability of assigning the Fasti to the Doric-Corthinian 
architectural fragments found in the area of the triple arch. Nedergaard has argued that 
the two walls to which the Fasti belong (Table 3 above), correspond to the two pillars 
of the central arch. The foundations of this central passageway measure 2.95m by 
5.25m,
 whilst the total length of the walls on which the Fasti were set measures 
3.865m.
 The central foundations of the triple arch would make a plausible platform 
for the walls carrying the Fasti Capitolini. As mentioned above, the Fasti were 
inscribed on solid blocks of marble and were not marble veneers,
 demonstrating that 
they must have formed an integral part of the structure of their building. Nedergaards 
reconstruction places the tablets on the four walls of the central pylons of the triple 
arch, with the pilasters placed on internal walls of the central passage, carrying the 
vault.
 The Fasti Triumphales were inscribed over the four pilasters of the central 
archway and were thus integral to the structure of the monument. The Fasti 
Triumphales fit exactly over the four pilasters, with the final entry of Balbus triumph 
in 19 B.C. at the bottom edge of the epigraphic field, just before the rough working of 
 Nedergaard (2004) 85. 
 Nedergaard (1993); Degrassi (1945) 91. 
 Gatti (1945) 115; Nedergaard (1993); Nedergaard (2004) 84. 
 See p. 175 above. 
 Nedergaard (2001) 118-119. 
- 184 - 
the stone for insertion (Figure 67). It seems highly plausible given the exact fit of the 
list on the pilasters, that it was conceived and inscribed as a complete list after 19 
 Whilst the Fasti Triumphales appear to agree with the date of the Parthian arch 
(post 19 B.C.), the Fasti Consulares are more problematic. 
 The main issue of the date of the inscription concerns erasures on the Fasti 
Consulares, though not the Fasti Triumphales, of the names of M. Antonius  both the 
entries of M. Antonius listed as consul in 99 B.C. and censor in 97 B.C. and his 
grandson M. Antonius the triumvir, who was listed as master of the horse in 47 B.C. 
and consul in 37 B.C.
 Dio records that Antonys name was condemned in 30 B.C. 
and removed from inscriptions.
 The names of the two Antonii were re-carved over 
the erasures,
 in order to maintain Antonius name in the lists.
 That the erasures occur in the Fasti Consulares and not the Fasti Triumphales 
suggests the possibility that the two were not inscribed at the same time.
 Degrassi 
saw the erasures of M. Antonius from the Fasti Consulares as dating to the senates 
decree of 30 B.C., and thus places the Fasti Consulares on the Actian arch, and argues 
that the Fasti Triumphales were added more than ten years later.
 This would mean 
that the arch, voted in 31 B.C., was erected and inscribed by August by 30 B.C., for the 
erasure of Antonys names (voted by the senate on news of his death) to take place.
 stenberg (2009b) 55. Spannagel (1999) 249 has suggested that Octavians triple triumph of 29 B.C. 
was a suitable occasion for the formulation of the Fasti Triumphales. 
 Degrassi (1947) 128, 133, 135. Due to the fragmentary nature of the Fasti the years for Antonys 
other consulships of 44 B.C. and 34 B.C. do not survive. 
 Dio Cass. 51.19.3; see chapter two p. 69 above. 
 Nedergaard (2001) n.96 believes, on inspection of the fragments, that the re-inscriptions have been 
undertaken by a different hand than the original inscription. 
 Tac. Ann. 3.18: ne nomen Pisonis fastis eximeretur, quando M. Antonii qui bellum patriae fecisset, Iulli 
Antonii qui domum Augusti violasset manerent (that Pisos name should not be removed from the lists, 
since the names of M. Antonius, who had made war against his country, and Iullus Antonius, who had 
violated the house of Augustus, remained).  
 Spannagel (1999) 246; Degrassi (1947) 19-20. 
 Degrassi (1947) 18-19; Degrassi (1945) 88ff. 
 Degrassi (1947) 19 assigns the recarving of M. Antonius into the Fasti to Octavians return in 29 B.C. 
- 185 - 
the Fasti Consulares were inscribed in c.30 B.C., we must assume, based on their 
archaeological remains, that they were structurally integrated into the Actian arch in the 
Forum. If the Fasti Consulares belonged originally to the Actian arch, then it is 
tempting to see the Fasti Triumphales as an addition to the arch after 19 B.C., at a point 
when the return of the Parthian standards was being commemorated.
 As dicussed 
above, it seems highly plausible that the Fasti Triumphales were conceived and 
inscribed as a complete list after 19 B.C.
 given that they fit exactly into the space of the 
four pilasters.
 However, Taylor dated the erasures to 2 B.C. and the downfall of Iullus 
Antonius.
Unfortunately the year of Iullus consulship (10 B.C.) is not extant. 
Furthermore, if the erasures were made in 2 B.C., the issue arises why they only take 
place on the Fasti Consulares and not the Fasti Triumphales, since Antony is named 
twice in the celebrations of 40 B.C. for the ovations he shared with Octavian for making 
pax with one another.
The only plausible explanation would be that Antonys name 
could not be removed from the Fasti Triumphales due to its association with the ovation 
of Octavian and the pax made.
 The question of the erasure remains a problem.
 This would certainly fit with the idea put forward by Rich (1998) 96-115, who argues that the 
Parthian arch was a compromise monument, adapted from the pre-existing Actian arch. 
 See n. 614 above. 
 Taylor (1950b) 92; Taylor (1946) 2-6. 
 See chapter one pp. 17-19, 51-52 above. 
 Nedergaard (2004) 96 says the explanation is not totally satisfactory. L. Antonius name is also left 
intact on the Fasti Triumphales. 
 The erasures of M. Antonius are not the only ones in the Fasti Consulares. A total of fourteen 
erasures occur, two from the second tablet, seven from the third tablet, and five from the fourth tablet.  
Some erasures are clearly to correct misspellings and inscribing errors such as the recarving of Centho 
(censor 225 B.C.), Perilus (consul 223 B.C.). Other recarving appears to be due to the length of the text, 
normally when someone has died in office,  which most likely had to be reinscribed to make it fit into 
the space: 253 B.C. cens(ores) D. Iunius D. f. D. n. Pra abd(icavit) L. Postumius L.f. L. n. Megell(us) 
m(orttus) e(st), and 214 B.C.: cens(ores) M. Atilius M. f. M. n. Regulus abd(icavit) P. Furius Sp. f. M. n. 
Philus in mag(istratu) m(ortuus) est.  It is notably that the recarving of M. Antonius (99, 97, 47, 37 B.C.) 
all come from the fourth tablet. Due to the frequency of erasure and recarving of the name it is unlikely 
that it was due to error and the need for spacing: indeed, the entries are a few of the rare occasions 
where there is no cognomen. Condemnation did not necessary result in erasure from the Fasti 
- 186 - 
Whenever the Fasti Consulares were initially inscribed, it should be noted that 
they were clearly intended to be added to, unlike the Fasti Triumphales. The so-called 
fifth tablet illustrates this point, in that the consuls continued to be added to the list 
even when the designated space  the tablets  was no longer available. What is 
important for the commemoration of the Parthian settlement is that the Fasti 
Triumphales were inscribed as part of that celebration, and were intended to be viewed 
alongside the Fasti Consulares in the context of the arch commemorating the return of 
the standards. 
 That the Fasti Consulares were intended, at least after 19 B.C., to be part of a 
new display is suggested by the extant entries for the third (236 B.C.) and fifth (17 
B.C.) Ludi Saeculares, as well as those held by Domitian in A.D. 88. The position of 
the first two relate to the consular year in which they were held: thus the 
commemoration of the third games is inscribed on the wall to the left of the third tablet, 
at the same level as the consuls for that year, whilst that of the fifth games is found on 
the wall to the right of the fourth tablet, and is in fact part of the so-called fifth tablet. 
The Domitianic record was inscribed below that of 17 B.C. Therefore its placement 
does not relate to the year, but rather seeks to emphasise the relevance of 
commemorating the Ludi Saeculares on that monument. Thus, the Ludi Saeculares 
were an integral part of the initial display of the Fasti, and this is supported by the later 
addition of the games of A.D. 88: the monument was clearly where one commemorated 
such an event. 
Nedergaard has offered an elegant solution for the inscribing of the Ludi on a 
monument inscribed with the Fasti Consulares and Triumphales. She has noted that the 
Consulares: A. Terentius Varro Murena, who was killed during his consulship of 23 B.C. for conspiracy 
was not omitted or erased from the Fasti Consulares. His condemnation appears to have been recorded 
and his replacement named (Degrassi (1947) 58-59), although in all other fasti records he is omitted 
(e.g. Fasti Feriarum Latinarum: Degrassi (1947) 150-151): see Degrassi (1945) 97 n. 178. 
- 187 - 
so-called fifth tablet, inscribed as it is on the wall between the fourth tablet and a 
three-quarter Doric column, rather than in its own tablet, has far more slender letters 
than the rest of the inscription and states that it is a later addition. Furthermore, the fifth 
Ludi Saeculares entry, on the fifth tablet, appears to restrict the epigraphic field for 
the final consular entry of A.D. 13: most notably a dividing line had to be used in the 
name of L. Munatius L. f. L. n. | Plancus (Figure 68).
 The final entry for the Fasti 
Triumphales is that of Balbus in 19 B.C., which together with the entry for the fifth 
Ludi Saeculares suggests a likely date of c. 17 B.C. for the overall display of the Fasti. 
Clearly by this date the fourth tablet would not be completely filled, and Nedergaard 
has proposed that space would have been left for the consular offices to continue to be 
recorded, whilst the list of triumphs was finished, designed to fit exactly over the four 
pilasters, with no further triumphs apparently recorded.
 That the Fasti Consulares 
were intended to continue after 17 B.C. is suggested from the fifth tablet, which was 
not part of the original display, but continued the list of the consuls, even though there 
was no proper space designated for it.  
Now that I have established the position of the Fasti Capitolini on the triple arch 
commemorating Augustus Parthian victory, I will now consider the ideological 
significance of this display which demonstrates that the pax established with Parthia 
was conceptualised in terms of a novum saeculum. 
 Nedergaard (2004) 93-94, esp. n. 37: an erasure above the annotation of the Secular Games of 17 
B.C. seems to indicate that the engraver had at first placed the cognomina underneath the nomina of 
the two consuls, but then decided that the line came too close to the annotation of the secular games.  
A similar system of placing the cognomina underneath the nomina of the consuls can be observed for 
instance for years 5, 6, and 7 on fragment XLV. 
 Nedergaard (2001) 120; Nedergaard (2004) 96-99. 
- 188 - 
The Novum Saeculum and the Parthian Victory 
It should be recalled that the Parthian arch was ostensibly a senatorial 
monument set up to commemorate the Parthian settlement. The integration of the Fasti 
Capitolini presents the viewer with a display of Republican history from the first 
consuls and the first triumphatores down to the 19 B.C, and beyond in the case of the 
Fasti Consulares. This display articulates the two highest attainments of Roman 
authority: imperium domi militiaeque, embodied in the offices of consul and general. 
These lists present the men who composed the structural fabric of Roman political life 
both at home and in the field.
 The arch, with the Fasti Capitolini illustrates how the 
senate took the celebration of pax and interpreted it as a celebration of their order.
From the arrangement of the Fasti proposed by Nedergaard not only were they 
designed as a structural part of the monument, but also the Fasti Triumphales were to 
cover only the four supporting pilasters of the central archway, whilst the Fasti 
Consulares were to occupy four walls, with space in the fourth tablet to continue the 
recording of the consular office. It seems that there are almost two separate emphases at 
work within the monument, which combine to illustrate the nature of victorious pax. 
Firstly, the central archway throws the emphasis on the celebration of the 
triumph. Indeed, the letter size of the Fasti Triumphales is larger than that of the Fasti 
Consulares.
  This may be in part due to the height of the pilasters (3.265m), to enable 
the highest lines to be visible. However, this still leads to a visual comparison between 
the two lists, which are further distinguished by the two columns of consular lists, 
 The triumphal lists record the geographical place or ethnic over which the victory was won. 
 The senatorial aspect of the monument is discussed in part by Amy Russell in an unpublished paper 
Quos habendos esse censebat senatus: senatorial monuments and political identity (18
 Oct. 2007), 
and my thanks to her for discussing this important aspect with me. See Degrassi (1945); Simpson (1993) 
on a Republican interpretation of the Fasti and their monument. 
 Even given small discrepancies for different engravers the Fasti Triumphales uniformly measure c. 
17mm, whilst the Fasti Consulares measure c.10-13mm. Only Gordon (1958) n. 9-11 gives the 
measurement for the three fragments he discusses. See also Nedergaard (2001) 120. 
- 189 - 
against the one straight list of triumphatores. It is notable that Romulus is depicted as 
the first triumphator, despite the fact that in the literary tradition he is credited with the 
first dedication of the spolia opima but not a triumph.
 Furthermore, the Fasti 
Triumphales do not record Romulus spolia opima even though they are recorded for 
M. Marcellus.
 In relation to the Parthian arch and Augustus triumph over the 
Parthians,
 Romulus is emphatically placed as the first triumphator, rather than the 
first to dedicate the spolia opima.  
Simpson complains that Balbus name, as the last triumphator, on an arch to 
Augustus is inherently unlikely
 but he fails to understand the full context of the 
monument.
 Romulus name might be first, and Balbus name might be last in the 
long history of the triumph, but Augustus name and the evidence of his deeds rises 
above the Fasti, on the architrave of the arch, as the coin of Vinicius illustrates. The 
placement of the Fasti Triumphales on the pilasters of the arch then implies that this 
history provides the foundations and support for Augustus victory, which surpasses 
them all, even though no triumph in fact took place. The dedication on the architrave of 
the arch, which gives Augustus title as Imp(erator) Caesar Aug(ustus), co(n)s(ul) XI, 
tr(ibunicia) pot(estate) VI,
 articulates his adoption of the title Imperator  the 
acclamation given to a general after a victory by his soldiers
  as his praenomen.
Even without a triumph, the presentation of Augustus is one of a victor. The return of 
the Parthian standards then is treated as a new first triumph of Rome, and Augustus as 
 Livy 1.10. The depiction of Romulus in the Forum Augustum credits him with the spolia opima but 
not the triumph (ILS 64).  
 Bastien (2007) 66-74. 
 See pp. 168 - 169 above on the numismatic evidence. 
 Simpson (1993) 64. 
 Simpson (1993) in fact assigned the Fasti Capitolini to the Regia and not the Augustan arch. 
 Degrassi (1945) 100; Taylor (1951a) 94 n. 39. 
 Versnel (1980) 340-349. 
 Syme (1958). 
- 190 - 
the new founder. This concept ties in with the ideology of the novum saeculum and the 
secular games.
The commemoration of all the Ludi Saeculares down to the games of 17 B.C. is 
further highlighted by the completion of the triumphal lists, and the continuation of the 
consular lists. The outcome of the Parthian settlement is the end of triumphs yet the 
continuation of the power and imperium of the highest magistracy of Rome. In this 
respect the Parthian arch aims to commemorate the accomplishment of the pax 
established, after which there will be no need for any further triumphs. The list of 
triumphatores was terminated through the inscribing of the dedicatory inscription on 
the arch; this was later echoed by Ovid in his depiction of the Ara Pacis: dum desint 
hostes, desit quoque causa triumphi.
 This list of consular offices was to continue, and 
did continue, even when there was no proper designated space left.  
The return of the Parthian standards received a triumphal commemoration for a 
military victory under Augustus auspices, yet it also signals the moment as a triumph 
to end all triumphs, and indeed in a sense it was, for Balbus was the last non-member of 
the imperial gens to hold the honour. Augustus, in 17 B.C., had apparently encouraged 
triumphatores to erect public monuments out of their spoils to commemorate such 
deeds, in place of a triumph.
 The Parthian arch was, at the very least, a 
commemoration of the triumphal deeds of the entire senatorial order. However, the 
return of the standards and the expectation of the Ludi Saeculares presented an 
opportunity to express an ideology of pax in the new age. What the victory 
commemoration of the Parthian arch illustrates is an idea of the cessation of triumphs 
because Augustus has achieved the ultimate victory, that of pax which, resting on the 
 Rose (2005) 23; Zanker (1988) 183-192. As Taylor (1946), Taylor (1951a) demonstrated, the 
chronology of the Fasti Capitolini appears to have been influenced by the dating for the Ludi Saeculares. 
 Ov. Fast. 1.713. 
 Dio Cass. 54.18.2. 
- 191 - 
glorious past, brings a new age where there is only the need to record the offices of 
consul. 
The Arch and the Visual Landscape of Rome 
 The links that the arch created with the great Republican past were further 
emphasised by the landscape in which the arch was set. It is striking that the 
monuments relationship to the aedes Vestae has never been commented on (Figure 60). 
Standing on the west side of the arch, the temple is clearly visible through the vista of 
the central passageway (Figure 69). Although the temple had been rebuilt a number of 
times, the form and location of the monument have remained a constant,
 so I will 
work on the assumption that what is now visible in the space between the two central 
pillars of the arch presents us with a similar view to that at the time of the archs 
erection. 
 The temple of Vesta was representative of the earth (Vesta eadem est et terra)
and the sacred flame of the goddess was strongly connected to the public hearth and the 
founding of the city.
 Ovid celebrates the burning of Vestas eternal flame under 
Augustus rule (nunc bene lucetis sacrae sub Caesare flammae)
 as a pledge of 
imperium: ignibus aeternis aeterni numina praesunt / Caesaris: imperii pignora iuncta 
vides.
 The visual link between the temple of Vesta, as the eternal hearth of the city of 
Rome and thus the empire, and the arch the senate erected for the Parthian victory is 
thus suggestive. The triumphal commemoration of the Parthian pax was to be seen in 
 Scott (1999). 
 Ov. Fast. 6.267, also 6.460. 6.267-280 describes how the temple of Vesta mirrors the concept of the 
earth as a globe (6.278). See also Dionysius Rom. Ant. 2.66.3. 
 Dion. Hal. Rom. Ant. 2.65-66.1; Ov. Fast. 3.417-428. 
 Ov. Fast. 6.455. 
 Ov. Fast. 3.421-22: the eternal divine will of Caesar presides over the eternal flames: you see 
pledges of empire joined together. See also Ov. Fast. 6.428-429. 
- 192 - 
relation to the symbol of the stability and continuity of the Roman state, again linking 
the contemporary celebration to the history of Rome. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that 
Ovid ties the living flame of Vesta on the day of the Vestalia to the return of the 
Parthian standards, placing in the goddess mouth the words: Parthe, quid exsultas? 
Signa remittes, / quique necem Crassi vindicet ultor erit.
 Certainly, whether or not Ovid was drawing on the physical relationship 
between the Parthian arch and the temple in his poem,
 the visual connection between 
the temple of Vesta, framed in the central archway of the Parthian arch, which as the 
numismatic evidence suggests depicted the Parthians returning the standards on the 
lateral arches, evokes the concept that the celebration of the Parthian triumph should 
be understood as emphasising that Augustus achievement ensured the continuation of 
the ignes aeternae. Augustus himself claims to have consecrated dona ex manubiis in 
the aedes Vestae.
 Dionysius account of Metellus rescue of the sacred things of 
Vesta also highlights him as a triumphator over the Carthaginians: the protection of the 
sacred flame required, it seems, someone of proven military prowess, for the ability to 
protect the imperium of Rome was equivalent to the protection of Vesta.
 It seems that 
the senate also wished to highlight how Augustus achievement was a continuous part 
of the display of Roman imperium domi et militiae through the vista of the arch. 
 Ov. Fast. 6.467-468: why do you exalt, Parthian? You will return the standards, for there is one who 
will be the avenger of Crassus death. 
 See Green (2004) on the lack of physicality of monuments in Ovids Fasti. 
 RG 21. 
 Dion. Hal. Rom. Ant, 2.66.3-5. 
- 193 - 
The senatorial display and Augustus commemorations 
I will now turn to compare the senatorial display of the Parthian settlement to 
the evidence of Augustus own commemoration of the event in 20/19 B.C., to 
demonstrate the different interpretations of the pax Parthorum at Rome.  
As mentioned above, the Fasti seek to establish Romulus as the first 
triumphator (over the Caenisnenses), yet do not record his dedication of the first spolia 
opima. In Livys first book of his Roman history Romulus first victory (victor Romulus 
rex) over the Caenisnenses and the dedication of the spolia opima to Jupiter 
Feretrius.
 Livy makes no mention of a triumph: indeed, he first uses the term 
(triumphans) in chapter 39 in reference to Tarquinius victory in the Sabine War. 
Dionysius, who was writing in 7 B.C., however, states that Romulus both instituted the 
triumph and the spolia opima.
 Taylor has shown that Dionysius must have used the 
Fasti Capitolini as source material and it may be possible to see the influence of the 
Fasti Triumphales in his account of Romulus victory celebrations.
 Yet since the 
Fasti do not record the spolia opima, Dionysius must be following the tradition 
recorded by Livy as well. The senate celebrated the return of the standards as 
comparable to a triumph, as opposed to the dedication of the spolia opima.
 Yet as 
discussed above, Augustus himself drew parallels between the signa and the spolia 
opima.
 The senatorial programme in the Forum may be viewed as an alternative or 
competitive programme which sought to set Augustus achievement within a display of 
 Livy. 1.10. See p. 161 above. 
 Dion. Hal. Rom. Ant. 2.34.3:          ,    
; See Bastien (2007) 67-68. 
 Taylor (1951a) n. 19. 
 Bastien (2007) 73 sees the triumph as un commun dnominateur aux deux partiques. 
 See pp. 161-162 above; Bastien (2007) 66-74. 
- 194 - 
the entire history of the imperium domi militiaeque of the senate. The Fasti 
Triumphales tie the ceremony of the triumph to the foundation of Rome itself, and 
depict the triumph as the attainment of the senatorial order. The continuous history of 
the Roman triumph emphasises the senates claim to their integral importance to the 
state: the Fasti Capitolini demonstrate the vital link between the senior magistrates of 
Rome and Romes military victories.
However, the Parthian arch also signals the end of the triumph, and the sole 
continuation of the imperium domi through the lists of the consuls. It is notable that in 
23 B.C. Augustus had renounced the consulship, and twice refused to take up the office 
in 21 and 19 B.C.
 True, he was granted imperium consulare in 19 B.C., but only took 
up the office for a few months in 5 and 2 B.C. to introduce his grandsons into public 
life. Augustus left the consulship as the preserve of the senatorial order.
senatorial display of the Fasti on the Parthian arch demonstrates that Augustus great 
Parthian victory had come out of the long history of the triumph, which comprised the 
glories of magistrates with imperium. The Parthian victory had brought about a new 
form of triumph as a new foundation of the state (the novum saeculum): the triumph 
of the imperium domi for the senate. Furthermore, the senates emphasis on the 
imperium domi in the visual correlation between the arch and the temple of Vesta may 
have been intended to play against the reference to Jupiter Feretrius as the oldest temple 
 On the value of the triumph to senators see: Cic. Ad. Att. 1.20: Metellus tuus est egregius consul; 
unum reprehendo, quod otium nuntiari e Gallia non magno opere gaudet. Cupit, credo, trumphare (Your 
friend Metellus is an excellent consul; I have only one fault to find with him, he is not at all pleased with 
the news of peace from Gaul. I take it he wants a triumph); see also Cic. Ad. Fam. 15.4, 15.5, 15.6. On 
the importance of imperium to the meaning of the triumph see Versnel (1980) 304-371. 
 Dio Cass. 54.6.1-7.1; 54.10.1-3; see n. 527 above. 
 Carter (1982) 121 notes that Augustus abdication in 23 B.C. marked a radical transformation of the 
principate. 
- 195 - 
of the city.
 The temple of Jupiter represented the earliest victory dedication, whilst 
the temple of Vesta represented the essence of the Roman state (imperii pignora). 
The wider victory commemoration of 19 B.C. 
 As the passage of Dio cited above illustrates, the Parthian arch was not the sole 
commemoration of success for the years 20-19 B.C.
 Whilst Dio separates the voting 
of the Ara Fortunae Reducis from that of the Parthian arch  which he must do as the 
altar is specifically linked to the return of Augustus to Rome and so he reserves it for 
that later point in his narrative  the altar is a major part of the visual programme of 19 
B.C. Certainly, as the numismatic evidence from Spain shows the altar was 
commemorated on aurei and denarii of 19 B.C., along with the celebration of the signa 
recepta.
 As Augustus records in the Res Gestae, the altar was voted by the senate on his 
return from Syria: 
Aram Fortunae Reducis ante aedes Honoris et Virtutis ad portam Capenam 
pro reditu meo senatus consacravit, in qua pontifices et virgines Vestales 
anniversarium sacrificium facere iussit eo die quo, consulibus Q. Lucretio 
et M. Vinicio, in urbem ex Syria redieram.
 Dion. Hal. Rom. Ant. 2.65.1-2 records one tradition in which Romulus, rather than Numa, was 
responsible for the temple of Vesta. Whilst Dionysius emphasises this belief as erroneous, it suggests at 
least one tradition that sought to link the temple of Vesta to the foundation of the state by Romulus. 
 See pp. 155-156 above. 
 RIC Aug. 53-54; RIC 58 for Mars holding the signa recepta. 
 RG 11. 
- 196 - 
The senate consecrated the altar of Fortune the Returner in front of the 
temple of Honour and Virtue at the Capena gate on behalf of my return, at 
which they ordered the priests and the vestal virgins to make annual 
sacrifices on that day on which, during the consulship of Q. Lucretius and 
M. Vinicius, I re-entered the city from Syria. 
The location of the altar in front of the temple of Honos et Virtus, was linked to the 
entrance into Rome (ad portam Capenam),
 and gives the impression that Augustus is 
returning to Rome as if in triumph.
 This is supported by the image of a laureate head 
of Augustus on the Spanish coinage, depicting the altar on the reverse (Figure 70).
Indeed, the altar may be understood as a commemoration of Augustus successful 
campaign in the East and perhaps as an alternative form of victory display to the closing 
of the Gates of Ianus, which had already been done in the celebration over the East (29 
B.C.)
 and over the West (25 B.C.).
 Certainly, by the time Augustus had written his 
Res Gestae (c. A.D. 13), both the Gates of Ianus and the dedication of an altar on his 
return had been used to commemorate victory and pax over both the East and the 
West.
 The associations of victory in this senatorial altar perhaps foreshadow the 
similar choice of triumphal imagery employed in the Parthian arch. The altar, which 
celebrated Augustus return to the city, was also linked to the things he had 
accomplished whilst away from the city regarding the consular elections of 21 and 19 
 Richardson (1992) 190; Palombi (1996) 32. The Greek version of the RG omits the reference to the 
temple of Honos et Virtus. 
Cooley (2009) 151; see p. 156 above. 
 RIC Aug. 54-55. 
 Livy 1.19.3. 
 Dio Cass. 53.26.5; Oros. 6.21.1. 
 RG 11-13; see chapter four, pp. 218-220 below; Rich (1998) 75 for the Ara Fortunae Reducis as a 
model for the Ara Pacis Augustae. 
- 197 - 
 The achievements of Augustus, which had established stability and continuity 
for the senior magistracies, were commemorated by the senate as forms of victory and 
triumph. 
It is worth noting that the Ara Fortunae Reducis was dedicated in 19 B.C.,
and thus immediately celebrated Augustus return. The Parthian arch, whilst voted in 20 
B.C. may not have been complete until c. 17 B.C., and indeed was designed to link the 
returned standards to the celebration of the novum saeculum and the triumph of the 
imperium domi for the senate.  
 The conceptualisation at Rome of the Parthian pax illustrates the importance of 
presenting a victory over Parthia. The diplomatic treaty, which involved no real military 
conflict or victory, was treated in a triumphal fashion. This celebration was to highlight 
not only Romes victorious military history, and to set the Parthian achievement as the 
culmination of that history, but also to suggest a new age, as articulated by the 
celebration of the Ludi Saeculares, which celebrated the greatness of Rome and the 
return of pax.
 The commemoration of the Parthian pax in a monument together with 
the Ludi Saeculares emphasises accomplishments of this pax, which looked to the 
future with the continuation of Romes magisterial history and the imperium domi. 
Augustus, whilst he was an important part of the senatorial display, himself stressed 
also the militaristic aspect of his achievement, celebrating pax and the achievement of 
amicitia with Parthia as if he had defeated Parthia in war. The specific pax made with 
Parthia enabled Rome to fit Parthia into a conceptualisation of the empire.  
In 20 B.C. the act of making pax was treated as a victory over Parthia. In the 
later dedication of the Temple to Mars Ultor in the Forum Augustum, the actual act of 
 Dio Cass. 54.10.2-3; see pp. 159-160 above. 
 Inscr. Ital. XIII 2, Fasti Amiternini Oc. 12
 and Dec. 15
 Hor. Carm. Saec. 11-12: possis nihil urbe Roma / visere maius; 57-59: iam Fides et Pax et Honos 
Pudorque / priscus et neglecta redire Virtus / audet. 
- 198 - 
making pax would be brought into the foreground of Romes articulation of her 
imperium, with the act itself being played out amongst a display of the pacified orbis 
terrarum; within this display the returned Parthian standards became one example of 
the power of Rome to control her empire through the establishment of pax. 
- 199 - 
Section Two 
The Later Commemoration of Augustus at Rome 
 In A.D. 6 the new temple of Castor and Pollux was dedicated by Tiberius ex 
manubiis in the Roman Forum.
 This new structure, which measured 32.1m x 49.5m, 
increased the podium height by one metre and enlarged the dimensions of the Metellan 
structure (117 B.C.) by a ratio of 7:6.
 The Metellan temple was c.4m narrower than 
the new temple, and although its tribunal was deeper than the Augustan structure, the 
overall increase of the new temples dimensions meant that the later tribunal was 
projected further into the Forum, and thus decreased the space between the temple and 
the Parthian arch (Figure 60).
 As I have discussed above, the lateral staircase of the 
temple was deliberately orientated at a slight angle to ensure it met with the lateral 
passageway of the arch (Figure 71).
 Whilst steps provided a harmonious join 
between the two structures, it is clear that the enlargement of the temple took 
precedence over access to the arch: the southern lateral arch now acted as the entrance 
way to the temple. 
 The new dialogue between the extended temple podium and tribunal, and the 
southern lateral arch meant that, whilst people approaching from the east would still 
have a clear view of the arch, those approaching from the west side of the forum would 
have their view of the arch obstructed by the temple of Castor and Pollux, now 
 Suet. Tib. 20: Dedicavit et Concordiae aedem, item Pollucis et Castoris suo fratrisque nomine de 
manubiis; Dio Cass. 55.27.4; Ov. Fast. 1.707-8. 
 Nielsen (1993); Nilson and Persson (2008b) 95ff. 
 Nielsen and Poulsen (1992) 112-113; Nilson and Persson (2008b) 95ff. 
 See p. 172 above. 
- 200 - 
rededicated in the name of two other brothers: Tiberius and the deceased Drusus.
Whilst the tribunal of the temple had, since the 117 B.C. rebuild, been used for political 
business and speeches, after the fire of 14 B.C. such business appears to have been 
transferred to the platform set in front of the temple of Divus Iulius.
 What the 
rebuilding and rededication of the temple of Castor suggests is that the senatorial 
display of the Parthian victory in the Forum was being replaced by dedications made by 
Augustus and his family.
 It should also be noted that by 2/1 B.C. the Parthian 
standards were dedicated in the temple of Mars Ultor and Gaius Caesar was setting out 
from the Forum Augustum on a new Parthian campaign. This again suggests that a new 
display of the Parthian victory was being established to replace the senatorial display in 
the Roman Forum, which was now subjected to encroaching displays of the Imperial 
family.
 I will now examine how the events of 20 B.C. were later commemorated in the 
Forum Augustum, and how the specific commemoration of the Parthian victory was 
used to articulate a broader conceptualisation of victorious pax over the empire as a 
whole. The emphasis moved from the senatorial display of such commemoration in the 
Roman Forum, to Augustus own Forum and its display of empire. 
Forum Augustum 
 The return of signa militaria is something that Augustus boasts of not only for 
the Parthian standards: signa militaria complura per alios duces amissa devictis 
 Ov. Fast. 1.707: fratribus illa deis fratres de gente deorum; Green (2004) 226-227; Sumi (2009) 174ff. 
 Sumi (2009) 170-173. 
 Sumi (2009) 186. 
 However, the correlation in Ovids Fasti between Vesta and the Parthian standards proposed above 
pp 187 - 188 suggests the possibility of a continued awareness of the visual links to be drawn in the 
Forum. 
- 201 - 
hostibus recepi ex Hispania et Gallia et a Dalmateis.
 The actual occasions on which 
standards were lost and recovered from Spain and Gaul are unclear,
 but we do know 
that Augustus recovered the Dalmatian standards in 35/34 B.C. and displayed them in 
the porticus Octaviae in 33 B.C.
 However, it is only after the return of the Parthian 
standards, and their dedication finally in the temple of Mars Ultor in the Forum 
Augustum, that a precedent is established for the display of the recovered signa 
militaria. Dio states that, in the context of the dedication of the temple of Mars Ultor in 
the Forum Augustum, military standards recovered from the enemy were to be placed in 
the temple.
 The Parthian military standards were the initial focal point when the 
temple of Mars Ultor was dedicated in 2 B.C. Ovid, in his Fasti, refers specifically to 
the Parthian standards in the context of Mars Ultor,
 whilst Augustus specifies the 
temple of Mars Ultor in relation to the Parthian standards, in contrast to the other signa 
militaria.
 I will now consider the ways in which the Forum Augustum conceptualised 
the return of the Parthian standards by comparison with the Parthian arch. 
 The Forum Augustum was a display of Roman victory and foreign policy, both 
past and present. The upper storey of the colonnades was decorated with Caryatids, 
representations of the vanquished, and shields whilst personifications of conquered 
peoples were also displayed in the colonnades (Figure 72). The Forum was decorated 
with a variety of marbles: Numidian yellow, Phrygian purple, Lucullan red/black and 
 RG 29.1: I subdued the enemy and recovered from Spain and Gaul and from Dalmatians several 
military standards which had been lost by other generals. 
 Cooley (2009) 241-242. 
 App Ill. 3.12, 5.25, 5.28; see chapter two pp. 71-72 above. 
 Dio Cass. 55.10.4. 
 Ov. Fast. 5.579-596. 
 RG 29.2: Parthos...signa reddere...coegi. ea autem signa in penetrali, quod est in templo Martis 
Ultoris. The use of ea autem signa (and in the Greek version    ) emphasises the 
distinction between the Parthian standards and the other signa militaria Augustus records. See pp. 160- 
162 above for the original plan for a temple to Mars Ultor on the Capitoline to receive the standards. 
Only the temple of Mars Ultor and the Forum Augustum are treated with a visual programme in Ovids 
Fasti: Green (2004) 225, 236-239. 
- 202 - 
Egyptian alabaster (Figure 73), which all offered a view of the empire and Romes 
control over it. The colonnades were decorated with statues and inscriptions recording 
the great men of Romes past,
 whilst the senate set up a quadriga statue of Augustus 
in the centre of the Forum (Figure 74).
 The senatorial presence, in the form of the 
dedication of the quadriga and the elogia of the summi viri, is interesting. In some 
respects it appears to echo the senatorial display in the Roman Forum surrounding the 
Parthian celebrations: the Parthian arch with the quadriga and the Fasti Capitolini. 
However, we should remember that the context of the display is the Forum of Augustus, 
and we must contextualise the senatorial presence as part of Augustus display and 
conceptualisation of the Forum space. 
 As Suetonius records, Augustus made his Forum and in particular the temple to 
Mars Ultor the new focus of Roman military activity and foreign policy: 
Nec ulli genti sine iustis et necessariis causis bellum intulit, tantumque afuit 
a cupiditate quoquo modo imperium vel bellicam gloriam augendi, ut 
quorundam barbarorum principes in aede Martis Ultoris iurare coegerit 
mansuros se in fide ac pace quam peterent. 
...Sanxit ergo, ut de bellis triumphisque hic consuleretur senatus, provincias 
cum imperio petituri hinc deduceretur, quique victores redissent, huc 
insignia triumphorum conferrent.
 Geiger (2008) 107 for the discovery of a second pair of exedrae at the south end of the Forum. 
 Claridge (1998) 158-161; Ganzert (2000); Zanker (1968) esp. 16 for the portraiture of the summi viri 
and 24 for the overall rhetoric of the programme. On the elogia of the summi viri  see Geiger (2008) 
129-157. 
 Suet. Aug. 21.2, 29.2; cf. Dio Cass. 55.10.2-4. 
- 203 - 
He never carried out war against any nation without just and necessary 
reasons, and he was so far removed from desire of increasing in any way 
imperium or warlike glory, that he compelled the leaders of certain 
barbarian nations to swear in the temple of Mars Ultor that they would keep 
themselves in the loyalty and pax which they sought. 
...Therefore he sanctioned that the senate should consult about wars and 
triumph here; that those who were sent into the provinces with imperium 
should be dispatched from here; and that everyone who had returned as 
victors should transfer the insignia of triumphs here. 
Thus when ambassadors came to Rome, pax was negotiated within the display of 
Roman victory at the temple to Mars Ultor. Velleius in a brief discussion of all the 
nations subjected to Rome as provinces (quae cuiusque ductu gens ac natio redacta in 
formulam provinciae stipendiaria facta sit)
 records the display of such nations in the 
Forum Augustum: Hispanias aliasque gentis, quarum titulis forum eius praenitet.
Zanker thought that these tituli would have been included within the inscription beneath 
the quadriga in the Forum.
 However, an inscription dedicating a gold statue from 
Baetica suggests that the names of pacified nations were inscribed separately from the 
inscription set up by the senate: 
 Vell. Pat. 2.38.1: the races and nations which were reduced to provinces and made tributary to 
Rome, and by what generals. 
 Vell. Pat. 2.39.2: Spain and other countries whose names adorn his Forum. 
 Zanker (1988) 214. 
- 204 - 
Imp(eratori) Caesari Augusto p(atri) p(atriae) Hispania Ulterior Baetica 
quod beneficio eius et perpetua cura provincia pacata est auri p(ondo) 
C(entum).
To Imperator Caesar Augustus, father of his country, because the province 
had been brought under the condition of peace by his benefaction and 
perpetual care, Further Spain Baetica (gives this statue) 100 pounds of gold 
in weight. 
The gold statue set up on the base, found between the right hand side of the temple and 
the southern exedra,
 has been suggested as representing either Augustus,
 or the 
province of Baetica itself.
 Either way, the inscription indicates that the display was 
intended to illustrate how pax was Augustus achievement. Indeed, Tacitus reference 
to gold statues set up in the Forum Augustum indicates that such displays were to 
celebrate victory over foreign nations:  
cum Valerius Messalinus signum aureum in aede Martis Ultoris, Caecina 
Severus aram ultioni statuendam censuisset, prohibuit, ob externas ea 
victorias sacrari dictitans, domestica mala tristitia operienda.
When Valerius Messalinus proposed to set up a gold statue in the temple of 
Mars Ultor, and Caecina Severus one on the altar of Vengence, Tiberius 
 ILS 103. 
 Lanciani (1889) 26-32 for the discovery of the base, which measures 0.47m x 0.39m x 0.23m. See also 
Gordon (1958) 43; Pekry (1985) 74; Alfldy (1992) 71-72. 
 Pekry (1985) 74. 
 Alfldy (1992) 72. 
 Tac. Ann. 3.18.2. 
- 205 - 
prohibited it, saying again and again that statues were consecrated on 
account of foreign victories, but that domestic misfortunes and grief ought 
to be concealed. 
The representation of Baetica whether through a statue or the inscription alone, as a 
provincia pacata, illustrates the place given to foreign peoples and provinces within the 
context of the history of Roman victory.
 Romes ability to allow or disallow pax with 
foreigners is also attested in at least one elogium in the Forum.
 The elogia of the summi viri are part of Augustus own representation and 
presentation of Roman history. The display of the political-military figures of Romes 
past in the Forum Augustum was a deliberate selection of certain individuals, in 
contrast to the lists of the consuls and triumphatores on the Parthian arch, which at least 
professed to depict all consuls and triumphatores from Roman history as a display of 
sentorial power.
 However, the selection of individuals for the elogia was, like the 
Fasti Capitolini, to be added to after the dedication of the temple and Forum. 
Furthermore, those who were added to the display after the dedication of the Forum 
were to be distinguished from the past heroes with a bronze statue instead of a marble 
 The articulation of space and time in the Forum Augustum thus rivals the 
senatorial display of the Parthian arch through a selective account of Roman history 
 Nicolet (1991) 43 argues that there is no effigy of a province or representing a people in the Forum, 
however even if the statue dedicated by Baetica was of Augustus the province was still represented 
within the display of the Forum. 
 The elogium of Appius Claudius Caecus records that he prevented (prohibuit) pax with Pyrrhus: ILS 
 Geiger (2008) 6 argues that whilst there was a precedent  for the display of heroes in the Forum 
Romanum the very assemblage and forging of these parts into a new entity constituted something 
totally new and unheard of, not least because of the precise circumstances of the project and the 
unique standing of its initiator. 
 Dio Cass. 55.10.3:              
(and others who received triumphal honours were to have their statues in bronze erected in the 
Forum); Geiger (2008) 84-85. 
- 206 - 
which expresses the triumphal nature of relations with non-Romans. This is particularly 
pronounced in the display of the summi viri: the term triumphavit and its derivatives 
occur frequently in the extant elogia, mainly from the south-east colonnade, where 
nearly all identified figures were triumphatores.
 Whilst the extant tituli from the 
north-west side of the gens Iulia do not seem to emphasise, or be able to offer, a display 
of triumphatores,
 it appears that at least the tituli of Tiberius and his son Drusus 
demonstrate how the gens Iulia now played a major role in Romes victory display: 
[Nero] Cl[a]udiu[s] Ti(beri) f(ilius) / [Dru]sus German[i]cus / [co(n)s(ul)] pr(aetor) 
urb(anus) q(uaestor) aug(ur) imp(erator) / [app]ellatus in Germania. 
Whilst the Parthian arch was to be a terminus for the recording of the triumph 
and presentation of the continuation of imperium domi, the display in the Forum 
Augustum was to allow for a continual articulation of those awarded triumphal honours. 
The senate endorsed the location of the Forum Augustum as the centre of victory 
celebrations, and established Augustus as the focal point of such celebrations, 
dedicating the quadriga statue group to Augustus Pater Patriae.
 The dedication of 
the Parthian standards must be understood within this context. 
Signa in templo Martis Ultoris
 By the time of the dedication of the temple of Mars Ultor in the Forum 
Augustum in 2 B.C., following the death of Phraates, the issue of Romes relations with 
 Appius Claudius Caecus (ILS 54) appears as the only non-triumphator in the extant inscriptions. 
Geiger (2008) 143 points out that this means Suetonius comment that all the statues were of those 
who had received triumphal honours (Suet. Aug 31.5: statuas omnium triumphali effigie) must be seen 
as a somewhat loose description of the precise state of affairs. Nevertheless, Appius role in foreign 
policies is emphasised as is his building of the temple of Bellona.  
 Geiger (2008) 129-137. The role of the north-west display seems more concerned with presenting 
the gens Iulia as an integral part of the urbs Romae since its foundation. 
 RG 35; Zanker (1988) 214. 
 RG 29. 
- 207 - 
Parthia, and influence over Armenia was again addressed.
 In A.D. 1 Augustus 
grandson and adopted son Gaius Caesar met the new Parthian king, Phraataces, son of 
Phraates IV, on the Euphrates to negotiate their respective influences in the area.
Gaius had been sent out from Rome in 2 B.C. to take charge of the legions on the 
Danube, although Ovid also marks his departure from Rome with further Parthian 
triumphs, and indeed highlights the coup over the Parthian throne: hostis ab invito 
regna parente rapit.
 However, no real need was felt to address the issue of Parthia 
immediately, particularly as Gaius meeting with Phraataces took place almost two 
years later.
Whether or not the situation in Armenia and Parthia presented a true threat to 
Rome in 2 B.C.,
 the display at Rome, with the dedication of the incomplete temple of 
Mars Ultor and the display of the standards suggests the reaffirmation of an overtly 
military victory, which most likely was associated with C. Caesars departure.
dedication of the standards in the temple can certainly be understood in the specific 
context of a renewed Parthian campaign and programme.
 The role of the temple of 
Mars Ultor within the Forum Augustum as the epicentre of military-political activity in 
Rome, and the location from which generals set out, combined with the display of the 
 Up until Phraates murder, the diplomacy of 20 B.C. appears to have, for the most part, held and 
indeed in 10/9 B.C. the king sent his heirs to live in Rome: Romer (1979) 200-202; Campbell (1993) 223-
 Vell. Pat. 2.101; Dio Cass. 55.10a.4. 
 Ov. Ars Am. 1.198. 
 Romer (1979) 201 n.6 suggests that the coup had likely taken place before Gaius left Rome. Dio Cass.  
55.10.17-20 places Gaius departure before the events in Armenia and Parthia, although he does not 
record the death of Phraates IV, and merely records that Phraataces, on learning of Gaius expedition, 
send a delegation to Augustus (55.10.20). 
 Romer (1979) 203. 
 Dio Cass. 55.10.18-19; Gruen (1982) 66; Rose (2005) 45-50, 53-54 for the base from Corinth which 
may commemorate Gaius (hoped for) Parthian victory. 
 Ov. Ars Am. 177-228. 
- 208 - 
standards and the dedication of the temple on the eve of Gaius departure,
 emphasises 
the continued role of the standards in symbolizing and portending Roman success. 
I discussed above the initial plans of Augustus dedication of the signa to Mars 
Ultor in 20 B.C.
 The potential conflict between the senatorial display of Romulus as 
the first triumphator and the connections to be drawn between Romuluss dedication of 
the spolia opima by Augustus, is resolved with the deposit of the standards in the 
temple of Mars Ultor in the Forum Augustum. Not only did Augustus set up a new 
record of Roman history in the display of the elogia of the summi viri and the tituli of 
the pacified provinces against the display of the Parthian arch, he also reintroduced 
Romulus as the first dedicator of the spolia opima within that new display. 
Whilst the Parthian arch sought to present Romulus as the first triumphator, the 
record of the Forum Augustum stresses his dedication of the spolia opima.
 Certainly, 
Ovid suggests that the focus of the display is one of arms captured: 
perspicit in foribus diversae tela figurae, 
armaque terrarum milite victa suo. 
hinc videt Aenean oneratum pondere caro 
et tot Iuleae nobilitatis avos; 
hinc videt Iliaden umeris ducis arma ferentem, 
claraque dispositis acta subesse viris.
 Ov. Ars Am 1.179-180: Parthe, dabis poenas: Crassi gaudete sepulti, / Signaque barbaricas non bene 
passa manus / Ultor adest, primisque ducem profitetur in annis, / Bellaque non puero tractat agenda 
puer (Parthia, you will pay the price; rejoice you deceased Crassi and you standards who have not 
borne barbarian handling well. The avengers here, the leader, proclaimed, of tender years, and a boy 
wages wars un-boy-like agenda). 
 See pp. 160-163 above. 
 For the possible reference to a triumph of Romulus in the Forum Augustum see: Geiger (2008) 138 n. 
 Ov. Fast. 5.561-566. 
- 209 - 
He perceived the weapons of various figures on the doors, and the arms of 
the lands conquered by his soldier. Here he sees Aeneas burdened by the 
dear weight and many ancestors of the Iulian nobility; here he sees the son 
of Ilia bearing the arms of a leader on his shoulders and well-known deeds 
displayed under the men set up in order. 
The articulation of Aeneas bearing the past and future of the Iulian line, set opposite 
Romulus bearing the first dedication of arms places Augustus, whose name adorned the 
temple set between the two exedrae,
 and the dedication of the signa recepta as the 
continuation and culmination of the display of Roman victory. Ovid, furthermore, 
emphasises the role of the Parthian standards within the historical display of arma 
victa: 
Persequitur Parthi signa retenta manu. 
Signa, decus belli, Parthus Romana tenebat, 
Romanaeque aquilae signifer hostis erat; 
Agnorunt signa recepta suos. 
Quid tibi nubc solitae mitti post terga sagittae, 
Quid loca, quid rapidi profuit usus equi? 
Parthe, refers aquilas, victos quoque porrigis arcus: 
 Ov. Fast. 5.567: spectat et Augusto praetextum nomine templum. The quadriga statue (RG 35) set up 
by the senate would also have carried Augustus name, although its exactly location within the Forum is 
unknown. 
- 210 - 
Pignora iam nostri nulla pudoris habes. 
Rite deo templumque datum nomenque bis ulto.
He seeks the standards held back by Parthian hands...The Parthian was 
holding the Roman standards, the glory of war, and the standard-bearer of 
the Roman eagle was the enemy...the returned standards recognised their 
own people. What now of the arrows accustomed to be fired from behind 
your back, what use is there for your places and swift horses? Parthian, 
return the eagles, and hand over your defeated bows. Now you have no 
pledge of our shame. The temple and the name are rightly given to the god, 
twice avenging. 
The return and dedication of the Parthian standards in the temple of Mars Ultor 
exemplifies not only the concept of revenge, but also the display of defeated and 
pacified nations within the commemoration of conquest and empire. Ovids treatment 
of the Forum Augustum articulates the play between the portrayal of great triumphal 
heroes of Romes past (claraque dispositis acta subesse viris) and of the pacified 
nations (arma victa), yet even whilst he emphasises the Parthians submission to Rome 
in their act of returning the standards, he also alludes to the concept of the standards as 
pignora, as pledges to secure pax.
 Within the display of the Forum Augustum the Parthian standards come to form 
part of the wider commemoration of the empire achieved by victorious pax. As I have 
argued above, the Forum was an arena of Roman victory display, within which foreign 
 Ov. Fast 5.580, 585-586, 590-595. 
 Ov. Fast 5.594. 
- 211 - 
nations came to negotiate pax with Rome.
 The pacified nations were represented 
through tituli, which demonstrated their relationship to Rome: Baetica termed itself a 
provincia pacata. The standards are in one sense the representation of Parthia at Rome 
and of Romes relationship with Parthia. The display within the Forum Augustum was 
the translation from the display of the Parthian arch as a specific form of 
commemorating the Parthian achievement, to a wider display of empire. Yet the 
Parthians are not being treated in the same rhetorical way as other subject states. The 
standards are not a representation of the Parthian nation, but are Roman standards 
reclaimed and then displayed in the context of the Forum space. Certainly, Parthia 
above any other nation was seen and represented as a rival to the Roman state. The 
failure of previous Roman generals to bring the Parthian empire under the control of 
Rome serves to enhance Augustus achievement in securing the return of the standards. 
The dedication of the standards also stands as testimony and proof of Augustus 
power to compel foreign leaders to seek pax within a space which articulated Romes 
long history of victory, with the princeps highlighted within the display through the 
senatorial quadriga statue and his name, dedicating the temple to Mars Ultor, set over 
and above all the other elogia. 
 See pp. 197-200 above. 
- 212 - 
Section Three  
Presentations of the Parthian pax in the provinces 
In this section I consider how the establishment of pax with the Parthians was 
presented outside Rome, both immediately following the events of 20 B.C. and the later 
commemorations associated with Gaius Parthian campaign. The focus in the provincial 
displays from the Imperial mints, Roman colonies and local communities was on 
Romes victory over Parthia and her control of the East.  
Commemorations of Augustus 20 B.C. Parthian settlement can certainly be 
seen in the East and in Spain, however even though a pax was established between 
Rome and Parthia there is little or no allusion to the pact in the regional displays. The 
interpretation and presentation of the pax with Parthia was dependent on the context of 
the commemoration: at Rome the various displays demonstrate the accomplishments of 
the pax Parthorum in terms of domestic imperium and the establishment of the novum 
saeculum; in the East a message of control over Armenia and Parthia was emphasised; 
in Spain, the victory over Parthia was again emphasised, but so too were the benefits 
that Augustus victory brought to the region, along with the novum saeculum. The later 
display in the Forum Augustum at Rome articulated the power of Rome over her empire 
through her ability to establish and impose pax over the empire. In Greece, there is 
evidence of the return of the Parthian standards being used as an example of the 
pacified orbis terrarum, but the specific role of pax, used as means of securing, 
imposing and articulating Romes control of her empire, is not articulated. 
I will first examine the evidence from both the East and West, for the 
commemoration of the Parthian settlement as a victory. Both the Imperial mints at 
- 213 - 
Pergamum and in Spain, and later displays from Corinth articulate Romes defeat of 
Parthia,
 whilst the temple erected by Athens to Roma and Augustus on the Acropolis, 
sets Augustus achievements against Parthia within the context of Athens past victories 
over the Persians.  
I will then turn to consider the broader themes of empire-wide pacification that 
were articulated in some of these provincial displays. The Spanish coinage not only 
emphasises ideas of victory and revenge, but also introduces the Ludi Saeculares and 
the benefits of the victory over Parthia in its display. The later display at Antioch-in-
Pisidia also alludes to the broader theme of empire-wide pacification through the return 
of the standards, and benefits of such control. 
The coins depicting the Parthian arch from Pergamum, Spain and Rome, 
discussed above in section one, illustrate how the monument was represented 
differently depending on the date and location of the issue, and the knowledge of the 
arch an audience was expected to have. The coins, taken together with other issues from 
the same locations, demonstrate the different messages that were being disseminated 
about the Parthian settlement.  
As I established above, the Pergamum coin depicts not the actual arch that was 
erected, but rather the honour voted to Augustus for the restoration of the standards 
(Figure 54). The other reverses of cistophori from the same issue of 19-18 B.C. from 
Pergamum offer further insight into the visual programme publicised by the Imperial 
mint in those years: a temple dedicated to Roma and Augustus by the Commune Asiae 
(Figure 75),
 and a domed temple to Mars Ultor with the standards (Figure 76).
Aurei and denarii produced at the mint in the same years show a visual programme 
 The displays at Corinth and Antioch-in-Pisidia are dated to the general period of Gaius Parthian 
campaigns, 2 B.C.  A.D. 1; Rose (2005) 53-57  
 RIC Aug. 505-506. 
 RIC Aug. 507. 
- 214 - 
commemorating the capture of Armenia (Figure 77) and the return of the Parthian 
standard (Figure 78).
 The coinage from Pergamum minted in 19-18 B.C. 
demonstrates Augustus control over the great eastern empire, and celebrates revenge 
over Parthia. Augustus Parthian settlement does not allude specially to the concept of 
pax, but rather illustrates the outcome of the settlement with Parthia as a victory over 
the East. 
Rich has suggested that the Spanish coinage was designed to stress the Parthian 
settlement (Figure 55), whilst the Vinicius coinage played down the Parthian theme 
(Figure 56).
 Certainly, the Spanish issue explicitly refers to the return of standards 
and citizens in its legend, and the figures on the lateral arches are at the same level as 
the central chariot group, and appear almost larger. The Vinicius coin in contrast does 
not mention the standards in the legend and sets the attic of the lateral arches much 
lower than that of the central arch. However, whilst the Parthian theme is clearly 
emphasised on the Spanish coin, the evidence does not indicate that the Vinicius coin 
plays it down, but rather that they are addressing different audiences. Vinicius coin 
was minted at Rome, where, in 16 B.C., an audience would have been familiar with the 
structure represented, and understood its context. For an audience in Spain the reference 
needed to be articulated to a greater degree. A clearer picture of the depiction of the 
Parthian settlement on the Spanish issue can be formed from a brief examination of the 
wider numismatic programmes of which it was a part. 
The imagery of victory on the Spanish coinages is clear: coins display triumphal 
garb (toga picta and tunica palmata) with the aquila and wreath, and triumphal chariots 
voted by the SPQR (Figure 79), and the temple of Mars Ultor with the standards (Figure 
 RIC Aug. 511-526; Rose (2005) 24.  
 Rich (1998) 110. 
- 215 - 
53). Coins minted between 18-16 B.C. continue the themes of previous years with 
Victory on a globe carrying the aquila, and sometimes a trophy and palm (Figure 80). 
These images emphasise the events of 20 B.C. as a victory accomplished by Augustus.  
Material remains for the Roman colony at Corinth also suggest the propagation 
of Romes victory over Parthia. A marble statue base from Corinth, which was used as 
part of a second century display of eight colossal Parthian figures along the north side 
of the agora,
 has been dated to the last quarter of the first century B.C. 
The base 
depicts a winged victory crowning a trophy with a wreath, and a bound Parthian captive 
standing on the other side (Figure 81).
 Though Schneider has assigned the base to 
commemorations in 20 B.C.,
 Rose suggests that it should be dated to Gaius Parthian 
campaign in 2 B.C.
 Whilst the specific context of its original display cannot be 
assigned with any accuracy as a specific commemoration at the end of the first century 
B.C., it is clear that the message is one of explicit victory over the Parthians.
These displays represent Roman imperial and colonial perspectives, which 
understood the settlement with Parthia as an assurance of Romes military prowess and 
control in the East. It is hardly surprising that local communities likewise give little 
allusion to the concept of pax in their commemorations of the Parthian settlement. The 
monopteros of Roma and Augustus on the Athenian Acropolis dedicated by the Demos, 
and dated to between 27-18 B.C. based on its inscription,
 was most likely erected to 
commemorate Augustus visit to the city on his return from Syria with the standards in 
 Vermeule (1968) 83. 
 Schneider (1986) 129-130; Rose (2005) 53-54. 
 The captive wears a long tunic and trousers commonly used in depictions of Parthians. 
 Schneider (1986) 129-130. 
 Rose (2005) 53-54. 
 Rose (2005) 54 has hypothesised that colossal statues of Parthian may have also stood on the base in 
the original Augustan display, thus further emphasising the victory over Parthia. Schneider (1986) 130 
for the ideological message of the Antonine display in reusing a display associated with Augustus 
Parthian victory. 
 IG II
2.3173; Schfer (1998) 47; Rose (2005) 50, n. 8. 
- 216 - 
19 B.C (Figure 82).
 The circular shape of the temple may possibly be intended to 
emulate the circular temple Mars Ultor, depicted on the coinage of Pergamum (Figure 
 Yet it is dedicated not to Mars Ultor, but to Roma and Augustus. The concept of 
revenge is not necessary in the context of the Athenian display: the temple stood on the 
east side of the Parthenon, which recorded the great history of Greek triumphs over the 
Persians and the East. Whilst the temple may emulate that of Mars Ultor to hold the 
returned signa, and was most likely erected to commemorate Augustus visit to the city 
with the standards in 19 B.C., its use functioned within the context of Greek victory 
over the eastern enemy. 
Even though the majority of the commemorations concerned with the Parthian 
settlement do not engage with the ideas of pax seen at Rome, there is evidence that the 
role of the Parthian settlement as an expression of Romes empire-wide pacification 
was also expressed in some of the provincial displays. 
The Augustan propylon at Antioch-in-Pisidia, dedicated to Augustus in c. 2/1 
B.C.,
 depicted a Parthian returning of the standards.
 Yet the Parthian victory was 
just one element within the display. Standards were also returned by Celts, and 
allusions were made to Augustus land and naval victories through the use of victories 
and bound barbarians, weapons and trophies, tritones, dolphins and ship prows.
Given the sculptural remains, the arch plausibly represents different instances of 
Romes ability to control her empire, with the return of the standards by both Parthia 
Dio Cass. 54.9.10; Schfer (1998) 47, 59-63; Rose (2005) 50-52. 
 RIC Aug. 507, and also the Spanish coins:  RIC Aug. 28, 68, 103-106; Schfer (1998) 63-67. 
 Mitchell and Waelkens (1998) 147: Imp. Caesari divi f. Augusto Pontifici Maximo / cos. XIII Tribuniciae 
Potestatis XII Imp. XIIII P. P.  
 The reconstruction of the Augustan propylon is based both on the architectural and sculptural 
remains, and the later Hadrianic propylon, which appears to be a close copy to the earlier arch. For the 
themes, in particular the representations of the Celtics and Parthians returning the standards, see 
Robinson (1926) 45-56; Rose (2005) 55-56; Ossi (2011) 97-101. 
Robinson (1926) 21-56; Mitchell and Waelkens (1998) 161-163; Rose (2005) 56; Rubin (2011) 41-44. 
- 217 - 
and Gaul serving as a display of the provinciae pacatae, comparable to the message of 
the Forum Augustum at Rome. Like the Forum Augustum, the display at Antioch-in-
Pisidia appears to be set up to commemorate Gaius Parthian campaign, as a 
continuation of Romes control over the empire.  
The propylon continued to serve as a focal point of Roman imperium: later the 
Latin text of Augustus Res Gestae was inscribed upon it.
 Certainly the monument 
articulated a strong Roman view point, especially through the use of Latin in the 
dedicatory inscription, and as the entrance to the Imperial Sanctuary dedicated to 
Jupiter Optimus Maxmius, Augustus and the Genius of the Colony.
  Yet the propylon 
also engaged with local identity, depicting the local tutelary deity, Mn Asakanos in 
the attic frieze. The Roman control of the empire, depicted on the arch was thus 
presented as supported by the indigenous deities of Antioch.  
Beyond the later role of the Parthian standards as one aspect of Romes 
pacification of the orbis terrarum, there is evidence in certain areas that the concept of 
the settlements association with the novum saeculum was disseminated. In addition to 
the images of victory and triumph on the Spanish coinage of 19 B.C., are the civil oak 
wreath crown - ob civis servatos (Figure 83), the two laurels, and Victory with the 
clupeus virtutis bestowed by the SPQR (Figure 84).
 Several of these images echo the 
honours given to Augustus by the senate in 27 B.C for his preservation and restoration 
of the state: laureis postes aedium mearum vestiti publice coronaque civica super 
 It is striking that Augustus Res Gestae was later inscribed in Latin on the propylon thus continuing to 
emphasise the message of Roman imperium: Cooley (2009) 6-18; Rubin (2011) 44.  
 Rubin (2011) for the overall display of the Imperial Sanctuary, and esp. 50-56 for the dedication of 
the temple. 
 RIC Aug. 59-95; Rose (2005) 23. 
- 218 - 
ianuam mean fixa est, et clupeus aureus in curia Iulia positus.
On the coinage of 18-
16 B.C. the theme of the Ludi Saeculares is introduced (Figure 85) along with 
commemorations for the building of roads (Figure 57) and a public vote for Augustus 
safe return from Gaul (Figure 86).
 The visual programme of the Spanish coinage 
introduces a celebration of the new age (with the games and the renewal of road 
building), and a celebration that is intimately linked to the achievements of Augustus as 
the depictions of the Victories and Mars demonstrate. In this respect the Spanish 
coinage reflects the association at Rome of the Parthian settlement and the novum 
saeculum.  
As a final remark on the presentation of the Parthian settlement in the provinces, 
it is worth noting that Borchhardt has hypothesised that the pact between the Parthian 
king and Gaius Caesar at the Euphrates may have been depicted on Gaius cenotaph at 
Limyra.
 This is based on fragmentary remains of bearded faces and a decorated 
quiver that suggest that the Parthians were in some way depicted as part of the 
sculptural relief of the monument. Even if the pact between Phraataces and Gaius were 
commemorated on the tomb, so too were symbols of Roman political and military 
power (the fasces, standards and olive and laurel wreaths).
 Gaius cenotaph 
celebrates his achievements as an aspect of Romes imperium and control of her empire. 
The ways in which the pax Parthorum was represented to and understood by 
the provinces was dependent on the context of the display and who the intended 
audience was. There are instances from Spanish and in Roman colonies in Greece that 
 RG 34: the doorposts of my house were publicly clothed with laurels, and a civic crown was fastened 
above my doorway, and a golden shield was set up in the Julian senate house; Cooley (2009) 262-270; 
Zanker (1988) 92-98. 
 RIC Aug. 121-123a (Victory); Aug. 138-139 (Ludi Saeculares); Aug. 140-144 (quod viae mun(itae) 
sunt); Aug. 146-153 (Mars and the votes for Augustus safe return). 
 Borchhardt (2002) 50-51, 60-62; Rose (2005) 57-58. 
 Borchhardt (2002) 36-40, 47-54, 58-60. 
- 219 - 
the Parthian victory was an example of the benefits of empire. Athens represented 
Augustus accomplishments as part of their own history of victory over the East. It 
seems to have mattered little that Romes power over Parthia was established through a 
pact rather than through victory in war what matter was what had been achieved, and 
for the provinces that was a clear example of Romes imperium over the empire. 
- 220 - 
Summary 
 This chapter has focused on the commemoration at Rome of Augustus Parthian 
campaign of 20 B.C. As with the ovations for Antony and Octavian in 40 B.C., the 
establishment of pax (made in place of war) was celebrated as if it were an actual 
victory. Of course, the difference in 20 B.C. is that this pax is not between two Roman 
generals and magistrates, but a diplomatic negotiation between two rival empires. Prior 
to 20 B.C. Romes relationship with Parthia was not characterised by pax, but by 
revenge and victory in battle. The Parthian settlement illustrates how Roman victory 
rhetoric adapted in order to be able to treat a pact with an external enemy not as the 
result of victory, but as a victory in itself. The Parthian pax illustrates one aspect of 
Imperial pax: how pax was treated as a victory in order to express Romes imperium, 
during the Augustan period.
 Whilst Romes victory over Parthia was propagated throughout the empire, the 
focus in these regional commemorations was on the event as a victory, with little or no 
allusion to pax specifically. The coinage at Pergamum focused on illustrating Augustus 
control over the East, through his victory over Parthia and his capture of Armenia. The 
Spanish coinage strongly emphasises ideas of victory and revenge, although the 
celebration of the new age, as the result of such a victory, is also introduced in the years 
following the return of the standards. It was however at Rome that the importance of 
pax as a pact imposed on the Parthians received the greatest attention. At Rome the 
 Another aspect of this Imperial pax is discussed below in Chapter four, where conquest and victory 
are expressed in terms of pax. 
- 221 - 
various displays demonstrate how Parthia was conceptualised to explain and justify 
Romes imperium through the victory of pax over the empire. 
 The senatorial display of 19-17 B.C. celebrated the return and victory over the 
East (Ara Fortunae Reducis), and also articulated a display of the continuation and 
security of imperium domi accomplished by Augustus through the diplomatic pact, in 
the Parthian arch. The monument presented the pax established with Parthia as a victory 
over Parthia and as an affirmation of the novum saeculum. This specific 
commemoration demonstrated the security of Rome and her empire through the 
exemplum of the Parthian standards and their return.  
Augustus later commemoration in the Forum Augustum reuses the standards as 
symbols of the pax Parthorum, the Parthian victory, as one instance amongst many 
which illustrate Romes imperium over the empire. The place of the Parthian victory 
within later displays in the Greek East also served as one exemplum among many of 
Romes imperium, such as the propylon at Antioch-in-Pisisdia illustrates. However, the 
displays at Rome, unlike those in the provinces, articulated the play between victory 
and control over the empire, and the establishment of pax. In the temple of Mars Ultor 
at Rome, the standards became part of a wider display of empire, which balanced 
Romes triumphal nature over the empire, within an arena for the negotiation of pax 
with the empire. This is true also in the context of Gaius Caesars departure to Parthia 
in 2 B.C. His victory was already assured
 by the presence of the standards dedicated 
at the site from where he set off, for Romes power over Parthia had already been long 
established, and was a focal point of the celebration of victorious pax within Augustus 
Forum.  
 See n. 732 above. 
- 222 - 
The integration of pax into Roman victory rhetoric in this period relies both on 
the continual concept of pax as an agreement between two sides (with Rome of course 
as the superior side) and on the growing association of the concept with that of 
imperium.
 stenberg (2009b) 68-70. 
- 223 - 
Chapter Four 
Victory and Pacification: Commemorating the 
Western Empire 
In 25 B.C. the Gates of Ianus were closed for a second time under Augustus,
for the successful completion of the wars against the Cantabri and Astures (who 
inhabited an area in the Spanish Pyrenees), and the revolt of the Salassi (who lived at 
the foot of the Alps), as well as the suppression of some of the Germans, and the 
reorganisation of Galatia as a Roman province.
 Although the Cantabri and Astures in 
fact continued to resist Roman control until 19 B.C.,
 they are not mentioned in the 
Res Gestae, besides the oblique references to the closing of the Gates of Ianus.
Rather, Augustus writing in A.D. 13 presents his pacification of Gaul and Spain as a 
single, cohesive act over the entire region,
 conceptualising them as the provinces 
they had become.
 However, the commemoration of the war of 25 B.C. was clearly 
considered of importance at the time: not only were the Gates closed in connection with 
the subjugation of these Spanish and Alpine peoples, but Augustus concluded his lost 
autobiography, de Vita Sua, with the Cantabricum bellum.
 To commemorate the 
subjugation of the Salassi the colony Augusta Praetoria (Aoste) was founded in 25 
 Dio Cass. 53.26.5; RGDA 13; Oros. 6.21.1 relates that the Gates had been opened when Augustus left 
for Spain in 27 B.C. 
 Dio Cass. 53.25-26.5.  
 Dio Cass. 54.11.2-5; Livy 28.12.12. 
 The formation of Galatia as a Roman province is also not recorded in the RG. 
 RG 26.2: Gallias et Hispanias provincas...pacavi. 
 By contrast the Germanic peoples, whilst Augustus claims to have pacified them, are still 
conceptualised as tribes and peoples: RG 26. 
 Suet. Aug. 85.1. On the de Vita Sua see Carter (1982) 5, 92, 197; Cooley (2009) 38-39. 
- 224 - 
B.C.,
 and an arch set up in the Alps to commemorate the victories in the region, 
possibly at Aoste.
 Perhaps due to the lack of success in defeating the tribes from 
northern Spain, a show of control was made instead in Lusitania, with the foundation of 
the colony of Emerita Augusta in 25 B.C.
 Prior to 25 B.C. Augustus had closed the Gates once before, after the battle of 
Actium: post bellum Actiacum ab imperatore Caesare Augusto pace terra marique 
parta.
 The omission of the closing of the Gates in 25 B.C. from Livys account is one 
of the factors by which his first book has been dated to 27-25 B.C.
 As discussed in 
chapter two, the gate closing of 29 B.C. was regarded as a celebration of pax won by 
land and sea, presenting one event as the emblem of the security of the empire.
However, the subsequent revolts in the West resulted in a separate commemoration of 
pacification.  
 The closing of the Gates of Ianus in 25 B.C. and the setting up of the arch at 
Aoste in the same year are commemorations of Romes control over a newly conquered 
territory. The second closing of the Gates may possibly also symbolise Romes victory 
over the West, just as the first closing of the Gates in 29 B.C. was part of the 
commemoration of Octavians eastern victories. The idea of pax linked to the 
establishment of control over omnes populi had emerged out of the civil wars as an 
 Dio Cass. 53.25.3-5. The colony of Aoste provided access through the St. Bernard Passes: Cooley 
(2009) 222-223 
 Dio Cass. 53.26.5; Prieur (1982) 447. No inscription or iconographic elements of the arch remain to 
indicate whether it was set up to commemorate the victory, however the foundation of the colony 
along with the arch in 25 B.C. suggests their strong links to the first victories over the Alps in that year. 
 Dio Cass. 53.26.1. 
 Livy 1.19.3.  
 Foster (1976) 69 n. 1; Luce (2009) 17. 
 See chapter two, p. 88-92 above. 
- 225 - 
explanation of Roman imperium (possession of which by individual statesmen had 
caused much of the conflict of the last years of the Republic).
The East/West divide is also clear in the altars which later commemorated 
Augustus returns to Rome from campaigns in 19 and 13 B.C.
 After the return of the 
Parthian standards and the celebrations of the novum saeculum won through Augustus 
victorious pax, the final pacification of the West
 was commemorated with the 
consecration of the altar to pax augusta.
 Now the whole empire was sub imperio 
populi Romani, and the senate chose to celebrate this in terms of pax achieved. 
* * * 
 In this final chapter I will examine how Roman imperialism was expressed 
through different commemorations and concepts of the pacification of the West,
how ideas of pax and victory were used as constructs for portraying and explaining the 
Roman empire at Rome and to a Roman audience. The subjugation of the West was 
commemorated in terms of pax augusta at Rome, and this concept was disseminated to 
some extent in the western empire, amongst Romans and in Roman colonies, yet the 
relationship between the local indigenous peoples and the Roman state did not adopt the 
concept of Roman imperialism in explicit terms of pax.  
 See chapter one above. 
 See pp. 223-226 below. 
 Vell. Pat. 2.38.3: immane bellicae civitatis argumentum, quod semel sub regibus iterum hoc T. Manlio 
consule, tertio Augusto principe certae pacis argumentum Ianus geminus clasus dedit (it is strong 
evidence of the warlike character of the state that once under the kings, again when Titus Manlius was 
consul, and a third time when Augustus was princeps that the closed Gates of Ianus were evidence of 
certain peace); cf. Vell. Pat. 2.90. 
 Augustus reorganised the western provinces from 16 to 13 B.C., and subjugated the Alps in 14 B.C.: 
Dio Cass. 53.26.5, 54.24-25 on the parallel campaigns by Augustus (and his legates) in Spain and Gaul, 
and Tiberius and Drusus (again as legates of Augustus) in the Alps; CAH X
Gruen (1996) 163-166, 169-
171; Cooley (2009) 220-223. 
 Wells (1972) 8-12 on the pacification of the west; 59ff on the occupation of the Alps. 
- 226 - 
 I will examine three case studies to assess these different approaches to 
commemorating the conquest of the West and to consider how and where the concept of 
pax was used. In his Res Gestae Augustus speaks of bringing the provinces of Gaul and 
Spain, and the Alps into the peace of the Roman imperium,
 and ties the dedication of 
the Ara Pacis Augustae to his return from his western campaigns.
 The Ara Pacis 
Augustae erected by the senate at Rome in 13-9 B.C. provides a perspective from 
Rome, where Augustus return from the West was celebrated as an achievement of 
victorious pax. This is presented as a fundamentally Roman concept which focuses on 
the prosperity of the state and victory in war.  
In the second section I will turn to consider the trophy monument at La Turbie 
(near Monaco) erected by the senate and people of Rome in 7/6 B.C. This monument 
provides us with a quite different Roman perspective from that of the Ara Pacis 
Augustae: what was celebrated at Rome in terms of pax was expressed as the 
subjugation of the entire region to Roman imperium in the Alps. The silence on pax in 
this monument expresses the relationship between Rome and the West in the very arena 
of conquest. 
Finally, I will examine the arch erected by Cottius, former king of a region of 
the Alps, at Segusio (modern day Susa) in 9/8 B.C. The arch offers yet another 
alternative perspective on the pacification, where the emphasis is on integration into the 
Roman world, and pax is not explicitly used, although concept of a relationship 
between two parties (inherent in the meaning of pax as a pact), and the dependence of 
that relationship of Roman imperium is articulated in the monument.  
 RG 26.1. 
 RG 12. 
- 227 - 
Through these case studies I will explore how Roman imperium was presented, 
depending on the intended audience and message, and how the concept of pax was used 
as part of this rhetoric.
 As I have illustrated in the preceding chapters the place of pax 
within Roman imperialism is defined not just by its presence in victory rhetoric, but 
also by its absence. The commemorations of the pacification of the Alps likewise 
illustrate the choices made in terms of the presentations of Roman imperialism. These 
choices were dependent on the context of the display and to whom Roman imperialism 
was being presented. 
 Revell (2009) ix-xii, 5-10 on how expressing aspects of Romanness and being Roman are expressions 
of an individuals experience of Rome, and are a means of maintaining the empire. 
- 228 - 
Section One 
Commemoration at Rome: The Ara Pacis Augustae 
Augustus commemorated the dedication of the Ara Pacis Augustae
 in his Res 
Gestae:  
Cum ex Hispania Galliaque, rebus in iis provincis prospere gestis, Romama 
redi Ti Nerone P. Quintilio consulibus aram Pacis Augustae senatus pro 
reditu meo consacrandum censuit ad campum Martium, in qua magistratus 
et sacerdotes virginesque Vestales anniversarium sacrificium facere 
iussit.
When I returned from Spain and Gaul to Rome during the consulship of 
Tiberius Nero and Publius Quintilius, having successfully concluded affairs 
in the provinces, the senate voted that an altar of Augustan pax should be 
consecrated on the Campus Martius for my return, where it ordered the 
magistrates and priests and Vestal virgins to make an annual sacrifice. 
His account should be understood within the context of his campaigns in Gaul and 
Spain. The phrase rebus in iis provinciis prospere gestis refers back to an earlier section 
 The Ara Pacis Augustae is recorded in RG 12 and several of the fasti: consecration 4
 July 13 B.C. 
(Fast. Amith ad. iv non. Iul. CIL I p. 244, 320: feriae ex. s.c. quo[d eo] die ara Pacis Augustae consituta 
est Nerone et Varo cos;Fasti Antiat. CIL I p. 248; 248; dedication 30
 January 9 B.C. (Fast. Caer. Praen. 
Ad iii Kal. Febr., CIL I p. 212. 232; Fast. Verul. NSc 1923, 196. Its name was later abbreviated to the Ara 
Pacis: Ov. Fast. 1.709; Act. Arval. a. 38, CIL VI 2028; a. 39 (?) CIL VI 23247a; a coin of Nero depicting the 
altar with the legend ARA PACIS:RIC 526. I will refer to the altar as the Ara Pacis, unless it is necessary to 
use its full name. 
 RG 12. 
- 229 - 
of the text, where Augustus discussed the triumphal honours he had received. He 
recorded that because he had concluded affairs prosperously (ob res a me aut per 
legatos meos auspicis meis terra marique prospere gestas)
 the senate decreed 55 
supplicationes to the gods. The phrase res prospere gestae is a reference to Augustus 
victories in war, which he recorded in the previous sentence: laurum de fascibus 
deposui in Capitolio, votis quae bello nuncupaveram solutis.
 Furthermore, Dio 
records that on Augustus return in 13 B.C. he laid the laurel from his fasces in the lap 
of Jupiter Capitolinus.
 It is evident in the accounts of both Augustus himself and Dio 
that Augustus return was conceived as a moment of victory, embodied in the 
dedication of the laurels of his imperium. 
 However, Augustus account of the altar should be understood not just within its 
historical context, but also in the context of his Res Gestae.
 His account of the Ara 
Pacis is preceded by that of the Ara Fortunae Reducis,
 and a comparison of the two 
accounts is valuable: 
Aram Fortunae Reducis ante aedes Honoris et Virtutis ad portam Capenam 
pro reditu me senatus consacravit, in qua pontifices et virgines Vestales 
anniversarium sacrificium facere iussit eo die, quo consulibus Q. Lucretio 
 RG 4.2: On account of things being successfully completed on land and sea by me or through my 
legates with me auspices. The reference to auspicium shows that the affairs were conducted under 
Augustus imperium, and clearly are military campaigns. 
 RG 4.1: I deposited the laurel from the fasces in the Capitoline temple, since I had fulfilled the vows 
which I had undertaken during war. 
 Dio Cass. 54.25.4:                  
  (and going up to the Capitol he took the laurel from the fasces and laid it in the lap of 
Jupiter).  Votive Games were also held for Jupiter Optimus Maximus to celebrate Augustus return: ILS 
 It should be remembered that the Res Gestae written in A.D. 13/14 is only one presentation of the 
ways in which the Roman empire and Roman imperialism were conceptualised. Greg Rowe suggested in 
a paper entitled A Commemoration of commemorations: the Res Gestae in the context of Augustan 
epigraphy, given at the Epigraphic Workshop, Oxford 6
 June 2011, that the Res Gestae is a 
compilation of senatorial honours to Augustus, rather than a purely auto-biographical account. 
 See chapter three, pp. 190 - 192 above. 
- 230 - 
et M. Vinicio in urbem ex Syria redieram, et diem Augustalia ex cogomine 
nostro appellavit.
The senate consecrated for my return the Altar of Fortuna Redux in front of 
the temple of Honour and Virtue at the Capenian gate, and it ordered that 
the priests and vestal virgins make annual sacrifices at this altar on that day, 
when during the consulship of Q. Lucretius and M. Vinicius I returned to 
the city from Syria, and the senate named the day Augustalia after my 
name. 
Both accounts comprise the same grammatical units: the name of the altar, its 
location, the reason for its consecration by the senate, the annual sacrifice, the date, and 
the location from which Augustus returned. However, the arrangement of these units 
differs in the two passages. What is notable about Augustus account is that he 
postpones the geographical detail about Syria until the end of the account of the Ara 
Fortunae Reducis, whilst he begins his account of the Ara Pacis with the detail of Spain 
and Gaul. In this way he emphasises the geographical implications of his campaigns 
and the monuments set up to commemorate them: the Ara Fortuna Reducis 
commemorated the triumph over the East, whilst the Ara Pacis celebrated the victories 
in the West. Augustus then goes on to tie the monuments to the concept of imperial pax 
with the account of the closing of the Gates of Ianus: Ianum Quirinum, quem claussum 
esse maiores nostri voluerunt, cum per totum imperium populi Romani terra marique 
 RG 11. 
- 231 - 
esset parta victoriis pax.
 Through this arrangement of these three chapters, Augustus 
is implying that the monuments that commemorate his conquest of the East and West 
are emblematic of totum imperium terra marique. Thus, within the context of the Res 
Gestae, the Ara Pacis is a testimony to the extent and completion of imperium, as a 
display of pax, achieved through victories. In Augustus Res Gestae written in A.D. 13, 
the Ara Fortunae Reducis and the Ara Pacis serve to illustrate the totality of Roman 
imperium as expressed as parta victoriis pax.  
Augustus account of the role and purpose of the Ara Pacis belongs to his 
presentation of Roman imperium at the very end of his reign. The Ara Pacis was 
however decreed by the senate on 4
 July 13 B.C. for the return of Augustus to Rome, 
and dedicated on 30
 January 9 B.C on the Campus Martius. Therefore, it may 
plausibly be understood as a senatorial monument, presenting the celebration within the 
context of Romes sphere of military display (the Campus).  
The remains of the monument found under the corner of via in Lucina and via 
dellImpesa,
 30m from via del Corso, are agreed to be those of the altar sanctioned 
by the senate to commemorate the return of Augustus in 13 B.C.
 The monument 
comprises an almost square enclosure of Carrara marble, around a central -shaped 
altar. A doorway on the east side led to the via Flaminia (via del Corso) at ground level, 
 RG 13: Ianus Quirinius, which our ancestors wished to be shut, when peace throughout the whole 
empire of the Roman people by land and sea has been won by victories. 
 The first finds from the site were recorded in 1569 in a letter of Cardinal Ricci da Montepulciano: 
Moretti (1948) 3; Vickers (1975) 109. 
 For (selective) scholarship on the discovery, excavations and identification see: Rossini (2006); 
Foresta (2002); Torelli (1999); Claridge (1998) 184-190; Bianchi (1994); La Rocca (1983); Moretti (1948); 
von Duhn (1881). Crow (2006) incorrectly states that the altar was originally erected on the orders of 
Augustus, whilst Rehak (2006) 98 argues that we should understand the altar as planned and designed 
by Augustus, not the senate. Weinstock (1960) 53 argues that we cannot positively identify the remains 
with the Ara Pacis Augustae because neither is Pax on the altar nor her symbol, the caduceus, nor is 
her name inscribed on it. 
- 232 - 
and another on the west side, to the Campus (1m lower) via a ramp of nine steps (Figure 
Two registers of decoration cover the exterior wall of the enclosure, divided by a 
meander band (Figure 88). The upper panels depict figural reliefs: on the longer north 
and south sides are processional friezes, moving from east to west, within which the 
figures of Augustus and Agrippa can be identified with some certainty, based on their 
portrait types (Figure 89 & Figure 90);
 on the east side two short panels likely depict 
Roma (Figure 91) and a female personification or allegorical figure (Figure 92); on the 
west side two short panels depict the foundation myths of Rome: Aeneas sacrificing to 
the Penates (Figure 93), and the god Mars, possibly with the wolf and twins (Figure 94). 
The lower external register is decorated with an elaborate acanthus scroll motif, which 
covers all four sides, with further acanthus leaves adorning the Corinthian pilasters, 
which frame the corners and doorways (Figure 95). The interior wall also has two 
registers, divided by a palmette band.  The upper register is decorated with bucrania, 
garlands and paterae, whilst the lower panels reproduce a wooden panelling (Figure 
96). Inside the enclosure a podium of four steps supports a base decorated with a 
processional frieze, and a further four steps on the west side lead up to the altar table. 
The altar itself is also decorated with a processional sacrificial frieze (Figure 97 & 
Figure 98).
 Further fragments from the lower sections of the altar have been 
suggested as personifications of provinces or peoples (Figure 99 & Figure 100). It is 
tempting on this interpretation to understand a depiction of the pacati populi in terms of 
 Rossini (2006) 48, 54-55. 
 For a discussion of the fragmentary friezes of the altar base and altar table: Rossini (2006) 22-25, 95-
97; Moretti (1948) 83-89. 
- 233 - 
the pax described by Livy: clausus pacatos circa omnes populos significaret,
 but the 
remains are highly fragmentary and their place on the altar is uncertain.
The monuments proximity to the via Flaminia must have ensured a high level of 
visibility to the people moving in both directions along the road, and was a marker and 
a monumentum, in the fullest sense of the word, of Augustus return from the West 
(Figure 101).
 Furthermore, the processional friezes on the north and south sides both 
move towards the Campus Martius, directing the audience towards the main entrance of 
the altar. This visual direction ensures a move from the route into Rome to the military 
centre of the city, the destination for returning armies. The striking arrangement of an 
altar to pax set up on the Field of Mars emphasises the structure as a triumphal 
monument, and the dependency of pax on military victories. I will now turn to look at 
how the Ara Pacis expresses the concept of parta victoriis pax. 
The Altar and Augustan peace 
pax was not a common quality: the Ara Pacis may be the first attestation of a 
cult.
 Although pax had been celebrated before both at Rome and within the empire, 
now with the subjugation of the West added to the victories already celebrated over the 
East, Augustus could claim to have established peace over the empire. The altar voted 
by the senate in 13 B.C. was not just to be an altar of pax, but of pax augusta, as its 
name illustrates. This creates an immediate link between the princeps and the 
 Livy 1.19.3: shut the gates signify that all the surrounding peoples have been pacified. 
 Rossini (2006) 94-97. 
 Torelli (1982) 29 has argued that the monument was exactly one mile from the pomerial line, which 
he sees as emphasising the change from imperium militiae to imperium domi. If Torellis theory was 
correct it would add another dimension to the aspect of victorious return (Cic. Pis. 55 illustrates the 
importance of crossing the pomerium for the returning general), however there is no evidence to 
support his claim, particularly as we have no indication of the Augustan pomerial line. My thanks to 
Saskia Stevens for discussing this with me. 
 Clark (2007) 8-9; see chapter one, pp. 24-25 above. 
- 234 - 
establishment of pax.
 This was indeed so, for it was through the victories won under 
the imperium held by Augustus that he could claim pax terra marique. To understand 
how the pax augusta was conceptualised in the altar I will now turn to consider the 
presentation of pax within the monument.  
The central figure of the south-east panel (Figure 92), traditionally called the 
Tellus relief,
 has been interpreted by several scholars as the goddess Pax, 
represented on her own altar.
 However, this desire to find one single depiction of the 
goddess Pax is misleading. Representations of Pax prior to the altar are few, and only 
two coins have an identifying legend (Figure 6 & Figure 44).
 Indeed, to see a single 
representation of Pax in the Tellus relief implies that that relief should be read as the 
focal point of the monument. The panel needs to be read alongside the other friezes to 
fully understand the message of the monument. I will first examine the Tellus relief, 
before considering it in the wider context of the monument in order to illustrate the 
visual message of parta victoriis pax. 
It is noteworthy that other scholars have interpreted the Tellus panel not as 
Pax but as a number of other possibilities: Terra Mater, Italia, Venus, Rhea Silvia, 
Ceres, and Livia.
 These interpretations have frequently been based on the 
 Fears (1981) 886-889. 
 Berczelly (1985) 96 criticises this general and somewhat entrenched assumption. 
 Rehak (2006) 112; Claridge (1998) 187; de Grummond (1990); Zanker (1988) 172-179. Weinstock 
(1960) 53 concludes neither Pax nor her attributes appear on the altar. See Toynbee (1961) for a review 
and critique of Weinstock. Simon (2001) has suggested that the caduceus was part of the monument, as 
an attribute of Mercury, whom she places behind Mars on the west side of the altar. Her arguments are 
based on the role of Mercury in the foundation stories of Rome, and on his association with peace 
negotiations. 
 See chapter one, pp. 33-34 for the coin of Caesar bearing the legend PAXS, and chapter two, pp.116 - 
117 for the cistophorus of Octavian depicting PAX.  
 Terra Mater: Strong (1937a); Momigliano (1942a); Moretti (1948); Ryberg (1949); Italia: van Buren 
(1913); Toynbee (1953); Simon (1967); Elsner (1991); Venus: Galinsky (1992); Rhea Silvia: Ceres: 
Berczelly (1985); Spaeth (1994); Livia: Bartman (1998); Castriota (1995) 58-73, esp. 71 on the 
multivalent iconography of the figure: see n. 797 above. 
- 235 - 
presentation of these figures in literature: something Torelli has criticised.
 Whilst 
there is a danger of using literary evidence as tenuous support for one or other 
interpretation, this evidence does in fact provide a tool by which the Tellus panel may 
be further understood. For Ovid, Terra, Ceres and Pax were, though not exactly 
interchangeable, part of the same embodiment or process: Terra and Ceres are the 
mothers of the fruits of the earth,
 and Pax nurtures Ceres with the stability she 
brings.
 Horace not only emphasises the relationship between Tellus and Ceres,
also represents the new age with the return of Fides, Pax, Honos, Pudor and Virtus, 
which are accompanied by Copia bearing a full horn.
 What the testimonies of Ovid 
and Horace illustrate is the diversity of personifications or qualities, and that there were 
a multitude of meanings associated with the novum saeculum and what would be 
commemorated as pax augusta in the senatorial monument.  
It is clear that the figure on the Ara Pacis embodied many of the attributes 
associated with a number of concepts and divinities. Clearly this is not to say that the 
figure does not portray the ideas of pax as they were understood at the time; indeed I 
believe it will be more enlightening to consider the Tellus panel, not as the sole 
representation of Pax, but rather as an aspect of pax augusta.
The panel impresses upon the viewer the images of fecundity and prosperity 
(echoing the message of the acanthus scroll below) in the garland worn by Tellus, the 
fruits in her lap, the ox and sheep at her feet and the babies in her arms (Figure 92). The 
 Torelli (1982) 40; see also Berczelly (1985). 
 Ov. Fast. 1. 671-3. 
 Ov. Fast. 1.704. Ovid summaries his account of the Day of Sowing (1.655-704) with the relationship 
of Pax and Ceres, which is separated by only four lines from his treatment of the altar of Pax.  
 Hor. Carmen Saec. 29-30: fertilis frugum pecorisque Tellus / spicea donet Cererem corona. 
 Hor. Carmen Saec. 57-60. 
 Castriota (1995) 71 suggests that the multivalent nature of the figure renders the need to distinguish 
Goddess from qualities of peace irrelevant; Momigliano (1942a) 220; Toynbee (1953) 80; Galinsky 
(1992) 457. 
- 236 - 
central scene is flanked by two female figures with billowing veils: the one on the left 
rides a swan over reeds, and that on the right rides a ketos over the sea. These figures 
are most often interpreted as Aurae, although they have also been seen as Horai, and as 
a Naiad and Nereid.
A comparison of these two figures to those of another version of the Tellus 
panel will help emphasise their role within the monument.
 The Tellus relief from 
Carthage appears as an exact copy of the Ara Pacis Tellus relief as regards the central 
figure, but the flanking figures suggest a different reading (Figure 102). On the right is 
a male figure, accompanied by a ketos and dolphin, whilst on the left, in the upper half 
of the relief is a female bust, holding a torch and another unidentifiable object. Baratte 
is hesitant to identify the figure as Caelestis,
 but it seems plausible that the figure in 
the upper half of the relief, and clearly separated from the lower half, is associated with 
the heavens, thus a triad of heaven, earth and sea is represented. There is a hierarchical 
order to the relief, with heaven in the top left corner, Tellus as the central focus and 
occupying the full height of the relief, and the triton filling roughly the bottom two-
thirds of the right hand side. The Carthage relief may well be a presentation of the orbis 
terrarum focused around a female figure of prosperity.   
The tripartite structure is also apparent in the Ara Pacis relief although the 
display is far more complex and draws on other illusions besides the concept of the 
 Aurae: Hor. Carmen Saec. 31-32: aquae salubres / et Iovis aurae; Plin. HN 36.29: Duaeque Aurae 
velificantes sua veste; Horai: de Grummond (1990); Naiad and Nereid: Spaeth (1994) 78. Castriota 
(1995) 66-68 emphasises that like the central figure, the two flanking figures are deliberate 
amalgamations of different iconographies. 
 The Carthage relief, now in the Louvre Museum, measures 1.13 m x 0.80 m. See Picard (1934); 
Galinsky (1992) 228 warns of the hypothetical nature of the relationship between the Carthage relief 
and that on the Ara Pacis.  
 Baratte (2006) 277 and n.29. 
- 237 - 
orbis terrarum.
 As Aurae velificantes both flanking figures represent something 
beyond simply sky and sea, for they both inhabit the aerial plan. They are secondary to 
the principal figure, yet they are not placed in opposing hemispheres, but equally in the 
central zone of the relief, directing the viewers attention to the principal figure by the 
direction of their faces and bodies (notably their bent knees, and feet) along with the 
ketos head turned to the centre, and the swans wing. As Galinsky and Castriota have 
shown the Aurae are in a sense attributes of Venus since their mounts are frequently 
associated with her.
 In this respect all three figures are bound together as the 
embodiment of more than one iconographic message: the panel not only alludes to 
Venus Genetrix, but also other concepts besides. Whilst the central figure is a clear 
allusion to the earth, the figure of the swan has also often been linked to the earth, for 
the water jug below is indicative of the fertility of the land. As Aurae the two figures 
are representations of the salubrious breezes of land and sea
 that are part of, and 
extend from the central figure as the prosperity of the earth.  
The Tellus panel offers a view of pax that expresses prosperity and fecundity; 
those qualities which are shared by the many female deities identified in the panel. 
Whichever deity we associate the figure with, it seems plausible that a Roman audience 
would have understood the figure to be a personification or representation of pax, but 
rather than looking to one individual panel to explain the meaning of the monument, we 
should consider that the Ara Pacis builds up a complex display throughout its facade.
The size of the monument and the space given over to sculptural relief means 
that the concept of pax augusta could be fully explored and expressed through 
 Zanker (1987) 316 on the suppression of the Aurae into more concrete conceptions on the Carthage 
relief; see also La Rocca (1983) 46, 64ff, and fig. 19-21, 24 and 27 for the identification of air and water. 
 Castriota (1995) 66-68; Galinsky (1992).  
 Rossini (2006) 36-39. 
 Castriota (1995) 3. 
- 238 - 
mythological, allegorical and contemporary scenes. More often than not, discussions of 
the sculptural decoration of the altar have focused on specific aspects, both in text and 
illustrations, so the reader is often misled as to the visually dominant aspects of the 
monument. The largest part of the exterior decoration is not the figurative friezes but 
the acanthus frieze.
 As stated above, the frieze covered all four sides of the 
monument in the lower register as well as the pilasters.
 Moreover, it is at eye level to 
the viewer, and conveys the ideas that prosperity and abundance support, and 
encompasses the ideals represented in the upper registers. It is unfortunate that 
scholarship has served to disconnect and distort our understanding of the relationship of 
the acanthus frieze to the upper reliefs in that they are constantly discussed separately 
and rarely shown together.
 The acanthus scroll provides a visual constant throughout 
the exterior decoration. In this way it embodies the continuity of the ideals of pax 
augusta, connecting all the panels of the upper register under (or rather over) one idea. 
Under the centre of each of the upper panels, the central acanthus scroll unfurls, 
directing the focus to the middle of each scene. The acanthus scrolls relationship to the 
upper figurative panels underlines the purpose of those panels within the monument. 
The acanthus scroll and its display of abundance project a message of the fertility and 
fruitfulness that is the result of peace.
 I will now consider the other reliefs of the 
upper panels to see how they relate to, and are brought under, the overarching message 
of the acanthus scroll, and present us with a variety of aspects and readings of pax 
augusta. 
 Castriota (1995) 4-8; LOrange (1962). 
 See Castriota (1995) 13-14 for a detailed description of the floral friezes. 
 Kellum (1994) provides a good observation of this failure in scholarship and an analysis of the 
relevance of the acanthus frieze.  Moretti (1948) pl. 3 and 4 provide an excellent example of the 
relationship between the upper and lower registers on the south and north sides, and amply 
demonstrates the size of the acanthus scroll, and indeed the podium of the altar; see also Cohon (2002). 
 Ov. Fast. 1.704: Pax Cererem nutrit, Pacis alumna Ceres; Castriota (1995) 21-22. 
- 239 - 
Roma and Tellus 
The northern panel on the east side of the monument, facing out towards the via 
Flaminia, comprises the remains of a female, seated on a pile of weapons, identified as 
Roma (Figure 91).
 The figure of Roma seated on spoils of war first appeared on coins 
in the first century both in the East, on an aes of P. Papirius Carbo from 62-59 B.C. 
where she holds a Victory, and is named in Greek,  (Figure 103),
 and at 
Rome, where she appears seated on shields, holding a staff or sceptre, crowned by 
Victory on a denarius of M. Nonius Sufenas from c. 60 B.C. (Figure 104),
 and later 
one of Caesar from 48 B.C. (Figure 105).
 Prior to Nero there is no numismatic 
evidence from Rome that depicts Roma Victrix (seated and holding a Victory), and as a 
result the reconstructed Roma on the Ara Pacis holds a sceptre, as in the first century 
coins. However, a 1
 century A.D. relief on an altar from Carthage, found in the 
vicinity of a temple building to the gens augusta and a dedication by the sacerdos 
perpetuus P. Perelius Hedulus,
 depicts Roma seated on the spoils of war, holding 
Victory setting a clipeus upon a pillar (an allusion to the clipeus virtutis and Tarentum 
Victory dedicated in the Curia Iulia in 27 B.C.)
, whilst opposite stands a base upon 
which is set a cornucopia, caduceus and celestial globe (Figure 106).
 It is clear that 
 The identification of the panel from its two remaining fragments was made by Studniczka (1909) 932-
 BMC Pontus 152. Eastern models for this depiction of Roma can be seen in coins from the third and 
second centuries from Asia Minor depicting Athena (Howgego (1995) pl. 56), and from Aetolia (BMC 
Thessaly 194): see Weinstock (1971) 96. 
 RRC 241/1 pl. 51 n. 13. The legend of Sufenas coin reads: Sex. Noni(us) pr(aetor) l(udos) V(ictoriae) 
p(rimus) f(ecit). Thus the connection between this image of Roma and victory are made explicit. 
 RRC 449/4, pl. 53 n. 13. A coin of Pansa from 49 B.C. has the added element of Roma placing her foot 
on a globe: Sydenham (1952) 159; Weinstock (1971) 93. 
 Cagnat (1913) 681 for the inscription and find spot: genti augustae / P. Perelius Hedulus Sac Perp. / 
templum solo privato / primus pecunia sua fecit. Cagnat (1913) 683 dates the inscription, based on its 
letter forms, to the beginning of the Empire; see also Poinssot (1929) 36 who attributes the altar, based 
on the inscription and the sculptural reliefs, to the beginning of the first century A.D. 
 See chapter two pp. 83-88 above for a discussion of these monuments. 
 Tunis, Bardo Museum, H: approx. 1.118m: see Zanker (1988) 315. Koortbojian (2006) 202-203 
interprets the Roma panel as being a representation of felicitas. 
- 240 - 
there is a history of associating Victory with Roma seated on the spoils of war: the 
image tells of the cessation of war and its successful conclusion. 
 The placement of Roma on the north-east side of the Ara Pacis also acts as a 
marker of the victorious return of Augustus into the city of Rome, travelling along the 
via Flaminia from the north. Furthermore, there is evidence to suggest that Roma was 
not alone, but accompanied by another figure. A head of a young man, bound with a 
fillet, with the remains of the top of a cornucopia next to his head (Figure 107), has 
been identified as belonging to the Roma relief.
 It has been suggested that the head 
represents Honos,
 possibly accompanied by another missing figure (to balance the 
three figures in the opposite Tellus relief), that of Virtus.
 Whilst Honos and Virtus 
were clearly associated with victory, as the temple near the Porta Capena 
demonstrates,
 this interpretation is problematic. It is highly unusual for Virtus and 
Roma to be depicted together as they share similar attributes.
 Kuttner has argued that 
the figure should in fact be identified as the Genius Populi Romani, who is often paired 
with Roma.
 She draws a parallel between Roma and the Genius Populi Romani on 
the Augustus Boscoreale Cup and the Roma panel of the Ara Pacis, and further ties 
 Simon (1967)23; Studniczka (1909) 939-941; Moretti (1948) 153 assigned the head to the Aeneas 
panel, identifying the cornucopia as part of a tree, but during the restoration of the altar in the 1980s it 
was discovered that the head did not fit: Rossini (2006) 47; La Rocca (1983) 40 and 49. 
 Studniczka (1909) 936-941. 
 Rossini (2006) 46-47. 
 See chapter three, p. 191 above. 
 Rehak (2006) 113 wrongly identifies Virtus as male; Sears (2000-2002) 42 also implies Virtus is male. 
Both interpretations must be based on later representations of Virtus as a male, however in the 
Republican period and early principate Virtus was depicted as an Amazon: see Vermeule (1959) 29-30; 
Bieber (1945) 30-31.   
 Kuttner (1995) 18-22. Who the possible third figure might be is a matter of speculation. One 
possibility might be the Genius Senatus, whose first attestation in sculptural relief is on the arch of Titus 
(Kleiner and Kleiner (1977) 260). The senate are clearly represented in the long processional friezes, 
though this neither confirms nor precludes the presence of the Genius Senatus alongside the Genius 
Populi Romani, and one might argue that the populus romanus is also represented in the processional 
friezes, in the men, women and children who make up the processional supplicatio (see p. 244 below). 
The Senatus Populi Romani, Senatus Genius and Roma all appear as statues in the adventus scene of the 
Cancelleria reliefs.  Another possible figure might be Victory, who appears with Roma and the Genius 
Populi Romani on the Boscorale Cup (although as a statuette offered by Venus). 
- 241 - 
them to the presentation of the peoples of empire as depicted on the Cup (Figure 
117). The iconography of the Cups, particularly in the presentation of empire is 
reminiscent of that found within the Ara Pacis monument itself, and Kuttner has 
illustrated, by a comparison to official images from coinage, relief and sculpture, that 
the Cups were  copied from monumental state reliefs.
 Furthermore, the image of 
Roma on the Augustus Bosecorale Cup, with her foot on the globe, the Genius with 
cornucopia, and Venus proffering Victory to Augustus, is reminiscent of the symbols 
depicted on the altar of Hedulus from Carthage. 
Whilst the fragmentary nature of the Roma panel on the Ara Pacis prevents us 
from confirming with certainty that the Roma panel from the altar of Hedulus at 
Carthage was a direct imitation of that at Rome,
 the overall message of the panel 
from Carthage strongly corresponds to the ideas of pax augusta on the altar at Rome.
The altar of Hedulus is decorated with relief panels on all four sides: Roma (Figure 
106); Aeneas flight from Troy (Figure 108); Apollo seated before a tripod (Figure 
109); and a sacrifice scene (Figure 110); all four panels are bordered by a stylised long 
stem laurel.
 Most interesting though is the relationship of the panels to each other. 
The movement in both the Aeneas panel and the sacrifice scene is directed towards the 
panel on their right: Roma.
 In this sense the Roma panel has become the focal point 
of the altars message. On the altar at Carthage, Roma holds out a victory towards the 
symbols of prosperity (cornucopia), pax (caduceus) and orbis terrarum (globe), as if to 
indicate that Romes victories have secured such ideals. The concepts of the cornucopia 
 Kuttner (1995) passim, esp. 1-6, 17-44, 193-209. The Cup will be discussed alongside the processional 
friezes of the Ara Pacis p. 246 below. 
 Poinssot (1929) 17; Galinsky (1992) 228 on the fragmentary nature of the Roma panel in comparison 
with that from Carthage. 
 Zanker (1988) 315. 
 Poinssot (1929) 9-35 for a detailed analysis of all decorative aspects of the altar. 
 Poinssot (1929) 10 describes the three panels as a triptych, with Roma at the centre. The Apollo relief 
is a separate tableau. 
- 242 - 
and the globe also are evident in the Tellus relief, but what of the caduceus? Whilst I 
argued above against looking for a single, well-defined depiction of Pax (as a cult 
figure),
 it is clear that the panel embodies pax augusta which celebrates the territorial 
aspects of victorious pax, alongside the concept of peace-bearing. This concept is 
heightened by the visual relationship between this figure and that of Roma opposite. 
Both figures face inwards, to each other, and should be viewed as part of the greater 
whole. 
The Roma panel on the altar of Hedulus echoes the claim Augustus made in his 
Res Gestae: totum imperium populi Romani terra marique esset parta victoriis pax.
The centrality of Roma on the altar of Hedulus suggests that the idea of victorious pax 
achieved by Rome was the embodiment of the power of the gens Augusta, surrounded 
by representations of the gens lineage, divine favour, and priestly devotion, in the eyes 
of its sacerdos Hedulus. The altar of Hedulus is a view of Rome and peace from outside 
the political centre. The Ara Pacis is a far more complex expression of the ideology of 
the Roman state and the peace established by Augustus. Even so, Zanker has suggested 
that the Roma relief on the altar of Hedulus may be viewed as a simplified version of 
both panels on the east side of the Ara Pacis, and understands the Tellus panel to be a 
representation of Pax.
 If the Roma panel from the altar of Hedulus is a shorthand 
form of these two reliefs from Rome, the Tellus panel on the Ara Pacis can be read as 
embodying the ideas of prosperity, pax and orbis terrarum. The presentation of the 
central figure, as evidence of prosperity won, flanked by representations of the orders of 
the world (both the orbis terrarum and terra marique) is a highly complex yet elegant 
 See pp. 228-230 above. 
 RG 13. 
 Zanker (1988) 315. 
- 243 - 
expression of pax terra marique parta.
  In the Ara Pacis we may observe a 
culmination of pax as an articulation of Roman imperium in the Augustan period. 
 The east side of the monument offers the viewer a complex yet clear message of 
the fundamental aspects of pax augusta: victory and empire (orbis terrarum) celebrated 
through the accomplishment of prosperity. 
 The continuous theme of the acanthus indicates that we should consider also the 
west side of the monument as representing certain aspects of pax augusta. I will now 
turn to consider these two panels, which may best be summarised as the foundation 
myths of Rome. 
Pater Mars and Pater Aeneas 
As with the Roma relief, the panel on the north-west side of the monument is 
very fragmentary. The remains show two male figures: that on the left side is agreed to 
show the bearded god Mars, helmeted, wearing a breast-plate and carrying a spear. 
Another two fragments from the right of the panel depict part of the drapery and torso 
of a bare-chested male figure, with his arm apparently resting on a staff: this fragment is 
the largest and its position is assured by the decoration on the back, which is part of the 
garland frieze. Other remains include tree branches with the feet of a bird on them 
(Figure 94). 
The panel is usually read as Mars observing the shepherd Faustulus discovery 
of the she-wolf and the twins, Romulus and Remus, in the cave which became known 
 The representation of terra marique is dealt with in a far more simplified manner on the Sebasteion 
at Aphrodisias, where Augustus, with billowing mantle (reminiscent of the Aurae velificantes figures on 
the Tellus panel), receives from representations of land and sea, their attributes (a cornucopia and a 
rudder): Smith (1987) 104-106. 
- 244 - 
as the Lupercal.
 However, Berczelly has argued that the scene should instead be read 
as Mars encounter with Rhea Silvia observed by Tiber or Somnus,
 on the grounds 
that the stance and posture of Mars are normally found in depictions of the gods 
meeting with Rhea Silvia.
 Such scenes in the Augustan period are confined to 
gemstones (Figure 111).
 She further argues that the bird in the scene is not, as is 
usually suggested, a woodpecker - the bird of Mars
 - but an eagle, which she 
associates with the dreams of Rhea Silvia and Atia.
 Indeed, birds in the Lupercal 
scene are not necessarily linked to Mars, as coins and gemstones from the late second 
and first centuries B.C. depict, where Faustulus is alone (Figure 112),
 or in the 
presence of Roma (Figure 113).
 It is perhaps tempting, as many scholars have done, 
to interpret the scene as the discovery of the twins, particularly as Augustus himself 
claimed to have repaired the Lupercal.
 The Lupercal is inherently concerned with the 
foundation of the Roman state and also Augustus restoration of the site in his role as 
the founder of the state.
 However, what Berczellys arguments show is the difficulty 
in reconstructing with certainty the missing focal point of the relief, which the central 
furl of the acanthus below emphasised. 
 See for example Rossini (2006) 34-35. 
 Berczelly (1985) 99-114 identifies the figure on the right as Tiber holding a reed stalk or rudder, or 
Somnus holding a horn. However, the shaft seems too narrow for a reed or rudder (these are also 
normally held with the upper part rising over the shoulder, which does not appear to be the case here). 
The presence of Somnus on a state monument of this period seems improbable. Although Faustulus is 
often depicted with a curved staff, it seems likely that here a simple staff is represented. 
 Berczelly (1985) 100, 104-5, 112-113, fig. 13-14. 
 LIMC II.I 549ff esp. n. 405-6. 
 The picus (woodpecker) is mentioned by Ov. Fast. 3.37, 54 and Plut. Rom.4.2 in connection to the 
she-wolf and the twins.  See RRC 235/1c for a depiction of the she-wolf and twins beneath the ficus 
Ruminalis, and a bird that Crawford identifies as a woodpecker (there are also two other un-identified 
birds in the branches). 
 Berczelly (1985) 107-109, fig. 7-10. 
 RRC 235 1a-c. 
 RRC 287; LIMC VI.I 295ff. 
 RG 19. 
 Cf. Suet. Aug. 7.2: quibus censentibus Romulum appellari oportere quasi et ipsum conditorem urbis. 
- 245 - 
The two suggested scenes (one of the rape of Rhea Silvia, the other of the 
discovery of the twins) are two different narratives concerning the foundation of the 
Roman state.
 All that can be concluded with any certainty is the presence of Mars 
and another male, possibly of rustic or divine character. It is most likely that the 
presence of Mars is concerned with his relationship to the state: both in the location of 
the altar on the Field of Mars, and in his role as the father of the Roman people. The 
importance of war to the Roman state and to the achievement of pax is articulated 
through the presence of Mars, as divine sanction of the state from its pre-foundation. 
The Mars panel demonstrates the intercession of the divine in the Roman state, which 
balances the scene of sacrifice in the opposite panel, demonstrating Romes active 
relationship with the divine and the pax deorum.
The scene on the south-west side of the monument is usually read as Aeneas, 
attended by two servants and another figure interpreted as either Ascanius or Achates. 
In the scene Aeneas sacrifices a sow to the Penates (who are seated in their temple in 
the background of the scene) on his arrival at the site of Lavinium (Figure 93), as told 
by Dionysius of Halicarnassus.
However, Rehak argues that the scene cannot be the Lavinium sacrifice because 
the piglets are not present as they are on the much smaller Altar of the Lares (formerly 
known as the Belvedere altar),
 which depicts the discovery of the sow in the presence 
of Fatum or a prophet, who unfurls a scroll: it is the confirmation of the prosperity (as 
symbolised in the piglets) of the prophesised Rome (Figure 114).
 Rehak also argues 
that the figure, bearded and mature, is contrasted to the usual late Republican and early 
 In art, both scenes comprise similar elements: a rock or cave, a tree, a spectator and Mars. 
 On the pax deorum/deum see: Fuchs (1926) 186; Sordi (1985) 13; OLD for pax deorum. 
 Dion. Hal. Rom. Ant. 1.55.4-1.57.1; see also Varro Rust. 2.4, Ling. 5.32. Contra Verg. Aen. 8.81-85 
where Aeneas sacrifices to Juno. 
 Rome, Vatican, inv. 1115. 
 Rehak (2001) 193ff. 
- 246 - 
Imperial images of Aeneas. Yet these depictions are concerned with the flight from 
Troy, and the figure of Aeneas on the Belvedere altar is also bearded and has a mature 
physique.
 What Rehak fails to note is that the Belvedere altar depicts a different 
aspect of the Lavinium sow story. The scene on the Altar of the Lares is not one of 
sacrifice for Aeneas is not capite velato as he is on the Ara Pacis. The tale of the 
sacrifice as related by Dionysius consists of two parts. First is the recollection of the 
prophecy that once they had eaten their tables the Trojans would be led by a four-footed 
animal to the site of their city. So Aeneas brings out the Penates from the ships and 
prepares a sacrifice for them:      ,     
         . 847 
Dionysius then tells us:  
      ,       
          
    .848 
While these were offering up their prayers, the sow which was the destined 
victim, being big with young and near her time, shook herself free as the 
priests were performing the initial rites, and fleeing from those who held 
her, ran back into the country. 
The Trojans give chase, and finally the sow stops and bears her young. It is then that the 
sacrifice actually takes place: 
  Rehak (2001) 191; see Zanker (1988) 203-204. 
 Dion. Hal. Ant. Rom. 1.55.5: And Aeneas with his companions, when a sacrifice had been made 
ready, stood round the altar with the customary garlands on their heads 
 Dion. Hal. Ant. Rom. 1.56.1. 
- 247 - 
               
  ,...        
              
  .849 
Aeneas sacrificed the young of the sow together with the mother to the 
ancestral gods in this place...and having ordered the Trojans to move the 
camp to the hill he set images of the gods in the best part and straightway 
began the preparation of the town with the greatest eagerness. 
The relief on the Ara Pacis is not a scene of discovery, but one of sacrifice and 
indeed from the readings of Dionysius it could plausibly depict either, or both sacrificial 
preparations: the damage on the stone prevents definite confirmation that the sow is 
pregnant, yet the temple on the hill accords with Dionysius second passage.
comparison between the text and the relief illustrates similar components of the story. It 
is also notable that Ovid links the Ara Pacis to Aeneas: horreat Aeneadas et primus et 
ultimus orbis.
 The relief depicts the sacrifice for the security and subsequent world 
rule of the Aeneadae. 
The panel may also allude to sacrifices for peace. The contemporary relevance 
of this type of sacrifice is attested in the Ludi Saeculares where Augustus sacrificed a 
pregnant sow to Terra Mater: Terra mater, uti tibi in ill[is scriptum est] / uti tibi sua 
 Dion. Hal. Ant. Rom. 1.57.1. 
 Rehak (2001) 195-196 for a discussion of the literary evidence of the Lavinium sow and his 
arguments against identifying the Ara Pacis relief with the story in Dionysius of Halicarnassus. 
 Ov. Fast. 1. 717. 
- 248 - 
plena propri[a sacrum fiat...c]etera [uti supra].
 The sacrifice of the sow embodied 
peace and prosperity, not just for the foundation of Rome by Aeneas, but to welcome in 
the new age established by pax augusta.
 As Aeneas ensured the establishment of 
Rome through sacrifice, so too did Augustus ensure the peace and stability of the 
Roman state through sacrifice.
Just as the Roma and Tellus panels worked together to present a victorious 
image of pax augusta, so too do the two panels on the west side, illustrating the inherent 
qualities of Romes foundation that are articulated throughout the monument: pax as 
security and prosperity, and pax as the victory of the Roman state (foretold by the 
presence of Mars) are two sides of the same coin.   
Momigliano has pointed out that the four short panels of the altar delimit the 
space for the procession of Romans.
 The procession moves from east to west: from 
the presentation of pax augusta in a symbolic or allegorical sense, to the attestation of 
such qualities as inherent within the Rome state. The procession itself serves to link the 
universal concepts of the west side to the exempla of the past, whilst celebrating the 
present state of victorious pax. I will now consider the role of the processional frieze 
within the monument. 
 CIL VI 32323 ll 134-7: Mother Earth, so for you it is written in regard to these things, that a pregnant 
sow be sacrifice to you, as is appropriate...the rest as above. The inscription is a commentary of the 
fifth Ludi Saeculares. 
 Zanker (1988) 167-72; Hall (1986). 
 The figure of Augustus in the processional frieze mirrors the stance of Aeneas; both are the 
sacrificant, wreathed and veiled. Rossini (2006) 54 suggests that Augustus arm is outstretched in salute, 
but the adduction of his thumb confirms his is holding something. My thanks to Jane Anderson for 
discussing this with me. 
 Momigliano (1942a) 228. 
- 249 - 
The processional frieze 
Scholars have often wanted to interpret the procession as either the consecratio 
in 13 B.C. or the dedicatio in 9 B.C. since these two dates are celebrated in various 
Fasti of the Julio-Claudian period.
 However, Billows has argued that the procession 
should be seen as an idealized version of history,
 rather than necessarily depicting a 
specific historic event, and sees the procession as depicting an idealised supplicatio. 
The supplicatio was given either in thanksgiving to the gods for a victory,
 or to seek 
pax from them:
 the procession included women and children, and laurels were 
carried by participants.
 Certainly, this interpretation emphasises the action of the 
senate who decreed supplicationes to Augustus on the successful conclusion of his 
campaigns.
 This interpretation of the procession allows us to understand the 
commemoration of both the initial celebration of Augustus return and a continued 
celebration each time the frieze was viewed. The idealised nature of the relief is 
emphasised in many of the figures of the procession who are idealised depictions. As 
Zanker states: [the] figure embodies the office, not the man who happened to hold it at 
the time.
 The processional frieze, as part of a monument set up by the senate, offers 
an idealised view of the state in a religious capacity and Augustus role within it. 
The processional frieze is usually understood as a celebration of the Imperial 
domus and scholars have tried to interpret the frieze in terms of family groups and 
 Momigliano (1942a) 231 discusses these two positions in the scholarship. The Fasti Antiates (Inscr. 
Ital. XIII 2, 201ff) and the Fasti Amiternini (Inscr. Ital. XIII 2. 185ff ) record the consecration of the altar 
on the 4
 July, whilst the Fasti Caerentani (Inscr. Ital. XIII 2, 64ff), Fasti Praenestini (Inscr. Ital. XIII 2, 
107ff) and the fasti Verulani (Inscr. Ital. XIII 2, 157ff) record the dedication of the altar on 30
 January.  
 Billows (1993) 91; Zanker (1988) 121 notes the timelessness of the frieze in its idealised realisation. 
 Livy 27.51.9. 
 Livy 3.7.7. 
 Livy 40.37.3: lauream in manu tenentes.  
 RG 4 and 12. Cic. Phil. 2.13 states that he was awarded a supplicatio, rebus iis gestis for his defeat of 
the Catilinarian conspiracy. 
 Zanker (1988) 121. 
- 250 - 
dynastic succession, based on the identifications of the participants.
 These 
interpretations rely on tentative identifications: only Augustus and Agrippa can be 
identified through their portraiture (Figure 90).
 This serves to heighten their 
prominence within the procession amongst so many idealized faces. Compositionally 
too, they are prominent, with the main focus on Augustus as other figures turn towards 
him. Agrippa, who is prominent owing to his posture and height, appears to emphasise 
the end of the magistrates and priests and the start of the more familial aspect of the 
procession. If one observes, however, the relationship of the central acanthus scroll to 
the processional frieze on the south side, one can see that another focal point is the 
group of Flamines between Augustus and Agrippa. The focus is on the religious offices 
of the state and indeed the prominence of Augustus and Agrippa (who are equidistant 
from the centre)
 must be understood within this context. As with the short panels, the 
processional frieze is subject to the acanthus scroll, which unifies the messages of the 
upper register and ties the ideology of the Roman state to the concepts of abundance 
and fruitfulness.
 The emphasis on the senatorial order within the processional friezes is not to 
deny that the gens Iulia is depicted, for the prominent female behind Agrippa (S-32) is 
evidently an important figure, not just from her position in the procession, but also 
owning to the parallel drawn between her and the Tellus figure. She shares the 
idealised features and is crowned and veiled (Figure 115).
 She has been identified as 
either Livia or Julia.
 I believe an identification of Livia is far more plausible: the 
 Moretti (1948); Ryberg (1949); Simon (1967); Kleiner (1978); Torelli (1982); Holloway (1984); Rose 
(1990); Rossini (2006) 48 notes how tentative the historical identifications are. Paul Rehak in a 
conference paper entitled Women and Children on the Ara Pacis Augustae delivered at the Classical 
Association of the Middle West and South, 2004 argues against the family groupings supposed by 
Kleiner (1978). 
 See p. 227 above. 
 Both stand over an open flower, from the main branch of the acanthus. 
 Castriota (1995) 3-12. 
- 251 - 
senate dedicated the monument on 30
 January 9 B.C., which was Livias birthday. The 
senate can thus been seen to depict the princeps wife as the embodiment of the 
womanly virtues of pax augusta displayed in the Tellus relief. Augustus household is 
depicted as important to the realisation of pax augusta. 
The desire to see a purely dynastic procession has led to the identification of S-
30, who stands behind the figure of Agrippa, and N-34 as Gaius and Lucius Caesar 
respectively (Figure 116).
 The clothing of the two boys is usually explained as Trojan 
dress, for the Ludi Troiani; however, another way of interpreting the boys dress is that 
they are non-Roman. This is a far more straightforward explanation of their clothing, 
and indeed Rose has pointed out that a depiction of both boys with no shoes, and Lucius 
with uncovered buttocks would be unprecedented.
 S-30 and N-34 are certainly 
prominent as the first children, and moreover as the first individuals who are not state 
officials. It is possible that in their non-Roman appearance they represent a form of 
pignora, offered to Augustus and Rome as evidence of pax.
 N-34 is strikingly similar 
to the depictions of pignora on the Augustus Boscoreale Cup (Figure 117), which we 
should read not as a blatant act of submission, but rather an expression of an imperial 
 Bartman (1998) 87-88. 
 Rossini (2006) 54 and 66 gives arguments for both, although she comes down on the side of Julia; on 
Livia and her role  see Bartman (1998) 88; Flory (1998), Flory (1995), Flory (1993). 
 Rose (1990) 463-464 argues that N-37 in fact represents Gaius Caesar, based on Gaius portraiture 
type. Kleiner and Buxton (2008) 85 n. 121 see N-37 as representing a Maurentanian prince wearing a 
Hellenistic royal cloak, and argue that the Julian style of portraiture was adopted by the Maurentanian 
royal house. However, Kuttner (1995) 102 points out the contrast between the delicate face of the 
young camillus Gaius Caesar' and the pudgy features of S-30: the point being that S-30 and N-34 are 
distinctively non-Roman in appearance, whilst N-37 appears Julio-Claudian. 
 Rose (1990) 459; see also Kuttner (1995) 101-105 for an identification of N-34 as a Gallic pignus and 
S-30 as an Oriental; Kleiner and Buxton (2008), Kuttner (1995); Schneider (2007) 76-78 has argued that 
both interpretations (Gaius and Lucius, or barbarian children) can stand, and that the childrens clothing 
refers to the Orient as a feature of Romes cultural identity. 
 RG 4.3, 32.2; Joseph. AJ 16.6.6; Dio Cass. 54.28.1; Ferris (2000) 27. 
- 252 - 
concept of pax.
 The image of the pignus given up to Augustus also appears on coins 
minted at Lugdunum in 8/7 B.C (Figure 118).
The altar offers a conceptualisation of pax as a discourse on the nature of 
Roman imperialism, celebrating the conquest of the orbis terrarum whilst at the same 
time promoting the stability of the state through an affirmation of the religious and 
political offices of the senatorial order. I will now turn to consider the Ara Pacis 
alongside other commemorations of 9 B.C. to examine how the senatorial presentation 
of the Roman state in terms of victorious pax worked within the city of Rome. 
Contextualising the Ara Pacis 
 The concept of the imperial nature of pax is highlighted by the relationship of 
the Ara Pacis to the obelisk set up in 10/9 B.C. as a gnomon of a solar meridian in the 
Campus (Figure 119).
 The red granite obelisk was originally erected by Psammeticus 
II (594-589 B.C.) at Heliopolis. The base of the monolith is inscribed on two opposite 
sides with the following inscription: 
Imp. Caesar divi. fil. / Augustus / Pontifex Maximus / Imp. XII Cos. Xi Trib.  
Pot XIV / Aegupto in potestatem populi Romani redacta / Soli donum 
dedit.
Imperator Caesar, son of a god, Augustus, Pontifex Maximus, Imperator for 
the 12
 time, Consul for the 11
 time, Tribunician power for the 14
 time, 
 Kuttner (1995) 94-123, esp. 95, 100-107.  
 RIC Aug. 200, 201a-b. 
 Heslin (2007) 2-12. 
 CIL VI 702. 
- 253 - 
gave this as a gift to Sol, with Egypt subjected to the power of the Roman 
people. 
This sentiment was later echoed in the heading of Augustus Res Gestae: orbem 
terrarum imperio populi Romani subiecit.
 The obelisk is aligned with the via 
Flaminia, and there is a clear spatial relationship between the monument and the Ara 
Pacis (Figure 101),
 which is further emphasised by the proximity in date of the two 
monuments dedications. In one sense the solar meridian serves as another example or 
extension of pax augusta, reminding the viewer of the ways in which pax for the empire 
had been achieved.  
Heslin sees the obelisks inscription as an implicit reference to the triumvirate - 
Augustus (Imp. Caesar), Lepidus (Pontifex Maximus) and Antony (Aegupto redacta) - 
and the triangle of the altar, obelisk and mausoleum as part of that display to impress 
upon the viewer the move of Augustus from the war of the triumviral period to the 
principate and peace.
 However, it is misleading to see the complex of the altar and 
obelisk as referring to the blood-stained Octavian who was transformed into Augustus, 
bringer of peace.
 It is Imperator Caesar Augustus who dedicates the obelisk to bring 
to the fore the fundamentally victorious nature of pax augusta as a commemoration of 
empire. It is true that the inscription refers back to the victory over Egypt in 30 B.C., 
yet that victory must be understood within the complex of monuments on the Campus. 
Indeed, the end of the war against Antony and Cleopatra, which was synonymous with 
the capture of Egypt as well as the battle of Actium, was celebrated with the closing of 
 RG Introduction. 
 Heslin (2007) 12-16; Rehak (2006) 89 suggests that the construction of the obelisk monument must 
have begun in 13 or 12 B.C. based on its evident spatial relationship with the Ara Pacis. 
 Heslin (2007) 16. 
 Heslin (2007) 16. 
- 254 - 
the Gates of Ianus as a display of pax terra marique parta.
 Augustus dedicated the 
obelisk to be viewed together with the senatorial monument celebrating pax augusta. 
The obelisk reminds the viewer of Augustus continued role in establishing totum 
imperium: whilst the senate commemorate the settlement of the West as the 
establishment of pax terra marique, Augustus reminds the viewer of his initial role in 
establishing pax as a display of Roman victory in his conquest of Egypt at the end of 
the civil wars. Thus Augustus dedication serves as a reminder of his past victories, and 
also his control over the empire.  
Furthermore, it is worth emphasising that in 8 B.C. Augustus made corrections 
to the Julian calendar.
 Within the inscription of the obelisk he emphasises his role as 
Pontifex Maximus (the second line is devoted to this one title), a position he assumed in 
12 B.C., which had made him responsible for the calendar. The restoration of the 
correct measurement of time which Augustus undertook in 8 B.C. may have been 
foreshadowed in the erection of the solar meridian. The obelisk is employed as a marker 
of the establishment of correct order, linked to the ideology of the Ara Pacis. The two 
monuments offer different perspectives on pax as an accomplishment of victory. The 
Ara Pacis presents the view of the senate: the stability of the state and the renewed 
prosperity, as illustrated by the exempla of Romes past, and continually acted out 
through the viewing of the processional frieze. The obelisk presents Augustus view: 
the establishment of Roman imperium both over a territorial area and as control of time 
as a victory of pax augusta. 
 Livy 1.19.3. 
 Macr Sat. 1.14.14; Wallace-Hadrill (2008) 244-245. 
- 255 - 
 The pacification of the West culminating in the return of Augustus in 13 B.C. 
was a catalyst for the monumentalisation of Roman imperialism in terms of pax. This 
monument to pax augusta celebrated both the military victories and the magisterial 
offices of the state, as well as Augustus role within that. The commemoration in 13 
B.C. was not restricted or confined to the pacification of the West, but rather celebrated 
the success of the Roman state in achieving pax; that is universal imperium. The power 
of the Ara Pacis as an expression of empire is clear from its later use by Augustus in his 
Res Gestae, and by Nero on his coins.
 Indeed, the use made of the Ara Pacis by 
Augustus and Nero illustrates its importance as a symbol of the expression of Roman 
imperialism (adopted by the principes from the senatorial display): that of victorious 
 RIC Nero 458-461, 526-529. 
- 256 - 
Section Two 
A Roman perspective on pacification in the West: La Turbie 
 The senates commemoration at Rome was the dedication to pax augusta, as a 
testimony of the stability of the Roman state and the prosperity achieved. It is 
interesting then that the senate and people dedicate a trophy monument with a rather 
different meaning in the Alps to commemorate the conquest. The monument does not 
speak with the language of pax augusta displayed at Rome, but with a more 
traditionally triumphal expression of the subjugation of the enemy. Indeed, it is the 
absence of any concept of pax augusta, as displayed by the senate at Rome, which 
makes this monument an interesting comparison regarding the presentation and 
understanding of pax and imperialism in the West. I will now turn to consider the 
Alpine trophy as a form of Roman imperialism displayed over a subjugated territory, 
first by considering its visual display in comparison to the ara Pacis at Rome, and then 
by examining it within its physical context.  
Tropaea Augusti
 The monument set up in the Alps was recorded by Pliny the Elder as a 
tropaeum.
 The remains of a monument at La Turbie, a small town 18 km from Nice, 
overlooking Monaco and the sea (Map 4), were identified as the trophy of Augustus in 
the fifteenth century by an anonymous Italian: In una delle facciate era linscrittione 
cavata da Plino nel capo 20 del libro 3...Sono poi attorno al luogo molti fragmenti del 
 Ptolemy Geography 3.1.2:  . 
 Plin. HN 3.136; Ptolemy (3.1.2) uses the tropaeum as a geographical marker, as he describes the 
coast line of the Massilienses.  
- 257 - 
marmo biano dellinscrittione sopracennata; then in 1564 by Pre Boyer, and later by 
Pietro Gioffredo, who found fragments of the inscription reused in a medieval archway 
in La Turbie.
 It was at the start of the twentieth century that architects began to work 
on reconstructing the monument as we currently see it (Figure 120 & Figure 121): a 
double square base, with the reconstructed inscription on the west side of the first base, 
flanked by victories and framed by sculptured trophies.
 On top of the second base 
stands a circular drum with a colonnade of 24 disengaged Tuscan columns, behind 
which, Formig suggested, twelve niches displayed statuary, based on the remains of a 
military torso and a Julio-Claudian head found at the site.
 Sculptures may have been 
set at the four corners of the second platform, based on the discovery of a large marble 
cylinder at the north-east corner.
 Formig envisaged a hierarchical display, with the 
depiction, both epigraphic and visual, of the defeated Alpine races on the bottom level, 
 Formig (1949) appendix II, 87-94 for extracts from Giffredos Nicaea civitas, sacris monumentis 
illustrata (1658). Despite these early accounts, some commentators on Plin. HN 3.136 have understood 
the inscription to be recorded on an arch, or trophy near Nicaea in Albania: Rackham (1947) 100; 
Bostock and Riley (1855-57) 256: The trophy or triumphal arch which bore this inscription is that which 
was still to be seen at Trobia near Nicaea in Illyria, in the time of Gruter, who has given that portion of 
the inscription un-obliterated down to gentes Alpinae. In fact, Gruter (1707) 216 n. 7 gives a copy of 
the text down to redactae sunt. His line division and his use of Plinys abbreviations, which does not 
concur with the reconstruction of the text by Formig (1943-44), indicate that he did not see the 
inscription. However, he states that Jacobus Lopides Stunica (Diego Lpez de Ziga d. 1530) recorded 
having seen fragments of the inscription used in the arch at La Turbie, nine miles from Nicaea (Nice) in 
the Alps. Rackham is clearly following Bostock, who mistook Nicaea in the Alps for that in Illyria, and the 
arch seen by Stunica as the original Roman structure. For a history of the monuments rediscovery see: 
Binninger (2006a) 180-184; Binninger (2009a) 23-25. 
 This placement is confirmed by the anonymous Italian (n. 885): Nelle facciate dalle bande erano duo 
gran Trofei di marmo biano intagliato a mezzo rilievo similar alli Trofei di Mario che ancora si veggono  
Roma, but he seems to suggest that the inscription was on the second base: Sopra questo basamento 
quadro era un piano...e sopra il vivo dellossatura, sinalazava un altro basamento parimente di quattro 
facciate...in una delle facciate era linscrittione: Formig (1949) 51-52 argues that the inscription would 
not have been seen from the second base, and that the depth of the inscription fragments matches the 
depth of the masonry from the first base.  
 Formig (1949) 70: the head, suggested as Drusus, was roughed out at the back indicating that it 
might have be designed to be viewed only from the front. Binninger (2009a) 54 on difficulty of identify 
the portrait. 
 Formig (1949) 65 suggests an eagle, whilst Picard (1957) 298 identifies the marble cylinder as the 
truck of a trophy. 
- 258 - 
followed by statuary of the colonnade representing the legates of Augustus,
finally a statue of the princeps himself, on top of a conical 12-stepped pyramid roof.
However, Binninger has recently warned of the hypothetical nature of the 
reconstructed monument. She confirms the plan and architectural principles governing 
the elevation of the monument, from the remains of the structure, but argues that the 
details of the elevation are uncertain;
 Binninger has been able to verify the height of 
the second square base, but argues that the first bases proportions have been 
exaggerated, and so too that of the whole monument.
 Furthermore she has advised 
against the sduisante hirarchisation of Formigs iconographic programme, owing 
to the scarcity of the sculptural remains.
Despite the lack of an assured visual programme of the trophy a comparison 
with the Ara Pacis can still be considered, particularly as the two monuments represent 
perspectives of the Roman state. What is first noteworthy is the different practical 
functions the two monuments fulfil: the Ara Pacis was designed for sacrifice and 
thanksgiving, as illustrated by the depiction of a supplicatio; the Tropaeum was 
designated as a marker of victory and conquest. Even from the few visual remains of 
the Trophy, the stark contrast between the two monuments is clear. Our understanding 
of the Ara Pacis monument relies heavily on the complex figural programme of the 
exterior. The Trophy on the other hand is largely not a figural display, although there 
 Formig (1949) 70 on Augustus legates, one of which was Drusus, see n. 887. 
 The presence of a statue on top on the monument seems likely given a reference in an 8
 century 
poem about Saint Honorat, which includes a description of the monument supposedly constructed by 
Apollo: Pueys fetz un ydola sagrar...En la tor lames Apollins (then he consecrated an idol...on the 
tower Apollo placed it): see Formig (1949) appendix I, 83-84. 
 Binninger (2009a) 42-43; Binninger (2006a) 182. Binningers current work is concerned with 
establishing the history and transformation of the monument over time in order to come closer to the 
original form and to understand its historical and physical context. 
 Binninger (2009a) 54 states that the monument as it currently stands measures 35.40 m in height to 
the medieval arcade at the top; Binninger (2004). 
 Binninger (2009a) 42-43; Binninger (2006a) 182-4. 
- 259 - 
are fragmentary remains of at least two trophy reliefs in Carrara marble. A frieze block 
depicting a cuirass, metopes decorated with a cuirass, boar, bucrania, two cornucopiae 
entwined, a ships prow and a rams head and garland,
 and some fragmentary 
sculptural remains from under the colonnade.
 Whilst certain elements, such as the 
bucrania and the cornucopiae, may echo themes depicted in far greater detail on the 
Ara Pacis, the very nature of the remains suggests a visual display very different from 
the altar. 
The trophy reliefs, of which there are 145 fragments, evoke a message of 
conquest and victory (Figure 122). Binninger has argued that whilst the trophy relief is 
assured by the large central fragment, there is no positive evidence to confirm that the 
fragmentary remains represented captives, and that Formigs restoration was instead 
inspired by the sculptural decoration of the arches of Narbonensis.
 Whilst 
Binningers warning is sound, it is worth noting that the fifteenth century Italian likens 
the two trophies he saw on the monument to the trophy of Marius at Rome.
 It is 
possible that he was thinking of the monument that Pope Sixtus V (1585-1590) moved 
to the piazza del Campidolgio, which depicts both the trophy and a captive (Figure 
123). Captives were frequently depicted beneath trophies both at Rome, such as the two 
captives sitting under a trophy in the triumphal procession depicted on the frieze of the 
temple of Apollo Sosianus (Figure 124), and those kneeling under the trophies on the 
frieze of the tomb of Caecilia Metella (Figure 125), and in the provinces, such as the 
monument at Saint-Bertand-de-Comminges, which depicts two trophies, each with a 
 Formig (1949) 68-69 states that the metope fragments, which are coarse and crude, were the work 
of local workmen, comparing them to the frieze on the arch at Susa, and the reliefs from Trajans 
monument at Adamklissi, yet see Binninger (2009a). 
 Binninger (2009a) 54. 
 Binninger (2009a) 141 has assigned them to the iconography of a hero type, rather than a submissive 
captive; Binninger (2009a) 50; Binninger (2002) 151. 
 See n. 886 above. 
- 260 - 
kneeling, fettered male captive, and a standing female (Figure 126),
 and the lateral 
side of the arch at Orange (Figure 127). These examples speak of the strong association 
of captives with trophies. It is notable that in Gallia Narbonensis all civilian arches (i.e. 
those not associated with a legionary colony) depicted captives fettered to a trophy, and 
were set up in Roman municipalities which received Latin rights under Augustus.
Particularly at sites such as Carpentras and Vienne (Isre), where the community 
comprised an indigenous population,
 the introduction of arches on the main arteries 
of the city (Carpentras entrance on the north-south axis and Viennes cardo) decorated 
with trophies of subjugated peoples (Figure 128),
 suggests a deep association of this 
form of display with a strong idea of what Roman imperium was.
 It is then plausible 
in the context of both Roman and indigenous displays in the area that the trophies could 
have depicted captives. 
Notable too is the use of marble within the Alpine Trophy. The structure of the 
Alpine Trophy is made of a finely grained, dense and hard limestone from two local 
quarries: at Justicier, 1480m from the monument (Figure 129),
 and at the foot of 
Mount Agel.
 Clearly, the massive white stone display set up at La Turbie 
demonstrated a harnessing of the local resources of the Alpine region.
 However, 
Carrara marble was used for the inscription, the relief sculpture and the capitals. The 
Ara Pacis, a fully figural monument, is made completely of Carrara marble; at La 
Turbie, this material is restricted to certain decorative and epigraphic elements. The 
 Boube (1996), see p. 265 below for further discussion of the monument; see Silberberg-Peirce (1986) 
for trophy reliefs in Gallia Narbonensis.   
 Silberberg-Peirce (1986) 316.   
 Carpentras: the Memini; Vienne: the Allobroges. 
 Silberberg-Peirce (1986) 318-319.   
 Ferris (2000) 46. 
 Cungondo (2000) 2; Binninger (2009a) 56; Casimir (1932) 49-50. 
 Cungondo (2000) 3. 
 The local stone was also used for the milestones marking the via Julia Augusta (Binninger (2001) 297) 
discussed below p. 261. 
- 261 - 
marble from Luna would have been imported via the port at Monaco.
 Thus this 
imported marble, with restricted use within the monumental display, was employed to 
illuminate certain aspects within the structure: the trophies and the inscription. 
The articulation of the monument through the use of marble and local stone 
illustrates the imperial aspect of the structure, both in the ability to use such materials, 
but also in the message expressed.
 As I have already emphasised above, the use of 
the trophy reliefs shows a concept of Roman imperialism seen throughout Gallia 
Narbonensis. In addition to this, the central point of the display, emphasised by the 
trophies either side, is on the inscription. I will now turn to briefly consider the 
reconstruction of the inscription and its message, before examining its role within the 
monuments context. Through this examination I will demonstrate that the absence of 
pax in this monument illustrates that the concept was not always a requirement for the 
discourse on Roman imperialism. The absence of pax here in the Alps, in contrast to the 
display at Rome, articulates the different kinds of relationships achieved as a result of 
Roman imperium. 
The Latin Inscription 
 The first historical reference to the Alpine Trophy is a quotation of its 
inscription in Plinys Historia Naturalis. In this section, I will assess Plinys record in 
light of the archaeological evidence. 
 Binninger (2001) 292 on the port of Monaco, 297 specifically on the importation of marble. 
 Binninger (2009a) discusses the sculptural work of the monument in both the imported marble 
(trophies) and local limestone (frieze), and notes that, contrary to previous interpretations (Picard 
(1949); Formig (1949); Formig (1955); Lamboglia (1938) 33-34) which considered the limestone 
sculpture of inferior workmanship (and therefore local), the metopes were carefully and expertly 
executed.  
- 262 - 
 Pliny, discussing the geography and ethnography of the Alps, records the 
inscription in the following manner: 
Non alienum videtur hoc loco subicere inscriptionem e tropaeo Alpium, 
quae talis est: IMP : CAESARI DIVI FILIO AVG : PONT : MAX : IMP : 
XIIII : TR : POT : XVII : S : P : Q : R : QVOD EIVS DVCTV 
AVSPICIISQVE GENTES ALPINAE OMNES QVAE A MARI SVPERO 
AD INFERVM PERTINEBANT SVB IMPERIVM P : R : SVNT 
REDACTAE : GENTES ALPINAE DEVICTAE TRVMPILINI : 
CAMVVNI : VENOSTES : VENNONETES : ISARCI : BREVNI : 
GENAVNES : FOCVNATES : VINDELICORVM GENTES QVATTVOR 
: COSVANETES : RVCINATES : LICATES : CATENATES : 
AMBISONTES : RVGVSCI : SVANETES : CALVCONES : 
BRIXENETES : LEPONTI : VBERI : NANTVATES : SEDVNI : 
VARAGRI : SALASSI : ACITAVONES : MEDVLLI : VCEENI : 
CATVRIGES : BRIGIANI : SOGIONTI : BRODIONTI : NEMALONI : 
EDENATES : VESVBIANI : VEAMINI : GALLITAE : TRIVLLATI : 
ECDINI : VERGVNNI : EGVI : TVRI : NEMATVRI : ORATELLI : 
NERVSI : VELAVNI : SVETRI.
 Plin. NH 3.136-7. 
- 263 - 
It does not seem out of place here to record the inscription from the Alpine 
Trophy, which is as follows: To Imperator Caesar, son of the divine, 
Augustus, Pontifex Maximus, Imperator for the 14
 time, with Tribunician 
power for the 17
 time, the senate and the people of Rome [dedicate] 
because by his leadership and auspices the Alpines races, which stretch 
from the upper sea to the lower sea, were reduced to the power of the 
Roman people.  The conquered Alpine races: Trumpilini, Camuni, 
Venostes, Vennonetes, Isarci, Breuni, Genaunes, Focunates, four races of 
the Vindelicii, Cosuanetes, Rucinates, Licates, Catenates, Ambisontes, 
Rugusci, Suanetes, Calucones, Brixenetes, Leponti, Uberi, Nantuates, 
Seduni, Varagri, Salassi, Acitavones, Medulli, Uceeni, Caturiges, Brigiani, 
Sogionti, Brodionti, Nemaloni, Edenates, Vesubiani, Veamini, Galli Taetri, 
Ullati,
 Ecdini, Vergunni, Turi, Nemturi, Oratelli, Nerusi, Velauni, Suetri. 
As I have noted above, the first evidence for the actual inscription comes from the 
account of the 15
 century Italian, who reports numerous marble fragments of the 
inscription, along with the trophy reliefs, around the monument.
 The reconstructed 
inscription, by Formig, has 144 original fragments set in it.
 Formig has argued that the inscription as recorded by Pliny can be 
reconstructed by and large from these fragments (Figure 130). On the remaining 
fragments of the inscription there are two different letter sizes, measuring 0.3696m high 
for the dedication (two letters are completely intact: auGusto and seNatus, with the N 
 Coins minted in the Alpine region indicate the existence of the Ullati, and so it is necessary to read: 
Galli Taetri, Ullati: see Arnaud (2004). 
 See n. 885 above. 
 Binninger (2009a) 51; Formig (1949) 51-61; Formig (1955). 
- 264 - 
fragment complete for the entire height of the masonry block), and 0.1848m high for 
the enumeration of the gentes (the most complete fragments were found in a medieval 
archway in the town).
 Formig has reconstructed the inscription on nine lines: the 
first three are the dedication to Augustus in larger letters, whilst lines 4-9 state the 
reason for the monument and enumerate the tribes that he conquered. 
 However, Binninger emphasises that the layout of the text within the epigraphic 
field must remain uncertain, because of the very fragmentary nature of the 
inscription.
 Mommsens reconstruction in CIL V, admittedly with far fewer 
fragments to work from, has the dedication over two lines, and the gentes devictae 
listed in six columns.
 The use of columns to articulate lists is evident in the listing of 
names such as Cn. Pompeius Strabos edict concerning the grant of Roman citizenship 
to the Hispanic cavalry.
 However, there is evidence of the enumeration of 
communities not in columns, but in lines, on the arch at Susa, which is discussed 
below.
 The display of the gentes in lines, as opposed to lists in columns, may be 
more appropriate to the architectural context, even with such limited archaeological 
remains with which to reconstruct the display. 
 What we may draw from Formigs analysis of the fragments is that Plinys 
account does not give an entirely accurate depiction of the inscription. The fragments 
indicate that the first line gave Imperator in full and not abridged as given in Plinys 
account.
 Whilst tribunicia is abbreviated, it reads TRIB., rather than TR, as the 
discovery of a fragment with B and an interpunct illustrates. Furthermore, the title 
 Magasin Pittoresque XXIe anne, 1853, p. 174. 
 Binninger (2009a) 51. 
 CIL V 7817. 
 CIL VI 37045. 
 CIL VI 7231, see p. 277ff below. 
 In the fragment ERA the serif of the A is just visible at the edge of the fragment, confirming that the 
belonged to imperator and not populusque romanus, 
- 265 - 
Senatus Populusque Romanus was given in full, and not abridged to S.P.Q.R.
 Plinys 
record is fairly accurate, although his use of abbreviations does not always match up to 
the epigraphic remains, and may plausibly have been taken from archival records as 
opposed to observation of the final inscribed version.   
An analysis of the fragments allows us to see that a visual distinction is made 
between the dedication and the enumeration of the gentes, both in the size of the 
lettering and the greater interline space between the two parts of the inscription. I will 
now examine the inscription in the context of the monument, as a message concerning 
Roman imperialism from the senate and people. 
e tropeo Alpinum 
 The inscription, as a senatorial record, indicates the purpose of the physical 
monument within the Alps. The monument was to celebrate the subjugation of the 
Alpine peoples from the mare superum to the mare inferum, under the imperium populi 
Romani. It is with this concept in mind that I now turn to consider the importance of the 
location and placement of the monument to the presentation of Roman imperialism 
within a conquered landscape. The role of a Roman monument erected in an area of 
conquest as a marker of that conquest is obvious and clear; nevertheless the finer details 
of the location of the monument and the relation of this placement to the message of the 
inscription are relevant to the investigation. I will examine the situation of the 
monument within the Alps. 
 La Turbie is located at the foothills of Mount Agel, the last summit in the chain 
of the Alpine mountains (Map 4). The monument was surrounded by the ridges of the 
 Formig (1955); AE 1999 n. 995 lists a number of different readings between Formig and Pliny. 
Arnaud (2002) 187 argues that the correct linguistic form of Brodiontii is Bodiontii. 
- 266 - 
mountain on two sides, and a sharp drop down to the sea, dominating the landscape 
(Figure 131). In addition to the natural position of the landscape, the monument 
required that rock be cut away to provide a level platform.
 Whilst the massive 
engineering task in itself is impressive, its greatest worth is in the display of absolute 
control over the landscape. 
However, the monument, dedicated in 7/6 B.C., is not the first monumental 
evidence of Roman control over the landscape. In fact, the Trophy was set up in relation 
to the via Iulia Augusta, which was built in 13/12 B.C. as attested to by milestones from 
the area.
  The same local quarries supplied stone for both the milestones, and the 
monument.
 Thus the area was already, in 13/12 B.C. visually under Roman control, 
and the via Iulia may be seen as illustrating the successful conclusion of Augustus 
campaigning in the region.
 That the site was a point of articulation in the landscape 
prior to the Augustan monument is illustrated by the existence of an earlier monument 
above the flank which the trophy is set up on.
The via Iulia Augusta began at Placentia (Piacenza) with the merging of the via 
Aemilia Scauri and the via Postumia, and ran through the Alps until Vado, where it 
continued along the coast before cutting between the foothills of Mount Agel, with 
Mont de la Bataille on the right, and La Revre on the left. The point at which the road 
runs through the Alps is recorded in the Itineraria Antonini Augusti as Alpe summa.
 Formig (1949) 43. 
 A total of four milestones were found near La Turbie: two Augustan (CIL V 8100 (number DCIV) found 
c. 450 m from La Turbie, and 8101 (number DCV) found c. 1500 m from La Turbie), one Hadrianic (CIL V. 
8102 (number DCV) found with CIL V 8101), and one from the reign of Caracalla (CIL V 8099 (number 
DCIII) found c. 1500 m from La Turbie). The stones from the later periods are evidence of the restoration 
and repair of the road. 
 Binninger (2001) 297. See n. 905 above. 
 Binninger (2006a) 185. 
 Formig (1951), Formig (1949) 44 argues that the remains pre-date the Alpine trophy. Binninger 
(2004) states that the remains are at present being excavated. 
 Itineraria Antoninii 296.3. 
- 267 - 
The next location recorded in the Itineraria is Cemenelo, (Cimiez, near Nice), and it is 
at this point that the via Iulia continues back along the coast. I will argue that summa 
not only refers to the end of the Alps, but also the route through them. The third 
Vicarello cup (which comes from a series of four silver 1
 century A.D. cups, shaped 
like a milestone mark, engraved with the route from Gades to Rome) also uses the term 
Summas Alpes, in reference to the pass at Mont-Genvre.
 This is the highest point of 
the route and so summas must refer to height. However, there is another instance of 
summa being used in connection to a route through a mountain range in the Itineraria 
Antoninii: summus Pyrenaeus.
 The via Domitia, commemorating the victories of 
Domitius Ahenobarbus in 121 B.C., does not cut through the Pyrenees mountains until 
this point, where the road passes through the col de Panissars.
 As with La Turbie, this 
does not represent the highest point of the mountain range, but rather a high point of the 
route through the mountains. Indeed, the placement of both the Alpine and Pyrenees 
trophies demonstrates this articulation of the route through territory under Roman 
control, as visual displays of Roman imperium over the landscape. 
It is notable in the case of the Pyrenees trophy of Pompey, erected in 71 B.C., 
that the monument was quite literally constructed over the road.
  The archaeological 
remains show two large substructures stretching for c. 30m along both sides of the road 
(which itself mesures c.5.15m wide).
 Castellvi, Nolla and Rod have shown that 
whilst the original route of the via Domitia ran through the col de Perthus, the site of 
Pompeys trophy monument caused a deviation of the route to the col de Panissars, 
 Prieur (1968) 98, notes the other three goblets refer to Druentium, Gruentia and Druentio; 105-6 for 
the different names designating Mont Genvre in Antiquity. 
 Itineraria Antoninii 397.7.  
Castellvi, et al. (2008) 51ff esp. 54 for the suggestion that Pompey deviated the via Domitia to run 
through the col de Panissars. 
 Castellvi, et al. (1995), Castellvi, et al. (2008). 
 Castellvi, et al. (2008) 72-73, the substructures measure 30.765-30.915m in length and 15.530-
16.066m in width. The monument covered an area of approximately 1132m
- 268 - 
where another road, predating the construction of the monument, ran (Map 5).
reason for locating the monument at the col de Panissars, rather than Perthus, is tied to 
the topography of the area: the site is c. 60m higher than the route over Perthus, and 
offers a greater panoramic view due to the exposure of the site.
 However, despite the 
more elevated platform, the monument was not set at its highest point, the col de 
Bellegarde, but 500m south-east of this point.
 The choice of location appears to be 
tied to the earlier road which cut around the summit through the slopes of the hill. As a 
result major engineering works were used to compensate for the nature of the terrace, 
with the substructure (cut into the rock) on the east side elevated to 1.70m, and that on 
the west side to 6.40m to create a level platform (Figure 132).
Whilst the reconstruction of the monument in the Pyrenees is uncertain, the size 
and design of the substructure indicate a monumental structure that was both highly 
visible within the landscape, and commanded views over the crossing of the Pyrenees 
along the Roman route through the mountains.
 The trophy monument at La Turbie 
acts in a similar way. It too was not placed at the summit of the area (Mt. de la Bataille, 
662m in altitude) but on a lower point (480m). The reasons for this are again tied to the 
route and placement of the road through the landscape. Whilst both roads cut through 
the mountain ranges the route itself is influenced by the topography of the land. As 
mentioned above, the roads run close to the coast for most of their route, before cutting 
through the mountains at the point described as summus. This is not the summit, but a 
 Castellvi, et al. (2008) on the deviation of the via Domitia: 54, 65-66; existence of an earlier road on 
the site of the monument: 71ff, 143. 
 Castellvi, et al. (2008) 54 point out the strategic aspect of the position, which allows a view of up to 
10 miles into the Spanish interior. 
 Castellvi, et al. (2008) 199. 
 Castellvi, et al. (2008) 71ff. 
 Castellvi, et al. (2008) 148ff offer three different reconstructions, esp. 161 for the lack of 
architectural remains; 156 argue that the remains must be the trophy of Pompey, rather than the altar 
of Caesar, based on the size of the foundations cf. 35-36. 
- 269 - 
lower point that emphasises the route through the mountains, without the necessity of 
an excessive climb to the highest ground.
 In one sense the monuments are 
subordinated to the course of the road,
 yet they further emphasise the concept of the 
road as a display of imperium, by monumentalising the area. 
The trophy in the Pyrenees illustrates how the construction of the monument 
was both influenced by the route into Spain and yet also deviated from the original 
course of the via Domitia to monumentalize Roman control over the landscape. The 
display at La Turbie however, offers greater unity between the route of the via Iulia 
Augusta and the monument, since no deviation from the original course of the road was 
required. The engineering worked required in the Pyrenees indicates the constraints of 
the area which the road ran through. In contrast, at La Turbie the creation of a 
monumental platform on the site suggests that it was already planned as a major point 
of articulation and site for the monument when the road was constructed. The 
monument at La Turbie overlooked both the route through the Alps, and the sea, and 
was itself also highly visible from the road and the sea, demonstrating the extent of 
Roman control and the victory won, which made the road through the Alps a reality. 
The relationship of these monuments to the road network not only demonstrates 
the control over the landscape, but also the articulation of boundaries. Strabo says of the 
Pyrenees trophy:         .937 That 
the monument was designed to mark the limits of Gallia Narbonensis and Spain is 
evident from its inscription: ab Alpibus ad fines Hispaniae ulterioris.
 Likewise the 
 Binninger (2006a) 188. 
 Castellvi, et al. (2008) 199. 
 Str. 4.1.3: The trophies of Pompey reveal the boundary of Spain and of Gaul. Other sources on the 
location of the trophy: Strabo 3.4.1, 3.4.7, 3.4.9: Servius Aen. 11.6-8; Plin. HN 3.18, 7.96, 37.15; Dio 
Cass. 41.24. 
 Plin. HN 3.18. Pliny appears to be quoting the text of the inscription, either from the monument itself 
or senatorial records, for he quotes the text twice at 3.18: utpote cum Pompeius Magnus tropaeis suis 
- 270 - 
inscription at La Turbie demonstrates the territorial limits marked out by the monument: 
gentes alpinae omnes quae a mari supero ad inferum. The trophy, in effect, marks the 
conclusion and terminus of the conquered territory. 
The use of trophy monuments to mark the limits of Roman administration in the 
West is also evident at Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges. The monument, like the Alpine 
trophy, depicts the successful pacification and conquest of the West from an imperial 
view point.
 It was found along the west side of the forum temple, although its 
original context and display is not clear.
 It is made of a local white marble and 
comprises three main elements (Figure 126). The central trophy depicts a ships prow, 
with a tritoness on top supporting a globe with the eagle of Jupiter on top. Above the 
eagle, on a plinth, strides a winged victory, whilst a dolphin and crocodile are set either 
side of the prow. Flanking the central trophy are two traditional trophies  trees 
decorated with the arms of the enemy  with a kneeling male captive and a standing 
female captive beneath each of them. The male on the right side has his hands bound 
behind his back, whilst both females are unfettered.
 Boube has identified the two 
female captives as personifications of Gallia, on the right side wearing a neck torque 
and holding a branch in her hand, and Hispania, on the left, and she links the secondary 
trophies, together with the eagle, to the recovery of the standards from Spain and 
Gaul.
 The trophy monument must date to a time after 25 B.C. and the initial 
quae statuebat in Pyrenaeo DCCCLXXVI oppida ad Alpibus ad fines Hispaniae ulterioris in dicionem ab se 
redacta testatus sitand 7.96: excitatis in Pyrenaeo tropaeis, oppida DCCCLXXVI ad Alpibus ad fines 
Hispaniae ulterioris in dicionem redacta victoriae suae adscripsit. This territorial limit remains still 
today, and the monument marks the limits of Spain and France established by the treaty of the 
Pyrenees and ratified by the treaty of Bayonne (1808). One third of the monument is on Spanish land, 
and the remaining two thirds in France: see Castellvi, et al. (2008) 71. 
 Boube (1996) 40-42. 
 Boube (1996) 42 has suggested that the monument was part of an altar display forming the central 
focus of regional cult, similar to the altars at Lugdunum, Tarraco, and Cologne. 
 The remains of the male captive on the left side do not indicate whether or not he was bound, 
though from his kneeling position it is likely that he was. 
 Boube (1996) 33-36, 44; RG 29. 
- 271 - 
pacification of the region, and Boube has pushed for a later date of 13-10 B.C., in the 
wake of the reorganisation of the provinces.
 Boube has emphasised that the trophy is 
of very different workmanship from that of the region. The trophy thus suggests an 
official message of victory and pacification from Rome.
The victories and conquest over Gaul and Spain are presented within a wider 
concept of empire, for they stand either side of the central naval trophy which asserts 
the message of victory terra marique. The subjugation of the two provinces is thus part 
of the commemoration of the empire, whilst also specifically referring to the territories 
brought under Roman control.
 Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges was the site of a major 
crossroads as well as a Roman centre from the reorganisation of Gaul, as its original 
name, Lugdunum Convenarum, suggests,
 and its articulation of bringing both Spain 
and Gaul into the Roman administrative sphere is illustrated by the personification of 
both provinces at the limits of their territories.  
Whilst at Rome the Ara Pacis commemorated the pacification of the western 
provinces as part of its message of pax over an empire, the monuments at La Turbie and 
in the Pyrenees articulated the reduction of peoples and communities to Roman 
imperium.
 pax as a concept is not explicit in these displays, and the concept of 
pacification is rather expressed in term of creating a sphere of Roman administration as 
a province (redigere).
 Boube (1996) 43-44. 
 Boube (1996) 40-42. 
 Silberberg-Peirce (1986) 313 argues that the unfettered figures are not prisoners of war, but the 
allied Gauls of Narbonensis, in contrast to the defeated captives who represented the losers of the 
Cantabrian wars. However, Boubes argument of the provinces is to my mind more convincing, 
particularly when considered alongside the evidence for personifications of gentes and nationes at 
Rome in the period: see Smith (1988) 71-72. 
 Silberberg-Peirce (1986) 311; Ferris (2000) 43. 
 Plin. HN 7.96. 
 Vell. Pat. 2.34; 2.94.4 cf. 2.37.5. He also uses the explicit term redacta in formulam provinciae (2.38), 
and redacta in formam provinciae (2.97.4 cf. 2.44.4). See also Ebel (1975) 368. 
- 272 - 
Ebel has argued that the Pyrenees and Alpine trophies were located on the 
boundaries of administrative units, not in, or even near, major population centres where 
they would have had more propaganda value for the conquering generals.
 Whilst the 
monument at Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges can be seen as a display within a 
population centre (unlike the trophy monuments), it is also related to the road networks. 
Ebels criticism of the placement of the monuments fails to consider the importance of 
the road network to the purpose of the trophies. Roman administrative control does not 
only concern centres of population, but also routes of communication. The via Iulia 
Augusta determined the northwest boundary of Italy, yet was also la colonne vertbrale 
de lEmpire.
 The pacification of the Alps, and the monument commemorating that 
achievement, must be viewed within the wider context of the pacification of the West, 
and not as an end in itself.
 Whilst the monument does mark the terminus of the extent 
of the gentes Alpinae, it also articulates the movement through and beyond the Alps. 
The relationship of the Alpine trophy with the route through the Alps, also plays 
on the history of that route. Ammianus, citing the several routes through the Maritime 
Alps records that Theban Hercules set up an arx and portus at Monaco to his eternal 
memory (ad perennem sui memoriam),
 whilst Strabo indicates that a  to Hercules 
existed at Monaco.
 The site of La Turbie, above Monaco, clearly had a history 
concerning the route through the mountains, prior to the Augustan monument. Of 
course, Hercules is a relevant figure in terms of conquest and triumph, and occurs 
 Ebel (1975) 368ff. 
 Formig (1949) 18, see also Casimir (1932) 9. 
 Binninger (2006a) 188. 
 Amm. Marc. 15.10.9 cites the 1
 century B.C. author Timagenes of Alexandria on the route opened 
up by Hercules. See also Livy 5.34; Diod. Sic. 50.4.19; Silius Italicus De bello Punico 3.511-515; DeWitt 
(1941). 
 Str. 4.6.3. 
- 273 - 
frequently in Augustan literature,
 and indeed Livy emphasises that no road existed in 
the Alps before Hercules.
 The nature of the site, which clearly signifies the historical 
importance of the route through the Alps, serves to link Augustus to Hercules as the 
founder of the road, and victor over the landscape.
 That the monument serves as an 
honorific dedication to Augustus is suggested by the dedicatory inscription and the 
possible statue that stood at the top.
The monument in the Alps offers a clear message of Roman control over the 
landscape in its relationship to the Roman road, and placement overlooking land and 
sea, yet it also expresses Roman imperium through Augustus as a heroised figure, 
contrary to the display at Rome.
 In this respect Roman imperialism is expressed as 
dependent on the traditions and history of the location. I will now turn to consider the 
relationship between the inscription and the physical setting of the monument. 
Echoing the Monumental Landscape in the Inscription 
Plinys account of the Alpine trophy only focuses on the inscription because of 
its ability to delineate a landscape: its place within Plinys text is after a long 
description of the measurements and different ethnic groups of the Alpine territory.
For Pliny the inscription illustrates how geography can express Roman imperium.
What Plinys quotation of the inscription does not show is that clear visual divisions 
were made between the grammatical units. I will next consider how these work within 
 Verg. Aen. 6.801-803; Hor. Carm. 3.39-12, 3.14.1-4; Binninger (2006a) 190ff. 
 Livy 5.34: Alpes...nulladum via, quod quidem continens memoria sit, nisi de Hercule fabulis credere 
libet, superatas. 
 Binninger (2004); Binninger (2006a). 
 See n. 890 above. 
 See pp.244 - 249 above. 
 Plin. HN 3.132-136. Pliny gives no details about the monument besides its location and inscription. 
 Carey (2003) 36.  
- 274 - 
the context of the monument to articulate a message of Roman imperium and Augustus 
victory over the Alps, and then consider why pax is absent from this message. 
The placement of the trophy over, and within, the Alpine territory is stressed in 
the inscription. The enumeration of the gentes, the explanation for the dedication of the 
trophy (quod...gentes Alpinae omnes...sunt redactae), records the geographical extent of 
imperium achieved under Augustus command. The inscription claims that the gentes 
Alpinae covered the land from the mare superum to the mare inferum: that is, from the 
Adriatic Sea, on the east coast of Italy, to the Tyrrhenian Sea on the west coast. The 
gentes appear to be listed in some sense of geographical order, beginning with the 
Trumpilini (from Valle Trompia between Lago dIseo and Lago di Garda), curving up 
through the mountain range as far east as Salzburg, past Lake Constance, down through 
the Alpine range to Vence (Figure 133). In a broad geographical sense the list moves 
from east to west, covering the curve of the Alps.
 The location of the monument 
marks, as it were, the terminus of the enumerated gentes devictae. It should be noted 
that the list of gentes are only those who have been conquered;
 certainly, only six of 
the fourteen Cottian civitates, listed on the arch at Susa as part of a Roman prefecture in 
the Alps, are listed on the trophy as gentes devictae.
 Thus the inscription propagates 
the image of the extent of Roman imperium in terms of military conquest.  
As has been discussed above,
 the inscription facade and the sculptural 
trophies are a focal point, and thus should be seen as directing the viewers 
understanding of the monument. The formula of the dedication to Augustus by the 
senate is not in itself unusual, for there is evidence for similar dedications, such as the 
 Arnaud (2004) 537. 
 Arnaud (2004). 
 See p. 286 below. 
 See p. 256 above. 
- 275 - 
arch at Arminium and inscriptions from Rome.
 However, what is striking about the 
La Turbie inscription, compared with those from Rome, is that the dedicatee procedes 
the dedicators.
 The dedication at La Turbie not only emphasises Augustus active 
role (quod eius ductu auspiciique) in the expansion of peoples under Roman imperium, 
but also his role as recipient of honour. The location of the monument outside Rome in 
a recently conquered area, which, according to Strabo and Ammianus, had a tradition of 
hero cult of Hercules,
 must have some influence on the message of the inscription.
Whilst the inscription is a message from the imperial centre, it is a message that speaks 
within the local context, using the setting and history of the place to engage its 
audience. It is through Augustus, as the cult figure, that the message of Roman control 
is articulated within the context of the site. 
 As has been noted, the inscription consists of two different letter sizes. 
Furthermore, the remains indicate that there was a larger interlinear gap between the 
last line of the dedication and the first line of the enumeration of the gentes than 
between other lines.
 The dedication thus dominated the inscription, and was 
separated clearly from the explanation of the dedication. This separation articulates a 
visual subjugation of the gentes, thus emphasising the fact that they are sub imperium 
populi Romani, as they are listed below the Senatus Populusque Romanus. 
 The dual nature of the monument and inscription, hero cult and Roman conquest 
commemorated together, raises the question of the intended audience. It is clear that the 
monument was intended to commemorate the conquest of the Alps as an area within 
 ILS 84: senatus populusq[ue Romanus / imp. Caesari divi f. Augusto imp. Sept.] / Cos. Sept. Designat. 
Octavom V[ia Flamini]A [et reliquei]S / celeberrimeis Italiae vieis consilio [et sumptib]VS [eius mu]niteis; 
at Rome: ILS 81 (see p. 109 above), 83 (an altar with a Victory holding a shield). 
 The same pattern is found on the arch at Susa, see p. 277 below. 
 See p. 267 above. 
 The monument appears to be the first dedicated to a man rather than god: Picard (1949) 154-155. 
 See pp. 258-259 above. 
- 276 - 
Roman control, yet the idea of hero cult suggests an interaction at a more local level. 
Of course, the use of a Latin inscription as the focal point of the monument suggests an 
audience who could read Latin, or at the very least, recognise it. However, epigraphic 
evidence for the use of Latin in the area of La Turbie is sparse. A large base, c. 1m in 
height and a little more in width, carrying a dedicatory inscription: [imp. C]aesari / 
Augusto, does not tell us who made the dedication, only that it must have been 
considered appropriate to do so in the area.
 Yet, it should be remembered that whilst 
the site was clearly of local significance prior to the Roman conquest, it was not a 
populated centre, but rather a monumentualised section of the road. Milestones are 
evidence of Roman control of the area and the route from 13 B.C. onwards, and whilst 
we cannot affirm that they could be read by all, they do suggest that a number of their 
viewers would understand them, particularly owing to their formulaic nature.
* * * 
The victories won over the vast Alpine area are commemorated in a single 
monument set up on the main route through the region. The monument articulates 
Roman perspective of control over the Alpine landscape to a multivalent audience 
(particularly considering the use of hero cult to express Augustus role). Unlike the 
earlier victory monument at Nikopolis, pax won over the area was not celebrated. This 
absence may suggest that pax was at this time and in this context a fundamentally 
Roman concept employed in a civic setting, in order to explain and express imperium. 
 CIL V 7818. Hussler (2002) 73 on the use and meaning of Latin for the local population under the 
Principate. 
 Petron. Sat, 58: sed lapidarias litteras scio. There is evidence for a Roman military presence in the 
form of two tombstones, one of which mentions the cohors Alpinorum,: P. Variu[s] / C. f. Vo[l(tinia)] / 
Rusticus V[i]/annesis m[il(es)] / cohortis A[lp(inorum) hic situs e[st] (CIL V 7820). The soldier was likely 
recruited from the Alpine region, though his father appears to have been a citizen. 
- 277 - 
Whilst this concept of pax was extremely important at Rome at the time, it was clearly 
not necessary or relevant for the discourse of Roman imperialism to the conquered 
territories. The pacification of the Alps was represented, at La Turbie, as the 
subjugation of the area to the power of Rome. 
In the context of such a message of subjugation from the centre, it is worth 
turning to look at provincial perspectives on the pacification, to see whether the 
message of pax augusta was taken up or not, and what such perspectives tell us about 
how communities choose to interact with Rome and the means used. 
- 278 - 
Section Three 
Provincial Perspectives in the West: Alternatives to Peace? 
Altars to pax augusta are found in Italy, at Praeneste (Figure 134), and at Narbo 
(Figure 135). At Praeneste, the colony erected an altar decorated on all four sides with 
garlands and bucrania and inscribed on the front and back sides: paci august(ae) / 
sacrum / Decuriones populusque / coloniae praenestin(ae).
 The altar at Narbo was 
dedicated by T. Domitius Romulus in fulfilment of a vow: paci aug(ustae) / T. Domitius 
Romulus / votum posuit quod / fidecommissum Phoebum liberu(m) / recepit inscribed 
within an oak wreath,
 whilst laurel branches decorate the sides and an oak garland 
and bucrania the back of the altar. It seems plausible that both altars were a response to 
the altar erected at Rome, and that they offer different perspectives on the concept.
 Weinstock has argued that it is only in their inscription that either altar is 
specific to pax, and not in their decoration.
 Certainly, the altar at Praeneste is a 
 CIL XIV 2898: the other side reads: Paci August(ae) / Sacrum / Decurio(nes) Populusque / Coloniae 
Praenest(inae); Agnoli (2002) 241-243. 
 CIL XII 4335. CIL states that Paci Aug was inscribed on a shield, though from the image in Esprandieu 
(1907) 362 n. 558 it appears just to be a simple civica corona. 
 Gayraud (1981) 356 dates the altar to 26-25 B.C. on the grounds that the iconography relates to the 
honours Augustus received from the senate in 27 B.C. (RG 34), comparing it to the copy of the clipeus 
virtutis set up at Arles in 26 B.C. However, he notes that the altar at Narbo is a private dedication and 
not an official cult. Gayraud reads the inscription as Paci Aug(usti), though CIL and Revue Epigraphique 
take it to read Paci Aug(ustae). Fears (1981) 887-889 highlights the fact that only Augusta is attested 
with certainty under Augustus, whilst Augusti is first attested in the coinage of Claudius. He goes on to 
emphasise that owing to the high level of abbreviations (Aug. And August.) in the epigraphic and 
numismatic fields it is extremely difficult for us to determine whether the adjective or genitive is 
intended, and whether the average Roman or even the markers of imperial propaganda saw a 
distinction between the adjectival and the genitival forms. The first securely dated example of Pax 
Augusta is the consecration of the altar at Rome by the senate, dedicated in 9 B.C.: RG 13, and the Fasti 
Praenestini (EJ
46); notably  the Fasti Amiternini, Antiates (EJ
47), and Caeretani (EJ
46) give the 
abbreviated form: ara Pacis. Aug. 
 Weinstock (1960) 56. 
- 279 - 
simple display popular in religious contexts during the Augustan period;
 indeed it 
was paired with a virtually identical altar which was dedicated to securitas augusta.
Furthermore, the inscriptions on these two Praeneste altars appear to be fitted around 
the decoration and the abbreviations are not consistent: most notably the T of paci 
august(ae) is taller than the other letters on one side, and shorter than the others on the 
opposite side, because of the horn of the bucranium, whilst the last two lines of all four 
inscriptions are fitted around the garland ribbons. For the colony of Praeneste the 
dedication of an altar to the Augustan quality of pax was a commemoration of the 
security and prosperity established, as the twin altar to securitas confirms. The visual 
programme of the altars does express general ideas of sacrifice and abundance, yet it is 
the inscriptions which are distinctive to the message of imperial ideology.  
 At Narbo, the personal dedication of Titus Romulus demonstrates a more select 
visual criteria to express an understanding of pax augusta. Phoebus, thought to be the 
son of Titus freed into his possession, does not have citizenship,
 whilst Titus is 
distinguished by the tria nomina. Furthermore, the fathers name is far more prominent 
than the sons. Titus demonstrates that he is buying into a Roman display of 
empire:
 the combination of the laurels and the corona civica are reminiscent of the 
honours granted to Augustus by the senate.
 The altar at Narbo indicates an 
understanding of how victory and civil harmony constituted pax augusta. This altar 
 Compare to the architrave reliefs from the temple of Apollo Sosianus at Rome and the garlands on 
altars from Emerita and Carteia: Ramage (1998) 471-472.  
 CIL XIV 2899: Securit(ati) Aug(ustae) / Sacrum / Decurone(es) Populusuqe / Coloniae Praenestin(ae) / 
Securitat(i) Aug(ustae) / Sacrum / Decurion(es) Populusque / Coloniae Praenestin(ae); Agnoli (2002) 235-
 CIL XII 4335 Mommsen: Phoebum crediderim Romuli filium naturalem fuisse eumque a domino patri 
ita legatum esse, ut eum per fideicommissum manumitti iuberet itque patrem eum patroni iure 
quodammodo recepisse; Allmer (1881) 236 for the meaning of liberum. 
 Revell (2009) xi: how buying into Roman culture on the part of [...] provincial communities became 
one of the ways in which the Roman empire was maintained. 
 RG 34 cf. n. 974 above. 
- 280 - 
offers us a glimpse of how pax augusta could be understood and used in the West, by a 
new Roman citizen, after the pacification. There was clearly an understanding and 
display of pax augusta in the West.
 The limited presence of pax augusta in the West appears in communities that 
already had a strong Roman presence. However, there were other ways in which the 
pacification of the West was commemorated by local agents, and the arch at Segusio 
(modern day Susa) offers an alternative perspective from that of pax augusta or 
subjugation. 
The Arch at Segusio 
The arch was erected at the western limits of Segusio (Figure 136), a town in the 
Italian Alps, over a north-south road linking Italy to Gaul (Map 6). The monument was 
dedicated to Augustus in 9/8 B.C. by Marcus Iulius Cottius, son of king Donnus, 
praefectus ceivitatium. The single freestanding arch is made of a local white marble 
(quarried at either Foresto or Chianocco)
 with a few elements (the base and column 
plinths) made of a grey limestone. Three-quarter columns with Corinthian capitals stand 
at each corner, supporting the entablature on which a frieze was carved on all four 
 The colonies of Pax Iulia (Beja) and Forum Iulii Colonia Octavanorum Pacensis Classica (Frjus) are 
evidence of the concept of pax as a celebration of victory in the West, however their foundations are 
connected to the pax Augustus celebrated after the battle of Actium.  Forum Iulii was re-founded from 
the Iulian colony in 30 B.C. for the fleet veterans: Ramage (1997) 121.  The colony of Pax Iulia has been 
assigned by some to Caesar: Ramage (1998) 440 esp. n. 38 and n. 169; Weinstock (1960) 46, and by 
others to Augustus colonies after Actium: Faria (2001). I disagree with Ramage (1998) n. 38 that pax is 
best associated with Caesar...because it was not a particularly Augustan virtue.  Str. 3.2.15 in fact 
refers to the colony of Pax Augusta in the Celtic country, possibly identifiable with Pax Iulia. 
 De Maria (1988) 329 states that the marble is Foresto; see Ferzini (1997) for an overview of the 
quarry and the stone it produces. Barello (2008) 431 and n. 2 states that the marble is Chianocco.  These 
marbles are very similar in appearance, having undergone the same metamorphic evolution: Borghi, et 
al. (2009).  The quarry at Foresto is perhaps the more likely site being nearer to Susa than Chianocco, 
and also producing marble for a dedicatory inscription to Agrippa found c. 60m from the arch: Barello 
(2011) see p. 294 below. 
- 281 - 
sides, 0.52m in height and a total of 33.20m in length.
 The frieze depicts on the north 
and south sides scenes of a sacrifice (suovetaurilia), and on the west side what has been 
interpreted as a foedus ceremony,
 or census.
 The east side is badly damaged, but 
appears to depict a similar scene to the west side.
 The arch is the only extant example 
of a narrative frieze on an Augustan arch.
 Above the entablature, on both the north 
and south faces, is the inscription dedicating the arch to Augustus. The original bronze 
inlaid letters were lost in the Middle Ages, and although some sections of the stone 
have fallen away, it has been possible to reconstruct the inscription from the 
countersunk letters (Figure 137).  
A drawing of the arch at Susa made in 1666 reflects the belief that the 
monument must have been erected to commemorate Augustus victory in the Alps 
(Figure 138).
 The drawing gives the dedicatory inscription of the arch over six lines, 
as opposed to the actual four, with the word VICTOR clearly visible in the sixth line. 
This reading is incorrect, and may plausibly reflect a desire to see in an arch dedicated 
to Augustus a triumphal monument commemorating his victorious achievements. The 
actual arch presents the conquest over the Alps in a different light.
In this section I will make an analysis of the inscription, which is crucial to 
interpreting the purpose of the monument in the eyes of its dedicators, and will argue 
against the traditional and more popular reading of the text. Once I have established my 
reading of the inscription, I will examine it in relation to the visual display of the arch, 
 Prieur (1982) 454. The frieze measures 10.75m in length on the north and south sides, and 5.85m on 
the east and west sides. 
 De Maria (1988) 329; Felletti Maj (1961) 135-6; Calvi (1976) 121-122 describes the scene as a 
negotiation of amicitia. 
 Prieur (1982) 456. 
 I will argue below p. 288 for the similarities between the east and west sides. 
 Calvi (1976). The frieze will be discussed in detail pp.287-293 below. 
 Forray (1994) 176. 
 Calvi (1976) 121-122 argues that the arch did not carry a trophy because it did not celebrate triumph.  
- 282 - 
in particular the narrative frieze, in order to further explore the viewpoint of the 
dedicants and the messages they wished to publicise. I will then consider the arch 
within the wider physical context of Susa and the Alpine region, and argue that the 
monument was designed to illustrate the route connecting Italy to Gaul, and the place of 
the Cottian Alps within the Roman empire. Whilst the arch does not explicitly engage 
with the concept pax, it does demonstrate the acceptance of a relationship between 
Roman imperium and the local communities, articulated through the making of a pact. 
* * * 
 The inscription raises several questions about the position of the dedicators and 
the administrative arrangements of the Alpine region involved in the commemoration. 
An analysis of the text will help us to understand the perception of the pacification of 
the Alps from the point of view of the communities involved, and how they presented 
The four line inscription on the arch reads: 
Imp. Caesari Augusto Divi f. Pontifici Maxumo Tribunic. Potestate XV Imp 
XIII / M. Iulius regis Donni f. Cottius Praefectus ceivitatium quae 
subscriptae sunt Segoviorum, Segusinorum / Belacorum, Caturigum, 
Medullorum, Tebaviorum, Adanatium, Savincatium, Egdiniorum, 
Veaminiorum, Venismorum, Ieriorum, Vesubianorum, Quadiatium et 
ceivitates quae sub eo praefecto fuerunt.
 CIL V 7231. 
- 283 - 
For Imperator Caesar Augustus son of the deified (Julius), Pontifex 
Maximus, holding tribunician power for the 15
 time, Imperator for the 13
time, Marcus Iulius Cottius, son of king Donnus, praefectus of the 
communities which are written below  the Segovii, the Segusii, the Belaci, 
the Caturiges, the Medulli, the Tebavii, the Adantii, the Savincates, the 
Egdini, the Veamini, the Venismi, the Ierii, the Vesubiani and the Quadiates 
 and the communities that were in his charge as praefectus (dedicated/gave 
this).
I will now examine the inscription, line by line, to construct a picture of the 
administration of the region and its position within the empire after the conquest of the 
Alps. I will emphasise the relationship created between the Cottian communities and 
Roman imperium, established through a pact, and their integration into the Roman 
world. 
Praefectus Ceivitatium 
 In the first line of the inscription Cottius presents himself as a Roman citizen 
(using tria nomina)
 with the title of praefectus ceivitatium, and his use of this 
terminology is important for our understanding of his self-presentation. Furthermore, he 
distinguishes himself in his titulature from his father, whom he names as Donnus rex.
To understand the nature of this distinction between rex and praefectus I will examine 
 Trans. adapted from Levick (1985) 20; see Ferrero (1901) for plates of the inscription. 
 Marcus Iulius Cottius: Prieur (1968) 84, 117-118; Cresci Marrone (2004) 52-53 suggests that Cottius 
took his nomen from Augustus and his praenomen from M. Agrippa, who was also honoured in Susa 
with a dedicatory inscription by the sons of Cottius: AE 1996, 971; Letta (1976) 44-52, see p. 294 and n. 
1064 below for a discussion of the inscription. 
 Donnus rex is also referred to in an inscription from Turin (AE 1994, 753), see p. 282 below.  
- 284 - 
the evidence for Donnus position as king of the region and then turn to look at the 
position occupied by Cottius before and after the pacification of the area by Augustus. 
 There is little testimony of Donnus direct relations with Rome, although he 
appears much later in one of Ovids poems from exile as the progenitor of an Alpine 
dynasty: progenies alti fortissima Donni.
 Nevertheless, there is evidence to suggest 
that Roman coinage influenced self-presentation on the first century B.C. Celtic coinage 
from Lyon and the area of the river Drme. The coins have been assigned to several 
chieftains, including Donnus, from the region of the Rhne valley and the 
French/Italian Alps based on names and ethnics on the coinage.
 These Celtic coins 
appear to imitate Roman denarii depicting Roma on the obverse and the Dioscuri on the 
reverse (Figure 139),
 though only a single rider is depicted on the reverse of the 
Celtic coins, which suggests an adaption of the Roman image to fit with the importance 
of the horse and the horseman as a symbol of power and kingship (Figure 140).
individual names of different chieftains appear on the reverse over the period. A 
chronological order of the named individuals has been suggested, based on the gradual 
debasement of the silver content: Comanus (2.20-2.15g); Calitix (2.12g); Eburovix 
(2.10g); Auscrocos (2.00g); Donnus (1.90g).
 Whilst a variety of different ethnics 
appear on the obverse throughout the series, the legend DVRNACOS, and later 
 Ov. Ex Ponto 4.7.29; 4.7.6: Alpinis iuvenis regibus orte. See Helzle (1989) 157-158; Syme (1997) 82. 
Some scholars have assumed that Donnus received the citizenship during Caesars Gallic campaigns 
based on an inscription of a freedman and freedwoman of C. Iulius Donnus: Oberziner (1900) 162; 
Braund (1984) 40, however the inscription may equally refer to Cottius son Donnus, known from an 
inscription at Susa, see n. 1064 below. 
 De La Tour and Fischer (1992) catalogue the coins as de la Valle du Rhne; Long (1849) 357; Rey 
(1898) 234; Hucher (1868-1874) Part II: 77 and 86 for the different hordes and find spots, and possible 
dates. 
 Hucher (1868-1874) Part II: 86; for some Republican examples see RRC index Types, Dioscuri, 861. 
 Creighton (2000) 22-28. 
 Hucher (1868-1874) Part II: 78ff for the chronological order on the coins; see also Bertone (2001) 16. 
silver content. 
- 285 - 
DVRNACVS, is used by three different chieftains: Eburovix,
 Auscrocos,
Donnus.
 The later form DVRNACVS appears only on Donnus coinage and Bertone 
suggests that this latinized form indicates a greater Roman influence and dates the 
coin to after the Gallic war.
The imitation of Roman Republican coinage suggests the possible circulation, or 
at least awareness of Roman coins of this type in the region, and an understanding of 
such images as symbols of power. The influence of the gold Macedonian coinage of 
Philip II on Celtic coinage is well attested, and the images became deeply embedded 
and stylised.
 By contrast the monnaies au cavalier are not heavily stylised, but 
passively imitate the Rome prototype.
 This may represent a recent introduction of 
the images into the Celtic coinage, and the adoption of the image may indeed indicate a 
growing awareness of Rome as a power with which to align oneself. Certainly the 
Romans perceived the corridor through the Alps to Gaul as having been opened up 
because of the campaigns of Caesar.
 In the wake of the Gallic war, gold coinage in 
the region disappeared, to be replaced by various series in silver and bronze. Scheers 
associates the variety of new coins in the Belgic Gallic region to the break-up of the 
civitas into pagi, a process which had already begun during the war with the Meldi 
declaring their interdependence and minting rights from the Suessiones in 57 B.C.
 Eburovix is connected to the area of the Ambarres on the France side of the Alps, through the ethnics 
on his coins. 
 No ethnics appear on his coins. 
 ESIANNI II appears on some of Donnus coins, which may be connected to the Vesubiani, who are 
named on the arch at Susa. 
 Bertone (2001) 16. 
 Scheers (1981); Fischer (1991); Creighton (2000) 26-28. 
 Bertone (2001) 15. 
 Cic. Pis. 33: cuius ego imperium, non Alpium vallum contra ascensum transgressionemque 
the Alps against the ascent and crossing of the Gauls); cf. Cic. de Prov. Cons 34; Petronius Satyricon 122. 
 Scheers (1981) 20. 
- 286 - 
The new minting practices during and after the Gallic war may suggest a political 
context within which the Celtic coins were minted.   
The title DVRNACOS/DVRNACVS does not appear to refer to any ethnic, as 
these appear in an abbreviated form.
 Furthermore it is found on the coins of 
chieftains associated with different geographical areas. Hucher suggested the possible 
associations of the title with a confederation.
 The coins suggest to us that whilst 
images appear to be copied from Roman coins, the Celtic coins asserted a local power 
base. The Alpine chieftains appear to have sought to reassert their authority in the 
region at a time when the presence of Rome was becoming more apparent. 
Cottius himself, as king, offered a great deal of resistance to Roman domination 
of the Alps: 
aggeribus cedit Alpium Cottiarum: quas Rex Cottius, perdomitiis Gallis 
solus in angustiis latens inviaque locorum asperitate confisus, lenito tandem 
in amicitiam Octaviani receptus principis.
It gave way to the mass of the Cottian Alps, where, at the time when the 
Gauls had been subdued, king Cottius alone lay hidden in the mountain 
passes and put his faith in the harsh inaccessibility of the location. Finally, 
when his pride was placated, he was received into the friendship of the 
princeps Octavianus. 
 Bertone (2001) 18. 
 Hucher (1868-1874) part II: 83-85 esp. 85. 
 Amm. Marc. 15.10.2. 
- 287 - 
Prior to the amicitia with Augustus, Cottius was seen, at least by Vitruvius, as 
possessing a kingdom: he speaks of a Cotti regnum in his De Architectura, written no 
later than 25 B.C.
 Later authors associated the Cottian territory far more with a 
kingdom than a Roman prefecture: Suetonius records that Tiberius sent a cohort from 
Rome, and another from the regnum Cotti to deal with a riot in Pollentina.
 Cottius 
inscription clearly defines him not as a rex but as a praefectus. 
 The title praefectus c(e)ivitatium continued to be used by Cottius successor, his 
son Donnus,
 as an inscription from Turin illustrates: 
[C. Iulius Cotti f. D]onni re[gis n. Donnus] Praef. [ci]v[itatium omnium 
quibus pa]ter eius praefuit / [M. Iulius Donni f. C]otti n. [Cottius port]icum 
[c]um [suis ornamentis et do]mus dederunt.
C. Iulius Donnus, son of Cottius, grandson of king Donnus, praefectus of all 
the communities over which his father presided / [and] M. Iulius Cottius, 
son of Donnus, grandson of Cottius, gave this porticus with its ornaments 
and building.
 Vitr. 8.3.17: Item Alpibus in Cotti regno est aqua. Fleury (1990) xvii-xxiv suggests a date range of 35-
25 B.C. for various editions of the treatise; see also Granger (1983) xiv for a date prior to 27 B.C. 
 Suet. Tib. 37; Laffi (2007) 93; cf. Ammianus 10.15.2. 
 Cottius is known to have at least two sons, Donnus and Cottius, attested in a dedication at Susa to 
M. Agrippa: M. Agrippa L. f. / [cos III tr]ib potest / - - - - - - - - / Don[nu]s et Cotti[us] / Cotti f. (AE 1996, 
971). Letta (1994) and Vota (2004) n. 26 restore Donnus as the son of Cottius in the Turin inscription (n. 
1013 below), whilst Mennella (1978) argues for the identification of Cottius II.  
 AE 1994, 753; Letta (1976) 53-56; 62-65; Letta (1994). 
 Letta (1976) 63-65 argues that the domus might refer to the stage building, suggesting a restoration 
of actorum domus. 
- 288 - 
Donnus emphasises the continunity between the territorial extent of his fathers 
praefecture and his own: pater eius praefuit.
 It is also notable that this inscription 
was a dedication at the theatre in Turin, a Roman colony, and thus indicates that the title 
praefectus civitatium was a self-confirmation to a Roman audience of the Cottian 
dynasty within the Roman empire, as an administrative authority. 
 The title of praefectus civitatium is used for other administrative districts: C. 
Baebius Atticus, who held both the positions of Praefectus Civitatium Moesiae et 
Trebelliae and Praefectus Civitatium in Alpibus Maritumis, followed a military career 
path,
 holding his position for a fixed term. Praefecti were usually fixed term: the 
Praefectus Aegypti was in office for an average period of three years.
 It seems 
plausible, by contrast, that the Cottian prefecture was not fixed term, and was possibly 
hereditary: Donnus is praefectus over the communities which his father governed, and 
Cottius II received governance of his  ,1018 although he received a different 
title and recognition from Rome. Indeed, what is important in the representation of 
power of the Cottian dynasty is the hereditary aspect of authority (filius Donni regi; 
praefectus civitatium... quibus pater eius praefuit;   ), combined with 
 The continuity and affirmation of the Cottian territory is also illustrated by Dio Cass. 60.24.4:  
     ,       , ,  
    (and he increased the ancestral domain for Marcus Iulius Cottius, which lay 
in the part of the Alps which bears his family name, and he named him king for the first time). 
 CIL V 1838, 1839: C(aio) Baebio P(ublii) f(ilio) Cla(udia tribu) / Attico / IIvir(o) i(ure) d(icundo) 
Primopil(o) / Leg(ionis) V Macedonic(ae), Praef(ecto) / civitatium Moesiae et Treballiae, Praef(ecto) / 
civitat(ium) / in Alpibus Maritumis, Tr(ibuno) Mil(itum) Coh(ortis) / VIII Pr(aetoriae), Primopil(o) iter(um) 
Procurator(i) / Ti(berii) Claudi Caesari Aug(usti) Germanici / in Norico / civitas / Saevatum et 
Laiancorum. Baebius probably served as praefectus of Moesia et Treballia under Tiberius, and probably 
acted as some form of district praefectus under the Legatus Moesiae C. Poppeaus Sabinus: Sutherland 
(1941) 78. 
 Brunt (1975) 126-127. The Praefectus Aegypti is a somewhat unusual office, having command of a 
legionary force: Stevenson (CAH X) 215; Brunt (1975). 
 Dio Cass. 60.24.4. 
- 289 - 
the usual aspect of Roman prefecture; that of territorial control.
 The integrity of the 
Cottian territory is stessed by his son. 
 The importance of territorial control is emphasised by Cottius listing the 
communities which comprise his prefecture. Cottius defines his prefecture through the 
communities under his control. Indeed, the section of the inscription which reads quae 
subscriptae sunt Segoviorum...Quadiatium is a clause dependent on praefectus 
ceivitatium. In the latter half of the inscription the co-dedicants are defined by their 
position within that prefecture: ceivitates quae sub eo praefecto fuerunt. Both these 
dedicants are defined by their respective relative clauses. It is necessary at this point to 
briefly deal with the more popular theory in the scholarship, which argues that the 
second relative clause refers not to the communities already named and listed as the 
ceivitates of Cottius prefecture, but instead to another group of communities that were 
under Cottius prefecture before the dedication of the arch, but who had at the time of 
dedication become former Cottian communities.
 This understanding of the 
inscription is the result of a too literal reading of the perfect tense in the second relative 
clause: quae sub eo praefecto fuerunt.
 However, use of the perfect fits in well with 
 This hereditary-territorial aspect is perhaps illustrated by Strabos use of the term    
(4.1.3, 4.6.6, 5.1.11), which seems to mark the area as somehow distinct and different from other area 
regions, which were defined by tribal names and ethnics. 
 This reading has been perpetuated by attempts to solve an anomaly between the number of 
communities listed on the arch and the number of Cottian communities cited by Pliny as not listed on 
the Alpine Trophy, since they were non hostiles (Pin. HN 3.138), when six of those listed on the arch do 
appear on the trophy. There are two manuscript traditions which give the number of non hostiles 
Cottiae civitates as 12 or 15 (see Nenci (1951a)). Obviously on either reading of Plinys text, the numbers 
do not add up  only eight of the communities on the arch can be termed non hostiles, since they are 
not on the trophy. Scholars have argued that Plinys reference includes not only the eight communities 
from the arch, but an additional number of the ceivitates quae sub eo praefecto fuerunt, which were 
former communities: see Prieur (1968) 74-75; Letta (2004); Letta (2001) 157-158; Letta (1976) 157-
160; Roth-Congs (1993-1994) 87; Laffi (1966) 176-177; Nenci (1951a). The passage of Pliny has 
provided scholars with an argument for understanding the fuerunt as referring to a past state and 
detracted from the study of the inscription in the context of the arch and the frieze. 
 Barruol (1969) 42. 
- 290 - 
the practice of setting dedications in the past tense (dedicaverunt/dederunt).
 The first 
relative clause: quae subscriptae sunt, whilst a passive construction, does not only mean 
those who have been written below, but also encompasses a continual present: those 
who are written below, because it refers to the inscription, which continues to exist in 
the present, as well as at the moment of dedication. Similarly, in the second relative 
clause, fuerunt as an historical statement defines the communities that comprised 
Cottius prefecture, when he was praefectus.  
In light of the representation of the dedicating ceivitates as comprising the 
communities of Cottius prefecture (sub eo praefecto), it makes sense that the et 
ceivitates refers back to that group of communities already listed in the genitive: they 
do not need to be listed again when they are presented as the dedicants.
 If the phrase 
sub eo praefecto fuerunt were to refer to, in some way, ex-Cottian communities, the 
scholarship has never sought to explain fully their role within the monument beyond 
their place in the inscription.
 In the context of the monument, the mention of ex-
Cottian communities would be strange since the monument presents the integration of 
Cottius and his prefecture into the Roman world. These former communities would 
have been removed from the form of administration Cottius had adopted after the 
pacification of the Alps, but on this reading they would still be participating with his 
prefecture in the dedication of the arch. Yet, if they are dedicators it is strange that they 
are far less prominent on the monument than the named Cottian communities, who are, 
on the reading I give above, clearly demonstrating their involvement in the erection of 
the arch: the absence from the inscription of any elucidation of the identification of 
these ex-communities beyond their participation in Cottius prefecture would seem 
 Fvrier (1975-1976) 275 n.23: Le fuerunt me parat entran par lhabitude quasi constante des 
ddicaces au pass. 
 Fvrier (1975-1976) 275; see also Barruol (1969); Letta (2004) 538. 
 Prieur (1968) 75 esp. n. 2; Letta (1976), Letta (2001), Letta (2004). 
- 291 - 
perverse. The reading I give above presents a clearer interpretation of the inscription 
than the traditional reading: my reading gives two dedicants, both defined by their 
relative clauses. 
 It is notable that the list of the names of the fourteen communities comes within 
the first relative clause, presenting them as subjects of Cottius, rather than in their 
position as co-dedicants of the monument. The listing of the communities delineates 
Cottius territory, and confirms the position of those communities under Cottius by the 
very act of inscribing their names (subscriptae sunt), similar to the inscribing of the 
names of the gentes devictae at La Turbie, or the names of the sixty Gallic tribes on the 
altar to Roma and Augustus at Lugdunum acts as a confirmation of Roman control over 
those tribes and their position as subjects of Rome. In 12 B.C. an attempted census of 
the Gallic communities resulted in an uprising. Drusus invited the leading men of the 
communities to Lugdunum to resolve the tensions.
 The altar which was set up 
recorded both the names and the images of the sixty tribes:     
           . 1026 
Although the census was the root of the trouble in Gaul, the representation of the tribes 
in word and visual display upon the altar acted as confirmation of that census, and of 
Roman control over the area. It is worth noting that the act of census is also suggested 
in the visual display of the frieze at Susa. In this respect Cottius has appropriated 
Roman imperial discourse, which articulates control through the states ability to list, 
arrange, classify and measure, as the cases of La Turbie and the altar at Lugdunum 
illustrate. It should be noted however, that whilst the gentes devictae appear to be listed 
 Livy Per. 138-139. 
 Str. 4.3.2: and there is a noteworthy altar, which has an inscription of the tribes, sixty in number, 
and images of these tribes, one of each tribe. Tac. Ann. 3.44 records sixty-four tribes; Fishwick (1987) 
101 suggests that the discrepancy in number might to be owing to later the addition of Germanic tribes. 
- 292 - 
in a rough geographical order from the Adriatic coast to the Tyrrhenian sea, there is no 
obvious geographical ordering of the Cottian communities.
 It is also notable that six of the Cottian civitates are also listed as gentes devictae 
at La Turbie.
 Some scholars have sought to explain their presence on the two 
monuments by a revolt between 9 and 6 B.C. in which the six communities were 
involved.
 This explanation however seems a little tenuous, particularly given the 
narrow chronological gap.
 Furthermore, it ignores the fact the Cottius himself was 
initially resistant to Rome, even continuing to fight after the Gallic tribes had been 
conquered.
 What the scholarship has failed to fully articulate is that we are dealing 
with two quite different representations of these communities  the six communities 
labelled as gentes devictae by Rome were in no way marked out as distinct amongst the 
civitates at Susa. The presentation at Susa, irrespective of the reality of the situation, 
was that of a cohesive group of communities, along with their governor, who presented 
themselves in terms of Roman power structures, and as being integrated into a Roman 
system, rather than being subjugated to it. Cottius, like his father, appropriated Roman 
expressions of power to confirm his authority, yet he also demonstrated his integration 
into the Roman system, whereas Donnus, perhaps, sought to distinguish himself in 
order to redefine and reconfirm his position of within the region.  
 Prieur (1968) 75-83 for the locations of each of the civitates. There may be some geographical 
groupings of certain civitates, such as the Savincates, Quariates and Brigiani, who would later be 
assigned to a separate, or perhaps subordinate praefectura (CIL XII 80; Letta (2001)). It is also notable 
that the Segusini are not named first. 
 The Caturiges, Medulli, Adanates (Edenates, Egdinii (Ecdini), Veamini and Vesubiani. See p. 285 
above. 
 Laffi (1966) 176, n. 529; Nenci (1951a) also see this revolt as an explanation for Plinys XII Cottianae 
civitates non hostiles, in that only four of the six revolting communities were restored to Cottius. 
 Indeed, if the trophy at La Turbie was planned at the same time as the building of the via Iulia 
Augusta, it is plausible to assume that those listed on the trophy were subdued prior to 13/12 B.C. 
 Amm. Marc. 15.10.2. 
- 293 - 
A Visual Narrative 
The relationship between the frieze and the inscription illustrates the role of the 
fourteen listed communities in Cottius prefecture and the Roman empire. Indeed, for a 
full understanding of the commemorative function of the arch it is necessary to see how 
the inscription relates to the monument, most notably the narrative frieze below it.
 There is certainly a desire in previous studies of the arch to see a successive 
series of events unfurled in the narrative frieze. Prieur has interpreted the frieze as 
follows: the east side (of which he only identifies two togate figures with a capsa at the 
far right) represents the submission of the peoples in 14/13 B.C; the north represents the 
suovetaurilia offered on that occasion; the west, the census ceremony; and the south, 
the suovetaurilia closing the lustration.
 However, Prieurs interpretation cannot 
hold: firstly, his identification of the east side as lacte de soumission des 
peuplades
, is based on only two figures and therefore cannot be accepted. Secondly, 
his wish to see a submission represented there is at odds with the message of the 
inscription. I have been able, having visited the monument, to reconstruct the narrative 
units of the damaged east side. Although not exactly identical to the west side, the east 
side clearly shows the procession of figures from the right side towards the centre, 
towards what appears to be the central altar with a figure standing behind it (Figure 
141). Also at the right end of the frieze, a figure seated at a table, similar to that at both 
ends of the west frieze, is identifiable (Figure 142). It is plausible to conclude that the 
 On Brilliants interpretation of visual narrative, the frieze at Susa is not a truly visual narrative, as it 
has visual text to which it must defer: Brilliant (1984) 17. 
 Prieur (1982) 456; Prieur (1968) 196-199. 
 Prieur (1982) 456. 
- 294 - 
east and west sides represent the same narrative scene,
 just as the north and south 
sides do.
Another problem with Prieurs interpretation is that it requires the audience to 
start on the east side, which seems strange when one considers that the arch is set on a 
north-south axis over the road. Felletti Maj, who also argues that the friezes should be 
viewed successively from left to right, does start from the north side.
 However, as 
the north and south sides both carry the inscription, these two sides should be 
understood as two individual starting points from which an audience is to view the arch 
(Figure 143). The very fact that the arch was set up over a road is an indication that the 
frieze has more than one starting point; more than one way from which to approach it. 
Moreover, on each side the frieze draws the eye to the centre of the scene, and does not 
lead the viewer around the corner to the next frieze.
 The central focus of each side is 
an altar and the participants around it.
 These separate, self-contained scenes offer 
two different presentations of the process that brought about Cottius prefecture: a 
sacrifice ratifying a pact and the establishment of that pact, which includes the presence 
of the fourteen communities who are being listed not only in the inscription, but also 
into a Roman prefecture.
 Cavargna Bontosi (1994) esp. 64 has reconstructed the east side frieze. 
 The north and south sides are also not exactly identical, differing only in the presentation of the 
sacrificial animals (a bull appears on either side of the altar on the south side, whilst only one appears 
on the north), and the presence of the Dioscuri at either end of the south side, but not the north (see p. 
291 below).  
 Felletti Maj (1961) 132; see also Calvi (1976) 117. 
 An example of a frieze leading the viewer around an arch is that on lateral sides of the Arch of 
Constantine, where the action of the frieze moves from left to right, and actually begins and ends at the 
extreme ends of the long sides of the arch, separated from the action of the long side friezes by a pillar 
and column. 
 McGowen (2009) 41; Prieur (1982) 459. 
 Cavargna Allemano (2004) 115 (following Felletti Maj (1961) and beginning the reading of the frieze 
on the north side); De Maria (1988) 329; Prieur (1982) 456-7 all argue for two different suovetaurilia 
taking place. Cavargna Allemano (2004) 122 notes that the friezes are not a continuous narrative. 
- 295 - 
It is notable that all the figures on the west side wear togas. The two central 
figures (slightly larger than the rest) sit on curule chairs either side of an altar, touching 
it. This scene is commonly understood as the foedus between Cottius and Augustus, 
which resulted in the amicitia Ammianus records.
 Augustan depictions on coins of 
the foedus between Roma and Gabii show two veiled priests either side of an altar 
sacrificing a pig (Figure 144).
 The aspect of sacrifice is in fact depicted on the north 
and south sides of the arch, where only one priest presides (Figure 145). The balance of 
two equal individuals at the altar on the west side suggests the equality of the pact, 
similar to the depiction on the coin. On both sides of the altar in the foedus scene are 
three lictors, togate figures holding volumina and tabulae, and a figure at each end 
seated at a table receiving these records. The figures carrying volumina/tabulae number 
fourteen, and are agreed to represent the fourteen named ceivitates from the inscription 
(Figure 146).
 One figure holding a volumen stands behind the altar, whilst two on 
either side touch the togas of the two central seated figures, demonstrating the inclusion 
of these communities and those that follow them in the foedus. 
The clear involvement of the fourteen communities of Cottius prefecture 
emphasises the relationship between the inscription and frieze in conveying the 
message of the monument. Indeed, the presence of these communities on both the 
inscription (north and south) and frieze (east and west) means they are depicted on all 
sides of the arch, either in text or image. The frieze is a visual testimony of relations 
recorded in the inscription.
 Amm. Marc. 15.10.2. 
 RIC Aug. 363, 411. 
 Prieur (1982) 456; Prieur (1968) 197; Cavargna Allemano (2004) 117; De Maria (1988) 329. 
 Cavargna Allemano (2004) 115. 
- 296 - 
The scenes at both ends of the west side are reminiscent of the scene of census 
of the so-called altar of Domitius Ahenobarbus.
 Despite their stylistic differences the 
two friezes comprise similar thematic units. The left side of the altar depicts, moving 
towards the central altar, a cavalryman, infantry, victims, attendants, lictors and 
musicians (Figure 147). The same units are used on the north and south sides of the 
arch, although the central altar is approached from both sides (Figure 148). On the right 
side of the altar frieze a scene of census is depicted, which again comprises the same 
units as the west and east sides of the arch (Figure 149). The frieze at Susa uses 
narrative patterns that a Roman audience would understand, both in terms of the actual 
practice depicted and the visual narrative tradition of the display. Whilst the inscription 
on the arch represents the communities as part of Cottius world, the visual display, as 
with the altar at Lugdunum, represents the communities as part of the Roman world in 
their participation in a census.
 The frieze articulates the iconography of the Roman 
world through which Cottius defined and supported his position and that of the 
communities under him.
The visual display of the frieze further emphasises a strong Roman ideology, not 
only with the togate figures, but also lictors (who are often assumed to be symbols of 
 The monument is agreed to come from a statue base in the Campus Martius and comprises four 
relief panels three of which (one long and two lateral sides) are a rescued Greek relief depicting the 
marriage of Poseidon, whilst the other long side is a Roman historical relief depicting a scene of Roman 
census: Coarelli (1968); Kuttner (1993); Wnsche (1994); Stilp (2003). The possible date of the 
monument ranges from the mid-second century to the mid-first century B.C.: Kuttner (1993) gives a 
strong argument for M. Antonius who celebrated a triumph over the Cicilian pirates in 100 B.C. and was 
censor in 97 B.C., but Stilp (2003) 92 concludes that it is not possible to attribute the monument to un 
individu prcis. 
 RG 8 gives the dates of three censuses of Roman citizens held by Augustus: 28 B.C., 8 B.C. and A.D. 
14. A census of the three Gauls was carried out in 27 B.C. by Augustus (Livy Per. 134), and again in 12 
B.C. by Drusus (Livy Per. 138). 
 The civitates are depicted in togas emphasising their position as Roman citizens. However, their 
actual political status is unclear, although by Plinys time they had ius Latii (Plin. HN 3.135), which may 
have been granted at the time of the foedus: Prieur (1968) 132. 
- 297 - 
Cottius prefecture)
, and even the Dioscuri on either end of the south frieze (Figure 
150). The presence of the Dioscuri is one of the few distinct differences between the 
two main approaches to the arch. It is notable that they are the only mythological aspect 
of the frieze. Felletti Maj has suggested that the two bulls on the south frieze were to be 
sacrificed to the Dioscuri, as protectors of the equestrian order, of which Cottius was 
most likely a member, as well as the guardians of treaties.
 Mars, overseeing the 
lustratio exercitus in the Domitius Ahenobarbus relief (Figure 151), and the Dioscuri, 
may fulfil a similar function, overseeing the ratification of the treaty between Rome and 
Cottius, as well as illustrating Cottius entry into the Equestrian order as praefectus.
Yet the Dioscuri may also stand in relation to the castellum, which is thought to be the 
seat of the local dynasts both prior to the Roman conquest, and afterwards.
horseman was an important symbol of authority and power for the Celtic peoples, and it 
is possible to understand a more local reading of the naked horsemen on the arch, in 
relation to the seat of local authority. 
Yet, although the archs visual display stems from the same narrative tradition 
as the altar of Domitius Ahenobarbus, its stylistic presentation is very different.
altar frieze has a dynamic composition and proportional figures.
 The frieze of the 
 Prieur (1968) 119; Cresci Marrone (2004) 55. The lex Ursonensis 62 gives provision for two lictors 
each for the colonies duoviri. See also Stevenson (1934) CAH X, 215 on inclusion of lictors on the 
governors staff. 
 Felletti Maj (1961) 138-139; McDonnell (2006) 185, 187-189 for the special role of the Dioscuri for 
the equestrian order. 
 Cavargna Allemano (2004) 117. See Strabo 4.6.4 for the equestrian status of the Praefectus of the 
Maritime Alps:    . On another level the presence of the Dioscuri may also allude 
to Cottius two sons Donnus and Cottius and their own entry into the Roman equestrian order. 
 Mercando (1993) 62; Prieur (1968) 204-205; Carducci (1941); see p. 296 below for a discussion of 
the castellum. 
 See Barpi (2004) 154 on the different labels given to the artistic style of the frieze. 
 Some scholars have argued that the frieze was the work of local artisans, who had come into 
contact with Gallic workmanship: especially Cavargna Allemano (2004) 130-134; see also De Maria 
(1977) 50; Calvi (1976) 124; Prieur (1982) 459; Prieur (1968) 199-200. McGowen (2009) 128 has argued 
that the reliefs are comparable to Italic freedmen funerary reliefs, and suggests that the sculptors of the 
archs frieze may have come from such a background; see Wilson and Schrle (2009) for a newly 
- 298 - 
arch is highly schematic, with disproportional figures, deep linear carving, symmetry of 
composition and isocephaly;
 this is all the more striking given the well-
proportioned, elegant dimensions of the arch itself.
 The contrast between the 
narrative aspects of the frieze and the artistic realisation illustrates how a typically 
Roman narrative is utilized for the purposes of the monument. As Barpi has cogently 
argued, the frieze at Susa represents two different aspects of Roman historical reliefs, 
following Torellis definitions: the true historical relief and the status or function 
relief, or as Barpi terms them the descrittivo-narrativo and the simbolico-allegorico 
respectively.
 By taking traditional Roman narrative relief units and realising them 
through a local artistic style,
 the frieze at Susa expresses both historical realities of 
the foedus and also the ideological importance of employing Roman scenes. Integration 
into the Roman world is ultimately articulated through the cohesion of Roman (the 
narrative) and local (stylistic realisation) elements of the archs frieze at a particular 
turning point in the history of the area.
Itinera struxisse: perspectives of integration 
 Ammianus records that Cottius built routes through the Alps as a testimony to 
his amicitia with Augustus and his incorporation into the Roman world: 
published funerary relief from Rome in travertine (dated by the authors to between the mid-first 
century B.C. and late first century A.D), esp. 107-108 for a discussion of the schematic delineation of the 
hair. 
 Cavargna Allemano (2004) 121; Prieur (1982) 459. 
 McGowen (2009) 41. 
 Barpi (2004) 159; Torelli (1982) 119ff esp. 132. 
 McGowen (2009) 138-139 convincingly argues that the schematic style at Susa gave narrative 
clarity and helped to articulate the message of the frieze more clearly than a more naturalistic style. 
 Barpi (2004) 160 on how the simplicity of the narrative style must be seen as a response to the need 
for a comprehensive message for an audience unfamiliar with the conceptual complexities of artistic 
expression at Rome. McGowen (2009) 43 on how the use of sculpture illustrates the local rulers 
reaction to the changing historical circumstances. 
- 299 - 
lenito tandem in amicitiam Octaviani receptus principis, molibus magnis 
extruxit ad vicem memorabilis muneris, conpendiarias et viantibus 
oportunas, medias inter alias Alpes vetustas.
Finally, when his pride was placated, he was received into the friendship of 
the princeps Octavianus and with a great amount of work he built, as a 
memorable gift, short cuts and routes that were convenient for travellers, 
midway between other ancient Alpine passes. 
The arch, set up over a road on a north-south axis, is a monumentalisation of the route 
that ran from Turin to Embrun, in Southern France, by way of Mont-Genvre. The 
archs axis deliberately emphasises the route through the Alps, framing Mont-
Rochemelon to the north (Figure 136).
 The archs surroundings articulate the 
integration of Cottius and his communities into the Roman world, which was brought 
about by the act of pacification and a pact. 
The integration of the Cottian Alps into the Roman world was demonstrated not 
only by the route Cottius built through the mountains, but also by the continual 
articulation of the importance of the road through Susa, and its links to Rome. An 
ancient paved road
 was discovered in 1904-1905 together with the remains of three 
structures, and various bronze articles, some 65m north of the arch, during the 
construction of the Palazzina Ramella (Figure 152 & Figure 153).
 Among the finds 
was a bronze head (Figure 154) together with the remains of a bronze cuirass statue, 
 Amm. Marc. 15.10.2, see also 15.10.7: quem itinera struxisse rettulimus. 
  The arch at Aosta, which was clearly placed in relationship with the town, through its position on 
the axis of the decumanus (Prieur (1968) 189; Prieur (1982) 451; McGowen (2009) 41), also articulated 
the route through the Alps by providing access through the St. Bernard Passes: Cooley (2009) 222-223. 
 Measuring 4.30m wide, with kerbs of 0.45m and 0.37m: Prieur (1968) 103. 
 Mercando (1993) 69-71, 79. 
- 300 - 
and an inscription, made of Foresto marble,
 dedicated to Marcus Agrippa by the 
sons of Cottius: M. Agrippa L. f.   cos     tr    p  otest / - - - - - - - - / Don[nu]s et 
Cotti[us] / Cotti f. (Figure 155). Although the inscription is fragmentary, it seems 
plausible that it dates to after the pacification of the Alps, and before Agrippas death 
(c. 13 B.C.),
 and suggests the interaction between the rulers of the Cottian Alps and 
Rome in the wake of the conquest of the area. Whilst the bronze head has frequently 
been attributed to Agrippa and is usually linked to the inscription,
 it has also been 
identified as Drusus Maior.
 At present we cannot with certainty state whether we 
have a single dedication (statue and inscription together), a larger display of the 
imperial family, or Augustus generals.
 Even so, the finds from the Palazzina 
Ramella contribute to a picture of the monumentualisation of the road (most likely at its 
inception or a short time thereafter) through a display of relations with the imperial 
centre.
 The display of the road as a monumentum is further emphasised by the flanking 
structures. The development of a forum space with a temple dominating the north end, 
in the modern day Piazza Savoia, is dated by terracotta finds to the mid-Augustan 
 Barello (2011); see n. 982 above. 
 Letta (1976) 44-50, esp. 47; see also Vota (2004) 30 n. 39. 
 Romeo (1998) 84, 184 dates the portrait to the Tiberian period, and argues that the inscription 
could be of the same date, however as Barello (2011) p.2 points out una dedica ad Agrippa sotto il 
regno di Tiberio sia poco probabile, and Romeo herself argues Agrippas image was scarce in the 
Tiberian period. 
 Agrippa: Evangelisti (1995) 59-63; Slavazzi (1996); Romeo (1998) 84, 184; Drusus Maior: Denti 
(1991) 217; see Rosso (2006) 493-494 for a bibliography of the debate. The disagreement over the 
identification is made further problematic by the fact that Romeo (1998) 89-90, 184-185 identifies a 
statue from Caere (Vatican Museum inv. 9951) as Agrippa, whilst Rose (1997) pl. 69 and 70 identifies it 
as Drusus Maior. 
 Denti (1991) 218. Notably it was Tiberius and Drusus who were celebrated for their campaigns in 
the Alps in 15/14 B.C.: Hor. Carm. 4.4, 4.14; Str. 4.6.9; Vell. Pat. 2.95.1-2; Dio Cass. 54.22. 
 The remains of three marble statues (ranging in date from the Julio-Claudian period, to the first half 
 century), found in 1802 reused in the late antique city wall near the Porta Savoia (see Figure 152), 
and now in the Museo di Antichit di Torino, suggest a continuous commemoration of relations with the 
imperial family at Susa: Slavazzi (1996) 161; Rosso (2006) 495-504. Although reused, the find spots of 
the statues make an original location in or near the forum space (see n. 1069 below) plausible. 
- 301 - 
period (Figure 156 & Figure 157).
 Cottius road is set alongside the contemporary 
monumentualisation of the civic centre of Susa. On the other side of the road is a 
prostyle tetrastyle temple and adjoining structure, which Brecciaroli Taborelli has 
suggested is the heroon of Cottius, recorded by Ammianus as being situated moenibus 
proximum.
 Within the adjoining structure a square stone base and stone urn (similar 
to cinerary urns from the region preserved in the Museo di Antichit di Torino) were 
found.
 The location of the building, which is next to the forum area and the road 
leading to the arch, certainly indicates its prominent position. Indeed, when Ammianus 
records the existence of Cottius sepulcrum reguli, he emphasises Cottius role as road 
builder and securer of alliance and peace with the Romans.
 The possible placement 
of his heroon at the side of the road would certainly emphasise Cottius role in the 
creation of the road and its links with Rome, as the dedication to Agrippa and the 
bronze cuirassed statue across the road also imply. 
The arch, set over the road, demonstrates a control over the landscape, as does the 
Augustan trophy monument at La Turbie, by the construction of a route through the 
landscape. The framing of the mountains through the archway illustrates this point well. 
However, unlike at La Turbie, the display is not a commemoration of conquest in terms 
of Augustus victory; rather it utilises the moment of pacification to assert the 
integration of the Cottian communities into a Roman framework.   
 Barello (2011); Barello (2008); Barello (2006). 
 Amm. Marc. 15.10.7. 
 Brecciaroli Taborelli (1994), Brecciaroli Taborelli (2004) 79-81; Barello (2011) p.2 highlights the lack 
of adequate documentation. 
 Amm. Marc. 15.10.7: huius sepulcrum reguli, quem itinera struxisse rettulimus, Segusione est 
moenibus proximum manesque eius ratione gemina religiose coluntur, quod isuto moderamine rexerat 
suos et adscitus in societatem rei Romanae quietem genti praestitit sempiternam (the tomb of this 
petty king, whom we recalled built routes [through the Alps], is at Segusio right up against the walls and 
his spirits are solemnly tended to for two reasons: because he had ruled his people with justice and 
having entered into an alliance with the Roman state, he procured for his race eternal peace). 
- 302 - 
Yet we can still read a local element into the context of the arch. The south side 
of the arch stands in relation to the new Roman forum and imperial display. The arch is 
also in close physical relation to the castellum, the possible seat of the Alpine dynasts 
prior to the Roman conquest.
 The elevated location of the site, which dominated the 
slope above the town, further emphasises the importance of the site for the Alpine 
dynasts (Figure 158). If the site continued to be used as the seat of the Cottian dynasty 
(finds indicate that it was being used as late as the 2
 century A.D.),
 we may 
observe a continuity of the local authority through the visual tie between the older 
structure of the castellum, and the new arch. 
* * * 
The arch at Susa offers a view point on the Roman pacification of the Alps that 
does not directly reflect the concepts of conquest and subjugation, but rather utilises the 
moment of pacification to assert the integration of the Cottian communities into the 
Roman world. But more than that, it takes the Roman rhetoric of administrative power 
and the organisation of subject states to promote a message of the continuity of local 
dynastic power. The pacification of the Alps and subsequent reorganisation gave 
Cottius the opportunity and the means to emphasise his position within the empire and 
within his own sphere of authority. 
At Segusio we see the results of what the Romans understood as pax augusta, 
but expressed in somewhat different tones. Perhaps for a Roman audience that arch at 
Segusio still expressed the concept of pax augusta in that it communicated the 
 Finds, including a Neolithic serpentine axe, and 13cm high limestone female head, possibly part of a 
capitol or an architectural detail are used to assign the site to a pre-Roman period: Mercando (1993) 62; 
Prieur (1968)204-206; Carducci (1941). 
 Prieur (1968) 205. 
- 303 - 
acceptance of Roman rule by the local communities, through the establishment of 
amicitia and a pact. The arch is not an explicit victory monument, but it does allude to 
the power Rome had in bringing communities, previously outside Roman imperium, 
into the empire. Whilst the Ara Pacis Augustae at Rome illustrates with extraordinary 
complexity the senatorial ideal of pax in 9 B.C., the arch at Segusio presents a quieter 
discourse that still illustrates the extent and power of Roman imperium. 
- 304 - 
Summary 
 As this chapter has illustrated, the pacification of the West was perceived and 
commemorated in notably different ways, and from different viewpoints. The 
expression of Roman imperialism was dependent on the context of its celebration, and 
this could mean something different depending on who was commemorating it. The 
role of pax within this commemoration appears as a fundamentally Roman concept, 
expressed at Rome, but rarely within the pacified territory; and only then within a 
strong Roman colonial context. The absence of pax in both senatorial and local displays 
in the West indicates that the discourse of Roman imperialism was not, outside Rome, 
concerned with the ideology of victorious pax but rather with an exchange of 
subjugation and integration. 
 The result of the pacification in the Cottian Alps was a display of integration 
into a Roman world: both with the road through the mountains and the declaration of 
being Roman which is embodied in the arch. Although Cottius had fought against 
Augustus, his acceptance of amicitia allowed him to reinforce his own position and 
create a new identity for him and his communities, which denied any concept of 
conquest or subjugation. 
 In contrast, the Alpine trophy offers an exemplum of a traditional display of 
subjugation and defeat of the enemy. Such displays were common in Gaul and Spain, 
and were used to delineate areas under Roman control.
 As a Roman trophy 
monument dedicated by the senate and people of Rome to Augustus, the themes of 
subjugation are logical. The site of the monument emphasises Romes control over the 
 Boube (1996); Silberberg-Peirce (1986). 
- 305 - 
Alpine region to all, both Roman and non-Roman, who travel along the via Iulia 
Augusta to Gaul and Spain. The monument at La Turbie is a true testimony to Romes 
victory terra marique. 
  Ferris has argued that under Augustus and the Julio-Claudians the celebrations 
of victory had now become the sole preserve of the emperor.
 However, we should 
note that the commemoration of victory both at Rome and in the conquered territory 
was ostensibly celebrated by the senate and the people, in honour of Augustus, as the 
adoption by Roman colonies demonstrates. The Ara Pacis Augustae is perhaps the 
greatest testimony to the employment of such commemoration by the senate to express 
the nature of Roman imperialism. It was as a member, if also the leading member, of 
the state and senatorial order, that Augustus was celebrated in the monument. Indeed, 
the Ara Pacis was used by the senate to express not just the celebration of one victory, 
but also the culmination of Romes continued conquest of the orbis terrarum. 
 Ferris (2000) 60. 
- 306 - 
Conclusion  
 This study has considered various commemorations of victory from the period 
of political change of the civil wars of the 40s, to the Augustan principate, in order to 
examine the role of pax as part of a discourse on the nature of Roman imperialism. 
Greg Woolf emphasised the prominence that peace acquired under the new political 
institution of the Empire and the conceptual change that pax underwent during this 
period.
 Woolf has pointed to the distinction between the conceptual purposes of pax 
under the Republic and under the Empire; in the above case studies I have taken this 
understanding to illustrate the story of the conceptual change of pax from Republic to 
Empire in more detail. The meaning and deployment of pax, as part of victory rhetoric, 
varied depending on the political, social and cultural situation. 
What is most striking is the growing prominence of pax as an expression of 
imperium in the context of victory commemoration. The civil wars of the late Republic 
evoked a response that brought the concept pax into the political discourse of the 
period. During the early 40s B.C. Cicero was clearly preoccupied with the idea of pax, 
as a form of negotiation and reconciliation between Caesar and Pompey. In fact at this 
time, at least from Ciceros own private perspective, pax stood in opposition to victory, 
most likely because victory in the civil wars would mean the defeat of fellow Romans, 
and in Ciceros eyes, the collapse of a stable form of government. Caesar, on the other 
hand, appears to have sought a redefinition of victory, which was to express his position 
over the state based on his policy of clementia.
 pax and its relationship to victory 
 Woolf (1993). 
 Cic. Att. 9.7c.1. 
- 307 - 
were fluid and changing notions, very much dependent on the political players who 
made use of the concepts. pax was now being used in the political discourse concerning 
the internal stability of the state, and as such it was used by those who sought to 
manipulate peoples views. Ciceros manipulation of the political discourse on pax in 
44-43 B.C. was driven by his desire to remove Antony, who at least appeared to be 
making a show of seeking peace and reconciliation with the senate, from the political 
scene. At this point Cicero publicly tied pax to the idea of victory, because he was 
trying to assert that only through the defeat of Antony could peace and stability be 
achieved for the state.  
The political upheaval and civil conflicts of the 40s certainly influenced the use 
made of pax in the commemorations of 40 B.C. Victory celebrations took place to 
commemorate the pax made between Antony and Octavian. Reconciliation had 
achieved stability for the state, and it was conceptualised as a victory. This use of peace 
and reconciliation was far nearer the definition of victory that Caesar spoke of during 
his conflicts with Pompey, than Ciceros vision of a pax achieved through victory and 
defeat of Antony. Perhaps the senate had hoped that this would be a lasting victory for 
the state and that the pax established would continue. Of course the numbers of treaties 
and alliances of the early 30s B.C. illustrate the real fragility of the pax of 40 B.C. Still 
the desire to associate pax with the termination of civil conflict continued, most notably 
with Octavians commemoration of his Sicilian victory: the erection of a columna 
rostrata in the Roman Forum claiming that peace had finally been re-established by 
land and sea.
 The employment of pax within the victory rhetoric of the final civil 
wars of the late Republic enabled the victors to commemorate their achievements and 
positions within the state without having to directly refer to their victory over fellow 
 App. B Civ. 5.130; see chapter two, p. 59 above. 
- 308 - 
Romans: pax was established over the expanse of empire, rather than in relation to an 
opponent. 
Once Octavian was established as a sole victor and the head of the Roman state, 
the use of pax within victory rhetoric was concerned with the concept of Roman 
imperium over an empire. Certainly, the victory display at Nicopolis asserted a concept 
of pax as the expression of the control over the empire that Octavian had won through 
his victory. Now pax was proclaimed as an emblem of the new political order, where 
there were no opponents to contend with. pax was a state that was brought to and 
imposed upon an empire. 
The celebrations of victory at the end of the civil wars had adopted the rhetoric 
of pax in order to blur the line between civil and foreign conflicts, and to present the 
victory as something other than the defeat of another Roman. Ten years later, with 
Augustus firmly established as the princeps of the Roman state, the concern was very 
much about external enemies and threats to the stability of the empire. The pax 
Parthorum illustrates the closely bound relationship of pax to victory, where a 
diplomatic treaty was celebrated by the senate and Augustus at Rome as the ultimate 
victory and the end of all triumphs. Augustus ability to compel the Parthians to seek 
peace with Rome was commemorated as a victory over the Parthians, and was later 
celebrated as an exemplum of the extent of Roman imperium within the Forum 
Augustum. The power of Rome was articulated by foreign nations seeking pax with 
Rome, within a monument that celebrated Roman victory.
 In the Augustan 
principate, the concept of victorious pax reached the height of its expression in the Ara 
Pacis Augustae, which combined the concepts of victory with that of the stability and 
continuation of the Roman state from its mythical foundations to the state of pax of the 
 Suet. Aug. 21.2. 
- 309 - 
present day. The monument expressed the achievements of Roman victory in terms of 
prosperity, and articulated Roman imperialism, to Rome, as the security of the Roman 
state achieved through victories (parta victoriis pax). 
The story of pax from the late Republic to early Principate outlined above has 
focused on the use made of pax within Roman victory commemoration. But, pax was 
not always used as part of victory commemoration, and the distinctions between when it 
was used and when it was not allow us an insight into the conception of the term and 
how it was used to express Roman imperialism.  
pax within victory commemoration was selective and predominantly used for a 
Roman audience.
 One of the few times we find a monumental display celebrating 
pax outside Rome is at Niopolis. It is perhaps the contrast and distinction between the 
display at Nicopolis and that at Rome which is so striking in the year 29 B.C. The 
honours voted to Octavian at Rome are far more concerned with concealing the issues 
of civil war than celebrating pax: true, the closing of the Gates of Ianus signified the 
cessation of war, but the intention of the senate here is very different from the message 
of pax that Octavian displayed at Nicopolis. As the meaning of pax during the civil 
wars of the 40s was dependent on the political players using the concept, so too was the 
articulation of pax in victory celebrations of 29 B.C. dependent on their authors. 
Despite the celebration made by Octavian in 36 B.C. of the restoration of pax, the 
senate clearly chose not to assert a strong message of pax in the wake of Octavians 
defeat of Antony: the celebrations at Rome were fundamentally concerned with the 
foreign aspects of the wars, although allusions were made to Antonys disgrace as a 
Roman statesman. It appears that Octavian considered a message of pax as an 
 The small altars to pax augusta from Narbo and Praeneste suggest that the Ara Pacis Augustae in 
Rome influenced commemorations in Roman colonies in the West: see chapter 4, pp. 273-275 above. 
- 310 - 
expression of an empire won, appropriate to use in the East. There was no 
commemoration of the civil war at Nicopolis either: Octavians victory had been for the 
stability of the res publica, which guaranteed pax for the empire. 
The message of pax was not considered necessary or important to any of 
Cornelius Gallus multiple audiences at Philae. The hieroglyphic text does emphasise 
the prosperity and stability achieved for Egypt under the rule of Octavian and Gallus, 
however the language of the text does not appear to introduce the concept of pax, but 
rather expresses the good state of affairs through traditional, religious language. The 
display at Philae is dependent on Gallus, the priests of the island, and their different 
audiences, and in all three texts there was no need or desire to use the concept of pax as 
part of the discourse. 
Later, the senate and Augustus chose to conceptualise the pacification of the 
West and the Alps at Rome through a clear celebration of pax. Whilst Augustus spoke 
to a Roman audience about bringing the West into peace (pacavi... pacificavi),
senatorial monument erected in the Alps at La Turbie expressed the power and extent of 
Roman imperium through a display of the subjugation of Alpine tribes stretching from 
the Hadrianic sea to the Tyrrhenian sea. Unlike the displays at Nicopolis where such 
imperium was expressed as the achievement of pax terra marique, the idea of pax was 
not required in the Alps to explain Romes victory. The display at La Turbie articulates 
the relationship between Rome and the Alpine tribes not through the negotiation of pax, 
but by subjugation to Romes imperium. The discourse on Roman imperialism and the 
pacification of the Alps is perhaps most interesting at Segusio (Susa). pax is again not 
directly employed in the monument, but Cottius chose to conceptualise the pacification 
 RG 26. 
- 311 - 
of the region as a moment of integration into the Roman empire, and articulates the new 
relationships established. 
It is clear that pax became, over the course of the period, integrated into imperial 
rhetoric and an important part of a discourse on Roman imperialism. The idea of pax as 
a concept of negotiation, conflict and victory, which developed during the civil wars of 
the late Republic, brought it fully into the political vocabulary of the period. Given the 
fluidity of the concept in the 40s and 30s B.C., Octavian was able to continue to use it 
in his victory rhetoric after Actium: it came to represent not just the internal stability of 
the state, but an empire-wide security to be imposed.
 pax became an expression and 
justification for the empire, although, by the end of the Augustan principate, it was still 
mainly confined to displays at Rome, or in Roman colonies. Thus pax was a way for 
Romans to understand and explain the empire.
 But it was rarely, it seems, directly 
presented to non-Roman audiences. At Segusio we see the results of what the Romans 
understood as pax augusta, but expressed in somewhat different tones. 
In A.D. 13, when Augustus wrote his Res Gestae, he conceptualised Roman 
imperialism as an expression of parta victoriis pax: 
Ianum Quirinum, quem claussum esse maiores nostri voluerunt cum per 
totum imperium populi Romani terra marique esset parta victoriis pax.
The Gate of Quirinius, which our ancestors wanted to be closed when peace 
was won through victories by land and sea on behalf on the entire empire of 
the Roman people. 
 Verg. Aen. 6.852: pacique imponere morem.  
 Barton (2007) 251-252. 
 RG 13. 
- 312 - 
Yet this view of Roman imperium was not propagated in the Greek version of the text. 
There is a conspicuous absence of the concept of victory to express Romes pacification 
of the world: 
 ,          
     .1086 
The Gate of War, which our ancestors wanted to be closed when peace was 
established by land and sea by the Romans. 
Victorious pax was still very much an expression of imperium from a Roman 
perspective; however the Greek version of the Res Gestae demonstrates that whilst the 
association of peace at the time was understood as being tied into a concept of Roman 
hegemony, this was not presented as victory. The acceptance of pax/eirene as the 
property of the Romans illustrates how Rome had achieved a rule of pax over the 
empire. 
 RG 13. 
Appendix I 
The coins of the Late Republic carry a number of personifications of qualities, however there are also a number of symbols and 
attributes that are combined to suggest a quality or concept.  The table below shows the variety of symbols which appear of the coinage of 
the Republic from 83 B.C. onwards. The quality or concept is indicated in bold CAPITALS if it appears as a legend on the coin, and in 
lower case if the quality is assumed to be demonstrated by the combination of the attributes and symbols.
 A x indicates the presence of 
an attribute or symbol; multiple xs indicate the number of that attribute present. Where necessary a written description is given. 
x   x 
 Wallace-Hadrill (1981) in his Appendix (319-323) described and recorded these coins as T(ype), to distinguish them from the personifications. 
x   x 
x x x   x      
victo
x    x      x 
ciliu
. Licin
ictrix (?
frica
 x x   x   x   
risiu
r sid
y victo
 x    x 
 III V
 III V
III V
victo
victo
ilitia
  x   x   x  
 III V
victo
- 324 - 
Bibliography 
Agnoli, N. (2002) Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Palestrina: Le sculture. 
(L'Erma di Bretschneider). 
Alfldy, G. (1992) Studi sull'epigrafia augustea e tiberiana di Roma. (Casa 
Editrice Quasar). 
Allmer, A. (1881) 'Revue Epigraphique du Midi de la France' in Revue 
Epigraphique du Midi de la France 1, 235-6. 
Arnaud, P. (2002) 'Des Peuples aux cits des Alpes Mridionales: sources, 
problmes, mthodes' in D. Garcia and Verdia, F., ed. Territoires 
Celtiques: Espaces ethniques et territoires des agglomrations 
protohistoriques d'Europe occidentale: actes du XXIVe colloque 
international de l'AFEAF, Martigues, 1-4 juin 2000, (Errance) 185-198. 
Arnaud, P. (2004) 'La Turbie, i populi alpini dall'iscrizione dedicatoria' in R. C. de 
Marinis and Spadea, G., ed. I Liguri: un antico populo europeo tra Alpi e 
Mediterraneo, (Skira) 537. 
Bagnall, R. S. (2012) 'Friedhelm Hoffmann, Martina MinasNerpel, Stefan 
Pfeiffer:  Die dreisprachige Stele des C. Cornelius Gallus.' in Gnomon 84, 
280-281. 
Ball, W. (2001) Rome in the East. The Transformation of an Empire. (Routledge). 
Baratte, F. (2006) 'L'image impriale sur les reliefs de l'Afrique Romaine' in M. 
Navaro Caballero and Roddaz, J.-M., ed. La Transmission de l'idologie 
impriale dans l'occident romain, 273-296.  
Barello, F. (2006) 'Archeologia urbana a Segusio' in L. Brecciaroli Taborelli, ed. 
Forme e tempi dell'urbanizzazione nella Cisalpina (II secolo a.C.- I secolo 
d.C.): Atti delle Giornate di Studio, Torino 4-6 maggio 2006, (All' Insegna 
del Giglio) 261-266. 
Barello, F. (2008) 'Segusio, nuovi dati archeologici sulla nascita di una capitale' in 
ed. Alpis Poenina.  Grand-Saint-Bernard: une voie  travers lEurope. 11-
12 Avril 2008, Fort de Bard [Valle d'Aoste], (Interreg IIIA Italy-
Switzerland 2000-2006) 431-438. 
- 325 - 
Barello, F. (2011) 'Il foro di Segusio e la nascita di una nuova citt' in ed. 
Convegno di studi "I complessi forensi dells Cisalpina romana: nuovi 
dati". Pavia, 12-13 marzo 2009, (All'Insegna del Giglio) 27-38. 
Barnes, T. D. (1974) 'The victories of Augustus' in Journal of Roman Studies 64, 
21-26. 
Barpi, S. (2004) 'Il fregio dell'arco di Augusto a Susa: interpretazioni storico-
artistiche' in P. Del Vecchio, ed. La biblioteca di Segusium: Romanit 
valsusina, (Segusium - Societ di Ricerche e Studi Valsusini) 139-160. 
Barruol, G. (1969) Les Peuples Prromains du Sud-Est de la Gaule: tude de 
Gographie Historique. (De Boccard). 
Bartman, E. (1998) Portraits of Livia: Imaging the Imperial Woman in Augustan 
Rome. (Cambridge University Press). 
Barton, C. A. (2007) 'The Price of Peace in Ancient Rome' in K. A. Raaflaub, ed. 
War and Peace in the Ancient World, (Blackwell Publishing Ltd.) 245-
Bastien, J.-L. (2007) Le Triomphe Romain et son Utilisation Politique:  Rome 
aux trois Derniers sicles de la Rpublique. (cole Franaise de Rome). 
Beard, M. (2007) Roman Triumph. (The Belknap Press of Harvard University 
Press). 
Berczelly, L. (1985) 'Ilia and the Divine Twins: a Reconsideration of Two Relief 
Panels from the Ara Pacis Augustae' in Acta ad archaeologiam et artium 
historiam pertinentia 5, 89-149. 
Bergmann, J. (1998) Die Rmische Kolonie von Butrint und die Romanisierung 
Griechenlands (Verlag Dr. Friedrich Pfeil). 
Bernand, E. (1969) Les Inscriptions Grecques et Latines de Philae: Tome II, Haut 
et Bas Empire. vol.II. (Editions du Centre National, de la Recherche 
Scientifique). 
Bertone, A. (2001) 'Il 'caso' Donnus ai margini dei contrafforti alpini.  
Considerazioni numismatiche' in Segusium - ricerche e studi valsusini 40, 
11-24. 
Bianchi, E. (1994) Ara Pacis Augustae. (Fratelli Palombi Editori). 
Bieber, M. (1945) 'Honos and Virtus' in American Journal of Archaeology 49, 25-
Billows, R. (1993) 'The religious procession of the Ara Pacis Augustae: Augustus' 
supplicatio in 13 B.C.' in Journal of Roman Archaeology 6, 80-92. 
- 326 - 
Binninger, S. (2001) 'L'environment archologique du monument de La Turbie 
perspectives de recherches sur une rgion' in P. Arnaud and Gazenbeek, 
M., ed. Habitat rural antique dans les Alps-Maritimes, (APDCA) 287-301. 
Binninger, S. (2003) 'Le Trophe et la clbration de la victoire' in Images et 
reprsentations: journes d'tudes interdiscilpinaires des 19, 20 et 21 
novembre. Nice, 149-160. 
Binninger, S. (2004) 'Il monumento della turbie' in R. C. de Marinis and Spadea, 
G., ed. I Liguri: un antico populo europeo tra Alpi e Mediterraneo, 539. 
(Skira). 
Binninger, S. (2006a) 'Le Tropaeum Alpium et l'Hracls Monoikos. Mmoire et 
Clbration de la Victorie dan la Propagande Augustenne  La Turbie.' in 
M. Navaro Caballero and Roddaz, J.-M., ed. La Transmission de 
l'Idologie Impriale dans Occident Romain, (Ausonius; CHTS) 179-203. 
Binninger, S. (2009a) Le trophe d'Auguste  La Turbie. (ditions du Patrimoine, 
Centre des Monuments Nationaux). 
Bleckmann, B. (2002) Die rmischen Nobilitt im Ersten Punischen Krieg: 
Untersuchungen zur aristokratischen Konkurrenz in der Republik. 
(Akademie Verlag). 
Bommelaer, J.-F. (1991) Guide de Delphes: le site. (cole Franaise d'Athnes). 
Borchhardt, J. (2002) Der Fries vom Kenotaph fr Gaius Caesar in Limyra. 
vol.Wien. (Phoibos). 
Borghi, A., Vaggelli, G., Marcon, C. and Fiora, L. (2009) 'The Piedmont white 
marbles used in Antiquity: an archaeometric inferred by a minero-
petographic and c-o stable istope study' in Archaeometry 51.6, 913-931. 
Bostock, J. and Riley, T. (1855-57) The Natural History of Pliny, vol. 1. (H.G. 
Bohn). 
Boube, E. (1996) Le Trophe Augusten. vol.4. (Haute-Garonne). 
Boucher, J.-P. (1966) Caius Cornlius Gallus. (Les Belles Lettres). 
Braund, D. (1984) Rome and the Friendly King: The Character of the Client 
Kingship. (Croom Helm Ltd; St. Martin's Press). 
Brecciaroli Taborelli, L. (1994) 'Un passo di Ammiano Marcellino ed il probabile 
Heroon di Cozio' in Segusium - ricerche e studi valsusini vol. speciale: 
Susa: Bimillenario dell'Arco.  Atti del Convegno (2-3 Ottobre 1992), 105-
- 327 - 
Brecciaroli Taborelli, L. (2004) 'Un passo di Ammiano Marcelliano e il probabile 
heroon di Cozio' in P. Del Vecchio, ed. La biblioteca di Segusium: 
Romanit valsusina, (Segusium - Societ di Ricerche e Studi Valsusini) 
75-82. 
Brilliant, R. (1984) Visual Narratives: Storytelling in Etruscan and Roman Art. 
(Cornell University Press). 
Brunt, P. A. (1975) 'Administrators of Roman Egypt' in Journal of Roman Studies 
65, 124-147. 
Bunson, M. (1991) The Encyclopedia of Ancient Egypt. (FactsOnFile). 
Burns, H. (1988) 'Pirro Ligorio's Reconstruction of Ancient Rome' in R. W. 
Gaston, ed. Pirro Ligorio: Artist and Antiquarian, (Silvana Editoriale). 
Butler, H. E. and A., B. E. (1933) The Elegies of Propertius.  
Cagnat, R. (1913) 'Un temple de la Gens Augusta  Carthage' in Comptes-rendus 
des sances de l'Acadmie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres 9, 680-686. 
Calvi, M. C. (1976) 'Osservazioni sul fregio dell'arco di Susa' in Archeologia 
Classica 28, 115-125. 
Campbell, B. (1993) 'War and diplomacy: Rome and Parthia, 31 BC-AD 235' in J. 
Rich and Shipley, G., ed. War and Society in the Roman World, 
(Routledge) 213-240. 
Camps, W. A. (1997) Propertius Elegies Book II. (Bristol Classical Press). 
Carducci, C. (1941) 'Susa - Scavi nell'area del 'Castrum'' in Notizie degli scavi di 
antichita 19, 20-28. 
Carey, S. (2003) Pliny's catalogue of culture. (Oxford University Press). 
Carnabuci, E. (1991) L'angolo sud-orientale del foro romano nel manoscritto 
inedito di Gaicomo Boni. (Accademia nazionale dei Lincei). 
Carter, J. M. (1977) 'A new fragment of Octavian's Inscription at Nicopolis' in 
Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und Epigraphik. 24, 227-230. 
Carter, J. M. (1982) Suetonius: Divus Augustus. (Bristol Classical Press). 
Casimir, P. (1932) Le Trophe d'Auguste  La Turbie. (A. Tacussel). 
Castellvi, G., Nolla, J. M. and Rho, I. (1995) 'La identificacin de los trofeos de 
Pompeyo en el Pirineo' in Journal of Roman Archaeology 5-18. 
- 328 - 
Castellvi, G., Nolla, J. M. and Rod, I. (2008) Le Trophe de Pompe dans les 
Pyrnes (71 avant J.-C.): Col des Panissars, Le Perthus Pyrnes-
Orientales (France), La Jonquera, Haut Empordan (Espagne). (CNRS 
Editions). 
Castriota, D. (1995) The Ara Pacis Augustae and the Imagery of Abundance in 
Later Greek and Early Roman Imperial Art. (Princeton University Press). 
Cavargna Allemano, A. M. (2004) 'Il fregio dell' arco di Susa espressionale locale 
di arte provinicale romana' in P. Del Vecchio, ed. La biblioteca di 
Segusium: Romanit valsusina, (Segusium - Societ di Ricerche e Studi 
Valsusini) 113-138. 
Cavargna Bontosi, M. (1994) 'Una Recostruzione del Fregio est dell' Arco di Susa' 
in Segusium - ricerche e studi valsusini vol. speciale: Susa Bimillenario 
dell'Arco.  Atti del Convegno (2-3 Ottobre 1992). 64-69. 
Chioffi, L. (1993) 'Columna Rostrata C. Duilii (Forum)' in M. Steinby, ed. 
Lexicon Topographicum Urbis Romae, (Quasar) 1, 309. 
Chioffi, L. (1996) Gli elogia augustei del Foro Romano. Aspetti epigrafici e 
topografici. vol.7. (Quasar). 
Choremi-Spetsieri, A. (1996) 'Eine berlebensgrosse Nike-Statue In Athen' in 
Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts, Athenische 
Abteilung 111, 363-390. 
Choremi-Spetsieri, A. and Tigginaga, I. (2008) 'He Bibliotheke tou Adrianou sten 
Athena. ta anaskaphika dedomena / The Library of Hadrian: the 
Archaeological Evidence' in ed. He Athena kata te Romaike epoche: 
prosphates anakalypseis, nees ereunes, (Mouseio Benake) 115-132. 
Chrysostomos, P., Kefallonitou, F. and Hardy, D. T. (2005) Nikopolis. 
(Archaeological Receipt Fund, Directorate of Publications). 
Cipriani, G. (1977) 'La Pro Marcello e il suo significato come orazione politica' in 
Atene e Roma 22, 113-125. 
Claridge, A. (1998) Rome: An Oxford Archaeological Guide. (Oxford University 
Press). 
Clark, A. J. (2007) Divine Qualities: Cult and Community in Republican Rome. 
(Oxford University Press). 
Clarke, K. (1999) Between Geography and History : Hellenistic Constructions of 
the Roman World. (Clarendon Press). 
Coarelli, F. (1968) 'L' "ara di Domizio Enobarbo" e la cultura artistica in Roma 
nel II secolo a.C' in Dialoghi di Archeologia 2, 302-368. 
- 329 - 
Coarelli, F. (1985) Il Foro Romano  v.2 . Periodo repubblicano e augusteo. vol.2. 
(Quasar). 
Coarelli, F. (1999) 'Rostra (Et Repubblicana)' in M. Steinby, ed. Lexicon 
Topographicum Urbis Romae, (Quasar) 4, 212-214. 
Coffin, D. R. (2004) Pirro Ligorio: The Renaissance Artist, Architect and 
Antiquarian. (The Pennsylvania State University Press). 
Cohon, R. (2002) 'Form and Meaning: Scrollwork on the Ara Pacis, Grotesques in 
Furniture Design' in Journal of Roman Archaeology 15, 416-28. 
Colin, G. (1922-1985) Inscriptions de la terrasse du temple et de la rgion nord 
du Sanctuaire. vol.3.4. (De Boccard). 
Cooley, A. E. (2009) Res Gestae Divi Augusti: Text, translation and commentary. 
(Cambridge University Press). 
Courby, F. (1922-27) La Terrasse du temple. vol.2.4. (De Boccard). 
Cowan, E. (2008) 'Libertas in the Philippics' in T. Stevenson and Wilson, M., ed. 
Cicero's Philippics: History, Rhetoric and Ideology, (Polygraphia Ltd) 
140-152. 
Crawford, M. H. (1974) Roman Republican Coinage. vol.I. (Cambridge 
University Press). 
Creighton, J. (2000) Coins and Power in Late Iron Age Britian. (Cambridge 
University Press). 
Cresci Marrone, G. (2004) 'Segusio e il processo d'intergrazione nella romanit' in 
P. Del Vecchio, ed. La biblioteca di Segusium: Romanit valsusina, 
(Segusium - Societ di Ricerche e Studi Valsusini) 51-62. 
Crow, C. (2006) 'The Ara Pacis' in History Today 56 (6), 5. 
de Grummond, N. T. (1990) 'Pax Augusta and the Horae on the Ara Pacis 
Augustae' in American Journal of Archaeology 94, 663-77. 
De La Tour, H. and Fischer, B. (1992) Atlas de Monnaies Gauloises. (Claude 
Burgen). 
De Maria, S. (1977) 'Apparato Figurativo nell'arco onorario di Susa. Revisione 
critica del problema' in Rivista di Archeologia 1, 44-52. 
De Maria, S. (1988) Gli Archi Onorari di Roma e dell'Italia Romana. (L'ERMA 
di Bretschneider). 
- 330 - 
de Souza, P. (2008) 'Parta victoriis pax: Roman emperors as peacemakers' in P. 
de Souza and France, J., ed. War and Peace in Ancient and Medieval 
History, (Cambridge University Press) 76-106. 
de Souza, P. and France, J. (2008) War and Peace in the Ancient and Medieval 
World. (Cambridge University Press). 
DeBrohun, J. B. (2007) 'The Gates of War (and Peace): Roman Literary 
Perspectives' in K. A. Raaflaub, ed. War and Peace in the Ancient World, 
(Blackwell Publishing Ltd.), 256-277. 
Degrassi, A. (1945) 'L'edificio dei Fasti Capitolini' in Rendiconti della Pontificia 
Accademia Romana di Archeologia 21, 57-104. 
Degrassi, A. (1947) Inscriptiones Italiae. Academiae Italicae Consociatae 
ediderunt. Volumen XIII, Fasciculus I  - Fasti consulares et triumphales. 
vol.13.1.  
Degrassi, A. (1971) 'L'epigrafia latina in Italia nell' ultimo quinquennio (1963-
1967)' in ed. Acta of the Fifth International Congress of Greek and Latin 
Epigraphy, Cambridge 1967, (Blackwell) 153-174. 
Denti, M. (1991) I Romani a Nord del Po. (Longanesi & C.,). 
DeWitt, N. J. (1941) 'Rome and the "Road of Hercules"' in Transactions and 
Proceedings of the American Philological Association 72, 59-69. 
Drijvers, J. W. (1998) 'Strabo on Parthia and the Parthians' in J. Wiesehfer, ed. 
Das Partherreich und seine Zeugnisse, (Franz Steiner Verlag) 279-293. 
Dueck, D. (2000) Strabo of Amasia: A Greek Man of Letters in Augustan Rome. 
(Routledge). 
Dyer, R. R. (1990) 'Rhetoric and Intention in Cicero's Pro Marcello' in Journal of 
Roman Studies 80, 17-30. 
Ebel, C. (1975) 'Pompey's Organization of Transalpina' in Phoenix 29, 358-373. 
Eckstein, A. M. (2006) 'Conceptualizing Roman Imperial Expansion under the 
Republic: An Introduction' in R. Morstein-Marx and Rosenstein, N., ed. A 
Companion to the Roman Republic, (Blackwell Publishing Ltd) 567-589. 
Elsner, J. (1991) 'Cult and Sculpture. Sacrifice in the Ara Pacis Augustae' in 
Journal of Roman Studies 81, 50-61. 
Esprandieu, . (1907) Recueil Gnral des bas-reliefs da la Gaule romaine. 
vol.1. (Imprimerie Nationale). 
- 331 - 
Evangelisti, E. (1995) 'Ritratto di Agrippa da Susa' in G. S. Chiesa, ed. Augusto in 
Cisalpina: ritratti augustei e Giulio-Claudi in Italia settentrionale, 
(Cisalpino). 
Faria, A. M. d. (2001) 'Pax Iulia, Felicitas  Iulia, Liberalitas Iulia' in Revista 
Portuguesa de Arqueologia 4, 351-362. 
Farr, J. (1989) 'Understanding Conceptual Change Politically' in T. Ball, Farr, J. 
and Hanson, R. L., ed. Political Innovation and Conceptual Change, 
(Cambridge University Press) 24-49. 
Fears, J. R. (1981) 'The Cult of Virtues' in Aufstieg und Niedergang der 
rmischen Welt 2.17.2, 827-948. 
Fears, J. R. (1981) 'The Theology of Victory at Rome' in Aufstieg und Niedergang 
der rmischen Welt 2.17.2, 736-826. 
Felletti Maj, B. M. (1961) 'Il Fregio Commemorativo dell'Arco di Susa' in 
Rendiconti della Pontificia Accademia Romana di Archeologia 33, 129-
Fentress, E. (2005) 'Castastae, chalcidia and cryptae in Early Imperial Italy' in 
Journal of Roman Archaeology 18, 220-234. 
Ferrero, E. (1901) L'arc d'Auguste  Suse. (Bocca Frres). 
Ferris, I. M. (2000) Enemies of Rome, Barbarians Through Roman Eyes. (Sutton 
Publishing). 
Fvrier, P.-A. (1975-1976) 'Gographie Historique des Alpes Mridionales' in 
Atti. Centro studi e documentazione sull'Italia romana 7, 271-301. 
Fischer, B. (1991) 'Les diffrents montaires des premires imitations du statre 
de Philippe II de Macdonie' in tudes Celtiques 28, 137-156. 
Fishwick, D. (1987) The Imperial Cult in the Latin West: studies in the ruler cult 
of the western provinces of the Roman Empire. vol.1.1. (Brill). 
Fleury, P. (1990) Vitruve. de l'Architecture. (CNRS). 
Flory, M. B. (1993) 'Livia and the History of Public Honorific Statues for Women 
in Rome' in Transactions of the American Philological Association 123, 
287-308. 
Flory, M. B. (1995) 'The Symbolism of Laurel in Cameo Portraits of Livia' in 
Memoirs of the Academy Academy in Rome 40, 43-68. 
Flory, M. B. (1998) 'The Intergration of Women into the Roman Triumph' in 
Historia 47, 489-494. 
- 332 - 
Flower, H. (2010) Roman Republics. (Princeton University Press). 
Foresta, S. (2002) 'I fregi con processione dell' Ara Pacis Augustae: osservazioni 
sull'attuale ricostruzione' in Bullettino della Commissione Archeologica 
Comunale di Roma 103, 43-66. 
Formig, J. (1943-44) 'L'inscription du trophe des Alpes  la Turbie' in Bulletin 
de la Socit nationale des antiquaires de France, 360-367. 
Formig, J. (1949) Le Trophe des Alpes (La Turbie). (Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique). 
Formig, J. (1951) 'Restes supposs d'un sanctuarie prromain  La Turbie' in 
Revue Archologique 38, 58-59. 
Formig, J. (1955) 'La ddicace du trophe des Alpes' in Gallia 13, 101-102. 
Forray, F. (1994) 'L'arc de Suse dans les guides de voyage du XVIIme au 
XIXme siecles.' in Segusium - ricerche e studi valsusini vol. speciale: 
Susa: Bimillenario dell'Arco.  Atti del Convego (2-3 Ottobre 1992). 175-
Foster, B. O. (1976) History of Rome: Livy; with an English Translation. vol.1. 
(Havard University Press). 
Freyburger-Galland, M.-L. (1997) Aspects du vocabulaire politique et 
institutionnel de Dion Cassius. (De Boccard). 
Frisch, H. (1946) Cicero's Fight for the Republic: the historical background of 
Cicero's Philippics. (Gyldendal). 
Fuchs, H. (1926) Augustin und der antike Friedensgedanke. (Weidmannsche 
Buchhandlung). 
Gag, J. (1932) 'La Victoire d'Auguste' in Melanges d'archeologie et d'histoire 49, 
61-92. 
Gag, J. (1936) 'Actiaca' in Melanges d'archeologie et d'histoire 53, 37-100. 
Galinsky, K. (1992) 'Venus, Polysemy, and the Ara Pacis Augustae' in American 
Journal of Archaeology 96, 457-475. 
Ganzert, J. (2000) Im Allerheiligsten des Augustusforums. (Philipp von Zabern). 
Gatti, G. (1945) 'La ricostruzione dell' Arco di Augusto al Foro Romano' in 
Rendiconti della Pontificia Accademia Romana di Archeologia 21, 105-
- 333 - 
Gayraud, M. (1981) Narbonne Antique: des origines  la fin du IIIe sicle. (De 
Boccard). 
Geiger, J. (2008) The First Hall of Fame: A Study of the Statues in the Forum 
Augustum. (Brill). 
Giuliani, C. F. and Verduchi, P. (1987) L' Area Central del Foro Romano. (Leo S. 
Olschki). 
Gordon, A. E. (1958) Album of dated Latin Inscriptions: Rome and the 
neighborhood, Augustus to Nerva. vol.I. (University of California Press). 
Gordon, A. E. (1983) Illustrated Introduction to Latin Epigraphy. (University of 
California Press). 
Gotter, U. (1996) Der Diktator ist tot Politik in Rom zwischen den Iden des Marz 
und der Begrundung des zwetien triumvirats. (Franz Steiner). 
Granger, F. (1983) Vitruvius.  On Architecture. (William Heineman Ltd.). 
Granino Cecere, M. G. (1996) 'Gli Elogi del Foro Romano' in S. Panciera, ed. 
Iscrizioni greche e latine del Foro Romano e del Palatino: inventario 
generale, inediti, revisioni, 122-124.  
Green, S. J. (2000) 'Multiple Interpretation of the Opening and Closing of the 
Temple of Janus: A Misunderstanding of Ovid Fasti 1.281' in Mnemosyne 
53, 302-309. 
Green, S. J. (2004) 'Playing with Marble: The Monuments of the Caesars in 
Ovid's Fasti' in Classical Quarterly 54, 224-239. 
Gros, P. (1976) Aurea Templa: recherches sur l'architecture relgieuse de Rome  
l'poque d'Auguste. (cole Franaise). 
Gros, P. (1996) 'Iulius, Divus, Aedes' in M. Steinby, ed. Lexicon Topographicum 
Urbis Romae, (Quasar) 3, 116-119. 
Gruen, E. S. (1982) 'Augustus and the Ideology of War and Peace' in R. Winkes, 
ed. The Age of Augustus: interdisciplinary conference held at Brown 
University Providence Rhode Island, 1982, (Louvain-la-Neuve: Art and 
Archaeology Publications, Collge Erasme) 51-72. 
Gruen, E. S. (1990) 'The Imperial Policy of Augustus' in K. Raaflaub, ed. Between 
Republic and Empire: Interpretations of Augustus and His Principate, 
(University of California Press) 395-416. 
Gruen, E. S. (1996) 'The expansion of the empire under Augustus' in A. K. 
Bowman, Champlin, E. and Lintott, A., ed. Cambridge Ancient History: 
- 334 - 
The Augustan Empire  43 B.C.-A.D.69, (Cambridge University Press) 148-
Gruter, J. (1707) Inscriptiones Antiquae totius orbis Romani (Amst.). 
Gurval, R. A. (1995) Actium and Augustus: The Politics and Emotions of Civil 
War. (Univ. of Michigan Press). 
Hafner, G. (1989) 'Die 'Romana Victoria' in der Curia Iulia' in Archologischer 
Anzeiger 553-558. 
Hall, J. (2008) 'The Rhetorical Design and Success of Cicero's Twelfth Philippic' 
in T. Stevenson and Wilson, M., ed. Cicero's Philippics: History, Politics 
and Ideology, 282-304. (Polygraphia Ltd). 
Hall, J. F. (1986) 'The Saeculum Novum of Augustus and its Etruscan 
Antecedents' in Aufstieg und Niedergang der rmischen Welt II.16.3, 
2564-89. 
Harries, J. (2006) Cicero and the Jurists. From Citizens' Law to the Lawful State. 
(Duckworth). 
Harris, W. V. (1979) War and Imperialism in Republican Rome, 327-70 B.C. 
(Clarendon Press). 
Hussler, R. (2002) 'Writing Latin - from resistance to assimilation: language, 
culture and society in N.Italy and S.Gaul' in A. E. Cooley, ed. Becoming 
Roman, Writing Latin? Literary and Epigraphy in the Roman West, 
(Portsmouth, R.I.: Journal of Roman Archaeology L.L.C.) 61-76. 
Helzle, M. (1989) Publii Ovidii Nasonis Epistularum ex Ponto liber IV. (Georg 
OLMS Verlag Hildesheim). 
Heslin, P. (2007) 'Augustus, Domitian and the so-called Horologium Augusti' in 
Journal of Roman Studies 97, 1-20. 
Hoffmann, F., Minas-Nerpel, M. and Pfeiffer, S. (2009) Die dreisprachige Stele 
des C. Cornelius Gallus. (Walter de Gruyter). 
Hlkeskamp, K.-J. (2006) 'History and collective memory in the Middle Republic' 
in N. Rosenstein and Morstein-Marx, R., ed. A Companion to the Roman 
Republic, (Blackwell) 478-95.  
Holland, L. B. (1946) 'The Triple Arch of Augustus' in American Journal of 
Archaeology 50, 52-59. 
Holloway, R. R. (1984) 'Who's Who on the Ara Pacis?' in Studi e Materiali (Studi 
in onore di Achlle Adriani) 6, 625-628. 
- 335 - 
Hlscher, T. (1967) Victoria Romana: Archologische Untersuchungen zur 
Geschichte und Wesensart der rmischen Siegesgttin von den Anfngen 
bis zum Ende des 3. Jhs. n. Chr. (Philipp von Zabern). 
Homolle, T. B. X.-. (1897) in Bulletin de correspondance hellnique. 21, 620-
Howgego, C. (1995) Ancient History from coins. (Routledge). 
Hucher, E. (1868-1874) L'Art Gaulois, ou, Les Gaulois d'aprs leurs Mdailles. 
(Par. &c.). 
Hurwit, J. M. (1999) The Athenian Acropolis: History, Mythology, and 
Archaeology from the Neolithic Era to the Present. (Cambridge University 
Press). 
Isaac, B. (1990) The Limits of Empire: The Roman Army in the East. (Clarendon 
Press). 
Jacquemin, A. and Laroche, D. (1982) 'Notes sur Trois Piliers Delphiques' in 
Bulletin de correspondance hellnique. 106, 191-218. 
Jal, P. (1961) 'Pax Civilis - Concordia' in Revue des tudes latines 39, 210-231. 
Jal, P. (1967) Florus : Oeuvres. vol.1. (Les Belles Lettres). 
Jones, J. E. (1987) 'Cities of victory: parallels and patterns' in ed. Nikopolis 1 : 
praktika tou protou Diethnous Symposiou gia te Nikopole (23-29 
Septemvriou 1984), ( Demos Prevezas) 99-108. 
Khler, H. (1965) Der Fries vom Reiterdenkmal des Aemilius Paullus in Delphi. 
(Mann). 
Keaveney, R. (1988) Views of Rome from the Thomas Ashby Collection in the 
Vatican Library. (Scala Publications Ltd.). 
Kellum, B. A. (1994) 'What We See and Don't See: Narrative Structure and the 
Ara Pacis Augustae' in Art History 17, 26-45. 
Kleiner, D. E. E. (1978) 'The Great Friezes of the Ara Pacis Augustae.  Greek 
Sources, Roman Derivatives, and Augustan Social Policy' in MEFRA 90, 
753- 785. 
Kleiner, D. E. E. and Buxton, B. (2008) 'Pledges of Empire: The Ara Pacis and 
Donations of Rome' in American Journal of Archaeology 112, 57-89. 
Kleiner, D. E. E. and Kleiner, F. S. (1977) 'Review' in American Journal of 
Archaeology 81, 260-262. 
- 336 - 
Kleiner, F. S. (1989) 'The study of Roman triumphal and honorary arches 50 years 
after Khler' in Journal of Roman Archaeology 2, 195-206. 
Kondratieff, E. (2004) 'The Column and Coinage of C. Duilius: Innovations in 
Iconography in Large and Small Media in the Middle Republic' in Scripta 
Classics Israelica 23, 1-39. 
Konstan, D. (2005) 'Clemency as a Virtue' in Classical Philology 100, 337-346. 
Koortbojian, M. (2006) 'The Bringer of Victory: Imagery and Institution at the 
Advent of Empire' in D. a. Welch, ed. Representations of War in Ancient 
Rome, (Cambridge University Press). 
Kuttner, A. (1993) 'Some New Grounds for Narrative: Marcus Antonius' Base 
(The Ara Domiti Ahenobarbi) and Republic Biographies' in P. J. Holliday, 
ed. Narrative and Event in Ancient Art, (Cambridge University Press) 198-
Kuttner, A. (1995) Dynasty and Empire in the Age of Augustus: The Case of the 
Boscoreale Cups (University of California Press). 
LOrange, H. P. (1962) 'Ara Pacis Augustae: La zona floreale' in Acta ad 
archaeologiam et artium historiam pertinentia 1, 9-16. 
La Rocca, E. (1983) Ara Pacis Augustae: In occasione del restauro della fronte 
orientale. (L'ERMA di Bretschneider). 
Laffi, U. (1966) Adtributio e Contributio: Problemi del sistema politico-
ammisitrativo dello stato Romano. (Nistri-Lischi). 
Laffi, U. (2007) Colonie e Muncipi nello Stato Romano. (Edizioni di Storia e 
Letteratura). 
Lamboglia, N. (1938) Il Trofeo di Augusto alla Turbia (Mostra Augustea della 
Romanit). 
Lanciani, R. (1889) 'Il foro di Augusto' in Bullettino della Commissione 
Archeologica Comule di Roma 17, 26-34. 
Lange, C. H. (2009) Res Publica Constituta: Actium, Apollo and the 
Accomplishment of the Triumviral Assignment. vol.10. (Brill). 
Lassandro, D. (1991) 'La Pro Marcello ciceroniana e la Clementia Cesaris' in M. 
Sordi, ed. L'immagine dell'uomo politico: vita pubblica e morale 
nell'antichit, (Vita e Pensiero) 195-200. 
Lerouge, C. (2007) L'image des Parthes dans le monde grco-romain: Du dbut 
du Ier sicle av. J.-C. jusqu' la fin du Haut-Empire romain. (Frans 
Steiner Verlag). 
- 337 - 
Letta, C. (1976) 'La dinastia dei Cozii e la romanizzazione delle Alpi occidentali' 
in Athenaeum 54, 37-76. 
Letta, C. (1994) 'Postille sulle iscrizioni della dinastia Cozia' in Segusium - 
ricerche e studi valsusini vol. speciale: Susa: Bimillernario dell'Arco. Atti 
del Convegno (2-3 Ottobre 1992). 112-127. 
Letta, C. (2001) 'Ancora sulle civitates di Cozio e sulla Praefectura di Albanus' in 
S. Giorcelli Bersani, ed. Gli Antichi e la Montagna: Ecologia, religione, 
economia e politica del territorio, (Celid) 149-166. 
Letta, C. (2004) 'L'arco di Susa e il suo rapport con il 'Tropaeum Alpium'' in R. C. 
de Marinis and Spadea, G., ed. I Liguri: un antico populo europeo tra 
Alpie e Mediterraneo, (Skira) 538-9. 
Levi, M. A. (1985) ''Pax romana' e imperialismo' in M. Sordi, ed. La pace nel 
mondo antico, (Vita e Pensiero) 203-210. 
Levick, B. (1985) The Government of the Roman Empire: A Sourcebook. (Croom 
Helm). 
Ligorio, P. (1553) Libro di M. Pyrrho Ligori Napolitano delle antichit di Roma, 
nel quale si tratta de' circi, theatri, & anfitheatri. Con le Paradosse, quai 
confutano la commune opinione sopra varii luoghi della citt di Roma 
(Per Michele Tramezino). 
Long, J.-D. (1849) 'Recherches sur les antiquits romaines du pays des 
Vocontiens' in Acadmie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres. Mmoires 
prsents par divers savants etc. sr. 2. tom. 2. 1843, etc. 4. (Imprimerie 
Royale) 2, 278-482. 
Luce, T. J. (2009) 'The Dating of Livy's First Decade' in J. D. Chaplin and Kraus, 
C. S., ed. Livy, (Oxford University Press) 17-48. 
MacKendrick, P. (1995) The Speeches of Cicero: Context, Law, Rhetoric. 
(Duckworth). 
Magi, F. (1963) 'Le iscrizioni recentemente scoperte sull'Obelisco Vaticano' in 
Studi Romani 11, 50-56. 
Makin, E. (1921) 'The triumphal route, with particular reference to the Flavian 
Triumph' in Journal of Roman Studies 11, 25-36. 
Malacrino, C. G. (2007) 'Il Monumento di Ottaviano a Nicopoli e l'opera 
reticolata in Grecia: Diffussione, caratteristiche, significato.' in K. L. 
Zachos, ed. Nikopolis 2: Praktika tou Deuterou Diethnous Sumposiou gia 
te Nikopole (11-15 September 2002), (Hidryma Aktia Nikopolis) 371-391.  
- 338 - 
Manuwald, G. (2007a) Cicero, Philippics 3-9.  Volume 1: Introduction, text and 
Translation, References and Indexes. (Walter de Gruyter). 
Manuwald, G. (2007b) 'Cicero, Philippics 3-9. Volume 2: Commentary' in 2: 
Commentary,  
Marchese, R. R. (2008) 'Diseguaglianza, potere, giochi di ruolo. Processi di 
formalizzione del beneficium fra pro Marcello e de beneficiis' in G. 
Picone, ed. Clementia Caesaris: Modelli  etici, parnesi, e retorica 
dell'esilio, (Palumbo) 129-154. 
Mattingly, D. J. (2011) Imperialism, Power, and Identity: Experiencing the 
Roman Empire. (Princeton University Press). 
McDonnell, M. (2006) Roman Manliness. (Cambridge University Press). 
McGowen, S. (2009) Sacred and Civic Stone Monuments of the Northwest Roman 
Provinces (DPhil, Classical Archaeology Oxford). 
McKenzie, J. (2007) The architecture of Alexandria and Egypt, c. 300 B.C. to 
A.D. 700. (Yale University Press). 
Mennella, G. (1978) 'Ipotesi sull'iscrizione dei re Cozi nel teatro di Augusta 
Taurinorum' in Rendiconti (Istituto Lomardo Accademia di Scienze e 
Lettere: Classe di Lettere e Scienze Morali e Storiche) 112, 96-100. 
Mercando, L. (1993) La Porta del Paradiso: un restauro a Susa. (Stamperia 
Artistica Nazionale). 
Milani, C. (1985) 'Terminologia della pace nel mondo antico' in M. Sordi, ed. La 
pace nel mondo antico, (Vita e Pensiero) 17-29. 
Mitchell, S. and Waelkens, M. (1998) Pisidian Antioch. (Duckworth). 
Momigliano, A. (1942a) 'Terra Marique' in Journal of Roman Studies 32, 53-64. 
Moore, J. P. (forthcoming) The Caduceus in the Second Punic War. 
Moretti, G. (1948) Ara Pacis Augustae. (Roma : La Libreria dello stato). 
Moretti, L. (1953) Iscrizioni agonistische greche. (A. Signorelli). 
Muller, V. (1943) 'The Shrine of Janus Geminus in Rome' in American Journal of 
Archaeology 47, 437-440. 
Murray, W. M. (2007) 'Recovering rams from the Battle of Actium.  Experimental 
archaeology at Nicopolis' in K. L. Zachos, ed. Nikopolis 2: Praktika tou 
Deuterou Diethnous Sumposiou gia te Nikopole (11-15 September 2002), 
(Hidryma Aktia Nikopolis) 445-451.  
- 339 - 
Murray, W. M. and Petsas, P. M. (1989) Octavian's Campsite Memorial for the 
Actian War ( American Philosophical Society). 
Narducci, E. (1991) 'Gli slogans delle pace in Cicerone' in R. Uglione, ed. Atti del 
Convegno Nazionale di Studi su la Pace nel Mondo Antico.  Torino 9-10-
11 Aprile 1990, 165-191.  
Nash, E. (1970) Pictorial Dictionary of Ancient Rome. vol.2. (Hacker Art Books). 
Nedergaard, E. (1988a) 'nouve indagini sull'Arco di Augusto nel Foro Romano' in 
Quaderni del Centro di Studio per l'archeologia etrusco-italica 16, 37-43. 
Nedergaard, E. (1993) 'Arcus Augusti 1-2' in E. M. Steinby, ed. Lexicon 
Topographicum Urbis Romae, (Quasar) 1, 80-85. 
Nedergaard, E. (1994-95) 'La collacazione originaria dei Fasti Capitolini e gli 
archi di Augusto nel Foro Romano' in Bullettino della Commissione 
Archeologica Comunale di Roma 96, 33-70. 
Nedergaard, E. (1999) 'Arcus Augusti (a. 29 a.C.); Arcus Augusti (a. 19 a.C)' in 
M. Steinby, ed. Lexicon Topographicum Urbis Romae, (Quasar) 4, 226-
Nedergaard, E. (2001) 'Facts  and Fiction about the Fasti Capitolini' in Analecta 
Romana Instituti Danici 27, 107-127. 
Nedergaard, E. (2004) 'Reconstructing the Fasti Capitolini' in Analecta Romana 
Instituti Danici 30, 83-99. 
Nenci, G. (1951a) 'La Terra di Cozio e la Terra di Ideonno' in Rendiconti 
dell'Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, classe di Scienze morali, storiche e 
filologiche 8.6, 299-305. 
Nicolet, C. (1991) Space, Geography and Politics of the Early Roman Empire. 
(The University of Michigan Press). 
Nielsen, I. (1993) 'Castor, Aedes, Templum' in M. Steinby, ed. Lexicon 
Topographicum Urbis Romae, (Quasar) 1, 242-245. 
Nielsen, I. and Poulsen, B. (1992) The Temple of Castor and Pollux I. (Edizioni 
de Luca). 
Nilson, K. A. and Persson, C. B. (2008b) 'The measuring system and proportions 
of the temple' in S. Sande and Zahle, J., ed. The Temple of Castor and 
Pollux III: The Augustan Temple, ('L'Erma' di Bretschneider) 75-101. 
Oberziner, G. (1900) Le Guerre di Augusto contro i Populi Alpini. (Ermanno 
Loescher & Co.). 
- 340 - 
Oliver, A. J. (1969) 'Octavian's inscription at Nicopolis' in American Journal of 
Philology 90, 178-182. 
Osgood, J. (2006) Caesar's Legacy: Civil War and the Emergence of the Roman 
Empire. (Cambridge University Press). 
Ossi, A. (2011) 'The Arch of Hadrian and Sabina at Pisidian Antioch' in E. K. 
Gazda and Ng, D., Y, ed. Building a new Rome : The Imperial Colony fo 
Pisidian Antioch (25 BC- AD 700), (Kelsey Museum of Archaeology) 85-
stenberg, I. (2009a) Staging the World: Spoils, Captives, and Representations in 
the Roman Triumphal Procession. (Oxford Studies in Ancient Culture and 
Representation). 
stenberg, I. (2009b) 'From Conquest to Pax Romana. The Signa Recepta and the 
end of the Triumphal Fasti in 19 B.C.' in O. Hekster, Schmidt-Hofner, S. 
and Witschel, C., ed. Ritual dynamics and religious change in the Roman 
Empire : proceedings of the eighth Workshop of the International Network 
Impact of Empire, Heidelberg, july 5-7, 2007, (Brill) 53-75. 
Palombi, D. (1996) 'Honos et Virtus, Aedes' in Steinby, ed. Lexicon 
Topographicum Urbis Romae, 31-33. (Quasar). 
Panvinio, O. (1558) Onuphrii Panuinii Veronensis fratris. eremitae Augustiniani 
Fastorum. Libri. V a. Romulo. Rege. usque ad. imp. Caesarem Carolum. V 
Austrium. Augustum. ( In officina Sanctandreana). 
Parchami, A. (2009) Hegemonic Peace and Empire: The Pax Romana, 
Britannica, and Americana. (Routledge). 
Pekry, T. (1985) Das Rmische Kaiserbildnis in Staat, Kult und Gesellschaft, 
dargestellt anhand der Schriftquellen. vol.III.5. (Gebr. Mann Verlag). 
Pelling, C. (1996) 'The Triumviral Period' in A. K. Bowman, Champlin, E. and 
Lintott, A., ed. Cambridge Ancient History, second edition, volume 10: 
The Augustan Empire, 43 B.C. - A.D. 69, (Cambridge University Press) 1-
Petit, P. (1967) Pax Romana. (B. T. Batsford Ltd.). 
Petsas, P. M. (1974) 'Anaskaphe Romanikes Nikopoleos' in Pratktika 79-88. 
Philadelpheus, A. (1913) 'Anaskaphai Nikopoleos' in Praktika 83-112. 
Phillips, J. E. (1974) 'Verbs compunded with Trans- in Livy's Triumph reports' in 
Classical Philology 69, 54-55. 
- 341 - 
Picard, C. (1934) 'Observations sur l'origine et l'influence des reliefs pittoresques 
dits "Alexandrins"' in Melanges Maspero II, 313-333. 
Picard, C. (1949) 'Le Trophe Augusten de la Turbie' in Revue Archologique 
34, 151-6. 
Picard, G. C. (1957) Les Trophes Romains: Contribution  l'histoire de la 
Religion et d l'Art triomphal de Rome. (E. de Boccard). 
Picone, G. (2008) 'Il paradigma Marcello. Tra esilio e clementia Caesaris' in G. 
Picone, ed. Clementia Caesaris: Modelli etici, parenesi e retorica 
dell'esilio, (Palumbo) 63-82. 
Pohlsander, H. A. (1969) 'Victory: The Story of a Statue' in Historia 18, 588-97. 
Poinssot, L. (1929) L'autel de la gens augusta  Cathage. (Tournier). 
Pollitt, J. J. (1986) Art in the Hellenistic Age. (Cambridge University Press). 
Pomtow, H. (1921) 'Delphische Neufunde V' in Klio 17, 153-203. 
Prag, J. R. W. (2006) 'Cave Navem' in Classical Quarterly 56, 538-547. 
Price, J. (2001) Thucydides and Internal War. (Cambridge University Press). 
Prieur, J. (1968) La province romaine des Alpes Cottiennes. (Imprimerie R. 
Gauthier). 
Prieur, J. (1982) 'Les arcs monumentaux dans les Alps occidentales: Aoste, Suse, 
Aix-les-Bains' in Aufstieg und Niedergang der rmischen Welt 2.12.1, 
442-475. 
Quinn, J. C. (2010) 'The reinvention of Lepcis' in Bollettino di Archeologia on 
line speciale A / A7 / 6, 52-69. 
Raaflaub, K. A. (2007) 'Introduction: Searching for Peace the the Ancient World' 
in K. A. Raaflaub, ed. War and Peace in the Ancient World, 1-33. 
(Blackwell Publishing Ltd.). 
Raaflaub, K. A. (2007) War and Peace in the Ancient World. (Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd.). 
Rackham, H. (1947) Pliny: Natural History vol II (Heinemann). 
Ramage, E. S. (1997) 'Augustus' Propaganda in Gaul' in Klio 79, 117-160. 
Ramage, E. S. (1998) 'Augustus' Propaganda in Spain' in Klio 80, 434-490. 
Ramsey, J. T. (2003) Cicero Philippics I-II. (Cambridge University Press). 
- 342 - 
Rehak, P. (2001) 'Aeneas or Numa?  Rethinking the Meaning of the Ara Pacis 
Augustae' in The Art Bulletin 83, 190-208. 
Rehak, P. (2006) Imperium and Cosmos: Augustus and the northern Campus 
Martius. (The University of Wisonsin Press). 
Reinach, A. (1913) 'Notes tarentines - Pyrrhus et la Nik de Tarente' in Neapolis: 
rivista di archeologia, epigrafia e numismatica 1, 19-29. 
Revell, L. (2009) Roman Imperialism and Local Identities. (Cambridge University 
Press). 
Rey, L. M. B. R. (1898) 'Le Royaume de Cottius et la province des Alpes 
cottiennes d'Auguste  Diocltien.' in Bulletin de L'Academie Delphinale 
11, 237-486. 
Reynolds, J. (1971) 'Roman Inscriptions 1966-1970' in Journal of Roman Studies 
61, 136-152. 
Rhomaios, K. (1921) 'Parartema tou Archaiologikou Deltiou 1920-21' in 
Archaiologikon Deltion 6, 165-172. 
Rhomaios, K. (1925) 'Parartema: tou archaioloikou Deltiou tou 1922-25.' in 
Archaiologikon Deltion 9, 1-12. 
Rich, J. W. (1996) 'Augustus and the spolia opima' in Chiron 26, 85-127. 
Rich, J. W. (1998) 'Augustus' Parthian honours, the temple of Mars Ultor and the 
arch in the Forum Romanum' in Papers of the British School at Rome 66, 
71-128. 
Rich, J. W. (2003) 'Augustus, war and peace' in L. de Blois, Erdkamp, P., Hekster, 
O., de Kleijn, G. and Mols, S., ed. The Representation and Perception of 
Roman Imperial Power: proceedings of the third workshop of the 
international network Impact of Empire (Roman Empire, c. 200 B.C. - 
A.D. 476), Netherlands Institute in Rome, March 20-23, 2002, (J. C. 
Gieben) 329-357. 
Rich, J. W. (2008) 'Treaties, allies and the Roman conquest of Italy' in P. de 
Souza and France, J., ed. War and Peace in Ancient and Medieval History, 
(Cambridge University Press) 51-75. 
Rich, J. W. and Williams, J. H. C. (1999) 'Leges et Ivra P. R. Restitvit: A New 
Aureus of Octavian and the Settlement of 28-27 B.C.' in Numismatic 
Chronicle 159, 169-213. 
Richardson (1992) A New Topographical Dictionary of Ancient Rome. (Johns 
Hopkins University Press). 
- 343 - 
Richardson, L. J. (1973) 'The Tribunals of the Praetors of Rome' in Mitteilungen 
des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts, Rmische Abteilung 80, 219-
Rieks, R. (1970) 'Sebasta und Aktia' in Hermes 98, 96-116. 
Robinson, D. M. (1926) 'Roman Sculptures from Colonia Caesarea (Pisidian 
Antioch)' in Art Bulletin 9, 5-69. 
Roller, M. (2009) 'The exemplary past in Roman historiography and culture' in A. 
Feldherr, ed. The Cambridge Companion to the Roman Historians, 
(Cambridge University Press) 214-230. 
Romanelli, P. (1940) 'Gli Archi di Tiberio e di Traiano in Leptis Magna' in Africa 
Italiana 7, 99-103. 
Romeo, I. (1998) Ingenuus Leo: L'immagine di Agrippa. (L'Erma di 
Bretschneider). 
Romer, F. E. (1979) 'Gaius Caesar's Military Diplomatic in the East' in 
Transactions of the American Philological Association 109, 199-214. 
Rose, C. B. (1990) '"Princes" and Barbarians on the Ara Pacis' in American 
Journal of Archaeology 94, 453-467. 
Rose, C. B. (1997) Dynastic Commemoration and Imperial Portraiture in the 
Julio-Claudian Period. (Cambridge University Press). 
Rose, C. B. (2005) 'The Parthians in Augustan Rome' in American Journal of 
Archaeology 109, 21-75. 
Rosenstein, N. (2007) 'War and Peace, Fear and Reconciliation at Rome' in K. A. 
Raaflaub, ed. War and Peace in the Ancient World, 226-244. (Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd.). 
Rossini, O. (2006) Ara Pacis. (Electa). 
Rosso, E. (2006) L'image de l'empereur en Gaule Romaine: portraits et 
inscriptions. (CTHS). 
Roth-Congs, A. (1993-1994) 'Inscription des Escoyres dans le Queyras' in 
Rivista di Studi Liguri 59-60, 72-101. 
Rubin, B. (2011) 'Ruler Cult and Colonial Identity: The Imperial Sanctuary at 
Pisidian Antioch' in E. K. Gazda and Ng, D., Y, ed. Building a new Rome: 
The Imperial Colony of Pisidian Antioch (25 BC - AD 700), 33-60. 
(Kelsey Museum of Archaeology). 
- 344 - 
Ruscu, L. (2006) 'Actia Nicopolis' in Zeitschrift fr Papyrologie und Epigraphik. 
157, 247-255. 
Ryberg, I. S. (1949) 'The Procession of the Ara Pacis' in Memoirs of the Academy 
Academy in Rome 19, 77-102. 
Schfer, T. (1993) 'Sur Datierung des Siegesdenkmals von Aktium' in 
Mitteilungen des Deutschen Archologischen Instituts, Athenische 
Abteilung 108, 239-248. 
Schfer, T. (1998) spolia et signa: Baupolitik und Reichskultur nach dem 
Parthererfolg des Augustus. (Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht). 
Scheers, S. (1981) 'The origins and evolution of coinage in Belgic Gaul' in B. 
Cunliffe, ed. Coinage and society in Britain and Gaul: some current 
problems, 18-24. (Council for British Archaeology). 
Schneider, R. M. (1986) Bunte Barbaren : Orientalenstatuen aus farbigem 
Marmor in der rmischen Reprsentationskunst. (Wernersche 
Verlagsgesellschaft). 
Schneider, R. M. (1998) 'Die Faszination des Feindes: Bilder der Parther und des 
Orients in Rom' in J. Wiesehfer, ed. Das Partherreich und seine 
Zeugnisse, 95-146. (Franz Steiner Verlag). 
Schneider, R. M. (2007) 'Friend and Foe: the Orient in Rome' in V. S. Curtis and 
Stewart, S., ed. The Age of the Parthians, 50-86. (I.B. Tauris). 
Scott, R. T. (1999) 'Vesta, Aedes' in M. Steinby, ed. Lexicon Topographicum 
Urbis Romae, (Quasar) 4, 125-128. 
Scott, R. T. (2000) 'The triple arch of Augustus and the Roman triumph' in 
Journal of Roman Archaeology 13, 183-191. 
Scullard, H. H. (1982) From the Gracchi to Nero : a history of Rome from 133BC 
to AD68. (Methuen & Co. Ltd). 
Sears, D. (2000-2002) Roman coins and their values. (Spink). 
Sellwood, D. G. (1971) An Introduction to the Coinage of Parthia. (Spink & Son 
Ltd.). 
Shackleton Bailey, D. R. (1965-70) Cicero's letters to Atticus. (Cambridge 
University Press). 
Shackleton Bailey, D. R. (1967) Cicero's letters to Atticus. vol.6. (Cambridge 
University Press). 
- 345 - 
Shackleton Bailey, D. R., Ramsey, J. T. and Manuwald, G. (2009a) Cicero 
Orations Philippics 1-6. (Harvard University Press). 
Shackleton Bailey, D. R., Ramsey, J. T. and Manuwald, G. (2009b) Cicero 
Orations Philippics 7-14. (Harvard University Press). 
Shelmeyer, M. (1999) Stadtrmische Ehrenstatuen der republikanischen Zeit. 
(Franz Steiner Verlag). 
Shelmeyer, M. (2002) 'Die Siegesmonumente Octavians nach Actium.  Zur 
Lokalisierung des bronzenen Viersulendenkmals (Serv. georg. 3,29)' in J. 
Spielvogel, ed. Res publica reperta : zur Verfassung und Gesellschaft der 
rmischen Republik und des frhen Prinzipats : Festschrift fr Jochen 
Bleicken zum 75. Geburtstag, ( F. Steiner) 216-226. 
Sherwin-White, N. (1990) Roman Foreign Policy in the East: 168 B.C. to A.D.1. 
(Duckworth). 
Shipley, F. W. (1930) 'Concerning the Rostra of Julius Caesar' in F. W. Shipley, 
ed. Papers on classical subjects : in memory of John Max Wulfing, (St. 
Louis) 88-102. 
Silberberg-Peirce, S. (1986) 'The Many Faces of the Pax Augusta: Images of War 
and Peace in Rome in Gallia Narbonensis' in Art History 9, 306-324. 
Simon, E. (1967) Ara Pacis Augustae. (New York Graphic Society). 
Simon, E. (2001) 'Mercurius im Lupa-Relief der Ara Pacis' in Archologischer 
Anzeiger 575-582. 
Simpson, C. J. (1992) 'On the Unreality of the Parthian Arch' in Latomus 51, 835-
Simpson, C. J. (1993) 'The Original Site of the Fasti Capitolini' in Historia 42, 
61-81. 
Simpson, C. J. (1998) 'The Curia Iulia and the Ara Victoriae: A 'Politico-
Religious' Imperative in August 29 B.C.' in Studies in Latin Literature and 
Roman History 9, 225-230. 
Skinner, Q. (1989) 'Language and Political Change' in T. Ball, Farr, J. and 
Hanson, R. L., ed. Political Innovation and Conceptual Change, 
(Cambridge University Press) 6-23. 
Slavazzi, F. (1996) 'Agrippa a Segusium: Su una statua loricata bronzea da Susa' 
in Acme 49, 153-164. 
Smith, R. R. R. (1987) 'The Imperial Reliefs from the Sebasteion at Aphrodisias' 
in Journal of Roman Studies 77, 88-138. 
- 346 - 
Smith, R. R. R. (1988) 'Simulacra Gentium: the Ethne from the Sebasteion at 
Aphrodisias' in JRS 78, 50-77. 
Solin, H. (1981) 'Analecta Epigraphica' in Arctos 15, 102-123. 
Sordi, M. (1985) 'Introduzione: dalla 'koin eirene' alla' pax Romana'' in M. Sordi, 
ed. La pace nel mondo antico, (Vita e Pensiero) 3-16. 
Sordi, M. (1985) ''Pax deorum' e libert religosa nella storia di Roma' in M. Sordi, 
ed. La pace nel mondo antico, (Vita e Pensiero) 146-154. 
Sordi, M. (1985) La pace nel mondo antico. (Vita e Pensiero). 
Spaeth, B. S. (1994) 'The Goddess Ceres in the Ara Pacis Augustae and the 
Carthage Relief' in American Journal of Archaeology 98, 65-100. 
Spannagel, M. (1999) Exemplaria principis : Untersuchungen zu Entstehung und 
Ausstattung des Augustusforums. (Archologie und Geschichte). 
Steinby, M. (1987) 'Il lato orientale del Foro Romano: Proposte di lettura' in 
Arctos 21, 139-184. 
Stevenson, G. H. (1934) 'The Imperial Administration' in S. A. Cook, Adcock, F. 
E. and Charlesworth, M. P., ed. Cambridge Ancient History. volume 10. 
The Augustan empire 44 B.C. - A.D. 70, (Cambridge University Press) 
182-217. 
Stevenson, T. and Wilson, M. (2008) 'Cicero's Philippics: History, Rhetoric, and 
Ideology' in T. Stevenson and Wilson, M., ed. Cicero's Philippics: 
History, Rhetoric and Ideology, (Polygraphia Ltd) 1-21. 
Stilp, F. (2003) Mariage et Suovetaurilia: tude sur le soi-distant "Autel de 
Domitius Ahenobarbus". (G. Bretschneider). 
Strong, E. (1937a) 'Terra Mater or Italia?' in Journal of Roman Studies 27, 114-
Studniczka, F. (1909) Zur Ara Pacis. (B.G. Teubner). 
Sumi, G. S. (2009) 'Monuments and Memory: The Aedes Castoris in the 
formation of Augustan Ideology' in Classical Quarterly 59, 167-186. 
Sutherland, C. H. V. (1941) 'C. Baebius and the Coinage of (?)Dium under 
Tiberius' in Journal of Roman Studies 31, 73-81. 
Sutherland, C. H. V. (1976) 'Octavian's gold and silver coinage from c. 32 to 27 
B.C.' in Numismatica e Antichit Classiche V, 129-157. 
- 347 - 
Sutherland, C. H. V. (1984) The Roman Imperial Coinage. vol.Volume I. (Spink 
and Son Ltd.). 
Sydenham, E. A. (1952) The Roman Republican Coinage. (Spink & Son, 
Limited). 
Syme, R. (1958) 'Imperator Caesar: A Study in Nomenclature' in Historia 7, 172-
Syme, R. (1989) 'Janus and Parthia in Horace' in J. Diggle, Hall, J. B. and Jocelyn, 
H. D., ed. Studies in Latin Literature and Its Tradition in Honour of C. O. 
Brink, (Cambridge Philological Society) 113-124. 
Syme, R. (1997) History in Ovid (Clarendon Press). 
Syme, R. (2002) The Roman Revolution. (Oxford University Press). 
Taylor, L. R. (1946) 'The Date of the Capitoline Fasti' in Classical Philology 41, 
1-11. 
Taylor, L. R. (1950a) 'Annals of the Roman Consulship of the Arch of Augustus' 
in Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 94, 511-516. 
Taylor, L. R. (1950b) 'Degrassi's Edition of the Consular and Triumphal Fasti' in 
Classical Philology 45, 84-95. 
Taylor, L. R. (1951a) 'New Indications of Augustan Editing in the Fasti Capitolini' 
in Classical Philology 46, 73-80. 
Taylor, R. (2000) 'Seeing through the Shrine of Janus Geminus' in American 
Journal of Archaeology 104, 365. 
Themelis, P. G. (1983) Delphi: The Archaeological site and Museum (Ekdotike 
Athenon). 
Tidman, B. M. (1950) 'On the Foundation of the Actian Games' in Classical 
Quarterly 44, 123-125. 
Torelli, M. (1982) Typology and Structure of Roman Historical Reliefs. (Anna 
Arbor, The University of Michigan Press). 
Torelli, M. (1999) 'Pax Augusta, Ara' in E. M. Steinby, ed. Lexicon 
Topographicum Urbis Romae, (Quasar) 4, 70-74 
Tortorici, E. (1993) 'Curia Iulia' in M. Steinby, ed. Lexicon Topographicum Urbis 
Romae, (Quasar) 1, 332-334. 
Toynbee, J. M. C. (1953) 'The Ara Pacis Reconsidered and Historical Art in 
Roman Italy' in Proceedings of the British Academy 39, 67-95. 
- 348 - 
Toynbee, J. M. C. (1961) 'The 'Ara Pacis Augustae'' in Journal of Roman Studies 
51, 153-156. 
Tsakoumis, C. N. (2007) 'E Geometria kai architektonike tou mnemeiou tou 
Augoustou kai e schese tous me ten pole tes Nikopoles / The geometry and 
architecture of the Monument of Augustus and their relationship to the 
Roman city of Nicopolis' in K. L. Zachos, ed. Nikopolis 2:  Proceedings of 
the second International Nicopolis Symposium (11-15th September 2002), 
(Hidryma Aktia Nikopolis) 393-399. 
Valvo, A. (1985) 'Istituti di pace in Roman repubblicana' in M. Sordi, ed. La pace 
nel mondo antico, (Vita e Pensiero) 155-174. 
van Buren, A. W. (1913) 'The Ara Pacis Augustae' in The Journal of Roman 
Studies 3, 134-141. 
Van Deman, E. B. (1909) 'The So-Called Flavian Rostra' in American Journal of 
Archaeology 13, 170-186. 
van der Blom, H. (2003) 'Officium and Res Publica: Cicero's political role after 
the Ides of March' in Classica et Medievalia 54, 287-319. 
Verduchi, P. (1999) 'Rostra Augusti' in M. Steinby, ed. Lexicon Topographicum 
Urbis Romae, (Quasar) 4, 214-217.  
Vermeule, C. C. (1959) The goddess Roma in the art of the Roman empire (Spink 
and Son).  
Vermeule, C. C. (1968) Roman Imperial Art in Greece and Asia Minor. (Belknap 
Press of Harvard University Press). 
Versnel, H. S. (1980) Triumphus: An Inquiry into the Origin, Development and 
Meaning of the Roman Triumph. (Brill). 
Vickers, M. (1975) 'Mantegna and the Ara Pacis' in The J. P. Getty Museum 
Journal 2, 109-120. 
von Duhn, F. (1881) 'Sopra alcuni bassirilievi che ornavano un monumento 
pubblico romano dell'epoca di Augusto' in Annali dell' Instituto di 
Corrispondenza Archeologica 53, 302-329. 
Vota, D. (2004) 'L'occupazione romana della Alpi Cozie: Ipotesi sul processo 
d'intervento' in P. Del Vecchio, ed. La biblioteca di Segusium: Romanit 
valsusina, (Segusium - Societ di Ricerche e Studi Valsusini) 15-50. 
Waddy, L. (1950) Pax Romana and World Peace. (Chapman & Hall). 
Wallace-Hadrill, A. (1981) 'The Emperor and his Virtues' in Historia 30, 298-323. 
- 349 - 
Wallace-Hadrill, A. (1987) 'Time for Augustus: Ovid, Augustus and the Fasti' in 
M. Whitby and Hardie, P., ed. Homo Viator: Classical Essays for John 
Bramble, (Bolchazy-Carducci) 221-30. 
Wallace-Hadrill, A. (1998) 'To be Roman, Go Greek' in M. Austin, Harries, J. and 
Smith, C., ed. Modus Operandi: Essays in Honours of Geoffrey Rickman, 
(Institute of Classical Studies) 79-91. 
Wallace-Hadrill, A. (2008) Rome's Cultural Revolution. (Cambridge University 
Press). 
Weinstock, S. (1960) 'Pax and the 'Ara Pacis'' in Journal of Roman Studies 50, 44-
Weinstock, S. (1971) Divus Julius. (Oxford University Press). 
Wells, C. M. (1972) The German Policy of Augustus. (Clarendon Press). 
Wilson, A. and Schrle, K. (2009) 'A baker's funerary relief from Rome' in Papers 
of the British School at Rome 77, 101-123. 
Wilton-Ely, J. (1994) Giovanni Battista Piranesi : the complete etchings. vol.1. 
(Alan Wofsy). 
Winterbottom, M. (2002) 'Believing the Pro Marcello' in J. F. Miller, Damon, C. 
and Myers, K. S., ed. Vertis in usum: studies in honor of Edward 
Courtney, 24-38.  
Wirsching, A. (2000) 'How the obelisks reached Rome: evidence of Roman 
double-ships' in The International Journal of Nautical Archaeology 29, 
273-283. 
Wirszubski, C. (1954) 'Cicero's 'Cum Dignitate Otium': a reconsideration' in 
Journal of Roman Studies 44, 1-13. 
Wirszubski, C. (1960) Libertas as a political idea at Rome during the late 
republic and early principate. (Cambridge University Press). 
Woolf, G. (1993) 'Roman peace' in J. W. Rich and Shipley, G., ed. War and 
society in the Roman World, 171-195. (Routledge). 
Wnsche, R. (1994) 'Ara di Domizio Enobarbo' in ed. Enciclopedia dell' Arte 
Antica classica e orientale, secondo supplemento 1971-1994 II., (G. 
Treccani) 393-395. 
Zachos, K. L. (1995) 'Nomos Prebezas' in Archaiologikon Deltion 50, 421-426. 
Zachos, K. L. (1997) 'Nomos Prebezas' in Archaiologikon Deltion 52, 576-592. 
- 350 - 
Zachos, K. L. (2001a) To mnemeio tou Oktavianou Augoustou ste Nikopole : to 
tropaio tes naumachias tou Aktiou. (Athena). 
Zachos, K. L. (2001b) 'Excavations at the Actian Tropaeum at Nikopolis: a 
preliminary report' in J. Isager, ed. Foundation and Destruction: Nikopolis 
and Northwestern Greece, (The Danish Institute at Athens) 29-42. 
Zachos, K. L. (2003) 'The tropaeum of the sea-battle of Actium at Nikopolis: 
interim report' in Journal of Roman Archaeology 16, 64-92. 
Zachos, K. L. (2007) 'Ta glupta tou bomou sto Mnemeio tou Oktavianou 
Augoustou ste Nikopole: Mia prote proseggise / The sculptures of the altar 
on the Monument of Octavian at Nicopolis: a first approach' in K. L. 
Zachos, ed. Nikopolis 2: Praktika tou Deuterou Diethnous Sumposiou gia 
te Nikopole (11-15th September 2002), 411-434.  
Zachos, K. L. (2009) 'Le Sculture dell'Altare nel Monumento di Ottaviano 
Augusto a Nicopoli: un primo approccio' in ed. Patrasso colonia di 
Augusto. Atti del Convegno internazionale, Patrasso 23-24 marzo 2006, 
(Scuola Archeologica Italiana di Atene) 269-306. 
Zampaglione, G. (1973) The Idea of Peace in Antiquity. (Uniersity of Notre Dame 
Press). 
Zanker, P. (1968) Forum Augustum: das Bildprogramm. (Verlag Ernst Wasmuth 
Tbingen). 
Zanker, P. (1987) Augustus und die Macht der Bilder (Beck). 
Zanker, P. (1988) The Power of Images in the Age of Augustus. (The University of 
Michigan Press). 
Ziegler, K.-H. (1964) Die Beziehungen zwischen Rom und dem Partherreich: ein 
Beitrag zur Geschichte des Vlkerrechts. (Franz Steiner Verlag GMBH). 
Ziolkowski, A. (1992) The temple of Mid-Republican Rome and their Historical 
and Topographical Context. (L'Erma di Bretshneider). 
Maps and Illustrations 
MAP 1: MAP SHOWING THE LOCATIONS OF THE MAJOR MONUMENTS DISCUSSED IN THIS STUDY. I 
MAP 2: THE ACTIAN PROMONTORY AND AMBRACIAN GULF. II 
MAP 3: EGYPT, THE FIRST CATARACT AND THE ISLAND OF PHILAE . III 
MAP 4: THE FRENCH ALPS. IV 
MAP 5: MAP OF THE PYRENEES. V 
MAP 6: THE COTTIAN ALPS. VI 
Illustrations
 All images of coins, unless otherwise stated are taken from http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/. 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/
FIGURE 30: A HYPOTHETICAL RECONSTRUCTION OF TWO INSCRIPTION BLOCKS, NICOPOLIS. .. XXIII 
FIGURE 37: RELIEF SCULPTURES DEPICTING A SHIP PROW AND AN ATTENDANT, NICOPOLIS. . XXVII 
FIGURE 50: RECONSTRUCTION OF C. CORNELIUS GALLUS INSCRIPTION ON THE BASE OF THE 
FIGURE 51: DETAIL OF THE CLAMP HOLES FROM THE ORIGINAL INSCRIPTION OF C. CORNELIUS 
FIGURE 61: DRAWING OF THE WALL CARRYING THE THIRD TABLET AND THE FIRST AND SECOND 
FIGURE 64: RECONSTRUCTION OF THE THIRD AND FOUR PILASTERS OF THE FASTI TRIUMPHALES
FIGURE 65: RECONSTRUCTION OF THE FASTI CAPITOLINI ON THE TRIPLE ARCH IN THE FORUM 
FIGURE 72: RESTORATION OF A SECTION OF THE UPPER STOREY OF THE PORTICOS IN THE 
FIGURE 89: PROCESSIONAL FRIEZE ON SOUTH EXTERIOR WALL OF THE ARA PACIS AUGUSTAE . LVII 
FIGURE 98: THE PROCESSIONAL FRIEZE DECORATING THE UPPER SECTIONS OF THE ALTAR TABLE, 
FIGURE 99: FRAGMENTARY RELIEF SCULPTURE FROM THE SMALL FRIEZE OF THE SACRIFICIAL 
FIGURE 100: FRAGMENTARY SCULPTURE FROM THE LARGE FRIEZE OF THE SACRIFICIAL TABLE, 
FIGURE 115: THE HEAD OF THE FEMALE DEITY ON THE TELLUS PANEL AND THE HEAD OF MOST 
FIGURE 120: FORMIGS RECONSTRUCTION OF THE ALPINE TROPHY AT LA TURBIE, FRANCE. LXXIII 
FIGURE 130: DETAIL OF FORMIGS RECONSTRUCTION OF THE INSCRIPTION ON THE ALPINE 
FIGURE 137: DETAIL OF THE INSCRIPTION ON ATTIC OF THE ARCH OF AUGUSTUS AT SUSA . LXXXIV 
FIGURE 149:  THE SO-CALLED ALTAR OF DOMITIUS AHENOBARBUS AND THE WEST FRIEZE ON 
FIGURE 152: PLAN SHOWING THE ARCH OF AUGUSTUS, AND THE EXCAVATION SITE OF THE 
FIGURE 154: BRONZE HEAD, FOUND IN THE EXCAVATIONS OF THE PALAZZINA RAMELLA, SUSA
Map 1: Map showing the locations of the major monuments (black stars), and secondary sites (grey circles) discussed in this study (Image: author).
Map 2: The Actian promontory and Ambracian Gulf, showing the location of 
Octavians and Antonys campsites originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The map was sourced at 
Chrysostomous-Kefallonitou (2005) fig.2. 
Map 3: Egypt, with the location of the First Cataract and the island of Philae 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The map was sourced at 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ancient_Egypt_main_map.png 
Map 4: The French Alps showing the end of the Alpine chain, the Roman road 
through the mountains and the location of the Trophy monument at La Turbie 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The map was sourced at The Barrington Atlas of the Greek and 
Roman World, map 16. 
Map 5: Map of the Pyrenees, showing the location of Panissars between Rousillon 
(to the north) and Empordon (to the south) and the route of the Roman roads 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The map was sourced at Castellvi et al (2008) fig. 1. 
Map 6: The Cottian Alps originally presented here cannot be made freely available 
via ORA because of copyright reasons. The map was sourced at The Barrington 
Atlas of the Greek and Roman World, map 17. 
Figure 1: Fragment XL of the Fasti Triumphales, with the two entries for 40 B.C. emphasised by the black outline 
(image: author, from the Musei Capitolini, Rome). 
Figure 3: Coin of c. 48 B.C.minted by L. Hostilius Saserna, depicting a female 
diademed head on the obverse, and a winged victory carrying a trophy and winged 
caduceus (RRC  448/1) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford5.html 
Figure 2: Coin of 70 B.C. minted by Q. Fufius Calenus and Mucius Cordus, 
representing the unification of Italy and Rome after the social war. On the obverse 
are the busts of HONOS and VIRTVS, and on the reverse, ITALIA, holding a 
cornucopia and joining hands with ROMA, who carries a sceptre and places her foot 
on a globe. A winged caduceus is in the field to the left of ITALIA, and the Legend 
CORDI below the field (RRC 403/1) originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford5.html 
Figure 5: Denarius of 48 B.C minted by D. Iunius Brutus Albinus., depicting 
PIETAS on the obverse, and a caduceus and joined hands of concordia on the 
reverse (RRC 450/1) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford6.html 
Figure 4: Denarius of 62 B.C. minted by Paullus Lepidus, depicting the veiled head 
of CONCORDIA on the obverse, and a trophy of L. Paullus (togatus) with three 
captives (RRC 415/1) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford5.html 
Figure 7: Denarius of Q. Metellus Pius Scipio minted in Africa, 47-46 B.C., 
depicting the GENIUS TERRA AFRICAE on the obverse, and a victory holding a 
shield and caduceus on the reverse (RRC 460/4) originally presented here cannot be 
made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was 
sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford6.html 
Figure 6: Coin minted by L. Buca in 44 B.C, depicting PAXS on the obverse, and the 
clasped hands of concord with the legend L.AEMILIVS.BVCA. III.VIR (RRC 480/24) 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford6.html 
Figure 9: Coin of Antony from 42 B.C. depicting the head of Antony as III VIR 
R.P.C. on the obverse, and a winged male with his foot on a globe, holding a 
cornucopia and caduceus, with a eagle and shield at his feet (Image: RRC 494/5 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford6.html 
Figure 8: Denarius of. Q. Metellus Pius Scipio minted in Africa, 47-46 B.C., 
depicting a turreted head of a city (Utica?), surrounded by an ear of corn, ship prow 
and caduceus on the obverse, and a trophy between a lituus and jug on the reverse 
(Image: RRC 460/3) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford6.html 
Figure 11: Quinarius depicting the pact and concord between Antony and Octavian 
in 40 B.C. On the obverse is a female head with the legend III.VIR.R.P.C; on the 
reverse are the clasped hands around a caduceus, and with the legend M. ANTON. C. 
CAESAR (Image: RRC 529/4b) originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford6.html 
Figure 10: Coin of Brutus minted on the move in 43-42 B.C., depicting the head of 
LEIBERTAS on the obverse (Image: RRC 501/1) originally presented here cannot be 
made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was 
sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford7.html 
Figure 13: The final sections of the Fasti Triumphales Barberiniani, listing the 
triumphs for 29 to 21 B.C. originally presented here cannot be made freely available 
via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Inscr. Ital. 
XIII.1 pl. XCIX. 
Figure 12: Denarius of Octavian, from Rome, 36-30 B.C., depicting the laureate 
head of Octavian on the obverse, and a columna rostrata with a nude male with staff 
and cloak, and the legend IMP.CAESAR (Image: RIC Aug. 271) originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus2.html 
Figure 14:  The west end of the Forum Romanum, showing the Speakers Platform (Augustan), and behind the Temple of Saturn. The inscription of C. 
Duilius was found in 1565, at the foot of the Capitoline hill, in the location of the Speakers Platform (Image: author). 
Figure 15: "Anaglypha Traiani" relief, from the Forum Romanum, showing the 
podium of the temple of Divus Iulius on the far left hand side of the relief originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at Torelli (1982), pl. IV.5. 
Figure 16: Plan of the Forum Romanum, showing the spatial relationship between 
the Speakers Platform at the west end of the forum, and the rostra on the podium of 
the temple of Divus Iulius at the east end originally presented here cannot be made 
freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
Coarelli (1985) fig. 41. 
Figure 18: Denarius of Mark Antony (minted by L. Pinarius Scarpus), from 
Cyrenaica, 31 B.C., depicting a winged Victory, carrying a palm branch and wreath, 
on the reverse. The head of Jupiter Ammon is on the obverse (RRC 546/2a) 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford6.html 
Figure 17: Denarius of Octavian, Rome, c. 29-27 B.C., depicting a building (most 
probably the Curia Iulia), which carries the legend IMP. CAESAR on the architrave, 
shows a winged Victory on a globe at the apex of the pediment, and on either side a 
figure holding a spear, with the right hand figure possibly holding an anchor (RIC 
Aug. 56) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because 
of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
XVIII 
Figure 20: Bronze statue of a winged Victory on a globe from Pompeii, now in the 
Museo Archeologico Nazionale di Napoli originally presented here cannot be made 
freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
Reinach (1913), pl. II. 
Figure 19: Denarius of Octavian (minted by L. Pinarius Scarpus), from Cyrenaica, 
31 B.C., depicting on the reverse a winged Victory standing on a globe, carrying a 
palm branch and holding out a wreath. On the obverse is a single hand (RRC 546/4) 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford6.html 
Figure 22: White pentelic marble sculpture of a Winged Victory on a globe, originally holding a shield (fragments 
remain), found in 1988 in the foundations of the Ottoman cistern near the wall of the southern wing of Hadrians 
Library in Athens. It is thought that the statue was originally set up in c. 17-16 B.C. in the Roman Agora in Athens 
(Image: author).  
Figure 21: The Augustus Boscorale Cup, depicting Venus handing Victory to 
Augustus, who holds out a globe to receive her. Behind Venus are Eros, the Genius 
Populus Romanus holding a cornucopia, and Roma originally presented here cannot 
be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was 
sourced at Kuttner (1995), fig. 1. 
Figure 24: Detail of one of the sockets for the bronze ship rams, on the podium facade of the monument above 
Nicopolis (Image: author). 
Figure 23: A reconstruction of the monument above Nicopolis originally presented 
here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The 
image was sourced at Zachos (2003), fig. 5. 
Figure 25: View from the site of monument above Nicopolis, overlooking the Ionian Sea and Actium harbour 
(Image: author). 
Figure 26: Inscription block from the podium facade of the monument at Nicopolis, with decorative bands above and 
behind the inscription (Image: author). 
Figure 27: Two blocks from the inscription course of the podium facade of the  monument at Nicopolis, the one on 
the left has the tabula ansata and marks the beginning of the inscription band,; the one of the right is un-inscribed, 
the demonstrates that the inscription did not fill the whole length of the inscription course (Image: author). 
Figure 28: Fragmentary inscription block from the podium facade of the monument above Nicopolis, which reading 
OR  BEL (Image: author). 
XXIII 
Figure 30: a hypothetical reconstruction of two inscription blocks from the podium facade of the monument above 
Nicopolis, reading F  VICTOR  BEL (Image: author). 
Figure 29: Marble fragment on an elogium from the Forum Romanum, which reads: 
[---]no cum / [---]tor belli / [---]+ctus / ------ (CIL VI 4092) originally presented 
here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The 
image was sourced at http://www1.ku-eichstaett.de/epigr/uah-
bilder.php?bild=PH0001949 
Figure 31: Fragmentary inscription block from the podium facade of the monument above Nicopolis, which reads O 
 Q (Image: author). 
Figure 32: Reconstruction of the monumental altar and frieze from the upper level of 
the monument above Nicopolis originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Zachos 
(2009) fig. 15. 
Figure 33: Relief sculpture of floral decoration from the altar frieze at Nicopolis, from the Archaeological Museum 
of Nicopolis, Preveza (Images: author). 
Figure 34: Relief sculpture depicting spolia and weapons from the altar frieze at 
Nicopolis originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Zachos (2009) fig. 13. 
Figure 35: Relief sculpture depicting a ships aplustre (above) and prow (below) from the altar frieze at Nicopolis. 
Fragments from the Archaeological Museum of Nicopolis, Preveza (Images: author). 
Figure 36: Relief sculpture depicting trumpeters from the altar frieze at Nicopolis 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Zachos (2009) fig. 16. 
XXVII 
Figure 38: Relief sculpture depicting (left) a ship prow carried in the triumph (Image: Zachos (2009) fig. 17), and 
(right) an attendant carrying a trestle from the altar frieze at Nicopolis, from the Archaeological Museum of 
Nicopolis, Preveza (Image: author). 
Figure 39: Relief sculpture depicting captives from the altar frieze at Nicopolis, from the Archaeological Museum of 
Nicopolis, Preveza (Images: author). 
Figure 37: Relief sculpture depicting (left) 
a ship prow carried in the triumph 
originally presented here cannot be made 
freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was 
sourced at Zachos (2009) fig. 17. 
XXVIII 
Figure 40: Relief sculpture depicting sacrifical victims from the altar frieze at Nicopolis, from the Archaeological 
Museum of Nicopolis, Preveza (Images: author). 
Figure 41: Relief sculpture depicting lictors from the altar frieze at Nicopolis, from the Archaeological Museum of 
Nicopolis, Preveza (Image: author). 
Figure 43: Relief sculpture depicting the triumphal chariot from the altar frieze at 
Nicopolis originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Zachos (2009) fig. 23. 
Figure 42: Relief sculpture depicting the cavalry from the altar frieze at Nicopolis 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Zachos (2009) fig. 24. 
Figure 45: Silver Cistophorus of Octavian, minted in Ephesus, c. 28 B.C., depicting 
the laureate head of Octavian on the obverse, with the legend IMP. CAESAR DIVI 
F. COS. VI LIBERTATIS P. R. VINDEX, and the figure of PAX holding a caduceus 
and standing on a parazonium, with a cista mystica in the background, all 
surrounded by a laurel wreath RIC Aug. 476) originally presented here cannot be 
made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was 
sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus3.html 
Figure 44: Relief sculpture depicting the senate from the altar frieze at Nicopolis 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Zachos (2009) fig. 22. 
Figure 46: Leaded bronze of Nicopolis, 27 B.C.  A.D. 14 (RPC 1364), depicting the head of Augustus with the 
legend   on the obverse, and a winged Nike, holding a wreath, with the   on 
the reverse. (Image: author, Ioannina Museum). 
Figure 47: Plan of Nicopolis, showing the spatial relationship between the city and 
the victory monument originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Chrysostomou-
Kefallonitou (2005), fig. 7. 
Figure 48: Fragmentary Greek inscriptions found at the site of the monument above Nicopolis. The central inscription possibly 
reads  originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was 
sourced at Zachos (2001a) fig. 19. 
Figure 49: Cornelius Gallus stele from Philae, in Egypt: (left) the fragmentary remains of the stele; (right) a reconstruction of the 
stele, showing sculptural reliefs of the winged solar disk, and rider charging the enemy originally presented here cannot be made 
freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The images were sourced at http://www.uni-trier.de/index.php?id=28124 
and Hoffmann (2009) fig. 4 respectively. 
XXXIV 
Figure 50: Plan of the site at Philae, showing the altar of the temple of Augustus, 
where the remains of the stele were found, and the temple complex of Isis originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at Hoffmann (2009) fig. 1. 
Figure 52: Detail of the clamp holes from the original inscription of C. Cornelius 
Gallus, with the later dedication to the deified Augustus and Tiberius carved over the 
top originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Magi (1963) pl. XI. 
Figure 51: Reconstruction of C. Cornelius Gallus inscription on the base of the 
obelisk from Alexandria. Gallus inscription was later covered by a dedication to the 
deified Augustus and Tiberius. Gallus inscription has been reconstructed from the 
clamp holes of the bronze lettering originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Magi 
(1963) pl. XII. 
XXXVI 
Figure 54: Denarius of Augustus, minted at Tarraco, Spain, c.18 B.C., depicting the 
laureate head of Augustus on the obverse, and a circular temple of Mars Ultor, in 
which reside two signa and an aquila (RIC Aug. 103) originally presented here 
cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image 
was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
Figure 53: Aureus minted in Asia Minor, dated to 28 B.C. On the obverse is the 
laureate head of Octavian accompanied by the legend IMP. CAESAR  DIVI F. COS. 
VI. On the reverse is depicted the togate figure of Octavian seated on curule chair, 
holding a scroll, with a scroll box at his feet, the accompanying legend reads: 
LEGES ET IVRA P. R. RESTIVIT originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at BM 
CM 1995.4-1.1 
XXXVII 
Figure 56: Denarius of Augustus, minted at Colonia Patricia, Spain, 18 B.C., 
depicting the head of Augustus on the obverse, and a triple arch surmounted by a 
quadriga over the central arch, and two standing figures raising up the returned 
standards over the two lateral arches. The figure over the right hand arch also carries 
a bow. The legend reads CIVIBVS ET SIGN. MILIT. A PARTH. RECVP. (RIC Aug. 
134a) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
Figure 55: Cistophorus of Augustus, minted at Pergamum, c. 19-18 B.C., depicted 
the head of Augustus on the obverse, and a single free-standing arch, surmounted by 
a quadriga, and decorated with two aquilae, commemorating the return of the 
Parthian standards  S.P. R. SIGNIS RECEPTIS (RIC Aug. 508) originally presented 
here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The 
image was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus3.html 
XXXVIII 
Figure 58: Denarius from Spain, dated to 17/16 B.C. On the obverse is the bare head 
of Augustus, accompanied by the legend SPQR CAESARI AVGVSTO. On the reverse 
Augustus rides a quadriga on top of a double arch adorned with prows, on top of a 
viaduct, and being crowned by Victory. The legend on the reverse reads QVOD 
VIAE MVN(ITAE) SVNT RIC Aug. 144) originally presented here cannot be made 
freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
Figure 57: Denarius of L. Vinicius, minted at Rome, 16 B.C., depicting the head of 
Augustus on the obverse, and a triple arch, dedicated to Augustus by the senate and 
people, surmounted by a quadriga over the central arch, and two standing figures 
holding a bow and raising up standards (RIC Aug. 359) originally presented here 
cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image 
was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus2.html 
XXXIX 
Figure 60: Denarius  of Vinicius minted in Rome, 16 B.C. depicting an Equestrian 
statue of Augustus on the obverse with the legend S.P.Q.R. / IMP  / CAES on the 
pedestal, and a cippus inscribed with the legend S P Q R / IMP CAE / QVOD / V / M 
S EX / EA P. Q. IS . AD A DE, on the reverse (RIC Aug. 362) originally presented 
here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The 
image was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus2.html 
Figure 59: Denarius of L. Miscinius Rufus, minted at Rome in 16 B.C., depicting the 
laureate head of Augustus on the obverse, and a statue of Mars holding a spear and 
parazonium, on a based inscription with the legend S. P. Q. R. / V. PR. PE. / CAES. 
(RIC Aug. 352) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus2.html 
Figure 61: Plan of the south-east end of the forum, showing the position of the triple 
arch to the south of the temple of Divus Iulius, and the alignment of the lateral 
staircase of the temple of Castor and Pollux to the southern lateral archway. Other 
major structures are the aedes Vestae, the Regia, and the Temple of Antoninus and 
Fausta originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Nedergaard (1994-5) fig.12. 
Figure 62: Drawing of the wall, part of which was found in situ, carrying the third 
tablet and the first and second pilasters of the Fasti Captiolini originally presented 
here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The 
image was sourced at Inscr. Ital.XIII 1, pl. XXII. 
Figure 64: The Campo Vaccino by Gian Paolo Panini (1691-1765) showing the three 
columns of the temple of Castor, now in the National Gallery of Ireland, Dublin 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Nielsen (1992) fig. 115. 
Figure 63: Veduta di Campo Vaccino by Giovanni Battista Piranesi (1772), showing 
the three remaining of the temple of Castor and Pollux on the right, and the temple 
of Faustina on the left originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Wilton-Ely (1994) 
v. 1, n.233. 
XLIII 
Figure 65: Nedergaards reconstruction of the third and four pilasters of the Fasti 
Triumphales, illustrating the measurement of fragment XL at 0.548m originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at Nedergaard (2004) fig. 4. 
Figure 66: Hypothetical reconstruction of the Fasti Capitolini on the triple arch in the Forum Romanum, based on the analysis 
Nedergaard (2004) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image 
was adapted from Gatti (1945) fig. 7. 
Figure 67: Fragment XLV of the Fasti Consulares, showing the vertical line and rough working (covering 26.5cm) 
to the right of the inscribed surface (Image: author, from the Musei Capitolini, Rome). 
Figure 68: Fragment XLI of the Fasti Triumphales showing the final entries on pilaster four, ending with the 
triumph of L. Cornelius Balbus in 19 B.C., below which the stone has been roughly worked (Image: author, from the 
Musei Capitolini, Rome). 
Figure 69: Detail of fragment XLVIII of the Fasti Consulares , showing the final entry of A.D. 13 and the entries for 
the Ludi Saeculares of 17 B.C. and A.D. 88 (Image: author, from the Musei Capitolini, Rome). 
Figure 70: View of the aedes Vestae between the remains of the central archway of the triple arch in the Forum 
Romanum (Image: author). 
XLVII 
Figure 72: View of the lateral staircase of the temple of Castor, aligned with the lateral passageway of the triple arch 
in the Forum Romanum (Image: author). 
Figure 71: Denarius of Augustus, from Spain (Tarraco?), c. 20-19 B.C., depicting 
the laureate head of Augustus on the obverse, and the altar of Fortuna Redux on the 
reverse (Image: RIC Aug. 54a) originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
XLVIII 
Figure 73: Restoration of a section of the upper storey of the porticos in the Forum Augustum, depicting Caryatids 
and a shield bearing the head of Jupiter Ammon (Image: author, Casa dei Cavalieri di Rodi, Rome). 
Figure 74: coloured marbles used for the pavement and columns in the north-west apse of the Forum Augustum 
(Image: author). 
Figure 75: Plan of the Forum Augustum originally presented here cannot be made 
freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
Geiger (2009) fig. 5. 
Figure 77: Cistophorus from Pergamum, 18 B.C., depicting the head of Augustus on 
the obverse accompanied by the legend IMP IX TR. PO V and a domed temple 
dedicated to MART(I) VLTO, housing a military standard (IRIC Aug. 507) originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus3.html 
Figure 76: Cistophorus from Pergamum, 18 B.C., depicting the head of Augustus on 
the obverse accompanied by the legend IMP IX TR PO V, and a temple inscribed to 
ROM. ET AVGVST. on the entablature, dedicated by the COM(mune) ASIAE (RIC 
Aug. 505) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus3.html 
Figure 79: Denarius from Pergamum, 19-18 B.C., depicting the head of Augustus on 
the obverse, and the legend SIGNIS PARTHICIS RECEPTIS on the reverse (RIC 
Aug. 526) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus3.html 
Figure 78: Denarius from Pergamum, 19-18.C. depicting the head of Augustus on 
the obverse, and a tiara and bow case and quiver on the reverse with the legend 
ARMENIA CAPTA (RIC Aug. 516) originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus3.html 
Figure 81: Aureus from Colonia Patricia, c. 18-16 B.C., depicting the head of 
Augustus on the obverse, and a winged victory standing on a glove, and carrying a 
palm branch and an aquila on the reverse (RIC Aug. 121) originally presented here 
cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image 
was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
Figure 80: Denarius of Augustus, minted in Spain, c. 19 B.C., depicting an aquila, 
toga picta  over a tunica palmata and laurel wreath on the obverse, and a quadriga 
decorated with winged Victories, and surmounted by four miniature horses (RIC 
Aug. 97) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because 
of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
Figure 83: The remains of the circular temple to Roma and Augustus on the 
Athenian Arcopolis originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Schfer (1998) Abb. 
Figure 82: Marble base from Corinth flanked by a bound Parthian and a winged 
Victory, crowned the trophy with a wreath and carried a palm branch originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at Rose (2005), fig. 21. 
Figure 85: Denarius of Augustus, minted at Tarraco, Spain, c. 19 B.C., depicting the 
wreathed head of Augustus on the obverse, and a winged Victory holding laurel 
branches over the Clipeus Virtutis (Image: RIC Aug. 95) originally presented here 
cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image 
was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
Figure 84: Aureus of Augustus, minted at Tarraco, Spain, c.19 B.C., depicting the 
head of Augustus on the obverse, and a civic oak wreath crown surrounding the 
legend OB CIVIS SERVATOS on the reverse (RIC Aug. 76a) originally presented 
here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The 
image was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
Figure 87: Denarius of Augustus, minted at Tarraco, Spain, c. 17-16 B.C., depicting 
the head of Augustus on the obverse, and Mars, helmeted and naked, except for a 
chlamys over his left arm, holding a vexillum and a parazonium, the legend  VOT. 
P. SVSC. PRO. SAL. ET RED. I. O. M. SACR. commemorates Augustus health and 
safe return to Rome (RIC Aug. 146) originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
Figure 86: Aureus of Augustus, minted at Colonia Patricia, Spain,  c. July 18 .BC. -
17/16 B.C., depicting the head of Augustus on the obverse, and an altar inscribed 
LVDI SAECVL. With a veiled priest standing on the left, and a caduceator on the 
right, the whole scene is surrounded with a wreath (RIC Aug. 138) originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus.html 
Figure 88: Ground plan of the Ara Pacis Augustae, including the Hadrianic precinct 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Claridge (1998) fig. 81. 
Figure 89: South exterior wall of the Ara Pacis Augustae, showing the upper register of the processional frieze, the meander band, and 
the lower register of the acanthus originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. 
The image was adapted from Moretti (1948) pl. 3. 
Figure 91: Details of the processional frieze on the south exterior wall of the Ara Pacis Augustae, showing Augustus (far left) and Agrippa (far right). (Images: author, Museo dellAra 
Pacis, Rome) 
Figure 90: Processional frieze on the south exterior wall of the Ara Pacis originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was adap.ted from La Rocca (1983) 27-28. 
Figure 92: Fragmentary relief sculpture of Roma, from the upper register on the east exterior wall of the Ara Pacis 
Augustae. (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 93: Relief sculpture of a female deity, often referred to as Tellus or Pax, accompanied by two Aurae , Ara 
Pacis Augustae (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 94: Fragmentary relief sculpture of Aeneas, the founder of Rome, sacrificing a sow to the Lares, Ara Pacis 
Augustae (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 95: Fragmentary relief sculpture of Mars, accompanied by another figure carrying a staff, and a fragmentary 
detail of tree in which a bird is perched, Ara Pacis Augustae (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 96: View of the north-west side of the Ara Pacis Augustae showing the pilasters, decorated with acanthus 
scrolls on either side of the doorway and at the corners (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 97: View of the interior of the Ara Pacis Augustae, showing the upper register of the wall decorated with 
garlands, bucrania, and paterae, and the lower register decorated as wooden panels. (Image: author, Museo dellAra 
Pacis, Rome). 
LXIII 
Figure 98: The sacrificial table of the Ara Pacis Augustae, with the restored frieze on the exterior and interior of the 
upper decoration. (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 99: The processional frieze decorating the upper sections of the altar table 
from the Ara Pacis Augustae, (top) procession of vestal virgins from the interior left 
side of the frieze; (bottom): procession of the victims from the exterior left side of 
the frieze originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Moretti (1948) 40-41. 
Figure 100: Fragmentary relief sculpture from the small frieze of the sacrificial table of the Ara Pacis Augustae. 
Reconstructions of the panels by DART s.n.c, (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 101: Fragmentary sculpture from the large frieze of the sacrificial table of the Ara Pacis Augustae. 
Reconstruction of the panels by DART s.n.c. (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 102: Plan of the Campus Martius showing the location of the Ara Pacis 
Augustae (2) and the Solar Meridian (1) in relation to each other originally presented 
here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The 
image was sourced at Heslin (2007) fig. 1. 
Figure 103: Cast of the Carthage version of the Tellus panel of the Ara Pacis Augustae. The original relief is in the 
Louvre Museum, Paris (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 104: Silver coin of C. Papirius Carbo , from Nicaea, 62-59 B.C., depicting 
the wreathed head of Dionysus with the legend , and Roma, seated on a 
heap of weapons, holding a spear and a small Nike, with the legend   
  /  originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at BMC 
Pontus pl. XXXI n. 1. 
LXVII 
Figure 106: Denarius of C. Vibius Pansa, from Rome, 48 B.C., depicting the 
wreathed head of LIBERTAS on the obverse, and the figure of Roma seated on a help 
of weapons, holding a sceptre and being crowned by a winged Victory (RRC 449/4) 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford5.html 
Figure 105:  Denarius of M. Nonias Sufenas,from Rome, 59 B.C., depicting on the 
obverse the head of Saturn, and on reverse Roma, seated on a heap of 
weaponsbeing crowned by a winged Victory holding a palm branch (RRC 421/1) 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford5.html 
LXVIII 
Figure 107: Cast of the relief sculpture of Roma seated on a heap of weapons, holding a winged Victory with a 
Clipeus Virtutis, and facing a display of a globe, cornucopia and caduceus, the altar of Hedulus, Carthage. The 
original relief is in the Bardo National Museum of Tunis (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 108: fragmentary relief sculpture of a youth, wearing a fillet and with the detail of a cornucopia next to the 
head, attributed to the Roma panel of the Ara Pacis Augustae (Image: author, Museo dellAra Pacis). 
Figure 110: Relief sculpture of Apollo, facing a tripod, the altar of Hedulus, 
Carthage originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because 
of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Poissnot (1929) tav. VII. 
109: relief sculpture of Aeneas flight from Troy, the altar of Hedulus, Carthage 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Poissnot (1929) tav. IX. 
Figure 112: First century B.C. gemstones depicting Mars and Rhea Silvia originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at LIMC II.2 405-406. 
Figure 111: Relief sculpture of a sacrifice, the atlar of Hedulus, Carthage originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at Poissnot (1929) tav. X. 
Figure 114: Denarius of an unknown minter, Rome, 115-114 B.C., depicting the 
helmeted head of Roma on the obverse, and the seated figure of Roma on a pile of 
shields, surrounded by two birds, and watching over the she-wolf and twins (RRC 
287/1) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because 
of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford3-2.html 
Figure 113: Denarius of Sex. Pompeius Fostlus, from Rome, 137 B.C., depicting the 
helmeted head of Roma on the obverse, and the shepherd Faustulus discovering the 
she-wolf and the twins, under a fig tree , with birds in the top branches (RRC 
235/1b) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because 
of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford3.html 
LXXII 
Figure 116: The head of the female deity on the Tellus panel (left) and the head of most likely Livia (right) from 
the south processional frieze of the Ara Pacis Augustae (Images: author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 115: The altar of the Lares (Rom. Vat. Inv. 115) depicting the discovery of 
the sow with her piglets by Aeneas in the presence of fatum or a prophet originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at Studniczka (1909) pl. V 7. 
LXXIII 
Figure 117: Details of figure S-30 (left) and N-34, from the processional friezes of the Ara Pacis Augustae (Images: 
author, Museo dellAra Pacis, Rome). 
Figure 118: The Augustus Boscorale cup, depicting Augustus receiving young 
barbarian children as pignora originally presented here cannot be made freely 
available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
Kuttner (1995), fig. 5. 
LXXIV 
Figure 120: The obelisk and base of the Solar Meridian, now in the Piazza di Montecitorio, Rome (Image: author). 
Figure 119: Denarius of Augustus, from Lugdunum, 8 B.C., depicting the laureate 
haed of Augustus on the obverse, and Augustus, seated on a curule chair, receiving a 
child from a barbarian as a pignus (RIC Aug. 201b) originally presented here cannot 
be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was 
sourced at http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus2.html 
Figure 121: Formigs reconstruction of the Alpine Trophy at La Turbie, France, 
viewed from the west originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Binninger (2009a) 
LXXVI 
Figure 122: The Alpine Trophy viewed from the east (Image: author, Trophe dAuguste  la Turbie). 
LXXVII 
Figure 123: Formigs reconstruction of a relief sculpture of a trophy and captives from the Alpine Trophy at La 
Turbie, France (Image: author, Trophe dAuguste  la Turbie). 
Figure 124: The Trophy of Marius, moved to the Capitoline from the Esquiline Hill by Pope Sixtus V (Image: 
author). 
LXXVIII 
Figure 125: Detail of a frieze from the interior of the Temple of Apollo Sosianus, Rome, depicting captives beneath 
a trophy, being carried in a triumphal procession (Image: author, Museo di Montemartini, Rome). 
Figure 126: Detail from the tomb of Caecilia Metella, Via Appia depicting a captive under a trophy (Image: author). 
LXXIX 
Figure 127: Trophy monument at Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges, France, (above) a 
reconstruction of the fragmentary remains, and (below) a hypothetical reconstruction 
of the original monumen originally presented here cannot be made freely available 
via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Boube (1996) 
24-25. 
Figure 129: Detail of the arch at Carpentras depicting captives either side of a trophy 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Silberberg-Peirce (1986) fig. 24. 
Figure 128: Lateral side of the Arch at Orange, depicting captives underneath 
trophies originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because 
of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Silberberg-Peirce (1986) fig. 19. 
LXXXI 
Figure 130: Roman quarry on Mont Justicier, looking toward the Alpine Trophy at La Turbie, France (Image: 
author). 
Figure 131: Detail of Formigs reconstruction of the inscription on the Alpine Trophy at La Turbie, France. The 
original inscription fragments are visible within the reconstruction (Image: author). 
LXXXII 
Figure 132: A view of the Alpine Trophy within the Alpine chain (Image: author). 
Figure 133: An axonometric view of the remains of the trophy of Pompey, in the 
Pyrenees, with the road running through the middle originally presented here cannot 
be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was 
sourced at Castellvi et al (2008) fig. 34.
Figure 134: The area of Alpine chain, illustrating the locations of the Alpine races enumerated (from east to west) on the Alpine 
Trophy originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
Formig (1955) fig.2. 
LXXXIV 
Figure 136: Altar to pax augusta, dedicated by T. Domitius Romulus, at Narbo 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Gayraud (1981) 357, fig.55. 
Figure 135: Altar to pax augusta, dedicated by the Decuriones and people of the 
colony of Praeneste originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Agnoli (2002) 240 fig.8a 
and 242, fig. 8c. 
LXXXV 
Figure 137: South side of the Arch of Augustus at Susa, with a view of the Alps (Mont Rochemelon) in the 
background and the Roman aqueduct c. 4th century A.D. (Image: author) 
Figure 138: Detail of the inscription on the attic of the arch of Augustus at Susa, illustrating the countersunk letters (Image: author). 
LXXXVII 
Figure 139: Drawing of the arch at Susa published in Theatrum Sabaudiae in 1666, 
incorrectly showing the inscription as comprising six lines, with the word VICTOR in 
the last line originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because 
of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Forray (1994) 181. 
LXXXVIII 
Figure 141: Silver Celtic coin of Donnus, found near Lyon, depicting a helmeted 
female head with the legend DVRNACVS on the obverse, and a galloping cavalryman 
carrying a spear with the legend DONNVS. Diameter: 16mm, weight: 1.90g originally 
presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright 
reasons. The image was sourced at Hucher (1868-1974) Part I pl. 64. 
Figure 140: Denarius of an unknown minter, from Rome, c. 194-190 B.C., depicting 
the helmeted head of Roma on the obverse, and the Dioscuri on the reverse (RRC 
134/1b) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/crawford2.html 
LXXXIX 
Figure 142:  (Top) the correlation between the central section of the east side of the frieze of the arch at Susa, with 
the outline of the figures highlighted to provide definition; (bottom)  the central section of the west side of the frieze 
of the arch of Susa (Images: author).  
Figure 143: (Left) detail of the right hand corner of the east side of the frieze of the arch at Susa, depicting a figure 
seated at a desk receiving tabulae (outline highlighted), and two standing togate figures, with a capsa at their feet;  
(right) detail of the right hand corner of the west side of the frieze of the arch at Susa, depicting a similar scene 
(Images: author). 
Figure 144: (Left) the north side of the arch and (right) the south side of the arch at Susa (Images by author). 
Figure 146: Detail on the central section of the south frieze on the arch at Susa, depicting a veiled priest (to the 
left of the altar) surrounded by victimarii and lictors (Image: author). 
Figure 145: Aureus minted by C. Antistius Reginus, from Rome, c. 13 B.C. the oak-
wreathed head of Augustus on the observe, and on the reverse, two veiled priests 
ratifying the foedus made between Rome and Gabii, by sacrificing a pig over an altar 
(RIC Aug. 411) originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at 
http://davy.potdevin.free.fr/Site/augustus3.html 
Figure 147: West side of the frieze from the arch at Susa, illustrating the positions of the fourteen civitates within the scene (Image:  author). 
   1                     2     (administrator)         3                         4                 5       (lictor)   (lictor)    (lictor)                 6         (official)       7 
(official)           8          (lictor)            (lictor)         (lictor)          9                   10                11    (administrator)   12                 13              14 
Figure 149: Right hand side of the south frieze of the arch of Augustus at Susa, depicting a procession of the army and sacrificial victims towards a central altar (Image: author). 
Figure 148: Right hand side of the Roman historical relief from the so-called Altar of Domitius Ahenobarbus, depicting a 
procession of the army and sacrificial (suvetaurilia) victims originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was adapted from Stilp (2003) figs 25-27. 
Figure 151: (below) detail of the right hand side of the west frieze on the arch at Susa, depicting a similar scene of 
census (Image: author).  
Figure 150: (Above) detail of the left hand side of the Roman relief from the so-
called Altar of Domitius Ahenobarbus, depicting a scene of census, with the 
seated administrator receiving volumina originally presented here cannot be 
made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was 
sourced at Stilp (2003) fig. 22. 
Figure 152: Details of the Dioscuri at the left hand side (above) and right hand side (below) of the south frieze of the 
arch, Susa (Images: author). 
Figure 153: Central detail of the Roman historical relief from the so-called Altar of Domitius Ahenobarbus, depicting 
the god Mars overseeing the lustratio exercitus originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA 
because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Stilp (2003) fig. 24. 
XCVII 
Figure 154: Plan showing the arch of Augustus, and the excavation site of the 
Palazzina Ramella, Susa, in 1904-1905, which revealed a Roman road and 
surrounding structures originally presented here cannot be made freely available via 
ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Mercando (1993) 
fig. 85. 
XCVIII 
Figure 155: Plan of the excavations of the Palazzina Ramella, Susa, in 1904-1905. 
(A) Roman road; (B) Heroon of Cottius;  (C) Forum; (D) unidentified structure; (1) 
bronze head; (2) fragments of an honorary inscription to Agrippa; (3) stone urn 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was adapted from Slavazzi (1996) pl. 4. 
Figure 156: Bronze head, attributed to either Marcus Agrippa or Drusus Maior, found in the excavations of the Palazzina Ramella, 
Susa, in 1904 measuring 0.31m high; New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art, inv. 14.130.2 originally presented here cannot be 
made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Evangelisti (1995) 64. 
Figure 157: Inscription dedicated by the sons of Cottius to Marcus Agrippa : M. 
Agrippa L. f. /[cos III tr]b potest / - - - - - - - - / Don[nu]s et Cotti[us] / Cotti f. 
originally presented here cannot be made freely available via ORA because of 
copyright reasons. The image was sourced at Letta (1976) fig. 2. 
Figure 158: Plan of the west of Susa, showing the principle urban alignments of 
the ancient structures, notably the Forum Temple (1) and the Roman road and 
adjacent buildings (3) originally presented here cannot be made freely available 
via ORA because of copyright reasons. The image was adapted from Barello 
(2008) fig. 2. 
Figure 159: Remains of the temple at the north end of the forum, in the modern day Piazza Savoia, Susa (Image: author).
Figure 160: Plan of the castellum, and arch at Susa originally presented here 
cannot be made freely available via ORA because of copyright reasons. The 
image was sourced at Mercando (1992) 55, fig. 51, 
	Front_matter
	Body_text_correct
	Images_dissemination
