Robert A. Boyle PhD thesis
Tortured Words: 
The first Soviet Writers Congress, Moscow 1934 
Socialist Realism and Soviet Reality in Stalin's Russia 1934-1939 
Robert Alexander Boyle 
This thesis is submitted in partial fulfilment for the degree of Ph.D  
at the  
University of St Andrews 
30th of September 2013 
Abstract 
Both the academic and the fiction element of the thesis concerns events in the Soviet Union and 
elsewhere in Europe in the 1930s. The first element informs the second. The academic portion is 
based on the first Soviet Writers Congress of 1934, the only such gathering allowed by Stalin in his 
lifetime and an event following which many of its delegates were murdered. Primary research 
sources include the stenographic verbatim record of the Congress itself and an addendum consisting 
of biographical material published by the Writers Union of the USSR in 1990 as Russian 
Communism tottered towards its end. This part of the thesis examines aspects of Soviet reality 
against the background of the Purges, and includes consideration of the writers world, the 
significance of the Red Army to literary life, the position of foreigners and the doctrine of Socialist 
Realism, officially sanctified at the Congress. Other sources include memoir, histories of the period 
and material from the Thirties Soviet press. 
The fiction element comprises an excerpt from a novel, The Eastern Bow, which takes its title from 
Audens poem A Summer Night.  It is a story of espionage set in Moscow, Paris and London from 
1937 to 1939. The plot involves the writing of a book in Russia by an unknown writer of genius 
who tells the truth about Stalin, the Purges and what the Revolution has become  a perversion of its 
earlier ideals. The secret police, the NKVD, hunt for the book, its author and all connected with it. 
This sub-plot combines with another centred in London and Paris in which a Soviet spy within MI6 
is also being sought by elements within British intelligence. The two strands combine in France at 
the climax of the novel. 
THE EASTERN BOW 
SYNOPSIS 
The Eastern Bow (TEB) begins on a winter night in 1937 in a Moscow flat and ends on a caf  
terrace at the bottom of the Rue de Faubourg du Temple, Paris XI, on the 23rd of August 1939, the 
day the Nazi-Soviet pact was announced. It is intended as a historical espionage story whose themes 
are class, betrayal, vulnerability and friendship and is the first book of a projected trilogy about 
Communism and Europe. The second is Only a Spy, set in Leningrad, Berlin and Paris during the 
war years, followed by The Shadow Pleasers, a novel of Eastern Europe in the early Fifties. TEB 
characters feature in later books. Their world is tortuous and uncertain.  Many Soviet intelligence 
figures were executed on Stalin's whim in the 30s and later and this fact is central to all three books. 
Willi Muntzenberg for example, the real-life genius of Soviet propaganda, first glimpsed in The 
Eastern Bow on a Montparnasse terrace, was strangled in a French wood  - probably by his NKVD 
travelling companion - at the Fall of France, when his and Stalin's views differed. Similarly, his 
assistant Otto Katz, who gave his life to world-wide espionage on behalf of the Revolution but who 
was also partial to an aperitif at La Rotonde, returned to his native Czechoslovakia in triumph after 
the war as an important functionary in the new Communist government. He was hanged after a last 
Stalinist show trial, as a capitalist spy, in Prague in 1952. 
The structure of TEB, though complicated, may be separated into three strands: events in Russia 
and Eastern Europe dealt with through Andrei Edouardovich Miller, a Russian student; a London 
sub-plot in which a British mole, (or 'sapper' in TEB parlance, an engineer soldier who excavates a 
mineshaft) is hunted within MI6  by William  Flanders, a low ranking intelligence officer, and a 
French coincidence which links the two ( through a fugitive Soviet spy master whose code name is 
Archimedes). 
The main strand of the story takes place in a profoundly evil time in Russia's history, the Purges of 
the 1930s, and concerns the writing of a book by a character called Fyodor. Writers and Poets have 
always been considered by the Russian population to be the 'Other Russia', tellers of truth and 
guardians of such free thought as was able to survive in an authoritarian society. In TEB, twenty 
years after the Revolution, thoughtful Russians in favour of its original ideals are devastated to find 
that these have been twisted and destroyed and the nation is in the hands of a paranoiac whose 
solution to any potential dissent is mass murder. Executions are running at ten thousand persons a 
week with deaths in the camps doubling that number, also weekly.  In this time of betrayal and 
planned killing an unknown writer of genius, pre-empting Pasternak by thirty years, is writing the 
truth about the Revolution, its corruption and the subsequent horror wreaked upon the nation. But 
Fyodor is not just a historian; the book's universality takes in everything Russian: music, landscape, 
childrens' tales and Tolstoy, Chaliapin and execution cellars, cathedral bells and firing squads. 
Gogol and Pushkin mingle with Rodchenko and Ivan the Terrible; Stalin appears repeatedly as a 
mentally- ill  murderous puppeteer.  
Socialist Realism does not allow such books to be written far less published and the penalty for so 
doing is death. The author is a secretive, often child-like forty year old, who drinks. He looks like 
Shostakovich, with forelock and small round glasses.  Originally from Odessa, he is alone in life, 
his brother, sister and parents having disappeared, as so many Russians did, in the Civil War. He 
writes in fear and despondency and is unable to cope with everyday reality, save on a page, but 
there his prose is immediately beautiful to any Russian reader, subtle and striking, his ideas forged 
of elegant steel.  The NKVD have captured a single chapter and its masterful grasp of truth 
frightens Stalin into incandescent rages. The book and its writer must be found and so the NKVD 
and the Writers Union (itself a Stalinist tool of great harm in the 1930s) are harnessed to the task. 
Against the background of the book being written there are two main characters at opposite ends of 
Europe: William Flanders, a low- level intelligence gatherer based in London and Paris, where he 
has a watching brief on Russian emigrs, and Andrei Miller, a Moscow law student whose father is 
a Red Army officer. His deceased mother was from French stock. Amid the slaughter of much of the 
Red Army's officer corps Miller's father is taking the first chapter of the book to Leningrad and 
safety when he is captured and Andrei is thereafter on his own. A subsidiary character, whose code 
name is Archimedes, a soviet spy master on the run who like many others Stalin is attempting to 
liquidate, will eventually link the British and Russian strands. 
The Russian end of the plot centres around Andrei's involvement with an enigmatic figure named 
Mendel who was a friend of his father and who assists Andrei to avoid the NKVD who are hunting 
him all over Moscow. He desires Andrei to look after Fyodor and when the book is ready, to take it 
to the West, to the British, with whom he has an unspecified connection. He is something of a 
miracle man, in reality a senior officer of Red Army Intelligence (GRU) a body in competition with 
the hated NKVD. The NKVD are executing GRU men daily. His hallmark is the ability, even in a 
deep Russian winter, to obtain lemons for tea.   In 30s Moscow this is extraordinary and marks him 
as a character of power. Mendel's lemons are a recurring theme in the novel.  Andrei and Fyodor 
have many adventures in Moscow, including meeting young Americans who have immigrated to 
Russia but who want very much to return home. The twos friendship, and Fyodor's arrest, is central 
to the theme of loss in The Eastern Bow.  Andrei initially cannot find the book, which is complete, 
but eventually does so through a facially disfigured  attendant of the famous Sandunovsky bath 
house, a character as disdained by Soviet society as he might be elsewhere. 
 Mendel contrives to hide Andrei but eventually he ends up in a Soviet prison under an assumed 
name, where, with hundreds of foreign communists of no further use to Stalin, he is to be shot. He 
escapes, (though the others do not - all are murdered) through the actions of the mysterious Mendel 
(again lemons) and is smuggled into Poland where the NKVD track him to Krakov. He becomes 
involved with the Jewish community there (Mendel has contacts) who help him and he narrowly 
avoids death. His link to Mendel is cut (no more lemons therefore) and he learns Mendel has been 
betrayed and captured. He finds safety with a high-level prostitute who gets him out of Poland to 
Paris. In Paris he has an address to which to take the book (an operative named Wolfie Light, a 
former St Petersburg Jew and impecunious lover of Paris who operates the Parisian end of Flanders' 
network) and is about to try to make contact when he meets a lovely girl. She drugs him. When he 
wakes up he has been robbed of everything except the transcript. He hides it just before he is 
arrested for vagrancy and is imprisoned. In prison he is badly beaten and emerges tired, lonely and 
almost finished. Starving in Paris and sleeping under the bridges he contemplates suicide. 
Interspersed with the Russian chapters a parallel story is developing in London where Flanders is 
enlisted by a Colonel Blake, the operative arm of a secret Cabinet committee known as 'The 
Committee' to take on the equally secret job of finding a mole (sapper  or tunnel man in TEB 
parlance, a digger of mines) in  MI6. Flanders is an outsider who walks with a limp and is from the 
lower classes. He speaks Russian because of a timber firm apprenticeship in St Petersburg before 
the Great War.  Commissioned in the trenches, he is in his forties and has inherited a large 
ramshackle house (from a former commanding officer) in Surrey where he lives alone. He has 
served as an intelligence officer in the British Intervention in North Russia, the Irish troubles and in 
India in the early thirties.  Often lonely and isolated he is picked by Blake to investigate MI6 
because he is not from an Oxbridge background or the establishment. His agent in Paris, Wolfie 
Light, has over the years and against the rules of espionage, become a friend. In the Russian Civil 
War Flanders saved Light's life. In the secret enquiry into the tunnel man Flanders is paired with 
Philip Maitland, a young Oxford graduate and MI6 officer who, against his will, has been ordered 
to befriend Flanders by the deputy head of MI6, Chalcott, who is against the enquiry and a snob. At 
a picnic at Maitland's house, Flanders meets his family, a retired Colonel of the Indian Army and his 
wife, and  Maitland's sister Julie. Despite himself, he falls in love. She is in her thirties, a sensitive 
person, as lonely as Flanders, whose fine features are ruined by a large wine stain birth mark 
covering half her face. Their courtship is Edwardian, gentle  and beautiful.  
In order to give atmospheric factual information (lightly, in an unobtrusive way) to the reader about 
the world of 30s espionage and, for example, the internal conflicts of the Soviet Secret Services, a 
character called Pushy (for Pushkin) Forbes acts as standing oracle to the British intelligence 
world. He is owlish, bibulous, Oxbridge, highly intelligent, and homosexual, his social circle 
including  E.M. Forster (who lives near the Maitlands in Weybridge) and a group who at that time 
all associated in a house by the Thames in Hammersmith. Flanders saves him from an indecency 
charge and rescues him from Hammersmith Police station.  
Chalcott, outwardly charming, a product of Eton and Christ Church, is determined to derail the 
enquiry into MI6 and pressures Maitland to find something with which to sink Flanders.  Maitland, 
probably in the wrong line of work, feels demeaned by this but his sense of duty forces him on. The 
MI6 enquiry finally reveals a sapper, an Oxford man known to Maitland and Chalcott, and  the 
traitor commits suicide.  
In a sub-plot, Light becomes suspected by Blake of being a Soviet double agent. Flanders refuses to 
believe this and tests of Lights loyalty prove the Paris agent innocent. This issue, however,  lingers 
in the mind of the reader and arises again.  Flanders proposes to Julie and is accepted. Her family is 
delighted. 
In France the sole coincidence in the book takes place. Andrei is at his life's end. He is ragged from 
sleeping rough and has lost much weight. He debates suicide on the Pont Neuf but decides on one 
last walk through the Sixth Arrondisement to the Luxembourg Gardens. In the Rue Tournon, outside 
the cafe of the same name, he sees Fyodor, wearing a hat and coat and reading the paper. 
 He shouts and crosses the street to find the man standing with his hand in his pocket, obviously 
holding a gun. It is Archimedes, on the run from the NKVD. He is Fyodor's brother. He also looks 
ill, and in fact has cancer. He doesn't shoot Andrei but talks to him and the whole story is revealed. 
Andrei tells him of Mendel, the man who can produce lemons in winter. Archimedes is determines 
to have the book published  and  he looks after Andrei thereafter, taking him to an isolated farm in 
the Aveyron in South West France. From there he gets a message  to British Intelligence. The offer 
is that Archimedes will reveal Oxbridge spies within the British establishment (it is the time of the 
Cambridge Five) in return for the book being published. Blake has also heard of the book, from 
sources not revealed, yet, to the reader. 
A team is sent from London to France. It is the hot summer of 1939 and Europe is caught in the run 
up to war.  Flanders and Maitland go as representatives of Blake and Chalcott respectively and 
Blake also allows Light to attend. In a hilltop farmhouse at night Archimedes, a living corpse, and 
Andrei, sit round a table with the three others. An envelope with names in it is produced and 
undertakings as to publication given by Flanders on behalf of HMG. As Flanders lifts the envelope 
Philip Maitland takes out a gun. Then, at what it is hoped is the high point of the chapter, he tells 
Light to search them all. Maitland and Light are Soviet agents, a team. Light cannot look Flanders 
in the eye. It is made clear to Flanders that he, and the two Russians, are to be murdered. The old 
Russian speaks of his time in the Revolution and curses Maitland, who loses his nerve and shoots 
him. Andrei tips over the oil lamp and in the dark manages to club Maitland. Flanders, now armed, 
calls for silence in the dark and Andrei finds a candle.   Light has his hands in the air. Flanders 
repeatedly smashes his face with the pistol. 
Maitland and Flanders speak, the former with his hands tied behind his back. Maitland cites the 
plight of the Jarrow marchers and unheeding high teas at Balliol, the corruption of British society, 
Munich, the way forward for mankind. He admits framing the MI6 suicide and arranging his 
murder. He also admits Flanders and the Russians were to be killed. He speaks in jargon.  Light will 
answer no questions, including how long he has been a Soviet double. 
When Maitland admits that the introduction to Julie was part of his Soviet handler's instructions 
Flanders suffers a hammer blow.  Flanders thinks of what a trial and the resultant disgrace would 
mean to the Maitland family. Andrei reminds him the NKVD are looking for them as they stand 
talking. Flanders orders Maitland's hands undone, then shoots him through the heart.  
Flanders leaves Light to be interrogated in France at a safe house near Bordeaux. Andrei stays there 
also and Flanders returns to London with the manuscript. He learns a team has been sent out from 
London with 'The Committee's' authorisation to interrogate and execute Light. Blake's earlier 
assessment of Light is vindicated. The list contains three names from Oxford, none from 
Cambridge. [This should allow usage of the Cambridge spies in the two sequels.] Flanders has to go 
to see the Maitland family, who have been told their son has been killed on active service. He has 
been awarded a medal. The family know something is wrong. Flanders meets closed shutters. He 
and Julie speak in the garden where the picnic was held. He cannot find words and in her face can 
see only Philip's.   She, wise beyond her years, is willing to go on but he cannot. She hands back the 
ring and kisses him goodbye. 
Flanders has lost all. Chalcott and MI6 want him ousted for incompetence. HMG, courting Stalin as 
war approaches, reneges on the promise to publish the book.  Blake defends Flanders who goes to 
see him in his flat in the Temple to see what the future holds. As Flanders walks along the Thames 
from Temple tube he runs everything over again in his mind.  He is early for his meeting with Blake 
and outside the Temple church he sits on a bench and a Damascene revelation comes to him.  It, and 
the scene with Blake, is not at all, hopefully, that which the reader has expected.  
The final scene takes place in Paris.  Andrei sits at a terrace outside the Grand Caf du Capitale des 
Balkans at the bottom of the Rue de Faubourg du Temple, a working class quarter of Paris 
containing many foreigners. It is the 23rd of August 1939 and the early evening crowd has just 
learned of the Nazi-Soviet pact. Uproar. Men are tearing up their Party cards, long-time symbols of  
a labourer's dignity. A table goes over. There is shouting; fighting breaks out. A man stands crying in 
the street. Andrei is transfixed. When he looks back to his table a steaming cup of coffee has 
appeared without being ordered, and with it a lemon on a saucer, round and yellow in the evening 
                                                                        * * * 
1. Candidates declarations: 
I, Robert Alexander Boyle, hereby certify that this thesis, which is approximately 80,000 words in length, has 
been written by me, that it is the record of work carried out by me and that it has not been submitted in any 
previous application for a higher degree.  
I was admitted as a research student in October 2009 and as a candidate for the degree of Ph.D in 
September 2010]; the higher study for which this is a record was carried out in the University of St Andrews 
between 2009 and 2013.  
Date  signature of candidate   
2. Supervisors declaration: 
I hereby certify that the candidate has fulfilled the conditions of the Resolution and Regulations appropriate 
for the degree of Ph.D in the University of St Andrews and that the candidate is qualified to submit this thesis 
in application for that degree.  
Date  signature of supervisor  
3. Permission for electronic publication: (to be signed by both candidate and supervisor) 
In submitting this thesis to the University of St Andrews I understand that I am giving permission for it to be 
made available for use in accordance with the regulations of the University Library for the time being in force, 
subject to any copyright vested in the work not being affected thereby.  I also understand that the title and the 
abstract will be published, and that a copy of the work may be made and supplied to any bona fide library or 
research worker, that my thesis will be electronically accessible for personal or research use unless exempt 
by award of an embargo as requested below, and that the library has the right to migrate my thesis into new 
electronic forms as required to ensure continued access to the thesis. I have obtained any third-party 
copyright permissions that may be required in order to allow such access and migration, or have requested 
the appropriate embargo below.  
The following is an agreed request by candidate and supervisor regarding the electronic publication of this 
thesis: 
(ii) Access to all of printed copy but embargo of all of electronic publication of thesis for a period of 5 years  
on the following grounds: 
publication would be commercially damaging to the researcher, or to the supervisor, or the University;  
publication would preclude future publication;  
By letter of the 2nd of October 2013 from the Pro-Provost the 
above request was granted by the University and thus an 
embargo for five years is placed on the electronic copy of this 
thesis. 
Date  signature of candidate     signature of supervisor  
Phd1c.doc - PhD Candidate Report Form  2009/2010 version 
UNIVERSITY OF ST ANDREWS 
REGISTRY  STUDENT OFFICE 
EXAMINATION FOR THE DEGREE OF Ph.D, D.Lang, Eng.D or M.D  
(by research thesis) 
1. Special Circumstances Form 
(to be completed by the candidate) 
Name of Candidate: Robert Alexander Boyle  
ID Number: 080014589   
Department / School: School of English  
Are there Special Circumstances?      NO 
Students Signature: Robert Boyle  
Date: 30th of September 2013 
N.B. The form should state any special circumstances that have affected the progress of the 
thesis or its final presentation e.g. ill health, bereavement or other temporary incapacity, and 
which should be brought to the attention of the examining committee and the Faculty Officer 
before the thesis is examined.  Failure to report any special circumstances without good 
reason may affect any subsequent appeal.  This form must be submitted with the thesis.  It is 
expected that the form will normally be blank. 
2. Details of Special Circumstances:- 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I should like to thank my supervisors Professor John 
Burnside and Professor Susan Sellers for their help and 
encouragement.  In addition I am grateful to Ms. Jennifer 
Griffiths of the Bodleian Library and to the staff of the 
Taylor Slavonic Library, Oxford.  Finally, but not least, my 
special thanks to Ms Sandra Wallace, Post-Graduate 
Secretary of the School of English, without whom 
This thesis is dedicated to three people 
For Carolyn 
kak vsegda 
For Fyodor 
silver-haired and of that time 
who first led me over white winter fields 
 past Pilnyaks gate to Pasternaks house 
and of whom I ought to have asked more questions 
and for  
Tamara Litsinskaya 
27 years old and a student 
born in Moscow 
arrested on the 8th of February 1937 
sentenced to death on the 25th of August 1937 
Murdered the same day 
Patronymic unknown 
Address unknown 
Charge unknown 
Grave unknown 
One day Lara went out and did not come back. She must have been arrested in the street, as so often 
happened in those days, and she died or vanished somewhere, forgotten as a nameless number on a 
list which later was mislaid, in one of the innumerable mixed or womens concentration camps in 
the north. 
                                                  Doctor Zhivago 
CONTENTS 
Thesis preliminaries                                                                                                         1-9 
Contents                                                                                                                           10 
Note on sources and translation                                                                                       11-12 
Chapter I     Introduction and Historical background                                                       13-21 
Chapter II    Socialist Realism at the Congress  Stalin demands                                    22-28 
Chapter III   The Congress and the Soviet Writers world                                                29-52 
Chapter IV   The significance of the Red Army to the Congress                                      53-63 
                     and the attack on the  Officer Corps 
Chapter V     Foreigners                                                                                                     64-79 
Chapter VI    Boris Pilnyak  The destruction of a Writer                                                 80-105 
Conclusion                                                                                                                          106 
Endnotes                                                                                                                             107-112 
Bibliography                                                                                                                       113-116 
Excerpt from The Eastern Bow                                                                                           117-257 
Note on Sources and Translation 
This thesis contains material drawn from sources in both Russian and English. All are listed in the 
Bibliography.  They are also marked in the text by footnotes and endnotes. Because the references 
are extensive it has been decided to present those sources largely, though not exclusively, through 
endnotes.  This structure has been chosen with the aim of combining detail within a readable 
narrative illustrating aspects of the writers life in Soviet Russia.  It is a method used, for example, 
in such books as Natashas Dance, A Cultural History of Russia by Orlando Figes, and as it 
provides both rigorous notation of sources and ease of reading it has been adopted in this thesis.  
Where a footnote refers to a specific source an abbreviated citation is given on the relevant page, 
the full citation appearing in the Bibliography. 
Original material in Russian consists of extracts from two main documentary sources and from 
articles in the Soviet press of the 1930s together with a small number of references from the late 
Soviet period.  The two central Russian publications (titles translated) are: The Stenographic Record 
of the 1st All Union Congress of Soviet Writers 1934, published in that year (and following its 
repression by Stalin reprinted only in 1990) and The Supplement to the Stenographic Record of the 
1st All Union Congress of Soviet Writers 1934.  The title and appearance of the latter publication is 
misleading in that it appears to be part of the original Congress Record but in fact consists almost 
entirely of later biographical material taken from the records of the Soviet Writers Union and 
published in Moscow in 1990 as the Soviet regime faltered and died. 
The main Congress document is thus a verbatim record of the Congress itself, six hundred pages of 
close type covering two weeks of speeches, formal addresses and presentations from delegations 
such as the Moscow garrison and the Pioneer youth movement. As well as being a contemporary 
record of the words uttered at the Congress it supplies, through appendices, sociological data 
showing the sex, age, social origin and Party affiliation of the delegates themselves.  This material 
was invaluable in rounding out the picture of who the Soviet writer was in the first main decade of 
iron literary conformity. 
The Congress supplement gives such information concerning the lives and fates of some delegates 
as appears to have been available in 1990 within the Writers Union records. There are gaps and 
omissions in the records, a fact emphasised in the publication itself. Such gaps did not augur well 
for the persons concerned. Many disappeared leaving no trace.  By cross-referencing writers names 
from the main Congress Record with the available biographical data of sixty years later it is 
possible however to present a picture, a fragmentary picture, of their lives and deaths. 
Other Russian material is cited in the endnotes. 
Concerning transliteration, since the thesis is concerned more with history than phonetics the 
method adopted is that used by Katerina Clark in her book The Soviet Novel as being the most 
suitable for non-specialist readers. See pxv of her text for details.  Exceptions have been made for 
certain widely recognised spellings. The name Beltov for example has been written thus and not 
Byeltoff a variant more phonetically correct but perhaps jarring to a reader of English. 
The thesis concentrates on the history of events and circumstances shaping the lives of Soviet 
writers, and not the literary content of their works.  Descriptions and analysis of those works where 
relevant are therefore taken from recognised authorities on Russian and Soviet literature such as 
Professor Gleb Struve and Katerina Clark. 
Strictly speaking the Soviet Union, embodying its fifteen constituent republics of which Russia was 
one, should be described thus or referred to as the USSR.  In common usage however the country 
was often spoken and written of, both at home and abroad, as Soviet Russia or simply Russia and 
all four descriptions are used interchangeably in the thesis. 
Finally, the text contains material taken from the pages of the Soviet press of the Thirties, including 
Pravda and Literaturnaya Gazeta (the Literary Gazette), the journal of the Writers Union. These 
newspaper sources came from the American State Department microfiche records held at the main 
Bodleian Library and the Taylor Slavonic Library, Oxford. 
Save where indicated, the translations from the Congress Stenographic Record, the biographical 
information from the Writers Union files and the Soviet press, are mine, as are any errors which 
may be contained therein. 
1st Congress of Soviet Writers 
The Hall of Columns, House of the Unions, Moscow 
17th of August 1934 
CHAPTER I 
Introduction 
 Historical Background 
Hail Caesar. We who are about to die salute you 
                                                      Suetonius 
MOSCOW 1934  
The Congress delegates do not realise that many of them are shortly to be murdered. In the times 
soon to come they will share their allotted end with a vast army of others. Killings will take place in 
execution cellars, lonely clearings or slave labour camps extending across Soviet Russia and since 
this land covers one sixth of the earth's land surface the deaths will number in the millions. 
Sentences will be ordered and carried out by the state whose praises the writers sing and by the 
leader whose name they daily glorify. As much part of the five year plan as wheat production or 
steel the murders will be developed into a nationwide factory process. At full capacity its  
machinery will kill an average of thirty thousand persons a week. 1 
Introduction 
By any reckoning the Russian century was hard.  The opening lines of The White Guard by Mikhail 
Bulgakov, though referring to the aftermath of the October Revolution and the Civil War with its 
evocation of mingled hope, promise and blood letting, might also provide a leitmotif for all the 
troubles that followed.  It serves especially for that period which has come to be known as the 
Purges, an epoch in which the purported ideals of a new just society lived side by side with planned 
but casual death. 
Great and terrible was the year of Our Lord 1918, of the Revolution the 
second. Its summer abundant with warmth and sun, its winter with snow, 
highest in heaven stood two stars: the shepherds' star, eventide Venus; and 
Mars  quivering, red. 2 
Of Bulgakov's two heavenly bodies Mars would be in the ascendant.   A man or woman born at the 
beginning of the century would by the end of a normal life span have survived much.  The list is 
long; the land suffered three revolutions, a vicious civil war, dismemberment by Germany, defeat by 
Poland, widespread poverty, famine, institutionalised mass murder as an instrument of state control, 
and war, destruction and death on a scarcely believable scale.  The Russian century will also create 
a word for institutionalised repression with which it will ever be identified.   A simple acronym for 
the anodyne-sounding State Administration of Camps (Gosudarstvenny Upravlenye Lagerov) will 
come to refer to the largest organised system of slave labour in history.   
This thesis is concerned with certain aspects of reality during a short period of the Soviet epoch in 
which a new literary genre, Socialist Realism, (described by Katerina Clark in The Soviet Novel, 
History as Ritual, as in truth a literary system3), came into being.  It had two obvious effects: the 
first was that published literature in the USSR atrophied for seventy years; the second that Soviet 
society was deprived of the sort of truth that only fiction can tell.  As Joseph Brodsky observed in 
his introduction to A Tomb for Boris Davidovich by Danilo Kish, a fictional indictment of the 
catastrophic realities of communism in the thirties: - 'By having written this book, Danilo Kish 
simply suggests that literature is the only available tool for the cognition of phenomena whose size 
otherwise numbs your senses and eludes human grasp. 4 
It is a commonplace that where a country's literature cannot serve as witness, its history becomes 
black farce and its truths slaves to euphemism.  What is extraordinary in the Soviet case however is 
both the length of time this state of falsity lasted and the extent to which it held sway.  The 
Congress and related events dealt with in this thesis took place in the 1930s but their collective 
shadow was long.  In the summer of 1934, for example, Kim Philby was sitting nervously on a 
Regents Park bench with his first Soviet controller as the Congress delegates prepared to assemble 
in Moscow. Four decades later he  felt able in a speech to a receptive KGB audience to  consider  
the black fate of millions thus:  'Now we all know that in the 30s some good people, including 
members of our own organisation, fell victim to cases of unfortunate disregard of socialist 
legality...'5   
Similarly, even so modern a Western writer as Christopher Hitchens seemingly at one time also felt 
able to wish away the mass horror of collectivisation in the 30s: 'there wasn't a famine...There may 
have been the occasional shortages...'.6  Vasily Grossman, with rather more experience of Soviet 
reality, was unequivocal: the regime's policy ordained 'that the peasants of the Ukraine, the Don and 
the Kuban be put to death by starvation, put to death along with their little children'.7 At least three 
and half million people died.in the Ukraine alone.8  Socialist Realism was silent as to these, and 
other, awful events. 
Although suppression of the truth and prudent or wilful blindness were attitudes applicable to all 
aspects of the creative arts and to Soviet life generally the present thesis is primarily concerned with 
the writers of the 1934 Congress (the only one allowed by Stalin in his lifetime) and the world in 
which they lived.  It will touch on Soviet Socialist Realism as a literary theory consecrated as state 
orthodoxy at the Congress in order to illustrate the constraints under which they worked but its 
principal aim is to convey something of Soviet daily reality in the 1930s, something of the world 
outside the Congress hall. 
  The 'Tortured Words' in the thesis title refer to those which characterised those tormented times- 
words falsely uttered, swallowed, hidden, wishful, destroyed, extracted or still-born -  whether 
found in the Congress record,  Pravdai headlines, or  interrogation notes of half a century ago, 
revealed as Communism fell. 
 When considering Soviet literature of the period generally there are a number of larger issues 
which arise but which do not fall to be considered in this thesis. Amongst these are questions of the 
possible validity of Socialist Realism itself as a practical didactic system for a country struggling to 
raise literacy levels and, also, in a specifically Soviet context the extent to which people needed 
Combray, or their political masters feared Leopold Bloom.    
Those questions, and others related to Socialist Realism, though of great interest, cannot be properly 
examined within the scope of this thesis. Instead it will focus on what the American critic of the 
Fifties Leonard Trilling called in another context the 'the dark and bloody crossroads where 
literature and politics meet',9 a particularly crowded Soviet intersection. Consonant with  themes 
within the novel The Eastern Bow, part of  which forms the creative writing element of this thesis, 
four aspects of Thirties Soviet life are considered; the world inhabited by the writers themselves 
(and through them the nation as a whole), the special position of the Red Army at the Congress and 
in Soviet society; the  relationship of  foreigners and fellow travellers to the Soviet Union, 
particularly Americansii; and finally the process by which an individual delegate to the Congress, 
one of the most famous Soviet writers of his time, Boris Pilnyak, became enmeshed in tortured 
words of his own and others' making. These words destroyed him. His fate stands for many. 
 Because the speeches of the main historical figures at the Congress-Gorky, Bukharin, Radek and 
Zhdanov - are readily accessible in Englishiii the emphasis in this thesis will be on less well-known 
figures whose words are only available, so far as I am aware, in Russian. 
With the Purges as a constant background the thesis will examine aspects of Soviet reality as the 
delegates themselves would have found it on stepping outside the Congress hall.   To attempt a 
picture, if only in part, of Moscow and Soviet life within the thesis parameters must necessarily be  
an  impressionistic endeavour but through examination of  diverse images of the time an idea of life 
as it was actually experienced by the writers during the 1930s emerges.  In order to bring life to 
i There were two main Soviet newspapers, Pravda, and the separate Communist Party organ Izvestia. 'Pravda' means 
'Truth' and 'Izvestia' means 'News.' In a quicksilver phrase facilitated by Russian grammar Russians would often 
murmur, privately, 'There's no News in the Truth and certainly no Truth in the News'. 
ii The position of  the Americans, because of the extent of both their emigration and disappearance, is particularly 
interesting and comparatively little known. This aspect, as with the others cited above, features in The Eastern Bow. 
iii See H.G. Scott, Problems of Soviet Literature.The three last named were senior Bolshevik politicians. 
such a picture in the context of the creative writing degree and the novel which forms its other half, 
after consultation with my supervisors a style of presentation has been adopted which combines a 
rigorous approach to research, through the use of both primary and secondary sources, with a less 
formal  evocation of a literary and physical landscape long since gone. The facts themselves are of 
great importance but it may be equally important, without straining metaphor, to picture a writer 
stepping out of the Congress hall between speeches and looking left and right, noting at either 
extremity of vision the Kremlin and the Lubyankai and his position almost exactly half-way 
between the two.  
The reason for the adoption of this approach is to convey the strangeness of the period. So many of 
its details are personal, its ironies and contradictions intimate and telling. The statistics render the 
reader numb after a while, their horrific significance diminishing with accumulation, and it is only 
through the personal that the full reality of what happened becomes even partially comprehensible.  
Even if Stalin, that 'pockmarked Caligula' as Pasternak famously called himii did not say those 
words often attributed - that the death of one person is a tragedy, a million a statisticiii- there is a 
doleful sense, faced with the Holocaust and other evils of the 20th century, in which the phrase itself 
is not without a certain melancholy truth.  
 All epochs of course have their oddities, their unique happenings, but this particular time and place 
seems to contain so many as to belong on another, almost incomprehensible, planet which at the 
same time still retains characteristics of a Europe we recognise and understand. Therein lies its 
singularity.  
i The  headquarters of the various incarnations of the Soviet secret police is a large, much altered, 19 th century building, 
in pre-revolutionary times the head office of an insurance company. In the 1930s it consisted of the main building, 
the infamous inner prison constructed in the courtyard and a number of local annexes connected to it by tunnels. It is 
situated adjacent to the largest childrens' toy shop in Russia. 
ii Levi, Peter. Boris Pasternak.  p 214 
iii No definitive primary source can be found for the attribution. 
 Historical Background to the Congress 
The general history of Auden's 'low dishonest decade' 10 is well known and does not   require 
repetition here but it may be useful to summarise briefly the peculiarly Russian and Soviet events 
which make up the contextual landscape informing fiction in the Soviet era. 
By 1934 the Soviet Union had entered into a period of comparative calm.  The two revolutions of 
February and October 1917, the forlorn intervention by Britain, France and America in the Civil 
War on behalf of the White forces, and the violent Civil War itself  had been followed by forced 
collectivisation of the peasantry, widespread devastation of the land, famine, and a massive drive to 
industrialisation which demanded huge sacrifices from the Soviet people. Behind these brief words 
lie the deaths of some twenty million of them.11   After the first Five-Year Plan however, that is after 
1933, an approximate sense of normality had returned to the country and though hardship and 
poverty were still obvious, things had improved to the extent that bread came off the ration in 
1934.12 Soviet power was well established and had already begun to create the mythology of the 
Revolution and the Civil War which would sustain its vision of itself in the years to come, fact 
immediately falling victim to propaganda. The events of the Great October Revolution for example, 
(or simply 'October' as Soviet Russians referred to it), though subsequently of great significance for 
the world, were in themselves less than stirring. The succeeding years would see heroic efforts by 
Soviet cinema and literature to portray October in tumultuous scenarios but the reality was 
otherwise. Soviets used to say, only half in jest, that casualties amongst Eisenstein's 5,000 army 
extras enthusiastically storming the Winter Palace for the cameras were greater than the true meek 
 surrender and  actual quiet entry up the stairs.i  The shots signalling revolution  fired by the cruiser 
Aurora moored on the Neva across from the Palace were blanks. Even the theatres stayed open.13  
This manner of thinking, the requirement to portray events as Bolshevik orthodoxy would have 
them rather than the actuality, became in itself a Soviet reality. Every Soviet citizen was bent to its 
needs; in the grip of Socialist Realism the writers were no exception. 
In politics Stalin had virtually won against all, former friends and otherwise, who stood in his way 
and said as much at the 17th Party Congress (in Communist terminology  'The Congress of Victors') 
in early 1934.14 The Writers Congress followed a few months later in similar self-congratulatory 
style. On the 1st of December that year, however, all was changed by the assassination of Sergei 
Kirovii Stalin used the ensuing chaos to begin immediate executions and to usher in the show trials 
and the Purges which reached their apogee in late 1937, a terrible year in the Russian psyche. For 
that reason, in her memoirs of the Purges and the camps, Into the Whirlwind, Evgenia Ginsberg 
wrote that 'The year 1937 really began on the 1st of December 1934'. 15 The writers of August 1934 
therefore, as if in thick fog, were standing on the edge of a pit they could not see.  
Consideration of the period requires mention of Trotsky. He features strongly in the Soviet Thirties.  
Following his forced exile in January 1929 (he demanded the arresting soldiers  carry him bodily 
down the stairs lest history paint him acquiescent)16 and his eventual residence abroad, he became 
the regime's most noted enemy, composing  his 'Bulletin of Opposition'17 with mordant accuracy. 
Trotsky's position is central to the Soviet Thirties and became a recurrent preoccupation of the 
Stalinist regime. As soi-disant keeper of the flame he founded the Fourth International as rival to 
Stalin's Third and this heresy was used to portray him as the enemy beyond the country's borders, a 
foul traitor bent on destruction of the Revolution. As will be seen in the chapters following it was a 
notable characteristic of the times that charges of sabotage, treason and murder often had 
'Trotskyite' attached to them as though the gravity of the charge could be increased by hyphenation 
as a lesser French growth is optimistically linked to one more grand. The writers became ensnared 
by the Trotskyite label, a feature of most denunciations or charges which affected both them and 
others.  A  vivid poster of the period,18 part of the propaganda assault against those whom Stalin 
i The side staircase used by the Bolsheviks lacked cinematic verve so the main Jordan stairs were used for October.  
Red Army extras fired off live ammunition inside the building, shattering expensive antique china and wounding 
five of their number. The caretaker, while sweeping up, told Eisenstein that his people caused far less damage the 
first time they took the palace. See Figes, Orlando. Natasha's Dance.  p 460. 
ii Kirov was the extremely popular Party leader of  Leningrad and a possible rival to Stalin. The latter's involvement in 
his murder is strongly suspected by many historians. See for example Conquest, The Great Terror, p 38 et seq. 
sought to destroy, covers almost all the dangerous ground in one picture- a massive red proletarian 
forearm is strangling a ferocious snake above  the words: 'TO THE WIPING OUT OF SPIES AND 
DIVERSIONISTS, AND OF THE TROTSKYITE  BUKHARINITE AGENTS OF FASCISM'  
The eyes of the reptile are Nazi swastikasi.  
By the time the main Purges end in 1938 Stalin had vanquished all opposition at home and abroad 
and he was ready to reach an accommodation with Hitler in the Nazi-Soviet Pact of 1939. The 
Russian end of Auden's decade closes with Von Ribbentrop's entourage arriving at the old Moscow 
airport. A guard of honour presents arms with much flying of swastikas (borrowed hurriedly from 
the sets of Mosfilm (the Moscow Film studio complex where they had of late been used in the 
making of anti-fascist epics) and in honour of the visitors the Red Army band played the unfamiliar 
notes of the German national anthem, and the Internationale; the music for the Horst Wessel could 
not be found but was soon added to the People's Army of Workers' and Peasants' repertoire. It 
disappeared in June 1941 when Hitler invaded.19 
* * * 
i The image has longevity. In 2013 it could be purchased at a bookseller's booth at the corner of the Pont Neuf and the 
Quai Conti. 
CHAPTER II 
Socialist Realism at the Congress  Stalin Demands 
An artist must above all portray life truthfully. 
                                                                                               J.V. Stalin 1932 
Of the hundreds of delegates gathering in the Hall of Columns that August fortnight it may perhaps 
be open to doubt as to whether any two of them would agree on a precise definition of the term 
'Socialist Realism.  In fact no single definition was attempted by any speaker. As Katerina Clark 
pointed out in her seminal book 'The Soviet Novel. History as Ritual',20 since the declaration  in 
1932 at the formation of the Writers Union that Socialist Realism was 'the sole method appropriate 
for Soviet Literature' Soviet scholars themselves  argued about what the term meant, with no real 
answer being agreed upon.21 She cites for example 'Byzantine' debates concerning the relative 
proportions of 'realism' and 'romanticism' the proper Soviet literary recipe  should contain and views 
these collectively as 'academic hair-splitting', 22 unhelpful for the consideration of  what Socialist 
Realism actually is and what it meant to those writing and reading it. Instead, she defines the 
concept as 'essentially a name applied to Soviet culture's literary system rather than to a way of 
writing that is particularly 'socialist' or 'realist.' That system, following a 'master plot, acts as a 
repository of national myth and as a 'parable for the working out of Marxism-Leninism in history'23  
through exemplars handed down, as if in benediction, at the beginning of every literary congress 
which has taken place in the Soviet Union. These form the Socialist Realist canon. Examples of 
some titles convey their themes: Cement; Virgin Soil upturned; How the Steel was tempered; and 
The Young Guard.i 
For the purposes of this thesis, save in so far as is necessary to explore the reality of some aspects of 
the lives of those affected by Socialist Realism, an analysis of  the concept itself or the books 
forming the canon is not made. It may be useful however to examine briefly Clark's concept of the 
types of soviet novel and the virtually universal structure of what she calls the 'master plot24 in order 
to illustrate the constraints binding any writer who wished to have anything published.  These 
constraints constituted the reality, the invisible boundaries, of the Soviet writer's creative world. 
Clark divides the types of most Soviet (and virtually all Stalinist) novels into several categories: the 
'production' novel (i.e. the increase of some commodity or endeavour); the historical novel; a novel 
about a worthy inventor or intellectual; a novel concerning war or revolution; a novel about spies or 
criminals and a novel about the West. The master plot, where the setting is in Russia, typically 
requires a 'positive hero,  usually from a modest background, who finds himself in an unfamiliar  
new closed environment ( a factory for example, or a dam, or a section of the front)  or who makes 
a  return to a place formerly known. He has to fulfil a task of some sort within that environment.   
i By Fyodor Gladkov, Mikhail Sholokov, Nikolai Ostrovsky and Alexander Fadeyev respectively    
This might include the 5 year plan not being properly carried out or a danger arising which imperils 
its completion. The template also requires that problems develop in the course of that fulfilment 
which appear to prevent the successful completion of the task. These might include both 
deficiencies in the quality of persons he finds on his arrival (backsliders, inefficient bureaucratic 
persons in authority lacking sufficient purpose or efficiency, truculent nay-sayers etc.) and practical 
difficulties such as climate or lack of materials. In overcoming these problems the positive hero 
seeks advice from a local source (the 'People' and its collective wisdom) as well as help from higher 
authority. In the course of these soundings a plan is formed through which the hero develops his 
own increased socialist consciousness and inspires the local people, and any salvageable 
bureaucrats, to complete the task. A climax may be engineered which threatens the completion. This 
is usually followed by a successful resolution of events and some sort of celebration or marking of 
the event which underscores the ideology at the centre of the work.25 
Within the master plot, given the wide nature of possible scenarios available in a rapidly 
industrialising country, any number of variants of its component parts were possible and might even 
include peripheral events such as an emotional estrangement which interferes with achievement. 
The central framework, however, was inviolable and long lasting.  Zhdanov, Stalin's cultural 
spokesman and acolyte, whose address at the 1934 Congress clearly set out the Party's viewpoint  
(see below) was still emphasising after the war that this framework, referred to by Clark as the 
'purity of the formula' must be followed without deviation.26   
The obligatory structural requirements of any work of fiction were so clearly defined and embedded 
in the soviet literary conscience that throughout the life of the Communism system it was being 
applied to all situations, even down to short stories or vignettes of Soviet rural life. In Stovemakers, 
a short story from the 50s by Alexander Tvardovsky, a much celebrated author -and young delegate 
to the Congress in 1934 - the raw material of an installation of a small village stove in the depths of 
the country is carved and fashioned to fit the model.27 The story concerns a young member of the 
intelligentsia (a teacher) recently arrived in the countryside and the useless stove in his new 
quarters. Intellect alone is unequal to the situation; bricks must be found, clay puddled and flues 
planned. It is only after seeking help from a bluff army major undaunted by any task and an elderly 
master of stove making (a clear man of the people) that warm serenity reigns. The tone, as with 
most Soviet morality tales, is always serious, the only unintended comedy for any Soviet reader 
arising at the injured refusal of the old tradesman to take even a drop of vodka before the job was 
completed. A party celebrating the building achievement ends the story. In a small way it illustrates 
the manner in which the genre, or the system, of Socialist Realism was intended to enter the 
consciousness of everyday people as an inspirational blueprint for their lives. It acted as a digestible 
narrative which in turn formed a building block of successful problem resolution cemented into 
place in the edifice of the Communist state. Its main enemies were the countless ironies of Soviet 
reality and an equal number of softly spoken Russian 'anekdotes'.  These were short stories in oral 
form largely following Zhdanov's hallowed structure, the subtleties and cumulative effect of which 
both teller and recipient expected and relished. They all ended with a variation on the soviet glass-
making factory narrative - a magnificent industrial palace covering miles of the Kazakh desert 
erected at extraordinary cost and in the teeth of every conceivable problem thrown up by man or 
nature, which closed after a month due to a sand shortage. 
Whatever literary development any Congress delegate thought might be desirable, Soviet reality 
meant that only the regime and its leader would decide its parameters. Stalin did not address the 
Congress, preferring strings to speech, but Andrei Zhdanov spoke with his voice.     
At the opening session, on the evening of the 17th of August, Gorky opened the Congress with a few 
remarks and introduced the session chairman, Ivan Mikityenko, who in turn introduced Zhdanov. 
Mikityenko was a senior writer and Party activist from the Ukraine.i His words  would carry in the 
hall - From the Central Committee of the All-union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) and from the 
Council of Peoples' Commissars of the USSR I present Comrade Zhdanov. - and they received 
loud applause'.28  Zhdanov took the podium to deliver the first address to the Congress. The order 
of precedence is not without significance; whatever the field, whether literature or cabbage 
production west of the Urals, the Party's message came first.  
Zhdanov, Stalins messenger and cultural gauleiter, controlled cultural matters in the Soviet Union 
on his master's behalf until 1948, when he died of alcoholism. That period of dark repression, of 
imprisonment and worse, is known in Russia as the Zhdanovshina, or the Zhdanov-time.  
  The rows of delegates listened to Zhdanov as he set the Congress tone. He first of all, as with 
 almost all speakers throughout the Congress, praised Stalin.ii For reasons of space when 
considering other speakers similar empty tributes will not be repeated but they represent  a constant 
i Later shot. See p 27 below 
ii It appears that in the context of the Congress, mention of Gorky was allowed to exceed that of Stalin. The former's 
name appears 253 times, the dictator's 167. Josef Vissarionovich still outshines Lenin (151), Pushkin (82), William 
Shakespeare (62) and Noel Coward (1). See the Congress Supplement pp 142,163,159,170 and 334 respectively. 
theme throughout the Congress Record and embody another Soviet reality of the time, that called by 
Russians the Cult of Personality.  Zhdanov's tortured words (though of course he may not have 
considered them as such) include:    
'...under the leadership of the Communist Party, under the guiding genius of 
our great leader and teacher, Comrade Stalin, the socialist system has finally 
and irrevocably triumphed in our country. 
'...At the Seventeenth Congress of our Party, Comrade Stalin gave a 
masterful, unsurpassed analysis of our victories...' 
'Comrade Stalin laid bare the very roots of our difficulties and 
shortcomings...' 
... [with] the untiring support and help of Comrade Stalin a whole army of 
Soviet writers has rallied around the Soviet power and the Party...' 29 
 He moved on to emphasise the interconnectedness of politics and literature in the Soviet Union, 
citing the dangerous European political situation, tolling the bell for the end of Western literature 
and stating, bluntly if turgidly, the regime's requirements for the practitioners of Socialist Realism: 
they should hold themselves in readiness, as 'engineers of the soul'i, to 'remould the mentality of 
their readers': 
'The present state of bourgeois literature is such that it is no longer able to 
create great works of art. The decadence and disintegration of bourgeois 
literature, resulting from the collapse and decay of the capitalist system, 
represent a characteristic trait, a characteristic peculiarity of the state of 
bourgeois culture and bourgeois literature at the present time.30  
i Stalin apparently coined this phrase, much taken up later by Soviet letters, at a literary meeting in Gorky's Moscow 
mansion. See Frank Westerman, Engineers of the Soul, p 33. 
His address then descended to the particular, the fundamental requirements of Socialist Realism as 
the state saw them. In a few important passages he revealed these demands in the answers to his 
own question: 
'Comrade Stalin has called our writers engineers of human souls. What does 
that mean? What duties does the title confer upon you? 
'In the first place, it means knowing life so as to be able to depict it 
truthfully in works of art, not to depict it in a dead, scholastic way, not 
simply as objective reality but to depict reality in its revolutionary 
development.  [my underlining] 
'In addition to this, the truthfulness and historical concreteness of the artistic 
portrayal should be combined with the ideological remoulding and 
education of the toiling people in the spirit of socialism. This method in 
belles lettres and literary criticism is what we call the method of socialist 
realism.31 
'...Comrades, the proletariat, just as in other provinces of material and 
spiritual culture, is the sole heir of all that is best in the treasury of world 
literature...'32  
'...untiring work directed towards improving their ideological equipment in 
the spirit of socialism represents an indispensable condition without which 
Soviet writers cannot remould the mentality of their readers...'33 
[Socialist Realism embodies]  'the most matter- of -fact everyday reality, 
and the most heroic of prospects.34  
'We require a high mastery of artistic production, and in this connection it is 
impossible to overrate the help that Maxim Gorky is rendering the Party and 
the proletariat in the struggle for quality in literature, for the culture of 
language.35 
The key to the Soviet literary situation as it was to develop in the Thirties and beyond lies in 
Zhdanovs dismissal of objective reality'. 'Reality in its revolutionary development' was what was 
being demanded and the 'Engineers of the Soul' knew that those code-words meant a portrayal of  
life not as it is, but as it should be. In turn that meant what the state says it should be. As the 
delegates applaud deliriously they may have little idea of just what that is going to mean. 
CHAPTER III 
The Congress and  
the Soviet Writer's World 
Poetry is respected only in this country - people are killed for it.  
There's no place where more people are killed for it. 
                                                                         Osip Mandelshtam36 
Nobles Club or Society of the Well Born. Bolshaya Dimitrovka. (Good balls,              
concerts and fetes.) Baedekers Russia. 191437 
At the bottom of Great Dimitrovka street in the centre of Moscow, appropriately, as subsequent 
events showed, half - way between the Kremlin towers and the Lubyanka, sits a demure building in 
the Russian neo-classical style. Its three stories, usually painted a light pastel, are austere, its faade 
relieved only by a portico and four large Corinthian columns. In date, intended function and style it 
is similar to the Assembly Rooms of Jane Austen's Bath or those of the Edinburgh of Walter Scott.  
Pushkin, Turgenev, Tolstoy and Dostoevsky all knew it well. 
 In its time as the Club of the Nobility (in Russian literally the Society of the Well-born), under 
tiers of bright candles the aristocracy of old Moscow whirled in endless mazurkas on its parquet 
while outside the city lay under thirty degrees of frost. Anna Karenina would have no difficulty 
today in recognising its tall windows and polished floor. Should she look beyond the curtains at the 
lines of Mercedes cars and and bright shopping bags bearing addresses on 5th Avenue or the Rue St 
Honor  she might recognise in the new Russia's deep thirst for excess something of the old.   
 Now, the streets of central Moscow throb with money. Concrete, steel and plate glass preen on old 
lanes; there are casinos, nightclubs, lights.   In a squat mausoleum of red Labradorite the leader of 
the Great October Revolution lies sightless within a few yards of a huge underground shopping 
centre, an obvious American victory hidden under cobbles. Where Lenin's speeches sought to 
inspire tired women in shawls and threadbare illiterate men with visions of a universal happiness for 
humankind, advertising hoardings now proffer a different joy. Their promises may be less lofty but 
offer more immediate contentment, funds permitting, from Sony or Marlboro, Rolex or Chanel. 
It was different in 1934. Before moving to consider certain aspects of the Soviet Writers' world at 
that time, mention should be made of one of the important facets of that world which of which 
space does not allow more than the briefest of mentions - the Writers Union. Founded in 1932 to 
oversee all aspects of literary production it had a central role in the lives of its members. This single 
body, through its power, and its policy of  Knut i Pryanik, (Whip and Gingerbread, the Soviet 
equivalent of  carrot and stick) controlled publication, pay, accommodation, travel, dachas, 
holidays, food, access to special shops, education and almost every aspect of the writing life for 
over half a century. It even decided who could be called a writer. Space does not allow analysis of 
its role but a full and very useful examination of the organisation in the round is to be found in The 
Soviet Writers Union by John and Carol Garrard, New York:The Free Press, MacMillan, 1990. 
This chapter will examine the delegates themselves, something of the increasingly surreal world a 
writer would see outside the Congress hall and something of the fate of those who for two weeks in 
August 1934 gathered within. As the Congress Record is verbatim and in the present tense, that 
tense will continue in use in appropriate parts of the thesis.  
 By 1934 the old Nobles' Club has become the House of Unionsi with the new name in large letters 
on the pediment. Fleeting clips of surviving newsreel footage shows the faade adorned with 
banners welcoming the writer delegates. Huge crowds of people filling the square outside are 
waiting for the arrival of Maxim Gorky. Moscow summers are hot; long days of deadening 
humidity are only broken by fierce downpours, and when Gorky steps out of the official car into 
strong sunlight there are puddles behind him on the paving stones. One of the most popular men in 
Soviet Russia he acknowledges solemnly the cheers of the crowd. His tall gaunt body and long 
drooping moustaches, now grey, make him the most recognisable figure, save one, in the country. 
With a stern glance at the camera he passes inside.38 
Away from the noise of the street the Congress is to take place in what was often called 'the most 
beautiful room in Moscow'.39  A vast hall painted entirely in white, its huge Corinthian columns rise 
up two storeys in grand simplicity. At the far end a podium for the speakers stands several feet 
above the long rows of chairs and tables set up for the delegates. Without stretching matters too far 
the podium itself might be said to convey at a glance some idea of the future direction of Soviet 
artistic thought. The excited experimentation and angular modernity of the new revolutionary art 
and architecture of only ten years before, the 'Arkhitekronics' of Malevich and Rodchenkos 
constructionism,40 are gone. A photograph of the dais shows a swagged satin backdrop and imperial 
quantities of brass-potted ferns.41 The avant garde has departed and the future, which in time will 
replicate much of the past, is to be proclaimed as if from the foyer of an Eastbourne hotel. 
A delegate arriving at the House of Unions and pausing with his back to the portico (97% of all 
i The trades unions existed but not in the Western sense. They were another branch of government. 
delegates were male, see below p 41) would see a changing city. Just beside him a new metro 
station is being built.  The first line will open later that year.  Looking immediately left over the 
heads of the crowd filling the square he will see the facade of the Bolshoi ('large' in Russian) and 
the side of the Maly ('small') theatres skirting a smaller square.  The buildings, as with most of 
Moscow, look tired and in need of paintingi. Beyond the theatres an avenue runs slightly uphill to a 
four-square heavy building about six hundred yards away, which sits facing the city. Depending on 
his origin he may not know this large edifice but it is the Lubyanka.  Muscovites avoid referring to 
it, or even walking past.  On the other side of the avenue the mosaics of the Art Moderne Metropole 
Hotel face the Bolshoi and behind it a run of the old city walls screens a long street filled with 
churches and monasteries.  Their cupolas peep over the walls, any remaining gilt shining in the hot 
August sun.  At the end of this street, hidden from view, is the Military Collegium of the Supreme 
Court which will be in time will become a place where, daily, long runs of death sentencesii will be 
passed.  
 Directly across the square two large ornate red brick buildings in the style usually referred to 
without a negative connotation as 'pseudo-Russian' contain the offices of the old city council and 
the rooms of the Historical Museum. Between them is the space where the old Chapel of the Iberian 
Virgin used to stand before its demolition a few years before. Then the Kremlin battlements, the 
broad expanse of Red Square and the long permanent queue, to view Lenin in his tomb. To the right 
a stretch of Kremlin wall draws the eye to the end of a long square where a low classical building, 
the former Imperial Riding School, sits in ochre yellow. The colour is the Maria Therese yellow or 
Kaiser gelb, sporadically brightening this often drab city and seen from Vienna to the Urals.  To the 
immediate right of the delegate a new modern building is rising; it is the central office of the Five 
Year Plan. Everywhere crowds pass and re-pass over the streets; trams clang by, filled to bursting. 
 The old city of Moscow, with its village air of low buildings, malodorous back lanes and small 
cupolaed churches in tired streets is changing, not only physically.iii The delegate does not realise it 
yet but soon Moscow is about to become the city of The Master and Margarita,iv surreal and darkly 
i See the diaries of the British Consul, Reader Bullard, Inside Stalin's Russia pp 1-37 for a contemporary description of 
the city. 
ii 35,000 in 2 years. Execution cells existed at the court. See David Satter, It Was a Long Time Ago and It Didn't  
Happen Anyway, p 5 
iii For a picture of the changing city in the 1930s see Kathleen Berton, Moscow, An Architectural History. 
iv Bulgakov was writing the novel in the Thirties, exactly the period of the Congress and subsequent Terror. It circulated 
in the Soviet Union in illegal samizdat (literally 'self publishing') form in the early sixties and openly in 1973. See 
Mikhail Bulgakov, The Master and Margarita. 
quixotic, and the country of which it is the capital is about to descend into a time of great evil.  For 
the moment however, there is a sort of busy calm.  Moscow is still just recognisable as of old and 
ironies thrown up by change still abound.  The Soviet re-naming of streets, for example, is not yet 
complete and the names of months, weeks and days, unlike those of an earlier revolution, have also 
not changed.  It is still  possible for two convinced Communists standing at the Saviour's Gate to the 
Kremlin, in agreeing a meeting  the following Sunday nearby, to speak without a second thought of 
gathering at Saint Basil's on Resurrection Day. 
The setting of those times is singular enough in itself - the largest country in the world where all 
borders are sealed and all means of communication and survival are controlled by the state. None 
may voice disquiet with impunity and the value of an individual life is assessed only in proportion 
to its value to the collective. 
 Below, before consideration of the Congress itself is considered, a number of random aspects of 
Thirties Soviet reality are juxtaposed, deliberately with little detail or explanation save in the end 
notes and minimal footnotes, so as  to show in brief something of  the whirling and surreal nature of 
the Soviet Writer's world as it developed throughout that decade. 
 The starvation in the Ukraine and Southern Russia of more than five million persons, 'one vast 
Belsen', 42  was not mentioned by a single delegate.  Maxim Gorky the world famous literary figure 
central to the Congress, whose former humanist views were legendary, calls people stigmatised as 
kulaks (slightly better-off farmers or those opposed to collectivisation) 'half-animals'.43 State murder 
through execution and other repressions is so widespread that a national census reveals a shortfall of 
several millions of people. The census is cancelled as never having taken place, the documents 
pulped.  The civil servants in charge of the census are shot.44  
The first Soviet Constitution, known as the Stalin Constitution, guaranteeing an independent 
judiciary, due legal process and freedom of speech, conscience and assembly is announced with  
some fanfare to Soviet Russia and the world.45  Its two principal authors, Bukharin and Radek, 
prominent delegates to the Congress, are arrested subsequently, forced in show trials to confess to 
imaginary crimes and then disposed of.46 The Constitution cites as immutable the freedoms and 
rights given to national minorities formerly marginalised by Tsarist autocracy while the entire thirty 
five members of the government of the Mongolian Peoples Republic, one of the fifteen constituent 
republics of the USSR, are invited as comrades to Moscow, then shot47.  Elsewhere, Soviet film 
studios and theatres turn out great numbers of comedies, romances, adventure stories and musicals48 
at the same time as more than twenty five thousand forced labourers are worked to death building a 
canal from the White sea too shallow to carry most sea-going ships.49 The state seeks to immortalise 
the waterway by a collective book created by a brigade of soviet authors praising the venture; 
writers apparently so excited at the prospect that their fingers were 'shaking from astonishment.50 
In the Gorky park of Culture and Rest teenage baseball teams of American emigrants to Soviet 
Russia flail at pitches on summer evenings and shout encouragement in the vowels of Brooklyn and 
Kansas. Many of the baseball players will end in the Gulag or in unmarked graves.51 As the press 
announces a 'beisbol' league being set up in Moscow, Pravda similarly announces that the death 
penalty is now applicable to twelve year olds.52 
Shortly before the Congress begins a famous poet, Osip Mandelshtam, is arrestedi in central 
Moscow for writing a poem, A poem on Stalin, (November 1933),53 describing him in graphically 
unflattering terms. It sums up an era: 
We live, deaf to the land beneath us 
Ten steps away no one hears our speeches 
All we hear is the Kremlin mountaineer 
The murderer and peasant slayer 
His fingers are as fat as grubs 
And the words, final as lead weights, fall from his lips, 
His cockroach whiskers leer 
And his boots gleam 
Around him a rabble of thin-necked leaders- 
fawning half-men for him to play with. 
They whinny, purr or whine 
As he prates and points a finger, 
One by one forging his laws, to be flung 
Like horseshoes at the head, the eye or the groin 
i  Information on events of the period can be confusing. Peter Levy in Boris Pasternak cites the arrest as having taken 
place in the poet's lodgings in Furmanov St in Leningrad.(see p 183) whereas his wife's memoirs  specify their room 
in Nashchokinsky Lane, Moscow. Emma Gerstein's Memoirs, p64 confirms this as does Anna Benn and Rosamund 
Bartlett's Literary Russia, p 79. Bulgakov also lived in this building which was not far from the Congress Hall. 
And every killing is a treat 
For the broad-chested Ossete  
 In the Lubyanka the poet admits this openly and recites the poem to his interrogators. In reply to a 
question, he replies that he wrote it because he hated fascism.54 Against all odds he is ordered by 
Stalin not shot or imprisoned but merely exiled to a provincial town. His health gone, he is soon to 
attempt suicide. Under guard leaving Moscow the dazed poet mumbles 'It's a miracle to the train 
compartment window.55 As delegates gather, Stalin's astute decision allows him to appear as the 
wise dispenser of mercy. Despite his fame and generally acknowledged brilliance the poet's name is 
mentioned at the Congress once only in passing as a member of a former literary grouping, now 
considered irrelevant.56 All other delegates remain silent; not a word is said publicly of his arrest for 
a dozen lines of verse. After his period of exile is served he receives an unexpected gift of a two- 
month rest home holiday from the Writers Union. It is bestowed so he may be arrested the more 
easily and he is taken one day, before dawn.57  He disappears this time for good. In the camps he 
becomes an emaciated skeleton driven to madness, and finally finds exhausted death. In a frozen 
Gulag transit camp on the far side of the world, in deep winter, whilst his rags are deloused, one of 
the greatest poets of the European twentieth century falls and dies half-naked on a sulphurous plank 
floor. A numbered wooden tag is attached to his foot and he is thrown into a communal pit.58  
 Another writer of renown, Isaac Babel,  popular for his unsparing vignettes of the Civil war, and of 
a famously European and liberal cast of mind, stands at the Congress and declares wryly that his 
new genre is one of silence.59 He receives surprised laughter and applause for his daring, still just 
possible at this time. He is a protg of Gorky. Most of the delegates may not be aware that he also 
socialises regularly with secret policemen, some of  the monstrous 'half  men' of the above poem 
for whom the clichd term 'blood-soaked' is, however apposite,  by infinite multiples inadequate.60  
When asked why he frequents these households - 'did he want to touch death?' - he replies 'No. I 
just like to have a sniff to see what it smells like'.61 The writer, for all his silence, is given money, 
privileges, special city lodgings and a country house in a unique writers' colony in which to create. 
This takes place in a land where most people think themselves fortunate to possess a few shoddy 
square feet of space in a communal flat. His links to the upper ranks of the Soviet elite and his 
equally important contacts and fame in Western Europe preserve him for a while but when these 
attributes become less relevant to Stalin and dangerous in a new political climate he, like many 
another less celebrated, is arrested, forced to confess to imagined charges, and shot.62  His 
Lubyanka photograph shows him bruised and stunned, his vital glasses gone.63 He will have stayed 
alive a little longer than most of those condemned in the frenzied killing period of the main Purges, 
but he cannot escape his name on a list, as chance has it  the same execution list as the man whose 
company he formerly sought, the erstwhile head of the secret police.64  Standing on the Congress 
podium, an urbane and civilised European figure, he does not realise how short his life is to be. 
Probably the most read author in Russia, Boris Pilnyak,  another delegate to Congressi and a leading 
member of the Soviet Writers Union and the Congress Praesidium,65  remains completely silent. 
Despite his acknowledged status, as literary mores veer and change his position has from time to 
time been subject to lacerating attacks in the state journals, and in the press. He cannot but be 
worried.  In silence safety may lie, he hopes, and in any event he confesses privately to trusted 
friends, that the gathering itself is a contrived affair of mediocrity in which he desires no part. In 
private he also discloses his true and unfavourable views of the Soviet state. These words, betrayed, 
will return in the form of an ever-tightening net.  Outwardly however, he has abandoned earlier 
independence and will continue to wrench and twist himself to every newly required nuance of 
official literary policy, turning out books to order and excoriating those he wrote before his 
publicly- voiced red Epiphany. His tortured words are many. They weigh on him.  Like other 
literary figures he frequents gatherings of senior secret policemen and in drink learns details of how 
executions are carried out, then returns to his family, with what thoughts are not recorded. He finds 
a protector in the head of the NKVD himself, a man who knows no limit of evil.  With time's 
passing the writers contorted writings bring him advantage.  All the privileges of a successful and 
approved writer are accorded him - he receives money, the gift of foreign travel (even Hollywood), 
the rare luxury of a private car, good accommodation in Moscow - and a large dacha where his next 
door neighbour is another famous writer, Boris Pasternak. They share a garden gate which 'was 
never closed'.66  From that garden his neighbour sees him lead away at dusk one Autumn day. He is 
taken to the Lubyanka, put in a cell and interrogated, and in due course murdered after a trial lasting 
fifteen minutes. 
The delegates increasingly will be becoming aware that the system, if such it may be called, also 
contains a measure of unpredictability. Evgeny Zamyatin, a widely read and respected author has 
risked the publication abroad, four years before, of a dystopic novel about totalitarianism. We, his 
tale of  'Onestate' ruled over by the 'Benefactor' , with unmistakeable echoes of  Soviet life, is now 
widely considered one of the 20th century's  most important books and was subsequently of great 
i See Chapter VI of this thesis for a more detailed examination of his position. 
interest to George Orwell when preparing to write1984.67  The writer is pilloried and threatened in 
all quarters of the Soviet press but after a brave direct appeal to Stalin is allowed, extraordinarily, to 
leave Russia.  He dies in Paris in the middle of the Purges, a 'loyal emigre', sad and bitter, having 
written little else.i  Mikhail Bulgakov, another writer now acknowledged as being of world stature, 
makes a similar request after being unable to publish for years.  He is refused. Stalin, after a 
personal telephone conversation with him, orders that a ban on publication be continued but that  he 
be given suitable employment at the  famous Moscow Arts Theatre and be protected from arrest. 
Stalin likes one of his works from which the quotation at the beginning of this chapter is taken. 
Formerly banned it is now dramatised for the stage at that theatre. It becomes the dictator's 
favourite; he sees it fifteen times.68 If the writer is saved by a caprice, however, the theatre and its 
director are not. It is closed and the director,Vsevolod Meyerhold,  an artist of European repute, is 
arrested and makes a written appeal from his cell (with the unbroken arm) to Stalin via Molotov. It 
goes unanswered. Perhaps he does not realise that the fact that his arrest warrant is signed by the 
head of the NKVD in blue pencil means he is destined for execution. He is tortured most evilly, as 
his Lubyanka photograph shows; this includes bones being broken and the interrogator urinating in 
his mouth.69 He is then shot. While he is in the Lubyanka his wife is murdered in their flat by 
persons unknown, her body suffering 17 stab wounds, a murder widely regarded as a general 
warning.70 This sordid event mingles with another aspect of Soviet reality, the corruption and 
omnipotence of those in authority; the elderly maid who was beaten unconscious in the attack is 
sent to the Gulag and the Meyerhold apartment is then divided between the chauffeur and the 
assistant of Lavrenti Beria, then head of the NKVD.71 
Though Literature seems to be the most dangerous category of the arts in which to work music is 
also subject to the same repressions.  Soviet Russia's premier composer Dimitri Shostakovich is 
summoned to a police station on a Friday and told to confess to espionage and implicate others. 
Unsurprisingly he is dumbfounded. His NKVD interrogator gives him a stark warning that he has 
the weekend to come up with the confession, then releases him. On his terrified return to the Police 
station on Monday morning the composer is told that his former interrogator has been himself 
arrested and he is therefore free to go.ii 
i No definitive authority can be cited for the following assertion which nevertheless demands to be made: Zamyatin 
must surely have been the only 1930s Russian dystopic novelist of international stature who was also a shipbuilding 
correspondent for the Glasgow Herald. See the Glasgow Herald Trade Review issues 31/12/32 p 66; 29/12/34 p 45 
and Glasgow Herald 30/6/34 p 4. Cited in Zamyatin,The Biography of a Heretic p 90 
ii Dimitri Shostakovich. See Elisabeth Wilson, Shostakovich, A Life Remembered, p 148 
Caprice also plays its parts in other walks of life; in industry a black American cotton specialist 
engineer emigrant working in a plant in a Soviet Central Asian city shows extraordinary courage 
when he learns of an NKVD arrest team who have come for him when he was absent. He goes 
immediately to NKVD headquarters and demands to know what is going on. An officer assures him 
he won't be troubled again and that it had been purely a question of a quota, now filled.72 
 The American ambassador Joseph Davies, appointed by Roosevelt, fosters a rosy view of the 
reality of life in the USSR while American citizens, disillusioned emigrants to Soviet Russia  who 
wish to return to the United States, are arrested on the pavements outside the embassy.73  The 
readers of the New York Times are assured by its Moscow correspondent, Walter Duranty, 
throughout the Purges and the great show trials that all is well in the USSR under Stalin and any 
statement to the contrary is either uninformed or malicious propaganda. The correspondent, an 
English ex-public schoolboy from Bedfordshire with one leg, celebrated in journalistic circles, is 
awarded a Pulitzer prize. He lives a good life in an excellent flat on a major street south of the 
Kremlin beyond the Moscow river.  Whilst his columns are appearing in the New York Times sealed 
vans containing  condemned prisoners cross and re-cross the city nightly from police station to 
prison, from the Lubyanka holding cells to dark and obscure places on the outskirts of the city.  
When records are opened half a century later one such mass grave eleven miles from Red Square 
contain tens of thousands of bodies.74 An NKVD senior administrator of the time, who later 
changed his name, confessed in 1990: 
                        'In the fall of 1936 all of the execution chambers in Moscow were working                      
                        at full capacity. Yet there were more and more people to shoot. It became            
                        difficult to remove the bodies of those who had been executed without being        
                         noticed by people in the area. There began to be bad rumours and the           
                         executioners, meanwhile, were pushed to the limit. What went on What                   
                         went on There was no time to wash away the blood in the basements.  
                         and it seemed like the shooting would never end. I did not know where  
                         to send the corpses, everything was filled...everything.'75 
 The mixture of ideology and banality which reflects the 1930s in Stalin's Russia is seen in the main 
press organ of the regime. The contemporary pages of Pravda, where the most utilised verbs seem 
to be 'unmask' and 'shoot', are violent and loud with denunciations and warnings of spies, saboteurs 
and traitors in every corner of Soviet society while at the same time recording adjacent facts of 
daily life as if the two were merely aspects of the same normality.  Below  black headlines shrieking 
for men to be 'shot like mad dogs' echoing the words of the Prosecutor Vishinsky at the show trials76  
appear notices for La Traviata at the Bolshoi Theatre. A few columns down, a new book by Stalin 
on the insufficiency of party workers effort towards the liquidation of Trotskyites and other 
double-dealers  appears without irony beside an illustrated advertisement for a new Soviet brand of 
instant soup cube.77 
In every part of the country, from Minsk to the Sea of Japan, mass graves will be dug.78  These 
graves are filled by the people who disappear daily from trains, places of work, and quiet rooms in 
sad communal flats.   No word of this is heard in the Hall of Columns nor afterwards in the works 
of the writers. Socialist Realism does not recognise, in Zhdanov's words, this particular aspect of 
'objective reality.' The writers grow to realise that failure to conform means at best a crushing 
repression harming the non- obedient and those closest to them; at worst it means death. Deliberate 
flouting of the rules is however not the only category which invites disaster; a slavish devotion to 
Party ordinances or as Pasternak wrote, simply being on an unlucky list 'which later was mislaid'79  
can also easily bring oblivion. In one central Moscow side street a few hundred paces long and five 
hundred yards from the Lubyanka, Potapovsky Lane, thirty five residents were arrested and 
murdered and over a hundred others were sent to the camps.80 Though some paths seem safer than 
others no one knows for certain which will lead to survival. That is the reality of the world 
inhabited by every Soviet writer in Thirties Russia. 
THE CONGRESS OPENS 
His initial brief words of welcome complete Gorky hands over the proceedings to Ivan Mitinyenko, 
a leading Ukrainian writer, party member and functionary of both the Ukrainian and the All-Soviet 
Union of Writers. He, together with Nikolai Tikhonov, a well known Leningrad writer, (who is later 
to publicly demand the death penalty for the accused in a show trial in this very building while the 
trial was in session)81 carry out the swift election of the Praesidium of the Congress. This was a 
body whose exact function were never made clear but whose members, judging by the rapid and 
unopposed election, embody another aspect of Soviet reality  the pre-determined vote.82 Robert 
Conquest cites a telling episode in the Cominterni where in 1927 two Italian delegates failed to 
understand the system. They declined to vote for condemnation of a Trotsky article on the grounds 
they had not read it. Despite being pressured to do so, they refused to give in. Stalin, the tactician, 
withdrew the motion but it appears that this was the last such serious incident of principle.83    
 Gorky's two colleagues on the podium embody from the outset the uncertain and hazardous world 
of Soviet literary reality. Tikhonov, from working class stock, was a favourite of Stalin and was 
often photographed with him. His Socialist Realist works earned him two Stalin prizes and he was 
awarded the Lenin Laureate prize in 1970. As well as being one of the foremost powers of the 
Union of Writers for 30 years he served as a member of the Supreme Soviet84  This body, like all 
other Soviets (the word comes from the Russian 'to advise') was in principle an executive unit in the 
governmental structure. In practice a duplicate Party structure at all levels made the decisions. 
Despite these badges of the establishment both the contemporary (1934) and later (1990) records 
show Tikhonov not to have been a Party member.85  
Mitinyenko, on the other hand, was of a similarly impeccable proletarian background but the model 
of a dedicated communist writer. He made his career ever upwards within Party and literary 
administrative posts and in the mid-thirties was an international Soviet delegate to anti-fascist 
Congresses abroad in 1935 and 1937 as well as being elected to international bodies (under Soviet 
control)  formed in opposition to fascism. A dependable Stalinist he was chosen to speak at the 
Congress in which the Stalin Constitution was formally adopted. The conclusion to his speech, met 
by 'frenzied enthusiasm', was couched in the turgid phrases typical of the period:  'Long live the 
Stalin Constitution Long live our great leader, the great Stalin Glory to Stalin (All delegates 
stand, thunderous applause, cried [sic] of 'Hurrah Hurrah for Comrade Stalin Hurrah for our great 
leader the great Stalin Greetings to the Great Comrade Stalin'86  His tortured words did not save 
him, neither did his participation with Tikhonov and others in a Writers Union letter published in it's 
own journal on the 15th of June 1937 following the judicial murder of senior army officers. It 
praised the both NKVD and the Stalin Constitution stating 'We demand the firing squad for spies'87 
Mitinyenko was arrested and shot later that year.88 
i The Communist International, a body devoted to the spreading of Communism outside the USSR. 
THE DELEGATES 
 As Gorky, Mitinyeko and Tikhonov complete the opening formalities and look out over the hall 
prior to the first address given by Andrei Zhdanov they see a large body of writers, about 650 in 
total, (including 40 foreign guests) filling all available space. They are of so many disparate origins 
that their journeys to Moscow might have begun from a rail halt at the edge of a baking desert a 
thousand miles away or the terrace of Lipp.  While at the Congress the delegates are asked to 
complete a questionnaire which recorded facts about them as individuals. The statistics compiled 
from these facts form several separate appendices to the original 1934 record. From these additional 
annexes (a proviso specifically states that minor variations in the figures derive from non-
attendance or non-completion of some forms) a picture may be formed as to the origins, 
occupations and political affiliations of the delegates.   
The delegates are overwhelmingly men (96.3%), whose average age is just under 36. 89  Party 
membership, categories of literary activity and social origins are dealt with in three separate 
sections. As to the first, 60.4% are members of the Party either as full members (49.1%), candidate 
or probational members (3.7%), or members of the Komsomol - or Young Communist League - 
(7.6%).  The remainder, about two fifths of the total at 39.6%, are declared to be 'Non-Party'90 
although as evidenced by writers such as Tikhonov this did not at all imply any lack of support for 
Party policy, quite the reverse.   
The list of delegates shows 52 separate nationalities.91 It appears from the figures that about a third 
of them (183 or 32.9%)  were engaged in prose, 107(19.2%) in poetry and 36(6.4%) in both. 106 
delegates (19%)  list themselves as being involved in mixed or general work with smaller numbers 
giving their primary employment as dramatists, journalists or, ever present, critics. There are 71 
critics listed,just over 12% of the total.92 In addition to areas of work, a specific tabulation is made 
of dates of publication. This divides the delegates into groups whose work was initially published  
pre-1917 (139), from 1918-1926 (257), from 1927-1931(151) and from 1932 onwards (8).93 From 
this it can be seen that the hall would contain a majority of younger writers, two thirds of them 
products of the Soviet regime and published under its auspices. It may be that writers of such 
comparative youth, exemplified by Tvardovsky, still writing of Socialist Realist  village stove repair 
in the 1950s, himself taken up and nurtured by the system, felt a sense of debt to the Soviet regime. 
This in turn, allied to fear, might be a factor explaining another aspect of the writers' world - the fact 
that while its members were being arrested over a number of years and either executed or sent to the 
camps their Union and its members remained silent. 
In keeping with the Partys teachings social origin was paramount.  The importance of this attitude  
is reflected by the table of percentages of persons coming from various social origins which follows 
on immediately after the section on political affiliation. Workers form just over a quarter of the 
delegates at 27.3%, peasants (Khristyanin or 'Christians', the old Russian word that would never 
change even under Soviet rule) make up 42.6% and the rest come from diverse backgrounds. These 
are 'the working intelligentsia' (12.9%), office workers (5.5%), handicraft tradesmen (3.8%). The 
less happy categories of social origin  then follow: nobility (2.4%), urban lower middle class 
(2.4%), clergy (1.7%) and the mercantile class (1.4%).94  The percentages speak for themselves as a 
reflection of another reality in Soviet Russia  the relative value of social origins in the eyes of  the 
regimei. There are many recorded instances of membership of such categories resulting in a person's 
inability to enter further education or obtain employment or even basic accommodation.95  Quite 
apart from these restrictions it may be imagined how precarious was the life  of a person from the 
wrong social origin (the phrase used in Russian was 'former people') when the press repeatedly 
printed hysterical diatribes against 'class enemies' who were presented as omnipresent hidden 
cancers in the body politic and whose 'unmasking' was demanded of all loyal Soviet citizens.96 
 Children of an affected person  also suffered. In the face of these perpetual disabilities many would 
move to a new area and start again with a newly created background (often by taking factory or 
other manual work to provide a tangible basis for a new beginning for self and family), taking a risk 
in the administrative chaos in the years after the Revolution that the lie would remain undetected. 
This process became widespread with the introduction of the internal passport system in 1932 and 
the purge of 'class enemies' which accompanied it as part of the second five year plan.97 In turn this 
lead to a situation of unease and distrust in Soviet society. In the words of Orlando Figes: 
'Throughout the 1930s the Party leadership encouraged the popular belief that colleagues, 
neighbours, even friends and relatives, might not be what they appeared to be -  a belief that did 
much to poison personal relationships and fuel the mass terror of  1937  38'. 98  Elena Bonner, wife 
of Andrei Sakharov the dissident Soviet physicist later recalled how, at the arrest of her father, her 
i It also reflects the marginalisation and repression of the old Russian Intelligentsia. For an examination of the fate of 
those who were deported from Russia see Lesley Chamberlain,The Philosophy Steamer. 
younger brother had said 'Look at what those enemies of the people are like. Some of them even 
pretend to be fathers'.99  
In the press, notices in which people, often children, renounced their parents and family appeared 
widely. Persons who wished to take part in the new Soviet world had to be seen to sever all 
connections with members of the class enemy such as kulaks and the former clergy.100  A typical 
example is given in Orlando Figes' book The Whisperers:  
I, Nikolai Ivanov, renounce my father, an ex-priest, because for many years 
he deceived the people by telling them that God exists, and that is the reason 
I am severing all my relations with him'.101   
One of the delegates to the Congress, Alexander Tvardovsky, a young writer and future famous 
Soviet poet from the Smolensk region whose Socialist Realist short story The Stovemakers (thesis p 
24) has already been mentioned,  found his own experiences in this area of Soviet reality to be 
particularly lacerating. He came from a large family judged to be kulaks - in Russian, 'fists', or 
better off peasants - because of his father's trade as a village blacksmith but had joined the Young 
Communist league as a fourteen year old. He became an activist and his disagreements with his 
family led to him to leave for the city of Smolensk in 1927 where he joined the Association of 
Proletarian Writers (RAPP)i and began to make a career in print. His family began to disintegrate 
under the punishing measures being taken then against people labelled class enemies, especially 
those decreed to be 'kulaks'. His father and two brothers, unable to pay the heavy tax bill imposed 
on them and fearing arrest, ran away to find work in the Urals. His younger brother was denied 
entry to school as the son of a kulak. When the family was finally re-united in their village a year 
later all, save Alexander, were deported to the Urals.   At the Pedagogical Institute where 
Tvardovsky was studying, he spoke as an activist at meetings in favour of the campaign against 
'kulakdom' as the press called it, but was troubled at his family's fate. He sought advice from his 
local Party Secretary but was told' in life there are moments when one had to choose between one's 
family and the Revolution'.  After this he was treated as someone unreliable and attacked at literary 
meetings as the son of a kulak. He was saved from expulsion only by the spirited intervention of a 
prominent local writer, (who was himself later arrested.)102 
In response to letters from his family who were in a poor situation but wished to stay in touch he 
i The Association of Proletarian Writers, a powerful hard line Bolshevik group absorbed into the Writers Union in 1932. 
finally wrote to exhort them to be patient and to work, but severing all ties. When his father and 
brother journeyed to Smolensk to see him later that year they found him at the local House of the 
Soviets (an administrative centre) where he had an editorial position. He was shocked and said he 
could only help by paying for them to return where they came from. His father went to borrow 
money from a friend but on his return, Alexander having notified the Police, was arrested.103 
Tvardovsky's  guilt followed him. His own tortured words can be found in an unpublished (and in 
the Soviet Union unpublishable) poem, Brothers, of 1933: 
What are you, brother? 
How are you, brother? 
Where are you, brother? 
On what Belomorkanal?i 
Time did not diminish the disquiet.  In the brief 'thaw' of 1962, as editor of Novy Mir (New World), 
one of the most prestigious  'thick journals' in which emerging Soviet literature was often serialised,  
Tvardovsky was both courageous and instrumental in putting into print Solzhenitsyn's A Day in the 
Life of Ivan Denisovich.  This book, unique in Soviet literature, was the first to expose the camps. In 
the words of a writer of the time it 'let the genie out of the bottle, and however hard they tried later, 
they couldn't put it back in'.104 Thirty years later Tvardovsky's tortured questions had returned with 
some sort of answer. 
Quite aside from people concealing their social origin to survive, and the renunciation of relatives, 
another aspect of Soviet reality became more pronounced as the thirties wore on - informers. This 
phenomenon  received a curious affirmation at the Congress through mention of a cult surrounding 
a Soviet teenager who had denounced his father, who was executed, and then had himself  been 
murdered. His name was Pavlik Morozov or Little Paulie Frost. This facet of Soviet life was one of 
the most singular of a strange epoch, the boy's name being shorthand for a system of denunciation 
lasting more than fifty years until the end of Communism in 1991.  
In 1989 Vitaly Shentalinsky, a courageous journalist and writer, campaigned under Glasnost for 
i The Belomorkanal or White Sea Canal was a forced labour project in which many thousands perished digging an 
almost useless canal by hand through hundreds of miles of granite. The poem is cited by Figes, The Whisperers, p 
access to the KGB files relating to the lost writers of the Thirties. Against considerable opposition 
he eventually persuaded the Secret Police to discuss giving him access to the whole files, not 
merely the  summaries proffered. They refused to grant such access, asking: 
'...What do you need the informers for?...'  
'Why are you so worried about them? [he said ] It all happened half a 
century ago. It's already history. You want censorship and half-truths, 
again?' 
'Now now, why talk in those terms?... But we shall not surrender Pavlik 
Morozov my dear Vitaly Alexandrovich'.105 
The Pavlik Morozov cult made its presence felt on the Congress in two ways with both the 
appearance of a young Pioneer delegation as well as Gorky's validation of denunciation  by 
attempting to raise money for a permanent Moscow monument to the boy.  Pavlik Morozov was a 
fourteen year old who denounced his father as a counter-revolutionary kulaki in a small village in 
the Urals in 1931. His father, a person locally of good reputation and veteran of the Red Army in the 
Civil War, was shot, Pavlik being the main witness at his trial. Afterwards Pavlik co-operated with 
the local 'organs' of power and with his brother began a series of denunciations of those they wished 
to accuse of withholding grain or speaking out against the forced collective farm system. The results 
caused great harm and ill-feeling which resulted in the murder of the two brothers. Whomever was 
the actual killer (and the theories advanced subsequently implicated various persons from his cousin 
to the local secret police anxious for fame) the case soon became politicised and an enduring part of 
Soviet mythology. iiWidespread press coverage was given to the case. In the end a show trial with 
pre-ordained findings of guilt led to the execution of five members of his family, including his 
grandparents.106  
The cult of his 'martyrdom' came to embody the state's requirement that loyalty to it 'was a higher 
virtue than family love and other personal ties'. 107 This legitimisation of informers disseminated 
through the Pioneer youth movement implanted 'in millions of minds' that 'snitching on ones friends 
i As mentioned in connection with Tvardovsky's family a label attached by the regime to any farmer who owned more 
than subsistence goods or who appeared lacking in revolutionary fervour. During the great forced collectivisation of 
agriculture anyone so labelled was liable to forced labour, deportation to the wastes of Siberia to die, or shot. 
ii For a full discussion of the case see Catriona Kelly, Comrade Pavlik, The Rise and Fall of a Soviet Boy Hero. 
and relatives was not shameful but public-spirited. It was indeed expected of the Soviet citizen'. 108  
To demur brought grave risk. Figes notes:  At the height of the Pavlik Morozov cult, the 1930s, the 
true Pioneer was almost expected to prove his worthiness by denouncing his own relatives. One 
provincial journal warned that Pioneers who failed to inform on their families should be treated 
with suspicion and, if found to be lacking vigilance, should be denounced themselves.109  
Against this background the writers watch a large delegation of Pioneers enter the Congress hall to 
martial music on the 21st of August. The verbatim record reads as follows: 
'At the sound of a loud fanfare and orchestra the Pioneer delegation marches 
into the hall in step. They are met with stormy applause from the whole hall. 
The Pioneer choir greets the writers: 
With the guidance of books, and the Red Army words, 
To the Writers of this unprecedented time, 
From healthy Pioneers in harmony 
From scholars and children 
From the October kids with sunny round faces 
Theirs from the age of nine too 
From the vigilant kids of the capital 
The Very Warmest Welcome to You110 
The pioneers continue in the same vein for some time. In addition to requesting stories about 
'patrols at dawn' and the 'biographies of the Bolshevik leaders' they make a  demand (the Russian 
used is specific - 'want' rather than 'would like'): 'We want to read about the Pavlik Hero'.111  
The pioneers leave the auditorium to more 'stormy applause'. At the end of the Congress Gorky  
makes a plea for funds for the erection of a permanent memorial  by the Union of Writers in honour 
of the 'Hero-Pioneer Pavlik Morozov, killed by his relations when he discovered their wrecking 
activities and chose to assert the interest of the toiling people over blood ties'.112 He ends by 
invoking the Congress ritual: 'Long live the Party of Lenin- leader of the Proletariat, and Long live 
the leader of the Party, Josef Stalin' 113Gorky, the world famous humanist of former years, then 
foremost man of Soviet letters, has come a long way, his tortured words reflecting another reality of 
the 1930s Soviet writers' world -  literature's  approval  of the informer within.   
One of the most troubling aspects of Soviet reality which affected all of society but which was 
particularly relevant to writers is the absence of any public mention of the actuality of what was 
going on. Pravda announced trials, specific executions and demands for retribution (and the Writers 
Union passed resolutions in favour of same) but nowhere in the Press or contemporary writing 
appears reference to the nightly disappearances on a huge scale or the millions of deaths by forced 
labour.114 Any unpleasant or revealing fact is simply ignored. A striking example of this aspect of 
life is seen in the descriptions of the House of Unions itself in later publications. The building was 
central to the Russian century but it's history was omitted from  books purportedly of record. A few 
examples show the extent of the silence: Stalin's funeral took place there as did Gorky's; the state's 
literary system was proclaimed  at the Congress  and  the three infamous show trials of 1936, 1937 
and 1938 were heard  within its walls in all their terrible detail. These important events were largely 
air-brushed from subsequent Soviet history; dangerous strings were clipped in case they unravelled. 
In the main Soviet Encyclopaedia of Moscow published in 1977, an important book in general 
circulation, none of the above facts are mentioned in the section dealing with the House of Unions.  
The encyclopaedia, for example, records 'leading members' of Bolshevik power who spoke there 
but does not mention their names or the fact that they were tried in the same building and shot after 
grim and farcical show trials.115 The fate of other 'leading members' of Lenin's first Soviet 
government, 13 in number, is also not given - three died of natural causes and the other ten were 
executed or died in the Gulag.116 Similarly the 'triumphant gatherings' of the Comintern (see p 72 
below) which took place in the building are mentioned in a short single phrase without any 
acknowledgement that the Comintern was annihilated. Per Conquest:  'In general, a clean sweep 
was made of the organisation and they were exterminated in their thousands, not only foreign 
Communists but Soviet citizens working with them who were 'blamed for collusion in the 
penetration of the enemy into the constituent parties'.117  
In exactly the same way, the fates of the repressed delegates at the Congress went long 
unmentioned, especially by their brethren. Though the surviving writers must have looked around at 
any gathering to see who had disappeared, or noticed that a fellow writer's dacha suddenly had new 
residents, nothing whatever could be said publicly without inviting disaster on self, family and 
friends. The silence was simply part of daily life.  
THE FATES OF THE WRITERS 
True numbers, of deaths or anything else, were notoriously difficult to obtain in the closed world of 
Soviet officialdom but since the coming of Glasnost and the demise of the Soviet Union in 1991, 
with the sporadic if incomplete release of some files, the position has become a little clearer. By 
way of illustration it is now known that of the two thousand delegates who in 1934  attended the 
17th Party Congress, the 'Congress of Victors' (just before that of the writers), 70% of them perished 
in the Purges.118 Before dealing with the position specifically of writers it is necessary to mention 
the repression numbers (those executed or sent to the Gulag)  for the country as a whole. These vary 
but Russian figures released in the last twenty years have tended to confirm, and even exceed, those 
cited by Robert Conquest, the pre-eminent historian of the Purges. They are a melancholy backdrop 
to the Soviet writer's world: 
1937 -1938 
Arrests                       about 7-8 million 
Executed                    about 1 million 
Died in camps            about 2 million  
In prison, late 1938    about 1 million 
In camps, late 1938    about 8 million119 
Of the last named figure he concludes that 'from much Soviet and other testimony that not more 
than 10% of those in camp survived'. He gives the total number of repressions - from Russian 
sources - as some 40 million (up to 1957) and sets the deaths of the Stalin era, including the horrors 
of collectivisation and famine, at 20 million people. These exclude a similar figure for the casualties 
of the war.120  
Concerning the writers, Conquest noted in his history of the Terror (which originally appeared in 
1968 prior to general confirmation of his conclusions during Glasnost ) '...the heaviest toll amongst 
them all [the intelligentsia] seems to have been among the writers. They were threatened from two 
directions. A theory of correct aesthetic method was imposed on them, and at the same time the 
content of their works was subject to intense scrutiny. It emerged in the 1950s that of the 
approximately 700  writers who met at the First Congress of the Union of Soviet Writers in 1934 
only 50 survived to see the second in 1954.i A recent estimate is that 90 percent of the Writers' 
Union membership was repressed. After the XXth Party Congress in 1956 [the 'secret speech' in 
which Krushchev recounted some of the crimes of the Stalinist period, excluding those in which he 
was, excluding those in which he was a participantii- [my italics,] it was confidentially admitted that 
'there were more than 600 writers who were guilty of no crime, and whom the Union [of Writers] 
obediently left to their fate in the prisons and camps'.121  
Alexander Solzhenitzn, writing of this betrayal in an open letter addressed to the  IVth Congress of 
Soviet Writers in 1967 stated that in reality the list is still longer.122  
 He was proved correct.  More recent research, making use of recently available files and 
comparatively more freedom to assess them, has shown that earlier estimates were low. A number 
of researchers in Russia such as Eduard Beltov and Vitaly Shentalinsky have devoted years to 
investigations in this field. Shentalinsky's courageous and extraordinary work will be considered 
further in the chapter dealing with Boris Pilnyak but in terms of  numbers alone  Conquest quotes 
Beltov's researches as showing nearly 1,300 writers being verified as dead during the purges 
(including post 1938  repressions).123   As is the case with the population at large it is not possible, 
because of the disappearance or withholding of records, to establish the exact fates of all writers. In 
an enquiry in Minsk instigated by an MP of the Byelorussian Supreme Soviet at the highest level 
into a comparatively small group of several dozen named writers from that country who had been 
arrested and who had disappeared during the 30s, the response received was that law enforcement 
agencies' had 'no information whatever' out 18 of them, roughly half of the total (my italics).124  But 
for their names on a bit of paper or long kept by memory, they might never have existed. 
 In the final period of Glastnost  just prior to the demise of the Soviet Union, in 1988, the tide had 
been turning, in some quarters, in favour of that memory. The Union of Writers was forced to 
examine its own records. In its journal, Literaturnaya Gazyeta (Literary Gazette ) -an organ that had 
itself been used repeatedly  in the 1930s to hound writers and herald their doom (see below)  it was 
admitted that after investigations 'about 150 litterateurs, including some 75 members of the Union 
of Soviet Writers could not be traced at all'.  In total, it was admitted, 'some 2,000 literary figures 
i Ilya Ehrenburg, a delegate to both, compared the two lists. Kemp-Welch pp 226-7. He also recalled the disappearance 
of 'writer after writer'. Conquest  The Great Terror p259. 
ii For example his orchestration and leading of a  'spontaneous' mass demonstration of two hundred thousand factory 
workers in Red Square in February 1937 which bayed  collectively for death sentences for accused persons in the 
House of Unions show trials. See The Foresaken by Tim Tzouliades p 115. 
were repressed, of whom about 1,500 met their deaths in prison or camp'.125  
In order to illustrate the uncertainty and unpredictable nature of the writer's world two days have 
been taken at random from the Congress record and the fate of the relevant speakers traced. Extracts 
from the record illustrate the turgid emptiness which characterises much of the Congress speeches. 
TWO DAYS OF THE CONGRESS.  20-21st of AUGUST 1934 
Over the whole fortnight, with some time off, there were twenty six sessions normally split between 
morning and evening. Taking two of those days (and four sessions) at random, the sheer uncertainty 
of whether a writer would die or survive becomes clear. On the morning of the 20th of August the 
fourth session lists three speakers:  Malachy Toroshelidze speaks of Georgian literature, a Comrade 
Sukhanov leads a delegation of Soviet inventors and Drastamat Simonyan, deals with Armenian 
literature. 126A short verbatim extract from the middle of Toroshelidze's long speech illustrates the 
first delegates approach, one typical of many speakers at the Congress: 
'The decision of the Central Committee of the All-Soviet Communist Party (Bolsheviks) of the 23rd 
of April 1932 i On the re-construction of the work of literary-artistic organisations provided a 
mighty impulse towards new heightened levels of creativity in Georgian literature. 
Under the leadership of the Party organisations of Georgia and Transcaucasia, and in the process of 
struggle to fulfil the decisions of the Central Committee we were able to smash  cliques  as well as 
overcome the leftist traditions of  Bulgarisationii and  administrative practices of literary 
organisations. Those mistaken individuals who made up the Georgian Association of Writers [i.e. 
the former national literary grouping, now banned] were exposed and unmasked in their anti-
Leninist platforms relating to creative methodology and to literary policies'.127  
Toroshelidze's speech ends with further exhortations to 'struggle for literature in our great epoch 
i This edict created the Union of Writers and laid down the basis for future literary development. 
ii A definition cannot be found. It is presumed to be perjorative. 
which is building socialism' all thanks to the 'exceptional daily help which has been shown to the 
literary front of the Central Committee by our Leninist party and by the wise, beloved leader of all 
the workers of the world, the mighty Stalin'.128 
There is 'prolonged' applause. 
His tortured words did not save him. Even his being appointed Rector of Tibilisi University and 
writing a hagiography of Stalin published under the name of Stalin's last head of the secret police- 
another Georgian, Beria- availed him nothing. He was denounced in Literaturnaya Gazeta on the 
26th of March 1937 and exposed as a despicable renegade, counter-revolutionary and enemy of the 
people. His fate was death.129   
The second speaker, Sukhanov, gives a short address on behalf of  '52,000 inventors and 
rationalization improvers (persons tasked with improving productivity) imploring the delegates to 
'supply creative charges for the furthering of our work as inventors and rationalisers, not only in the 
field of industrialisation of our country but in the invention of a new literature which will in its turn 
Communism Long live our glorious Leninist party and its leader and teacher Comrade Stalin130 
There are two Sukhanovs listed in the index as being delegates at the Congress but it is not clear 
whether this man was a writer or solely an inventor. In any event no biographical information is 
available at all from the Union of Writers 1990 records, an absence indicating an unhappy end for 
any delegate named Sukhanov. Given the countless persons from industry who were  shot during 
the Purges  on false charges of sabotage or 'wrecking' it may be that the speaker's chances of 
survival were not high in any event..  
The third speaker, Simonyan, delivers an address on Armenian literature past and present. There are 
two references to Stalin in his speech but he does not end the address with the customary tribute. He 
was arrested in 1937 and shot.131 
The 5th session of the Congress began the same evening. Of the six speakers two definitely 
survived. There is no information available on two others (which, again, bodes ill), and two were 
definitely shot. Mahmed Alekberli was executed in 1937132  and Oraz Tachnazarov was arrested in 
that year also but sent to the camps where he died.133  
The next session began the following morning, the 21st. There were 13 speakers. Of that total one 
died in the 1940 war against Finland, seven survived or died of natural causes, and four were shot 
including Ivan Mikityenko who assisted Gorky in the opening ceremonies on the first day. 134 
On the evening of the 21st there were four Soviet delegate speakers; all lived, including  Ilya 
Ehrenburg, friend of Malraux and Stalins cultural ambassador in Paris in the inter-war years.135 
The 8th session began the following morning, the 22nd. Eight of the speakers lived through the 
Purges and three did not. Axel Bakunts, a Party member from Armenia, was shot in 1937:136 and 
Afzal Tagirov, an old Bolshevik from 1913 and member of the Central Committee of the Party in 
Bashkiria was also shot in the same year.137 The third delegate, Ali Nazim from Azerbaijan, Party 
member from1930 and 'an active Marxist literary critic' was denounced in the Writers Union 
journal, the Literary Gazette of the 10th of July 1937. With a number of others he was declared to be 
' an agent of German-Japanese fascism, a Trotskyite, an inciter and a nationalist-deviationist.'138  He 
was shot that year.139 
The world of the Soviet writer was not an enviable one. The Congress extracts show that such a 
world consisted of turgid prose, meaningless formulaic repetition, slavish adulation of Stalin and the 
regime, and death, if not of self then of those nearby. What it felt like to live in fear amongst 
informers, to utter false words as true, to call for the deaths of innocent people then return home 
safe for that day at least, is not often recorded. The Congress Record does not reflect these realities 
and  Socialist Realism did not write them down. 
CHAPTER IV 
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE RED ARMY TO THE CONGRESS AND THE 
ATTACK ON THE OFFICER CORPS 
  Ils sauront bientt que nos balles 
sont pour nos propres gnraux 
                                           The Internationale140  
At the Congress the later mass executions and destruction of the Red Army Officer Corps could not 
yet be seen, the bullets 'for our nice clean generals' who were the heroes of that army,141 
unimaginable. Following the appearance of the Pioneers and their choir on the evening of the 21st of 
August the Congress heard from Ilya Ehrenburg followed by the arrival, to great fanfare, of the 
Moscow garrison delegation. It represented the Red Army and the armed forces as a whole. The 
army was particularly  important to the country's view of itself because of its role as chief defender 
of the Revolution during the foreign intervention and the Civil War when  White forces and their 
allies  had to be cleared from both Northern and Southern Russia and from Siberia . The army had, 
even in its first decade and a half of existence, become a central platform of revolutionary 
mythology and its exploits had become famous in books and on the screen. Less rosily, Babel had 
chronicled its activities in his realistic stories of the Civil War collectively entitled Red Cavalry.i 
That mythology also included the actions of the sailors who mutinied in both 1905 and  1917 in the  
Baltic and Black Sea fleets, especially the men who pace forever the monochrome quarter-deck of 
the Battleship Potemkin. Sailors also formed a large component of the forces who fought for the 
Bolshevik cause on land, especially the Kronstadt ii naval base garrison which consolidated 
Communist rule in Petrograd. They were treated in Soviet history as the heroic shock troops of the 
Revolution. Under Revolution Square a few steps away from the House of Unions the vast marble 
arches of the Metro ceiling are supported by life-size bronze figures from that conflict, the favourite 
for many Muscovites being the brawny sailor holding a Mauser pistol, long worn shiny by 
childrens' passing hands.142  
In practical terms the regime had some difficulties in dealing with the history of both the sailors and 
the Red Army. The main problems were with the Kronstadt naval garrison's uprising against 
Bolshevik power in 1921 and Trotsky's successful creation and leadership of the Red Army (laurels  
which Stalin fain would wear) whose exploits won the Civil War. At Kronstadt the same sailors who 
delivered the Revolution to Lenin, its own ' most favoured sons',143 and, according to Trotsky the 
'pride and glory of the Russian Revolution',144  revolted against Bolshevik rule.  They demanded 
free elections, ( for those occupying the left of the political spectrum; not monarchists or rightists), 
freedom of speech, removal of Communist ration privileges and a right for peasants to work the 
land unmolested.145  The uprising was suppressed with much loss of life, those who failed to escape 
over the frozen ice to Finland being shot.  The Kronstadt rebellion was dealt with in Soviet 
mythology (in a manner similar to that of the Hitler-Stalin pact in 1939) largely by ignoring it. 
A greater difficulty  for Stalin's regime lay in the fact that the achievements of  the Red Army, 
indeed its creation as a fighting force,  were largely due to the leadership of Leon Trotsky,146  
someone  who was by the 1930s  the dictator's main enemy and - if the term is not inappropriate - 
an exiled Anti-Christ from the chapel of Bolshevik Orthodoxy. He, like others, was airbrushed 
i These unsentimental harsh tales earned the undying enmity of Stalin's crony and cavalry general, Budyonny, former 
Red Cavalry Commander, and, later, an enthusiastic participant in the judicial murder of the General Staff.  
ii The main  naval fortress protecting the Baltic approaches to Petrograd. 
literally and figurativelyi from Revolutionary history and his person replaced by adulation of the 
Red Army itself. Stalin, whose minimal and less than competent role in any fighting was 
transformed into a vast false edifice of military omnipotence by the publication of books and 
articles by  Marshal Voroshilov and others. The dictator was presented as a military genius and 
Trotsky's role erased.147 
The Civil War and the Red Army's central role in the Revolution became one of the mainstays of the 
Soviet Arts.  Leon Feuchtwanger, an influential German anti-fascist writer and Fellow Traveller, 
visited the USSR in 1937 and wrote a book, Moscow 1937, largely an attempt to rebut the heretical 
doubts of A la Rtour de l'URSS by Andre Gide published in 1936. Gide's  own elevated Fellow 
Traveller status was lost in an instantii.  Feuchtwanger was astounded at the extent of war planning - 
'In the Soviet Union...everyone reckons with the imminent war as with a hundred per cent 
certainty'148  and the amazingly high status of the army itself. Describing the vaunted closeness 
'between the army and the people' he cites its role as educator of the people through libraries, 
theatres, cinemas and literary journals and the intertwined connections between writers and the 
military  'I know of no other country where high literary talent is so frequently combined with 
military abilities'.149    
Though Feuchtwanger is openly partial to the Soviet position the book was written to persuade and 
reassure Western readers (its covers are in the nostalgically strident orange of the Left Book Club, 
1/-3d) at a time of   Hitler's increasingly higher pitched speeches and the war in Spain. Soviet 
foreign policy was to participate in a broad coalition of the Left whenever possible, the most visible 
signs of which was support for the Popular Front government of Leon Blum in France from 1936 
onwards. Designed to further this policy the book makes an attempt at projecting a certain sort of 
balance. A particularly interesting example of this is his mention of Trotsky: 'A writer, Leo Trotsky, 
was one of the organisers of the Red Army, and today writers play an important part in it'.150 
Trotsky's seminal part in the creation of the Red Army was well known in the West and therefore 
complete omission of his name in this regard would have undermined the author's desire for his 
book's acceptance as something approaching an objective report. Only a foreigner with a larger 
mission on behalf of the USSR, and embodying concomitant political advantages visible to Stalin, 
could have mentioned Trotsky without obloquy in this way and lived. 
i For an examination of this particularly Soviet form of photographic and artistic erasure see David King,The 
Commissar Vanishes. 
ii See Thesis Chapter V, Foreigners. 
The intimate connection between Soviet literature, indeed all the arts, and the military exploits of 
the Red Army forms one of the strongest aspects of the Soviet writer's reality at this period. It was a   
popular genre, as politically safe as it was ubiquitous.  As Feuchtwanger stated; 'I have already 
mentioned the war plays and films which dominate the repertoires, and of the great range of 
literature commemorating the heroism of those who fought in the Civil War or the Intervention... 
One could hardly have seen at the front in the four years of the Great War as much slaughter, battle, 
and conflict as appeared on the stage and screen during the ten weeks of my visit to Moscow'.'151 
(My italics)  
Against this background of a strong link between the military and the Arts the appearance of the 
Red Army at the Congress seems inevitable. Following the speech of Ehrenburg on the evening of 
the 21st all in the auditorium hear the thud of the drums and the high sound of trumpets. Every head 
cannot but have turned.  The Congress Record shows as follows: 
'CHAIRMAN. Comrades, the Congress receives the delegation from the 
soldiers of the Moscow Garrison.(Applause)'. 
(Fanfares, March music, the entry of the Red Army soldiers; applause. 
Hurrahs.) 
'ILYICHEV. [a member of the delegation] From the men of the Red Army,  
Trainee Commanders, Commanders and Political Commissars of the 
Moscow Garrison to the First All-Union Congress of Writers...' 
'-All Red Army men together: - Our fiery Red Army Greetings' 
'ILYICHEV.  'Dear Comrades, the men of the Red Army are not only men 
who master difficult military technology, they are not only men who study 
military affairs, they are rounded people who aspire as much as possible to 
take from that which strengthens mankind and from that culture from which 
humanity gains'. 
The speaker goes on to name writers, like Furmanov (who wrote the Civil War epic Chapaev) and 
Alexei Tolstoyi, who he declares have touched the hearts of the Red Army by their books on the 
Revolution and the civil war. He then moves on to the nation's official number one writer. 
i A distant relation of Leo Tolstoy who returned to Russia after a period abroad in emigration. He was known as 'The 
Count' and survived the Purges. 
'Comrades, you think maybe in naming these other writers I have forgotten 
one great name? No, Comrades: the soldiers of the Worker Peasant Red 
Army will never forget Alexei Maximovich Gorky. (loud applause)'. 
'Dear Alexei Maximovich When we came here the soldiers of the Moscow 
Garrison fervently desired us to tell you the following: The soldiers of the 
Worker Peasant Red Army love you, value you and understand all you have 
written. The soldiers love you because you are the first soldier of proletarian 
culture, you are the first to come to give us the basis on which to create the 
road to a new, light-filled life. With great pride, with great love we say to 
you, dear Alexei Maximovich, that your initiatives in this creative-historical 
civil war have a high value to us. We love you. We really want to say to you 
that you are our native, beloved and great proletarian writer. (loud 
applause)...' 
'We are not only delighted with you, we love and read you with great 
attention. Moreover we want to invite you to consider our requests, and we 
think you will agree with them'. 
'Our country, our socialist society, our Red Army would like very much that 
more books and better books be written about them. We wait for books to be 
written about the Red Army, about its soldiers and most importantly the 
ordinary soldier from the ranks in his everyday life. There have been many 
and good books about the heroes, the great heroes, tempered in the fire of  
the Civil War but you yourself know how few the books are where the 
ordinary soldier figures; his daily life, his training. We wait and we think 
that you will fulfil our task. We hope you'll show the life of those who guard 
the nation, which literature up till now has done little about. (applause)...' 
'...Show how the national culture is increasing, show how the soldiers of the 
Worker Peasant Red Army are increasing and strengthening. Show how we 
are striving to master difficult technology, that when the call comes we'll 
move to defend the borders (applause)'. 
'Comrades, we are soldiers and you, you are soldiers. When the time comes, 
when the Party, when the working class, when the government give the 
word that it's time to defend the country, we will move as one to defend her 
borders. (applause) If carrion crows caw at our borders and white guard 
tanks appear i we'll take things in hand and our vehicles will head for the 
battle in very quick time'. 
'We all, soldiers of the Worker Peasant Red Army, know that when the time 
comes we, all who labour, all the freemen of our 170 million people, will 
come together in the defence of our country'. 
i In Soviet terms 'white' was associated with counter-revolutionary, usually right wing or fascist, forces. This reference 
appears to include Germany in that generality, it being the Soviet Union's principal concern at the time. 
'Long live the Communist Party' 
'Long live the Leninist Central Committee' 
'Long live the Worker Peasant Red Army and its beloved People's 
Commissar Klim Voroshilov' 
'Long live Socialist Culture and the great beloved proletarian writer A. M. 
Gorky' 
'Long live our Motherland 
Long live our country 
Long live the great Stalin' 
                   (Loud applause. Cries of Hurrah. The soldiers leave the hall, scattering flowers and     
                    singing songs.)152 
As the soldiers march from the hall, the delegate Vishnyevsky, who later became infamous as a 
literary bureaucrat, informer and scheming servant of the regime,153 proposes that an address be 
given welcoming Marshal Kliment Voroshilov, the Peoples Commissar for Defence. Voroshilov, a 
brave soldier but incompetent generali, was no bibliophile but that did not prevent him being 
adopted at the beginning of the Congress as a member of its Praesidium.  Vishnevsky reads out the 
address: 
'THE WELCOME TO PEOPLES COMMISSAR FOR DEFENCE K.E. 
VOROSHILOV' 
'Dear Kliment Efremovich 
The first All-Union Congress of Soviet Writers, consisting of 500 
representatives from the different nationalities within Soviet literature, born 
in the flame of the October Revolution, tempered in the Civil War  and 
i He was a constant companion to Stalin, who preserved him. After almost allowing the defeat of the Red Army by the 
tiny Finnish forces in the Winter war of 1940, however, he was sidelined  for the rest of the war. 
strengthened in the decisive battles of the two socialist five year plans  come 
to you, iron peoples' commissar of defence, heroic leader of the Red Army, 
defender of mankind's  peace and the development of all humanity with all 
its cares, to give greetings from the bottom of our hearts.  
Our address to you and to the Red Army has special significance. The Red 
Army is both family and school for the majority of us.  The Red Army 
formed our youth and guided us on the wide path of life. The names and 
numbers of the partisan columns and the regular divisions are for us both 
dear and unforgettable. 
Linking the blood of the Red Army and our own consciously chosen fates 
we have given our works, written down while the battle was still hot. In 
these books we have shown to the proletariat of the Union [the USSR] and 
to the international proletariat, the soldiers, commanders and commissars of 
Piter [the informal name of St Petersburg and Petrograd], the Far East, 
Siberia, the Ukraine, the Caucasus, the Urals and Central Asia.  Their names 
and characters will ever remain in literature. 
The majority of us here are no longer in the ranks of the army but, with the 
renewed appearance of an aggressor we charge ourselves with the  aim of 
delivering new, stirring books and within them raising the voice of new and 
still better aims, the bearers of which are the proletariat. 
The writers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics state that the country 
and the army will receive as a weapon new types of writing. Writers are 
showing the new modern Soviet army, the modesty, simplicity and heroism 
of its soldiers, its high pure morals and its high ideals and strength- a 
strength with which nothing can be compared. 
We are aiming to give you books dealing with likely adversaries, revealing 
the quality of their forces, their intentions against humanity and the 
preparations taking place in the rear of the capitalist armies intending to do 
battle against our proletarian forces. 
The writers of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics promise you this: if it 
becomes necessary to defend this great Motherland against attack, then at 
the first call of the Party and the government we writers will again be in the 
army's ranks. Again will live, from first to last, the noble fighting traditions 
of the Red Army. Remember one: Beat the enemy till he's senseless. We 
are young as before, our stern commander, and ready to fight to the end.  
Up with our war cry- Long live our Red Army, our love and our pride. 
(applause)'.154  
There followed a short address from the Sailor's section of the Civil Defence and    
Veterans Association Osoviakhin. They asked for more stories of maritime life.155 The 
head of that association, a powerful body in Soviet life, was later executed in the 
Purges. 
At the time of the Congress the army's special position as national saviour and guardian outside the 
political arena meant that it had avoided most of the political infighting in the late twenties and 
early thirties when Stalin was consolidating his power within the Politburo. Up until the early 
summer of 1937 arrests and show trials had mainly concerned civilians stigmatised as wreckers, 
saboteurs and  Trotskyites,  or senior Bolshevik figures, politicians like Radek, Zinoviev and 
Bukharin, potential challengers Stalin's eyes  to his one- man rule. It was therefore a thunderbolt in 
the eyes of the entire Soviet populace, accustomed to constant and long standing adulation of the 
Red Army as embodied in the speeches cited above, to read in Pravda on the 11th of June 1937, that 
eight of its most senior officers, all decorated heroes of the Civil War, were to be tried for treason 
that very day. The press announcement of the 11th of June stated that the indictment of the USSR 
Procurator accused the officers of 'violating their military oaths, of treason against the Motherland, 
of treason against the peoples of the USSR, and of treason against the RKKAi'.156     
The article cites an indictment, without any particulars as to specific offences, stating  that they had 
participated in 'anti-government associations with leading military circles of a foreign state, [later 
named as Germany- unlikely; three of the generals were Jewish] which conducts an unfriendly 
policy towards the USSR...' It accused them of betraying secrets and  carrying out acts of sabotage 
to 'weaken the powers of the Red Army' as well as  attempting to ensure its defeat in the event of an 
attack on the Soviet Union. It was also stated that the soldiers had sought to re-establish the 'power 
of landlords and capitalists in the USSR.157  A subsequent report on the 15th, under Voroshilov's 
name includes, for good measure, and perhaps inevitably, an allegation of association with Trotsky 
and the preparation of assassination plots against 'the leaders of the Party and the Government'.158  
Pravda also stated that all of the accused had admitted their complete guilt and that the trial would 
be held in a closed session of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court.159  
i Rabochnaya Krestyanskaya Krasnaya Armya- The Worker Peasant Red Army. 
There are differing views as to whether there was any basis whatever for questioning the loyalty of 
the senior officer corps of the Red Army.  Alexander Orlov, a senior NKVD functionary, spyi and  
defector to America to  avoid his own execution, stated in his memoirs160  that that the generals had 
spoken of ridding the country of Stalin. Other commentators such as Conquest are of the view that 
no evidence at all exists for this theory.161 None was ever produced publicly. All commentators 
seem at least to be agreed that the military was the only power with the ability to threaten Stalin's 
hegemony in thirties Russia and that possibility, to a paranoid personality such as he, was sufficient 
excuse for any barbarity. 
 Because of a lack of documentation little concrete information as to  the proceedings themselves is 
available but whatever their nature Pravda's large black headlines above an article on  the 12th of 
June left no doubt, if any existed, as to the outcome:162 
FOR ESPIONAGE AND BETRAYAL OF THE MOTHERLAND 
SHOOT THEM 
'The Supreme Court has delivered well-founded verdicts against the eight 
persons listed below, all spies caught red-handed. A special sitting of the 
Supreme Court of the USSR has found [the eight officers are named without 
military titles] to be in breach of their military oaths, to have betrayed the 
Worker-Peasant Army and to have betrayed the Motherland. It was ordered 
that all be deprived of their military ranks, the defendant Tukhachevsky that 
of Marshal of the Soviet Union,[ a special appointment] and that all be 
sentenced to the highest measure of criminal punishment  shooting'.ii 
Recent Russian scholarship generally acknowledges the officers  to have been the best of the Red 
Army General Staff and in an essay on the trial two informed commentators, Vitaly Rappaport and 
Yuri Alexeev, list them together with ranks. The names are Marshal Tukhachevsky, Deputy Peoples 
Commissar of Defence, and Chief of Combat Preparedness of the Red Army, Commander Yakir, 
Commander of the Kiev Military District, Army Commander Uborevich, Commander of the 
i His one-time cover was that of an American refrigerator salesman in an office off Regent Street. 
ii The word 'rasstrel' used in Pravda implies a military shooting by firing squad. In fact multiple exhumations have 
shown that the usual method of execution was a single bullet to the head from behind or, even more terribly, with 
two. See Satter, p 59  
Byelorussian Military District, Corps Commander Eideman, Head of the civil defence organisation 
Osoaviakhin, Army Commander Kork, head of the main Military Academy, [the Frunze Academy],  
Corps Commander Putna, lately the Military Attach in London, Corps Commander Feldman, Head 
of the Political Administration of the Red Army and Corps Commander Primakov, Deputy 
Commander of the Leningrad Military District. In addition, Yan Gamarnik, Head of the Political 
Adminstration of the Red Army and First Deputy Commissar of Defence, described as being 
involved with those named above, was stated as having committed suicide.163  
 The trial took place in the main court building of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court in 
Nikolsky Street, an ancient thoroughfare off Red Square, which in 1932 had been re-named the 
Street of the 25th of October. It is located a few hundred yards from both the Lubyanka and the 
House of Unions.  Before the Revolution the Nikolsky had been famous for its religious buildings 
and a famous  restaurant, the Slavyanksky Bazaar, was a favourite dining place of, amongst others, 
Tchaikovsky, Stanislavsky and Chekhov.164   The Collegium had its own execution cellars, fully 
employed, almost next door. The juxtaposition of such evil  with the Russia of Swan Lake and the 
Cherry Orchard of only  a generation before emphasises the estrangement and dislocation of the 
Soviet 30s.       
There were seven judges, all senior military officers, of the rank if not of the same calibre as the 
accused, and one chairman, V.V. Ulrikh, President of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court. 
He was experienced and had had charge of show trials in 1936 and 1937 under the tutelage of 
Vishinsky, Stalin's principal prosecutor, the most famous face of the Purges and a man whom 
Robert Conquest, who had opportunities of meeting him later in life, characterised as 'physically 
and spiritually a creature who gave life to the image of a rat in human form'.165 Vishinsky 
controlled the military proceedings from behind the scenes. Of the seven military judges who 
pronounced the death sentences on that day five apparently showed through their silence a lack of 
participatory enthusiasm which angered Stalin. Within months they themselves were shot in turn.166   
As mentioned earlier, because of that other aspect of reality typical of the times  secrecy in all state 
matters  there is no completely reliable account of the proceedings. In later years however, some 
small glimpses emerged. Khruschev, in his famous 'Secret Speech' to the Party of 1956 stated that 
witnesses subsequently describe Yakir's execution. At the moment of being shot he died shouting 
'Long live the Party Long live Stalin Stalin, when this was reported, cursed him.167 
The main attack on the army began almost immediately. Four days later another senior officer was 
shot 'on a charge only of Trotskyite ideas' and this event signalled the purge of the army and fleet.168 
Within nine days of the trial just under a thousand officers were arrested including 21 Corps 
Commanders and 37 Commanders of Divisions. At the Army's Moscow headquarters twenty 
younger generals were executed. In the military academies staff and students were 'rounded up in 
droves'.169 In his history of the Soviet -German conflict, Barbarossa, Alan Clark lists a short 
summary of the military executions over the succeeding two years of the Purges. 'Only Budyenny 
and Voroshilov [long standing creatures of Stalin] remained among the Marshals. Out of eighty 
members of the 1934 Military Soviet only five were left in September 1938. All eleven Deputy 
Commissars for Defence were eliminated. Every commander of a military district (including 
replacements of the first casualties) had been executed by the summer of 1938. Thirteen out of 
fifteen army commanders, fifty-seven out of eighty-five corps commanders, 110 out of 195 
Divisional Commander, 220 out of 406 Brigade Commanders, were executed. But the greatest 
numerical loss was borne in the Soviet officer corps from the rank of Colonel downward and 
extending to company commander.'170  Thousands of officers from the Red Army, Fleet and Air 
force simply disappeared from their units never to be seen againi.  
Where officers were not murdered, tens of thousands of them were dismissed from the army and 
thus were rendered liable to civilian arrest by the NKVD with all the consequences that 
vulnerability entails. Aside from the terrible human cost to all those repressed and to their families 
(sometimes executed, often sent to the camps) iithe effect on Soviet society was not felt fully until 
the German invasion of Russia in June 1941.  So few experienced officers were left to deal with the 
calamity of invasion that within a few months the Wermacht arrived in the Moscow suburbs leaving 
in their wake two and a half million Soviet soldiers dead or dying.171  
The  murderous process of dismembering the Red Army Officer Corps went on untroubled by  
comment; no sequel by Feuchtwanger appeared in the Left Book Club's list for 1938. The euphoric 
tributes, mutual congratulations and professed camaraderie between writer and soldier which had 
filled the Hall of Columns - '...we are soldiers, and you, you are soldiers...' -  was followed by a chill  
silence.  Of the daily slaughter in the Red Army, the writers wrote not a syllable.  
i For a full discussion of the numbers and extent of the military purges see Conquest, The Great Terror, Chapter 7 
ii For an analysis of specific murders of family members of  executed officers see Conquest, p 204 
CHAPTER V 
Foreigners 
'It is also, it is in great part, the stupidity and dishonesty of the attacks 
against the USSR that today make us defend her with a certain obstinacy. 
They, the fault-finders, will begin to approve her just when we shall cease to 
do so; for they will approve her compromises and concessions, which will 
make the others say: You see but by which she will wander from the end 
she originally pursued. May our eyes, while continuing to focus on that end, 
not be led, thereby, to turn away from the USSR'. 
                                                                                            Andre Gide, 1935 
                                                                                            Pre Soviet visit172  
'...the smallest protest, the least criticism, is liable to the severest penalties, 
and in fact is immediately stifled. And I doubt whether in any other country 
in the world, even Hitler's Germany, thought be less free, more bowed 
down, more fearful (terrorized), more vassalized'. 
                                                                                                             Andre Gide, 1936 
                                                                                                             Post Soviet visit173 
'27 Nov. Went with Walton to hear the trial of the eight 'wreckers' and 
'organisers of intervention'. It is being held in an enormous building which 
was formerly the Nobles' Club or meeting-place. The great hall packed with 
people'...'A considerable crowed outside, for the feelings of the people have 
been cleverly worked on. There were at least eight searchlights in the hall'. 
'2 Dec. The 'wreckers' trial drags on. No one can make out the truth, though 
no-one accepts it at face value. It is a revolting show if they intend to 
execute the accused- the searchlights, the loudspeakers, the judges and the 
Public Prosecutor smoking cigarettes, the two judges taken from the 
workshop bench to sit on the judicial, the propaganda...'. 
'6 Dec. Sentence on the eight 'wreckers' is to be given tonight. Crowds were 
lining up to go in as I went home'.    
  '8 Dec. Sentence was given at 2.30 a.m. Everyone had to stand while a 
long considered judgment (sic) was read. Five of the eight are to be shot and 
three got ten years. Walton said that when the sentence was read out the 
audience clapped as at a play  many standing on tiptoe and clapping with 
their hands above their heads so that it might be seen that they were doing 
their bit. A revolting sight.' 
                                                                                         Reader Bullard 
                                                                                         British Consul Moscow 1930174 
'He is a man of the Left,' said Teitelbaum.  'What would he think, I wonder, 
of this German-Soviet Friendship Treaty?' 
Everyone looked at Guy to see what he, another man of the Left, thought of 
it. He merely said: 'I imagine Russia has a plan. She knows what she is 
doing'. 
                                                                                       Guy Pringle,  
                                                                                       The Balkan Trilogy175 
Now Papa my fate is sealed. I have left you, lost my country, lost my 
freedom, lost all the delights of life...there remains only to lose in addition 
my head, which may happen not being able to live through it all. Today is a 
day which brought me much unpleasantness. I refused to work in the mine. 
                                                                         George Sviridoff, 17 
                                                                         American Citizen  
                                                                         Vorkhuta Camp, Soviet Arctic 
                                                                         17th July 1937176 
Indeed everywhere in that great city of Moscow there was an atmosphere of 
harmony and contentment, even of happiness. 
                                                                                         Leon Feuchtwanger 
                                                                                         Fellow Traveller 
                                                                                         Moscow 1937177 
We talked anxiously and it grew dark. The park gates were closed and we 
walked together through the streets. 'Is there no chance at all of getting 
away? Must we wait and let ourselves be slaughtered like sheep?' How 
could we have suffered everything all those years without criticism? What 
came out of Moscow was accepted as gospel, and we suppressed all our 
doubts. We wanted to believe. The alternative was grim. But now we had to 
pay for our credulity. 
That was the last time I saw Kurella. The next time I went to the rendezvous 
I waited vainly for two hours. He didn't come. Afterwards I learnt that he 
had been arrested on his way to the railway station. 
                                                                                   Margarete Buber-Neumann 
                                                                                   German Communist 
                                                                                   Party Member 
                                                                                   Moscow 1937178 
Foreigners worried Stalin. Never as controllable as Russians, they seemed to him to be both 
necessary evils and potential carriers of political disease, whether as engineer specialists starting up 
a factory or Fellow Traveller journalists, vital for successful pursuit of the propaganda war in the 
West. Their disparate origins and attitudes, their forbidden but lingering habits of independent 
thought, meant that at any moment Stalin's greatest hate and fear, a differing opinion, could 
manifest itself. Even within Communism, if outside the Party  his ideas were continually mocked 
and derided from abroad; Trotsky's deft barbs in the Bulletin of the Opposition continued 
throughout the 1930s. 
The theme of foreigners and their relationship to the Soviet Union and its politics in the thirties is a 
large one. It includes visiting drawing room socialists like George Bernard Shaw who returned from 
Russia to English lanes and tea as well as convinced Communists who found in the Promised Land 
a grave. It also includes diplomats, spies, Comintern workers, writers from St Germain and Popular 
Front politicians, Russians like Isaac Babel with contacts in the West, returning Commissars from 
the war in Spain and young men who in Glasgow or Cambridge boarded a train for Barcelona not to 
return. Many were politically committed but there were also others who in the economic doldrums 
of the thirties were drawn into the political maelstrom of that era through hardship at home; after 
the October Revolution those who saw a decent working future in the newly created Soviet Union 
travelled there from all over Europe and North America. Disillusionment and worse was to be their 
lot. In a troubled decade all of the above categories of persons whirled in a confusing haze of ideals 
and ideology, their ends various and usually, if within Stalin's control, bad. 
Stalin  needed to mobilise and maintain support for the Soviet Union amongst the intellectuals of 
the Western democracies and the populations they influenced, especially with the increased danger 
from Nazi Germany as the thirties wore on. The Congress year, 1934, also saw the release of 
Triumph of the Will179 which Stalin must surely have viewed in the private Kremlin cinema; its 
message of Teutonic mass ardour will not have been lost on him.  Leaving aside the military 
implications, the sequence in the film in which fifty two thousand immaculately uniformed 
agricultural workers shoulder polished spades as one must have prompted an uneasy comparison 
with the wrecked shambles of Soviet agriculture following collectivisation. In order to harness 
widespread anti-Nazi feelings as pro-Soviet, he needed writers, actors, film makers, theatre people 
and journalists to adopt, or at least not obstruct, Soviet policies. If not actually members of the Party 
these people of the creative industries became part of a group whose name has entered English as  
the Fellow Travellers.  The term, 'Pahputchiki' in Russian, ('Put' is a path; a paputchik is one who 
follows it) appeared in the 1920s, could have positive or negative connotations depending on the  
user and featured prominently and disparagingly in the writings of Trotsky.  In Soviet terms It came 
to mean all those, foreign and domestic, who broadly accepted the Soviet regime and its aims, but 
who had not joined the Party.180 A number of them addressed the Congress during that August 
fortnight from the ranks of the 40 foreign guests.  The most important speech was that of Andre 
Malraux, who, with typical grandiosity, states that whereas Soviet writers are able to write for the 
Proletariat, 'we revolutionary writers of the West' only had the opportunity to work against the 
bourgeoisie181  among whose comfortable ranks Malraux evidently did not count himself.i He does 
however, almost alone amid the formulaic speeches, make a plea for individuality. 'If writers are 
really engineers of the soul [in Stalin's phrase] it's necessary not to forget that the most important 
function of an engineer is that of invention. Art is not subordinate - art is conquest'.182 While a 
famous and protected foreigner might be able to utter these views in the Hall of Columns, Soviet 
reality demanded total conformity. As evidenced by the destruction of Boris Pilnyak considered in 
the Chapter VI a Soviet writer voicing the same views would be courting death. 
This incompatibility between Soviet reality and the need for the artist to speak individually and 
freely was vividly illustrated by the writings of one of the most important Thirties Fellow Traellers, 
Andre Gide. His status in Soviet Russia was high because of his position in pre-war letters in 
France and his pronouncements (if not always sufficiently and sternly Bolshevik for Moscow's 
taste) in favour of the unprecented183 Communist experiment.ii Though not a delegate he sent his 
greetings to the Congress and despite his absence he is mentioned in the speeches nineteen times.184  
His hopeful travelling however did not survive Soviet reality. In 1936 he made a visit to the Soviet 
Union and on his return to France wrote one of the Thirties' most famous books, Retour de 
l'URSS.185 In it, whilst still clinging to the ideals of the Revolution which had caused him to write 
in 1932 that  'I have declared as loud and clear as I could my sympathy (and the word is weak) for 
the USSR and for all it represents in our eyes, in our hearts, despite all the imperfections that are 
still held up to us',186 he concluded that those ideals had changed, a great deal for the worse, because 
of the man at its head.187  Despite leavening the book with positive observations on charming 
i He later became one of De Gaulle's most devoted tribunes. 
ii See Andre Gide, Journals 1889-1949 pp 539,541,549,553,564,593. 
Russians he had met and splendid childrens' schools he had been shown his overall conclusions 
were damning: art and life was miserable and submission and conformism was everywhere. 'Every 
morning' he declared, 'the Pravda teaches them [the Soviet population] just what they should know 
and think and believe. And he who strays from the path had better look out'188   He noted also that 
any dissenting voices are condemned as Trotskyists so that one begins to wonder if Lenin himself 
were to return to earth today...?'189  
In Soviet terms this was heresy, especially that last sentiment. The book was a severe shock to 
Stalin just as he was trying to engineer the construction of the Popular Front in France through 
mobilisation of the broad left. Gide was never forgiven; immediately a campaign was begun to 
vilify him in all Soviet controlled publications and organisations, at home and abroad.190  
There were many such organisations. Another aspect of the relationship between foreigners and 
Soviet Russia was the use of front organisations in the West to influence public opinion in order to 
further Soviet foreign policy.i  These activities were normally centred in Berlin until the advent of 
Hitler to power in 1933, thereafter in Paris. Bodies with odd names, such as the World Committee 
for the Relief of the Victims of German Fascism cropped up after the Congress, or were already in 
existence at the time. From modest premises (the above 'committee' was run out of a flat in the Rue 
Mondtour by les Halles)  Soviet policy, trumpeted or whispered as occasion and readership 
required, moved into the wider  world more easily than would serial diktats emerging  from behind 
the Kremlin walls.ii  Space does not allow consideration of the two men most concerned in the 
Soviet propaganda battle in Western Europe, Willi Muntzenberg and Otto Katz, but their ends are 
significant in that they typify the fate of those foreigners who were destroyed by the regime in 
whose service they spent their lives.iii  Muntzenberg, a giant of propaganda, broke with Moscow as 
a result of the Purges and at the Fall of France was found strangled in a wood, probably by his 
Soviet companion. Katz, returning as a hero to a newly Communist Czechoslovakia after the war 
was hanged in Prague as a capitalist spy in the Stalinist Slansky show trial of 1952.   
i For a full examination of this area see Stephen Koch, Stalin, Willi Muntzenberg and the Seduction of the Intellectuals. 
ii Another of the cover institutions, the 'Institute for the Study of Fascism' was run out of  flat at 25, Rue Buffon near       
       the Jardin des Plantes in the Fifth Arrondisement of Paris. Alone among the myriad Soviet vehicles of propaganda it  
       had the distinction  of providing unpaid employment and one meal daily, a 'thick,pure-like German soup of lentils,      
       peas or potatoes, occasionally with delicious bits of sausage swimming in it' to the destitute Arthur Koestler, later  
       the author of Darkness at Noon, one of the most important works against totalitarianism of the 20th century. A rare    
       Stalinist nutritional mistake.  See Arthur Koestler, Invisible Writing p 298. 
iii See Sean McMeekin, The Red Millionaire and Jonathan Miles, The Nine Lives of Otto Katz respectively. 
The ideological basis for the suspicion and destruction of those who had come from abroad to build 
Socialism was set out by Stalin in a speech to the Central Committee of the Party in March 1937. 
The implications for any person with a link, however tenuous, to abroad, were clear: 
'It has been proved as definitely as twice two are four, that the bourgeois 
states send to each other spies, wreckers, diversionists and sometimes also 
assassins...The question arises why should bourgeois states be milder and 
more neighbourly towards the Soviet Socialist state  Would it not be more 
true, from the point of view of Marxism, to assume that to the rear of the 
Soviet Union the bourgeois states should send twice and three times as 
many wreckers, spies, diversionists and murderers'?191  
These could  only come from the foreigners living in the Soviet Union. The bright sentiments of an 
international Socialist brotherhood voiced repeatedly at the 1934 Congress dimmed quickly to a 
dark world, confused and murky, where those strangers who had come to the USSR to help build 
Socialism heard Stalin pronounce their fate: 
'...We shall have to extirpate those persons, grind them down without 
stopping, without flagging, for they are the enemies of the working class, 
they are traitors to our homeland'192  
And so 'those persons' were extirpated and ground down. Stalin's orders did not of course only 
apply to those born abroad. His paranoia devoured Russians as well in their millions but in the great 
mass of  people covering the Soviet Union foreigners and those connected to them were especially 
vulnerable as their obvious distinctness made it impossible to hide. In a very few cases individuals 
were able to use foreign contacts in order to survive. Victor Serge, one of the great voices of the 
Revolution and  a declared member of the Trotskyite Opposition exiled to Siberia in the early 
Thirties, was fortunate enough to have vocal and influential connections in the West at a time whom  
Stalin needed to placate. His case was pleaded at the 1935 Paris Writers Congress attended by 
amongst others, Babel, Pasternak, E.M. Forster and Virginia Woolf. The Communists present tried 
repeatedly to prevent a hearing but were unsuccessful due to the efforts of persons not cowed by 
Stalin's writ.  These friends were able to render his execution politically troublesome and so he was 
deported rather than shot.193 His luck was rare and his resultant memoirs one of the few books by an 
eye-witness of the corroded aftermath of the Revolution.194   
The general position was quite otherwise.  As Anne Appelbaum notes in her study of the Soviet 
prison and camp system, Gulag, foreigners were always considered suspect. Such people 
included 'citizens of other countries, people who might have contacts abroad, or people who might 
have some link, imaginary or real, to a foreign country. No matter what they did they were always 
to Moscow in 1930. He wrote that 'Every single black I knew in the early 1930s who became a 
Soviet citizen disappeared from Moscow within seven years'.196  
Another category involved Russians who had foreign contacts. The interrogation records of Isaac 
Babel, revealed at the end of the Communist era, show how a Soviet citizen with precious links 
abroad found they had become manacles. He had many such links with France. Under prolonged 
interrogation he was forced to implicate both Russians and foreigners such as Andre Malraux, a 
fellow delegate to the 1934 Congress and a long standing friend of Soviet Russia, as spies and 
enemies of the Soviet Union.197  At his 'trial' he bravely renounced all such falsities 'prompted by 
my own faint-hearted behaviour during the cross-examination'198 but inevitably it availed him 
nothing. He was shot at 1.30 a.m. on the 27th of January 1940 and his cremated remains thrown into 
a common pit in the grounds of the Don Monastery in central Moscow.199  As an illustration of the 
inter-connection between Soviet literary matters and politics, the timing of his arrest (on the 16th of 
May 1939) and its aftermath may be significant in that they took place during  the summer of secret 
negotiations behind the Nazi-Soviet friendship Pact signed  on the 23rd of August 1939. As a result 
France, Malraux and the remnants of the Popular Front were no longer of any significance to Stalin. 
Babel realised this. He confessed himself lost to a fellow prisoner who, in a similar NKVD fairy 
tale, had become a spy but of the German-Japanese variety: ' When the German-Soviet alliance was 
concluded, Babel downheartedly remarked that he was now quite certain to be shot and 
congratulated me on having probably avoided a similar fate'. 200   
As well as recognising that certain friends abroad were no longer necessary Stalin also decided that 
the same principle applied at home. Within the USSR itself the organisation charged with the 
successful spread of international Revolution was, as the thirties progressed, already slipping from 
its previous position as the world vanguard of the Bolshevik dream.201 The Comintern had begun to 
lose influence in the Kremlin from the mid-twenties when Stalin began to formulate his policy of 
'Socialism in one Country following the failed attempted revolts in Germany, Hungary and Austria. 
This policy of course was contrary to Marxist and Leninist theory which envisaged the success of 
Socialism only in international terms and under conditions of constant revolution in the developed 
European countries, especially Germany. To this view Trotsky still held; it became one of the major 
fault lines of theory and policy between his camp and Stalin's.  
The Comintern, by its very nature, involved foreigners, foreigners whom Stalin did not trust.  His 
solution was to label them all as potential spies and traitors. In February 1937 he told Georgi 
 Dimitrov i the Bulgarian Communist running the Comintern, and acolyte of Stalin, that 'all of you 
there in the Comintern are working in the hands of the enemy'.202 As a result the Comintern was 
virtually annihilated. Margarete Buber-Neumann's memoirs, Under Two Dictators, recalls vividly 
the arrest of her husband in the Hotel Lux, a Moscow Comintern hostel, who was a senior German 
Communist and Comintern functionary. This followed the NKVD decree in mid-February 1937 
ordering the arrest of thousands of German Communists in Russia as Trotskyites and counter-
revolutionaries.203  He was executed later in the year and her arrest, as with many other foreign 
Communists, soon followed. Against the odds she survived the Soviet camps only to be handed 
over to the Gestapo as part of a secret protocol of the Nazi-Soviet pact whereby nationals of each 
country held by the other were exchanged. These persons, pushed across the railway bridge at 
Brest-Litovsk, included those who were both Communist and Jewish and who had come to Russia 
to build Socialism, their fate a particularly sordid betrayal.204   
Among the many nationalities who fell victim within the Comintern the Germans and the Poles 
seem to have fared the worst as being the two most important Communist parties whose members 
were in Russia because of the  illegality of the Party in their respective nations. All twelve members 
of the Polish Central Committee were shot together with many others.205 Conquest cites sources 
showing ten thousand Poles shot in Moscow at the time of the 1938 Bukharin show trial alone 
among which number will be both Comintern and non-Comintern persons.206 Within the German 
i A defendant in the trial following  the famous Reichstag fire trial of 1933. He was acquitted after a massive 
propaganda campaign by Willi Muntzenberg. 
Communist Party (KPD) whose members had escaped to sanctuary in Moscow after 1933, Stalin 
killed more of its leading Communists than Hitler; 41 out of 68 members of its Central Committee 
dying by shooting or in the Gulag.207  In the literary world Soviet Russia was home to many 
German writers of Socialist sympathies. Their endi was the same as those who worked for the 
Comintern. They must have thought with bitterness on the book written by one of the most famous 
of their number, Leon Feuchtwanger, whose 1937 Moscow painted the Soviet Union in fine bright 
colours whilst many of his compatriots were being taken from that citys streets and murdered. He 
himself lived abroad. 
Another, and less well documented, component of foreigners in the Soviet Union at the time of the 
Congress was the considerable number of people working in industry as part of the first and second 
five year plans. Amongst them, there was a large body of emigrants, almost forgotten now, who 
came from across the Atlantic. Had any of the delegates to the Congress taken some time away from 
the endless speeches and strolled south- west through the hot streets to the Stalin stadium opposite 
the Gorky Park of Culture and Rest they would have seen an enthusiastic Soviet crowd cheering on 
a 'beisbol' game whose participants whistled and stamped, shouting in the adenoidal tones of New  
York or the long vowels of the mid-West.208 The game had been played informally in Moscow since 
the arrival of the first emigrants to Russia and in early 1932 a city league was set up in Gorky Park 
itself. In  the summer of that year the Soviet Supreme Council of Physical culture announced the 
decision to adopt baseball as a 'national sport'.209 The August 1934 match was between two rival 
teams, the Moscow Foreign Workers team captained by Arnold Preedin, a cheerful young man   
from Boston, and the Karelian Americans, a side based in Petrozavodsk, a town 400 kilometres 
north of Leningrad on the heavily wooded Finnish border. The latter side was drawn from American 
lumberjacks and ski-makers  and their captain was Albert 'Red' Lonn from Detroit. In front of a 
happy crowd, shouting 'we want baseball' (meaning a formal inter-city league) the Karelians won 
14-9. Arnold Preedin, who Tim Tzouliadis in his book 'The Forsaken' describes as appearing in 
photographs curly haired and  usually pictured grinning conceded gracefully, later thanking the 
i See David Pike, German Writers in Soviet Exile 1933-1945 for a full examination of the plight of German writers 
trapped in Soviet Russia. 
'genuine fourteen carat rabid fans'  for turning out in support. It is not difficult to hear the American 
voice or to imagine his rueful smiling acknowledgement that Albert Lonn's team deserved to be 
crowned 'the USSR champions of 1934' together with his promise to give them 'the sweetest 
trimming they ever got in their lives in 1935'.210  These words sound incongruous in Thirties 
Moscow, their innocence a prelude to much sadness for the Americans in Soviet Russia. As yet, 
none of that was known; a photograph of two American baseball teams of the time, showing a 
mixed group from the Moscow Foreigners team and their opponents from the Gorky Automobile 
Factory, show tired young men smiling at the lens in home-made uniforms covered in cyrillic 
lettering. Their happy arms are thrown round one another's shoulders and the grass of Gorky Park is 
covered with bats and baseball gloves.211  
Within two summers everything changed. Many of these players and their families and friends who 
supported them were not to live through the Purges or, if they were lucky enough to survive, were to 
spend many years in the Gulag. The fates of the two captains of the 1934 game embodied that of the 
other Americans; Red Lonn from Detroit served fourteen years in the camps, sometimes eating rats 
to survive, and  Arnold Preedin, the cheerful good sportsman from Boston and the Huckleberry Finn 
figure of Gorky Park, was with his brother Walter arrested and shot.  They lie today in a vast 
communal grave outside Moscow with twenty thousand others. The only reason their names and 
final places of rest, if the term is applicable, are known is because they form part of an NKVD 
archive which was released  in the autumn of 1991 and shown to Vitaly  Shentalinsky a 
campaigning Russian writer who spearheaded an investigatory commission as Communism fell.212  
The list, known as Depository Number 7, is a record of executions at one Moscow site at a former 
army firing range near the village of Butovo, eleven miles west of central Moscow. Up to four 
hundred people a night were shot there.213 The lists are bound, page after page of surnames each 
ticked with a red pencil, into thick directories like telephone books. Depository Number 7 alone has 
four hundred volumes.214 20,675 persons are recorded as having been murdered at this single site 
between the 8th of August 1937 and the 19th of October 1938.215 
The baseball players of Gorky Park were only part of a greater emigration. The American 
Depression forced others, desperate to find work, to look eastwards to a country represented by both 
Soviet propaganda and Western Fellow Travellers as an Eden for the working man.  
As early as the mid- twenties an American magazine article summed up a certain view of the new 
Soviet experiment: 
'There is much to say about Soviet Russia. It is a new world to explore, 
Americans know almost nothing about it. But the story filters through, and it 
rouses heroism. As long as the Red Flag waves over the Kremlin, there is 
hope in the world. There is something in the air of Soviet Russia that 
throbbed in the air of Pericles' Athens; the England of Shakespeare; the 
France of Danton; the America of Walt Whitman...This is the first man 
learning in agony and joy how to think. Where else is there hope in the 
world?'216  
In 1931 a book appeared in American bookshops which described the new world. New Russia's 
Primer: The Story of the Five-Year Plan became one of the highest selling titles in American non-
fiction for the preceding ten years and was on the best-seller list for seven months. In simple 
language it described clean factories like cathedrals lit by huge windows, places where 'Not the 
lungs of men, but powerful ventilators will suck in and swallow, the dirt, dust, and shavings of the 
factories...Socialism is no longer a myth, a phantasy of mind...We ourselves are building it...And 
this better life will not come as a miracle: we ourselves must create it. But to create it we need 
Plan'.217  
That year an advertisement was placed in American newspapers offering six thousand jobs in 
Russia for workers with skills. Over a hundred thousand applications were received and ten 
thousand Americans were hired.218  
 The words and actions of those who decided to go to Soviet Russia, in the light of what happened 
to them, have a pathos all of their own. A man called Harry Dalhart wrote to the American State 
Department as the president of the Soviet emigration society' of  Wichita, Kansas seeking advice 
about going to Russia in a group. He wrote on behalf of 342 members, all under forty years of age'. 
They included ninety two 'overseas world war veterans: all native born Americans'.219  A mechanic 
from San Francisco wrote to a Moscow paper asking if it would better his chances to change his 
name to a Russian one 'with that -ovitch or itsky ending'.220  From Virginia a group of Shenandoah 
Valley miners was ready to 'go to Russia with their picks and drills and any other machinery that 
they have enough to buy'. Other groups sold everything they had. One used the money to buy 
American machinery for a collective farm near Moscow where they intended to settle and another 
group, sixteen people from San Francisco, clubbed together all their assets- tools, a Lincoln car, 
savings- so they could buy tractors for the new 'Portland' commune near Kiev.221  Their sincerity 
and courage, ready to cross the world to a place where they could not so much as speak the 
language, is affecting even at these years distance. Their words embody a willingness, even a 
determination, to believe.  It is impossible not to think on the faces of those men and women on the 
day when the realities of Soviet life became irrevocably clear, still less when they were forced onto 
a Gulag transport train or lead out to die alone in a darkened field. 
Because of the lack of records or their continued retention by Russian authorities it is not possible 
to trace the fates of all those emigrants from America who had been arriving in Russia in the early 
30s. There are some clues however. In his book, The Forsaken, Tim Tzouliades cites a number of 
examples where he was able to gain some clues as to what happened. In one, a commission set up 
by the American Government after the Second World War recorded the testimony of a survivor of 
the Gulag who had seen a 'column of prisoners, half-frozen in threadbare clothes, driven forward 
like cattle by their NKVD guards. Unable to speak Russian, these men could only repeat 
American. American and eat, eat'.i 
Tzouliades was able to find some other answers in individual cases which shed some light on the 
fate of the Americans. In October 1938 the parents of a young American woman named Mrs Bertha 
Kylma of Painestale, Michigan wrote to the then Secretary of State Cordell  Hull reporting her 
detention, as well that of many other Americans, and asking for help.  
'.We have definite proof from her  by letter, that she is being held 
prisoner for no reason at all and that she is being forced to suffer untold 
misery. She says several hundred other women of American citizenship are 
also being imprisoned on several islands which are in Lake Ladoga'. ii 
i See Tzouliades p  288. This evidence arose in 1948 and may have related to Americans found in German POW camps 
by the Red Army and not released. 
ii Lake Ladoga is situated north-east of the present St Petersburg, formerly Leningrad. 
There are other instances of letters being smuggled out of camps and routed to the West presumably 
by bribery or by courageous Russians with access to the outside world. Two such extraordinary 
letters from a young New Yorker to his father were passed on by the latter to the State Department, 
again with the request for help. The writer was George Sviridoff, 'a sixteen or seventeen year old 
fair-haired boy'222 who had tried to stowaway on the Kim, a ship going from Soviet Russia to 
America. Upon discovery he was sentenced to ten years for attempting to leave the Soviet Union 
illegally. The first letter, dated the 10th of July 1936, two years after the Congress, spoke of his 
detention in the huge Arctic mining camp of Vorkuta, a place of dreadi, where he writes that 'the 
material conditions are all right but you know, Papa, in one word, a camp gets you in the end...' He 
ends the letter with a request for food 'suitable for the North', photographs, 'one sweater with a 
fastener' and some 'views of New York'. He asks his father to reply immediately as 'Time is 
precious'.223 
The second letter is dated a year later on the 17th of July 1937, a time when the Purges were in 
spate. Its contents indicate that in his earlier letter he wanted to spare his father the truth but could 
no longer do so. The tone is sombre, the more so when the age of the writer is considered: 
'Greetings dear Papa, 
.I have had one letter from you during three years and two months[this 
perhaps indicates at least the approximate date of his arrival in Soviet 
Russia - the early summer of 1934 - shortly before the Congress opened.] 
All hope has collapsed... Dear Papa, I did not want to upset you up to now, 
but it would be even sadder were you not to know my actual situation and 
whereabouts... 
Now Papa, my fate is sealed. I have left you, lost my country, lost my 
freedom, lost all the delights of life...there remains only to lose in addition 
my head, which may happen not being able to live through it all. Today is a 
day which brought me much unpleasantness. I refused to work in the mine. 
Your loving son,  
George Sviridoff'.224  
i 'One of the largest and toughest camps in the entire Gulag system'. Per Appelbaum, Gulag, p 94. 
There was no further contact from George Sviridoff. His end can only be imagined. A sympathetic 
State Department official in Russia wrote in June 1938, a year later, a long note in George's file 
concerning the fate of all Americans deemed by the Soviet state to be Soviet citizens, emphasizing 
that 'The Soviet Government has the administrative power to arrest and hold incommunicado 
indefinitely any American citizen in the Soviet Union...' and recognising that 'the situation is such 
that these people are virtually at the mercy of the Soviet Authorities...' His recommendation was 
that America should refuse to recognise the purported unilateral naturalisation of Americans without 
proof of its voluntary nature or, alternatively, should publicise the true state of affairs.225 The former 
course might not have achieved very much given the regime's ability through torture to force a 
prisoner to say or do anything but in any event, there was no publicity and the American 
Government did nothing. That stance reflected another aspect of reality for foreigners in Stalin's 
Russia of the 1930s  they were completely alone. Given the contents of George Sviridoff's letter he 
was probably dead before the State Department note was penned.  
Space does not permit further examination here of the fates of  other individual Americans or 
groups of emigrants but their world and its destruction is chronicled in Tzouliades' book, the main 
source for this chapter. A few examples must serve to outline their plight. The Foreign Workers 
Club and its baseball team was shut down and the Anglo-American school for emigrants was 
declared to be a 'spy centre' 226 with all that that meant in Thirties Russia. Foreigners clamouring at 
their embassies for repatriation were arrested on the streets outside with no diplomatic protests 
being made.227  Americans were recruited by the NKVD to inform on other emigrants as the price of 
their continued relative freedom. Those denounced disappeared.228 A young man of 24, Alexander 
Gelver from Oshkosh Wisconsin, went to his Embassy for repatriation then was picked up on the 
pavement outside; a single laconic entry on his NKVD file records his death on New Year's Day 
1938.229 The lives of those who were not executed but who disappeared into the Gulag are given life 
in the memoirs of a twenty one year old from Buffalo, New York, Thomas Sgovio, who had come 
as a teenager to the USSR with his family to escape the Depression. Arrested outside after an 
Embassy visit he was taken to the Lubyanka and given a piece of paper with '5' written on it. It was 
his first sentence.230 When it expired he was simply given another.  
Briefly at liberty after eight years his former girlfriend, an American NKVD informer, betrayed him 
and he was sent back to the camps. Against every imaginable portent he survived the terrible 
Kolyma gold fieldsi (by luck he obtained an inside job) and on Stalin's death his sister, writing to 
the authorities that 'Please remember that of the nineteen years my brother has lived in the Soviet 
Union sixteen of them have been in prison', finally obtained his release.231 He eventually managed 
to get back to America and in memory of all those who had been taken wrote his life story.232 Under 
an Arizona sun this child of the Depression would later recall a dark Russian forest and a rare Gulag 
showing of an American film left over from the war. It was The Grapes of Wrath.     
i Even getting there was perilous. One large ship, caught in the Autumn ice of 1933, did not arrive until the following 
year (the year of the Writers Congress). None of the thousands of prisoners on board survived. On the Kolyma 
outside work was compulsory until the temperature fell to  minus 50 Centigrade. Conquest, p 326. Conquest's 
research from Soviet and non-Soviet sources indicates that of the 8 million persons in the camps by 1938 the 
survival rate was no more than 10%. See Conquest, The Great Terror, p 485 
CHAPTER VI 
Boris Pilnyak  The Destruction of a Writer 
Mirror mirror on the wall 
Who's the fairest of them all? 
And the mirror answered 
I'd prefer not to speak about politics 
                                                                                  Soviet variant 
Not every delegate to the Congress spoke.  Some were too junior in years or lacked sufficient 
stature in the literary world to be invited to the podium; others, famous and acclaimed, kept silent 
for quite different reasons.   
 Boris Pilnyak, even now little known in the West, was described by Victor Serge, the memoirist of 
the Revolution,  as 'one of the greatest soviet writers,'233  Gleb Struve in his magisterial  history 
'Russian Literature under Lenin and Stalin 1917-1953', dedicates the volume to Babel, 
Mandelshtam and Pilnyak.234 Pilnyak's multiple works were published in ten languages and he was 
fervently admired by those such as Simone de Beauvoir235  and Anna Akhmatova, his friend.236  He 
was  a man who had described the revolution as 'a rebirth of some ancient Slavic quality in the 
Russian soul and an event of 'cleansing fire'.237  Those flames would end his life but not before he  
was ground down and forced to renounce his beliefs. Worst of all he was also made to collaborate 
on the writing of a book not with another writer but with a man who would head the NKVD during 
its most awful epoch, Nikolai Yezhov, whose name is one of the most reviled in the history of 
Russia.  
Pilnyak's  life, though adorned with the material benefits of a successful Soviet writer, had hidden 
costs and painful contradictions.  In the Russia in which he found himself, the Russia of forced 
collectivisation and famine, deportations of whole peoples, mass arrests, legalised murder and  
random death, Pilnyak was obliged to make choices as to how he was going to live. These cannot 
but have caused him sorrow. His instincts were civilised but like many others he signed petitions 
calling for the deaths of engineers being tried as 'wreckers' and 'saboteurs' when he knew the 
charges were false,238 and though he would have known that a refusal to sign would not have 
prevented the executions, his tortured words of assent must have festered like a wound. His 
participation in the regime's realities did not end there.  He also, like Babel, sought out the company 
of influential members of the NKVD as insurance and protection and in so doing learned sordid 
details of the minutiae of executions from tipsy secret policemen.239 There is no evidence he was a 
cruel or evil man; all sources show him, whilst accepting the Revolution as part of Russia's destiny, 
to be a writer in love with words and memories of an erstwhile land; evening cupolas above still 
water, boisterous market days by city walls, and wise old men. He was a romantic in an era shorn of 
gentleness. What it cost him to take wine with executioners is not known. 
  Pilnyak's tribulations demonstrate how difficult it was for writers during the thirties to navigate the 
tortuous paths that the Revolution had scattered through the altered topography of both literary and 
ordinary life.  These paths often enough led to catastrophe but even if they were recognised from 
afar as dangerous, they were not always avoidable. Conformity did not ensure safety. 
Boris Andreevich Pilnyak, real surname Wolgaui though little remembered now outside Russia, was 
at the beginning of the 1930s one of the best known and successful writers in the country. He was 
born in 1894, had reached his early twenties at the coming of the Revolution and at the time of the 
Writers Congress was in early middle age, widely published, strong and settled in creativity. His 
work had emerged during the complicated post-revolutionary period in which stubborn traces of the 
immediate past mingled with new directions.  In a time of relative toleration, factions of writers, 
poets and artists developed in all spheres of artistic life. In his memoirs Ilya Ehrenburg, one of the 
few writers of that epoch who was able to live abroad and to survive and prosper because of his  
uses to Stalin, remembered the window of a bookshop where a 'tree of Soviet literature' was 
displayed. It showed, from left to right, branches tagged with proletarians, LEFii peasant 
poets, left- wing fellow- travellers, centrist fellow-travellers, right- wing fellow-travellers, 
and neo-bourgeois.240 Grafted on to that tree might be a number of other terms, organisations and 
tendencies which complicated the position still further. These included the Futurists, splintering into 
Cubo-futurists, Ego-Futurists and others RAPP, the Association of Proletarian Writers, a hard line 
group responsible for many vicious literary attacks before it was disbanded in 1932, and members 
of the All-Russian Writers Union (disbanded in 1929 and not connected to the later, all-powerful 
Soviet Writers Union)iii.Remnants of other, pre-revolutionary, tendencies still lingered though of 
course without official approval. The lyricism in the work of Alexander Blok and the Symbolists, 
representing a mystical view of Russia, still entranced some readers of Russian. Amongst the most 
famous were the Acmeists who embraced 'the classical poetic principles of clarity, concision and the 
precise expression of emotional experience'.241 and who were to become one of the most famous 
and lasting of all the literary sets, its best known voices being  Akhmatova and  Mandelstam.  
It was during the post-revolutionary period that Boris Pilnyak began to be noticed as a writer of 
i A name coming from the Volga Germans, settlers brought in by Catherine the Great to advance agriculture. Pilnyak 
was of mixed Russian, German and Tartar descent. 
ii LEF was a particularly left wing literary grouping  in which Mayakovsky and others participated. 
iii For a full discussion of the varied groupings of the time see Struve, pp 14-38. 
short stories and other works. By 1922 he had become the most popular writer in the Soviet 
Union242,  his shorter earlier works being complemented by the publication in that year of one of the 
first novels of the Revolution. It was called Goly God (The Naked Year), and describes, through 
characters  from all walks of life, from dispossessed aristocrats to Bolshevik 'leathern men in 
leathern jackets',i  the struggles of 1918 and 1919 in the immediate aftermath of the Communist 
victory. Struve describes Pilnyak's first novel as 'fragmentary and disjointed, without a unified plot 
or a central character' and states flatly that 'To tell the story of the Naked Year is a hopeless task.'243  
For the purposes of this thesis it is not necessary to analyse the novel save to note briefly, in order to 
illustrate Pilnyak's development,  Struve's listing of its various elements. These include a love for 
pre-Petrine Russia, the rich colloquial language of the villages, 'historico-philisophical digressions' 
and its 'musical' fragmented structure in which time's exact meaning is lost. Pilnyak's style also 
favoured  the use of symbolic and stylistic devices. These include many references to the Kitay 
Gorod ('Chinatown)ii in Moscow, an old quarter to the immediate east of the Kremlin  which he uses 
to show Russia's 'dual face' to both Occident and Orient. Another technique, playing with time and 
perception, was the idiosyncratic insertion of identical pages of the book in different and unrelated 
chapters.244 
In general terms Struve believes that despite some elements which 'smack of a cheap imitation of 
Dostoyevsky' and others embodying art which has a second hand flavor, certain ready-made 
patterns merely cut to post-Revolutionary measure', nonetheless Pilnyak's vision has many valuable 
elements including his love of language, his humanism and sympathy with oppressed people and 
above all, his independence and courage which were 'conspicuous amongst his contemporaries.245 
He quotes Pilnyak as seeing himself having the artists's 'bitter duty' in being honest with himself 
and with Russia.246   
In 1924 (the year in which Lenin died) Pilnyak contributed to a composite book Writers About Art 
and About Themselves'. In extracts from his diaries, submitted in place of an article, he stated his 
creed: 
i An iconic form of Bolshevik dress, especially popular with the Secret Police. See Figes, Natasha's dance p 444 
ii The accepted modern Russian usage. It's original medieval meaning was 'defended city.' See Berton p 34. 'Kitay' 
means Chinese, 'gorod' means town or city. Thus Eisenstein's  stentorian Alexander Nevsky: 'V Novgorod'. The 
English translation - 'To :Newtown' is less heroic. 
'I am not a Communist and therefore do not admit that I have to be a 
Communist and write as a Communist, while  I admit that the Communist 
power in Russia is determined, not by the will of the Communists, but by 
the historical destinies of Russia, and, inasmuch as I want to trace those 
destinies (as best I can and as my conscience and my intellect prompt me), I 
am with the Communists, that is, inasmuch as the Communists are with 
Russia I am with them, too... I admit that I am much less interested in the 
fortunes of the Russian Communist party than in the fate of Russia, the 
Russian Communist party being for me only a link in the history of Russia.'   
 'I know that I must be absolutely objective...and I admit that I may be 
wrong in everything, but I also know that I cannot, nor know not how to, 
nor ever shall, write otherwise than I do, even if I wanted to do violence to 
myself...' 
'In recent years our state has been setting up incubators for Party literature, 
providing them with food rations, and nothing came of it, or rather bad 
things came of it, for when these people touched art they stopped being 
politicians, without becoming artists...Hence another conclusion: I believe 
that a writer must care only about his manuscripts, about their being good, 
and the honesty and validity of his Party-school-social membership card is 
his own personal business which has nothing to do with literature'.247  
He was to prove faithful to these beliefs as the twenties wore on but two further novels, in which    
daring exceeded wisdom, placed Pilnyak in a vulnerable position as the decade closed. The first of 
these concerned the death, on the operating table not the battlefield, of one of the Revolution's 
greatest soldiers. The second related to a tale set in an old world Russian town in which he revived 
and savoured the early romantic ideals of the Revolution.   
 The first novel, written when a divergence of views was still possible, focussed on an event far 
away from the Soviet literary world; it was to cast a long shadow on its author. In the mid - 
Twenties a  much celebrated hero of the Civil War, Mikhail Frunze, had been appointed  the Deputy 
People's Commissar for War and though nominally Trotsky's deputy in fact  took over control of the 
Red Army.  Frunze, in Conquest's words, 'seems to have sympathised with the Zinoviev-Kamenev 
group' which later was wiped out by Stalin in the first main show trial in 1936.248  
Barely a year after his appointment Frunze became ill in the late summer of 1925 and after an 
operation, rumoured in Moscow to have taken place on the orders of the Central Committee (i.e. a 
body already being controlled by Stalin)he died on the operating table.  As Conquest points out such 
a rumour, hinting at a possible rival being eliminated, would be entirely understandable in 1936 or 
1937, when to be a possible opponent of Stalin was a certain death warrant, but  its public currency 
in the capital as early as 1925 (before Stalin had 'given any precedents' ) was 'extraordinary'.249 
Such rumour and intrigue might have seemed to Pilnyak a good basis for a story. He wrote it, the 
novella  Tale of the Unextinguished Moon. If there was any latent ambiguity about the title, its  stark 
sub-title, Murder of the Army Commander, removed it. 
Whether the rumours citing Stalin's participation in the death of Frunze were correct or not (and the 
argument continues still among Russian historians) their public currency clearly had a political 
dimension. Pilnyak, avowedly non-political, seems to have either ignored or failed to see the 
implications. Stalin had begun his rise to unfettered power immediately after the death of Lenin. On 
the 23rd of January 1924, two days after the death of Lenin, Stalin led the Central Committee to the 
formers convalescent home to collect the body and return it to Moscow to lie in state in the very 
hall where the 1934 Congress would take place. He directed the funeral arrangements (against 
Lenin's and his wife's wishes a lavish state funeral was ordered by him) and positioned himself as 
Lenin's heir immediately.  Famously, Lenin's final testament, derogative of Stalin and 
recommending a secondary role for him, was suppressed by the future dictator. On the 28th, the day 
after Lenin's funeral, Stalin was formally 'elected' to the Central Committee and two days later 
installed as a member of the Praesidium of the Party, later called the Politburo.  His growing power 
and increasing status received formal recognition by the re-naming of the city of Tsaritsyn 
('Kingsville', very roughly) as Stalingrad.in April 1925.250  These events were not secrets, quite the 
reverse. Despite, or perhaps because of, these clear signs of developing power, Pilnyak in 1926 
submitted the novella to Novy Mir.251  
Accounts differ as to the actual publication. The record of the Writers Union252  states that it was 
published in Novy Mir and re-published in the beginnings of the Glasnost era (1987) in Banner a 
leading magazine. Conquest's view is that it had been about to be printed when the issue was 
suddenly confiscated. In any event it seems there were many copies in circulation (it was  also 
printed in Bulgaria in 1927) and shortly thereafter, per Conquest,  'The editors admitted in the 
following number that accepting it had been a mistake and printed letters describing it as  a 
malicious slander on our Party.'253  In the literary hothouse that was Moscow at the time such a 
disclaimer could only have increased its illicit readership. 
Conquests short summary of the plot highlights the dangerous similarities of Pilnyak's story to the 
death of Frunze. 'The hero, Gavrilov, is described as a well-known Red Army leader who returns to 
Moscow on orders and reads with surprise in the papers  that he has come back for an operation. He 
has had stomach ulcers, but is now fully recovered. He goes to see a man described as the most 
important of the three who lead the Party,i  who orders him to have the operation. The doctors 
examine him, and report that an operation is necessary, but afterwards in private conversation say 
that it is not. The operation is performed and he dies of an overdose of chloroform'. The tone of the 
story is described as being 'very sinister and gloomy'.254 
It is difficult to see, with the story's sub-title Murder of a Red Army Commander and its details 
chiming exactly with the circulating rumours, how Stalin, by then the coming man in the Politburo, 
could fail to place a black mark beside Pilnyak's name. The dictator had a long memory and took 
revenge against all who failed to see the world as he saw it, even those closest to him. As his 
daughter Svetlana observed: 'Years of friendship and fighting side by side in a common cause might 
as well never have been. He could wipe it all out at a stroke  and X would be doomed'.255 Conquest 
speculates that given that no sensible person with any political sense at all would have written a 
story like The Unextinguished Moon  at that time in Russia - 'it seems likely that Pilnyak was put up 
to it by some friend more involved in the struggles of the time'.256 Whatever his reasons, the matter 
seems to have rested there until Pilnyak's next brush with the regime. This came with the new 
decade, an attack by RAPP - the  association of Proletarian Writers  whose credo stated that 'The 
one and only task of Soviet Literature is the depiction of the Five-year Plan and the class war.'257 
By 1929 Pilnyak was head of the Moscow, and pre-eminent, branch of the important All-Russian 
Union of Writers, an association founded in 1919 by intellectuals as a non-political writers forum.258  
Another famous Soviet writer, Evgeny Zamyatin, was chairman of the branch in Leningrad, as 
Petrograd had been renamed after the death of Lenin in 1924. This body existed in the company of 
other groupings of the time, such as the Peasant Writers Union, RAPP and others under the 
umbrella of the Federation of Soviet Writers Associations. Within this loose group of associations 
the principal enemy of Pilnyak's organisation was the authoritatian RAPP.  The implacable stance of 
RAPP and the fierce antagonism of its adherents towards Pilnyak and others lacking sufficient 
Bolshevik purity was to become an especially  ominous facet of the Soviet literary scene as the new 
decade approached. 
Pilnyak's next significant book, refused publication by the organs of Soviet censorship, was called 
i At that time Stalin, Bukharin and Kirov 
Mahogany (Krasnoyeh Dyeryevo in Russian),  which he published in 1929 in Russian in  Berlin, 
apparently through a firm which had official links with the main Soviet State Publishing house.259 
This of itself was not uncommon in that some Soviet authors published both within and without the 
Soviet Union at the same time to preserve copyright because the country had not signed any 
international copyright protection treaties.260  The Russian emigration, or Russia Abroad as it was 
known, was widespread. Berlin, until the coming of Hitler when it moved to Paris, was the main,  
non-Soviet,  Russian cultural centre in Europe. Virulently anti-Soviet,, the emigrs  commented 
trenchantly on all matters of Russian politics and culture through journals, publishing houses and 
newspapers. 
It was this circumstance which allowed the literary zealots in RAPP to misrepresent Pilnyaks 
actions and castigate him as a counter-revolutionary and an individualist whose actions were 
harmful to the Soviet Union. In a concerted shrill campaign he was pilloried in the Soviet press and 
literary journals. Headlines from the Literary Gazette and Komsomol Pravda, the Communist Youth 
Movement's paper, convey the force and virulence of the assault: 'A Hostile Network of Agents in 
the Ranks of Soviet Writers'; 'Boris Pilnyak, Special Correspondent for the White Guard 
Supporters'; 'Investigate the Union of Writers'; 'The Lessons of Pilnyakism'.261  
These attacks were dangerous enough in themselves but they were added to by an especially 
celebrated figure of the Revolution, Vladimir. Mayakovsky.  He had been the self-publicising but   
successful declamatory voice of Soviet prose and poetry since 1918. Considered a genuine talent by 
many he was a striking physical and verbal presence in Moscow, involving himself in varied artistic 
pursuits over a wide area - film, poetry, art, cartoons, journalism and a long successful run of plays 
on the Soviet stage. His aggressive, strident style, damning of what he saw as the banality of old 
petty- bourgeois Russia lurking just below the surface of society, caught the iconoclastic mood of 
early Bolshevism: 
Forward, my country, 
                     move on faster 
Get on with it,  
                     sweep away the antiquated junk 
Stronger, my commune, 
                      strike at the enemy, 
Make it die out,  
                      that monster, the old way of life262 
 His merciless attack on Pilnyak, preserved in the latters Lyubyanka arrest file, follows the tone set 
by the functionaries of RAPP. This may not be surprising given Mayakovsky's situation in late 1929 
and early 1930, when the campaign against Pilnyak reached its height.  Mayakovskys own position 
was very much under threat. In addition to a failing private life Mayakovsky was suffering from the 
increasing realisation that his style of confrontational individualism, born of the avant garde, was 
not consonant with the direction the Soviet arts were taking. His last two plays, The Bedbug (scored 
by Shostakovich) and The Bathhouse, both satires on Soviet life, had   failed in the theatres and had 
been condemned in the press as 'failing to portray the Soviet future in heroici terms'.263   In March 
1930 his stock appeared to approach its nadir - a major retrospective exhibition of his artwork in 
Moscow was avoided by the city's intelligentsia, a visitor recalling his tall gaunt figure pacing alone 
in the empty rooms.264  
In the last few months of his life, under attack by extreme RAPP elements himself, and desperate to 
belong, he penned a vitriolic article entitled 'Our View'. In its mixture of politics, denunciation and 
danger it exemplifies a particularly crude Soviet reality of the Thirties  an attack on an individual 
which also threatens others by implication: 
'I have not read Boris Pilnyak's short novel The Tale of Mahogany (is that 
the right title?) or, for that matter, other tales by him and many other writers. 
To me a finished literary work is like a weapon. Even if that weapon were 
above the class struggle - such a thing does not exist (though, perhaps, 
Pilnyak thinks of it like that)  handing it over to the White press 
strengthens the arsenal of our enemies. 
At the present time of darkening storm clouds this is the same as treachery 
at the front. 
i Almost exactly the words used by Zhdanov in his speech on Socialist Realism at the 1934 Congress. See Thesis p 26. 
We must give up subject-less literature-mongering. 
We must put an end to the irresponsibility of writers. 
Pilnyak's guilt is shared by many. Who? That is a story by itself. 
For instance, who handed over a third of the Federation [of Soviet Writers 
Associations] to the Union of Pilnyaks? 
Who always defended the Pilnyaks from the tendentiousness of REF?i 
Who made this writer feel sure of the right of geniuses to extra-territorial 
class immunity?'265  
Attacks of this sort in 1930, in the middle of the national struggle to complete the first Five year 
plan, were not meaningless or innocuous, a type of bookish squabble as might be conducted in the 
West in the columns of a fashionable review. They had significance both inside and outside 
literature. As the decade wore on, each assault signalled increasing danger. 
What would have been in 1937 a death warrant was, for a short time yet, in 1930, still a warning. In 
addition, Gorky was a supporter of Pilnyak who had visited him in Italian exile and Stalin was still 
trying to entice Gorky back to Soviet Russia permanently.  Pilnyak was given a chance to recant. He 
did so, in terms described by Struve as 'abject'.266  It was the time of trials of 'saboteurs' and 
'wreckers' whose alleged acts of industrial vandalism were used by the regime to explain problems 
with rapid industrialisation and the Five year plan. The trials were forerunners of the later show 
trials which eliminated the senior Bolshevik leadership and involved ordinary and middle-ranking 
engineers and managers, working under dire industrial conditions. One such trial was witnessed, 
with considerable disgust, by the then British Consul Reader Bullard. He recalled the animated and 
prolonged applause of the audience 'so that it might be seen that they were doing their bit' when the 
death sentences were announced.267 In the Radek show trial of early 1937  Pilnyak, with others, 
signed a resolution stating 'If the enemy does not surrender  he must be annhiliated'.268 He even 
wrote an article for Pravda in this vein, described as 'wretched' by his close friend Victor Serge.269 
Although these situations were an inescapable reality of the times (Serge notes writers who knew 
Pilnyak well taking part in the ritual public denunciations of him organised by RAPP, then coming 
round to see him to make private apology)270 they must have added to the  self-hatred  felt by 
Pilnyak, whose earlier credo had declared honesty paramount.   
i Revolutionary Front of Art, an unsuccessful group of brief existence formed by Mayakovsky in 1929 after he              
abandoned LEF, his earlier body. 
As part of his penance Pilnyak had been given the opportunity of redeeming his earlier novel 
Mahogany. It was to be re-written but not simply as a second version of the book. More subtly, and 
for greater effect in political terms, it was to be subsumed in an entirely new novel which would be 
a paean to the first Five year plan. It's title was to be The Volga falls to the Caspian Sea. There was 
another condition imposed however, unique perhaps in the literature of any nation; it was to be 
written as a joint enterprise with a man who was shortly to become Stalins head executioner of the 
Purges, Nikolai Ivanovich Yezhov. Though without much formal education Yezhov was popular 
with Stalin and had some literary connections through his nephew Leonid Averbachi the rabid head 
of RAPP, author and instigator of many Pilnyak denunciations. The interconnection of these persons 
is an illustration of another reality in the world of Soviet letters, the glutinous mixture of literature 
itself and the politics of control. It is clear that however much Pilnyak resented Yezhov's 
involvement with his book his relationship to the up and coming bureaucrat also had the flavour, 
almost medieval, of protection sought and patronage given in a world where to be without either the 
supplicant was at great risk.  Nadezhda Mandelstam recalls a conversation with Yezhov's wife in a 
rest home for higher Party people in 1930 (to which she says the Mandelstams were admitted 
apparently through an administrative error). She was indignant at a comment from Yezhovaii 
implying that it was a given that some sort of protection was as a matter of course sought by every 
writer; 'Pilnyak comes to see us' Yezhova had said, 'Whom do you go to see? On speaking about 
her anger later to her husband Mandelstam tried to calm her responding wearily that 'Everyone goes 
to see someone. There's no other way. We go to see Nikolai Ivanovich'.iii271 
Pilnyak needed protection and had much to lose. His support of the regime in print had seen Stalin 
reward him with material privileges and foreign travel. He took trips to Paris, America and Japan, 
opportunities almost unheard of in Soviet society. By any standard he led a privileged life but one 
enmeshed in contradictions. 
A pen portrait of Pilnyak and his situation at this time has been preserved in the writings of his 
friend Victor Serge, old revolutionary, associate of Trotsky, and Marxist critic of Stalin, who 
escaped Russia and certain death only because of influential friends in the European literary world 
i His RAPP demagoguery availed him little; Averbach himself was shot in 1937 by his uncle's Secret Police. When 
Yezhov's usefulness ran out he later found himself on the same execution list as Isaac Babel. 
ii In Russian a married woman's name is an adaptation of her husband's. Yezhova is 'of Yezhov' in the same way a             
      Anna Karenina is 'of' her husband Karenin. 
iii Bukharin, himself shot after his 1938 show trial. 
and Stalin's desire for political reasons to maintain influence there, especially France.272  Pilnyak ' 
was tall,' Serge wrote, an oval head, strong features, a Germanic type, very egotistical and very 
human' who was' childishly pleased with his fame and his material comforts. Thanks to his trips 
abroad he dressed in 'English tweed and had ' a little car of his own.' [a Ford and an extraordinary 
luxury for a private individual at this time]. He bitterly resented Yezhov.  Pilnyak  'would twist his 
I could write freely What could I not do'  He was also subject to fits of depression, fearing jail, and 
responded to Serge's protestations that  his safety was guaranteed by his  fame abroad with 
dejection- There isn't a single thinking adult in this country who has not thought that he might be 
shot.273 
The Volga runs to the Caspian Sea, in Struve's words, despite its many efforts (and those of his co-
author) 'to put right the ideological fallacies of Mahogany'  by telling the story 'of the building of a 
gigantic dam'  was not a success.274 Pilnyak depicted a new town built beside an old Russian 
settlement and in the portrayal of these, seemed unable to rid himself of equally old romantic habits 
of idealising what he saw as long standing values of the Russian peasantry.  The novel, in which he 
attempted to 'glorify the Five year plan and  remove the bad impression that Mahogany had created 
in Communist circles' was 'filled with romanticism and heavily flavoured with Dostoyevskian 
scenes'. It 'misfired completely'.275   
Other efforts of recantation were required. Pilnyak made them.  In 1926 he had been allowed to 
visit Japan and had written a book called  The Roots of the Japanese Sun (Korni Yaponskovo 
solntsa) which was issued in Volume 7 of his Collected Works published by GIZ 
(Gosudarstvenoyeh Idzatelstvo, the State Publishing House). Struve describes it thus: 'It was a 
typical mixture of 'the usual Pilnyakian fireworks, of relevant and irrelevant reflections, of 
interesting observations and half-baked generalisations'.276 What it was not was Soviet, especially in 
an increasingly xenophobic climate within Russia and Stalin's growing attention towards the rise of 
Japan on its eastern border. He was allowed to make a second visit in 1932 and in 1934, the year of 
the Congress, wrote another book, Rocks and Roots, (Kamni I Korni) which was a refutation of his 
earlier work.  Struve quotes the formal renunciation from the book: 
The writer Pilnyak informs his readers that his Roots (1926) are no good. 
The writer Pilnyak of 1932 asks his readers to throw out from their shelves 
the seventh volume of the GIZ edition of his Collected Works. As for the 
translations of this book, Pilnyak asks that its Japanese translation be 
destroyed first of all. This must be done out of respect for the author277  
Pilnyak's abasement and accommodation with the regime meant that in the early part of the 1930s 
he still retained a significant position in Soviet letters. After a state sponsored visit to America in 
1931 (itself a mark of considerable favour)i he wrote a book attacking that country, O-Kay, to 
order.278  When Anna Akhmatova's husband Nikolai Punin and her son Lev were arrested in 
Leningrad in 1935 it was Pilnyak she asked to accompany her when she sought to deliver a letter to 
Stalin asking for their release. In her memoirs Emma Gersteinii recalls how Akhmatova and Pilnyak 
drove up to the Kremlin in his Ford car and handed the letter over to a previously agreed recipient 
on Stalin's staff.  The plea, accompanied by letters directly to Stalin from others like Boris Pasternak 
and Bulgarkov was successful.279  
 Gerstein recalled her visit to Pilnyak's flat where Akhmatova was staying after the release of her 
husband and son.   There is no description of the interior save for the important fact that it had more 
than one room, her quietly voiced conversation with Akhmatova taking place in a bedroom while a 
celebration was audible in a dining room next door. In Soviet terms, during this period when the 
vast majority of families lived in single and often partitioned rooms in communal flats, Pilnyak's 
possession of such accommodation is evidence of considerable status. His guests also indicated 
friends in high places; Akhmatova whispered that one was 'an important Party figure from the 
regional committee' and one other, unnamed, who apparently had 'three pips' (three lozenge shaped 
badges worn on each collar to indicate high rank in the NKVD and army). 280 
i For a description of Pilnyak's visit to Hollywood see Russians in Hollywood, Hollywood's Russians, by Harlow 
Robinson. 
ii Emma Gerstein, who lived till the age of 99 with all of her considerable faculties intact published a memoir of Russian 
literary life when all of those involved had already died. She had been close to the Mandelshtams, Akhmatova and 
her son Lev, imprisoned to control his mother. Her book cause consternation in some quarters as it was not a 
hagiography but a severely honest and affectionate portrayal. Akhmatova's homosexuality, for example, apparently 
widely known about in Russian literary circles but not written about, was flatly stated by Gerstein. 
In addition to his disavowal of his earlier work Pilnyak inserted a passage into the later book of 
1932 which indicated how much his earlier views had, at least for public purposes, changed. The 
diarist of 1923 in Writers About Art and About Themselves had altered considerably. The former 
individualist  whose only concern was whether a manuscript was 'good', someone who disdained 
state created 'incubators for Party Literature', and a writer who could not 'nor know how to, nor ever 
shall, write otherwise than how I do, even if I wanted to do violence to myself...' would write a 
decade later in Rocks and Roots, the disavowal of his earlier work:  
 'A writer is like a geologist or a traveller to uninhabited and undiscovered 
lands. ...Writers must be treated like geologists, for writers can certainly 
muddle up things no less than the latter. In Soviet literature, too, it is 
necessary, after re-registering all writers and cutting down their number...to 
create an Institute of Literature, an Institute of Artistic Prospecting and 
Equipment, without whose diploma writers could not have the status of a 
writer and get published, by analogy with the Institutes of Mining 
Prospecting which equip the geologist for his work. This institute, in 
qualifying a writer, should demand from him, beside the ability to write and 
general knowledge, moral good faith which characterizes the writer in his 
public work and his home life...And if a writer makes a mistake (this also 
happens to geologists) his mistake will be an accident and a matter for regret 
rather than abuse. For, given the diploma of the Literary Prospecting 
Institute and the writer's honesty there will be no doubt about the 
accidentally vexatious nature of the mistake. And the mistakes will be much 
fewer, although God alone is never mistaken because He does not 
exist...while those who make most mistakes are the geologists because they 
discover things hitherto undiscovered and because they are not tourists who 
follow beaten paths. Tourist writers, in particular those who travel from 
Moscow to the Dneprprostroyi of Socialism in the mail coaches, dormeusesii 
and railway carriages of Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky and Buniniii travel like 
tourists and will never get anywhere...'281 
In this poignant extract Pilnyak shows how far he has been subdued by the pressures being piled 
upon him in a land in which, to repeat his earlier remark to his  friend Serge, 'There isn't a single 
thinking adult in this country, who hasn't thought that he might be shot'.  Whilst still trying to 
preserve some room for manoeuvre for writers, and laying down a foundation for his 'mistakes' to 
be understood as innocent and not indicative of political unreliability, he clearly accepts state 
i Large scale dam on the Dnieper river in the Ukraine. 
ii Old name for railway sleeping compartments. 
iii Russian emigr   writer in Paris awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1933. 
control; going further, he advocates it.  The date is perhaps significant. In 1932, the year of the 
book's publication, Stalin ordered all literary organisations swept away and replaced with a single 
organ, the Union of Soviet Writers. Writers needed to fit in, and Pilnyak was no exception. 
Shentalinsky cites quotations contrasting Pilnyak's stance in the 20s with writings from the early 
1930s which show his desperate attempts to fit in to the new reality: 
'The more gifted a writer is', he had written in the earlier decade, 'the more politically inept he 
fame of those who kick against the pricks.' By the thirties, he had joined those who praised the 
Party and courted Stalin's favour - 'He is truly a great man, a man of great determination, of great 
deeds and words'. In the 20s he had written about the need for compassion and the relationship 
between state and man thus- 'The courts should not and cannot be as strict as the judgement the 
individual passes on himself'. Shentalinsky points out that a decade later  Pilnyak 'demanded that 
enemies of the people be punished even before sentence had been passed and called upon people 
to destroy each individual who infringes our Constitution'. 282   
These later tortured words must have cost his soul much. Their hollowness seems perceptible even 
at three quarters of a century's remove. So far as the regime is concerned however, Pilnyak's 
changed public stance allowed him some reward. Gorky had defended Pilnyak in 1929 in print283 
and in 1934 his standing as a Soviet writer, an approved Fellow Traveller, was sufficiently 
recovered for him to be elected at the Congress to the management board of the Union of Writers 
itself.284  In addition he received a special mark of favour - one of the fourteen country houses, or 
dachas, built for the newly created Writers Colony in the village of Peredelkino, half an hour west 
of Moscow on the main Moscow to Kiev railway line.  It is a beautiful Russian landscape of gentle 
hills, pine forests and fields open to the sky. Considering the difficult living conditions in the city 
(where they were also allowed to retain accommodation) the fortunate recipients must have felt 
themselves anointed. Pilnyak became the next door neighbour of Pasternak - the gate between the 
two properties was apparently 'never closed'285 - and settled into a new life there, a daughter being 
born to him and his wife in the autumn of 1934. As for his private feelings, the public enthusiasm 
for a system he feared and despised which was forced on Pilnyak by both the regime and his own 
desire to maintain his position brought him only cynicism and a hollow despondency. Another 
writer and Fellow Traveller who spoke with him at the time said afterwards 'I have understood the 
emptiness of all who declare their loyalty to the Party.286  
Among the trees and quiet paths of Peredelkino, in a new family life, he began another novel in an 
uncertain time.  Gorky (who had in previous years spoke in his defence) had died in 1936 and on 
the 17th of May 1937 another attack on Pilynak had appeared in Pravda accusing him of 'counter-
revolutionary writing'.287 His end was drawing closer.  It was in front of  that garden where the gate 
to his neighbour 'was never closed', in the late afternoon of the 28th of October 1937,  that a car 
drew up during the birthday celebrations for Pilnyak's three year old daughter.288 A number of 
NKVD men in uniform got out. Quite apart from the official car in an empty lane they would have 
been immediately recognisable to him by his previous acquaintance with other wearers of the 
distinctive blue caps. After a search, which confiscated two caucasian silver daggers, a typewriter 
and the first draft of a novel,i an officer well known to Pilnyak and his family told him it would be 
necessary to take him to Moscow to deal with some unexplained matter and that he would be back 
in two hours. This was not true. As the car taking him to the Lubyanka jolted over the country 
roads, his house and family growing smaller behind him, he may have known  that in his heart. 
Perhaps he had hopes that his accommodation with the regime, his standing as a famous writer and 
his relationship with Yezhov would save him. If so, it did not, and he never returned.289  
THE LUBYANKA FILE ON BORIS PILNYAK 
Almost nothing was known of the subsequent fate of Boris Pilnyak until the closing months of the 
Soviet regime. A courageous member of the Writers Union, Vitaly  Alexandrovich Shentalinsky, 
approached the upper reaches of the Union bureaucracy with an unheard of request: openness. He 
met with obstruction at every turn but in the end prevailedii and the commission  he founded was 
soon inundated with material.  He writes about one old man who rode trains from Siberia to 
i Un-named and never recovered. 
ii See Shentalinsky pp 5-21 for details of the obstructions he faced from both the KGB and the Writers Union. 
Moscow and unable to afford or obtain lodging in the city spent the night on a railway station bench 
so he could hand in his prison diaries to the commission in the morning. He refused to trust 
anything to the postal system. Then he turned around and began the long journey back.  'Take them 
and print them' he said, as he handed over the notebooks. 'Now I really believe the time has 
come...' 290 
In 1989, when the Soviet Union had only two more years of existence, Shentalinsky began his 
examination of the files. This process took place at the place most feared by Russians. He wrote:  
'Each citizen of our vast country knew that the Lyubyanka was watching him. At any moment, it 
could take charge of his life and then there was no power that could defend him'.291 The KGB 
officer with whom he dealt observed on first meeting that Shentalinsky was probably the first writer 
who had come to the building of his own accord. 
Sitting in a room of the Lubyanka he began to  follow the files forms, certificates, press cuttings, 
records of interrogation, informers' reports and court proceedings which traced out the  fates of 
Babel, Pilnyak, Mandelstam and numbers of others, harrowing accounts that had lain silent for half 
a century. All the information on Boris Pilnyak from the moment of his arrest at a three year old's 
birthday party to his murder in an execution cellar was contained in the fading paper. 
In Pilnyak's case his own files both at the NKVD and at the Procurator's Office, as well as those on 
his two wivesi, contained copies of all the attacks that had been made on him in print since the 20s. 
In addition, actual minutes of meetings held at the Writers Union were also sewn into the file jacket. 
They show the horrific measures to which Pilnyak was subjected.   
One, a year before his arrest,  records a meeting of the editorial board of Novy Mir ii on the 1st of 
September 1936 and  the words, which cannot be judged less than evil, of Ivan Gronsky the Chief 
Editor. Pilnyak was recorded as present and had obviously tried to respond to the attacks. 
'Ivan Gronsky. (Chief Editor). You have retorted that you are distancing yourself from the enemies 
in your work. Which works? The Tale of the Unextinguished Moon, perhaps, or the Mahogany? 
i Olga Shcherbinovskaya and Kira Andronikashvili, both actresses, were arrested after Pilnyak and sent to the camps 
because of their connection to him. 
ii The premier Soviet 'thick journal' as they are called, in which new fiction appears.  
These works were written on the direct instructions of the Trotskyists. Whether you consciously or 
fearsome allegation given the similar charges made in the major show trial of 1936 involving 
Zinoviev, Kamenev and others. These proceedings had ended just the week before on the 23rd of 
August and involved the many defendants in accusations of having Trotskyite sympathies. Every 
defendant had received the death sentence, one crying out in the courtroom at its pronouncement 
Long live the cause of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin before being led away to execution.293  
Being accused of the very crimes for which those similarly accused had just been executed must 
have placed Pilnyak under extraordinary pressure. That burden was to increase during his time in 
custody. Putting extreme pressure, mental or physical, on arrested persons to implicate others was a 
characteristic of the investigative techniques used by the NKVD at the time.294  Unable to stand 
torture or threats of it often people broke down and gave any names the interrogators wished. A 
statement would be tidied up and signed and there would be little evidence of what had produced it. 
 The interrogation statement of a poet, Konstantin Bolshakov,i who knew Pilnyak and had been 
arrested shortly before him, implicated the writer as a counter-revolutionary. He recounted 
conversations with Pilnyak, his words showing the reality of the times. As Shentalinsky writes, 
'Before people were arrested they were driven to the brink of insanity and suicide by the all-
pervading fear and suspicion'.295  This state of torpid horror, in limbo between a tenuous present and 
fell inevitability, emerges in Bolshakov's words, almost all of which ring true amongst expressions 
which have the stamp of the NKVD. They are the sentences of a fatalist, a broken man: 
'Bolshakov:     Pilnyak dragged me back to his dacha. When we were alone 
together I started talking about the trial of the united Trotskyite-Zinovievite 
centre. [an expression much used by officialdom and which had featured 
prominently in the 1936 show trial]  Pilnyak said that Trotskyism had 
nothing to do with it. Anyone could be convicted of Trotskyism now. 
Anyone who did not think like the leading article of Pravda was already a 
Trotskyist. You and I are also Trotskyists, he said. Later he returned to this 
theme and began to say that all his friends were Trotskyists, not just because 
they had been in the Opposition but because they refused to conform.' 
Bolshakov then spoke about his own fears, the illness that had 'forced me to remain in bed for three 
months', and thereafter his hiding from people to avoid hearing of the constant rumours and arrests. 
i He was not a Congress delegate but wrote to it in the customary fulsome and congratulatory terms. See Congress 
Record p 628. His fate is ominously not recorded by the Writers Union records. Survival seems unlikely.  
He spoke of his 'own inevitable death', following which statement he returned to Pilnyak: 
'The arrests scared people and evoked a muted and furious anger. I thought 
to myself, infuriated, they are taking away the individual's right to doubt. 
Pilnyak asserted that they would come and arrest people again, that our 
arrest was also nearing and did not even conceal the fact that he feared arrest 
himself and that almost everybody else in Peredelkino was afraid of him. 
Rumours, each more fantastic than the last, were the only thing that 
mattered to us and nourished us. I reduced my circle of acquaintances to a 
minimum. There was some kind of monstrous nightmare in my head. I was 
afraid to have a drink in case my subconscious might surface when I had 
become drunk'- 
Interrogator: We have no interest in your emotional state.'296 
The file records statements from four other writersi arrested before Pilnyak, men, as Shentalinsky 
puts it 'already in the hands of the interrogators'. These statements asserted that he kept anti-Soviet 
company, had Trotskyite friends, was involved in terrorism and, in 1937 the accusation most deadly 
of all, that he was a spy.297 The torture carried out on these men, or the base promises probably        
made to them in return for false testimony, do not of course form part of the investigation record. It 
was characteristic of investigations that no actual proof of any alleged act was obtained, merely a 
matrix of denunciations by men frightened for themselves and their families.  Shentalinsky quotes 
an extract from an NKVD strategy meeting in 1935 addressed by Yakov Agranov, Deputy Peoples 
Commissar for Internal Affairs: 
'Our tactic for crushing the enemy was to confront all these scoundrels and 
set them against each other. It was a difficult task. It was essential to turn 
them against one another because all these traitors were closely bound 
together'. 298  
The first record of Pilnyak being interrogated is on the 2nd of November at the Lubyanka, five days 
after his arrest. His bare details are listed at the top of the form. Name, date of birth, nationality 
Volga German, not a Party member, Writer of fiction. His 'social group' is given, without intended 
irony, as 'free professional'. 
That very day Pilnyak wrote a typewritten letter to Yezhov, head of the NKVD and the man whose  
i Of the four writers implicating Pilnyak, two (Aroshev and Bolshakov) are listed as Congress delegates (pp 628, 678, 
680 of the Congress record. Of of the other two there is no trace. Aroshev was a veteran of the Revolution and 
commanded the Moscow garrison thereafter. His Writers Union entry reads: 'Arrested 1937. Shot. Rehabilitated in 
1956'. (See Congress Record Supplement p84). 
relationship with Pilnyak the latter thought would protect him.299 Shentalinsky's view is that the 
very fact he was afforded a typewriter immediately meant that an understanding involving 'co-
operation' between Pilnyak and his jailers had already been agreed upon.300 Judging by the first line 
of the letter, which sets the tone for the remainder, this may well have been so: 
'I ask myself whether the NKVD was right to arrest me and answer, they 
were right...'  
The reaction to interrogation varied from person to person. Some prisoners were tortured for 
months without their surrendering to the false allegations being made to them; others collapsed 
immediately due to the barbarity of the treatment. Still others, envisaging what lay ahead and 
hoping to avoid torture, came to an arrangement with the interrogators immediately. Shentalinsky 
observes that  former members of the Secret Police, practiced in every  nuance of torture 'often 
immediately demanded pen and paper when they themselves were arrested and unconditionally 
confessed to every crime...Sometimes they even wrote out the entire deposition for the 
investigators, inventing their imaginary dialogue...If I live today then maybe I shall survive to tell 
the truth tomorrow...'301  
Pilnyak's decision to co-operate, whether based on promises made to him or fear for his family, 
appears clear. His letter to Yezhov, which amounts to a script in which the main points have been 
given to him for elaboration, continues:  
 My life and my actions show that I was a counter-revolutionary, an enemy 
of the existing order and of the existing government. If this arrest will be 
only a lesson for me, i.e., if I remain alive, I shall consider this a wonderful 
dealings with the Trotskyites...I had dealings with all who shared my 
counter-revolutionary views...[ He then cites conversations with like minded 
persons who held counter-revolutionary views] I shall provide detailed 
testimony about the nature and dates of these conversations during the 
investigation...Because I do not wish to hide anything I must also mention 
espionage. Since my first trip to Japan in 1926 I have remained in contact 
with Professor Yonekawa, an officer on the General Staff and an intelligence 
agent. Through him I became a Japanese agent and carried out my 
espionage activities. Moreover, other Japanese came to visit me, and so did 
foreigners from other countries. I shall describe all of these things in detail 
during the investigation...302 
There appears to be no record of a reply from Yezhov, at least in writing. In this year, 1937, he was 
a busy man; conservative figures arrived at after exhaustive Western and Soviet research show 
arrests in that year and the year following of seven million persons. Of these, two million died 
during that period in the Gulag. A total of 8 million people were imprisoned in the camps by 1938. 
At the time of Pilnyak's letter to Yezhov NKVD executions alone (without taking into account the 
two million being worked to death in the camps over the same period) were running at an average 
of ten thousand people a week.303  
In the record of interrogation there is then a delay of a month. The file is silent as to any 
involvement by Yezhov. It may of course have been the case whereby Pilnyak was encouraged to 
write the letter to Yezhov in hope of a quick release from  a terrible place. Once written however, it 
was impossible to retract. On the 11th of December another interrogation takes place. In it Pilnyak is 
led through his early disenchantment with the Revolution and his participation in various literary 
groups unsympathetic to Soviet power. I began to struggle against the Soviet regime during the 
first years of the Revolution...' He implicates his long-time friend Zamyatin and others. Pilnyak then 
spoke about Trotsky, who, he said, had joint conversations with Pilnyak, Mayakovsky and 
Pasternak: 
 'Trotsky talked to us about internationalism in literature and said it made no 
difference to him where he made a Revolution, in Moscow or in Rome. 
Trotsky did everything to charm us'.'304  
Clearly this was a dangerous area for Pasternak, Pilnyak's next door neighbour. Informers' 
statements on the file implicate both he and Pilnyak further by alleging that ' In 1936 Pilnyak and 
Pasternak had several secret meetings with Andre Gide, who was visiting the USSR, during which 
they gave him tendentious information about the Soviet Union. There can be no doubt that Gide 
used this information in his booki against the USSR'.305  
The interrogators try to make him implicate other writers, especially Pasternak, further but he 
manages to defend his neighbour obliquely by saying the poet had became antagonistic to him when 
Pasternak joined the organisational committee of the Writers Union on its creation: 'I made all kinds 
i Return from the USSR published 1936. See Thesis pp 68, 69. 
of attacks on him and our relations even became difficult for this reason'.306  
Concerning his own relationship with the Union and his position as a writer he deals with the issue 
of why, as a leading Soviet Writer, at the Congress (and elected there to the main board of the Union 
of Writers) he did not speak. This was, he said 'as a consequence of my then particularly hostile 
attitude to the policies of the Party and its leadership, I boycotted the Writers Union and did not 
therefore speak at the Writers' Congress. The Congress struck me as a hypocritical bureaucratic 
venture and the addresses given by writers there, lying and double-dealing...' These words, which 
have the mark of authenticity upon them show the ambivalence of  Pilnyak's relationship with the 
Writers Union in that he appears to distance himself from the very organisation which appointed 
him to a position of standing and gave him a country house in the same year. It may be however that 
silence was a sensible policy at the Congress given the attacks upon him which were still taking 
place. In any event it seems likely, given his private conversations with trusted friends like 
Bolshakov and Serge, that he did in truth hold the whole literary edifice in contempt. 
He was questioned closely about Victor Serge (real name Victor Kabalchich) who was at that time 
in France and thus not directly under Soviet threat. He describes their conversations about the 
repressions, the Terror and the disaster that was collectivisation. These words are frank and, again, 
siege' ... ' This was not socialism since socialism implied an improvement in relations between 
people whereas we were being encouraged to act like savage beasts...' Pilnyak ended this segment 
with a declaration which itself alone would be fatal. As a result of our discussions, Serge and I 
reached the conclusion that we must let the Western public know what was happening in Russia'.307 
Stalin was particularly sensitive at this time towards foreign opinion. The Popular Front was a 
central plank in his foreign policy (at least until he began to court Hitler) and he tried to mould 
Western opinion through what was left of the Comintern, front organisations run by Willi 
Munzenburg and others in Paris, and writers such as Gide and Panait Istrati, an influential French-
Rumanian Fellow Traveller also based there. Gide's 'betrayal' had angered Stalin and Istratii's 
similar change of heart was to follow.  Istrati had come to the Soviet Union as a supporter and had 
been heralded all over the country as a future Western laureate for Stalin's new land. Pilnyak met 
him reluctantly, telling him ' You do not look at our country as you should but only through the eyes 
of official representatives. You accept too many congratulations and express your thanks too often. 
You have a false assessment of the situation here and if you write about it then it will be a sugary 
picture and not the truth...' Istrati apparently responded that he' would like to know the truth.'308   
Pilnyak and Serge told him what  Soviet reality was. Assisted by Serge, the results of his travels and 
searches for truth appeared in three volumes in Paris. The unflattering contents resulted in Istraati 
being described in the Soviet Encyclopedia of Literature as a 'most shameless renegade', and his 
writings as 'crude counter-revolutionary libels'.309 The interrogator pounces on Pilnyak: 
'Interrogator: So you were the main source for treacherous information 
against the Land of the Soviets? 
Pilnyak: Yes, I am guilty before the Soviet people for having tried to 
discredit the Soviet Union in the eyes of the Western Intelligentsia by 
passing on this treacherous information through Istrati...'310  
The interrogation record moves on.' We have information that you were preparing to commit a 
terrorist act. Confess'311 After this point Pilnyak in a mixture of truth and fantasy both implicates a 
number of other people and confesses, amongst other things, to being a Japanese spy, a would be 
assassin of Yezhov and a party to discussions about murdering Stalin. A particular friend of his, 
Artyom Vesyolyi (who was also a fellow delegate to the 1934 Congress) is specially mentioned by 
the interrogators. Vesyoly was another old Bolshevik who had taken part in the Revolution and the 
Civil War. He had  been arrested in Peredelkino on the same day as Pilnyak. In the interrogation 
record  the latter relates a conversation just prior to his arrest in which Vesyoly is described as being 
so angry and  distraught at the state of things in the country and in the Bolshevik party that he 
couldn't speak 'without a bottle of vodka.'  and saw a revolver as the only answer: 
[Pilnyak] 'Who would you go after?' 
[Vesyoly] 'Who do you think? Stalin, of course'.312  
These words are a death sentence for everyone implicated. Shentalinsky's investigations reveal that 
not only was Vesyoly arrested in Peredelkino on the same day as Pilnyak but that his interrogators 
were the same men. As Pilnyak wrote to Yezhov, so did Vesyoly, evidently with the same result. 
i Artur Vyesoly was a writer who had also fallen foul of the authorities for his independent stance. He was denounced  in 
the Press in 1929 as assisting 'class enemies'. (See Congress Record Supplement p 21) His Writers Union records 
show he was shot sometime in 1937. (Ibid) 
The first interrogation comes to an end with Pilnyak confirming that he had been a spy, handing 
over secret information to enemy agents  (apparently consisting of material about life in the Soviet 
Union, literature and literary groupings) as an agent among certain sections of the 
intelligentsia.313  
Four months passed, apparently, before he was interrogated formally again on the 26th of March 
1938. There is no record of what he said.  The renewed questioning proved to be little more than a 
re-ordering of the material covered on the first occasion. Shentalinsky states that the record shows a 
number of names, [unspecified by Shentalinsky ] being proposed by the NKVD which were 
incorporated into Pilnyak's statement as if by rote. Shentalinsky refers to the process as a 'tidying 
up'.314  He notices however that there is a major discrepancy within the file. The original statement, 
handwritten as was the requirement in the case of every prisoner interrogated, is missing. In its 
place is a typed copy, apparently signed by Pilnyak but with a signature in places so unlike his that 
it's authenticity is doubtful. It appears at the bottom of each page and only against some, 'but not 
all', of the answers. Shentalinsky concludes that only a handwriting expert could tell whether the 
signatures are genuine or were 'written in a very depressed state'.315 
Whilst Pilnyak waited those long four months much was happening outside the Lubyanka. What is 
generally considered to be the greatest show trial began, again in the House of the Unions, on the 
2nd of March. It involved three original friends of Lenin  old Bolsheviks and members of his 
Politburo  Bukharin, Rykov and Krestinsky, and a number of others, including Yagoda, former 
head of the Secret Police before Yezhov. Gorky's secretary (and Secret Police informant) 
Kriyuchkov was also in the dock, accused with Yagoda of murdering his former master. A number 
of defendants, including Bukharin, had been in NKVD hands for over a year since their arrest on 
the 27th of February, 1937. It may be wondered if, when he was marched through the hallways of 
the House of Unions to the dock, he remembered his address to the Congress on 'Poetry and Poetics' 
received with  loud applause only a few years before. If echo there was it must have been a bitter 
sound. 
Bukharin's 'trial' ended after ten days. On the 12th of March all defendants save three 'junior' 
accused were sentenced to death. Those three received long prison sentences but were later shot in 
prison in any event.  The machinery of the Party worked the country into a frenzy of hatred against 
the defendants which was manifest in newspapers, workplace resolutions and in all public fora. The 
Prosecutor Vyshinksky's words sum up the venomous fervour of the times: 
'...Shoot these rabid dogs...Down with that vulture Trotsky, from whose 
mouth a bloody venom drips, putrefying the great ideals of 
Marxism...Down with these abject animals...Let's put an end once and for 
all to these miserable hybrids of foxes and pigs, these stinking corpses Let's 
exterminate the mad dogs of capitalism, who want to tear to pieces the 
flower of our new Soviet nation Let's push the bestial hatred they bear our 
leaders back down their throats 316 
In this atmosphere, the Soviet reality in which all writers and ordinary citizens lived, Pilnyak was 
lost, his end near. His own 'trial', if such it may be called, came on before Ulrich, the military jurist 
who had presided over the proceedings in June of the preceeding year in which the Soviet Union's 
most senior military officers were condemned to death. His name crops up often during the Purges 
in important cases and perhaps his involvement with Pilnyak's trial indicates its significance to the 
regime.  
 The hearing began at 5.45 pm with a reading of the charges: of terrorism, spying for Japan and 
plotting the murder of Stalin and Yezhov.  The charge sheet was signed by Vyshinsky himself.  
There is of course no written record of any inducements, such as his own life or the well being of 
his family, which, it might be fair to think, must have been promised him verbally by the 
interrogators.  In any event whatever they had threatened or promised they had prepared him well: 
'Ulrich: Do you acknowledge your guilt?' 
'Pilnyak: Yes, entirely. I also fully confirm my deposition. During the 
interrogation I told the whole truth and I have nothing to add.'317  
He was allowed some final words: 
'I very much want to work. After being held in prison for so long I have 
become a different person and look on life with new eyes. I want to live, to 
work hard, I want to have paper in front of me on which I could write 
something of use to Soviet people...' 
The entire hearing took exactly fifteen minutes, from 5.45 to 6pm. He was sentenced to be shot 
immediately. A small faded slip of paper in the file records that a Lieutenant Shevelev carried out 
that sentence the following day.318 
Subsequent to the trial, as mentioned earlier, Pilnyaks widow and his first wife were sentenced to 
long periods in the Gulag. It is not clear what happened to his young daughter but if she was not 
cared for by relatives the normal practice was for children of  'enemies of the people' to be sent into 
a state orphanage where their past was erased. Pilnyak's books were declared illegal following his 
arrest, withdrawn from all institutions and destroyed.319 Any remaining in private hands were 
dangerous indeed to possess.   In Peredelkino another writer moved into Pilnyak's house. The writer 
was gone, a name in faint and illegible pencil, as if he had never existed. 
CONCLUSION 
In the end the Congress was an irrelevance to Russian Literature. The great names, Akhmatova, 
Mandelshtam, Tsvetaeva, Bulgakov, Babel, and Pasternak either did not attend or, treating Socialist 
Realism as an affliction, took refuge in silence. For those who did not survive, the Congress Record 
stands not as a milestone of Literature but as an unintended war memorial. 
There seems little left to say. The stark facts speak clearly and need little interpretation. Running 
through the lives of the persons considered in this thesis, the writers, the soldiers and the foreigners 
of the time, there is a common thread of ideals betrayed, of lives perverted. The voices of the 
Congress fade one after the other. Whatever the achievements of Soviet society in steel production 
or literacy the 'heroic prospects', to use Zhdanovs's words,  became tainted by the overriding aspects 
of 1930s Soviet reality - enslavement, dishonesty, death - all things that Socialist Realism itself 
helped to hide. The laudatory enthusiasm of the Congress lies in the same mass graves as many of 
the speakers. It takes some time to absorb that almost all the Soviet words of the Thirties seem 
tortured whether they come from the Congress Record, the Press or the interrogation files. All are 
poisoned by falsity, malice, brutality or forced surrender and in the shadow of Socialist Realism, 
fiction was without tongue. Literature, as Brodsky suggested, 'the only available tool for the 
cognition of phenomena whose size otherwise numbs your senses and eludes human grasp was 
neutered. It could not rebut, argue or speak truth, its subservience one of the greatest shames of  
Soviet rule. 
Words like 'countless' or 'untold' seem inadequate in the face of mass graves. Thus it is submitted 
that it may be permissible to see the life and death of Boris Pilnyak as embodying much of that lost 
Russia, his tortured words representative of a collective undeserved fate.  He stands at his window 
looking at the quiet lane, his daughter's birthday laughter behind him, and sees his own face white 
in the glass. A car has stopped and blue-capped men step out. He knows them. They stretch their 
legs in the October dusk. 
                                                                     Endnotes 
1  Figures averaged from those executed or who died in camps 1936-37. Total 3 million persons.  Conquest, Robert, 
The Great Terror.  London: Pimlico, 2008 p 485 
2  Bulgakov, Mikhail, The White Guard. London: Fontana, 1979 p7 
3  Clark, Katerina, The Soviet Novel, History as Ritual.  Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000 p 9 
4  Kish, Danilo, A Tomb for Boris Davidovich.  Dublin: Dalkey Archive Press, 2001 p xvii 
5  Philby, Kim. Address to the Chief Directorate of the Committee of State Security (KGB) Moscow 1977. Cited by his    
  wife, Ruffina Philby in The Private life of Kim Philby - The Moscow Years, Ruffina Philby with Hayden Peake and   
   Mikhail Lyubimov. London: St Ermin's Press, 1999 p 250 
6  Amis, Martin. Koba the Dread. London: Jonathan Cape, 2002 p 47 
7  Reid, Anna. Borderlands  A Journey through the History of the Ukraine. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1997   
   p 112 
8  Snyder, Timothy. Bloodlands. London: The Bodley Head, 2010 p 53 
9  Trilling, Leonard. The Liberal Imagination, New York: Doubleday, 1953 p 10 
10  Auden. W. H.  September 1, 1939, cited in W. H. Auden by Humphrey Carpenter. Oxford: OUP, p 273 
11  Merridale, Catherine. Night of Stone. Death and Memory in Russia. London: Granta, 2000, p14 
12    Arch Getty, J. and Naumov O. The Road to Terror, Stalin and the self-destruction of the Bolsheviks. Newhaven :    
  Yale University     Press, 1999, p 135 
13  Berton Kathleen, Moscow, An Architectural History. London: Cassel, Collier and MacMillan, 1977, p 194 
14  Conquest, Robert. The Great Terror. p xxvii 
15  Ginsberg, Evgenia. Into the Whirlwind. London: Collins Harvill, 1967, p 11 
16  Polonsky, Rachel, Molotov's Magic Lantern. London: Faber, 2011, p 60 
17  Trotsky's bulletin was distributed to his followers world-wide. 
18  Appelbaum, Anne. Gulag, A History. London: Penguin, 2003, p130-31 
19    Read, Anthony and Fisher, David. The Deadly Embrace. London: Michael Joseph, 1988, p 248 
20  Clark, Katerina. The Soviet Novel, History as Ritual. See note 3 
21  Ibid p 3 
22  Ibid p 3 
23  Ibid p 9 
24  Ibid p 10 
25  Ibid Appendix A pp 255-260 
26  Ibid p 10 
27  Tvardovsky, Alexander. Short Stories by Soviet Writers. Ed R. Dixon. Moscow: Progress Publishers, undated. 
28  Congress Record p 2 
29  Ibid pp 2-5 
30  H.G. Scott. Problems of Soviet Literature. London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1977 p 19 
31  Ibid p 21 
32  Ibid p 23 
33  Ibid p 23 
34  Ibid p 22 
35  Ibid p 22 
36  Mandelshtam, Nadyezhda. Hope against Hope. London: Collins Harvill, 1989 p 159 
37  Baedeker, Karl. Russia. 1914. London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd, 1979 reprint, p 274 
38  Soviet Writers First Congress 1934. Footage file 16 Dec 2010. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HJ4i3clp6Es    
  (accessed May 16th 2013) 
39  Nagel's Moscow and Leningrad. Geneva: Nagel Publishers, 1958, p 59 
40  Grey, Camilla. The Russian Experiment in Art. London: Thames and Hudson, 1986 (Enlarged addition by Marion   
  Burleigh-Motley) pp 167 and 226 
41  Scott, cover photograph 
42  Conquest, Robert. The Harvest of Sorrow. London: Hutchinson, 1986, p 3 
43  Maxim Gorky. See Appelbaum p 112 
44  Conquest, Robert. The Harvest of Sorrow, pp 299 - 307 
45  Conquest, The Great Terror, p 79 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HJ4i3clp6Es
46  Nikolai Bukharin and Karl Radek 
47  Satter, David. It Was a Long Time Ago and It Didn't Happen Anyway. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012, p   
48  Figes, Orlando. Natasha's Dance. A Cultural History of Russia. London: Penguin, 2003 p 477 
49  Appelbaum p 84 
50  Ibid p 81 
51  Tzouliades, Tim. The Forsaken. London: Little Brown, 2008 p 19  
52  Kelly, Catriona. Comrade Pavlik. London: Granta, 2006 p 149 
53  Mandelshtam, Nadyezhda. Hope against Hope.  pp 5-6. Osip Mandelshtam completed several versions of the poem.   
  his variant is the first version in the possession of the NKVD, or Peoples Committee for Internal Affairs, the secret           
  police. See also Figes, Natasha's Dance, p 484.  
54  Shentalinsky, Vitaly. Arrested Voices. New York: The Free Press, 1996 p 172 
55  Mandelshtam, Nadyezhda. Hope against Hope, p 40 
56  Congress Record, p 416 
57  Shentalinsky, p 189 
58  Ibid p 196 
59  Isaac Babel. Speech. Congress Record p 278 
60  Shentalinsky, p 68 
61  Mandelshtam, Nadyezhda p 321 
62  Shentalinsky, p 70 
63  Ibid, after p 150 
64  Yezhov, head of the NKVD, became surplus to Stalin's requirements in 1938. His name was on the same execution   
  list as Babel's and they were shot within days of one another. See Conquest, The Great Terror, p xix.  
65  Boris Pilnyak. Congress Record p 711 
66  Boris Pasternak and Pilnyak had a common garden gate. They were neighbours on the same lane in the village of   
  Peredelkino, half an hour east of Moscow by train. See Shentalinsky p 145 
67  Crick, Bernard. George Orwell, A Life. London: Penguin, 1980 pp 448, 450 
68  Shentalinsky p 88 
69  See Conquest, The Great Terror pp 306-07 and Shentalinsky, Arrested Voices p 25 
70  Conquest, Ibid p307 
71  Braun, Edward. Vsevolod Meyerhold, The Final Act. Essay in Enemies of the People, edited by Katherine Bliss.  
  Evanton, Ill: Eaton Northwestern University Press, 2002, p 156 
72  Golden, Oliver (with Yelena Khanga and Susan Jacobi) Soul to Soul, A Black Russian-American Family 1865-1992.  
  New York: Norton, 1992 p 90 
73  Tzouliades p 120 
74  Shentalinsky p222 and Satter pp 49-75 
75  Satter, p 57, citing Valentin Gordin, Kak Sobrat' Ubyiti Narod (How the killings were done); interview with    
  Alexander Milchakov in Yechernaya Moskva (Moscow Evening, a newspaper) 18th of February 1992 
76  Kemp- Welch Anthony, Stalin and the Literary Intelligentsia. London: MacMillan, 1991 p 209 
77  Pravda, 12/6/37 
78  Conquest, The Great Terror, p 288 
79  Pasternak, Boris, Doctor Zhivago. London: Vintage, 2002, p 449 
80  Shiraev, Valeri. 283 Shaga (283 steps -the length of the street) Novaya Gazeta (New Journal) Feb 21-27 2008 p 6    
  quoted in Satter p 4 
81  Kemp-Welsh p 214 
82  Congress Record p 1 
83  Conquest, The Great Terror, p 399 
84  Congress Record Supplement 1990 p 70 
85  Congress Record p 691 and Record Supplement 1990 p 70 
86  Kemp-Welch p212 
87    Literaturnaya Gazeta, (The Literary Gazette) 15th of June 1937 article entitled 'No life for Spies' 
88  Congress Record Supplement 1990 p 54 
89  Congress Record Appendix 5 p 697 
90  Ibid  
91  Ibid 
92  Ibid pp 697-708 
93  Ibid p 708 
94  Ibid  
95  Figes, Orlando. The Whisperers. London: Penguin, 2007 p 137 
96  Brendon, Piers. The Dark Valley, A Panorama of the 1930s,London: Jonathan Cape, 2000, p 208 
97  Figes, The Whisperers, p 98 
98  Ibid p 137 
99  Ibid p 137 
100  Ibid p 130 
101  Ibid p 130 
102  Ibid pp 133-34 
103  Ibid 
104  Vishnyevskaya, Galina. Soviet Writer. Quoted in The Great Terror by Conquest p ix. 
105  Shentalinsky p 20 
106  Orlando Figes, The Whisperers, p 124 
107  Ibid p 125 
108  Ibid p 125 
109  Ibid p 125 
110  Congress Record pp 178-79 
111  Ibid p 179 
112  Ibid p 681 
113  Ibid 
114  Kemp-Welch p 214 
115  Narochnitsky,A.L. Encyclopaedia of Moscow, Moscow: 'Soviet Publishers' 1980 p 245  
116  Levytsky, Borys. The Stalinist Terror of the Thirties. Stamford: Hoover Institution Press. 1974 Appendix A 
117  Conquest, The Great Terror, p 407 
118  Kemp-Welch p 226 
119  Conquest, The Great Terror p 485 
120  Ibid pp 484-489 
121  Ibid p 297 
122  Ibid p 297 
123  Ibid p 297 
124  Kemp-Welch p 225 
125  Literaturnaya Gazeta, 28th of December 1988, Moscow, quoted by Conquest, The Great Terror p 297 
126  Congress Record pp 74-111 
127  Ibid p 102 
128  Ibid p 103 
129  Literaturnaya Gazeta, 27th of March 1937 and Congress Supplement Record p 71 
130  Congress Record p 103 
131  Congress Supplement Record  p 67 
132  Ibid p 12 
133  Ibid p 69 
134  Congress Record pp 146-169. 
135  Ibid pp 170-187 
136  Congress Record Supplement p 16 
137  Ibid p 69 
138  Literaturnaya Gazeta, 10th of July 1937 
139  Congress Supplement Record p 56 
140  'Soon our bullets, Will be for our own nice clean generals'. French version quoted by Conquest, The Great Terror, p   
141  Congress Record p 186 
142  Personal experience 
143  Figes, Orlando. A People's Tragedy London Pimlico 1996 p 762 
144  Ibid p 760 
145  Ibid 
146  Rapoport,Vitaly and Alexeev, Yuri. High Treason, Essays on the History of the Red Army, Durham: Duke,1985 p   
147  Ibid pp 139-146 
148  Feuchtwanger, Leon. Moscow 1937. Left Book Club. Victor Gollanz. London 1937 p106 
149  Ibid p 112 
150  Ibid p 112 
151  Ibid p 110 
152  Congress Record pp 186-87 
153  Garrard,  pp 40,51 
154  Congress Record p 187 
155  Congress Record pp 185-6 
156  Pravda, 11th of June 1937 
157  Ibid 
158  Conquest, The Great Terror, p 183 
159  Pravda, 11th of June 1937 
160  Orlov Alexander. The Secret History of Stalin's Crimes. London: Jarrolds Publishers, 1954 p 239 et seq 
161  Conquest The Great Terror, pp 186-7 
162  Pravda, 12th of June 1937 
163  Rappaport and Alexeev p 8 
164   Ibid pp 5-11 
165  Conquest, The Great Terror, p 15 
166  Ibid p 203 
167  Ibid 
168  Ibid p 205 
169  Ibid  
170  Clark, Alan. Barbarossa. London: Cassell, 1965 p 34 
171  Ibid p 145 
172  Gide, Andre. Journals 1889-1949. Trans. Justin O'Brien. London: Penguin,1978 p 593 
173  Gide, Andre. Return from the USSR.  New York: A. Knopf Publishers, 1937 p 42 
174  Bullard, Reader. Inside Soviet Russia. Diaries. Oxford: Day Books, 2000 p 19 
175  Manning, Olivia. The Balkan Trilogy. London: Arrow Books, 2004 p 104 
176  Tzouliades p 134 
177  Feuchtwanger, p 16 
178  Buber-Neumann, Margarete. Under Two Dictators. London: Pimlico, 2008 p 10 
179  Riefenstalhl Reni, Triumph of the Will. Berlin 1934. DD Video 2001 
180  Caute, David, The Fellow Travellers. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1973 pp 1-4 
181  Congress Record p 286 
182  Ibid p 287 
183  Gide, Return from the USSR p xi 
184  Congress Record p 146 
185  Gide, Return from the USSR  
186  Gide, Journals p 549 
187  Gide, Return from the USSR p xiii 
188  Gide, ibid p 27 
189  Gide, ibid p 49 
190  Koch, Stephen. Stalin, Willi Muntzenberg and the Seduction of the Intellectuals. London: Harper Collins, 1994  p   
191  Tzouliades P 91 
192  Ibid 
193  Weissman, Susan. Victor Serge, The Course Is Set On Hope. London: Verso, 2001, p161 
194  Serge, Victor. Memoirs of a Revolutionary. New York: New York Review of Books, 2012 
195  Appelbaum p 129 
196  Ibid 
197  Shentalinsky pp 41 
198  Ibid p 69 
199  Ibid p 70 
200  Ibid p 60  
201  Conquest, The Great Terror pp 399-408 
202  Appelbaum p 129 
203  Baber-Neumann, p xii 
204  Ibid p 143 and  Conquest, The Great Terror, p 402 
205  Ibid p405 
206  Ibid 
207  Appelbaum, p 129 
208  Tzouliades, p 21 
209  Ibid p 16 
210  Ibid p 21 
211  Ibid pp 152-153 
212  Ibid p 104 citing Shentalinsky p 220 
213  Satter, p58 
214  Shentalinsky p 220 
215  Satter, p 66 
216  New Masses, November 1926 quoted by Tzouliades p 1 
217  Tzouliades p 5 citing George S. Counts and Nucia P. Lodge, New Russia's Primer: The Story of the Five Year Plan,   
  Boston: Houghton Mifflin 1931 pp 148-160 
218  Ibid p 6 
219  Ibid p 8 
220  Ibid 
221  Ibid pp 9-10 
222  Ibid p 133 
223  Ibid p 134 
224  Ibid 
225  Ibid p 135 
226  Ibid p 104 
227  Ibid 
228  Ibid p 268 
229  Ibid p 105 
230  Ibid 
231  Ibid p 316 
232  Sgovio's memoirs are entitled Dear America. Kenmore: NY. Partners Press, 1979 
233  Serge p 397 
234  Struve, Gleb. Russian Literature under Lenin and Stalin 1917-1953. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1971 
235  Caute p 54 
236  Feinstein, Elaine. Anna of all the Russias. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2005 p 138 
237  Lincoln, Bruce. Between Heaven and Hell. London: Viking, 1998 p 412 
238  Kemp-Welch p 214 
239  Serge, p 312 
240  Caute, p 2 
241  Figes, Natasha's dance p 435 
242  Clark, p 80 
243  Struve p 41 
244  Ibid p 42 
245  Ibid 
246  Ibid 
247  Ibid pp 227-228 
248  Conquest, The Great Terror p 299 
249  Ibid 
250  Cawthorne, Nige. The Crimes of Stalin. London: Arcturus Publishing, 2011 pp 102-103 
251  Congress Record Supplement p 61 
252  Ibid 
253  Conquest, The Great Terror, p 299 
254  Ibid 
255  Alliuevna, p 86 
256  Conquest, The Great Terror p 299 
257  Borland, H. Soviet Literary Theory and Practice during the first Five-year plan, 1928-1932, New York, 1950   
  quoted by Figes, Natasha's Dance p 471 
258  Shentalinsky p 139 
259  Congress Addendum Record p 61 and Struve, p 223 
260  Conquest p300 
261  Shentalinsky p 141 
262  Figes, Natasha's dance p 466  
263  Ibid p 470 
264  Ibid p 471 
265  Shentalinsky p 141 
266  Struve, p 226 
267  Bullard, p 19 
268  Kemp-Welch p 214 
269  Serge, p308 
270  Ibid 
271  Mandelshtam, Nadezhda,  p 113 
272  Weiss, Susan pp 161-162 
273  Serge, p 312 
274  Struve p 226 
275  Ibid 
276  Ibid 
277  Ibid 
278  Struve p 228. The novel, 'O-Kay' was in Struve's view 'a denunciation of of Capitalist America, one-sided and   
  biased.' 
279  Gerstein, Emma. Moscow Memoirs. London: Harvill Press, 2004, pp 187-188. (Originally published as Memoari,   
  (Memoirs) in Russian, Moscow, 1998). 
280  Ibid p 188 
281  Struve, p 227 quoting Pilnyak's Rocks and Roots, pp 57-58 
282  Shentalinsky p 142 
283  Congress Record Supplement p 61 
284  Congress Record Appendix VI p 709 
285  Shentalinsky p 142 
286  Ibid 
287  Conquest p 300 
288  Shentalinsky p 145 
289  Ibid 
290  Ibid p 16 
291  Ibid p 19 
292  Shentalinsky p 144 
293  Conquest p 104 
294  Ibid pp 124-127 
295  Shentalinsky p 143 
296  Ibid p 144 
297  Ibid p 145 
298  Ibid p 151 
299  Ibid p 146 
300  Ibid 
301  Ibid p 147 
302  Ibid 
303  Conquest, The Great Terror, p 484 et seq. 
304  Shentalinsky p 149 
305  Ibid 
306  Ibid p 151 
307  Ibid p 152 
308  Ibid pp 152,153 
309  Ibid p 153 
310  Ibid 
311  Ibid p 154 
312  Ibid 
313  Ibid p 155 
314  Ibid 
315  Ibid 
316  Cawthorne p 135 
317  Shentalinsky p 156 
318  Ibid p 157 
319  Ibid 
                                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1. Akhmatova, Anna. The Complete Poems of Anna Akhmatova. Edinburgh.  Canongate Books 
Ltd, 2000. 
2. Alliluyeva, Svetlana. 20 Letters to a Friend. Translated by Priscilla Johnson. London: World 
Books, 1967. 
3. Amis, Martin. Koba the Dread. London: Jonathan Cape, 2002. 
4. Applebaum, Anne. Gulag, A History. London: Penguin Books, 2003. 
5. Babel, Nathalie. Isaac Babel: The Lonely Years 1925-1939. New York: Noonday Press, 
1964. 
6. Beckett, Francis. Stalin's British Victims. Stroud: Sutton Publishing, 2004. 
7. Benn, Anna and Bartlett, Rosamund. Literary Russia, London: Papermac, 1997. 
8. Berberova, Nina. Moura, The Dangerous Life of the Baroness Budberg. Translated by 
Marian Schwartz, & Richard Sylvester. New York: New York Review Books, 1988. 
9. . The Italics Are Mine. London: Chatto & Windus, 1991. 
10. Berlin, Isaiah. Flourishing, Letters 1928-1946. London: Chatto & Windus, 2004. 
11. Berton, Kathleen. Moscow, An Architectural History. London: Studio Vista, 1977. 
12. Brodsky, Joseph. Less Than One, Selected Essays. London: Penguin Books, 1987. 
13. Buber-Neumann, Margarete. Under Two Dictators, Prisoner of Stalin and Hitler. Translated 
by Edward Fitzgerald. London: Pimlico, 2008. 
14. Bulgakov, Mikhail. Master and Margarita, London: Harvill Panther, 1996. 
15. Bullard, John, and Margaret Bullard. Inside Stalin's Russia, The Diaries of Reader Bullard 
1930-1934. Oxford: Day Books, 2000. 
16. Carpenter, Humphrey. W.H. Auden, Oxford: OUP, 1992 
17. Caute, David. The Fellow-Travellers. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson Limited, 1973. 
18. Cawthorne, Nigel. The Crimes of Stalin, The Murderous Career of the Red Tsar. London: 
Arcturus Publishing Ltd, 2011. 
19. Chamberlain, Lesley. The Philosophy Steamer, Lenin and the Exile of the Intelligentsia. 
London: Atlantic Books, 2007. 
20. Clark, Katerina. The Soviet Novel, History as Ritual. 3rd. Bloomington and Indianapolis: 
Indiana University Press, 2000. 
21. Clark, Alan. Barbarossa, London: Cassell, 2005. 
22. Conquest, Robert. The Great Terror, A Reassessment. London: Pimlico, 2008. 
23. E.H.Carr. Twilight of the Comintern, 1930-1935. New York: Pantheon Books, 1982. 
24. Ehrenburgh, Ilya. Truce: 1921-33. Translated by Tatania Shebunina. Vols. 3 of Men, Years-
Life. London: MacGibbon and Kee, 1963. 
25. Fang, David. Gorky's Tolstoy and Other Reminiscences. Edited by David Fang. Translated 
by David Fang. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2008. 
26. Feinstein, Elaine. Anna of all the Russias, The life of Anna Akhmatova. London: Weidenfeld 
& Nicolson, 2005. 
27. Figes, Orlando. A People's Tragedy, The Russian Revolution 1891-1924. London: Pimlico, 
1997. 
28. . A People's Tragedy, The Russian Revolution 1891-1924. London: Pimlico, 1996. 
29. . Natasha's Dance, A Cultural History of Russia. London: Penguin Books, 2003. 
30. . The Whisperers, Private Life in Stalin's Russia. London: Penguin Books, 2008. 
31. Freidin, Gregory. The Enigma of Isaac Babel, Biography, History, Context. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press, 2009. 
32. Garrard, John, and Garrard, Carol. Inside the Soviet Writers' Union. New York: The Free 
Press, 1990. 
33. Gerstein, Emma. Moscow Memoirs. London: The Harvill Press, 1998. 
34. Getty, J. Arch, and Oleg V. Naumov. The Road to Terror, Stalin and the Self-Destruction of 
the Bolsheviks, 1932-1939. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1999. 
35. Getty, J.Arch, and Roberta T. Manning. Stalinist Terror, New Perspectives. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1993. 
36. Gide, Andr. Journals 1889-1949. Edited by Justin O'Brien. Translated by Justin O'Brien. 
London: Penguin Books, 1978. 
37. . Return from the USSR. Translated by Dorothy Bussy. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1937. 
38. Ginzburg, Eugenia. Into the Whirlwind. Translated by Paul Stevenson and Manya Harari. 
London: Collins Harvill, 1989. 
39. Gladkov, Alexander. Meetings With Pasternak. Translated by Max Hayward. London: 
Collins and Harvill Press, 1977. 
40. Hingley, Ronald. The Russian Secret Police. London: Hutchinson & Co, 1970. 
41. Hitchens, Christopher. Unacknowledged Legislation, Writers in the Public Sphere. London: 
Verso, 2002. 
42. Ignatieff, Michael. Isaiah Berlin A Life. London: Chatto & Windus, 1998. 
43. Kelly, Catriona. Comrade Pavlik, The Rise and Fall of a Soviet Boy Hero. London: Granta 
Books, 2006. 
44. Kemp-Welsh, Anthony. Stalin and the Literary Intelligentsia: 1928-39. London: Macmillan 
Ltd, 1991. 
45. King, David. The Commissar Vanishes, The Falsification of Photographs and Art in Stalin's 
Russia. New York: Owl Books, 1997. 
46. Kish, Danilo. A Tomb for Boris Davidovitch. Dublin: Dalkey Archive Press, 2001. 
47. Koch, Stephen. Stalin, Willi Muntzenberg and the Seduction of the Intellectuals, London: 
Harper Collins, 1995. 
48. Koestler, Arthur. Darkness at Noon. Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1980. 
49. . The Invisible Writing, The Second Volume of an Autobiography 1932-40. London: 
Vintage, 1969. 
50. Levi, Peter. Boris Pasternak. London:MacMillan, 1991 
51. Levitsky,Boris. The Soviet Terror in the Thirties. Stamford:Hoover Institution Press, 1974 
52. Lincoln, W. Bruce. Between Heaven and Hell, The Story of a Thousand Years of Artistic Life 
in Russia. London: Viking, 1998. 
53. Mandelstam, Nadezhda. Hope Abandoned. Translated by Max Hayward. London: Collins 
Harvill, 1989. 
54. . Hope Against Hope. London: Collins Harvill, 1989. 
55. . Hope Against Hope. London: Penguin Books, 1983. 
56. Manning, Olivia. The Balkan Trilogy. London: Arrow Books, 2004 
57. McMeekin, Sean. The Red Millionaire, A Political Biography of Willi Mnzenberg, 
Moscow's Secret Propoganda Tsar in the West. New Haven and London: Yale University 
Press, 2003. 
58. Medvedev, Roy. All Stalin's Men. Translated by Harold Shukman. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 
1983. 
59. Merridale, Catherine. Night of Stone, Death and Memory in Russia. London: Granta Books, 
2000. 
60. Milne, Lesley. Mikhail Bulgakov, A Critical Biography . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1990. 
61. Montefiore, Simon Sebag. Stalin, The Court of the Red Tsar. London: Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson, 1988. 
62. Orlov, Alexander. The Secret History of Stalin's Crimes. London: Jarrolds Publishers Ltd, 
1954. 
63. Pasternak, Boris. Doctor Zhivago.London: Vintage,2002. 
64. Patenaude, Bertrand M. Stalin's Nemesis, The Exile and Murder of Leon Trotsky. London: 
Faber and Faber, 2009. 
65. Piers, Brendan. The Dark Valley, A Panorama of the 1930s. London: Jonathan Cape,2000. 
66. Pike, David. German Writers in Soviet Exile 1933-1945. Chapel Hill: The University of 
North Carolina Press, 1982. 
67. Pirozhkova, Antonina. Vospominaniye o Babele.(Memoirs of Babel) Moscow: Knizhnaya 
Palata Publishers, 1989. 
68. Polonsky, Rachel. Molotov's Magic Lantern, Uncovering Russia's Secret History. London: 
Faber and Faber, 2010. 
69. Pringle, Peter. The Murder of Nikolai Vavilov. London: JR Books, 2009. 
70. Rapoport, Vitaly, and Yuri Alexeev. High Treason, Essays on the History of the Red Army, 
1918-1938. Edited by Vladimir G. Treml. Translated by Bruce Adams. Durham: Duke 
University Press, 1985. 
71. Rayfield, Donald. Stalin and His Hangmen, The Tyrant and Those Who Killed For Him. 
New York: Randon House , 2004. 
72. Read, Anthony, and David Fisher. The Deadly Embrace, Hitler, Stalin and the Nazi-Soviet 
Pact 1939-1941. London: Michael Joseph, 1988. 
73. Reid, Anna. Borderland, A Journey Through the History of the Ukraine. London: 
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1997. 
74. Riefenstahl, Leni. Triumph of the Will. Berlin 1934, DD Video 
75. Robinson, Harlow. Russians in Hollywood, Hollywood's Russians, Biography of an Image. 
Hanover and London: University Press of New England, 2007. 
76. Rubenstein, Joshua. Tangled Loyalties, The Life and Times of Ilya Ehrenburg. London: I.B. 
Tauris Publishers, 1996. 
77. Satter, David. It Was a Long Time Ago, and It Never Happened Anyway, Russia and the 
Communist Past. New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2012. 
78. Scammell, Michael. Koestler, The Indispensable Intellectual. London: Faber and Faber, 
2009. 
79. Scott, H.G. Problems of Soviet Literature, London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1977. 
80. Shane, Alex. Evgeni Zamyatin, The Biography of a Heretic. Berkeley. University of 
California Press, 1968 
81. Shentalinsky, Vitaly. Arrested Voices, Resurrecting the Disappeared Writes of the Soviet 
Regime. New York: The Free Press, 1996. 
82. Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr. The Gulag Archipelago. London: Book Club Associates, 1974. 
83.          -  -, A Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, London: Penguin Modern Classics, 2000. 
84. Soviet Writers First Congress 1934. Footage File. 16 December 2010. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HJ4i3cIp6Es (accessed May 16, 2013). 
85. Struve, Gleb. Russian Literature under Lenin and Stalin 1917-1953. Norman: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1971. 
86. Taylor, S.J. Stalin's Apologist, Walter Duranty The New York Times's Man in Moscow. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1990. 
87. Troyat, Henri. Chekov. London: Macmillan, 1987. 
88. Tvardovsky, Alexander, Kontantin Paustovsky, Andrei Merkulov, Sergei Antonov, and Ilf 
and Petrov.   . Parallel Text. Edited by R. Dixon. Moscow: 
Progress Publishers, Undated. 
89. Tzouliadis, Tim. The Forsaken, From the Great Depression to the Gulags: Hope and 
Betrayal in Stalin's Russia. London: Little, Brown, 2008. 
90. Weissman, Susan. Victor Serge, The Course is Set on Hope. London: Verso, 2001. 
91. Zamyatin, Evgeny, We, London: Penguin Classics, 1993. 
92. Wilmers, Mary-Kay. The Eitingons, A Twentieth-Century Story. London: Faber and Faber, 
2009. 
93. , . . , . :  , 1980 
(Narochnitsky, A. L. Encyclopaedia of Moscow, Moscow, 'Soviet' Publishers, 1980). 
94. , . . ,  . T 2. : , 1986 
(Poliakov, Y.A., Moscow, The Illusrated History Volume 2. Moscow, Idea Publisher, 1986)). 
95. , . .      1934 . 
 .    1934 . : 
 , 1989 (Samoilova, M. I. The First All-Union Congress of Soviet 
Writers 1934. Stenographic Record. Reprint of the 1934 original. Moscow. Soviet Writer 
Publishers. 1989). 
96. , ..      1934 . 
 . . :  , 1990 
(Samoilova, M. I. The First All-Union Congress of Soviet Writers 1934. Stenographic 
Record. Supplement. Moscow. Soviet Writer Publishers. 1989). 
            PRESS: Pravda, Moscow.  
                          Literaturnaya Gazeta, Moscow.  
 THE EASTERN BOW                         
                                      And, gentle, do not care to know, 
                                      Where Poland draws her eastern bow, 
                                         What violence is done, 
                                      Nor ask what doubtful act allows 
                                      Our freedom in this English house, 
                                         Our picnics in the sun. 
                                                                      W. H. Auden 
                                                                            A Summer Night               
CHAPTER I 
Oprichniki 
Off Kropotkin Street, Moscow, 15th of  December 1937 
They came for him at midnight. Early.  Arrests usually happened in the small hours.  On the stairs 
leading to the landing he heard the slap of shoes mixed with the rasp of nailed boots on stone. A 
banging on the door. The hinges creaking as they always did.  Behind the cavity wall Andrei, dozing 
but not sleeping, sat bolt upright.   
Its not locked, Comrade he heard a voice say. Andrei recognised it - Kruchkov, the caretaker. He 
sounded incredulous. 
Evidently, a deep voice said.  The same voice said Go ahead Nikolai Salmanovich, but I think 
our pigeon has flown. 
The light came on.  One after another they entered the room. Andrei's view was through a peep hole 
behind a small ventilation grille. Between the lines of the grid he saw three men.  Two were in 
civilian clothes, one in uniform. From his sitting position inside the wall cavity Andrei could see the 
bodies but not the faces.  A pair of long leather coats; the other wore a uniform greatcoat. Andrei 
could see a revolver in his hand.  All their feet were wet with snow.   
I think we can lose the howitzer.  The same bass voice, tired. The officer put the pistol in his 
holster. Andrei heard the leather creak when it slid home. 
The man with the deep voice spoke again. His tone was contemptuous.  Get in here. You said he 
was at home. 
A shuffling of feet. Part of Kruchkov's stomach came into the left hand side of the grid. He was, 
Comrade Colonel, he said, sniffing.  He always sniffed between sentences.  Andrei heard the fear 
in his voice. I could swear to it. I saw him this evening.  How he could have got past me I...I really 
cannot say. Perhaps at seven, when I was asked to come to the Police Station. There are two other 
exits to the block but I locked them myself. My wife kept a watch when I was away. Kruchkovs 
voice was high and strained.   He sniffed again, quickly and rapidly at first, then tailed away.  I 
assure you, comrade Colonel, she kept a watch... 
Really. Two flat syllables.  
There was silence in the room. Only Kruchkovs nasal passages could be heard.  The officer half 
turned.  
Comrade Colonel, will we do a search now? 
A quick one. There wont be anything here. Im sure of that. His personal things are gone. Look at 
the empty drawers.  Whatever was here is gone. It's him I want.  For the moment, relax. 
 Andrei heard the scrape of a match. The tang of sulphur and makhorka filled the room. Andrei's 
nose twitched.  Someone liked old fashioned peasant tobacco. A wet Fedora was placed on the 
table, then another. 
I said relax. 
A blue officer's cap was placed beside the other two. Andrei recognised it, the special blue of the 
NKVD. Though he expected it, it jolted him. 
Nikolai Salmanovich, you take the bed spaces. Comrade Major, you look at the desk. I'll do the 
bookshelves. 
What exactly is to be looked for? said the officer. 
A long drag on a cigarette. Anything. 
Yes, Comrade. 
Sheets of paper. Manuscript. Addresses. Writing. Things like that.  Anything of use will have gone 
with him but you never know. 
In his hiding place Andrei silently covered the peep hole with a piece of painted wood prepared for 
that purpose. He secured it and sat, hands on knees, on the edge of the camp bed. Only he could 
hear the slamming of his heart. He could feel his fingers trembling, butterflies in the pitch black. He 
felt sick. 
Let's get on with it, the deep voice said. Andrei closed his eyes. 
The search took fifteen minutes; mattresses prodded, drawers opened, books examined. He could 
hear someone taking books at random from the shelf. Pages ruffled with a thumb. 
How old is he? a new voice said, not the deep one or the officer's. A high voice with a sharp edge. 
Twenty. Born in the year of the Revolution, the officer said.  Someone snorted.  Whats he a 
student of?  The officer again.  
 Law, the deep  voice answered.  The high voice laughed, then stopped. Then the officer's voice 
again. A lot closer. 
French and German, he said, foreign rubbish.  Andrei heard new fingers plucking at the 
bookshelves. His body drew back in the dark. Shall I take these as evidence? They must be 
counter-revolutionary. 
Certainly. Take them, the edgy voice replied, coming closer. What are the bastards doing with 
anti-soviet materials such as these? And they have nothing from our leader. They are guilty swine. 
Nothing but swine. French and German shit. He spat the last words out. A silence followed. Andrei 
could hear again the controlled ruffle of pages. 
Which books are the most counter-revolutionary would you say? said the bass voice, as if asking 
about the weather.  
Silence. 
I dont exactly know, Comrade Colonel. The high voice. 
Come. I'd value your opinion. Read the titles. 
Another silence. 
 I dont read French.  
Ah. No matter.  The German ones then. 
'Soviet power has no need of foreign -' 
So if, for example, this one here said 'The Collected Works of Lenin' lets say, for the French 
workers, or this one for  the Berlin proletariat, what would your reaction be? 
In the silence Andrei could hear the slow tapping of a finger on the bookcase. It cut through him. He 
winced and bit his lip.  No one spoke. 
You, Comrade Major? 
I dont either, Com-. 
The deep voice sounded bored. Yes.  Leave the books.  Nikolai Salmanovich, fill in the forms. 
You, he said in a different voice,  sign them. 
Of course, Comrade Colonel,  Kruchkov said. Id be hap 
Sign them.  When we have left get this door padlocked right away. Retain the key. Do not, if your 
life has any value to you, enter this room. Comrade Major, how many men have you outside the 
main entrance? 
We only brought two. 
We'll need more.  From the caretaker's lodge telephone the Factory. I want every man they have. 
Now. The entire night shift and if that's not enough get men in from home. Comrade Yezhov's 
authority. Clear? 
Clear. 
We're going. Seal the door. Bring your fellow downstairs up here, break the seal then put him 
inside. Seal it again behind him. He's to touch nothing but stay put, very quietly, until relieved. No-
one to have access to the room save myself and Comrade Nishikov. Anyone comes in, breaks the 
seal, your man is to arrest him. No shooting. Understood? 
Understood. the Major said. 
Comrade Colonel, I have no padlock. But I can get one in the morning. Kruchkovs voice had 
almost disappeared.  
Get one tonight. 
Yes Comrade. Kruchkov sniffed again. 
Well speak again. About tonight.  Nikolai Salmanovich, the seals. 
I have them.  Andrei heard a rustle of paper. What about the neighbours? If he hasn't got away 
earlier might one of them be sheltering him? 
The flare of another match. Again the stink of burning makhorka. Again the deep voice, weary. 
 That indeed is what I hope for. And we'll see if anyone is tempted to break the seals. But that is 
probably expecting too much, Nikolai Salmanovich. Listen.  Absolute silence. 
I can hear nothing. 
My point. A black maria arrives in the courtyard. Men ascend the stairs, bang on the door and 
search a flat. Lights. Noise. At arse-freezing midnight. And what can you hear? Not a sound. Cant 
you feel them breathing? Sitting up, staring at the wall, their little suitcases already packed. Waiting. 
For us to pick someone up. Someone else of course, not them. Then they will expect us to go. So 
well go. And theyll relax. Until we do a door-to-door and give them a little shock. Every single 
flat. So seal the door absolutely as normal and I would like very much to see if anyone breaks that 
seal in the next ten minutes. If you are so anxious please do wait for the guard. 
No. Of course. I see what you are doing. 
What additional action do you propose? The bass voice sounded silky. 
It's not my responsibility - 
No. It's mine. But of course I value your opinion. Would you say that anyone in these two hundred 
communal flats here may be giving him shelter? 
I think not, Comrade Colonel. 
I think not also. They know what would happen.  But we do not take chances. Even though he has  
slid out while this excuse for a caretaker was supposedly keeping watch. We are going to leave now 
as if we have found nothing. We are going to clump down those stares and gather at the caretaker's 
lodge. Then when we have enough men well be back. Like a dose of salts. Questions? 
There was complete silence in the room. Andrei felt his heart battering against his chest. 
Good. Let's go. I'm getting irritable.  Im also thirsty. And we still have work at the factory. How 
many were pulled in yesterday? 
Twelve. The officer's voice. 
Plus the scribblers and that idiot from the Ministry.  Much to do.  Pull the door closed. He's gone. 
The question is where to. 
Well find out. When we sweat the bastards. That I look forward to. The high voice.  
Miller heard their steps fading down the stairs.  He stretched his arms and fingers straight out to the 
side. His shoulders and legs were locked and his right leg would not stop trembling. Nausea rose to 
the back of his throat. Despite the cold, his clothes were wet with sweat. Had they gone or were 
they waiting at the bottom of the stairwell?  If so he was probably done for.  Kruchkov would be 
scurrying to make up for his earlier error and would be back as soon as he could with the padlock.  
Guards would be up to enter the room  in a few moments. Andrei's mind felt slow; mummified. He 
couldn't feel his feet.  He tried to concentrate but couldn't.  A cold sour fear rose in his stomach. In 
the paralysing dark he heard his father's words. Prepare, then get out. Get out. 
 His fingers moved blindly over his rucksack, checking the fastenings. In a rolled up sock in one 
pocket he felt the outline of his father's watch and held it quietly for a few seconds. Rising off the 
camp bed he eased back the panel giving access into the storage cupboard on the other landing and 
jammed his old fur hat on. He stepped out quickly, holding his rucksack and boots. Replacing the 
panel he covered it carefully with the pile of old tins, broken heating pipes and sacking, the normal 
contents of the cupboard. Shrugging on the rucksack he descended the staircase in stockinged feet, 
his boots tied round his neck. The cold from the stone seeped up his legs. It was pitch dark.  He 
moved down quietly and steadily, feeling each step. Fourth floor, third, second.  On the last flight he 
heard the guard begin to climb the other stairwell, a tired plodding scrape. 
At the bottom of the staircase he was sitting on the steps tying up his laces when a door opened 
slowly and a weak light spread over the walls.  A voice coughed. Andrei's face froze.  An old 
woman wearing a shawl and carrying the lit stub of a candle on a saucer stepped into the 
passageway. She peered at him. Swiftly she put out the candle with her fingertips but said nothing.  
Andrei fought to keep his voice quiet and gentle. Hello, Lyudmilla Sergeiyevna. Sorry to disturb 
you.  A widow, she had lived in one tiny cupboard of a room for years and when he was very 
young she used to shout at him for playing with a ball outside her window. His father always made 
a point of dropping off some small bit of food from the Military Commissary for her when he was 
in Moscow and Andrei used to bring her sticks for her small stove when he could find them. 
They faced each other in the dark. She continued to stare, then backed away from him into her 
room. Andrei kept quite still, looking towards the courtyard and feeling for his laces.  Moments 
later she shuffled out and fumbled for his hands. She put something covered with a cloth into them 
and closed his fingers around it.. He felt her hand rest on the top of his old fur hat. Then her fingers 
slowly tracing the sign of the cross on his forehead. He had stopped breathing.  Hands at her side 
she turned and slowly re-entered her room. The door closed quietly behind her.  
He got up, stuffed the bundle in his coat pocket and walked quietly through a small archway 
towards the back entrance of the block, his eyes moving constantly. The courtyard was silent, dark 
windows rising in tiers. No guard as yet.  A flashing thought that there might be one on the other 
side of the rear door stalled him. He listened, ear against the door. Nothing.  Holding his breath he 
turned the key. It stuck at first but then clicked over. It sounded loud; Andrei snapped his head 
around to scan the yard.  The door opened. He stepped through. No-one.  Andrei locked the door 
and  moved into  the shadow of an old factory building  by a torn down fence, his lungs going in 
and out, his breath freezing in the air. Go.  Now. Go quickly. 
 In the distance he could hear a lorry.  He had five or six hours to wait before people on early shifts 
began to appear on the streets. Keeping out of any light he moved around to the back of the factory 
to some derelict huts huddled against its walls. Keeping the huts between himself and the flats he 
walked swiftly away, head down, a worker heading to a late shift. Four streets later he hadn't seen a 
soul. He was tempted to keep walking but he remembered what his father had told him and made 
for an old church he knew with some abandoned outbuildings running off its courtyard. Here he slid 
down into the tight space between them where the snow was light. A brick wall running head-high 
screened him from view. He lay propped on his rucksack on an old pallet which had somehow 
escaped being taken for firewood, and waited. The cold had already started up his legs and he 
pulled the long skirts of his coat over them. Remembering the old woman's bundle, he pulled it 
from his coat and found bread smeared with salt and meat fat. He took two large bites and replaced 
it in his pocket. The taste of the bread somehow made him giddy. He didn't know why, then he had 
it.  He was out.  Without thinking he touched his forehead. The snow had stopped and it had become 
colder.  His heart had stopped thumping and now that he was still he could again feel the sweat 
turning cold under his coat. A plume of breath rose above his face. Looking up he could see the long 
thin bar of black sky between the buildings, filled with stars. 
Lying there he could think only of the night when his father had told him of the blue vase and 
Mendel. Just a week ago.  He wondered where his father was.  His mind raced over each sentence 
of their conversations, each word, tracking backwards and forwards as if repetition would bring 
understanding. Lying there, looking up at the line of stars between the eaves, his thoughts went back 
to the room. Whatever happened he knew he had seen it for the last time.  
A week ago he had been alone in the room in the evening, sitting at the table by the stove and 
staring out the window at the falling snow, when his father had come home unexpectedly from his 
regiment. He had put his hand on his sons shoulder and kissed him hard on each cheek, an unusual 
event. Taking his long officers greatcoat off, he hung it and his hat on the back of the door and sat 
down heavily at the table. A chipped green enamel lampshade hung down low over the surface from 
a flex in the ceiling.  It cast a weak angular beam downwards but left the rest of the room in 
shadow. In the evenings Andrei liked to sit here by the window and read by the single lamp, a book 
flat under the light.  
In that same light Miller looked at his father. It had been a month since they had seen each other. He 
seemed tired and suddenly old. Under the well-kept colonels uniform he seemed also to have 
shrunk, the collar looser than it had been and the belt taken in another notch. His father took the belt 
off and unbuttoned his tunic. He sat quite still. The light showed up the lines in his face, the heavy 
circles under the eyes and the cropped thinning hair. 
Tea, Papa? 
His father nodded but said nothing. Andrei got up to pump the primus stove  and put some water in 
the kettle. The small flame hissed under it, turning blue. Andrei got out the glasses and set them on 
the table. Then he sat down opposite his father. Neither said anything. Waiting for his father to 
speak, Andrei looked around him. 
The room was four metres by six. They were lucky to have it. It had its own entrance from the 
landing and with a sink and a primus they didnt have to share a kitchen. Most people outside the 
privileged elite had only a few square metres per person and lived in communal apartments, one 
room to a family. A room like this might easily have five people squeezed into it. The ceiling was 
high, sagging, with half the cornice missing.  One large window, divided into square panes, looked 
onto the onion dome cupolas of a church, now a storehouse, whose crosses were long gone.   A table 
and three odd chairs sat in the centre of the room surrounded by a stove, armchair and broken 
wardrobe.  At one end of the room a bed recess was cut into the wall.  Andrei usually slept on a 
folding cot.  The last piece of furniture was a tall bookcase, roughly made of heavy planking and 
other bits of wood hammered together and painted grey. It was nailed to the wall. On the bookcase 
were some odd volumes of Pushkin, and some books in French and German both in translation and 
in the original. Goethe, Victor Hugo, Balzac. His mother's books. 
 Beside these were a range of novels from Dostoevsky, Gogol, Turgenev and Tolstoy. There were a 
few books of  poetry; Stone and Egyptian Stamp by Mandelshtam had been there side by side 
with Pasternaks verses but his father had taken them wordlessly one night after the news of the  
poet's arrest and they had never re-appeared.  Only the Pasternak remained.  At the end of the short 
row, Versts, by Akhmatova stuck out slightly.  Another shelf was filled with books on architecture 
and topography. Volumes by Grabar on Russian buildings sat beside heavy bound books  on 
Russian and European buildings and other works on the history of Moscow and Leningrad.   
 Two silver photograph frames, the large assay marks showing the old Petersburg emblem of 
crossed anchors, stood on the middle shelf. One was a stiff group portrait of his mothers family 
taken in Paris around 1900 and the other was of his mother alone taken in 1914. The date and the 
photographers stamp was on the bottom right hand corner. Fischer & Son. Fontanka 14, Petrograd. 
The photograph showed an austere young woman in a plain white blouse with a severe black bow 
around the throat. She had a sensible face with a deep intelligence in the eyes.  A smaller 
photograph in a plain wooden frame showed the same face caught off guard, this time open and 
smiling, leaning back on a granite block with the Neva and the spire of the Peter and Paul fortress in 
the background.  
Andrei's father caught him looking round the room. He pointed to the kettle. When Andrei had 
made the tea his father stared at the rising steam. 
You love this place. 
Yes, of course...Youre back early Papa, Andrei said. 
Yes. said his father. He slid across the table a book wrapped in brown paper. 
Pushkin. One of the new editions. It's part of the frenzy. Seventeen million volumes this year they 
tell me. 
Seventeen. 
Yes. He's in favour. Pravda says he's 'semi-divine'. All of a sudden. I wonder what it means. His 
voice sounded low. Maybe to take our minds away from what they're writing now. Drink your tea, 
Andryoshka, we must go for a walk. It is a fine evening. 
Miller looked out at the snow swirling beyond the window, then back to his father. The colonel 
closed his eyes and slowly shook his head. He raised a forefinger to his lips. 
They talked of the weather. How it was very cold now, even for Moscow. When they had finished 
the tea his father rose and fastened his tunic. He didnt put on his belt but only shrugged himself 
into the greatcoat. Andrei pulled on an old jacket and a long dark coat, a soldier's coat dyed black, 
from the pocket of which he drew out a scarf and workmans cap. 
Fits you well that coat said his father, Im glad I kept it. He put his hat on and motioning to 
Andrei to lock the door, began to descend the steps. The flat was on the top floor. Five flights led 
down to the street. Below him Andrei could see his father descending the circular stairs, following 
the curved handrail slowly down. His body moved in a tired way from side to side.  Andrei locked 
the door and went down the stairs after him. 
In the courtyard the snow was falling, quite thickly now, but there were still people passing under 
the great arch leading to the boulevard. Each figure seemed weighed down with their own thoughts. 
His father turned up his collar. 
I doubt they have any listening devices upstairs. But you never know. Its good not to talk in rooms 
if you have an alternative. Something to remember. Their eyes locked briefly and they began to 
cross the courtyard. 
Good Evening, Comrade Colonel. It was Kruchkov, coming out from the shadow of the arch. 
Good Evening, Vasily Dimitrovich, said his father. Ever on duty. 
Of course, Comrade Colonel, Kruchkov said. We must always be on guard. Our motherland is 
surrounded by enemies. Eternal vigilance is what we must keep. We are all soldiers in these times.  
In Pravda today there is news of the trials of more of them. He pointed to newspapers pinned on 
wooden boards attached to the wall. In the dim light under the archway black headlines stood out. 
'Death to Spies. Those who betray the Motherland-Shoot them like dogs. Unmask the 
Trotskyite conspirators.' 
Colonel Miller glanced at the papers but said nothing, nodding to himself.  
The caretaker grew more agitated. His hands balled into small white fists.  Enemies of the people. 
Saboteurs, spies, wreckers. They all confessed. Shooting is not enough for these swine. If it were 
How would you do it, Comrade? You have a different approach? 
Me? He hesitated. Approach? His voice tailed off, then recovered. Im not sure what you 
mean, Comrade Colonel. I would leave that in the hands of the proper authorities.  The state organs 
who protect us night and day from- 
I thought you were saying something else.  That the organs of state have made the wrong decision 
as to how to execute enemies of the people. That you have a different view? 
The man stared.  No. No.  A figure of speechOf course not. Never. The organs stand between us 
and and  
Enemies of the people said the Colonel. 
Exactly. Exactly.  That is what I was saying. Exactly what ... 
A peaceful night to you, Comrade. 
Father and son passed through the arch, turned left onto the main road and left again into a side 
street. 
Andryoshka. You must listen. I have just done what you must never do. Spite vermin. I'm getting 
to be an older fool than I thought. 
He's foul. 
Not the point, as well you know. A snake he is, agreed, but not stupid.  And so you have my 
apologies. I should have not provoked him. He is devious and a survivor. Speaks of military 
sacrifice. A friend warned me of him. During the war and the civil war his service was limited to the 
main sorting office in Petrograd. Supposedly directing mail. Opening it certainly. Probably stole 
half of it. 
Andrei looked at his father.  
And of course he was an informer. Then and now. A willing one. They aren't all, willing. The 
older man shook his head gently.  It is time we talked, he said in a quiet voice. Andrei said 
nothing.  
That's good,  his father murmured, placing his hand for a moment on his sons arm, then putting it 
back deep in his pocket. Silence is good.  Remember, spontaneity is dangerous, Andryoska. Guard 
against it and allow the snakes their hour. That way yours may come also. 
What do you mean? Andrei said. His father made a gesture with his head. They turned and 
walked on in silence, under falling snow. 
I am an old Bolshevik, but I am weak. 
What do youwhats that mean, Papa? 
Im not sure. 
They walked on. Moscow was dark around them. Few lights showed and most of the street lamps 
were out.  On the pavement the snow creaked under their feet. There was no wind now and the 
snowflakes were falling straight down. Occasionally someone passed them on the other side of the 
street, a well wrapped bundle passing silently by. They took side streets, two dark blurs in 
occasional lamplight. Stopping in a doorway under a lop-sided sheet of iron holding up a pillow of 
snow   Andrei's father lit a cigarette.  The door was boarded up and a single sheet of typing was 
nailed to the wood, the paper stained with brown rust marks. It could no longer be read. 
 The older man spoke at last, in a forced cheerful voice. And how goes the law? 
Okay. Next years the last, and I look forward to that. 
His father turned to look directly at him. Their faces were a foot apart. 
 Thats  how you must think. Look forward. Do not forget that. Come on.  He turned again and 
began to walk. Andrei fell into step beside him. 
Andryoshka, listen carefully. Youre going to be upset so prepare yourself for it. 
Andrei looked over at his father, who stared straight ahead. 
I've failed. 
What? 
I've failed. You, your mama, the country. Failed all of you. In various ways. His voice trailed 
away. 
I dont understand. 
Listen. 
 You're an officer of the Red Army. Mama died ten years ago. I shall be a lawyer. What more- 
His father raised a hand slightly. At the corner where the lane met Old Stable Street the Colonel 
stopped.  Above them in the darkness a large placard ten metres by fifteen covered the gable end of 
an apartment building. A familiar portrait of the Leader filled the rectangle. The huge moustachioed 
face looked out over the street through the falling white curtain. Colonel Miller looked up. 
He smiled.You know, I first kissed a girl in that building. I was younger than you are now. She was 
rather beautiful. And kind. Karolina Perelman. Wonderful red hair. Her fathers grocery shop was 
just here. He pointed to an empty shop front. One window was broken and boarded up. The other 
showed rows of empty shelves. The sign above the door said 'Moscow Food Trust'. Some faded 
illegible lettering was just visible behind it. 
Andrei stared. He had never heard his father speak in this way. 
On the top floor landing. See it? The window in the centre with the light. Oh yes. I had a life too, 
once. Of course this was long before I met your mother. I was only sixteen. It was before the war. 
He looked up again, Under the other Tsar. 
Andrei couldn't stop his head swivelling round and his mouth opening. 
I know. I know. But I know also who Im speaking to. Honestly, maybe, for the first time. Come 
on. Lets walk. Time is not something we have much of now. 
They moved on down Old Stable Street.  The snow was falling less thickly now. Babushkas, 
wadded and wrapped against the cold had their heads down and were scouring the pavement with 
long brooms of birch twigs, their long skirts swinging. A militiaman stood shivering on the corner. 
He saluted and Colonel Miller flicked the edge of his cap. 
Out of earshot of the militiaman, Andreis father began to speak. 
Let me go on for a bit. When Ive finished you can ask any questions you wish. I dont say I will 
answer but you can ask. Agreed? Andrei nodded. Im back early because they tell me I am to be 
promoted. Not such a good thing as you might think. A driver is coming for me tomorrow and 
then... back to Leningrad. A place is reserved for me on the night train. Everything is arranged, they 
tell me. Andrei's father pursed his lips. I believe them. 
You love Leningrad 
Indeed I do. I met your mother there. And together with its many other attributes it has the 
distinction of being the city of your birth. Miller smiled briefly. But it may not be such  a happy 
trip this time I think. 
Andrei said nothing. Confusion showed on his face. 
I think they plan to arrest me at some stage. No, dont. Otherwise my heart may go also. Please. 
Just get a hold of yourself a little. I know its a shock. Look at the last few months. It's not just the 
General Staff they've butchered. Half the officers above field rank have been taken away. Many 
good men. They have not returned. Many are being shot. Every day. The army is being destroyed. 
We know it. 
Its mad. For what? 
For what? is a good but irrelevant question.  'Za shto?' is indeed what they shout before they get a 
bullet. So we hear. In the back of the neck, they say. But no reason is necessary for the NKVD. 
Another thing to remember. Colonel Miller sighed. They will wait till next week.  It is important I 
get back to Leningrad. I have something to do there. They know that. They will give me some rope. 
It wont happen until then. And, don't worry.  It's all planned. I'll disappear. They won't be taking 
What do you mean .? 
There is a plan. And a plan's first requirement is that it should survive a sally of the enemy. Yet 
another thing to remember. How many things to remember does that make? Anyway.  First you 
must listen carefully. Agreed? 
If you say it. 
Good. If you listen and do as I say well both meet up outside the slaughter house this country has 
become.  I realise that is hard for you to hear.  I want to talk about your life. Your future. At least I 
can give you that. Andrei's father stopped speaking for a short while, then began again. Its lost. 
The Revolution. We have lost it. For your generation. We've allowed a beast to rule us. This beast 
needs blood. And he'll murder anyone. Our leader, our Vozhd, - he feeds on us. And the sorrowful 
thing is we've let him. 
Papa 
No. Listen. An old Bolshevik speaks. I've seen two wars now, the big one and the civil, and two 
revolutions. And there's another war coming. Maybe I wont live to see it. Along with many others. 
The beast has murdered almost all the good ones, thousands of them, but still hes not satisfied. He's 
ruining the lives of millions. Still it goes on. He's jumping around in our blood and there is still no 
end to it.  Arrests, denunciations. Camps in the wilderness with millions being worked to an early 
death. I've seen the documents about these places.  And I saw the famines in the Ukraine. He made 
it so.  Ten year old living skeletons lying in ditches eating grass. And looking at me as if I could 
help them. It was the opposite. I took part in grain requisition.  Held a pistol to an old farmers head. 
I will not speak of it. It was another time'. He paused, his face still.  'Though I will be judged. 
Andrei felt he could say nothing; he stared at his father, who cleared his throat and spoke again. 
And people disappear off the street every day. We're no longer surprised. We just look down and 
pretend it did not happen. People. Just. Disappear. As if they never existed. Tortured.  Tortured in a 
Socialist country. Shot. In their hundreds of thousands. For what? A madmans smile. His bloated 
approval. Our shame is that well never know how many. Miller made a sour face. For this the 
Revolution was fought. 
Andrei said nothing. His body had broken out in sweat. He looked at his father in the dark.  
And if I am taken, they'll come for you. You know their rules. Any relative is taken also. We dont 
speak of it but you know it. But they wont get either of us. Andrei's father turned to grasp his arm. 
Both men stopped.  You are not for them. Remember that when things are hard.  You are not for 
them. 
Papa 
Not yet. Not yet. You must listen. You're to leave Russia. 
Leave Russia?  
Yes. I also.  It's fortunate we have no relatives. Very fortunate.  No argument. I will join you on the 
other side of the hill. 
Where's that-? 
The other side. I cannot say where. And I dont know where you are going either. That way I can't 
tell the Oprichniki. We'll meet on the other side. 
What  'Oprichniki'? 
Them. Who else? In our regiment, amongst friends of course, we call them that. The Chekhists, the 
NKVD. What else to call them? Just like in Ivan the Terribles time. His thugs. They used to wear 
dogs head and broom badges, didnt they? Loyalty and the clean sweeping broom.  Just a new Ivan, 
thats all. 
Both men were silent. 
What I dont know I can't tell, Andryoshka. That is why I am telling you little and why I dont 
know where you are going. But you are going. Otherwise it will be the end. And soon. I'm on a list. 
And so will you be. So it's time. Listen. 
They began walking again. The face of Stalin above them, unblinking, stared out over the street. 
They passed an old palace behind railings, the space between its pillars filling up with snow.  
When the time comes you must go across the river. To Zamoskvoreche, to  Pyatnitskaya, the old 
Church. You know it. Where we used to go. 
The one built over the gate. 
That one. The Zachachievsky. Where I took you when you were young.  Its now a small shoe 
repair place. A co-operative. Of sorts.  Through the gate is a workshop. I'll tell you what to say. 
It sounds crazy- 
A friend is there. His name, so far as we're concerned anyway, is Mendel. A name to be silent 
about and to guard. Go to him. He is to be trusted. He will look after you and get you away. 
How can I leave you? What does this mean? 
It means there's a chance for life. And its not a sure chance but it's the only chance. And you're not 
leaving me. We'll meet on the far side of the hill, as I told you. Where exactly I dont know just yet. 
Here are some more things to surprise you. Back at the room there's a cavity behind the wall. You're 
moving in there. Close your jaw. It looks odd hanging open like that. 
A what? 
I know. A little melodramatic, but its just insurance. When we return I'll show you. It's entered 
from the other landing and was a storage cupboard once. Long forgotten. And filthy. Now it's half a 
storage cupboard. And still filthy.  But you enter it from the other staircase. Thats the thing. When 
you were at the young peoples camp with Roman this last summer and Vasily was away, I rebuilt it. 
It's small but it'll take a man lying down. I've tried it. The thing is we cant afford to keep your 
things anywhere else or involve anyone else. In the end, you must just disappear. Tonight I'll show 
you how to get in there from the other landing and leave no traces. You must pack your rucksack 
with what you need. Andrei's father made  movements with his hands, as if he were stuffing a sack. 
 A change of clothing, the photographs. A book to keep your spirits up.  Food.  Socks.  But travel 
light.  Keep the rucksack in the cavity. I've left money on a shelf. There's a small eye hole I'll show 
you and a false ventilation grill which will stand examination from the other side but it'll let you 
hear whats said if they come. That may be important. Be ready to go always. Sleep in there. For a 
toilet you must use the normal communal one but in one of the other staircases.  Pace yourself. For 
peeing Ive put in a petrol container with a tight cap. 
Disappear. Disappear? What do I say to Roman? 
Nothing. At all. I know it'll be hard. He's a fine chap and you've known him all your life. But 
nothing can be said to him, for his own sake. They're almost certain to  question him and it's better 
if he genuinely doesn't understand any of it.  Even his  hurt will help us. Later, we'll get word to him 
you are safe. When it's not dangerous to him or his mother. Andryoshka, dont look at me like that. I 
know what he means to you. That's the reason I am saying it must be done this way. Please. For his 
sake. His father looked away and spoke in a tired voice. For everyones in fact. 
What about Kruchkov? He watches always too. 
He does, the slug. Here. Dont ask. 
Without breaking step his father handed Andrei two keys. They're for the back entrances which he 
keeps locked. He doesn't know about these of course. They'll let you in and out of the far block if 
you're careful. You use the other staircases and landings, not ours. Remember to move on the streets 
when other people are using them. Not in the middle of the night. If you find yourself in that 
position, hide till the people are out for the early shift. Then lose yourself in them. Get to Mendel. 
We can communicate through him. I'll be in Leningrad and making my own preparations. We'll 
meet on the other side, never fear.  You must carry on as normal for the next week or so. The 
Oprichniki will expect me to be away and for your life at the university to continue. Let them. You 
wait. Every day as you leave your classes at four go out through the main gate. You must look 
without fail at the first floor window over the barbers shop. You know it? 
Yes, of course. 
Good. Everything must go along as normal. Thats important. Say it to yourself a hundred times. 
Were you  suddenly to disappear before time they would be alerted and everything would go 
wrong. 
Whats everything? How would anyone know I've disappeared? I don't understand. 
Ignorance in this case is bliss. They'll know because they'll be watching. At the moment they 
aren't. But each day check that window. If there's nothing but curtains in the window go home as 
normal but sleep in the cavity just in case. If there's a blue vase there may be danger. Be especially 
ready. They usually come somewhere between three and five in the morning. They'll search but not 
rip apart the flat there and then so you'll be safe. Leave quietly by the other landing and the back 
door and go to Mendel. Do you follow? 
I think so. 
Dont worry. Well go over everything again, in more detail, later.  Also- listen carefully. If there's 
a red vase, dont go home- go to Mendel right away. Try to avoid being followed. I'll speak to you 
later about how to do that. If all else fails and you feel yourself to be in danger or that the Chekhists 
are following you go to the Sandunovsky baths first. There's an attendant who hands out the towels. 
He's got a hare lip. Quite bad.  He'll watch for you. And guide you away. It's a busy place with 
many exits and you can leave un-noticed. Then to Mendel. Take a roundabout route. Well discuss 
this more later. Understood? 
Yes. Blue-cavity, trouble coming but act normal.  Red to Mendel right away.  Sandonuvsky 
otherwise. 
Good. Mendel knows what you look like. I've shown him a photo. For the bath fellow I'll give you 
a Pushkin quote which he'll complete.  At the Zachachievsky church- the shoe repair place- you tell 
whoever's there you've got two old pairs of boots you need remaking into one pair. He'll ask if they 
are brown or black. Youll answer unfortunately one of each. 
How will I know anyone? 
You wont. That again is best. As I said you may trust Mendel. We're both trusting him with our 
lives but that trust is well placed. Follow what he says exactly. To the letter. 
I cant believe this, Papa 
Nor me. But its real. Well go back now. On the way Ill go over everything again. About identity 
documents, movements, the ways of the Lubyanka people You'll need to learn quickly. How to tell 
if you're being followed. How to be careful.  Dont speak of anything in the flat. I dont think it's 
wired but it's good to get into the habit of silence in buildings.  I'll give you half of a torn postcard. 
Its simple but it works. Anyone producing the other half is a friend.  
Colonel Miller stopped under a light and turned. Andrei thought he looked very old. 
Well? Are you all right? his father said. 
Honestly? Im afraid. And for you, why don't we go now if it's so necess- 
We can't. Just accept that. And being afraid is good. It'll make you careful. We're all afraid now. Its 
our world. One we've created, God help us. Odd that we still say such things. We expect him to help 
but don't believe he exists. But now we've a sort of hope. That's something you must never 
underestimate. I know you wont. Hope is all. Let's go back. 
They turned and began to walk back towards Kropotkin Street. At an intersection Colonel Miller 
stopped and turned towards the centre of the city. Andrei followed his eyes and they stood there for 
some minutes without speaking. Between the buildings they could see searchlights in the distance 
and the dim outlines of the Kremlin spires towards the north east  In the tenement buildings on 
either side of them a few brownish lights showed in some of the high windows; most were dark. 
Two men were walking by in silence on the other side of the street. A woman stood in a doorway at 
the far end, a bag in her hand, staring into space. A family, all holding a roll of old carpet, straggled 
along the frozen pavement, walking carefully.  Andrei and his father moved for them, receiving a 
quiet word of thanks. When they had passed Andrei and his father started walking again.  
Somewhere a child was crying. 
                                                            CHAPTER II 
 Old Stable Street, Moscow. 15th of December 1937. 1.30 am.  
A man sits writing  in a small room high up in an old building.  He is about forty, thin, with a small 
sharp face. A long pale forelock hangs down limp and straight and this, together with a pair of round 
steel rimmed glasses perched on the end of his nose, gives him the air of a younger man, almost of a 
schoolboy.  An oil lamp and half a candle sitting inside a tin lid light up the cramped cubicle of 
plywood walls. A single iron bed, an upturned packing case beside it piled with books, and the table 
at which he sits, fill the room. Standing with arms outstretched he can touch both walls. Above his 
head, the light fades to a Piranesi shadow. Where the wooden partitions chop into the tall plaster 
walls, a short line of massive cornice hangs suspended in dark air. 
 The street outside is silent. A lorry engine sounds sometimes from the Arbat a hundred metres 
away. Weak light comes in from a gap at the bottom of curtains made up of an army blanket sewn 
with an uneven cross- stitch to a piece of ripped damask. The only sound is the soft stabbing hiss of 
the pencil moving over the paper, its point jabbing in the circle of lamplight. The man writes 
quickly, pausing between groups of words. From time to time he looks up, his face puckered with 
thought, then his head drops into the light and his hand moves again.  
A door opens in the corridor. The mans head rises and he stops writing. His ears strain to hear and 
he cannot stop himself glancing towards his own door, his neck extended. The large bolt, lock and 
wedge under the door look solid but he knows the structure is in truth flimsy and a determined boot 
would have the wood in splinters. Nonetheless, standing outside himself he marvels at the illusion 
of the door, noting both its strength and its falsity, and storing them somewhere in the recesses of 
his mind. 
He looks quickly at a scarred watch on the table. Only its hour hand remains. Half past one. Its 
Torpovsky coming back after his shift at the tram depot. As on every evening he enters the 
communal kitchen, boils water for tea and drinks a cup before taking one to his wife. The writer 
listens and his head sags back into his shoulders when he hears a kettle being filled and the distant 
musical clink of a spoon in a glass. 
Placing his pencil flat on the table he stares at the exercise book. He knows the words filling its 
pages mean his death. The smallest of sighs escapes him. He moves the chair back and stands, 
rubbing at his lower back. His face is taut.  A pinched nerve troubles him in winter. He pulls the 
curtain back. It's still snowing.  
Beside the bed a half empty vodka bottle stands on the packing case. Making no noise the man fills 
a glass and sips at it by the window, grateful for its roughness.. The panes of glass are clear and 
beyond them the snow falls silently. He feels the whole city breathing in shallow, imperceptible, 
draughts of air. In his mind millions of lungs fill every building, street and square. They rise and fall 
as one, but uncertainly, waiting and listening just below the surface of sleep. He thinks always in 
images and earlier tonight he saw from behind the curtains one of the Crows, a single black police 
van moving slowly down the street, a torch beam lingering on house numbers. It passed his building 
and moved on but all night he thought of the black vans crossing and re-crossing Moscow, carrying 
lost faces, stricken and dry-throated in the jolting dark. 
 Loneliness hits him in the chest like a spear. He watches himself, the two small circles of his 
glasses flashing in the window pane. He thinks about what it would be like not to be alive any more, 
not to feel the burn of vodka in his throat nor walk the empty winter embankments of the Moskva 
river. No more towers half- hidden in falling snow; no gold leaves in Autumn on the boulevards; no 
fierce gleaming cupolas on a white-hot Russian summer day. He pours more vodka, the rattling 
chink of bottle on glass making him clutch them together quickly to still the sound.    In a few hours 
the pavements below will be covered in people hurrying along, heads down but still alive. One day, 
he knows, he wont be amongst them; the whole swirling world will go on and he wont be there. 
He cannot quite believe it. 
And yet he does. One night, he knows, hell hear a sound at the end of the corridor, then low voices 
and swift confident footsteps in the hall. 
                                                       CHAPTER III 
Sitting on the snow between the walls, propped up by his rucksack, Andrei took a 
small drink of vodka from his father's flask and felt the warmth spread through him. 
He was tempted to take another but put the flask away. He thought over his life in the 
last  week and it still made no sense. He had begun to think it was some sort of 
mistake and his father would come through the door with a  laugh and an explanation.  
He had had a sense, no more, of not being alone on the streets and he knew Vasily 
clocked him in and out of the building. At first he had sat by the window as usual in 
the evenings and read Pushkin again, the  book flat in the circle of light on the table, 
woodcuts for each chapter showing old St Petersburg; moonbeams on a bridge over 
the Moika, black footsteps in the snow, pillared shadows in the Winter Palace Square. 
The block, run by the Literary Fund was quiet, large and honeycombed with different 
stairs and passages, some cut out of older buildings connected to the main block. The 
tenants were mostly writers. How his father  ever got the place was a mystery never 
explained to him. 
 The building had been blighted over the last two years by arrests and the 
disappearance of writers and their families. People who used to speak to neighbours 
now kept to themselves. On the streets people were wary of something they would not 
name.  Staring out the window he could not bring himself to believe he would no 
longer be able to walk into the room, see the familiar photographs and books, and sit 
with some tea in his fathers chair by the stove. He had been granted the privilege 
when he turned fourteen. In that room, the world seemed a safe place. Only the cavity 
disturbed his thought, like a tooth ache. Each night he had taken took some rubbish 
down to the courtyard to place in the communal bins and made his way  back up to 
the top floor by other staircases, noting the layout as he went. When it was quiet he 
would slip into the cavity and lie silent in the dark. With familiarity came sleep.  
The main university lecture of the week, usually followed by a discussion, had been 
about the 1936 Soviet constitution, the one the papers called the Stalin constitution.  
The lecturer, normally quite a cheerful old man, a lively speaker given to the odd 
aside, spoke in a robotic trance throughout the morning, his face drawn. The ends of 
his fingers fluttered at the edge of the lectern. Unusually, he was wearing a coloured 
enamel badge of some sort in his lapel and a few of the students remarked on his 
nerves and  best suit. He looked like a reluctant groom.  Andrei noticed another man, 
middle-aged and silent, sitting at the back of the auditorium. He kept his hat on. The 
students nudged one another, looking over their shoulders.  He sat there throughout 
the lecture, his expression one of mild boredom. Towards the end the lecturer began to 
look increasingly like a rabbit caught in bright light. Finishing, he gabbled together a 
few words on the subject for the next day, which no-one made out, and scuttled off the 
podium, notes clutched to his chest.  The class broke up early. Some of the students 
felt deprived of the opportunity to insert polished phrases into the discussion. Most 
had prepared quotes from Stalin, some in case they were required to speak, others in 
any event. According to disposition all felt release or disappointment at the 
unexpected turn of events. 
The next day a new lecturer appeared. Professor Rembovsky proved to be a very 
boring speaker.  He delivered the lecture in an unbroken monotone, reading from his 
notes and looking up only occasionally. Andrei counted six mentions of Stalin in the 
first quarter hour. At the lunch break he went into the basement canteen where he had 
arranged to meet Roman. He had known Roman Brodsky from childhood. They had 
gone to the same primary school on Kropotkin Street and had stayed together through 
secondary school and the Pioneers youth group. Andrei had enjoyed the camping and 
walking. His friend had not, his chubby body averse to all physical strain. Roman was 
studying languages and  literature. 
Comrade What news from the Rialto? Roman said, on seeing him, his palms 
outstretched. He was always grinning. His large head was crowned with thick black 
hair. He looked around quickly to make sure they were alone. 
From the Rialto, not much Andrei replied, also looking around. Our new lecturer 
bores to Olympian standard. 
What happened to the other one? 
Gone. 
Each looked at the other. 
Ech, Roman said, speaking quietly.  He paused.  He wasn't so bad that old one, 
was he. 
He wasn't. Dont think about it. Nothing can be done. 
No. Brodskys voice sounded lost. I suppose not. His mouth turned downwards. 
He muttered something. Silence fell on them both. 
 Whats on today? Andrei prodded his friend in the stomach, trying to cheer him up. 
Brodsky brightened. 
There's a choice of roast pheasant or buckwheat noodles. 
Really? 
No. 
Then I think the noodles. 
A wise choice. Game can be so disappointing in December, I find.  Et comme vin? 
In the event the Bordeaux is not yet ready for drinking I shall have tea. 
Again, wisdom personified. The red, especially the 29, will be presumptuous and 
confused for a year or two yet. 
Can Bordeaux be confused? 
Language. Its beauty is its plasticity. A concept lost on you pedants of the law. 
Balls. 
Ever the mot juste. 
Andrei smiled, Brodsky also. He had won. Directness is not a virtue always, 
Andryoshka. They picked up discoloured plates and joined the line of students. Each 
again fell silent. 
 They found a table.Come on. Andrei said, Why were you so cheerful anyway?  
They threw grey salt on mounds of brown noodles. Roman prodded his without 
enthusiasm but lifted his head with the beginnings of a smile. 
Because the fair Larissa Nikolaevna bestowed her warm radiance on me this 
morning. After I had astounded the study group with a new and  flawless 
interpretation of  The Cherry Orchard from a socialist perspective. 
Which is? 
No cherries. 
Andrei spluttered a short laugh and paused. Tell me you didnt. 
Almost. Actually I may have said there would have been lots of cherries if only 
Chekhov had seen the future and harnessed his talent to the Five Year Plan. Dying 
young he was of course deprived of the opportunity. 
Andrei barked out another laugh and looked around the room. No-one was paying any 
attention. Roman chewed and grinned at the same time. He lifted his fork like a 
trident. 
Clever. Andrei said, Could you elaborate? 
I could but I won't. Be grateful. 
I am. But was Larissa Nikolevna? 
Sadly, with my body and furry pate, no. Not to mention the glasses, the thickness of  
whose lenses repels passion like bubonic plague. These things I know. Not to 
mention, also, the J word. 
Thats two not to mentions. I thought we had agreed you would normally restrict 
yourself to one. 
I pour out the fears of my noble and tender heart and you quibble on the number of 
not- to- mentions.  
Sorry. 
I needs must find comfort in language if nowhere else. Henceforth icy- hearted 
maidens and lamp-lit casements shall feature prominently. 
Ill get the tea. 
They walked under the portico, between the peeling stuccoed  pillars  and  down the 
steps to  the courtyard. Roman lived with his mother in a single room in a lane off  the 
Petrovka and did not have far to go. He had on his head an old schapka of leprous 
beaver skin and wore a frayed overcoat which reached almost to his ankles. One cuff 
had been repaired and was a different colour than the other.  Over one shoulder he 
carried a canvas bag of books.  An arm of his glasses was bound with black string. 
The heavy thick lenses kept slipping down his nose and he had to push them back up 
every so often. They stood by the gates, outside the flow of students. 
Damn these. Ive tried to get them fixed but I cant find anyone who knows what 
they are doing.  He forced his glasses higher. 
Have your valet do it. 
Normally I would but he is of course detained at my estate dealing with the harvest. I 
say that with all necessary hauteur. 
The harvest. In December. 
Its a large estate. 
They walked slowly through the crowd. 
Lots of cherries? 
Roman beamed. You see. Linguistically you are improving already. At the club 
tonight you shall shine. With my modest assistance of course. 
Modest? 
I speak figuratively. What time? 
 Half past seven. Outside the Metropole. Everyone is meeting there. We can watch 
the swells going in to dinner. 
Roman raised an arm like an orator before a crowd. You do not speak surely of our 
socialist betters? 
Andreis eyes flicked left and right. Roman. Be careful. For Gods sake. Keep your 
voice down. One day someone will be listening. 
I only speak to you.  And Mama. He plucked again at his glasses. I must go. Via 
Tverskaya.   She asked me to try for some bread at Yesiliev's on the way home. The 
artisanal baguette, I fancy. 
Not Tverskaya. Gorky Street now.  And Gastronom Number 1. State Grocery Shop 
Number 1. As you know well. Repeat and remember. Yesiliev's no more.  Jesus. You 
sound like a White Guard aristo. Andrei looked around again. Be careful. 
Brodsky pushed the glasses up the bridge of his nose. Behind the lenses his eyes 
blinked happily.  
As you wish. A White Guard aristo who speaks Yiddish. Good image. He paused 
for breath.  But no dawdling.  I must go to prepare myself. Rare ointments. Balm. 
Essence of Myrhh. Larissa Nikolaevna awaits. 
They stopped.  Brodsky was looking for something in his bag. He looked up. 
Andryoshka. Whats the matter? 
 A large blue vase stood in the window above the barber shop.  
Andrei felt both  hot and cold. He only just stopped himself looking around. Instead, 
he looked at his friend. His brain seemed no longer to work. He stared at Roman's 
surprised face for a good while. Then touched his shoulder. 
See you tonight. He turned and walked quickly away. Behind him Roman's mouth 
opened and shut, causing his glasses to fall down his nose. By the time he had 
recovered himself and thought of shouting, Andrei was across the road beyond the 
tram line and into the crowd. Roman stood, blinking. Eventually he turned away, his 
shoulders drooping. Feet splashing through dark slush, his big head down, he walked 
slowly towards Gorky Street. 
Andrei stepped down from the tram.  Two men got off behind him; one crossed to the 
other side of the street and  walked away towards the river, the other went to stand at 
the corner. A woman with a child went into the block. Following his fathers 
instructions Andrei was careful not to look around but instead went to look in the 
window of the bakers at the plaster models of loaves, then joined the queue. Bread 
had been off the ration for three years now but there was never enough.  He could see 
no-one looking odd or out of place. What, he thought, in these circumstances, was 
odd? He really had no idea.  Feeling as if every nerve in his body was trembling he 
bought half a black loaf and headed towards the flat. The man at the corner was gone.   
Andrei Eduardovich, how goes the studies?  Kruchkov, emerging from his 
caretaker's apartment under the archway. His grin was greasy. 
Fine, thank you Vasily  Dimitrovich. Sometimes boring, but thats the law for you. 
Kruchkov picked yellow teeth. Boring? Can it be? Our revolutionary  law surely 
cannot be that. I just wish I had your opportunities. Some of us had to bear arms when 
young. 
Really. Didn't they clutter up the Post Office? 
Kruchkov started as if hed been slapped. He sniffed twice. Youll find it does not 
pay to cheek your elders. I dont think that day is far off either. 
He waddled stiffly back towards his apartment entrance. A glazed window had been 
inserted into the stone wall beside his door. Behind, it was normally dark but though 
he could not be seen everyone in the block knew he kept a constant watch at all hours. 
He must like the new politics, the voting stuff, the  babushkas used to say in the 
courtyard, laughing so you could see the grey gums,  for who has more ayes than 
Vasily?  
Andrei walked past him to his own staircase, cursing himself. Kruchkov stood at his 
door his arms folded. The caretaker watched until Andrei had passed under the portal, 
then went inside. 
Climbing the stairs Andreis heart felt as if it would burst. He felt sick and frightened. 
Entering the room he switched on only a small side light and slumped down into his 
fathers chair. Fear seeped through him, a sticky coldness. It gripped his bowels. He 
tried to remember his fathers words. 
Andryoshka. Dont be afraid. The blue vase means take care, not disaster. Don't alert 
them. They prefer order. Habit.  They'll come at their usual time in the early hours, 
that day or in the next few days following. Don't run. They will be watching and 
Kruchkov certainly will be as well. But prepare. Be in the hiding place early just in 
case.  You won't be caught. You'll be behind the wall. Then you can slip away quietly 
down the back stairs. Prepare. Then go. 
On the last night they had taken a glass of vodka in the darkened room, the first time 
Andrei had ever drank with his father.  Moonlight shone through the window and the 
snow lay in smooth white blankets on the rooftops below and in rounded curves on 
the cupolas. They had sat with a single candle then gone to bed silently. In the 
morning his father had embraced him once, hard, then walked out the door. Andrei 
had cried, then sat by the window, trembling. After an hour he got up and pulled out 
his rucksack from the bottom of the wardrobe. In it  he found a small silver vodka 
flask,full, and his fathers watch and chain. 
In the gap between the buildings it was growing colder. He had gone over everything 
again and again in his mind but it still made no sense. After two hours behind the 
brick wall he thought he would freeze to death. He knew he had to move. He 
drummed his legs quietly on the pallet and lifted his arms up and down. Stiff, he rose 
and began to walk back and forth in the little alleyway. It was a long four hours., his 
feet treading the snow flat in endless pacing. Ten forward, ten back.  Faces crowded 
into his mind; his father's, stiff and tight, Roman's blank expression as he left him and 
the unlucky old lecturer who had ended up on a list. Kruchkov's sallow  face too kept 
swimming back into his mind. Maybe his failure to keep a good watch would go 
badly for him. Andrei, surprised, felt a smile coming. 
Eventually he heard traffic on the street. He squinted out from the gap. A fair few 
people were on the move. The cold had pierced him and he couldnt control the rapid 
clicking of his teeth. He beat his arms against his chest. Moving along the shadow of 
the huts he waited, then stepped out boldly onto the pavement. Without looking 
around he strode off turning onto the main boulevard.  Trams ran early round the 
Garden Ring Boulevard circling Moscow.  They'd be busy with people.  He'd fight for 
a seat then rumble around the city.  Blood began to return to his limbs. At the next 
corner he pulled the watch from his pocket and opened the silver case under a street 
lamp. On the reverse of the lid there was an engraving of Peter the Great, mounted, 
the Bronze Horseman of St Petersburg, and his fathers initials. An inscription said the 
watch came from the atelier of Paul Bourier, by appointment to the Court of His 
Imperial Majesty.  And what happened to him, Andrei said to himself, snapping the lid 
shut. His father's face again came into his mind and with it a sudden black depression, 
heavy and bleak. He looked around, feeling lost. Some people had gathered at the 
tram stop, wrapped against the cold, shuffling and coughing. A few more lights were 
on in the tenements.  Then heads came up and he heard clanking; a tram was rolling 
towards them.  Somehow the sight cheered him, the wobbling metallic screech and 
the overhead sparks sputtering orange in the early morning dark.  It was a quarter past 
six. He moved to join the waiting passengers.  Mendel, he said to himself.  
CHAPTER IV 
The Writers' Colony, Peredelkino  
15th of December 1937 
Fadayev caught a late morning train into Moscow from Peredelkino on a brilliant 
winter day. It was cold and clear and the air smelled of pine woods. Walking down the 
road to the station, slithering every few yards over the hard packed snow, he looked 
over the white fields towards Pasternaks house. There was no sign of movement but a  
thin column of wood smoke rose from it, a pencil line into a china blue sky.  A further 
ten minutes walk brought him to the long wooden railway platform, uncovered and 
bare with a small log shelter at one end. To keep warm while he waited, he marched 
up and down, arms flapping round his thick body. He was short and overweight, 
almost a comical figure in a long expensive black coat and large fur hat.  Behind him, 
on the hill above the cemetery scattered  birch trees stood bare and bright, silver grey 
against the snow. 
 He waited.  The train arrived late, rumbling along the platform and coming to a halt. 
In the corner of the empty carriage one old woman sat beside a ripped sack of dirty 
vegetables. The train itself was grimy, inside and out. It set him down at the stucco 
palace of the  Kiev station just before noon. 
Before leaving his dacha  he had wrapped himself in several layers against the cold. 
Standing at the tram stop he looked around at all of Russia standing impassive on the 
pavement.  Patched coats, shawls wrapped tightly around peasant faces, bundles tied 
into grey sausages, red snub noses. Old men and solemn children.  Old women giving 
unwanted advice to strangers about their babies. Mothers staring straight ahead. 
Fadayev ignored them all. There was a variety of headgear, from old cloth, ratty with 
age and use, to more wearable  schapkas of plain sheepskin and cheap fur, mostly ex-
army issue. Fadayevs was made of mink, deep brown and lustrous. It gleamed in the 
When the tram came he found himself  jammed up against an old man with a hat 
jammed on the back of his head, who was eating a raw onion. Fadayev closed his eyes 
for the whole journey. It wasn't the only smell. In the carriage there was  the sour, 
heavy odour of people who worked hard and had few opportunities for daily bathing. 
And soap was hard to come by. Some passengers carried sacks from the country, 
bringing food into Moscow to sell privately. On the left, as it was called. The tram 
smelled like a farmyard. Fadayev  was glad to get off the train at Red Presnaya and 
into the street. In the fresh air all of Moscow seemed newly minted. Moving slowly, 
he made his way past the scarred tenements of  Barricade Street to the open spaces of 
the Garden Ring Boulevard.  He stopped short at the western end of  Vorovsky Street, 
looking at the Writers Union Club.  
It never failed to cheer him. The stone gateway, the circular drive up to the main 
building. Behind the forecourt the old mansion sat quietly, its neo-classical central 
block and two wings  painted in soft yellow and white. It seemed to him as if it had 
come straight from a Palladian sketch book. No, not Palladio, Fadeyev thought, but 
perhaps one of his students, via Minsk. Not bad, he said to himself, I might use that. If 
he looked at the building through half closed eyes it had the look of a villa on the 
outskirts of a small Tuscan town, half way up a hill. Wine and summer laughter 
among the trees. Sun blinding on the terrace.  Fadayev stopped in the driveway and 
took it all in. The house was supposed to have been used by Tolstoy as the Rostovs 
city residence in War and Peace. He could never forget that, loved the thought of it.  
There were no crinolines or carriages in the courtyard this afternoon, just three official 
cars and their chauffeurs off to one side, smoking in the crystalline air.  Fadayev 
walked towards the main entrance, his good mood momentarily clouded.  It took him 
a few moments to identify why.  When he passed under the portico it came to him but 
he shook it away with a short movement of the head.  He realised he had let his guard 
down, had allowed his mind to wander to an Italy he would never see. 
Inside, the doorkeeper, an old man, hair combed over a balding head and thin 
cadaverous face, stiffly inclined his head. 
Ivan Konstantinovich. How pleasant to see you again may I say. He gestured to a 
young boy standing by and spoke in a different tone. Take Comrade Fadayevs coat 
and hat. 
Good day, Josef. How are things? Fadayev said, handing them over and smoothing 
his hair. 
Not too bad, thank you, the old man said.  Your table is ready now. I have your 
official post and some private letters which have come.  Do you wish to go in 
immediately or wait till the time you reserved? 
Ill wait in the reading room for a bit. Give me a table at two. A glass of something in 
the meantime I think. 
Of course. Ill have it sent in. 
Fadayev took his letters and some recent editions of the Literary Gazette and settled 
himself in an armchair by the window of the reading room. A servant brought vodka. 
A large glass of it sat on a table beside him in the sunlight. The room was quiet and 
empty. On the far wall a clock ticked almost silently. In the gazette he turned up the 
letters column and there he was. A sharp denunciation of two writers of little account. 
Backsliders. Individualists. Signed by himself and three others from the Union. It had 
been given a prominent position.  Looking around, Fadayev could not suppress a 
small contented sigh.  
Later, he began lunch with a large bowl of hot borscht and meat dumplings. It had the 
sour but savoury taste he loved.  Then he ordered a beef goulash with noodles. At his 
elbow was a jug of water and a carafe of dark Georgian wine. From time to time he 
nodded to an acquaintance across the dining room. It was busy.  People tried to catch 
his eye. Some he acknowledged. Waiters moved between the tables, laying and 
clearing cutlery and dishes, eddying to and from the kitchen in a constant white-
jacketed stream. The room was austere in itself, high ceilinged and painted cream 
with dark brown wood panelling to head height. Polished brass chandeliers remained 
unlit but here and there table lamps were turned on against the winter afternoon. The 
weather had changed and beyond the windows, a low grey sky promised snow. Inside 
the room all was warm and comfortable, the lamps glowing parchment yellow above 
white starched tablecloths. 
In the middle  of his meal the head waiter approached Fadayev, his face signalling 
apology. Out of the corner of his eye he noted the wine carafe. It was almost empty. 
Im most sorry Ivan Konstantinovich, to interrupt. Really I would not- 
Dont worry Kiril, Fadayev said, waving his hand and raising a starched napkin to 
his lips, What is it? By the way, another carafe. 
Of course. Immediately. He hesitated. Comrade Bloch... 
Bloch? Fadayev frowned and lifted his upper lip a fraction.Bloch? 
Yes.  He has asked to see you. I have explained you are dining but he insists its a 
matter of the greatest importance and begs the favour of seeing you for five minutes. 
He says it wont take longer. 
It had better not. 
He is outside. 
Fadayev concentrated for a moment. Bloch was a minor hack of no importance and a 
fussy manner who wrote poor articles  to order  for one of the more obscure Trade 
Union journals. People shunned him, quietly, without being obvious about it. Russians 
never needed to be told why. He smelled like an informer. Seemingly oblivious, he 
cultivated his own small niche in the Writers Union and kept to the edges of events. 
He didnt seem to mind being despised. Why that was so was unclear. Careful, 
thought Fadayev, careful. But the thought weakened and was swept away by the  wine 
singing in his head.   Fadayev felt capable. He pushed the thoughts of Bloch to the 
back of his mind and waved an expansive hand. 
Oh send him over. But bring the wine first. 
The waiter nodded and left the room. A few minutes later a younger waiter came to 
the table with another carafe of wine. Fadayev poured a full glass. Shortly afterwards 
Bloch approached Fadayevs table. He was a small thin man, about fifty, with rounded 
shoulders, wearing a brown, ill- fitting suit. Grey, slicked back hair, a prominent nose 
and receding chin, coupled with large shining intelligent eyes, made him look like an 
inquisitive mouse. His head bobbed once. 
 Ivan Konstantinovich. Very good of you to see me, so to say. Im sorry to disturb 
you but Im leaving for Leningrad this afternoon and I needed to speak to you. I heard 
you were due to be in the building. 
Not at all. Sit down. How are things at  at...? 
Printworker Journal. 
The Journal. Precisely. A little wine? Bloch nodded assent and Fadayev signalled 
for another glass. It was brought over immediately. When both glasses were filled 
Fadeyev tasted his and turned with a smile. Bloch also tasted the wine, swilling it 
around this mouth, then replaced the glass on the table. He said nothing. 
So. How may I help you? Fadayev said. 
I came because of your position of authority within the Union. 
Fadayev nodded. He drank again and his mouth formed a small red circle. 
After all, so to say, you are the chairman of the Financial Committee Fadayev 
nodded. 
And the Editorial Board Fadayev nodded again. 
Both, so to say. 
Fadayev nodded for the third time, less benignly. Somewhere, he could feel irritation 
beginning to mount. He hated wordy fools who were without influence. Bloch carried 
on speaking. 
You are, if I may say so, one of the leading and most respected members of our 
Union. A creative artist published throughout the country. A fearless critic.  A true 
Bolshevik and servant of the people. And of the Party. What did the Central 
Committee say, The basic objectives of the Party in the field of literature and the arts 
can only be achievedbe achieved . 
By increasing the Partys influence with the organizations of writers and artists and 
by strengthening Marxist communist criticism.  Im familiar with the quote. What is 
it you wish to speak about?  
An important matter, may I say, most important, one which  
And?  Fadayev felt  a small retaining strap fly loose inside his head.  His face was 
red.  He drank off his wine and pointed a forefinger at Bloch.  And?  You come here 
during my lunch. Fine. I allow it. You wish to speak to me. Fine also. Allow me to 
remind you I am a busy person. I have much to 
Bloch interrupted him with a single word, switching to the familiar form of address 
reserved by the Russian language for friends, children or inferiors. 
Malchai, he said softly. Shut up.  
 Fadayev stared, his eyes bulging. No-one ever interrupted him. No-one had said that 
to him in a quarter of a century. 
Be silent, Bloch said again, his low voice contemptuous, and listen. His face had 
lost all animation.  
Fadayevs mouth hung open. Bloch moved back into the formal mode of address, his 
tone once more smooth. 
It concerns a book, Ivan Konstantinovich. 
A book?  Fadayev looked around the room, his eyes wide. You come to me here, the 
Writers Union, and bother me about a book? 
A book. Or, to be more precise, a manuscript. 
What do you mean, a manuscript? Somewhere, deep inside the recesses of his 
brain, the small voice which had earlier urged caution spoke again, telling him to 
lower his voice. He paid more attention to it this time. His head shrunk into his 
shoulders.  What are you talking about? Fadayev spoke through his teeth. He 
glanced quickly around the room again. People were eating and talking quietly but he 
caught a few people looking at him. He had begun to feel unwell; something was 
slipping away. 
It appears someone has written a book. And not a good one.  Quite the reverse. One, 
so to say, which fails to respect the Soviet people. Or its leaders. A bad book. One 
might say so. One might indeed. And its thought you might know something about 
Fadayev felt cold hands at his heart. Cold wet fingers massaged his organs, slippery 
and chill. His throat closed. When he spoke his voice had almost disappeared. He 
coughed and began again.  He lowered his head to the table. 
But what has this to do with me? he said, hissing the words. His face had taken on 
the colour of an old dishcloth. It's thought I might know something...It's thought... 
He stopped and stared at Bloch. Who are you? he asked in a whisper. 
Thats not important. 
Habit returned, momentarily and unwisely, to Fadayev. Not important? Not 
important?  I am the senior official of this Union. I demandabsolutely demand- 
Very little, if you want my advice. Or even if you dont. I know who you are. It may 
be better for you if you dont know who I am. Perhaps, perhaps, if you think for a 
moment that much may become clear. As for your demands, someone wants to see 
you this afternoon. About the book. Manuscript, so to say. A car will be at the front 
door at three. That is all. Good day, Ivan Konstantinovich. Allow me to replentish 
your glass. Bloch stood up and poured wine smoothly from the carafe into Fadayevs 
empty glass. He replaced the carafe, still half full, on the tablecloth with a slight but 
audible thump. Dabbing a napkin at his lips, he crumpled it onto the table and left the 
room.  Fadayev looked straight ahead, his jowls hanging  over his collar.  
In the hall Bloch asked for the telephone at the porters counter. After he was 
connected he spoke briefly into the receiver. 
All arranged. At three. Behind him he heard the breaking of glass. 
He listened to a question from the person on the other end for a moment, then looked 
back into the restaurant. Fadayev  sat still, his face a mask. In front of him, under his 
outstretched arm, a purple stain flooded across the  tablecloth. It dripped off the edge  
and onto splinters of crystal and crockery littering the floor.  
 Oh yes, Bloch said, speaking quietly into the receiver.  He glanced back into the 
restaurant again, scratching  the inside of  his ear then examining his forefinger. So 
to say. Yes indeed. 
CHAPTER V 
52 Vorovsky Street, Moscow.  The  Writers Union. 15th of December 1937 
The car for Fadeyev arrived promptly at three. He couldnt make his hands do up the 
buttons on his coat. The driver, a stocky young man with a flat cap pulled down over 
his eyes and a smouldering yellow cigarette on his lower lip, saw and smiled to 
himself. Gently, he had been told, no excitement.  Another man sat in the front beside 
the driver. He wore a heavy greatcoat and a hat and said nothing, not even turning in 
his seat. 
Good afternoon, Comrade the driver said, his voice bright. He got out and opened 
the rear door. It rasped on its hinges. Fadayev got in and sat back, his heart 
hammering. He mumbled something to the driver, he wasnt himself sure what. The 
car lurched forward. 
Fadeyev watched the streets of the city pass by, trying to memorise each balcony and 
corner. They moved along the Arbat towards the centre. Saving memories, he filed 
away  the grey light and blue shadow, sloping  metal roofs and ochre walls.  Life all at 
once seemed very beautiful and made up of so many possibilities. A sadness flooded 
over  him. He knew it had happened to others; now it was happening to him. The 
people on the pavements hurried past. He could see ahead the  Kremlin towers, red-
brown and sharply pointed. Dusk was beginning to fall on the streets. Fadayev felt his 
mouth wobble; he wanted to cry.   
At the bottom end of the Vozdvizhenka, under the Kremlin walls by the Borovitsky 
Gate, the car slowed. Fadayev dropped his eyes to the floor. When he realised the car 
had not turned left towards Revolution Square and the main road up to the 
Lyubyanka, but had turned right, his head came up like a starving dog smelling meat. 
He couldnt stop blinking. The car was moving towards the huge hole on the river 
embankment left over from the blowing up and demolition of the Cathedral of the 
Redeemer, then began to thread its way among the narrow lanes around  Kropotkin 
street. Breaking out in sweat Fadayev couldnt stop himself looking into the mirror 
and the amused eyes of the driver, flicking backwards and forwards from the road to 
his passenger. 
Not far now, the young man said. Fadayev didnt reply. The other man remained 
silent. 
The car slowed down and pulled up outside an old town house of three stories. On the 
ground floor a large door broke the dirty yellow, almost orange, plaster faade. On the 
floor above, a large Oriel window flanked by two others, long and thin, looked over 
the street and on the floor above that a row of three square casements stared out  
below a green metal roof, just visible under a covering of snow. The driver got out, 
opened Fadeyevs door, and pulled a brass knob to the right of the entrance. The door 
opened  immediately. 
Comrade Fadayev, a voice said from the darkness. It took Fadayev a few moments 
to accustom his eyes to the sudden loss of light. Inside the house the temperature was 
hothouse warm. A small wizened man dressed in dark clothing two sizes too big for 
him indicated a large curved staircase.  He and Fadayev ascended, their footfalls loud 
on the bare stone. The old man murmured to himself but  Fadayev couldn't make him 
 On the first floor the small man knocked on a tall mahogany door. At the sound of a 
bell he swung the door open and beckoned Fadayev into a long dark corridor which 
twisted and  led to another, smaller, door. A second bell rang, more dully. The door 
opened and the old man led Fadayev into  a large room with  two tall windows whose 
shutters were partly closed. The room stood in half light and faced, from what  
Fadayev could see, into an interior courtyard. He had the strong impression he was no 
longer in the same building.  The room was almost empty but its floor was filled 
entirely with a vast red Persian carpet. At Fadayev's end  two leather armchairs were 
grouped in front of  a fireplace of white marble. A ten foot high gold framed mirror sat 
on the mantelpiece. At the far end of the room, a small man perched  behind a walnut 
and gilt Empire desk the surface lit by the green shade of a single lamp. Empty 
bookcases rose up the wall behind him. Though he spoke quietly, his voice carried 
across the room, inviting Fadayev to sit down. He gestured towards a chair. The small 
man who had accompanied Fadayev withdrew. Fadayev began the long walk over the 
red carpet towards the light. 
The man behind the desk did not rise. Fadayev saw he was bald and his face was 
pockmarked. Small round glasses, gold. He looked about fifty. So. Ivan 
Konstantinovich. Welcome. You dont know who I am. My name is Suslov, Genady 
Ivanich. I imagine you know which organisation I work for. 
Fadaev willed himself to speak clearly but the words didn't come out well.  
Well-...Yes...That is- 
Good. Will you take tea? 
Fadayev nodded. He stared at Suslov as if the man behind the desk could see the  
thoughts inside his head. Suslov rang a bell and leaned back in his chair. 
May I be frank? 
Fadayev nodded and swallowed at the same time. 
You are a person of importance in the Writers Union I believe. 
Fadayev nodded again, hesitantly. 
Excellent. There is a problem. With a book. 
Fadayev found his voice. I know nothing about a problem book, I ... 
Suslov waved him to silence. 
Im aware of that. Thats why youre here. Its precisely why you dont know about a 
book that we have a problem. I hope Im clear. 
Fadaev wanted to indicate that things were both clear and unclear but found himself 
unable to formulate a reply. In the middle of his struggle the door opened and the  
man who had escorted him from the front door wheeled in a trolley. The wheels 
squeaked and rattled across the carpet, the sound slicing at  Fadayev's nerves. He 
winced and swallowed once.  The tray contained a small lit samovar, tea glasses, 
sugar and a plate of plain biscuits. The man mixed the amber tea, left two glasses on 
coasters on the desk, and left. Fadayev decided to speak. 
Im sorry Comrade. Im...so About this book. What book? 
Suslov stirred his tea, added a lump of rough brown sugar, and contemplated the 
steam.  His eyebrows came together in the light of the desk lamp.  He waited a full 
minute, the longest in Fadayevs life, before replying. 
An important book. I believe. But Ive never read it. Or all of it. Few people have- I 
believe  this also. It is a book which is apparently being written as we speak 
Fadayev couldnt stop himself. Who by? 
Suslov clapped his hands together gently. Ah, you have it. I knew you were the right 
man. The very question I am being asked. By the General Secretary. And who better 
to know, I said to Comrade Stalin, than a luminary of the Writers Union. Exactly what 
I said to him. 
Fadayev could feel the blood leave his face. He opened his mouth but no sound came 
Yes, the General Secretary is taking a personal interest. Hes Are you all right 
Comrade? Fadayev leaned forward. Do, please, take a biscuit. 
Fadayev felt himself reach forward, pick up a biscuit and place it in his mouth. It 
tasted of sweet sawdust. 
Eventually he managed a sentence. Im afraid I dont understand. 
Suslov leaned back again and began counting on his fingers.  
Quite simple. One, you are a senior administrator of the Writers Union? 
Yes. Of course. 
Two. You were a leading member of the Association of Proletarian Writers? A 
professional critic I'm told? You led the excellent attacks in the press and in the 
Literary Gazette on those writers who were less than enthusiastic about our literary 
rules. I don't pretend to understand the complexities, not being a literary man myself, 
but Socialist Realism? It's philosophy? Their failure to grasp... etc. That sort of 
thing? 
Yes. But those articles were necessary I assure- 
Of course they were necessary. I've read them. All of them. They were just what was 
necessary. Excellent in every way. 
Fadayev was silent. Suslov once again addressed his fingers.  
So. Three. The Writers Union is the body, authorised by the State, which oversees 
literature? 
Yes. 
Four. It controls all aspects of authorship- fees, the provision of apartments, special 
food allocations, special  holidays, special  medical care, dachas, education etc. etc. 
Of which abundance you yourself have been a beneficiary they tell me. The Union 
deals with the entirety of the writing life in fact.  Would I be correct? 
The Union does those things, yes. 
How is the dacha by the way? Comfortable? You've had it what, three years now? 
Yes. Wellyes. 
And your Moscow apartment? Is it comfortable enough also? The new building on 
Lavrunshinsky lane isn't I?  Quite nice they tell me. Is that your impression? 
It's..excell- 
Good. That brings us to number five. The end product of the Writers Union.  And 
that means books, doesnt it, they are the end product? 
I suppose so, yes. 
Well then. There we are. Your organisation is responsible for all writing and books. 
That is why it sits in special buildings, eating special food, enjoying special 
privileges. It is the literary guardian of the peoples future, the torch bearer of socialist 
beliefs, the watchdog over the Revolutions literature. As the General Secretary has 
observed, writers are the engineers of mens' souls. And women too I shouldn't 
wonder. A nice idea no? Literature being the engine of mens souls. Our souls. Am I 
not correct? Do we have any?  
Fadayevs eyes bulged out of their sockets. 
Suslov smiled. Of course if the General Secretary says we do, we do, dont we? 
Fadayev felt his collar absorbing sweat. His body was leaking sweat.  Evening was 
falling outside the windows but the room felt like the inside of  a dark oven. 
Suslov sat back and spread his hands. So if there is a problem with a book, it is your 
problem Ivan Konstantinovich. Quite easy if you think it through. Which we have. 
Fadayev thought. What can I do, he said, his words flat. 
A good question as they say. Upon the answer much depends. 
Fadayev stiffened his jaw. Of course Im ready to do my revolutionary duty. 
Suslov looked across the lamplight. He saw the heavy sag of a well- fed stomach, red 
vodka veins in the cheeks, small eyes like an animals, gleaming. 
Oh come now Comrade he said, sitting back, his face disappearing from the light 
with a flash of his spectacle lenses and a thin smile Fadayev could hear but not see, 
Really. Well need much more than that. 
The two men sat in silence for a while. Suslov eventually stirred himself. His voice 
had changed. 
Listen carefully to what I am about to tell you. I hope I dont have to emphasise that 
should you be unwise enough to whisper even a word outside this room you and your 
family will cease to exist. You understand that, dont you? 
Fadayev nodded. He could not prevent himself swallowing. 
Someone is writing a book. That much we know. It is not a good book, it is not in 
any sense a good book, though I shall deal with this aspect in a moment, but it is a 
book. We have the first chapter and a brief synopsis of later chapters but that is all. 
Clear so far? 
Fadayev nodded again, but inside himself he felt something he could not pinpoint or 
define, slip away. His shirt was dank and hot and he could feel perspiration coursing 
between his thighs, under his arms. He wanted to rip off his shoes  and scratch the 
mad itching of his feet. 
In a moment you are going to read this chapter and synopsis. You are the only person 
outside certain members of the state security organs, and of course the General 
Secretary, to do so. We very much hope something will occur to you. In the way of 
vocabulary, of the use of grammar, of style. Something which will assist us in the 
identification of the author. 
Fadayev floundered for words. Of course, of course Im only too ready to assist the  
security organs but I really must say that this sort of thing is a job for masters of  
There is no choice in the matter, Suslov said. None. 
Fadayev said nothing. 
You have been selected - forgive me for frankness - not for literary talent but for a 
certain ability to categorise. You are one of the most senior critics in the Writers 
Union. You have read all manner of manuscripts -  Fellow Travellers, writers 
published and unpublished, established and raw, of communist belief and from the 
reactionaries and the bourgeoisie. Even...they tell me...from abroad. 
Fadayev sat slowly upright. He opened his mouth but no sound came out. Suslov 
raised his hand from the desk top. We dont see anything wrong in this. Not 
necessarily. Of course for some, links beyond our borders lead to...well let's leave that 
for the moment. But not everyone my dear Ivan Konstantinovich. Some of our 
specialists have to know what is going on elsewhere. The Party recognises that.  And 
if texts fall into their hands from unexpected quarters, shall we say, perhaps some 
tempting migr morsels, it would be inhuman not to expect them to read those 
publications. One can even understand if they kept quiet about this activity. After all, 
who does it hurt? 
Fadayev half nodded, then caught himself. 
If there is an identifiable style, and if I may say so youd better hope there is, we 
hope youll see it. Now, about the book itself. Im afraid, for reasons that will become 
clear to you, note taking wont be possible.  So I advise you to listen carefully. You 
give us the name, or better names, you think might be involved and we'll do the rest. 
Before we begin may I offer you any refreshment? Some vodka perhaps? It is early I 
accept but may I press you to a little? 
Fadaev nodded like a seal. Suslov spoke into the solitary telephone on his desk and a 
few moments later the same man as before brought in a tray with a newly opened 
vodka bottle, a single glass, and some slices of black bread spread with meat paste. He 
then left. After a nod from Suslov, Fadayev poured out some of the vodka. He felt his 
fingers tremble. Pressing the neck of the bottle firmly against the glass  he poured the 
glass half full and swallowed it at once. Then he looked at Suslov, who nodded again. 
Fadayev filled up the glass once more, then took a careful sip. 
Again. Listen carefully. Suslov said, leaning forward, his voice becoming animated. 
This book is treason. Filthy, abominable, treason. Any words you care to name- 
White Guard, reactionary, anti-soviet, counterrevolutionary, foul. It is trash. Why, 
you say to yourself, is so much trouble taken over it?  
Fadayev again nodded, but couldn't speak. He felt he was about to fall over. 
Suslov sat back, his voice returning to normal. Because it might be said that although 
it is all of these things some...unreconstructed persons might consider it to be not 
badly written. Stylistically speaking. The contents of course are, as I said, trash, but 
the Russian, well 
Fadayev knew what that meant. The writing was good. He felt himself falling through 
empty air.  
Suslov snapped his fingers. Wake up. Even traitors may be stylists, Suslov said, 
look at Trotsky. 
Fadaevs eyes opened wide in alarm. Suslov continued smoothly. Yes, we may as 
well get used to saying the word within these walls. Trotsky is still with us, enjoying 
the sun inis it Istanbul or Mexico, I forget. Do you happen to know? 
No idea. None. 
Suslov gave a silky smile, putting his fingers together in a steeple. No-one seems to 
know anything about Lev Davidovich these days. Yet the papers are full of the names 
of people linked to him. Executions even, they tell me. Most odd. Never mind. Within 
this room all words are permissible, looking for this scribbler of counter-revolutionary 
trash. 
The book is... political? Fadayev said, eventually. He felt faint. 
Yes. And more than political. It purports to set the events since the Revolution in the 
context of Russian history and thought. It describes personal relationships amongst 
describes landscape. 
Landscape? Fadayevs voice rose in fright. Politics and Landscape? 
 Suslov nodded, his lips pursed. Oh yes. Church bells at evening over still water. The 
first snow.  Cossack sabres and machine guns on the Nevsky. All that romantic drivel. 
It has music also. And streets, lots of streets. Moscow and Leningrad. Paris too. 
There's a list of them in the synopsis. It might be said that the book has pretensions, 
oh I don't know, to Tolstoyanism, whatever that was... This book attempts a...  
universality. A Slav universality. Of course a false one that doesn't exist.  It has 
surface glitter, a trap for the unwary. And we know that in the struggle for Socialism 
there are many of the unwary. He looked across the table. Or the uncommitted.  
Fadayev considered this; fear stabbing him in the abdomen. He bit softly at his lower 
lip, thinking. 
Questions? Suslov said, his tone indicating otherwise. 
Might it be said that the author of the book appears, even if he is anenemy of the 
people, to beso to say...well informed? 
Suslov considered. He pursed his lips, bloodless in the lamplight, again. It might. 
Fadayev nodded, his eyes closing swiftly. He tried to visualise his life after all of this 
was over and found that he couldn't. 
Suslov pulled out from a yellowish  file a small sheaf of typewritten papers. He slid 
them across the desk.  
Take it. And one glass of vodka. There is a table in the next room. 
Fadayev licked his lips once and picked up the pages as if they hurt his hands. He 
looked up to see Suslov indicating a set of double doors which were now open. A 
single table, lamp and chair stood alone in the centre of another large room. 
Take your time, Ivan Konstantinovich. It's important not to rush this vital work. A 
preliminary view, that's the ticket. And names.  In which as I may have said, the 
General Secretary is taking a close interest. Suslov looked at his watch, then leant 
back, his hands open and expansive either side of the desk light. Shall we say half an 
hour? 
                                                        CHAPTER VI 
 5th Floor, NKVD Headquarters, Dzerzhinsky Street, Moscow.  
The Lubyanka. 15th of December 1937 
In a room overlooking  the Lubyanka Square a long table was set for a meeting. Three 
men sat at one end in winter uniforms, a single table lamp lighting up their faces.  
Colonel General Kirilenko, Assistant-Director of Section IV Special Duties, Colonel 
Zubov, his Deputy, and Major  Stern, French Desk. Bottles of Narzan mineral water 
sat on the empty table.  Kirilenko rose and walked over to the window. He spoke to 
the glass. 
Where is he? 
 Kirilenko  stared out of the window, his eyes compressed.  A short man with a bull 
neck he smelled strongly of sweat.  Squinting, he could see the  long avenue running 
down to Revolution Square and the familiar outlines of the city, the top of the 
Bolshoi, the old city walls and the Metropole Hotel, the Kremlin towers. Every street 
was clogged with pedestrians, moving slowly.  The light was failing and the snow on 
the rooftops was turning grey.    
I repeat. Where is he? 
Well, Comrade General- It was Zubov. 
Kirilenko grunted, cutting him off. There was a silence.  The noise of traffic in the 
square below was a low rumble. Returning to his chair he sat down heavily. He 
opened a bottle of mineral water and drank a glass. 
Piss.  Right. Usual rules. Any notes to be left with me. Nothing to be taken from the 
room. No stenographer. Well, we know why we're here.  Zubov, what do we have? 
After his unauthorised disappearance three days ago as a servant of the peop- 
Get- on- with- it. 
Yes, Comrade General. In essence he appears to have left Berlin two hours before he 
was due to meet our man. We don't know what happened to his network but our 
source over at the barracks should have more for us on that very shortly-. 
For his sake, I hope so. 
-And we think he's heading for Paris. 
What? Kirilenko  sat very still. Do I have this correctly? A man we have been 
dancing around  for half a year, a man  who we have been ordered to squeeze then  
liquidate has disappeared to France shortly after our approach? 
Yes, Zubov said, though of course he didn't know it was us. We posed as Belgian 
with an offer of material in Brussels. Once he was in there he would have been 
brought to Leningrad by boat from Antwerp. Then of course here, where he-. 
Most clever. Had it succeeded. May I continue Zubov? So kind. And this man, the 
senior Red Army Intelligence controller in Germany, this fucker who thinks he's above 
the Revolution, who refused to work with us and shat on us from a great height, has 
vanished. Because no-one kept a close eye on him. Vanished.  And you think he's 
going to Paris.  
No-one spoke. 
Kirilenko smashed the table twice with a large fist. Paris? Paris? What the fuck is he 
doing in Paris? You think hes in Paris?   Report for Gods sake. He pointed at Stern. 
You have the French desk. For the moment. I am becoming irritable. He sank back in 
his chair. 
Stern adjusted his glasses and looked at the paper in front of him. His voice was 
steady. Comrade General, we have a report of him in Antwerp the day before 
yesterday. He was seeking help from a man he knew in Spain in 35, a militant who 
works on the railways. This man is ours and  knew him as Minsky at that time, 
obviously not by his real name or his code name at the GRU. He looked at a note. 
Archimedes. His German work name is Hans Albrecht. For his cover a Sudeten 
Czech. Journalist, pro-Nazi. 
Archimedes. Kirilnenko said to himself. 
 Stern looked up. Yes. Our source at the barracks tells us that he has had that name 
since beginning service fifteen years ago. We can't find his original name. 
So. Archimedes we-don't-know-his-real-name was in Antwerp talking to his old 
comrade while one of our vessels was in the port waiting for him and our men in 
Berlin were running around with their cocks in their hands. 
It appears so. Regretfully. 
The bastard was in a caf on the quayside and we didn't know. 
In essence. Yes. 
The idiots from Berlin are to be brought back. Today.  Put them in the inner prison.  
Zubov. Arrange a court-martial. I will preside personally. Continue. 
Stern adjusted his glasses. Our fellow in Antwerp reports weekly to one of our 
controllers on railway matters or anything else he hears. He mentioned Minsky in 
passing as being in trouble. The controller merely noted the name and passed it on 
yesterday. A check with Registry shows that Minsky was a cover name for 
Archimedes in Barcelona- 
What was he doing in Barcelona? 
We don't know exactly. Attached to the International Brigades. 
That useless bunch of bastards. Go on. 
The railwayman gave him the keys to a room in Paris belonging to a friend away in 
Algiers for six months. He and Archimedes got drunk, our man less so. Archimedes 
intimated he was running away. 
 He said this? To someone he hadnt seen for years?  Kirilenko leaned back in his 
chair and looked at the ceiling. He must be losing his touch. Why would he take such 
a chance? To someone he knew in Spain. Did he say running from who? 
Yes, Comrade General. Us. He hinted us. 
Kirilenko grunted and closed his eyes. 
No-one spoke in the room. Kirilenko rose and again walked over to the window. 
Outside, the square was almost empty. People usually avoided passing by.  A single 
black van was moving slowly along the curb through dark slush, about to turn into the 
Lubyanka. 
Fuck. 
Yes, Comrade General.  Zubov stared straight ahead. Kirilenko turned. 
And fuck again. 
I am in the process of preparing a report for you summarising everything about 
Archimedes since we approached him. Zubov spoke in an official voice. 
By Four oclock. Kirilenko spoke to the window. Anything at all from our 
friends? 
Nothing. The daily Military Intelligence liaison meeting  has taken place for three 
days now  nothing was said. Of course they know hes gone. We are trying to find out 
what is happening at the barracks but it is difficult. Our source says a lid has been 
clamped down tight and there is much movement on the top floor. 
I'll bet.  Who  I wonder was the first to christen the GRU the barracks? said 
Kirilenko quietly. Do they think because they are army intelligence they're soldiers? 
No-one spoke. They're a nest  of fancyboy intellectuals who think they can swan 
around abroad supposedly acquiring information. We know better. Dilettantes who 
like living it up in  Berlin or Vienna and think they are immune. Well they're not. As 
many have discovered. Trotskyite shit. We should have shot them all in June with 
their precious generals. He came back and sat down again. 
There was silence in the room. No one answered.  Eventually, Stern spoke. 
Comrade General. We believe he is now in Paris or on his way there after Antwerp.  
Archimedes is travelling on false papers. The informant does not know his new name. 
Archimedes wouldnt tell him.  But we do have the address of the room the informant 
gave him. It is being monitored now. He speaks good French and knows the city but 
we know exactly where he is going. He can't get away. I have alerted our operatives 
within the migr community. We cannot risk causing an uproar with the French but 
all other measures are being taken. 
We need to find him. This order came from the top. Need I say more? 
Yes, Comrade General. Stern couldn't prevent the bob of his adams apple.  I mean 
Call in every favour. Activate all teams. I want reports every hour. To be taken alive 
if possible. Dead if not. Screw the French. The boss wants this one. Has he family in 
Berlin? Relatives in the motherland? 
None that we know of, Comrade General. There are rumours, no more, of a family 
split up during the Civil War. Down in the Ukraine.  But as we don't know his real 
name we can't do any tracing. 
The GRU know his real name though. They must. 
Presumably. But we haven't got access to that yet. Our man is trying. 
Tell him to try harder. Or hell be in a camp. Forty below zero digging coal with a 
lump of wood. Hell last a month. If that. Kirilenko looked towards the window. 
Something you two should bear in mind. 
He tapped the table. Stern, leave us. Report back this afternoon. Stern left the 
notepad and walked stiffly from the room. Kirilenko turned to Zubov  who thought to 
himself that he had never before seen Kirilenko look frightened. 
And what about this fucking book? 
We got the courier with the chapter and- 
Kirilenko picked up a pencil and snapped it in two. I know that. And the arsehole 
killed himself. Before we got anything. Have our idiots from  Leningrad who allowed 
that been dealt with? 
Yesterday. All three. 
Where? 
Here. Downstairs.  The officer wounded two of them when they arrested him. Had to 
bring them by train with a doctor.  
So I read. Did they cry for their mamas? 
Zubov hesitated. 
Never mind. And? 
Cremated. Then to the Donskoi cemetery. Unmarked. 
No pensions to any families. Not a single rouble. Wives to the camps. Children to the 
wherever the hell they take them. I ordered that and I want it done. 
As you ordered. 
I want everyone involved to understand how important this is. No room for failure. 
Do you know the pressure I'm getting? 
Zubov knew better than to reply.  
What about our literary Colonel's son? He looked at a notepad. Andrei Fucking 
Eduardovich Miller. 
Disappeared. We're looking. Everybody's looking. Pulling people in all over the city. 
Were - 
It's a hanging matter, Kirilenko said quietly.  He looked away. 
We have an expert from the Writers Union looking at the chapter. If it's one of their 
members we'll have him. 
And if it isn't? 
We'll get him somehow. They can't publish here. And for abroad they have to get it 
out. 
Kirilenko was motionless, his eyes closed.  That's all. Report by five. Zubov left the 
room. Kirilenko sat for ten minutes, thinking. He pulled an opened bottle of vodka 
from a cabinet beside the table and drank a full glass. Then, rising, he move slowly 
towards the window. Lights were on in the Kremlin and in the trams running down the 
hill.  He slammed the glass with both hands. 
CHAPTER VII 
Place de la Republique, Paris XI. 15th of December 1937 
The man known as Archimedes stood with his back to the Place de la Republique and 
looked up the Rue du Faubourg du Temple. He cursed the damp cold silently. A 
dewdrop clung to the end of his nose. The small suitcase he carried weighed heavily 
in his hand. He set it on the pavement and pulled his scarf tight. He needed to think 
things out. But somewhere in the warm. On the first side street to the right, the Rue de 
Malte, he knew there was a small caf which used to have an old stove kept going at 
all hours. He picked up the suitcase and began walking. His feet were sore. Anyone 
looking at him would see a thin middle-aged man in a grey coat and hat walking 
slowly with a suitcase, another commercial traveller looking for a cheap hotel. 
It had been a few years but the name of the place was still the same.  Things didnt 
change much in this quarter. The Auberge du Parisot leaned against a closed butchers 
shop on one side and a patisserie, also closed, on the other. He looked around once at 
the silent street and walked into the caf, triggering an almost inaudible bell.  It was 
light inside and the old stove was still there. It glowed in a corner. A small man, 
plump and balding, stood  behind the battered zinc bar. He wore a home knitted         
v-necked pullover too large for him. The sleeves were rolled up to his elbows. He said 
good day in a way that indicated he thought it anything but. Archimedes took a seat in 
the corner looking out through the window. He ordered a demi of beer, drank it off 
and ordered another and a Calvados. The spirit glass  felt beautiful and  heavy in his 
hand. 
Not much of a day, Monsieur. The man sounded as if he came from the Aveyron, 
the vowels nasal yet flat. His face was brick red.  
Not much. Archimedes began to feel a little more relaxed. The trip from Belgium, 
avoiding the express trains and taking the slow country routes coming down the Pas 
de Calais and then inland from Normandy, had tired him. He had left the railways at 
St Germain en Laye and come the last ten kilometres into Paris by autobus. At the 
outskirts he changed and caught local buses to the Place de la Republique.  No need to 
visit any of the big stations, he thought, not good places at the moment. A few more 
steps and he was safe. He considered ordering another Calvados but decided against 
He had pored over his Plan de Paris on the way from Brussels but he looked at the 
small brown book again now. The Rue Auguste Barbier was a short dog-leg street 
between Avenue Parmentier and the Rue de la Fontaine au Roi. Some poet, 
Bobrovsky had said.  It was at the northern end of the 11th arrondisement not far from 
Metro Goncourt. He knew it vaguely. Any fountain had long gone. It was a poor part 
of the city. He recalled the area from the twenties, when he had first come to Paris 
from Russia. It was full of  Poles, Serbs, Bulgarians, White Russians, Turks- every 
immigrant under the sun; even some French. There were streets of Jewish people who 
had arrived after the Great War; on market days here you could hear speech from 
every God-forsaken  shtetl and broken down  village of the old Austro-Hungarian 
empire. 
Bobrovsky had told him the room at number 7 was not ideal but he was welcome to it.  
It was a maids room, a Chambre du Bonne, up underneath the eaves and would be as 
cold as hell at this time of year. Also, it had no rear exit of any kind and the street was 
so small that it could be cut off with only a few men. Against that it had  two very 
desirable characteristics; there was no need to register at a hotel in the  book inspected 
every night by the Police and, most importantly, no-one  knew of its existence. He had 
known Bobrovsky since Spain and trusted him. But he wished he had not got drunk 
with him or talked so much about the old days.  Archimedes finished his Calvados. He 
knew he was drinking too much these days but without it his hands shook. They had 
come close to getting him in Berlin. Russians.  His own people. He shook his head 
and picked up his suitcase.  
At Boulevard Jules Ferry, where the canal disappeared underneath the street, he 
passed the bronze statue of the little Parisienne and touched her foot for luck. It was 
worn shiny by a thousand other passers- by. On the other side of the road was a large 
caf he knew well from before, Le Grand Caf de la Capitale des  Balkans. It used to 
seethe with men in long moustaches smoking foul  tobacco and drinking plum brandy, 
all shouting at each other about politics. By the look of it nothing had changed much. 
Capital of the Balkans, he thought, what  hell-hole claims that sad title. He'd been in a 
few and wanted never to return.  As he began the incline up the Rue du Faubourg du 
Temple, threading his way amongst the other pedestrians, he passed a fish stall. The 
owner was gutting fish on a wooden block with a long knife and a smell came to 
Archimedes from across the years. He saw his mother on a Black Sea quayside 
slapping a fish before she bought it for supper. He felt tired down to his boots and his 
eyelids were heavy. People with shopping bags bumped around him. Not far to go 
now, he said to himself.  I need sleep. 
And so he almost missed them. Fifty metres away. Two men in suits and hats  sitting 
in a black Renault just below the junction of Avenue Parmentier and the Rue du 
Faubourg  du Temple where the street narrows. Windows open on a cold winter day.  
Another man might have stopped dead but he carried on walking slowly, then blended 
into a small crowd  standing around a street trader's stall. He came instantly awake, 
scanning the street with his eyes but not his head. All seemed normal. The only traffic 
appeared to be carts and lorries with the occasional open-backed bus. Horse droppings 
on the cobbles steamed in the cold. Children shouted a street game on the pavement. 
The big car was  about twenty metres from the crossroads, sitting alone.  It probably 
meant nothing but an old instinct made him turn left into the Rue Bichat and then 
immediately right so as to emerge on Avenue Parmentier a little way from the junction 
and looking back down  at the boot of the car. The street was lined with small shops 
and cafs  and he chose  the Caf du Paradis, a plain-looking place with a good view, 
and put his suitcase down by a table near the door.  
Good day Madame. A Calva if you please. Large. 
A large woman nodded and poured it from a plain green bottle.  Archimedes looked 
around.  He chose a likely candidate - scuffed shoes, probably unemployed, intelligent 
eyes, late twenties. Sitting all day, by the look of him, over the remains of a glass of 
beer and the racing paper.  Two fat purple- faced men were gesturing forcefully and 
arguing about Leon Blum and the  Popular Front at the bar and Madame, polishing 
glasses, went back to them, her face indifferent. Archimedes sat down at a table one 
away from the young man. 
Bonjour Monsieur. A cold day. 
The young man looked at him, suspecting something. He raised one eyebrow. 
And to you Monsieur. It is. 
Sorry for the interruption. I'll be frank. I've a favour to ask which only involves you 
in asking someone nearby a question. Thats all. Twenty francs. Ten now, ten later. 
May I explain and would you have a glass while I do? 
A long pause. Lips gently pursed. A look at the calvados.  A ghost of a smile.  If you 
like. Its been a slow day. He folded the paper in two and laid it on the table. The 
man known as Archimedes called for the drink. He waited until it had been brought 
over to the table. 
May I ask how you feel about the police? Forgive the abruptness. 
I suppose it depends on the policeman. Its fair to say I'm not invited to their 
Christmas dance. 
Clear. I've been away and am going home. At the moment I'm not in good odour with 
the cops and I think two flics I recognise are waiting for me at the corner over there in 
the big Renault. If you agree I need you to ask them for directions - to the hospital St 
Louis might  be best - and get a clear look at them. Perhaps in passing you might see 
if any gentleman is hanging around the entrance to Rue Auguste Barbier. Then head 
down Rue de Faubourg du Temple and back here  by the Rue Bichat. If you feel like 
it, twenty francs  if not, no harm done. 
The man gave him a long cool look. Your French is excellent Monsieur. If I may say 
so. Really. He smiled and thought for a moment. Twenty francs? He  blew air out 
through his nostrils and looked faintly amused.  What harm? You're aware of course 
that the Hospital St Louis is five minutes walk away? 
I am. 
 Its a strange world Monsieur. And getting stranger. 
Without doubt. Archimedes said.  
Im bored. Its agreed. Back in a minute. 
Dont you want half the money? 
With a story like that, I think I trust you.  
The man called Archimedes watched the young man saunter down the avenue. He 
finished his drink, ordered another, then went outside the caf to stand amongst the 
people waiting for the bus, collar turned up. He lit a cigarette and stood under the 
awning, one eye on his suitcase inside the caf, just a fellow in the crowd. He watched 
the young man crossing the main road and carry on down the Avenue Parmentier, 
crossing  the avenue itself near the entrance to the Rue Auguste Barbier.  He then 
turned turn back towards the main junction and the car. He was looking around, as if 
slightly lost, like someone from the country, and spoke to two people in the street as if 
to ask directions. This boy is a natural, he thought. 
When he reached the junction the young man turned left into the Rue de Faubourg du 
Temple and  walked over to the Renault. He leaned in the car window and quickly 
withdrew. Again he leaned in the window. A moment later he backed away from the 
car, his palms raised in front of his body. Then he walked away down the Rue du 
Faubourg du Temple and  spoke to a man in a bowler hat who gesticulated towards the 
west. The young man followed the direction given and disappeared from view. Three 
minutes later he was back in the caf. He gave a single low whistle. 
Not polite, your friends. 
No? 
And not French, or flics either, but maybe you knew that. A lazy smile. 
Archimedes acknowledged the sally with a slight nod of the head. Maybe... It's in 
your paper.  The young man opened the paper slightly, then closed it, nodding once.    
Thanks. One tall party, moustache, big nose. He was the driver. The other was a short 
fellow, bald, bad teeth. Neither seemed to know, or care, where the hospital St Louis 
was.  If you ask me theyd know where a hospital was in Warsaw, or Kiev maybe, 
somewhere that way. My granny was from around there. 
What did they say to you? 
 Eventually? Something to do with my parentage. 
Impolite. As you say. 
Yes. Their French was poor but their meaning was clear. And... 
And...? 
They looked cold. Even with heavy jackets. Buttoned up too. I suppose it was the 
windows being open. He smiled with one side of his mouth.   
Ah yes. The windows. Then what. 
I made sure to ask someone else for directions so they could see me. Of course  the 
chap pointed me down the Rue Bichat. So here I am. 
Really, Archimedes thought, a natural. 
What about the  Auguste Barbier entrance? 
There was a fellow with a tool bag and  wearing workers overalls standing near the 
entrance. At the bus stop.  He looked as if he had been there a while. Certainly he 
failed to take either of the two buses which use that stop and came along together. 
Dont they always.  It didn't seem too clever to speak to him as well as the boys in the 
car but if you ask me his face looked as if it had been made by the same factory as 
theirs. One shouldnt judge by appearances, as my grandmother, who always did, used 
to say, but, well ...you know. Lumpy. I had the feeling that had I asked him for the 
best way to the Academie Francaise, he might not have known. 
Or cared? 
Just so. 
So, he thought to himself. Bobrowsky. What a foolish, foolish man am I. 
I am obliged to you. The name is Walter Bennerlink. Will you have another? 
 Jean Yablonsky. Please. Beer. I think Ive worked up a thirst. 
Will you take a Calva also? 
Yablonsky assented with his eyebrows. 
Archimedes looked out onto the grey street, his mind moving rapidly.  A taxi 
telephoned from here, the destination  a  hotel address in the twelfth arrondisement, 
then change that in the cab. Another taxi at the Gare de Lyon for somewhere  in the 
Fifth. Walk from there. A hotel up by the Pantheon. After that he'd return by cab to see 
whether  the men in the Renault were still waiting or Yablonsky had sold him to them 
as soon as he had gone. Either way he'd know where he stood.  He looked at the 
Frenchman. They smiled at one another and Archimedes turned his head towards the 
bar.   Two beers and two Calvas, Madame, he said. Large ones.  
CHAPTER VIII 
Off Pyatnitskaya Street, Zamoskvareche, Moscow.  
16th of December 1937 
Walking through the early morning streets Andrei took bites out of the bread the old 
woman had given him. He felt light-headed and tired at the same time. At nine o'clock 
he passed the Borovitsky gate at the south west corner of the Kremlin and  crossed the 
Moskva river by the Great Stone bridge. 
[In order to include the following three chapters in the fiction portion of the thesis a 
portion of this chapter has been excluded. It deals with Andrei's wanderings through 
Moscow and  his arrival at the church where he meets Mendel, a small nondescript 
man who looks like an ordinary worker. In reality he is a senior officer of Red Army 
Intelligence. He produces lemons, an event almost unheard of in Moscow in the 
winter of 1937, and is thus an understated figure of power. The character Fyodor is 
introduced briefly into the chapter when Andrei meets him for the first time. Mendel 
feeds Andrei, explains that there is no news about his father but  that more will be 
revealed to him later. Andrei, exhausted, sleeps the day through.] 
When one of the men wakened Andrei darkness had already  fallen. After he had 
washed his face in a basin of cold water he was taken across the yard to Mendel's hut. 
The frozen air took his lungs by surprise. Inside the room Mendel sat by the stove, 
feeding it with wood. The flames lit up the faces of two men sitting in the corner. 
Both stood. One was an old man with a white beard who wore a long brown coat. The 
other was younger, with small round steel glasses and a forelock hanging over his 
brow. A blue scarf of some soft material was looped around his neck. He smiled 
hesitantly. Andrei wasn't sure of his age.  Mendel pointed. 
Pyotr. Ivan. Pavel. We don't need other names. Andrei shook hands with the men. 
Mendel brought out a bottle of vodka, some dried fish and a large loaf of  black bread. 
He held up a lemon as if it were a Faberg egg. The man with the glasses grinned. 
 Sit down gentlemen.  Pavel is from the Ukraine, Mendel said in a conversational 
tone, setting out glasses.  But he hasnt been back there for a while. 
The old man nodded. That is so, he said, turning to Andrei, have you ever been? 
No, he said, never. The man with glasses said nothing.  
But you have heard? 
Of the...problems? Yes. 
Problems I suppose one might say...Disaster might be a better word. Excuse my 
frankness.  
Andrei looked at Mendel.  
I asked Ivan to come to speak to us, Mendel said. We all like books and hes a 
writer. He poured some vodka and smiled.  And we all like books. 
'Used to be,' the old man said. He nodded at the fire. 
Mendel opened his hands towards the old man, who stroked his beard and  looked at 
his own hands before speaking. 
The Ukraine. The grain requisitioning. The murdering. The senselessness. The old 
man spoke quietly, without emphasis. 
Andrei responded. You hear about things of course, but unless you get out of 
Moscow and travel what can you know? It doesn't appear in Pravda. 
Yes. And maybe people dont really want to hear.  He looked at Andrei. Young 
man, I dont mean you. Or you, he said, turning to the man with glasses. 
Andrei looked back and forth between Mendel and the old man. He said nothing. 
Mendel cut the bread into slices with a large clasp knife. The old man stared into the 
fire. Eventually, he spoke. His voice was low and calm. 
I believe you have had some trouble. Of course I don't know details. But trouble. 
Yes. 
I'm sorry for that. It's part of our countrys sadness-I can say little more. What we've 
given your generation. Sorry. 
I thank you. 
The old man nodded again. 
I've been asked to speak about something. Maybe you believe it maybe you dont. 
But its true. 
I have no reason to doubt you. Andrei looked at Mendel uncertainly.  
In our world, you have every reason, the old man said. Ttruth is a stranger to 
Russia now. It was always... quite a distant relative, met with at weddings and 
funerals. But now 
Mendel opened the stove with a steel rod and threw in more wood. Flames licked at 
the mica window. Inside, something hissed. Beyond the window panes no lights 
showed in the dark. 
The old man gathered the three others with a single glance. Seven years ago, in 1930, 
I was living near Vavarskoe, a little village fify versts from Kharkov. It was the back 
of beyond. The roads were just tracks among the fields. Before the revolution it had 
had a shop of sorts but when I came to live there it had a closed church, a bath house 
and about eighty people and a priest. They were all farmers in a small way, with some 
livestock. A few had a bit more money, and employed labour at sowing and harvest 
but mostly they all rubbed along without much in the way of cash. Now, of course, 
he said, looking directly at Andrei, the whole countryside has nothing at all. 
Andrei didnt know what to say so he nodded. 
I came to live there for a number of reasons, the old man said.  Id been a medical 
student, then turned to teaching language and literature in Kiev. Before the revolution 
I was one of those who felt they could change the world by education. We moved out 
into the countryside and travelled among the people with a few blackboards and 
books. Tolstoyan, as they say. It didnt really work. 
May I ask why not?, the man with the glasses said, his voice deferential. He blinked 
behind his glasses.  
Us. Them. Who knows. Im sure if I ever did I dont know now. But we tried. To 
change hundreds of years of backwardness in a generation wasnt at all easy. The 
Soviets are right about that. Anyway I found myself liking bits of the villagers. Many 
were ignorant, some darkly so, but many others were as Tolstoy described, an odd 
combination of piety, greed, violence and unexpected kindness. I never married and 
ended up living with my books in an old house by the river on the edge of Vavarskoe. 
I am he said, looking up  with a shy smile, or rather was, interested in 
literature. And linguistics, he added after a moment, murmuring, half-
apologetically, I wrote some books once. 
I look old I know. But Im only fifty. I was in the big war. What I saw there 
convinced me the Revolution was right. I was for the Bolsheviks. What the people 
lacked under the Tsar would now be remedied. There would be something like 
freedom. There was hope. I fought in the Civil as well, humping my books around in 
my knapsack like some fool. Out of the line I taught soldiers to read and write. Even 
met Isaac Babel.  Of course he stays silent these days, too honest  to put pen to paper 
in the world we have now.  Anyway. Shrapnel ripped open my shoulder, then I was 
invalided out. It was of course a bad time, but there was hope, as I say. I was a Red, 
and proud of it. After the war I went back to teaching. Never joined the Party but, you 
know, I did believe.  Travelled round the province with my blackboard, same as 
before. 
In 1929, the Ukraine started to starve. It went on for three years and more. If it 
hadnt been for the Americans and their food assistance it would have been much 
worse but it was bad enough. I have seen children dying in empty fields and families 
lying beside carts, their mouths stained green with grass and the flies at them already.  
He took a long drink of vodka. 
Forced collectivisation. Well, we told ourselves, the revolution demanded sacrifices. 
It would never be easy. But of course gradually the truth sank in. On and on it went.  
Arrests, deportations, shootings, more arrests. They needed the grain for the cities, 
they said, and that was true, so they did. But not that way. The farmers were being 
ground down, the countryside ruined. Corpses hanging in trees at crossroads. Bodies 
in ditches.  People were dying in their thousands. Then tens of thousands. Then 
hundreds.  Because of that mad bastard Stalin. And his hangers-on. 
Andrei stared. The words shocked him. The man with the glasses took them off and 
polished the lenses on his scarf. 
Mendel cut some more bread. We are amongst friends, he said, heresy is allowed. 
It took us some time to realise that truth was heresy of course, and heresy truth, the 
old man said, but once that realisation sinks in, well, certain things flow from it. 
I was still teaching what the revolution would bring, still talking about the bright 
future, when the requisitioning party arrived in the village in the autumn. To be 
truthful the people thought I was harmless, thats why they didnt kill me. I was just 
too stupid. And besides I taught for nothing and asked for little from them.  Also, I did 
some basic doctoring for free. Delivered a few babies too. 
It was coming on to Winter. One day wet, the next cold and dry. The soldiers arrived 
with two lorries and a cart in the afternoon. Not soldiers. Chekhists. Leather jackets 
and everything. There were eight of them, heavily armed, led by a very young man. 
Epstein. Short,  with a small moustache, like Yagoda, his Secret Police God. We were 
all told to assemble in the centre of the village and Epstein, after a speech about the 
Revolution, told the people he wanted all their grain. They would be left enough to 
live on but all the rest had to be loaded on the lorries. Enough to live on turned out 
to be a few kilos of grain per person per month and wouldnt have kept a flea alive but 
there was no room for compromise. They were given 24 hours. The old man fell 
silent, plucking at his beard. 
What happened? said Andrei. 
Well, they didnt hand it all over. That was for sure. Or not enough. Two reasons. 
The people couldnt see why they should starve in the coming winter, they had grown 
the stuff after all and secondly The old man shrugged. 
Secondly? 
Secondly, Epstein was...well...obviously a Jew. 
Andrei just stopped himself looking across at Mendel. No one spoke. Then the old 
man began to talk again. 
I know what it sounds like. But it was true. The villagers were not saints and no 
different from most of the country people who had prejudices too deep to understand. 
Or to change. I tried. They hadnt been fond of Jews for a few hundred years. Still 
werent, some of them. Others realised what nonsense it all was.  I dont know how 
far back you have to go to understand it all. Ive given up. It was prejudice pure and 
simple. A pox of the mind.  No use to the world. But all I know is Epstein was a Jew 
and he wasnt getting the grain. 
On the following day he summoned the people and the Headman. Everybody was 
there, women in kerchiefs, children, men in muddy clothes. The Chekhists with rifles, 
standing on the lorries.  Anton Pavelich was the village Headman. He had also fought 
in the Civil and had lost half of an arm. Red Cavalry. You know, the Babel stories.  
Even  had a Soviet medal. He had it on his chest that day. On his best jacket. Empty 
arm pinned up neatly. Some of the grain had been surrendered but he told a lie of 
course about the rest. The village didnt have a great deal but some was hidden away 
and he wasnt telling. I  can see him now, standing in front of Epstein with his cap 
off.   The old man took a bit of bread and chewed it. He cleared his throat and 
changed his voice. 
Youre a fucking liar.. 
No, your Honour. 
Comrade Commissar. 
Comrade Commissar. 
And a disgrace to the Revolution.  
Andrei exchanged surprised looks with the man wearing glasses. The old man's voice 
went back to normal.  Pavelich said nothing. Everyone there knew Epstein was too 
young ever to have even been  in the Civil, never mind the Revolution.   Pavelich had 
though. Been in both.  He had  had to  cut bits of his own arm off with his own knife. 
Anyway, he just stood there, holding his hat with his good arm. 
So. There we were. Without any warning Epstein pulled his pistol from his holster 
and shot Pavelich in the forehead. Quite calm about it. He watched him crumple and 
fall face-down in the mud. He then shouted that he wanted the grain on the morrow 
and told us to go home. Some men tried to lift Pavelich. The back of his head was 
missing. 
'He stays. Leave him'. That's what Epstein said.  The Chekhists lifted their rifles. The 
men laid him back down in the mud. I walked away. Later that afternoon I looked 
down the roadway. Pavelich was still lying there, face down in dung. 
No one spoke in the room. Mendel poured out three more glasses of vodka.  
What happened with the grain? Andrei said. 
Nothing, said the old man, it didnt come to thatNo...no... The old man looked 
at the floor. 
Go on, please, said Mendel quietly. 
The old mans face became still. That afternoon all the Chekhists got drunk. They 
took a young girl who was ordered to cook for them into the Bath house. There they 
did bad things. Really bad.  She was only sixteen. From a small family, only her and 
her father. Mother dead. Old Pavlenko was away in Kharkov. Thank God. He couldn't 
hear her shouting. People covered their ears. Father Pavel was the only one who tried 
to do anything and they beat him senseless in front of the Banya. Im not religious of 
course but he was a good man and they beat him like a dog. Unconscious. He lost an 
eye. 
My God, Andrei said. 
Yes. He was absent that day. 
Again, no one spoke. 
They let her go eventually. When the women went to her house she had hanged 
herself from the rafters. 
Her father came back from Kharkov that night. Some of the men met him at the edge 
of the village and told him. I was there. He was a small man, a good farmer, quiet, 
with a club foot and a special built up boot. At ploughing time you could spot him 
from a distance, going up and down behind the horses. That night he looked like you 
had told him he was about to die. Then he looked at all of us in turn. Men turned 
away.  They took him to see his daughter. I didnt go with them. I couldnt. 
That night the temperature fell. Steel cold. Frost. Some of the men came to my 
house. They told me I could leave the village if I wanted but they had decided to deal 
with the Chekhists and if I was going, to go now. The priest was in my house lying in 
the back room by the stove.  I said I would stay.  I don't know why. The men said they 
were going to confront Epstein in the Banya, where they were having a party.  One of  
the Chekhists could play the accordion. You could hear the mazurkas and the noise all 
over the village. They had plenty of vodka and had ordered food to be brought in to 
them. 
 I asked the  men what they were going to do.  They mumbled in their beards. They 
are beasts, they said, and do not deserve to live. 
They have guns, I told them. 
We know. But it wont matter, they said, they can have all the guns in the world. 
Others will come. 
They just looked at me. This too we know, they said. But we shall be gone. There 
is no staying in this place now. They will destroy us anyway. We have nothing to 
lose.  
I asked them what they wanted of me and they said nothing. They knew I was a Red, 
or sort of a  Red, and wanted to know if I would warn the Chekhists.  I told them I 
would not. I knew the girl and the father. They were good people. 
They said they believed me. But they left Petrovich, a big man, with me all the same. 
Later that evening, when the party was still going on in the Banya, I saw men 
assembling in the shadows of the houses. I put my coat on and went out to them. They 
began moving towards the bath house. I can still remember the tune drifting out over 
the road. It was a slow, sad tune. Polish I think. I noticed there was no longer a sentry 
guarding the front door of the bath house and asked where he was.  
With his maker, one of the men said, out of the corner of his mouth. I found out 
later some women, looking suitably cowed, had taken food to the sentry outside the 
bath house and the one guarding the arms in the Chekhists quarters. Both had been 
over confident and unafraid of women. When each bent to lift the cloth cover from the 
bowl The old man made a single chopping motion with his open hand. Each died 
with an axe in his head. 
There were about twenty men, all silent. As we came up to  the Bath house a young 
boy emerged from the side of the building and whispered to one of the men. Artyom 
Fillipovich..Last name Ignatiev.  He was now acting as Headman. The boy handed 
Fillipovich a small bag and the Headman patted the boy on the shoulder and told one 
of the men to take him away.  The boy went to protest but Fillipovich spoke to him 
gently and he was led away. 
What was he doing there in the first place? Andrei said, immediately sorry he had 
interrupted. 
I asked the same question. It was to do with the layout of the Bath house. There were 
two big rooms, one for men the other for women, and each had a smaller room off the 
main for boots and  clothes. A storage place to keep things dry while people went into 
the  steam. The women taking in the food had reported that the small room was where 
the Chekhists were kept their clothing and guns. Each of them had one of those 
artillery Mauser pistols, with the long handles and a magazine in front of the trigger. 
Broom- handled I think they call them... 
They do. Mendel looked up and gave a faint smile. 
Yes, broom-handled. I thought it was. The boy had slipped in through the small 
window used for ventilation and handed the pistols out to one of the men who had 
been in the army. He emptied the magazines. Its pretty simple to do. If you know. All 
of this was whispered to me in a few sentences. We stood there in the dark, in the 
rutted road, twenty men and me. In complete silence now. Just the yellow lights from 
the bath house and the bright moon on the frost. From inside there was singing. It was 
carrying over the fields. 
So the Chekhists had no weapons? Andrei said. 
Oh, they did. All the Mausers were replaced, back into the holsters. They only lacked 
ammunition. 
The man with the glasses drank his vodka and put the empty glass on the table. 
Mendel poured some vodka for him and the others. 
The men pulled open the door and filed into the Bath house. Me at the back. The 
accordion music stopped. There wasn't much steam but the place was was filled with 
smoke and the smell of fried food. And vodka. Like a distillery.  There were some oil 
lamps on the  walls and light from the open fire. No one moved. Most of the 
Chekhists had towels round their waists but two were naked. Epstein stood up. His  
face was red with drink. 
He shouted at them. You sons of bitches he shouted, back to your kennels. The 
men made no reply and Epstein began to look uneasy. You could see him counting.  
Comrades, he said then,we all want the same things. Let's not be enemies. Behind 
him I could see the Chekhists. They of course didn't look happy. 
 Mendel muttered something to himself. Andrei didnt catch it.   
The old man scratched his chin. Epstein tried to fool them. You know, conciliatory. 
He told them he would read them the words of Lenin explaining everything. The book 
was in his bag next door. That's what he said'. 
 The men just snorted. Fillipovich held up his hand. He said  'If you like - we have 
time'. 
 Of course, Epstein went into the inner room and came back right away with three 
pistols, one he held and the other two he gave to two of the Chekhists. They stood 
there, happier men than they had been a moment ago. They cocked the pistols. 
 'Now fuck off,' Epstein told them, 'or all your women in this shit pit  will be 
widows tonight'. I remember his words after all this time. 
Fillipovich said it was  a woman they had come to speak about. Epstein told him to 
address him as 'Comrade Commissar. The men laughed of course. Epstein didn't get 
it. He smiled as well. From nerves. Then the smile went away. 
 'This is her father. Comrade Commissar,' Fillipovich told him.  I remember his tone. 
Not angry at all. More...matter of fact.  The men moved aside and old Pavlenko 
moved forward, dragging his leg. Never mind a pin, you could hear a feather drop; 
just the soft scraping over the floorboards. He looked  at each of the Chekhists in 
turn. 
Epsteins face looked green. He knew something was wrong. Started to shout. 
Telling them to get out or he'd shoot. All that sort of thing.  No one moved. He raised 
his pistol, pointing it at the girls father. I can see his face, all screwed up and red. He 
pulled the trigger. And the hammer clicked on an empty chamber. We all flinched but 
there was only that dry tap. I tell you, in the silence of that room, well it... The old 
man shook his head. He cocked and fired again. So did the others. Then they ripped 
out the empty magazines and stared at them. Just stared at them. Then they stared at 
each other. 
It was so quiet. I noticed a sack being passed through the village men to the front 
row. With nothing said they started to hand out sickles and cleavers. Long leather 
aprons too, all dark and stiff. Each man tied one on himself. No fuss. Tying the bow in 
front. Finally, someone handed the girls father a short-handled scythe and a 
whetstone. He started to sharpen the blade. One of the Chekhists started  shouting  
about how men would be sent looking for them but he didn't finish, just fell silent. 
That ringing, you see. The whetstone. Back and forth. 
Mendel levered open the stove door and checked  the fire. The old man stopped 
speaking. Mendel looked up and nodded. 
The old man drank some vodka. Pavlenko stopped. He put the stone in his pocket 
and tested the edge with his thumb just as if he was about to begin a field. I had to get 
out. No one tried to stop me. The men were studying the Chekhists... The old man 
paused. As if they were cattle. One of them, no clothes on I remember, holding an 
empty Mauser. Well he crossed himself. The old man looked at Andrei, Mendel and 
the other man in turn. Im not exaggerating. The Chekhist crossed himself. 
I hadn't  gone five steps when it happened. A thump like an axe biting into a log. The 
scream was terrible. High, strangled. High. High. Like an animal. Then it started. All 
the men moved forward, lifting and swinging the blades. They were shouting, the 
Chekhists screaming. Screaming. All of them screaming. 
 I got out the door and ran.  It went on for a long time but got fainter as I got farther 
from the village. Eventually all sound stopped. I stood there. There was that frost and 
a big white moon over the fields.  From that distance I saw flames. Curling round a 
roof. Thatch does that. I walked back quickly. The bath house was on fire. The men 
stood beside it in orange light. I saw them. Their eyes were huge, I remember that. 
Huge. And dark splashes on their faces. Wet.  Hanging in the beards. Some of them 
were wet from their faces to their boots. 
Mendel poured out more vodka, the old man lifting his cup and taking it to his chest. 
He took a sip. 
What happened? Andrei asked. 
It had all already been decided, the old man said, the lorries were  stripped and 
dismantled, then thrown in the river. The two guards' bodies were thrown into the 
flames. Like bales of hay.  Each man set fire to his own house and last of all they 
burned the church. The grain was distributed according to the size of each  family. 
Then the icons by lot.  By morning there was nothing left but embers. 
And the people? the man with the glasses said. He sat forward. 
Each family left in its cart. Some people combined, others went off alone. There was 
a heavy frost that morning and a fog.  At daylight  I watched them go. From the 
crossroads in every direction. Children in the back wrapped up against the cold. 
Women with babies. The able bodied on foot.  After fifty metres  they all became 
shadows in the mist - then nothing. Gone.  I could  hear the horses' hooves. And a 
baby crying. Then nothing. In ten minutes, nothing. Just the fog and the silence. I was 
the last to go. They'd given me food for myself and the priest, who they liked. I put 
my old horse in the traces and left. You could smell the burning for a good distance 
but there was no wind. Just fog. We set off in the direction of Kharkov, then realised 
thats where reinforcements might be coming from. I turned off onto back roads and 
we wandered. For days. Slow.  
How did you manage after that? Andrei said. 
We were a little conspicuous, it is true. Father Pavel was not wearing vestments of 
course but his head was still heavily bandaged. He had regained bare consciousness 
before we left but he was in great pain. Moaning, you know. Being jolted in the back 
of the cart didnt help but there was no choice - we had to get away. He died on the 
second day.  
Andrei could think of little to say. You were a friend to him, he said finally. 
I wish I could have been a better one. 
What happened then? 
Well 
For another time I think, Mendel said quickly, but in a quiet voice. He put a hand on 
the old man's sleeve. It's late and there's a lot to do tomorrow. I'll have someone 
show you where to sleep.  The old man nodded and  pulled on his heavy clothing. He 
embraced Mendel, Andrei and the man with the glasses in turn. 
Good luck boys, he murmured, and stepped out into the night. Andrei heard 
someone speaking to him outside. 
So. Gentlemen. He turned to the man called with the glasses. If you would return to 
your hut we'll meet again in the morning. A peaceful night to you. 
The man with the glasses nodded and  shook Andrei's hand. Good Fortune to you, 
he said. 
And to you, Andrei said. The man pulled his scarf round his neck and left. Mendel 
turned towards Andrei. He stood in the open doorway. The yard was  in darkness.  
Some flakes of snow blew across the threshold. 
Youll be moving on in a little while. Well discuss it tomorrow. Much to talk over. 
Bed down here tonight. Someone will bring your rucksack. I'll say goodnight then. 
Don't worry. 
Don't worry? 
No. You're safe. Don't forget. I can get lemons in a Moscow winter. That should 
reassure you. I hope it does. A little anyway. A half smile.  
Where? Where am I going? Andrei said, his face alive in the lamp light. 
Mendel smiled briefly. How do you like Turgenev? 
Well enough. 
 Good, Mendel said, just before he closed the door. Again a half smile.  I think you 
need a Month in the Country. 
CHAPTER IX 
5 King's Bench Walk, The Temple, London. 16th of December 1937 
Towards six in the evening it was already dark.  London was brightly lit but in the 
Temple soft shadows were cast by gaslight. Two men in their sixties, one a retired 
colonel named Blake, nominally of engineers, the other a serving general at the War 
Office, sat beside a fire in an upper room of a building overlooking  Kings Bench 
Walk. Outside, a square was bordered by gardens towards the Thames and barristers' 
chambers on the far side. Every window was lit up.  The noise and traffic of Fleet 
Street, a few hundred yards north, could not be heard. 
The general, a small, bird-like man with silver hair, smiled and held out a glass. The 
other man, tall, neatly dressed, filled it from a square decanter on a side table. 
Thanks. Are you sure he's the right man for this job, Tom? It could be hellish tricky. 
I am. But of course the decision is yours sir. 
 The general grunted. He rose and went to the window. Below, typists, clerks and 
messengers were moving quickly in every direction carrying bundles of papers. 
Amongst them dark-suited barristers trooped  back from court with less animation, 
robe bags over their shoulders. He spoke to his own reflection in the glass. 
He inherited a  house from somebody. Have I got that right? 
As the file says. His old commanding officer in the war. Died a widower and without 
children. Left him the place. Needed a lot of work. Which he hasn't the money to do. 
The General turned and leaned back on the sill. What sort of a place? 
Big. Stockbroker Tudor. Leans a bit. Jungle of a garden. 
Sounds as if you like it. 
I do. 
Inside? 
Icons everywhere.  Indian stuff from his time in Peshawar. One old housekeeper, 
everything a bit dusty. Why do you ask? 
Oh you know. Background. One likes background... Time spent in reconnaissance is 
seldom wasted etcetera. He sipped at his glass. 
And your general view of this fortunate legatee? Forgive the lingo Tom,he said,  
glancing back at the  window, its being surrounded by all these damn lawyers. Quite 
gives one the willies. Its a beautiful place of course but how do you stand living 
amongst them? 
They're not so bad on the whole. A chance came up for a flat here through Jennys 
father who's a judge at the Old Bailey, as you know. I took it. Some very smart people 
live next door you know, more your milieu than mine. 
Who? 
The Nicholsons. 
Harold  and Vita? 
The same. 
Good God. People will be living in Islington next. Anyway, about Flanders. Tell me 
what you really think.  
He's clever enough to deal with the beggars at MI6 and outsider enough not to be 
beholden to them. Experienced. Sensible. Limp slows him down a bit but nothing 
wrong with his mind. Wouldnt have put his name forward otherwise. 
It wont be an easy job, Tom. 
Hes not entirely an easy chap, as you may find. But he's what you want. 
The General, neat in a fine grey suit, looked into the fire. He used tongs to pluck a 
lump of coal from the scuttle and placed it on the flames. 
I don't know... I accept all you say of course... He looked up. But I've never 
engaged a man whos been tried for murder before. 
Acquitted. 
The general shot the other man a glance. I think Id picked that up. They did a  brief 
prcis of his file for me at the office. Quite interesting. Not the normal His voice 
tailed off while he thought. His mouth puckered. 
What exactly is it he does for you? 
He runs a small team dealing with  Russian emigrs in Paris. He's got a leg man 
there, and a clerk and some girls here. We declare him to the French and we share 
some information with them. There's an office in Villiers Street by Hungerford 
Bridge. The cover is timber importing. 
And you came by him how? 
After Russia he was seconded over to the RIC in Dublin and when that all finished 
he went to the Intelligence people in India. Ten years there, Frontier mostly. Peshawar. 
Attached to the Frontier Scouts for a bit then got a bullet in the leg from a tribesman. 
From a long way off he told me. He was quite impressed. Invalided out in '32 and 
back here. I took him on at the end of '33. 
The General shifted in his chair.Have I got this right? Born in the early nineties. 
Galloway direction. Father a schoolmaster. No money. Good results at school but not 
good enough for a scholarship. Went into the timber trade. 
He was. After a year in an architects office. Dont know what happened there. Dont 
think he could afford the fees for a full apprenticeship. 
The General looked at his glass. Sent to Russia in 1913 for a year to deal in Baltic 
timber. St Petersburg. Picked up Russian surprisingly quickly. And a fianc it seems.  
Engaged too young to a  Russian woman. All went wrong. Would that be fair? 
We all do daft things when young. Especially abroad. The heady air of Simla, sir, 
that sort of thing. Blake turned to the General with a face innocent of mischief. The 
other man  coloured. 
 Youre not shy, Tom.  
 Not not shy sir- retired officer without ambition. 
The General snorted and held out his glass.  What happened after that? 
Timber freighter from Petersburg when war was declared. Landed at Leith and 
joined up in Edinburgh. In the ranks. A Kitchener battalion of the Royal Scots. He  
eventually got to France. 
When was he commissioned? 
Early 16.  Then they transferred him. Lucky. His old battalion were cut to bits on the 
first day of the Somme. 
I remember. One of the Edinburgh City battalions. The General's face looked 
thoughtful. How the hell did he end up in his other regiment? As far as I can see he'd 
never even been to the West Country. 
Not sure. I asked him once. Something about meeting two chaps in a pub off the 
Aldwych. 
A brief smile. Glad to see some things dont change. 
Thereafter wounded 
Where? 
Shoulder. Lucky again.  After convalescing he ended up back on the Somme later 
that year. Got the MC there. 
How did he end up with you in Russia? 
After they told me I was going to Archangel I knew Id need Russian speakers. Id 
never come across the language before. Put the word out and he responded just before 
they were going to demob him. We were running networks in Northern Russia, during 
the intervention as the historians now call it, our ill-starred venture into the Russian 
Revolution. He became my assistant. Good too. An aptitude for it. 
Not an easy time. 
You could say that. Bloody awful. Never seen the like. I suppose civil wars are 
always the worst. Hard to say who was the nastiest between them, Bolsheviks or 
Whites. 
What was his attitude to the Bolos? 
Thats a bit of a mystery. He didnt seem very impressed with what had gone before -  
that comes from his year there  I expect. He  saw quite a lot. But  he didn't buy the  
new world of the comrades either. He very rarely mentions politics. 
All right...That brings us to his court martial for murder 
That. 
 A small point but I hope you dont mind me raising it. 
It's in the file. As the lawyers say hereabouts - a triumphant acquittal. Also in the 
file. 
It is. But what I want, Tom, is to know what happened. 
Blake lifted the decanter but the General shook his head. Blake poured some in his 
own glass and took a long drink. 
In truth there isn't much to tell. As you know His Majesty's Government thought it a 
good idea to involve us in the Russian Civil War to stop the spread of the Red 
Menace. We were stuck in Archangel attached to the Whites. They quartered us in the 
former clap hospital. Me, a small staff, a company of the Middlesex, and Flanders. He 
was our  Russian speaker. As a posting it wasn't much fun. 
Did the Bolos abolish clap? One hears they abolished so much. 
Not exactly. What a place. Reds and Whites about as bad as each other. Atrocities 
every other week. I went into a barn one frozen morning and found six naked men 
hanging from the rafters. They were missing vital parts of their anatomy. Sword cuts. 
Blake made a face and drank from his glass. 
Anyway. We had orders not to interfere with what the Whites were doing. That was 
hard to stomach, I may say. But that's what we did. One night we had a mess dinner 
with the Russians. It had been a hard week and we'd brought back several prisoners.  
To loosen their tongues the Whites had put them in iron cages out in the open. It was 
cold as anything. Twenty degrees of frost. I protested but to no great effect. The 
prisoners were well clothed and wouldn't freeze to death anyway. Thought I'd sort it 
out in the morning. In the mess  people were sitting around a big stove or playing 
cards. Flanders was on his own in a corner reading old Tatlers. A card school was 
going full blast and someone had started up a gramophone. 
Blake stirred the fire and put on more coal. He glanced at his watch. 
The card school started arguing amongst themselves. All very Russian. I couldn't 
follow it. A big fellow, Ostrovsky won in the end. Quite an efficient sort for a White, 
but a bully. Used to hit his chaps, that sort of thing. Some of them did. 
Good Lord. 
And worse. Anyway, he put his cards down and went for the door, pulling out his 
revolver. I heard the word 'plennik'. That I knew. It means 'prisoner'. 
Thank you. He was going to threaten the prisoners? 
No. Shoot one. That's what the card school were playing for.  He won. Found all this 
out later of course. 
Ah. 
Quite. He wanted to shoot one in particular, he said.  A Petersburg Jew the Whites 
thought was a spy. He was on his way out the door when Flanders spoke to him. Quite 
calmly. I turned and looked over my shoulder when I heard his voice. He was holding 
a big pistol, one of those American 45 things with the half- inch calibre bullet. Same 
as the Martini-Henry they used at Rorke's Drift - a man-stopper if ever there was.  I 
recognised some of what he was saying - 'plennik' and 'nyet'  amongst them. 
And? 
 Well. That was that.  Ostrovsky's pistol came up and there was a sound like a 
howitzer going off. Ostrovsky went backwards over the sofa with a hole in his chest 
you could drive a carriage through. Another card player went to lift his holster flap but 
thought better of it. Sensible fellow. Blighter gave the sort of a smile you muster after 
losing at bridge. Then he put his hands back on the table. Blake lifted his glass. And 
that's it. I called the guard out and the place was soon filled with a sergeant and six 
riflemen from the Middlesex. Open- mouthed, I need hardly say, but loving it. 
Soldiers. Flanders handed me his pistol, butt-first, then tucked the unfinished Tatlers 
under his arm. And off he went under escort. Didn't turn a hair. 
The Court-Martial?' 
Back in London. Russian General got shirty the following day, wanted a firing 
squad. General Ironsides told him that if anyone was going to shoot a British officer it 
was he.  I got orders to put Flanders under close arrest and put him on the next boat. 
The Middlesex cheered him up the gangplank. Despite being told not to. Acquitted at 
Court Martial. 
After your written evidence. 
Yes. 
Without a stain... 
Ish. What did you expect. The Foreign Office got their knickers twisted round their 
necks. Complex political situation... international fight against Bolshevik menace 
etcetera. A British officer whose ideas of co-operation was, shall we say, unorthodox, 
was surplus to requirements. Off to Dublin Castle on the next mail boat from 
Holyhead. 
I see. No medals then. 
No. 
Weren't the Bolos keen to give him something? Hero of whatever it is? Not many 
imperialist capitalist lackeys have  actually shot a White Guard officer after all. The 
General lifted his glass.  Even on a mess night. 
Blake gave a thin smile and looked at his watch. You'll be able to ask him yourself 
sir. He's due. 
Both men went to the window. There were fewer people about now, hurrying to 
Blackfriars in the dark for the suburban trains or walking up to Fleet Street to catch a 
bus for Charing Cross. Blake pointed to a figure fifty yards away approaching from 
the direction of Temple tube. He wore an overcoat and hat and carried a stick. His 
pace was steady under the gas lights but he limped slightly, the left foot thrown out at 
each step.  They saw him disappear below the window and a minute later a 
manservant showed him into the room where he immediately slotted a heavy ash plant 
into the umbrella stand. The General looked him up and down. He saw a man in his 
mid-forties, greying dark hair, stout but not fat, below the middle height.   His suit 
was pressed but old.  Blake shook hands and made the introductions. He moved 
beyond the door to lock the ante-room outer door. They sat round the fire, each with a 
glass. 
A cold night, the General said. 
It is sir. Flanders' voice was dry, neutral. 
But not as cold as North Russia, I imagine. 
Few places are. 
The General lifted a buff file and held it up. Thank you for coming. Mind if I run 
through some of this with you? 
I don't mind. Flanders thought in the firelight the old man looked like a small bird 
of prey. 
For half an hour he took Flanders through his life on paper. He ignored chronology, 
moved from subject to subject, and often doubled back to earlier ground, then re-
doubled back again, all in a quiet, disinterested voice. At one point without preamble 
he spoke in a foreign language. Blake looked up, alert, not understanding. 
How's your language Do you keep it up? The old man spoke to Flanders in swift 
Urdu. 
Flanders replied in the same language. I dont. Serviceable only I'd say, these days. 
Though I miss the hills at dawn or evening- as must you.   The general grunted to 
himself and reverted to English. Blake sat back. 
Finally: Not married? 
My life didn't seem to suit it. 
The General closed the file and placed it on the table. He thought for a moment and 
sat back in his chair, crossing his hands over his stomach. 
I'd like you to take on a job for me. 
Flanders looked at Blake, who nodded almost imperceptibly. 
What sort of job is it? 
A tricky job. One you can't refuse if I explain it to you. The word 'secret' doesn't 
begin to cover it. 
Is it within my capabilities? 
Yes. 
Flanders glanced again at Blake. Another slight nod. 
All right sir. Say on. 
The General stretched out his legs and crossed his ankles. He appeared to study  his 
toecaps.  The thing is, the General said mildly, not taking his eyes from his shoes, 
I'd like you to catch a spy. 
CHAPTER X 
Yaroslavsky Station, Komsomol Square, Moscow. 20th of March 1938 
Andrei's train arrived mid-morning, late.  He left the station and  walked at random in 
the bright sunshine, glad to be back in the city. Moscow smelled of cement.  
[In order to include the most important scenes from this chapter a portion of its  
initial narrative has been excluded. It deals with Andrei's time in the country working 
in a logging camp. There he learns from Mendel of his father's suicide on being 
captured in Leningrad and his courage in refusing to betray anyone to the NKVD. The 
scene is being set for Andrei in a later chapter to be offered revenge for his father's 
death with the prize of one of the NKVD men whose arrest Mendel can engineer. The 
policeman's wife and children will also suffer,as is the norm in Soviet Russia and 
Andrei has to make the choice, his character in the book developing thereby.  Andrei's 
appearance has changed with a beard and pudding bowl peasant haircut and Moscow 
is changing also. He is met by one of Mendel's men, the monosyllabic Volodya, and 
taken to a safe house to rest.] 
Later Andrei heard the soft knocking. In an instant he was up. A key turned in the 
door and  Mendel appeared.  As usual he wore a flat cap on his shaven head and 
workman's overalls. His hands were rough looking and raw. He embraced Andrei and 
held him at arms length. 
Country life agrees with you, I see,  he said, sitting on a crate and pulling out from 
his coat a bag which smelled of bread and sausage and  some tea. Finally,  he held up 
two lemons.Well, you'd be disappointed otherwise. There are some plates and glasses 
in that box. Why dont we get that stove going? 
When the water had boiled, they sat on a bunk and ate.  The shouts of children filtered 
up from the courtyards below. Mendel looked at him appraisingly. 
Well. No-one followed you, youll be glad to know. I am anyway. Ive had your back 
watched since the station. How did you find Volodya? 
Chatty.  
Mendel laughed. He is that. A good man to have on your side in anydifficult  
situation though. It might be thought that he'd stand out but in fact he is ignored or 
avoided by people because of his deformity and can go many places where another 
man might not.  You may meet him again. But for now I imagine you want to know 
what happens next. 
Very much. 
I've got a job for you. Cover. In a factory. 
All right. 
And, if you would do me a favour at the same time, I'd be very much obliged. Shall 
we have another glass of tea? 
Andrei sat on the edge of the bed waiting for Mendel to speak. 
I need you to look after someone. A writer. More than. Actually, you've met. He was 
the fellow in Zamoskvareche, the one with the glasses when you met Ivan from the 
Ukraine. You haven't forgotten that. 
Andrei saw Mendel was looking at him with more than ordinary attention. 
I remember. And I'll look after whoever you need me to. he said. 
Mendel smiled and he touched Andrei gently on the shoulder. His shaved head 
gleamed in the light from the high window. He sipped his tea. Hes a genius. How 
else to put it I dont know. Hes a literary genius, the like of which this country, and a 
Europe we're still part of whatever they say, hasn't seen since Pushkin. And I don't 
exaggerate. 
Who is he? Have I read him?- 
No. No-one has. Hes unknown, writing only for himself. He is also, in many things, 
nave and foolish- he behaves like one young in years, though he is no longer. His 
mind simply doesnt see the everyday, except in his writing.  In many ways hes 
childlike. He of course likes to eat- but cannot devote time to finding food.  He likes- 
too much, between us- to drink, but has to scrounge vodka. And when he finds it he 
drinks to oblivion. 
A Russian then. 
Of course hes a Russian. But not a stage Russian.  His true world exists inside his 
brain and nowhere else. There he makes fine, balanced judgements, draws inferences, 
sums up complex aspects of character in a single phrase. In normal life he can do 
none of that.  He flounders, badly dressed and hungry amongst the problems of 
everyday existence like a caricature of an artist in a garret. And most of all, most 
worrying of all from my point of view, and yours... well, he cannot gauge risk. Not at 
all. 
And you want me to look after him. 
I ask that. He's only survived until now by luck and the fact that in his outward 
appearance he's unremarkable. He says very little, an advantage in our times. And a 
more ordinary-looking  person youll not find. But he needs someone to watch out for 
him. In return you'll be helping him, and us all. 
Whats the reason he needs to be looked after, other than he flounders a bit. We all 
Mendel looked directly at Andrei. He's writing a book, a fine book, an amazing 
book, which well enable him to complete. In this country, as in no other, the right 
book can be worth the earth. You know that. It can change the minds of men. This one 
will set Russia, Europe by the ears. 
And those who murdered my father? Are they involved? 
Mendel thought for a moment and paused. Yes. I can only give you one. I'll speak of 
it another day. May I? 
Thats something. 
Indeed it is. And more than something. We all do well to remember in these times 
that we work with the possible. Without going into details, that which is possible 
becomes less and less each day. What I can do on a Monday night becomes 
impossible  by Tuesday morning. We have been lucky so far. 
Andrei looked closely at the other man. His voice had fallen away. On the  angular 
face minute lines of tension  hatched the skin. Tiredness seeped from him. 
 Of course I agree to whatever you wish, Andrei said. 
Good. Mendel gave his small smile and Andrei felt the relief in the other man.  
Theres something else. I couldn't tell you before. Your father was carrying part of 
this book, a chapter, when they arrested him. Im afraid I asked him to. I've got to tell 
you that. 
He did it freely? 
No. Courage made him do it. 
Andrei  saw a picture of his father making tea in their room, standing in his slippers, 
his greatcoat over his shoulders, laughing about something. Mendel waited. 
 He was taking it to an intermediary in Leningrad who was to take it to the West. 
They caught him. I dont yet know how. The rest you know. He died without 
betraying anyone. He didn't talk. 
Andrei sat back. Have you read this book? 
Only the part your father was carrying. But I can tell you it grabs you by the throat 
and holds you. Our lives suddenly have meaning in those pages. Your father had read 
this portion also. He knew the risks but decided nonetheless to carry on. He was  a 
man, a patriot, though of course the present...authorities have another view. They are 
running scared.  Very scared. This makes them extremely dangerous. 
How so? Andrei put down his glass. 
Its right you know the risks. As I understand it three writers suspected of being the 
author have been tortured, then shot, in the last year. Two senior officers of the NKVD  
who have failed to find the book or the author have also been taken to the punishment 
cells. Taken down in the lift from their offices. Shot. 
How do you know? 
Mendel pursed his lips.  
Please accept it from me. 
All right. Two shot. Theres now a third? 
Yes. With a small team. Of course it has to be small. Otherwise the rumours begin. 
The last thing they want is a work of genuine value, an all encompassing Russian 
work of  genius appearing in the West where they've no control. The next worse thing 
is word getting out in Russia that it even exists. Or might exist.  Thinking about it Im 
not sure the latter isn't more powerful than the former. We're the land after all  where 
fact runs a poor second to invention. 
Andrei thought for a few moments. What does this book say? 
Mendel himself paused, leaning forward slightly, his elbows on his knees.  It tells us 
something I thought in my lifetime Id never hear.  It tells the truth about the 
Revolution. All of it. 
A silence hung between them. Andrei looked directly into Mendels eyes. 
My God. 
Thats one way to look at it. Not being a believer I dont often use the expression but 
when all is said and done it may be the only one that fits. 
I still dont understand. 
You will later.  For the moment I can tell you that its all there. Lenin, Trotsky, 
Stalins rise to power, his part in  Kirovs murder, his paranoia, the deliberate famines, 
the crushing of the sailors at Kronstadt, collectivisation, the falsities, the massive lies. 
And now the faked trials, the legalised murders, the lists of arrests, the deaths, the 
plots that dont exist, the ones that do. The secret graveyards out beyond the city. 
Butovo for example. Hundreds are being shot there every night. It's going on all over 
the country. The lives of millions squandered by a paranoid criminal. Its about us, all 
of us. He tapped the packing case twice.  In the end, its about humankind. 
Some of these things are known, other things are hidden. How does the author get 
such information? Andrei hesitated. From you? 
Im the conduit, that much I will say. More you don't need to know. I've said too 
much already but you are taking on a task and you should know something of it.  
And what am I to do? 
Just look after him. To get the book finished. I got him a job as a night watchman-
terrible pay, bottom of the line- where he writes. You and he will be sharing a room at 
the Hotel Lux. That place on Gorky Street. Its just around the corner from here. His 
old place was getting too dangerous. The Lux is where the foreigners from the 
Comintern stay-or used to stay, mostly they've been shot. All committed communists 
working for the international success of the Party. Some are still alive but not many. 
Some of their families have survived but ...well...it won't be that long till they go to 
the camps if they haven't already. Foreigners equals danger to Stalin. The country is to 
be sealed even tighter than before. A hermetic seal between us and the rest of the 
world. 
Is such a place safe? Sorry to ask but- 
You do right  to ask. It suits our purposes. There's a hostel  annex in the back 
courtyard for domestic workers, thats where youll be living. And I've someone there. 
He'll keep an eye out for you. There are other Russians there but the Organs dont 
bother with them. Its the old Communists - German translators, the Hungarian left- 
wing journalists, the French dreamers. That's who they want.  The ones who might be 
having second thoughts, the ones whove concluded this  isn't the Revolution they had 
in mind. 
Mendel poured some more water into the pot and pumped up the primus stove till it 
gave a good flame.   The Lux isnt well named, but the best I can do at the moment. 
There are advantages. Temporary and transient workers passing through there, doing 
shifts at all hours. Two more wont be noticed. I have arranged things with the 
manager. He thinks you are informers of mine. With the heavy beard and the new 
haircut you look very different from your appearance a year ago and your ward- his 
name is Mirnov, Fyodor Arkadeyovich - isn't known to the system at all. A fortunate 
thing. Your papers are in here. Learn the details. Mendel proffered a dirty brown 
envelope.  
Your new name is Popov, Andrei Andreiovich. Different date of birth. Born near 
where you were staying in the North. Dont get into long discussions with anyone 
about your past. Family perished in the Civil War etc. No dependants.Like many 
another.You look like a country boy in the big city. There are thousands. People have 
been scattered to the four winds. No-one will care. 
How long? And what's to happen in the end? Andrei said, taking the envelope. 
Months, not years. Hes been working on it for four  years and is quite close to 
finishing. I hope. After that we get  the manuscript to the West. Paris probably, though 
that is not yet decided. 
How'll it get there? 
Youll take it. 
 Andrei gave a double yelp. Me? How? 
That, Im considering. 
My God. How much of the book is finished? 
A good question. He wont let anyone read it. After losing the first chapter when 
your father was arrested - he's not to know about that by the way - he had to re-write it 
from his first notes. Now he wont confide in anyone and wont even tell me where 
the manuscript is. Not in his lodgings. Perhaps hidden at a friends or at work. Thats 
one of the things I want you to find out. 
You want me to spy on him? 
Mendel spoke wearily, rubbing his face. Yes. Its necessary. Get used to it. 
Andrei grimaced. Mendel spread his hands.  
Its for his own good, not to damage him. I hope hell come to trust you and in turn 
you'll save his manuscript and give it life. It sounds high flown but its quite real, I 
assure you. All Russia must read it. The world must read it. 
When do I go to the Lux? 
If you agree, hes waiting. Now. 
Andrei opened the envelope to find his face staring from an internal passport, a 
creased dirty birth certificate and a Moscow Residence permit. Behind the passport, in 
a blue rubber band was a small wad of paper roubles. Okay he said, and then in a 
quieter voice, Lets go. They walked down the three flights of old stone stairs and 
across the courtyard, picking their way through people hurrying by. The children were 
playing with a small ball, their shrieks rebounding off the courtyard walls, and some 
women were arguing shrilly about washing clothes but Andrei walked straight past, 
hearing nothing. Paris. 
If the name of the Hotel Lux was intended to convey an opulent interior of damasked 
splendour, it failed. The lobby bore signs of old grandeur but  the rooms were divided 
and sub-divided with thin plywood partitions, the un-carpeted halls were loud with 
childrens running feet and the staff were indifferent at best, more usually drunk and 
surly. On Andreis second evening  he couldnt find the night porter until he looked 
behind the high desk to see the man curled up on the floor, an empty bottle of vodka 
cradled in his arms.  The toilets stank, the water was lukewarm for an hour each day 
and the bathroom arguments legendary.  Every European language filled the corridors; 
the nasal vowels of Poland, Finnish words like cracking walnuts, the crisp rasp of 
German and astonishing long runs of Hungarian where the ends of each word to 
Andreis ears sounded the same. In the canteen early one evening, after a bowl of 
greasy soup and a large lump of dark bread, Andrei counted Italian, Spanish, English, 
French and something that sounded like all four.  
Rumanian,  Fyodor said, lifting his mouth from a chipped cup of lukewarm tea. He 
rubbed a black smear inside the cup with his thumb, which only made it larger. He 
peered at the stain through steel spectacles, his straight fair hair falling over the small 
round rims, then gave up. He continued to drink the tea. 
Andrei looked at him.  How do you know? 
Odessa. Where I come from. You hear it a lot there. Or used to. 
Andrei said nothing, just nodded. They sat in silence for a few moments. Fyodor 
cleared his throat. Any vodka? 
Half bottle in the room. 
Fyodor looked around the canteen. Two small women in stained coats, elderly and  
overweight, were clattering dirty dishes into piles and shouting at one another. Small 
children were chanting a song at the far end, their parents snapping at them in a tired 
and listless way. Beside them a small group of adults on their own sat looking at each 
other  across the table, chain- smoking, largely in silence. Their faces were rigid in a 
haze of blue smoke.  Lets get it and get out of here, its depressing. Fyodor said. A 
walk? How about a walk over to Zamoskvoreche? 
They turned out of the hotel and down the slight decline of Gorky Street in the dusk, 
collars up and hands deep in pockets. Autumn had come.It was cold.  In Revolution 
Square the wind tugged at the bottom of their coats. The crowd swept them along  
when the traffic policeman pointed his white stick.  On the slope up to Red Square 
they found themselves where the chapel of the  Iberian Virgin chapel had stood for 
centuries until its demolition six years before. 
There was no traffic. Fyodor stopped in the middle of the road and looked up. Andrei 
followed his gaze, finding only the open sky and a few emerging stars. 
This is where it was. Fyodor said, head still back, were underneath the arches 
now. 
Yes, I remember the place, but do you know I was never inside-. 
Two fairy towers and two arches. So the coach could draw up and the Iberian Virgin 
icon could be passed down and driven off to whichever poor soul needed its heeling 
powers. Famous, as youll have heard, throughout the city. People stopped in the 
street, some falling to their knees, when it passed. You're too young to remember all 
that. Even from a distance you could see the flurries of people crossing themselves as 
it passed. A great fat Izvozchik in a top hat drove the coach like he was a Field 
Marshall, not a glorified cabbie. He thought he had the Czar and the Crown jewels in 
the back - not two priests. Honestly, he used to rattle along, his head going in a lordly 
way from side to side as if  he was the miracle. Quite a sight. 
Andrei looked around quickly. They had received a few odd glances from passers by. 
Best to keep your voice down. What was it like? Were you inside? 
Fyodor looked at him.  Often. Very often. Especially in winter. You cant imagine it, 
the richness, the colour, the smells. Everyone was there, peasants straight from the 
fields, hats in hands, young women praying for fertility, stealthy merchants with a 
long list of sins. The stone pillar where the icon stood was black. At first you thought 
it was finger marks, then realised it was kisses. 
It'd need Levitan to paint it. 
Oh indeed. He'd be just the man. Capture it for certain. 
And could you equal him in words? 
Fyodor made no reply. He looked at Andrei for some time, then gave a  small quick 
smile. With his lank forelock, small round glasses and muffler wrapped twice about 
his neck he looked more like a schoolboy than ever.  
Mischevious, Andrei Andreiovich. You see my desire to speak about my writing as 
well as my reluctance to do so. And you link me to a man I admire, but in such an 
open way I can't take offence. 
And 
The answer I believe is yes, I 've written about it, how well its not for me to say. But 
I remember it as though it was yesterday and as though there was not air above our 
heads but that fantastical chapel. On our visits from Odessa my father would take me 
and later I'd come on my own. Especially, as I said, in winter. I'd stand at the back and 
watch. It stirred the heart as nothing else. It does still. And I'm not alone 
Andrei followed his glance to the side of the road where a small group of old women 
sat on wooden crates. In their mixtures of drab clothing and bright cotton kerchiefs 
they looked like bundles of  brown cloth topped by a dab of paint. They  appeared to 
be mumbling, almost inaudibly, and now and again they would dip their heads briefly  
in unison. People ignored them, sweeping past singly and in small groups. 
Fyodor stood with his back to Red Square. The Lenin mausoleum was over his left 
shoulder. A long line of people waited for admittance even this late in the day. He 
smiled. 
It was wonderful. On a winter afternoon, late on, it would begin to grow dark and all 
the candles would be lit. The iconostasis  burning with light, climbing in hammered 
gold sheets up to the ceilings. Lamps glowing in front of the icons- rows and rows of 
them -  all those solemn, long-ago faces and the sorrow of them, alive in the candle 
light. Not just flickering, but rippling in the air currents against the gold and the stone. 
Small  forests of flame. Trembling flame. The people were shoulder to shoulder. Then 
the first thumping bass chant. Carrying to every corner. When the choir responded, 
you could hold the centuries in your hand.  All those swelling hearts and the faces 
bright amongst the  white candles. Shoals and shoals of candles all tipped with fire. 
Up and up the voices. Climbing up into the incense. And all of them, the poor, the rich 
the ugly, the deformed, the beautiful- all of them crossing themselves in a rolling sea 
of movement across the body of the church. Slow waves of hands crossing and re-
crossing -  thumping on foreheads and sweeping across the heart. It was a Diaghelev 
ballet. And  the snow falling past the  windows, each flake held  in  yellow light, as if 
for ever. 
Fyodor fell silent. Andrei spoke quietly. Are you a believer?  
Fyodor did not respond. He had taken off his glasses and was polishing them on his 
scarf. He seemed mesmerised by the group of older women sitting on the wooden 
crates. They continued to sit murmuring to themselves. Pedestrians moved around 
them in a constant flow.  
Are you? Andrei said again. He spoke softly. 
Me? Fyodor said, turning, Of course not. 
But 
One mustnt forget that the home visits and healing miracles of the icon were only 
available to those who could pay.  Not much of the divine in that concept I should 
say. 
And the people? Their faith? The feeling in that room? 
That's of course a different matter. I don't question it. After all, neither, really, do the 
Communists. Thats after all what the Party is trying to recreate but with images of 
tractors and factories and plenty. There'll be halls of worship, whatever happens. They 
just wont contain representations of Christ. No prizes for guessing whose picture 
there will be. 
No.  
And instead of St Nicolas the Wonder worker, or Saint Catherine of Sinai, well have 
whatever members of the Politburo have managed to stay alive. It'll be a rather mobile 
iconostasis. 
But that scene  youve just described. It moved you. All of it- the colour, the heat, the 
feelings of the people those voices 
It did, and does, Fyodor said, replacing his glasses and blinking twice. He turned to 
continue the walk,  but we must remember who else was present; - remember what  
Baedeker says. They made up a considerable proportion of the congregation, among 
the peasants, the deep voiced priests, the comely women and  the rich merchants with 
bad consciences Fyodor smiled like a naughty boy. 
Who? Andrei said, falling into step. 
Fyodor half-turned and smiled broadly.  Criminals, Andrei Andreiovich.  
Pickpockets. The place was absolutely stiff with them. 
Passing the shops with empty windows, known formerly as the Trading Rows but 
now known as GUM, the State Universal Store, they looked across the cobbled 
expanse of Red Square to the Kremlin walls, russet swallow-tailed battlements taken 
from an Italian landscape painting. 
What would the Kremlin be without the Italian architects, do you think? 
Smaller. 
At least. Do you think the Vozhd ponders that? What do you think hes doing in there 
at this moment, Fyodor asked in an ordinary voice, having a cup of tea? Signing a 
few thousand  more death warrants? 
Andrei looked round quickly. Keep your voice down, he hissed, Thats enough to 
get us killed. Just that. 
Fyodor looked downcast.  Sorry, he said quietly, his eyes blinking behind his 
spectacles, -Wasnt thinking. Any of that vodka? 
The river. 
On the bridge, they stopped to lean on the parapet and look back at the city. The wind 
had fallen. Lights were on all over the Kremlin.  To one side St Basils stood at the 
bottom of Red Square like a  childs toy. Where the Redeemer Church had stood until 
a few years ago over to the West there was an empty space. 
Fyodor narrowed his eyes. I believe that they plan  to erect a giant palace of the 
Soviets with a central pillar half a mile high. Then theyre going to put an even more 
gigantic statue of Lenin on it. Hand raised in salute. To whom is not immediately 
clear. A masonry birthday cake. Never liked the Redeemer Church myself, too smug 
and stodgy. The 19th century at its worse. But I think Id prefer it over the cake. 
Andrei smiled, and tugged his scarf, a worn thing with several holes, round his throat. 
It was getting colder. 
Vodka. Fyodor said, his face turning in anticipation.  
Andrei got the bottle out. It was wrapped in paper and stoppered with a  wooden plug. 
Fyodor took a deep swig and handed the bottle back. Andrei took a small sip. 
And again, Fyodor said. Please. 
Andrei handed the bottle back and watched  the other man drank half of the remaining 
liquid. Thats enough for the present, he said, Weve got tonight to think of. 
Fyodor said nothing but handed back the bottle, pulled up his collar, stuck his hands 
back in his pocket and began walking. Andrei followed. They looked up at the stars 
and walked on in silence. 
Turning into Pyatnitskaya Street, they slowed.  Small  wooden and plaster houses 
filled either side of the road and they passed the Zachachievsky church in silence, 
each raising his eyebrows to the other.  Andrei touched the empty bench his father 
used to sit him on.  Woodsmoke drifted on the cold air. There were few people on the 
pavements.  Andrei remarked on the quiet and the lack of  construction. 
Its why I come, Fyodor said, I feel like an Oblomov character here. It allows my 
mind to drift. 
Where does it drift to?  
The past. Of course I prefer it. 
Why? 
 Selection. One may choose. And of course one has the decided advantage of not 
having to live through it. 
What of the present, or even of the future? 
The future I cannot bear to think about. Im glad Ive no children. Im not a 
courageous person, I know that. And I certainly havent got the courage to have 
children. 
Andrei was about to speak but Fyodor shook his head. And of the present we shant 
speak, if youll allow. It'll ruin our walk. 
What past do you select? 
The best bits. Our Russian past. I take the easy path.  Leave aside the monsters and 
tyrants who've disfigured our consciousness. Never mind the bones without number 
of the poor  who were forced to build Petersburg and died there nameless and 
scrabbling in the mud; think instead of that incomparable place in the slanting winter 
sun. One of the wonders of the modern world.  Dont look at me like that, Im 
exaggerating for effect. But not by much. 
Was it worth it? The deaths of all those nameless people, for architecture. 
Thats one of the questions. I fear on balance it was. For us of course, not them.  I 
certainly find it all too easy to put them out of my mind when I look at the Winter 
Palace Square.  Its one of our problems, the over- sufficiency of people, the never 
ending streams of them pouring in from every corner of the country. The individual 
simply does not matter. There are more of them than the world, the Russian world, 
needs. Or can cope with. 
 So- 
So an indifference to the individual, and therefore to the fate of that individual is one 
of our three problems. We can't seem to see that such indifference allows the present 
situation to arise, and that our collective and individual suffering therefore also 
continues. Our often stated national saying is a wish to live like people not, youll 
note, live like a person. An important difference. In other words, its our own fault. 
But within that fault lies perhaps our salvation, a feeling of responsibility to the 
collective world beyond the individual. Question of balance in the end. 
The second? Andrei looked around. The street was empty. They continued to walk. 
Size. The administration of the biggest country on earth. The immensity defies 
comprehension. We straddle Europe and Asia from t from the Baltic to the Sea of 
Japan. And yet Japan, which could just about be squeezed into a Siberian district for 
God's sake, beat us hollow. We're backward. The Bolsheviks are right about that part. 
But the question is how does the state govern and administer such a colossal country 
for the benefit of the people without oppressing and coercing that same people? 
Fyodor threw his hands up. How does it rule? 
Well? How? 
Ive no idea. Not the faintest. 
Andrei stopped and faced the other man, who also stopped. But arent you writing 
about that? 
Not at all. Thats for the people to decide. Eventually. I'm saying what has happened. 
What went wrong. He stamped his feet gently in the cold. Can we carry on 
walking? 
They passed a man walking the other way, his face deep in his collar. And number 
three. Our third problem? Andrei said. 
 Fyodor took his glasses off the bridge of his nose and stared about him with 
unfocused eyes. The most difficult, the most intractable of all. One I doubt is 
susceptible of any solution. Not for years. He pulled a dirty square of cotton from his 
pocket and again began to polish the lenses as he walked. Yes. Sadly. I believe it to 
be so. 
He said nothing more, but continued to walk slowly, looking at the old buildings in 
shadow. Andrei walked alongside him. At the next corner Fyodor stopped. Shouldnt 
we be getting back? I heard a rumour there was going to be some sort of meat later. 
He squeezed his eyes together. Maybe that was yesterday. He looked around. Its 
getting on. 
 They began to retrace their steps.  In silence they walked back towards the river and 
paused again on the bridge. 
Well? said Andrei. 
Fyodor turned, startled. Well? Well what? 
Andrei fought to contain his impatience. The third problem. The third- 
Oh. Im sorry. Really. Didnt I say? 
No. 
 In front of them the Kremlin sat on its hill.  Ivan the Terrible's Bell tower, rose over 
the floodlit roofs, a slim white finger.  
Fyodor took his glasses off and blinked his eyes. Its as they say Im afraid, Andrei 
Andreiovich, its as they say He put his glasses back on and touched Andrei's 
sleeve. The Renaissance. We missed it by a country mile. 
As the autumn days grew shorter they settled into a routine. Andrei saw Mendel once 
a week by arrangement in different parts of the city. He thought Mendel looked older 
each time. At the Lux Fyodor always returned in the early morning from his boiler 
room just as Andrei was waking. The hostel was quiet, its halls deserted, and Fyodor 
would make two cups of tea  in the kitchen, bringing them along to their room, 
handing it over formally. No matter how many times Andrei raised the subject Fyodor 
always addressed him by first name and patronymic. Forgive me Andrei 
Andreiovich, Im a little old now to change. They would sit together, not saying 
much, then Andrei would head up Gorky Street, wrapped tightly in his long coat. 
Fyodor usually stuffed waxed cotton balls into his ears and slid under the rough 
blankets, his coat spread over them.  
Towards late afternoon Andrei would return and it would be his turn to make the tea. 
Fyodor slept so deeply he would have to be woken up but the instant he smelled the 
tea he would be sitting up in bed, knees bent,  breathing in the steam. 
Really, this is excellent tea. He would say, smiling, the same thing every day. Very 
occasionally Andrei would acquire a bit of lemon from the women in the canteen and 
would slice it into two  halves. Fyodor would beam. Lemon...you are becoming 
another Mendel. Really. He would shake his head in quiet enjoyment. Smell the 
Crimea, Andrei Andreiovich. Smell the South. 
In the early evening they would usually go downstairs and across the courtyard to the 
dining room where they would wait in line with the others for an evening meal of 
potatoes or buckwheat with some sort of over-boiled stew of vegetables or gristle. On 
other nights there would be gobbets of preserved fish or thin, almost transparent, 
beetroot soup. At communal tables  each nationality usually kept to its group but from 
time to time a foreigner would speak and some sort of acquaintance would spring up. 
More often a polite distance was kept. One November evening Fyodor started 
speaking to three sad looking children sitting on their benches. They responded 
brightly but their mother, returning from the queue with a tray of food, took them to 
the other side of the room without a word. 
Fyodor looked as if he had been slapped. They think were informers. Spies. Andrei 
pushed a potato round his plate. Its not personal, he said.  
Fyodor nodded silently, his forelock going up and down. He pushed it to one side but 
it bounced back as always, almost touching the top of his glasses. Andrei could see he 
was upset. 
Im afraid they do. Andrei said softly. Were Russians, and feared. Do you see the 
Poles? Paler than usual and going about like ghosts. The last  of them were arrested in 
the middle of the night on Friday night and never came back. They have families. The 
women all look as if they have raw ulcers. Look. Gently does it. 
Fyodor reached over for bread and as casually as he could, looked across the tables. 
Half a dozen young and middle-aged women sat in a group, arguing in low voices and 
smoking, hard faces tight with worry. Children plucked at their sleeves. The women 
ignored them. 
They cant even trust each other. How are they to know none of them are stool 
pigeons. 
Fyodor still hadnt spoken. His mind seemed far away. He let out a small sigh. A 
walk? he said.  
Back at the Lux, Andrei noticed a new assistant manager. This one sat behind the desk  
saying nothing, his eyes swivelling unblinkingly. His look, as if he had a right to ask 
anyone their business, betrayed him as NKVD as surely as if he had worn the blue  
hat. The old assistant manager, a small thin man called Shevshenko, who had always 
looked harassed and tired, dark rings under his eyes and his hair falling out in 
handfuls, disappeared. No-one ever mentioned his name again.  
One evening in late November Andrei came back to find the room smelled of vodka. 
An empty bottle lay on the floor. Fyodor had been drinking heavily for two weeks. He 
was lying on the bed fully clothed and snoring, his glasses lying beside the bottle. 
Scattered to one side were some handwritten sheets of cheap brownish paper. A pencil 
lay on the floor.  
 Andrei tried to wake him but Fyodor snored on. He moved him onto his side and 
picked up the glasses and paper. Lying on his bunk he tried to read the sentences 
written in tight slanting script. He found it difficult, some words being clear but the 
majority running across the page in spiky arabesques. Notes in pencilled balloons 
filled every space on the paper.  It took him fifteen minutes to decipher a sentence 
which, as far as he could tell, concerned a field and an abandoned house. He gave up 
and tidied the papers away. Then he fell asleep for an hour waking only when his 
stomach told him it was time to eat. He managed to rouse Fyodor. In the canteen, the 
writers hands quivered; he couldn't eat kasha.The grains of boiled buckwheat littered 
the table between them. 
I cant go to work. Dont feel well. Honestly. I cant.  
Was it the full bottle? 
Fyodor nodded, then winced. Someone was selling them at work. Home made 
Youre drinking Samogon? God Almighty. You never know whats in that stuff, its- 
Andrei broke off. Fyodor averted his face and was sick over the floor. People on the 
surrounding tables looked away, the mothers turning the heads of the children. 
Im sorry, I am reallyOh God- 
Ill get a bucket. Andrei went to the cleaners room and returned with a wooden 
bucket full of water, some rags and a long handled mop. While Fyodor sat on a bench, 
his face in his hands, Andrei cleared up the mess. Come on, he said, once he had 
finished, lets go back to the room and you can get some sleep.  
Im so sorry Andrei Andreiovich, Fyodor  mumbled, before falling asleep. Andrei 
waited till it was two hours to go before Fyodor's shift was to begin, and woke him. 
He made him wash, still befuddled, his hands trembling, before taking him out into 
the cold air and walking him  north up Gorky street towards Pushkin Square. Im 
coming with you, he said; Fyodor had just looked grateful. 
Youll want these, Andrei said, taking out the papers from the inside of his coat. 
Not something we can leave in the room. 
Fyodor took the thin sheaf without a word and stuffed them in a pocket. He carried on 
walking, eyes straight ahead, glasses bobbing slightly on his nose, an automaton 
among the evening crowds on the pavement. Dark had fallen long since and lights had 
come on along the whole avenue, not bright lights but a hesitant, worn-out yellow.  A 
few years before Tverskaya  had been a pleasant meandering street, not very wide, of 
three storey buildings straggling from the centre to the north. Now, as Gorky Street, it 
was an arterial  thoroughfare of eight traffic lanes lined on each side by vast apartment 
blocks. Some of the old buildings had simply been moved back on rollers, a triumph 
of heavy engineering. Trams and trolleybuses clanged past constantly on steel rails in 
both directions with tired people staring out of the windows. The crowds seemed 
never ending. 
They walked in silence. Both the writing and the manuscript had become issues 
between them. Fyodor had been reluctant to discuss any aspect of his writing, nor 
would he disclose the size or whereabouts of the manuscript. Most of his writing was 
done at work on the night watchmans job but if he was working in the room when 
Andrei came back he would gently pack up the papers and take them with them that 
night when he went to work. Whenever Andrei had tried to raise the matter Fyodor 
had simply apologised. 
Sorry Andrei Andreovich. Please forgiveDont ask me about these things, he 
would say gently, turning away.    
Andrei decided it was time to try again. Mendel had looked hunted the last time they 
had met. His nails had been bitten down into the flesh. Andrei glanced over at Fyodor. 
His eyes were swollen and his face was bloodless under the lamplight as he trudged 
along. Andrei felt himself change into someone he only slightly recognised as he 
made his calculation. When they came abreast of the Moscow City Council building 
he spoke. 
Its dangerous. Thats the first thing. If you get drunk and youve got that writing on 
you or you leave it somewhere we could be finished. Both of us. Badly. 
Fyodor said nothing. 
And if you pass out somewhere and something happens to you your work could be 
lost. All those years for nothing.  We need to have a plan if something goes wrong. 
Fyodor turned to look at him without slackening pace, then returned to staring straight 
ahead. They kept moving. 
If you dont care about that, what about all the people whove helped us?  What 
about Mendel? The Volinskys? All of that goes for nothing because you've got the 
artistic temperament?  
Im sorry Andrei Andreiovich. Truly I realise you've helped me this evening when 
you dont want to.  And you've been so very good, so very good. And now youre 
angry.  But Im afraid, pathetic as I sometimes am-- 
Stop feeling sorry for yourself. Its what drunks do and its getting boring. Im taking 
you to work because I promised Mendel Id look after you. Well I will. Until he 
releases me from that undertaking. I hope that's soon. Never thought I'd say that. No 
more talking about it. Its finished. 
They walked on in silence, Andrei angry, Fyodor with his head  down. At Pushkin 
Square, a place they often went to for the gaiety of the crowds, young lovers meeting, 
friends hugging, they said not a word. Turning into Trubnaya Boulevard Fyodor 
neglected to mention, as he never normally failed to do, the destruction of the 
Monastery of the Passion, one of the most beautiful buildings in the city, and the 
erection of a concrete and steel box to lodge the Partys newspaper.  IZVESTIA was 
written in huge letters across the front. He said not a word and they walked on. After 
half an hour, just before the great squat monster of the  Butyrki prison, they came to 
the gates of the factory. 
Thats it. Youre here. Im heading back to the hotel, Andrei said, resignation and 
tiredness in his voice. They stood under a street lamp beside a wall plastered with 
slogans about the second Five-Year Plan. 
Please dont be angry with me. I know I should feel differently. Youre right about all 
that But since my chapter was lost and I had to do all of it again 
It wasnt lost. 
Yes. It was, I- 
It was taken. Along with my father. 
Fyodors glasses jolted. His head moved back in surprise. Your father? What does 
he-? 
He was taking your manuscript out to Leningrad  when he was arrested. He died 
there. Eventually. Mendel told me.  Took his own life.  But he didnt betray anyone, 
otherwise you and I wouldnt be here now. 
You never said Fyodors voice was small and quiet in the empty street. He looked 
down. They faced each other, two figures in old overcoats, hands deep in pockets. 
Mendel said better not to. It would only complicate relations between us, he said. He 
was probably right. 
They stood in silence for a minute. Fyodors face looked confused, filled with too 
many thoughts. Eventually he took his glasses off and gave a small sigh. Will you 
come into the watchmans room with me? Id like to show you something. He put the 
glasses back on his nose and blinked. Please. 
Why would they let me in? 
Peter, the man I take over from wont make any trouble. He paused. He drinks. 
He reached inside a wooden box and tugged on a length of wire. From beyond the 
wall Andrei could hear a bell and footsteps crossing a yard. 
There was a grating of hinges and the  gate swung open. An old man holding a lantern 
greeted Fyodor and stood aside. 
Pyotr Denisovich, this is my friend. I dont feel so well tonight and he will sit with 
me a while. Perhaps you could join us for a drink before you go off watch? 
The old man grinned and relocked the gate. They followed him across the yard to the 
watchmans room past a large riveted boiler which lay silent and cold. Andrei looked 
round the room, noticing a table, a broken sink, some metal lockers lining one wall 
and four chairs.  The entire back of the room was piled up to the ceiling with coal and 
a  small cast iron stove looked blistering hot in a corner. After the cold outside the 
room was stifling. 
Im glad you came Fyodor Arkadeovich, even though you dont feel well, the old 
man said  formally, I want to go home tonight. Im very tired. His face was miss-
shapen and red. He brought out three cups and waited till Andrei filled them half way. 
Andrei sipped his but the other two men drank theirs down in one. Fyodor exhaled 
deeply and slumped back in his chair. 
Another before you go? Andrei said to the old man, who nodded quickly. When he 
had finished he bade them both a peaceful night and Fyodor walked him to the gate. 
Andrei was sitting warming his hands by the stove when he returned. 
Hes a nice old fellow, but the drink is killing him. He looked straight at Andrei.  
Can I have some more? He sat down. 
Andrei shrugged his shoulders and Fyodor half-filled his cup, sipping it slowly this 
time. 
Would you tell me about your father? he said, his voice subdued. Then Ill explain 
about the manuscript. 
Nothing much to say. Mendel needed someone he trusted to get the first chapter to 
Leningrad. From there someone else was to get it to Europe, through Finland or by 
sea. He told me my father was arrested with the papers but he doesnt know exactly 
how it happened. From what Mendel could find out, he wounded two of them. And in 
the prison managed to kill himself before a second interrogation.  Thats all I know. 
Andrei unhooked the stove and put on more coal, leaving the door open. 
Fyodor looked lost. He closed his eyes and spoke very quietly.I wish I knew what to 
say. Bravery like that. It's beyond me... 
Andrei said nothing but continued to stare at the flames. 
Who is Mendel? he said finally. 
I dont know, Fyodor said. But a while ago I came across this. 
He took out his glasses case and took out a folded newspaper photograph. It was of a 
group of army officers applauding at one of the show trials earlier that year. Mendel 
was in the second row, smiling.  
Andrei stared at the uniform and medals and the face above them. He shook his head 
like a terrier. 
I know, Fyodor said. I wasn't sure if I should say. Of course from all the 
information he has given me I realised he must be a functionary of some sort, clearly 
with power. And a deep hater of Stalin and what he did to the Revolution. He's 
obviously a soldier who survived. In the intelligence world I should say. Not many 
did. 
Andrei brought the photograph up to his eyes. Well. I think he knows what he's 
doing. He believes your book will change the way people think. Will it? 
I dont know. I hope so. I want to say that for good or ill only the truth will make 
us...I was going to say 'free' but I suppose I mean 'whole'... Its not an original concept 
I realise, I don't claim originality. But here and now it is of relevance. God knows 
we've nothing else. 
Since were talking about it, how long till its completed, Andrei asked. 
Fyodor hesitated for a moment, pursing his lips, then nodding.  Im almost there. Its 
been three years and more. But one more month ought to see it done. Its almost 
over. 
Does Mendel know? 
No, he doesn't. Fyodor hesitated.  I presumedI presumedthats why he paired 
you up with me... 
Andrei lifted up his head sharply and looked directly at the other man. Fyodors face 
was twisted in embarrassment. Andrei said nothing. Fyodor grimaced and his fingers 
fluttered on his knees. 
Please dont get angry. I know we're on the same side. It doesnt really matter. But if 
you tell me it isnt so of course I believe you  
Andrei again remained silent, and turned his head back. He spoke to the stove. 
It's so. But not so cut and dried. He asked me to do my best to look after you. 
Anything I learned which would help that, I was to tell him, yes. Is there any reason 
he shouldnt know? Hes done a lot for you. And me. 
Its difficult to explain. I need his help of course and I'm more grateful to him than I 
can say. To you too. But I want to keep things myself to the very last moment. After I 
hand it overeverything ends. Ill never write anything again. I know that. 
How do you know such a thing? Its a stupid thing to say. 
I agree. But its true nonetheless.. We each have our own truth. Mine is that soon... 
Im finished. He coughed. 
But he needs to make arrangements. You must see that- 
Fyodor simply nodded and gave the slightest of shrugs. 
I think he needs to be told, Andrei said. Will you allow that? 
Would you tell him anyway? 
Andrei remained silent. He threw more coal into the stove. The flames died 
momentarily and a hissing sound filled the small room. The  silence returned.  
No. 
Honestly? 
Not until you're ready Its your book. But I  want to persuade you also that it no 
longer just belongs to you  otherwise why write it. It belongs to those who've gone 
and those who might read it. The time is near. And I believe he is under a great deal of 
pressure. He helped us. We owe him. He held up the photograph and lifted his 
eyebrows. Well? It's your photo. 
Fyodor took his glasses off and blinked. With his jaw he indicated the stove. Andrei 
threw it on top of the coals. It gave a small puff and blossomed into flame. Andrei 
clapped Fyodor on the shoulder.  
And he needs to make preparations we can only guess at. With dwindling resources. 
Think of the risks he runs to give your book life. You've written it. Now let it live. 
They sat for a full minute in silence, the stove door open and the red coals bright.  
Fyodor rose to his feet and moved over to the other side of the room, beckoning. 
Andrei joined him. A number of rusty iron lockers were plastered into the wall. None 
were locked and the first one opened easily. It was empty but for a small pile of rags.  
Fyodor pulled them out to let Andrei look in. 
And? Andrei said, hie eyes looking closely at the rusty streaked sides of the locker.  
Fyodor went to the corner where a tangle of taps, spouts and valves came together on 
the wall. He pulled one of the pipes and Andrei heard a small metallic noise coming 
from the locker. Fyodor reached in and pressed the back panel. A flap six inches high 
swung back into the wall and when his hand came out again it held a manuscript 
bundle about four inches thick. He handed it to Andrei, who looked at it open- 
mouthed. 
Thats it. The panel opens with a long lever, Fyodor said. 
Who built this? Andrei said, putting his hand into the hidden space. It was the size of 
a large reference book. 
Fyodor grinned, his glasses flashing. Me. My father was a watchmaker you know. It 
seems Im not entirely lacking in some practical ability. There were some long nights 
here and theres a tool shop next door. Its a simple rod and spring going to the panel. 
Pulling on that pipe releases it. Doing the reverse closes it. You can't see it.  With all 
the dirt in there I think its pretty safe unless they demolish the wall. 
Andrei bent again to reach inside the locker with splayed fingers.Well Im damned. 
Just dont know what to say. Unbelievable. Its so good. He straightened, holding the 
manuscript in both hands. The top page was a mass of close handwriting in black ink 
with violet-coloured corrections in the margins. 
Fyodor looked like an anxious child. No title yet. Funny, after all this time. Do you 
want to read a bit of it? Its mostly in manuscript  but some I typed on the office 
machine here. There's no 'b' or 's'. Broken. Special thin paper as you see. Hard to get. 
Mendel gave me it. I only type when theres absolutely no chance of anyone coming. 
Well anyway, he said, his voice suddenly shy,  you can tell him. Its almost done. 
Andrei hefted the manuscript in his hand. He placed it gently on the table and grasped 
Fyodor's shoulders. Neither spoke. 
Vodka, Andrei said finally, his arms dropping to his side. He pulled a chair to the 
fire and  lifted the first page. 
CHAPTER XI 
The brief Russian autumn moved to its end. Fyodor and Andrei walked the city in all weathers. 
Leaves fell and gathered in the gutters in brown heaps. Sharp bright periods were followed by short 
days of sullen rain. Moscow became grey again.  Along the ring boulevards, following the line of 
the old city wall, people walked alone or in pairs between the trees. They talked in undertones, or 
sat in silence on the benches, bundled up in coats and waiting for winter. 
Fyodor entered into a new phase of work with the coming of the short days. Frost began to trim the 
window panes in the early morning when he brought Andrei  tea. Andrei would study him closely 
over the rim of his mug. The book coming to an end seemed no longer to fill him with melancholy 
as he allowed himself finally to be caught up in the excitement of its final revisions.  His face had 
become more drawn, less boyish, and though his forelock still hung straight down over the small 
round glasses and the bright grin was still the same it seemed to Andrei that his friend had finally 
said goodbye to something that had remained of  youth.  Now there were  bags under his eyes, like 
pale delicate bruises, and networks of tiny lines in the skin, minute seams of age which had become 
visible, as if for the first time.  The realisation came to Andrei suddenly, and made him sad. 
On one of their walks across the city Fyodor had spoken for the first time about publication. It was a 
foggy, dank day.  A pair of silent figures they moved  in the dusk between the rows of graves in the 
cemetery of the Don Monastery, a place they often came to. It was deserted save for a few old 
women clearing the drifts of wet ochre leaves. Fyodor came to a halt under the walls of the New  
Cathedral. Its bricks were a scarred red, its cupolas great bulbous domes hanging above them in the 
mist.  Not so new really, he said, They only call it that because of the really old one over there. 
He pointed to a small painted church with rows of rounded gables.  His words were slow, almost 
physically painful, as if he feared an immediate bolt of lightning.  Andrei saw anxiety behind the 
small round glasses. Fyodor had pulled his head down deep behind the blue coils of his scarf.  They 
could hear among the trees the faint rhythmic strokes of a scrubbing brush on a  headstone. 
Paris. Is it really possible? Can it be? Fyodor said, his voice mournful. He took his glasses off and 
held them in his hands. Without them he could see little. He blinked myopically. Really?  
If we make it so. With a bit of luck. Mendel knows what hes doing. 
Have you seen him in the last few days? 
I met him as usual last week. I told you.  He seemed fine, but strained. I think hes under a lot of 
pressure and believe me, he was happy to hear youre almost done.  He made me go over again all 
the emergency procedures. Three times. I said I knew them. He got a bit short with me. I havent 
seen that before. 
He is under pressure isnt he? 
Without a doubt. What he calls the art of the possible. Its becoming less so every day. Look at the 
papers. Still headlines about new spy rings uncovered, new arrests, new trials. Wreckers, saboteurs, 
revisionists, Trotskyites, this tendency that tendency.  People denounced because others want their 
flat, for a job, for a woman. Demonstrations outside courtrooms screaming for the death penalty 
before the first words of evidence. All orchestrated beforehand. No real evidence at all.  That 
editorial in Pravda for Gods sake, the one calling for anyone convicted of anything to be shot like 
dogs. It made me ashamed to be Russian. Is all that in the book? 
It is. 
Good. The word foreign is being repeated in the same way as people spoke of the black death. 
Thats not a good sign.  Look at the Lux. Almost all the Comintern people are gone. No-one speaks 
of them. 'Ten years without the right to correspondence' their families have all been told, those that 
are left.  Mendel says that means execution. 
Yes. . . It's true. A  morgue. When I came back from my shift this morning there were three 
German women crying together in the lobby. You know what that means. And last week those two 
little Hungarian brothers 
I know. God forgive me I dont even know their names- 
They were always pleasant to us, always. Photographers they were, did you know that? Dandies. 
Always a buttonhole flower. Speaking French, laughing about Paris, Budapest, Vienna And then 
one of them jumps out of a fifth floor window at three in the morning when they come for him. 
Fyodor turned away slightly, muttering obscenities Andrei had no idea he knew.  
Andrei waited until Fyodor had fallen silent. And is he also in the book?he said. 
Yes. I call him Istvan.  
Good. His brothers still free, for the moment. 
But do you really think it can get to Paris? Will it ever be published? I just cannot believe it so. 
His face fell and his head pulled back into his upturned collar. Really. I cannot. He put his glasses 
back on and tightened his old scarf until only the steel rims and his nose  remained above it. 
You just finish it. And well do the rest. Trust Mendel. I believe well do it. I do. 
A considerable silence, then a huge smile splitting  Fyodors face. He pulled his hands from his 
pockets and grabbed Andrei  round the shoulders. They stood amongst the gravestones, and hugged 
each other. The old women looked up briefly and smiled. 
Early the following morning returning  from work, Fyodor was arrested in the courtyard of the 
Hotel Lux. 
It was the frenzy of the knocking, not the muted volume, which brought Andrei awake. When he 
pulled open the door he found the surviving Hungarian brother, Ferenc. The little man, hair 
dishevelled and in his bare feet, stood in his  striped pyjamas and an overcoat. His face was flushed 
and his eyes were wide open. He hissed rather than spoke, the sinews in his throat standing out like 
bowstrings.  
Pliss. Pliss. Hurry. Your friend taken. Get out. Get out I tell you. Quick. Come with me. He 
grasped Andrei's shoulders and shook him, hard. Come. 
Andrei threw on his clothes and  boots and stuffed whatever papers there were into the rucksack he 
always kept packed. He followed the small figure who was already hurrying down the corridor, the 
black wings of his coat flapping over bony ankles. They moved quickly through the maze of 
temporary wooden partitions, up, then down some stairs, until Andrei found himself, his lungs 
screaming for air, in a store room of the main hotel. 
After Istvan dead,  have looked these places, the Hungarian whispered in stilted Russian,  You 
regardez,he added, lapsing into French,  Un Corbeau, un corbeau. Andrei nodded to show he'd 
understood.  A Crow. The other man  pointed to the window, pulling back a sliver of  yellowed 
muslin curtain. Andrei could see they were in the main hotel opposite his own room in the hostel. In 
the courtyard was a large black van.  No markings but everyone knew.  The back doors of the van 
were splayed wide but the vehicle faced towards them so Andrei couldnt see in. Beyond the doors a 
small crowd of people in various states of undress had gathered. Some of the women were crying. A 
squad of NKVD soldiers, rifles  high across their chests, held them back. It seemed as though 
people were waiting for something.  The van sat like an evil thing.  
The Hungarian had given up trying to piece together his indifferent Russian, and spoke in quick 
French. They came early. With a list. Looking for Germans. What few were left. 
Fyodors not a German. And why wouldnt they come to our room?  
Dont know. Kleinfeld the writer fellow started shouting and woke us all up. He wouldnt go 
quietly and shouted the place down. They clubbed him and dragged him down the stairs. People 
started saying things to the soldiers. I heard the officer shout at a sergeant that they still had two to 
get. He kept saying Two more, two more'.  I think thats what theyre waiting for. The men are 
either not there or have hidden. They could start searching the place.  We probably shouldnt wait 
long here. 
But I still dont understand, why-? 
I dont know if they were waiting for him or not. He was just there. Maybe the wrong place wrong 
time. Maybe quota.  He came round the corner and they grabbed him. And that was that. Filth. 
Was he carrying anything? 
The Hungarians eyes flicked over to Andrei, looking at him closely. Not that I could see.   
Are they searching our bit, the hostel? 
I don't know. But I thought it best to get you. Just in case. 
Andrei grabbed the Hungarians hand with both of his. I wont forget it. 
I liked your friend. Im so sorry. 
 And I about your brother. Slov nyet, he said in Russian. The Hungarian stared at him without 
comprehension so he moved back to French.  It means there are no words,he said quietly. The 
Hungarian nodded. Andrei thought quickly.  I must try to see my friend. 
Impossible. He lifted the curtain slightly again. You see? There must be a dozen goons out 
there. 
Theyre still waiting for something. And no-one has come into our bit of the hostel. It must be the 
German fellows theyre still looking for. Im going down into the courtyard. 
Ferenc sighed.   And they say Hungarians are crazy. Okay. Well just slip into the crowd from the 
back. Follow me. 
The crowd had become restless, some women holding babies and jeering at the soldiers in good 
Russian. Others used their own languages. The courtyard filled with shouts in a dozen different 
tongues. The guards, all young, looked frightened, white knuckles round rifle stocks. They kept  
looking around for their officer. Andrei and the Hungarian joined the crowd just as shouts came 
from the hotel. A man was led out, his arms handcuffed behind his back. The crowd fell instantly 
silent.  
Andrei turned his head. Fyodor was sitting closest to the door of the van on the right hand side. His 
hat had gone and his head was lowered. He was holding his glasses, staring at them, not moving. 
His wrists were handcuffed. On the steps the arrested man refused to walk and  begun to shout in 
German. Shouting started again from the crowd.  A bottle exploded on the side of the van. An 
officer, an older man with folds of flesh bulging over his collar, emerged from the hotel and called 
for silence. When none came he drew a pistol from a holster and fired a single shot in the air. After 
a few seconds silence the shouting began again, some of the women holding up the young children. 
Andrei cried out Fyodors name. His head came up, looking around wildly, His hands were cuffed 
and he fumbled with his glasses. The officer shouted and the soldiers jerked the rifle bolts, ramming 
a round into every breech. At another command an untidy volley ripped into the air.  
All shouting stopped. The  women shrank back, covering their children with their own bodies. 
Andrei felt the raw sweetness of cordite flood into his nostrils. At the rear of the van the German 
was thrown bodily into the space between the benches. He lay on the floor, breathing heavily. 
Another vehicle backed into the courtyard. The doors were open and it was empty. At a word from 
the officer the guards began to file slowly back towards it, entering in pairs. The officer stood facing 
the crowd, blue hat on the back of his head, and his pistol still out. His mouth was a twisted slit. 
But for one baby crying there was silence. Fyodor managed to put his glasses on. He scanned the 
crowd with one eye closed and finally found Andrei. They stared at one another. Fyodors shoulders 
rose and fell once. He tried to smile. His glasses were twisted and crumpled on his nose, one lens 
missing. A sad uncertain smile finally came, then faltered. The last thing Andrei saw before the steel 
doors slammed shut was the bent glasses and two thin manacled hands raised in slow benediction.   
                                                 *  *  * 
                                           END OF FICTIONAL PORTION OF THESIS 
