AUTHOR: 
TITLE:  
YEAR:  
OpenAIR citation: 
OpenAIR takedown statement: 
 This work is made freely 
available under open 
access. 
This  is distributed under a CC ____________ license. 
____________________________________________________ 
Section 6 of the Repository policy for OpenAIR @ RGU (available from http://www.rgu.ac.uk/staff-and-current-
students/library/library-policies/repository-policies) provides guidance on the criteria under which RGU will 
consider withdrawing material from OpenAIR. If you believe that this item is subject to any of these criteria, or for 
any other reason should not be held on OpenAIR, then please contact openair-help@rgu.ac.uk with the details of 
the item and the nature of your complaint. 
This work was submitted to- and approved by Robert Gordon University in partial fulfilment of the following degree: 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________ 
TRADITIONAL & HYBRID LEADERSHIP STYLES IN RWANDA 
Examining the common leadership styles, influencing factors, and culture in post-genocide 
Rwanda. 
Map 1: Administrative map of Rwanda 
NSHUTI RUGERINYANGE 
(0612436) 
DBA 2016
TRADITIONAL & HYBRID LEADERSHIP STYLES IN RWANDA 
Examining the common leadership styles, influencing factors, and culture in post-genocide Rwanda. 
NSHUTI Rugerinyange 
(0612436) 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements of the 
Robert Gordon University  
for the degree of Doctor of Business Administration 
Supervisory team: 
Dr. Robert Halsall (Principal) 
Dr. Yvonne Turner 
Professor Rita Marcella 
August 2016 
Keywords: Leadership styles, Cultural Influence, Rwandaliens, Rwandigenous, Ubuntu, Indaba 
Copyright 2016, Nshuti Rugerinyange
Acknowledgements 
This thesis is a culmination of more than half a decade research journey in obtaining a doctoral 
certification at the Robert Gordon University. It is a milestone in my professional path, and an 
introduction to the world of research. The formation of research questions, the interviewing of 
people and interrogation of data has been the most eye-opening experience in my adult life. 
This research has been seen through to completion with the support and encouragement of my 
Principal Supervisor and Friend, Dr. Robert Halsall, whose wish to see me succeed made this work 
was possible. 
In addition, thanks Dr. Yvonne Turner and Professor Rita Marcella for being willing to read my 
drafts, and offering your support over the course of this research. 
Dr. David Jones, thank you for helping me with research progress interviews and I am grateful for 
your positive words of encouragement. I am also honored that you accepted to be on my 
examiners team.  
Faculty members of the Business School were very kind enough to help whenever I approached 
them, and I acknowledge them all. My thanks go to Mugabo Steven (Mbombo) who helped with 
the typing in the early stages of the thesis. 
My sincere gratitude goes to my mother Nyirantore Flavia for her darling friendship, my brothers, 
sisters and the entire Gitore family for your encouragement and support. For lack of proper words 
(in English) to express my gratitude, I say mugire amahoro, you are most special to me 
Life has a way of building wisdom by making us stumble in our paths, so that we get up, and go 
on with more care and speed. My admission of guilt goes to my young family - Nshuti Enie Neil 
(10years), Nshuti Hans Junior (9year) and Nshuti Ralph (7years) - for walking out on you at the 
time you needed me most. My pursuit for a better life for you took me down many uncharted 
paths. I am really sorry my little souls. You are the only ones in my world, I will always give you 
my love. 
This piece of work is dedicated to the man whose name (Rugerinyange) I proudly associate with. 
The man I wish had live a little longer to be interview for this research. His insights of the Rwandan 
culture influenced me to diverge from my Engineering background to venture into cultural 
anthropology. 
Contents 
5.5.1 Contribution of the thesis to the development of leadership in Africa and in Rwanda in 
particular 202 
Abstract 
For most of Rwandas post-independence past, the country has been marked by ethnic feuding, 
mass population movements and long exiles in neighboring countries, and civil wars that 
culminated in the genocide in 1994. As this research shows in its review of literature of the history 
of Rwandas post-independence period, the civil wars of ethnically differentiated access to power 
and wealth have had social, cultural and economic effects. 
Hundreds of thousands of people were driven into long time exiles and others were born in 
neighboring countries acquiring foreign cultures, education and professional experiences. After the 
civil war and genocide, the exiled Rwandan communities abroad [Rwandaliens] returned and 
integrated with the indigenous [Rwandigenous], and together they have charted a path for Rwanda 
and in particular its present leadership styles. Twenty years on, Rwanda has been described by its 
development partners as a country on an uphill economic recovery trajectory.  
However, a note of caution must be sounded. How has foreign culture  acquired by Rwandaliens 
 affected indigenous Rwandan culture, and its influence thereof on the present leadership 
styles? 
This thesis assesses the most common leadership styles in companies/organizations in Rwanda, 
in order to build a theory of the predominant leadership styles and culture in Rwanda in the 
context of the post-genocide era. 
In examining the changes that have taken place in business/organizations in terms of leadership 
style and culture in post-genocide Rwanda, this research contributes to growing body of research 
on cognizance of cultural influence on leadership styles in Africa. It argues that failure to recognize 
the differences that exist between African and other (western) contexts or insufficient cognizance 
of local cultural contexts leads to ineffectual leadership styles. The African cultural particularity 
differences addressed in this thesis as pertinent to leadership styles are; collectivism, family 
arrangements, language barrier, philosopy of business, and contextual surprises. This was 
accomplished through analysis of stakeholders views and perspectives, conducted in an inductive 
methodological stance. This is because such inferences are best understood through a process of 
immersion in the context being studied. 
Specifically, through narrative interviews, the researcher sought to explore experiences, different 
ideas, attitudes, and views held by middle managers in companies in Rwandan. The research 
sought to explore the stakeholders perspectives on the most common leadership styles, what 
influenced their leadership styles, and their view of culture in Rwanda. 
Emerging from the data, five leadership styles were identified; paternalism, 'task-oriented', 
'team-oriented', 'self-protective' and hybrid style, the last of which combines the strength of 
traditional and more contemporary leadership styles. These styles are discussed in the context of 
societal culture, informal training (personality and family upbringing), formal training (education, 
professional training, work experience), as well as organizational culture (policies and laws) in 
post-genocide context. 
In order to draw conclusion about the causal connection between the predominant leadership 
styles and culture, a causal inference framework is used based on eight cultural variables 
identified by GLOBE with the occurrence of an effect based on the views of research participants. 
Causal inference was an important aspect in the process of developing a theory that takes as its 
starting points the perspectives and words of native members (research participants) of the 
culture whose beliefs and behaviors are being studied. 
Research findings suggests that four of the five leadership styles presented are endorsed by the 
sample of leaders  paternalistic, task-oriented, team oriented and hybrid, but not the self-
protective style. The case is made, from the perspective of participants, that leadership style is 
influenced by several variables, including cultural background, professional background and, to a 
degree, organizational culture. Whereas the emergent theory reflects the particularity of the 
context being studied, the constructs of the accounts or descriptions of the concepts are 
expressed in a worldview of existing theories and conceptual frameworks. 
By presenting the particularity of the context (emic perspective) and the worldview of leadership 
styles, the thesis provides a new thinking of the questions of leadership styles and culture. The 
styles are not mutually exclusive to specific cultural values and that some styles may fall in more 
or even all categories of cultural values. 
1. CHAPTER ONE:   INTRODUCTION 
1.1. Introduction 
This chapter will first deal with two aspects of the context of the research, first, touching on the 
background Rwanda - a history marked by ethnic feuding due to ethnically differentiated access 
to power and wealth as a prelude to genocide period and second, it touches on the post-genocide 
era, which has brought about major changes in politics, and business, is a good opportunity to 
examine the theme of leadership and culture  as finding an appropriate form of leadership for 
Rwanda becomes important. The second section of this chapter discusses the academic and 
theoretical context of the research subject and value of the research. Thirdly, this chapter 
introduces the research question, provides a discussion and justification. The chapter makes 
some initial explanations regarding the choice of methodology, design and research tools. Finally, 
this introductory chapter presents a summary of the chapter as well as outline of the thesis. 
1.2. Background to the Rwandan cultural context 
Oral history suggests that human occupation of Rwanda is thought to have begun in the later 10th 
or early 11th century when the kingdom of Rwanda was formed by a Tutsi King called Gihanga. 
Oral legends described Gihanga as having possessed great talents in leadership, technology and 
religion and relate him to the foundation of civilization, including pottery, wood and 
metalworking, hunting, and farming in the African Great Lakes. The people of Rwanda are called 
Banyarwanda, comprising three culturally homogeneous ethnic groups: abahutu, abautsi and 
abatwa, who all speak the same and only language, Kinyarwanda, and share a common culture 
(Gahima, 2012). The countrys post-independence period was marked by ethnic feuding which 
culminated in the 1994 genocide that left an estimated one million people dead, and two and half 
millions new case load refugees1 fled to neighboring countries. Another one million of old case 
1 New case load refugees refer to Rwandans who had fled during and after the genocide in 1994 
(King, 2013. p.117). 
load refugees2 who had fled the country during earlier conflicts and lived in exile in the 
neighboring countries for more than three years also returned (Crowley, 2000). For the purpose 
of this research, old case refugees will be referred to as Rwandaliens3. In late 1996, an 
estimated 1.5 million of the new case refugees returned and reintegrated within communities. 
For the purpose of distinction, new case load refugees and those who had not fled the country 
will be referred to as Rwandigenous4. Due to the gravity of the genocide, there was a level of 
anxiety and uncertainty of the future lingering in the minds of every Rwandan. The complexity 
and sensitivity of the bahutu/batutsi ethnicity are difficult to comprehend, let alone explain in 
this chapter. The new transition administration reintroduced ancestral traditions such as 
Gacaca5 in order to encourage reconciliation and peaceful cohabitation, that is, encouraging 
forgiveness of suspects if they acknowledge what they have done and apologize, and express 
willingness to work together for a better future. 
2 Old case load refugees denote those who had fled Rwanda mainly during the political troubles 
against the Tutsis and moderate Hutus in 1959 and 1973 (King, 2013. p.117). 
3 For the purpose of differentiation of the two broad sections of Rwandans  home-cultured and 
foreign-cultured Rwandans, the terms Rwandalien and Rwandigenous have been coined by this 
researcher. The terms Rwandalien is derived from two words  Rwandans (people of Rwanda) 
and aliens defined here as people of Rwandan origin born in and/or whose enculturation history 
occurred elsewhere. For the purpose of this research term Rwandalien denotes the section of 
Rwandans who were born or lived out of Rwanda for a long time to be enculturalized or to acquire 
foreign cultures. 
4 On the other hand, the term Rwandigenous, derived from two words  Rwandan (people of 
Rwanda) and indigenous (people born in and belonging naturally to Rwanda) has been coined and 
used for the purpose of this research to refer to those (Rwandans) born in, and have a historical 
continuity in Rwanda, consider themselves distinct from other sections of the society now 
prevailing in the country. 
5 Gacaca courts are ancestral traditional Rwandan courts in which a community and 
Inyangamugayo (local level elected judges known for their integrity and wisdom) gathered to 
hear the trials of suspects accused of all crimes or to discuss and resolve conflicts. 
In the post-genocide era there has been a transition to a peaceful multi-ethnic state. At the end 
of the 1990s and early 2000s, the eight million population of Rwanda was composed of both 
Rwandaliens and Rwandigenous fully integrated, living side by side and sharing social and 
economic activities. Twenty one years after the genocide, the country has evolved and is 
capturing interest as one of the worlds fastest growing economies (Kawa, 2015) because it has 
demonstrated the powerful role of entrepreneurship in economic recovery. According to the 
World Banks Doing Business reports, from 2005 - 2015 Rwanda ranked third, and 32nd, 48th and 
46th easiest place to do business in 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015 respectively, the second in sub-
Saharan Africa, and first in the East African community. 
There has been a growth in the economy, partly although not wholly due to private sector growth. 
According to the World Bank, which reports GDP per capita in Rwanda, the country averaged 
243.83 USD from 1960 until 2013, reaching an all-time high of 387.66 USD in 2013 and a record 
low of 140.25 USD in 1994. One of the key drivers and pillars of Rwandas economic progress has 
been a private sector-led development spearheaded by competitiveness and entrepreneurship 
as highlighted in the countrys long term development agenda (formally known as Vision 2020) 
which states that For Rwandas development the emergence of a viable private sector that can 
take over as the principle growth engine of the economy, is absolutely key (Vision 2020, p.15). 
Alongside the paradigm shift and steady growth of the economy from the ruins of the genocide, 
partly although not wholly due to private sector growth there has been a return of the 
Rwandaliens, bringing with it outside cultural influences. 
These factors bring about the need for a study of leadership in the post-genocide context, because 
Rwanda is generally considered a resource-scarce country whose economy is dependent largely 
on drivers such as agriculture, artisan industry and services. 
1.3. Background to the research 
As discussed in the preceding section, by the end of the 1990s and early 2000s, Rwanda was a 
fully integrated society - both Rwandaliens and Rwandigenous living together and sharing social 
and economic activities. Twenty years after the genocide, Rwandans have responded to the 
tremendously challenging post-genocide context (social, political and economic as well as 
cultural) whose ramifications are felt in the country and outside its borders. For example, the 
opening up of economic space for all actors - both local and foreigners - to engage in the economic 
and development process created a multicultural environment. However, critics argue that these 
important initiatives came to be more window-dressing than effective (Sebarenzi, 2002). From 
the business and academic perspective, the cultural dynamics presents an interesting case study 
about the state of culture and its influences on the more common leadership styles in the post 
genocide Rwanda. 
This cultural context is important to this research because it conceptualizes leadership within a 
specific context rather than from culture blind conception and view of leadership as a universal - 
the belief that there are certain traits that contribute to leadership effectiveness in all situations. 
Furthermore, the researchers background as both an insider and outsider brings important 
insights to this research, which explores whether the Rwandaliens (with different values, norms 
and practices) could have influenced the leadership styles in organisations in post-genocide 
Rwanda (producing what will be called "Hybrid" leadership styles). 
1.4. The Background to previous research 
1.4.1. Previous research on leadership style 
The study of leadership style theories dates back to psychologist Kurt Lewin (1890 - 1947) and a 
group of researchers who set out to identify different styles of leadership. Lewin's leadership 
theories focused on how managers behave in relation to other members of the workforce. 
Leadership style as a specific topic of study has gained enormous interest in the business world 
throughout the last half century and more specific leadership styles have been identified. Over 
the last century, other types of leadership can be seen to have contributed to the field of 
leadership styles. First, there was Weber's (1947) story of charismatic leaders, heroes that 
transformed and changed the world. In the ensuing period, Burns (1978) and Bass (1985), Bennis 
& Nanus (1985) and then House (1997) furthered the field of leadership styles on the basis of 
Trait, Behavioral, Transformational, and Situational and Charisma theories. In this very influential 
study, Lewin and his colleagues identified three major leadership styles in organizational 
management which they labeled as Autocratic, Democratic and Laissez-faire (see discussion of 
leadership styles in Chapter Two  Literature Review). Although the phenomenon of leadership 
style has been around since antiquity (Bass, 1990 in House, 1997), it is a subject that has 
generated a lot of interest among scholars. One of the advances in leadership research was to 
determine whether and/ or the extent to which leadership behaviors can be influenced by cultural 
values - cross-cultural leadership.  
A number of researchers suggest that leadership is a universal phenomenon  the etic 
perspective, whereas others argue that the perception of effective leadership differs between 
cultures (GLOBE, 2004). 
The premise of the etic perspective is that there should be certain roles that leaders must perform 
to be effective, regardless of cultures, whereas the emic perspective argue that certain leadership 
behaviors are likely to be particular to a given culture. However, as Fiedler (cited in Henman, 
2011) argued in his concept of situational favorableness, there is no precise formula for producing 
leaders, hence there is no universal theory of leadership or one best way to manage. Bennis 
(2003) also argued that the ingredients of leadership cannot be taught. He goes on to say the way 
people become leader is a highly personal process dependent on the particular background of 
the individual. In other words, leadership style depends as much on the context as it depends 
upon the leader's own attributes. 
A growing body of literature suggests a far more complex than suggested by Adair (1989) that 
leadership is a trainable and transferable skill. It may be that what constitutes leadership will be 
dependent on a confluence of factors, operating locally, in context, and that such a confluence of 
factors is subject to constant change. 
A review of the literature on the subject of universal leadership theory (Stogdill, 1948; Adair, 
1989; Capowski, 1994) suggests that indeed some elements of leadership are a trainable and 
transferable skill, but without establishing the emic dimensions or culturally endorsed elements, 
effective leadership may not be produced. The view of leadership as a skill that can be taught 
might explain the interests by a number of researchers (Adair, 1989; Capowski, 1994 and 
Taylor, 2003) to seek to describe the leadership skills that people who want to become leaders 
can develop. Taylor discusses the practices such as visioning, building trust, understanding of 
power, nurturing future leaders as skills that can be developed for successful leadership to be 
attainable, although more precise formula for teaching these skills would have been helpful. The 
cumulative literature has greatly contributed to what we know about leadership styles. By 
reviewing the more recent scholarly output on leadership styles we can conclude that leadership 
has both the emic and etic aspects. 
While there appears to be a significant amount of the research effort of the study of the 
leadership styles, prominent leadership scholars (see Antonakis & House, 2002; House et al., 
2004; Bennis, 2007; Bass, 1985, 2008;) they have largely focused on the Western context (Sichuan 
& Li, 2012), and little attention has been paid to leadership styles in the African context in 
comparison to the amount on universal leadership theories. As remarked by Jackson (2005) it 
is rare to find a chapter on African management and its contribution in textbooks on international 
management (p.15).  Research suggests that research on leadership styles in organization in the 
African context is relatively growing. For example studies by Jackson on management systems in 
Africa shows that African contribution to literature on international management is hampered by 
a pejorative view that the management approach in African is fatalistic, resistant to change, 
reactive, short-termed, authoritarian, risk reducing, context dependent, and basing on 
relationship criteria, rather than universalistic criteria (p.15).  Ironically, what is postulated as 
African approach in the current literature on management arguably reflects a colonial legacy 
rather than an indigenous African approach. Literature suggests that research on leadership 
styles in organizations in the African context is growing and contributed new insights about 
African folktales, myths and puzzles and proverbs (African proverbs are known for imparting bits 
of wisdom and knowledge) not previously explained using traditional research methods to be 
included in the main text (Twesigye, 2010).  Notable researchers on African culture and leadership 
include Kuanda (2010), Malunga (2006), Bolden (2009), and Kamoche (2011), Kamoche et al., 
(2004; 2013) on understanding people management in Africa. The conclusion from literature on 
African culture and leadership suggests that these traditional concepts such as Ubuntu and 
servant leadership stem from the African humanistic culture, and this research is a contribution 
to that trend. 
This is a fascinating body of literature puts Africa on pedestal because it not only brings an African 
context to a setting which can be regarded as a highly westernized field of study in Africa, but also 
addresses the very crucial issue - the cultural influence on leadership styles. 
The purpose of this research is precisely to contribute to that trend - establishing leadership as 
operating in a cultural context and to move beyond approaches that seek to establish objective 
truth as universal by applying the various instruments and theories such as dimensions which 
can be used to analyze the cultural context. It seeks to view leadership in a cultural context, and 
style as interplay between several factors, such as informal education (uburere or upbringing), 
formal education, professional experiences and organizational policies and laws, which influence 
the leader behavior and practices and inform followers with meaning. It attempts to make sense 
of the process and actions of those individual leaders as described by those within a culture 
(emic). 
From the review of literature extending from Weber to Burns to Bass, and as Antonakis et al., 
(2003) argue, leadership is a complex and diverse field of knowledge, and trying to make sense of 
research can become an intimidating endeavor (p.1). Perhaps due to cultural difference, research 
offers little to explain the different leadership theories and perceptions on leadership styles or 
indeed why managers in similar industries may lead their companies in different ways. 
Considering the above discussion this research can be said to be of some value, both academically 
and to business leaders. Academically, the value of the research lies in providing a further 
empirical contribution to the understanding of cultural influence on leadership style in Rwanda. 
From a practice perspective, the findings of the research could inform business leaders, especially 
foreigners appreciation of the local culture and adapting their leadership styles to the specific 
context in which they operate, and, indeed, to determine what is feasible or culturally acceptable.  
Additionally, it is hoped that business leaders may draw insight that may contribute to striking a 
balance between their own culture and host culture and be able to determine when to apply their 
formal training and experiences appropriately. 
There was no illusion within the research that culture is the sole influencing factor on leadership 
style, nor does the researcher conclude that universal theories of leadership were out of order. 
Rather, the challenge was to assess how culture influences the most common leadership styles in 
companies in Rwanda, in order to build a theory of the predominant leadership styles and culture 
in Rwanda in the context of the post-genocide era. 
1.4.2. Previous research on cultural theories 
Seldom is a research paper published on social sciences and humanities without mention of the 
term 'culture'. The term culture has been one of the most researched concepts of the nineteenth 
century social sciences and humanities disciplines. Whereas culture is constantly researched, it 
the most contested concepts as there is not a common definition of culture, and it is often defined 
against the concept of nature (Williams, 1963).  
The term culture has been used to refer to many things to different people. Anthropologists 
have defined culture in terms of shared norms and values of a society (Trenholm & Jenson, 2000; 
Hall, 2002; Giddens, 1993) and sociologists (Hall, 1997; Brah et al, 1999) speak of culture as the 
lived experience of everyday life. Culture has also been associated with language, religion, 
cuisine, social habits, music and arts (Ray, Nilanjan, 2014; Barber, 2012). 
Heavily influenced by their background, many of the researchers definitions of culture may 
account for their own culture or that of the society they study. According to Chai (2010), the study 
of culture across the social science disciplines has long been hampered by a common malady: the 
tendency to view cultural theories and theories of action as disjointed, or even opposing, models 
of analysis (p.1). The term [culture] has been used widely used both within and outside academia 
has increased substantially in the past decades and different theories developed depending on 
context, including the work of Talmy's (1995) cognitive culture system, Levi-Claude Strauss 
(1958) cultures as structural systems and Cliffords (1972) cultures as symbolic systems.  
The cognitive theory of culture, according to Talmy (1995), suggests that cognition in individuals 
is the primary locality and center or source of activities of culture. The acquisition, exercise, and 
transmission of culture are functions of an innate cognitive system, which accounts for structural 
difference and commonalities across cultures. 
The structural theory of culture posited that universal processes of human mind develop diverse 
but similar patterns and that the logic of relations and transformation provides an order that can 
transcend boundaries of language and customs (Gonzalez, 2005). Levi-Strauss focused on 
discovering the structuring of cultural domains (myth, art, kinship, language) that form the 
principles of mind that generate these cultural elaborations. 
The symbolic theory of cultural treats cultures as systems of shared symbols and meanings. 
Proponents of this school of thought (most notably Boon, 1972; Clifford and Schneider, 1972) 
argue that meanings are not in peoples heads but are shared between social actors, thus, are 
public not private (Clifford, 1973:89). According to Geertz (1973, p.79), to study culture is to study 
the shared codes of meanings, a semiotic interpretation of ongoing practices and webs of 
significance. 
More recent social science work examined culture in relation with socialization or the learning of 
the norms and values of society. Giddens (2009) described socialization as the process whereby 
helpless infants gradually become self-aware, knowledgeable persons, skilled in the ways of the 
culture in which they are born (p.284). Geertz talks of culture as webs of significance which man 
himself has spun, not independent but tied to their environments. 
The cultural theories and definitions of the word culture offered above would help us better 
understand the influence it has on leadership styles. Firstly, all the definitions of culture speak of 
a social phenomenon. Giddens talks of gradually becoming knowledgeable persons and skilled 
in the way of the culture in which s/he is born (p.60). Presumably culture is acquired from and 
shared by all the members of a given society or culture only. Secondly, the all definitions of culture 
points to context. Geertz has described humans as being suspended in webs of significance, not 
independent but tied to their environment (p.5). This suggests that culture is society-specific. 
Every human society has its own culture, its own institutions, and its own symbols. However, no 
culture is unique  some elements of culture are common across cultures, and there are some 
similarities in the dimensions of cultures. Every human society attributes special meanings to their 
symbols, although some symbols can have similar meanings in different cultures. 
This research aims to provide is an analysis of the impact of culture on leadership in Rwanda, 
using some of the approaches to describing culture used in other studies  dimensions, high/low 
context etc., while attempting to remedy the deficiencies of these approaches by providing an in 
depth emic study. 
1.5. Key concepts 
As mentioned above, this research assesses the most common leadership styles in companies in 
Rwanda, in order to build a theory of the predominant leadership styles and culture in Rwanda in 
the context of the post-genocide era. The two obvious key concepts involved are culture, and 
"leadership style". A brief explanation will be given below to set the background, as the concepts 
will be discussed in detail in literature review (Chapter 2). 
Culture is addressed in the thesis as a part of the wider understanding of personality factors 
influencing leadership styles, other than situational factors. Following from previous studies on 
the influence of culture on leadership styles, (House, 2004), Key terms are defined in the table 
below: 
Term Definition 
Culture Refers to all the learned and shared, explicit or implicit, assumptions, 
beliefs, norms, and values, as all the learned and shared, explicit or 
implicit, assumptions, beliefs, norms, and values, as well as attitudes, 
behavior, dress, and language (Nwambueze et al., 2012).  
Leadership An interaction between members of a group; in which the acts of one 
person affects the acts of other people (Bass, 1985, p. 16).The 
process of defining current situations and articulating goals for the 
future; making the decisions necessary to resolve the situation or 
achieve the goals; and gaining the commitment from those who have 
to implement these decisions (Brache, 1983, p.120). 
Leadership style The manner in which one person, the leader, influences others to 
work willingly to attain that which the leader desires (Terry, 1977, 
p.410).  
Rwandalien "Rwandalien" is defined as people of Rwandan genealogy who were 
born or lived out of Rwanda for a long time to be enculturalized or to 
acquire foreign cultures. 
Rwandigenous Rwandigenous is defined as people of Rwandan genealogy who were 
born in, and have a historical continuity in Rwanda, consider 
themselves distinct from other sections of the society now prevailing 
in the country. 
Table 1: Definition of key terms 
1.6. Establishing the research problem 
From the review of mainstream research and related literature, it is clear that leadership style 
research has been dominated by studies of traits of effective leaders (Derue et al., 2011; Hoffman 
et al., 2011; Judge et al., 2009; Zaccaro, 2007). Other studies have focused on gathering 
subordinates' perception about their leader's behaviors, practices, interpersonal relations and 
management efficiency. The literature reveals little empirical research about why some 
leadership styles are endorsed in certain cultures and rejected in others. One of the most 
prominent and influential studies to date (GLOBE by House, et al., 2004) that has pondered the 
influence of culture on leadership recommended more research into cultures in sub-Saharan 
Africa. This research will hopefully attempt to shed new insight on the influence of African culture 
on leadership styles, particularly in Rwanda. 
1.7. Statement of the Research questions 
From the previous section, it is evident that there is growing body of literature on the influence 
of culture on leadership styles (House, Wright, & Aditya, 1997). However, some gaps still exist 
especially in the developing countries south of the Sahara perhaps due to the oral culture, low 
levels of literacy and poor reading habits of Africans. Africa produces a mere 2% of the world's 
books, despite having 12% of the world's population (Krolak, 2005). In this sense, the research 
question had to explore leaders cultural, educational and professional backgrounds and their 
effect in terms of subsequent behavior and practice. 
The question, therefore, ought to allow for the understanding of the common leadership styles 
in organisations, influencing factors, and culture in Rwanda. Analyzing the possibility that culture 
has influences on leadership styles in some form, it was the function of the questions to explore 
what the common leader behaviors were, what factors influenced their behaviors and what 
cultural values were more important to them. Academically, it was of value to explore the 
empirical contribution to the understanding of cultural influence on leadership style in Rwanda. 
Moreover, to allow for the possibility of developing a theory of the predominant leadership styles 
and culture in Rwanda in the context of the post-genocide era, it was necessary to construct the 
question in such a way as to allow for the exploration of broader organizational and professional 
influences on leadership styles. 
With this in mind, the question was framed as follows.  
- What are the common leadership styles, influencing factors, and culture in Rwanda within the 
context of post-genocide? 
The researcher addresses the following overarching research questions: 
1.1 What characterizes the leadership styles of managers in organizations in Rwanda? 
Answering this question enables the researcher to map out the factors/threads in the form 
of leaders behavior and practices. For example, Fiedler (1996) argues that ones leadership 
style is a reflection of personality and behavior.  
1.2 What specific elements of culture, professional experiences have influenced the leadership 
styles of managers in organizations in Rwanda? This question enables the researcher to 
identify the common underlying cultural and professional factors and threads that act as 
antecedents to these leadership style dimensions.  Studying individual behaviour in relation 
with culture leads to a rich understanding of their leadership styles (House et al., 2004). 
The following talking points guided narrative interviews: 
a. Discussion of interviewees' background, their view of management as is/should be; 
b. Interviewees' view of the leadership styles of other managers, - as is; 
c. Interviewees' view of the factors that influenced their leadership styles; 
d. Interviewee's view of Rwandan culture, behavior, values, norms and practices. 
1.8. The aims of the research 
The main of this research is to assess the more common leadership styles in organizations, in 
order to provide is an analysis of the impact of culture on leadership in Rwanda in the context of 
the post-genocide era. 
1.9. Objectives of this research 
Three primary objectives informed the research project. These are as follows: 
1.8.1 To identify and describe the more common leadership styles in organizations in Rwanda.  
1.8.2 To identify the common underlying factors and threads that act as antecedents to these 
leadership style dimensions.  To map out these factors/threads in the form of leaders 
behavior and practices, as well as cultural values and norms. 
2.8.2 To seek possible relationships between the more common leadership styles and the 
culture in the post-genocide context in Rwanda. 
1.10. Overview of research design and methods to address the research questions 
This section gives an overview of the research methodology for the present study. It explains the 
research objectives and a suitable methodology to achieve those objectives. The methodology 
presented is informed by discussions in the previous chapter and focused on three distinct topics 
- leadership styles, culture and cultural influence, each of which involved three particular 
perspectives (i) prevalence or the level of existence, (ii) context (what it actually means) and, (iii) 
desirability or undesirable (what people make of it). This is because both culture and leadership 
are, according to GLOBE conceptualized in two ways: (i) practices or "as is," and values or "should 
A discussion of the choice of methods is presented, differentiating between qualitative and 
quantitative research methods. The researchers belief that leadership style requires a qualitative 
research strategy is offered. A range of specific qualitative research methodologies are discussed, 
with their comparative strengths and weaknesses, in the context of the present study, weighed. 
Grounded theory is justified as an appropriate research strategy. Its emphasis on the research 
context is offered as valuable for a research of a disputed phenomenon such as leadership styles 
and culture. The strength of grounded theory to value and give voice to the perspectives of 
participants is highlighted. Its strength for presenting a depth of analysis, with a range of scenes 
and perspectives gained over time, is discussed. The challenges presented by ethnography, in 
particular, the limitations of the strategy, are discussed. 
The methodology chapter goes on to explain the logic of the choice of research settings. An 
intrinsic knowledge of the Rwandan culture and language, as well as the wide diversity of business 
organisations in which participants were drawn from within a limited geographic area, are also 
discussed. Furthermore, it was expected that the research findings will be bound by the context 
within which the research was conducted, that this is regarded as the view of the participants 
interviewed. The theoretical framework used as the basis for data analysis and discussion was 
informed by the literature review. The chapter concludes with a discussion of an appropriate 
ethical framework for the research. 
1.11. Summary of the chapter 
The findings of the research are summarized and re-examined using the theoretical frameworks 
presented in the literature review. The potential for a synthesis model is examined in greater 
detail. It is stated that, on the strength of the findings presented earlier, the model may represent 
greater value than the sum of its parts in isolation. It would suggest that effective leadership 
development should be concerned with managing a sense making process, where various 
theoretical perspectives will enrich and inform each other. It is stated that the synthesis model 
holds the potential for assisting organizations and participants in changing the way leadership is 
practiced. In turn, however, this may threaten the sacredness of leadership. It is hypothesized 
that this may be one reason why there seems to be a scarcity of writing and practical examples 
of such a process focus. The analysis portion of the chapter concludes by offering a lifecycle 
metaphor thought suitable for conceptualizing the challenge of designing an effective formal 
leadership development experience, before some thoughts on appropriate future research are 
offered.  
2. CHAPTER TWO: LITERATURE REVIEW 
The introductory chapter delineated the scope of research by defining research objectives and 
framing research questions. The aim of the research has been defined as assessing the more 
common leadership styles in organizations, in order to provide is an analysis of the impact of 
culture on leadership in Rwanda in the context of the post-genocide. This chapter explores 
literature related leadership styles and culture, the theories that supports cultural influence on 
leaderships styles, in order to and to position the research within the larger theoretical context. 
2.1. Overview of Leadership theories literature 
Looking back over the past century alone, the field of leadership styles has aroused considerable 
research interests and volumes of literature written on the topic. As research focused more on 
attributes of effective leadership styles, new concepts sprung from 'trait' to 'behavioral' to 
'situational and functional theories'. As attributes of effective leadership proven hard to pin 
down, anthropologists turned to cultural [beliefs, norms and values] as factors mediating or 
contributing to modeling leadership styles. In this chapter, the different schools of thoughts on 
the leadership styles and theoretical framework including transactional, transformational and 
laissez-faire, are described. Besides, emerging theories of 'Hybrid leadership style' and recent 
research about the influence of culture on leadership style are discussed. Further, a review of 
approaches to culture studies including Emic and Etic theories and relationship between 
leadership styles and particular African culture is presented. We begin by going back to the 
earliest work on traits theories of leadership. 
Figure 1: Mapping of Leadership and culture Literature 
This chapter thesis explores literature related leadership style as influenced by societal norms and 
values espoused in a given cultural context. It is informed by the mono-ethnic context as it seeks 
to contribute to recent research in leadership and cultural studies. It precisely goes a step beyond 
the generic approach of universal leadership principles by traditional mainstream studies to draw 
on a more critical perspective that analyzes the dynamics of leaders and the led relations within 
their specific culture and context. Though there could be one predominant leadership style in a 
given culture or suitable to specific contexts, rather than looking at leadership styles as 
prescribable sets of certain charismatic qualities or autocratic attributes applicable in certain 
contexts, this approach looks at leadership as a dynamic, interactional, but irregular process 
between leaders and the led, operating within a particular evolving local, national and shifting 
global contexts. This view of the leader-led relations takes into account the operating culture as 
part of the whole context in which the leader operates. In the quest for universal rules and 
principles of leadership, mainstream leadership researchers have often overlooked or not 
emphasized enough the importance of context. 
Research into the leader-led relation by middle managers in the service industry (public & private 
sectors) in the post-1994 Rwanda is particularly an out of the ordinary context and interesting 
case study. The post-94 era is a unique context both culturally and in terms of business practices 
in the history of Rwanda due to the convergence en masse of Rwandan communities 
(Rwandescents) of diverse cultural backgrounds. On the business management paradigm, the 
post-94 context presents a hybrid of a variety of cosmopolitan backgrounds interoperating in a 
new locale. The understanding of the factors that influence the ability to of people, to perform is 
critical for an organisations workforce to operate. In present-day Rwandan society, where 
meritocracy is intensely emphasized, there is a need to look closely at context both situational, 
cultural and professional, as well as global factors that may influence or inhibit leaders of 
organisations to achieve desired outcomes. 
The significance of the research on the post-94 context is in the learning and informing emerging 
young business leaders and cross-culture researchers who are frequently at a critical stage of their 
career development or research life. Understanding of how culture influences practices at early 
stage in ones career, is likely to impact the rest of their lives. In addition to providing learning 
and contribution to research, the understanding of the link between culture and business 
management, it is crucial to confer credibility on the leaders of multinational and international 
organisations operating in Rwanda. While not all international organisations are led by foreigners, 
most are in fact led by Rwandans but some of whom may themselves be foreign cultured. As we 
will elaborate in subsequent chapters, knowing the complexities of leader-led relations and 
dynamics of the context in which leadership operates helps us in adopting them to different 
situations, switching between the leadership styles as necessary in different project management 
situations to achieve success. 
This first section defined the scope of the study as business leadership within the context of the 
culture, professional and operating situation, the study industry as the services sector, the 
country/culture of the research as Rwanda, and the subjects of the research as middle managers. 
It briefly explains the theoretical assumptions that underpin the research project, highlighting in 
particular the key issues of cultural influences, professional experiences (education & work) and 
operating situation. 
The second section then traces the historical development of leadership theories and models so 
as to develop a definition for leadership style, and then review the relevant theories of trait, 
situation, functional/skills and behavior, as well as the approaches to culture studies, to build a 
theoretical framework upon which the research will be based. 
2.2. Leadership theories and models 
This section reviews the historical conceptualization and recent theoretical developments in the 
leadership literature. It begins with topics such as trait, situational, functional/skills, and 
behavioural theories that are currently receiving attention in terms of research, theory, and 
practice. Looking back over the past 100 years alone, there have been considerable studies and 
volumes of academic literature written on leadership (see e.g. Northouse 2004, Linstead et al 
2004).  
Mainstream studies have developed numerous theories of leadership such as trait, situational, 
functional/skills, and behavioural (see Kirkpatrick and Locke, 1991; Spencer, 1884; Hersey and 
Blanchard, 1969; Hackman & Walton, 1986; McGrath, 1962; and Lewin, Lipitt & White, 1939). 
However, most mainstream research has highly generic seeking to identify the possible universal 
characteristics of effective leaders. Over the past fifty years or so the focus for leadership research 
has been on what the most effective leadership styles are? What the universal attributes of 
effective leaders are? However, universal attributes of effective leaders have proved hard to pin 
down, instead conflating the notion of leadership as individual with charismatic qualities able 
to enhance organizational performance by inspiring followers to achieve collective goals. 
Functionalist theories have neglected the complex interplay of personal values (Kroeber, 1952 
and Kluckhohn, 1949), cultures and context in which leaders operate in. So what does or could a 
post-heroic, integrative conception of leadership look like? This thesis hypothesizes that an 
integrative look at the leader-led relation could add knowledge to our understanding of 
leadership theories. Conceivably the first question to grapple with before embarking on the main 
thrust of the thesis seeks is, what do we know about the leader-led relations?  
This thesis will look at this issue from five perspectives of traits, situation, function/skills, behavior 
and contingency theories. Starting any research on leadership theory with the overarching model 
proposed by organizational researcher Yukl will help familiarize with these theories. His work 
comprehensively reviews many of the leadership elements and theories experts in the field have 
developed in recent years. We begin by going back to the earliest work on traits theories of 
leadership. 
2.2.1. Traits theory 
The trait theory by Carlyle (1841) believes that people are either born or are made with certain 
qualities that will make them excel in leadership roles. Kirkpatrick and Locke (1991) talks about 
personality characteristics, such as assertiveness and integrity, and personal characteristics, such 
as height, demeanour, and voice tone. Research on leadership began with a search for hereditary 
attributes that differentiated leaders from the led/followers and explained individuals 
effectiveness as leaders (Galton & Eysenck, 1969).  
The traits identified included demographics, task relevant competence, interpersonal attributes 
(Bass & Bass, 2008) and level of energy and activity. While subsequent reviews of and research 
on traits theory suggest that such traits are not reliable predictors of who will emerge into 
leadership roles (Stogdill, 1948; Mann, 1959), in effect, recent proponents of this theory such 
Cawthon & Organ (1996) suggest that biographies of great leaders sometimes read as if they had 
entered the world with an extraordinary genetic endowment, that somehow their future 
leadership role was preordained. This view is counteracted by Bass (2008) who contended that 
little to no research has systematically addressed question regarding the relative magnitude of 
effects across leader traits. While many (Bennis and Nanus, 1986), of course, ridicules the theory 
that leaders are born, not made theory to be myth arguing that nurture is far more important 
than nature in determining who becomes a successful leader. However to suggest that leadership 
is merely a learned skill that has little to do with nature is to imply that people are born with equal 
abilities and equal talents.  
Theres little evidence to support the proposition that given equal opportunities, any person can 
be a leader. Apart from the genetic endowment, the early great man theory was the beginning of 
research in the understanding of leadership paradigm. Given space limitations of this thesis, we 
delimit the scope of literature review of the traits theory of leadership to the early leader traits 
(Costa & McCrae, 1992), focusing our review of how traits theory literature evolved to the big 
three pillars of the trait theory namely - demographic, task competence, and interpersonal 
dimensions, some of which have understandably grown exponentially than others. It is neither 
the intention of this thesis and certainly beyond its scope to build a theoretical case for the 
relative validity of traits theory nor to prescribe traits that will be more predictive of future 
leaders than others, but to contribute crucial knowledge to the relative understanding of the 
factors influencing leadership styles. We will comprehensively review a number of elements of 
the trait theory including demographics (gender, ethnicity, height weight, education, social status 
and age), task relevant competence (Conscientiousness, intelligence, openness to experience, 
emotional stability, technology and leadership self-efficacy), interpersonal attributes 
(communication skills, emotional intelligence, political skills, acceptance, extraversion; Bass & 
Bass, 2008) and level of energy and activity to help familiarize with these theories. We begin by 
looking at work on leadership that premises underlying traits as consistent with human 
demographics. 
2.2.2. Demographic 
At a general level, the premises underlying traits theory are consistent with human demographics 
or statistical characteristics of a population used widely in public opinion polling. The commonly 
examined demographics leader traits include gender, age, ethnicity, education and social status. 
In this category gender has by far received the most attention in terms of leadership (Derue, 
2011). 
Other demographics such as physical characteristics, education (Howard & Bray, 1988), and 
experience (Fiedler, 1970) have been examined but the amount of research on these other 
demographics pales in comparison to the research on gender and leadership, and scholars have 
found that male and female leaders are both equally effective. Most notably, Eagly and colleagues 
(Eagly & Johnson, 1990; Eagly, et al., 1995, 2003) meta-analyzed the relationship between gender 
and leadership and found that, although men and women exhibit some differences in leadership 
style, men and women appear to be equally effective - thus drawing into question gender as a 
valid predictor of leadership effectiveness. Thus, based on the controversies we may argue the 
differences in leadership style between gender yet equally effective might be explained by other 
factors such as culture due to its (culture) subconscious influence on human actions.  
Based on previous researches such as Derue et al, (2011) we may argue differences might exist 
with other leadership theories such as situation, function/skills, behavior and contingency 
theories due to lack of predictive relationships with leadership styles, thus we re-examine these 
theoretical frameworks to give meaningful effects on leadership theory. For trait theories, we 
focus more on task competence, and interpersonal dimensions as next elements of the trait 
theory, and the current state of these respective areas in terms of advances in research including 
the criticisms of theories where appropriate, and discuss what we know, what we dont know, 
and what remains to pursue in future research. 
2.2.3. Task competence 
This refers to the dimension of leadership traits associated individuals approach to the execution 
and performance of tasks (Bass & Bass, 2008 in Derue et al., 2011). Previous researches such as 
Judge et al., (2004) described task competence in terms of intelligence, conscientiousness, and 
openness to experience and emotional stability. Task competence reflects the extent to which a 
person is dependable, dutiful, and achievements oriented, and often associated with deliberate 
planning and open to different ways of working. Other dimensions of task competence of the trait 
theory include a persons ability to remain calm and not be easily upset when faced with 
challenging tasks. While Judges meta-analysis suggests that intelligence was positively related to 
leadership effectiveness, the relativity of the description of intelligence does not provide valid 
predictor of task performance because meanings can vary from culture to culture. Also, some 
leaders might possess certain traits but the absence of them did not necessarily mean that the 
person was not a leader. Thus, we propose a re-examination the theoretical differences to give 
meaningful effects on leadership styles. 
2.2.3.1 Interpersonal attributes 
Interpersonal attributes is a general category of leader traits that relate to how individuals 
approach social interactions (Bass & Bass, 2008 in Derue et al., 2011). These traits include the 
interpersonal plane of personality such as extraversion and agreeableness (Costa & McCrae, 1992 
in Derue et al., 2011), as well as skills and abilities related to social functioning such as 
communication skills (Klimoski & Hayes, 1980 in Derue et al., 2011). However, the degree to which 
leadership effectiveness rely on these criteria is counteracted by Bass (2008) who contend that 
little to no research has systematically addressed question regarding the relative stability of 
leader traits. 
2.2.3.2 Relative validity of leader traits 
One consistent theme in the leadership literature is that traits related to task competence and 
interpersonal attributes are important predictors of leadership effectiveness. In particular, the 
degree to which a leadership style is considered effective will depend on the execution and 
performance criteria such as being in touch, emphatic, and being part of whats going on, not 
apart from whats going on (Luthans, 2005: 546). For example leaders who ensure that their 
followers have sufficient role clarity, structure, and goals to help facilitate task performance are 
categorized as highly intelligent and conscientious leaders. In contrast, we expect that the 
interpersonal attributes of leaders, namely Extraversion and Agreeableness, to be highly 
agreeable to invoke strong emotional ties and build high-quality relationships with followers 
(Nahrgang, Morgeson, & Ilies, 2009), which should lead to improved scores on affective criteria 
such as follower satisfaction with the leader. We may however expect that the relative validity of 
these leader traits to vary in both definition and the relative effectiveness criterion depending on 
the culture in which leadership operates. 
While research shows that the possession of certain traits alone does not guarantee leadership 
success, trait theorists Kirkpatrick et al. (1991) argues that there is evidence that effective leaders 
are different from other people in certain key respects. The trait theory assumes that certain 
people inherit unique qualities and traits that make them effective leaders or that are required 
to acquire necessary skills be effective. Kirkpatrick et al. identified leader traits such as drive (a 
broad term which includes achievement, motivation, ambition, energy, tenacity, and initiative), 
motivation (the desire to lead but not to seek power as an end in itself), honesty and integrity, 
self-confidence (which is associated with emotional stability), cognitive ability and knowledge of 
the business as key ingredients that help the leader acquire necessary skills be effective. 
Trait theorists Block, Tellegen, Eysenck, Loevinger, have identified intelligence, self-confidence, 
determination, sociability, and integrity (Bligh, 2009) as particular personality or behavioural 
characteristics shared by leaders (Gill, 2006). 
However, if particular traits are predictors of leadership, then how do we explain people who 
possess those qualities but are not leaders? Some researchers also pointed to the inherent 
difficulty in measuring a human personality trait. How do you effectively and consistently 
measure confidence or loyalty, for example? While you cant easily measure confidence or loyalty 
in a person, they noted, you can define behaviour (observable actions) or a set of behaviours that 
seem to embody the trait, which makes measuring them more scientifically valid than trying to 
measure a human personality trait. These questions are some of the inherent difficulties in using 
trait theories to explain leadership and have prompted critiques of the leader trait paradigm 
(Jenkins, 1947; Mann, 1959; Stogdill, 1948) to look beyond leader traits and consider how leaders 
behaviors predicted effectiveness. This led to research on initiation (Hemphill & Coons, 1957; 
Stogdill, 1963), and established the behavior paradigm of leadership research. 
The influence of the leader behavior paradigm can be seen across leadership theories, including 
Fiedlers (1967) contingency model, Blake and Moutons (1964) managerial grid, and the work on 
transformational and transactional leadership (the full range model of leadership; Avolio et al., 
2003; Bass, 1985; Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Moorman, & Fetter, 1990). Not only did the leader 
behavior paradigm provide the basis for new theory but (Judge, Bono, Ilies, and Gerhardt, 2002) 
meta-analytic evidence that suggests that leader behaviors are variables that consistently and 
reliably correlate with leadership emergence and leadership effectiveness (Judge et al., 2004). 
Becoming familiar with these theories in early sections of this thesis will help us to better 
understand the leadership paradigm in order to develop a conceptual framework for investigating 
leadership styles. 
As a result of the disenchantment with the trait approach to leadership that occurred by the 
beginning of the 1950s, the focus of leadership research shifted away from leader traits to leader 
behaviors. The premise of this stream of research was that the behaviors exhibited by leaders are 
more important than their physical, mental, or emotional traits. 
2.2.4. Behavior theories 
Another important thrust of the understanding of leadership styles as a behaviour (White, 1939; 
Hemphill & Coons, 1957; Stogdill, 1963) has to do with literature on the natural difficulty of 
measuring human personality traits and characteristics. For instance, how do you effectively and 
consistently measure intelligence, energy, power, and influence? As debates about the challenge 
of measuring traits continued, researchers began considering behaviours for measuring 
leadership styles, arguing that while you cant easily measure traits in a person, you can define 
behaviours or observable actions, which makes measuring them more scientifically valid than 
trying to measure a human personality trait. Behavioural theory contains some very different 
assumptions from trait theory. Behavioural theorists (Halpin & Winer, 1957; Hemplin & Coons, 
1957) saw leadership as a pattern of motives and refer to a leaders' strength of concern for people 
and their concern for goal achievement. Perhaps, researchers wanted to describe individuals 
behaviours while they acted as leaders of groups or organizations (Bass, 1990a) and began to 
look at leaders in the context of the organization, identifying the behaviours leaders exhibits that 
increase the effectiveness of the company. Hemphills and Coons (1957) research ultimately 
resulted in two primary dimensions of leadership styles: initiation of structure and consideration 
(Halpin & Winer, 1957) and Fleishman and Harris (1962) defined them as follows: 
Initiating Structure includes behaviour in which the supervisor organizes and defines group 
activities and his relation to the group. Thus, he defines the role he expects each member 
to assume, assigns tasks, plans ahead, establishes ways of getting things done, and pushes 
for production. This dimension seems to emphasize overt attempts to achieve organization 
goals (p. 43-44). Consideration is defined as behaviours demonstrating mutual trust, 
respect, and a certain warmth and rapport between the supervisor and his group. This 
does not mean that this dimension reflects a superficial pat-on-the-back, first name 
calling kind of human relations behaviour. This dimension appears to emphasize a deeper 
concern for group members needs and includes such behaviour as allowing subordinates 
more participation in decision making and encouraging more two-way communication (p. 
43-44). 
In their narrative review of the leader behaviour literature, Fleishman and colleagues (1991) 
identified 65 distinct classifications of leader behaviour, and subsequent reviews have identified 
that further new leader behaviour theories and typologies continue to be conceived without 
explicit comparison to existing leader behaviour theories (Derue et al., 2003). Despite the 
proliferation of leader behaviour dimensions, one consistent theme in the literature is that 
behaviours can fit into two broad categories: task-oriented and relational-oriented behaviours. 
The behavioural theory of leadership is based upon the belief that great leaders are made, not 
born (St. Pierre, 2004, p.178).  Rooted in behaviourism, this leadership theory focuses on the 
actions of the leader not on mental qualities or internal states but instead, effective leadership 
methods could be taught to employees (Saal & Knight, 1988). According to this theory, people 
can learn to become leaders through teaching and observation. While progress has been made 
toward identifying the behaviours that differentiated leaders from followers, and has ultimately 
led to their introduction in the academic domain to be taught, very little effort has been made on 
the linkage between leadership behaviour and mental qualities that aid in developing capacities 
for self-regulation or other internal states that is the hallmark of true reflectiveness (Arietta Slade, 
2002). Albeit the proliferation of leader behaviour dimensions, one consistent theme in the 
literature is that behaviours can be fit into two broad categories: task-oriented and relational-
oriented behaviours (Hemphill, 1950, Fleishman, 1957, Bass, 1967, Misumi, 1985), relational-
oriented behaviours (Hemphill, 1950; Fleishman, 1951; Blake & Mouton, 1964; Reddin, 1977; 
Indvik, 1986; Zaleznik, 1977 & 1992).  
Another impact of behaviour leadership studies was the broadening of management literature to 
include people-oriented as well as task-oriented management styles. Accordingly, managers who 
most frequently exhibit behaviours that fall into one of the two primary variables (task or people) 
could be placed along each of the two continua. This thesis attempts to illustrate how these two 
most studied theories of leader behaviour, can be arranged along these behavioural dimensions. 
This thesis also discuss how the most studied leadership theories and models of trait, behaviour 
(Lewin, Lipitt, and White, 1939), situation (Herbert Spencer, 1884; Hersey and Blanchard, 1969), 
function or skills (Hackman & Walton, 1986; McGrath, 1962) and contingency theories overlap 
conceptually in ways that inform our understanding of leadership as a complex interaction among 
the leader, the followers, and the situation. The outcome of this research was primarily to identify 
the predominant leadership styles among middle managers in organisations in Rwanda. 
2.3. Criticism of the behavior theory 
The behaviour theory has been criticized as simplistic (Pavlov, 1927; Skinner, 1938) arguing that 
the theory puts too little emphasis on cognition, too little consideration of the spontaneity and 
creativity of humans and too much emphasis on external or environmental determinants. 
Another argument against behaviour theory is that reflexes and conditioning are not sufficient to 
explain most behaviour especially language (Miller and Konorski, 1928). The cognitive revolution 
seems to have wholly displaced behaviour theory arguing that we need to refer to internal states 
to explain most behaviour. This argument is supported by Putnam who argue behaviour does not 
translate what we mean. Putnam argues that all of the people are able to completely suppress all 
outward pain-associated behaviours or on the flip side, someone can fake pain behaviours when 
there is actually no experience of pain. 
In view of the above, it can be argued that the link between behaviour and leadership style cannot 
be defined in just a simple, direct, cause and effect relationship, but rather by other dynamics 
beyond the behaviours involved in determining the leadership style. These forces comprise 
genetic and cognitive factors, cultural variations as well as the environment either through 
association or reinforcement. Actions occur based on purpose, and purpose is determined by the 
mind of the subject. Thus, leadership style theory would require a more complete understanding 
of the complexities of human behaviour to include other dynamics both the external actions of 
the body and the inner life of the mind. From a leadership paradigm if outward behaviours were 
predictors of leadership styles, then someone else other than me would be better suited to know 
what my leadership style is than myself. However, on the other hand one would even argue that 
just because we see the actions of a leader does not mean that we know what the actual drivers 
underlying their decisions. 
Finally, research by anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski (1927) has shown that the principles of 
strength and conditioning are not universal but depends on cultural variations, countering equal-
potentiality concept of the behaviour theory. 
2.4 Theories associated with leadership 
2.4.1. Leadership versus Management 
Leadership has been among the most popular concepts in recent literature evolving from early 
theories of traits to relationships and later personality theories. Many researchers believe some 
theories have been overemphasized and did not give adequate attention to socio-cultural 
influences. For instance behaviourism disregards any notion that there may be an internal 
component to human behaviours (Merriam & Caffarella, 1999) arguing that all behaviour learning 
occurs by external factors. 
Lack of clarity regarding these terminologies resulted in the proliferation of dimensions that 
describe leadership and management styles phenomenon (see Table 2.2). A review of these 
concepts also reveals a people-versus-task orientation as summarized below by Randy G. Eppard 
(2004). Some scholars argue that although management and leadership overlap, the two activities 
are not synonymous (Bass, 2010), leaders are concerned with understanding peoples beliefs and 
gaining their commitment, managers carry out responsibilities, exercise authority, and worry 
about how things get accomplished. 
Leadership (John Kotter (1990a, 1990b) involves influencing through (a) developing a strategic 
thinking for the organization and strategies to achieving goals/results; (b) persuade people to 
subscribe to the organisational goals through compelling communication; and (c) empowering 
people to action through motivation and building relationships while management on the other 
hand consists of (a) preparations for doing the work for achievement of organizational purposes 
through planning, budgeting and staffing; (b) actuating the organizational methods to work 
efficiently through guiding and supervising the work of sub-ordinates (Fayol, 1908); and (c) 
checking conformities with the standards and correction of deviation through measuring and 
correcting of performance activities of subordinates in order to make sure that organisational 
objectives and plans are being accomplished (Kootz & O'Donell, 1995). Prominent management 
theorists (Fayol, 1908a; Kootz & O'Donell, 1995) have offered frameworks and dimensions for 
describing management functions (see diagram: 2.1). 
Figure 2: Management functions 
Figure 3: Leadership functions 
Figure 4: Comparison between Management & Leadership functions 
Leadership  
Produces change and movement 
Management 
Produces order and consistency 
Strategic thinking  
Creating a clear vision 
Setting strategies 
Planning for doing the work 
Establishing agendas & timetables 
Budgeting (allocating resources) 
Communication 
Articulating compelling goals 
Seeking commitment 
Building teams and coalitions 
Organizing 
Provide structure 
Aligning people 
Establish rules and procedures 
Relationships/Empowering people  
Motivating (Satisfy peoples needs) 
Building trusts & relationships 
Empowering & inspiring 
Controlling 
Develop incentives  
Directs & coordinates 
Take corrective action 
Personal drive & Integrity 
Listen openly to ideas 
Encourages standards in others 
Respect for self; Respect for others; and 
Responsibility for all your actions  
Directing  
Initiates action and solutions 
Instructing, and overseeing the performance 
Providing guidance to workers is doing work 
Results /Aligning people 
Maximizing organizational effectiveness 
Ensuring people get support and tools 
Align people, work, and systems 
Staffing 
Determining human resource needs; 
Recruiting, selecting, hiring & training 
Developing staff members 
Table 2: Leadership and Management functions defined 
Review of the literature in this area show that these terms that have been used interchangeably 
and people in different cultures have defined leadership and management differently (Bass, 
2002). Does culture dictate how we define leadership? A further examination of the distinctions 
between leadership and management becomes less confusing if we distinguish leadership from 
management and define leadership function as manipulation [creating and changing] 
organizational culture. According to Shein the unique and essential of leadership is the 
manipulation of culture. "Leaders work on the culture of the organization, creating it or changing 
it.  Managers work within the culture of the organization (Shein, "Organizational Culture" in 
Wrens The Leader's companion). Other researchers suggest that no single leadership style can 
be generalized; Stogdill (1948) concluded that persons who are leaders in one situation may not 
necessarily be leaders in other situations (p. 65). This school of thought suggests that effective 
leadership requires both acts of leadership and management to addresses both the changing 
complexity of the tasks, and the changing abilities of the followers, as they move together toward 
goal attainment (Thomas and Bainbridge, 2002). 
2.4.2. Situational leadership 
Situational leadership according to Hersey, P. (1984) is not a theory but a model that can be 
replicated and used in a variety of different settings. Situational leadership (Hersey and 
Blanchard, 1969) involves both characteristics of the environment and characteristics of the 
followers. The situational leadership as a model was developed by Hersey as a training program 
where people tried all hands-on skills that would be useful in goal setting, performance 
evaluation, and problem solving and role-played and internalized them. In an interview with 
Schermerhorn (Ohio University), Hersey explained that situational leadership first began as an 
effort to find something that can make a difference in the real world, a training program to help 
people make a successful transition from technical to supervisory work. It included training and 
development prior to being promoted, the opportunity to try the job on a part-time basis before 
you get promoted to it fulltime. People didn't just learn the skills in terms of concepts or 
knowledge; they role-played, practice and used them before going into their work. It was quickly 
developed into a leadership by Blanchard and Hersey, while working on the first edition of 
Management of Organizational behaviour (1969). 
The fundamental principle underlying of the situational leadership theory is that there is no single 
best style of leadership but rather that through training (to match leader behaviors with the 
needs of the individual or group that they are working with), people can become more effective 
leaders in a variety of situations. Effective leadership is task-relevant and that the most successful 
leaders are those that adapt their leadership style to the readiness (the ability and willingness 
of a person to take responsibility for directing their own behaviour in relation to a specific task to 
be performed) of the individuals or groups they are attempting to lead/influence. Kenneth 
Blanchard and Paul Hersey argue that leaders should vary their leadership style according to their 
analysis of the situation and the abilities of learners, rather than using a single leadership 
approach all the time. The underlying principle is in the leader diagnosing the demands of their 
situation. Situational leadership is based on interplay among the amount of the direction (task 
behaviour) and the socio-emotional support (relationship behaviour) a leader provides and the 
readiness (competence or maturity) level that followers exhibit on a specific task, function, 
activity, or objective that the leader is attempting to accomplish through the individual or group. 
The Hersey and Blanchard theory (Situational leadership) espouses four leadership styles: 
Hersey and Blanchards four leadership styles 
Telling/directing Selling/coaching 
This style is characterized by one-way 
communication in which the leader defines 
the roles of followers and tells them what, 
how, when, and where to do various tasks. 
This style the leader still provides most of the 
direction but also begins to attempts through 
two-way communication and socio-
emotional support to get the followers 
psychologically to "buy into" decisions that 
have to be made. 
Participating/coaching Delegating/observing 
This style is characterized by two-way 
communication in which the leader and 
followers now share in decision making with 
facilitating behavior from the leader, since 
The style involves letting followers "run their 
own show." The leader delegates since the 
followers are high in readiness, have the 
ability, and are both willing and able to take 
followers have the ability and knowledge to do 
the task. 
responsibility for directing their own actions 
or performance. 
Table 3: Hersey & Blanchard's Four Leadership styles 
The theory has advantages in terms simplicity that makes it easy to use in a variety of different 
settings, and the focus on maturity and competence of the-led/follower often overlooked in other 
leadership theories. It recognizes the need for flexibility on the part of leaders and the importance 
of the maturity and competence of the-led/follower as determinants of leader behaviour, often 
overlooked in other leadership theories followers. However intuitive the theory may be, the 
difficulty in quantifying and assessing accurately the readiness (competence or maturity) of an 
individual or group (Goodson et al., 1989) may undermine the pragmatic utility of the model. 
There also, is the misjudgement of the leader, especially the tendency to assume that leaders are 
higher in readiness (competence or maturity) than the followers. The Hersey-Blanchard model 
has also been criticized for a North American bias that neglects the way other cultures 
communicate and prioritize values such as individualism and family. The theory doesn't seem to 
bear out or ignores interpersonal relationships within work groups that can have a negative 
impact on performance. 
In a world of globalization where the rate of change escalates, leadership models continue to 
evolve toward team approaches, employee empowerment and continuous learning, other factors 
such as cultural values intrinsic to ethical exercise of power have become topics of discussion 
regarding effective leadership. 
2.4.3. Contingency Theories 
For some time now, researchers have emphasized the influences of leader behaviour on 
organisational effectiveness but they give little guidance as to what constitutes effective 
leadership in different situations and have led to proliferation of numerous theories about 
leadership. Perhaps the most popular, behaviour theory to be advanced was the Fiedler 
contingency model of leadership effectiveness (Bedeian, Glueck 1983) that explains leadership 
effectiveness in terms of situational moderators or contingent upon factors such as the situation, 
the people, the task, the organization, and other environmental variables. Contingency implies "it 
depends". That is, the effectiveness of a given pattern of leader behaviour depends (or is 
contingent upon) aspects of the situation the leader is in. To a certain extent contingency 
leadership theories are extensions of the trait theory, in the sense that human traits are related 
to the situation in which the leaders exercise their leadership. It is also linked to behaviour theory, 
in the sense that particular variables related to the environment that might determine which 
particular style of leadership is best suited for the situation. It is generally accepted within the 
contingency theories that leaders are more likely to express their leadership when they feel that 
their followers will be responsive. Contingency theories gained prominence during the 1970s and 
1980s as scholars endeavoured to pinpoint behavioural characteristics of effective leaders. 
Contingency theories hold that there is no one leadership style and that leadership effectiveness 
is related to the interplay of a leader's traits or behaviours and situational factors. The major 
theories contributing towards this school of thought are described below. 
2.4.4. The Ohio State and University of Michigan leadership models 
The contingency approach to leadership was influenced by two separate research projects by 
Ohio State University (Fleishman, 1953; Halpin, et al., 1957; Stodgill, et al., 1962) and University 
of Michigan (Katz, et al., 1952, Likert, 1961, 1967) measuring a range of possible leader behaviours 
in various organizational contexts and measures of group productivity to assess effective 
leadership behaviours respectively. Two dimensions of leader behaviour emerged from both 
studies namely; consideration (Ohio State 1953) or relation-oriented behaviour (Michigan) and 
initiating structure or task-oriented behaviour. This line of research was later extended by Blake 
and Mouton in 1964 to suggest that effective leaders score high on both of these behaviours 
(high-high leaders). In contrast, the Contingency Leadership theory argues that there is no single 
way of leading and that every leadership style should be based on certain situations, which 
signifies that there are certain people who perform at the maximum level in certain places, but 
at minimal performance when taken out of their element. 
2.4.5. Blake and Mouton's Managerial Grid 
The Managerial Grid developed by Robert Blake and Jane Mouton focuses on task and employee 
orientations of managers in terms of two extremes of leadership concern (Bolden, R et al., 2003). 
Blake and Mouton studied leadership behaviour and developed a five basic leadership styles 
framework called the managerial grid model (1964) and plots task orientation on the horizontal 
axis and concern for employee on the vertical axis. 
Blake and Mouton as published in 1964, updated in 1978 and 1985, and became in 1991 described 
the five different leadership styles resulting from the grid. 
Figure 5: Blake & Mouton (1991)'s Five leadership styles 
 The first is characterized by the avoidance of responsibility or personal commitment, and by 
leaving people to work as they see fit (impoverished management or leadership style (1.1). 
Plotted at one (low concern for task) on the horizontal axis and at one (low concern for people), 
the kind of leader applies (and expects) minimal effort and has little concern for either staff 
satisfaction or work targets. Managers use this style to preserve job and job seniority, 
protecting themselves by avoiding getting into trouble. As a result, disorganization, 
dissatisfaction and disharmony due to lack of effective leadership are present. 
 The second is the authority-obedience style (9.1) which focuses on production. Plotted at nine 
(9) on the horizontal axis and at one on the vertical axis, the leader concentrates almost 
exclusively on achieving results. The leader makes decisions then subordinates carry them out. 
People are viewed as instruments to be used to get the job done.  
 Then theres the agreeable, eager to help, non-confrontational, comforting and 
uncontroversial. Plotted at nine (9) on the vertical axis (high concern for staff) and at one (1) 
on the horizontal axis (1.9 or low concern for task and high concern for staff), this leadership 
styles emphasizes sole concern for staff. Also known as country club (1.9), the leader has a 
high concern for people's needs and has developed satisfying relationships and work culture - 
but not necessarily very productive. 
 The fourth is the Middle of the road/ politician style also known as organization Man 
Management style (5.5), characterized alternation between Country Club Management (1.9) 
and Authority-Obedience Management styles (9.1), this leader tightens up to increase output 
but when human relations begin to suffer they swing back to 1.9. Adequate organisational 
performance is possible through balancing the necessity to get work done and maintaining 
morale of staff at a satisfactory level. 
 And lastly, Team or Sound Style (9.9) plotted high on both horizontal (Production) and vertical 
axis (People), is highly participative and considered the most effective because work 
accomplishment is from committed people and interdependence through a common stake in 
organisation purpose that leads to relationships of trust and respect (Blake & Mouton, 1985). 
Leaders in this category achieve high work performance through 'leading' people to being 
dedicated to the organizational goals. There is a high degree of participation and teamwork, 
which satisfies the basic need of people to be involved and committed to their work. 
2.4.6. Fiedler's contingency theory  
Fiedler's contingency theory is one of the contingency theories that states that effective 
leadership depends not only on the style of leading but on the control over a situation (Verkerk 
2002). Fiedlers Contingency Theory shows the relationship between the leaders orientation or 
style and group performance under differing situational conditions. The theory is based on 
determining the orientation of the leader (relationship or task), the elements of the situation 
(leader-led relations, task structure, and position power), and the leader orientation was found 
to change from low to moderate to high control as the situation changed. Situational elements of 
Fiedler's contingency theory include: 
 Leader-led relations - the extent to which the leader has the support and loyalty of 
subordinates, and whether the relations with subordinates are friendly and cooperative. A 
leader who is accepted by the group members is in a more favorable situation than one who 
is not; 
 Task structure - the extent to which there are clear, standardized procedures to accomplish 
the task; detailed descriptions of the finished product or service, and objective measures of 
how well the task is being performed (high structured jobs). If the groups task is unstructured, 
and if the leader is no more knowledgeable that the group about how to accomplish the task, 
the situation is unfavorable. 
 Position power - the extent to which the leader has authority to evaluate subordinate 
performance and give rewards and punishments. The more power the leader has, the more 
favorable the situation. According to Verkerk, a leader with powerful position behaved 
differently from one with low power. This indicated that the power given by the organization 
to the position of the leader was an important factor. 
Fiedler concludes that there is no single leadership style that is effective in all situations. Rather, 
certain leadership styles are better suited for some situations than for others. Fiedler found that 
the effectiveness of the leader is contingent upon the orientation of the leader and the 
favorableness of the situation. 
2.4.7. Hersey-Blanchard Situational Leadership Theory  
Situational theories (Spencer, 1884; Hersey and Blanchard, 1969) involve both characteristics of 
the environment and characters of the followers. The situational leadership theory is a leadership 
theory developed by Hersey and Blanchard, 1969), while working on the first edition of 
Management of Organizational Behaviour (now in its 9th edition). Situational theories is based 
on the thinking that leadership is a relationship between an individuals development level 
(various combinations of competence and commitment) on a specific goal or task and the 
leadership style (various combinations of directive and supportive behaviour) that the leader 
provides to match an individuals development level at each stage of development on a specific 
goal or task. As development level changes, the leaders style should change. The leader operates 
the appropriate leadership styles from directing style to coaching style and from supporting styles 
to delegating as individual/followers (the led) move along the development continuum  from 
developing (D1) to developed (4). 
2.4.8. The Tannenbaum/Schmidt continuum of leader ship theory 
After almost after four decades of research about different definitions and theories of leadership 
styles, in 1973, Tannenbaum & Schmidt (1970) came up with a continuum of possible leadership 
styles related to the degree of authority available to managers and the amount of freedom 
available to subordinates in making decisions. Tannenbaum and Schmidt Continuum of leadership 
behaviour concentrated more on delegation & freedom in decision making to subordinates based 
on a number of parameters that goes into choosing the managerial style such as managers 
competence, subordinates developmental level and the situation. The model defines the range 
of leadership styles depicted on the continuum between two extremes of autocratic and free rein 
(See figure below). 
Figure 6: Continuum of leadership behavior 
Derived from earlier studies, the continuum describes 7 levels of leadership behaviours ranging 
from (1) a manager who makes a decision without consideration of his/her subordinates and 
communicate it for implementation, (2) a manager who makes the decision but rather than 
communicating it for implementation, s/he makes an effort to sell a decision or gain acceptance 
of his/her subordinates before implementation, (3) a manager who, as before, takes responsibility 
and arrives at a decision but invites questions and provides an opportunity for his/her 
subordinates to get a fuller explanation of his/her decision and intentions, (4) a manager who 
presents a tentative decision subject to change and allows subordinates to exert or alter the 
decision, (5) a manager who presents the problem to his/her subordinates, gets suggestions 
before making the decision. Here the subordinates get the first chance to suggest solutions, (6) a 
manager who identifies the problem and defines limits within which subordinates or the group 
makes the decision. The manager may or may not take part as a member of the group and (7) a 
manager who permits subordinate extreme degree of freedom to make decisions. For instance a 
team of manager or engineers identifies and diagnoses the problem and decides the solutions.  
As team develops, leadership styles moves from one to the next level  the area of subordinates 
freedom increases and the need for managers intervention decreases. The continuum defines 
the criteria for choosing the leadership style and delegation or level of involvement of 
subordinates. According to Tannenbaum and Schmidt, the choice of the leadership style will 
depend upon the following three factors: 
1. Forces in the Manager: The behavior of the leader is influenced by his personality, background, 
knowledge, and experience. These forces include value systems, Confidence in subordinates, 
Leadership inclinations and feeling of security in an uncertain situation. 
2. Forces in the subordinate: The personality of the subordinates and their expectations from the 
leader influences their behavior. The factors include readiness to assume responsibility in 
decision-making, degree of tolerance for ambiguity, interest in the problem and feelings as to 
its importance, strength of the needs for independence, knowledge and experience to deal 
with the problem, and understanding and identification with the goals of the organization. 
3. Forces in the situation: The environmental and general situations also affect the leaders 
behavior. These include factors like type of organization, group effectiveness, nature of the 
problem, and time pressure. 
When these factors are on a positive side, then the leader allows more freedom to the 
subordinate. Although the model clearly shows that leadership behavior should be viewed on a 
continuum with different degrees of authority, and defines the criteria for choosing the 
leadership style and delegation or level of involvement of subordinates, Weihrich (1979) contends 
that it does not suggest how to change a leadership pattern. 
2.4.9. Transformational Leadership Theories 
The Transactional and Transformational Leadership theories, first described by James Burns in 
1978, represent polar opposites when it comes to the underlying theories of management and 
motivation. Transformational Leaders are depicted by charisma and shared vision between 
leaders and followers (Burns, 2010). The essence of transformational theories is that the leader 
stimulates and inspires others (followers) through their inspirational nature and charismatic 
personalities to produce exceptional work (Burns, 1978; Bass, 1990). That is, the leader interacts 
with others and is able to create a solid relationship that results in a high percentage of trust that 
will later result in an increase of motivation, both intrinsic and extrinsic, in both leaders and 
followers. In contrast, transactional leadership describes more of a give and take working 
relationship. Transactional leaders are more concerned with maintaining the normal flow of 
operations. The term "transactional" refers to the fact that this type of leader essentially 
motivates subordinates by exchanging rewards for performance to meeting particular objectives. 
In 1985, Bernard Bass expanded on Burns (1978) theory to organisational management and 
argued that transactional leaders are mostly concerned with how to improve and maintain the 
quantity and quality of performance, how to substitute one goal for another, how to reduce 
resistance to particular actions, and how to implement decisions (p.27). Bass (1985) further 
contrasts transformational leaders substantially from transactional leadership, arguing that 
transformational leadership enhances the effects of transactional leadership on followers (Bass, 
1985b, 1990a). Transformational leaders attempts and succeeds in raising colleagues, 
subordinates, followers, clients or constituencies to greater awareness about the issues of 
consequence. This heightening of awareness requires leaders with vision, self-confidence and 
inner strength to argue successfully for what he/she sees is right or good, not for what is popular 
or is acceptable according to established wisdom of the time (p.17). 
Although a lot of research effort has been invested and significant progress made in studying the 
processes through which leadership influence followers attitudes, behaviours, and performance, 
a number of areas still deserve further attention. First, there is a need to examine how leadership 
is viewed across specific situations and cultures. Up until very recently, context-based literature 
on leadership was hard to find (Luthans & Avolio 2003). Even more difficult to find is ethnographic 
leadership literature of individual cultures. Specifically, what ethnographic evidence is there to 
support universally endorsed leaders attributes as contributing to efficacy of leadership in a 
specific culture based y on empirical data. Limited research has examined leaders biographies 
(Howell & Shamir 2005) as predictor leadership style s, e.g., participative, directive, or inspiring. 
In the next section, we turn our focus to the second major theoretical framework that has 
dominated leadership research, which incorporates the term culture. 
2.5. Culture and leadership/organisational behavior 
The word culture has been used to many things to different people understandably because 
different groups of people have many different cultures. The word culture has been used to refer 
to the customary ways in which humans live  for example, Hogan (2006) used the word culture 
to refer to family norms, social organization and religion. culture as a way of life of a people, to 
their traditions, heritage, designs for living, or life scripts (Rohber, 1984) meaning the way they 
do things; Pufendorf as cited in Velkley (2002); all the ways in which human beings overcome 
their original barbarism, and through artifice, become fully human; the institutions regulating 
our behaviour  the way of talking about collective identities (Kuper, 1999); Everything that 
people have, think, and do as members of a society, Ferraro (2003); what distinguishes humans 
from other species, etc. Many people dont really care about culture which explains how culture 
influences our view of the world around us  the way we live our day -to-day lives, the way we 
work differently across different cultures. 
2.6. What is culture? 
To answer this question requires defining the context in which the word culture is 
conceptualized. There are two classic conceptualization of culture that relevant to this research: 
(a) Anthropological, which pertains to sociological revolves in the human society on its belief, art, 
morals, custom and other capabilities such as values, norms, and habits acquired by member of 
a society, (Taylor, 1871), and; (b) Scientific conceptualization which pertains to the integral whole 
consisting of consumers tools and goods, of constitutional charters that rule various social groups, 
of human ideas and crafts, beliefs and customs (Malinowski, 1944). 
2.6.1. Overview of the literature on the relationship of culture to leadership 
The topics of leadership and culture have attracted considerable interest from both academics 
and practitioners and there is no shortage of anecdotal claims that leadership styles and culture 
are linked (Bass and Avolio, 1993; Nicholls, 1988; Quick, 1992; Schein, 1992; Simms, 1997). A 
review of the literature on the relationship of culture to leadership reveals three fascinating 
correlation (1) both are two of the research worlds most popular themes (Pfeiffer 1993; Williams, 
1958), (2) the two phenomena have correlational influence to the organization/society, and (3) 
while African cultures have been studied substantially and extensively in other disciplines, 
research into culture in organizations in Africa is still lacking in the mainstream. More so, little is 
known about leadership styles in the post-genocide context of the Rwandan culture. 
The study of leadership and culture has been popular research subjects, indeed theory of traits 
and attributes concept of t h e  leader is an old one, predating the scientific study of leadership 
and reaching back into antiquity, across several early civilizations (Bass, 1990; Zaccaro, in press). 
Similarly, the search for the defining culture dates to the scholarly work of Taylor (1871) 
considered by many to have helped to build the discipline of anthropology in the nineteenth 
century. Tylor asserts that the human mind and its capabilities are the same globally, despite a 
particular societys stage in social evolution. Tylor described culture as the cumulative knowledge. 
Tylor defined charisma as: 
that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, custom, and any 
other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of society. Human mind and its 
capabilities are the same globally, despite a particular societys stage in social evolution. For 
instance a hunter-gatherer society possesses the same amount of intelligence as an 
advanced industrial society. The difference is education, which is the cumulative knowledge 
and methodology that takes thousands of years to acquire. Cultures are like children - culture 
and the mind of humans as progressive (cited in Kim et al. 2006). 
Research on leadership evolved through the 20th century from trait/personality based, to 
behavioural to context based theories (Nahavandi, 2006) while cultural theories evolved around 
cognitive, communicative and symbolic systems. While the large body of the literature seems to 
agree on the development of the main theories, the constructs remains elusive (Burns, 1978). 
As literature on leadership style evolved, researchers further sought examined the relationship 
of culture to leadership styles (see Bass & Avolio, 1993; Schein, 1991; Schwartz, 1992, 1994; 
Hofstede, 2001; House, et al., 2004). For decades the importance of the relationship of culture 
to leadership styles has become more clearer to the research community and an increasing 
number of researchers  are discussing  the impact of culture on the effectiveness  of the leader's 
practices or leadership styles (e.g., Gessner, Arnold, & Mobley, 1999; Hofstede, 1991; House, 
Ranges, Javidan, Dorfman, & Gupta, 2004; Leslie & Van Velsor, 1998) and assessing the 
generalizability of leadership theories, behaviours, and processes  across cultures (Dorfman, 
2004; Chemers, 1997). For example the 'Leadership categorization theory (Lord & Maher, 1991) 
uses cognitive categorization processes and discrete schemas to explain the effect of culture on 
leadership and follower behaviour. This model suggests that the better the match between a 
perceived individual and the leadership system held by the perceiver, the more likely it is that the 
perceiver actually sees the individual as a leader. Recently, Ranges, Lord, and Dickson (2000) 
introduced a model called "Connectionist Model of Culture and Leadership" that explains how 
leadership behaviour interacts with societal values and organizational culture to influence the 
reactions and behaviour of followers. Connectionist models focus on connections between 
concepts in cognitive networks rather than discrete schemas. 
While there is no shortage of anecdotal claims of the relationship of culture to leadership, critics 
(Lui, 2011) argue that this theme has been unduly overshadowed by the bias, which is often an 
American one, toward the pursuit of a universal model of leadership. Cultures in Africa have too 
often been overlooked by the mainstream researchers. More so, little is known about leadership 
styles in oral cultures particularly, the Rwandan culture. Seldom has the need for study of cultures 
in Africa been voiced more strongly than now. Accordingly, Winston & Ryan (2008) argue that 
differences in cultures may have an effect on the effectiveness of the leadership style (Hale & 
Fields, 2007). 
Therefore, it is important to recognize that different cultural groups will vary in their 
conceptualizations of effective leadership (Den Hartog, House, Hanges, Ruiz-Quintanilla & 
Dorfman 1999). Winston and Ryan delineate unique parallels between the Global Leadership 
and Organizational Behaviour Effectiveness Research Programs (GLOBE) humane orientation 
and cultural conceptions of servant leadership from around the world, suggesting that servant 
leadership is a global leadership style (2008, p. 212). 
Leadership studies have begun to explore the uniqueness of the conceptualization in various 
global cultures, including those in Africa (e.g. Nelson, 2003; Danhausser & Boshoff, 2007; 
Hale & Fields, 2007; Koshal, 2005), however, most of these are qualitative studies, which cannot 
be generalized beyond their respective samples (Willig, 2008) and critics have accused it of being 
discussed in the Western context (Hale & Fields, 2007). It is important to explore the 
uniqueness of the conceptualization of leadership styles in the context of what is emic and etic 
in various global cultures, including particularly the oral cultures in Africa. 
2.6.2. Traditional Leadership and Culture in Africa 
Leadership styles and culture in Africa and the influence thereof has recently attracted 
researchers and writers on African social and cultural landscape and in the course of time 
becoming either diluted or overemphasized (Sardan, 2004). On the one hand, the economic 
strives and social issues that marked Africa's post-colonial era blamed on challenges of leadership. 
Africa's biggest problem today lies with the leadership (Mwakikagile, 2001; Ong'ayo, 2008; 
Dentou, 2003; Afegbua & Adejuwon, 2012). For example, The prevalence of infectious diseases 
such as HIV/AIDS in Africa despite scientific strides has been blamed on great attachment to 
African cultural practices such as forced marriages, widow's rituals, 'cleansing' after male 
circumcision which are held by members of a community for periods often spanning generations 
(MJ Maluleke, 2012). On the other hand, much of what is written about African leadership styles 
and culture is seen as "Eurocentric or western view" which casts a negative beam of light on 
African leadership styles and culture (Malunga, 2006). They are quick to blame the legacy of 
colonialism for current social and economic strives, others accuse the influence of Western social 
scientists in cultural research reinforced ways of thinking and acting that are rooted in Western 
ideologies or cultures. For example, several case studies have been conducted using Hofstede 
cross-cultural model that put culture into neat, sometimes unconnected, little boxes. As such, 
using Western benchmarks and assessment tools are inadequate to evaluate management and 
leadership in African, living by the African proverb that 'Inkingi imwe ntigera inzu [one pillar 
cannot measure a house]'. To try to reconcile or redress the disparity, the following section 
explores practices based on two distinctive cultural concepts, which are based on African human 
relation traditions (that are different from the western instrumentalism framework). African 
humanism is most often referred to in the Southern African context as Ubuntu and Indaba 
(Horwitz et al., 2002; Jackson, 2002; Mbigi, 1997)  the indigenous leadership styles based on 
values such as supportiveness, extended networks, interpersonal relationships and open 
discussions involving all, as well as discipline based on how the individual affects the group. 
Ubuntu can be equated with Hofstedes collectivism which he [Hofstede] is frequently 
contrasted with western cultures, referred to as individualism. In similar vein, Indaba can be 
equated with a trust building measure through collective decision making process or restoration 
of relationships not only of individuals but communities. Hofstedes work, described in chapter 
2, is widely cited by scholars (Bond 2002; Hofstede 1997) for a highly valuable insight into cultural 
dynamics hence a good reference when discussing Ubuntu and Indaba. These dimensions 
founded by Hofstede, particularly Collectivism and Masculinity illustrate the deeply embedded 
values of African cultures such as preference for assertiveness, heroism, achievement and 
maintenance of social harmony among in-group members, as well as sharing of resources and 
readiness to give up personal interest keeping in mind the collective interest. These values impact 
not only how people with these cultural backgrounds behave, but also the manner in which they 
will potentially behave when they become leaders in a work-associated context. Hofstedes work 
serves as the base to examine how African culture of Ubuntu and Indaba is likely to influence 
leadership. 
2.6.3. Ubuntu Philosophy 
Africa is known for its rich cultural heritage, passed on from generation to generation, has been 
a source of guidance for communities in times of peace, uncertainty, birth, life and death. This 
humanistic African culture of interconnectedness, respect and dignity, collectivism and solidarity, 
communalism is known as Ubuntu. ''Ubuntu'' is a concept that most visibly appears in Afrocentric 
the literature on ''African Management'' (Mbigi and Maree, 1995; Kamoche, 2002; Kamoche et 
al., 2004; Newenham-Kahindi, 2009; Seny Kan 2014). Ubuntu is said to signify an indigenous 
African philosophy of management which captures the complex social relations between people 
and the idea of caring for others as though they were members of ones own family (Kamoche et 
al., 2004). According to Malunga (2006) "it [Ubuntu] has enabled us to live in harmony with our 
physical, social and spiritual environment. It provides the foundation for leadership, problem-
solving, decision making and hope for the future". The ubuntu is an Africa concept literally 
translated as 'humanism or generosity (Kinyarwanda) but it also means I am because we are in 
xhosa/zulu. The xhosa/zulu expression - Umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu - a person is a person 
through other people expresses a profound believe in human relationships with other humans 
as core traditional African values, Khoza (2007).Van der Colff (2003) describes ubuntu as a 
mediating variable key to all African cultural values and involves collective personhood and 
collective morality (p.257). 
To sum up, ubuntu philosophy is an African cultural worldview of what it means to be human and 
provides guidelines for leadership styles and management practices. According to this 
conception, interconnectedness, respect and dignity, collectivism and solidarity, communalism 
defines leadership legitimacy. Ubuntu philosophy is built on numerous principle values and 
leadership practices which are similar or shared in many African cultures (Mulanga, 2004; 2006; 
Dia, 1991).  
There were positive aspects of ubuntu in how they were applied in the past but also demerits 
which arise from the fact that ubuntu values were mainly practiced in stable environment with 
relatively limited interaction with outside world. Also with the change of time and the 
environment becoming less predictable, certain shadows will inevitably be cast over the 
relevance of ubuntu values in current African context. The globalisation trend not only 
foregrounds Northern values but renders ubuntu values and practices inferior status (Malunga, 
2006:2). The advent of Christianity branded African traditional values and practices as evil and 
outlawed traditional taboos, as the African proverb says: 'the church has uprooted [displaced] 
taboos' (Fardon & Furniss, 2002). Critics of the Ubuntu (e.g., Seny Kan et al., 2015; Chen, 2014; 
West, 2014; Kragh, 2012) argue that it is presented with a form of idealism that exposes only the 
positive aspects of African social norms, and that the generalization of the concept to the whole 
of sub-Saharan Africa may be unfounded because all its distinctive elements are not unique to 
African societies. A claim rejected by Mutabazi (2006, 2007) who argues that beyond the diversity 
that characterises African societies, common cultural traits forming a coherent system of beliefs, 
values and sociability rules can be found. As Mutabazi (2008) observed, the history of Africa has 
been marked by significant migration during wars, epidemics or nomadic clans searching for 
pasture during major regional droughts, by which several cultural values and traditions have been 
taken from one region to another and beyond the current borders of nations. 
The Ubuntu has also been criticized as a concept poorly documented empirically (Seny Kan et 
al., 2015). As a result, African culture and traditions including oral literature passed orally from 
generation to generation is over the course of time becoming diluted, but sadly not being 
replaced with a culture of documentation. This is what Malunga calls throwing away the bath 
water together with the baby, that is, throwing the good out with the bad (p.3). Despite the 
shortcomings of oral literature, the concept of 'Ubuntu' still allows better investigation of the 
social nature of managerial practices in African organizations. (e.g., Amoako-Agyei, 2009; Chen, 
2014; Khan and Ackers, 2004). The next section reviews the second major concept of African 
culture indaba, and how they were applied to leadership practices. 
2.6.4. Culture of Indaba 
The term Indaba refers to a traditional social structure of handling and resolving any debate or 
conflict that may arise within a group (Newenham-Kahindi, 2009). The term implies that 
leadership is defined according to experience and competence, much like the Zulu terms Ubaba 
(respecting of experienced elders). A similar concepts is also found in Kinyarwanda and Kirundi, 
(the local languages of Rwanda and Burundi) it is inararibonye6 (the experienced or the elder 
in English). The term "inararibonye" someone who, by his past experience, acquired an expert 
6 The term "inararibonye" someone who, by his past experience, acquired an expert status in 
human affairs (L Nshimirimana, 2003). Stroh (2007) defines 'inararibonye', as a local term which 
is difficult to define precisely  but refers to a cloudy social concept of venerability. 
status in human affairs (Tripp, A.M. (2005); Ntahobari and Ndayiziga, 2003:19-20). Stroh (2007) 
defines 'inararibonye', as a local term which is difficult to define precisely  but refers to a cloudy 
social concept of venerability. The Inararibonye were selected for their leadership qualities and 
integrity, implying that the leadership of the elders is used to coerce groups into resolving 
problems collectively (Newenham-Kahindi, 2009; Nurse, 1994 cited in Management in Africa: 
Macro and Micro Perspectives (2013)). In Indaba, decision-making tends to be circular and 
inclusive (Horwitz et al., 2002). It promotes leadership engagement in more experienced 
individuals. The term itself is grounded on agaciro and ubunyangamugayo (dignity and eminent 
personality respectively) that any form of debate must be honored and respected by all. When 
used in connection with leadership, the concept of Ubuntu and indaba means that people are 
seen not as an individual but as part of a collective society (Horwitz et al., 2002; Jackson, 2002; 
Kamoche, 2002; Mbigi and Maree, 1995). They will feel they are part of a firms family, will be 
dedicated in their work, will have a high level of accountability and trust, will become more 
innovative, productive for the firm and for their own interests (Seny Kan et al., 2015). Both ubuntu 
and Indaba remind us that African cultures are socially and institutionally well equipped to 
address certain organizational issues by using their own unique approach to business, and they 
measure their success according to their own distinctive management system (Newenham-
Kahindi, 2007), rather than following the western models of management practices. Using 
folktales and proverbs, the next section discusses the positive aspects of African cultural concepts 
in turns with their demerits and how they were applied to leadership practices in the past, as well 
as the lessons that modern day African leadership paradigm can learn from these principles. As 
Malunga (2009) suggests, "folktales and proverbs offers a creative, innovative and holistic 
approach to understanding organizational leadership [in Africa] using the principles embodied in 
the African philosophy of personhood known as ubuntu". 
2.6.5. Values of Communalism  
"Your neighbour's child is your own child".  "The prosperity of a single person does not make a 
community rich". "A person can only be truly safe in a safe community". "Go the way that many 
people go; if you go alone, you will have reason to lament". 
The above African proverbs offer rich insights into the understanding of communalism values. 
Most societies and cultures in Africa (particularly in rural areas still) believe in sharing and 
collective ownership of opportunities, responsibilities and challenges. For example, "clan 
households collectively meet responsibilities such as school fees, medical and other expenses for 
children" (Malunga, 2009) and members of extended families and neighbours. In present day 
Rwanda, wedding expenses are expected to be covered (often entirely) by family members, 
neighbours, friends and colleagues. Furthermore, in ubuntu philosophy, the community is 
conceptualized as both 'god-made' and 'mad-made'. According to Onwubiko (2009), a society that 
is believed by the Africans to be originally "godmade" because it transcends the people who live 
in it now, and it is "Man-made" because it cannot be culturally understood independent of those 
who live in it now [p.14].  
Within the god-made (transcendental) community the clan stood the void in strong and ever 
present contrast. As the Kongo put it, a man outside his clan is like a grasshopper which has lost 
its wings. Within the man-made mentality, a community is the custodian of the individual hence 
he must go where the community goes. Furthermore, the community as an entity is permanent 
but individuals come and go. In another sense, when an individual dies, they leave their close 
family members who might be subject to retribution. This shows how Africans are connected to 
the community even long after they are gone. Therefore, the authentic African is known and 
identified in, by and through his/her community. They believed that problems were better solved 
by working together on the assumption that: united, the ants can take a dead elephant to their 
cave. 
2.6.6. Values of Human relations 
Kinship is like a bone, it does not decay. 
"Friendship with the ferryman during the dry season means that when rains come, you will be 
the first to cross" 
Relationships were (and are still) given very high priority in African societies. For example, all 
adults in the community were treated as ones parents. In this sense, everyone is related to 
everyone else. According to Malunga (2006):  
Uncles were/are ranked and treated the same as fathers, Aunts as mothers, and Cousins as 
brothers and sisters. When one married someone from another clan, one did not marry just 
the individual but the whole clan. When this happened, every member of each clan became a 
relative of every member of the other clan. These also implied mutual responsibilities: the 
celebrations (births, weddings etc...) and problems (sickness, funerals etc...) of one clan 
belonged to the other as well. 
This is because according to ubuntu philosophy every person has something to contribute to 
someone else's welfare - children's welfare is a responsibility of every parent and in return the 
elderly and the sick are affectionately taken care of (Okafor, 2000) by every working class 
individual. Hence the ferryman proverb - for example, the ferryman may not be in demand during 
dry season, however, it is worth befriending for the service he offers during when rains come. In 
African cultures, relationships between individuals transcend family to professional spheres. 
Senghor (1976), "in African society, technical activities are always linked with cultural and 
religious activities, with art and magic, with the realm of the mystical. In technical activities and 
especially in productive labour, all these have an important part to play. We are dealing with a 
society based essentially on human relationships... p. 34". What Senghor means is that the central 
importance of positive human relationships between employers and workers lies at the heart of 
its leadership and organisational principles. For Senghor, the fundamental importance of 'human 
relationships' in Africa transcends technical transactions such as commerce and productive labor 
into more meaningful interactions based on cooperation, respect and joy. 
2.6.7. Values of collective responsibilities 
"United, the ants can take a dead elephant to their cave. 
Most indigenous African societies believed in sharing and collective ownership of opportunities, 
responsibilities and challenges. The following quotes express the African values of collective 
responsibility.  
Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe has urged South Africans to take collective 
Arthur Muliro, Deputy Director of SID, "argued that African states need to take their 
the terror and the horror has not sunk in into the minds of white people, South African poet, 
journalist and peace activist Don Mattera. 
These quotes show how Africans believed (and still believe) that problems were better solved by 
working together. Those in privileged positions took it as their responsibility to help the less 
privileged to rise to positions of privilege as well on the assumption that real progress was 
believed to be that which could benefit all. Thus the saying that lit candle does not lose its light 
by lighting other candles. 
2.6.8. Values of participatory leadership 
The fact that malls did not exist in African villages does not mean the market as an institution was 
unknown in Africa. 
Traditional African leadership styles appear to be autocratic and non-participatory, if viewed 
through foreign lenses because it was the same lineages that produced the future leaders. Indeed 
it can be argued that patriarchal succession systems prevented women from holding the highest 
traditional offices (GMO report 2010; Offenhauer, 2005), however, it [Traditional African 
leadership] was in fact transparent and participatory if viewed through African lenses. In 
traditional communities, participatory leadership was achieved in different ways.  
Traditional African leadership was not, as so many persist in claiming, without viable institutions 
of its own before the European arrived. Mall and bazaars are different forms of the same 
institution - the market. Institution existed in different forms and names. As Ayittey (2010) argues, 
European colonialists introduced no new institutions into Africa - only different names and forms 
of already existing institutions. For example, the African "village meeting under a big tree" and 
the European "parliaments" were simply different forms of the same institution of democracy. 
What Africans had was participatory decision-making process. The Europeans introduced 
parliamentary democracy. The specificity of characteristic of Africa's indigenous system was that 
it was open and inclusive. No one was locked out of the decision-making process. Even people 
from neighboring communities or kingdoms and foreigners were allowed participation. At village 
meetings, the people expressed their views freely, which was vital for consensus to be reached. 
No one was arrested or detained for disagreeing with the leader. In the case of Rwanda, for 
example, before the colonial era, the country was organized in small autonomous regional 
kingdoms, sometimes interdependent, especially to be able to defend against an external 
common enemy  just as it was in most other African countries (Mutabazi, 2008). 
Second, in traditional communities, participatory leadership was achieved in the following ways. 
The King's (read leader's) decisions and policies were continually subject to review by others 
(Molotlegi, 2004:3). Leadership systems were characterized by extensive devolution of authority 
to chiefdoms which enjoyed the substantial autonomy to run their own affairs. At central level, 
the authority of the leader was constantly challenged and / or influenced by the entities were 
governed by the queen mother, godfathers, councils, secret societies, mystics, rituals, 
ceremonies, rules and citizens. According to Mutabazi (2007), it was until the colonial era that 
power was concentrated at the top of the hierarchical on a more federal model of organization 
and to manage the relationship between the three Rwandan clan communities. 
2.6.9. Value of sacredness of life 
Africans were always aware and had a sacred reverence for life, for it is believed to be the greatest 
of God's gifts to humans. Human life was the centre of traditional African morality thus according 
to Yuruba culture, shedding of blood was abhorred (Igwe, 2011).  Only those people whose 
continued existence was considered a threat to the life of others in the community were killed 
because it was believed that it is better for one man to die than for the entire community to 
perish. Wartime was the only exception when those who participated in it committed murder in 
self defence. Even in such events as wartime, those who participated in it were not expected to 
eat until they were ritually cleansed the blood of the slain off their hands (p.126). 
Further, according to Okollo (2012), an African in traditional setting regarded all men as his 
brethren - as members of his ever extending family thus to encourage and enforce proper family 
behavior, criminals were punished by fines or corporal punishment or custodial sentences such 
as prison. 
2.6.10. Conclusion 
African culture emphasizes the need to harness the communalist tendency and behavior as 
embodied in the African philosophical traditions and thought system of ubuntu. In Africa, Culture 
takes centre stage in social dynamics and relationships including moderation of leadership and 
management approaches and practices. From an organizational leadership point of view, culture 
is a powerful instrument that can be used to analyze or understand the behaviours and responses 
of employers and employees, which, in turn, influence the performance of the firm itself 
(Browning, 2006 cited in Newenham-Kahindi, 2009). As such a review of African social dynamics 
and relationships cannot be considered comprehensive without a review of ubuntu philosophy. 
An Afrocentric culture or philosophy underlying their conceptualization and thought of the 
essence of who they are vis--vis their history, values, ideals, self-image and the nature of their 
relationships with the world around them. An evaluation of the history and evolution of culture 
and leadership in Africa should be comprehended and analyzed on the basis of African culture, 
thought and intellectual experience of ubuntu  a concept they believe is often applied out of 
context. The position adopted by this researcher will not be unique, but a hybrid of the analytic 
approaches and methodologies used by notable proponents of African philosophy such as Gyekye 
(1996) whose perspectives of African cultural and intellectual experience and social relationships 
is the basis of their analysis of the history and evolution of African leadership paradigm. 
Similarly, as Kenyan social commentator Mwiti (1998) argues, the future of African leadership 
can only be forged from accepting traditional African cultural values (that) can be considered 
positive features in the scheme of African modernity, even if they may undergo some 
refinement and pruning to become fully harmonious with the spirit of modern culture and to 
function. Modernity has brought irreversible changes and cultural evolution in Africa that are 
afflicting our society. For Mwiti, the realities of modernity are here to stay and no amount of 
talking of Africanisation or African cultural values will make them go away hence the cognition 
that we must adapt to living with them the better for African leadership paradigm. 
Understanding of culture specific, their similarities and differences, and the processes of 
global cultural adaptation can improve human living conditions. 
By understanding the underlying ubuntu values which underlie the behaviors of Africans as 
well as similarities and differences of specific cultures, and the processes of global cultural 
adaptation one can avoid the common trap of judging the other's leadership style by ones 
own values. The style of leaders as influenced by values of one culture may be judged as 
ineffective or wrong if view by another but also as being simply different if a more objective 
view is taken. 
2.7 Culture and leadership in Rwanda 
The study of leadership has a long and controversial history (Kirkpatrick, 1991). One of the issues 
that make leadership discourse more contentious particularly in Africa is the cultural influence on 
leadership or its moderating effect on leadership styles. The contention may also have to do with 
culturally influenced human perception of leadership styles because as Den Hartog et al. (1999) 
notes the perception of effectiveness of leadership differs across cultures. Likewise Malunga 
(2006) suggests that the plethoras of discourses are largely imported from the West, and tend to 
have only limited reflection to the specific African contexts and cultures. As a consequence, it 
remains rather elusive, contentious and the discourses rant and rave. 
In Rwanda, like in many other African countries the state of the research related to culture and 
leadership styles suffers from a number of challenges: (a) until the sprung of research interest on 
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, little research or documentation existed on culture, and as a result; 
(1) little valid literature exists to construct narrative account of events of leadership (2) the actions 
of leaders (read leadership styles) have been examined using Western conceptualized assessment 
tools that are inadequate to evaluate management and leadership in a local context; and hence 
(b) there is still conceptual disagreement within the literature as to whether leadership is a 
universal phenomenon or contingent to culture. 
Researchers have presented multiple theories of leadership styles within which they propose 
various values, behaviours, and virtues perceived of 'effective' leaders in Africa (see Nelson, 2003; 
Koshal, 2005; Mangaliso, 2001; Bekker, 2008; Muchiri, 2011; Poovan, du Toit, & Engelbrecht, 
2006; Sigger, Polak, & Pennink, 2010). For example, one of the concepts held as a promise for 
culturally appropriate leadership and leadership development in contemporary Africa (Ncube, 
2001, p. 77) is ubuntu7. The behavioural expression of uBuntu demonstrates compassion, dignity, 
respect, and a humanistic concern for relationships (Muchiri, 2011). At its best it has been the 
basis for identity, respect and self-confidence. Ubuntu in Rwanda is a word that is commonly used 
in atleast three contexts in the day-to-day lives of Rwandans (within culture perspective). 
In behavioural contexts, Ubumuntu refers to humanness or the quality of being human. For 
example, "kwiyubaha nimwe mungeri zigize ubumuntu or self-respect is one trait of humanness". 
The behavioural expression of Ubuntu demonstrates compassion, dignity, respect, and a 
humanistic concern for relationships (Muchiri, 2011). In religious contexts, Ubuntu bw'Imana 
means the grace of God (1 Corinthians 15:10 - ariko ubuntu bwImana ni bwo bwatumye mba uko 
ndi - but by the grace of God I am what I am), whereas in cultural contexts Ubuntu refers to 
generosity or the quality of being kind and generous" (note the spelling difference 
ubuntu/ubumuntu). 
The philosophical and cultural connotations of Ubuntu as conceptualized in Rwandan worldview 
are also present in other African cultures (as discussed above). The detailed observation of facts 
and behaviors (in work and life outside work) of these countries shows that there is a common 
cultural and managerial capital, that is to say, a coherent system of beliefs, values and sociability 
rules and shared fairly common in the lives of communities in western and central, northern and 
eastern Africa (Mutabazi, 2008). Also Malunga (2006) describes ubuntu as "African cultural 
heritage, passed on from generation to generation as a source of guidance for communities in 
times of peace, uncertainty, birth, life and death (p.3). Adding that, "it has enabled us to live in 
harmony with our physical, social and spiritual environment (p.3)". As a management concept, 
Ubuntu is often conceptualized based on five social values (survival, spirit of solidarity, 
7 Ubuntu philosophy is a cultural worldview of leadership style(s) common among the Bantu 
tribes and languages in East, Southern, and Central Africa to refer to human relationships that 
elevates the importance of humanness and shared community (Le Grange, 2011; Murithi, 
2009). 
compassion, respect, and dignity) proposed by Mbigi (1997, 2000), although as Brubaker (2013) 
observes, most studies combine respect and dignity into a single value (p.101). 
Ubuntu provides our foundation for leadership, problem- solving, decision making and hope for 
the future. For example, Brubaker's quantitative study of both servant leadership and Ubuntu- 
related leadership in Rwanda, suggests that servant leadership and Ubuntu are significantly linked 
and positively and significantly related to leader effectiveness in Rwanda (p.1). When Brubaker 
asked a group of Rwandans to explain the philosophical implications of Ubuntu, he says they 
explained that "Ubuntu is primarily expressed by acts wherein the recipient of Ubuntu is shown 
that he/she is as human as the giver and deserves the same quality of humanness as the giver". 
Accordingly, Ubuntu is held up as a cardinal and inspirational virtue that demonstrates 
ubuvandimwe (brotherly care in times of happiness and difficulties) among Rwandans. In business 
contexts, Brubaker (2013) draws distinction of Ubuntu as more than mere interdependence but 
defines the organization as a body (not simply a collection of individuals) that exists to benefit 
the community, as well as the larger communities of which it is a part (Lutz, 2009, p. 318 cited 
in Brubaker, 2013). In sum, Ubuntu is a fundamental predisposition by which people express and 
extend humanness within community (Nussbaum, 2003). It is built on five interrelated principles 
(Malunga, 2006): 
1. Sharing and collective ownership of opportunities, responsibilities and challenges. For 
example, Children belong to the community rather than belonging to their biological parents 
only hence the proverbs. "It takes a whole village to raise a child. Your friend/neighbor's child 
is your own child".  
2. The importance of people and relationships over things; communities relationships   are   
given   very   high priority. All adults are treated as ones parents. All Aunts/step-mother are 
treated as mothers. Cousins are brothers and sisters. My brother's children call me Papa and 
vice versa, only we (me and my brother) are present that they distinguish us with our first 
child's name. Kinship is like a bone, it does not decay. 
3. Participatory decision making and leadership; while the leader generally appeared very 
powerful from outside, decisions and policies were influenced by others (queen's mothers, 
council of ritualists and secret societies (Tangwa, 1998; Molotlegi, 2004). 
4. Patriotism; Child are taught their origins, their family history and encouraged to know and 
visit their extended families. People were continually reminded to respect their cultural values 
and practices, irrespective of where they are and not abandoning their origins and identity by 
sending remittances. a river that forgets its source will soon dry up. 
5. Reconciliation as a goal of conflict management and resolution. Principles of conflict 
management emphasized the values of trust, fairness and reconciliation. Conflict was 
managed systematically through a hierarchy of levels. Smaller conflicts are resolved at family 
or household   levels by clan leaders and preceded to higher levels through appeal if some 
parties were not satisfied with the outcome. Openness is an important value hence people 
are duty-bound to attend court hearings to ensure laws were upheld (Jackson, 2012). 
Yet still, the leadership styles heavily depend on the developmental stage of the 
society/organization, the more the leader continue to deepen their understanding of the culture 
they operate in, the better equipped they will be to directing change and leading their 
organisations effectively (Peterson, 2002). 
2.8. A review of culture theories 
A review of the literature in this area reveals three 'schools of thought' called systems - culture as 
value systems/cognitive (Hall, 1989; Hofstede, 1991; Gesteland, 2012), culture as communicative 
systems (Talmy's, 1995; Hofstede), culture as structural systems (Levi-Strauss, 1958) and culture 
as symbolic systems (Malinowski, Levi-Strauss and Geertz, 1973) (see table below). This body of 
literature also reveals that a major defect of the dimensional approaches is that it does not 
adequately take into account communication. Halls approach puts communication at the centre 
of the view of culture which he calls the silent language' - the unwritten, non-verbal 
communication. 
Culture as a 
value/cognitive system 
Cultural cognitivism according to Talmy (1995) suggests that 
cognition in individuals is the primary locality and center or 
source of activities of culture. The acquisition, exercise, and 
transmission of culture are functions of an innate cognitive 
system, which accounts for structural difference and 
commonalities across cultures. 
Culture as communicative 
systems (Talmy's, 1995; 
Hofstede) 
Halls approach puts communication at the centre of the view 
of culture. This theory suggests that communication takes 
place on the background of unwritten assumptions (the silent 
language) or non-verbal communication. 
Culture as structural 
systems (Levi-Strauss, 
1958) 
This school of thought posited that universal processes of 
human mind develop diverse but similar patterns and that the 
logic of relations and transformation provides an order that can 
transcend boundaries of language and customs (Gonzalez, 
2005). 
Culture as symbolic 
systems (Malinowski, Levi-
Strauss and Geertz, 1973) 
This school of thought treats cultures as systems of shared 
symbols and meanings. Meanings are not in peoples heads but 
are shared between social actors, thus, are public not private 
(Clifford Geertz, 1973e:89). 
Table 4: Major cultural theories 
In the section below these cultural theories are discussed in detail with the focus primarily 
on the more anthropological views of culture that have greatest relevance to the understanding 
of the relationship of culture to leadership as each culture will have different myths associated 
with leadership. The thesis will, however, review the contribution of the normative theories 
which views cultures as shared symbolic systems that are cumulative creations of mind. 
2.8.1. Culture as values system/cognitive system (Hofstede) 
The cognitive paradigm/approach to culture studies stemmed from Hofstedes work in the 1980s 
and then followed by Trompenaars and Hampden-Turner, and later Schwartz's views culture as 
mental programming. Hofstede defined as 'the collective programming of the mind that 
distinguishes members of one society or group or category of people from another' (Hofstede et 
al., 2010:06). It [society] may be a grouping of people involved with each other through persistent 
relations or interactions or belonging to the same institution, subject to the same authority and 
sharing the same expectations among its constituent members. His [Hofstedes] work focused on 
how culture is acquired and likened humans to a computer with an operating system but need a 
lot of programming to operate. This is a metaphor that has certainly influenced the cognitive view 
of culture in business since the 1980s but of course culture is not programmed like a computer 
but rather acquired from the moment of birth before puberty and mostly the learning of culture 
is unconscious.  
After decades of research of different value systems and thousands of interviews conducted 
among IBM employees in the 1980s, Hofstede concluded that the different aspects of values can 
be reduced to a number of dimensions and developed a model of cultural dimensions, which he 
has since updated, as the way of unpacking the concept of culture and predicting certain things 
in society. In other words, dimensions are useful to unpacking this complex concept (culture) into 
parts which have more clear resemblance to real phenomenon in society. Hofstede and those 
who follow his dimensional model believe that the 5 dimensions explain most of the variations in 
values which in fact were work-related values as the surveys were conducted among IBM 
employees.  
Hofstede's model has become an internationally recognized yard stick for studying  and 
comparing cultural differences and the different aspects of values or dimensions of culture have 
been used to map leadership or management styles across the world. Hofstede's contribution to 
the study of cultures is in distinction between national cultures and organisation cultures and 
personality. He describes national culture as the glue that keeps societies together; however, 
critics argue that nations are not culturally homogeneous particularly in light of globalisation. The 
unwritten protocols or rules of the social game including attitudes to status differences and 
hierarchies and the fact that members of the society have to play their game by abiding to certain 
rules. Organisational culture however, the rules are different at different levels, less profound 
and more explicit and also changeable. 
Developed from his experience as an international member of staff and subsequently as a 
consultant of the multi-national company (IBM) and academic, Hofstede's approach was 
observing the way people, both the leaders and the-led behave in a particular environment or 
when solving problems. He also collected data using value survey module (VSM) questionnaire. 
He then used comparison methods to measure cultural differences - comparing cultures from one 
place to another, one nation with another, and one organization with another. According to 
Hofstede, the study of national culture belongs to anthropology while organisational cultures 
belong to sociology.  
 Differences between national cultures and organisational cultures  
National cultures Organisational cultures 
Differ mainly in values Differ mainly in practices 
Learned before the age of 10years Learned when join the organisation 
Cannot be managed Can sometimes be managed 
Belongs to anthropology Belongs to sociology 
Table 5: Hofstede (2011)'s differentiation of national and organisational culture 
He (Hofstede) initially analyzed how humans deal with problems and presented four profiles of 
solutions (a) handling inequality, (b) dealing with the unknown by using the need for rules and 
predictability, (c) the balance between individual goals and dependence on company, and (d) the 
balance between the ego values and social values. Hofstede labelled the four dimensions as  
power distance - the emotional relationship between the person at the top and the person below; 
Uncertainty avoidance - handling or dealing with ambiguity and uncertainty or situations you 
know nothing about; Individualism versus collectivism - deals with how people view relationship 
between self and others or how people take responsibility for each other's well-being and to 
others within the community and; Masculinity versus femininity deals with attitudes to 
assertiveness. Traditionally a positive view of individual assertiveness would be associated with 
traditionally masculine values and vice versa. It also deals with how society sticks with, and 
values, traditional male and female roles. Some societies with high degrees of masculinity might 
preserve leadership roles for males as they meet these expectations. 
As more and more researches were conducted and reached places where Hofstede had originally 
not reached, the fifth dimension related to the choice of long term versus short term orientation 
focus for people's efforts, and later sixth dimensions related to the gratification versus control of 
basic human desires related to enjoying life (indulgence versus restraint) were identified. In this 
section we will discuss the context of each dimension and review their validity in relations with 
studies of others. Hofstede uses the term collective in his definition and throughout his work 
because culture is not an individual phenomenon but shared by people who grow up in the same 
society. 
2.8.1.1 Power distance  
Power distance is defined in the context of power distribution among members of the society or 
institutions (like family) in which unequal power distribution is accepted mutually accepted by 
both the less powerful and powerful members. It suggests that power inequity (more versus less) 
is defined from below and endorsed by the followers (less powerful) as well as the (leaders) more 
powerful members of the society. Contrary to the fact that Africa is increasingly seen a high power 
distance culture, Mutabazi (2009) argues that it was characterized by the decentralization of 
power as well as its sharing among clan leaders living in the same region. And although it is 
currently covered or contaminated by imported contradictory forms of foreign models such as 
the bureaucratic centralization in French, management by objective with American, quality circles 
in Japan, elements of the common cultural heritage remain alive - it is a very common mode of 
social and political life in Africa. 
Cultural differences on power distance 
Low power distance High power distance 
Use of power should be legitimate and is 
subject to criteria of good and evil; 
Power is a basic fact of society antedating 
good or evil. Its legitimacy is irrelevant; 
Parents treat children as equals; 
Older people are neither respected nor 
feared; 
Student-centered education; 
Hierarchy means inequality of roles, 
established for convenience; 
Subordinates expect to be consulted; 
Pluralist governments based on majority vote 
and changed peacefully; 
Corruption are rare and scandals end political 
careers; 
Income distribution in society is rather even; 
Parents teach children obedience; 
Older people are both respected and feared; 
Teacher-centered education; 
Hierarchy means existential inequality; 
Subordinates expect to be told what to do; 
Autocratic governments based on co-
optation and changed by revolution; 
Frequent corruption and scandals are 
covered up; 
Income distribution in society very uneven; 
Religions stressing equality of believers Religions with a hierarchy of priests 
Table 6: Hofstede (2001)s Cultural differences on distribution of power 
2.8.1.2. Uncertainty avoidance 
Hofstede's uncertainty avoidance dimension is not the same as averting risk but defined in the 
context of society's tolerance for ambiguity or handling situations you don't know about. It 
describes the extent to which members of a culture feel either comfortable or uncomfortable in 
unstructured situations. Weak uncertainty avoidance treats unstructured situations as novel, 
unknown, surprising, and different from usual whereas strong uncertainty avoidance cultures try 
to minimize the possibility of unstructured situations by strict behavioural codes, laws and rules, 
disapproval of out of the ordinary opinions.  
Cultural differences on Uncertainty avoidance 
Weak uncertainty avoidance) Strong uncertainty avoidance 
The uncertainty inherent in life is accepted 
and each day is taken as it comes; 
Ease, lower stress, self-control, low anxiety; 
Higher scores of subjective health and well-
being; 
Tolerance of deviant persons and ideas: 
what is different is curious; 
Comfortable with ambiguity and chaos; 
Teacher may say 'I don't know'; 
Changing jobs is not a problem; 
Dislike of rules - written or unwritten; 
In politics, citizens feel and are seen as 
competent towards authorities; 
The uncertainty inherent in life is seen as 
continuous threat that must be fought; 
Higher stress, emotionality, anxiety, 
neuroticism; 
Lower scores on subjective health and well-
being; 
Intolerance of deviant person and ideas: 
what is different is dangerous; 
Need for clarity and structure; 
Teacher is supposed to have all the answers; 
Stay in the job even if dislike; 
Emotional need for rules - even if not 
obeyed; 
In politics, citizens feel and are seen as 
incompetent towards authorities; 
In religion, philosophy and science: 
relativism and empiricism. 
In religion, philosophy and science: belief in 
ultimate truths and grand theories. 
Table 7: Hofstede (2011)'s cultural differences on Uncertainity avoidance 
2.8.1.3. Individualism versus collectivism 
Individualism/collectivism is the degree to which individuals are integrated into groups. In 
Individualist societies or cultures, ties between individuals are loose - everyone is expected to 
look after him/herself and his/her immediate family, and little sharing of responsibility beyond 
family and perhaps a few close friends. In collectivist societies individuals are integrated into 
strong, cohesive groups, often extended families (uncles, aunts and grandparents) which provide 
them protection in exchange for unquestioning loyalty. In collectivist culture, people share the 
responsibility for each other's well-being and to others within the community.  
Hofstedes Individualism/collectivism dimension is a boundary marker that helps distinguish 
African societies - less individualistic and more communal from Western societies - more 
individualistic and less communal. Thus, as discussed earlier (see section 2.4 ubuntu philosophy) 
the ''Ubuntu'' crystallizes the idea of a communal perspective of the African cultures (Lutz, 2009). 
From an analytical point of view, ''Ubuntu'' is built on the distinctive features of African communal 
societies including ethics, interdependence, the human spirit and totality (Prinsloo 2000). 
 Cultural differences on Individualism/collectivism 
Individualist cultures Collectivist cultures 
Everyone is support to take care of 
him/herself and his/her immediate family 
only; 
"I" - consciousness; 
Right of privacy; 
Speaking one's mind is healthy; 
Others are classified as individuals; 
People are born into extended families or clans 
which protect them in exchange for loyalty; 
"We" - consciousness; 
Stress on belonging; 
Harmony should always be maintained; 
Others are classified as in-group or out-group; 
Opinion and votes predetermined by in-group; 
Personal opinion expected: one person, 
one vote; 
Transgression of norms leads to guilt 
feelings; 
Languages in which the word "I" is 
indispensable; 
Purpose of education is learning how to 
learn;  
Transgression of norms leads to shame 
feelings; 
Languages in which the word "I" is avoided; 
Purpose of education is learning how to do; 
Task prevail over relationship Relationships prevail over task. 
Table 8: Hofstede (2011)'s Individualism/collectivism dimension 
2.8.1.4. Masculinity versus Femininity 
Even though societies are made of individuals, masculinity versus femininity dimension describes 
societies not individual. It [masculinity versus femininity] as rooted in social and cultural conditions 
refers to the degree to which a person or persons are seen by members of the society as masculine 
or feminine given what is perceived as being man or woman in that particular society. 
Femininity/Masculinity should be distinguished from gender role refers to shared task 
expectations or the way responsibilities are shared between genders. For example, in traditional 
Rwandan culture, women were expected to stay at home, do domestic chores and take care of the 
children. A recent study by The Institute for Inclusive Security (Uwineza & Pearson, 2009) revealed 
that Rwandan women were expected to defer to men, for example, in decision-making and were 
(often still) discouraged from speaking or at least expects the man to speak on behalf of the 
family.   
By contrast, according to Stets & Burke (2000), femininity and masculinity are rooted in the social 
(one's gender) rather than the biological (one's sex). In other words, the way members of a 
particular society define what being male or female means (e.g., men are assertive, aggressive or 
brave, competitive, dominant and instrumentally oriented while women are passive, cooperative 
and expressive, emotional). Hence male behaviour generalized as masculine while females' will 
generally are referred to as feminine. 
According to Hofstede (1998), in masculine cultures there are often a taboos around 
femininity/masculinity based on deeply rooted values. In some cultures, femininity/masculinity 
touches basic and often unconscious values, too sensitive to be discussed (Hofstede, 2011).  
Cultural differences on Masculinity versus Femininity 
Feminine cultures Masculine cultures 
Minimum emotional and social role 
differentiation between the genders; 
Men and women should be modest and 
caring; 
Balance between family and work; 
Sympathy for the weak; 
Both fathers and mothers deal with facts 
and feelings; 
Both boys and girls may cry but neither 
should fight; 
Mothers decide on number of children; 
Many women in elected political positions; 
Religion focuses on fellow human beings; 
Maximum emotional and social role 
differentiation between the genders; 
Men should be and women may be assertive 
and ambitious; 
Work prevails over family; 
Admiration for the strong; 
Father deals with facts, mother deals with 
feelings; 
Girls cry, boys don't. Boys should fight back, 
girls shouldn't fight; 
Father decide on family size; 
Few women in elected political positions; 
Religions focuses on God or gods; 
Matter-of-fact attitudes about sexuality; sex 
is a way of relating; 
Moralistic attitudes about sexuality: sex is a 
way of performing. 
Table 9: Hofstede (2011)'s Masculinity vs. Femininity 
2.8.1.5. Long-term versus short-term orientation 
The Long-term/short-term orientation dimension refers to society's attitude to hard work and is 
associated with or in fact derived this criterion from the Confucian-influenced cultures (Bond, 
1987), primarily China, but also other East Asian cultures such as Japan and Korea where there 
was a preference for long-term orientation based on the values prevalent in Confucian 
philosophy. Long-term oriented society's values long-standing traditions and values and rewards 
perseverance, loyalty, and commitment, whereas in short-term orientated cultures, delivering on 
social obligations and avoiding "loss of face" are considered very important. However, in the light 
of globalisation, and in particular the global tendency towards varieties of capitalism based on 
short-term profit and shareholder value, this criterion, even in cultures such as East Asia where 
they traditionally prefer long-term orientation, they may be under pressure to adopt more short 
term values. 
 Cultural differences on Long-term versus short-term orientation  
Long-term orientation cultures short-term orientation cultures 
Perseverance; thrift; ordering relationships 
by status; shared tasks; sense of shame; 
adaptability; future; 
Reciprocating social obligations; respect for 
tradition as sacred, protecting one's face; 
personal steadiness and stability;  
Economic growth of countries up till a level 
of prosperity 
Pride; slow or no-economic growth; social 
spending and consumption. 
Table 10: Hofstede (2011) Long-term vs. short-term orientation 
2.8.1.6. Indulgence versus restraint 
The sixth and newest dimension added to Hofstede's dimension model, uses Minkov's label 
indulgence versus restraint focuses on aspects not covered by the other five dimensions. 
Indulgence refers to a society that allows free gratification of basic and natural human desires 
related to enjoying life and having fun which would be equivalent to Schwartzs hedonism' 
(Schwartz, 2006) and includes elements of both openness to change and self-enhancement (p.11). 
Restraint on the other hand stands for a society that controls gratification of needs and regulates 
it by means of strict social norms. The table below shows a selection of differences between 
societies associated with indulgence/restraint.  
Cultural differences on indulgence versus restraint 
Indulgence cultures Restraint cultures 
Majority of people declare themselves 
happy; 
Perception of personal life control; 
Freedom of speech seen as important; 
Higher importance of leisure; Remember 
positive emotions; higher birth-rates; 
actively involved in sports; higher %ge of 
obese people; Lenient sexual norms;  
Fewer people are very happy;  
Perception of hopelessness; Freedom of 
speech not a primary concern; Lower 
importance of leisure; Less likely to 
remember positive emotions; lower birth 
rates; fewer obese people; stricter sexual 
norms; 
Maintaining order not given high priority; Maintaining order given high priority; 
Table 11: Hofstede (2011) Indulgence vs. Restraint 
Hofstede's parameters for measuring the distinction between small and high power distance are 
arguably too general and too wide and possibly too figurative to be observed in one person as a 
unit of study especially when all of the parameters are of the same type/dimension. Also as he 
[Hofstede] admits, the parameters for measuring the distinction between small and high power 
distance describes two extreme situation don't represent a specific culture but rather plain 
western conceptualization of culture used mainly to study or compare other cultures with theirs.  
Individualist cultures such as the US, UK and Western Europe who have a preference for low 
power distance will look upon predominantly high power distance cultures such as Africa as the 
other and somehow rank them not modern in business terms. This misses the point however 
about the reasons why there is this preference for high power distance in those cultures  such 
as Rwanda where historical forces and factors may have influenced the perception that difference 
of opinion is distraction from the course hence a preference for decisions making powers to be 
vested in one person (the leader).  
Hofstedes criteria do not really supply us with this background. It represents not only a western-
centric view of "other cultures" but also based on quantitative methods [largely a Business 
school's framework] for measuring leadership styles in organisations around the world. This 
western business school framework has however, been criticized for objectivism. Research has 
shown that business management or leadership styles are contingency-based: An organisation's 
management or leadership style may vary across stakeholders depending on the degree to which 
they perceive how the organisation fulfils its expectations (Bromley, 2002), and it may vary as a 
function of institutional forces that influence different policies [norms and values] over time 
(Schweizer & Wijnberg, 1999; Vidaver-cohen, 2007). Hence the within culture perspective is key 
to interpreting leadership style because as noted by Hall [in The Silent Language], what culture 
hides, it hides most effectively even from its own participants. 
2.8.2. National cultures and Organisational cultures 
Hofstede's contribution to the study of cultures is in distinction between national cultures and 
organisation cultures and individual personality. He describes national culture as the glue that 
keeps societies together; the unwritten rules of the social game that members of the society have 
to abide to. For organisational culture however, the rules are different at different levels, less 
profound and more explicit and also changeable. Organisational cultures are measured by 
dimensions of practices whereas national cultures measured by dimensions of values. 
Differences between national cultures and organisational cultures 
National cultures Organisational cultures 
Differ mainly in values; Differ mainly in practices; 
Learned before the age of 10years; Learned when join the organisation; 
Cannot be managed; Can sometimes be managed; 
Belongs to anthropology Belongs to sociology 
Table 12: Hofstede (2011) national and organisational culture measurements 
Hofstede analyzed cultural differences between nations and within nations and found much 
larger cultural differences between nations but there weren't much larger cultural differences 
within nations as there are now. For example, Hofstede analyzed Brazils ethnically diverse 
cultures through the lens of the 5-D Model, and found that there weren't much larger differences 
between regions within the country but there were much larger cultural differences compared 
with the neighbouring countries such as the United States which score 91 on Hofstede's 
individualism scale. Hofstede identified six independent dimensions that describe the larger part 
of the variety in organisation practices or organisational cultural framework. These dimensions as 
described below can be useful for the understanding organisational culture, leadership styles and 
followers acceptances. 
Figure 7: Cultural values and practices at national and organisational levels 
2.8.2.1. Process versus result-oriented (organisational) cultures  
The process versus result-oriented describes the extent to which the organisation leadership 
expects bureaucratic routines to be followed versus pursuing outcomes. According to Hofstede 
process-oriented cultures are dominated by systems of bureaucratic routines and vast differences 
among members with regards to perception of how work should be conducted. There has, 
however, been a trend away from the (Weberian) bureaucratic organisation, at least in some 
parts of the world, towards a more flexible postmodern organisation. By contrast, result-
oriented cultures are mainly concerned with achieving the desired results or outcomes and less 
concerned with the processes for achieving the goals and objectives of the organisation. In result-
oriented cultures everybody perceives their practices in about the same way. Cultural difference 
may, however, justify why some cultures may be less comfortable or more result-oriented than 
others. 
 Differences between Process versus Result-oriented cultures  
Process-oriented cultures Result-oriented culture 
Focus on means or process versus result; Care for employee interest versus organisation; 
People perceive themselves as avoiding 
risks and making only a limited effort in 
their jobs; 
Each day is pretty much the same; 
People perceive themselves as comfortable in 
unfamiliar situations; 
Each day brings in new challenge; 
Table 13: Hofstede (2011) Process vs. Result-oriented cultures 
2.8.2.2 Employee oriented versus Job-oriented (organisational) cultures  
The Employee oriented versus job oriented describes the degree of homogeneity of the 
organisation leadership's concern for people to a concern for completing the job. In Employee 
oriented cultures, the organization takes a responsibility for employee welfare and employees 
feel that their personal problems are taken into account, whereas by contrast, in job oriented 
cultures the leadership exerts strong pressure on employees to complete their job; employees 
feel the organization as only interested in the work they do. The orientation of an organization 
on this dimension tended to be strongly influenced by historical factors including the 
philosophy of the founder(s) and/or economic crisis leading to collective layoffs (Hofstede, 
1997). 
2.8.2.3. Parochial versus Professional (organisational) cultures  
Members of parochial culture feel the organizations norms cover their behavior on the job as 
well as their home. By contrast, in organizations with a professional culture, the members, who 
typically are highly educated with degrees in recognized professional, scientific and engineering 
disciplines, tend to identify primarily with their professions. Members of professional cultures 
consider their private lives their own business (Hofstede, 1997). By contrast, the members of 
parochial organizations are supposed to identify strongly with the organization rather than their 
jobs parochial. The parochial/professional cultural dimension describes employees' relative 
preference to identify themselves with the organization to their profession or type of job. 
Hofstede (1997) argued that the poles of this dimension corresponded to the contrast between 
"local" and "cosmopolitan". 
2.8.2.4. Open versus closed (organisational) systems  
The open/closed systems refer to the common style of internal and external communication, and 
to the ease with which outsiders and newcomers are admitted and integrated into the 
organization family. This dimension focuses on identifying and classifying the styles commonly 
used within the organization and shows that organisation cultures also contain elements from 
national cultures (Hofstede, 2011).  In open systems, almost anyone would fit into the 
organization. In contrast, closed systems the organization and its people use implicit 
communication (e.g: Rwandans use proverbs) and secretive, even among insiders (Hofstede, 
1997). 
2.8.2.5 Loose versus tight control 
This dimension deals with the degree of formality and punctuality within the organization. It 
partly reflects internal structuring and level of technology in the organization though even with 
the same level of technology, some organizations such as banks and pharmacies may still have 
tighter controls than laboratories and advertising agencies. In loose control organizations, people 
think that no one is concerned about costs, meeting times are only approximate, and jokes about 
the organization and job are frequent. People in tight control organizations, describe their work 
environment as cost conscious, specific meeting times, jokes about the company or job are rare 
(Hofstede, 1997). 
2.8.2.6. Normative versus Pragmatic cultures 
The last of Hofstede's organizational cultural dimensions deals with the notion of customer 
orientation with respect to flexibility or rigidity. Hofstede associated scores on this dimension 
with the level of "customer orientation", a popular topic among management theorists, and 
observed that organizations involved in the sale of services tended to be more pragmatic 
while organizations that were engaged in the application of laws and rules were more 
normative. Pragmatic cultures are market driven; normative cultures people perceive their task 
toward outside world as the implementation of some sacred rules. To normative cultures people, 
following organizational procedures are more important than the results, whereas to 
organizations with pragmatic leadership, results and meeting customer needs is more important 
than following the procedures (Hofstede, 1997). 
Organizational culture has been defined among various dimensions that influence management 
and leadership paradigm and thought of as a set of cognitions shared by organizational members 
and used as a basis for interpreting past experiences and current situations and determining 
future action as well as guiding interactions and socialization processes. Schein (2004) argues that 
good managers must work from a more anthropological model of understanding the rules of the 
game in organization [culture] to understand the organization. Pratt et al. (1992) found that 
organization culture is a function of size, technology, structure and functional area, aspects not 
explicitly covered by Hofstede's organization culture model. Other factors that have a bearing on 
leadership style which is a function of organisational culture include national culture, societal 
culture (Bloor and Dawson, 1994), and organizational environments and goals (Cooke and 
Rousseau, 1988). 
Critics of Hofstede's model have pointed to its minimalist approach designed primarily for 
mapping leadership across several cultures, rather than the influences on leadership styles in a 
particular culture, which is the thesis of this study. Hofstede's stress on national cultures has been 
deemed less relevant as globalisation progresses  in particular it masks substantial differences 
within nations and the presence of substantial minorities in some countries. National culture 
dominates shaping the meaning of organisational culture and effectively leadership styles. 
Hofstede and proponents of his model stress on the scale of the number of respondents across 
many countries for validity of the model but according to McSweeney (2002), Hofstede presents 
a radically diluted version of what he has hitherto robustly asserted. It may also lead to confirm 
stereotypes of other cultures rather than challenge them. McSweeney argues that using large 
number of respondents that not of itself guarantee representativeness as the populations 
surveyed were exclusively from IBM Company hence his dimensional model perhaps represents 
IBM's culture rather than national cultures. Furthermore, the nature of the workplace itself has 
also changed  in many cases the staff of a company will be multinational in makeup, even within 
one country. Also as Hofstede admits, culture is a subconscious programming of the mind, a point 
echoed by Hall (1959) that cultures contains a range of unspoken, unwritten assumptions which 
include stress on words, tone and body language hence an observable phenomenon rather than 
measurable using questionnaire or the immeasurable (Smelser, 1992). 
Another weakness of the Hofstede's approach is the evident subsumption that cultures are bound 
by national borders, which exclude vast differences that exist between nations and between 
regions or states within nations, in terms of geographical area, ethnic groups, level of 
development etc... For example, Hofstede describes the United States as a highly individualistic 
(91), medium power distance (40) and masculine culture, yet the United States is a vast country 
with a population of 317 million people (U.S. Census Bureau, 2013), the world's third largest with 
literally all world's ethnic groups represented in large or small communities. Hofstede's approach 
can be questioned for using a single method or questionnaire to measure culture at vastly large 
national scale like China and comparing results with small and relatively homogeneous cultures 
like the Netherlands. 
2.8.3. Cultures as communication systems  
The proposition that human beings consciousness - through their culture - create their own values 
and determine their communication codes, and that culture is created and maintained by 
communication, is the view of the American anthropologist and cross-cultural researcher, Edward 
Twitchell Hall (1914 - 2009), who describes culture as primarily a system for creating, sending, 
storing and processing information. Culture underlies everything is Hall's (1976) thesis that 
everything that a person does subconsciously reflect his/her cultural background. Our 
personality, how we express ourselves (including shows of emotion), are influenced in the 
deepest and most subtle ways by culture (p.14). As a result of cultural differences, people in 
different cultures communicate differently. Communication takes place in a contextual 
environment, including non-verbal elements such as space, time, body movement, facial 
expression, information networks. 
2.8.3.1. Context  
Context, high or low refers to the amount of information that is in a given communication as a 
function of the context in which it occurs (p.229). It refers to the insight that actual words in a 
communication renders to the interpretation and understanding of the message delivered. High-
context and Low-context Communication refers to the degree to which speakers rely on factors 
other than explicit speech to convey their messages. According to Hall, the most important 
aspects that differentiate cultures are, what he calls the out-of-awareness features, the hidden 
dimension, and Hall goes on to say that, culture hides much more than it reveals, and what it 
hides, it hides most effectively". Hall distinguishes between two types of context, high and low 
which he defines as: 
Communication or message in which most of the information is either in the physical 
context or internalized in the person, while very little is in the coded, explicit, transmitted 
part of the message (high context). In low context, the most of the information is explicit 
in the communication or message (Hall, 1976, p.79 cited in Barron & Schneider, 2004, 
p.241). 
Hall refers to information that is communicated mostly through verbal language as low context 
and information that is communicated mostly through other ways other than verbal languages as 
high context. Essentially what underlie Hall's model is that high context cultures apply high level 
of thinking whereas low context cultures tend to be direct in communication. Low context 
cultures tend to emphasize logic and rationality, based on the belief that there is always an 
objective truth that can be reached through linear processes of discovery. High context cultures, 
on the other hand, believe that truth will manifest itself through non-linear discovery processes 
and without having to employ rationality (Wang, 2008). The following gives an overview of the 
distinctions between high and low-context cultures. 
Hall's high-context versus low-context cultures 
High-context culture Low-context 
 Information is widely shared hence 
requires extensive cultural 
programming; 
 Providing too much information is 
considered talking down to others; 
 Emphasis for stability; 
 Communication is an art that is unifying 
and cohesive and thus displays 
sophistication, nuance, and cultural 
identity; 
 Appreciates slow, indirect 
communications; 
 Extensive use of informal networks; 
 Interprets laws with personal 
involvement thus bend rules to 
accommodate relationships 
 Information is less widely shared 
hence requires less cultural 
programming; 
 Providing too much information is 
considered thorough; 
 Emphasis for change and mobility; 
 Communication is primarily task 
oriented; 
 Appreciates fast and direct 
communications; 
 Prefer formal information networks; 
 Interprets laws impersonally thus 
maintain strict adherence to rules; 
High-context interacting with low-context communicators should be mindful that 
High-context communicators  low-context communicators 
 things can be taken at face value rather 
than as representative of layers of 
meaning; 
 roles and functions may be decoupled 
from status and identity; 
 efficiency and effectiveness may be 
served by a sustained focus on tasks; 
 direct questions and observations are 
not necessarily meant to offend, but to 
clarify and advance shared goals; and 
indirect cues may not be enough to get 
the other's attention 
 nonverbal messages and gestures, 
may be as important as what is said; 
 status and identity may be 
communicated nonverbally and 
require appropriate 
acknowledgement; 
 face-saving and tact may be important, 
and need to be balanced with the 
desire to communicate fully and 
frankly; 
 building a good relationship can 
contribute to effectiveness over time; 
 Indirect routes and creative thinking 
are important alternatives to problem-
solving when blocks are encountered. 
Source: Adapted from Jianeng Wang (2008)  
Table 14: High-context vs. Low-context culture 
Emphasizing the importance of the context of culture, anthropologists Kevin Avruch and Peter 
Black describes one's own culture as the "lens" through which s/he views the world and the 
"grammar" by which language makes sense. And because culture provides the grammar by which 
language makes sense, to some cultures (high context), providing too much information is 
considered talking down to others, whereas to northern cultures such as Europe, providing too 
little information is considered discreet or not thorough and may attract many questions. 
During the course of this study, the researcher accompanied a western journalist gathering 
information and documenting a community development project in Eastern Rwanda. Below is an 
extract from a lengthy interview.  
The journalist asks: 
Journalist: Do you have any animals? 
Informant:  Yes 
Journalist: Do you eat them? 
Informant: No 
Journalist: So, why do you keep them? 
Informant: We sale them 
Talking to the journalist later after the interview, the journalist was clearly upset with how 
Rwandans were terse and brief. The journalist felt as though he had to literally extract words 
out of the informant's mouth. The journalist expected a thorough response such as the type 
of animals, whether the animals were kept for food or for sale. The farmer on the other 
hand expressed the feeling that he had been overlooked because in high context cultures, 
"you don't ask what is obvious". Why would these animals be here if they were not mine? 
The mis-communication is that Rwanda is a high context culture, so there was much implicit 
in the statement from the farmer  whereas the journalist  coming from a low context 
culture expected the farmer to spell out the details. 
This theory is important for a study of culture and leadership because one of the principal traits 
of leadership is communication between leaders and subordinates. Leaders' understanding of the 
context in which the information or message is communicated including non-verbal elements 
such as space, time, and body movement, facial expression, informal networks, can be useful in 
the interpretation of a message being communicated. From the above example, it is evident what 
is 'obvious' in low-context culture may in fact be source of confusion to someone from high-
context culture. For example, Hall argues that meaning of a message does not come from the 
spoken words, sentences or physical gestures but from interpreting the 'unspoken words' and 
considering the status and identity of the people in communication (see Edward T. Hall's The 
Silent language, 1959). 
The Silent language includes a range of unspoken, unwritten assumptions that takes place on the 
background which includes the relationship between the people engaged in communication. Low 
context excludes all the implicit and focus more on the explicit message. Understanding the 
context of culture is particularly important to leadership because culture - as a complex computer 
which programs the actions and responses of every person - leaders have to understand the 
context (high or low) in which it operates for the system to work. For example, in a high context 
culture such as Rwanda where much of the communication is through proverbs and gestures 
indirect, implicit in the context, rather than explicit, understanding of the context of leadership 
communication, becomes vital to the understanding the behaviour of leaders and their leadership 
styles. For example, the speed with which a particular message can be decoded and acted on is 
an important characteristic of communication but also has more to do with the recipient's 
interpretation of the message (what Hall calls releasing responses). 
According to Hall, it is more important to release the right response than to send the "right 
message" because 80 to 90% of communication is not in language, but words, materials things, 
and behaviour. Words refer to the medium of communication - the pattern of grammar. Material 
refers to the indicators of status and power - who said it. Behaviour refers to the feedback to how 
others feel and the techniques for how it is said. Behaviours are influenced by deep and hidden 
meanings, values, socially accepted protocols to avoid confrontation. 
As Hall notes, cultures consists of visible and invisible patterns which evolve independently of his 
physiology and not innate (p.42).The visible or overt culture concept which can be immediately 
observed through art and artefacts, songs and dance, customs, food as well as dialect and 
greeting protocol. It also includes cultural norms and values reflected in visible elements such as 
behaviour. The second of Hall's components of culture is the hidden or the implicit culture which 
is invisible cultural assumptions, views, behaviour patterns, and ways of interacting which 
children learn in the process of growing up, they sink below the conscious level and become 
unconscious, which is why people often believe that culture is intrinsic (p.45). This implicit 
culture is important for leadership as these unspoken assumptions might be significant in 
determining the success of leader/follower relations in a culture. The hidden component of 
culture contains stress on words, tone, gender roles, and status roles. Culture, both the visible 
and invisible, operates according to society's internal dynamic, its own principles (values), and its 
own laws written and unwritten (norms). Understanding of Hall's theory provides the cultural 
observer insights into the principles, values and norms underlying a particular culture. This 
contextual element has however been ignored by cognitive approaches such as Hofstedes which 
have until recently dominated the literature on culture and leadership. 
Hall further identifies and discusses context, time and space as patterns or dimensions present in 
every culture, and developed a framework for making sense of the way people of that culture 
interact with others and utilize space and time. Understanding everything people do, how they 
related to each other and the way they speaks requires situating in that particular culture. Time 
and space are equally important for a study of leadership styles because as Hall says, in a high 
context culture, people invest in time - there is less strict emphasis on schedules. Learning a 
culture can be an infinitely complex process that requires years of observation and practice, and 
may not achieve full mastery of culture because as Hall notes [in The Silent Language], culture 
hides much more than it reveals, and what it hides, it hides most effectively" but can be useful to 
the understanding the different attitudes placed by leaders on deadlines, work and non-work. 
Cultures are learned over time by children learn in the process of growing up and become 
malleable. The dimensions below were taken from Halls observations. 
2.8.3.2. Personal space 
Culture conditions it participant to keep a distance from each other in order to operate properly. 
Every member of the culture will enjoy this invisible space around them which they perceive as 
intimate or private, and which few people are allowed to penetrate and then only for short 
periods of time. The distance, which Hall calls personal space, differs greatly from culture to 
culture, large or small. Personal space refers to, the attitudes of leaders and followers to how 
space is used may vary according to context some cultures, for example, in a low context culture; 
leaders may be conformable in crowded areas such as shared office and work environments. In 
high context cultures, leaders are allergic or uncomfortable to crowds including having their own 
work space at work. For example as Hall notes, "Germans are notorious for their obsession with 
personal space. German offices are often compartmentalized and sealed off from interference". 
Space or personal space varies according to culture and is used only in culturally appropriate 
contexts. 
2.8.3.3. Time 
Edward T. Hall further identifies time as another factor or dimensions present in every culture 
and discuss how cultures structure and use their time - monochromic and polychromic cultures.  
Different cultures view and use time differently. The monochromic time concept follows the 
notion of one thing at any one time. In monochromic cultures, such Western Europe time is 
divided and programmed to make it possible for a person to concentrate on one thing at a time. 
In a monochromic system, the schedule takes priority, is treated as sacred and coming late for an 
appointment is not tolerated. By contrast, the polychromic time concept focuses on multiple tasks 
being handled at any one time and time is subordinate to interpersonal relations. In polychromic 
time cultures, such Africa, their view and use of time is quite opposite. People deal with many 
things at once, important meetings are scheduled though coming late for a meeting or waiting 
can be tolerated as though it was normal. The table below (adapted from Stephan Dahl, 2000) 
provides a framework for the two different time concepts, and their resultant attitudes placed by 
leaders on deadlines, work and non-work. This framework will be useful for the study of culture 
and leadership. Observation of the behaviour of leaders in organisations in Rwanda may reveal 
the societal/cultural attitudes towards time orientation. 
Monochronic and Polychronic Cultures 
 Monochronic Culture Polychronic Culture 
Interpersonal Relations Interpersonal relations are 
subordinate to present schedule 
Present schedule is 
subordinate to interpersonal 
relations Activity co-ordination Schedule co-ordinates activity; 
appointment time is rigid. 
Interpersonal relations co- 
ordinate activity; 
appointment time is flexible 
Task handling One task at a time Many tasks can be handled 
simultaneously 
Breaks and personal 
Breaks and personal time are 
sacrosanct regardless of 
personal ties. 
Breaks and personal time are 
subordinate to personal ties. 
Temporal Structure Time is inflexible; time is 
tangible 
Time is flexible; time is fluid 
Work/personal time 
separability 
Work time is clearly separable 
from personal time 
Work time is not clearly 
separable from personal 
time Organisational  
Perception 
Activities are isolated from 
organisation as a whole; tasks 
are measured by output in time 
(activity per hour or minute) 
Activities are integrated into 
organisation as a whole; 
tasks are measured as part 
of overall organisational goal 
Adapted from Stephan Dahl: An overview of Intercultural research 
Table 15: Monochronic vs. polychronic cultures 
From the above, it is clear that attitude to time varies across social and professional levels of 
culture. At professional level, different time attitudes may include flexibility versus rigidity of 
appointments, separation of work from personal time, and measuring tasks by output in time 
versus overall organisational goal. Perhaps the most important time attitude difference between 
polychromic and monochromic culture is interpersonal relations. In monochromic cultures, 
interpersonal relations are subordinate to present schedule whereas in polychromic cultures such 
as Rwanda, interpersonal relations precedes work schedule. Like in high context cultures, 
polychromic people tend to be group-oriented and seek long term relationships spanning from 
past through present to the future. By contrast, monochromic seek out relationships that offer 
business future goals. Attitude to time can have major implications in the business environment 
and can lead to frustrations. For example, in polychromic cultures, employees' value long term 
employments and promotions are based on somewhat subjective criteria linked to one's informal 
networks. In the western worlds which are predominantly monochromic cultures, promotions are 
linked to past achievements or potential for success in the future. 
2.8.4. Culture as communication 
Whereas other cultural theorists focused on identifying and studying the visible behavioral 
patterns that are relatively easy to understand, Halls distinctions is his perspective on 
communication that focused on the subtle, invisible patterns that regulates behavior rather 
unconsciously. Halls perspective allows a more insight for understanding of the full range of 
culture distinctions by comparing ones own way of life, how they walk and talk, with the other 
cultures s/he encounters. According to Hall, learning how to move the body while talking and 
reading facial expressions and finger signs of others is deeply ingrained in the human brain's 
thinking processes that operate in the out-of awareness mode.  
Reviewing Hall's cultural communicative theory, it is possible to say that his approach allows new 
and helpful insights into the understanding of the distinctions existing in the world of leadership 
styles. Institutions (e.g., military) have long established norms, values and deep-rooted behavior 
patterns taken as sacred that have become entrenched in the human brain (Hall, 1977). Much 
like culture is made up visible and invisible components, the style of leadership is influenced by 
personal traits, the people she will lead, and the nature of the activity (Rollinson, 2005) though 
the later components are kept afloat.  
The personal traits of the leader as manifested in communication through syllables that can be 
read in one way by the insider and read, perhaps, another way by the outsider. In a series of 
studies conducted by The Ken Blanchard from 2003 to 2006, inappropriate communication was 
identified as the number one mistake leaders make, stressing that for a company to reach new 
benchmarks of achievement; its leadership must master the art of clear communication. Prior to 
Hall's culture theory, this insight was not clearly discernible. 
2.8.5. Communication as culture 
Communication, according to Hall is much more than language proficiency. In other words its not 
enough to speak the language, leaders have to make sure they are being heard and understood, 
and the aspects likely to cause misunderstanding in cross culture communication can be 
compounded in those out-of awareness features, of the new culture such as the unspoken 
words (what he calls the silent language), the language tone, expressions and body language 
blended together. For example Rwandans expect/believe that an official communication should 
be formal written, signed and stamped, hence regard as unauthentic other forms of 
communication such as email.  
Another example is that a verbal warning to a subordinate will not be taken seriously and cannot 
be used as justification for disciplinary action if repeated just like three written warning letters 
would justify termination of employment. The perceptive observer will look for the pervasive and 
illusive components within each system. 
Hall's communicative theory describes cultures as either high or low-context, but his critics 
notably Cardon (2008) suggests he [Hall] does not describe how these contexts can be measured 
and that his data collection method cannot be considered 'rigorous by today's standards'. Other 
critics including Patton (2002) contends citing absence of negative case analysis, triangulation, 
review by experts and inquiry participants, bias acknowledgement and framework analysis. 
Whereas these critiques bay be valid by today's standards, it may not do full justice to Hall's 
conceptual framework if not judged in the context and time it was developed. Perhaps, what is 
missing in his [Hall] cultural theory is an attempt to speculate about culture from an evolutionary 
perspective.  
Reflecting on such questions as how much more complex cultures become if societies become 
industrialized would allow a full understanding of the distinction of communicative patterns since 
according to Richardson & Boyd (2004), the progressive trend toward more complex societies 
characterizes almost all parts of the industrialized world. When societies become more 
modernised or globalised there will be a tendency to move towards low context 
communication. More so, Hall acknowledges that his sample was taken from a small group of 
friends who were middle class professionals which renders his results less than final word. Hall 
identifies Arabs and Americans as 'contact and noncontact people and attempts to describe limits 
of proxemic zones such as 18inches to 4 feet for personal distance and 4 to 10 feet as social 
distance but makes no attempt to speculate about variation of distance between people of 
different sex and marital status. For instance the distance a male person is expected to keep when 
hugging an unmarried woman who is different from married woman or between age mates. 
Edward T. Halls communicative approach has had a theoretical influence to the study of cultural 
differences and leadership behavior, practices and communication particularly the nonverbal 
communication as it has a bearing on the effectiveness of interactions between members of the 
society or the interactions between the leader and followers. For example, Lord and Maher (1991) 
suggest that the leader-led relationships are more likely to be characterized by trust, motivation 
and high performance when the congruence between the implicit leadership theories of the 
persons involved is high.  
Certain aspects of leadership styles such as distal to the organization members which may be 
endorsed as effective organizational functioning in one culture can have affects that impedes 
leadership success to a manager from foreign culture. Lord and Maher (1991) define leadership 
as the process of being perceived by others as a leader, for followers constitute the context in 
which leaders operate (Silvia & Duval, 2001). Followers need to understand whether what they 
or their leaders are doing is part of a meaningful whole. Leaders must communicate a clear 
mission and purpose of the organization and share it with the followers, and will work to assist in 
coming up with their role in the how the why will be realized. Talking with people from cultures 
different from ourselves, we begin to orient ourselves and to be able to interpret subtle cultural 
clues that often underlie most communication challenges in the world of business leadership. 
2.8.6. Culture as a symbolic/mythical system (Malinowski, Levi-Strauss, Geertz) 
Human being expresses their desires, impulses, and emotions, through a system of 
communication that, according to Sapir (1939) uses arbitrary signals, such as voice sounds, 
gestures, or written symbols (p.7). Symbols represent a big part of our social and professional life. 
The symbolic culture theory was coined by Bronisaw Kasper Malinowski (1884-1942), founder of 
the branch of Social Anthropology known as functionalism, who viewed culture as the interface 
(symbolic, material, and organizational) between individuals and their environment. According to 
Malinowski, culture exists for the purpose of meeting the socialization needs of individuals thus 
the use of artifacts and symbolism is an instrumental enhancement of human anatomy, and refers 
directly or indirectly to the satisfaction of a bodily need (quoted in Moore, 142). Culture is an 
enormously complicated behavioral web of symbols, rituals and myths aimed at responding to 
complex needs that can ultimately be traced to the individual (Moore, 142). It encompasses an 
array of processes, structures and contexts that mediate our assumptions and belief system, and 
actions. 
In other words, we do not exist apart from culture because the symbols, rituals, myths that 
influence a big part of our perceptions of social and professional life are embodied in cultures. 
Symbol, according to Peirce, consists of three elements: [1] the representamen - the tangible side 
of the symbol.  The material element of the symbol that is physically tangible and can be seen 
with naked eyes; [2] the object - what the symbol refers to. For example a bell or wooden gavel 
is used by judges in the courts or the chair or presiding officer in parliaments of some countries 
to ostensibly call for attention or to keep the session calm and orderly; it is a symbol of the 
authority and right to act officially and also a forceful signal; and [3] the interpretant - the relation 
between the representamen and the object. The effect a signal or sound actually makes on the 
mind of someone who understands it.   
Peirce further explains that "representamen is something which stands to somebody for 
something in some respect or capacity. It creates in the mind of that person an equivalent sign, 
or perhaps a more amplified signal. The signal it creates is the interpretant of the first sign. The 
sign stands for something, its object. It stands for that object, not in all respects, but in reference 
to a sort of idea, sometimes called the ground of the representamen". 
In the world of business (occupation, profession or trade), symbols are powerful 'objects' of 
differentiation between cadres (leaders and staff). For instance, clothing or privilege of chauffeur-
driven cars and flying business class, to accessories and external entities of varying functionality 
such as finger rings may also serve to mark out leaders from followers. For example, in military 
organizations, apart from more elaborate uniform and their distinguishing rank and marks, such 
as epaulettes, caps, medals, senior military officers traditionally may carry a baton which 
symbolizes seniority. These formal badges of office symbolize authority and right to act officially 
in their leadership capacities. Leslie White argues that culture originated when our ancestors 
acquired the ability to use symbols. Anthropologist Clifford Geertz (1973) defined culture as ideas 
based on cultural learning through symbols (p. 44).  It encompasses shared beliefs and symbols 
which govern behaviours, and vary greatly from place to place, more importantly, it is adaptive 
and integrative.   
According to Geertz, Man is an animal suspended in webs of significance that he himself has 
spun. He was referring to the influence of culture on human beings. In other words Geertz is 
saying that humans have the ability to create and modify symbols of their cultures.  Symbolic 
definition of culture means that human behaviour is seen as a system of symbolic action - actions 
such as phonation in speech, pigment in painting, line in writing, or sonance in music which serve 
to define a given society and solve the problems around them. Leslie White (1959) argues that 
culture originated when our ancestors acquired the ability to use symbols to originate and bestow 
meaning on a thing, idea or events and to appreciate such meanings (p.3).  
It [culture] to imposes meaning to the world around us and makes it understandable to members 
of society. Perhaps White's view is that culture does not have a real meaning that is beyond 
history, and Geertz's contends that culture is adaptive and integrative which means that it 
changes to cope with social and environmental changes or stresses. For example, if something 
new happened which have an impact to the lives of members of a society, then culture will 
respond by providing semantic interpretations and meanings for such new situations through 
enculturation in that particular tradition. 
From this view of "Culture" and to quote Geertz (1973), "consists of whatever it is one has to 
know or believes in order to operate in a manner acceptable to its members (p. 11)". Similarly, 
culture consists of whatever it is a leader has to know in order to operate in a manner acceptable 
to his followers because it [culture] influences their behaviours and interactions. In order for 
leaders to operate in a manner acceptable to followers, Geertz suggests a holistic approach or 
ethnographic algorithm to interpreting a cultures web of symbols (what he calls the thick 
description).  A thick description of a human behavior sets apart from thin description by the 
formers attention to study not just the behavior, but to explain the meaning of actions and events 
in its context such that the behavior becomes meaningful to an outsider.  A thick description gets 
to the heart of another culture, or a part of another culture, at a particular time.  
A thick description, according to Geertz (1973), is composed not only of facts but also of 
commentary, interpretation and interpretations of those comments, in such a way that extreme 
subjectivism is married to extreme formalism to reflect what the natives "really" think rather than 
intellectual simulations, logically equivalent but substantively different, of what they think. Geertz 
outlines four parameters for an adequate "thick description" and a study of culture; explore the 
latent and the manifest of the human act, their ethos tones, character, quality of life, moral and 
aesthetic style, mood and their worldview and the comprehensive ideas of order. Geertz sums up 
culture as an historically transmitted pattern of meanings embodied in symbols, a system of 
inherited conceptions expressed in symbolic forms by means of which men communicate, 
perpetuate, and develop their knowledge about and attitudes toward life[89]. 
The symbolic/mythical cultural theory is an important anthropological contribution to the 
understanding of culture, in particular how symbols, rituals and myths influence leadership styles 
as each culture will have different myths associated with leadership, although there may be some 
elements of leadership which are common across cultures. Culture symbols, as objects or 
behaviour or language carry meanings that influence followers' behaviour. Accordingly, Yukl 
(2013) identified cultural symbols as useful for understanding leadership processes and outcomes 
because leadership takes place within a particular social reality which provides the member of a 
community with a common pre-understanding and a frame of interpretation.  
Organizational cultural and leadership symbols as objects, behaviour or language carry meanings 
or expressions of a number of meaning (Morgan et al. 1983) which enables members to define 
and understand their roles within the organisation reality as providing followers with information 
about status, power, commitment, motivation and control (Daft, 1983). The concept describes 
assumes that reality, created and lived by employees in companies is a social construction with 
leadership being a part of this reality (Bartlke 1987). Symbolic or symbolism concentrates on 
studying values, meaning, interpretation, history, context, as well as other symbolic elements in 
the process (Kezar et al. 2006). Culture has also been described by David Schneider as comprising 
of categories or "units," and "rules" about relationships and modes of behaviour. Schneider takes 
further step to distinguish "the system of symbols and meanings embedded in the normative 
system, to define symbols and meanings as the basic premises which a culture posits for life: what 
its units consist in; how those units are defined and differentiated; how they form an integrated 
order or classification; how the world is structured; in what parts it consists and on what premises 
it is conceived to exist, the categories and classifications of the various domains of the world of 
man and how they relate one with another, and the world that man sees himself living in (p. 38). 
2.8.7. Emic and etic views of culture 
Cultures have different myths associated with leadership, although there may be some elements 
of leadership which are common across cultures. Linguist Pike (1954) distinguishes elements 
common across cultures, as etic, from and elements such as ritual and myths associated uniquely 
with a specific culture - which he called emic. Pike's coined the emic/etic binary terms in trying to 
apply the linguistic principles to study behaviour. Emic behaviour has certain features which 
account - in terms of 'form-meaning' and 'form-purpose' -for non-verbal behavioural differences. 
In leadership paradigm, the fundamental criterion of contrast might be a difference in 
interpretation of observable actions and behaviour of leaders. Understanding whether a certain 
behaviour feature is emic or etic depends on the approached used to get inside the stream of 
behaviour whose locus is in the heads of social actors. Pike rejected the possibility of an etic 
approach yielding interesting generalization of behaviour, arguing that etic data atleast provides 
access into the behaviour system - the starting point of analysis, and then an initial etic description 
is gradually defined, and ultimately replaced by one which is emic (p.39). In the words of Pike, 
"you cannot get inside people's heads by observing what they do during the natural course of 
behaviour stream events as it only leads to etic not emic distinctions". In other words, etic 
approaches make inferences concerning what is going on inside of people's heads from purely 
outsider perspective. Pike used two analogies to developed an operational definition of the terms 
emic and etic. Two units are etically different when instrumental measurements can show them 
to be. Likewise, units are emically different only when they can elicit different responses from 
people acting within the same system (p.38). 
In this section, Geertzs notion of culture as a system of symbols has been reviewed and 
understood; the concept of thick description of human behaviour discussed as well as the notion 
of leadership as a symbolic system. Pike's emic and etic bimodal approaches to understanding 
culture and leadership behaviour and actions has been discussed, in particular the importance of 
understanding the beliefs or actions of persons from inside the culture. We cannot, or only barely, 
understand how cultures influences human behaviour or its systems of meaning when, as 
Wittgenstein noted, we cannot find our feet with them. (13), because cultures are not 
disorganised assortments of customs and belief. They are in the most case adaptive and 
integrated sets of values, ideas, symbols and judgements that operate out of a social system or 
network. 
2.8.8. GLOBE (Global Leadership and Organisational Behaviour Effectiveness) 
Hofstede defines culture as the collective programming of the mind that distinguishes the 
members of one group or category of people from others (Hofstede et al., 2010:6). Culture is the 
collective programming of the mind distinguishing the members of one group or category of 
people from others. The values that distinguished one group or category of people from each 
other could be grouped statistically into four clusters. 
These four groups became the Hofstedes dimensions of national culture. The country scores on 
The Hofstede Dimensions can also be found to correlate with other data about the countries in 
question. Some examples: Power distance (PDI) is correlated with income inequality in a country. 
Individualism (IDV) is correlated with national wealth. Masculinity (MAS) is correlated negatively 
with the percent of women in democratically elected governments. Uncertainty avoidance (UAI) 
is associated with the legal obligation in developed countries for citizens to carry identity cards. 
A fifth dimension was added in 1991 based on research by Michael Bond who conducted an 
additional international study among students with a survey instrument that was developed 
together with Chinese employees and managers. Long-term orientation (LTO) is correlated with 
school results in international comparisons. 
In early 1990 to 2000s, Schwartz studied individual differences in value priorities and their effects 
on attitudes and behavior, and seven cultural value orientations that form three cultural value 
dimensions (Schwartz, 1994b, 1999, 2004). He examined examples of socioeconomic, political, 
and demographic factors that give rise to national differences on the cultural value dimensions, 
factors that are, themselves reciprocally influenced by culture. He labeled cultural dimensions as 
autonomy versus embeddedness. In autonomy cultures, people are viewed as autonomous, 
bounded entities. There are two types of autonomy: Intellectual autonomy encourages 
individuals to pursue their own ideas and intellectual directions independently. Affective 
autonomy encourages individuals to pursue affectively positive experience for themselves. 
2.9. Summary 
Culture contributes to the overall organisational leadership styles. Although the business school 
theories may provide generic insights into leadership and management principles, the real 
chances of being an effective leader are remote unless rooted in a local culture that reflects and 
values local structural and contextual realities. Then, leaders will be viewed as being vital to 
improving the effectiveness of an organization. One possible method for increasing leader-led 
relations and hence organizations effectiveness is by identifying an individuals leadership style, 
and consequently, matching it to a compatible culture. 
Based on the review of the literature, there is evidence that clearly indicates that leadership styles 
and culture are closely correlated. Attempting to understand one without having an 
understanding of the other will not obtain the desired results. As a result, leaders must have a 
thorough understanding of the local culture in shaping the organisational culture, as well as the 
leadership style that is most appropriate to the context they operate in, in order for them to be 
effective. Adding knowledge to the understanding that certain leadership styles would be 
considered as appropriate in once culture and less appropriate in another could potentially lead 
to assisting organizations in selecting or developing within-culture leaders to enhance the 
effectiveness of the organization. In turn, this research study will help to fill this gap.  
3. CHAPTER THREE:    METHODOLOGY 
3.1. Introduction 
Previous chapter (literature view), reviewed the literature on leadership, culture and cultural 
influence on leadership styles in order to develop a theoretical framework for this research to be 
better situated in relation to the existing literature. This chapter details the research methodology 
for the present study. It explains the research objectives and a suitable methodology to achieve 
those objectives. This chapter is concerned with the design process (methodology) for carrying 
out this research. The purpose of a discussion on methodology, according to Bryman (2004 cited 
in Owain, 2011, p.132) is to connect theory with relevant research methods for the purpose of 
adequately testing the theory in question. In doing so, Owain (2011) argues that a discussion 
should adopt a practical focus, concerned with subjecting the theory to the most rigorous possible 
analysis that will produce data capable of contributing to our understanding of a particular field. 
The methodology presented in this chapter as informed by discussions in the previous chapter 
focuses three distinct topics - leadership styles, culture and cultural influence, each of which 
involved three particular perspectives (i) prevalence or the level of existence, (ii) context (what it 
actually means) and, (iii) desirability or undesirability (what people make of it). This is because 
both culture and leadership are, according to GLOBE conceptualized in two ways: (i) practices or 
"as is," and values or "should be". In this research, elements of leadership and cultural values and 
practices derived from a review of interviews texts were analyzed as having isomorphic structures 
across the two levels of analysis (As Is and Should Be). What the predominant leadership styles 
are, how they are socially constructed (context), and what participants make of these practices 
and values in their own personal experiences. This knowledge will be further analyzed to develop 
a socially constructed theory. In other words, what is considered as acceptable leader behaviors 
and/ or desirable cultural values for participants will constitute the emerging theory. 
The preceding discussions (literature review) on leadership styles and culture had influencing 
implications on the selection of a research approach.  
First, the consensus of researchers (Trigg et al., 2014) that both leadership and culture are social 
phenomena not material objects measurable in quantitative forms. One approach to studying 
culture is qualitative methods that draw from individuals' experiences to explain behaviors 
patterns, interactions and practices in local context.  
Second, leadership styles and culture are social phenomena that flout being neatly 
dimensionalized, influenced by a range of factors - situation, and time. This, however, does not 
render leadership indefinable, but rather an observable cognitive phenomenon. Griswold (2004) 
explains how cultural sociologists approach their research, 
...if you were to understand a certain group of people you would look for the expressive 
forms through which they represent themselves (Griswold, 2004, p.59). 
A particular example of a cultural study that examines how people make meaning in their lives 
out of the different cultural elements that surround them by Anderson (1990). What participants 
make of leadership is socially constructed hence Andersons approach was a combination of 
participant observation and interviews. Essentially, what is considered as a leadership theory for 
participants will depend on how the outcome reflects the views of culture actors. This theory is 
further situated in the literature as contribution to knowledge. 
Apart from the literature review that set the scene, other factors contributed to the choice of 
methods used in this research. 
First, the objective of this research as stated in the introduction chapter is to assess the 
predominant leadership styles and the state of culture in Rwanda's post-genocide era, so as to 
build a theory of the most common patterns of leaders' behaviors in companies in Rwanda. 
Linking the various cultural values to patterns of leaders' behaviors and leadership styles was 
equally an important consideration in choosing the approach /research methodology. 
Second, the need develop an induced theory of leadership styles and influenced by the Rwandan 
culture rather than testing an existing theory established from prior literature. In other words, 
the research intention is to construct a theory grounded in the data and providing an 
understanding not available in existing literature and contributing to existing body of knowledge. 
The following were the most important considerations in choosing the approach to the research: 
middle managers were willing to be interviewed provided that interviewees' confidentiality was 
guaranteed; and that the interviewer did not demand information deemed sensitive.  
The first part of this methodology chapter discusses the different schools of thought about 
grounded theory method, drawing its strength on the contributions by different researchers 
(Glaser and Strauss 1967, Charmaz 1983, 2006, 2009; Strauss & Corbin 1990, 1994; Stern 1994; 
Corbin 1998; Glaser 2002). 
In the second part of this chapter, the research paradigm is located and discussed with reference 
to a branch of knowledge or academic discipline. It offers the theoretical underpinning for the 
approach to be followed; it discusses the methods to be used and defines the means of data 
collection and analysis. Attention is particularly given to the procedures followed at specific 
stages to attain study objectives. Also discussed in this chapter are multiple aspects of research 
approaches including the rationale for the choice of participants and who they were, the use of 
the narrative interview as the data collection method, the use of grounded theory for data 
analysis, as well as the ethical issues and challenges faced in this research. I describe how I 
embarked on my research journey, starting from how I piloted the interviews. This section 
underpins or forms the basis the researcher's discussion of data and to qualify the results 
presented in Chapter (4) Four. 
3.2. Epistemological Approaches 
There are various arguments for and against the different methodological approaches to social 
sciences research. Psychologists, sociologists and anthropologists each have their own 
methodological approaches in their field of study, approaches whose traditions, paradigms, 
worldviews and tools cast the character and influence in particular forms. This variety of 
perspectives and approaches in the field can make any attempt to locate the edges of research 
approach a messy one. Much of the debate about research methodology can be subsumed as the 
quantitative versus qualitative research methods argument. In qualitative research, it can be 
described as positivism versus the rest of the research paradigms such as social constructionism, 
phenomenology (Burrell and Morgan, 1979; Easterby-Smith et al., 1991/2002). Positivists begin 
by presuming a nature out there that is the object of sciences attention; that scientists observe 
that nature and that there is no knowledge except about nature (Kolakowski, 1972). The problem 
with this realist view is the assumption that we have no certain knowledge of reality. Sense-data 
are perceptions, not reality itself, and we cannot stand outside these to know for certain to what 
they refer. 
On the other hand phenomenologists describe subjective human experience as it reflects peoples 
values, purposes, ideals, intentions, emotions, and relationships. Existential phenomenology 
concerns itself with the experiences and actions of the individual, rather than conformity or 
behaviour.  
By contrast, social constructivists focus on construction as an individual cognitive process 
influenced by social relationships, and explore how individuals make sense of their social 
situations (Schn, 1983). They [constructivists] often include the subjects voice in the research 
process through participative data collection methods. Whereas a one-sided social 
constructionism would argue that what matters are the meanings attributed to artifacts, Hutchby 
argues that affordances constrain and enable the meanings and uses that are possible in the first 
place. What defines a research paradigm is not so much the common methods or units of analysis, 
but enabling the researcher to see things anew - to develop a theory of the ongoing research 
problem from subjects experiences that form the raw material for the data by which they make 
sense of the social world.  
The method ultimately adopted in this research is defined by its aim: to become more aware of 
and find the influence of Rwandan culture on leadership styles in post-genocide organizations. 
Understanding the theoretical basis and application of the theory demands a clear insight into 
the varying and sometimes conflicting epistemological viewpoints of these key authors, and how 
the method of enquiry took on additional form over the years. 
This thesis is introduced from an historical and post-genocide cultural perspective as the context 
of the business leadership styles in companies in Rwanda. This research has been approached 
with a social constructivism ontology and interpretativist epistemological positioning and these 
comprise the methodological stance. The derived theory has been inductively constructed from 
the analysis of the views and experiences of middle managers interviewed for this research. 
Middle managers were selected for their direct influence as frontline managers through whom 
organizational strategies are executed. Specifically, middle managers are considered the interface 
between the senior management or executive and the frontline (line and support) staff. 
A literature review explored the theories and dimensions of leadership styles and through this a 
conceptual framework was developed around leadership behavior and practices from which the 
research questions are formulated with respect to the post-genocide organizational context in 
Rwanda. My constructivist grounded theory and interpretive-epistemological stance highlights 
the use of qualitative data mainly based on narrative interviews. Secondary-generated data from 
literature was used for data triangulation purposes. For effective record keeping and ease of 
referencing, I kept a digital recorder which proved very helpful during transcription and analysis 
stage of this research. 
3.3. Situating this research within the literature 
Situating the research is intended to situate the findings of the research within the context of the 
fundamental trends of leadership and culture studies but also to demonstrate a breadth of 
knowledge in the discipline sufficient to undertake original research. This research is about 
leadership styles (practices) as influenced by culture (values).  
The main focus is to probe into views and perspectives of stakeholders regarding the culture and 
leadership styles in organisations in Rwanda's post-genocide era. The main substantive issues are 
'leadership styles' and 'culture'  both behavioral phenomena which precludes them from being 
easily measured, hence, qualitative in the sense that mental phenomena are explained in terms 
of hypothetical mechanisms to which theoretical properties are attributed (Chow, 2002).  
This research is situated in modern sociology - the study of human social life, groups and societies 
(Giddens, 1989) which provides insights into the many forms of relationship, both formal and 
informal, between people. According to the BSA, sociological research consists of the 
identification, development and testing of theories. Sociological research is carried-out through 
direct observation, communication with participants, or analysis of texts, and may stress 
contextual and subjective accuracy over generality.  
The methodology used in this research is rooted in an interpretive epistemology. The methods 
used in collection of data are qualitative; that is, through direct observation, interviews and 
conversations with participants who have direct influence on leadership. Specifically, interview 
participants were middle managers drawn from a selection of companies representing telecom, 
banking, foods and beverage industries in a series of data collection approaches. Conceptual 
meanings have been induced from the lived experiences through interviews and conversations 
with participants who have direct influence on leadership.  
In an inductive approach, we begin with specific observations and measures, begin to detect 
patterns and regularities, formulate some tentative hypotheses that we can explore, and finally 
end up developing some general conclusions or theories. In broader terms, the methodological 
positioning of this research has been shaped and inspired by Neuman (2003), Strauss and Corbin 
(1990), Glaser (1978, 1992), Charmaz (2000) who argue that the inductive approach allows the 
result to emerge from the frequent, significant themes discovered in the raw data without 
applying any structured methodology. This is the central point of the research. 
This research was conducted in natural settings: in participants' offices, except two participants 
who were interviewed in a restaurant and hotel. This naturalistic setting is consistent with the 
inductive approach, and supported by Creswell (1998) and Given (2008), who contend that 
ordinary events and behaviors are best studied in their everyday context. This process generally 
involves interacting with people by interviewing them and observing the setting. This view is also 
supported by Gummesson (2005) who contends that, "inductive research lets the reality tell its 
story on its own terms and not on the terms of extant theory" (p.322). My research interest is the 
cultural influence on leadership style - subjects that are not amenable to statistical analysis 
(quantitative research) but are social and cultural phenomena that are solely amenable to a 
qualitative one - a perspective on research that seeks to gain more highly detailed responses in 
the subjects' own words. Qualitative research is the method of choice when the research subject 
requires understanding of the processes, events and relationships in the context of the social and 
cultural situation. Kvale (1996) calls the qualitative research interview "a construction site of 
knowledge" (p. 42). Both the researcher and the interviewee are engaged in that construction, 
and the reader of the final research text also constructs knowledge by engaging with the stories 
told (p.42). During an interview, the researcher listens to what the interviewee or participants 
says about their world, learns about their beliefs about work, family, dreams and hope (Kvale, 
1996, as cited in Annette Sue Nasr, 2007: 99). In broader terms, the process of knowledge 
construction generally involves interacting with people by interviewing them and observing the 
setting. This is what Kvale (1996) call the five features of knowledge: knowledge as interrelation, 
knowledge as context, knowledge as language, knowledge as conversation and knowledge as 
narrative. Hence semi-structured interview as the method of choice was useful for exploring the 
topic broadly and particularly proved very helpful during analysis stage of this research. 
3.4. Selection of Participants 
As discussed in the previous sections, the method used in data collection was through narrative 
interviews with participants who have direct influence on leadership in their organizations. 
Participants for this research were selected using purposive or convenience sampling. Teddlie & 
Yu (2007) say that purposive, also commonly called a judgmental sampling, is when a researcher 
selects "participants that are both easily accessible and willing to participate in the study" (p.1). 
That is, participants are selected based on the purpose of the study and researcher's knowledge 
of a population's ability to inform important facets and perspectives related to the phenomenon 
under consideration. This method is consistent with Creswell (2009) and Kuper et al., (2008) who 
assert that researcher should select participants who can best inform the research questions and 
enhance understanding of the phenomenon under study. Creswell (2007) also emphasizes the 
importance of acquiring participants who are willing to openly and honestly share information or 
tell their story (p.133). 
The second consideration of research design is sample size. The sample size of a research most 
typically refers to the number of units that were chosen from which data were gathered. While 
most project proposals require researchers to state a number, specifying the number of 
qualitative interviews necessary to complete a project at its inception or researching until 
saturation is achieved is a challenging approach because as Bryman wrote in Baker & Edwards 
(2012) writes, it forces the researcher to combine sampling, data collection, and data analysis, 
rather than treating them as separate stages in a linear process (p.19). Many experts agree that 
saturation is ideal, some give numerical guidance. For example, Adler and Adler (2012) advise 
research students to sample between 12 and 60, with 30 being the mean. In this research the 
target sample size, which is the number of participants selected or contacted for interview was 
25 and the final sample size, which is the number of completed interviews for which data was 
actually analyzed in great depth was 20 eliminating 5 from the original sample on the basis of 
non-responses and ineligibility. Mason (2002) also identifies the need within qualitative research 
to build a convincing analytical narrative based on richness, complexity and detail rather than 
on statistical logic. 
In this case, participants were drawn from middle managers who have direct influence on 
leadership and the understanding of the processes in their organizations. Interview participants 
were selected as follows: nine (9) interview participants were drawn from nine (9) public sector 
institutions and eleven (11) from private companies representing the telecom, banking, foods and 
beverage industries, thus achieving a balance between the public sector and the private sector. 
In order to achieve the desired richness of views and perspectives about leadership styles in 
Rwanda, interview participants were selected on the basis of having a working experience of more 
than five years with an emphasis on people management. This is because most leadership 
positions require a minimum of five years proven people management experience. This emphasis 
on people management was intended specifically to tap into more informed views and 
perspectives about the people side of the leadership, because participants might have acquired 
certain experiences and qualities essential to lead, motivate, inspire, encourage and manage 
different personalities. Leadership is about setting goals much as giving direction to people, and 
providing resources to enable them to perform and achieve their agreed-upon goals (Williams, 
2010, p.536). Also Williams et al., (2011) emphasizes that thoughtful attention of the needs to 
people for satisfying relationships leads to a comfortable and friendly organizational atmosphere. 
Although I had initially thought people management experience would only be one aspect of 
leadership, as I discovered later, information about people management contributed significantly 
to my data. This is confirmed by Peterson (2005) argues that leadership requires constant 
attention to the communication of business goals in order to present an integrated picture to 
employees (p.210). 
The second consideration for selecting interview participants was location and access to 
interviewees. Thus, the capital Kigali was the choice location. The capital city was believed to have 
a good mix and concentration of Rwandans with different cultural backgrounds. That is, 
Rwandaliens, mainly returnees who had been in exile in neighboring countries for more than 
thirty years, and Rwandigenous, people of Rwandan genealogy who were born and had lived in 
Rwanda prior to 1994. 
The third consideration for choosing organizations located in Kigali was the relative stable 
operating environment; that is, the head offices mirror the image of the organization as a whole 
and reflect the ideal working environment of the organization because they (the head offices) are 
often well equipped and better staffed than provincial or branch offices. This was an important 
consideration to inform important facets and perspectives related to the separation and 
delegation of duties as well as the tools/technology available to facilitate work processes. 
Fourth, the choice of organizations and associated interviewees was also influenced by their 
location and willingness to share information. 
The final sample consisted of a total of twenty Interview participants whose characteristics are 
reflected in the following table. 
Profiling of Interview participants 
# Cultural Background Education 
Background 
Current 
position 
Working 
experiences (years) 
Organization 
1 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
2 Local/ Rwandigenous BA M. Manager 7+ Yes Non-Gov't 
3 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
4 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
5 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Multi-national 
6 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
7 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
8 Local/ Rwandigenous BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
9 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
10 Local/ Rwandigenous BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
11 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
12 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Corporate 
13 Local/ Rwandigenous MA M. Manager 20+ Yes Non-Gov't 
14 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 5+ Yes Private 
15 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA M. Manager 5+ Yes Private 
16 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
17 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
18 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 20+ Yes Non-Gov't 
19 Local/ Rwandigenous MA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
20 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA Sr. Manager 20+ Yes Non-Gov't 
Table 16: Profiling of interview of participants 
3.5. Justification for selected participants 
During the planning phase of the research, one of the questions asked was  which organizations 
and participants would best be able to provide the information about decision making processes 
in their organizations but the rationale and depth required to develop a theory about business 
leadership styles in post-genocide context. Given this, it was important to select participants with 
similar characteristics  i.e people in positions of power and authority, with similar educational 
background, technical skills and people management experiences. Middle managers were 
considered the best people to talk to about leadership behavior and practices. The reason for this 
is that people at the middle management level were likely to talk more openly and sharing their 
experiences and perspective about decision making processes in their organizations. 
Also important was to select business organisations in the formal sector (see types of organisation 
in the sample) that have something in common with each other - an organogram with middle 
management level. Given the very shortlist of private companies within the formal sector that 
have similar organogram, a decision was made to consider both private companies and public 
corporation sector. 
The justification for choosing participants from both private and public sector was to achieve a 
fairly representative sample from which to collect information about leader behavior and practice 
as well as the factors that might most influence decision making processes in business. This will 
enable the researcher to get a deep understanding of how organizations in Rwanda function. 
3.6. Definition of sectors and types of organization in sample 
Since the purpose of this research was to examine/investigate the common leadership styles, 
influencing factors, and culture in post-genocide Rwanda in different types of organizations, - as 
a Doctoral of Business Administration (DBA) research, the choice of organizations selected was 
mainly formal sector organisations8 largely, because formal sector employment is defined and 
regulated in terms of clear job tasks, working hours and regular salary or wages. Theoretically, 
the formal sector consists of the businesses, enterprises and economic activities that are 
monitored, protected and regulated by the government. In the context of Rwanda, this is because 
Rwandas economy is largely dependent on agricultural productivity with almost 90% of the 
population living on farming and livestock rearing. Qualitative data for the study was gathered 
from twenty interviews with key stakeholders in both private and public sector organizations. 
Three organizations were from the private sector (sector-1) and one was a public sector 
institution (organization 2). The sample for this study was drawn from urban-based businesses, 
organizations and institutions, largely associated with service industry, telecom and banking 
institutions and public service. 
Sector- 1 organizations were both local and multinational as well as not-for-profit or charity. This 
category of organization (sector-1) operates over a number of facilities across the country and 
central administration. The local organizations were originally established in the pre-genocide 
period (before 1994) and have more than 100 employees. In addition they have the policies and 
the systems/tools with which management must use in order to shape the decisions and 
behaviors of their organizations effectively. 
Sector-2 organizations were public institutions also spread over multiple locations throughout 
Rwanda. In this category of institution (Sector-2), the work process, management structure, and 
8 The formal sector encompasses all companies/organizations with clear written rules of 
recruitment, agreement and job responsibilities, including a registered location, regular hours of 
operation and wages, and other structured benefits. 
human resource policies of recruitment, selection, rotation and training is governed by public 
service policy. 
The first level of selection criteria was based the existence of known as Artifacts, that is, elements 
which an outsider may observer, including the dress code, work environment, furniture, 
organizational structure, work process etc. Those elements reflect the cultural philosophy of the 
organization. 
The organizations in the two categories were selected because of a number or core 
commonalities in their organizational structures - the existence of three management levels 
(Executive/senior, middle and first-line managers. Both categories of organisations had a 
relatively good mix of Rwandan born and non-Rwandan born managers involved in decision 
making and implementation process. However, the organizations differed in many other 
contextual ways which provided an insight into their varied cultures, organizational history, 
decision making styles and politics. Interviewees were selected among middle managers because 
of their practical involvement with the shaping of the organizational strategies that specify the 
goals and objectives to be achieved, implementation processes and people management 
processes. Middle managers are responsible for specialized units within functional lines. It is an 
intermediate management level between the top management and lower level managers in 
pursuit of the values and missions of the organisation. This selection of middle managers for 
interviewees gave a broad range of views and a richness and depth to the data collection. 
3.7 Definition of middle managers 
In order to achieve organizations' objectives, there are people who steer the process of planning, 
organizing, leading and controlling the efforts of organisation members and allocation of 
resources. These people are known as 'managers'. Managers have formal authority to use 
organizational resources and to make decisions on the work performance of other organizational 
members. The decision-making hierarchy of an organisation typically has three levels in which 
they are ranked in order of importance as discussed in the preceding section. For the purpose of 
this research, middle managers were chosen for participants for the broad range of views and a 
richness and depth. Middle managers are responsible for accomplishing the core tasks of their 
organizations. According to Osterman (2008), middle managers get the electric circuits designed, 
place the loans, sell the products, oversee space allocation, manage legal issues and handle all 
the many other tasks (p.66).  They devote more time to organizational and directional functions, 
by setting goals for their departments and other business units. Middle managers are the 
intermediate management level between the top managers and first-line managers. Additionally, 
there are differences across the management levels as to what types of management tasks each 
does and the roles that they take in their jobs. For example, in small organization, there might be 
only one layer of middle level managers who manage at least one subordinate level of managers, 
and reports to a higher. The role of middle managers involves motivating and assisting first-line 
managers to achieve business objectives, and they may also communicate upward, by offering 
suggestions and feedback to top managers. Because middle managers are more involved in the 
day-to-day workings of a company, they may provide valuable information to top managers to 
help improve the organization's bottom line. 
3.8 Recruitment of participants 
Recruitment refers to the process whereby the researcher identifies and invites (recruits) 
participants to join the study. Identification, initial contact, and recruitment of participants form 
the foundation of the informed consent process. Recruitment and selection of participants must 
be equitable (fair or just) within the confines of the study. Qualitative researchers strive to include 
participants who meet the study criteria and who represent the richest source of information 
(data) relevant to the phenomena being studied. A major element of the recruitment involves 
developing guidelines as to who will be recruited for the proposed study. The specific research 
questions will guide the choice of participants best suited to address the study objectives. For the 
purpose of this research, participants were recruited through advertisement. In research, 
advertisement is any form of communication aimed directly to potential research participants 
and which is under the control of the researcher.  
Email communication was used to contact potential participants. The email advertisement 
included attachments such as an introduction letter and areas to be covered in the interview to 
give potential participants a basic idea of the purpose of the study and what their participation 
would entail. This proved not only to have helped inform better the participants, but also helped 
to attract participants who were really serious about and engaging in the study. In addition, a 
secondary recruitment method was used. Secondary recruitment refers to asking a study 
participant for identify information about eligible friends or direct connection with friends or 
colleague to contact them as potential research participants. Given that, in Rwanda, leadership 
as a subject is synonymous with politics, there were important research reasons to use secondary 
recruitment, but the approach was used in a manner that respects the privacy of the potential 
participants. Only name, address, email, and telephone number were requested. Also, in the 
email the researcher specified inclusion and exclusion criteria for participation in the research. 
The key inclusion criteria were that the potential participants had the attributes that would 
enable them to be included in the sample. That is, factors such as nationality, cultural background 
(Rwandalien/Rwandigenous), possession of a university degree, people management experience, 
the participant's current or previous experience at middle management level in Rwanda, 
willingness to participate, and physical presence in the country. Exclusion criteria are those 
characteristics that disqualify prospective subjects from inclusion in the research, and they 
included any disparity from the inclusion criteria. For example participants without the people 
management experiences were excluded. The rationale for these inclusion and exclusion criteria 
was targeting a population of participants that has a basic idea of what the study entails and is 
diverse enough to distinguish effects and benefits of differing cultural backgrounds. 
3.9 Sample stratification variables 
Sample stratification is a sampling technique which involves specifying certain variables e.g. age, 
gender, origin of the entire sample population. The purpose of this research was to assess the most 
common leadership styles in organizations in Rwanda, in order to build a theory of the 
predominant leadership styles and culture in Rwanda in the context of the post-genocide era. The 
post-genocide era is a unique context in the history of Rwanda, when millions of Rwandans who 
had fled or were born and had lived outside Rwanda for a long time returned and integrated with 
those that were born and raised in Rwanda and had remained there. Therefore, the population 
of interest was stratified using the variables Rwandalien, indicating someone who had spent 
most of their life outside Rwanda and returned, and Rwandiginous, indicating someone who had 
not lived outside Rwanda and indigenous v post-genocide type of organisation. The sample size 
of each stratum did not have to be proportionate to the entire population sample. Sample 
stratification involves two steps: 
The purpose of the stratification was to achieve roughly equal proportions of the two categories 
of people (Rwandaliens and Rwandigenous) in the study population sample. 
For some research projects, disproportionate stratified sampling may be more appropriate than 
proportionate stratified sampling (Monette, Sullivan et al., 2013). The purpose of the research did 
not require a researcher to compare strata to each other but rather to examine the state of 
culture in the post-genocide period after the convergence of different Rwandescents cultures. 
For the objective of this research, equal allocation (also referred to as balanced allocation and 
factorial sampling) was not required. Instead sufficient numbers of participants were sought for 
the researcher to gain useful insights. Also, the researcher eliminated non-Rwandan managers to 
ensure that the resulting theory reflects the Rwandan culture. 
3.10. Approach to data collection 
There are various claims for methodological approaches to data collection. A review of the work 
of Westbrook (1994) and Ellis & Levy (2009) on qualitative research methods provided useful 
insights and a guide for conducting scholarly research: data collection, analysis, and theory 
development and validation techniques. According to Marshall (2006), qualitative research relies 
on four data collection methods: (1) participation, (2) observation, (3) interviews, and (4) 
analyzing documents. While some research domains are sufficiently narrow that they allow only 
a limited number methodologies, Ellis and Levy (2009) argue that it is 'essential' for the researcher 
to have a firm grasp of what is entailed in producing legitimate, valid results and conclusions. 
Harrigan (1983) recommends the use of hybrid methods to overcome the limits of single method. 
He (Harrigan) argues that hybrid methods allow the researcher to capture the depth and breadth 
required to develop a generalization and predictions through a more coarse grained 
methodology.  
In the context of this research, grounded theory fits squarely into the definition of hybrid 
methodologies. The recognition of the researchers intrinsic knowledge of the culture (as an 
insider) and its language made grounded theory a method of choice for this research. As this 
research is about leadership styles and cultural influences, grounded theory seem to offer the 
best options for digging deeper into the belief system of participants to explain the meaning and 
complexity associated with questions such as what the prevalent leadership styles are, why 
leaders behave the way they do, what cultural or contextual factors might have contributed to 
their behavior, what do followers expect of their leaders in terms of decision making and 
communications, and what the middle managers make of the leadership styles in their 
organization, desirable or undesirable. The approach used in data collection for this research was 
mainly narrative interview methods. This is because narrative interviewing allows the researcher 
to extract quality data by focusing the interviewee on the question under scrutiny (Curran and 
Blackburn 2001). 
3.11. Introduction to different interview approaches 
An interview is a conversation with a purpose (Woods, 2011). Typically, an interview represents 
a meeting or dialogue between two or more people where questions are asked by the interviewer 
to elicit facts or statements from the interviewee. Kvale (1983, p.174) defines the qualitative 
research interview as "an interview, whose purpose is to gather descriptions of the life-world of 
the interviewee with respect to interpretation of the meaning of the described phenomena". In 
research, interviews are widely used to supplement and extend our knowledge about individuals' 
thoughts, feelings and behaviors, meanings, interpretations, etc. Denzin and Lincoln (1998) 
asserted that qualitative research emphasizes the process of discovering how the social meaning 
is constructed and stresses the relationship between the investigator and the topic studied. 
Although interviews can be generally defined and have some commonality of meaning, they can 
vary enormously in terms of the context or setting in which they are carried out, the purpose they 
serve as well as how they are structured and conducted. Some research questions are better 
answered in a certain fashion. This gives rise to many different types of research interviews: 
structured, semi-structured and unstructured.  
A structured interview is a qualitative method of collecting data, in which "lists of predetermined 
questions are asked, with little or no variation and with no scope for follow-up questions to 
responses that warrant further elaboration" (Gill et al., 2008, p.2). A structured interview involves 
a researcher asking an interviewee a set of predetermined questions about a topic of his or her 
interests. The benefit of this approach, according to Gill et al., 2008, is that structured interviews 
are relatively quick and easy to administer and may be particularly useful when dealing with 
literacy or numeracy problems. Additionally, biases in information gathering, judgment and 
decision making can be reduced and reliability and validity of the interviewer judgment improved. 
Despite the empirical support for the use of structured interviews, by their very nature, they only 
allow for limited participant responses and are, therefore, of little use if 'depth' is required (p.3). 
The format of the questionnaire design makes it difficult for the researcher to examine complex 
issues and opinions compared to semi-structured where open-ended questions and probes are 
used to elicit depth of answers. 
Developed in the disciplines of anthropology and sociology as a method to elicit peoples social 
realities, unstructured interviews do not reflect any preconceived theories or ideas and are 
performed with little or no organisation. An interview guide, usually including both closed-ended 
and open-ended questions, is prepared; but in the course of the interview, the interviewer has a 
certain amount of room to adjust the sequence of the questions to be asked and to add questions 
based on the context of the participants responses (Gill et al., 2008) suggests that an 
unstructured interview begin with an opening question such as "What do you think about . . .., 
to the initial question. In unstructured interviews, the researcher relies on the interviewees' 
responses as no questions will have been predetermined (Lawal, 2009). To avoid preconceived 
questions which might limit the topic of research, Punch (2009) argues that "unstructured 
interview is used as a way to understand the complex behavior of people without imposing any a 
priori categorization' (p.147). This is not to say that unstructured interviews rely entirely on the 
spontaneous generation of questions or the natural flow of an interaction as suggested by Lawal 
(2009, p.84). Usually, the researcher will prepare an interview guide as the basis through which 
interactions flows as the topic is explored in-depth. 
The use of interview guide instead of predetermined interview questions to explore the topic 
being researched, researchers may find unstructured interviews to be difficult and time-
consuming to conduct. 
A semi-structured interview is a qualitative method of inquiry that combines a pre-determined 
set of open questions (questions that prompt discussion) with the opportunity for the interviewer 
to explore particular themes or responses further. Semi-structured interviews consist of several 
key questions that help to define the areas to be explored, but also allows the interviewer or 
interviewee to diverge in order to pursue an idea or response in more detail. This interview format 
are used in a variety of social sciences research fields such as sociology,  as it provides participants 
with some guidance on what to talk about, which many find helpful. The flexibility of this 
approach, particularly compared to structured interviews, also allows for the discovery or 
elaboration of information that is important to participants but may not have previously been 
thought of as pertinent by the researcher. A lot of extra information may surface during 
interviews. Often the information obtained from semi-structured interviews will provide not just 
answers, but the reasons for the answers. When individuals are interviewed they may more easily 
discuss sensitive issues. Provides valuable information from context of participants (and 
stakeholder) experiences. However, semi-structured interviews can be time consuming to collect 
and analyze data, and requires some level of training or practice in order to prevent interviewer 
suggesting answers. 
With the aim of this research to develop a leadership theory from the description and the 
meanings of participants and develop central themes of their life world, semi-structured 
approached was deemed suitable for getting the story behind a participants experiences. In the 
semi-structured interview, the interviewer engages directly the participant, the interviewer has 
the opportunity to probe or ask follow up questions, the interviews are generally easier for 
respondent, especially if what is sought is opinions or impressions, and they allow for some 
personal contact between the interviewer and the participants for the follow-up purpose 
questions. According to Bryman (1988) the decision to choose a specific approach or 
methodology should be based on its suitability to answer the research questions. The main task 
in interviewing is to understand the meaning of what the interviewees say (Kvale, 1996).  
However, interviews are time consuming and they are resource intensive in both the data 
collection and analysis. Also the fact that there are no predetermined questions asked, this 
approach is arguably prone to possible bias. The use of an occasional spontaneous question 
makes the answers difficult to quantify and analyze. However, the fact that in-depth interviews 
provide much more detailed information than what is available through other data collection 
methods, such as surveys, outweighs their weaknesses. And, in order to remain as open and 
adaptable as possible to the interviewees nature and priorities during the interview, the 
interviewer had to allow maximum flexibility in the structure of the interview. Semi-structured 
interviews were particularly useful for getting the story behind a participants experiences and 
occasionally allowed the interviewer to give more clarification when the question was 
misinterpreted or misunderstood. 
3.12. The narrative interview 
A narrative interview is an interview that is organized to facilitate the development of a text that 
can be interpreted through narrative analysis (Given, 2008). There are different forms of narrative 
interviews, ranging from recounting specific time-bounded past events to narratives that 
transverse temporal and geographical space  e.g: accounts that cover an entire life of career. As 
researcher was interested in leadership styles and culture, 'as is' and what it 'should be', the 
narrative interview method used in this research was adapted from Wengraf's (2001) Biographical 
Narrative Interpretive Method (BNIM) - a method of asking questions that requires participants 
to tell stories about their experiences in their own way and from their own perspective. The 
choice of method is supported by (Wengraf 2008) emphasizing that BNIM supports research into 
the lived experience of individuals and collectives. He (Wengraf, 2004) describes three steps for 
conducting narrative interviews: 
First, the interviewer offers only a carefully constructed single narrative question (e.g., 
Please tell me the story of your life, all the events and experiences that have been 
important to you personally; begin wherever you want to begin, I wont interrupt, Ill just 
take some notes for afterwards). Second, sticking strictly to the sequence of topics 
raised and the words used the interviewer probes for more narratives about them.  Then, 
third, the interviewer can follow on with non-narrative questions (p.2). 
Before embarking on the interview, the researcher deemed it critically necessary to describe the 
study so as to impress upon the interviewee the background of the study and to dispel any fears, 
anxiety, apprehension, confusion or sensitivity surrounding the leadership subject, which is often 
synonymous with politics in Rwanda. This confidence building or building rapport with the 
interviewee is in line with Williams (1993), Campion et al. (1994) and Kvale (1996) who emphasize 
the need for interviewers to remain as neutral as possible. This process was a useful because it 
helped build rapport with the interviewee in any genuine way.  
The following steps explain how the entire process was conducted. First, the researcher wrote to 
five managing directors of the organizations to gain approval for the research. Out of the five, 
two responded. The first Managing Director to respond sent a letter to all members of the senior 
management team advising them to facilitate me during my research period. The senior 
management team comprised of individuals who are heads of departments and have several 
middle managers and officers who report to them. In this research, participants were drawn from 
middle managers because, while their decision-making powers were limited, they understood the 
policy framework and contributed to decision-making in their particular department. While the 
research was approved by the senior management, participations were voluntary.  
On the first day, then I attended a monthly staff meeting comprising of the entire leadership and 
staff team of the organization. I was introduced and asked to talk about my research to the wide 
team. Introducing me to the wider staff team meant (in the words of the staff) that I had the 
blessing of the Managing Director and was accorded unhindered access to information. It also 
meant that I could conduct my interviews during working hours and the time that interviewees 
spent with me conducting interview was part of the work. I spent a couple of days reading about 
the organization before conducting any interviews. I wanted to familiarize myself with the 
organization structure and functions, and identify the right interview candidates, but also to build 
rapport with them in preparation for interviews. I thought that interviewees would be hesitant to 
talk openly to a stranger which would have resulted in giving me less accurate information than 
they would give to someone they were connected or familiar with. Knowing that Rwanda is an 
interconnected community in which almost everybody knows everybody else, it didn't take long 
to be fully integrated and socialized during lunch breaks. I then identified candidates who were 
willing to be interviewed. During the interviews, I would describe the background to my research 
and why their insight was important to my research. I also explained to every participant I 
interviewed that participation was completely voluntary. I also requested their consent to be 
recorded and that they would have time to ask me any questions at the end of the interview.  
After the interviews, often in the evening, I would listen to the recorded interview to get a feel of 
how the process had gone and gauge whether the follow-up probe were appropriate during the 
interviews. This exercise proved to be useful in informing the next interviews by making reference 
to what previous interviews had said and asking their views of the same. It also helped to keep 
the interview exercise more focused. As I continued interviewing I continually asked myself 'how 
many interviews would be enough? After I had conducted 20 interviews, it was clear that no new 
information emerged as new candidates repeated almost every that had been said previously by 
other participants. Then I realized I had reached saturation point. Saturation is the point in data 
collection when no new information emerges and a researcher feels no more data need to be 
collected. Saturation is when the theory appears to be robust, with no gaps or unexplained 
phenomena. When saturation point has been achieved, the resulting theory is more easily 
constructed (Mason, 2010).  
For effective and easy collection of data, all interviews were audio-recorded and kept on a digital 
recorder for record keeping and easy referencing. After conducting each interview, the researcher 
transcribed the audio-recorded data in a word-to-word written documentation so that it can 
studied in detail, linked with analytic notes during analysis stage of this research. For those which 
were not conducted in English (two interviews were conducted in local language  Kinyarwanda), 
they were left their wording exactly as they said (to get a true picture of what they said), except 
in those instances where the meaning was unintelligible, in which case the researcher corrected 
the text to render it what the researcher thought they [interviewees) meant. 
Though cumbersome, the process proved a useful way to familiarize myself with data and 
reviewing all steps undertaken during interviews in order to gauge whether all important aspects 
of the subject had been followed-up on and challenges that arose from the interviews. The 
transcribed interview texts was shared with the supervisor and a third party for critical 
commentary on clarity of thoughts, consistency and correct terminology that match the subject 
of the research. Feedback would be given either by direct comments in the text or via regular 
supervisor conversations. The later was particularly very useful because discussing data and how 
it was generated, made the next interviews more focused. 
3.13. Ethical issues and Research integrity 
Ethics and research integrity have been stressed by many scholars, e.g. Kelly & Ali (2004), Blaxter 
et al. (2002), Cohen et al. (2000), Silverman (2000) and Kvale (1996). According to Kvale 
(1996:111) ethical issues revolve around informed consent, confidentiality of subject report and 
whether subjects have a say in how their statements are interpreted and reported. Upholding 
the principle of anonymity and non-traceability on the part of the participants is equally an 
important ethical issue. In this research, participants were given full information about the 
purpose of research and they give their consent in line with the Robert Gordon University's ethical 
guidelines. Also the Management approval was requested for the two organizations where the 
researcher spent two weeks of research. This was to spent time building rapport and identifying 
with participants to minimize the foreseen risk of interview participants telling good stories about 
leadership styles (as it should be) rather than the practice (as it is) in their organizations. This is 
because Rwandans are generally skeptical about expressing themselves frankly and openly to 
strangers. It is also important to note that the space for free speech is still limited (at least on 
certain topics) which discourages people from expressing their opinion on subjects such as politics 
and leadership. There was another challenge that stem from Rwanda's recent history - the 
Hutu/Tutsi ethnic divide - which creates unnecessary suspicions of the researcher and affects 
interviewees' views and perceptions, especially on topics regarded as sensitive topics. This prior 
knowledge and understanding of the Rwandan society was important in the design of the 
research. 
3.14. Reflections on the interview practice 
Reflecting on the methodology overall, the qualitative approach to data collection exercise was 
appropriate for this sociology research. The procedure and instruments used in this research, as 
described in the previous sections (see section 3.4.2) were essential to ensure the quality and 
validity of the data and credibility of findings. The result is not only that research goals, namely, 
assessing the most common leadership styles, in order to build a theory of the predominant 
leadership styles and culture in Rwanda, were achieved, but also provided a holistic 
understanding of the subject (leadership and culture) in the context of the post-genocide era. In 
the course of this research project, however, a number of methodological challenges that 
emerged deserve to be reflected on. 
3.15. Scope of the research 
At the outset, the researcher was ambitious about addressing a much broader and 
multidimensional topic. As the researcher went deeper into literature review and data collection, 
it became clear that leadership was a more complex and multifaceted process that interacts with 
a broader environmental system. Thus, the researcher decided to delineate the scope of the 
study, define the research problem and concepts within the problem. While the process was 
daunting, it proved useful to develop a more thorough understanding of each component of the 
topic in greater detail in isolation before integrating these components and specifying 
relationships between key concepts. Since this was a qualitative research, delineating the 
research topic involved paying particular attention to how stakeholders define the concepts 
locally during data analysis stage. A theory emerged as a result of a significant investment of time 
of engagement with data. The key was to be ever vigilant about the new concepts that presented 
themselves in unexpected ways and at unanticipated times and engaging in continuously 
reflection aimed at achieving a critical understanding of the influencing factors. 
3.16. Primacy of evidence in the research 
From the beginning of this research, I wanted to primary source materials in the form of interview 
data as documentary evidence to take precedence of literature for theory development. I wanted 
the theory to emerge out of data rather than beginning with a hypothetical theory. I conducted 
interviews that lasted an average of one and half hours each and drawing a substantive amount 
of information on a wide range of issues. I underestimated the enormity of material and the 
amount of time it would take to transcribe recorded interview. I had also assumed that I would 
use computer software to analyze the data. Instead I learnt that, the advantage of manually 
analyzing the data was that the researcher pays more attention to meaning, key words and 
concepts, and the particular cultural meanings. Qualitative Data analysis (QDA) packages such as 
NVivo and and ATLAS.ti offers an array of tools for effective data exploration and presentation of 
results, however the level analysis may not have been met. The choice of manually analyzing the 
data was a conscious decision based upon the research objectives. 
3.17. Recruitment of participants in the research 
The main challenge for recruitment of participants was that people in the Rwanda are connected 
to each other but closed to strangers. They would hardly accept a request for interview from an 
unfamiliar person, let alone opening up to express their views when it comes to discussing 
sensitive topics such as leadership. To overcome this challenge, a secondary recruitment method 
was used. I asked research participants for information about eligible friends or direct connection 
with friends or colleagues as potential research participants. This helped ensure that the purpose 
of the interview was understood as purely academic and gave reassurance on the anonymity of 
the participants identities.   
The other challenge was that, in Rwanda, leadership as a subject is synonymous with politics and 
people in Rwanda are certainly hesitant to disclose their political views to unfamiliar persons, 
especially for fear of mischief or causing harm to others. To overcome this challenge, the term 
leadership was used interchangeably with management.  The justification was, then, to choose 
a more politically neutral term. This is because, in Rwanda the terms management is associated 
with the business world and people management. The term manager is perceived as or depicts 
someone who manages a team of people. This view is supported by Gagnon (2012) that many 
organizations in the business world, the terms management and leadership are used 
interchangeably, suggesting that leadership falls under the purview of management. 
3.18. Data Analysis 
The primary data collected was in the form of recorded voice interviews. Secondary data was 
generated from existing literature on leadership and culture as part of the literature review 
(Chapter-Two). The secondary data also informed the selection of methods for data collection - 
narrative interviews - as well as the development of the framework for data analysis (see 
appendix-1). The framework describes a series of steps - open coding, axial coding and selective 
coding to create themes and sub-themes, as well as the interpretation of concepts and metaphors 
used by interview participants. As a result of repeated engagement with data, two interviews 
were eliminated on the basis of quality and richness of information but also participants did not 
have people management experiences. Also, this repeated engagement with data, helped 
construct meaning of key concepts during analysis stage. 
The second stage of data analysis was to identify themes that link across sub-themes based on 
the theoretical framework developed using secondary data. Similar and / or related responses 
were grouped together under themes, e.g. paternalistic leadership,  task-oriented leadership, 
while issues related to cultural influence were grouped together under cultural dimensions, such 
as collectivism, performance orientation etc. Themes were created on the based on the 
frequency that a concept or phrase appeared in the transcripts. The frequency of five occurrences 
was set as the basis for a concept or phrase to be classified as a common theme or perception. 
The most frequent views were then identified and grouped into categories. Less frequent and 
individual views were also taken into consideration to ensure that no voice was ignored. This was 
followed by comparing the data coding framework with the literature review framework (see 
appendix-II) to show the similarities and contrast in relation to the three research questions. The 
similarities between literature and verbatim transcript quotations from respondents ensure that 
research findings are grounded in existing body of research. The contrasts represents the specific 
context of the culture being examined - Rwanda. The interpretation of research findings is 
discussed in more detail in subsequent chapters. 
3.19. Grounded Theory approach to the research 
Originally developed by sociologists Glaser and Strauss in their 1967 book "The Discovery of 
Grounded Theory", the grounded theory method was designed to open up a space for the 
development of new contextualized theories, that is, theories specific to the context in which 
they had been developed. Different schools exist within grounded theory that claims to fit with 
different types of research topics (Martin & Turner, 1986; Borgatti, 2004; Khan, 2014). Borgatti 
(2004) defines grounded theory as a method of using empirical data without preconceived 
theories. Khan (2014) described grounded theory as a research method that involves a set of 
inductive strategies for analyzing data and theory development. It begins with abstract concepts 
moving from a specific case or cases or observations to obtain a general conclusion. The 
researcher becomes immersed in the culture as an active participant and records extensive field 
notes. Grounded theory is a research method used to studying a process, action, or interaction 
involving many individuals and it draws a theory in the views of participants (Shan, 2014). It 
operates almost in a reverse fashion from social science research in the positivist tradition. 
Grounded theory is a theory obtained or derived from data which have been systematically 
obtained through 'social research (Baker et al 1992: Stern 1994). Unlike many other methods 
that test preconceived theories through 'scientific procedures and otherwise, a grounded theory 
emerges during the research process itself. It [a grounded theory] is a product of a continuous 
engagement with data collection during analysis of that data (Glaser & Strauss 1967; Glaser 1978, 
1992; Charmaz 1983; Strauss 1991; Strauss & Corbin 1990, 1994; Stern 1994). 
Charmaz (2006) argues that the resulting theory is an interpretation of a complex world as seen 
through the eyes of the informed researcher (Charmaz 2006). Grounded Theory is a research 
method that enables the research to develop a theory which explains the phenomenon of interest 
or area of study and the process that led to it. 
Within grounded theory, differences of views have emerged between Glaser and Strauss (1967) 
with Strauss and Corbin (1990) emphasizing that the researcher need to predetermine a general 
subject of inquiry before entering the research site and adapt a structured set of analytical steps, 
while Glaser (1992) argues that researchers need to be less procedural and more creative in their 
methodological approach. According to Glaser the approach to the identification and 
specification of the research issue to be addressed is entirely dependent upon the perceptions of 
the actors and the researcher - "in grounded theory we do not know, until it (theory) emerges" 
(p.95). 
A review of literature on research methodology specific to the areas of culture suggests two 
possible methods are appropriate for dealing with values and practices and the meanings they 
imply (Miles and Huberman, 1994, cited in Alewa, 2013). They are inductive and deductive 
methods. Inductive reasoning (also known as the bottom up approach) is the process whereby 
a general proposition or observation is used to infer a larger theory, without necessarily proving 
it (Boone, 2014, p.473). By contrast, deductive reasoning (also known as top-down logic) is a 
logical process in which a conclusion is based on the accordance of multiple premises that are 
generally assumed to be true. Deduction, starts out with a general statement, or hypothesis, and 
examines the possibilities to reach a specific, logical conclusion. 
Therefore, the approach relevant to this research is that of Glaser which relies upon the constant 
comparison of different incidents, perceptions, relationships and issues, with the aim of 
identifying inconsistencies, contradictions, gaps in data and emerging consensus on key concepts 
and relationships. In inductive inference, we go from the specific to the general. 
3.20. Inductive approach 
A key feature of grounded theory, according to Elliot and Higgins (2012) is that it provides for 
inductive enquiry, a means of generating new theory and new understandings. Inductive inquiry 
(also known as inductive approach) refers to theory that is developed inductively from a corpus 
of data. The inductive approach is a systematic procedure for analyzing qualitative data in which 
the analysis is likely to be guided by specific evaluation objectives (Bryman & Burgess, 1994; Dey, 
1993) Inductive analysis refers to approaches that primarily use detailed readings of raw data to 
derive concepts, themes, or a model through interpretations made from the raw data by a 
researcher. Inductive analysis is consistent with Strauss and Corbins (1998) description: The 
researcher begins with an area of study and allows the theory to emerge from the frequent, 
dominant, or significant themes inherent in raw data, without the restraints imposed by 
structured methodologies (p. 12). The goal-free approach, as described by Scriven (1991, p. 
56), is appropriate when a researcher's wish is to describe the actual observable phenomena, not 
just planned effects. Inductive analysis leads the reader towards what the researcher thinks is 
most significant about the research findings. The importance of the findings must be made 
transparent and choices and assumptions made by the researcher made explicit in relation to 
the methodological perspective. 
In this research the inductive approach was used. The inductive approach, in this research, refers 
to an approach that primarily uses detailed reading of raw data to derive concepts, phrases and 
metaphors, and then classify them into much smaller groups (also known as codes), and labeling 
and translating those codes into meaningful themes. This is followed by axialing - comparing 
codes with codes, statements with statements, case with case, event with event, to understand 
and explain similarities and variations in the data. These data components or codes are then 
combined as categories and related to one another, and are reconstructed as concepts. The 
results of the process are expressed as an emergent theory, that is, as a set of concepts that are 
related to one another in a cohesive whole. This method is considered inductive in that it is a 
process of building theory from the data itself through iterative processes until a grounded theory 
is fully integrated. 
Franz. The direct method. Retrieved March 6, 2004, from 
http://www.vobs.at/ludescher/Alternative%20methods/direct_method.htm  
3.20.1 Coding 
In this study, the steps described in the figure-1 above will be followed. The first step is open 
coding to open up the transcribed interview text and explore the ideas and thoughts in it. Open 
coding is the process of breaking down the data into separate units of meaning (Goulding, 1999). 
The process starts with reading through the text and then identifying (by highlighting) the key 
words, sentences and metaphors and developing categories of data includes labeling concepts, 
defining categories based on their properties and translating raw data into meaningful categories. 
This is in line with Punch, (1998) that the theory will be generated on the basis of data; the theory 
will therefore be grounded in data (p.163). In this study, for example, sections of the text, phrases 
describing the behavior of leaders regarding decision making process and communication styles 
were highlighted. Also highlighted were sections of the text describing the cultural values, norms 
and beliefs. Culture' according to Chamberlain (2005), is represented by the values, norms, and 
traditions that affect how individuals of a particular group perceive, think, interact, behave, and 
make judgments about their world (p.197). After the Open Codes were identified, the next stage 
was axial-ling to disaggregate the core themes from general codes or axial coding. This process 
http://www.vobs.at/ludescher/Alternative%20methods/direct_method.htm
involved a more directed approach of looking at the identified codes in relations to highlighted 
sections of the text or raw data and the entire interview. 
Axial coding is the disaggregation of core themes - the process of relating categories to their 
subcategories. Strauss and Corbin used this term for one of the stages of the data analysis 
approach of the grounded theory. It involves reading through the codes and clustering them 
under sub-heading or categories that directly relate to the research question.  
The essence of axial coding according to Strauss (2006) is to identify some central characteristic 
or phenomenon (the axis) around which differences or similarities in properties or dimensions 
exist. It is an inductive thinking process of relating codes to each other emphasize causal 
relationships, and fitting things into a basic frame of contextual relationships. 
To build a theory in an inductive process, axial coding involves looking for concepts that holds the 
bits together, analyzing the events or variables that lead to the occurrence or the phenomenon. 
However, due to the lack of theoretical foundation  relying on descriptions provided by 
respondents and researchers intuitive framework, results may contain extraneous contents 
(Schriesheim & Hinkin, 1990). Hence, to provide a more complete portrayal of the subject, the 
researcher makes a quaint distinction between active variables (causes) and background variables 
(context). The researcher identifies the context with moderating variables or conditions that 
influence the action as well as intervening conditions associated with mediating variables that 
lead to the phenomenon and their properties. This resonated with Swanson & Holton III (2005. 
P,165)s argument that inductive approach is the most appropriate for exploratory research or 
where theres little theory to guide the researcher when developing a theory by interpreting the 
descriptions provided by research participants. Inductive approach is particularly useful for 
interpretation of data in ways that specify the "concepts of interest, causal relationships, the 
presence and effect of contextual relationships, and outcomes". According to Wilson (2008) and 
Kauffman (2010) inductive reasoning, by its very nature, is more open-minded and exploratory, 
especially at the beginning. 
The essence of axial coding in this research was to identify some central characteristic or 
phenomenon (also known as the axis) around which differences and consistency in properties or 
dimensions exist. The researcher made the connections among the codes and develops initial 
umbrella themes. By putting data together in new ways that make connections between the 
categories, the researcher focused on each category in terms of: 
 the prevalence of the phenomenon and context in which it is occurs;  
 the participants perception of something as it 'should be' and 'as it is'; 
 what the participants make of it (desirable or undesirable). 
Figure 8: Coding Flowchart 
The framework below was used to fit the open codes into initial relationships categories. The 
frame consists of the following elements: 
Element Description 
Phenomenon This is the theme that brings together emerging patterns that have 
been identified and randomly placed into broad categories during 
the initial or open coding. At this stage the researcher is interested 
in disaggregation of themes that directly relate to the research 
question. 
Context This is the set of background influencing conditions that give rise to 
the phenomenon. It is the set of variables embedded in the setting 
for an event or phenomenon in which it can be fully understood. 
Causal conditions These are the cause variables that lead to the occurrence or 
development of the phenomenon. It is a set of causes and their 
properties. 
Intervening 
conditions 
These are the events or variables that rise out of the need to deal 
with unusual or certain situation. Unlike causal conditions, 
intervening condition are temporal in nature, intervening conditions 
are part of the context as the dividing line between the two is a thin 
Ideal conditions These are events or conditions perceived as acceptable by 
participants. Phenomenon as it 'should be'. 
Effective 
conditions 
These are actual events or conditions as practiced by participants. 
Phenomenon 'as it is'. 
Consequence 
conditions 
These are the perceptions of participants' action strategies. What 
participants make of it (desirable or undesirable). 
Source: Borgatti (2002) 
Table 17: Elelements for Data analysis 
Applied to the subject of the researchers study, leadership and culture in Rwanda, this produces 
the following:  
Phenomena of interest is leaders' behavior, the context is culture background as reflected in 
values and practices, causal conditions are effective culture, the intervening conditions is the 
business situation, the ideal conditions are leaders' behaviors as they should be, the effective 
conditions refers to the leaders' practices as seen by the participants, and the consequence 
conditions is what participants make of it (desirable or undesirable). Here the researcher is 
interest in the consequences of the phenomenon itself. As the analysis evolved from core codes, 
linkages and new categories were created, thematic umbrellas began to be formed as the 
researcher moved on to selective coding. 
Selective coding is the process of relating all categories created in the precedent stage and 
choosing one category to be the thematic umbrella which eventually leads to formulating the 
[grounded] theory. After choosing thematic umbrella and positioning it at the centre of the 
process being explored, all the other categories are integrated and developed into the theory. 
According to Strauss and Corbin (1990) a theory is a set of relationships that proposes a 
reasonable explanation of the phenomenon under study. Strauss and Corbin (1990) further 
defines selective coding as "the process of selecting the central or core category, systematically 
relating it to other categories, validating those relationships, and filling in categories that need 
further refinement and development" (p.116). A theory developed in this way demonstrates how, 
why and from where early concepts and categories were derived.  
These early concepts and categories are the active variables (causes) and background variables 
(context) identified earlier in axial coding, which illustrate the context (structure) and the process 
of a phenomenon (Goede & Villiers, 2003; Creswell, 2002, p.441). The process also provides 
evidence of the relationship between concepts, categories and this evidence by connecting the 
conditions that give rise to a certain phenomenon. This mapping forms the basis of the theory 
(Troiano, Schneider et al., 2002). 
3.21. Reflections on validity of the process 
An instrument is valid if it measures what it is intended to measure and accurately achieves the 
purpose for which it was designed (Patten, 2004; Wallen & Fraenkel, 2001). With regard to the 
validity of this process of developing a [grounded] theory, it may be argued (for example Hume 
cited in Lange, 2008) that with an inductive approach or indeed qualitative research "it is not 
possible to provide the full evidence" such as copy of the questionnaire and statistical analysis in 
a manner that is as immediately accessible to the reader. Inductive approaches have often faced 
acceptance problems. Denzin & Lincoln (2000, p.7) called qualitative researchers "journalists, or 
soft scientists, and their work is termed unscientific, or only exploratory, or subjective (p.7)".  
However, great efforts have also been made to present inductive research methods in such a way 
that it is valid. This is in line with Patton (2003), Fohlbacher (2006) and Yin (2013) who stress that 
the strength of the inductive approach is in its ability to deal with a full variety of data 
(documents, artifacts, interviews, and observations (p. 8) and to compare with ease data across 
cases. Thus, what is included in this thesis was selected and presented in a way that is meaningful 
to the context in which research was conducted. According to Goulding (1999), "it is important to 
chart the process as it evolves, to use diagrams to illustrate the emergence of the theory and to 
point to critical junctures and breakthroughs in terms of theoretical insights". This is supported 
by Glaser & Strauss (1967) contends that, contrary to traditional research approaches, which 
usually rely on a literature review to form a hypothesis and putting it to the test by 
experimentation in the real world, inductive research, on the other hand, investigates the 
actualities in the real world and analyses the data with no preconceived hypothesis. It is not 
necessary to ask the participants to validate if the theory covers their situation, as is usual in 
narrative research designs. According to Glaser (2002), inviting participants to review the theory 
for whether or not it is their voice is wrong as a 'test' on validity. They may or may not understand 
the theory, or even like the theory if they do understand it. Grounded theory is generated from 
much data, of which many participants may be empirically unaware. Indeed, grounded theory is 
not their voice; it is a generated abstraction from their doings and their meanings that are taken 
as data for the conceptual generation. 
3.22. Summary of the chapter 
In this chapter research design has been presented. The purpose of this chapter was to describe 
the research methodology of this research, situating the approaches within research paradigms, 
to describe and explain the sample selection, describe the procedure used in designing the 
instruments for collecting data and provide reflections on the interview practice, to discuss the 
procedures used to analyze the data, and provide an explanation on the validity of the process. 
4. CHAPTER FOUR: ANALYSIS OF DATA 
4.1. Introduction 
Following from the theoretical framework established in the literature review, this chapter 
discusses emerging issues pertinent to leadership styles and the state of culture in the context of 
post-genocide Rwanda through the experience and perspectives of middle managers in 
organizations in Rwanda. The focus is on what participants perceive as the predominant 
leadership styles as exemplified in leaders' behaviors and practices, 'as is', and contrasts with 
participants' expectations leaders' behaviors and practices, as they 'should be'. Given that 
researchers (House et al., 2004, Eagly, 2007, Hofstede & Hofstede, 2005, Schein, 1992) have 
established, in literature review that culture has an influence on leadership styles through a 
complex set of behavioral processes, nuances, sensitivities and values. The discussion in this 
chapter is extended to explore the state of culture as an integrated pattern of human behavior 
that includes belief system, values, practices, communications, manners of interacting and roles 
relationships and expected behaviors of a leader (Taylor, 1996). Finally, it examines what 
participants make of the predominant leadership styles, in terms of what participants perceive as 
desirable and undesirable. Discussion of the behaviors and practices that participants perceive as 
desirable and undesirable is not only an important contribution to knowledge in its own right but 
also significant to my research interests for developing a culture specific framework for 
understanding leadership styles. The approach to data analysis adopted in this chapter is 
grounded in the theoretical framework established earlier in the literature review. However, 
findings were contextualized to participants' perception and insights which informs their 
appreciation of the world around them as well as their behaviors and practices. 
4.2 The Sample 
As discussed in Chapter Three, methodology, the data being analyzed in this chapter was obtained 
from middle managers working in both private and public sector. Companies included in the data 
collection telecom, banking, and food industry. In analyzing the views of participants, the 
researcher's interpretation of findings are backed-up by verbatim quotations from participants' 
interviews throughout this chapter. Participants' were given pseudonyms to ensure 
confidentiality of their identities. This introductory section is followed by presentation of findings 
and emerging themes representing leadership, culture and cultural influence. The first section 
presents six emerging leadership subthemes; the second section presents five leadership 
influencing factors, and the third section presenting nine culture subthemes. In each section, 
interview data were analyzed in pairs with literature to explain their similarities, variations and 
differences in data. The chapter concludes by drawing together the main themes of analysis and 
explaining their significance in the Rwandan context. 
4.2.1 Paternalistic leadership approach 
Paternalism is the attitude or behavior of a person, who protects people and gives them what 
they need in return for total loyalty. In the Merriam-Webster dictionary, paternalistic leadership 
is defined as a system under which an authority undertakes to supply needs or regulate conduct 
of those under its control in matters affecting them as individuals as well as in their relations to 
authority and to each other. In management, paternalistic leadership is a type of fatherly 
managerial style typically employed by dominant males where their organizational power is used 
to control and protect subordinate staff that are expected to be loyal and obedient. It is based, 
intentionally or unintentionally, on the idea that the leader is an expert father figure" who is in 
a position that allows him or her to have information and expertise that others in the organization 
may lack. In other words the leader is believed to be in position to know best what is good for the 
organization; thus, (when the belief is held by the followers) paternalistic leaders make decisions 
that go down well with followers. The downside is that it does not give them any responsibility or 
freedom of choice. 
Another version is that paternalism is an approach or style under which a leader undertakes to 
provide the needs whilst regulating the conducts of those under its control including matters 
affecting them as individuals as well as in their relationships to authority and to each other. 
According to a research by Erben and Guneser, Gul and Ayse (2008), a paternalistic leader works 
by acting as a father figure by taking care of their subordinates as a parent would. Thus, the 
paternalist leaders provide for the needs of those under their supervision and effective control to 
gets the job done. In return the leader receives the complete trust and loyalty of followers. 
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/manager.html
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/style.html
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/employment.html
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/organizational.html
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/power.html
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/control.html
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/subordinate.html
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/staff.html
The first is directed inwards, while the latter is directed outwards. It is argued that the later 
(paternalistic leadership) behaviors create humanize and moralize the workplace. The later 
resonates with the findings from data analysis which showed the existence of paternalistic 
relationship between leaders and their followers or workers. It also showed that workers were 
expected to be committed to what the leader believes and will not strive off and work 
independently. The relationship between the leader and followers are as solid as that of the 
father and children. And not only do followers treat each other like family inside the work force, 
but outside too. They go to each other with any problems they have (both personal and 
professional) because they are not only listened to but they also believe what they are told is 
going to truly help them. Workers had stayed longer with the company where their godfathers 
stayed longer because of the loyalty and trust. This is resonates with Erben et al., (2008)s 
research conclusions that paternalistic leadership had a moderate effect on affective 
commitment and strong effect on continuance commitment. Personal connections and loyalty is 
very important both in private and public service as workers are expected to be totally committed 
to the leader. Evidence provided by participants emphasize the widely held perception in Rwanda 
that people with paternalistic connections or relationship have more privileges and access to 
resources and better jobs. When participants were asked how they got the jobs, their responses 
can be summed up by these verbatim quotations from a select two who said: 
Because the commission was still building itself and I had finished my University 
education, I made an (unsolicited) application but because they (read the head of the 
institution) knew me, I didnt do the interviews (i1, L50-1, P3). 
After the war I walked to the Ministry, there were not cars at that time. But of course I 
knew someone who knew the then Minister Higiro and the Minister gave me a note which 
I took to the Director of Cabinet and I immediately started the job (i4, L1279-84, P45). 
Despite the fact that laws have been put in place in attempt to abolish (in fact criminalized) 
paternalism, the reality is that every government employee are required by article 29 of the 
general statutes for Rwanda public service to take the following oath before taking office: 
to promote Rwandese people's interests, in abiding by the fundamental law and other 
laws"(p.7) 
It is argued that paternalism engenders loyalty and obedience and paternalistic behaviors are 
developed to humanize and re-moralize the workplace. However, when a paternalistic leader 
exhibits an over inflated ego, and a strong belief that s/he "knows better" than followers and 
refuses to keep in touch with followers in an organization, it often can lead to a de-moralized 
workplace. The reality is that most leaders sometimes (or in fact, often) are in positions that allow 
them to have more information and expertise that others in the organization may not. The issue 
is whether leaders acting in paternal type roles make decisions that would be better than if 
followers made them or had extensive input into them. 
4.2.2 Nepotism, cronyism and/or favouritism 
Originating from the assignment of nephews to cardinal positions by Catholic popes and bishops, 
the term nepotism has been defined as the employment of relatives in the same organization or 
the use of family influence to employ them in other organizations (Hagen F. Abdalla, Ahmed S. 
Maghrabi, Bel G. Raggad (1998). Nepotism is a common accusation in politics when the relative 
of a powerful figure ascends to similar power seemingly without appropriate qualifications. 
Cronyism, the practice of favoring of friends and associates to positions of authority, without 
proper regard to their qualifications. Favoritism in the workplace refers to a practice in which a 
person is treated differently better than others, not because the person is qualified in terms of 
skill requirements. It is the practice among those with power or influence of favouring relatives 
or friends, especially by giving preferential treatment to one or more employees. In this study, 
nepotism, cronyism and favouritism are defined in terms of liking or disliking an individual or more 
employees because of their ethnicity, friendship or association to powerful figure in positions of 
authority. In the case of Rwanda, perhaps due to the long history of ethnic feuding and mistrust, 
leaders (especially in politics) surround themselves with cronies to be able to accumulate a great 
deal of personal information on voters and citizens of the oposite ethnicity. Nepotism, cronyism 
and favouritism are a very common behavior in service business life and it comes in various guises 
arising from different motivational bases and power dependence relations. 
The leader is inclined to followers who are more apt to follow him or her and exclude the ones 
who are perceived to be less loyal. The quotation below explains the practice in organisations: 
...his style is that he picks a few individuals in the organization (akabashyira kwibere - 
preferential treatment) and gives them all the favors and they fell strong. When other 
people think they are left out, they feel that are not in the architecture/structure of the 
organization, they feel there are people who are more important than others, then the 
organization will fail by all means. 
They are called circles of influence because those persons who are treated special and considered 
closed to the leader can also influence the management and other people. Other people call it 
an untouchable group. They are untouchable by other group because of their closeness to the 
top powerful figure or authority. A head of department in a public institution, interviewed for this 
research claims that:  
... a man like Minister, he cant do anything at all without actually seeking approval of his 
permanent secretary (i1, l549, P16);  
.. a friend introduced me to the Minister who gave me a small note that i took to the 
Director of cabinet. The Director immediately issued me with an appointment letter and I 
started the job (i4, l1353-6, p40); 
When this happens, the leader starts to play favorites in decisions and alienated followers (or 
workers) begin to look for other job opportunities because they feel it is very difficult to get 
promotion if they compete with the one who has a family member, relative or friends in the 
higher level position in the organization. 
4.2.3 Task-oriented leadership 
Task-oriented leadership is one of several predominant styles used by managers in a business 
setting. The task-oriented leadership is one of the styles of leadership behaviors identified by 
Ohio State academic researchers as framework to categorize leadership behavior, Stogdill (1950, 
cited in Tabarnero et al., 2009) defined task-oriented leadership as a style that focuses on the 
goal achievement by followers and establishes a well-defined pattern of communication (p.4). 
Task-oriented leaders define roles and set goals for themselves and their employees, and helps 
employees understand what is expected of them and then manage their activities to accomplish 
business objectives. In discussion with participants, task-orientation emerged as a key area of 
leadership functions. Evidence provided by participants suggest that there exists a strong 
emphasis for tasks over human-orientation as reflected in the emphasis on aspects of leadership 
including coordinating and control of work activities, paying attention to administrative details, 
monitoring of quality and control of resources. Participants specifically pointed out that 
leadership is demonstrated in the leader's ability to achieve the goals of the organization. This 
theme (task-oriented leadership) emerged out of cross-sectional views of several participants 
who were asked to describe their leadership styles, and below were their responses: 
receiving your files and giving to the people that belong in the people youre supervising 
in other words to carry out their tasks so for me its a technical thing (i9, L3788-9, p110); 
prevent aspects from losing disappointments for efficiency and for obtaining good results 
(i8, L3488, p100); 
need to debate on, but the work plan of unit you have to debate on it come up with an 
action plan then divide tasks then we meet when we are presenting our results (i7, l2970-
2, p86); 
member understands his/her obligations and all the support they need from me or from 
anyone who ever, and I expect to get good results as per the set targets (i5, L1906-8, 
p56); 
know each other, we sit together. If something is urgent, they will as you as the head and 
you talk to others and tell them let's do this urgently. ..you can't wait until the other 
person is ready, no, for me I call them directly and tell them let's do this evaluation. 
Sometimes I tell them to do it right in my presence (i4, l1413-9, P42). 
other side you need to be a skillful person to create your own management style, because 
at the end of the day the objective as a manager is to achieve your goals. And to achieve 
your goals its not something that is cast in stones, that this is how you should do. As a 
manager you have to always constantly revise your own style- if this doesnt work then 
you know how to handle it. (i1, L87, P4) ...they are task oriented (i3, l1202, P36). 
Notwithstanding the variation of views, the majority of participants are in agreement with 
Interview-1's view of leadership. S/he observed that 'at the end of the day the objective of 
leadership is to achieve your goals' (i1, L87, P4). According to Mujtaba and Alsua, (2011) the two 
most common leadership styles in business are task-oriented and people-oriented but the fact 
that participants' views showed a prevalence of task-oriented behavior among the Rwandan 
leaders suggests entrenched high power culture as will be discussed in culture sections of this 
chapter. As Mujtaba and Alsua observed the behavior of people reflects their native culture (p.2) 
orientation or characteristics that help make sure that things get done in a manner that is both 
proficient and on time every time. Task-oriented usually create clear, easy-to-follow work 
schedules with specific requirements and deadlines. As seen in chapter three (literature review), 
different leadership styles coexist in a person. This is because, according to Bryman et al., (2011) 
difference in knowledge processes exists at various levels of the organization, hence leaders may 
adopt different styles which can result in the most effective style of leadership (p.61). Other 
leadership styles identified by participants as prevalent in organisations in Rwanda as discussed 
in the next sections of this chapter. 
4.2.3 Team-oriented leadership 
Team-oriented leadership is the opposite of task-oriented leadership and is a behavioral approach 
in which the leader put a lot of emphasis on a common purpose or goal. It includes being 
diplomatic and administratively competent (House, 2004, Northouse, 2006). In this style of 
leadership the leader is participating directly with the employees throughout the process, and is 
there to offer ideas, advice, and support to his or her employees. Consistent with House and 
Northouse, my research on leadership styles in Rwanda also showed that a considerable number 
of business leaders operate a team-oriented style. In this research, participants frequently 
stressed that this style offers a great deal of team spirit within the organization and workmates, 
and it can allow for a lot of collaboration and brainstorming, stimulating ideas from every member 
of the team. As one of the participants put it, "Im emphasizing the human resource ... most 
important resource for any organization that touches all is the human resource (i1, L99-102, P4)". 
Historically, large companies were mostly family owned and run by family members at the top 
while the rest of employees were selected from near extended family members. This is because 
family members were (and still) considered trustworthy that outsiders. Analyzing the leaders' 
behaviors as expressed in the views and expressions of participants interviewed for this research, 
it emerged that leaders emphasize team spirit, shared responsibility, team building, and a 
common purpose among subordinates to foster positive relationships. One participant concluded 
that "as a leader you have to be able to hear the views of other people in the group ...you have to 
make people with different views be as one ...better to understand and make the analysis of 
views..to show them a way how we had to go forward" (i2, L773-6, P22). This participant 
acknowledges the difference of views in a group but emphasized the leader's role as to focus on 
the common purpose to make people with different views be as one to be able to move forward. 
In the late 1990s, as Rwandans who were coming from different countries where they had lived 
for a long time and acquired different cultures and as more and more multi-national companies 
opened shops in Rwanda, the hereditary or family consideration could not apply, instead those 
found to have the skills were hired at all levels including leaders. Today, companies are believed 
to have gotten smarter about how to exert effective team leadership, but it may take a while to 
transition as the team-orientation leadership is still the most preferred style.  Participants 
interviewed for this research believed that they can be effective and enhance job performance of 
followers through a variety of motivation mechanisms but as one participant observed, "You need 
to be able to work with, working through members of the organization" (i1, L95, P4). 
Responding to a similar question, other participants gave the following response which reaffirms 
the above assertion. 
colleagues debate on it and we come up with something that is final - an action plan or 
way forward (i7, L2960-2,  p85). 
Interviewee-7 (i7) a head of department at a government agency formed in early 2000s as a 
merger of different agencies charged with business registration and business development, 
outline his/her styles of leadership. 
colleagues debate on it and we come up with something that is final - an action plan 
or way forward (i7, L2960-2,  p85). 
Interviewee-2 (i2) is even keener on team spirit that goes beyond professional level and 
suggests that: 
Good managers wine and dine with what we call the support staff (i1, L99-126, P5); 
Interviewee-13 (i13)'s response was more instructive when asked to describe their leadership 
styles but interestingly draws a line when team spirit breaks down: 
(i13, l4642, p136). 
This view is revealing than a simple assumption that there will always be team spirit in a group. 
S/he thinks there might be differences of views and the leader should be there to take the 
decision. On the same issue, Interviewee-7 &14 (i7&14) a division manager with an insurance 
company was more pragmatic to solving problems and suggests that: 
...a leader should have effective and a friendly talk with his staff in figuring out what's 
really the problem and their take on it collectively so that they can draw to a genuine 
decision (i14, l4699, p137). 
Definitely there are some administrative decisions that you would not necessarily need 
to debate on, but the work plan of unit you have to debate on it come up with an 
action plan then divide tasks then we meet when we are presenting our results (i7, 
l2970-2, p86); 
The same view is echoed by Interviewee-16 (116) also a division manager with a major 
commercial bank arguing that leaders' decisions affect everybody in the organization. In the 
leadership game: 
... There is no stand-alone man/woman. Collective decision is always the best and its 
always better to agree on the decision to facilitate its implementation (i16, L4812-3, 
P141). S/he adds that "motivating the team builds passion and commitment toward 
the organizational objectives" (i16, L4819, P141). 
The notwithstanding the variations in their emphasis, the majority of respondents expressed view 
and expression to support team-oriented style of leadership. Most participants regard leadership 
is a collective rather an individual phenomena. As described by participant-i8 interviewed for this 
research and echoed, leadership is about managing, organizing, coordinating, controlling 
communicating and providing guidance to achieving the desired goals (i8, L3488, p100). Where 
there is a leader there are followers and vice versa. This research is about the predominant 
leadership styles in organizations in Rwanda and as seen in chapter 3, there are other leadership 
styles which were identified by participants. It is these other leadership styles that I focus on in 
the next three sections. 
4.2.4 Hybrid Leadership style 
Of the six leadership styles identified by Project GLOBE, a cross-cultural research initiative, hybrid 
or value-based (CVB) leadership considered as universally endorsed across cultures. GLOBE 
researchers described hybrid leaders as those who articulate and emphasize end-values such as 
dignity, peace, order and freedom" (House, 2004). Conceptually similar to transformational 
leadership, hybrid leadership combines the strengths of other styles to be able to effective to 
different cultures. It also encompasses performance-orientation, willingness to sacrifice self-
interest and being able to adapt to different cultures. Webster's describes a hybrid as a person 
whose background is a blend of two diverse cultures or traditions. In the context of leadership, a 
hybrid could be described as a style that has two or more different styles or components 
performing essentially the same function. 
Along with Team-oriented, participative and humane-oriented style, hybrid was identified by 
GLOBE researchers to be one of the six culturally endorsed leadership theory dimensions, or 
CLTs. (pp. 61- 65). GLOBE researchers argued that hybrid leadership style reflects the ability to 
inspire, to motivate, and to excite high performance outcomes from others on the basis of firmly 
held core values.   Newly defined (in Project GLOBE) leadership dimension not previously 
appeared in the literature, hybrid was an issue that surfaced frequently in discussion with 
participants interviewed for this research. Extracts from interview texts shows reiterated today's 
workforce is more response to a leadership style that is dynamic or adaptable, flexibility, more 
gender aware, collaborative and more practical versus self-centered, status conscious, conflict-
inducer, face-saver, and procedural or authoritarian. This is despite the fact that Rwandan 
managers exhibit tendencies of authoritative and hierarchical behaviors especially in public 
sector.  
..the management style in Rwanda I can say it doesnt favor low class people, where the head 
is the determinant no arguing about his/her view (i2, L832-3, p24). There are some people 
who still apply the bureaucracy but the number is very few (i2, L836-7, p24). 
Looking at these responses, we infer from this that they (interviewees) recognize that the 
bureaucratic/authoritarian style is still prevalent in Rwanda, but he would prefer a more 
consultative style. 
In the business world, the leadership styles are different because of the competition from 
outsiders than ever before in Rwanda's commerce industry. As stressed by a number of 
researchers referred to in the literature review and emphasized by a number of participants 
interviewed for this research, the world of business needs a hybrid leader. They specifically 
pointed out the change in science and technology of the past 30 years has influenced the world 
of business. Indeed, 20th century technology has completely and irreversibly changed workplace 
and every aspect of business in so many ways including the way people interact, decision making 
processes, advertising and customer relations and labour laws. According to Bateman and 
Zeithaml, today, businesses are bombarded by incredibly high rates of change from a frustratingly 
large number of sources.internal pressures come from top managers and lower-level employees 
who push for change. Outside pressures come from changes in the legal, competitive, 
technological, and economic environments. 
This view is supported by participant-i3 who asserts that "values are changing time after time 
because as we move into a world of technology and everything so they are trying to adapt some 
good values" (i3, L1208, p36). This view is echoed by several participants interviewed for this 
research, who were asked their thoughts on the common leadership styles in Rwanda today. 
Innocent (i2), a middle manager working with a commercial bank observed that: 
traditional way of doing things to a little bit of scientific way of doing things (i1, L222, 
which concerned much the limitations of a lady in the real life (i2, L899, p26); 
Margaret (not her real name) a female senior manager with Rwanda Development Organisation, 
a local non-government organisation in Kigali described her leadership style. 
... am kind of liberal... I agree with my staff on things that have to be done and then 
ensuring every staff member understands his/her obligations and all the support they 
need from me or from anyone who ever, and I expect to get good results as per the 
set targets (i5, L1906-8, p56); 
Margaret clearly combines team-oriented, participative, and humane and aspects of authoritative 
leadership rooted in high power culture. The same reason is given by Robert, a division manager 
working with the Rwanda Development Board who believes Rwanda's quick recovery from the 
genocide was driven by Rwandaliens. 
from people in managerial positions being exposed to the outside world (i6, l2672-3, 
to our culture much as we maintained the way some of the issues or some of the ways 
we have been doing things discarded (i6, l3068-9, p89). 
Another participant who shares the same leadership style as Margaret is Joyce, a middle manager 
with the Ministry of Justice. Joyce was unapologetic in her critic of what she thinks is authoritarian 
style and justified her preference for hybrid style on the basis of maturity.  
... Im a grown person so I know that I have to come to office to work I know Im 
expected to leave here on time basically I know there some tasks that I have to 
undertake (i9, L3816-7, p111); ... I dont think thats a good style of leadership where 
you spend most of the time following up on what all your staff are doing in terms of 
their movements so that they are seated in the office because being seated in the 
office doesnt mean that theyre actually doing the job (i9, L3820-2, p111); 
... my approach to work, well for me here its a very technical thing its about receiving 
your files and giving to the people that belong in the people youre supervising in other 
words to carry out their tasks so for me its a technical thing (i9, L3788-9, p110). 
We wont know the extent to which hybrid leadership is endorsed across the Rwandigenous and 
Rwandalien spectrum  but preliminary findings showed that all the clusters of leaders had the 
highest preference for hybrid leadership. 
I was privileged to have started work at a time when the country was reforming (i1, 
world of technology and everything so they are trying to adapt some good values (i3, 
L1207-8, p36); We borrowed some of the forms or some of the culture that we feel is 
necessary to our culture much as we maintained the way some of the issues or some of 
the ways we have been doing things discarded (i7, l3068-9, p89); 
Rwandan managers are flexible (i2, L848, p25); - a shift from traditional way of doing 
things to a little bit of scientific way of doing things (i1, L222, P7); we now have the 
political of gender... before there were even some proverbs which concerned much the 
what we were able to achieve comes from outside  from people in managerial 
positions being exposed to the outside world (i6, l2672-3, p77); - a very good manager, 
you need to be a person who is able to blend both (i1, L84, P4); 
It is worth noting that in the context of Rwanda hybrid culture and leadership styles resulted from 
a history of violence characterized by mass movement of people and which also resulted in long 
exile. Hundreds of thousands of Rwandans fled and sought refuge in neighboring countries; 
others were born and lived in countries of refuge for so long to acquire host country culture. 
4.2.5 Self-protective (and group-protective) style 
Self-protective leadership (SPL), is the sixth of the six leadership styles described by Project GLOBE 
- an interdisciplinary study of the leadership style variations across cultures - as leadership 
dimension focuses on ensuring the safety and security of the individual or group member.  It 
encompasses being status-conscious, self-centered, conflict-inducing, procedural and face-saving 
(House, 2004). 
An alternative explanation is that self-protective leadership "is composed of items that reflect 
being status- and class-conscious, ritualistic, procedural, normative, secretive, evasive, indirect, 
self-centered, and asocial."  According to GLOBE, in some societies, leaders may need to "protect 
themselves from acts of criticism and corruption," may want to insure "that they are not made 
into scapegoats for political ends," and may wish to "respond to humane considerations" [p. 555]. 
Consistent with this view, this research showed leaders' behaviors such as taking moderate, 
carefully calculated risks, emphasis on procedures to take decision, status-conscious, and 'face-
saving which are characteristic of self-protective leadership Style. Although negatively rated 
across all participants interviewed for this research, self-protective was identified as one of the 
predominant leadership styles. In this research, respondents frequently mentioned the negative 
impact on the business and organisation that resulted in non-decisive leaders which they perceive 
as lack of confidence on the part of senior managers. What was rather revealing was the fact that 
this perception cuts across the board - middle managers believed that it was the responsibility of 
the more senior managers to make big decisions concerning their departments. This view is 
stressed by a head of department (a Director) of in the Rwanda Development Bank, who pointed 
out that: 
...big decision here such as recruitment and tenders are taken by the senior 
management meeting which is to brings together senior directors. No single director 
can take decision on matters concerning the company alone even if it belongs to his/her 
department. 
Probed further to elaborate which decisions were taken by the senior management as a team, 
which ones were taken by the individual director and which one (if any) were taken by lower level 
managers such as middle managers. The director said: 
individuals members of the management team. To protect yourself, you avoid 
making decisions because of the consequences. 
The above view shows that decision making was considered taking a risk that might backfire 
hence leaders were either hesitant or taking moderate, carefully calculated risks by following the 
rules and procedures. This style of leadership was regarded as ineffective by participants 
interviewed for this research. In Rwanda many leaders have been arrested, prosecuted and 
sentenced to long term jail terms. As a result of the government's anti-corruption policy, leaders 
emphasize following procedures to take decision to safe their face. 
4.3 Factors Influencing Leadership style 
Leadership has been explained as the ability of an individual to motivate and to influence others 
to work hard in order to realize and support organizational goals (Schermerhorn, 1999; Hersey et 
al. 2001; Robbins, 2001). Bass (1990) defined leadership as a process of interaction among 
individuals and groups that includes a structured or restructured situation, members 
expectations and perceptions. Leadership style is defined as the pattern of interactions between 
leaders and subordinates (Miller et al., 2002), while Hersey and Blanchard (1993) view leadership 
style as the pattern of behaviors that leaders display during their work with and through others. 
From these discussions it is possible to conclude leadership plays an important role in leading a 
group and influencing that group to achieve its goals. Leadership style has been a fundamental 
concern of researchers (Wood, 1994) due to its effect on organisational effectiveness and 
productivity when their managers adopt a specific leadership style (Mullins, 1998). Research has 
shown that different leadership styles are adopted to motivate employees and to promote 
innovations. Whereas some researchers believe leaders are distinctive from their followers, and 
can influence individuals activities to achieve goals set in their organizations, according to 
Kavanaugh and Ninemeier (2001), leadership style is influenced by; leaders behavior, 
subordinates characteristics and the organisation environment. Kavanaugh and Ninemeier 
(2001) further explains that the personal background of leaders such as personality, knowledge, 
values, and experiences shapes their feelings about leadership and hence influences their 
leadership style. Through their education, training, and experience, managers develop their 
personal leadership style (Hersey et al., 2001). Equally, he argues that employees also have 
different personalities, backgrounds and experiences which shape their expectations, for 
example, employees who are more knowledgeable and experienced expect to be consulted on 
decisions that affect them, while unskilled employees with little experiences may require a close 
supervision and guidance. Also factors in the organisation environment such as type of work or 
task at hand, urgency of the task, time, organizational culture and composition of work group can 
also influence the style leadership. For example, hospitality industry requires a being there style 
of leadership to be able to intervene and control operations and interactions between client and 
members at all levels in the organisation. Leaders can also adapt their leadership style to the 
economic, technological, social, political/legal and cultural context (Wood, 1994). 
Figure 9: Leader - Followers' relationship 
Mandy (2009) suggests that the styles of leadership a leader is able to exercise will not be 
influenced by leader/follower relationships in isolation but the organizational environment, task 
in hand and the nature and urgency of time in which the task to be disseminated by the leader to 
the followers. 
4.3.1 Formal training/Education 
The term leadership means different things to different people and different styles of leadership 
exist in work environments that the concept has acquired arrange of definitions. As Stogdill (1974) 
noted there are as many different definitions of leadership as there are persons who have 
attempted to define the concept (p. 7). Much of the diversity might actually be driven by the 
different styles of leadership exist in work environments. For example, Yukl (2010) has defined 
leadership as the act of influencing followers or subordinates to accomplish organizational goals 
through authority. While not intending to further turbid the already muddy waters, I ask what 
factors drive the leader to influence others. In this section of the analysis chapter, I focus on how 
formal education influences the leadership style of leaders in organizations in Rwanda. According 
to Nsubuga (2009) and Van Vugt (2006), through formal education the leader learns to adjust to 
his or her followers and this brings about a change in his or her leadership style. This view is 
supported by Katozai (2005) who argued that "knowledge is a chief weapon that makes a leader 
effective and therefore a leader should be educated". In this research, participants frequently 
mentioned 'education as a factor that influenced their leadership styles. Asked to explain how 
education has influenced their leadership styles, below were their responses: 
...therere so many taught approaches to management which you can use to resolve 
the issue and understand it more. With the background you had in the education, you 
contributed much to me and to my managerial style - developed some confidence in 
journey or current life (i6, l2612, p75).  
Gakuba, a middle manager the development bank of Rwanda explains that: 
through education you learn how issues are being solved, and how decision making 
steps should be undertaken.  
This view correlates with George (2004) who suggests that leader follows a set of regulations that 
form his or her unique leadership style that reflects leaders personality and character. In a study 
of the influence of education and work-experience on the leadership styles in Chittoor sugar 
factory in South India, Bhargava et al., (2014) concluded that significant variance in the leadership 
styles existed between leaders, with the most educated favoring democratic style. The more 
educated leaders differ in leadership styles from the less educated. With increasing educational 
qualifications the employees exhibit more of the democratic leadership tendencies and those 
who are less educated are inclined towards the autocratic leadership style. The study also 
indicated that with increasing educational qualifications there is a transition from one leadership 
style to the other styles. This view is echoed by Calixte, a Human resource manager who explained 
that: 
different people (i8, l3567, p104); .it is because of education that with people the 
way I do. At professional level most people are educated and things are slightly better 
organized but in family matters there are no rules to follow (i13, l4666, p137). 
This is also premised on the fact that the business schools' claims that educated people will 
become more knowledgeable, understanding, broad minded, more adjusting to the environment 
and less brutal. This claim states that due to the increase in education, the employees will 
naturally become more capable of understanding their fellow men. 
4.3.2 Informal education/family upbringing 
This section examines the emerging views and expressions of interviewees that suggest that their 
leadership style was influenced by informal education. Informal education is a general term for 
the learning that goes on in daily life outside of a standard school setting, at home, in after-school 
programmes, community-based organizations, museums, and libraries (Ololube & Egbezor, 
2012). According to Ololube & Egbezor, informal education is for example when parents and other 
caregivers, show children how to prepare family food or tie their shoe laces or friends encourage 
each other to talk about things that have happened in their lives through which they learn how 
to process their feelings and arrive at appropriate actions and reactions (p.3). Although informal 
education does not necessarily correspond to an organized, preconceived curriculum and 
systematic view of education differ from formal education in terms of structure, didactics and 
content, it is capable of maintaining a close relationship with and consists of the norms and values 
acquired from the school environment, such as doing what you are told and acceptance of a 
hierarchy. Sociologists often refer to informal education as social environment or the hidden 
curriculum (Hafferty, 1994). The hidden curriculum refers to the unwritten, unofficial, and often 
unintended lessons, values, and perspectives that students or children learn out-of-school, in the 
social environment. Informal education was the form of learning in Africa, and indeed in Rwanda 
before the coming of the European or formal education system (Scanlon, 1964:3). This process of 
education was and still is intimately integrated with the social, cultural, artistic, religious, and 
recreational life of the ethnic groups, and the learning of skills, social and cultural values and 
norms are not separated from other spheres of life (Marah, 2006). Marah (2006:1), states that 
education of the African child started at birth and continued into adulthood and it fitted the 
group and the expected social roles in society were learned by adulthood. For instance, girls were 
socialized to effectively learn the roles of motherhood, wife, and other sex-appropriate skills. Boys 
were socialized to be hunters, herders, agriculturalists and/or blacksmiths, etc.., depending on 
how the particular ethnic group, clan or family derived its livelihood"(p.1). 
In the Rwandan context, informal education was, and is acquired through family upbringing 
(uburere), nurturing family life, parents and workplace role models, on the job training to keep 
communities cohesively by rules and regulations, values and social sanctions, approvals, rewards 
and punishments, into which he was inducted. This narrative is supported by Scanlon (1964:3 
cited in Marah, 2006) who states that the education of the African before the coming of the 
European was an education that prepared him for his responsibilities as an adult in his home, his 
village and his tribe (p.3). This view resonates with Gatabazi (pseudo name)'s description of what 
he believes influenced his/her leadership style. S/he said: 
the work place (i2, l793-5, P23); 
Informal education or social environment was considered essential for the latent value 
orientation of the individual. Values which are sometimes context-based and hardly ever changes, 
as it often accompanies the individual throughout ones life influence attitudes and in their turn, 
attitudes are displayed through behaviors. Evidence from this research suggests that, among the 
factors that influence leadership style one is the congruence in terms of values of the leader and 
those of the group members and the current section seeks to discuss this issue. According to 
Rosca & Stanescu (2014), values provide valuable insights when included in research related to 
areas that have a highly social component, such as leadership. Like friends or parents, these 
workers may respond to what is going on, but as professionals they are able to illicit special 
insights and ways of working (Jeffs & Smith, 2005). Similarly, the view of Mugabo, a middle 
manager working for an international organisation emphasize indeed that the values of the leader 
acquired through informal education has an influence of leadership style. 
style that dominates but also for business especially we acquire knowledge from experience 
(i8, l3575, p104). 
A leadership style come from and always goes back to the core needs, desires, aspirations and 
values of the followers. James McGregor Burns (1978), who is considered one of the foremost 
leadership style theorists and the father of the transformational leadership, points out that: 
leadership that can produce social change which will satisfy the genuine needs of the followers 
(p.4). This perspective was evident in the views of participants interviewed for this research who 
frequently stressed that their leadership style was inherent personality structure. 
... I have a bit of a Rwandese style that dominates but also for business especially we acquire 
carrying out my duties is inherent in my personality structure. I personally wouldn't wish to 
implement any decision blindly, so I strive to do the same to my subordinates (i13, l4649, 
culture (i15, l4755, p139). 
From the literature review and the above extracts from participants interview texts, this research 
claims, in line with Marsick & Watkins (2001) that, leadership style is a by-product of other factors 
that occur implicitly (Eraut, 2007) including informal education. Informal education systems in 
Africawere and are still highly regarded as effective and quite adequate in meeting the 
requirements of the society (Ociti, 1973:105). In Rwanda, for example, children education is 
largely in the hands of the biological mother, and the community assumes the greater role as 
adolescence approaches and is trained to know, internalize and practice roles appropriate to sex 
and age so as to avoid affairs scorned by the community. 
place (i2, l793-5, P23). 
And like any other system of education, it has its objectives, scope and methods which clearly 
reflect the ways of life or cultural patterns (Ociti, 1973:105). Informal education comprising of 
myths, legends, folksongs and folktales, proverbs, dances, etc. Boateng claims that the essential 
goal of traditional education is still admirable and remains challenging (p. 336). 
4.3.3 Professional experience 
Leadership means different things to different people (Bertocci, 2009:21; Klenke, 2006:6). And no 
wonder it [leadership] has been defined in many ways, and different people provide a different 
emphasis for what influences leadership styles, including traits, behavior, education and 
experience. However, the most consistent element noted is that "leadership is the process of 
influencing people, willingly towards the achievement of objects (Adeyemi and Bolarinwa, 2013), 
to accomplish shared objectives (Yukl, 2006:8; Northouse, 2010:3) effectively and efficiently 
(Sergiovani, 1984:106)".  Having defined leadership as the process of influencing people, it 
involves convincing other people of the importance of the goal, and encouraging people to direct 
their efforts towards and motivating them to work together to achieve it.  These definitions of 
leadership suggests a several phenomenon (a) leadership happens within the context of a group, 
(b) leadership involves attainment of goals, (c) it implies that goals are shared, (d) it requires 
acceptance on the part of followers, and (e) in some situations require the possession of 
specialized knowledge that may be held by experienced individuals. 
For example, when Christine and James (both not their real names), both middle managers 
working with government and commercial bank respectively, were asked what shaped or 
influenced their leadership styles, they said: 
materials and so on depends on the leadership skills you have acquired, especially the practice 
they can do so as to get good results (i2, l817, P24); 
... the leadership skills I have acquired, and  the management skills and more especially when 
ideas, you have to make those people with different views be as one. ... You have more people 
to manage from different cultures but you also have processes and procedures that you need 
to be aware of, that you need to be able to develop within that particular environment (i6, 
l2448-9, p71); 
This perspective is supported by Kotur & Anbazhagan (2014) who believes that work experience 
educates an individual to certain degree hence it [work experience] is one of the factors that 
affect leadership behavior. A leader follows a set of regulations that form his or her unique 
leadership style that reflects leaders personality and character (George, 2004 cited in Kotur & 
Anbazhagan, 2014) but the leader gains more work experiences, s/he switches from one 
leadership style to another or might use a combination of styles. Professional or work-experience 
as factor influencing leadership style has also been emphasized by Kearney (2008 also cited in 
Kotur & Anbazhagan, 2014), who suggests that the team or followers may be more accepting of 
an older leader because of the leaders experience (p.2). In Africa (and indeed in Rwanda), 
experience is considered a key criteria for leadership in many organizations because of the belief 
that people get wise due to more exposure and experience. A view echoed by a number of 
participants interviewed for this research including Tony (pseudo name), a middle manager 
working with the Rwanda Development board who said: 
you dont trust any of the subordinates. I think as experience comes in the job, thats when you 
start feeling that perhaps, you need to develop confidence in subordinates (i6, l2468-71, p72). 
As discussed in literature review in chapter two, leadership styles differ from culture to culture 
and country to country depending upon life patterns, beliefs and value system or otherwise on 
the knowledge and experience of the people (see Trompenaars, 1993). Professional experience 
is echoed by Gronn (1986) who states that leadership style is rooted in the condition of workplace 
and less dependent upon personality attributes or in other words on experience. This view was 
frequently echoed by a number of participants interviewed for this research who, when asked 
what influenced their leadership styles, they stated that experience and exposure were key 
influencing factors: 
... Personally, there are two things. I think one is the experience in working with these public 
comes from parents or other members of the family. Personally, I tend to believe that because 
factor that influenced the way I work (i14, l4707, p138);... my professional background 
because of education and work experience (i16, l4830, p142). 
The above variant view notwithstanding, the majority of participants interviewed for this research 
were in agreement with what is indicated in the literature and previous research (see chapter 3). 
Most of participants regard professional experience as a key factor influencing leadership styles 
in Rwanda. As seen in chapter 3, work experience is not the only factor responsible for leadership 
styles. There are various internal and external factors that may affect the leadership style that the 
leader is able to exercise. People at different level of responsibility in any organization, from 
administrators to directors, face different types of decisions which come with their specific 
requirements and timescales. These will certainly influence the most appropriate leadership style 
for a particular piece of work based on the nature and urgency of the task, the capacities of 
individuals involved, and technological resources available and time. The fact that work 
experience was emphasized by participants connotes entrenched age bias or preconceived notion 
about experience in the Rwandan society. In many African cultures, there is a myth that people 
get wiser due to more exposure and experience. For example in Rwandan culture, experience is 
considered as a priority for leadership positions. 
4.3.4 Organizational policies and laws 
Hersey and Blanchard (1982) define leadership style in terms of the perceived consistent pattern 
of behaviors that leaders use when they work with and through people. According to Tuuli and 
Rowlinson (2010), leadership provides a direct channel through which individuals interpret 
organizational policies and practices. Leaders create, and rely on, policies and procedures which 
are followed by the employees [including the leader] to drive execution, strategy, objectives and 
outcomes. According to Butler (2000) a policy is a predetermined course of action, which is 
established to provide a guide toward accepted business strategies and objectives (p.321). He 
[Butker] explains that in most organizations, the policy document will provide the general 
guidelines for procedures and work instruction.  Procedures on the other hand are methods by 
which policies can be accomplished; it provides the framework necessary to carry out policy 
statement (Butler, 2002. p.2). Policy is a course of action or guidelines to be followed whereas a 
procedure is the nitty gritty of the policy, outlining what has to be done to implement the policy. 
In other words, policies and procedure are a direct link between an organizations objective and 
goals (vision) and their day-to-day operations. Policies identify the key activities and provide a 
general strategy to decision-makers on how to handle issues as they arise. In essence, policies 
and procedure influence the leadership style. According to Biech (2008) this is accomplished by 
providing the leader with limits and a choice of alternatives that can be used to guide their 
decision making process as they attempt to overcome problems (p.461). This view was echoed by 
Gatare, a middle manager working with a commercial bank in Kigali when asked what he believes 
has influenced his leadership style. He said: 
I would say, three factors have influenced my leadership style. First, I would call it 
organizational policy which expects managers to behave in a certain ways and getting out of 
step with peers may not be appreciated. Secondly, I try to adopt a style of management in a 
manner that is compatible with the local culture. You know the people you manage also expect 
you to behave according to the culture. Last but of course not least is the professional ethics 
which we learn in college (i15, l4752-7, p138); 
Policies and procedures take on other names such as organizational culture which Ravasi and 
Schultz (2006) define a set of shared assumptions that guide what happens in organizations by 
defining appropriate behavior for various situations. 
According to Hofstede (1980), culture [organizational] is the collective thinking of minds which 
create a difference between the members of one group from another; it differentiates the firm 
from other one (Forehand and von Gilmer, 1964). What Hofstede's definition helps us to 
understand is the fact that different organizations have different policies which the leaders are 
expected to adhere to and enforce across the organisation. This will implicitly or explicitly 
influence how the leaders conduct themselves (leader behavior) and the business hence their 
leadership styles. Also Schein (1990), defines organizational culture as a set of different values 
and behaviors that guide to success. In simple terms we can understand the influence of 
organizational policies and procedures [organizational culture] as in total sum of gained 
knowledge, behaviors, communication, beliefs, and values that guide a group of people, at the 
same time and same place. Based on this premise, Tannenbaum and Schmidt (1973) depicts 
leadership style as existing on a continuum; from a democratic or subordinate centred style to an 
authoritarian or leader centred style. This is because organizational culture represents the 
collective values, beliefs and principles of organizational leaders and is a product of such factors 
as history, product, market, technology, and strategy, type of employees, management style, and 
national culture (Needle, 2004). In the context of Rwanda, participants interviewed for this 
research frequently emphasized that policies and procedures of their organization help to guide 
them how to think and make decisions. They also suggested there are different level of policies 
and procedures based on the multifaceted set of beliefs, values and assumptions that determine 
ways to organizations to conduct its business. In his response to a question about devolution of 
power in the organisation, Tony (not real name), a senior manager with the Rwanda Development 
Agency said: 
talking about delegation of powers if I understood you correctly. In taking up the Director 
position, I didnt have managers to manage. Maybe the structure of the institution is different. 
When I was a manager, I had people under me in specific projects. When I became a Director, 
I only had staff under my direct supervision. I didnt have people in the middle to manage staff. 
I had about five or six people that were all officer. It was more of change of job title but the 
role remained the same because the role was called manager because it was managing a 
particular project which was not within the structure of the institution itself (i6, l2456, p71). 
This means that different policies and procedures exist at different levels of the organisation 
based on the multifaceted set of assumptions to guide ways the organizations conduct its 
business. Based on this premise, it justifies why different leadership styles exist on a continuum; 
from a democratic or subordinate center style to an authoritarian or leader-center style. 
According to Tichy (1982), organizational culture is known as normative glue means to hold the 
overall organization together. The concept of organizational culture also makes available a base 
for determination the differentiation that may survive in-between the organizations that are 
doing business in the same national culture (Schein, 1990). 
4.4 Culture themes/dimensions 
Culture is a difficult term to define let alone to measure its influence on human behavior. For 
Avruch (1998), much of the difficulty of understanding of culture stems from the different usages 
of the term p.6) in the nineteenth century. ... the set of attitudes, values, beliefs, and behaviors 
shared by a group of people, but different for each individual, communicated from one 
generation to the next (Matsumoto 1996 cited in Spencer-Oatey, H. 2012. According to Spencer-
Oatey (2008 cited in Spencer-Oatey, 2012), Culture is a set of basic assumptions and values, 
orientations to life, beliefs, policies, procedures and behavioral conventions that are shared by a 
group of people, and that influence each members behavior and his/her interpretations of the 
meaning of other peoples behavior; it is a way of thinking, behaving, or working that exists in 
a society or organization (such as a business). In other words culture is a system of knowledge 
shared by a relatively large group of people fostered by social patterns unique to that group. Thus, 
a particular society has its own values, ways of life, and belief system. As Hofstede (1994) has 
defined 'Culture as the collective programming of the mind which distinguishes the members of 
one group or category of people from another (p.5). Although the borderline between cultures 
might be difficult to draw, Storey (2006) argues that 'it exists'. Hofstede (1991:8) makes the 
important point that although certain aspects of culture are physically visible, their meaning is 
invisible, thus hard to measure: their cultural meaning ... lies precisely and only in the way these 
practices are interpreted by the insiders. For example, a gesture such as the upward 
headshaking may be interpreted as conveying agreement, approval or acceptance in the many 
African cultures, it conveys disapproval or refusal gesture in several Asian countries such as India. 
It is, of course, difficult to draw a clear borderline between cultures; it is difficult to say what 
elements belong in one culture and not in the other stressing that country or society is not entirely 
one or the other. However, as Marcus (2006) suggests it is possible to measure an unobservable 
variable or construct by means of aggregating scores on several observable variables into an 
overall score. A variable can be operationalized either by single-or composite-measure 
techniques. A single-measure technique means the use of one indicator to measure the domain 
of a concept; the composite-measure technique means the use of several indicators to construct 
an index for the concept after the domain of the concept has been empirically sampled. Hofstede 
(1997) has devised a composite-measure technique to measure cultural differences among 
different societies: (1) Power distance index measures the degree of inequality that exists in a 
society; (2) Uncertainty avoidance index measures the extent to which a society feels threatened 
by uncertain or ambiguous situations; (3) Individualism index measures the extent to which 
members of a society are supposed to or take care of themselves and their immediate families 
only; (4) Collectivism index which is the other end of the spectrum of individualism measures the 
extent to which members of the society expect their in-groups (relatives, clans, organizations) to 
look after them in exchange for absolute loyalty; (5) Masculinity (Achievement vs. Relationship) 
index measures the extent to which the dominant values are assertiveness, money and things 
(achievement), not caring for others or for quality of life; and (6) Femininity (relationship) index - 
other end of the spectrum - measures attributes, behaviors, and roles generally associated with 
girls and women. In this section, views and expressions emerging out of interviewees are 
categorized into cultural dimensions and analyzed in the context of Rwanda. 
4.4.1 Collectivism /in-group collectivism 
Hofstede (2001) has defined collectivism as a society in which people from birth onwards are 
integrated into strong, cohesive in-groups, which throughout people's lifetime continue to 
protect them in exchange for unquestioning loyalty' (p. 225). According to Triandis (2001) 
Collectivism can be divided into horizontal collectivism and vertical collectivism. And Analyses 
conducted by the GLOBE researchers revealed that the dimension of collectivism should be 
divided into two sub-dimensions: Institutional collectivism which is defined as "the degree to 
which organizational laws, social programs or institutional practices are designed to encourage 
collectivist behavior. This sub-dimension (Institutional COLL) did not feature and will not be 
discussed in this thesis. Project GLOBEs other collectivism sub-dimension (In-Group Collectivism 
(IngC), also known as Family Collectivism, reflects the degree to which individuals take pride in 
and are loyal to their families" or group, even if this undermines the pursuit of individual goals. 
House et al, (2004) defined In-group collectivism is "the degree to which individuals express pride, 
loyalty, and cohesiveness in their organizations or families" (p. 30). The findings about "in-group 
collectivism" are important because this cultural dimension emerges as a strong predictor of the 
two most widely admired characteristics of successful leaders. Some of the characteristics of 
societies that have high and low in-group collectivism (based on House et al, 2004) are shown in 
Table1 below: 
HIGH IN-GROUP COLLECTIVISM societies 
have characteristics such as... 
LOW IN-GROUP COLLECTIVISM societies 
have characteristics such as... 
 Duties and obligations are important 
determinants of social behavior. 
 A strong distinction is made between 
in-groups and out-groups. 
 People emphasize relatedness with 
groups.  
 The pace of life is slower. 
 Love is assigned little weight in 
marriage 
 Personal needs and attitudes are 
important determinants of social 
behavior.  
 Little distinction is made between in-
groups and out-groups. 
 People emphasize rationality in 
behavior.  
 The pace of life is faster. 
 Love is assigned great weight in 
marriage 
Table 18: High in-group collectivism vs. low in-group collectivism 
Consistent with characteristics of societies that have high and low in-group collectivism, my 
research in Rwanda also shows that in-group collectivism characteristics were predominant 
among middle managers interviewed for this research. In this research, participants frequently 
expressed views that characterized Rwandan people [and culture] as proud, loyal, and cohesive 
in their organizations or families [in-group collectivism]. Among the Participants, Gatare (pseudo 
name) the Head of human resource of a Kigali based commercial bank described the Rwandan 
people as: 
Rwandese people always want to have the values where they support their ideas in front other 
people, where they are confident about being called Rwandese, where they cant abuse their 
themselves and to take some decisions they consult each other (i2, l851-67, P25); 
Gatera's view explains how people emphasize relatedness within in-groups, and one sees oneself 
as part of a larger self, or group. It is this in-group rather than the self, that is the root and center 
of ones thinking, and the welfare of the in-group frequently takes precedence over ones own. 
In Rwandan society group members are obligated to and interdependent with each other. In this 
way, group memberships and the relationships extend to professional life. Phillip another middle 
manager working with an International NGO for example, explains how he benefitted from group 
memberships and the relationships in quest for a new job. When asked how he got the job, Philip 
said: 
. a friend introduced me to the Minister who gave me a small note that I took to the Director of 
cabinet. The Director immediately issued me with an appointment letter and I started the job (i4, 
l1353-6, p40). ... your boss is more than your boss because he/she is going to look at how well 
you conduct your work in the office and he will also go beyond that and also follow up on your 
reputation outside the office (i9, l3898, p113); 
Another aspect of an in-group collectivistic perspective, individuals feel can only be understood 
within the context of the groups they belong to. Comparing the cultures of the Rwandan born 
and non-Rwandan born Rwandans, Kevin, a middle manager working with a local NGO explains 
her experience when she returned to Rwandans after living in Tanzania for a long time: 
The difference was because in Tanzania we used to live a socialized life, we loved each other even 
if you could meet a new person who was not a Rwandese you could talk and become friends so 
we used to be friendly in Tanzania with a lot of care about friends and any one you would meet 
on the way. And what I found here was like I dont know if I can call it selfishness but people were 
not open to each other at all I even once thought that I cant cope up with a person who were born 
in Rwanda (i3, l1008, p30). 
Other participants interviewed for this research also described the Rwandan culture as more 
collectivist.  
... you always find them together, they help the society they live in and they like co-operating 
and helping each other (i3, l1083, p30); ... They are not individualistic (i3, l1089, p30); ... How 
I interact with them depends on how long I have spent (known) with a certain person. In the 
beginning, I am reluctant to comfortably talk to people in power (i6, l2761, p80); ... In families 
we try to appear somehow respectful. I think the values are divided between family and 
community (i8, l3468, p101); .. Your personal life affects your professional life because they 
are actually merged. Yeah its a culture thing (i9, l3903, p113); 
The significance of collectivism has been asserted by many participants. Alex, another middle 
manager working with the multinational telecom company and himself was born, and lived 
outside Rwanda for a long time who described the Rwandan culture and people as Collectivist: 
... My understanding is that appreciation, tolerance, and protection for the welfare of all people 
(i14, l46, p113). .. Personal interests are not seen as different from those of the group (i15, l4764, 
p140). ...some of the important values include independence of thought and action, good 
relationships with those whom one is in frequent personal contact, respect for all people (i16, 
l4825, p141). ...instance you find that personal interests are advanced as those of the 
community (i16, l4838, p142). 
The above views as expressed by the majority of respondents notwithstanding contextual 
difference are in agreement with what the literature and previous research indicate (see chapter 
3). Most participants strongly regard the Rwandan culture as collectivism. The fact that both the 
Rwandan-born and those born outside like sharing ideas among themselves itself reflects deeply 
held and practiced collectivism values passed from generation to generation. 
4.4.2 Performance Orientation / High context 
Another concept that will help us pull together a lot of the cultural material and information 
collected from interview participants is called "context". Hall (1976), defined context as the array 
of stimuli surrounding a communication event (cited in Herkenhoff, 2000) including: body 
gestures; tone of voice; physical distance between interlocutors; time of day; societal norms; 
geographic place of communication; and other external factors. According to research, cultures 
can be placed on high-low context scale. The essential difference between the two is the 
importance that each culture places on the context versus the actual message itself. According 
Hall, high-context cultures assign primary importance to the stimuli surrounding a message and 
secondary importance to the message itself; place greater emphasis on indirect communication, 
nonverbal communication, and contextual cues.  
Low-context cultures are logical, linear, individualistic, and action-oriented. People from low-
context cultures mostly North America and much of Western Europe, value logic, facts, and 
directness. Solving a problem means lining up the facts and evaluating one after 
another. Decisions are based on fact rather than intuition. Discussions end with actions. And 
communicators are expected to be straightforward, concise, and efficient in telling what action is 
expected. To be absolutely clear, they strive to use precise words and intend them to be taken 
literally. Explicit contracts conclude negotiations. This is very different from communicators in 
high-context cultures who depend less on language precision and legal documents. High-context 
business people (including sub-Saharan Africa) may even distrust contracts and be offended by 
the lack of trust they suggest. The high-low context provides us a broad framework for looking at 
culture. 
Even though high-context cultures place greater emphasis on well-defined roles and formality, 
their members also value a personal approach to communication. For example, Alex, a middle 
manager who has worked with government for a long time describes a leader as some who 
connects with his/her subordinates. He states that: 
Leadership is an art in a sense that people who have never gone to school can create their 
leadership styles; its an art in the sense that each individual is endowed with personal skills of 
managing especially human resources, managing other material resources, technology, finances. 
You find that one creates his/her own style as a person. Good managers wine and dine with 
what we call the support staff (i1, l126, p5). 
The view that high-context cultures place greater emphasis on indirect communication, 
nonverbal communication, and contextual cues is echoed by participants interviewed for this 
research. Asked what communication style were common in their organisation, below are some 
of the description of commutation styles. 
mails and if theres a need to emphasize on, I walk in to that general room and have a chart 
with them (i5, l1977, P58); ...yes, we use memos and emails. Those are ways we share 
information. We also have what we call strategic issue memos (i6, l2587, p75). 
Ironically the words of Christine, a middle manager working with the department of justice, 
describe her communication style in a manner that suggests a culture that assigns primary 
importance to the message itself than the stimuli surrounding a message. 
the way that has worked for me is that when is received a file, before I can actually hand it over 
to the person below me I have to go through it, understand it just a quick peruse then give it to 
the person and give them the task so show them what Im expected to them so after when theyre 
done they it back to me and I have to go through it again to ensure that I understand their point 
of view and if they have actually done what I told them to do and in the case that they didnt fulfill 
the task I seat with them and tell them exactly what is expected from the file. This is echoed by 
Tony, another middle manager working with the development agency. He says that: 
When giving those instructions... you send by memo and then have office administrators, 
but if its a file that I notice first of all sensitive or complicated in any way I personally take it 
to them (i9, l3809-10, p1114). 
When Participants were asked to describe how they (as Rwandans) relate to each other, how they 
communicate with each other and a common thread that cuts across these typical indirect 
responses suggest that communication (verbal message) is indirect; they talk around the point. 
... even at the retreat of senior management team, people don't express their opinions in 
public and instead confiding their opinions only with one person thats what happens most of 
the time (i6, l26776, p80). Otherwise you will take months to meet your boss or even fail to 
get him/talk to your boss (i1, l408, P12). 
With the above views about communication styles as expressed by participants, it can be argued 
that the culture in Rwanda has values strongly associated with high-context, including values for 
societal and family relationships, expectation for indirect, subtle communication and strict 
society. In his 1976 book titled Beyond Culture Anthropologist Edward T. Hall described high-
context cultures are those in which the rules of communication are primarily transmitted through 
the use of contextual elements (i.e., body language, a person's status, and tone of voice) and are 
not explicitly stated. As observed by participants interviewed for this research, members of the 
Rwandan culture place high value on building relationships that last for an extended period of 
time. As a result of these years of close relationships with one another, they know each other 
well, how to behave to each other (so they do not have to be explicitly). This makes high-context 
cultures difficult to navigate for those who do not understand the culture's unwritten rules. In 
Rwanda for instance, it is a known fact two familiar members may have an implicit conversation 
that no one else will understand even when they understand the language.   
4.4.3 Power distance 
The Power Distance Index (PDI) is one of the five intercultural dimensions developed by Hofstede 
in his well-known 1980 study of IBM employees in forty countries. This dimensions focuses on the 
nature of human relationship in terms of hierarchy. People in societies exhibiting a large degree 
of power distance accept a hierarchical order in which everybody has a place and which needs no 
further justification. Hierarchical cultures emphasize the chain of authority and rely on 
hierarchically structured roles. Employees are expected to comply with management's directives 
without questioning them. In contrast to low power distance cultures employees in high power 
distance countries are typically more reluctant to challenge their supervisors and more fearful of 
expressing disagreement with their managers. People are (relatively) dependent on the Power 
Holder. Power was one of the issues that surfaced frequently in all discussions about leadership 
styles and culture in Rwanda. Participants from all the sectors / groups interviewed for this 
research reiterated that power was a key influencing factor to leadership style. They specifically 
pointed to the very big power gap [distance] between the boss and the employee. As such, though 
there are other influencing factors that contribute to leadership styles as discussed other 
preceding and subsequent sections of this chapter. When Kevin and Gatera, both middle manager 
of Alliance International [pseudo for an NGO] and Bank Rwanda [pseudonym for a commercial 
bank] respectively were asked what they thought about the division of power between leaders 
and subordinates in organizations in Rwanda, they observed:  
... Theres a very big distance between the boss and the employee, with a lot of fear that if 
have to respect that person because of that position he is holding (i5, l2153, p63); 
Power distance focuses on how a society deals with the inequality present among its people; how 
an organization handles inequality among its employees in relation to or individual due to their 
position within the organization. However, evidence from this research suggests that in Rwanda 
some individuals have more power (formal or informal) within an organization than others. For 
example some individuals have power over others, but it is not part of the hierarchical structure 
of the organization. A person could just be bestowed with power in an organization that has weak 
leaders, thus they have informal power as they stand out against those with formal positions of 
the hierarchical structure of the organization. This can cause issues as some employees might feel 
they have no say, or are not heard or even that they are not valued. This was reiterated by 
Mugabo, a middle manager who has worked with government for more than ten years, he 
observed that: 
... there are people who holds executive position but really do not appreciate it (i1, l575, P17); 
... a man like Minister, he cant do anything at all without actually seeking approval (i1, l549, 
P16). 
This is in contrast to Hofstedes power distance that defines the inequality (more versus less), but 
defined from below, not from above. In the context of Rwanda, power inequality is accepted by 
the followers and supposedly endorsed as much by the leaders even when the leader's powers is 
curtailed, but this could result in not taking own initiative, but rather wait for the boss to give 
instructions. When Gatera, a head of department in public service was asked to describe the 
decision making process in his organisation, he was quite hesitant but it was clear there is 
relatively little real empowerment. He said: 
... I think they fear them, to me well Im not 100% sure but its like they fear their bosses (i5, 
institutions should be ran (i1, l675, P20); ... the Rwandan culture still has these influences on 
how people use their powers (i6, l2759, p80); 
According to Mugabo, there's value in unequal power distribution. He states that: because 
they [people] respect power very much, its very simple to disseminate it because people 
respect the powers very much they cant create the resistance (i3, l1199, p35); 
The significance of traditional and cultural issues in social interactions and institutional life and 
their influence on leadership styles -the central argument of the thesis that leadership cannot be 
fully understood without those contextual factors. In this thesis, culture is as the fountain spring 
of all policies whether educational, social, political, or economical. Increasingly, recognition of 
indigenous peoples intellectual properties or culture has a usefulness which could be developed 
into interesting knowledge. 
4.4.4 Traditional practice 
Cultural practice generally refers to the manifestation of a culture, especially in regard to the 
traditional and customary practices of a particular ethnic or societal group. In the broadest sense, 
it commonly refers to the traditional practices developed within specific ethnic cultures, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Culture
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ethnic
especially those aspects of culture that have been practiced since ancient times. Both colonial 
and post-colonial academy ignored the potential role of traditional African cultural practices in 
the study of leadership styles in Africa. Recently, there has been a growing global interest in these 
practices (Ezenweke, 2013; Maluleke, 2012; Njoh, 2012) although recognition in mainstream is 
still minimal in many countries. In the broadest sense, this term can apply to any person 
manifesting any aspect of any culture at any time. The traditional practices of a people is their 
identity as it affords them due recognition. It reflects the extent to which members of a society 
cherish and practice traditional cultural customs and values. Traditional practices are said to 
reflect values and beliefs held by members of a community for periods often spanning 
generations. These norms and values which are often at the core of human development and 
informed coexistence are founded and bonded on specific sets of principles that guide human 
behavior in favorable ways. Resort to culture should therefore not be seen through lenses that 
depict primitive undertones but rather in such a way as to identify the values that will be useful 
to addressing societal or organizational needs. This view was supported and echoed by several 
respondents who observed that: 
... there exist some values people are used to or even people are trained in as well as the 
natural behaviors you were born with and mostly the effect on the environment you grew in 
which seems like ex-communities where boys were put into those communities so as to 
need to be proud of where we come from as Rwandans... Rwandan culture of dignity (i6, 
Rwandan traditional values that we have but at the same time try to learn from other 
as integrity, service, ambition, honesty, accountability, courage, wisdom, generosity as very 
important. Other values include success in social standards (successful) (i13, l4670, p137); 
On the same issue, a head of export promotion raised another dimension linked to traditional 
practices. He indicated that one of the key values of Rwandan culture is the reliance on informal 
networks.  
(i5, l2033, p59);  ... my experience at personal level of course because of ones upbringing 
and it affects the management of people have (i1, l510, P15);...they extensively use informal 
networks, emphasis for change and mobility; prefer informal information networks (i15, 
l4778, p140); 
The factors associated with traditional, including informality in interactions with others, Informal 
power and paying allegiances to authority hierarchy and direct communication were frequently 
expressed by interview participants as among the significant factors that have influence on 
leadership styles in Rwanda. The interview participants also raised several other issues that 
influence leadership styles which are highlighted and discussed below including assertiveness, 
humaneness, gender egalitarianism and institutional collectivism. I also consider how these issues 
are deepened in the African culture. These issues do not contradict what the literature says about 
the factors influencing leadership styles and are in many cases complementary. 
4.4.5 Assertiveness 
"Assertiveness" as a cultural dimension that measures "the degree to which individuals are 
assertive, confrontational, and aggressive in their relationships with others" (House et al, 2004; 
Dan Hortog, 2004; Holmberg & kerblom 2007). It contrasts with cultures that encourage 
nonassertive, nonaggressive and tender in their social relationships (Dan Hortog, 2004). In the 
case of Rwanda, assertiveness is the quality of being self-assured and confident without being 
aggressive. It means standing up for your personal worth (especially men) - expressing thoughts, 
feelings and beliefs in direct, honest and appropriate ways.  
... Men are more significant in the society though we are trying to have the balance somehow 
beyond their expectations its not obviously but its there you see it to the extent that even 
you at a certain point you also change your mind (i9, l3948, p115). 
men doing this and women doing that, you will definitely tend to remain with that particular 
position (i6, l2735, p79). 
It is important to note also that assertive or manliness [umugabo] does not mean disrespect for 
women, feelings and beliefs of other people. In fact, women that speak out for what is right or 
womanness [umutegarugore] is respected. In this culture, women are high regarded as 'mutima 
w'urugo' or the 'heart of the family'. Being assertive means standing your ground in a way that is 
honest and respectful. 
..I think Im exposed enough I believe in speaking what I feel like and I believe if you have given 
me a certain position because Im a woman I shouldnt let men take it (i9, l3940,  p114). 
However, in the Rwandan context, women are generally expected to be nonassertive, 
nonaggressive and tender in their behaviors. It is important to know where the fine line is 
between assertion and aggression and balancing on it. 
issue has now gained power compared to the situation before ... actually a man and a woman are 
very much different (i2, l939, p28); 
Being assertive means standing your ground in a way that is honest and respectful. Indeed 
foreigners may regard Rwandan women as somewhat cold-hearted due to the fact that they are 
non-dominant and do not reveal their emotions openly. This way of holding one's emotions and 
feelings is very culture-specific - it is an indication of the sense of tenderness and calmness 
expected of women [umwali] in an interdependent society such as Rwanda. In the Rwandan 
culture it is rare to have a heated argument among women but strong disagreement absolutely 
normal for men. A sense of non-dominance is instilled in the girl child from an early age and learns 
to take the back seat in the company boardroom. 
4.4.6 Humane orientation 
Humane Orientation is the degree to which an organization or society encourages and rewards 
individuals for being fair, altruistic, friendly, generous, caring and kind to others (Chokar et al. 
2007). The social concern that is characteristic of African cultures and Rwanda is captured high in 
part by this dimension. The Rwandan culture is known for generosity and supporting programmes 
that foster the wellbeing of poor members of the community - such as umuganda [voluntary 
community work] and ubudehe9 initiatives through which the poor, the elderly and weaker 
members of the society are supported with activities such building homes for the poor and 
vulnerable. Also Rwandan culture is fond of initiatives for brokering peaceful resolution of 
disputes and negotiation such as the Gacaca - a system for reconciliatory justice that encourages 
confession and forgiveness. Such initiatives may be seen to indicate a sense of humane 
orientation towards others. At an institutional level, it quantifies the fairness and care that can 
be expected in the Rwandan society. Historically, a predominately agricultural nation, local 
communities have traditionally helped each other in times of need. Even today, the philosophy 
of civic duty and taking part in a umuganda [voluntary community work] has been 
institutionalized and remains a part of life [held every last Saturday of the month] in all parts of 
the country, both in rural and urban areas/cities. To conclude, the view that Rwandan culture 
scores high in humane orientation is supported by participants interviewed for this research. For 
example when participants were asked to describe the Rwandan culture, and Kevin a head of 
human resource at the Rwandan commercial bank expressed views that suggest a deep rooted 
belief and obligation for humane orientation. She describes a Rwanda person as: 
... Rwandan person is that person, who is very confident, patient and somebody with fidelity and 
so on who is very attached to the value of human rights and values (i8, l3463, and p101). 
9 The word Ubudehe refers to the long-standing Rwandan practice and culture of collective action 
and mutual support to solve problems within a community. Today, the concept has been 
translated into a home grown development programme whereby citizens are placed into 
different categories based on their social-economic status, and their property  in terms of land 
and other belongings  and what the families breadwinners do to earn a living. These categories 
inform the level of support families receive through government social protection programs. 
This view is echoed by Gatera, also a middle manager at the Alliance International organisation. 
His view of Rwandan culture is that: 
he does to the community, the way he involves himself in work makes him be a real man in front 
of the community eyes. (i2, l874, P25); 
Gatama, a head of investment promotion at the Rwanda development agency drew contrasts 
between Rwandan and culture and Singapore. While he believes that his colleague could have 
attended to the investor before answered the phone, his also expressed disapproval of the 
behavior or reaction of the foreigner.  
For example I personally wouldnt have been harsh as the Singaporean was. I would have been 
polite and explain that next time not use a phone when we are discussing a business. The way he 
packed his things and said you guys are not serious, I personally think that was harsh (i6, l2847-9, 
p82). 
Humane orientation and values associated with humaneness, politeness, respect for people, self-
discipline, tenderness, compassion, social and sympathy, benevolence were frequently expressed 
by participants interviewed for this research. With reference to traditional concepts and 
initiatives [umuganda, ubudehe] described above and what we know from the literature on other 
African cultures  as discussed in the literature review chapter would give an understanding to 
the adoption of a leadership style with human orientation as one which would be appropriate to 
fit into Rwandan culture. 
4.4.7 Gender egalitarianism 
Gender and egalitarianism issues did not feature in the mainstream literature in Rwandan until 
the late 1990s and early 2000s. Gender and egalitarianism measures the extent to which a society 
minimizes gender role differences. This perspective [the post-modern] doesn't seem to recognize 
that while men and women can solve problems equally well, their approach and their process are 
often quite different. Men and women approach problems with similar goals but with different 
considerations. In the context of Rwanda however, it [Gender and egalitarianism] is the extent to 
which members of the society are treated with respect to the social differences between men 
and women. It is in the context of the social differences and principle of treating both men and 
women humanely different roles are divided according to their gender. Few people recognize that 
the conditions, in which we are born, where we grow and work have very real influence on the 
society segregates roles based on sex. This was the view of Gatore, a middle manager at the 
multination telecommunication company. He thinks there's a rationale in gender-based 
segregation of duties.  
I am not going to send a girl to fetch water not because she is not able to do that but because she 
might be exposed to people who might rape her or something like that (i6, l2717, p.78); Again, if 
something was risky for a girl, my mother would not give it to the girl not because she believes 
that girls cannot do it but because she thinks its risky for girls (i6, l2740, p.79); 
In the professional arena this may justify why the leader maybe expected to treat men and 
women differently because of the cultural specific considerations. This view is echoed by Alex, 
the program manager at Alliance who thinks that:  
will go and come back after 2-3 hrs (i1, l538, p16); 
The differences between men and women are socially defined not personal [men assumed 
superior over women] as it is often distorted through a lens of sexism, but are merely 
manifestations of nature. Even those that subscribe to sexism would argue the fact that men and 
women are physically different. Recognizing and understanding the differences between men and 
women can be difficult, but it widens the possibilities for discovery of what truly exists within a 
man and within a woman. This thesis shows that within the realm of leadership in Rwanda, 
women can become effective leaders just like their male counterparts. The participants 
interviewed for this research conclude that: 
about lifting something like this (table), then definitely women cannot but if it is about 
thinking and taking a decision and guiding people in certain things (leadership), I think these 
are things that women can also do. 
As the debate about gender and egalitarianism grows, it is important to honor and rejoice in our 
nature and our individuality rather than narrowing it to men versus women which omits the 
important differences specific to this culture. This culture-specific perspective acknowledges that 
there is difference not inequalities and where inequalities exist there's always a cause. For 
example the Kinyarwanda proverb that 'Iyo amazi abaye make aharirwa impfizi' (where water is 
not enough, it is given to the bull) may seem as emphasizing inequity if seen from an egalitarian 
perspective but from a farmer perspective even with a large cow herd you need only one bull for 
breeding the entire herd. This proverb has been misinterpreted by Ukwishaka (2014) to portray 
that he who has power will get more in his way. This omits the origin of the proverb when men 
were historically the caretakers of the family and when there was little food left it was given to 
the one who would go to labour more food. Findings from interview data suggests that the 
Rwanda culture emphasizes equity or the principle of fairness rather equality between men and 
women. 
4.4.8 Institutional Collectivism 
Institutional collectivism" is defined as "the degree to which organizational and societal 
institutional practices encourage and reward collective distribution of resources and collective 
action" (House et al, 2004). It refers to individuals being encouraged by societys institutions to 
be integrated into groups and organizations within the society. Institutional Collectivism (defined 
for measuring culture) is one of Project GLOBEs nine societal dimensions. Some of the 
characteristics of societies of institutional collectivism according project GLOBE include leaders 
encouraging group loyalty even if it means that individual goals must be compromised; being 
accepted by the other members of ones group is very important and group cohesion is valued 
more than individualism. Having spent the last five years studying culture in Rwanda I find 
practices correlate strongly with Institutional Collectivism. In order to get a better idea of how 
correlate with the Rwandan culture, we can look at some of the views of participants interviewed 
for this research. Mutabazi is a middle manager with the multinational telecom company. When 
he was asked to describe the Rwandan culture, here's what he said: 
... I think Rwandans are becoming individualists but usually they cherish such values integrity, 
service, shared responsibility, respect, improvement, empowerment, dignity (i14723, p138);  
The strong support for the cooperatives, associations and unions is a good indicator of this 
dimension as their political influence and high level of membership represent the ethos of 
supportive collective interests in a society. 
people and look at people who were exposed to external world - people who will have seen 
that everything is possible when it comes to gender. Others who grew up in a culture where 
their parents would tell them what to do  what boys do and what girls do. When you grow 
up with such mentality, it will follow you (i6, l2890-3, p83); 
Institutional collectivism in Rwanda can also be seen in the high level involvement of public sector 
assuming extensive responsibility for many services such as education, country wide medical care, 
care for the sick, pensions, the state provides homes for the poor, social insurance, state provides 
a certain financial support to survivors of the genocide, thus the high level of taxes to support 
institutional collectivist goals. A specific uniqueness of the Rwandan institutional collectivist 
culture lies in the tradition of expecting the family to take care of old people and the sick rather 
than expecting the state to take this collective responsibility. 
The views by interviews suggest that individuals express pride, loyalty and cohesiveness in their 
families and community/organizations. Pride for the nation is an important element of 
Institutional collectivism  national pride and also pride in the achievements of the local 
community and the achievements of the individual members of the collective. 
4.4.9 Future Orientation 
Future Orientation is the degree to which an organization or society encourages and rewards 
future-oriented behaviours such as planning, investing in the future and delaying gratification 
(Chokar et al. 2007). Rwandans feature moderately high in terms of future orientation. This result 
mirrors a culture where saving for the future and long-term planning at an institutional level is 
valued. On an individual level, the majority Rwandans are encouraged to have some private 
savings for financial security in the future. They also strive and take pride in owning a home. At 
an institutional level, the welfare system and occupational pension schemes are mandatory to 
provide guarantee for pensions or disability that may result from occupational activities. The 
state's strong commitment to 12 years free schooling from the age of six to eighteen also mirrors 
the Rwandan cultural values of planning for a better future. Kevin is a middle manager with 
Alliance International and she her approach to work is typical of a culture that is future oriented. 
- I always like to know how to project things in the future than in the present and thats how I 
say that wasnt 100% as you would wish the Rwandan culture to be (i5, l2000-1, p58). 
This view of futuristic orientation was frequently echoed in discussion with participants 
interviewed for this research about leadership styles. For example Mugabo's description of a 
leader and leadership reflects a society that has a great deal of optimism about the future. 
Members of the society believe that they understand the future and can shape it through their 
actions. 
Sometimes its about taking the risk, or thinking outside the box. Sometimes building that 
confidence in you helps you to look far  not what is going to happen today but the impact that 
the decision you are going to make will have on the overall mandate or objective of the institution. 
I always try to think about the future. When I decided to let Patrick go (the Intern), I was thinking 
about maybe next year when he will be happy or when he will be somewhere else in a certain 
position. 
They view management as a matter of planning, doing (and controlling) as opposed to going with 
the flow, letting things happen naturally. The Rwandan culture is almost impossible to reconcile 
with different cultural views. Differently oriented cultures will view each other at best as old-
fashioned or, at worst, with considerable contempt. This was manifested in the views of interview 
participants who were born outside Rwanda (Rwandaliens). They believe that they are more 
dynamic and open because they have been exposed.  
...for us the culture where we grew up in I think forced us to know all those things (i5, l1662, 
as you would wish the Rwandan culture to be (i5, l2000-1, p58); 
... It is different from how we expected it to be so that means that what we have to understand 
knowledge (i5, l2007, p59); If you are talking about people who were born and lived their entire 
life in Rwanda, they would hardly accept criticism and I think that is definitely a concern as far 
as leaders are concerned because you cant lead effectively if you dont accept criticism (i6, 
l2800, p81). 
4.5 Differences in leadership styles in the sample 
This section reviews how conventional wisdom and attitudes and beliefs towards seeing women 
as leaders. As Eagly (2013) opines there exists some differences in leadership styles between 
males and females  - they differ in communication styles, situational handling styles and female 
leaders are seen to adopt a more democratic and participative style than their male counterparts 
(Merchant, 2012). This research shows that female leaders tend to apply more culturally 
appropriate leadership behaviors, make a better combination of feminine and masculine leader 
behaviors) as they tend to communicate more expressively and can motivate the creativity and 
innovation in the team. It also emerged that female leaders were generally more interpersonally 
- or communally-oriented than male leaders as they were seen to be inspirational role models, 
nurture good relationships, cultivate the skills of the member followers and motivate them to 
think out of the confines of the job requisites. 
As Alex (not real names) opines: 
.. not all people do that because my experience shows me that not everybody has the same 
management style but there could be other people, because even myself there are role models 
that I learnt from. Probably what you may want to say that I hadnt said of course I give training 
top priority (in terms of influences) but when you finish school, there are role models. I didnt 
start at managerial position, I started from the lower rank in the organization but you learn from 
the role model. I think to me its been an opportunity because the people I started with (job) - of 
course two ladies both have been very successful while managing their organizations. Especially 
on the aspect of motivation of staff  thats an important thing. Staff motivation be it my very 
first former boss, she was very good at managing the HR functions  she did a good job. Be it her 
replacement she also did well of course what I can add is that when you have the opportunity to 
have the role model  the people you look up to and you have seen their style (management 
styles)  so when you blend that with your own training  you get something that is strong (I1, 
L147-159, p158). 
There is also evidence that the female leaders are seen to adopt a more democratic and 
participative style than their male counterparts. 
However, this research also shows that being less-directive can be less effective or hinder the 
achievement of intended goals, and, the outcomes of such leadership styles are more suited 
towards the public good rather than the success of the corporate level organizations which, in a 
hierarchical culture, might require more assertive and commanding leadership abilities.  
Gender differences in the personal sphere 
Female leaders Male leaders 
Generally more risk-averse 
Greater risk takers in social situations  
Higher social sensitivity  
React by feeling 
More overconfident  
More optimistic  
React by action 
Expectations and rewards, inspiration, and 
participative decision-making 
Men were more likely to exhibit the 
punishment element of transactional 
leadership, as well as the laissez-faire style 
Female were less hierarchical, more 
cooperative and collaborative. 
Male were more hierarchical, and more 
dominant of others 
Female leaders showed a bit more 
democratic/ participative leadership styles 
and a bit less directive/autocratic styles 
Male leaders showed were less democratic/ 
participative leadership styles and more 
directive/autocratic styles 
Female are rated more in integrity and 
honesty 
Male are rated less in integrity and honesty 
The reason for female leaders being seen as inspirational role models could be that, the cultural 
gender at work reacting favorably towards leaders with androgynous style than those with strict 
masculine or lenient feminine styles. 
The small differences detected in leadership style are consistent with (Eagly, 2013; Avolio, 2010; 
Merchant, 2012; McKinsey, 2009) who emphasize that female leaders tend to be more 
participative than their male counterparts. 
4.6 Summary of statements used to describe Rwandan culture 
The qualitative statements listed below, collected during the course of this researcher from 
narrative interviews, particularly capture important and unique aspects of culture which 
individuals need to manage in business. Leaders of organizations in Rwanda, may need to 
understand, for example that honesty is traditionally valued highly above money. They may also 
learn to respect the general appreciation of the matter-of-fact that the borderline between 
private life and professional life. 
In-group collectivism 
 Rwandese people always like sharing ideas among themselves and to take some decisions 
they consult each other; 
 your boss is more than your boss because he/she will also go beyond that and also follow 
up on your reputation outside the office; 
 they help the society they live in and they like co-operating and helping each other 
 How I interact with them depends on how long I have spent (known) with a certain person 
 Your personal life affects your professional life because they are actually merged. 
Performance Orientation / High context 
 In doing business they are not so direct (i3, l205, p36); 
 people don't express their opinions in public and instead confiding their opinions only with 
one person; 
 you will take months to meet your boss or even fail to get him/talk to your boss; 
 significant gaps between the boss and the rest of subordinates 
 any word from him/her is often treated with high respect as a law or order; 
 Memos are upward communication while emails are downward communication. 
High power distance/Hierarchical 
 people respect power very much; 
 Theres a very big distance between the boss and the employee, with a lot of fear that if 
someone is your boss then you cant just greet him or meet him anyhow;  
 number one thing is the regulatory framework that clearly defines how institutions should 
be ran; 
 Because of the fear for the boss,  they tend to be careful in the beginning when talking to 
people with power; 
 they like to have full control of the group he/she is leading to be under his/her rules and 
powers 
Traditional practice 
 ones upbringing (uburere), influences his/her behavior e.g: respect for the elderly; 
 The culture people have a lot to do with culture; 
 we dont have that culture of communicating the problems in the public; 
 Consider values such as integrity, service, ambition, honesty, accountability, courage, 
wisdom, generosity as very important. 
Assertiveness  
 Men and women are actually a very much different both socially, physically and 
psychologically; 
 They dont see gender as a big issue like other cultures do; 
 Gender is a politics; 
 Men are more significant in the society though we are trying to have the balance somehow 
but we still have to wait for some time. 
Humane orientation 
 they respect themselves, they respect other people thats one, and another thing is like 
they have another behavior of loving each other; 
 they are very attached to the value of humaneness; 
 they have the culture of being polite and respecting people; 
 the way he involves himself in work makes him be a real man in front of the community 
Gender egalitarianism 
 acknowledges that there is difference not inequalities; 
 where inequalities exist there's always a cause; 
 allocating different role and responsibilities between boys and girls is fair and humane; 
 there are certain things attributes to men and others attributed to women of course 
Institutional Collectivism  
 ones group is very important and group cohesion 
 The strong support for the cooperatives, associations and unions 
 the state provides homes for the poor 
 the high level of taxes to support institutional collectivist goals 
Future Orientation  
 People are concerned about the future; 
 always like to know how to project things in the future than in the present  
 leadership is  about taking the risk, or thinking outside the box 
 building that confidence in you helps you to look far; 
 I always try to think about the future.  
The above views emphasize central argument of the thesis that leadership cannot be fully 
understood outside the cultural context it embeds. The importance of understanding culturally 
determined differences in communication practices is absolutely crucial. In todays global world, 
there are wide cultural differences, and these differences influence how people do business. Even 
though people are focused on the bottom line, in Rwanda people do business with people they 
like, trust, and understand. Culture influences how employees are best managed based on their 
values and priorities. When youre dealing with people from another culture, you may find that 
their business practices, communication, and management styles are different from those to 
which you are accustomed. Understanding the culture of the people with whom you are dealing 
is important to successful business interactions and to accomplishing business objectives. To 
conduct business with people from other cultures, you must put aside preconceived notions and 
strive to learn about the culture of your counterpart. Often the greatest challenge is learning not 
to apply your own value system when judging people from other cultures. It is important to 
remember that there is no right or wrong ways to deal with other people - just different ways. 
Concepts like time and ethics are viewed differently from place to place, and the smart business 
professional will seek to understand the rationale underlying another cultures concepts. 
It is also critically important to understand the history of the country in which we work or intend 
to work. It is important to remember that each person considers his or her sphere or world 
the most important and that this attitude forms the basis of his or her individual perspective. We 
often forget that cultures are shaped by decades and centuries of experience and that ignoring 
cultural differences puts us at a disadvantage. 
5. CHAPTER FIVE: DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
5.1 Overview of the thesis 
The research seeks to add African insight to the GLOBE study that seeks to understand leadership 
in a cultural context. It was conceived out of a critique of universal theory of leadership literature 
- the view that there are acquired skills that are universal or constant across contexts and cultures 
(e.g. Stogdill, 1948; House and Aditya, 1997; House, 2004). The most prominent universal theories 
include transactional or its opposite (transformational) leadership (Bass, 2000; Bennis, 2003; 
Burns, 1978; Taylor, 2009; Bass, 1985; Bennis & Nanus 1985; Bass and Avolio, 1994; Yukl, 1998), 
and participative (also known as democratic) leadership (Lewin, Lippit, and White, 1939; Smith, 
2008; Probst, 2005; Steinheider, Bayerl, & Wuestewald, 2006), which are rooted in a Western 
sociocultural context and have been developed as etic theories, with little attention paid to emic 
dimensions. These etic theories draw critique for their general lack of an emic dimension, 
precisely in prescribing a series of supposedly scientifically proven best practices and verifiable 
competencies, desirable traits and behaviours that can be acquired or learned for leadership to 
be created. Such a presumption might explain the drastic departure from the great man or 
servant leader theory (Greenleaf, 1977 cited in Bass, 2000) of leadership and trait-based 
leadership models (Savage, 2006 cited in Huffman, Stephanie, 2010). The dominance of the 
universal leadership theory stems from the presumption that we are all born with the capabilities 
to learn certain skills to become leaders. However, the desire to develop universal leadership 
theories (identifying a set of skills which people in business need to learn to become leaders 
irrespective of context) also known as the etic qualities of leadership, without understanding the 
emic, leadership will not be culturally appropriate. 
These etic theories also seem to suggest or have been publicized as universal best practice 
applicable everywhere and in all cases but without a precise formula for its applicability to 
different context. Related to the belief that leadership is primarily etic is the related practice of 
exporting best leadership practices to other cultures, such as Africa, and that by adopting these, 
things will become better  this is the substance of the post-colonial critique of Western 
leadership theories. 
In this research we have taken the culture contextual perspective informed by the work of 
sociologist Herbert Spencer (1820 - 1903), who said that leaders were only products of the 
atmosphere and society in which they worked. In other words, societal culture shapes these great 
men as oppose to them shaping society. One of the shifts away from the great men way of 
thinking, of course, would be the recognition that leaders can be women, and that believing that 
leaders must be 'great men' may prevent women playing their role as leaders. It was also 
informed by a contextual analysis of the cultural diversity in Rwandas post-genocide context, 
viewed in relation to the available literature on cultural influence on leadership styles as the main 
substantive focus of the research. This research contributes to critique of universal leadership 
theories on the basis of understanding leadership as an emic as well as an etic phenomenon. It 
also contributes to the growing body of literature on management and leadership in Africa 
(Jackson, 2004; Jackson et al., 2008; Jackson, 2011 & 2012; Kamoche, 2000, 2011, Kamoche et al., 
2012; Zimbango, 2013; Newenham-Kahindi et., 2013). It is the first in depth study in Rwanda - 
which is a particularly interesting example for leadership studies given the historical and cultural 
context. 
Historically, Rwandan society had become characterized by turbulence, with the country having 
been the site of a strict colonial rule followed by a brutal ethnic conflict, mass migration and 
political tensions that culminated into the 1994 genocide. The cultural context is equally 
interesting given convergence en masse in the late 1990s (post-genocide period) of various 
Rwandescent cultures (Rwandaliens with Rwandigenous). As such, this research supports the idea 
that there are etic and emic aspects of leadership styles in the special circumstances of a post-
conflict country. 
5.2 The impact of Rwandas history on current leadership styles  
This brief review of the history Rwanda is to enable the understanding of the impact of ethnic-
feuding on peoples culture and leader styles in post-genocide era. Since the revolution in 1959, 
the repressive post-independence regime, military coup dtat in 1974 and ethnic feuding that 
drove half of the population to take refuge and consequent civil wars that culminated into the 
genocide in 1994. These circumstances lead some of the Rwandans to a long period of exile and, 
as a result they acquired cultures from neighboring countries. After the genocide in 1994, the 
convergence of diverse Rwandalien cultures created a paradigm shift and divergence of views on 
leadership styles. Understanding the impact of this history and its consequences in the post-
genocide cultural convergence raises two fundamental questions: in what way are Rwandaliens 
culturally similar or different from Rwandigenous? Secondly, in what way they differ in leadership 
styles? 
From the business leadership perspective, research findings and literature on this topic points to 
a major divergence of views regarding what is acceptable or not acceptable leaders behaviour. 
5.3 Discussion of findings 
5.3.1 Leadership styles in a cultural context 
Leadership style is the manner and approach in which the leader provides the direction and 
motivation to other members of the company to achieve its goals, and includes the total pattern 
of explicit and implicit actions performed by their leader (Newstrom & Davis, 1993). Although 
leadership is a skill (Taylor - 2003), there are many factors in addition to learning that impact 
leadership competence, including context, ones personality traits and other inherited abilities 
(Jokinen, 2005; Chin, 2006; Abbas, 2010).  However, different leaders will display different 
leadership styles, depending on the context and circumstances of a situation. According to 
Rumsey (2013), leadership is context. Adding that this is because the emergence or relevance of 
leadership is thought to be context dependent (p.414). As one of the participants interviewed for 
this research put it, you cannot move leaders from their cultural context and expect them to 
perform with the same level of effectiveness. The leader, the follower, the context, and the 
interactions amongst these elements must all be considered. 
In other words, the principles of leadership can be effective in a wide variety of situations (etic), 
but often they need to be applied in a contextual (emic) manner depending on the circumstances, 
experiences and the culture of the groups involved. However, as Bass (2000) argues, many 
theories and models of leadership emphasize the work to be done and/or the relations between 
the leader and the led. These styles or theories include democratic, empowering, participative 
leadership, leader-member exchange, strategic leadership, servant leadership, and leadership 
based on communication competence. 
For instance, in the post-genocide context of Rwanda, leadership behaviour as expressed by 
participants in this research presents six emerging leadership subthemes: Paternalistic 
leadership, Task-oriented leadership, Team-oriented leadership, Autonomous leadership, mixed 
styles/Hybrid leadership and the self-protective (and group-protective) style. 
According to a study by Erben & Guneser (2008), a paternalistic leader works by acting as a father 
figure by taking care of his/her subordinates as a parent would. Thus, the paternalist leader 
provides care, nurture, and guidance to employees in their professional and personal lives in a 
parental manner, and, in exchange, expects loyalty and deference from the employees (Aycan, 
2006). In return the leader receives the complete trust and loyalty of followers.  According to the 
literature/theory (see Jackson, 2008), paternalistic leadership is still prevalent and effective in 
many business cultures in Africa and China. This type of leadership style that combines strong 
discipline and authority with fatherly benevolence (Farh & Cheng, 2000) is commensurate with 
African cultural values and principles of ubuntu which has similarities with Chinese 
Confucian values and principles (such as ren). Research such as Jacksons is leading the way, 
and should be brought more clearly into the mainstream of management studies. Jackson argues 
that paternalism offers an explanation to what is seen as African management and organisation 
as it would have value in modern organizations in Africa, and other parts of the world.  
This is consistent with Hofstede (2001) and GLOBE's in-group collectivism culture. Individuals in 
collectivist culture express pride, loyalty and cohesiveness in their organizations or families 
(House et al, 2004, p. 30). Hofstede (2001) has defined 'collectivism' as a society in which people 
from birth onwards are integrated into strong, cohesive in-groups, which throughout people's 
lifetime continue to protect them in exchange for unquestioning loyalty' (p. 225). 
Authoritarian leadership is still prevalent in many Rwandan business organizations. Many of the 
leaders interviewed for this research believe that a leader should exhibit decision making powers 
and authority (kutavugirwamo) if they are to be effective. Authoritarian leadership also fits well 
with traditional values of masculinity. One important aspect underlying the relationship between 
authoritarian leadership and culture in Rwanda as perceived by the leaders interviewed for this 
research was that authority and decisiveness engender perceptions of performance. 
However, this leadership style is less conducive for emphasis on absolute authority and control 
over subordinates, and subordinates are likely to feel uneasy and oppressed, and it ultimately 
causes negative social exchanges between supervisors and subordinates. Research findings show 
that this as an emic style does fit with the changes which have taken place in Rwanda over recent 
times - and there has been a move away from this tradition towards its being replaced with an 
etic style. Employees are increasingly being involved in decision-making and how change is 
implemented. 
Teamwork leadership is the classic leadership behavior in Rwandan cultural context, where it is 
seen to increase trust-in-supervisor by enhancing the concept of shared responsibility. Leaders 
who exhibit Teamwork leadership qualities can fit well with Rwandan traditional values of 
collectivism by engaging and being closer to subordinates when they encounter difficulties, and 
expressing interest in subordinates welfare even outside work settings.  For leaders familiar with 
Rwandan collectivism, this knowledge would be implicit in the local value system, but for those 
leaders with less familiarity with Rwandan values (the Rwandalien category), it may not be 
obvious hence they might need to adapt. Research findings show that leaders perceived (by 
followers) as less strong on teamwork qualities are seen as leading from behind rather than the 
front - a sign of lack of solidarity. 
Laissez-faire leadership is defined as the combination of elements from both the hands-off and 
passivity styles. Research findings suggest that perhaps to manage the consequences of the long 
history of the Hutu vs. Tutsi ethnic feuding, this type of leadership is prevalent in Rwandan 
organizations, especially in the public sector. For example, departmental managers may be 
imposed (appointed to positions of power) on a leader (in a public institution) and by that nature 
they are not accountable to their superior or those they lead. Their allegiance and accountability 
is to their benefactor (commonly referred to as appointing authority). In such situations, theres 
tendency of self-restraint and passivity on the part of the leader. Leaders become permissive and 
abstain from leading their subordinates. 
Research findings also suggest that team members may be treated preferentially in order to 
maintain a balance between the two (hutu/tutsi) ethnic groups, including often the leader to 
desist from giving instructions and do the work themselves. Critics of this passive leadership style 
contend it creates resentment among staff members not given preferential treatment. However, 
the leaders interviewed for this research believe that it invigorates positive relationships with all 
members of both groups and use these relationships to steer the organisation in a particular 
direction. Team members are often treated preferentially (e.g. they rise to senior positions) 
because the leader may not want to exert power and control for fear of being perceived by 
members of one ethnic group as ethnically biased. The leader operates a free-rein approach, 
although s/he retains command responsibility as the custodian of the company. 
Second, research findings show that people, especially in public organizations rise to senior 
positions because of their ethnicity rather than their competencies, hence may have minimal 
authority over subordinates, who may have more experience or a long history in the organisation. 
This was expressed by participants interviewed for this research citing profiles of leaders who are 
relatively young, less experienced and not highly qualified compared to their subordinates. 
Indeed a review of the profiles of senior leaders in public companies shows that aging leaders are 
giving way to a new generation of leaders taking charge of key positions. It can also be argued 
perhaps that the fact that there are no minimum qualifications or experiences required to 
become a leader contributes to inferiority complex resulting in the laissez-faire leadership, which 
as Goodnight (2011) argues is usually appropriate when the team is highly skilled, and has a 
history of producing excellent work. 
5.3.2 Culture in post-genocide context 
The current period in Rwandas history has been described by many scholars and practitioners 
(Schabas, 1996; Tiemessen, 2003; Zorbas, 2004; Buckley-Zistel, 2006; Reyntjens, 2011) as "post-
genocide in their analysis of the social, political and economic events in the period after the 
genocide in 1994. Within the broader themes of social, political and economic perspective, the 
post-genocide context presents an interesting scholarly case in making sense of culture in the 
current period. This is an interesting endeavour to recognize the ways that changes in subtle 
elements in culture affect the ways of thinking in the Rwandan post-genocide society and 
leadership style in particular. Although contemporary critics would understandably be sceptical 
about the post-genocide culture theory given the limited literature on the subject, and this 
research welcomes ethical critique to be better guided and adequately informed about the way 
in which the predominant leadership styles in the post-genocide era have been influenced by 
culture. 
According to Kasamala (2013) and Mafulauzi (2011), culture is in all aspects of life, the totality of 
meanings, ideas and beliefs shared by individuals within a group of people. Culture provides the 
overall frame of reference or logic by which behaviour can be understood (Dorfman et el., 2006 
in Kuanda, 2010). Culture has been described as the social structure through which behavior - 
how we think, the way we act and how we interact with others - in other words, how we 
communicate - are regulated. For scholars such as Kuanda (2010), culture binds members of a 
society or organisation together as a homogeneous entity and have their conduct regulated 
through a collection of consensual aspirations (emic values) and universal orientations (etic 
patterns). It is those core values and shared patterns that identify members of a culture as a group 
while also distinguishing those from another group. As thus, it is natural that people from 
different cultural groups behave differently. The dissertation presents an analysis of the Rwandan 
culture in the post-genocide period within the broader context of the GLOBE's dimensions and 
cross-cultural literature. 
The post-genocide context is purposeful to describe and provide reference for cultural influence 
on leadership styles in organisations in Rwanda. This is because the central argument of this 
research is that leaders behavior and styles of leadership are mutually inclusive events and 
culture-bound. From a cultural context, Rwanda presents an interesting case study. Historically, 
the Banyarwanda people shared a common cultural tradition, customs and, a single language 
(Kinyarwanda), and a cultural identity since pre-colonial times. We often assume that because all 
members of the nation-state share a common language, they share the same cultural identity. 
However, like most modern societies, post-genocide Rwanda has a diversity of cultural identities. 
This is especially a result of the history of mass migrations and emigration following independence 
in 1962.  For example, when Rwanda gained independence, a segment of people took refuge in 
neighboring countries due to the ethnic-feuding, and have been socialised outside. After the civil 
war and genocide in 1994, there was another mass outflow of new-case refugees (as they came 
to be called) when old-case refugees (as they came to be called) returned back to Rwanda. 
Finally, in the period of globalisation, multinational companies are operating or have operated in 
Rwanda. Thus, post-genocide Rwanda contains multiple cultural identities and languages. In 
recognition of this diversity, the government of Rwanda recognizes four business languages, 
including English and Swahili, which have traditionally not been common in Rwanda. 
Parallel to the cultural diversity discussed above, research findings suggest that the business 
landscape, especially the leadership paradigm, may have evolved. Research findings show a 
process of enculturation has been taking place through which Rwandaliens  adapting some emic 
elements of leadership (identified as 'traditional') is seen as desirable. Similarly there are etic 
elements of leadership which are seen by Rwandigenous as desirable - some are welcomed, 
others less so. This is in line with what literature says about globalisation and its effect on local 
cultures. Research findings show a shift in the post-genocide culture as regards leadership - a 
gradual shift from the traditionally hierarchical to more transformational styles. 
Analysis of the leader behaviors show that they tend to focus on enhancing efficiency and 
productivity of the organization, while technical aspects are delegated to departmental managers 
or team supervisors. This style of leadership has been described as transformational style (Bass & 
Riggio, 2008). The involvement of leaders in management is expected (should be) in giving the 
direction and process of setting goals and strategies to meet the goals. This is in line with GLOBEs 
charismatic/value-based leadership dimension described by such values as visionary, 
inspirational, integrity, decisive, and performance orientation. Charismatic/value-based leaders 
articulate and emphasize end-values. Research findings show that transformational form of 
leadership style is seen as desirable. However, it may be important to note that the drive ability 
to achieve pragmatic effects has been emphasized, regardless of the means by which such effects 
are attained. 
Consequently the question of results orientation arises. The drive for achievement of 
organizational goals has been emphasized by leaders in this study as one of the direct influences 
of the Rwandan culture.  Results orientation is the degree to which managers put emphasis on 
ensuring that work gets done in a manner that is both proficient and in the agreed timeframe. 
For example, every year, since 2006, local government institutions and line ministries sign the 
Imihigo10 or performance contracts with Rwanda's President committing them to achieving set 
objectives. Leaders also sign performance contracts (imihigo) with employees committing them 
to implementing and achieving institutional objectives. Imihigo has been chosen a solution for 
committing leaders and employees who struggle with planning and managing their time under 
this result-oriented leadership, because it helps them be more organized and is deadline driven. 
This result-oriented leadership invokes the concept of power to ensure planning, 
implementation, performance evaluation and accountability for all public institutions and staff. 
Power is defined as the ability relative position in social or organizational structure to exert 
control over people to do something  to give orders, expect people to follow them. This thesis 
shows that leaders interviewed in this study believe in hierarchy or respect for power (authority, 
age, status) to maintain social order within groups and to mobilize resources of the organization 
to get things done. 
This thesis also shows that leaders attach great importance of cohesion or collectivism within 
social groups. For example, employees are encouraged to form associations, and social groups for 
mutual protection and cohesion among members, and cooperative to help build assets and 
advancement of their members. Although these associations vary in shapes and sizes, they all 
10 Imihigo comes from a Kinyarwanda concept guhiga which means to vows to deliver. Imihigo 
also includes the concept of Guhiganwa, which means to compete among one another. Imihigo 
describes the pre-colonial cultural practice in Rwanda where an individual sets targets or goals 
to be achieved within a specific period of time. Imihigo has been chosen a solution for 
committing leaders to implementing and achieving set objectives - originating from the 
Rwandan culture. 
share the twin goals of mutually helping their members and advancing societal cohesion. 
However, for the multinational company or foreign manager operating in Rwanda, striking a good 
balance between the pursuit for economic interests of the company and observance to the 
feelings of the societys indigenous collectivist values becomes an issue. 
5.4 Reflexivity on the research process  
5.4.1 The political situation in Rwanda and its effect on the research process 
Toward the concluding stage of this research, it is worth reflecting on the context of the research 
paradigm and challenges experienced in the process. As I explained earlier in the methodology 
chapter, the term leader or leadership is synonymous with politics in Rwanda. And politics is 
such a sensitive subject that interview participants would not freely share their political views 
with strangers. One may be willing or unwilling to express their political views, depending on 
countrys political conditions. Moreover, interviews were conducted at the time of the 
presidential elections - which were reported to have been characterized by a number of incidents 
of violence. The run up to and post-presidential elections exacerbated the already inhibiting 
atmosphere of restrained press freedom. 
But as an insider researcher, I had prior knowledge and experience of the cultural and ethnicity 
context. To overcome this challenge, I used secondary recruitment (see Chapter Three - research 
methodology) asking participants for referral of potential new research participants. This 
approach proved not only helped to have better informed participants, but also helped address 
the political connotation associated with leadership and ethnic feuding. 
5.4.2 Original contribution 
As explained earlier in the previous sections of the thesis, literature on leadership styles and 
culture in Rwanda was lacking. This research makes a contribution to the growing literature 
aiming to develop culturally-appropriate leadership styles (i.e. the GLOBE project). Like, the 
GLOBE research project (House et al., 2004), this research examined the relationship between 
societal culture and leadership in terms of practices of 'the way things are done, and values or 
perceptions of the way things should be done. This research concurs with GLOBE research 
project (House et al., 2004) which shows that societal culture influences the kind of leadership 
found to be acceptable and effective by people within that culture. 
Secondly, this research also makes a contribution to the growing literature on leadership in Africa, 
in particular addressing traditional leadership concepts such as servant leadership and Ubuntu 
and their effect on contemporary business organisations. Notwithstanding the global concern for 
leadership styles that are endorsed as universally effective, it is important to recognize that 
different cultural groups will vary in their conceptualizations of effective leadership. This research 
is a contribution to contemporary African leadership theories that draws its legitimacy and 
inspiration from African collective leadership principles and cultural values and customs. 
Thirdly, a specific research of leadership in the post-genocide in Rwanda is, particularly valuable 
given the history and changes which have taken place. For example, there is evidence among the 
main cultural strata (Rwandaliens and Rwandigeneous) for the discriminant validity of 'the way 
things are done, and the way things should be done. However, research findings show a common 
emphasis on collective leadership styles - such as servant leadership rather than individualistic 
styles. This research argues for hybrid leadership styles that both Rwandaliens and 
Rwandigeneous identify with, instinctively know and understand something indigenous yet 
contemporary. In the context of the post-genocide Rwanda, hybrid leadership denotes a 
leadership style or approach that is sensitive to the cultural values, and responsive to the peoples 
aspirations and needs, without necessary abandoning the emic or what is already in place but 
improving on it. 
Finally, although the contribution of this research to knowledge is important in itself, there may 
be value in follow-up research that may move from this base to explore more aspects of 
leadership styles and culture in post-genocide Rwanda. This has implications for practical 
approaches to business leadership, theoretical considerations and its place in policy formulation. 
There is a need, for example, to undertake more researches in areas identified under section (5.6) 
below. 
5.5 Achievements 
5.5.1 Contribution of the thesis to the development of leadership in Africa and in Rwanda in 
particular 
Regardless of the limitations, the research findings presented in this thesis are of value to the 
academia and to the business industry in Rwanda. Leadership styles were found be context-
specific and are products of the societal culture in which business leaders operate in as opposed 
to being a universal phenomenon applicable everywhere and in all cases. 
There is a common misconception on the African continent (alias the cultural-blind view) that the 
hardware language of growth and development is more important to the continents 
advancement than the software language of culture. In other words, in the pressure for 
development (understandably) there has been a tendency to neglect culture, in particular to 
neglect the important issue that business leadership styles should reflect local culture. African 
culture is hence ignored and at worst viewed simply as a negative obstacle to leadership 
(Mulanga, 2006). 
This thesis takes a differentiated view of leadership which does not assume that culture is an 
obstacle to leadership, but rather that leadership is contextual, or embedded in societal norms, 
values, and beliefs. This is because further analysis showed that leader characteristics are valued 
very differently across societies based on peoples early experiences with leaders and shaped by 
culture in their upbringing. For example, this research shows that in Rwanda for a leader to seen 
to be effective, s/he is expected to be decisive  being able to make quick and impartial decisions. 
Conversely, in western or individualist cultures such as United States, Australia, the United, 
Kingdom (UK), France or Germany (Hofstedes, 2001), being decisive tends to mean a more 
deliberate and precise approach to decision making. Consequently, it is culture that give it 
[leadership] meaning. 
This research argue that those of us working as scholars, and writers on the African culture have 
more work to do, first in demystifying culture and seeing it not just another passive software but 
as the operating system of the brain (Hofstede, 1994), not something deeply hidden beneath us 
or that reside outside our private life but rather the other side of the human coin; secondly in 
understanding the language of culture i.e understanding the metaphor, words, phrases, signs and 
symbols, and what they stand for or the meanings implied in phrases rather than the thing which 
it describes when explicitly expressed, and thirdly in creative symbiosis of business and culture to 
promote well-being and economic competitiveness and organisational effectiveness rather than 
the view culture as a negative obstacle to business leadership. 
This research, to the best of my knowledge, is the first one to study leadership styles and culture 
in post-genocide Rwanda. The post-genocide cultural context  the cultural difference and 
similarities between Rwandalien and Rwandigenous - added an insight the understanding of the 
state of culture and leadership styles in organisations in Rwanda (and possibly broader African) 
context. It seeks to challenge the conventional (western) belief of leadership as being a universal 
phenomenon and prescribing of best practices such as setting clear goals (with clear expected 
results), prioritizing, planning, clarifying roles, and monitoring and managing performance/ 
progress, as applicable everywhere and in all cases. This thesis argues that while every society or 
company has leadership, the styles are different and certain leadership styles are more effective 
in certain cultural contexts than others. It shows that these aspects of leadership are more 
acceptable within the Rwandan (and possibly broader African) context.  These include: 
 Impartiality - also known as fair-mindedness is an aspect of leadership holding that decisions 
should be based on objective criteria, rather than on the basis of bias, prejudice, or preferring 
the benefit to one person over another for improper reasons.  
 Benevolence is the aspect of leadership or leader behavior characterized by preserving and 
enhancing the welfare of those with whom one is in frequent personal contact. Specific 
qualities include being helpful, forgiving, honest, loyal; 
 Traditional values  Rwandan (and African) cultural values are based on a foundation of the 
past and present, a leading reason why preferred values include respect (for leaders and 
elders), commitment, and acceptance of the customs and ideas that traditional culture or 
religion provides the self. Specific qualities include accepting ones own portion, devoutness, 
respect for tradition, humbleness and moderation; 
 Security or concern for security within an organisation is about safety, harmony, and stability 
of society, of relationships, and of self (family security, national security, social order, clean, 
sense of belonging);  
 Conformity as an aspect of leadership style or leader behavior is about restraint of actions, 
inclinations, and impulses likely to upset or harm others and violate social expectations or 
norms (obedient, self-discipline, politeness, honoring parents & elders); 
 Achievement within an organisation is about the leaders personal success demonstrated 
through competences according to social standards (successful, capability and ambitions).  
 Power within an organisation is about social status and prestige, control or dominance over 
people and resources. One that makes reference to common values of social, power, wealth, 
authority and preserving public image; 
 A polychronic time concept within a culture is about how leadership styles are affected by 
individuals view and interpret time. Despite the use of clocks to tell time, Rwandan time (as 
often referred by locals) works differently from western time. In Rwanda (and in African 
cultures generally), things fall into place as they unfold.  Future-time is of less importance and 
schedules arent always respected. Delay for the schedule meeting is normal and if a plan or 
event gets cancelled or changes drastically, you can only accept and continue with a positive 
attitude. 
5.5.2 Implications of the research for Rwandan business leaders 
The degree, to which skills and traits are desirable, differs from one country to another (Hofstede 
& Wursten, 2012). One explanation as to how and why people behave differently or have very 
different views on "what is appropriate leader behaviour and what is considered ineffective 
leadership style, is culture. And to understand how culture influences business leadership, it is 
essential to understand that culture does not reside passively in individual employees, but it 
consists of shared values and norms, which influence their conduct, routines and operating 
procedures. 
If business leaders can understand more about Rwandan cultural values when working in Rwanda, 
they can make a positive impression. Those business leaders  managers, technocrats, and policy 
makers in the business in Africa and Rwanda, in particular, have more work to do in establishing 
business and operating according to specific culture. In other words, as businesses in Rwanda 
globalise, more understanding is needed of what are culturally appropriate leadership styles. As 
Peter Drucker (cited in Wursten, 2012) wrote: what the managers do is the same the world over, 
but how they do it is determined by culture and tradition. This is because a management or 
leadership style that is effective in one culture may not necessarily work or not as effective in 
another. For instance, the research findings show that in the post-genocide context the move 
towards less paternalistic styles, more teamwork, the move towards more gender equality is seen 
by some of the leaders as beneficial. On the other hand, the humane orientation and collectivism 
are still entrenched. 
Interestingly, however, when multinational organisations and companies - mostly based in 
America and Western Europe- want somebody to work in Africa, their recruitment departments 
develop profiles containing competencies, skills and character traits such as direct 
communication and timekeeping that are desirable in America or Europe. However, in the 
Rwandan cultural context indirect communication is preferred and people have no problem being 
late for an event. This lack of cultural sensitivity could potentially result in the manager being 
dysfunctional in his new working environment, which could end up costly to the business. This 
thesis argues that a process of adaptation of outside organizations to the Rwandan culture 
becomes necessary - and of course the specific impact of culture on leadership needs to be 
understood - but also a reverse process - there is also going to be some effect of globalisation on 
the local - and companies need to sensitize their employees about these factors by training may 
be beneficial. 
Character represents principles that inform behavior within a particular culture of a particular 
group or organization. According to Hartman (1996), culture is important to business because it 
is a vehicle for imparting and maintaining the moral principles and the values, good and bad, that 
animate life in the organization" (p. 150). From the business ethics standpoint - adopting 
culturally appropriate leadership styles should be seen as part of business ethics. Therefore, to 
develop an effective leadership style in organization business leaders will need to engage in a 
system of interrelated activities, including: 
 The incorporation of culture in leadership development programs, training themselves and 
their staff in the development of cultural intelligence skills. This could greatly contribute 
positive social change when leaders in multinational companies appreciate and are 
appreciated by local staff. The findings of this study show that there is a close correlation 
between leaders culture, behaviors and [leadership] style. With the incorporation of these 
[cultural intelligence] skills in leadership development programs, future leaders will be more 
successful in international business. 
 The incorporation of ethical behavior (where culturally-defined ethics may take precedence 
over universally-endorsed ethics) in internal organizational code of ethics containing vivid 
examples to make each point as clear as possible would be a socially necessary on the part 
of the business leader. 
 Development and strengthening of culturally-endorsed decision-making processes fully 
integrated into all day-to-day business operations. When the peculiarities existing in a 
particular cultural group is taken for granted, it becomes harder to set practices to which the 
members adapt. This is because cultural knowledge influences the decision-making 
processes  the decision motives, the situational demands and how the decision content 
translate into practices. 
 The Rwandan cultural (and generally African) view of time does not focus far into the future, 
but dwells more on past events and whatever is happening currently.  Future scheduled 
times cant be rushed, theres not always something you can do besides accept it and 
continue with a positive attitude otherwise will only make one more and more frustrated; 
 Self-control - closely relating to how future-time is of less importance, display any sort of 
negative feeling in public isnt always cherished. Though circumstances have potential to 
become frustrating, it is an important leadership quality NOT to display any sort of negative 
feeling in public. Rwandans have incredible sense of self-control and are careful not to offend 
or shame anyone in public; 
 Since values develop in interactions and through personal example, business leaders, being 
among the most visible promoters of organizational values, must act as role models of ethical 
behavior. Nothing will impact the organization more positively than a well-rounded and 
culturally-informed leader. 
Therefore, the need to adapt leadership styles and instruments that reflect the culture in which 
the business operates is both practically and theoretically important. 
5.6 Recommendations 
This research has sought to assess the most common leadership styles in companies in Rwanda, 
in order to build a theory of the predominant leadership styles and culture in Rwanda in the 
context of the post-genocide era. Given the changing nature of business in the post-genocide 
context, the following recommendations are offered. 
5.6.1 Societal cultural obligation in labor time - business leaders should find room to 
accommodate the societal social obligation within which they operate. For example, an 
employee is expected to be absent from work or abscond attending a business meeting 
because s/he has to attend a weeding for relatives, and neighbors funerals and political 
meetings. These are the necessary social obligation of citizenship, whereas going to work is 
considered as an individual obligation (Parkin, 2013). In African culture, society social 
cohesion prevails over individuality. It is often said that in Africa, to be a neighbor implies 
social obligations. Equally, (it can be said) to operate a business in African implies 
accommodating societal cultural obligations. 
5.6.2 Polychronic time - it is desirable for business leaders to be less strict on time. In Africa, 
time is social not commercial  the past and future is the same. For example, the word ejo 
is used for both yesterday and tomorrow. Time is so elastic that people are not cautious about 
end time. What matters is to start and finish. Working long hours is normal in Rwanda; in fact 
important meetings happen very late whereas in western culture such as France, Germany 
and the UK are strict on time. The business leaders (particularly from outside) who are more 
flexible, particularly to allow the incorporation of social obligations, which may take 
precedence over schedules in some circumstances or different time concepts may increase 
their effectiveness as leaders. 
5.6.3 High context culture - respect social hierarchies in interaction with one another and in 
professional relationships. In African cultures, the society is structured. Men, women and 
children play different roles. These social structures define space for men, space for women 
and space for children. For example children are not allowed look in the eyes of elder and are 
obliged to be passive listeners when talking to elders as a sign of respect. Leaders should 
observe and be cautious of social structures, social hierarchies and social space. However, 
there is a push for gender equality which conflicts with traditional roles. Theres a need for 
adaptation (which need not mean abandonment of traditions) in the other direction. 
5.6.4 Rwandanizing the senior management. The globalisation of business may be a fact  but 
without the legitimacy brought about by outside businesses understanding the cultural 
sensitivities a situation of colonialism might be brought about. For example, participants 
interviewed for this research confirmed that international non-government organisations 
(NGOs) are required to renew their licenses and their vehicle carry temporary registration 
number plates (known as Immatriculation Temporaire  IT plates).  
The research findings show that in some instances there are mismatches between leaders 
conduct and societal expectations. A leader is expected to have integrity, be honest, have genuine 
love and sacrifice for others. These are expectations shared by the people within the organisation 
as well as those that it serves. It is when the leader otherwise fall short of these expectations that 
their position might become tenuous. 
For example favouritism was identified as one of the barriers to staff motivation. Whereas 
behaviour approval or disapproval is subjective, a great deal of this perception of favouritism 
referred to being partial which might lead to lack of trust of the leader by the staff. 
The research advises as well that leaders need to be seen as assertive and confident to make 
decisions as opposed to being laisez-faire or passive which makes the leaders unreliable. The 
expectation is that leaders should be seen to exercise authority in addressing issues brought to 
them as opposed to being too consultative. Performance is crucial for creating a reputation of 
successful organisation which implies hardworking and builds confidence among members. 
5.7 Areas for future research 
The review of existing literature as discussed the previous chapters, it is evident that information 
is still lacking in a number of areas related to cultural influence on leadership styles.  Whilst 
research undertaken for this thesis addressed some of the topics highlighted in literature review, 
there are a number of areas on which further research would be beneficial. 
5.7.1 For instance, it would be valuable to conduct a similar research on a broader scale, 
adopting a similar model  studying the most common leadership styles and state of culture 
in companies in Rwanda. This would help to highlight the influence of culture, and possibly to 
map the changes over time in the post-genocide context. The study would also explain degree 
to which the proportion of Rwandalien-Rwandigenous cultures influences the prevalent 
leadership styles might also be investigated, and might give an indication of how realistic the 
leadership styles are convective. 
5.7.2 Alternatively, one could scale up this research, exploring cultural influence on elements of 
leadership (styles) as they appear in other sectors not covered in this research such as 
education, politics, and military.  
5.7.3 It would be valuable to conduct research that explores the depth of a phenomenon within 
certain contexts  segregating the findings of this research according to different cultural 
backgrounds. For example difference (in terms of leadership styles) between Rwandaliens and 
Rwandigenous groups. 
5.7.4 Different cultures will conceptualize leadership in different ways and so may regard the 
findings of this research as misjudged or fuzzy. It should be pointed out to the readers of this 
thesis that the interpretation is necessarily cultural-bound within the Rwandan culture, largely 
the post-genocide cultural context. It would be worthy for a non-Rwandan researcher to 
conduct a similar research, adopting a similar model, in order to compare the findings. 
5.7.5 The scope and focus of this research was limited only to middle managers. The researcher 
was aware of the possible critique that it is mostly from the perspectives of leaders rather 
than the led. However, the objective of the research sought to understand leadership styles, 
from the perspective of policy and decision making process standpoint. Henceforth, it would 
be valuable to conduct further research to examine the same issues but with a micro focus to 
capture the views of followers (non-managerial staff). 
5.8 Summary of the chapter 
Reflections upon the research, the research design and strategy adopted are made, with 
weaknesses and challenges of the process highlighted. The findings of the research are 
summarized and discussed in the context of the literature review, again using the theoretical 
frameworks presented in the literature review (leadership styles, influencing factors and culture) 
as a basis for the analysis.  
The emergent themes synthesized into a framework that is examined in greater detail. It is stated 
that, on the strength of the findings presented earlier, the framework may represent greater 
understanding of the subject than the sum of its components in isolation. It suggests that, where 
various theoretical perspectives will enrich and inform their leadership styles, leaders should be 
concerned with managing a sense making process.  
The synthesis framework presents the potential for assisting organizations and leaders adapt their 
leadership in way acceptable in the culture they operate in. In turn, however, this may call for 
leaders operating in other cultures to divorce their own culture. It is probable that this may be 
one reason why leaders would reluctant to adapt their leadership styles to other cultures. And 
perhaps the same reason that there seems to be a scarcity of literature on practical examples of 
such a culture focused leadership styles. The discussion portion of the thesis concludes by offering 
thoughts for context of leadership styles, before some thoughts on appropriate future research 
are offered. 
Finally, when dealing with human behavioral issues such as culture, it is very important not to 
underestimate the role of culture in the process. The findings of this research showed that culture 
appear to have a powerful influence on how leadership styles are conceived. However, making 
sense of that influence requires a deeper immersion into the culture to try to understand what 
goes on within its members - crucial for understanding leadership styles. On the basis of the 
findings of this research, I conclude that it is critically important for research into leadership to 
analyze styles from a cultural context. Only then can the reader make sense of the style of 
leadership if they understand what happens inside the leaders mind. 
6. Appendices: 
6.1. Appendix - I: Research outline and participants profiles 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
Research conducted by: Nshuti Rugerinyange 
This field work is taking place in the fourth year of DBA study at Aberdeen Business School (ABS), 
The Robert Gordon University (RGU), Scotland - UK.  
1. Research objectives 
This research will explore the extent to which culture influences leadership styles. The intention 
is to gain a more detailed and in depth understanding of the emic/etic factors underlying 
leadership styles in organisations in Rwanda. The study industry is the services sector, and the 
subjects of the research are middle managers. 
2. Intended outcomes 
It is expected that this research will be of interest on several theoretical and practical grounds to 
guide leaders (policy and decision makers) and managers in business deal with challenges of 
cultural diversity in a work environment. It is intended to till out cultural values that have unique 
meaning (emic) in one context (Rwanda) from values of common meaning across cultures (etic). 
It is anticipated that an appropriate framework for studying leadership styles in terms of 
constructs and effectiveness will be developed with a view of understanding the leader-led 
relation metaphor. 
3. Informed Consent 
Details of participants in this research will be kept confidential at all times. Names and positions 
will not be referred to, instead, all participants will be known by a code. Only I will know which 
code belongs to which participant. Interviewees details will not be shared with any third parties. 
The data collected, including the paper notes taken will be kept in a secure location and will be 
destroyed within 6 years of completing this research (in accordance with good data protection 
practice). The data will be used only for the completion of this research and not for any further 
studies. 
4. Structure of the Research 
4.1 Narrative interview Methods 
A narrative interview is conducted in a one on one environment and is unstructured in its nature. 
Narrative interviews are appropriate for culture research because narrative stories or storytelling 
allows the interviewee to select, recollect and reflect on events within their own cultural context 
and language of their choice rather than in the cultural context and language chosen by the 
researcher (Bishop, 1994, p. 24). Its purpose is to draw out a participants account of events as 
experienced by the participant. The interviewer will have very little input into the conversation 
as to minimize any influence the interviewer may have on the participants words. The interviewer 
however may use prompts to ensure that the discussion is kept in the direction of the interview. 
The narrative interview is used to investigate issues perceived to be sensitive'. Sensitive in the 
sense that if revealed may have negative implications to the interviewee. In this research 
leadership is a sensitive issue because it is plainly translated as ubutegetsi (rule) which is 
perceived/associated with politics and synonymous with negative attributes. People do not like 
to be seen as 'ruler'. If somebody is asked whether he or she is a ruler, she is likely to deny it. 
Peoples desire to seen to be fair leads to understating the intensity of or portraying their 
behaviour to ideal norms/ stature  leadership as should be when asked to rate themselves on 
a 1 to 5 scale. The narrative interview provides a more sensitive approach as it draws information 
from interviewee in an unconscious manner. This is the rationale for the choice of the narrative 
interview technique for this research on leadership styles in Rwanda. Quantitative techniques will 
be used to reduce the volumes and quantity of transcribed data/text and put narratives into 
perspectives of the event/problem under study. Two major problems can be anticipated using 
the narrative interview: (a) the uncontrollable expectations of the interviewees which put a doubt 
over the strong claims of the narrative interview of being non-directive and (b) the possibility for 
interviewees portraying qualities perceived as ideal leader attributes or give purposeful account 
either to please the interviewer.  
To manage or minimize the uncontrollable expectations of the interviewees, the interviewer with 
present himself as if he knows very little about the subject or nothing about the events, while 
actual knowledge increases as the interview progresses. In addition the narrative interviews will 
be complemented by qualitative and quantitative techniques including a few observations and 
media analysis to make meaning of events and experiences that narrators report. 
4.2 Anticipated time commitment 
It is anticipated that each narrative interview will take about 45 minutes but no longer than one 
hour. After the narration has come to a natural end the interviewer will open for examinant 
questions. The interviewer translates examinant questions into immanent questions to complete 
the gaps in the story. Interviews will be conducted over a period of 3 to 4 months (the time taken 
to complete 20 rounds of narrative interviews). 
4.3 Method for selecting the research population 
Quota sampling is used to select the research population. This research examines the current 
state of Culture in light of the mass cultural convergence of diverse people of Rwandan descent 
(Rwandescents) in the post-genocide Rwanda. It seeks to examine leader-led relation in 
organisations in Rwanda from a two stratum culture perspective. For that purpose the research 
population is stratified into two stratums: (a) Rwandaliens, defined as people of Rwandan descent 
born or lived out of Rwanda for prolonged period of time to acquired foreign cultures, (b) 
Rwandigenous, defined as Rwandan who were born and have spent their entire in Rwanda.  A 
stratum is a subset of the population that share at least one common characteristic. The study 
industry is the services sector and companies in the sector are stratified into two categories: (a) 
the indigenous  this category mainly comprises of companies that were established before the 
genocide   and, (b) hybrid companies - mainly comprising of companies established after the 
genocide including subsidiaries of multinational companies and non-government organisations. 
Then convenience or judgment sampling is used to select the companies where research is carried 
out, as well as selecting subjects of the research who are middle managers. 
# Cultural Background Education 
Background 
Current 
position 
Working 
experiences 
(years) 
Organization 
1 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
2 Local/ Rwandigenous BA M. Manager 7+ Yes Non-Gov't 
3 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
4 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
5 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Multi-national 
6 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
7 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
8 Local/ Rwandigenous BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
9 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
10 Local/ Rwandigenous BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
11 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Non-Gov't 
12 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Corporate 
13 Local/ Rwandigenous MA M. Manager 20+ Yes Non-Gov't 
14 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 5+ Yes Private 
15 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA M. Manager 5+ Yes Private 
16 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
17 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
18 Rwandalien/ Foreign BA M. Manager 20+ Yes Non-Gov't 
19 Local/ Rwandigenous MA M. Manager 10+ Yes Public 
20 Rwandalien/ Foreign MA Sr. Manager 20+ Yes Non-Gov't 
4.4 Feedback through group presentation and discussion 
After the analysis, I intend to organize two group discussion sessions to present the preliminary 
findings for comments and feedback. The first session will be organized with a local University to 
seek feedback from the academic and research staff as well as students. The seconds will target 
managers in business and will be organized through sector working groups of which I am a 
member. I will be looking for opportunities for workshops, conferences and webinars. 
6.2. Appendix - II: Research plan and dissertation write-up phase 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
An indicative time schedule for 65,000 or so word DBA thesis to be completed during academic year 
2014 - 2015. 
Steps of the dissertation writing process 
Days/w
Start date End date 
Status 
Step One: Reading and research September to November 2013 Done 
a) Revise dissertation structure (sections and 
subsections) 
b) Construct a detailed plan of the 
dissertation 
c) Review of literature of the chosen theorists    Done 
Step Two: Initial writing September to December 2013  
a) Draft the various sections of the 
dissertation 
b) Undertake additional interviews  11th Nov 13 15th Nov 13 Done 
c) Transcription of interviews  11th Nov 13 29th Nov 13 Done 
d) Develop analysis framework  09th June 14 21st June 14 Done 
e) Analysis, supplementary literature review  02nd July 14 15th July 14 Done 
Step Three: The first draft August to December 2014 Done 
a) Compile and collate sections into first draft 
of dissertation 
 02nd Aug 13 02nd Dec 14 
b) Check the flow of the dissertation    Done 
c) Check the length of the dissertation    Done 
d) Submit first draft to supervisor for review   20th Dec 14 Done 
Requested Four months suspension Jan 2015  April 2015  
Step Four: Review of the final draft May 2015 - June 2015 Done 
a) Undertake any additional analysis and 
editing 
 May 2015 June 2015 
Requested three months extension July 2015 - September 2015 Done 
b) Check for errors     
c) Prepare for submission     
d) Final proof-read by supervisory team and 
final editing 
e) Compile bibliography     
f) Get the dissertation bound     
g) Submit dissertation     
Step Five: Doctoral oral examination September 2015 - November 2015 Pending 
a) Prepare for pre-oral examination     
b) Final doctoral oral examination     
c) Undertake any additional corrections     
d) Get the dissertation bound     
e) Submit dissertation     
6.3. Appendix - III: Supervisors letter 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
Study Title: TRADITIONAL AND HYBRID LEADERSHIP STYLES IN RWANDA 
Dear sir/Madame, 
This research study entitled Traditional and Hybrid leadership styles in Rwanda, by Nshuti 
Rugerinyange a doctoral research student at Aberdeen Business School (ABS), The Robert Gordon 
University (RGU), has been examined and acceptance for his doctoral thesis. Nshutis premise is 
that identical pieces of information can be interpreted differently by people from different culture 
because cultural values, behaviour, skills and social environment. It is this difference in 
interpretation and perception that he is interested in. The purpose of this research is by no means 
to judge the leadership in your organisation as effective or ineffective but rather to investigate 
cultural influence on Business Leadership styles in Rwanda. 
Attached to this letter is a questionnaire that asks a variety of questions about perceived leader 
behaviors, values and practice. I guarantee that responses will not be identified in the thesis or in 
any report or publication based on this research. 
If you have any questions or concerns about any aspect of the questionnaire, you may contact 
this student who is based in Rwanda via phone # (+250) 788 300-176 or myself by email: 
r.halsall@rgu.ac.uk I would like to assure you that this study has been reviewed and received 
ethics clearance by Research Ethics committee at Aberdeen Business School, The Robert Gordon 
University. 
Yours sincerely, 
Robert HALSALL 
Principal Supervisor 
mailto:r.halsall@rgu.ac.uk
6.4. Appendix - IV: Researcher letter 
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
Doctoral Research Field work: Nshuti Rugerinyange 
Traditional and Hybrid leadership styles in Rwanda 
I am a doctoral candidate at Aberdeen Business School (ABS), The Robert Gordon University 
(RGU). My research thesis is in the areas of Business Leadership styles in Rwanda.  
I would like to request permission to carry out my research at Bank de Kigali, Head Office. The 
nature of my research requires that I spend time with senior managers in private companies, 
government and non-government organizations observing firsthand their leadership styles 
through daily conduct of business. The intention is not to judge the best, all views are useful and 
valid, but to gain a more detailed and in depth understanding of the factors that influence their 
leadership styles.  
It is in this context that would really appreciate the opportunity to spend one to two weeks 
shadowing and talking to managers at Bank de Kigali to know how they respond to the dynamic 
environment of a developing country. 
I guarantee that this research is purely academic and expert views will not be identified in the 
thesis or in any report or publication based on this research. I promise not to share any 
information that identifies your institution with anyone outside my research group which includes 
me and my supervisors. 
This study has been reviewed and received ethics clearance by Research Ethics committee at 
Aberdeen Business School, The Robert Gordon University. 
Yours sincerely, 
NSHUTI S. Rugerinyange 
6.5. Appendix - V: Narrative interview discussion points 
Discussion points 
1. I would like to hear about yourself (background) - how long you have been working/in 
service for, and your career progression. 
2. Your view of Management or your approach to management? 
3. Education  Your view of the importance of education? Any example of a significant event 
in your education process which you think was important. 
4. Experience  Well talk about your work experiences. 
5. Talk about Rwandan culture. I would be interested to hear your 
understanding/interpretation of a common expression in Kinyarwanda  Abanyarwanda 
ntubazi (literally translated as you dont know/understand banyarwanda) what is your 
understanding of this expression. 
6. I would also be interested to hear how you think the Rwandan people/culture have shaped 
your approach to management. 
7. I would also be interested to hear your view on aspects such as family, gender, age, 
position, power, (authority, community, groups, family (close/extended), individual, social 
8. Examples of how the above aspects of culture influence your day to day work 
(management or leadership) activities? 
Anything you would like to comment on or question. 
6.6 Appendix - VI: Transcribed Interview texts  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
Transcribed Interviews 
Interviewee1 
Thank you very much for accepting to talk to me to discuss my research. To introduce myself, I 
am a doctoral student at The Robert Gordon University. My research interest is in the areas of 
leadership and culture. My research title is Traditional and hybrid leadership styles in Rwanda  
looking at cultural influences on ones leadership styles. Perhaps to give you a little background 
to my own interest in this subject. Many Rwandans were born, lived outside for many years, and 
after the 1994 war, the returned from places/countries where they were living. They had acquired 
cultures, beliefs and even practices that are not necessarily Rwanda. The country through RDB 
has since been attracting investors especially foreigners to come and invest in Rwanda. Now my 
question of research - Im trying to investigate if those people coming outside Rwanda  whether 
of Rwandan origin or completely foreigners whether their practices can really work in Rwanda. 
For instance the RDB website, they say  RDB is modeled on international best practices examples 
of Singapore and Costa Rica and have advisors with global entrepreneurs and experts from World 
Bank etc. Now the question is Can those international best practices be applied to work in 
Rwanda Or is Rwanda at the risk of becoming a halfway house of the so-called International 
best practices? I would be interested in hearing your views on a number of issues. Theres no 
wrong or right answer. My objective is to see what many Rwandans think as general prospects. 
Interviewee: Certainly its an opinion but ofcourse niko mutubeshya (thats what you researchers 
tell us).  
Interviewer: My objective is to get a general perception of what people think, its not for me to 
judge what is right or wrong and Im not asking you to tell me what is good or bad. So, well talk 
about your background, because your background informs your thinking and your view or 
appreciation of the world around you. Well also talk about your managerial role or experience, 
and your educational background and we also talk about the Rwandan context/culture, your 
views of the Rwandan people, the culture etc 
You will have the chance to ask me any questions at the end of our discussion. Do you have a 
question on the structure of the interview? 
Interviewee: Hahaaaa Interviews zirasekeje (interviews are funny) how long will this discussion 
take? 
Interviewer: About 45 minutes 
Interviewee: Ok 
Interviewer: If we could start by telling me about yourself. 
Interviewee: My background briefly is that of a boy who was born in a refugee camp, born outside 
Rwanda. 
Interviewer, probe: Sorry where were you born? 
Interviewee: From Uganda, but of course am a star, I was born in Kampala but in the early stages 
of my life I found myself in a refugee camp so my background is shaped largely by the status of 
any ordinary refugee person who finds his/her parents living outside their country for quite a long 
time. You said educational background will come later? 
Interviewer: No, carry on  where did you go to school? 
Interviewee: I went to school in the camp; I did my primary education in the camp in the Ugandan 
system and completed primary seven, then went on to secondary/high school and find myself 
now in an environment that is composed largely by so many Ugandan tribes. For the very first 
time as a refugee boy you find yourself in an environment where you are intermingling with so 
many tribes in that country. Education in Uganda was on merit meaning you had to pass.  
But at later stages in my education, I started realizing that I was not a citizen. You are not a 
national. Actually, you are a citizen but not a national. You start those feelings. I remember - I 
think it was in senior four (grade4), actually for me it was a bit peculiar because I remember 
campaigning for leadership roles in the school for the first time. The school had 800 students. One 
of the opposition (opponent) students came and found I had campaigned for Head boy and he 
shouts on the top of his voice ako nakanyarwanda  local Lunyankole language for that little 
one is a Rwandan. You see, at the school we thought that we were Ugandans, now someone 
says that he is a refugee   Now, all of a sudden you see people moving away from your queue. 
Then you start realizing that theres something wrong with you. You start to realize that somehow 
you do not belong to that country. So during the war I actually came to Rwanda during the war 
(middle)  thats another story all together. Thats also another aspect that shaped my life to join 
the struggle knowing that that place wasnt your home. Going to university was not possible; 
anyway, I hadnt passed to go to Makerere University Kampala but I hard the enough 
marks/points/grade to go to any other tertiary institution I found myself in the struggle (war). 
Then I went back to school after 1995. I mean after the war (should I call it a revolution). 
Completed my University Education, and after spending 6years doing a management course. I 
then joined, but slightly maybe about my professional background. Before I joined the University, 
I worked for the immigration department under the Ministry of the Interior at the time a high 
school student (high school graduate). 
Interviewer, Probe: Interior ministry of Rwanda? 
Interviewee: Yes, then when University re-opened after the war, and graduated in the year 2000. 
When I graduated/finished studies, I went to search for a job like any other person, then got a job 
with National Unity & Reconciliation commission (NURC) and served as an Internal Auditor. 
Within 1.5yrs (you were taking about career) I had shot to the position of Director of 
Administration and Finance (DAF) just within 1.5yrs. 
Interviewer, Probe: How did you get this job? 
Interviewee: its very funny because its in two ways.  First when I joined as an Internal Auditor; I 
had previously worked as an Intern. The commission (NURC) had opened (established) in 1999 
and I had worked there as an Intern for 3months. Because the commission was still building it-
self and I had finished my University education, I made an application but because they knew me, 
I didnt do the interviews. I had to go and open the Internal Audit unit that didnt exist. But finally, 
what is interesting later when government institutions were structuring themselves; they did a 
review of all staff and we did interviews to confirm me in the position of DAF. They hired an 
independent skills audit done by a Kenyan company (dont remember the name) and we were 
confirmed in our positions. And by 2005, I was confirmed in my position and was even 
restructured rather than being DAF, I was a Director of planning, resources and management. 
That was the position I took on after the skills audit. Then by 2007 there was an open entry for a 
position of project coordinator  Project was financed by DFID and UNDP, that one I applied and 
competitively did test and interviews, then took over that position around September 2007. 
Then 2009 I applied for a job in an International organization (UNDP and IREX) both organizations 
offered me jobs; In the UNDP the job title was National Program Manager and in IREX the position 
was Deputy Program Manager. Both organizations offered me the job but UNDP did the 
placement immediately. I took up the job position at UNDP for one year and then IREX because it 
was funded by USAID; when they got money in 2010 they called me and took the position. So I 
spent one year at UNDP as National Program Manager, and then took up the IREX, Position of 
Deputy Program Manager in 2010, this is where Im currently working, there are twists going on, 
and beginning next year 2012, I have been communicated that I will take up a position of Deputy 
Programme Manager for the country office. I will be Deputy Program Manager in charge of 
finance and grants. So briefly, thats my profile. 
Interviewer: Thanks. Talk to me about your view of management. What do you think of 
management? 
Interviewee: My view and understanding of management is that management is both a science 
and an art. It is a science in a sense that you can go to school and undertake course in 
management. For instance I did finance, I did courses in accounts, I did courses in marketing, I did 
courses in so many fields. Many of those courses are very scientific in a sense that they will tell 
you that the best style of management is - good manager have these attributes, if you want to 
succeed in management the following are things you can do. It is a science because you can go to 
school and learn management. It is an art in a sense that management is innovative, an art in a 
sense that people who have never gone to school can create their management styles, its an art 
in the sense that each individual is endowed with personal skills of managing especially human 
resources, managing other material resources, technology, finances. You find that one creates 
his/her own style as a person. So personally thats how I see management, if you want to become 
a very good manager, you need to be a person who is able to blend both.  On one side, you need 
to have management skills that are scientific but on the other side you need to be a skillful person 
to create your own management style, because at the end of the day the objective as a manager 
is to achieve your goals. And to achieve your goals its not something that is cast in stones, that 
this is how you should do. As a manager you have to always constantly revise your own style- if 
this doesnt work then you know how to handle it. 
Interviewer: Obviously you have a lot of experience, what would you say is your management 
styles? 
Interviewee: Aha Thats a very tough one. You know when you are a manager. My experience is 
that as a manager you are of course managing resources and one of the most critical resources 
of any organization is the human resource. In my own experience and capacity as a manager, my 
own management style was that of being able to work with, working through members of the 
organization, build team spirit, communicate effectively, agree on target but have the skills to 
effectively engage the team with an objective, purpose for all to achieve that target. My 
management style in short is the ability to engage, to build a coherent team that understands 
institutional objectives and having the style to motivate fellow employees. So, Im emphasizing 
the human resource but at the end of the day, the style is about bringing on board all the 
resources - be it human, financial, technology, information etc all is necessary but the most, most 
important resource for any organization that touches all is the human resource. So if you dont 
have the skill to properly manage human resource it, and coordinate. In fact you can use the word 
coordinate to describe management. 
 Interviewer: Do you think these are skills that are available to all/everybody or uniquely 
specific to you. Is that shared by many people? 
 Interviewee: Absolutely not, and that is of course part of the reason. The answer is no thats 
not something that is shared by all. To make a justification for the no, thats why you find partly 
the reason why you find some companies are successful, other not successful. Im saying this from 
experience because the organization I left (NURC), all the trouble that the Executive Secretary has 
(I understand from sources there) are because of his inability to coordinate staff. It is his inability 
to motivate employees, his inability to communicate quite well the objectives, his inability for the 
employees to feel comfortable with him (kumwibonamo). Its actually both the Executive 
Secretary and someone I left in Finance department; I understand they are failing when it comes 
to team building. Be it the one who replaced my boss as head of the organization, he has also 
failed. Even if I go back, everything they tell me - it is their inability to coordinate staff not because 
salaries have increased also, other spirit, cohesion has broken down. So that is why you asked 
that - what is my management style? His management style is that he picks a few individuals in 
the organization (akabashyira kwibere) and gives them all the favours and they fell strong. When 
other people think they are left out, they feel that are not in the architecture/structure of the 
organization, they feel there are people who are more important than others, then the 
organization will fail by all means. 
Interviewer: What do you think influences or has influenced your management style?  
Interviewee: At the beginning, I said management was an art. In the art you create your own 
innovations - how you deal with people. For example, no one will tell you to be closer to what we 
call support staff. Good managers wine and dine with what we call the support staff. But what 
influenced me so much is that I had training. To be honest, there is scientific approach to 
management because management is taught in school, you go to school and learn management 
even though people who learn management dont apply the same but it is something that you 
can go in school and they show you the best practices. You learn about organization that have 
been successful and learn why some organizations are successful while others are not. Basically 
what influenced was because I had training enough to know what management is all about. 
Interviewer probe: When you say training - what kind of training are you talking about?  
Interviewee: Is it University training which I did for 6years but as time went-by when on the job, 
you get on the job training and the peer to peer or organization to organization exchanges to see 
the people in the same field, how they do their job. You meet and discus but, basically me I would 
say the university education gave me a very good foundation to understanding what management 
is all about.     
Interviewer probe: You said that Management is something we learn in school, and Im sure you 
were not alone in school, you were in a class with others but on the other hand you are saying 
not everybody who went to school have the same management style. These organizations 
exchange etc.. You remember you said this is a kind of unique management style. My question is 
what do you think influenced your unique management style? 
Interviewee: Yeah I dont know whether it is unique 
Interviewer probe: Im saying in a sense that not many people share the same management 
style. 
Interviewee: I didnt say not many. They could be many but not all people do that because my 
experience shows me that not everybody has the same management style but there could be 
other people, because even myself there are role models that I learnt from. Probably what you 
may want to say that I hadnt said of course I give training top priority (in terms of influences) but 
when you finish school, there are role models. I didnt start at managerial position, I started from 
the lower rank in the organization but you learn from the role model. I think to me its been an 
opportunity because the people I started with (job) - of course two ladies both have been very 
successful while managing their organizations. Especially on the aspect of motivation of staff  
thats an important thing. Staff motivation be it my very first former boss, she was very good at 
managing the HR functions  she did a good job. Be it her replacement she also did well of course 
what I can add is that when you have the opportunity to have the role model  the people you 
look up to and you have seen their style (management styles)  so when you blend that with your 
own training  you get something that is strong. 
Interviewer probe: These role model you are talking about, are they Rwandans? 
Interviewee: Yes- both of them. 
Interviewer probe: Born and educated in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: Both of them had their education outside. They all got their education from Uganda 
but also those things you talked about on the job training. From time to time you get consultants, 
they come and you work together- some are managerial others are technical. Those are 
contributing factors but when you analyze, everything has a foundation. All other things come 
and add to the foundation. So when you have had good training and when you come to work and 
see someones style, then say I ever learnt this in school when you work with a consultant, you 
also learn from them. But even though everybody went school, but theres also the personality 
of people. People will go to school but individual personality influences. However much you may 
have gone to Harvard, and if you went to Harvard and you meet with a student from America 
when you are coming from Nshungerezi (refugee camp in Uganda)  even if you come out with 
the same degree, you still have the environment that shaped you. It is going to influence how you 
manage your organization. 
Interviewer: You kept referring to education as the contributing factor. What is the most 
significant event in your education life that you think has contributed to your view of 
management? 
Interviewee: Really, Really what now? 
Interviewer: I just need to understand why you think education has contributed to the way you 
approach management. 
Interviewee: There are things that are not easy to see or remember. What I can tell you on my 
own case, during my undergraduate studies, one thing that has contributed to my way of thinking 
it was at time when our country had just come out of war. Even getting lecturers was not easy 
and I think our class was one of the most privileged because almost 80% of the courses were 
delivered by lecturers that came from one of highly rated institutions in Africa (Makerere) and 
were very good. Professionally they were experienced in offering management courses. So, to be 
honesty those guys, I dont want to single out individuals but the majority of the professors we 
got from Makerere University shaped the way we started understanding things from the 
management point of view. I remember my lecturers in finance, field of management course, they 
were really wonderful. There are times when you are influenced by people individually not even 
the courses but individually when somebody comes- like when you hear that they have called a 
professor from Harvard - when they come, even he teaches for one hour it may prove to be better 
than 50hours you will have spent (learnt) from someone you dont trust. It becomes like 
mentorship. So personally in my education I was privileged to have competent, qualified lecturers 
from Makerere University who taught really a number of courses. They were really many. 
Interviewer probe: So you think you benefited from those lecturers from Makerere University? 
Interviewee: Certainly, they made a significant impact not only on how I did the job but 
appreciating the course. It was an important choice. Because of the experience you would see in 
them, and by the way we had bench marks because there times when we didnt get them, then 
you could see the difference when they were not available.  
Interviewer probe: What did you do? 
Interviewee: We had local professors sometimes we had even foreigner like Indians but no 
professors have had a profound influence on my management style like those guys from 
Makerere University. They were really wonderful; anybody would tell you that those guys were 
extremely wonderful. 
Interviewer: Lets talk a little bit more about your experience; you said earlier that you started 
as an Internal Auditor and rose up to being a Director. If you could tell me an event  Im really 
interested in stories because stories bring out insight about influences. In ones life etc... Is there 
anything in particular in your work/career that you look back and think it has helped shape the 
way you manage people? 
Interviewee: The first important thing generally speaking- when you start an organization from 
the scratch. I was part of the team that started the organization. We didnt have structures 
(system)  we were there to build all the structures (systems) - those Internal Audits. I remember 
putting in place all the staff rules and regulations, I remember drafting the financial manual for 
the organization. I remember when we called an independent audit team to come and do skills 
audit. The experience of starting something from the scratch is the best teacher any one can have. 
Everything you put your hands on, and sometimes it is the first time you are doing that. Another 
significant even that has had significant impact, I started in the period when Rwanda was in what 
I would call a shift from traditional way of doing things to a little bit of scientific way of doing 
things. When I started my job, I remember it was the time the office of Auditor General started; 
Procurement Authority instituted all those things that make people accountable started. All those 
things (Institutions/mechanism) started in the year 2005. Again at National level - that was at 
organization level  At national level again I was privileged to have started work at a time when 
the country was reforming. On many of the occasions you would find that everybody was learning 
new things (new way of work). You go to procurement; they tell you this is not the ordinary way 
of doing procurements. Theres the procurement code, reporting systems have now changed. 
Theres now an auditor who will be coming every year to audit you. So, there must be scientific 
ways of doing financial reports. I was engaged at a time/ period when the whole nation was 
undergoing some kind of reforms in the staffing and processes and systems. All those experiences 
shaped how you deal with things- everything was learning. 
Interviewer probe: How does that shape you? 
Interviewee: Of course it was a kind of learning. As you learn, everything you learn, you put it into 
practice. When a country is undergoing reforms, e.g. the public finance system, the ministry of 
finance had started putting in place the requirements (for financial management) that alone 
pushes you learn  the aim of financial procedures look at staff payments, the public service 
ministry was also reforming actually the public service reform is still going on. It is always in 
constant reforms. There were these new labor laws etc In a way all those factors contributed. 
In terms of narrowing down - I would say theres nothing that has had serious impact like that 
experience. 
Interviewer probe: For instance if you could give an example how for instance the new 
requirements made you think that you need to have some coordination to achieve certain goals. 
Basically an example of shift that influenced your planning skills or approach to management. 
Interviewee: Lets talk about my function that changed overtime. Under my portfolio, there were 
a lot of things each of them shaped me in some ways. There was finance, there was HR, there was 
Administration, and there was planning. Lets start on the core function like planning, I was 
amazed that in this country, many people (I have live experience from evaluation by DFID that 
concluded that out of 8 organizations, only the NURC had a strategic plan and it was put on 
record) knew how to do strategic plan. I remember in 2002 when Rwanda started the PRSP 
previously known as (Poverty Reduction Strategy) as the planning officer I always constantly 
networking and dealing with donor and I was introduced to PRSP. And PRSP was northing apart 
from planning. I remember the first strategic plan we had/developed at NURC (2002-2005) I 
played a key role. To understand when someone says whats a log frame for an organization to 
develop it has to have all those instruments. I was still green because I had spent only one year in 
the organization (or actually one in service) then you start developing strategic plan. Though we 
had consultants, I had to work very closely with them. Progressively I found myself becoming the 
focal point for EDPRS. The PRSP graduated into EDPRS I think we had 2 PRSPs up to 2008, then 
EDPRS 2008-2012. All those processes have had an impact in as far as planning is concerned. But 
mid-way, I had consultants who used to come from time to time to train us on things like result 
based management, log frames, Monitoring & Evaluation. You get to understand the intrinsic 
aspects of processes in the organization. What are you looking for to be able to plan whether 
resources or activities. Another core function I mentioned. I was in charge of finance, our country 
started financial reform in 2002, which was the time that I personally was starting in management 
 now what were the financial requirements? They were telling you have new ways of doing 
financial management; we have new ways of managing organization stock/resources, new ways 
of requesting funds from government treasury. Basically everything was new. Procurement 
Authority and Audit Generals office were starting. These to me was a process reforms and are 
still ongoing even after I left the government but Im among the first people  one of the first new 
bid of government finance managers that started with reforms in HR, and all those (Process) when 
they were introduced. Maybe you want to ask - how does it influenced me. All these processes 
are regulated by law. For example you are going to procurement you have a code, reporting has 
a code. This is when we started what they used to call finance manuals. When Auditors came, the 
first thing they asked was the financial manual. There were rules/laws that regulate. Of course it 
wasnt even ones own style. It was about your code. The question was  what is your code? 
Interviewer: Still on this issue of management style. Management involves making decisions. In 
your previous roles as Director of Administration and Finance or as National program manager 
and even your current role as Deputy Programme Manager, is there a management decision or 
initiative youve taken in recent days/times. Any major decision you may have taken in recent 
times.  
Interviewee: As a manager. You know, decision making in an organization - we always have a 
problem that most of the time, decision making is always at the top. In many vertical 
organizations, you find that line managers hardly takes decisions. But maybe lets look at the 
vertical level; there are a number of decisions. Many of them I have even forgotten. Basically the 
job of a manager is always deciding I can imagine you are interested in policy decisions. 
Interviewer: Not really, any decision you can think of. I am interested in the process of how to 
deal with decision making. 
Interviewee: Oh, there are many. Let me give you an example. When I was DAF, the first finance 
manual we did, it was decided at department level communicated to the team, director and 
manager; it was accepted, adopted and got a go ahead to be implemented. As a team in the 
finance department, we developed the manual and until now it is still in place. 
Interviewer: I think you answered my next question. Could you maybe take me through the 
process how you developed that manual? 
Interviewee: Yeah, The way we developed that manual. First of all a manual is a guideline. A 
document to guide you on how you do certain things. For instance finances are quite many. How 
do you manage stocks? We had vehicles, we have fuel, we had petty cash, we had bank money, 
we had HR, we had laws  you know. So what we did, we sat down and said that here at the 
commission, we dont have any guideline for us to be able to do things in a professional way, we 
need to have a document that guides us. So, when we got the go-ahead to do it, we started from 
scratch. It was very interesting that there was no official manual in the entire government system. 
If there was one, we would have adopted it. Like now I understand the government has a 
policy/document. Of course some institutions have their own policies. We sourced from the None 
Government Organization (NGO) world, from the International None Government Organizations, 
we used their manuals and we were comparing with the existing laws at that time. I remember 
we got into a conflict when we wanted to have petty cash of 10,0000Rwf but someone would tell 
you that petty cash shouldnt exceed 20,000Rwf. Until when we said we had our own things - 
dealing with complex issues. Our first manual we developed the petty cash limit was 150,000Rwf, 
and was approved. So we did a draft and presented it to the management. That draft was a 
product of so many manuals from other organizations. They read it and gave us comment and 
time for corrections and amendments. Then manual went to the board (as highest body of the 
commission) for approval. They approved it with some amendment. I personally liked the way 
they did it (approval). They did it in managerial and technical way. The head of institutions signed 
it, the head of finance signed it and the approval from the board. Then we shared our manual 
with the Office of the Auditor General and the ministry of finance. That is also the way we 
developed the HR manual that we didnt have at the time. Actually its not HR manual but staff 
rules and regulations detailing things like what happens when staffs comes late to work, under 
what circumstance can a staff contract be terminated etc We did all that in consultation with 
the labor law but we wanted a customized/tailored staff rules and regulations that is not in 
conflicts with the labor law in Rwanda but also a manual, the NURC see as being governed by the 
manual. 
Interviewer probe: Who else was involved in the development of the manual? Did you hire a 
consultant? 
Interviewee: No, no, no, on both occasions, we never hired any consultants. We used a team of 
our own staff in the department. But also other staff outside the department, both manuals 
(finance & HR), the majority of the members who participated were those concerned. But for the 
purpose of always being inclusive, we always requested one member from each department to 
come on board. We gave those assignments and time to deliver, if they failed to meet deadline, 
we would give them more time until we produced the two documents which became the guiding 
documents to staff and the management of resources. 
Interviewer probe: How were those manual communicated to all staff?  
Interviewee: As I said first of all, they were developed by staff. The organization (NURC) used to 
have weekly meetings. Every week there was a Management meeting chaired by the Executive 
Secretary, who is technically the top person in the institution. The senior management team is 
allowed to endorse some of these documents pending approvals from the board. So, the first 
communication was through the management meeting which is always representative of every 
department. Another communication channel that came was (Internet is not something that 
came very recent- its been there for some time) we communicated through the internet. Second 
was to communicate to the board. When they approved, every department owned a copy. And 
tasked every director to communicate it in every departmental meeting. Each department had a 
fortnight meeting (every 2 weeks). So every important decision by the management had to be 
communicated we didnt want a staff to say there was anything, they didnt know in organization. 
It was a must. 
Interviewee: I think its a bit of challenge because, theres one Im used to and the one Im using 
now (where I currently work). 
Interviewer: Currently in the None Government Organization world its a little bit different. When 
I was at UNDP, there communication was through internet. And it was email at global level. The 
head of UNDP (globally) communicates to Country Programs (offices) and when it comes to 
country office, the head of the institution communicates to the Directors. Directions 
communicate within the departments. If it was something that concern all UNDP staff globally, 
they have a connection through the internet. One single email could get to every UNDP staff 
globally. That would mean that communication concerns all staff but depending on the 
information, it would be filtered depending on who should have the information and would be 
sent through UNDP a group emails. For instance staff can communicate among themselves, 
department (e.g: democratic government department). 
Interviewer probe: Is that the same communication style you are using at your present job. 
Interviewee: Here at IREX. I still dont understand IREX communication style. Since I joined IREX, 
I only communicate with my supervisor and other project people. The structure of IREX starts at 
the Headquarters (HQ) in the United States, and then you have Country Programme office nothing 
like regional offices. So, in IREX, only the head of project (Programme Manager) deals with the 
HQ. Within the CP we dont have that system where all staff meet together. If say project (X) has 
a communication, its within themselves. If we in project xx have a communication, it is among us 
alone. If theres something important to the staff, it comes from the administrative office, IREX is 
a bit tricky. It has people called chief of party (CoP) but you are a chief of party for your project. 
There was one man that they cheated by calling him a Country Director. Who used to 
communicate important decisions but again, decisions are based on projects. 
Interviewer probe: Within the project staff themselves, how do you communicate? Is it by 
memos, emails? 
Interviewee: Email, basically emails. We have many channels of communication. We have phones 
- are official - I can call you and communicate something on the phone. But if you want something 
to have an official impact, you use the internet (Email). 
Interviewer: What is your sitting arrangement? 
Interviewee: The sitting arrangement does not apply. It applies where you have those vertical 
arrangements where you have the boss and his/her subordinates. For us, it is just one project 
sitting in one room. The Director (maybe) has a separate room and the rest of the staff sit in what 
we call work stations. We dont sit in a way of hierarchy  the traditional way of sitting (sitting 
arrangement). 
Interviewer probe: How would you compare the sitting arrangement at IREX, UNDP, and NURC? 
Interviewee: Hahaha At UNDP it was very much confused. They were saying that sitting 
arrangement was based on programs/department. But practically it was based on the availability 
of office space. For instance, if a person came in department and theres no space on their floor 
(department floor), and theres space say on the floor of department XX, then thats where will 
sit. Why? It didnt matter because UNDP had the intranet system and decisions were made on 
the intranet, you can authorize anything by intranet. At the end of the day it does not matter 
whether I sit on the fifth floor and others (in the department) are sitting on the last floor. They 
were few sitting on the same floor and they didnt need to move around for signature, you could 
sign on the intranet. Then at the end one of them prints out. At UNDP, Ideally they should sit by 
program but practically it based on availability 
Interviewer probe: Do they sit in the same room-open space? 
Interviewee: I wouldnt call UNDP open space. Ideally thats what it is because you may find about 
four people in one room, but still there will be small partitions/closed. Talking about open space 
we were used to is big room where the boss and deputes sit in one room. But for UNDP, they 
have rooms. My understanding open space is indeed as per the word, for UNDP offices are always 
closed. And at the NURC, it was very much departmentalized. You could see hierarchy. You could 
see it from the top person, and the deputies in the way they sit and then the staff. Its very much 
departmentalized- observable to anyone. You asked to go to a certain department; they tell you 
that that is the Directors office. 
Interviewer probe: Looking at the systems you have worked in, whats your view of those three 
arrangements? 
Interviewee: Personally, I liked the open space. It is a little bit free. In those closed systems (which 
are indeed closed) in a sense that it creates significant gaps between the boss and the rest of 
subordinates. When I moved from government to the UNDP I could really see the gap was bridged 
to see that theres no boss. You can move at one moment and go to the office of Country Director 
and you say hi and you can go with a cup of tea and say hi? How was your night? Something 
you can never do in the government system. In the government system, you will take months to 
meet your boss or even fail to get him/talk to your boss. The open space is very important (good) 
- it is very informal but also formal. Informal in a sense that you can always pop in the office of 
your boss, and say hi to him/her with a cup of tea, we have this and that problem and the problem 
gets solved immediately. The other system (closed) - it is always booking appointments. If you 
need someone it takes time and decisions delay, it creates that feeling that theres a boss and the 
subordinates? 
Interviewer: Talking about boss and the subordinates, whats your view of expressing opinions in 
Rwanda context: Do Rwandans express their opinions freely to their bosses? How do you deal 
with differences in opinions from your subordinates? 
Interviewee: This one I dont know. This is just my own feeling. In that first system, the impression 
I have is that on many occasions the bosss word is always the final. That is to say, you can discuss 
with the boss but bosses hardly change their opinion. Chances of changing bosss opinion are very 
minimal. Unless if its something that has been discussed in a boarder management meeting but 
not the one-on-one. When the boss tells you that you have to do this activity, and you start to 
explain to him or her, chances are that the boss will not listen. Perhaps the boss can be influenced 
other peoples opinions in a meeting as bigger group. This happens most often to finance 
managers  usually what you do (as a finance manager) is to tell the boss to sign for you. It used 
to happen in institutions where the boss took decisions (financial) regardless of guidelines in 
place. The good thing with open space system, it breaks the complex barrier, when you remove 
the complex barrier between you and the boss. The bad thing with the first system, the boss is 
the boss; any word from him/her is often treated with high respect as (a law or order). In the 
open space system, theres that room for the employees/staff to challenge the boss and express 
a different opinion. You say to the boss, what if we do things this way and you know that he/she 
will listen. 
Interviewer: Talking about that complex or the boss being always right is that a Rwandan 
mentality or is it because of the sitting arrangements? 
Interviewee: It was nothing to do with the sitting arrangement. It has a lot to do with the culture. 
The management culture people have. I guess things have changed after I left the government. 
With now the Auditor generals reports of government showing how bosses are messing up 
things, of recent the introduction of the public accounts committee that holds the Executive to 
account, ever since I left government, things might have changed or might change. But previously 
it was a culture. E.g. If I am a minister and I make a decision, the Permanent Secretary should 
implement. And as the Permanent Secretary you should communicate to the rest of the team 
that the minister has taken the decision. If Im the Executive secretary of an institution the same 
thing happened. So, now because any decision you take has a bearing on a number of things, it 
has a bearing on finances of the institution and the people you are commenting to implement.  
For example; a minister could commit like a million francs and communicate to the Permanent 
Secretary that we have committed a million francs to such and such a district. If the Permanent 
Secretary found himself in a difficult situation, all he could do is to get the Ministers signature 
but currently its no longer possible because of the accountability mechanism that were put in 
place. Every decision you make you must be held accountable especially if it is likely to backfire. 
Interviewer probe: Talking about that culture, do you think that culture has in away shaped your 
way of doing things? Do you sometimes feel having to adjust to certain cultural norms to be able 
to work with them? Do you think culture has in any way influenced your management style? 
Interviewee: Yes, yes, yes, yes Do you know what happens? You are always at logger heads with 
your bosses. For example my experience in finance we were always in conflicts with the bosses. 
But the good thing is when you are a firm person - on many occasions my boss has been invited 
by a certain district, they dance for him/her, shes happy and when she comes back, you receive 
a letter from the district saying that we would like to remind you that you pledged two million 
francs, the letter comes and the boss sends it to you (head of finance). As the finance manager, 
what you do is to decide whether that is going to be a health financial transaction for the 
institution. So the boss sends you the letter and you communicate back saying there is no budget 
 then fighting starts (induru zikavuga). Of course I was privileged to work in an institution with 
financial flexibility (in terms of budget). If say the budget of the institution is 500millions the 
budget line are not predetermined. So you start to ask yourself how you can re-allocate. So what 
I want to tell you - how does it influence is that every time as a finance person - you would find 
that starting from the top, vertically through your peers, and subordinates, you are always trying 
to instill a sense of responsibility, a sense of accountability, a sense of policy abidance in the 
organization until everyone has got some sense of financial discipline. We reached a point where 
junior staff were delegated to represent the organization in a given function and they would 
committee/pledge money without consultation and he would return and say AFANDE meaning 
Sir, everyone else gave money and I though the commission should not be undermined, so I 
committed 200,000Rwf. As a finance manager, you would tell them in management meeting that 
I think the pledge will come from your salary and they would turn it into a joke say but DAF you 
are exaggerating thing, so and so (Frank) represented the organization. And I would tell them lets 
face up to the law. The law says no staff should give gift on behalf of the organization, not even 
the Minister. Its only the top five (President, Prime Minister, Speakers and Chief Justice). The 
influence is that you are always at loggerheads with people trying to instill discipline - of course 
it shows whether you are a strict manager or a flexible person. At the end of the day - finally the 
institution has someone who leads. 
Interviewer: Finally on that issue of culture, what aspect of the Rwandan culture do you think are 
important? For instance, age (elderly) managing people who are older than you, maybe because 
of the culture that kind of obliges respecting old people maybe that in a way that may influence 
the way you manage (your management style). Elderly, gender 
Interviewee: My experience of the Rwandan case, I dont want to commit myself saying its the 
Rwandan culture, if I understand the culture; I am looking at it from a broad sense. I think its not 
solved yet- I often hear the press saying the country has been disoriented because of the effects 
of war systems destroyed. We didnt have systems, legal framework and accountability 
mechanisms that guide people to say if I dont do this - often time rather than being a Rwandan 
culture you would find that it is individual culture. Thats you find that when a leader xxx is 
replaced by leader yyy, changes the whole setup and would do things the way she/he feels like 
or wants. But finally in organizations that are managed by systems, Processes- people come and 
go but systems remain. So for me I dont want to call it a Rwandan culture but a disoriented 
system that we were working in and everyone would do things the way she/he wants /wants. And 
that was the truth. If you brought me as a manager I would try to do the best of my best. 
Everything revolves around the approach of the politician at the top, so the top politician would 
determine how he wants to manage the organization. If say Inyumba with the cadre-ship 
mentality, she would use cardre-ship style, if it was Fatuma who was her deputy with a bit of 
young blood, she will want some reforms. So the thing is  where the country is moving, you need 
systems at least at the technical level. At the political level its still difficult because a minister will 
always be a minister but thank God even the minister will find system in place. 
Interviewer: If you are managing people in a Rwandan context, does the issues of culture or do 
you in a way feel compelled to behave in a certain way? Say when you are giving instructions 
(talking) to me who is younger than you or when talking to someone older than you. Things that 
may not necessary be managerial but maybe upbringing (uburere). For example having lived in 
Uganda you may compare the context there- if say you manage someone older than you - do you 
say (sha) you 
Interviewee: Well, well, well the Rwandan culture is too demanding but from the set up of the 
organization people are not compelled in a sense that if you dont respect me when Im older you 
- nothing will happen to you. But my experience at personal level of course because of ones 
upbringing (uburere), someone can decide to respect. I remember I had an older man sometimes 
you felt compelled to give him some respect - not push him the way you would push any ordinary 
staff when you are actually demanding the same task like reports. You would treat him differently 
because he is of advanced age. But you were not compelled in a sense that if you did not treat 
him differently - he would, so culture has a role to play. 
Interviewer: As there are other cultural aspects that in your managerial experience that you felt 
somewhat compelled to give certain/ special consideration? Say for example, Gender, Age. Just a 
few examples of the things you think as a manager you have to be mindful about. They are not in 
the policy but you somehow treat them or mindful about.  
Interviewee: The example I gave you does not have significant on the overall management of the 
organization but somehow you find yourself doing it. But the reason I dont want to do dwell on 
it, it does not affect the style of management of the organization. Because at the end of the day 
if you (for instance) you demanded a report from him, he had to produce it whether he was old 
or not. So, being kind is also relative. He probably did not see it as being special consideration. 
When talking to him- you often think you are a child (young) to him but still I dont think it has an 
impact on the management. It doesnt change the decision you may want to take against/for this 
person. I would say that in my own experience. I didnt feel that probably its possible in other 
organization. The other organization I have seen (worked for), it does not apply at all as long as it 
does not have any impact on the decisions or the policies of the organization. 
Interviewer Probe: The reason I think these aspects may have an influence - let me give an 
example, when an older man (member of your staff) comes late, you dont (give a warning letter; 
a mother with a baby, or pregnant etc you tend to give favorable consideration. 
Interviewee: Well, I understand it happens. 
Interviewer Probe: In your own words you said you could see yourself as a kid (young). Seeing 
yourself as young not in terms of work but in terms of age and I think that in away makes you 
adjust.  
Interviewee: Yes you are right. I will give you an example a woman gives birth, she goes home for 
breast feeding. Shes allowed one hour but she will go and come back after 2-3 hrs but you know 
shes gone breast feeding or the next day she turns to work at 9:00am (normally work starts at 
7:00) and she tells you, I spent the whole night at hospital because my kid was sick etc Those 
aspects are very important.  
Interviewee: Never happened during my time.  
Interviewer Probe: Well may never have happened to you but as a Rwandan working in Rwanda 
- do you think it has a kind of influence? 
Interviewee: It does. I dont want to give examples  
Interviewer: You dont have to name, names. 
Interviewee: Yes it does matter so much; let me give you an example. Here in Rwanda, it actually 
works perhaps more than anywhere else. For instance it is being said that a man like Minister, he 
cant do anything at all without consulting his Permanent Secretary (actually seeking her 
approval). He doesnt or cant question the Permanent Secretary, Why? He knows that (Niwe 
umuhatse - the Permanent Secretary is his boss). Its the Permanent Secretary that gives daily 
reports about the minister and those reports have to reach or must reach who/where they are 
meant to go. So, on one hand you have a minister who in fact is in charge of a super ministry 
(ikomeye) but he cant /doesnt power to question his subordinates. And clearly there are no 
other. Theres clearly no other major reason except for the connection that the Permanent 
Secretary has. She has personal connections. That was a small example - (Nshuti thinks it is not 
small). Connections here in Rwanda give some people privileges on a number of things. I dont 
want to draw a general conclusion but that example will or shows how social status is very 
important an aspect. Another example, at Mr Mugabos work place (bank) theres a lady who is 
an in-law to the kapero (Chief), 1st lady. Im told that while shes even a nice lady, ntamuntu 
ushobora kumuvugiramo (shes never influenced) not even by the Director General/Managing 
Director. Why? She attends baptism parties for the 1st family. She can basically communicate bad 
or good things. When kids (1st family) go to visit the grandmother, shes the one to accompany 
them. You never know who she meets in all those circles. Contact is very important here. In fact 
if there is one important thing that influences how organizations are run here in Rwanda, thats 
it - informal powers, vested somewhere. 
Interviewer: You talked about informal powers. How about the formal powers vested in an 
official/ formal position. For example, you as the DAF how much powers do you enjoy over 
subordinates? 
Interviewee: It also works, here in Rwandan government, theres also the ethnic line. That is also 
another aspect in Rwanda. (I am late my boss is going to kill me). Not all individuals have equal 
powers. You never know where those powers come from. For example if today Im trusted (ndi 
kwibere- tendered). Not all the DGs/MDs have equal (powers) influences, not all ministers have 
equal informal influences (powers) even though they (on the surface) have equal powers (formal 
powers). There are people who holds executive position but really do not appreciate (its powers). 
I will give you an example, you will be my boss and Im your subordinate but in the organization 
everyone knows Im the power. You will be my boss but within the organization, everyone fears 
me, why? Kubera ko wowe ntakantu bakubonamo, because they dont see any powers in you (the 
boss). They feel that one is just a stooge- just there to fill the position. The really powers lay in 
someone else and you will hear people say it. For instance my former boss who was an 
Ambassador, they brought her back and made her (Appointed her) the deputy of a man called 
xxx. Her boss is a hutu (ethnic tribe) from Butare prefecture who just rose to prominence but his 
father was imprisoned in Gitarama prison for genocide - so shes been appointed as his deputy 
but now the word around is that she (my former boss/former ambassador) will take over the top 
position in less than a year. That means, even though they will be working together, one is a 
professor but the air (umwuka mubakozi) among the staff is of, so and so is the one that 
reports/reaches where major decision take place but this other one (the boss) is just a stooge. Its 
quite tricky to understand where people derive their powers from. Maybe you may want to ask- 
where those powers come from. They get it from their connections with the mighty powers. Again 
who are the mighty powers, where do they come from - or how do they get the mighty powers. 
Interviewer probe: Talking about mighty powers and the examples you gave- Im not going to 
repeat name them or for the purpose of charity lets take one example of Fatuma and Shyaka, 
among themselves (deep inside them) forget about perceptions of their subordinates. What is 
their working relationship vis a vis powers division? 
Interviewee: Its hard to tell something like that, here in Rwanda, some of these things are very 
open. If you have been placed (appointed) somewhere - the relationship is that of adversarial 
crash. You take a decision and I refuse it, Ufata icyemezo nkahangana nawe (you take a decision 
and I confront you). Another good example is what these guys in TIG used to do, someone called 
xxx used to confront with the so-called boss. The boss takes the decision, his deputy refuses 
outright. In most cases, people are appointed to confront. But when you are appointed and given 
the confidence and you can feel the confidence - also it may depend on the personalities of both 
leaders. There are people who can never have problems e.g. (my former boss/ambassador and 
her new boss), that is personal except if other factors interfere or come into play. Why? I know 
quite well that even if she was appointed as the physical power broker, dealing with whoever 
should deal with, e.g. those research and survey reports cant be published before she gets 
approval from higher circles but I know that she cant undermine her boss. She will respect him 
but behind the science, it wont stop her to do whatever she wants to do (what she is asked to 
do). She will of course disagree with her boss because she represents another eye (someone 
else). Shes basically an eye for some other people (she represents other people/some). 
Probe: Does the boss somehow fells or submit to subordinating someone junior to him? In other 
words, the boss accepts that real powers lay in his deputy?    
 Interviewee: eh, eh, yes, yes so much, if you hear of resignation  for instance our former 
Ambassador to Holland who resigned and when asked (Icyo azira), why he had resigned and he 
said it was his 1st secretary. He said my 1st secretary makes my life hard. Eventually you feel you 
cant lead the organization and resign. For instance in FARG (Genocide Survivors Fund) we had 
those cases where the executive secretary was confronted by the DAF (Executive Secretarys life 
made difficult by the DAF). Every decision he takes, the DAF doesnt accept, those boys of xxx. 
Muhima got instructed from Barikana, until the man (Executive Secretary) failed and decided to 
quit and run away. So, you either submit or become rigid and fail (system Ikakunanira ukagenda) 
and go. 
Interviewer: You have worked in government- lets call it the local system. Youve also worked 
with Non Government Organizations - lets call it the international systems like UNDP. Going back 
to the 1st question where I started, do you think those open, international systems are replicable 
in Rwanda looking at the environment with all the aspects and configurations of cultures - aspects 
of informal powers etc do you think international best practices can work here? You remember 
I talked about two things - the graveyard of best practices that arent working, or maybe the 
Rwandan environment is so dynamic that everything you bring in works. So, talking about powers 
(informal & formal), Age, Gender, Ethic lines. 
Interviewee: there are two things. Theres the open system of the management where gaps 
between the employee and the leader is bridged - of course as the word goes - its open. If Im 
sitting on this table and my boss is sitting next but theres one thing called corporate governance. 
Actually Im doing some kind of research (MA) on corporate governance; defines the structures 
of the organization and gives guidelines of how they are followed. For example, organization has 
boards, but do all boards understand their functions and roles or does the management or 
technocratic follow the instruction/guidelines from the boards. For the case of NURC, I know very 
well that the board and the Executive used to crash. As staff we had a feeling that our board was 
useless. We didnt even have respect for it (board). They were in retreats every month, spending 
money but at the end of the day/retreats we were not communicated the resolutions of the 
board. We were never called to defend the budget. They just approved our budget without any 
questions. 
Probe: Having a board that those not perform its duties is good or bad as not having one. Thats 
what I want to the graveyard of. 
Interviewee: You were asking me the difference between organizations. My experience that 
organization like the UNPD has that governance culture and the rules but that does not stop them 
from doing those mistakes (amanyanga), to a lager extent, the individual personality matters so 
much, and skills of managing people. For instance one will come and change the organization. 
The current representative of UNDP has disorganized the organization and recently, he was 
audited about three times. And I understand they have decided to replace/relocate him. Now 
looking at his style Vis his predecessor, both operating under the same rules of the organization 
but their management styles are different. UNDP offices should be following the same rules 
globally because the rules and structure of cooperate Governance are clearly defined. But people 
will do things the way they want/feel like. Here in Rwanda I think theres still a lot of things to be 
done, the regulatory framework is very much needed. They need to define the laws governing 
boards. Here boards dont work by the way; you can go and ask any one especially government 
boards. They come and sit, get their pay cheque and go. First of all they are under paid compared 
to common law countries. I understand that in Kenya when you sit on three boards, then its 
enough. They are well paid, but here in Rwanda, our board members are paid 50,000Rwf. So, 
being a board member doing all the reading of organization documents is not worthwhile. 
Regulation framework should define powers. If they exist anyway Im not sure. If for instance you 
wanted to introduce corporate governance culture, I think its still difficult or impossible. Let me 
give you an example the ministry of finance tried to instill the corporate governance culture but 
if you go and investigate deep, you will find that the practice is as I told you earlier. The Permanent 
Secretary is stronger than the minister. Recently someone was fired, and as a last resort, he went 
to the minister - he had made a grave mistake of going outside the country without permission - 
he pleaded to the minister whether that was the only appropriate decision to dismiss him given 
the position he held in the ministry (he was a director general in the ministry). He had not received 
any warning letter. The minister had received a letter from the organization that sponsored his 
trip and it clearly stated the Director Generals names but the Permanent Secretary decided to 
dismiss/fire him yet the labor law requires you to write and ask me to explain myself brabrabra.. 
The minister said my friend you have to own up to your mistakes. I cant help. 
Probe: You think there should be a regulatory framework defining what works in Rwanda and not 
copy and paste standards. 
Interviewee: Number one thing is the regulatory framework that clearly defines how institutions 
should be ran but the difficulty with our country is that, as I earlier said, (this is a disoriented 
country). Because of the little bit of what we went through - the culture is still down such that 
even if you to reform the legal framework, you will not see results tomorrow or in 2-4years time 
(foreseeable future). Why? Building systems takes time (long) but at the beginning (on set) you 
need the framework defining how systems should be working. This goes hand in hand with 
development - our human capital development and how will continue to change/ improve. Of 
course as number one thing, the laws makers (Parliament or boards) need to put in place the 
foundation to operate, For instance the relationship between the board and the executive. There 
should be clear policies, board, executive, technocrats etc we always talk about customer 
service in private and public institutions, if there were clear systems - but still the regulatory 
framework alone cannot change much. For instance if you are not properly served here, the law 
will not be applied or change that person.  
Probe: I think the regulatory framework is there (with its weakness or strength) but as you said, 
things havent changed - maybe because of other dynamic, powers, ethnicity etc 
Interviewee: Yes, absolutely. A lot of things need to change - simple example is the private sector, 
weve been sitting here for over 30minutes (after eating) has any one asked you if you need 
something? We finished eating and someone should have asked us whether you need tea or drink 
etc For this system to change, or this system will change when we become competitive. This is 
like the demand and supply theory. It would be automatic if we opened up for external influences. 
When we fast came here in Rwanda people were working till mid-day and would ran and go home 
for lunch, but that is no more. Weve given it time space and it disappeared. The way this has 
changed, I cant explain. That system was not changed by law but by people adapting to change. 
When we came to Rwanda, People were working up to 5:00PM, then a law was put in place to 
work 24hours but it has failed - very few people work 24hours. But what I can tell you is that 
things will work (we will see change) - I cant tell it will happen in 2yrs, 4yrs, or even in 10yrs but 
the trend shows that things will change. It started with not closing at 12:00 noon, to 5:00PM, 
6:00PM and now at we close at 10:00PM (22hrs). 
Probe: Final thought, you said weve been sitting for long and no one has bothered to ask us 
whether we need a tea, coffee or even a beer - and you are absolutely right. My question is why 
are you able to see that when they (bar owners) havent? What is it that makes you see what 
others dont? Is it exposure of example, experience, what? 
Interviewee: I understand what you mean. Its a complex question/situation; part of the problem 
is motivation. If people are not motivated, clearly this is how they work. They (staff) do not have 
the business at heart. They are not well paid. So, they are here simply waiting for their cash at the 
end of the month. Some bars have changed. Again in this particular bar, I cant tell you if its the 
style of the manager. She doesnt motivate the staff and she/he himself may not be motivated. 
Sincerely speaking, customer care is still lacking in Rwanda including public sector. The reason 
this varies, you need to look at each of them case by case. My analysis of this bar - I would say its 
the responsibility of the top management of this place. Because it is different from another bar 
(say at Pascals). Pascal has moved a step and told his staff that, a customer is a very important 
person, he motivates his staff, and he trains them. At Pascals place, the moment you sit, someone 
is there to serve you. So, you need to study these cases, case by case but on the whole, theres a 
very big problem. The causes Im not able to break it down. 
To come back to your question, I think we need to open up. We still lack the culture of 
competitiveness, Rwanda will not be changed by laws. As I said earlier, the former Mayor of Kigali 
did put in place the 24hrs work policy, we didnt do it. Only competition will make us 
work/change. If people compete - you want to ask me how are we going to compete? I have no 
answer but time will tell. Give it time, you will see changes. I often drive around town, at 10PM 
and find a few shops still open. In my area (Remera/Kimironko) there are people I know that work 
24hrs. If theres one person working 24hrs that shows that others will also follow or learn from 
him/her. Another reason for not working 24hrs could be no profit. Why should I keep my shop 
open when there are no people coming. I open, people dont come. Recent a 24hr policy was put 
in place, but police is forcing people to close at 10PM and people are asking - what is this 
contradiction? One had you are telling people to open shops 24hrs, and on the other hand, Police 
arrests people or forces them to close at 10PM. 
Interviewer: My research is about those contradictions. Its basically that question of 
contradictions of policies and practices that I am interested in. Looking at whether what we are 
copying can actually work in this context. For instance we seem to be copying models like having 
boards at institutional level, districts have the Executives and the council boards are things that 
may or have worked well in Europe or that work well in Kenya, but as you said, they dont seem 
to work well in Rwanda. Does Rwanda need to keep investing or trying to replicate models from 
other places? Another aspect is the foreigners who read policies and are all good (similar to 
policies in their home countries) and come and invest here in Rwanda but, only to find that the 
practices are quite different. They face those power structures especially the informal power 
structures where you employ people e.g. a Managing Director of a business and by mistake or 
other factors, you employ a head of department, who has informal powers because of the 
connections (discussed earlier) and eventually manages the organization/company. 
Interviewee: The moment/day you publish your doctoral project report is the day they will put 
you in 1930 (prison). 
Interviewer: Why should go to the 1930. I am not saying this is good or bad. I am simply interested 
in the general perception of abanyarwanda (Rwandans). 
Interviewee: Before you release it, you should come and we give you parental advice (Inama ya 
kibyeyi) ha ha ha if you still need to live in this country. I think this is a good thesis but the 
people in this system dont want to hear this. Thats why you people say theres no press freedom. 
People dont like newspapers that write truth of matter, those people that we talked about - who 
have informal powers. 
Interviewer: Well I am not a foreigner to this culture thats why I took it from a business 
perspective and not political angle. 
Interviewee2 
Interviewer: I would like you to start with your background first. Where were you born? 
Interviewee: Yeah I was born here in Rwanda, in secondary I did Economics as my combination, 
and in the university I followed the option of finance at KIST. So according to different experience 
I have I worked in different NGOs, different ministries. For example: where I was the finance 
manager of the two projects under MIJEPROF where we had those two projects one was Healthy 
promotion and the second was Gender Advocacy, after that I was also an executive coordinator 
at Rwanda red cross and now Im the program manager of HIV handled by  the Global Fund. 
Interviewer: Whats your view of management? 
Interviewee: management is all about to know different issues concerning how to control people, 
how to control the resources of an organization and etc... 
Interviewer: What has been your management style? 
Interviewer: Actually there are two management styles (The open style and the closed style of 
management) where the modern style is the open style because here you have to discuss your 
points, where you have to discuss with the team youre working with. 
Interviewer: Whats your own style among these two, you know what would you say is the style 
for you as Marks management style? Either from what you know about your or from your own 
experience what you had people talking about you what do people say is your style? 
Interviewee: Yeah, my style is just to try and make the team work together, where I will be able 
to hear the views of other people in the group or in the team and to solve problems for a short 
period of time because if you have a question and you take a long time to resolve it has an impact 
on an organization so, it is better to understand and make the analysis of views. Because that 
analysis will help you to come out with good solutions to your issue. 
Interviewer: Now looking back in your experience years, can you tell me a little story of a decision 
you have taken on your own. 
Interviewee: yeah for example when I was a coordinator of one of the Belgium projects of Red 
Cross, we had issues to integrate the people expelled from Tanzania where we had to build a 
house to do healthy integrate from. It was just a complicated issue because; there were different 
cultures so the big question we had I to integrate those people with different cultures and to try 
to show them a way how we had to go forward. So the problem there was to meet the project 
time and to get the result and accomplish our target. So I think the big decision here was 
concerning about the demand we had of construction which sometimes requires making the 
tender, to secure different material we had to lose. 
Interviewer: Has your education ever contributed to your way of management? 
Interviewee: the education you have will always help you in decision making processes e.g if you 
have a problem therere so many education systems (approaches to management) you can use 
to resolve the issue and understand it more. For example the course of code organization 
behaviour where you learn how issues are being solved, and how decision making steps should 
be undertaken. 
Interviewer: How about your background as a Rwandese, do you think your family background 
has a contribution to your view of management. 
Interviewee: Yeah normally if you were born in the family, you copy the styles of your parents. 
Sometimes if your parents take a decision in the family, a child will also refer to the decision a 
parent has made which will help you to have a background of decision making. 
Interviewer: Now for to understand thing Im sorry I will be asking for examples, do you 
remember of any example how your family background, your parents, or something your father 
did or your family that influence the way you think and the way treat people to work and as well 
as the way you do your work? 
Interviewee: Yeah normally if youre mistreated in your family, it will also affect the way you do 
your job at the work place. Example if your family has good behaviour it will also lead you to have 
that good behaviour at work also. 
Interviewer: How about your work experience? What have you copied from your family which 
has also contributed to your way of thinking and you talked about your education and so also tell 
me about your working experience... actually has your experience influence your management 
style? 
Interviewee: Yeah I told you that concerning to the background of the question, normally 
concerning to the management I told you just to see how you manage the people, how you 
manage the resources, how you manage the materials and so on. So concerning to the 
background you had in the education, it will be an asset for you to know how you should treat 
other people. 
Interviewer: But Im asking your experience at work because we have seen the contributions of 
education, we have seen the way your family influence the way you do things but do you think 
your work experience has also contributed to your view of management? For example when you 
see the time you started working and compare that day with todays management style of yours 
do you think theres something in change. 
Interviewee: Yeah for example by now we work in rural areas so you have to meet the people 
who have different views, you will have to sensitize them how they can create the income 
generating activities and think the difference is all about experience where I listen to people and 
make the follow up to correct the mistakes they can do so as to get good results. 
Interviewer: With a help of an example Im asking, within the few years you have been working 
what do you think is the difference between the your (Marks) styles of management in 3 years 
ago compared with the style you are using now? 
Interviewee: Yes the difference is only the leadership skills I have acquired, management skills 
and more especially the practice which makes perfect. 
Interviewer: So do you think you do things differently from the way you have been doing them in 
the past few years. 
Interviewee: Yeah because when you complete studies, you dont have the experience on how to 
use the education you did but when youre on the field you get to know the realities because you 
meet different people with different ideas and you have to make those people with different 
views be as one, work together and choose amongst all the views what are the best to be to be 
worked up on. 
Interviewer: Okay Any way that was about you but will you talk more generally about Rwandans. 
What is your view of management in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: the management style in Rwanda I can say it doesnt favour low class people, where 
the head is the determinant no arguing about his/her view. 
Interviewer: Do you think that management style is consistent in all place, you know consistent 
to all managers in Rwanda?  
Interviewee: I dont think so because there some people who still apply the bureaucracy but the 
number is very few. 
Interviewer: Now having done management I think you have heard of these different leadership 
styles? Autocratic, Democratic, charismatic and others what do you think is the common 
leadership style in Rwanda?  
Interviewee: I think its democratic even though it is not totally democratic because therere some 
people who have no needed skills about democratic management. 
Interviewer: How will you describe the Rwandan leadership styles? 
Interviewee: They are so democratic workers. 
Interviewer: Is that new or they have been democratic ever since? Not you just others including 
myself and different managers you have seen where ever you have been working in SONARWA, 
regional Red Cross and everywhere you go? 
Interviewee: Now Rwandan managers are flexible. 
Interviewer: Now we shift a little beat to talk about the Rwandan culture, how would you describe 
Rwandese person? 
Interviewee: Ever since Rwandese people always want to have the values where they support 
their ideas in front other people, where they are confident about being called Rwandese, where 
they cant abuse their leadership with so many sins (DOs & DON'Ts) in their daily living e.g. eating 
on the way and etc if they want to take something they try and find where to take it from   
 Interviewer: And what is their behaviour? 
Interviewee: Normally they have good behaviours compared to our neighbouring countries as 
their behaviour is very strong. 
Interviewer: What do you mean by saying that they have strong behaviour? 
Interviewee: I mean there are respective. They both respect themselves and others in general. 
Interviewer: Any other behaviour trait that we can talk of about Rwandans instead of their 
respective strong behaviour? 
Interviewee: Yeah they so morally. 
Interviewer: Now talking about Rwandan people and their behaviours, do you think they are 
individualistic or they are collectivist?  
Interviewee: They are so collectivist. 
Interviewer: Will you explain why you think Rwandans are more collectivist? 
Interviewee: Because they normally like sharing ideas among themselves, and when they want to 
take some decisions they consult each other. 
Interviewer: Another value is about culture, Equality and Hierarchy do you think Rwandans are 
more equal in decision making or they are more Hierarchical? 
Interviewee: No they are equal. 
Interviewer: Another value is about task and people, in some cultures people are task oriented 
and others are people oriented what do you think?  
Interviewee: They are people oriented. 
Interviewer: How about formal and being informal do you think Rwandan people are more formal 
or something else? 
Interviewee: Yeah okay for the present situation they are formal but before it was informal. 
Interviewer: Another value is about being direct open and being indirect? Do you think 
Rwandans are direct? 
Interviewee: No they are indirect 
Interviewer: About power, do you think people respect power here in Rwanda or not? 
Interviewee: Yes they respect power very much. 
Interviewer: Will you give an example of how to respect power? 
Interviewee: Yes, for example if there are some disseminations of any political kind in Rwanda, 
its very simple to disseminate it because people respect the powers very much. 
Interviewer: Is this how Rwandan are I mean respecting the powers very much or it is due to some 
political situations that make them feel that way? 
Interviewee: No, normally the characters of Rwandans always want to go forward and even they 
are some complaints the want to do it after the political result but they cant create the resistance 
without seeing the results from it. 
Interviewer: Now we talked about many things but you continuously mentioned before and now, 
do you think there have been the changes between these events? 
Interviewee: Yeah because we have two different regimes. 
Interviewer: What are the changes? 
Interviewee: As I said before we had informal political regime but now we have formal e.g. 
Imihigo. 
Interviewer: Are any Rwandan values that you think have lost value, I mean those ones that used 
to be very important but now they are not important? 
Interviewee: For example we now have the political of gender, but before there were even some 
proverbs which concerned much the limitations of a lady in the real life but these are not there 
today. 
Interviewer: Do you have any example of the proverbs? 
Interviewee: Yeah like where they said that urugo ruvuze umugore ruvuga umuhoro 
Interviewer: And are there any values have gained most significance? 
Interviewee: Yeah, for example gender issue has now gained power compared to the situation 
before. 
Interviewer: Is there anything borrowed outside with most significance which you think isnt good 
for Rwandans at all. 
Interviewee: Yeah, like the case of homosexual relations this is very bad really. 
Interviewer: But are sure it is there? 
Interviewee: Yeah its there but theres no law allowing them to do it publically. 
Interviewer: But in terms of leadership, are there any leadership styles or practices that are being 
borrowed from outside that you think arent necessarily positive to Rwanda? 
Interviewee: for example the system of managing people, as we know Rwandans we dont have 
equal management skills like the European people. So this will make us go slowly by slowly to 
reach their step and this will be possible if we always work hard. E.g for the European child at the 
level of seven years he/she is given all the rights which I think is not easily possible in Africa to 
give a seven years child all the rights I mean in Europe by seven years you do what you want, you 
go where you want you manage yourself in other words. 
Interviewer: But in terms of money at work, are there anything you think we need to involve? 
Interviewee: Okay for example in Rwanda we dont have so many materials which is a barrier 
compared to the European people because we mostly use the materials which have been once 
used before and this will slowdown the development speed. Because the management we are 
using now is due to the opportunity we had to join schools and we learnt from them and the 
system we are using now is just their long ago system. 
Interviewer: Final question can you describe success in Rwandan context what do Rwandans 
think mean by being successful? 
Interviewee: they are very successes in Rwanda e.g. like in the education sectors, political sectors 
and economically 
Interviewer: What does it mean for someone to be a umugabo (real man)? 
Interviewee: This will depend on what he does to the community not having that male sex but 
the way he involves himself in work makes him be a real man in front of the community eyes. 
Interviewer: Is it fair to say a man in English means the success because I dont find a good 
explanation of a real man in the sense of success. 
Interviewee: Not success only even the simple contributions can lead to be called a man. 
Interviewer: What about a person who is a failure? 
Interviewee: If you fail actually will lead you to the loss of the position in what you have been 
doing because people will lose hope in you and they will not consider you as a person who can 
lead their steps to success any more.  
Interviewer: Finally what is your view of gender difference in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: According to gender people dont understand what gender is, actually a man and a 
woman are very much different physiologically 
Interviewer: For instance when you dont have family, I mean how do you see the person who is 
not married single but old not young? 
Interviewee: To the society if youre still single they dont respect you as the married people. E.g. 
when the married and the single persons go to a certain ceremony and they happen to find a 
single seat, that seat will be given to a married person first and the single one will wait to get 
another seat if possible and if not possible obviously he will not get somewhere to seat simply 
because he came along with a married person which attaches some higher status to the person 
than the singles. So this confirms that people who are married are most respected than the 
singles. 
Interviewer: But generally with nothing to compare what is your view of someone who is may be 
forty years and not married what will people think about him/ her? 
Interviewee: In the Rwandan family they say that youre not normal because they cant 
understand possibly what the problem is, they do not understand what the person is missing to 
get married. 
Nshuti: Thats all I had to ask you so thank you very much for giving me your valuable time but do 
you have a question for me? 
Mark: I would like to ask you what your plans are in the future. 
Nshuti: very good question, actually I have so many interests in academics so Im planning to finish 
my doctorate and later in future pursue my carrier in academics. 
Mark: Okay thats good and I think no more questions but I wish you success 
Nshuti: Thank you once again for your time I really appreciate your quick responses and think 
youre really useful to my research and I will be back in case I get something more to ask you 
Interviewee3 
Interviewers Introduction: May to give as a background, in the past few decades Rwanda has 
been characterized by a number of different issues and notable rant history and people moving 
out of this country, and some of the people were born out of this country so they back after the 
war so I assume in one way or the other they must have acquired different cultures from different 
countries and we also have people who were born and educated here in Rwanda you know they 
also acquired that culture so Im wondering whether and how will that work? You know what 
people feel about different leaderships in different organizations due to different cultures 
acquired. So we will be discussing mainly around three areas,  
1. I would like to hear about your own background, this will let me know where youre coming 
from and also show the way you understand things so its not knowing whether youre from this 
place or that but simply that our background informs the way we do business. And the second 
part of this question one about you, I want to see if theres any commonality if you ask Rwandese 
to talk about them how much information do they give you so is there some commonality because 
some people give less and others give more information so you take your time if you can describe 
yourself in one fine or if you can describe yourself in 1000 words thats also fine.  
2. This second question will be around management, your own view of management Business 
management or running an organization business management doesnt mean commercials 
only 
3. The last part will be around culture I dont expect you to be an anthropologist but I want you 
to talk about the Rwandan people, your view of the Rwandan people or the description how you 
understand the Rwandan people 
Interviewee: I was born in Tanzania I grew up there in 1978 thats when I was born, I studied there 
the whole of my primary studies and one part of my secondary up to s.3 and then in 1994 thats 
when there was a war in Rwanda and right after the war we came back in Rwanda. So I studied 
there up to senior three and I came back to Rwanda in 1996 I was in Lycee de Kigali doing my high 
school studies by the way my parents are both Rwandans. So I have two mixed cultures as you 
said because I was born in Tanzania in an area where we were known as Rwandese but in terms 
of education I could not identify myself as a Rwandese because towards you education I couldnt 
identify myself as Rwandese unless I could say Im a Tanzanian. 
Interviewer: Still on that one, I know Tanzania is a multicultural area they have hundreds of tribes, 
would they tell that your name Bajeneza as a Rwandese? 
Interviewee: Yes because I was born near this boarder of Tanzania called Ngara, and this Ngara is 
just about 50 Kilometers from the boarder of Rusumo and from there, that area itself had two 
different tribes in a way that one tribe was from Burundi and another tribe was from Rwanda so 
those people formed one tribe called abahangazi so for us we could describe ourselves as 
abahangazi because they spoke something close to Kinyarwanda language and the names came 
out of the tribe were like Hakizimana and things like that 
Interviewer: When did you know that you were not a Tanzanian? 
Interviewee: Yeah I knew that since I was in primary four, I knew this because we had our own 
school and even the headmaster of the school and of course the big number of teachers was 
Rwandese also so that school was built for refugees at the time when our parents were moving 
to that area. 
Interviewer: So you came to Rwanda, joined high school and then the university 
Interviewee: Actually Rwanda was quite different from the place where I was born in terms of 
culture and everything. 
Interviewer: What was the difference? 
Interviewee: The difference was because in Tanzania we used to live a socialized life, we loved 
each other even if you could meet a new person who was not a Rwandese you could talk and 
become friends so we used to be friendly in Tanzania with a lot of care about friends and any one 
you would meet on the way. And what I found here was like I dont know if I can call it selfishness 
but people were not open to each other at all I even once thought that I cant cope up with a 
person who were born in Rwanda. Okay after high school I joined KIST as a university, I studied 
there in systems where almost everything was changed after that I went to work because at the 
work, at the work place also there were so big difference. But again at work place things were 
quite moving, because would talk to each, people would chart and would also share different 
ideas may be this was because every work has got his/her target to achieve. 
Interviewer: So for how many years have you been working? 
Interviewee: Okay I started working in 2005 so I think this is my seventh year at work. 
Interviewer: Within these 7years have you held a managerial post? 
Interviewee: Yes I did, I started working as an IT Auditor in the computer lab training people but 
that one was not my job position, so after shifted from KIST when I joined RITA where I had a 
position of projects manager where I had like 5 project I was managing, I had a team of 10 people 
who were implementing in those projects. So from there I worked there until RITA was immerged 
to RDB and I worked in the RDB from 2009-2011 as a senior project manager. 
Interviewer: So how do you find management, managing people?  
Interviewee: Managing People have different aspect as you said depending on different 
backgrounds and culture. You know culture in Rwanda can be categorized according to the areas 
where people were born from; you see if you were born in the eastern province you have some 
elements that who was elsewhere because you having some difference resulted to different 
cultural aspects but when it comes to the point of demographic that maybe youre born from 
where and where you come up with something that you need also to categorize the background. 
Interviewer: Yeah maybe to put it this way, what is your view of that role of management? 
Interviewee: It depends on the backgrounds of those people youre managing and it also depends 
on different levels of their education and of course to the management around us. 
Interviewer: What is your understanding of that task management? 
Interviewee: I understand this management in the two ways, if we have the skill set of 
management and we also need to have education because education contributes to that and 
leadership so you need to have those key elements of leadership. 
Interviewer: What would you say is your own approach to management as Karens approach to 
management? Not the managers, not the places you have worked but your own management for 
example you have managed about 10 people so, how would you say in own words? 
Interviewee: my approach to management is set to two things,  
1. Being open to my team, communicate my goals and targets that I want us to achieve so in my 
being very open I need also to be at the level of the people in the team that Im managing. 
2. My management bases on discuses of people I mean I cant recruit anyone that because seems 
working in my team. I have to make a selection so as to much the skills and the education of the 
people I have to manage especially when youre in a field that youre doing that management 
because managing a program or project you need to have a criteria. 
Interviewer: Maybe what Im trying to mean is that you heard about management styles, do you 
remember some of the common words they use in management styles or leadership styles you 
know I want to see if you can put yourself in one of the categories. For example therere, 
participative, democratic theres Autocratic theres self cycle hands off etc some people have 
also used transformational leaders, invention ally leaders and charismatic leaders, as well as 
transactional so do you think you can fit yourself in one of those leadership styles?  
Interviewee: Yeah I can fit myself in transformational leadership style because I always like to 
know how to project things in the future than in the present and thats how I operate actually. 
Interviewer: Now am wondering what influences the way you look at these managing tasks? You 
know the way do things, do you think that theres something that influences the way you do 
them? 
Interviewee: Yeah, actually the thing is what is built in you. 
Interviewer: And what is that? 
Interviewee: Okay myself I was born as someone who is in charge I mean somebody who keeps 
in touch all the time, who takes the lead to any type of work. So I always want to provide my 
views at the first place, you know let people get together, so as them to understand each and 
agree on some principle points and some ways of doing business. 
Interviewer: Yeah thats perfect but where do you get that? Where do you think you get those 
characters from? 
Interviewee: It is the way I was born and followed example from my Mum. 
Interviewer: Now do you think education has in a way contributed to your view of management?  
Interviewee: Yeah very much, education has contributed much to me and to my managerial style 
because when you start high school thats when you have to start finding yourself in some groups 
so all the time I thought I could find myself in a class of 20boys with one or two girls if were many 
it could 2 or 3 so I developed some confidence in organizing people. Because for example since 
my high school I was in a class of 40 boys and two girls, and in KIST I was in a class of 20 boys and 
5girls even during my primary in Tanzania I could find myself in a class of very many boys with a 
small number of girls. 
Interviewer: And what do you feel when you find yourself in a huge number of boys? 
Interviewee: I always fit; with so comfort actually I dominate. You know am not talkative but when 
I get a chance to talk I talk a lot.  
Interviewer: How do you dominate when you cant even talk a lot? 
Interviewee: I keep quiet, I never just talk loudly but when theres a forum to talk I talk so when 
you approach me to talk to me, to discuss with me I get open and tell you truth of myself and 
when I find myself in a group of many males I like to be direct so thats why I say that I dominate 
in that way. And everyone becomes my friend. 
Interviewer: We shift to experience a little bit, how do you see your work experience you know if 
it has how did it contribute to the way you look at management?  
Interviewee: yeah it did contribute because as I told you something that happened ever since I 
joined the work place I found because I was in a department of many males and I could make sure 
that I manage that job and make sure that Im performing well as they do because I had very little 
keys and the task was very high and very much demanding but I had to make sure that I  
accomplish my task, so all the time at the work place I learnt that that every time you can achieve 
the goals you set and you dont have to manage yourself so you have to be managed by others 
and so you have to follow their system. 
Interviewer: Now do you think that the management style had changed, do you see any change 
in the way of doing business? 
Interviewee: Yeah it has contributed a lot especially when I realized that I used to dominate, I 
used to like you know all my ideas to confect that all and thats when I realized that all the time I 
had to listen to others, give the compromise you know and all the time I had to share my ideas 
openly with people not just by taking decisions but tomorrow I want this, after tomorrow I will 
do this so it has contributed much like working in a team, team management, self management 
customer services how you treat people, how present you fellows all those things came. 
Interviewer: Karen I need a story from you of a major decision you have taken in your career just 
if you could give me a small story of the decision you have taken and you took that decision? 
Interviewee: Okay for me ever since my secondary school I was studying sciences so one time 
after my secondary in Lycee de Kigali I was a signed to UNR where there were no sciences actually 
you could think that which science I was running for Computer Science so in UNR there was pure 
science but I wanted computer science so I cancelled my admission and said I have to wait for 
KIST which had the first year only so I had to wait for one year so that I go to KIST so I waited for 
9 months and then they gave us an exam for KIST which I passed and I joined from there I choose 
computer science thats one part of it so the second part I said I will study up to masters degree 
and beyond and I set this goal at the age if 16 years of age and this was a dream. 
Interviewer: No that was more of a dream but at the work place a decision you made which you 
think was your 100% decision with no influences from other people. 
Interviewee: The time when I wanted to assign me to a project so I went back to the 
project and I said I dont want Why, because of so and so reasons, so what project do 
you want? I want this and hat project a chose was the most complicated project I have ever seen 
so that is the decision I have made and after that I received the team members I had to talk to 
them and told them that after 3 months I found that I have to evaluate them and recommended 
some of them just to away..why, because he wasnt following the instructions. 
Interviewer: So the recommendation to fire someone which was quiet a good one, how did you 
do that, how did you get a lead of that person in your team? 
Interviewee: No I had to write down a reform for which I had to explain the how he has been 
acting in work; how he does the assignment and finally I did the conclusion. 
Interviewer: Did you buy any chance you know having discussion with that person him/her self? 
Interviewee: Yeah I did, I did so many times actually thats what I do even if youre my best friend, 
I have to talk to you at least 3 times telling you that this is what I dont like you to do. 
Interviewer: Now looking at you know if we talk about the way you do things do you think many 
Rwandan do the same? 
Interviewee: They are not. 
Interviewer: What is your view of management style of others in Rwanda? The way they do 
manage people because you have heard managers who managed you so you have seen very 
managers so how do you see other peoples management styles?  
Interviewee: Quiet different because everyone has got his/her own style of management but the 
one common thing that they lack of is that for me according to my analysis, they lack one thing 
of leadership theres a way they can appoint you to become somebody you know DG Director 
General but in you, you lack a leadership skill, so leadership skill why Im mentioning it, it has a 
lot of things it has customer service, it has communication, it has managing people  and very many 
key things so we lack many of them. 
Interviewer: Would you again describe, may be you talked about the leadership styles of 
transformation, transactional, Autocratic and so many others so what do you think is the common 
leadership style out there? 
Interviewee: I dont know the common one now but I think if I could remember the factors that 
are under each and every style. 
Interviewer: Well some build trust, you know others act in integrate and others inspire people, 
while others encourage and motivate, thanking, you know some managers will reward fastest and 
of course punishing may not be delivering and others will monitoring as they want to keep an eye 
on you. 
Interviewee: Yeah monitoring is there but with no other something to help, they monitor but by 
eyes not by  I mean therere kin of systems that can help to monitor someone without seeing 
him or her seated there in the office to believe that that person is working. 
Interviewer: But some people can just monitor mistakes and what. 
Interviewee: And that is it, they just monitor mistakes because I wasnt seeing you then I count 
you as somebody who isnt at work. 
Interviewer:  Some may say they are fire fighters, meaning that they only act when theres a 
problem and others just give you free time to do things and will approach you when you need 
some help 
Interviewee: Though they do monitoring but they lack one thing of. because the monitor the 
person not monitoring the activities you know if you monitor the activities thats when you have 
a real system to really measure that the person is working. 
Interviewer: Yup we now talk about the Rwandan culture, how can you describe a typical 
Rwandan? Because youre like a Tanzanian so can you tell the characters of Rwandese people? 
Interviewee: Yes someone who is humble by physical appearance, by the body he/ she is beautiful 
or handsome maybe tall or short but good looking. For the Rwandese characters, a Rwandan is a 
person who is humble, who respects people and too reserve to talk, because wherever you find 
a Rwandan you will not find him/her talking a lot, someone who is quiet when you seem to 
approach him. 
Interviewer: How do they talk then? 
Interviewee: They talk at the given time in different forums in an organized way they cant just 
talk, eat because he can even travel a long distance but reaches there without taking something 
on the way so he will wait until he finds a convenient place to eat. 
Interviewer: What do they value more in terms of cultural values? 
Interviewee: Okay in their culture they do never copy from others any how E.g. when they find 
Tanzanians are doing something and they immediately do it also, no they have to first take time 
even if they are in that society, they take time to copy others peoples culture or other peoples 
style of leading. And another value is that theyre educated, not having gone to school only but 
even if one didnt go to school he/she will act as a person who is educated so they all have the 
formal education. They have different powerful, good ideas and opinions wherever therere. 
Interviewer: Are there any specific behaviors that you think Rwandans have that are different 
from other society tribes that you have seen. 
Interviewee: Yeah all those behaviors I said you know they respect themselves, they respect other 
people thats one, and another thing is like they have another behavior of loving each other. 
Because you always find them together, they help the society they live in and they like co-
operating and helping each other. 
Interviewer: Now if you could use one of the words, maybe you could tell me where the Rwandan 
fit. You know, in some cultures people are individualistic, in some cultures people are more 
corrective, for instance you know the American people tend to be individualistic so do you 
Rwandese are corrective or are individualistic or something else? 
Interviewee: They are not individualistic. 
Interviewer: How about high lucky? What your view of Rwandese with regards to high lucky thing? 
E.g. someone is your boss what does that mean? 
Interviewee: Theres a very big distance between the boss and the employee, with a lot of fear 
that if someone is your boss then you cant just greet him or meet him anyhow So theres a 
strong gap between a boss and an employee and that gap results into those other elements we 
said so they just live a life of no co-operation.  
Interviewer: How about some cultures are formal strict and some cultures are informal you know 
you can just walk in someones office, they dont care what youre putting on so do you Rwandese 
are formal they are strict or they are more informal? 
Interviewee: They are formal. 
Interviewer: Some cultures tend to focus on tasks over people so what is your view Rwandese. So 
do you think they are task oriented or people oriented? 
Interviewee: They are task oriented. 
Interviewer: And in conducting business do you think Rwandans are direct or more indirect in 
implicit or explicit? 
Interviewee: In doing business they are not so direct. 
Interviewer: And are any of these values changing, you know do you see any kind of change? 
Interviewee: Yeah those values are changing time after time because as we move into a world of 
technology and everything so they are trying to adapt some good values or good examples from 
experience. 
Interviewer: Which value do you think has lost the importance or significance? 
Interviewee: Those of being too reserved, in terms of doing business because we are trying to be 
open to achieve what we want to achieve. 
Interviewer: And is there any value you think that is gaining more significance than it was once 
sometime back?  
Interviewee: Yeah the culture, because culture is now being encouraged has been common you 
know, as I said that in the last years you could think that we have different cultures in one nation. 
You could find that someone who is coming from the eastern province and another one from the 
southern province they are having like two different cultures but they are bringing in to one 
culture and thats why. 
Interviewer: Talking to people during my research theres one word coming in Agaciro what is 
that? 
Interviewee: It means keeping your values and letting others know that youre somebody not just 
any one can just see your appearance and judge the way you look like or the way you appear, so 
you have to demonstrate your values. 
Interviewer: Another thing that seems to be gaining significance is gender, what is the Rwandans 
view of gender?     
Interviewee: Rwandans doesnt see gender as a big issue as other cultures. 
Interviewer: Do you think men are treated the same way as women in the society do they have 
the same value? 
Interviewee: At least we are trying but not at 100% achieved so its like 45%. 
Interviewer: So which part of the society do you think men are more significant than women or 
women have more significance than men? 
Interviewee: Men are more significant in the society though we are trying to have the balance 
somehow but we still have to wait for some time. 
Interviewer: How does it feel, if youre grown up and youre not married whether you are a man 
or a woman? 
Interviewer: They see you as someone who is lacking something, who has failed may be to take a 
decision and propose another for marriage, so he/she is considered as a person who failed 
actually by him/herself so youre taken as someone who doesnt have some characters of making 
decisions like so and so time that I have marry which goes with taking responsibility. 
Interviewer: Do you also believe that one? 
Interviewee: Yes, I do believe that also. 
Interviewer: And how does the society see someone who divorced? 
Interviewee: Yeah, its different from someone who didnt get married because in our society 
someone who divorced is still having value in the society they always concentrate to know what 
happened and they always tend to know what has happened if the man is a husband or something 
and they like to know more about the background of that man you know all those staff. 
Interviewer: And again talking about being married or not being married do you think that the 
perception is the same for men and for women, you think a woman who isnt married and she is 
in her 40s and the man who is not married and he is also old does the society sees them as failure 
in making decision? 
Interviewee: Yeah is almost the same because if it a man they say that this one is lousy man who 
cant settle down and plan for the future, which is the same as the lady. 
Interviewer: How do they call an old lady who is not married? 
Interviewee: They say that this has rejected all the proposals for marriage now she is ending up 
not keeping any because she wasted her time to take decision and say the one I want isnt this 
one another one comes also isnt this one so you stay like that because in Rwanda people share 
the information one will tell another that, that girls is ready so you will not manage her things like 
that. And for a man lets take two categories one the one they say that is womanizer and that 
is another bad quality so if a man doesnt get married they consider that factor but this time that 
is not common, it is not much and same as a man who has been going out very much. 
Interviewer: Do you think that any Rwandese who has got these good values can decide, or do 
you think it is normal for a Rwandese to decide not to marry. 
Interviewee: No its not normal because in a Rwandese culture people have to get married even 
if you are not ready they used to get someone for you and this was among the values a Rwandan 
should have. 
Interviewer: But as we interact and move around the world, we see in some areas where people 
dont marry and its taken as a normal thing, so is there anything like that coming in our culture 
and people say well Nshuti Decided not to marry and its fine he can also be respected as Joseph 
who is married. 
Interviewee: No, Joseph is as different you know, and you know even the leaders in Rwanda 
should be married they first have to know this one is married or not. 
Interviewer: The final question is about power; in some societies people have a lot of power and 
other societies power is evenly or equally distributed in an organization, so how is power 
distributed in Rwanda? In an organization how is power shared from the lower person to the top?  
Interviewee: The powers are shared. 
Interviewer: So you think that the boss and the subordinate seem to have equal powers or the 
bosses are the powerful? 
Interviewee: Yeah the bosses actually are the powerful; the powers are at the top always. 
Nshuti: Okay do you have a question for me? 
Interviewee: I dont have a question; just I want to know which university you are graduating at.  
Nshuti: Good question Im pursuing my doctorate at the Robert Gordon University. 
Interviewee: Where is it from? 
Nshuti: It is in Scotland in the city of Aberdeen so I have been doing that and this is my forth year 
which is the final year. 
Interviewee: So you do it while working, I mean you do it online or what is it. 
Nshuti: No I do it in class; well the doctorate is not slightly different from other ways graduate 
like masters degrees so when you have few questions you attend so I attend few months and 
come back so I do my doctorate by research. 
Interviewee: That is fine keep it up 
Nshuti: Thank you 
Interviewee4 
Intro: Thank you very much for accepting to talk to me to discuss my research. To introduce 
myself, I am a doctoral student at The Robert Gordon University. My research interest is in the 
areas of leadership and culture. My research title is Traditional and hybrid leadership styles in 
Rwanda  looking at cultural influences on ones leadership styles. Im trying to investigate if those 
people coming outside Rwanda  whether of Rwandan origin or completely foreigners whether 
their practices can really work in Rwanda. I would be interested in hearing your views on a number 
of issues. Theres no wrong or right answer. My objective is to get a general view of the Rwandans 
themselves. Its going to be a discussion and I will be mainly interested in stories or experiences. 
So, it is with experience from you and from the other people that in the end I will compile and 
see what it is you know I would also be interested in talking with people who are not necessarily 
Rwandans so, thats the background, so do you have a question for me so far? (Not yet), good. 
Interviewee: Reka tubanze icyongicyo simbizi niba I will be comfortable wenda tuvuze nko 
mukinyarwanda haricyo bigutwaye?  
Interviewer: No problem. 
Interviewee: Okay now, Njye urabona ndashaje manze iminsi nkora muri reta nakoze nohanze, 
icyokibazo ubajije nikiza cyane kandi njyewe nkibona muri prospective ya experience umuntu aba 
afite mumikorere yabantu. Actually Iyurebye ibintu from the model wavuze nkiyo yo kwa Toni 
Belier, ibintu bya Singapore tugenda tuvugango tuti dukore nkabiriya tugiredute, nibintu biri 
comp tic nuko tumeze natwe abanyarwanda kuko iyurebye umunyarwanda ahoyabaye hose 
umunyarwanda yari wa muntu ushaka ko agaragara nkumugabo. Sinzi ntago nize ibintu bya 
cultural cyangwa ariko abanyarwanda bose baraavugango banyemere bambone nkumugabo 
kandi kugirango bakwemere nkumugabo nukuvugango ubugomba kugira icyufitecyangwa 
icyowakoze nibintu bibiri. Now iyurebye ababantu turimo dufatiraho za Model nka Singapore nka 
Toni B kuko we yifitiye abantu baza hano dugakorana nabo inama the new thinking 
badushyiramo nugukora cyane ntanubwo arikindi kintu gishya. Njye nagiye muri Singapore muri 
training bo icyo bakubwira barakubwira bati nibintu bibiri (Planning and Delivering), so, nibintu 
bibiri nukuvugango wowe wakoze planning, actually bavuga ko igomba gufata 30% percent of the 
time na budget, hahahaa cyane mwashaka ukamara ukwezi kose mumwaka mukora planning 
ariko mwayirangiza mukanjya muri implementation muzi icyo mugiye gukora mwagitunganyije 
mukibona mumurongo neza. 
Interviewer: Now kugirango mbimenye neza wenda bize nkokumpfasha nko kwa analyzing 
haruburyo narinateguye turibuganire, so, numvaga ndashaka mbere na mbere background yawe 
(amateka yawe), so your background will help me to analyze where you are coming from because 
one of the questions will be you know what are the influences to the way you see or do things. 
So, my first question would be if you could please tell me about your background 
Interviewee: Aho nabaye ibyonize njyewe nize muri Congo (Nihowavukiye?), Oya navukiye mu 
Rwanda njye ndashaje navukiye ndahunga ndimuto cyane ariko ninkaho ariho navukiye kuko 
nibyangombwa niko nabyandikaga sibyo nihonize amshuri yose, Nyuma hahahaha Abantu mwiga 
mubamushaka kuvugisha umuntu amagambo atakubwizukuri, Nyuma  nzagukora mu Rwanda 
ndumuzayirwa ariko sinahatinda inkotanyi zihita zitera hahhaha nubwowabeshya rero ngo 
urumuzayirwa inkotanyi zateye uragenda tu ngIburundi gukorayo twakoraga nakazi kubwarimu 
so, narigishaga muri secondary education so, urumva nabaye muri Congo  nabaye mu Rwanda 
nicishije I Burundi iyo niyo background yanjye nyuma tuje mu Rwanda, nkora muri MINICOM gusa  
(1994-2004), yeah MINICOM imyaka myinshi (wakoraga iki muri MINICOM?), Nakoraga muri 
department ya Industry, (wakoraga iki akazi kaburimunsi?), akazi kaburimunsi icyogihe actually 
byari bikivangavanze ntago ari nkubungubu ninaho wenda umuntu ashobora kubibonera ko 
tugenda twikosora icyogihe muri Reta barakubwiragango warazaga ngo uje kukazi 
bakakubwirango ukoriki bwaracyaga ugakora kiriya ibintu byimihigo ntitwabigiraga performance 
zo ntawazitagaho. 
Probe: Waba wibuka title warufite nibura uko yitwaga? 
Interviewee: yeah nitwaga yari kuri level ya division manager, assistance to industry yeah. 
Twagendaga mumugi za Kampala mu bintu byogukora assessment mukamenya ibibazo cyane 
cyane ikintu cyari kigezweho kitwaga rehabilitation, yeah so, nibyo twabagamo kureba ibibazo 
Bya Company burigihe gukorana nabo inama mugakora nka ka program ko gufasha muri 
diagnostic no gufasha muri management  utuntu nkutwo tworoheje. 
Interviewer: Harabantu wayoboraga? 
Interviewee: No ntanumwe. Nagiye mbayobora ubwo nakoraga mumwanya wa Director 
Interviewer: akakazi wakabonye gute: 
Interviewee: Intambara ikirangira  nagiye kuri minisiteri icyo gihe abantu twari tu kigenda 
kumaguru ntamodoka zihari bacyeneye abakozi ndakomanga ariko harumuntu twari tuziranyi 
uziranyi na minisitiri icyogihe uriya Higiro aramunyi aramvuganira (introducing) arambwirango 
ningende ampa akanoti shyira uwitwaga Director of the cabinet ndagenda ampa ibaruwa 
ndagenda ndatangira tu Hahah 
Interviewer: Okay so, 2004 kugeza ubungubu? 
Interviewee: Oya 2004-2008 nakoraga muri CAPMER (title?), Nari coordinator wa capacity 
building program. 
Interviewer: Harabantu wayoboraga?  
Interviewee: Narimfite bebiri, (muri make byariki?) twebwe twakoraga ikintu kitwa training muri 
CND nukuvuga iki? Twakoraga assessment tukavuga duti CND bacyeneye training mubintu bya 
business planning, bacyeneye training muri management isanzwe, accounting, marketing ibintu  
nkibyo, so twebwe tugatunganya ukuntu twabona aba trainers twebwe ntago aritwe twa 
twatozaga. We used to recruit trainers then after recruiting them we advertise that program 
harizo twakoraga with local trainers harizindi twakoraga with international trainers then abantu 
bakaza bakaba trained tugakora raporo tukazakora monitoring ho gatoya thats all, 
Interviewer: So, from 2008 kugezubu?  
Interviewee: Yeah ubwo nyine nanjye, kuko twaje hano muri December (2009) nibwo RDB yabaye 
prom minable yeah. (uba head wa trade?) ariko ubu head of trade and manufacturing mbimazeho 
igihe cyamezi 5 gusa nabwo ndacyari muri acting. 
Interviewer: Ufite abantu uyobora?  
Interviewee: Yes ndabafite (bangahe?) cuminumwe (11) ubu,ariko mbere yo kwa acting nari 
division manager waa Ubundi ninayo position yanjye division manager wa business incubation   
and BDF  
Interviewer: Division manager nawe afite abantu ayobora? 
Interviewee: Yes mfite batatu (3), yes. 
Interviewer: So, murimake division manager, turavuuga muri acting role ukoriki umunsi kumunsi? 
Cyangwa what does it imply? 
Interviewee: It involves gukurikirana ko action plan yabantu bawe bose irigukurikizwa 
nukuvugango when we start the fiscal (financial) year tuba dufite action plan ikaba approved 
including budget yayo yamara kuba approved then tukajya muri implementation and reporting 
so twebwe nuku monitoring ko izo action plans ziba implemented ukamenya akazi muri buri 
division, mfite divisions Eshatu (3), imwe ishinzwe incubation iyo arinayo nshinzwe jyewe indi 
ishinzwe trade development indi ishinzwe manufacturing development so nukuvugango 
programs za bagenzi bange zose kubera ko mba nzifite muri action plan 
Ndeba (Monitoring) ko bagenda bakora activities twagiye tuvuga tuti this month tuzakora iki the 
other month tuzakora kiriya. Now ikindi gikomeye rero cyane cyane ni stakeholder meetings 
nabantu bohanze nkubu kuva mugitondo nibwo nkicara ahangaha hahaha. So nkubu twaridufite 
umuntu wo muri World Bank waruje kubonana na CEO akaguhamagara ati ngwino kuko 
birakureba harinubwo twaridufite gutegura presentation ya minister harimo nibya RDB      
Ejo munama yushyikirano from (8:00-2:00), so urabona ko nibintu byi involving cyane cyane 
meeting with stake holder partners mubikorwa noneho no gucoordinating actions. 
Interviewer: Iyo uvuga gu coordinating action nijambo rinini uku wowe ucoordinating hano 
ntabwo ariko undi head a coordinating so wowe ubwawe muri division yawe cyangwa muri 
department bigenda bite in fact ikintu wibuka cyakozwe cyamfasha kuruta? 
Iterviewee: Yeah ukobigenda reka tuvuge tuti privatization of BDS centers (Business 
Development services Centers) iyo tuvuze nkicyongicyo wicarana nabagenzi bawe ukavuga uti 
muriyi division twebwe barashaka cyangwase twemeje yuko iyi privatization igomba gukorwa, 
Now dukeneye iki? Tukavuga tuti dukeneye ku developing the concept yuko bizakorwa nyuma 
ya concept, ducyeneye ku developing terms of reference, then ninde uzabikora to bring in the 
private of the letters ninde uzikora, nikanaka nyuma yahoo dukeneye gukora na procurement 
kugirango dutange advert sibyo iyo advert nukuvugango twarangije kwemwza izo documents 
zose twakoze submitting yazo kubayobozi bacu the we move forward kunjya gukorana na 
procurement bagatanga advert nyuma yaho niki, nugu coordinating ikindi nukuvuganga ngwino 
ngwino ngwino ibitabobyose byabonetse proposals zabantu zabonetse muze dukore na 
evaluation 
Interviewer: Niwowe ubahamagara cyangwa utuma umuntu uti mpamagarira bariya bantu 
cyangwa division manager niwe ubyi initiating?. You know ndimo ndashaka kugabanya role yawe 
niya division manager niba iyi privatization of BDA centers I assume ko biri muri division runaka 
so, wowe na division manager kuko ufite divisions eshatu (3) siko wavuze so, iyi division ishinzwe 
gu privating ibibintu nawe mukorana gute? 
Interviewee: Gewe rero ukonkorana nabo cyane cyane twebwe dukorana urumva twaranabanye 
twaranicaranye uko dukorana cyane cyane nukuvugango ikikintu kirihutirwa iyikintukihutirwa 
niwowe babibaza wowe nka head nawe uravuga uti kanjye kubwira kanaka bigire vubavuba 
ukamuhamagara ngwino muze dukore ikikintu  ntutegereza ngo we igihe azashakira azaze ngo 
akubwirengo ya evaluation twarayitangiye oyaaa gewe ndagenda nkamubwira nti muze twicare 
dukore iyi evaluation cyangwase muyikore ndeba hano ibitabo mbireba hano mubikore.  So, naho 
bitandukaniye  ubimurekeye yavugango yeah we meet tomorrow cyangwa se one week. 
Interviewer: Babywakira bate se? (Ntakibazo) kuko I imagine a division manager numuyobozi 
mubyukuri mungana cyane cyane wowe ko uri no muri acting position nukuvugango mumezi 6 
ashize mwari ku level imwe uwo muntu ndiba ari responsible so, abyakira ate? 
Interviewee: Abyakira nezacyane kuko niwo muco dufite hano twebwe niko dukorana ntago 
arukuvugango nagiye kumupfinagaza cyangwa se ndashaka kumukoresha akuburetwa wa mugani 
wabanyarwanda cyangwa iki no ntago ariko bigenda. 
Intervieewer: Kuko ndumva mfite intuza division yange you know wowe kuza kumbwira ngo ni 
muzane byabintu tubya analyzing ese gentagonarimbizi ko ibibintu bigomba gukorwa. 
Interviewee: Urabizi ariko pressure mfite yo kuva hejuru ntago ariyo wowe nagushyizeho nange 
kuko njye barambwira bati ejobundi tugomba kuba twa sinye contract urumva ko mfite 
instruction, nangye nyimanukana vuba buba ngwino dukore byabintu birihutirwa kuko ejo 
contract igomba kuba yasinnye kuko we ashobora kumbwira ngo no ndacyafite ninama ngo mfite 
nibindi bintu reka tuzabikore ejobundi ariko nukuvugango njyewe menya uburemere 
bwaburikintu nshobora nokumubwira ngo kiriya bukihoreye ngwino tubanze dukore ikingiki. 
Interviewer: Leadership cyangwa management ya senior level involves decision, Do you have an 
example of a major decision wumva wafashe icyemezo runaka wafashe wiringiriye ukagifata 
ukaba wantekerereza story yiyo decision ikomeye wumva wafashe? 
Interviewee: Decisions rero zacu ziragoye burya kugirango uvugengo nigenafashe ikiniki ariko 
nimurwego rwa program ushobora gutangira nka negotiation ndetse nabantu for a specific 
program ugafata icyemezo uti nimuze tuyikore even if itaraba approved cyangwa se nagreement 
itaraba signed kurwego rwa RDB. Kubera ko mbanumva (Harurugero wumva wampa) nka 
program yitwa ninayo James akoramo yitwa trade winds, Trade winds ni program dushaka gu 
promoting ibicuruzwa byuRwanda muri Uganda dufatanyije nabandi ba partners bitwa Trade 
Mark East Africa. Trade wind niyo company dufatanya kimwe na Trade Mark East Africa so, 
twebwe tugashaka companies tukazikorera promotions Uganda nabo baga contributing 
tukabakorera ubwo buvugizi kugirango bageyo, abangaba dukorana bakaba guhura  suspecting 
guhura  nabakiriya nka program nkiyongiyo za Guinness ziracyarimo zirakora signature 
ntibirarangira ariko  twarabitangiye. So, nkicyongicyo nicyemezo umuntu aba afashe ukavuga uti 
gewe nuwabimbaza navuga yuko biriya biri munshingano zange kandi ntakintu cya miss 
management yamafaranga nzashyiramo nyanicyo bindendabaho ariko ufashe icyocyemezo aho 
kubwira aba partners ngo nimube muretse ntago barabyemera you know icyemezo nkicyongicyo. 
Interviewer: Bibaye bisaba amafaranga se? 
Interviewee: Bibaye bisaba amafaranga icyogihe you have to make sure that it goes with the 
regulations of money kuko ubijyanye wenda bitemewe icyogihe nabantu bashinzwe amafaranga 
ntibayaguha, ufata icyemezo nkicyongicyo kuko it doesnt compromise you in terms of money, 
kuko arikintu cyamafranga ntushobora kubyirengera. 
Interviewer: Byihutirwa se cyangwa abagombaga gusinya badahari? (harimo amafaranga?)  
Interviewee: Oya urabyihorera eeehh icyocyo nikintu gikomeye cyane urakihorera rwose.. Ha ha 
ha haaaa. Icyocyo uracyihorera yeah so, ntago nzayakura kumufuka wange 
Interviewer: So, iyufashe icyemezo rero nkicyongicyo how do you communicate to others? 
Interviewee: Dukorana inama nkabereka ukobimeze nkabahuza naba partners bacu tukumvikana 
uko activity ifite ikintu kimeze nka import ikomeye cyane, import ikomeye muri mandate yacu. 
Interviewer: So, hari communication igana hasi hari na communication yohejuru so, bose ni 
mumanama cyangwa? 
Interviewee: Nkabohejuru bo ushobora kubikorera munama cyangwa se ukaboherereza 
namanote yeah including the proposal ya agreement nkuko nakubwiraga ukayohereza kugirango 
ubone bines zabo. 
Interviewer:    Ndashaka kubaza akabazo kuri education, yeah haribintu twiga mwishuri hari na 
experience, harikintu runaka wumva kwiga byaba byarakumariye? Mucyongereza nabazaga nti 
What is the most significant event in your education process? which you know is important 
ikintu wumva wize mwishuri gikomeye nigiki? 
Interviewee: Yeah ikintu nize mwishuri cyane, jyewe nkora research ndangiza License nkora 
research njewe nabonye arikintu kiri akiza cyane kuvugango ufashe nka topic runaka uyikoreye 
analysis you formulate ugiye muri research udefanze nabantu mubyo wanditse nikintu jyewe 
nabonaga cyanyuraga. 
Interviewer: Byagenze bite niba ukibyibuka? 
Interviewee: Yeah ndacyabyibuka cyane urumva ikibazo ntago twebwe umuntu simbinzi 
nubungubu niba ariko bikigenda twebwe wakoraga research kugirango uzabone amanota 
urangize amashuri wigendere ugekwishakira akaz.i ntabwo ari necessary cyakintu cyari muri mu 
bintu ukunda cyangwa iki, no jyewe nashaka kurangiza ngo mbone amanita gusa, ariko nanone 
ukavuga uti nanone gukora research ngomba gukora research ubwayo muri domain yumu 
professor runaka nkunda kuko niwe tuzakorana, sibyo kandiburya professor aremewe ukoranye 
nawe research you cant fair yakuyobora neza ibyobyombi mbishyiraho pfata topic aranyobora 
dukora plan yabyo njyamuri laboratory nigaga mubintu bya chemistry and biology ndabikora 
kugeza igihe ndangirije. ariko uko nagendaga nkora research niko nagendaga mbona ko kwiga 
arikintu kiza cyiguha ukuntu ugira knowledge mubintu byinshi  noneho ukabawa wana, ubungubu 
nibwo abantu barikwiga neza kera twebwe ntago twigaga neza kwakundi ujya kuri internet kujya 
gushakisha ikintu, wajyaga muri library umuntu akurangiye igitabo ukagikurura ukarebamo 
ukagisoma wenda ukanakirirwaho ugakururayo nikindi byacya ugakora research ugahuza 
ibitekerezo birimo nacyakindi cyawe kikurimo ugasanga nibintu gewe nakunze cyane 
byanyoroheye. 
Interviewer: Byagufashije iki mubuzima cyangwa mukazi? 
Interviewee: Bipfasha nubungubu kugirango wumve unasubize ikibazo, ugishakire ibisubuzo 
byinshi cyane ukoresheje ikintu kimeze nkubushakashatsi. Uvuguti ikingiki ngikoze gutsya 
byagenda gute, ikindi ngikoze gutsya byagenda gute noneho ukaza hamwe inzira nyayo wumva 
kuri wowe ifatika yeah. Urabona nkabantu babagabo iyo barimo baganira nkuku turiho tuganira 
nohanze iyo wakoze research ugerageza kubera ko wagiye unyura muribyo bintu byinshi wenda 
wafataga iyinzira ukavuga uti hariya ntago nzahaca ikintago cyafata ugafata iyindi no muri 
discussion icyo kintu kibamo, usanga umuntu afite za redeemer kurusha ibyo waba warize gusa, 
umenya ku balancing thoughts. 
Interviewer:  Akandi kabazo ni aka experience haribyowize mwshuri ariko binagufasha ariko 
noneho experience yo mukazi yo yagufashije iki niba haricyo yigeze igufasha? 
Interviewee: Oya iragufasha burigihe nagirango nkubwire nkurugero ngitangira akazi muri 
MINICOM, narimvuye mubwarimu urabona muri Reta twirirwa twandika amabaruwa, memo niki 
nokwandika ibaruwa ya administratif ntabyo narinzi numuntu twahasanze waruhamenyereye 
watubwiye ati dore uko bandika ibaruwa akatwerekera nibindi byose. Ariko ubungubu ibaruwa 
washoboraga kuyirirwaho umnsi wose kugirango uyinoze na minister azayisinye ari ibaruwa nziza 
cyane ariko ubungubu kukubwira ngo andika ibaruwa nikintu kiminota (30minutes) cyangwa 
maximum 15 ukaba uyishyiriye umuyobozi wenda akayisinya cyangwa akayikosoramo akantu 
urumva experience igenda yoroshya imikorere. Ikindi nukuvugango experience yo mukazi yo 
nikintu gikomeye you create network ikomeye cyane nkubu ntiwambwira ngo jyagushaka umuntu 
muri MINICOM cyangwa information muri MINICOM ngo nzagire ikibazo ntiwambwira gushaka 
information muri PSF ngo nzagire ikibazo ntiwambwira gushaka information muri MINAGRI ngo 
nzagire ikibazo so, nabantu muba mwarakoranye mwarahuriye munama nyinshi mwarahuriye 
ahantu henshi kuburyo uba ufite network yo guhuza no kubona information nibitekerezo. 
Interviewer: Akabazo kanyuma kuri culture nakubwiye yuko research yange iri kuri culture, so 
nagirango umbwire umuco nyarwanda (hahahhaa. Ko ntawuzise?), urUmunuarwanda 
nagirango umbwire ukuntu gukorana nabanyarwanda ubibona ute? Cyane cyane ko wabaye 
muri Congo, wabaye iBurundi. 
Interviewee: Gukorana nabanyarwanda hari ibintu bibiri ibishyize muri etaje gukorana 
nabanyekongo biroroshye gukorana nabanyarwanda bikoroha ariko sinko gukorana 
nabanyecongo noneho abarundi bigakomera. Urumva aho mpereye nukuvugango, ariko 
ibyobyose bitera niki nacyakintu cya openness Abanyarwanda ntago dufunze cyane nkabarundi 
ariko nanone ntago dufunguye cyane nkabanye Congo. So nukuvugango iyukorana numuntu 
cyakintu cyo gu sharing information, cyo kubwizanya ukuri, cyo kugirango ikintu kindimo koko 
abe aricyo nkubwira ntakantu nguhishe ngo utanamenya wese wese kuko abanyarwanda nicyo 
dufite ntago mpita nkubwira, niba nkubwiye ngo jyewe rwose uriho urantesha igihe, oya ariko 
umuzayirwa arabikubwira, wowe uransuriye mvira nomuri office abarundi akakubwira ngo aya 
maye nibiki byose akakwereka yuko, Umunyarwanda yenda akihangana ho gatoya nyuma wenda 
akaza guturika, so iyo culture yabanyarwanda yo irihagati Openness ntago bafungutse ariko 
nanone ntibafunze cyan, Gukorana nabo rero simbizi niba aruko umuntu amaze mubimenyera 
usanga cyeretse umuntu abihaye ama levels nibwowaguga uti yenda ntago ai 100% byoroshye 
ariko yenda maybe nka 50% biroroshye. 
Interviewer: Yenda kugirango mbashe kubyumva wibaza niba utari umunyarwanda uri nkundi fata 
urugero nkumukongomani. 
Interviewee: Byangora byangora icyocyo ni clear yeah. 
Interviewer: Nibintuki bikomeye mumuco wabanyarwanda bituma bagorana nkibintu wavuga uti 
runaka uti haribintu byabo bikomeye, ingero runaka yenda zituma bikomeye gukorana nabo 
cyangwa ibintu runaka bemera se? 
Interviewee: Nicyakintu cyo kugirango uvuge ubwize umuntu ukuri abanyarwanda ntago dugifite 
cyane duca kuruhande icyonicyo mbona cyane cyane nogushaka guhisha utuntu kandi birajyanye 
nicyongicyo yeah nicyombona cyane cyane, reka nguhe nkurugero, wenda nshobora kuba 
nyobora nkumuntu hano kandi wenda andusha experience sibyo, twajyankomunama akanyumva 
akumva wenda ibintu ndiho mvuga akaza kunyi interrupting ho gatoya akambira ikintu,  
Interviewer: Twarituri hafi yo gusoza, haribintu twariturimo tuvuga bikomeye mumuco 
nyarwanda hanyuma noneho nkibaza nka Gender abanyarwanda bayumva bate? 
Interviewee: Ibihe byinshi abanyarwanda bubaha abagore cyane, Njyewe mbona rwose nandi 
moko ugereranyije nandi moko nabayemo njyewe mbona abanyarwana abagore babo bagira 
agaciro najyaga mbibonana bamama muri Congo wabonaga nabadata babubaha kurusha kurusha 
uko abazayirwa bafataga abagore babo, ukabona niba arukujya mwisoko cyangwa se mumurima 
cyangwa nahandi ubona bafatanyije bajyanye amuha value ye rwose kurusha abobandi uko 
babigenzaga. 
Interviewer: Nonese wowe iyo wumva, wumva abagore bafie ibyo bangobye gukora nibyo 
batagobye gukora abagabo fatite ibintu byabo, nkabantu babakobwa nabahungu wumva 
bagombye gukora ibintu bimwe bagombye kurira igiti bose?, kubafata kimwe wumva byo yenda 
byumvikana ariko harimirimo runaka wumva igenewe nkabakobwa abahungu batakora usibye 
ibi byadutse niba ariko navuga, ariko clearly ushyize mugaciro wumva abana bose bangombye 
gukora imirimo imwe?  
Interviewee: No hari, jye simbona limitation yo kumwana wumukobwa yo kuvugango akakazi 
yagakora cyangwa ntiyagakora, wenda umbwiyengo sport runaka yeah ariko akazi yenda nko 
gutwara igikamyo ubona bitabereye umugore, gutwara tax ubona bitabereye umugore, yeah hari 
imirimo uba ubona ariyakigabo cyane kurusha uko yaba iyakigore. 
Interviewer: Abanyarwanda bafata bate abantu ukurikije imyaka (age) iyo umuntu umurut,a iyo 
umuntu akuruta ibyo bintu bigenda gute mubanyarwanda?  
Interviewee: Mbere byari bikomeye,ubona abantu bubaha abantu bakuze ariko ubu jyewe mbona 
bigenda bigabanuka (nukuvuga?, Nukuvugango urubyiruko rwubungubu kubpna umuntu 
wumusaza niyo yaba ari sekuru bafite icyobapfana cyangwa batagifite uba ubona rwose ntacyo 
binamubwiye. 
Interviewer: Ese ntibyaba yuko wenda uwo musaza naba mbona murusha amashuri, nurugero? 
Interviewee: Nanjye sinzi impamvu Ariko mbere wabonaga abantu kubera ukuntu bafite 
imyaka yubukure niki arikintu abantu bashyiramo agaciro cyane kurusha ubungubu. 
Interviewer: Now position, position yumuntu haba muri society, haba mukazi icyokintu 
abanyarwanda bagifata gute? 
Interviewee: Eehehee nikintu gikomeye no muri karitsiye no mumuganda nahehe hose, hahaa 
niyo mugiye mumuganda uzarebe njyewe mpora nabantu iyo umuntu ari deputy mukajya kwira 
ahantu muri yanama yanyuma yumuganda niwe wicara hariya imbere kandi mwagiye 
mumuganda guhinga mwese no kugira gute ariko iyo position ikamuhesha kagaciro kisumbuyeho 
kurusha ako yakabonye muruwo mwanya. 
Interviewer: Wowe ukabyakira ute? 
Interviewee: Okay njye mbona arugukabya. 
Interviewer: Wowe iyo babigukoreye se, urugero nkiyo mugiye kujya mumugi urikumwe na James 
sinibaza ko ajya imbere ngo wowe ujye inyuma? 
Interviewee: Nanjye ntago binshimisha cyane, jye rero uzababaze ahubwo ninabyo dukunze no 
gupfa nabantu jyewe niyicarira inyuma sinzi yenda niba arinaho nkunda. Ariko nukuvugango 
nkanjye abahungu dukorana bose hano usibye niyo position bananyubahira imyaka kuko 
ndibibakundira cyane kuko bose ndabaruta, ariko nukuvugango ntago cyakagombye kuba ikibazo 
ngo chief niwe ugenda yicaye imbere ngo abandi 
Interviewer: No ibyo ni kuri wowe, nonese wowe nabashefu bawe iyo mugendanye murikumwe 
se, muri munama se, mutanga ibitekerezo wowe wicara he? 
Interviewee: Njye nabashefu banjye iyo turikumwe murekera itebe yimbere noneho jyewe nkaza 
nunganira yeah ntago arijyewe ubanza kuvuga kugira cyangwa iki no. 
Interviewer: Ndibaza ari ibyongibyo twashakaga kuganira, so, sinzi niba wowe haricyo ushaka 
kumbaza? (urimo gukora research) ndimo ndakora research ya Doctoral, Ndimo kuganira nabantu 
yeah ntago ari ibibazo byo gukosora (teak) ngo nza totalize, ndashaka kuza analyzing nkareba 
abanyarwanda babyumva bate? Impamvu ndimo kubaza ibintu byukuntu mwicara ahangaha 
arrangements hano wenda nacyo nagombaga kuba nakikubajije, gutsya kwicara mutsya wowe 
ubibona ute kwanza?       
Interviewee: Kwicara dutsya hano byabange kudutonda tukiza kuko twari tumenyereye ibintu 
bya offices aho umuntu yinjira agakinga akegekaho ukaza ukomanga, utanamuruzi, chief arukwe 
nabakozi barukwabo noneho tuje hano dusanga nugukwicara hano telephone yasona niyo yaba 
ari numugore ukwishyuza ukayakira nabandi bayumva cyangwa se ukabura uburyo bwo 
gusohoka, byabanje kudutonda ugasanga Atari byiza ariko nyuma yaho twaje gusanga byorashya 
communication cyane kabisa. 
Interviewer: Kuburyo ubu wumva ntakibazo cyangwa habonetse uburyo ukabona aka office. 
Interviewee: No, ntakintu bintwaye bayishyizema sinayijyamo mvugango ahwiii niruhukije ngo 
hariya hantu hari hamereye nabi noway 
Interviewer: Ntagobakuderanja se nibura, cyangwa ngo wowe ube uderanja abandi? 
Interviewee: Yes, icyocyo nicyo kuko iyo ufite nkinama ahangaha abandi bicaye hariya 
urabasakuriza ariko nukuvuga ngo ntago ariko byagakwiriye kujyenda, uko byagakwiriye kujyenda 
nukuvugango twakagombye kwicarana birumuntu afite akekazi wagira inama yi involving abandi 
bantu mukaba mwajya mukandi ka room. So, icyongicyo nicyocyo koko nibyo kuko ntiwagombye 
kubuza abantu concentration yabo mugihe barimo bakora akazi ubakoreraho inama icyocyo ariko 
sukuvugango office ibe na meeting board nibiki byose oya ntago ariko yakagombye kugenda yeah 
Interviewer: Urakoze cyane (Sawa) 
Interviewee5 
Introduction: Thank you very much for accepting to talk to me to discuss my research. To 
introduce myself, I am a doctoral student at The Robert Gordon University. My research interest 
is in the areas of leadership and culture  looking at cultural influences on ones leadership styles. 
I would be interested in hearing your views on a number of issues. We will mainly be discussing 
about three areas; I would be interested to hear about your background. Your background in a 
way influences your thinking which then informs your leadership style. So its from that angle that 
I would like to hear your background - knowing whether youre born, educated in Rwanda or out 
of the country or both, so that is the reason of my interest to know your background. Second, I 
would be interested to hear your view of management or your management styles; and lastly we 
will talk about issues around culture.  
Interviewee: Culture? 
Interviewer: Well, we are only going talk about some aspects of the life of Rwandans then I should 
be able to know your view of Rwandan culture - your appreciation of the Rwandan culture. Its 
going to be simple and straight forward. I wonder if you have a question for me regarding the 
structure of the discussion. 
Interviewee: Now no question maybe it will come when we are discussing. 
Interviewer: Yes, after the discussion you will also have chance to ask me any questions or any 
clarification or anything. To start, if you could kindly tell me about your background? 
Interviewee: Well I was born out of Rwanda in 1975 in a family of 8 children; we had a chance to 
have all the parents by then for all of us and then to ensure that we all followed the education, 
actually we all attended schools which I think wasnt a simple thing to the view of conditions 
whereby we were living as refugees. My father was a doctor who used to work in the hospital 
called Prince Charles in Burundi. 
Probe: If I could interrupt a little bit, do you mind telling me which country it was? 
Interviewee: Yeah, I said its from Burundi and my mother was a primary teacher and after she 
had to resigned because she had to look after her children especially me and my brother the last 
born because we were too young and we came like six years after the first tribal conflict began. 
She resigned from that job and she put up a small business that helped us in contributing towards 
the home (family) expenses and as I said it wasnt easy to study as a refugee because at the level 
of primary six in Burundi they had a policy that set a lower pass mark for Burundians only for 
primary six living exams, I think they were varying between 45-55% whereas the rate for the other 
people refugees and foreigners was at 75-80%. So, myself I was one of the victims for that and I 
had to, because of the conviction of my parents they couldnt let me go in senior one in a private 
school because they wanted me to get or to reach that point where by I had that 80% such that I 
can continue in a public school. 
Probe: Did you at that early age know that you were not a Burundian? 
Interviewee: Well, I knew when I was in (P2) primary two  
Probe: Interesting I am asking because I didnt know that I was a Rwandese until I was may be in 
secondary school. 
Interviewee: No, I knew when I was in P2 or P1. 
Probe: P1 really? Interesting You must have been a kid how did you get to know that youre not 
a Burundian? 
Interviewee: For us the culture where we grew up in I think forced us to know all those things. 
First of all though my father was the first and the only Osteopathic physician in the Burundi and 
Rwanda by that time he never wanted to seek for a Burundian nationality he remained as 
Rwandese I know not all Rwandese that migrated from Rwanda to Burundi had a chance of having 
that nationality because many who applied by then were given that nationality as well as other 
Rwandese that went (fleed) to Uganda I think most of them had that nationality and those who 
went in former Zaire actually they had that nationality but my father didnt want that one, so, as 
I have been saying I had to repeat the primary six and at the 3rd time actually by that time I had 
or got 75% and thats when I had a discussion with my father showing him that this is not possible 
because other Burundians that we were together in the same class I was very far behind them 
because actually its me who passed the exam very well compared to them but when the points 
came out I didnt have enough points to go to secondary school so, by then we decided and I 
went/attended the secondary school - a private secondary school actually astablished by the 
Rwandese called Ecole league its one that Rwandese came up with and from there I started 
shinning - if I may use the word. After senior four there was another Exam that all senior four 
students used to do and I succeeded actually I succeeded at a point whereby I had a chance to 
continue in a public school actually that was the first or second most powerful secondary school 
within Burundi. 
Probe: So you didnt repeat senior four? 
Interviewee: No, no, no.. I didnt repeat any class in secondary. That school was owned by the 
Priests. At that school they were very selective at a point where by they couldnt let refugees or 
any foreigners. From there I finished up with my secondary school that was remaining three years 
because in Burundi we had to spend seven years in secondary school but primary was six years. 
When I reached that priests school there were Rwandese teachers, Burundians, and Congolese I 
dont know what happened but I think its because of, I dont know if it was because of my 
leadership, my thinking, my behaviours within the first two weeks I had a crash with a teacher 
who used to teach mathematics that is in S5 - a Congolese and that crash came from nowhere. I 
may say came from the group but because I was kind of prepared and ready I knew how to 
manage it. I knew well at the time of the crash that I had excelled in his tests and the exams but 
at the end of S5 he couldnt let me be promoted to another class. I had to go through the process 
of repeating the subjects he taught - you had to pass them to be promoted to another class. And 
again in that second exam all the teachers and students were wondering how come I didnt 
succeed to the exam of this teacher (the Congolese) but there was a kind of a surprise they 
couldnt understand what happened but because I had some Rwandese teachers like the current 
RPF secretary general (Ngarambe Francis) so they used to give us some coaching and used to tell 
us that we were not welcomed to that school so that we have to fight (work hard) and having 
listened to many histories actually same things happened to our brothers who were there before 
then I said that this one (the Congolese) will see me, so, well in that second exam again.  
Probe: Was he giving you less marks or what? 
Interviewee: No, he was not marking me very well, giving me below marks in that second exam 
again. Well because I had excelled I had succeeded but he didnt want to show that I had 
succeeded/passed at a rate of - lets say 80% or 90% but he gave me 50%. 
Probe: Was it (50%) enough to pass? 
Interviewee: Yeah it was enough to pass for me I said thats fine then I continued, he again 
became one of my teachers in S7 - the terminal year but now not as in charge of mathematics but 
scientific drawing (one of the sciences courses), before he entered in the classroom I stood up 
because I was kind of, I stood up before the class and I said you know who is going to come it is 
this teacher but Im sure something is going to happen and he entered, two minutes after he 
pointed at me and he asked me to go to the blackboard in front. I went there and all the students 
started laughing so he was embarrassed because those miner things, well he was embarrassed 
and he started asking me so many Physics, Biology and chemistry as my principal subjects, and 
again I succeeded very well and actually I was meant to continue to University. I had chosen to go 
for the Medicine Faculty in the University. That was towards the end of 1996 but my father 
returned to Rwanda actually he even returned a while before because he had participated in that 
noble fight he went there and we remained or I remained in Bujumbura myself because the rest 
of the children had that chance of going outside in Europe, so, I was the only kid who remained 
at home.  
Probe: Where was your mother? 
Interviewee: My mother died in 1987 but I had stayed or I have been living with my step mother 
- the second wife of my father, so, I think in Burundi there was the civil war it became tight and I 
decided to come to Rwanda I didnt have the chance to continue the Medicine Faculty because 
at the time I came to Rwanda other students had passed the test of joining the National University 
(Butare). But again to me I had all the certificates, there was that other certificate called 
Homologation certificate that was a kind of standard or internationally recognised certificate 
meaning that once you had that one, you are about to start the University. I dont remember 
what happened because I didnt have other chance and I came into Kigali. 
Interviewer: You mean you missed a chance of going into the University in Burundi or in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: In Rwanda, in Burundi I had my position already as a person who is proven to join 
the university any time but because of the Civil war, and coming to Kigali I started looking for 
other Universities by then the Adventist University of central Africa previously called Mudende 
University was opening and I started the university just in 1997. So, if I may go back a little bit 
maybe I can say one thing that helped me to get focused or one thing that opened my mind was 
the death of my mother in 1987 thats when I think I changed and I became another man. 
Probe: So, how? 
Interviewee: Now, from child level to a mature person at the age of 12years because thats when 
the Rwandese Patriotic Front (RPF) preparations had started. Maybe a while before in struggle of 
gathering Banyarwanda thinking of when we can go back to Rwanda all those things - the 
meetings and everything. Well, I was very young so, I couldnt participate in meetings but I could 
go near the place where the meetings were taking place and stand outside so that they are not 
interrupted - meaning that I knew what was happening because I grew up seeing everything that 
was been taking place in the community. So at the University again the Lecturer and the Secretary 
General of the University were all whites (white people) and if I remember very well those two 
whites didnt like Banyarwanda more especially the Tutsis and again because I was kind of seeing 
that I said I have to intervene in one way or the other, first of all what I did (maybe this you can 
put it off the record) I approached the Military Intelligence I worked with one of their staff and 
showed them how they are treating the Tutsis in the University especially the genocide survivors 
and on top of that I said this is the time to put up a student structure so just one year after in 
1998 thats when we started or set-up the student structure. Well I started going to the National 
University so that I can get to know how they started and maybe having that interaction because 
they had their own structure before, well me and my classmates not all of them there were some 
that I had chosen to get part of that fight we were able to make it and in 1999 thats when the 
university had the fast committee an executive committee of student councils and right after 
towards the end of 1999. Again because there was that general sensitization of putting up those 
structure within the secondary schools we put up all those structures in other schools to sensitise 
them, It was in both secondary schools and universities at the same time and I think when was 
that time of I remember it was September 1999 together with the so called national youth council 
we started to work with those forces to work with those forces in the university and bring up 
other ones from secondary schools and we had a retreat in former Auto-Kicukiro whereby we put 
up the national student council, yeah In that retreat I think that we spent like a week. There were 
a lot of mergences well some people were seen in those kinds of opportunities where for us we 
said this is what we have been fighting for years, n way for me I was saying if we succeed and put 
this up, like me this was my goal or my focus or my achievement though I cant get any position 
but I make sure that theres a students council. Many government officials by then and military I 
mean the senior military officers came in deriver some topics actually it was the ministers, 
secretary generals and chiefs of staff all those. So during the elections all the Audience wanted 
me to become the president of that students council they nominated me with other three people 
we went there before the audience and there were all those government officials and I remember 
saying, for me I really apologize its I didnt like to work for them but let me leave this position to 
my partners but whoever who is going to win will lead us and the audience were like crazy saying 
no Why are you saying that bra.bra bra until when one of the officials intervened and 
said well the man is Un capable or not having time or whatever you just leave him. The president 
was elected on the post of the vice president again they nominated me and I said please leave I 
know where Im useful then it came a paralyzed kind and the minister of youth came up and said 
now you want to make the elections un successful, so tell us what are the variety points? And so, 
I faced the audience thinking that what am I going to say here in front of this audience? 
Probe: By the way why did you refuse the job/the offer? 
Interviewee: Yeah I didnt want to become the President because, you see, the National 
University as the leader in all other Universities, ULK as the leader in private Universities so, it was 
kind of if I happen to hold those positions I would have not been able to perform my tasks because 
I told you that before there were so many problems like robbing/misunderstandings so what you 
first have to do, is to try and find away how to settle people down showing them that even if they 
are fighting/hustling for the positions, first of all show them that the positions are theres but for 
us what we want is to make sure that the council exists because for long time we tried our best 
for it to be there and in peace really. So, indeed for you the leaders you have so many challenges 
of choosing the people that merits the positions, so myself my conviction was say, because it was 
the first committee let us first have the National university of Rwanda on the post of the president 
and also have the ULK on vice president position then other universities come later.  
Different question and I answered or replied. From there I said okay, in my heart I started thinking 
that this is the final term, this is the crucial one, so for me I told myself Im not going to stand. I 
will be attending his classes but when it comes to exams and tests yes I will be doing them but I 
had taken another level that Im going to engage the Prefet des etudes (the one in charge of 
studies in the school) so that he can come in and see. He was a priest (white man), okay everything 
went well because that was a miner course that didnt have any impacts because in the secondary 
school I have been offering Mathematics. 
Because National University Butare had experience their students council had been there for 
years and years, they had the structure but in our University (Mudende) the structure had been 
there for only one year as well as in ULK though the council of ULK was quite bigger in terms of 
students numbers and in different faculties but they also had more improved powers compared 
to Mudende in fact even the students were a bit more. But I used to say that for the secretary 
general of the council am going to campaign for the post after all it was my favourite position, 
because I was saying as we are still in the beginning this is the position that needs a bit more hard 
working spirit because my only goals was to start and operate successfully and this is what 
happened the president was from ULK the vice president was from the National University and 
as well as me the secretary general from Mudende University and then rest followed but having 
voted for those three principal positions, so we made sure that we were done with that one, then 
in 1999 I think by the way it was in January or February I dont remember very well but we went 
up to Ruhengeri I dont remember the name of that school, yes it is Busogo. 
Thats where we had a retreat again to come up with the youth council at the national level, 
because we were youth representatives that had a chance to attend schools we tried to meet 
with other people from other areas who never had that chance of schooling/attending schools. 
So, again when we reached there, the pressure was like 100% than the one we had in another 
group. 
Probe: Why?  
Interviewee: Because the people had known that the President and the vice president were all 
coming from the youth council will go to the parliament, so as we reached there as students we 
found there a very tough campaign saying that, because what I think to them, they thought that 
we had a chance so that it can make us succeed and reach that point (member of parliament). 
First of all started saying that we arent allowed to lead the elections or campaigning in those 
elections because we were on top positions on the other side, so these are laws that they just 
formulated/invented which really werent there before and as well they said so many things 
again they used a trick of divisionism between Hutus and Tutsis. 
Probe: sorry, who are you referring to as they? 
Interviewee: Well, the people who found there like youth from many sides. They never attended 
schools but they were voted at sector level and they kept on coming like that level by level till 
they reached at the national level. 
Probe: No, you said that there was no youth council but there were youth clubs, youth 
committees and etc... 
Interviewee: They were youth representatives from their sectors, well I dont remember if those 
sectors were there but yes they were there. As we didnt have provinces at that time there were 
prefectures. We didnt have what we have today, so I can say that the way we found there were 
block of eight provinces. Most of the representatives who were coming from there were all Hutus. 
But they had formulated a community in order to become so powerful so that they can defeat 
the force that came from Kigali. Those were some of the challenges that we have come across 
with. So, thats when we started that structure but as well as trying to change the atmosphere 
that we found there which was no good at all. Again we did that as a community/family where 
we had a late meeting at 2:00/3:00hrs in the morning, I think there were even another meeting 
that took place before the elections, which run until at 6:00 am in the morning,  
Probe: Why? 
Interviewee: Because there misapprehension between sides, even if were a Hutu or Tutsi, we 
were all members of the community but the only problem was that some of people were running 
after their personal interests not to the community, so, at times you may find even people fighting 
and abusing one another. Well we tried to sort them down; by the way let me come back, on my 
side, my contribution again first of all I was discouraged/ demotivated  because I think  it was my 
first time to hear of a crash in my ears. When you see the magnitude which was there regarding 
tribe in Rwanda, so as you could see, I can say the impacts of Genocide or what caused Genocide 
is also still there, even if may be most of times for us, I dont how I can say? Yeah we were clean 
in a way that we just wanted to make that council be there and as well in a better way. This means 
that even the people to be elected must also be of merits but we came across those problems so 
personally I got discouraged. I can express this in a way that, at the time we reached the site I 
stood behind and talked to 2 or 3 people telling them that I didnt expect this to happen. 
There were evil spirits of tribes between Hutus and Tutsis, as well division between Anglophone 
and the francophone. 
So surely I couldnt predict the future of the council, I didnt know why there were no decision 
making of course I was one of the participants so didnt have to make any decision but I said why 
cant we arrange things first by starting everyday meetings throughout the week. We see all those 
things well; it was comprehensible because the people I have been talking to were actually 
mature compared to me above all I told this to the minister of youth by then but it was beyond 
my expectations. Ok, the elections were persistent/continued but of course the President, the 
vice president and as well me as the secretary general. 
Probe: But you said you had been banned from standing for elections? 
Interviewee: well we could elect but not being elected and I said guys you know what still we 
have some responsibilities to do which are not even good at all because it was the first time to 
have that structure which was put in place, so what we have to do is work hard, of course we 
found some hostilities like these ones if we contest in this election and we involve our selves 
much into this election I am sure the elections will never be successful/ we wont achieve our 
goals really And to me I think that we will be more responsible than those because for us we are 
alerted and we have clear objectives, so we became so kind and they voted for their favourite 
leaders/candidates. 
Probe: When you say us and others or those that also doing their things, at least among you, 
did you think that you were on the same page? That you had a common vision/ goal because what 
am trying to a understand here is that you didnt want because as you explained you had your 
own vision and etc to achieve but maybe within your own camp some people as you said were 
eyeing for potential role in parliament. I guess from your own camp there might have been people 
who could say I would also want to be part of that to contest for the positions. 
Interviewee: Of course yeah, one/two people would prefer/want to be elected. I personally 
because the other one I was sure of his convictions, so one of the three I think if they even happen 
to get that chance surely he would have contest for the post. 
Interviewer: Another discussion is all about your work life, if you could tell a little bit about how 
you started working and where. How has your career progress been? 
Interviewee: Well I completed my university studies in 2000 and right after I started working with 
one of the family members. We worked together for two years from (2000-2001) then in 2002 I 
think it was in February thats when I heard that there was a job in MTN and I applied. 
Interviewer: Which role was that, the job position? 
Interviewee: The job position was dealer. 
Interviewer: How was that job, coming from the University and all these movements so, how did 
you find the work environment? 
Interviewee: Yeah I liked the working environment in MTN because the people we were working 
with were understandable and logical, they knew what they were titled to do and I think I even 
got appreciated by the director. I mean the head of the department, he used to point at me in 
the weekly meetings saying that you need to work, to behave like this gentleman here that we 
have because I think I was the youngest in that department yeah (I was the youngest), I enjoyed 
working with that team really and I think that from there thats when, from that sense thats when 
I got an opportunity to of grabbing another job actually in 2004. Another opportunity was 
presented and I had to apply and that was a senior position. It was supervisory position so liked 
two years and five months before I became a credit controller supervisor, a supervisor in charge 
of administration. By then I was in charge of the main service centre which was like a head quarter 
and at the same time in charge of all prospect clients. 
Interviewer: So this is now the most interesting part here youre managing staff, what would you 
say is your management style or whats your view of management, managing people. 
Interviewee: Yeah am kind of liberal. First of all I agree with my staff on things that have to be 
done and then ensuring every staff member understands his/her obligations and all the support 
they need from me or from anyone who ever, and I expect to get good results as per the set 
targets and of course I do weekly meetings, monthly meetings and again in those meetings thats 
when I emphasise on how they performed. So, thats when we discuss on their performances 
such that they know in the following week or the following month what to be emphasized on. 
Interviewer: Of course agreeing with the staff on tasks to do is one thing and ensuring that every 
staff member understands and giving them the support of analysis but in reality does it 
necessarily work telling someone that this is what you have to do this week? Do staff always 
understands what they are expected to do? 
Interviewee: Not all the time, thats when I said I have to work with that person in particular and 
to ensure and see what are the challenges that person is facing and if he is not a performer/ not 
performing well then start from there . 
Probe: Do you have a particular example a staff who you think didnt work well. I would like to 
hear live example and you dont have to mention the names. 
Interviewee: Yes, yes but we reached a point where by some staffs couldnt perform as 
expected and well we tried our best. 
Interviewer: If you could take me through that some process a little bit more - a particular 
example would be good just for one person, and the kind of a support you gave. 
Interviewee: yeah, cases were there and for instance within the supplies there was someone who 
serving directly to the bank process so we used to have an MOU with some cooperative banks 
where by those banks were to pay  for some of their clients. So, and that was kind of a monthly 
thing, so if the person in charge was either forgetting or failing to fall up and ensure that the 
payment are reconciled and those respective payments are captured within customs accounts. 
You could find that, that small check failed and that customers had paid many times, so we 
reached at a point where by those customers complained, the bank also complained. You must 
have been one of them ha ha ha  
Interviewer: Still on the experience, I actually chose to come to take you as MTN, because MTN 
is multi-national company. It might be registered as a Rwandan company but it is also multi-
national or at least a pan Africa Company so, I am wondering whether you think working with 
MTN is Quite different from working with a Rwandan organisation, do you think there is a foreign 
influence in the way you do business? 
Interviewee: Yes, sure I can say the working environment is here at MTN is somehow different 
to all other institutions but to most of them especially public institutions though they are changing 
these days, yeah they are really changing one of the things that I can point out here is for instance 
here I think we have some performance areas (performance objectives) in just the beginning of 
the year that every staff is supposed to know what he is expected to deliver within key 
performance areas. We tried to lay down points by points and showing even the target and the 
performance indicators then say for instance within my team our performance areas is to ensure 
that all these amounts are paid back by customers. And accordingly, whoever is in charge of, let 
say this type of subscribers category he has his/her sets targets as every month, every bill that 
comes out that person has to ensure the collections and not going beyond x% of unpaid invoices. 
So, in that areas again that person has to ensure that according to brackets lets say the credit 
period in which different customers fall in, so that person has to ensure again that correction 
within those are not going beyond a certain x percentage. Thats one of the things, so other things 
because within my division thats where we are in charge of producing customer invoices, ensure 
that the invoices are accurate and ensure that the customers get their invoices on time, they also 
get responses from the customers acknowledge that they received invoices, the person who is in 
charge of that has to ensure that all the points are clearly done and the performance indicator for 
that person is like how many invoices, how many accounts did we invoice? If we invoice about 
5,000 accounts or 10,000 accounts how many of them had issues in terms of long bill? And those 
issues needed to have been picked before the invoices are confirmed and printed. So, that person 
has to ensure that all that is done before the confirmation and printing of those invoices. 
Interviewer: Moving on to another aspect, one other area that am also be interested in hearing 
your view on - the working environment in some organisation especially public institution which 
you referred to earlier and the gap between the boss and the subordinate, the staff, and the 
manager.  
Interviewee: Yeah theres a gap, here I may say that the gap is not such a big thing, so when I 
started joining MTN/ working in MTN I think within the fast week I became a friend of the head 
of department because he could see me as a performer, a hard working person, he could also see 
me as a person who wants to learn and perform to the level where I am today as a manager, well 
yes am not reporting for instance to the CEO. Between me and the CEO theres one person but 
talking to the CEO or seeking for an appointment and discussing with him is not such a big deal. 
Probe: Do you just walk in or you seek for an appointment? 
Interviewee: Of course I have to alert him that before. 
Interviewer: So, how about you? What if someone among your staff needed an appointment with 
Interviewee: Here we practice open policy. So any time she/he walks in 
Interviewer: What is your best communication style? Say you want to communicate something 
to your staff. 
Interviewee: Of course officially we use internal E-mails or mails and if theres a need to 
emphasise on, I walk in to that general room and have a chart with them. 
Interviewer: Ok, final question is about the Rwandan culture which is quite interesting and I 
would like to use a Rwandan expression Abanyarwanda ntubazi (you dont know Rwandese 
people). What does that expression mean to you?  
Interviewee: Banyarwanda always have one or two things they keep behind for themselves, I 
think its from this issue that expression is coming from of course you can work together, you can 
chat, you can do everything but its changing now because we are coming from different countries 
acquiring different cultures but I think its mostly because in everyday life we have habits of living 
a secret life. 
Interviewer: And what is your understanding of banyarwanda? Say if you could describe 
banyarwanda for me, assume am not a munyarwanda and you are telling me 1 to 2 things about 
a munyarwanda for me. 
Interviewee: First of all banyarwanda are beautiful with good culture even if we cant forget the 
hell that happened here which until now maybe we are yet to overcome but I think its in the 
plans of the government. But when you see even those impacts/consequences its slowly coming 
to the end even if its unbreakable from the minds of people but really quite good improvement 
is recognised. Here I can give an example I think by now people have known the truth on how I 
was born as well as the other person was born if theres really any difference, from how I grew 
up as well as how other ones also grew, I think if theres any difference from other ones thinking. 
so, one doesnt have to be a problem to others but there must be friendship and co-assistance of 
one another so as to develop our country and ourselves in particular because this country as you 
earlier said in the beginning its a country composed of too much cultures and beliefs due to 
where her people are coming from because of refugee setback which joins on the Rwandan 
culture its self that we found here in Rwanda. I can say that wasnt 100% as you would wish the 
Rwandan culture to be because we found so many changes in our culture, look the Rwandan 
culture as of any country in Africa depends on her historical background (history) of Rwanda as a 
country say from (1959-1994) there was some Rwandan history that was confused from peoples 
minds, from schools, from peoples understandings and kept it in drawers. It is difference from 
how we expected it to be so that means that what we have to understand is that even if we are 
2, 3 or even millions we have different points of views, we have different backgrounds, we have 
also acquired different knowledge but do we all know or agree/see eye to eye our vision/our 
objectives. 
Interviewer: My question I think is this, maybe I should put it this way, you know Im trying to 
understand a picture of umunyarwanda, maybe compared to umurundi, Congolese, Ugandans  
just a few elements which would maybe help me understand a munyarwanda.  
Interviewee: Yes may be I didnt detail what I mentioned, but what I said they are good people 
thats what I tried to say. Im not against/opposing the peoples culture but still me as 
munyarwanda, eating on the way, advising someone when theres a problem like at home you 
dont go in public and fight until one another or if theres a certain problems the husband doesnt 
fight the wife or vice versa and after he buys her a clothing to ask for forgiveness. Well I didnt 
say that its totally not there but in isolated say on every ones mental understanding but common 
thats why I said that they are good people there so many things in everyday life but what I can 
say related to Rwandan culture is that Im proud of being a Rwandan. Im proud of Rwandan 
culture, Im proud of practice/ exercises or being in Rwandan culture and I think that today what 
I have been thinking in past year that I mentioned wasnt insincere to myself. 
Interviewer: If you may also talk a little bit about the Rwandan people, you work with them, but 
you also work with foreigner and Rwandans from outside the country, what do you think, how do 
you find working with Rwandan (Abanyarwanda)? Working environment that may be different if 
you could be working in Burundi or anywhere else outside Rwanda? 
Interviewee: I can say Rwandese are not straight, I think in every culture of a country theres 
advantage or disadvantage, so one of the disadvantages of Rwandan culture is that we are not 
straight and also that the reason to why we are not straight is that when someone has a problem 
he/she cant express the problem in public and also dont prefer the public but what if you can 
come and say that you need an advice or guidance about this kind of a problem as also giving your 
wishes on how you think it would be sorted-up or when you see and hear a person is in dilemma 
or when you see someone working less than expectations, us Rwandans well we dont have that 
culture of communicating the problems in the public even if they say their problems in a good 
state/situation. I will give you an example: Anytime that I get a chance to go out of the country in 
bars or anywhere, I always watch to see how waiter serves, so what I have recognised is that say 
that, say we are sitting like this I think I expect the waiter to serve me from right side or the left 
side but also which even is convenient not coming and stand here then goes to serve other you 
see, or even if when serving me any of staff to keep on watching whether I have finished for the 
intention of giving me one more without even asking me. In addition he/she is holding the bottle-
top. Ok I mostly enjoy looking at how the people we are together always see the problem but it 
remains his/her secret or he/she keeps quite you see, he/she has seen but kept quite he wants 
to say something but finally doesnt, so this always annoys me really. At the first time I agree to 
see but at the reactions but at the second time I put across the problem without showing disgust 
but telling him/her as a help to him because she/he never had that chance of knowing the right 
way/manner to serve in. 
Interviewer: Now thats actually a good example which happened to me last night, I will get back 
to that discussion but why do you see those little things that others dont see? Why are you so 
different? Or there are two parts in this question.There are those who keep quiet, and there are 
those who speak or talk about the problem. 
Interviewee: Thats what I told you, there exist some values people are used to or even people 
are trained in as well as the natural behaviours you were born with and mostly the effect on the 
environment you grew in which seems like ex-communities where boys were put into those 
communities so as to acquire/learn those good values, girls also the same thing, so I think that 
the only reason is that; 
 There exist the people with traditional culture; 
 Or those that acquired cultures they found in the area where they had migrated to, 
Its like when you get both black stone and white stone may be and put them into the water after 
sometime the so called white stone changes to yellow and the one which was black even though 
it is losing its colour but still as quite black as it was before. So, giving you that example is because 
people have got things in common/in universal, Rwandese culture. But in comparison those two 
people are same and put them into another new environment they are used to, do the effect that 
the environment affect them; 
One: For them to get used/familiar/adjust in that environment. 
Two: The way that new environment affects them, how they manage it/administer that new 
environmental effects. 
Sometimes you may find a person meets some life styles which makes him loose morale for 
settling down and feel at home so as to analyse the situation and compare how he is, how he 
thinks, and say am of this nature and I want things this way but here its a different case, so this 
is where so many Rwandan people missed. 
Interviewer: The effect of the foreign environment on Rwandans, that is the subject on my study, 
you talked about values maybe to conclude I would like to hear your views on certain aspects of 
the Rwandan culture or people, family how much values of people put to families in a Rwandan 
context?  
Interviewee: Oh first and fore most the family to me is very keen, I cant understand the parents 
who spends or who doesnt spend in terms of percentage maybe its not necessary but the 
reasonable time with his family because as a parent always have the needed experience about 
life as a parent you have ways how you have to direct your family as well as that person. If you 
are a herdsman who keeps cattle in an unimproved way say giving them or graze them where 
theres no water in water expected time and vice versa it becomes a problem. Or if you are a 
herdsman and you care about your own things leaving them behind or everything that you may 
be doing you have to get some time for your family. Family is important in the Rwandan culture. 
Probe: Family means kids, wife, and husband? 
Interviewee: Family is made up of parents, and kids but there are also your brother, sisters, staple 
ones, like its about 10years for my marriage anniversary but brother-in-law are marred but they 
are young compared to me so it doesnt mean that I will only sit home and care only about my 
kids and wife, but to me I feel like having that duty of caring also about how they are. Knowing 
some of problems they face day by day and why they have those problems and they cant solve 
them out and as well I advise them and because maybe I have more life experience than them. 
So when it comes to the working environment its the same care I told you I started as a low rank 
and today Im a manager. So I came across so many things and so have to communicate this to 
them. 
Interviewer: Another aspect of culture is gender, what is your view of gender? 
Interviewee: For sure all the people either men or women in terms of everything they must all 
achieve them equally, then when one gets constraint let him/her know that she wont lose hope 
and it becomes the source of frustration and likewise but it may be a sign of knowing that people 
have got some differences and we dont have the same energy to do things and as well we will 
be the same in everything, towards the life cycle but let us get it as a lesson of helping each other 
or giving a hand to one another thats where it should come from because we all have the same 
cause. 
Interviewer: Theres gender aspect in the working environment but theres also looking at gender 
at family or society level. Do you think there certain things for women only and others for men 
only? 
Interviewee: Definitely yes, not treated differently but that what I told you am looking/seeing 
that there are certain things attributes to men and others attributed to women of course, Men 
and men you cant feed a baby, blest feeding is something given to the women from God we cant 
change that but if the baby is crying when the wife is not there or is doing something else why 
cant I hold that baby, why cant I hold the baby and see whats wrong with the baby and solve it 
if its trying to change the clothing stuff I do that; you know if the baby wants to sleep sometimes 
they cry so why cant I hold the baby until he/she falls asleep. 
Interviewer: Thats actually interesting, you are saying if the baby is crying when the mother is 
not there, so what if youre both there, and do you think its mothers primary responsibility?  
Interviewee: We sometimes spent like 2 months without (a house boy/house girl) to take care of 
children but I was there and or well also the wife was there, the cooker by them was working day 
(I mean coming in the morning and go back home in the evening) so I knew that I had to come 
from the job having that responsibility of cleaning at home, I knew that I had to make sure that 
children have done their homework and see how or if their rooms are clean, everything it doesnt 
mean that I should leave all that for the wife. 
Interviewer: Do you think that the culture in urban areas is different from that in rural areas? To 
give you an example; I come from pastoralist family my father had hundreds of heads of cattle. I 
dont know whether it was gender positive or negative but our sister were not looking after cows 
and we also couldnt clean the ranch, maybe its a little bit hard to find a good example, but would 
you for instance voluntarily clean while someone also can clean. If say you wanted someone to 
buy you a beer at the shop next door and you daughter and son are right there, who do you ask 
to go buy it? Do you have a preference in the mind? 
Interviewee: Rural I cant say much because I didnt have a chance to live there or keeping cows. 
There were some traditional beliefs things that were forbidden that if you do that the cow die as 
a result of what you did. Or wont give milk as usual, so I cant say about that because I dont know 
much about it but thats my limit. So back to urban areas yeah of course if you have a child or you 
have children who have a bit grown up to train them you dont train them as a priest I mean not 
just using words saying that Do what I say not what I do no you have to act so that you put into 
action of what you say. Yeah I may go home its normal and I usually come back home late from 
work, but I can tell you that my last born who is two years, I think it was towards September he 
wasnt even two tears I came home and he never greeted me I was tied but he saw me and came 
and stopped me on the dower for me I was forcing to enter and sit, he removed my shoes, socks 
this showed me that training children I think even if the baby doesnt talk but he/she always sees 
what you do, so he gets used to that, it also shows me that the home management style, it shows 
me the results that things are somehow good. Yeah Its possible that I can come home tied and 
ask for an older child to bring me a glass or even the wife also may take care of me as asking me 
what she can assist me of its like when she finds me at home I also welcome her and help her in 
everything she may need. Asking her how the day was, by the way I even know what she likes (I 
know she likes tea), I go and prepare the tea for her.  
Interviewer: Ha ha ha to cut the conversation short I see it can even take the hole day but do 
you think that the way you manage (your management style) is Rwandan because have had your 
own exposure and the life you have gone through, you live in banyarwanda so, do you think that 
thing is common? Do you share that view with many people if I could put it that way?  
Interviewee: Oh well I dont think 
Interviewer: Ok the final sort is about positions power in Rwanda, you have talked about your 
own way of working with your colleges but what is your view of position of power in a Rwandan 
context, so do people take position of power to be a serious big thing? 
Interviewee: Yeah well I know I have to respect that person because of that position he is holding 
but again when it comes to work, work is work thats what I said that you can be a cabinet Minister 
and your being a Minister and you have MTNs loan and am the one in charge of creditors 
accounts and I just not tell you or remind you because you are a minister or if you have refused 
to pay I fail to report you I can say many people because of the long-time maybe the effect of the 
environment changes them. So, those two things again died in our minds and cause us failing the 
work as it would be expected; maybe what I can tell you, I think, when Im talking to people say 
customers of MTN of course I dont with the minister or any other leader telling him what they 
didnt pay in time because I know his overall but when Im talking to one of those I feel like I could 
be in their positions so as to know what the problem is causing them not to pay in time. So, maybe 
I can also help them to sort out those issues. E.g. Last time (few days ago) there was one I told 
that if you are telling this, I mean that the PS is doing this and that and remember this is about 
the second time for this to happen, so what do you think I can do? I said that, the powers I have 
starts from here and stops her. You see, we are discussing as colleges so, what I can manage to 
do is to talk to PS to know what the problem is or talk to minister. As saying the Minister he 
raised up the voice that what? I said no take it easy of course Im not going to report you because 
I trust in you what you tell me all the process that you passed through, I never thought that you 
were telling lies to me I trusted I took that as the truth so, if I dont do this in my responsibilities 
and powers that I have is that I will write a letter and give the copies to your senior managers 
and one to the minister. So, I said that, that will be the work to do and I prefer to first talk to you 
everything to find the solution so again in public institutions how people take positions, the gap 
is still wide, saying that so and so is untouchable. 
Probe: Will it be fair to say that the Rwandan culture is highly hierarchal or do people respect or 
fear their bosses?  
Interviewee: I think they fear them, to me well Im not 100% sure but its like they fear their 
bosses. 
Interviewer: Does the bosses themselves expect to be feared or where does that fear come from?  
Interviewee: Theres the impact of responsibility of bosses because if you interactive with the 
staff they dont have to fear you. 
Interviewer: Talking about power, what is your view of informal power in the Rwandan 
environment? And how does it work? 
Interviewee: Well its nature of the things you come across in your life make him know even if 
he/she has that right of doing something but he first imposition and arrange him. And well do you 
think that the leaders have lets say at the level of ministers, do you think that there are the ones 
driving the country? Not only here in Rwanda even across the boarders in other countries. 
Interviewer: May be my honesty answer would be I dont know, its really hard for me to say yes 
or no, I may  probably comment on that but i thought its the people in those positions or offices 
because there are the ones that make decisions. 
Interviewee: Well I may say they make decisions at a certain percentage (%) which unfortunately 
I cant tell/determine because I dont have the facts. But the rate of the other percentage (%) it is 
kind of informal. I mean the outside influence is the one that do that rest of percentage. 
Interviewer: Outside or inside the institutions? Because there could be informal power within the 
institution or you mean informal power from outside the institution? 
Interviewee: Yeah its there but I cant tell the actual extent though its there but I think its going 
on decreasing really as people run towards the development, people attended schools and also 
it goes on decreasing but its still there. 
Interviewer: Because someone was giving me main example of districts you find that the Mayor 
is figure head, that maybe the Executive Secretary or one of the vice mayors has the most decision 
making powers not because they better educated than the mayor but because they have informal 
power. How that work does if Im the mayor and decision are made by someone else? 
Interviewee: Yeah thats what I have been telling you, if we a bit come back to the experience 
that I had of setting up that council you could see some of people, their own goals were to capture 
the positions only. So, it means that there are two things; It means that, that mayor had the 
intensions of having the position only which is maybe a different case if he contested for that 
position because he saw some gaps/issues and he felt like coming in and adds his power so as to 
develop the community and theres also another mayor who battled for the position with the 
intensions of working but he gets discouraged by the staff he has, why because theres such 
persons who represent other forces or other influence and the mayor always gets put off by that 
person. So, for me if I could be that mayor who wanted to work the development my way would 
be this, either we seat and discuss as telling them my points of views not with those decision 
makers who cant come and help me, or resign from their position because in this world your life 
doesnt have to stop it has to continue because there are some staffs that are interested in your 
work. 
Interviewer: That brings to an interesting part because from your perspective of working in 
private sectors, from those institutions which are structured like that. How does it work when you 
meet the head of institution and the person you are meeting doesnt make the decisions? 
Interviewee: Of course I wouldnt wish to work in such environment. 
Probe: How do you feel meeting a head of an institution when you clearly know that s/he doesnt 
have power to make a decision or whatever decision you reach may not be implemented? 
Interviewee: of course it will be wasting time. First of all you get surprised then you need to adjust 
accordingly that means you need to get to know the real decision maker and you talk or have a 
chart or a discussion with that decision maker who is going back and influence that deal. 
Interviewer: Rwanda is developing very fast, and according to RDB website they are promoting 
international best practices of Singapore and Malaysia and everywhere. My question is that we 
are importing those best practices of Malaysia, Europe and in all other places in a Rwandan 
culture that has informal powers sometimes over powers formal powers and my question which 
is actually one of the core areas of my research is to know whether those international best 
practices can actually work in Rwanda. Is the Rwandan environment too dynamic to 
accommodate all those international best practices or it is going to a graveyard of models that 
dont work? Im interested to hear your view on this. 
 Interviewee: Umwera uturuka ibukuru ugukurikira aho ugiye hose Thats my answer as long as 
the top leaders are flexible enough for them to see and compare what they have that was working 
and those that were not working/not productive so, that new or those new practices, what are 
the disadvantages and advantages do they have, well in these advantages what is suitable as 
regards the Rwandan culture so that they can come and help what good we also hard or ours that 
didnt work because I didnt have to bring those international best practices in Rwanda or doing 
things but there would be a group of people who are interactuals in each and every 
domain/domain experts; so, that they seat and analyse those practices to remove what is good 
and leave alone what is not productive and see how can they chose feat in what we have, so the 
second step which is the special one how can we present those new practices in the Rwandan 
community so, as getting a group of people and put them into a new environment because there 
will be some that were dominated which can help in our development and what we already have 
so, its like schedules of practices so, that person who was used to the, say in practices I can call 
Ansambly A and them there can comes another practice say Ansambly B and then practice C 
as a result of these above two practices. E.g. the person that was used to swimming in a river say 
Akagera and changes to a swimming pool, you understand what will happen and likewise so, 
you have to first see what you can be able or accomplished of. 
1. The first problem that we will meet is that most us we dont have the realisation capacity 
to see the change that happened or we dont have the capacity of say I was used to 
swimming in a pool and now I have shifted to the river so, that you compare and contrast 
between the river and the pool yeah I know and I even learnt but I didnt know that 
the Akagera flows while the pool constant you know those things. So, sense makes sense 
of agency that its time for the country Rwanda to develop because those things we 
migrate from A to C to create that sense of agency. 
2. The way we live our life styles the way we analyse things has to change to accommodate 
so as we shift to C we dont face so many problems. So, if we manage to function that 
second step. 
Interviewer: Looking at the trends that planned for RDB, they shifted prefectures to districts  so 
between me and you the structure seem to bang and thats why Im interested in this question, 
you know that UMWERA UTURUKA IBUKURU 
 NIWO UZANA those best practices of Singapore of having say a board that rules MTN but within 
that board you find that, the board is there but not making any decisions at all, you know not as 
independent as you would think it should be because theres someone in that board say Nshuti 
who is in that board that basically drives everything, Njyanama iraho, Komite nyobozi aho 
sometimes they meet up basically again theres maybe one person kingly managing Akarere and 
is not necessarily the mayor so, Im wondering whether looking at the trend does it seem to be 
working because unfortunately the Singapore model is international board and those best 
practices if you work in an international organisation you need to have a board, open to equal 
boards, equal decision making, do you think that the way the MTN board at least the one of yours 
in Rwanda works is the same way as the board of OCIR-TEA works and if yours is also composed 
of so many foreigners may I think there two or even maybe one person who dont think they over 
power others but if you look at the way MTN board works and the board of NIMC board or board 
of any other public institution? 
Interviewee: Ok I never had any chance to attend any board, maybe if I get a chance to meet His 
Excellence, I will ask him that favour that he could have to also think about the youth, yeah its in 
already in the process but they have to even have the representatives in those boards. Today the 
ones that are ruling them also Im not sure but its kind of impression there are some who go with 
everything that comes in. 
Interviewer: What causes this I mean being much flexible moving with whatever that comes in, 
isnt it because there are not empowered or because you know first, Im telling you because I 
dont know. 
Interviewee: Umwera uturutse ibukuru  
Probe: what does it mean?  
Interviewee: It means that; 
The way people are appointed to the Board of Directors is the source of the whole problem and 
maybe they are not be the right person to sit in that board, which is the problem that does really 
happen. 
People come and find the way things are, they start expressing view but no reaction and if they 
keep shouting, then they will show him that he can be fired finally he keeps quiet and waits for 
the seating allowance. 
Interviewer: Just something came into my mind, why not have Boards with people who know 
what needs to be done other than bringing the figure heads. Am assuming there should be people 
who understand the vision, goals of any kind of company that is going to be put up other than 
mixing people who dont know what they are doing. 
Interviewee: I dont know maybe we will reach there 
Interviewer: Yes, so thank you very much for your time. Do you have a question for me. 
Interviewee: Yeah, I have one question. so, should you tell me how chose me and how did you 
find me, and my last question what is your primary goal after conducting this research where do 
you want to go and what do you want to do? 
Interviewer: Yeah, very good question. Well, I think I choose MTN before choosing to speak to 
you. Secondly, I think as I gave you the background of my research and my interest in hearing 
about your views of management or how people think of leadership or management in different 
areas so, I choose private and public and in private sector, I choose local and international or 
multi-national because of the foreign cultural influences. MTN being an international or multi-
nation company I dont think that it operates as exactly the same way as a local company - say 
Rwandatel I expected that may there would be a difference between MTN and Rwandatel 
because of that foreign influence or that foreign input and now because my subject is about 
leadership, and leadership lies somewhere between middle to senior management. So, I wanted 
to interview people at managerial level because managers have got experiences. So having 
interacted with you on business basis, I asked whether we could discuss and, again thank you very 
much for accepting to talk to me. Briefly thats how I choose MTN and yourself, and I would 
appreciate if you could refer colleges managers whom I can talk to.  
With regards to how I find you? Should I say, I find a bit of contrast between the backgrounds of 
a stubborn student who was crashing with teachers, who was leading movements etc... and the 
soft spoken, easy person and I think Im not exaggerating hahaha Talking about leading riots 
and now I see someone who is down to earth, soft spoken, it just unbelievable 
Interviewee: Do you think Im in wrong position? 
Interviewer: Ah, well maybe thats where you want to be. I sometimes find myself thinking Im in 
a wrong position but I think I asked why you didnt want to be elected; I think your answer was 
quite clear. So having had that answer from you I wouldnt say you are in a wrong position. I think 
having dealt with you on a business or professional level I would personally say you are good at 
your job because I call you a lot of times and every time, i get what I want.  
To answer your question about my goal, I will go back to my profile. I happen to have a lifetime 
leadership role as a clan leader (umukuru wumuryango) which I have been practicing since I was 
a little bit young. I also have a person plan to transition from relief and development work to 
research and academics in a not distant future. I really like the opportunity to further interrogate 
the topics of behaviour, culture and leadership. Im interested in researching and writing about 
leadership, so as to inform policy in Rwanda I think my interests lie in the contributions I can make 
to thinking independently in freelance work in consultancy, research, education and training 
around leadership... 
Interviewee6 
Thank you very much for accepting to talk to me to discuss my research. To introduce myself, I 
am a doctoral student at The Robert Gordon University. My research interest is in the areas of 
leadership and culture. My research title is Traditional and hybrid leadership styles in Rwanda  
looking at cultural influences on ones leadership styles. Perhaps to give you a little background 
to my own interest in this subject. I was born and lived outside Rwanda after the war and 
genocide. Since 1994 many Rwandans  who were with born or had fled the country  returned 
and the country has been trying to recover from the past history. Rwanda has been in the news 
for its economic progress and more recently as among the best reformer in the World Banks 
Doing business report. Rwanda through RDB is attracting Diasporas and foreign investors to 
invest in Rwanda. You (RDB) say you are modeled on international best practice examples of 
Singapore and Costa Rica and have advisors with global entrepreneurs and experts from World 
Bank etc So, I am investigating whether these international best practices that seem to have 
worked miraculously well in Singapore and Costa Rica will yield similar successes in Rwanda 
context or risk turning Rwanda a graveyard of foreign models blind to the local context. So, I will 
be interested in your view of management in a Rwandan context as a Rwandan. Theres no right 
or wrong answer. 
Interviewee: When I received your email I started asking myself what I would (you know) help 
you with...as far as this information you are looking for is concerned because most of these 
questions or the issues you are looking at, I would say they are really debatable people have 
their own ways of thinking, and how they manage things, what influences them but I thought I 
was really worth it having a discussion rather than it being a q&a session..it would be good to 
share our ideas. If you spent some time in Scotland, you can see what is happening there, and 
how people manage things there, and also being here managing this kind of NGO (WaterAid), it 
is an INGO, I guess? 
Interviewer: Yes, an International organisation. 
Interviewee: Probably you interact with people here around and can see where the differences 
are. So, personally, I think as you said, after the war, it was quite clear that people would not 
continue with their own cultures or something like that, again as you said we got many people 
who came from outside the country, who were living outside the country, whether its neighboring 
countries or even from other countries. I personally was born in this country, grew up in this 
country although I was privileged to go to Congo for some time where my parents used to work. 
Interestingly, I went to Russia. So that is my interesting to look at how Russians live. I spent some 
time (7yrs) in Russia.not a little time. 
I also had the privilege to travel a lot going to many countries. You were talking about Singapore; 
I went as part of the senior management of RDB to Singapore to see how far they have gone. We 
went through their history to see that they came from far, went through difficult problems and 
were able to become one of the most powerful countries in the world. If I come back a bit to what 
you were saying (traditional and international practices), I think in Rwanda theres need to 
combine. 
We dont want to lose our culture in many aspectswhether in management, whether in practice 
in as far as Rwanda is concerned, the culture is still there. Thats why weam sure youve heard 
of several programmes still trying to bring back when we talk of Gacaca, when we talk about 
Imihigos, all these are programmes that used to be in this country.  We dont want to lose these 
elements of our culture. We still believe we can use them to resolve some of the issues the 
country has. Very important to keep these cultural elements but at the same time, the world has 
become a small village. We all depend on each other as far as countries are concerned. If we 
depend on international trade and FDI, theres no way we cannot interact with other countries 
both to trade with them but also to get currency/investments from them. 
Interviewer: Maybe to try and structure the discussion, I would like to suggest a few topics, and 
I would mainly be interested in your own experiences, am not really looking for the best 
answers in this case, as I already said, theres no right or wrong answerbut your view. We will 
talk about your background, your management approach and the local Rwandan context. 
So, If you could briefly tell me about your background, where you were born, your education 
and experiences: 
Interviewee: Ok, well I was born in this country (Rwanda). I would say, I did my primary school 
and part of Secondary school in Rwanda. I did part of my Secondary school education in Congo in 
the early 1990s when my parents my Dud went to work. So, I spent some time there and in the 
late 1990s, (ofcourse am not too old as you can see),  I went to study in Russia. I did my first 
degree and my Masters degree in Russia, so I spent like 7years in Russia. So I had a quite early 
experience in managerial role from the University where I was leading African students where I 
used to be. I had also considering my. People say I can easily learn. I believe its true because I 
can easily speak many different languages. I was really privileged to learn the Russian language 
and lead students from other African countries in different platforms. After my 7years in Russia, 
in fact, I had started my PhD but I had to stop it when I came to Rwanda. I had spent like 6months 
on the PhD programme then I came back, started working in RIEPA. I was given as the first job to 
manage a World Bank programme called Trade Point. 
Interviewer: Sorry, how did you get the job? 
Interviewee: I applied and passed exams and I was retained. Thats how I got that position. 
It was the beginning  of course it was challenging because I had to lead people. I had to manage 
a programme that was financed by the World Bank. I had to learn the WB processes and 
procedures but at the same time the Rwandan procedures  a country I left when in secondary 
school. I had to learn almost everything. 
Interviewer: This was your first managerial role, right? 
Interviewee: First job and first managerial role and what was most interesting at that time - very 
difficult to believe  I didnt speak good English. My English was very poor because the 7years I 
spent in Russia, I only spoke the local language. 
Interviewer: But you spoke Kinyarwanda (a common language to all Rwandans)? 
Interviewee: Yes, I spoke Kinyarwanda because I was born here, I grew up here but I had spent 
7years I Russia speaking only Russian  the only language of instruction in Russia. Because it was 
a friendly university, people came from different countries, we used to interact with many people 
from Nigeria and others from English speaking countries, so by the time I came here, I had some 
basic English. I started this job in RIEPA and one and half years, I was promoted to become 
Director of Export Promotion because that WB programme was really a component of export 
promotion. I was moved up to become Director of export promotion before we joined RDB. RDB 
is a merger of several institutions. 
Interviewer: What was the difference between the Manager and the Director roles? 
Interviewee: One difference was in the number of people. As a manager for the WB Programme, 
I had maybe 2people who were under me  who were supporting me but I was also having indirect 
supervisory role to people who used to be in the Trade Point Centres. These TLC were about 
decentralizing RIEPA services. There were people in those centres that I used to supervise 
indirectly because they were under PSF. But because I was providing facilitating services to those 
people in those centres, I would somehow supervise them. 
Now, being Director of export promotion, I had the whole team of export promotion - though not 
many but it was an interesting experience. Sometimes, I wonder, I asked myself the kind of 
culture. It was a mixture of things.  
Born in Rwanda, spent some time in DRC then moved to Russia when I was quite young. Wheni 
went to Russia, I was 18years of Age. I spent 7years in a country where theres a lot of people I 
had to deal with at different times. There were really difficult times when we met people who 
dont like Africans. So, when I came back, if found people  particularly in the team (my team) 
from different cultures. You find people from Uganda, from Congo  who were born there, grew 
up there and came to Rwanda after the war. It was very interesting to manage people from 
different cultures. 
Interviewer: Were they all Rwandans or some were foreigners? 
Interviewee: There were people from Uganda, Congo and Rwanda. No foreigners. I would say I 
had working relationship with foreigners. Now we talk about foreigners when it comes to working 
with them. We had to interact with many people. Talking about trade, we talked to people from 
many countries whom we had to work with, those we wanted to sell our product to we met 
potential buyers of our products from different countries. 
Interviewer: In your view, was there any difference between the Manager and Director role in 
terms of work? 
Interviewee: In terms of work, what I would say is that from manager to director role, the 
responsibilities became more. You have more portfolios to manage. You have more people to 
manage from different cultures but you also have processes and procedures that you need to be 
aware of, that you need to be able to develop within that particular environment. I wouldnt know 
exactly what you want me to touch on. 
Interviewer: At managerial level, you are practically doing the job but at Director level - it 
ofcourse depends on the structure of the organization you are working for  you manages 
Managers while Managers manage staffs. 
Interviewee: Well, thats probably talking about delegation of powers if I understood you 
correctly. In taking up the Director job, I didnt have managers to manage. Maybe the structure 
of the institution is different. When I was a manager, I had people under me in specific projects. 
When I became a Director, I only had staff under my direct supervision. I didnt have people in 
the middle to manage staff. I had about 5 or 6 people that were all officer. It was more of change 
of job title but the role remained the same because the role was called manager because it was 
managing a particular project which was not within the structure of the institution itself.  
Maybe something that just came to my mind, when you talked people under you and its 
important to understand the kind of delegation of powers that you exercise.  
Delegation of powers is important because you want to do everything. You want to put a final 
touch on everything. You would spend a lot of time doing that instead of focusing on other 
important things. Trust of subordinate..Does that. 
Interviewer: You talked about trust of subordinates; does that come with the managers 
experience or subordinates experience? 
Interviewee: Well, both, more particularly I would think that if you are not experienced yourself 
as a manager, you are not confident enough to say that you dont trust any of the subordinates. 
I think as experience comes in the job, thats when you start feeling that perhaps, you need to 
develop confidence in subordinates. I think it really comes with time and experience and your 
subordinates also need to have certain experiences. You dont expect someone who has just 
spent one month in the job to come up with good results on certain assignments because they 
need time/experience to be efficient. 
To learn to draft a letters for example may not be easy not because the person is not good but 
just because the person needs time to develop that skills and confidence. 
Interviewer: The next topic of our discussion is about decision making, as a manager or Director, 
this is a daily activity. Can you tell me about a major decision you may have taken in recent 
times and how you went about it? 
Interviewee: Hmm A very recent decision one I think is here at RDB. I happen not to have staff 
as you can see but I happen to have some Interns but Interns are not in the structure of the 
institution. These are people who come for a certain period of time, stay a short time and go. We 
have a six month internship program. We hire young graduates who want to learn and gain some 
experiences. So, it happened that we got an opportunity for training and I knew that this is 
something that is usually given to (permanent) staff of the institution but because I had a very 
good intern - in fact who is still here and currently being recruited  I had to take a decision to 
send him for this international training to Japan not even in Rwanda. It was about travelling to 
Japan for 3weeks. I of course consulted with the HR department and the HR department would  
you know that for the Intern it is very difficult to get clearance  you know we get our clearance 
from the Presidents office and Prime-Ministers office- but I said we cannot really lose this 
opportunity of sending this person who is a Rwandan, who studied here in Rwanda and is going 
to work in this country just because he is an Intern. I said to the HR that I was going to take the 
responsibility for sending him to Japan for that particular training. It wasnt an easy decision. I 
know I was perhaps going to be asked to explain  in fact that happened because I had to give 
explanations to the CEO and other senior staff of the institution. Fortunately, we made a request 
to the Presidents office for clearance for him to travel  giving justification. We always make a 
justification note. I had to explain that although this is an Intern but I believe he can work for RDB 
but also for the country in general. So, I personally took the responsibility and decision to make 
sure that he benefited from that particular capacity building programme. 
Interviewer: You mentioned a while ago  of following the procedures, according to your own 
words, its not in the procedure or one would day inappropriate to send an Intern on an 
expensive training like that one, why did you do that? You would have gone there yourself? 
Interviewee: Me? 
Interviewer: yes, because you are in the structure of the institution. Im not against the Intern 
 because I dont even know him  but clearly the policy is that Interns are temporary. They are 
only here for 6months and not worth investing in someone who is not going to be here in the 
next couple of weeks. It is also possible that while in Japan, he gets other opportunities and 
doesnt return. Wasnt the decision a good use of institutional resources? 
Interviewee: Yes. But the good thing is that when I later shared this with the management, it 
wasnt as crazy an idea as you might think. Again, it wasnt clear in the HR manual  
Again, a 6months internship is not like the usual one month internship for undergraduate who 
want to write their project. This is a graduate who has finished studies, who want to gain work 
experience, these interns get money from the institution they work for like RDB and for me he 
was like any other contractual staff  not statutory but atleast contractual, you get it? We even 
take 3months contractual staff to work for some time. Personally I said he was eligible for this 
kind of opportunity. Again, I could go myself not only because this was training for junior staff but 
I had gone to a similar training before. It would have been more difficult to live with that guilt for 
losing that opportunity when there was another person to delegate. Someone who somehow 
understands what we are doing and could potentially become our staff member. So thats how I 
decided to say that lets take the advantage of this opportunity and also more importantly, this 
was fully financed by JICA (Japan International Cooperation Agency). Loosing such an opportunity 
would have been seen by our partners as something we didnt take seriously. Again the CEO is 
the one who signed the request for clearance. I went to him with a justification note. I explained 
to him and in the end he also said that he believed this opportunity shouldnt be lost. Thats how 
the decision was taken and the intern was sent to Japan. Fortunately he went and came back. 
Interviewer: Would you handle it the same way if another opportunity came? Or to put it in 
another way, if another opportunity came and you thought it was worthwhile but funds would 
have to come from your budget (Institutional budget). 
Interviewee: I would try to get other people concerned, my supervisor to buy-in. But thats 
another question because among the questions I was asked was who is going to finance the trip. 
It was much easier when I said it was JICA but I would not tell what would have happened if I said 
it was RDB. We usually have training plans, so if its not in the training plan, it might be difficult 
but when an opportunity comes from outside and is financed by that particular institution, we 
dont need to say that this is not part of the plan. I mean, its an opportunity to learn  any person 
in the institution whether intern or staff in the structure. I would say it might be difficult to 
convince other colleagues here that that person needs training but I would personally take the 
decision because when you are managing a department, you understand better what the 
department need vis a vis the benefit to whole country. I see this Intern (Patrick) not as an RDB 
person but as a resource for the country. If hes not here, he might be in the Ministry or other 
institution. I know that whatever skills he got from Japan is important for RDB but also for other 
institutions but more importantly for the country thats why I think I would take the same 
decision. 
Interviewer: How was this received by the Intern himself and others within the institution? 
Maybe you partly answered it  do you think the CEO just signed it off because after all it wasnt 
going to you (RDB) anything? What was the view of the people you consulted? 
Interviewee: I would say they werent very much convinced at the beginning but I pushed hard. 
What is more interesting is that when he (Intern) came back, the CEO came and talked to him and 
he realized that he (intern) was a person not to lose. He even said to me, please make sure we 
dont lose him because we will need him in the department. What was important is that we had 
a retreat as RDB senior management and we were talking about thinking outside the box, and 
working with other institutions, and consulting with many other stakeholders and one of the case 
he (CEO) talked about was the decision I took to send the intern to Japan for training. He said he 
wasnt very convinced at the beginning but after he realized it was important to let managers take 
decisions. We are an agency that cuts across all the ministries. Sometimes, to work with an 
institution, you have to inform the CEO. You inform him later. 
Interviewer: How do you inform him or what strategies do you use to communicate regularly 
with others within the institution? 
Interviewee: We have  particularly at senior management level apart from the weekly meeting 
 time allocated to heads of departments to talk to the CEO about the plans we have or the 
activities we are undertaking and programs you are planning. So every week theres time for every 
head of department to meet the CEO to discuss issues affecting the department. It doesnt 
happen every time depending on the schedule of the CEO who is very busy but thats the principle 
we have here. 
Interviewer: So, you have senior management meetings and one-on-ones with the CEO? 
Interviewee: Yes, we have one-on-ones with the CEO but we also have monthly meeting with all 
the staff. Every first Tuesday of the month, we have staff meeting where we meet and discuss 
issue. We also have an electronic way of communicating  through the intranet, where we share 
documents, we share information internally that is also a good way of communicating. At 
department level, we also have weekly meetings but ofcourse me here I dont have many staff. 
I rarely meet my advisor (Singaporean) and Patrick who is still an Intern but is the process of being 
recruited  we share some of those issues. 
Interviewer: Do you use memos? 
Interviewee: Yes, we use memos and emails. Those are ways we share information. We also have 
what we call strategic issue memos. Sometimes when you want the senior management to take 
a decision on a strategic issue, you have to make a strategic issue memo that you take to the 
senior management meeting and you briefly talk about it and the senior management takes the 
decision. 
Emails are used  for example  when the Human resource department wants to make a general 
communication like the community umuganda (community work) for all the staff. Thats a simple 
email the HR sends to all staff. You also use email when you want to go on a mission  to 
communicate to staff that you will be away for a certain period of time. Those kind of 
communications. Sometimes you do a memo when it is particularly for the CEO or COO for a 
particular consideration or a particular senior official. 
Interviewer: So, Memos are upward communication while emails are downward 
communication  right? 
Interviewee: Yes. 
Interviewer: What do you think influences the way you take decisions? Do you think its the 
education, experience or the local context, for example? 
Interviewee: Personally, there are two things. I think one is the experience in working with these 
public environment and secondly the exposure as well. Because being exposed to certain 
environment makes you decide to make certain decisions but we also go through certain capacity 
building programmes where we talk about leadership and what it means being a leader. 
Sometimes its about taking the risk, or thinking outside the box. Sometimes building that 
confidence in you helps you to look far  not what is going to happen today but the impact that 
the decision you are going to make will have on the overall mandate or objective of the institution. 
I always try to think about the future. When I decided to let Patrick go (the Intern), I was thinking 
about maybe next year when he will be happy here in RDB or when he will be somewhere else in 
a certain position. I was thinking that we need a team. It was also important to understand the 
topic of this capacity building training. So, theres really a mixture of these things because when I 
was in Russia, I was exposed to these kind of environment where I would go and talk to the 
management of the University about certain issues affecting students. All these experiences 
working with public institutions  I remember when I was in RIEPA, I would hardly take such 
decision because I thought I needed to follow all processes and I knew that that could be done by 
me only. But with experience, I used to learn from other leaders what they used to do, talk to 
some people, they tell me what kind of decision they have to take bearing in mind that it is a risk. 
I think sometimes to think as a leader. If I do this, I will be in trouble. 
Interviewer: How important has been education to your life journey? 
Interviewee: I would say, only the second part was really important to my journey or current life. 
Personally when I think about the first 4years at the University, I would not tell you exactly what 
I got out of it. I had to spend all the fours because I had to learn the Russian language. It was hard 
and after nine months, I was moved to first year of the University. The four years I didnt learn a 
lot perhaps a part from interacting with the Russian people and speaking better the language  
otherwise it wasnt much helpful. But in Masters what brought even confidence in me in whatever 
am doing, it was quite different in a sense that we would not have many courses to go through 
with our lecturers. We would do it ourselves. We would go and prepare and come and teach 
others. A Professor would be there to provide some guidance but you would be really the one to 
teach all these students who were all Russians. I was the only African and foreigner in that 
particular class. I would go home, prepare the course and come teach them and answer questions 
and all that. I think that really built confidence in me and something I realized it later.  I remember 
when I went to defend my project without having any papers. I was convinced that I needed to 
make a surprise. I went there and there were all the old men and I talked about my subject. I was 
asked questions and I was among the top two best students. 
Interviewer: Congs  How did you get the confidence yet you did not have the experience you 
have now? 
Interviewee: Well, it is about building the confidence. The first time we were told that for Masters 
Degree we were not going to have lecture courses, that we were in fact going to prepare them, I 
was worried because I had never done this before.  I never took seriously my studies for the first 
four years. Now, I realized this was the beginning and that whatever was done in previous years 
was not important. I thought this was important. I realized that I needed to start building 
confidence in me so that I can be able to face all these Russian people which I thought were 
superior to me. I think this is where the cultural thing comes in, when I went to Russia. I thought 
this is a country of smart people because they are white thatfeeing inferiority complex. I had to 
fight hard until I had to convince them that we were the same or I can even do better than you 
(them). That is why I took the decision and said I was going to defend my subject without any 
paper. I know we all come with those papers. I remember spending the whole night reading the 
summary of my project and deciding to go in the morning and face all this. I think it helps. When 
there is this complex but deep in you, you have that courage to say I need certain thing. I think it 
helps and that is how it continued and when I came back to Rwanda, I didnt have complex to 
think no, no I need to be under someone to supervise me, to tell me what I have to do. But 
because I had the confidence from the University, I believed in me that I could do that. 
Interviewer: That urge in you. The can do better, wanting to do or make a difference attitude 
or doing things differently, the courage in you. Where do you think you get that courage from? 
Is it an inborn for example? 
Interviewee: I wouldnt say that courage comes from parents or other members of the family. 
Personally, I tend to believe that because I was exposed at an early age to certain circumstances 
in very difficult countries such as Russia. I think it came because I was still young, I could get such 
qualities in me. 
Interviewer: Is this (courage) something you developed because you were in Russia  specific 
to Russia? Would you say this courage is more Russian or Rwandan-Russian? 
Interviewee: Yes, they (Russians) do have courage. I remember I used to be in a class of mostly 
young  even young to me but they used to do things that I thought was impossible to be done 
by such young people. I grew up with them and its in the Russian culture to be really working 
hard and take risks. You probably know about Russian history, they have also gone through 
difficult periods. From young age, Russian people are working hard. Whatever they start, they 
have to finish. I think thats where I got that from but I think I was in very difficult situation when 
it was very hard to get money. I remember my Dud used to pay for my studies but it would be 
very difficult to pay for eating (food). I would struggle myself to get that and that most important 
thing is that in Russia it is very difficult to get a job if you are a foreigner. So I would really struggle 
much and would say I need to do something to finish my studies and to do it well so that I become 
self sustainable. All these things brought me to become really courageous and who I am. 
Interviewer: Lets talk about Rwanda. How do you think the Rwandan people shaped your 
management style? 
Interviewee: Personally to be frank, I dont think I have learnt a lot from the Rwandan people or 
the Rwandan environment because I am sure whatever achievement Rwanda has made today, 
the biggest percentage is the experience that the people in Rwanda brought from other countries. 
The culture (Rwandan) remains and in the sense theres need to keep everything around the 
Rwandan culture so that we dont become a country with values from other countries. I tend to 
believe that most of what we were able to achieve comes from outside  from people in 
managerial positions being exposed to the outside world. 
Interviewer: You touched on cultural values, what aspects of the local culture do you think are 
important? 
Interviewee: Yes, we talk about values, we talk about dignity  this is something that is even 
mentioned most of the time (agaciro). We need to be proud of where we come from as Rwandans 
because most of us come from other countries where we had become citizens of those countries 
and had acquired values of those countries but we still think of Rwandan culture of dignity. I tend 
to forget most of these values because we really dont talk much about values. 
Interviewer: How important is family for instance? Some of the values are family, gender, age 
(children/elderly) 
Interviewee: I think they are important. I was young when I left the country. I know what used to 
happen when we were still young or how family would be important. Unfortunately, today, 
although we tend to say that we attach much value to the family but you find that we dont spend 
enough time with the family. I personally I think family is important and try best when I have time 
to go to my parents who are not even here in Kigali. When I have time, I take my wife and my kind 
of certain places but gender is also important. Equality in terms of gender respecting old people 
I find these values really important. 
Interviewer: Talking about gender, Rwanda is one country with many women in decision 
making positions, what is your view of gender  do you for instance think men and women are 
equal in all aspects. 
Interviewee: I think they should, and today when you go in a meeting and you find a woman 
leading, you realize that they are really capable of becoming leaders of the country. I think the 
most important thing is to give them opportunity to show that they are capable of leading. What 
used to be lacking in other countries is that women are not exposed to those kind of leadership 
environment but we can see that in Rwanda if you trust women and give them responsibilities, 
they can deliver. Women are mature people. If they are able to take care of the family as women 
 and that is my own belief  it would not be difficult to take care of other people as leaders. 
Interviewer: Someone would say, there are certain roles for women and others for men. If you 
had a team of men and women, would you give them the same kind of tasks? 
Interviewee: Well, yes. No exception when it comes to physical capabilities of what women can 
do, it is definitely if its about lifting something like this (table), then definitely women cannot 
but if it is about thinking and taking a decision and guiding people in certain things, I think these 
are things that women can also do (i6, L2702, p78). 
Interviewer: At home, would you want all the children  girls and boys  to do everything or 
you think that there are certain things that girl at good at and others for boys? For example 
making the bed, fetching water, cleaning the house/clothes, collecting firewood etc 
Interviewee: To me, I wouldnt think there should be. If it is not something that requires physical 
intervention that you find in men that you dont find in women, then I think all can be done by 
both. Gusasa (making the bed) for example, I dont see why boys cant do that. In fact I happen 
to do that myself. 
Interviewer: How the issues of integrity and sensitivity or privacy especially for girls or women? 
Interviewee: Well, if you talk about the sensitivities that are associated to certain interventions  
yes. I am not going to send a girl to fetch water not because she is not able to do that but because 
she might be exposed to people who might rape her or something like that. This is also something 
you would tend to think for the boys. You cant send a boy to fetch water in the middle of the 
night for example not because he would not be able to do that but because he would be exposed 
to other dangers. 
Interviewer: Some Rwandans think that girls can do a good job than boy in cleaning a house for 
example, what is your view? 
Interviewee: That is a perception. Thats how people perceive things but if you have the chance 
to be exposed to different perception, you will see that cleaning the house would be done by 
either the boys or girls. But again, if there are other factors that come in, like having enough 
strength to do that, perhaps a girl would not be able to clean a whole house not because of the 
job itself is not something she cannot do but perhaps because of the enormity of the work. There 
could be factors that could affect the perceptions but naturally I think boys or girls could do more 
or less the same. 
Interviewer: You made your point clear how strongly you believe about gender, do you think 
this is a perception shared by many Rwandans? 
Interviewee: I think it is a view shared by Rwandans. I wouldnt know if there are many who think 
the same way but it depends on what you have been exposed to. If a person grew up in Nyaruguru 
(Rusizi district) in rural areas, who grew up seeing only men doing this and women doing that, he 
will definitely tend to remain with that particular position. But for me, because I grew up in a 
family where my mother would give any task either to my sister or to myself or my brother and I 
could see that something girls do, we could do as well. Again, if something was risky for a girl, my 
mother would not give it to the girl not because she believes that girls cannot do it but because 
she thinks its risky for girls. 
Interviewer: Would the majority of Rwandans see it the say way? 
Interviewee: The majority? Yes, because the majority of people have been exposed. 
Interviewer: How about in the rural areas who are not exposed that much? 
Interviewee: People who are not exposed wouldnt think that way. 
Interviewer: How important is position of power in a Rwanda context? For example, Job titles 
(Director, Minister etc..) or rank. Does it make any difference? 
Interviewee: I think in African context in general, it makes a lot of sense. It is unfortunate to me 
because I was in Rwanda..You can see that Director example you dont feel comfortable just 
because you are director. Again thats because of cultures, mentality etc Thats how I grew up. 
Interviewer: So, you think the Rwandan culture is hierarchal? 
Interviewee: Yes, very hierarchal unfortunately. Again, people who have been exposed would not 
feel disturbed to talk to me. But I dont know for example how a minister would feel if I am 
comfortable to speak to him/her easily. Sometimes you speak to a Minister and s/he thinks that 
you disrespect him/her because you come to him easily. You talk to him easily but just because 
s/he is a Minister. You dont feel comfortable to talk to him but unfortunately some people want 
to use those powers to become much more superior and more powerful. If I am a minister, you 
are not allowed to come to my office any time and ask for appointment. There are certain things 
that people tend to think that power gives. Unfortunately, yes, the Rwandan culture still has these 
influences on how people use their powers. 
Interviewer: How do you interact with people with power? 
Interviewee: How I interact with them depends on how long I have spent (known) with a certain 
person. In the beginning, I am reluctant to comfortably talk to people in power. I have to go 
through channels to make appointment, where I go there and not talk about sensitive issues - 
fear to talk about different things even when you have a different view of certain things, asking 
questions but as time goes, feel comfortable to talk  see how that person goes. It becomes much 
easier. But perhaps because I dont know the culture the person, I tend to be careful in the 
beginning when I talk to people with power. 
Interviewer: Expression of opinion. How do you express your opinion that may not necessarily 
shared by your superior? 
Interviewee: That one again  a different opinion I would always go for mentioning it  
particularly if its something that I believe in. I would go for my opinion. 
Interviewer: Do Rwandan people usually express their opinions? 
Interviewee: No 
Interviewer: Why? 
Interviewee: This is again similar to powers and all that. For example at retreat of senior 
management team, there people express opinion in public and explaining your opinion only with 
one person thats what happens most of the time. Today you will to pass in the corridors and 
people talking about the CEO that the CEO cannot take decisions, that he is slow etcbut when 
you go to the staff meeting that person cannot mention it. 
Interviewer: Why? Is it fear of the CEO or the personality of that particular person? 
Interviewee: I think it is both but the fear comes from something behind. The personality of the 
person not the CEO because the CEO has been exposed, he is very open. He never lived in Rwanda. 
He will meet you in the corridor and tell you that you shouldnt wear that shirt for example. He 
will tell you anything even in public. He believes that if theres something he needs to share, he 
will share but 
Interviewer: Will he also accept to be challenged? 
Interviewee: Yes he would. People who challenge others usually like to be challenged but there 
are others who want to challenge but not to be challenged. But if you are courageous enough to 
challenge other people, you would expect others to challenge you would still have your own 
opinion. 
Interviewer: If you thought the criticism was somehow negative, how do you deal with negative 
criticism? 
Interviewee: I dont take it personal particularly if it is related to work. If for example it is about 
my decision ways or managerial approach or something like that, I dont really take it personal. 
On the contrary, I would like to hear from that person what s/he would like me to improve on.  
Interviewer: Do you think that is a view shared by many Rwandans? 
Interviewee: No I think it depends. People who have been exposed tend to accept. If you are 
talking about people who were born and lived their entire life in Rwanda, they would hardly 
accept criticism and I think that is definitely a concern as far as leaders are concerned because 
you cant lead effectively if you dont accept criticism. You would not expect to be perfect.. Even 
some leaders would want to hear from people under them about what they would want their 
leader to change in terms of the way they manage the institution or the way they take decisions. 
Interviewer: You (RDB) are inviting people - including foreigners to come and invest in Rwanda. 
There are two issues as far as this subject is concerned. On one hand you have Foreigners who 
come to invest in Rwanda will have their mentalities (cultures), on the other hand, you have 
local people who may not have been exposed to other cultures  as you said who are not as 
open. How do you think these two kinds of extremes will work? 
Interviewee: Again, when these people (foreigners) come, it depends on the people they interact 
with. The people/investors we get come from different countries, very open people, sometimes 
they face people (locals) who are very open in everything they do or sometimes they meet people 
who are very slow in the services they provide or people who are not used to being criticized 
because most of these investors will tell you the whole truth. For example theres a Singaporean 
guy who came here. You know, Singaporeans are very open. If they think something is wrong, 
they will tell you straight away. Even though I was exposed, I was surprised to hear a Singaporean 
investor whom I took to my colleague in the one-stop centre where they provide registration 
services when my colleague picked a phone and the Singaporean was showing him something on 
the laptop. He packed up his stuff and said am leaving because I can talk to someone who answers 
a phone when am talking to him etc so, those are the kind of things we (Rwandans) are not used 
to. My colleague was shocked and said what this is. Now I cant even answer a phone. Investors 
come with their own ways of thinking. He (investor) said you guys are not serious. You cannot talk 
to investors and then start talking to phones. Its not polite. Yes, we have these kind of investors 
who come with these mentalities. 
Interviewer: Do you think that disparity in terms of mentality is an issue? On one hand you have 
people who come with their ways of doing things; on the other hand you also have people 
(locals) who are not very dynamic or not exposed. What do you think is the way forward? 
Should we for instance adopt the international best standards or stick to the local ways of 
doing things? 
Interviewee: I think we need both. We need to borrow some international standards that will 
help us improve this particular environment. Its not really a bad thing if someone could express 
themselves easily/openly about something they are not happy about. I think and wish we can also 
borrow from those people. At the same time I wouldnt say we leave out the remaining values 
that Rwanda has. As we mentioned, family, respect for old people etc.. All those kinds of Rwandan 
traditional values that we have but at the same time try to learn from other particular cultures. 
Interviewer: In other words a hybrid that incorporates the local as well as the international 
practices? 
Interviewee: Yes. In the current environment, I wouldnt think that you would stick to your own 
cultural values and think that you are going to be able to perform in this particular environment. 
For example one thing we need to have in RDB is confidence - if we want to attract people to 
come and invest in Rwanda. Sometimes you stick to your culture because Rwandan people dont 
talk much. Are very quite. Things will not change people are coming from outside and are 
coming with those standards. You need to find your way to position yourself in that kind of 
environment so that you are able to attract them. 
Interviewer: Should we therefore try and copy and paste the Singapore model in Rwanda after 
all it has worked extremely well in Singapore  why cant it work in Rwanda. 
Interviewee: I dont think we are copying and pasting. For example I personally wouldnt have 
been harsh as the Singaporean was. I would have been polite and explain that next time not use 
a phone when we are discussing a business. The way he packed his things and said you guys are 
not serious, I personally think that was harsh. But thats their way of doing business. If I were to 
copy and paste, I would do the same and if an investor tells me something I am not happy about, 
I would tell him to go away, I dont need you. But I have to find a way of mixing i.e being frank 
and open but at the same time keeping the culture of being polite and respecting people. Thats 
what we are talking about hybrid  mixing particular culture with international standards that we 
need to adapt to. 
Interviewer: Thank you very much for your time and sharing your insights. Its been a real 
pleasure talking to you. I wonder if you have a question for me. 
Interviewee: I want to know what next. What are you going to do with this particular 
conversation? 
Interviewer: Good question. I am talking to a wide range of people  those who were born and 
raised in Rwanda and others who were born and raised outside Rwanda (exposed and those 
not very much exposed) to try and see if there are any difference or similarities in their 
view/perception of management. This is what my doctoral research is all about.  
Interviewee: Why me? Why did you choose to speak to me? 
Interviewer: Again, I think thats an interesting question. Perhaps I should start by explaining 
why I chose this institution. I live and work in Rwanda and I know a bit of background about 
this institution (RDB), so I kind of knew the people working for RDB. I expected to find people 
who have lived outside the country as well as people who grew up in Rwanda  I for instance 
knew the CEO lived outside Rwanda for many years.  Why you? I looked at RDB website and 
your job title seemed to suggest to me that you interact with foreigners. So, I was really 
interested to talking to you because I thought that by interacting with foreigners, you will have 
some insights about the behaviors of foreigners.  Of course I could also tell from your names 
that you are a Rwandan and you would know something about Rwandan culture. And I think it 
came out clearly in the discussion that you have a good appreciation of the local culture as well 
as the exposure to foreign context. 
Interviewee: Interestingly, I also interact with people in rural areas. I find myself interacting with 
farmers. You have to establish linkages between foreigners who come to invest in Agriculture 
sector and farmers who produce raw materials they need for their industries. So, I sometimes 
have to go there with foreigners, have meeting with cooperatives who want to work with foreign 
investors. It is really a privilege to be able to interact with all sorts of people and I hope this 
discussion has been helpful. 
Interviewer: Sure It was extremely helpful. I like your honesty in the way you respond to 
questions and your openness in expressing your views. You clearly have the external experience 
having lived outside the country as well as a good grasp of the local context. You clearly 
understand the local culture though at some point you were a bit hesitant to discern your own 
view from the general view. E.g: I think your view of gender was clear  no doubt about that 
but as a Rwandan I thought not all Rwandans were as gender sensitive as you. I am not sure if 
many Rwandans would treat girls and boys the same. 
Interviewee: Yes, you are right  they are not. I think I tried to draw a line when I talked about 
people in rural area who never left the country, who are never exposed. Thats why I said it would 
be good to categorize these people and look at people who were exposed to external world - 
people who will have seen that everything is possible when it comes to gender. Others who grew 
up in a culture where their parents would tell them what to do  what boys do and what girls do. 
When you grow up with such mentality, it will follow you. 
Interviewer: Do you think there was a reason for the grandparents to have specific roles for 
girls and boys? 
Interviewee: Sometimes when I think that they were colonized by these western people, I ask 
myself why the kept their mentality. But I think the rationale is about the issues we talked about 
 maybe the risks related to exposing girls to certain things, or maybe even physical capabilities, 
otherwise I dont see any other reason why people would tend to think this is for men and that is 
for women. If for example there is risk that a girl would be raped going to certain areas, I would 
understand that but in an environment that does not expose any of them to any risk, then I would 
really see no reason. That is really something very important to know. 
Interviewer: Talking about gender and the Rwandan culture, if you did something important, 
they will say uri umugabo (you are a really man) and I think the bible talks about man to refer 
to people  not woman. What do you make of that? 
Interviewee: Being head of family? In certain context, yes, I can agree with that but it shouldnt 
be. The problem is that sometimes it is wrongly interpreted. Thats the problem. Even the bible 
is sometimes wrongly interpreted by one Pastor or another depending on what a particular 
Pastors thinks. So I really think that things should be flexible. There should be that flexibility and 
not have that kind ofwhere you think things should be like this and not consider the other way 
is also possible. Otherwise people can have different views on different things. 
Interviewer: Thank you very much. It was a real pleasure talking to you. This will be kept 
confidential and I will definitely share the findings of my research with you. 
Thank you 
Interview7 
Intro: Thank you very much for accepting to talk to me to discuss my research. To introduce 
myself, I am a doctoral student at The Robert Gordon University. My research interest is in the 
areas of leadership and culture. My research title is Traditional and hybrid leadership styles in 
Rwanda  so I am looking at cultural influences on ones leadership styles. I would be interested 
in hearing your views about doing business in Rwanda. Can International best practices be applied 
to work in Rwanda Or is Rwanda at the risk of becoming a halfway house of the so-called 
International best practices? Theres no wrong or right answer. My objective is to see what 
many Rwandans think as general prospects. 
We will talk a little bit about your back ground, because your back ground will inform why you 
think this or that. The next question will be around your education and experiences as how they 
inform your managerial approach, how you manage your business or how you conduct business 
and the third question will be around culture, so I dont expect (ask) you to explain what culture. 
I will be asking questions and probes to be able to understand what your perception (your view) 
of Rwandan culture to is. Do you have a question about the structure of the interview? 
Interviewee: No. 
Interviewer:  Maybe to start, could you tell me your background? 
Interviewee: First, I come from the legal field, legal field is my background. Im a lawyer by 
confession. Secondly its now 10-11yrs of experience in the field with almost 10yrs in trade and 
investment office, so basically I have been handling commercial matter. 
 Interviewer: What does that mean in practice? 
Interviewee: It has very many issues; one is giving legal opinion to the business men especially 
investors and the legal opinion would vary depending on the work that they have questions 
about. It could be labor, maybe on investment, be it dispute settlement, drafting legal documents, 
then the other part that is the part of investors. On the government side my main task has been 
to advise the government on what best practices of legal matters we should borrow to our legal 
system as a way of having a best friendly investment climate and in getting those best practices 
of course I look at countries that have advanced, countries which were in more less the same 
situation as Rwanda in 30yrs, which were in developing countries but now they have gone far - a 
best example is Singapore, Mauritius though its still in the developing path but they advanced in 
many stages. 
Interviewer: So, how did you get this job in the first place? 
Interviewee: I went through the normal channels of recruitment I did interview and I got it. I saw 
it in the newspaper that was in 2003 then I applied, went into recruitment process and got a job. 
So, I have been in several offices, I have been in investment promotion, I have headed special 
investment project, I have been a public Notary, I have been a legal advisor of the Institution 
(RDB) and 2008 I left government and I became a legal consultant to government so that is the 
job that Im handling up to now (I advise government). 
Interviewer: Would you say that you have done any managerial roles? 
Interviewee: Yes. 
Interviewer: what was it? 
Interviewee: I was a head of doing business in 2008-2009 
Interviewer: How many people were you managing? 
Interviewee: Three consultants. 
Interviewer:  Could you tell me about your view of management? 
Interviewee: Yes my management style was that of team spirit where I table a proposal and my 
colleagues debate on it and we come up with something that is final - an action plan or way 
forward. Someone would say that, it is being bureaucratic because you know some people need 
a manager or a leader, who make decisions. Mine was democratic where people would come up 
with views and we deliberate on them it doesnt necessarily mean that if I bring my suggestion 
that is it. We have to weigh Pros and Cons. 
Interviewer: The point I want to make here is that nowdays people would like someone who 
could make decision not even having to call meetings every now and then. A little thing you are 
consulting, you table a proposal and you get views and people debate and come up with a 
decision? 
Interviewee: Definitely there are some administrative decisions that you would not necessarily 
need to debate on, but the work plan of unit you have to debate on it come up with an action 
plan then divide tasks then we meet when we are presenting our results. 
Interviewer: You talked about administrative decisions it would really help me if you could give 
an administrative decision that you made in recent times and tell me how you went about it (how 
you approached it), A live example of an incidence and decision not how you would do it but how 
you did it. For instance I will give you an example maybe to clarify this; two weeks ago I had to let 
go one of my colleagues. So this is something that happened now if you ask me how I did it then 
I would tell this what I did, and how I did it. A live example of something that happened and a 
decision made. 
Interviewee: ooh decisions or my decisions are not that big. I will give many examples my decision 
were though I call them administrative but were simple decisions that dont carry any legal 
element like if I say next week we should have a press conference, that is an administrative 
decision that doesnt require any legal mandate and by saying that I instruct our communications 
person to prepare then we make a briefing to the press. 
Probe: But I asked for an example. I mean there are these issues in a managerial role 
Interviewee: Today Im not in managerial role I told you that was in 2009. 
Interviewer: So, you are a consultant? 
Interviewee: Yeah, Im a consultant. 
Interviewer: Being a consultant I think would also involve making decision? 
Interviewee: Of course some decisions but you know when you are a consultant you are not 
guided as the other people who get daily orders. I have terms of reference, work to deriver in a 
specific period so, the way I go about that work those are my own decisions. If I say I will be visiting 
the Ministry of Justice as a follow-up of my work every two weeks that is a decision that I really 
dont need to request anybody. 
Interviewer: yeah, so but even in other consultancies you can choose to take this consultancy or 
you leave it because of one or two things. Even in your day-to-day life at home we always meet 
decisions on a day-to-day basis. Maybe just as an example which would have helped you to 
illustrate but maybe moving on, you said you are a lawyer by profession, what would you say was 
the most important thing about your education? 
Interviewee: The most important thing as you said is being part of the team that has reformed 
the country to the global title, having moved Rwanda from the position of 139 any way 150 in fact 
from 2007 to todays rank of 45 in the whole world (from 150 in 2009, to 87 in 2011 to today. Also 
today in2011 we are at the position of 150 in the easy of doing business. Rwanda is the easiest. 
Probe: You said you are 150th position in doing business?  
Interviewee: Yes I was a part of the group. 
Probe: Rwanda is on 150th position out of? 
Interviewee: Yes 150 out 183 countries and now we are at 45 out of 193, so being part of it and 
having seen that atleast in those reforms the legal reforms have been taking the line share around 
70% of the reforms, so being part of it I think Im happy with it. 
Interviewer: So, you think your legal advice contributed to this  
Interviewee: Yeah it has led the country so good. 
Probe: I mean it takes a lot of things for the country to develop (definitely), so why do you think 
your legal contribution was important? 
Interviewee: I say it was important because the kind of work we do have got deliverables that are 
on record of course I cant, claim that I was the only person in those reforms but being in a unit 
that is mandated to coordinate reforms in the country and being the only lawyer in that unit it 
means that I was coordinating all those legal reforms even if there are other people many people 
who also contributed but I was the only person in charge of coordinating the legal reforms so I 
feel my contribution is good. 
Interviewer: So how does that link to your education? 
Interviewee: Well my education I studied law and its what Im doing basically Im putting in 
practice what I studied which has developed my career.  
Interviewer: Other than your legal training is there any thing else that you think education 
contributed to your thinking and how you conduct yourself or was just the legal skill you got from 
the university, is there anything else you learnt from school that you think was important? 
Interviewee: Well being in school I wasnt alone of course I was with many people and I learnt 
the team spirit by the way starts from school not only at work because when you are at school, 
you are given an assignment that you work as a team so, the team spirit started from school 
working with people accepting peoples ideas, learning how to concede or to accept that this 
argument sounds more profession or more contributive than yours. So those are some of the 
things that I studied from school. 
Interviewer: So we now move on to your working experience I think we are now kind of going 
back, what you would say was the most significant event in your work life? 
Interviewee: The most significant event was in 2010 Rwanda my country and this time in the 
doing business where I work was pronounced as the top global reformer and the event was 
officiated by the world bank officials where the vice president was there and almost 6 countries 
in Washington, South Africa, Mauritius, Liberia and many others I have forgotten were hooked on 
the video conference, and everybody was eager to ask what we did, so to me I think that event 
was really important to me. 
Interviewer: Why do you think it was important, it is because it video conference-d with 
Washington? 
Interviewee: Ooh  Not only just having video conference but it shows that what we did was 
very, very much recorganized meaning that I can call it is an appreciation of our work because 
looking at countries that have advanced and at that time they were asking us how we handle 
things. So to me it was something good, something memorial. 
Interviewer: Im glad that you are using the word memorial which means that is something you 
still recognize. How has that experience pushed you either do more or do less? 
Interviewee: It has inspired us because of the following: 
- It showed us that we can do some things that we thought that we could not do, we have been 
reforming but we didnt know that our skills can be so much recorganized To a level of beating 
those advanced countries so we felt that we have the capacity. 
- And the second thing is that we got an inspiration of even more hard working, we think we 
are able to compete. 
Interviewer: Ok Let us now move on to the next subject called culture  a seemingly complex 
issue but quit easy subject. How have the Rwanda people shaped your view of management, or 
your view of doing your job? 
Interviewee: Yeah the only one thing that they have taught me how to be patient and the reason 
is simple. 
Probe: So Rwandan people are patient? 
Interviewee: The culture requires patience, because the kind of work we do is somehow new to 
the traditional or the cultural way of doing business the reforms as you said are the first that we 
were trying bring in the best practice those are the kind of work or reforms that are borrowed 
from the western culture which is totally different from our culture. So, you require some 
patience for people to adapt to those reforms because they are totally new. 
Interviewer: So, what is the difference between the new models and the typical Rwandan 
traditional way of doing things? 
Interviewee: Well, I cant say that the style is 100% western, we borrow some of the forms or 
some of the culture that we feel is necessary to our culture much as we maintained the way some 
of the issues or some of the ways we have been doing things discarded. 
Interviewer: So which new practices do you think you have borrowed from outside? 
Interviewer: Yes, I will give you an example; you know when you do business, you start business 
you know business has got a life cycle, you start a business, you do the borrowing from the bank, 
you reach a stage of putting up a structure, you do business but at certain point not all the 100% 
businesses are successful, due to many factors some of the businesses collapse, So in the 
Rwandan culture having a business that have once collapsed was something treated as a shame 
if you go by the culture of these people who rear cattle if the cattle got finished meaning that you 
are knobbed you arent a man you cant talk in people. That culture has hampered a lot of people 
a lot of business men here many people have gone bankrupt but because they dont have that 
culture of going to court to request for bankrupts they could keep cringing to that dying business 
at the end they get defaulting in the Bank they even sale their houses, their property and they get 
finished but if they could have been borrowed the system we are bringing in now of filling for 
bankrupts, you file for bankrupts, the court declares you bankrupt and the company closes 
tomorrow you start afresh other than going far deep making yourself busy into your personal 
property trying to rescue the company. 
Interviewer: So, is that to do with Rwandan people or is it Africans or is it specific to Rwandans? 
Interviewee: Well, I think it is to do with Rwandans. Its the society that I know better since 
Africans have got some similarities even African have got that kind of behavior of thinking that if 
I show that Im bankrupt people will rough at me but this is a normal culture in business its also, 
even in those big, big multinationals they go bankrupt theres no shame in that things can go 
wrong. So our culture has been very crowd of being so separative even if youre getting to and to 
you dont want to be known and there is no way in business you can be rescued from that angle 
unless you file for bankrupts I will give you an example maybe to insight you on bankrupts. For 
instance if you have a company or a hotel like this one normally you have tax administration 
revenue which you have to pay you have electricity, you have water, and you have suppliers of 
food or drinks and whatever so when your business goes wrong you find yourself you cant pay 
taxes, you cant pay suppliers and also you cant pay EWASA, if you dont file for bankrupts at the 
end you will find you are now going into your personal accounts to make sure that at least next 
year you can survive the other year you try to borrow from other places to try to pay the date 
when you should have gone to court and say guys Im bankrupt then you save your property. 
Interviewer: Now talking about the bankrupt thing is it a new thing or is filling the bankrupt the 
new thing because there are two things here: One is that did we have these roles before or for 
there to file the bankrupts or is it force there were no laws and people were not filling bankrupts? 
Interviewee: They were there but not sufficient and not updated those laws were there, they 
were not being implemented. One because the culture was so strong, two the laws that were 
there were shaky. So, we have brought in modern laws and we are trying sensitizing people not 
to fear. 
Interviewee: Maybe for the implementation of those laws and the Revenue Authority hunting 
people up and down how do people receive you know those new approaches. 
Interviewee: Definitely they are resistant for every reform it is not easy changing the mind-set of 
people is not easy people are to certain things and you trying to bring in others even if therere 
good it will take time its not easy to change peoples mind. 
Interviewer: So why is it not, because if you are saying these are good things everyone wants 
good things, dont they? 
Interviewee: Because they dont understand first of all they have to understand that good thing 
what is good in it so it will take time. 
Interviewer: So why do some people see the advantage of having these new laws and for others 
it takes ages (yrs) for them to except (understand) as you are saying you bring new thing you think 
they are good for the business in Rwanda but the business community doesnt welcome those 
changes. 
Interviewee: Yes because you know in business therere risks so they also have to rake time to 
understand the risks involved in that new thing, secondly theres this thing I dont know how I can 
call it something that is in a human being of trying to be resistant to change no matter how 
positive it is they will first resist. 
Interviewer: Maybe let me check it to another angle, did it also take a bit of time to even except 
to bring in those change you know is it justified for the community to resist from the good thing 
that you are bringing? 
Interviewee: I think to cut your story short it all goes back to the culture; the culture is somehow 
resistant to accepting good things at the first sport they always take some time. 
Interviewer: So who takes the leads then? 
Interviewee: Of course as of now the reforms are being taken the lead reform the government. 
Interviewer: But Im trying to understand why people would go to say for instance Singapore and 
not America and you know would you say this is absolutely right I have to bring this how do you 
choose where to go.  
Interviewee: Thats good, one you compare all those entire best practices there are pots done 
worldwide for instance you have got a report done by World Bank on doing business, that report 
it comes out on an annual basis (every year) and it shows, it ranks countries. So, if you really look 
at Singapore it has been always the first for the last 5years, thats one reason why we say we 
should go to Singapore because it is the best country, Secondly you see the historical background, 
Singapore was behind in last 30years today is being ranked as the first so this also shows you that 
even our country can go to that level if they have been on our level in 30yrs only and they have 
managed to make all those reforms in30yrs, so it gives us hope and courage that we can as well 
do what they are doing. 
Interviewer: Do you believe in those World Bank reports and rankings? 
Interviewee: Partly yes and (partly no) yes partly no because we read them and they dont take 
100% of what they say we have to bring in our own positions. 
Interviewer: So you only accept things that you think that (that can help what we have) no but if 
they ranked in No145 out of 180 countries are you happy with the rankings? 
Interviewee: Yes, we are happy with the rankings because the rank doesnt only help us assessing 
how we are doing things but it also helps us to sell our sales to the investors because whenever 
the investor is going invest in a country he go through those many reports its not doing business 
only there is another one called world economic forum theres transparence international there 
are many reports worldwide done by different people or different organizations. 
Interviewer: But today you said you are at 150 I think no (145) if next year you are ranked 100 
(definitely we would feel bad) why? 
Interviewee: Because it shows, you know the ranking comes after doing the assessment so it 
would show us that we are going back we have been doing well in trying to make the investment 
climate friendly if we go to the rank that is above it is an indicator that somehow somewhere we 
not performing well. 
Interviewer: So, would you say, would you agree with their ranking and you say we think we 
are100 lets do more or you know the environment you said you have been in warping throughout 
this process so if next year you happen to be ranked N067 so how would you receive it? Would 
you think its fair? 
Interviewee: No, no, no it is something that I cant just say no or yes, or this or the other because 
there are reasons today we are 45 but if we went backwards like 20positions and we are 65 
position that would be a question mark (?) because the experience that we have you cant tell me 
that 20 countries have by passed us even if we dont make a reform today any reform you cant 
tell me that we would go back 20 times we would go back like 5 and if it goes to worse finally we 
would go back like 10 positions but 20 position in reforming procedures in methodology we know 
its not possible there would be something we would question the world bank what happened 
but if you go back 5 thats possible like we make positions in front we can still flow behind if we 
dont continue again. 
Interviewer: If then next year Rwanda is ranked N07 would you still question form 45-maybe to 
30th or 25th  
Interviewee: If even if we reforming of whatever kind at the level we are now at 45 because we 
are approaching top 30 countries, top 30 countries those are countries that automated all their 
systems everything is on automation so it would be a shock because I know the situation here 
theres no way you can tell me that we can just jump into the top 30 
Interviewer: So, would you protest or would you question that rank? Okay fine. 
Interviewee:  No I wouldnt protest but I know it basically I know its impossible. 
Interviewer: If it happens would you question? 
Interviewee: No I wouldnt question but I know many countries would question. 
Interviewer: Yeah So, still on this subject of culture I would like to understand your view on a 
few cultural aspects: one of each is Gender, what is your view of gender? To give an example do 
you think men and women are equal or are supposed to be equal or treated equal in Rwanda  
Interviewee: Well I believe in quality but the equality as explained in the constitution. 
Probe: How is it explained? 
Interviewee: It means that we have equal rights if Im allowed to vote one ballot then the woman 
will also be allowed to one ballot if my right to get a job is through doing interview then they 
should also do interviews. 
Interviewer: Yeah but in a cultural or in the Rwandan context at home do you see yourself as 
equal to your wife? 
Interviewee: No. 
Interviewer: Do you think there are certain roles for men there are certain roles for women? 
Interviewee: Definitely yes there some responsibilities that are specifically for men (like?), like 
being a head of a family because we know society has got two people heading at the same time. 
So, always men are the head and of course the security of the family is headed by a man 
Probe: When you say security what do you mean? Do men have a gun? 
Interviewee: I dont have a gun but culturally we have got our guns the sticks and whatever if 
anything goes wrong lets say at night you dont expect a woman to come out and check when 
you are there unless if you are not there but if a man is there definitely that is a role of a man in 
our culture and I really do support that. 
Interviewer: And women what are they supposed to do? 
Interviewee: Women definitely have got these young domestic roles (issues), like for instance 
preparing food even if you have maids at home but I dont expect to ask a maid food when my 
wife is there, that is a role of a woman. 
Interviewer: How about children (girls and boys) so do you think they should also be treated the 
same or as equal? 
Interviewee: Definitely they should be treated equally 
Probe: And when it comes to work do you again think that there should be specific roles for boy 
child and girl child? 
Interviewee: Yes, yes because this specification gives them an upbringing of growing up knowing 
that s/he belongs to this gender and this is the type of work they will do if I can give you an 
example if I have my son here and my daughter when I want to give them tasks at home I cant 
get a boy to tell him to sweep the house I would rather tell the daughter to sweep the house then 
I tell the son to go and fetch water. 
Interviewer: The other aspects you have said of course ages, what is the age difference in terms 
of respect maybe if I could use that word you know how do you treat people who are young to 
you and people who are older that you or people of your same age, do you treat them the same, 
does age make any difference? 
Interviewee: Definitely it has a very, very big age somebody who is below 18 to me is a child 
s/he has got a separate class of people I treat them separately between those who are not 
married and then those who are married. To be simple I have got three classes, one are those 
who are under 18, the other one are those who are above 18 but not married then the other age 
group is that person who is married that one is also in a certain category, then the next of course 
the last is the old somebody who is above 60yrs of age, I also give him a kind of respect that is 
different from these other people. 
Interviewer: Would you help me to understand how you treat these differences you have 
mentioned. Some of them, under 18 you call them the children so how you treat these four 
categories differently? 
Interviewee: Yes, yes the under 18 are the people I give respect but not because they, you know 
the simple way I treat them as children people whom I feel I have an obligation to take care of, 
(Probe: Even if you are not related to them?) yes because those are young people. They are still 
in school and those who are not at school they are not still in position to be self sustaining on 
their own so thats why I look at them at that level. And then the above 18 but not married those 
ones in our culture again if somebody is just there he has never been married and he is just there 
and yet he has the age which is very important in the culture leave alone other factors but he has 
the age so to me I also give him respect in his category but I treat him in that level 
Probe: But which level I mean you think they are not serious you think they are . 
Interviewee: I mean in the level for instance what can I talk with him if for instance the issues of 
the family he has no experience with a family (Probe: But he can do business) well may be I didnt 
understand your question. 
Interviewer: You tell me how do you deal with them? 
Interviewee: I can do with them very many things even the other people under 18 I can do some 
of the issues with them but in general they have got there class. 
Interviewer: So, how about the married ones? 
 Interviewee: now we share a lot (Probe: like?) like the family issues, like taking care of the 
children, solving issues of the domestic nature so, basically I treat them as my friends in the club. 
Interviewer: And the older ones the above 60years? 
Interviewee: Ooooh the above 60yrs now those are advisors (senior citizens) yes, (Probe: so how 
do you treat them?) I give them maximum respect they are my parent because they merit to be 
my parents, having had experience in life I treat them, they are my advisors because I think they 
know more than I do. 
Interviewer: Another interesting aspect of culture is positions what does that means to you to 
know that Nshuti is a managing director or so and so is a military person you know those positions, 
do they ring any bells (knowing that so and so holds a certain position) if I told you I do this, what 
does that mean to you my position? 
Interviewee: In our culture some things do help knowing somebody is good (Probe: why, why is 
it good?), because in one way or another you might need his assistance and his assistance you 
should be treat it this way not to mix it with corruption - you know our systems somehow still 
closed the African setup so the information is not accessible as the advanced countries but when 
you know that you are one and you are the mayor of Kigali or a district is very easy for me to get 
the information from you as quick as possible unlike the advanced countries where I dont need 
to come to you but to browse through the web site and I get what I want. 
Interviewer: No but if someone came here, say for instance you saw a Minister walking in and 
someone tells you that he is a Minister does that make any difference to you?  
Interviewee: Not really  
Interviewer: And if the Minister come and greats you would you great them differently 
Interviewee: Yes, I have to give him that respect being a Minister or holding any title not 
necessarily a Minister there is that kind of respect because either from the administrative point 
of view or from cultural point of view you have to respect the people with their titles.  
Probe: But these are titles;  
Interviewee: Yes, if he is demised I would great him like a colleague but if he holds that title 
maybe the Minister he deserves respect  
Probe: But he is not your minister he is a Minister in another department/Ministry you have 
nothing to do with. 
Interviewee: Yes, in fact even if he is not a Minister in my function but he is a minister from 
somewhere I will give him that respect because in our culture we respect either the age, people 
with those titles, because we know they have got should I call it a command of respect. They have 
got some obligations, social obligations or administrative obligations to cater for the people so 
we have to give them that respect. 
Interviewer: So, would it be fair to say, Rwandans are hierarchical? 
Interviewee: Partly yes.  
Probe: Now the reason to why I brought in that question of hierarchical thing is I want to go to 
another aspect of culture - disagreeing or expressing different views with people with positions. 
For instance if your position was slightly lower than mine or if your position is slightly higher than 
mine, how do we interact? Is there a difference between interacting up wards and interacting 
down wards? 
Interviewee: Yes, interacting up wards when you are, for instance you want to bring in suggestion 
it is in form of a request with arguments, with supportive arguments but when you are interacting 
down wards there is a little bit of instructions. 
Probe: What if the instructions are not respected for any reasons? That is you are asking me the 
way I see it or if I was somebody you line manage. If you instructed someone and he dont respect 
the instructions? 
Interviewee: Yes, it would depend on the kind of instruction if the instruction - if I was a leader 
and the instruction is basically knocking into the entrance of the institution that I lead then you 
would definitely have to follow the instructions but if it is, the instruction doesnt look into the 
interest of the many you can as well also give it up. 
Interviewer: So to you what is the most important is it the person or the product or the activity? 
Interviewee: The activity not the person. 
Interviewer: How about the person, its the person that does the activity or do you put work first 
and then person the second. 
Interviewee: Then that one also goes back to my issue as I was saying what does that activity do? 
If that person also benefits on that activity then the activity is above him if it is a national interest 
by the way the nation interest comes faster than anyone else but if it is personal then 
Interviewer: Well maybe the national interest is big or quite big depending on how you define a 
national interest but by the way what activity would you refer to be the national interest? 
Interviewee: For instance if I say that if there is a reform being carried out and the reform is really 
going to benefit Rwandese or the people living in the country then that reform is above a personal 
interest it is a national interest but if somebody is bringing in a reform that helps his company 
grow, single company then that reform is a personal interest people can as well discard that but 
if it is benefiting many people then that is a national interest and you cant object that. 
Interviewer: My final question is around communication, how do you often communicate with 
the people you work with? 
Interviewee: Oooh frequently I have no problem in that 
Interviewer: No I mean the way of communication. Do you for instance use meetings to 
communicate, Emails, memos, or letter? 
Interviewee: Yes, yes we use Mails, messages on phone I dont go to many meeting with people 
I work with.  
Interviewer: Both the ones you work at the same level and the ones that you line manager? 
Interviewee: Even if there are the people we work in the same office I dont remember having 
meeting sitting, setting agenda or what.  
Interviewer: Then how do you plan? 
Interviewee: No the plan of course Im not saying we dont have meetings we do but there are 
rare in fact we have got an action plan for a hole year for instance now we have made a plan for 
a whole year so what is remaining is to make a follow-up otherwise I dont see ourselves meeting 
again maybe like in three months or four. 
Interviewer: So how was that action plan communicated to ensure that everyone understands 
it and the role? 
Interviewee: Yes the proposal is designed by our office then we call stakeholders, - stakeholders 
those are the people we work with to implement it so we call a meeting we make a presentation 
we deliberate on it and we agree on it so the final action plan is sent to them on their personal e-
mails and hard copies then the rest is to follow-up how far have you gone with these, - any 
problem or such kind of things. Then we meet like in three months or four to make the evaluation 
of what we have done. 
Probe: But if you have an agent issue to deal with how do you link-up with others how do you 
communicate? 
Interviewee: Because the urgent issue would not need all the stakeholders because the action 
plan is divided into sections if an urent issue is for instance in paying taxes it means that I would 
hold a meeting with commissioner general I dont need to call somebody in land centre because 
one he is wastage of time theres no his contribution. 
Interviewer: So, after the meeting with the commissioner general 
Interviewee: Yes, I dont even need to communicate it in the land centre because it has nothing 
to do with his work 
Interviewer: So, who else in your organization do you communicate it to?  
Interviewee: I just communicate it to my immediate boss. 
Interviewer: How?  
Interviewee: Either through face to face, Verbal communication in most cases E-mail.  
Interviewer: Okay 
Interviewer: You said sometimes uses Short Messages (SMS), When do you use SMS? 
Interviewee:  Ooh when we have like very fast message, if I want to deliver a very fast message 
urgent things we deliver both I can send an email at the same time a message. 
Interviewer: Okay Do you have a question for me? 
Interviewee: In fact for instance if somebody is in a meeting the messages are very easier. 
Interviewer: I thank you very much for your time  
Interviewee: Thank you too 
Interviewer: And at this moment you can ask me any question. 
Interviewee: Yeah we have talked at length, so, what have you gained from the talk or from my 
answers. 
Interviewer: As I said at the beginning there is no wrong or right answer Im gathering stories - 
talking to people so in the end I will be doing an analysis to try and understand the general view 
- Im interested in peoples perceptions so Im asking the same questions in an informal in 
unstructured manner but they are kind of structured in a way.  Im a bit consistent on the 
number of issues that Im discussing so in the end I need to see if theres anything that is 
common to Rwandans - do they see things in the same way or do they see things differently? 
For instance the best practices that we touched on at the beginning. So do you see those as 
working in Rwanda or maybe should I rephrase it, do you think those Singaporeans models can 
really work in Rwanda? So that is the question Im trying to investigate.  
Interviewee: No. The second question when should I expect to see your findings? Because I need 
to, I feel interesting and its in my field and I would also need to see your analysis because I guess 
after this you will make your analysis on how you will also see them or how you found the 
guidance so when should we expect it and maybe they can guide us also? 
Interviewer: So thats a very good one actually, yeah Im doing few interviews I need atleast to 
gather I think about twenty interviews and I so far had quite a few, so I need to do a bit of few 
interviews then I analyze them and I will be definitely be interested in sharing with you my 
analysis for your comments and I would actually appreciate if you could again allow me more 
time to further discuss my analysis and hear what you think. 
Interviewee: Im very, very much optimistic because we might think that there are doing good 
things but when things are analyzed and maybe they give us sense of direction on where we 
should change and yeah.. So thank you very much 
Interviewer: Thank you very much Really helpful its not easy to get people to give time to talk 
to. I appreciate own to be honesty to be honesty. 
Interviewee: I have had these interviews and people are not forthcoming. They are trying to be 
on defense. Ndabizi abanyarwanda umubaza akantu agashaka kujya kuri defense icyomaze nicyo 
dupfa nabazungu (I know Rwandan people, you ask him/her one thing and they are trying to be 
on defense. Thats where we differ with white people). 
Inteviewee8 
Interviewer: Thank you for accepting to talk to me about my research, its going to be belief. So 
my research is about Leadership and Culture, Im interested in understanding how culture 
influences leadership or management styles? So to be able to do that, I would like to hear from 
you what you think culture has to do with management but first of all I want to hear a bit of an 
introduction of yourself, now that will allow me to understand how you have been going about 
and the countries that you lived in so that I see your culture diversity, then we talk about 
experience how manage the work you do? So that will tell me your management style which is 
basically what Im interested in and of course your education because I will also need to know 
how your education influences your management style so basically I want to know your 
management style but also to know what influences the way you manage things. So a belief 
introduction will be helpful.  
Interviewee: Thank you very much Ok let me star with my education background I have Bachelors 
Degree in law. But before law I also did philosophy and as you know Im working in the water 
sector and my long working experience is in water and sanitation. My education life has focused 
much on church institutions or seminaries secondary schools and I passed in the major seminary 
for three years where I completed it. 
Interviewer: Sorry, where was that: 
It was in Rwanda. I started working in the year 2000 as a teacher for five months - teaching 
biology, history and from 2001 I started working in NGOs (None Government Organizations) with 
COFORWA and I spent ten years. I think my best times so far in working are related to COFORWA 
because I have been the manager of the project so I was involved in the management of the 
institution itself not only with the executive committee but also linked or collaborating with the 
board of directors, so I have been involved in the development of the association devising the 
schedules. Generally that is my background as regards my work experience. 
Interviewer: How many people were you managing at COFORWA, did you have any people that 
were under your line management? 
Interviewee: Yeah at first I was managing 60 people as depute coordinator at that time for four 
up to five years with structuring of the association I was dedicated to one department (social 
mobilization of trainers department) 
Interviewer: Now coming from teaching to managing people how did you find it? 
Interviewer: It seemed different, there is something additive of course but teaching is just dealing 
with children under eighteen most of them but working, managing sixty employees its another 
case even most of them were older than me maybe I was the youngest of the team 
hahahaha..The acceptance of my authority was very challenging but with my skills and the 
confidence of the power given by the board and head executive could make me come out with 
good results because of many improvements within the institution itself from the new project 
formulation and people working in the capacity building of the organization not only the staff 
group but also board, advisors commit and members who were also a huge number more than a 
hundred. I proposed many activities of capacity building of this organization, so at certain time I 
was accepted and everybody was appreciating my competence to building the capacity or to 
support the organization towards a better vision and all this was just the source of good results. 
Interviewer: What would you say is your management style? 
Interviewee: At that time and today it has been changed according to time, my management 
ability was rebuilt as I have acquired different leadership trainings and also increasing my 
knowledge in my studies so gives me a kind of more experience in my management styles. 
 Interviewer: What is your understanding of management? 
Interviewee: Yeah management to me, are those principles that I call maybe managing is 
organizing, coordinating, guiding, controlling communicating to prevent aspects from loosing 
disappointments for efficiency and for obtaining good results. Ok this is a technical aspect but the 
results of that aspect of leadership which is different. 
Probe: Maybe we will get to the leadership in the moment but what would you say is your own 
style of leadership style? So I think you know how you managed people at COFORWA and how 
you manage them here at JICA, and also see how other people manage institutions or projects 
and also their businesses. So what would you say is your own as Norberts style of doing approach 
to management? 
Interviewee: I think three words can be a key for me, looking at my experience what I can tell is 
good communication, guiding people and the third is encouraging hard working initiative to make 
people work on their own and so they become confident to contribute and produce good results 
with no much of supervision. 
Interviewer: Now going back to leadership. What is your understanding of leadership and the 
difference between leadership and management? 
Interviewee: Leadership is that aspect of a leader guiding people towards objectives aims and 
focus of innovation and allowing initiatives to be enlarged. 
Interviewer: so what is the difference between management and leadership in your view? 
Interviewee: Leadership is about vision and management is a technical level of standards but 
leadership is always communicating the vision. 
Interviewer: Some people say management is about doing things right while leadership is doing 
the right things does that make sense to you? 
Interviewee: yeah surely. 
Interviewer: We now move on to the culture aspect and I think if you could kindly tell me about 
your understanding of a Rwandese?  
Interviewee: A Rwandan person is that person, who is very confident, patient and somebody with 
fidelity and so on who is very attached to the value of human rights and values. 
Interviewer: What values do you consider to be more important a Rwandese? 
Interviewee: Targeting and courage. 
Interviewer: How do they manifest these values? 
Interviewee: In families we try to appear somehow respectful. I think the values are divided 
between family and community because a Rwandese, a well respected Rwandese will appear on 
the community value as trying to show his superiority to the public but what he is starts at home 
and when seen in the public he try to show that power. So you cant go appear smart in the public 
without something behind on how your family behaves your children are taught or cared so the 
best starts in the family and from people enjoy the community life where they can also learn 
different things or contribute to the rest of the community so if the man doesnt care about his 
family he comes to the community and they start saying that  Aah this man is talking a lot of 
things in front of us but at home he even doesnt care about his children and his wife so you find 
that it is something considered as a shame to that man. So the valuable behavior for a Rwandese 
is to be balanced at home, in the family and at same time to the community. 
Interviewer: Now how do you compare a Rwandese and a non Rwandese people that you work 
with or you worked with? I think most people will love their families but are there any other 
cultures that you think are different - at least from neighboring countries. 
Interviewee: Of course there are some differences, a Rwandese will tell you that Congolese are 
so productive and the Ugandans dont care much about their behaviors, the Rwandese person 
would like to stay away from the public life. Yeah those are some different aspects between a 
Rwandese to the other communities. 
Interviewer: What is importance do Rwandese people put to things like Power, how do people 
see you when you are their line manager? 
Interviewee: They really fear, worry much about power and they respect too much on it. The 
higher person let say the leader, the chief of the group they do so much so that they carry all the 
initiatives. 
Probe: How about yourself? 
Interviewee: Myself I dont fear power. Okay I need to give that respect to the higher persons but 
I would also make things simple, actually most people really dont like injustice and those super 
powers demonstration. 
Interviewer: Now when you say people fearing the boss, do you think the boss also expects the 
subordinate to fear him? 
Interviewee: Yeah most of them really do like being feared by the subordinates, or being praised 
to certain concept of power. I dont know if it is necessarily to Rwandese only, but any way I think 
many people like that praise. 
Interviewer: Another thing that interests me is age You said that you managed people that 
were mostly older that you, so how does it defer managing people who are older than you and 
managing people who are younger than your age? 
Interviewee: Of course for the people who are younger than you, you need to be a model for 
them but to the older people you need to be maybe more good communicative with them so that 
they can understand the ideas you develop but they also need your attention to towards their 
ideas as well. Here I dont say that clear communication isnt good for the young people but also 
focus on being their model where you need first to let the adults communicate. 
Interviewer: Now if you were to do things again, would you treat them the same way or not? 
Interviewee: No, of course no, you need to guide, to correct the mistakes and you also need to 
draw lessons from their respect especial adults. 
Interviewer: Have you ever had time to make a major decision at a work place? Please tell me 
about the most important decision you took and how you managed that decision. 
Interviewee: This decision was proposing restructuring the organisation, so before you make such 
a big decision you need to prepare your mind set, prepare people who will solve it and you need 
also to prepare the governance not only your team but also partners. So for a big decision to be 
successful, you need to do it when youre well prepared and having consulted with all the 
important people who can give you some good ideas. 
Interviewer: No Im interested in a one live example that you yourself have taken as a manager 
and how you dealt with outcomes. I mean a practical decision made that as now you can show 
me that here are results of that decision. Okay it may have ended successfully or not on the other 
hand. So it doesnt have to be the best decision you made but to me the most important decision 
is that decision you thought was really challenging and the results dont have to be positive 
Interviewee: I dont think I have made such a kind of decision at work place so far. Okay we once 
made a decision. 
Interviewer: How did it go? 
Interviewee: Okay we were a group of 60 people and the organization was facing serious financial 
problems and we made a decision to reduce the number of workers from 60 to 30 people. This 
took like six months to prepare and find different ways of how people will be oriented, some of 
them were asked to retire and others were asked to just stop the work. So we mobilized the to 
restructure the organization and as well reducing the costs raising roles and responsibilities to 
people and then at certain times we conducted consultations but first of all with the management 
committees and after concentration also we informed our partners, donors and other local 
Authorities in the area and because the organization was very sensitive in the area, sensitive I 
mean it had a wide influence on different perspectives, I mean COFORWA was Socially, 
Economically and Professionally important at certain times we worked with other people, so 
before communicating this we sat in the ground meeting and discussed with all staff members 
and we were ready to receive their comments about the decision that was to be made so with 
the observation about the issue. Okay Im proud that they understood that it was necessary to be 
made that way and if we couldnt make that decision that time, the organization would have 
ended up collapsing and close so you see people understood the decision and yeah it was really 
the only choice that we had. 
Interviewer: What was the feedback from the people? 
Interviewee: Of course they were there And many people were unhappy to be fired but a good 
thing here is that we were prepared. Okay most of them got their terminal benefits and their 
terms of conditions the person was living in. but also no people who would have that idea so we 
found a bionomist because after that decision we needed also to settle down and start working. 
Interviewer: How do you think education or to what extent do you think that education is 
important? You told me earlier that you did Philosophy, and law, but you ended up doing 
management Water and Sanitation so why do you think education is important yet youre 
doing things that arent necessarily in line with your education background? 
Interviewee: Even if Im doing things which are not related to what I studied but the studies I got 
opened my mind to even hold the work that in any different field of study. So the important thing 
first is you need to be educated at the first place so as to be open minded in any field and if youre 
lucky you can find a job which is related to the field that you specialized in but not still with the 
capacity that if you find another you can adapt yourself easily. 
Interviewer: Wait, is that education or it is a matter of experience? Because if I did law and I 
end up in the Water and sanitation or other field, what is the link? 
Interviewee: There are certain bases that you got in education so without them you couldnt 
adapt yourself to a different new sector or field, of course experience will complement as we all 
know always studied things which were theoretical and we need experience to focus on that so 
that we acquire the knowhow. I think my first class in philosophy had opened me to the world 
enough. I dont know if it is personal spirits or sign of philosophy that I walk with which are 
reactive enough. Otherwise I could have stayed where I worked before. 
Interviewer: Do you think that education has influenced something on the way you conduct 
business? Your view of management, the way you interact with people, the way you manage 
people and etc. 
Interviewee: There are many courses that helped me to dealing with people or understanding 
different people, because when you did philosophy and law, those are also social courses that 
help to understand people not only individuals but also in groups. So those courses contributed a 
lot to my view of things and view of people. I cant also forget to mention the short term courses 
were practical because at the university, you will find that a person who has an opportunity to 
participate in trainings of people with different nationalities so this is something that opens much 
your mind towards your view of things or to the view of realities. 
Interviewer: Do you think that the way you do business is because youre a Rwandese? 
Interviewee: I have a bit of a Rwandese style that dominates but also for business especially we 
acquire knowledge from experience. 
I should have asked what the Rwandan aspect was 
Interviewer: Do you think that most Rwandese would have the same management style like 
Interviewee: Not really, Okay they try to do well but it will depends on who the person is. So a 
Rwandese traditional style of management is very much open to businesses, so what I do depends 
much on what I got elsewhere. 
Interviewer: Youve worked with many organizations and indeed as a Rwandese yourself, and 
remember you said a traditional style, what would you say is a typical Rwandan style or way of 
managing people? Could you describe how most Rwandese manages people or manage 
businesses.   
Interviewee: People are less motivated to share their views. 
Probe: Im talking to the leaders themselves, what would be your description of a typical way a 
traditional Rwandan use to manage people? I mean the Boss to say. 
Interviewee: A typical Rwandese manager is that person who likes full control of the group he/she 
is leading to be under his/her rules and powers but they also have relaxation moments with the 
group but doing that at the same time with limitations to protect his power on the other hand 
very proud of success of his team not only inside but also outside in front of other groups. 
Interviewer: Ok, Do you have any question for me? 
Interviewee: How are you going to get the difference between management and leadership 
because the two really confusing, I think with our discussion we mostly talked about 
management? 
Interviewer: Well I have read some literature about leadership and as well a lot on management, 
from interviews I should be able to draw a line between what is the strategic from the operational. 
So during my analysis I will be looking at the key words and phrases. For instance I asked what a 
traditional Rwandan managers do and you said they control, want everything, they are proud of 
success now those are some leadership traits. I think is quite scientific as its about looking at 
what seems to consistent across or what is endorsed by the majority of Rwandans. 
Interviewee: It will be very difficult for me to find the difference between the traditional way of 
management and the new management style, because this country Rwanda is changing day by 
day, so I dont think that people will be able to provide you with the needed information about 
the traditional way of management e.g Before Independence management style, so you need to 
involve older people within your research area because for us we are not sure of what has been 
happening.  
Interviewer: No actually I understand what you mean but Im not very much interested in the 
pre-independence Rwanda. By asking the traditional or the typical Rwandese style of 
management really what I am looking for is what you just said that people like 
supervising/controlling. Im trying to know is it still there that Rwandan managers still like much 
of controlling or it is less. You know people go outside and they get exposed to other influences 
they try to practice a kind of dual management than the traditional one. 
Interviewee: When do you think youre going to be done with your research? 
Interviewer: Very good question. Im working to complete it by the end of this year hopefully. 
Interviewee: You need to work hard. 
Interviewer: Unfortunately my work doesnt allow me. Im actually running for another meeting 
at ADB (African Development Bank) to discuss equity and inclusion but I want to work hard on 
this and make sure that I complete by the end of this year. 
Thank you very much for your time 
Interview10 
Interviewer: With developing a model of Singapore and all others so my interest is that can those 
models of Singapore really work or be applicable here in Rwanda and 2 is that personally I was 
born out of this country, now how do I find working here in Rwanda? Do I it easy for me? So its 
from that background that I would like to hear your background where have you spent your last 
couple of years, education and all that so that when we come to your experience of course we 
will be talking about your own view of management in a way that will inform your view of thinking 
about management and leadership and basically we talk about your own background which is 
used to do with where you got up and where you had your education, your experience and I will 
also be interested in your view about Rwanda. 
Interviewee: Im still wondering why you refer to me as a leader 
Interviewer: Well I had a chance to look at your profile and I thought your position, maybe also 
to give you background is that Im talking to people who are at a managerial level so Im not 
talking to freshly graduated people because they havent managed people yet But at a 
managerial you at least understand policies, visions and the strategy of the institution that youre 
working in. 
Interviewee: Okay Im like you also didnt grow up in Rwanda, I grew up in Kenya but I went to 
high schools and universities in Uganda so these are two different cultures, so after university of 
course I came back to Rwanda  
Interviewer: So where did you do your university? 
Interviewee: At Makerere University so I came to Rwanda of course but right after that I started 
working now the place I worked first as a prosecutor and at that prosecutors work was actually, 
it was undergoing some reforms; it was the guideline on how you want it was in terms of culture 
and everything, Okay in terms of culture and everything it was a real culture show, introduction 
to the Rwandan society and for me one of my challenges, because I was a prosecutor at a 
provincial level and I have been with people who had worked for many years so they did not 
understand how a person like me with my age would work with them And on top of that I spoke 
I used to speak a lot of English so I was kind of, any way to them I was an outsider. 
Interviewer: Did you speak Kinyarwanda? 
Interviewee: Yeah I did speak Kinyarwanda but my Kinyarwanda wasnt so good I remember I 
went to court and people laughed because really I spoke little of Kinyarwanda. So to them I wasnt 
a Rwandan enough and on top of that I was very young compared to them, so it was a challenge 
to impose myself. 
Probe: Today youre not Rwandan enough and what about you, did you yourself with being a 
Rwandan that one there was no doubt? 
Interviewee: well I have never felt anything elsewhere, well with so many differences with them 
well the fact is that tried to impose myself then that did make me fell Rwandan enough but I 
thought in their case they were a bit cross minded, you know in the sense that for them what 
made you probably a professional in that profession was so limited yet for me my understanding 
was that it was just beyond the standard they had created. For example on how well you speak 
the language you know, I spoke the language but not well enough. 
Interviewer: I think Im not a lawyer, but I think not knowing the language well enough in my 
understanding it doesnt work well you know I can struggle with business but when it comes to 
law And the cases are being heard in Kinyarwanda You know miss interpretation of words is a 
problem? 
Interviewee: Even the judgers perception view of reading certainly or if you took someone to 
court they were not confident that I should actually you know I could actually what I had to do in 
a proper way, because youre not well good enough in the language but for me I was a fresh 
graduate I was just looking at an opportunity to get into system understand better, I knew I had 
no way out and so I had to find my way in and do what I had to do but I wasnt there for longer I 
left about after some months I moved to Tanzania where was legal reception of the tribunal, so I 
was there for about 8 months and after that I went for my masters degree in Scotland as well in 
black pool university and then after I came back to Rwanda again. And when I came back my job 
wasnt as a lawyer I was used to doing some public events so that I try to find a job. And its from 
there that I really got into the real Rwandan system. 
Interviewer: For how long time did you spend in public investment? 
Interviewee: Almost about four months, yeah I think so. So with that time I was just going around 
and I had to look sponsors I was involved in a whole organization, there was a big international 
women parliamentary conference here, same as that a lot of people were used to men being at 
the full control of organizing these things. So I appreciate I had a good school which gave me the 
opportunity of being at the top Actually I was an event organizer 
Interviewer: Did you manage any people there? 
Interviewee: Yeah, I managed people basically what I used to do is that, when we were organizing 
the conference, we had a lot of things we were doing we had to have protocols we had conference 
services and I had to supervise all those people for which we contacted them, so after four months 
I left and came to the ministry. 
Interviewer: For how long have you been here? 
Interviewee: I have been here I think its going to be my fifth year in the ministry by August. 
Interviewer: And what are you doing now? 
Interviewee: Im a principle Senior Lawyer Attorney I actually dont go to court because Im a 
senior lawyer for the government of Rwanda. So have the general who is known as the Minister 
so all the lawyers who work under him are called Attorneys so there is principle and therere also 
state attorneys so for me Im a principle state attorney and mainly my work involves, well when I 
started to work, I worked in the law reform department I used to reform laws, actually my work 
basically was law reforming. So the laws reform aspect I think would interest you because talked 
about Singapore and everything. So our laws were actually old laws. So we had some laws of 
1940s, 1970s and others of 1980s you know when you look at the 80s really Rwanda was a much 
closed society it was mainly francophones (French speaking people) and following civil laws. So 
in terms of the region and everywhere they were not really bordered their wings and their system 
so they were very close, so when we came in, it was a bit of a challenge with a new system, I mean 
we joined the east African community, things that involves business are being looked at a totally 
different perspective in Rwanda now. It has a more developed perspective so we found that the 
laws most of the laws didnt apply to where Rwanda was at time there were even laws that didnt 
exist that we thought were relevant. So what we did is that we had to conduct law reformation, 
(changing laws, and introduce the new ones) to actually get us to the level of other states in the 
East Africa and also to better our systems. So we had borrow Ideas from other countries that 
actually succeeded in combining both civil laws and common laws because by then we had only 
had civil laws and we wanted to apply civil laws which we thought was much better and wider, 
but one of the things I remember when we were organizing these workshops a lot of people were 
francophones especially and the people who were here in Rwanda before the war did not 
understand what system that would be better than the one they already had. 
Interviewer: So what they had was the civil law system? 
Interviewee: Yeah was a civil law and now we are getting a highbred and mixture of both civil and 
common laws. So we met a lot of challenges you know and one of those were people who didnt 
want a change so that those were other culture perspectives we were looking at. You know for 
example in the court the civil law were not allowed to refer to a previous case and everything, so 
sometimes we thought that in the common law you have to and when we introduced fact and we 
said it will be relevant they like said that your doing doesnt exist how? you consider the case 
with its own facts you dont have to reconstruct on a previous one. 
Probe: Now do you consider or its still the same. 
Interviewee: We dont really consider simply because its a gradual process especially in a court 
process. 
Interviewer: So laws of any case say when someone killed is the whole information/history is 
forgotten? 
Interviewee: No, no, no its kept so thats the basis. No what we mean by precedent is a mother 
case similar to that one that can be referred to as for guidance. E.g. when youre in the court then 
they refer to a previous case that you were involved in to use it as a reference and to help them 
decide. 
Interviewer: Can you put it in a non legal language because I have a whole trail of cases so whether 
this vague but I know I have a record of driving when drunker so is that what you mean? 
Interviewee: No, thats not what I mean. For example if you raped, you raped your claims so you 
to court, the law is clear on that but there is a judge who decided previously that in a marriage 
there is nothing like rape So they refer to that case to determine your case may be introduce 
totally a new aspect on that particular matter but maybe I could tell in terms of law reform and 
real classic case on how our society and culture so we tried to introduce an insolvent law meaning 
a back graft so when we introduced this law actually it was introduced by MINICOM so abantu 
baravuga ntamucuruzi uhomba basically you cannot declare that you made a loss it was as good 
as declaring yourself dead in accouter you cannot go somewhere and declare that you made a 
loss So its a personal thing and with hope that next time you pull yourself out of that loss 
situation. So when we introduced this law, the insolvents law even in parliament they were like it 
cant happen How do you introduce such a law for someone to go to court and declare his/her 
loss? Be declared bankrupt so there was opposition of that. 
Interviewer: Yeah for the company to go bankrupt. 
Interviewee: In Rwanda they go bankrupt but they never declare the bankrupts there is a 
difference between you actually loosing and declaring that loss because when you declare that 
loss thats means your credit about to be sorted so you have protected your creditors, here they 
do it in the most suitable way they feel. 
Interviewer: Now let look at how they used to do it before. 
Interviewee: What happened you never went to court its like you made a loss and you have loan 
from other people you may never pay them thats why you find people are killing each other and 
the other agree that the feeling made a loss and it ends there. When luck he can go and find the 
properties but the other one can refuse because there was no a system in the place helping 
creditors I think you understand what Im saying so you just close your business and finish so the 
other people who gave you that loan wont be paid because they cannot pursue you but for me 
their understanding wasnt over privy thing you know okay all know that your business had some 
losses but yourself dont give out an open declaration about what happened to the business, so 
for them they didnt understand that about people seeing you like you have failed but its more 
about protecting your property and protecting the people you owner their money. 
Interviewer: So the insolvent thing was seen as a failure? 
Interviewee: Yeah sure. 
Interviewer: And what is the situation now? 
Interviewee: The situation, now I think the law is in place where it should be in place 
Interviewer: Now talking about your experience, what is your view of management in Rwanda at 
least compared to other places you have been living in? How do Rwandan people approach 
management or leadership? N we let me start with your own, what is your view of management? 
Interviewee: Well for me my view of management over here, first of all for us in Rwanda our 
perception of leadership starts from hope. So what Im trying to say is that we are expected to 
work in certain way because of the expectations that have been created. Do you understand In 
the sense that when youre working its just beyond yourself it is more about the country. So 
when I come to the office I have these files when Im looking at them I look the in such a way that 
can I actually get a benefit out of this When Im working on myself Im looking at how is it going 
to take us to the next level in Kinyarwanda we call it politics you know there is a lot of politics 
that have been created at a certain level that even at a lower level its in grade new have to 
actually conduct reconduct this in a certain way. 
Interviewer: And what is that way? Thats what I have been asking 
Interviewee: whatever youre working on look at it beyond yourself look at it as a way of building 
the nation yeah its really beyond yourself. To the sense that I have been here for 5years, and I 
want to look beyond the nation, I want to now to start looking at self you understand what I 
mean? Because the thing about it is this kind of leadership way is that youre not a priority here, 
only the nation is the priority 
Interviewer: So how do you balance serving the nation or how do you Because when I asked your 
view of management, I was trying to see how, because management is like a wide thing thats the 
goal but management is the mean to reach the goal and is where interact with other people and 
management is way you interact with people to make them be productive actually the managers 
dont do work unless they supervise other to do it. So my question is would you make people 
work and this is your view or your approach to management? 
Interviewee: Yeah, well my approach to work, well for me here its a very technical thing its about 
receiving your files and giving to the people that belong in the people youre supervising in other 
words to carry out their tasks so for me its a technical thing, say have you received your file, do 
you understand what it tells, have you conducted whatever youre supposed to do and have 
returned it on time 
Interviewer: Now thats one thing giving the assignments and etcBut getting the output is a 
different thing, so how do you manage people to make sure that they produce what youre 
expecting them to produce? 
Interviewee: Yeah getting the output, okay first of all maybe I will tell you what the chain is like 
here. Theres a minister, theres the head of department, then theres me and then lastly therere 
people bellow so the chain comes from up going down. So in terms of my supervising its minimal 
unless if my boss isnt around and in the past year she has been away for the ever a year so I had 
basically to be the head of the department and the way that has worked for me is that when is 
received a file, before I can actually hand it over to the person below me I have to go through it, 
understand it just a quick peruse then give it to the person and give them the task so show them 
what Im expected to them so after when theyre done they it back to me and I have to go through 
it again to ensure that I understand their point of view and if they have actually done what I told 
them to do and in the case that they didnt fulfill the task I seat with them and tell them exactly 
what is expected from the file  
Interviewer: When youre giving those instructions and all the tasks, how do you communicate 
that? Do you email, do you send letters actually how do you communicate these things  
Interviewee: No you send by memo and then have office administrators, but if its a file that I 
notices first of all sensitive or complicated in any way I personally take it to them. 
Interviewer: Now talking of management Im sure you have had of these theories of autocratic, 
charismatic you know they whole list of leadership styles, what is your preference or what do 
you think is your style of leadership or management in other words? 
Interviewee: Me I can tell you what my leadership style is so which I have found a bit of challenge 
working institutions in Rwanda for example Im an adult I have a child you know Im a grown 
person so I know that I have to come to office to work I know Im expected to leave here on time 
basically I know there some tasks that I have to undertake but my bigger challenge has been in 
some cases where youre followed to that ugiye hehe kudahari you know it I think That hope 
followed up that I think it should be, any way I dont think thats a good style of leadership where 
you spend most of the time following up on what all your staff are doing in terms of their 
movements so that they are seated in the office because being seated in the office doesnt mean 
that theyre actually doing the job So because of that I think a good management style or 
leadership style in a working environment is first of all give clear instructions. Of what is expected 
on the employees and then give the employees their opportunity to exploit themselves you know 
to understand who I am in the working environment or what is expected on them or give them a 
benefit of the ditch and when I talk benefit of the ditch I dont mean only in terms of how they 
execute their case files, but also how they conduct themselves in the office are you on time, are 
punctual, how serious do you take your job you know And once you have done that then that 
you can come in and have a more strict supervisory style but not necessarily a policing style 
because I believe everyone is a grown up so if you search and tell them what you expect on them 
and also give by example because I dont see why how you run after your staff members while 
youre also hardly in an office so I believe they should lead by examples. 
Interviewer: Now, you said you have acted in a position of a head of department, which means, 
you manage people and practically whether it is in few months or years how do you conduct that 
business of managing people? What is Christines style of managing people? How have you done 
it? But take in mind that Im not interested in what is supposed to be good 
Interviewee: Well mine, I give you the files, first of all I expect you to be here on time really if 
youre supposed to be here by 7:30AM then you should be here by that time or at most be here 
at 8:00 Oclock be here early enough, yeah and then a file for me its a maximum of 5 days yes 
the early you bring it the better but if you have a file beyond 5 days and theres something that is 
not right and I will not leave my office to come and check if your seated on your desk or anything 
the most important thing is that are you delivering what youre expected to deliver? So for me 
my management style is I expect everyone to be responsible for what they are doing and deliver 
what you have to deliver on time, Yeah actually Im a free hand if you call it that way. 
Interviewer: Yeah the style itself the language that people use in management is basically that 
freehand so where you think people are responsible enough they can deliver on their own, but 
what if they dont or one of them doesnt? 
Interviewee: Well if you dont I caution you really theres the caution but if you still insist on doing 
what you have been doing in proper way then I will send the matter to the boss 
Interviewer: Now I want to take you to the culture thing, I think people like to be policing others 
now looking at the way those people are managing and the people that you have managed do 
you in a Rwanda context, do you think its necessary to police people? Because you could police 
people if there are not naturally they need to policed or its just me with that altitude of policing 
people so do you think its necessary or do you think Rwandan people can work freely if you give 
them I free hand to manage themselves? 
Interviewee: I think it depends on the institution because for us here it does really encounter your 
reputation really matters and we are also appointed to the cabinet most of us. So and the ones 
below are not appointed to the cabinet and when people are here they looking at being 
promoted, they are also looking at the risk of losing their jobs because you just dont know when 
youre going to lose your job so all those issues for me make policing irrelevant  
Interviewer: Now is that from the police people or from the policed people or the community that 
youre policing are these relevant reputations, the posts for promotion and that job insecurity as 
you call it, okay is that at the leader level or is that at the led level? 
Interviewee: Its at the led level because if you have a file you have to execute, because for us 
here we work on the basis of a file when have you produced your work, and we also have a culture 
reporting others to the leaders they are also these people looking for ways to I dont want to say 
to bring you down but many people are fighting for the same position so that means they will do 
anything to get what you have so for me those issues make policing irrelevant. 
Interviewer: Now Im struggling to find how the net policing thing is irrelevant because if youre 
saying its about to the led or the community that is being led now because of reputation, 
promotion and insecurity how does it orient them to be policed?  
Interviewee: No, it doesnt orient them to be policed its makes policing irrelevance. 
Interviewer: So for the boss? 
Interviewee: Yeah for the boss, because these people down here are not comfortable enough, 
you cannot say therere comfortable enough. 
Interviewer: And how about the boss or the leaders? 
Interviewee: Of course the leaders are under pressure, the leader has been appointed to by 
cabinet the leader is also being watched.  
Interviewer: So its a cycle everyone is looking for promotion and everyone is being reported 
which actually makes policing irrelevance? 
Interviewee: Yeah absolutely. 
Interviewer: That takes me back to the law reforms, and combining the models from Singapore 
and everywhere else because the Singapore model I assume is supposed to be working in an 
environment which is actually similar where you have insecurity and etc, so how will it work? 
Interviewee: Well what we do when we are trying to get system from other countries we create 
a highbred, for example we have Mauritius, Mauritius actually has civil and common laws. So the 
laws are drafted in such a way they are applied free, in Rwanda we have civil law and we have 
common law as well combined so what we do is that we look at countries or states that have both 
systems and then borrow ideas from them you dont lift everything from them and bring it here 
no you lift the workable of course depending on how far we have gone in terms of development. 
Interviewer: sorry to take you back to the management area You talked about your own view 
of management and how you practice management, but generally what would you say is the 
common style of management is Rwanda? Because you have also managed and seen how 
people conduct themselves so what would you is the common style here if not the majority 
style?   
Interviewee: I think the common management style in Rwanda is not the free style management, 
because looking at the way things work what I have seen and what I have exploited in some cases, 
your boss is more than your boss because he/she is going to look at how well you conduct your 
work in the office and he will also go beyond that and also follow up on your reputation outside 
the office. 
Interviewer: Why? 
Interviewee: Its a culture thing, its a Rwandese culture. Your personal life affects your 
professional life they are actually emerged. Yeah its a culture thing and thats why you will 
someone who has been behaved in a certain way it will cross over to his employment as well and 
will affect. 
Interviewer: So your boss also wants to manage your personal life? 
Interviewee: He wants to know, its by knowing your personal affairs suppose the drunken you 
love going to the bars after work and the boss wants to bring this situation into the office despite 
the fact that you get to office on time and all that, this also becomes a limitation to your 
promotion in work. 
Interviewer: Actually my research is mostly all about what people think, theres one thing that 
free hand is the best way of management so Im struggling to understand why do you think, you 
think its important I mean you like being freely managed, but do you also think policing is justified 
or is okay? 
Interviewee: I dont think policing is justified, even in the Rwanda context its not justified I dont 
really like the policing way of conducting business because every employee needs to be given the 
benefit of the ditch he needs to be given the tools to perform your duties, so if you have failed to 
make use of those tools of a liberty to conduct your duties, thats when policing can come in even 
I dont think its proper. I dont think policing means better output at work thats not what it means 
to me. 
Interviewer: Maybe towards the final question is that, in your view how would you describe a 
Rwandese person? Well you can say a Munyarwanda is a friendly person and everything but in 
your own description because also Rwandese, you work in Rwanda, you live in Rwanda, etc...  
Interviewee: Lol Goodness its hard I think Rwandese is contradiction yeah in the sense that 
you want to be who youre but cant be who youre because perceptions of the society. 
Interviewer: Maybe thats how the society is? 
Interviewee: I think the problem with that you know, thats why for us Rwandese its beyond 
individual it is society so youre who the society pursues you to be and thats the styli types come 
in, as a man you have to be like this and this and this, as woman youre supposed to be like this 
youre supposed to conduct yourself in this way and that way so where does the individual come 
in, you as a person exactly what do you what are you looking for. 
Interviewer: Now to help me I think its really touching on what I was looking for, you said they 
are these perceived expectations of a man and those of a woman, if you could kindly tell me one/ 
two things you remember that perceived to be attached to Rwandan man or how a Rwandan man 
is expected to be? 
Interviewee: for example from my first perspective Im a woman, Im a single woman because of 
my job and everything I can be found in many like society or things like management and all that, 
but when I go for someone for a visit I will stand up and speak, I think Im exposed enough I believe 
in speaking what I feel like and I believe if you have given me a certain position because Im a 
woman I shouldnt let men take it, I have a contribution to men so we go somewhere and with 
women and they will not speak actually that women are not supposed to speak in the 
public.Ugomba kwifata nkumugore cyangwa umukobwa you know let the men take the 
forefront.  
Interviewer: So you mean if the man doesnt take the forefront then youre not a man enough. 
Interviewee: Yeah. 
Interviewer: And if youre taking the forefront as the woman? 
Interviewee: Youre more than a woman or youre beyond their expectations its not obviously 
but its there you see it to the extent that even you at a certain point you also change your mind 
and fell like what is this let people dont think Im something new.. 
Interviewer: Is it not really changing to some extent? 
Interviewee: Not really very much Its changing slowly but Its still the ambition you know for 
example like I have said Im a single woman, I get paid, I have a child, and I take care of my business 
but because of societies perceptions they dont understand how that is done because their 
understanding is that a woman has to be taken care of you cant be doing this on your own I think 
thats clear. 
Interviewer: So what I also wanted to ask you. What is the Rwandan perception of single woman? 
Interviewee: Its a problem Lol for them its a big deal I go for parents meetings and people are 
wondering why they ask me wabuze umugabo, cyangwa ntawe ushaka so this is a parents 
meeting totally different from your professional life but it always comes in, you know that thing 
of status always affects every aspect of your life. So you find that you have to impose yourself to 
get certain things done. 
Interviewer: What would you say are the most important values in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: I think the most important value in Rwanda which is also a contradiction is Dignity 
Agaciro as they put it; you know you need to have the way you present, that is the contradiction 
I was saying. The way you present yourself in society and the way you conduct a business is 
beyond self it will also determine how the society gets you to be so dignity is beyond it is how 
people pursues you So if you give them the wrong impression then you dont have that dignity. 
So as a Rwandan you cant run away from society because society is your guiding principle in life 
which can as well be your down fall because society has created styli tight so if you are not 
satisfied with those styli tights the society will not consider you as doing the proper things.   
Interviewer: How important is family? 
Interviewee: It is very important yeah. 
Interviewer: How? 
Interviewee: When we talk about family me Im looking at the setup of a husband, wife and kids 
in Rwanda you seemed to have succeeded if you have that complete youre considered successful 
ahahahaha so if you dont have that complete status they look at you and they feel like whats 
going on And when you come to the society they perceive you in that way. 
Interviewer: How about power in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: Everyone wants power because they think with power you will get all that you want 
whether its a commanding respect or access to things power is important but with time I think 
my generation also understands also that power is everything yeah. Because Rwandas 
perception of power is not total, today you can have it but tomorrow its taken away from you 
Interviewer: so when you have it you know when we analyze power leadership, certain cultures 
are what we call high power distances, where the distance between you and your boss the gap is 
quite huge and the gap between you and your subordinate is quite huge and in some societies  
Interviewee: I think the power difference is not wide and thats why, is because of all these 
activities e.g the community, ubusabane work and all these things we are involved in brings the 
leaders closer to the people. 
Interviewer: In a working environment but depending on how your boss is but generally what is 
the power difference between the bosses and the subordinates? 
Interviewee: I think it has changed but before the distance was there but today I have not had 
people complaining you know they were looking bosses as unreachable but its not common 
anymore now. 
Interviewer: So do people walk in into their bosss offices and everything? 
Interviewee: For us here we do, every staff member is given a priority to receive a minister so you 
go and you cannot miss it even in meeting, but I dont know what is going on in other ministers 
offices but some that I know I know that they have access to their ministers. 
Interviewer: So I asked this because of two reasons. One is that I know your minister and I would 
struggle to use him as a case, because I called him for an appointment and he said that Nshuti I 
dont give appointments just come in if Im in you will see me and if Im not there Im not. But 
generally being in Rwanda and working here we know, of course you dont work with this ministry, 
youre not confined to this ministry, because this ministry interacts with all the other ministries 
so how do you find as a leader. 
Interviewee: I think in ministry its okay most difficult thing has been maybe like going to see an 
executive those district people for me thats the hardest. 
Interviewer: Talking about the part power distance which I also work as my own perception as a 
Rwandese do you think the leader except some people use the word fear, do you think leaders 
expect to be feared and the subordinates also expect to give fear to their leaders or their bosses? 
Interviewee: its true; its even a cultural thing. Even they dont expect the appointment from 
people like ministers so thats mean what we have encountered previously has given them the 
perception as if people are not reachable. 
Interviewer: So Christine thank you very much for your I wonder if you have a question for me 
Christine: So Im wondering why you are doing this PHD and youre an Engineer or something? So 
why are you doing this? 
Nshuti: Very good question, it is passionate one actually I work in WaterAid, Im an engineer Im 
a representative unfortunately I like sometimeor Im an engineer but as you saw my 
business card Im no longer doing much of engineering work so I lead company but also I have a 
life time leadership role because Im a clan leader and I have been doing that for quite some time 
Christine: So your clan is called what does it have a name? 
Nshuti: Abenegitore 
Christine: Aaaah even me Im of that clan Im Umwenegitore as well 
Nshuti: So youre lost from the clan lol In that way I have that life time role and I have been 
practicing leadership since I have been a little bit young and even at work I liked a job as I did as 
an engineer but unfortunately I gained more experience you find you know moving up the ladder 
and I ended up in leadership so Im doing leadership but the reason of doing a Doctoral research 
around leadership and culture is that Rwandan culture is quite contradictory as you said and doing 
this at a Doctoral level is thinking of transitioning, I think my interest is in contributing to areas of 
research and academics so would really like to retire it a bit early and transitioning to academics 
and research thats where Im pensioned. 
Christine: Okay academic that means you will end up teaching what you studied? 
Nshuti: Im actually good at teaching, yeah I like teaching when I time I do a bit of teaching and I 
would like to continue doing so. 
Christine: I wish you the best, but youre at the final stages or youre just at the beginning? 
Nshuti: I think I will finish by the end of this year. So in the next year I will be as Doctor 
Rugerinyange and etcbut it has not been easy combining it with work. Establishing Water Aid in 
Rwanda and managing 
Christine: So what do you people do at Water Aid? 
Nshuti: Water Aid is an international, is a bit charity that works exclusively on water sanitation 
and hygiene and In Rwanda we do work around water, sanitation and hygiene, we have two 
programs sacks delivery of the hardware putting infrastructure in place which is actually my 
passionate area But the other important area is policy influencing the advocacy because water 
and sanitation is central to life but unfortunately we think isnt priority enough and everyone in 
most countries I think including Rwanda is modernized but 884Million people around the world 
dont have water and 2.4 Billion do not have a place to for erective in Rwanda the figures are not 
as good actually Rwanda is one of the countries that are trying but there are still a long way to go 
I think and so we do pilots some techniques of how to feed people with water but also we 
contribute to push you guys that are doing policies and laws to make sure you prioritize water 
and sanitation because we think by not prioritizing water and sanitation, it affects other areas for 
instance by investing a little bit in water in schools, communities and other facilities you will 
actually 1Dollar you invest in water you get about 8Dollars in return because when people have 
good access in water and good sanitation they produce more in work and other thing but without 
clean water and sanitation people spend productive work in hospitals and not only them but the 
bills still go high again in a society like Rwanda where family is strong they will all go to the villages 
you know they will also leave work and in rural areas. So one person is . but puts a whole 
lack to about 6 other people so now if you could compute that into monitory terms what they 
lose, what the family loses in addition to the bill they are going to pay the hospital, so I think 
investing in water saves a lot of things. Community education we have made research around 
water and sanitation 442Million school days are lost in one year because of lack of clean water 
and sanitation and unfortunately the majority of this 442million are girls so even in Rwanda the 
figure could be disturbing because when we building schools especially primary and secondary 
school we dont cater for girls menstrual hygiene so and with taboos and things that are nation 
barrier girls will not go to school during their days menstruation period, so of the 442 million days, 
I think more than a half of it is people of anemia girls contribute to that and I think it is a challenge 
we need to address if we are to develop countries yeah especially poor countries like Rwanda so 
we were making noise so part of my job is to make noise that people decision makers can realize 
that this is a priority. 
Christine: Its quite interesting really. 
Nshuti: Well thank you very much it was a honesty discussion and you know Im getting a picture 
of the Rwandan society and I think its going to be an interesting piece of research 
Christine: Send us when youre done with it 
Nshuti: Thank and surely I will 
-END- 
Interview11 
Interviewer: I would like you to start with your background first. Tell me about your background, 
where were you born? 
Interviewee: Yeah I was born here in Rwanda, in secondary I did Economics as my combination, 
and in the university I followed the option of finance at KIST. So according to different experience 
I have I worked in different NGOs, different ministries. For example: where I was the finance 
manager of the two projects under MIJEPROF (Ministry of gender) where we had those two 
projects one was Health promotion and the second was Gender Advocacy, after that I was also 
an executive coordinator at Rwanda red cross and now Im the program manager of HIV project 
funded by  the Global Fund. 
Interviewer: Whats your view of management? 
Interviewee: Management is all about to know different issues concerning how to control people, 
how to control the resources of an organization and etc 
Interviewer: What has been your management style? 
Interviewer: Actually there are two management styles (The open style and the crossed style of 
management) where the modern style is the open style because here you have to discuss your 
points, where you have to discuss with the team youre working with. 
Interviewer: Of these two, whats your own style, what would you say is your management style? 
Interviewee: Yeah, my style is just to try and make the team work together, where I will be able 
to hear the views of other people in the group or in the team and to solve problems in a short 
period of time because if you have a question and you take a long time to resolve it, it has an 
impact on an organization so, it is better to understand and make the analysis of views. Because 
the analysis will help you to come up with good solutions to these issues. 
Interviewer: Now looking back in your experience years, can you tell me a little story of a decision 
you have taken on your own. 
Interviewee: Yeah for example when I was a coordinator of one of the Belgium projects of Red 
Cross, we had issues to integrate the people expelled from Tanzania where we had to build a 
house to do healthy integrate from. It was just a complicated issue because; there were different 
cultures so the big question we had I to integrate those people with different cultures and to try 
to show them a way how we had to go forward. So the problem there was to meet the project 
time and to get the result and accomplish our target. So I think the big decision here was 
concerning about the demand we had of construction which sometimes requires making the 
tender, to secure different material we had to use. 
Interviewer: Has your education contributed to your way of management? 
Interviewer: The education will always help you in decision making processes e.g if you have a 
problem therere so many education systems you can use to resolve the issue and understand it 
more. For example the course called organization behavior where you learn how issues are being 
solved, and how decision making steps should be undertaken. 
Interviewer: How about your background as a Rwandese, do you think your family background 
has a contribution to your view of management? 
Interviewee: Yeah normally if you were born in the family, you copy the styles of your parents. 
Sometimes if your parents take a decision in the family, a child will also differ to the decision a 
parent has made which will help you to have a background of decision making. 
Interviewer: For me to understand this, sorry I will be asking for examples, do you remember of 
any example how your family background, your parents, or something your father did that 
influence the way you think and the way you treat people at work and as well as the way you do 
your work? 
Interviewee: Yeah normally if youre mistreated in your family, it will also affect the way you do 
your job at the work place. Example if your family has good behavior it will also lead you to have 
that good behavior at work also. 
Interviewer: How about your work experience? What have you learnt from your family which has 
also contributed to your way of thinking and you talked about your education and so also tell me 
about your working experience... has your experience influence your management style? 
Interviewee: Yeah I told you that concerning to the background of the question, normally 
concerning to the management I told you just to see how you manage the people, how you 
manage the resources, how you manage the materials and so on. So concerning to the 
background you had in the education, it will be an asset for you to know how you should treat 
other people. 
Interviewer: But Im asking about your experience at work because we have seen the 
contributions of education, we have seen the way your family influence the way you do things 
but do you think your work experience has also contributed to your view of management? For 
example, from the time you started working and compare that day with todays management 
style of yours do you think theres something in change. 
Interviewee: Yeah for example by now we work in rural areas so you have to meet the people 
who have different views, you will have to sensitize them how they can create the income 
generating activities and think the difference is all about experience where I listen to people and 
make the follow up to correct the mistakes they can do so as to get good results. 
Interviewer: With a help of an example Im asking, within the few years you have been working 
what do you think is the difference between the marks styles of management 3 years ago 
compared with the style you are using now? 
Interviewee: Yes the difference is only the leadership skills I have acquired, management skills 
and more especially the practice which makes perfect. 
Interviewer: So do you think you do things differently from the way you have been doing them 
in the few past years. 
Interviewee: Yeah because when you complete studies, you dont have the experience on how 
to use the education you did but when youre on the field you get to know the realities because 
you meet different people with different ideas and you have to make those people with different 
views be as one, work together and choose amongst all the views what are the best to be worked 
upon. 
Interviewer: Okay Any way that was about you but will you talk more generally about Rwandans. 
What is your view of management in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: The management style in Rwanda I can say it doesnt favor below class people, 
where the head is the determinant no arguing about his/her view. 
Interviewer: Do you think that management style is consistent in all all managers in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: I dont think so because there some people who still apply the bureaucracy style but 
the number is very few 
Interviewer: As a graduate of management I think you have heard of these different management 
styles? Autocratic, Democratic, charismatic and others what do you think is the common 
management style in Rwanda?  
Interviewee: I think its democratic even if it is not totally democratic because therere some 
people who have no needed skills about democratic management. 
Interviewer: How will you describe the Rwandan management if someone asks you that 
question? 
Interviewee: They are so democratic workers. 
Interviewer: Is that new or they have been democratic ever since? The different managers you 
have seen wherever you have been working in SONARWA, regional Red Cross and everywhere 
you go? 
Interviewee: Now Rwandan managers are flexible. 
Interviewer: Now we shift a little beat to talk about the Rwandan culture, how would you describe 
Rwandese person? 
Interviewee: Ever since Rwandese people always want to have the values where they support 
their ideas in front other people, where they are confident about being called Rwandese, where 
they cant abuse their leadership with so many so called sins in their daily living e.g. eating on the 
way and etc if they want to take some staff they try and find where to eat it from   
 Interviewer: And what is their behavior? 
Interviewee: Normally they have good behaviors compared to our neighboring countries as their 
behavior is very strong. 
Interviewer: What do you mean by saying that they have strong behavior? 
Interviewee: I mean there are respecting and rspectable. They both respect themselves and 
others in general. 
Interviewer: Any other behavior trait that we can talk of about Rwandans instead of their 
respective strong behavior? 
Interviewee: Yeah they so morally. 
Interviewer: Now talking about Rwandan people and their behaviors, do you think they are 
individualistic or they are corrective?  
Interviewee: They are so corrective. 
Interviewer: Why you think Rwandans are more corrective? 
Interviewee: Because they normally like sharing ideas among themselves, and when they want 
to take some decisions they consult others. 
Interviewer: Another value is about culture, equality and hierarchy, do you think decision making 
powers are evenly divided or they are more hierarchical? 
Interviewee: No they are equal. 
Interviewer: Another value is about task and people, in some cultures people are task oriented 
and others are people oriented what do you think?  
Interviewee: They are people oriented. 
Interviewer: How about formal and being informal do you think Rwandan people are more formal 
or something else? 
Interviewee: Yeah okay for the present situation they are formal but before it was informal. 
Interviewer: Another value is about being direct open and being indirect? Do you think 
Rwandans are direct? 
Interviewee: No they are indirect 
Interviewer: About power, do you think people respect power here in Rwanda or not? 
Interviewee: Yes they respect power very much. 
Interviewer: Will you give an example of how power is respect? 
Interviewee: Yes, for example if there are some disseminations of any political decision in 
Rwanda, its very simple to disseminate it because people respect the powers very much.  
Interviewer: Is this how Rwandan about respecting the powers very much or it is due to some 
political situations that make them feel that way? 
Interviewee: No, normally the characters of Rwandans always want to go forward and even they 
are some complaints the want to do it after the political result but they cant create the resistance 
without seeing the results from it. 
Interviewer: We talked about many things and you continuously mentioned before and now, do 
you think there have been the changes between these events? 
Interviewee: Yeah because we have two different regimes. 
Interviewer: What are the changes? 
Interviewee: As I said before we had informal political regime but now we have formal e.g. 
Imihigo. 
Interviewer: Are there any Rwandan values that you think have lost value, I mean those ones that 
used to be very important but now they are not as important as used to be? 
Interviewee: For example we now have the politics of gender, but before there were even some 
proverbs which concerned much the limitations of a lady in the real life but these are not there 
today. 
Interviewer: Do you have any example of the proverbs? 
Interviewee: Yeah like where they said that urugo ruvuze umugore ruvuga umuhoro. A family 
where the woman has the ultimate work then havoc prevails 
Interviewer: And are there any values that have gained most significance? 
Interviewee: Yeah, for example gender issue has now gained power compared to the situation 
before. 
Interviewer: Is there anything borrowed outside with most significance which you think isnt good 
for Rwandans at all. 
Interviewee: Yeah, like the case of homosexual relations this is very bad really. 
Interviewer: But are you sure it is there? 
Interviewee: Yeah its there but theres no law allowing them to do it publically. 
Interviewer: But in terms of management or leadership, are there any leadership styles or 
management styles or practices that are being borrowed from outside that you think arent 
necessarily positive to Rwanda? 
Interviewee: For example the system of managing people, as we know Rwandans we dont have 
equal management skills like the European people. So this will make us go slowly by slowly to 
reach their step and this will be possible if we always work hard. E.g for the European child at the 
level of seven years he/she is given all the rights which I think is not easily possible in Africa to 
give a seven year child all the rights. I mean in Europe by seven years you do what you want, you 
go where you want you manage yourself in other words. 
Interviewer: But in terms of work, is there anything you think we need to adopt? 
Interviewee: Okay for example in Rwanda we dont have so many materials which is a barrier 
compared to the European people because we mostly use the materials which have been once 
used before and this will slowdown the development speed. Because the management we are 
using now is due to the opportunity we had to join schools and we learnt from them and the 
system we are using now is just there since long ago system. 
Interviewer: Final question, can you describe success in Rwandan context what do Rwandans 
think being successful? 
Interviewee: They are very many successes in Rwanda e.g. like in the education sectors, political 
sectors and economically 
Interviewer: What does it mean for someone to be Umugabo (manly not as in being male sex)? 
Interviewee: This will depend on what he does to the community not just he is male by sex but 
the way he involves himself in work makes him be a real man in front of the community eyes. 
Interviewer: Is it fair to say umugabo means a successful person in English because I dont 
seem to find an equivalent word in the same sense? 
Interviewee: Not success person only even the simple contributions can lead to be called 
umugabo. 
Interviewer: What about a person who is a failure? 
Interviewee: If you fail actually will lead you to the loss of the position in what you have been 
doing because people will lose hope in you and they will not consider you as a person who can 
lead them to success any more.  
Interviewer: Finally what is your view of gender or gender difference in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: People dont understand what gender is, actually a man and a woman are very much 
different physiologically 
Interviewer: For instance when you dont have family, I mean how do you see the person who is 
not married single but old not young? 
Interviewee: To the society if youre still single they dont respect you as the married people. E.g. 
when the married and the single persons go to a certain ceremony and they happen to find a 
single seat, that seat will be given to a married person first and the single one will wait to get 
another seat if possible and if not possible obviously he will not get somewhere to seat simply 
because he came along with a married person which attaches some higher status to the person 
than the singles. So this confirms that people who are married are most respected than the 
singles. 
Interviewer: But generally if someone is forty years and not married what will people think about 
him/ her? 
Interviewee: In the Rwandan family they say that youre not normal because they cant 
understand possibly what the problem is, they do not understand what the person is missing to 
get married. 
Interviewer: Thats all I had to ask you. Thank you very much for giving me your valuable time. 
Do you have a question for me? 
Interviewee: I would like to ask you what your plans are in the future. 
Interviewer: Very good question, actually I have interests in academics. So Im planning to finish 
my doctorate and pursue a carrier in academics. 
Interviewee: Okay thats good and I think no more questions and I wish you success 
Interviewer: Thank you once again for your time I really appreciate your quick responses to my 
request and thank you for the useful information. Hope you will be happy to talk to me in case I 
have something more to ask you 
Interview12 
Interviewers Introduction: To start with, I will give you a bit of background to my research, in 
the past few decades Rwanda has been characterized by turburant history and people moving 
out of this country, and some of the people were born out of this country so they came back after 
the war. So I assume those Rwandan who were born or lived out of the country for many years 
may have acquired different cultures from different countries and we also have people who were 
born and educated here in Rwanda - they also acquired that culture so Im wondering what has 
become of the Rwandan culture. Also, what people feel about different leadership styles in 
different organizations differ due to different cultures acquired. So we will be discussing mainly 
around three areas,  
I would like to hear about your own background, this will let me know where youre coming from 
and also your perspective of things so its not knowing whether youre from this place or that but 
simply that our background informs the way we do business. And the second part of this question 
one about you, I want to see if theres any commonality if you ask Rwandese to talk about them 
how much information do they give you so is there some commonality because some people give 
less and others give more information so you take your time if you can describe yourself in one 
sentence, its fine or if you can describe yourself in 1000 words thats also fine.  
2. This second question will be around management, your own view of management Business 
management or running an organization business management doesnt mean commercials 
only 
3. The last part will be around culture I dont expect you to be an anthropologist but I want you 
to talk about the Rwandan people, your view of the Rwandan people or the description how you 
understand the Rwandan people 
Interviewee: I was born in Tanzania I grew up there in 1978 thats when I was born, I studied 
there the whole of my primary studies and one part of my secondary up to senior three 
(secondary school 3) and then in 1994 that is when there was a war in Rwanda and right after the 
war we came back in Rwanda. So I studied there up to senior three and I came back to Rwanda in 
1996 I was in Lycee de Kigali doing my high school studies by the way my parents are both 
Rwandans. So I have two mixed cultures as you said because I was born in Tanzania in an area 
where we were known as Rwandese but in terms of education I could not identify myself as a 
Rwandese because towards education I couldnt identify myself as Rwandese unless I could say 
Im a Tanzanian. 
Interviewer: Still on that one, I know Tanzania is a multicultural area they have hundreds of 
tribes, would they tell by your name that you are a Rwandese? 
Interviewee: Yes, because I was born near the border of Tanzania called Ngara, and this Ngara is 
just about 50 Kilometers from the border of Rusumo and that area itself had two different tribes 
in a way that one tribe was from Burundi and another tribe was from Rwanda so those people 
formed one tribe called abahangazi so for us we could describe ourselves as abahangazi because 
they spoke something close to Kinyarwanda language and the names came out of the tribe were 
like Hakizimana and things like that 
Interviewer: When did you know that you were not a Tanzanian? 
Interviewee: Yeah I knew that since I was in primary four, I knew this because we had our own 
school and even the headmaster of the school and of course the big number of teachers was 
Rwandese also that school was built for refugees at the time when our parents were moving to 
that area. 
Interviewer: So you came to Rwanda, joined high school and then the university 
Interviewer: Actually Rwanda was quite different from the place where I was born in terms of 
culture and everything. 
Interviewer: What was the difference? 
Interviewee: The difference was because in Tanzania we used to live a socialized life, we loved 
each other even if you could meet a new person who was not a Rwandese you could talk and 
become friends so we used to be friendly in Tanzania with a lot of care about friends and any one 
you would meet on the way. And what I found here was like I dont know if I can call it selfishness 
but people were not open to each other at all I even once thought that I cant cope with a person 
who were born in Rwanda. Okay after high school I joined KIST as a university, I studied there in 
systems where almost everything was changing after that I went to work because at the work, at 
the work place also there were so big difference. But again at work place things were quite 
moving, because would talk to each, people would chat and would also share different ideas may 
be this was because every person has got his/her target to achieve. 
Interviewer: For how many years have you been working? 
Interviewee: Okay I started working in 2005 so I think this is my seventh year at work. 
Interviewer: Within these 7years, have you held a managerial post? 
Interviewee: Yes I did, I started working as an IT Auditor in the computer lab training people but 
that one was not my job position, so after shifted from KIST when I joined RITA where I had a 
position of projects manager where I had like 5 project I was managing, I had a team of 10 people 
who were implementing in those projects. So from there I worked there until RITA was merged 
to form RDB and I worked in the RDB from 2009-2011 as a senior project manager. 
Interviewer: So how do you find management, managing people?  
Interviewee: Managing People have different aspect as you said depending on different 
backgrounds and culture. You know culture in Rwanda can be categorized according to the areas 
where people were born from; you see if you were born in the eastern province you have some 
elements that those who were born elsewhere because you having some difference resulted to 
different cultural aspects but when it comes to the point of demographics that maybe youre born 
from where and where you come up with something that you need also to categorize the 
background. 
Interviewer: Maybe to put it this way, what is your view of that role of management? 
Interviewee: It depends on the backgrounds of those people youre managing and it also depends 
on different levels of their education and of course to the management around us. 
Interviewer: What is your understanding of that task management? 
Interviewee: I understand this management in the two ways, if we have the skill set of 
management and we also need to have education because education contributes to that and 
leadership so you need to have those key elements of leadership. 
Interviewer: What would you say is your own approach to management? For example you said 
you have managed about 10 people so, how did you manage them? 
Interviewee: My approach to management is set to two things,  
1. Being open to my team, communicate my goals and targets that I want us to achieve so in my 
being very open I need also to be at the level of the people in the team that Im managing. 
2. My management bases on discussion with people I mean I cant work with anyone that 
because seems working in my team. I have to make a selection so as to match the skills and 
the education of the people I have to manage especially when youre in a field that youre 
doing that management because managing a program or project you need to have criteria. 
Interviewer: Maybe what Im trying to mean is that youve heard about management styles, do 
you remember some of the common words they use in management styles or leadership styles? 
I want to see if you can put yourself in one of the categories. For example therere, participative, 
democratic, Autocratic, hands off etc some people have also used transformational, charismatic 
as well as transactional leadership styles, do you think you can fit yourself in one of those 
leadership styles?  
Interviewee: Yeah I can fit myself in visionary style because I always like to know how to project 
things in the future than in the present and thats how I operate actually. 
Interviewer: Now, Im wondering what you think may have influenced the way you look at these 
managing tasks? The way you do things, do you think that theres something that influences the 
way you do them? 
Interviewee: Yeah, actually the thing is what is built in you. 
Interviewer: And what is that? 
Interviewee: Okay myself I was born as someone who is in charge I mean somebody who keeps 
in touch all the time, who takes the lead to any type of work. So I always want to provide my 
views at the first place, you know let people get together, so as them to understand each and 
agree on some principle points and some ways of doing business. 
Interviewer: Yeah thats perfect but where do you get that? Where do you think you get those 
characters from? 
Interviewee: It is the way I was born and followed example from my Mum. 
Interviewer: Now do you think education has in a way contributed to your view of management?  
Interviewee: Yeah very much, education has contributed much to me and to my managerial style 
because when you start high school thats when you have to start finding yourself in some groups 
so all the time I thought I could find myself in a class of 20boys with one or two girls if were many 
it could 2 or 3 so I developed some confidence in organizing people. Because for example since 
my high school I was in a class of 40 boys and two girls, and in KIST I was in a class of 20 boys and 
5girls even during my primary in Tanzania I could find myself in a class of very many boys with a 
small number of girls. 
Interviewer: And what do you feel when you find yourself in a huge number of males? 
Interviewee: I always fit; with so comfort actually I dominate. You know am not talkative but 
when I get a chance to talk I talk a lot. 
Interviewer: How do you dominate when you dont seem to talk a lot? 
Interviewee: I keep quiet, I never just talk loudly but when theres a forum to talk I talk so when 
you approach me to talk to me, to discuss with me I get open and tell you truth of myself and 
when I find myself in a group of many males I like to be direct so thats why I say that I dominate 
in that way. And everyone becomes my friend. 
Interviewer: If we could shift and talk about your experience a little bit. How do you see your 
work experience? How did it contribute to the way you look at management?  
Interviewee: Yeah, it did contribute because as I told you something that happened ever since I 
joined the work place I found because I was in a department of many males and I could make sure 
that I manage that job and make sure that Im performing well as they do because I had very little 
keys and the task was very high and very much demanding but I had to make sure that I  
accomplish my task, so all the time at the work place I learnt that that every time you can achieve 
the goals you set and you dont have to manage yourself so you have to be managed by others 
and so you have to follow their system. 
Interviewer: Now do you think that your management style has changed, do you see any change 
in the way of doing business? 
Interviewee: Yeah, it has contributed a lot especially when I realized that I used to dominate, I 
used to like you know all my ideas to confect that all and thats when I realized that all the time I 
had to listen to others, give the compromise you know and all the time I had to share my ideas 
openly with people not just by taking decisions but tomorrow I want this, after tomorrow I will 
do this so it has contributed much like working in a team, team management, self management 
customer services how you treat people, how present you fellows all those things came. 
Interviewer: Appreciated if you could tell me a story from you of a major decision you have taken 
in your career? 
Interviewee: Okay, for me ever since my secondary school I was studying sciences so one time 
after my secondary in Lycee de Kigali I was assigned to UNR where there were no sciences actually 
you could think that which science I was running for Computer Science so in UNR there was pure 
science but I wanted computer science so I cancelled my admission and said I have to wait for 
KIST which had the first year only so I had to wait for one year so that I go to KIST so I waited for 
9 months and then they gave us an exam for KIST which I passed and I joined from there I choose 
computer science thats one part of it so the second part I said I will study up to masters degree 
and beyond and I set this goal at the age if 16 years of age and this was a dream. 
Interviewer: That was more of a dream but Im asking about a work place decision you made 
which you think was 100% your decision with no influences from other people. 
Interviewee: The time when they wanted to assign me to a project so I went back to the Manager 
and I said I dont want Why? Because of so and so reasons, so what project do you want? I want 
this and that project. I chose the most complicated project I have ever seen so that is the decision 
I have made and after that I received the team members I had to talk to them and told them that 
after 3 months I found that I have to evaluate them and recommended some of them just to 
away..why, because he wasnt following the instructions. 
Interviewer: So the recommendation to fire someone which was quite a good one (jokes), how 
did you do that, how did you let go that person in your team? 
Interviewee: No, I had to write down a report for which I had to explain how he has been acting 
in work; how he does the assignment and finally I did the conclusion. 
Interviewer: Did you have discussion with that person him/herself? 
Interviewee: Yeah, I did, I did so many times actually thats what I do even if youre my best friend, 
I have to talk to you at least 3 times telling you that this is what I dont like you to do. 
Interviewer: Now looking at you, if we talk about the way you do things do you think many 
Rwandan do the same? 
Interviewee: They are not. 
Interviewer: What is your view of management style of others in Rwanda? 
Interviewee: Quite different because everyone has got his/her own style of management but the 
one common thing that they lack is that for me according to my analysis, they lack one thing of 
leadership. Theres a way they can appoint you to become somebody you know DG Director 
General but in you, you lack a leadership skill, so leadership skill why Im mentioning it, it has a 
lot of things it has customer service, it has communication, it has managing people and very many 
key things so we lack many of them. 
Interviewer: Would you again describe, may be you talked about the leadership styles of 
transformation, transactional, Autocratic and so many others so what do you think is the common 
leadership style out there? 
Interviewee: I dont know the common one now but I think if I could remember the factors that 
are under each and every style. 
Interviewer: Well some build trust, you know others act in integrate and others inspire people, 
while others encourage and motivate employees. Some managers will reward success and of 
course punish none delivery and others will be monitoring because they want to keep an eye on 
Interviewee: Yeah, monitoring is there but with not to help, they monitor but by eyes not by 
systems  I mean therere kind of systems that can help to monitor someone without seeing 
him or her seated there in the office to believe that that person is working. 
Interviewer: But some people can just monitor mistakes 
Interviewee: And that is it, they just monitor mistakes because I wasnt seeing you then I count 
you as somebody who isnt at work. 
Interviewer:  Someone may say they are fire fighters, meaning that they only act when theres a 
problem and others just give you free time to do things and will approach you when you need 
some help 
 Interviewee: Though they do monitoring but they lack one thing of because they monitor the 
person not monitoring the activities, you know, if you monitor the activity thats when you have 
a real system to really measure that the person is working. 
Interviewer: Now talk about the Rwandan culture, how can you describe a typical Rwandan? Can 
you tell the characters of Rwandese people? 
Interviewee: Yes, someone who is humble by physical appearance, by the body he/ she is 
beautiful or handsome maybe tall or short but good looking. For the Rwandese characters, a 
Rwandan is a person who is humble, who respects people and too reserve to talk, because 
wherever you find a Rwandan you will not find him/her talking a lot, someone who is quiet when 
you seem to approach him. 
Interviewer: How do approach/talk to then? 
Interviewee: They talk at the given time in different forums in an organized way they cant just 
talk, eat because he can even travel a long distance but reaches there without taking something 
on the way so he will wait until he finds a convenient place to eat. 
Interviewer: What do you value more in terms of cultural values? 
Interviewee: Ok, in the culture, we do never copy from others any how E.g. when we find 
Tanzanians are doing something and they immediately do it also, no they have to first take time 
even if they are in that society, they take time to copy others peoples culture or other peoples 
style of leading. And another value is that theyre educated, not having gone to school only but 
even if one didnt go to school he/she will act as a person who is educated so they all have the 
formal education. They have different powerful, good ideas and opinions wherever therere. 
Interviewer: Are there any specific behaviors that you think Rwandans have that are different 
from other society tribes that you are aware of. 
Interviewee: Yeah, all those behaviors I said you know they respect themselves, they respect 
other people, thats one, and another thing is like they have another behavior of loving each 
other. Because you always find them together, they help the society they live in and they like co-
operating and helping each other. 
Interviewer: How about hierarchy? What your view of Rwandese with regards to hierarchy?  
Interviewee: Theres a very big distance between the boss and the employee, with a lot of fear 
that if someone is your boss then you cant just greet him or meet him anyhow So theres a 
strong gap between a boss and an employee and that gap results into those other elements we 
said earlier  the disconnect between the boss and the employees.  
Interviewer: Some cultures are formal strict and some cultures are informal - you can just walk in 
someones office, they dont care what youre putting on. What is your view of Rwandese - formal 
or more informal? 
Interviewee: They are formal. 
Interviewer: Some cultures tend to focus on tasks over people so what is your view Rwandese. 
So do you think they are task oriented or people oriented? 
Interviewee: They are task oriented. 
Interviewer: And in conducting business do you think Rwandans are direct or more indirect? 
Interviewee: In doing business they are not so direct. 
Interviewer: And are any of these values changing, you know do you see any kind of change? 
Interviewee: Yeah, those values are changing time after time because as we move into a world 
of technology and everything so they are trying to adapt some good values or good examples 
from experience. 
Interviewer: Which value do you think has lost the importance or significance? 
Interviewee: Those of being too reserved, in terms of doing business because we are trying to be 
open to achieve what we want to achieve. 
Interviewer: Is there any value you think that is gaining more significance than it was sometime 
back?  
Interviewee: Yeah, the culture, because culture is now being encouraged. As I said, in the past 
you could think that we have different cultures in one nation. You could find that people from the 
Eastern province and another one from the Southern province had two different cultures but now 
are bringing into one culture. 
Interviewer: Talking to people during my research theres one word that keeps coming - Agaciro 
what does it mean? 
Interviewee: It means keeping your values and letting others know that youre somebody not just 
any one can just see your appearance and judge the way you look like or the way you appear, so 
you have to demonstrate your values. 
Interviewer: Another thing that seems to be gaining significance is gender, what is the Rwandans 
view of gender?     
Interviewee: Rwandans dont see gender as a big issue as other cultures. 
Interviewer: Do you think men are treated the same way as women in the society do they have 
the same value? 
Interviewee: At least we are trying but not at 100% achieved so its like 45%. 
Interviewer: So which part of the society do you think men are more significant than women or 
women have more significance than men? 
Interviewee: Men are more significant in the society though we are trying to have the balance 
somehow but we still have to wait for some time. 
Interviewer: How does it feel, if youre grown up and youre not married whether you are a man 
or a woman? 
Interviewee: They see you as someone who is lacking something, has failed maybe to take a 
decision and propose another for marriage. Youre taken as someone who doesnt have some 
characters of making decisions. Marriage goes with taking responsibility. 
Interviewer: Do you also believe like that? 
Interviewee: Yes, I do believe that also. 
Interviewer: And how does the society see someone who divorced? 
Interviewee: Yeah, its different from someone who didnt get married because in our society 
someone who divorced is still having value in the society they always concentrate to know what 
happened and they always tend to know what has happened and they like to know more about 
the background of that man you know all those staff. 
Interviewer: Talking about being married or not being married, do you think that the perception 
is the same for unmarried men and unmarried women in their 40s? 
Interviewee: Yeah is almost the same because if it a man they say that this one is lousy man who 
cant settle down and plan for the future, which is the same as the lady. 
Interviewer: What is your view of an unmarried lady in her 40s? 
Interviewee: They say that this has rejected all the proposals for marriage now she is ending up 
not keeping any because she wasted her time to take decision - saying the one I want isnt this 
one, another one comes also isnt this one so you stay like that because in Rwanda people share 
the information one will tell another that, that girls is not good so you will not manage her things 
like that. And for a man lets take two categories one the one they say that is womanizer and 
that is another bad quality so if a man doesnt get married they consider that factor but this time 
that is not common, it is not much and same as a man who has been going out very much. 
Interviewer: Do you think it is normal for a Rwandese to decide not to marry. 
Interviewee: No, its not normal because in a Rwandese culture people have to get married even 
if you are not ready they used to get someone for you and this was among the values a Rwandan 
should have. 
Interviewer: But as we interact and move around the world, we see in some areas where people 
dont marry and its taken as a normal thing, so is there anything like that coming in our culture 
and people say well Nshuti decided not to marry and its fine he can also be respected as Joseph 
who is married. 
Interviewee: No, Joseph is as different you know, and you know even the leaders in Rwanda 
should be married they first have to know this one is married or not. 
Interviewer: The final question is about power; in some societies people have a lot of power and 
other societies power is evenly or equally distributed in an organization, so how is power 
distributed in Rwanda? In an organization how is power shared from the lower person to the top?  
Interviewee: The powers are shared. 
Interviewer: So you think that the boss and the subordinate seem to have equal powers or the 
bosses are the powerful? 
Interviewee: No, the bosses actually are the powerful; the powers are at the top always. 
Interviewer: Ok, do you have a question for me? 
Interviewee: I dont have a question; just I want to know which University you are studying at.  
Interviewer: Good question. Im pursuing my doctorate at the Robert Gordon University. 
Interviewee: Where is it from? 
Interviewer: It is in Scotland in the city of Aberdeen. I have been doing that and this is my forth 
year which is the final year. 
Interviewee: So you do it while working, I mean you do it online or what is it. 
Interviewer: No, I do it in class; well the doctorate by research is slightly different from other 
ways graduate studies - Masters degrees, I had classes to attend in the UK and come back. The 
rest of my doctoral work is by research. 
Interviewee: That is fine, keep it up 
Nshuti: Thank you 
Interview13 
Interviewer: Thank you very much for accepting to talk to me to discuss my research. To introduce 
myself, I am a doctoral student at The Robert Gordon University. My research interest is in the 
areas of leadership and culture. My objective is to get a general perception of what people think, 
its not for me to judge what is right or wrong and Im not asking you to tell me what is good or 
bad. So, well talk about your background, because your background informs your thinking and 
your view or appreciation of the world around you. Well also talk about your managerial role or 
experience, and your educational background and we also talk about the Rwandan 
context/culture, your views of the Rwandan people, the culture etc 
You will have the chance to ask me any questions at the end of our discussion. Do you have a 
question on the structure of the interview?  
Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences. 
Interviewee: I was born in Rwanda, attended Primary and Secondary school in Rwanda, and went 
outside Rwanda for university and masters. I'm a senior manager for a non governmental 
organization. I have lived and worked in Rwanda for the last 20 years. 
Interviewer: Thanks. Talk to me about your view of management.  How would you describe 
your management style? 
Interviewee: I believe that a good manager should confers with the the staff before taking 
decisions and, in fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when framing decisions but still 
retains full responsibility. This way, the manager proactively builds and aligns stakeholders, 
capabilities, and resources for getting things done quickly and achieving complex objectives. 
Interviewer: Could you please give me an example to explain what you mean? 
Interviewee: The example: we recently revised our staff policy, procedures and code of conduct, 
I always inform staff about what I think should change, and get their feedback either in writting 
or during a meeting before any changes are made. If contradictory ideas come out, i then have to 
take a decision as a leader. 
Any other example? 
Interviewee: Yes, for example with a new staff, I always work with him/her to demonstrate how 
things need to be done, showing him/her examples of my success in similar assignments, and 
telling him/her that if determined, s/he should be able to accomplish anything with no or 
minimum supervision. 
Interviewer: What do you think has influenced your approach to management? 
Interviewee: Personally, I think that my approach of management I use in carrying out my duties 
is inherent in my personality structure. I personally wouldn't wish to implement any decision 
blindly, so I strive to do the same to my subordinates. 
Interviewer: Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style? 
Interviewee: No 
Interviewer: Why and how would you describe the management style(s) of other managers in 
this society? 
Interviewee: From my experience, some share my management style philosophy, others are just 
dictators; do not consult in any way, and subordinates have to implement their decisions 
whatever bad they might be. 
Interviewer: What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans? 
Interviewee: To me the behavior of Rwandans has two perspectives - the family and 
professional view. Much as educated Rwandans are becoming most conscious about time 
management, there are still a lot of flexibilities when it comes to time. People are flexible on time, 
plans, tasks and commitments. The situation is worse in the rural settings. 
Probe: Why is that? 
Interviewee: It is because of education. At professional level most people are educated and things 
are slightly better organiszed but in family matters there are no rules to follow. 
Interviewer: Now we will talk a bit about culture. What would you say are the most important 
values? 
Interviewee: I would say the many Rwandans consider values such as integrity, service, ambition, 
honesty, accountability, courage, wisdom, generosity as very important. Other values include 
success in social standards (successful). 
Interview14 
Interviewer: Thank you very much for accepting to talk to me to discuss my research. To introduce 
myself, I am a doctoral student at The Robert Gordon University. My research interest is in the 
areas of leadership and culture. My objective is to get a general perception of what people think, 
its not for me to judge what is right or wrong and Im not asking you to tell me what is good or 
bad. So, well talk about your background, because your background informs your thinking and 
your view or appreciation of the world around you. Well also talk about your managerial role or 
experience, and your educational background and we also talk about the Rwandan 
context/culture, your views of the Rwandan people, the culture etc 
You will have the chance to ask me any questions at the end of our discussion. Do you have a 
question on the structure of the interview?  
Interviewee: Not now. Maybe I may have questions as we talk. 
Interviewer: Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences. 
Interviewee: Uhhh, ok, I was born in Uganda 1984 but am a Rwandese, I attended primary and 
secondary school in Rwanda, I am a middle manager and have lived and worked in Rwanda for 
over 5 years with 3 years in financial institutions and private enterprise. 
Interviewer: You said you are a middle manager, how would you describe your management 
style? 
Interviewee: My management style is that I believe that the leader should confers with the group 
members before taking decisions and, in fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when 
framing decisions but still retains full responsibility. I also believe the leader should lay the 
problem and allow the decision to emerge out of the process of group discussion, instead of 
imposing it on the group as its boss. A leader should have effective and a friendly talk with his 
stuff in figuring out what's really the problem and their take on it collectively so that they can 
draw to a genuine decision. 
Interviewer: Why is that important to you? 
Interviewee: My understanding is that appreciation, tolerance, and protection for the welfare of 
all people and for nature (social justice, broadminded, world of peace, wisdom, a world of beauty, 
equality) are really important demonstrate professional ethics to inspire others towards common 
goal. To ensure that the whole team contribute to the betterment of the organization. 
Interviewer: What do you think has influenced your approach to management? 
Interviewee: I would say, professional ethics has been the main factor that influenced the way I 
work (leadership styles) to persuade others to commit to the process of transforming the 
organization. 
Interviewer: Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style? 
Interviewee: Well, I don't want to generalize but i don't think many Rwandans share the same 
management style. Due to the in competencies resulted from acquiring positions/offices by 
technical know who, most of Rwandan managers are there to execute what is been given by their 
top bosses, and they scrutinize their subordinates. 
Interviewer: Why and how would you describe the management style(s) of other managers in 
this society? 
Interviewer: What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans? 
Interviewee: People place a high importance on laws, rules, values, and obligations. They try to 
deal fairly with people based on these rules, but rules come before relationships. Communication 
is slow, indirect communications and is primarily task oriented. 
Interviewer: Now we will talk a bit about culture. What would you say are the most important 
values? I think Rwandans are becoming individualists but usually they cherish such values 
integrity, service, responsibility, respect, improvement, empowerment, dignity, courage, 
influence, dependability. 
Interview15 
Interviewer: Thank you very much for accepting to talk to me to discuss my research. To introduce 
myself, I am a doctoral student at The Robert Gordon University. My research interest is in the 
areas of leadership and culture. My objective is to get a general perception of what people think, 
its not for me to judge what is right or wrong and Im not asking you to tell me what is good or 
bad. So, well talk about your background, because your background informs your thinking and 
your view or appreciation of the world around you. Well also talk about your managerial role or 
experience, and your educational background and we also talk about the Rwandan 
context/culture, your views of the Rwandan people, the culture etc You will have the chance to 
ask me any questions at the end of our discussion. Do you have a question on the structure of the 
interview? 
Interviewee: Yes, how did you get my contact? 
Interviewer: I interviewed one of your colleagues here and after the discussion I asked him to 
give me contacts of other people at middle manager level so that i seek appointments to talk to 
them. So when I email you, you accepted. 
Interviewer: Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences. 
Interviewee: Ok, I was born in Uganda, raised up and attended primary, secondary and college in 
Kenya and did my University in Rwanda. I am a middle manager and have lived and worked in 
Rwanda for now 13 years. 
Interviewer: You said you are a middle manager and worked in Rwanda for now 13 years, how 
would you describe your management style? 
Interviewee: For me I believe the manager should create and sustains a context that maximizes 
human and organizational capabilities. As a manager, you recruit the right people, develop them, 
and retain talents to ensure that people with the right skills and motivations to meet business 
needs are in the right place at the right time. 
Interviewer: What do you think has influenced your approach to management? 
Interviewee: I would say, three factors have influenced my management style. First, i would call 
it organisational policy which expects managers to behave in a certain wayand getting out of step 
with peers may not be appreciated. Secondly, I try to adopt a style of management in a manner 
that is compatible with the the local culture. You know the people you manage also expects you 
to behave according to the culture. Last but ofcourse not least is the professional ethics which we 
learn in college.  
Interviewer: Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style? 
Interviewee: Yes 
Interviewer: Why and how would you describe the management style(s) of other managers in 
this society? 
Interviewer: What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans? 
Interviewee: In this Rwandan culture, personal interests are not seen as different from those of 
the group. Individuals are content to accept and seek to understand, preserve and protect it 
rather than change, direct or exploit it. Individuals and the resources associated with society are 
organized hierarchically and individuals within those societies are socialized to comply with the 
roles assigned to them in the hierarchy and subjected to sanctions if they fail to comply, modesty 
and self-control are values associated with hierarchy. Important values include social order, 
respect for tradition, security, obedience and wisdom. 
Interviewer: What is their view on things like time, values etc...? 
Interviewee: Oh, in this culture and i think in African culture, time is flexible and people are 
flexible on time, plans, tasks and commitments. To give you an example, meetings are never on 
time including high level meetings. 
Interviewer: Now we will talk a bit about culture. What would you say are the most important 
values? 
Interviewee: I think Rwandans emphasize values such values integrity, service, responsibility, 
respect, improvement, empowerment, dignity, courage, influence, dependability, dedication.  
Extensive use of informal networks, Emphasis for change and mobility; Prefer formal information 
networks; 
Interview16 
Interviewers Introduction: To start with, I will give you a bit of background to my research, in 
the past few decades Rwanda has been characterized by turburant history and people moving 
out of this country, and some of the people were born out of this country so they came back after 
the war. So I assume those Rwandan who were born or lived out of the country for many years 
may have acquired different cultures from different countries and we also have people who were 
born and educated here in Rwanda - they also acquired that culture so Im wondering what has 
become of the Rwandan culture. Also, what people feel about different leadership styles in 
different organizations differ due to different cultures acquired. So we will be discussing mainly 
around three areas,  
I would like to hear about your own background, this will let me know where youre coming from 
and also your perspective of things so its not knowing whether youre from this place or that but 
simply that our background informs the way we do business. And the second part of this question 
one about you, I want to see if theres any commonality if you ask Rwandese to talk about them 
how much information do they give you so is there some commonality because some people give 
less and others give more information so you take your time if you can describe yourself in one 
sentence, its fine or if you can describe yourself in 1000 words thats also fine.  
2. This second question will be around management, your own view of management Business 
management or running an organization business management doesnt mean commercials 
only 
3. The last part will be around culture I dont expect you to be an anthropologist but I want you 
to talk about the Rwandan people, your view of the Rwandan people or the description how you 
understand the Rwandan people... 
Interviewee: I was born and attended nursery, primary, secondary and half of University 
education outside Rwanda. I did my first degree in Rwanda and did my master degree in the UK. 
I have worked for about 20 years now from low to management levels. My professional 
experience is in academics, NGO and Public sector. 
Interviewer: How would you describe your management style?  
Interviewee: I believe that a manager should confers with his or her staff members before taking 
decisions and, in fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when taking decisions on 
organisational matters. You create an environment where staff are involved to be able to 
maximize their potential and organizational benefits/profits. There is no stand alone 
man/woman. Collective decision is always the best and its always better to agree on the decision 
to facilitate its implementation. 
Interviewer: Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style? 
Interviewee: Yes, i think so. 
Interviewer: How do you go about persuading others? 
Interviewee: It starts with recruitment of the right people (with the right skills), develop their 
talents to ensure that they meet business. Then motivating them builds their passion and 
commitment toward the organisational objectives. Ensure they have resources for getting things 
done quickly and achieving objectives. 
Interviewer: What would you say are the most important values and ethics of management? 
Interviewee: I don't know how to describe the values but for me some of the important values 
include independence of thought and action, good relationships with those whom one is in 
frequent personal contact, respect for all people, appreciation, tolerance, and commitment to 
one's job, and acceptance of the customs, traditional culture or religion  
Interviewer: What would you say influences your management style? 
Interviewee: For me, it is has to do with my personality - how I grew up, my professional 
background because of education and work experience. I am motivated to get things done by 
persuading others to commit to achieving the task ahead of us. Of course I also try to adopt a 
style of management or create an atmosphere that I believe is most compatible with the diverse 
culture sets of workers. 
Interviewer: What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans? 
Interviewee: Due to the effects of the tragic history and other internal dynamics, the behavior of 
Rwandans can be perplexing and hard to define. However, there are common factors that cut 
across the different sections of Rwandans. For instance you find that personal interests are 
advanced as those of the community. Important values include social order, respect for tradition, 
security, obedience and wisdom. Individuals value succeeding and getting ahead through self-
assertion and proactively seek advance their personal and their community interests. As you frou 
up, you are taught that heroism or fearlessness and daring, ambition and hard work are key 
drivers for success. 
Probe: just out of curiosity, what is their approach to time? 
Interviewee: hahahahah, in Rwandan culture, people are flexible on time, plans, tasks and 
commitments. You find that meetings are never on time. If a meeting is schedule to start at 08am, 
don't be surprised to see people start coming at 10am. 
Probe: Why? 
Interviewee: I don't know. It is the culture. 
Interviewer: Thank you very much for your time. Do you have a question for me? 
Interviewee: No 
Inteviewee17 
I would like to hear about your own background, this will let me know where youre coming from 
and also your perspective of things so its not knowing whether youre from this place or that but 
simply that our background informs the way we do business. And the second part of this question 
one about you, I want to see if theres any commonality if you ask Rwandese to talk about them 
how much information do they give you so is there some commonality because some people give 
less and others give more information so you take your time if you can describe yourself in one 
sentence, its fine or if you can describe yourself in 1000 words thats also fine.  
2. This second question will be around management, your own view of management Business 
management or running an organization business management doesnt mean commercials 
only 
3. The last part will be around culture I dont expect you to be an anthropologist but I want you 
to talk about the Rwandan people, your view of the Rwandan people or the description how you 
understand the Rwandan people... 
I'm a born again Christian, I have been in Christian ministry since I was young, I'm now the senior 
Pastor of StEtienne Cathedral. I was born in Uganda, by Rwandan parents. I have been a Pastor 
Manager and Administrator since 1999, it's now my 14 year of service. 
How would you describe your management style philosophy? 
I believe that the leader should confers with the group members before taking decisions and, in 
fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when framing decisions but still retains full 
responsibility.  
I believe the leader should lay the problem and allow the decision to emerge out of the process 
of group discussion, instead of imposing it on the group as its boss.  
Please give an example to support your answer/s above. The leader is not an island and he can 
not be a specialist in everything. 
How do you go about inspiring others to achieve company objectives? 
Builds passion and commitment toward a common goal. 
Integrates information from all sources to develop a well-informed, diverse perspective that can 
be used to optimize organizational performance. 
Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style philosophy? 
If no, how would you describe a typical Rwandan manager? Most managers rely on what they 
know and rarely find out what their staff think. 
What would you say influences your management style? 
READINESS OR STAFF MATURITY - the developmental level of the people being managed 
determines the type of leadership style a manager adopts 
Give us an example to support your answer  
The level and capacity of those being led has an impact on the style of leadership. 
What would you say are the most important values and ethics of management? 
SECURITY - Safety, harmony, and stability of society, of relationships, and of self (family security, 
national security, social order, clean, sense of belonging). 
Give an example of how you demonstrate those values in your daily practices I give peace and 
a sense of self-worth to the staff to raise their esteem and confidence. 
Describe communication styles in Rwandan? 
Interprets laws impersonally thus maintain strict adherence to rules; 
What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans? 
In this culture, "time is flexible" and people are flexible on time, plans, tasks and commitments. 
Interviewee18 
How would you describe your management style philosophy? 
I believe that the leader should confers with the group members before taking decisions and, in 
fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when framing decisions but still retains full 
responsibility.  
I believe the leader should create and sustains a context that maximizes human and 
organizational capabilities  
I believe the leader should leverage multicultural differences for innovation, fostering team and 
individual effectiveness.  
Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style philosophy?  
If no, how would you describe a typical Rwandan manager?  
Management capacity is still low and discussions are still not fully utilised  
What would you say influences your management style?  
PERSONALITY - The particular style of management I use in carrying out my duties is inherent in 
my personality structure.  
BELIEF SYSTEM - professional ethics has been the main factor that influenced the way I work 
(leadership styles) to persuade others to commit to the process of transforming the organization. 
CULTURAL DIVERSITY - I try to adopt a style of management or create an atmosphere that I believe 
is most compatible with the diverse culture sets of workers.  
Give us an example to support your answer while the organisational structure helps in facilitating 
the management in general, the individual's approach and character also helps in addition to 
experience and patience.  
What would you say are the most important values and ethics of management? 
Independent thought and action; choosing, creating, exploring (creativity, freedom, curious, 
independent, choosing own goals). Personal success through demonstrating competence 
according to social standards (successful, capable, ambitious). 
Leadership has been defined as "inspiring others to achieve common goals". How do you go about 
inspiring others to achieve company objectives?  
Develops a long-range course of action or set of goals to align with the organizations vision.  
Proactively builds and aligns stakeholders, capabilities, and resources for getting things done 
quickly and achieving complex objectives. Builds passion and commitment toward a common 
goal. Integrates information from all sources to develop a well-informed, diverse perspective that 
can be used to optimize organizational performance. Creates an environment that embraces 
change; makes change happen even if the change is radical and helps others to accept new ideas. 
Ensures shareholder value through courageous decision making that supports enterprise or unit-
wide interests.  
How would you describe communication styles in Rwandan? 
Communication is an art that is unifying and cohesive and thus displays sophistication, nuance, 
and cultural identity; Appreciates slow, indirect communications; Communication is primarily task 
oriented; Prefer formal information networks; what is your view of the behavior of Rwandans?  
Individuals value succeeding and getting ahead through self-assertion and proactively seek 
advance their personal and their groups interests. Important values include independence, 
fearlessness and daring, ambition and hard work, drive for success and competence.  
Individuals and the resources associated with society are organized hierarchically and individuals 
within those societies are socialized to comply with the roles assigned to them in the hierarchy 
and subjected to sanctions if they fail to comply, modesty and self-control are values associated 
with hierarchy. People place a high importance on laws, rules, values, and obligations. They try to 
deal fairly with people based on these rules, but rules come before relationships.  
In this culture, "time is flexible" and people are flexible on time, plans, tasks and commitments.  
Which cultural values are considered the most important in Rwanda?  
Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences (e.g: I was born 
attended primary & secondary school in or outside Rwanda, I am a middle or senior manager and 
have lived and worked in Rwanda for xx years etc...). 
Born in Rwanda, grew and attended school in Uganda, USA, UK. Worked in organisations and also 
Created organisations and helped build them. Worked as a Senior Manager in Government and 
now works as a High level Technician in International organisation. 
Interview 19 
How would you describe your management style philosophy?  
I believe that the leader should confers with the group members before taking decisions and, in 
fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when framing decisions but still retains full 
responsibility.  
Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style philosophy?  
If no, how would you describe a typical Rwandan manager? Lord servant relationship  
What would you say influences your management style?  
THE STYLE OF THE BOSSES - the boss is a very directive manager it may be difficult to engage in a 
consultative or participatory leadership style without getting myself into hot water.  
Give us an example to support your answer my boss believes that every body in the institution is 
equally important in his / her context of work accomplishments  
What would you say are the most important values and ethics of management?  
Personal success through demonstrating competence according to social standards (successful, 
capable, ambitious). Safety, harmony, and stability of society, of relationships, and of self (family 
security, national security, social order, clean, sense of belonging).  
Leadership has been defined as "inspiring others to achieve common goals". How do you go about 
inspiring others to achieve company objectives?  
Develops a long-range course of action or set of goals to align with the organizations vision.  
How would you describe communication styles in Rwandan?  
Extensive use of informal networks;  
What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans?  
Individuals and the resources associated with society are organized hierarchically and individuals 
within those societies are socialized to comply with the roles assigned to them in the hierarchy 
and subjected to sanctions if they fail to comply, modesty and self-control are values associated 
with hierarchy.  
Which cultural values are considered the most important in Rwanda?  
Loyalty, teamwork, excellence, security  
Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences (e.g: I was born 
attended primary & secondary school in or outside Rwanda, I am a middle or senior manager and 
have lived and worked in Rwanda for xx years etc...). 
Born and attended primary and secondary schools in Uganda later attended university education 
and worked in Rwanda. I have worked in Rwanda for the last 12years in different institution in 
different capacities and lastly to day am among senior manager in my present institution which 
am working for. 
Interviewee20 
How would you describe your management style philosophy?  
I believe that the leader should confers with the group members before taking decisions and, in 
fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when framing decisions but still retains full 
responsibility. 
Please give an example to support your answer/s above.  
Philosophy chosen encourages team spirit, a leader is not necessarily reliquishing his powers but 
creating a bond that is driven by thier involvement in setting objectives & goals e.g Bank of Kigali 
Ltd is a listed company and majority of staff are shareholders who attend AGM and vote.  
Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style philosophy?  
If no, how would you describe a typical Rwandan manager? 
Most organisations in Rwanda still practice old traditional style of management which is "do as 
you are told" a leader decides on behalf of managers and in some cases where they are empowed 
there is fear to make decisions and take risks 
What would you say influences your management style?  
The particular style of management I use in carrying out my duties is inherent in my personality 
structure. My professional ethics has been the main factor that influenced the way I work 
(leadership styles) to persuade others to commit to the process of transforming the organization. 
I try to adopt a style of management or create an atmosphere that I believe is most compatible 
with the diverse culture sets of workers. 
Give us an example to support your answer. 
I am calm and composed and always take time to think things through Avoid making decisions 
under duress...  
What would you say are the most important values and ethics of management?  
Personal success through demonstrating competence according to social standards (successful, 
capable, ambitious). Social status and prestige, control or dominance over people and resources 
(social, power, wealth, authority, preserving public image). Safety, harmony, and stability of 
society, of relationships, and of self (family security, national security, social order, clean, sense 
of belonging). Restraint of actions, inclinations, and impulses likely to upset or harm others and 
violate social expectations or norms (obedient, self-discipline, politeness, honoring parents & 
elders). Preserving and enhancing the welfare of those with whom one is in frequent personal 
contact (helpful, forgiving, honest, and loyal). 
Give an example of how you demonstrate those values in your daily practices.  
Leadership has been defined as "inspiring others to achieve common goals". How do you go 
about inspiring others to achieve company objectives?  
Clearly and quickly works through the complexity of key issues, problems and opportunities to 
affect actions. Attracts, develops, and retains talent to ensure that people with the right skills and 
motivations to meet business needs are in the right place at the right time. Integrates information 
from all sources to develop a well-informed, diverse perspective that can be used to optimize 
organizational performance. Creates an environment that embraces change; makes change 
happen even if the change is radical and helps others to accept new ideas. Ensures shareholder 
value through courageous decision making that supports enterprise or unit-wide interests.  
How would you describe communication styles in Rwandan?  
Emphasis for stability, Appreciates slow, indirect communications, Extensive use of informal 
networks;  
What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans?  
Individuals and the resources associated with society are organized hierarchically and individuals 
within those societies are socialized to comply with the roles assigned to them in the hierarchy 
and subjected to sanctions if they fail to comply, modesty and self-control are values associated 
with hierarchy. Individuals are seen as moral equals and everyone shares the same basic interests 
and feel concern for everyone's welfare. Egalitarianism values include social justice, honesty, 
equality, sympathy and caring for the weaker members of the society. People place a high 
importance on laws, rules, values, and obligations. They try to deal fairly with people based on 
these rules, but rules come before relationships. In this culture, "time is flexible" and people are 
flexible on time, plans, tasks and commitments.  
What cultural values are considered the most important in Rwanda?  
Competency, individuality, loyalty, stewardship, accomplishment, Security, challenge, influence, 
discipline/order, dependability  
Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences (e.g: I was born 
attended primary & secondary school in or outside Rwanda, I am a middle or senior manager 
and have lived and worked in Rwanda for xx years etc..)  
I was born raised and attended primary, secondary, university in EAC & UK. I am a middle manager 
have been in Rwanda for 3 years Good Luck with your research 
Interviewee21 
How would you describe your management style philosophy?  
I believe the leader should set clear objectives and goals for others and emphasize getting things 
done either by punishments or rewards in order to encourage compliance. I believe the leader 
should create and sustains a context that maximizes human and organizational capabilities. I 
believe that everything should be done according to procedures & policy, if not covered by the 
policy, it should be referred to the next hierarchy level above. I believe the leader should lay the 
problem and allow the decision to emerge out of the process of group discussion, instead of 
imposing it on the group as its boss. I believe that the leader should confers with the group 
members before taking decisions and, in fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when 
framing decisions but still retains full responsibility. 
Please give an example to support your answer/s above.  
I believe being a leader is putting the needs of your followers first. Thus, you have to listen to your 
staff, get advice from them. This motivates them and the organization quickly realizes its goals.  
Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style philosophy?  
How would you describe a typical Rwandan manager? 
Policies and procedures are in place but they are not followed as they are.  
What would you say influences your management style?  
I believe in the developmental level of the people being managed determines the type of 
leadership style a manager adopts. The particular style of management I use in carrying out my 
duties is inherent in my personality structure. The professional ethics has been the main factor 
that influenced the way I work (leadership styles) to persuade others to commit to the process of 
transforming the organization.  I try to adopt a style of management or create an atmosphere 
that I believe is most compatible with the diverse culture sets of workers. My management style 
is largely influenced by time - if time is available, I will be happy to support subordinates than 
when things get wild and hairy around the office. Give us an example to support your answer 
because most managers don't do as written in the procedures manual, you find that the 
organizational goals are diverted, thus, it's good to follow your personality backed by the factors 
mentioned above.  
What would you say are the most important values and ethics of management?  
Independent thought and action; choosing, creating, exploring (creativity, freedom, curious, 
independent, choosing own goals). Personal success through demonstrating competence 
according to social standards (successful, capable, ambitious). Safety, harmony, and stability of 
society, of relationships, and of self (family security, national security, social order, clean, sense 
of belonging).  Restraint of actions, inclinations, and impulses likely to upset or harm others and 
violate social expectations or norms (obedient, self-discipline, politeness, honoring parents & 
elders). Respect, commitment, and acceptance of the customs and ideas that traditional culture 
or religion provide the self (accepting my portion, devout, respect for tradition, humble, 
moderate). Understanding, appreciation, tolerance, and protection for the welfare of all people 
and for nature (social justice, broadminded, world of peace, wisdom, a world of beauty, equality).  
Give an example of how you demonstrate those values in your daily practices  
By letting staffs initiate anything in the organization rather than waiting for others to think or 
innovate for them. This helps staff feel part of the decision and the organization at large.Self-
Direction  
Leadership has been defined as "inspiring others to achieve common goals". How do you go 
about inspiring others to achieve company objectives?  
Ensures shareholder value through courageous decision making that supports enterprise or unit-
wide interests. Creates an environment that embraces change; makes change happen even if the 
change is radical and helps others to accept new ideas. Integrates information from all sources to 
develop a well-informed, diverse perspective that can be used to optimize organizational 
performance. Builds passion and commitment toward a common goal. Attracts, develops, and 
retains talent to ensure that people with the right skills and motivations to meet business needs 
are in the right place at the right time. Develops a long-range course of action or set of goals to 
align with the organizations vision.  
What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans?  
Personal interests are not seen as different from those of the group. Important values include 
social order, respect for tradition, security, obedience and wisdom. Individuals are viewed as 
autonomous and are expected to cultivate and express their own preferences, feelings, ideas, and 
abilities and find meaning in their own uniqueness. Individuals value succeeding and getting 
ahead through self-assertion and proactively seek advance their personal and their groups 
interests. Important values include independence, fearlessness and daring, ambition and hard 
work, drive for success and competence. Individuals are content to accept and seek to 
understand, preserve and protect it rather than change, direct or exploit it. Important values in 
societies include world at peace, unity with nature, and protecting the environment. Individuals 
are seen as moral equals and everyone shares the same basic interests and feel concern for 
everyone's welfare. Egalitarianism values include social justice, honesty, equality, sympathy and 
caring for the weaker members of the society. In this culture, "time is flexible" and people are 
flexible on time, plans, tasks and commitments.  
Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences (e.g: I was born 
attended primary & secondary school in or outside Rwanda, I am a middle or senior manager 
and have lived and worked in Rwanda for xx years etc...)  
I was born and attended Primary School in Uganda. I later came in Rwanda where i attended my 
secondary school. I am a middle manager and have lived in Rwanda for 18 years. 
Interviewee22 
How would you describe your management style philosophy?  
I believe that the leader should confers with the group members before taking decisions and, in 
fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when framing decisions but still retains full 
responsibility. I believe the leader should lay the problem and allow the decision to emerge out 
of the process of group discussion, instead of imposing it on the group as its boss. I believe the 
leader should set clear objectives and goals for others and emphasize getting things done either 
by punishments or rewards in order to encourage compliance. I believe the leader should 
leverage multicultural differences for innovation, fostering team and individual effectiveness. 
Please give an example to support explain your answer/s above.  
In our department we do create an environment where everyone is free to give ideas either face 
to face or by email and then as managers we sit and take final decisions.  
How would you describe a typical Rwandan manager?  
It varies across companies. Some are rigid to consult team members and other are quite open for 
ideas.  
What would you say influences your management style?  
The developmental level of the people being managed determines the type of leadership style a 
manager adopts. I try to adopt a style of management or create an atmosphere that I believe is 
most compatible with the diverse culture sets of workers.  
What would you say are the most important values and ethics of management?  
Independent thought and action; choosing, creating, exploring (creativity, freedom, curious, 
independent, choosing own goals). Excitement, novelty, and challenge in life (daring, a varied life, 
an exciting life). Personal success through demonstrating competence according to social 
standards (successful, capable, ambitious). Respect, commitment, and acceptance of the customs 
and ideas that traditional culture or religion provide the self (accepting my portion, devout, 
respect for tradition, humble, moderate). 
Leadership has been defined as "inspiring others to achieve common goals". How do you go 
about inspiring others to achieve company objectives?  
Develops a long-range course of action or set of goals to align with the organizations vision.  
Identifies and exploits opportunities for new products, services, and markets. Attracts, develops, 
and retains talent to ensure that people with the right skills and motivations to meet business 
needs are in the right place at the right time. Builds passion and commitment toward a common 
goal. Creates an environment that embraces change; makes change happen even if the change is 
radical and helps others to accept new ideas. 
How would you describe communication styles in Rwandan?  
Information is less widely shared hence requires less cultural programming; 
What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans?  
Individuals and the resources associated with society are organized hierarchically and individuals 
within those societies are socialized to comply with the roles assigned to them in the hierarchy 
and subjected to sanctions if they fail to comply, modesty and self-control are values associated 
with hierarchy. People place a high importance on laws, rules, values, and obligations. They try to 
deal fairly with people based on these rules, but rules come before relationships.  
What cultural values are considered the most important in Rwanda?  
Ambition, competency, integrity, responsibility, discipline/order  
Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences (e.g: I was born 
attended primary & secondary school in or outside Rwanda, I am a middle or senior manager 
and have lived and worked in Rwanda for xx years etc...). 
Was born 1976 attended primary school at Gadaffi Barracks primary school and joined Jinja 
College for O'level in Uganda and finished my A'level in Rwanda. Did my bachelors in USA and 
masters in South Africa. Am a middle Manager and i have lived in Rwanda since 1994. I have more 
than 8 years in the work environment. 
Interviewee23 
How would you describe your management style philosophy?  
I believe that the leader should confers with the group members before taking decisions and, in 
fact, considers staff advice and their feelings when framing decisions but still retains full 
responsibility.  
Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style philosophy?  
If no, how would you describe a typical Rwandan manager? Take decisions for the group and then 
explain to the group.  
What would you say influences your management style? 
The particular style of management I use in carrying out my duties is inherent in my personality 
structure.  
What would you say are the most important values and ethics of management?  
Independent thought and action; choosing, creating, exploring (creativity, freedom, curious, 
independent, choosing own goals). Personal success through demonstrating competence 
according to social standards (successful, capable, ambitious). Respect, commitment, and 
acceptance of the customs and ideas that traditional culture or religion provides the self 
(accepting my portion, devout, respect for tradition, humble, moderate).  
Leadership has been defined as "inspiring others to achieve common goals". How do you go 
about inspiring others to achieve company objectives?  
Develops a long-range course of action or set of goals to align with the organizations vision.  
Identifies and exploits opportunities for new products, services, and markets.  
Proactively builds and aligns stakeholders, capabilities, and resources for getting things done 
quickly and achieving complex objectives.  
How would you describe communication styles in Rwandan?  
Appreciates fast and direct communications;  
What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans?  
Personal interests are not seen as different from those of the group. Important values include 
social order, respect for tradition, security, obedience and wisdom.  
In this culture, "time is flexible" and people are flexible on time, plans, tasks and commitments.  
What cultural values are considered the most important in Rwanda?  
Ambition, credibility, excellence, dignity wisdom discipline/order optimism 
Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences (e.g: I was born 
attended primary & secondary school in or outside Rwanda, I am a middle or senior manager 
and have lived and worked in Rwanda for xx years etc...). 
I was born in 1953 in Rwanda. I attended primary school and secondary and university in 
Katanga/DRC. I attended postgraduate studies in Africa, Europe and America. I has been a middle 
manager for more than 27 years. I worked in Rwanda for more than 30 years. 
Interviewee24 
Interviewer: Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences (e.g: 
where you were born, raised and whether you attended primary & secondary school in or outside 
Rwanda. Also you could mention about the level of your current role in the company and years 
of experience. 
Interviewee: I was born and raised in Rwanda. I completed Primary in 1993 in Nyanza and 
secondary in 1998 and then University also in Rwanda. Currently I am a middle manager working 
at MINECOFIN (Ministry of Economic Planning and Finance) as EDF/NAO Infrastructure sector 
specialist. 
Interviewer: How would you describe your style of management?  
Interviewee: Hahahah my style is that of consulting with my bosses and subordinates as well as 
others I work before taking decisions and, in fact, I consider staff advice and their feelings when 
making my decisions.  
Probe: who takes the decission then? 
Interviewee: Ofcourse I am answerable for every decision made but i also follow according to 
procedures & policy, if not covered by the policy, it should be referred to the next hierarchy level 
above.  
Interviewer: Would you say that most Rwandan managers share your management style 
philosophy?  
Interviewee: No  
Please give an example to support your answer/s above.  
Interviewee: Leader keeps severe, close control over supporters by keeping close regulation of 
policies and procedures given to followers. His emphasis on the feature of the authoritarian 
leader and their supporters, these types of leaders make sure to only create a distinct professional 
relationship. Direct supervision is what they believe to be key in maintaining a successful 
environment and follower ship  
What would you say influences your management style?  
The particular style of management I use in carrying out my duties is inherent in my personality 
structure. I emphasize the developmental level of the people being managed determines the type 
of leadership style a manager adopts. It is expected that all managers operate in pretty much the 
same manner and getting out of step with peers may not work best for me and your company.  
If time is available, I will be happy to support subordinates than when things get wild and hairy 
around the office. 
Give me an example to support your answer  
Every manager must have or adopts appropriate management style which will help organization 
to achieve. The general objective as well as with personal knowledge to dispatch tasks and respect 
time frame. 
What would you say are the most important values and ethics of management?  
Independent thought and action; choosing, creating, exploring (creativity, freedom, curious, 
independent, choosing own goals). Excitement, novelty, and challenge in life (daring, a varied life, 
an exciting life). Personal success through demonstrating competence according to social 
standards (successful, capable, ambitious). Social status and prestige, control or dominance over 
people and resources (social, power, wealth, authority, preserving public image). Safety, 
harmony, and stability of society, of relationships, and of self (family security, national security, 
social order, clean, sense of belonging). Restraint of actions, inclinations, and impulses likely to 
upset or harm others and violate social expectations or norms (obedient, self-discipline, 
politeness, honoring parents & elders). Understanding, appreciation, tolerance, and protection 
for the welfare of all people and for nature (social justice, broadminded, world of peace, wisdom, 
a world of beauty, equality). 
Give an example of how you demonstrate those values in your daily practices. 
All of values are linked to security and from security you can achieve as many as possible required 
target.  
Leadership has been defined as "inspiring others to achieve common goals". How do you go 
about inspiring others to achieve company objectives?  
Clearly and quickly works through the complexity of key issues, problems and opportunities to 
affect actions. Identifies and exploits opportunities for new products, services, and markets.  
Proactively builds and aligns stakeholders, capabilities, and resources for getting things done 
quickly and achieving complex objectives. Integrates information from all sources to develop a 
well-informed, diverse perspective that can be used to optimize organizational performance.  
Ensures shareholder value through courageous decision making that supports enterprise or unit-
wide interests.  
Please specify.  
By adopting team spirit working, delegate power, consider lifestyle and behavior of all staffs, 
providing motivation and receive advice of every one.  
How would you describe communication styles in Rwandan?  
Information is widely shared hence requires extensive cultural programming; Emphasis for 
stability; Extensive use of informal networks; Emphasis for change and mobility; Appreciates fast 
and direct communications; Interprets laws impersonally thus maintain strict adherence to rules;  
What is your view of the behavior of Rwandans?  
Personal interests are not seen as different from those of the group. Important values include 
social order, respect for tradition, security, obedience and wisdom.  
Individuals value succeeding and getting ahead through self-assertion and proactively seek 
advance their personal and their groups interests. Important values include independence, 
fearlessness and daring, ambition and hard work, drive for success and competence.  
Individuals are seen as moral equals and everyone shares the same basic interests and feel 
concern for everyone's welfare. Egalitarianism values include social justice, honesty, equality, 
sympathy and caring for the weaker members of the society.  
People place a high importance on laws, rules, values, and obligations. They try to deal fairly with 
people based on these rules, but rules come before relationships.  
In this culture, "time is flexible" and people are flexible on time, plans, tasks and commitments.  
Other (please specify) Rwandans have cultural belief, behaviors and values which guide and used 
in management style.  
Which cultural values are considered the most important in Rwanda?  
Ambition, competency, equality, ntegrity, responsibility, diversity, improvement, credibility  
Honesty. 
Please describe yourself - your early background and professional experiences (e.g: I was born 
attended primary & secondary school in or outside Rwanda, I am a middle or senior manager 
and have lived and worked in Rwanda for xx years etc...). 
I'm Public Health Engineer, specialized in WASH intervention, I completed Primary in 1993 in 
Nyanza, secondary in 1998 and then University also in Rwanda Currently I work at MINECOFIN as 
EDF/NAO Infrastructure sector specialist. 
7. References 
Afegbua, S.I & Adejuwon, K. D. (2012). The challenges of leadership and governance in Africa. 
International journal of Academic research in business and social science. Vol. 2, No. 9. 
Avruch, K. and Black, P. W. (1993) "Conflict Resolution in Intercultural Settings: Problems and 
Prospects," in Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: Integration and Application, edited by 
Dennis Sandole and Hugo van der Merwe. New York: St. Martin's Press. 
Avruch, K. and Black, P. W. (1993) "Conflict Resolution in Intercultural Settings: Problems and 
Prospects," in Conflict Resolution Theory and Practice: Integration and Application, edited by 
Dennis Sandole and Hugo van der Merwe. New York: St. Martin's Press. 
Ayittey, G.B.N. (2001). The African People in the Global Village: An Introduction to Pan African 
Studies. Journal of World History, Vol. 12, number 1, spring, pp. 220-222 
Barbuto, J.E. (Jnr) (2005). Motivation and transactional, charismatic, and transformational 
leadership: a test of antecedents. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 11(4), 26-
Barling, J., Weber, T., and Kelloway, E.K. (1996). "Effects of Transformational Leadership Training 
on Attitudinal Financial Outcomes: A Field Experiment." Journal of Applied Psychology 81, no. 6: 
872-832. 
Barnett, A. (2003). The impact of transformational leadership style of the school principal on 
school learning environments and selected teacher outcomes: a preliminary report. Paper 
presented at NZARE AARE, Auckland, New Zealand. Manuscript available from the author. 
Barnett, K., McCormick, J. & Conners, R. (2001). Transformational leadership in schools  
panacea, placebo or problem? Journal of Educational Administration, 39(1), pp. 24-46. 
Bass, B., Jung, D., Avolio, B.J., and Berson, Y. (2003). "Predicting Unit Performance by Assessing 
Transformational and Transactional Leadership." Journal of Applied Psychology 88, no. 2: 207-
Bass, B.M. (1990). From Transactional to Transformational Leadership Learning to Share the 
Vision. Organizational Dynamics, (winter): 19-31.  
Bass, B.M. (1990a). Bass & Stodgills Handbook of Leadership. Theory, Research and Managerial 
Applications (3rd Ed.). New York, NY: The Free Press. 
Bass, B.M. (1990b). From transactional to transformational leadership: learning to share the 
vision. Organizational Dynamics, 13, pp. 26-40. 
Bass, B.M. (1997). The ethics of transformational leadership. KLSP: Transformational Leadership, 
Working Papers. Retrieved August 3, 2006, from 
http://www.academy.umd.edu/publications/klspdocs/bbass_pl.htm   
http://www.academy.umd.edu/publications/klspdocs/bbass_pl.htm
Bass, B.M., Avolio, B.J., Jung, D.I., & Berson, Y. (2003). Predicting unit performance by assessing 
transformational and transactional leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(2), pp. 207-
Bateman, T.S., and Zeithaml, C.P. (1990). Management: Function and Strategy. Homewood, IL: 
Irwin. 
Bedeian, A.G., and Gleuck, F.W. (1983). Management 3rd Ed. New York: The Dryden Press. 
Bennis, W.G. (1959). Leadership theory and administrative behavior: the problem of authority. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 4, pp. 259-260. 
Bligh, M. C. (2009). Personality Theories of Leadership. In Levine, J. M., & Hogg, M. A. (Eds.), 
Encyclopedia of Group Processes and Intergroup Relations. 
Bligh, M.C., (2009). Personality Theories of Leadership. Encyclopedia of Group Process & 
Intergroup Relations. SAGE Publications. 
Bligh, M.C., and James R. Meindl. (2005). "The Cultural Ecology of Leadership: an Analysis of 
Popular Leadership Books." The Psychology of Leadership: New Perspectives and Research. Ed. 
David M. Messick andRoderick M. Kramer. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 11-36. 
Bloor, G., & Dawson, P. (1994). Understanding Professional Culture in Organizational Context. 
Organization Studies, 15, 275-292. 
Bloor, G., & Dawson, P. (1994). Understanding Professional Culture in Organizational 
Context. Organization Studies, 15, 275-292. 
Bono, J.E. & Judge, T.A. (2004). Personality and transformational and transactional leadership: a 
meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(5), pp. 901-910. 
Bromley, D. (2002) 'Comparing corporate reputations: League tables, quotients, benchmarks or 
case studies', Corporate Reputation Review, 5(1), 33-50; 
Bromley, D. (2002) 'Comparing corporate reputations: League tables, quotients, benchmarks or 
case studies', Corporate Reputation Review, 5(1), 33-50; 
Brubaker, T. A. (2013), 'Servant Leadership, Ubuntu, and Leader Effectiveness in Rwanda. 
Emerging Leadership Journeys, Vol.6 Iss.1, pp. 95-131 
Bryant, S.E. (2003). The role of transformational and transactional leadership in creating, sharing 
and exploiting organizational knowledge. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 9(4), 
pp. 32-44. 
Burke, C. Shawn, Stagl Klein, Cameron Klein, Gerald F. Goodwin, Eduardo Salas and Stanley 
Halpin. "What Types of Leadership Behaviours are Functional in Teams? A Meta-Analysis." The 
Leadership Quarterly 17, (2006): 288-307. 
Burns, J. (1978). Leadership. New York, NY: Harper and Row. 
Capowski, G., (1994). Anatomy of a Leader: Where are the Leaders of Tomorrow? 
Management Review, Vol. 83 Issue 3, p.10-18. 
Carlson, D.S. & Perrewe, P.L. (1995). Institutionalization of organizational ethics through 
transformational leadership. Journal of Business Ethics, 14(10), pp. 829-839.  
Cashin, J., Crewe, P., Desai, J., Desrosiers, L., Prince, J., Shallow, G. & Slaney, S. (2000). 
Transformational Leadership. Retrieved August 3, 2006 from 
http://www.mun.ca/educ/ed4361/virtual_academy/campus_a/aleaders.html  
Chekwa, E. (2001). Searching for African American transformational leaders. Academy of 
Business and Administrative Sciences 4th International Conference, Quebec City, Canada. 
Manuscript available from the author. 
 Chemers, M.M. (1997). An Integrative Theory of Leadership. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. Chicago (Author-Date, 15th Ed.). 
Conger, J.A. (1999). Charismatic and transformational leadership in organizations: an insiders 
perspective on these developing streams of research. The Leadership Quarterly, 10(2), pp. 145-
Cooke, R. A., & Rousseau, D. M. (1988). Behavioral Norms and Expectations: A Quantitative 
Approach to the Assessment of Organizational Culture. Group & Organizational Studies, 13, 245-
http://www.mun.ca/educ/ed4361/virtual_academy/campus_a/aleaders.html
Cooke, R. A., & Rousseau, D. M. (1988). Behavioral Norms and Expectations: A Quantitative 
Approach to the Assessment of Organizational Culture. Group & Organizational Studies, 13, 
245-273. 
Cooper, P., Smith, C.J., and Upton, G. (1994). Emotional and Behavioural Difficulties: Theory to 
Practice. New York: Routledge. 
Cox, P.L. (2001). Transformational leadership: a success story at Cornell University. Proceedings 
of the ATEM/aappa 2001 conference. Retrieved March 17, 2004, from 
http://www.anu.edu.au/facilities/atem-aappaa/full_papers/Coxkeynote.html   
Crawford, C.B., Gould, L.V., & Scott, R.F. (2003). Transformational leader as champion and 
techie: implications for leadership educators. Journal of Leadership Education, 2(1), pp. 1-12. 
Creswell, J.W. (2009). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative and Mixed Methods 
Approaches. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Crowley, J. (2000). Rwanda: Recent Economic Developments. International Monetary Fund. 
Staff Country Report. No.4 
Davidson, B., The African Genius, Boston, 1969, p.31 
Den Hartog et al. (1999) 
Dionne, S. D., Yammarino, F. J., Atwater, L .E. & Spangler, W. D. (2004). Transformational 
leadership and team performance. Journal of organizational change management 17 (2), 177-
Dixon, D. (1998). "The Balanced CEO: A Transformational Leader and a Capable Manager." 
Healthcare Forum Journal 41, no. 2: 26-29. 
Epitropaki, O. (undated). What is transformational leadership? Institute of Work Pyschology, 
University of Sheffield, England. 
Fardon, R & Furniss, G. (2002). African languages, development and the state. 
Fayol, H.H (1908a). "Lexposee des principles generaux dadministration". Unpublished paper, 
translated by J.D Breeze. Published in: Daniel A. Wren, Arthur G. Bedeian, John D. Breeze, (2002) 
http://www.anu.edu.au/facilities/atem-aappaa/full_papers/Coxkeynote.html
"The foundations of Henri Fayols administrative theory", Management Decision, Vol. 40 Iss: 9, 
pp.906 - 918 
Feinberg, B.J., Ostroff, & Burke, W.W. (2005). The role of within-group agreement in 
understanding transformational leadership. Journal of Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology, 78, 471-488.  
Geertz, C. (1973). Description: Toward and Interpretive Theory of Culture, The Interpretation 
of Culture, (NY: Basic Books). 
Gellis, Z.D. (2001). Social work perceptions of transformational and transactional leadership in 
health care. Social Work Research, 25(1), pp. 17-25. 
Gesteland, R.R. (2012). Cross-cultural business behavior, a guide for global management, 
Copenhagen business school press- Universitetsforlaget, 5th edition 
Goodson, J. et al., (1989). "Situational Leadership Theory: A Test of Leadership Prescriptions", 
Group and Organization Studies, Vol 14, No. 4, p. 358 
Gronn, P. (1996). From transactions to transformations: a new world order in the study of 
leadership. Educational Management and Administration, 24(1), pp. 7-30. 
Gummesson, E. (2005), 'Qualitative research in marketing', European journal of marketing 39 
(3/4): 309 - 329 
Hagen, F.A et al., (1998). "Assessing the perceptions of human resource managers toward 
nepotism: A cross-cultural study", International Journal of Manpower, Vol. 19 Iss: 8, pp.554  
Hagen, F.A et al., (1998). "Assessing the perceptions of human resource managers toward 
nepotism: A cross-cultural study", International Journal of Manpower, Vol. 19 Iss: 8, pp.554  
Hall, E. T. (1976). Beyond culture. Garden City, N.Y., Anchor Press. 
Hall, E. T. (1976). Beyond culture. Garden City, N.Y., Anchor Press.p.79 
Hall, E.T. (1959). The Silent Language (Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Company, Inc.,), 55. 
Hall, E.T. (1959). The Silent Language (New York: Anchor Books, 1959) 
Hall, E.T. (1983).The Dance of Life. The Other Dimension of Time (New York: Doubleday), p.229 
Hall, E.T. (1987). Hidden Differences Doing Business with the Japanese. Anchor Books. p.3 
Hall, J., Johnson, S., Wysocki, A. & Kepner, K. (2002). Transformational leadership: the 
transformation of managers and associates. Retrieved August 3, 2006, from 
http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu  
Hersey, P. and Blanchard, K. H. (1969). Management of Organizational Behaviour  Utilizing 
Human Resources. New Jersey/Prentice Hall 
Hilarie, O. (2000). In Search of Leaders. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000. Questia. Web. 15 
Jan. 2011. Sogunro, Olusegun Agboola. "Leadership Effectiveness and Personality Characteristics 
of Group Members." Journal of Leadership Studies 5.3 (1998): 26.  
Hofstede, G. (1997). The Archimedes effect. Working at the interface of cultures: 18 lives in 
social science. M.H.Bond, London, Routldge: 47-61. 
Hofstede, G., Hofstede, G.J., & Minkov, M. (2010). Cultures and organizations: Software of the 
mind. New York: McGraw-Hill. P.6; 
Horwitz et al., 2002; Jackson, 2002; Mbigi, 1997; Malunga (2006); Mulanga, 2004; 2006; Dia, 
1991); Seny Kan et al., 2015; Chen, 2014; West, 2014; Kragh, 2012). 
Horwitz, F. M., Kamoche, K., & Chew, I. K. (2002b). 'Looking East: Diffusing high performance 
work practices in the southern Afro-Asian context'. International Journal of Human Resource 
Management, 13(7), 1019-1041. 
House, R. J., Hanges, P. J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P. W., & Gupta, V. (Eds.). (2004). Culture, 
leadership, and organizations: The GLOBE study of 62 societies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Howell, Jane M., and Bruce J. Avolio. "Transformational Leadership, Transactional Leadership, 
Locus of Control and Support for Innovation: Key Predictors of Consolidated-Business-Unit 
Performance." Journal of Applied Psychology 78, no. 6(1993): 891-902. 
http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/
Hoyt, C.L. & Blascovich, J. (2003). Transformational and transactional leadership in virtual and 
physical environments. Small Group Research, 34(6), pp. 678-715. 
Igwe, E.D. (2011). Igbo Jurisprudence; A discourse on the nature of punishment in traditional 
African society. Filosofia Theoretica, Vol. 1, No.1. 
Israel, M. & Hay. I. (2006). Research Ethics for Social Scientists: between ethical conduct and 
regulatory compliance. London: Sage. 
Jackson, T. (2002c). Reframing human resource management in Africa: a cross-cultural 
perspective. Int. J. of Human Resource Management 13:7 November 2002 9981018. 
Jackson, T. (2012) Cross-cultural management and the informal economy in sub-Saharan Africa: 
implications for organization, employment and skills development, The International Journal of 
Human Resource Management, 23(14), 29012916. 
Jackson, T. (2012) Cross-cultural management and the informal economy in sub-Saharan Africa: 
implications for organization, employment and skills development, The International Journal of 
Human Resource Management, 23(14), 29012916. 
Jackson, T. (2012) Postcolonialism and Organizational Knowledge in the Wake of Chinas 
Presence in Africa: Interrogating South-South relations, Organization. 19(2): 181-204. 
James, R. and Malunga, C., (2006), The Rise and Pitfalls of Civil Society Networks in Malawi, 
INTRAC, London 
Jayasingam, S., Mahfooz, A., and Jantan, M.M. (2009). "Influencing Knowledge Workers: The 
Power of Top Management." Industrial Management & Data Systems 110, no.1, 134-151. Doi: 
10.1108/02635571011008443 
Judge, T.A. & Piccolo, R.F. (2004). Transformational and transactional leadership: a meta-
analytic test of their relative validity.  Journal of Applied Psychology, 89/5, pp. 755-768. 
Judge, T.A., and Piccolo, R.F. (2004). "Transformational and Transactional Teadership: A Meta-
Analytic Test of their Relative Validity." Journal of Applied Psychology 89, no. 5: 755-768. Doi: 
10.1037/0021-9010.89.5.755. 
Kamoche, K, Yaw, D, Horwitz, F and Muuka, G N (Eds) (2004) Managing Human Resources in 
Africa, Routledge, London; 
Kamoche, K. (2002) "Human resources in Africa," International Journal of Human Resource 
Management i3 (7): 993-997 
Kawa, L. (2013). The 20 Fastest-Growing Countries in the World, Business Insider.  
Kelly, J. and Kelly, L. (1998). An Existential-Systems Approach to Managing Organizations. 
Westport, CT: Quorum Books.  
Kelly, M.L. (2003). Academic advisers as transformational leaders. The Mentor. Retrieved August 
3, 2006, from http://www.psu.edu/dus/mentor/030101mk.htm     
Kelman, HC. (1958). Compliance, identification, and internalization: Three processes of attitude 
change. Journal of Conflict Resolution. 2(1):51-60. 
Kelman, HC. (1958). Compliance, identification, and internalization: Three processes of attitude 
change. Journal of Conflict Resolution. 2(1):51-60. 
Khatri, N., Toang, E.W.K. and Bigley, T.M. (2006) 'Cronyism: A Cross-cultural Analysis', Journal of 
International Business Studies, vol. 37, pp. 6175. 
Kirkpatrick, S.A. & Locke, E.A. (1991). Leadership: do traits matter? Academy of management 
Executive, 5, 48-60 
Koontz, H. and ODonnell, C. (1955). Principles of Management: An Analysis of Managerial 
Functions. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co. 
Kragh, S. U. (2012). The anthropology of nepotism: Social distance and reciprocity in 
organizations in developing countries. International Journal of Cross Cultural Management, vol 
12, no. 2, pp. 247-265. 
Kuper, A., Lingard, L., and Levinson, W. (2008). Critically appraising qualitative research. British 
Medical Journal, 337, 687689. 
Kwame, G. (1996). African Cultural Values. An Introduction. Philadelphia, Pa/Accra: Sankofa 
Publishing Company 
http://www.psu.edu/dus/mentor/030101mk.htm
Kwame, G. (1996). African Cultural Values. An Introduction. Philadelphia, Pa/Accra: Sankofa 
Publishing Company 
Leithwood, K. & Jantzi, D. (2000). The effects of transformational leadership on organizational 
conditions and student engagement with school. Journal of Educational Administration, 38(2), 
p. 112. 
Liontos, L. B. (1992). Transformational leadership. ERIC Digest, Number 72. (Report No. EDO-EA-
92-5). 
Lituchy, T.R., Punnett, B.J., & Puplampu, B.B. (2013). Management in Africa: Macro and Micro 
Perspectives. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Liu, L. (2010). Conversation on leadership. Wisdom from management gurus 
Locke, E.A. (1986). "Toward a Theory of Task Performance and Incentive." Organizational 
Behavior and Human Performance 3, no. 2: 157-189. 
Lord, R.G. & Maher, K.J. (1991). Leadership and Information Processing: Linking Perceptions and 
Organizational Performance. New York: Routledge, Chapman & Hall 
Lord, R.G. & Maher, K.J. (1991). Leadership and Information Processing: Linking Perceptions and 
Organizational Performance. New York: Routledge, Chapman & Hall 
Lord, R.G. & Maher, K.J. (1991). Leadership and Information Processing: Linking Perceptions and 
Organizational Performance. New York: Routledge, Chapman & Hall 
Lowe, B.K., Kroeck, G.K., & Sivasubramanium, N. (1996). "Effectiveness Correlates of 
Transformational and Transactional Leadership: A Meta-Analytic Review of the MLQ Literature." 
Leadership Quarterly 7, no. 3. 
Lunenburg, F.C. (2011). Leadership versus Management: A Key DistinctionAt Least in Theory. 
International Journal of Management, Business & Administration, vol 14, number 1 (pp.2). 
Lussier, R.N. & Achua, C.F. (2004). Leadership: theory, application, skill development (2nd Ed.). 
Eagan, MN: Thomson-West.  
Lutz, D.W. (2009). African Ubuntu Philosophy and Global Management. Journal of Business 
Ethics, 84, 313-328 
Lutz, D.W. (2009). African Ubuntu Philosophy and Global Management. Journal of Business 
Ethics, 84, 313-328 
Lutz, D.W. (2009). African Ubuntu Philosophy and Global Management. Journal of Business 
Ethics, 84, 313-328 
Malunga, C. (2004). Learning Leadership Development from African Culture: A persona 
Perspective. Praxis note 25. International NGO Training and Research centre. 
Malunga, C. (2009). Understanding Organizational Leadership through Ubuntu. Adonis & Abbey 
Publishers, London 
Mbigi, L & Maree, J. (1995). Ubuntu, the spirit of African transformation management. 
Knowledge Resources 
Mbigi, L. (1997). The African Dream in Management, Randburg, Knowledge Resources  
Mbigi, L. (2000), In the Search for African Business Renaissance, Randburg, Knowledge 
Resources 
Miller, S. and Konorski, J. (1928). Sur one forme particulibe des reflexes conditionels. Compt. 
Rend. Sbnc. Soc. Biol. 99: 1155- 1157. 
Miner, J.B. (2002). Organizational Behavior: Foundations, Theories, and Analyses. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.  
Molotlegi, K. (2004). Traditional Leadership for a Progressing Africa. A paper presented at the 
Africad Development Forun (IV), United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. Addis Ababa. 
Moore, J.D. (2012). Visions of Culture: An Introduction to Anthropological Theories and 
Theorists. Expanded 3rd Edition.  
Muchiri, M.K. (2011), Leadership in context: a review and research agenda for Sub-Saharan 
Africa', Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, Vol. 84 No. 3, pp. 440-452 
Munch, R. and Smelser, N.J. (Eds) (1992), Theory of Culture, Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 
Mwakikagile, G. (2001). The Modern African State. Quest for transformation. Huntington, New 
York: Nova Science Publishers, pp. 73  107. 
Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps. (Undated). Leadership and management: Transactional 
and transformational leadership. Retrieved March 29, 2004 from 
http://nrotc.wisc.edu/battalioncourses/naval  
Ncube, L. B. (2010). Ubuntu: A transformative leadership philosophy. Journal of Leadership 
Studies, 4(3), 7782 
 Newenham-Kahindi, A. (2009). The transfer of Ubuntu and Indaba business models abroad: A 
case of South African multinational banks and telecommunication services in Tanzania. 
International Journal of Cross Cultural Management, 9(1), 87-108. 
Ntahobari, J. and Ndayiziga, B. (2003). The role of Burundian women in the peaceful settlement 
of conflicts. UNESCO, printed in France. SHS-2003/WS/38. 
Nussbaum, B. (2003), African culture and Ubuntu: Reflections of a South African in America. 
World Business Academy 17 (1) 
Nwabueze, C., Nweke, N., Ejezie, L. (2012). Cross-cultural research in public relations: An 
analysis appraisal. Journal of business and management. Vol. 2, Issue 6, pp. 14-18 
Odom, L. & Green, M.T. (2003). Law and the ethics of transformational leadership. Leadership 
and Organization Development Journal, 24(1/2), pp. 62-69. 
Onwubiko, O.A. (1991). African Thought, Religion and culture. Snaap Press Ltd. 
Oral literature 
Osterman P., (2008) The Truth about Middle Managers: Who They Are, How They Work, Why 
They Matter, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 
Otieno O.A. (2008). Political instability in Africa. Where the problem lies and alternative 
perspect. The African diaspora policy centre, Amsterdam 
http://nrotc.wisc.edu/battalioncourses/naval
Rice, J.B. (1993). Transactional and transformational leadership: an analysis of male and female 
leadership styles in Delaware public schools. Abstract of EdD dissertation completed at Widener 
University, Pennsylvania. Retrieved August 3, 2006 from 
http://muse.widener.edu/~egr0001/Dissertations/RiceW.html  
Robbins, S.P., et al. (2009). Organisational behaviour: Global and Southern African Perspectives. 
Forest Drive, Pinelands, Cape Town: Pearson Education South African 
Rohber, R.P. (1984). Toward a Conception of Culture for Cross-Cultural Psychology. Journal of 
Cross-Cultural Psychology 15: 111-138, 
Sanders, C.P. (1934). From an unidentified fragment c. 1897. Collected Papers, vol. 2, para. 228, 
Harvard University Press (1934). 
Sanders, J.E., Hopkins, W.E. & Geroy, G.D. (3rd) (2003). From transactional to transcendental: 
toward an integrated theory of leadership. Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 
9(4), pp. 21-31. 
Sapir, E. (1921). Language: An introduction to the study of speech, p.7 
Sardan, J. (2004). Etat, bureaucratie et gouvernance en Afrique de lOuest francophone. Un 
diagnostic empirique, une perspective historique. Politique Africaine. 
Schein, E.H. (2004). Organisational culture and leadership, 3nd ed. (Jossey-Bass); 
Schuster, J.P. (1994). "Transforming Your Leadership Style." Association Management 46, no.1. 
Schwartz, S. (2006). A Theory of Cultural Value Orientations: Explication and Applications. 
Comparative Sociology, Volume 5, Issue 2, pages 137  182. 
Schwartz, S.H (2006a). Basic Human Values: Theory, Measurement, and Applications, Revue 
franaise de sociologie, 47(4) 249-288; 
Schwartz, S.H (2006a). Basic Human Values: Theory, Measurement, and Applications, Revue 
franaise de sociologie, 47(4) 249-288;  
http://muse.widener.edu/~egr0001/Dissertations/RiceW.html
Schweizer, T.S. and Wijnberg, N.M. (1999) Transferring reputation to the corporation in 
different cultures: Individuals, collectives, systems and the strategic management of corporate 
reputation, Corporate Reputation Review, 2(3), 249-266; 
Schweizer, T.S. and Wijnberg, N.M. (1999) Transferring reputation to the corporation in 
different cultures: Individuals, collectives, systems and the strategic management of corporate 
reputation, Corporate Reputation Review, 2(3), 249-266; 
Seny-Kan, K.A, Apista, S.M, Adeghite, E. (2015). African management: concept, content and 
usability", Society and Business Review, Vol. 10 Iss: 3, pp.258  279. 
Sheppard, P. (2002). Leading the turnaround: Lou Gerstner of IBM. Wharton Leadership Digest. 
Retrieved August 3, 2006, from http://leadership.wharton.upenn.edu/digest/02-03.shtml  
Shin, S.J. & Zhou, J. (2003). Transformational leadership, conservation, and creativity: evidence 
from Korea. Academy of Management Journal, 46(6), pp. 703-714. 
Silvia, P.T. & Duval, T.S. (2001). Objective self-awareness theory: Recent progress and enduring 
problems. Personality and social psychology Review, 5, 230 - 241 
Silvia, P.T. & Duval, T.S. (2001). Objective self-awareness theory: Recent progress and enduring 
problems. Personality and social psychology Review, 5, 230 - 241 
Silvia, P.T. & Duval, T.S. (2001). Objective self-awareness theory: Recent progress and enduring 
problems. Personality and social psychology Review, 5, 230 - 241 
Simic, I. (1998). Transformational leadership - the key to successful management of 
transformational organizational changes. Facta Universitas, 1(6), pp. 49-55.  
Slade, A. (2002). Keeping the baby in mind: A Critical Factor in Perinatal Mental Health. Yale 
Child Study Center New Haven, Connecticut 
Spreitzer, G.M., Perttula, K.H. & Xin, K. (2005). Traditionality matters: an examination of the 
effectiveness of transformational leadership in the United States and Taiwan. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 26, 205-227. 
Stephen, B. (1998). Establishing a System of Policies and Procedures. BookMasters, Inc 
http://leadership.wharton.upenn.edu/digest/02-03.shtml
Stewart, G. L. (2006). A meta-analytic review of relationships between team design features and 
team performance. Journal of Management, 32, 2955. 
Stroh, A. (2007). Crafting Political Institutions in Africa: Electoral Systems and Systems of 
Government in Rwanda and Zambia Compared in: VR Verfassung in Recht und bersee, 
Volume 40 (2007), Issue 4, page 449  470. 
Swartz, E & Rae, D. (1997) "Ubuntu - the spirit of African transformation management - a 
review", Leadership & Organization Development Journal, Vol. 18 Iss: 6, pp.290  294. 
Tangwa, G. (1998), Democracy and Development in Africa. Putting the Horse before the cart. 
Road companion to democracy and meritocracy. Bellington, WA; Kola Tree Press 
Thomas, D., and Bainbridge, W.L. (2002). Sharing the Glory. Leadership. Volume 31, Number 3, 
Pages 12-15. 
Tichy, N.M. & Devanna, M.A. (1986). The Transformational Leader. New York, NY: John Wiley. 
Triandis, H. C. (2001). Individualism-collectivism and personality. Journal of Personality, 69, 907 
Tripp, A.M. (2005). Empowering Women in the Great lakes region: Violence, Peace and 
Womens Leadership. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. 
Tucker, B. A., & Russell, R. F. (2004). The influence of the transformational leader. Journal of 
Leadership and Organizational Studies, 10(4), 103-111. 
Tuuli, M M. and Rowlinson, S (2010) Impact of leadership style and team context on 
psychological empowerment in construction project teams. In: Egbu, C. (Ed) Procs 26th Annual 
ARCOM Conference, 6-8 September 2010, Leeds, UK, Association of Researchers in Construction 
Management, 411-420. 
Van der Colff, L. (2003). Leadership lessons from the African tree. Management Decision, vol.41, 
no.3, pp.257-261. 
Velkley, R.L. (2002). Being after Rousseau: Philosophy and culture in question. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, Pp. 192. 
Verkerk, P. (2002). Fiedlers contingency model of leadership effectiveness: Background and 
recent developments. Department of Philosophy and Social Sciences. Eindhoven University of 
Technology 
Wang, J. (2008). A Cross-cultural Study of Daily Communication between Chinese and American 
- From the Perspective of High Context and Low Context. Asian social science. Vol. 4, No.10 
Weihrich, H. (1979). How to change a leadership pattern. Management Review, April: 26-28, 
68(4), 37-40 
Wells, J. E., and Welty P. (2010). Turnover Intentions: Do Leadership Behaviours and Satisfaction 
with Leader Matters? Team Performance Management, 17, no. 1/2 (2010): 23-40. 
Williams, M., (2005) Leadership for Leaders, London, Thorogood. 
Yates, M. (2002) Genghis Khan. LeaderValues. Retrieved August 3, 2006 from 
http://www.leader-values.com/historicalleaders/  
Yukl, G.A. (1989). Leadership in Organizations (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall 
http://www.leader-valies.com/historical
	OA Logo: 
	AUTHOR: RUGERINYANGE, N.
	TITLE: Traditional and hybrid leadership styles in Rwanda: examining the common leadership styles, influencing factors, and culture in post-genocide Rwanda.
	YEAR: 2016
	OpenAIR citation: RUGERINYANGE, N. 2016. Traditional and hybrid leadership styles in Rwanda: examining the common leadership styles, influencing factors, and culture in post-genocide Rwanda. Robert Gordon University, DBA thesis. Held on OpenAIR [online]. Available from: https://openair.rgu.ac.uk/
	Degree: Doctor of Business Administration, Aberdeen Business School, Department of Management
	License: BY-NC-ND 4.0
	License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0
	CC Logo: 
		2017-01-26T17:12:29+0000
	OpenAIR at RGU
