00001.jpg
Bofrs t \  y o t PoK:n
ana g e m m a e  a c ,e n c e _
Russia in Movement S. A.
The London School of Economics and Political Science
Russia in Movement:
Civil Society and the State in Putins Russia
Samuel A. Greene
A thesis submitted to the European Institute of the London 
School of Economics for the degree of Doctor of 
Philosophy, London, March 2010
Greene
UMI Number: U615977
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
Dissertation Publishing
UMI U615977
Published by ProQuest LLC 2014. Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition  ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against 
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
ProQuest LLC 
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346
mazes
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Declaration
I certify that the thesis I have presented for examination for the MPhil/PhD degree of 
the London School of Economics and Political Science is solely my own work other 
than where I have clearly indicated that it is the work of others (in which case the extent 
of any work carried out jointly by me and any other person is clearly identified in it).
The copyright of this thesis rests with the author. Quotation from it is permitted, 
provided that full acknowledgement is made. This thesis may not be reproduced 
without the prior written consent of the author.
I warrant that this authorization does not, to the best of my belief, infringe the rights of 
any third party.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Abstract
The weakness of civil society in post-Soviet Russia has been widely discussed and is 
generally attributed to combinations of historical and cultural factors and authoritarian 
repression. This thesis adopts a conceptualization of civil society, drawn in part from 
social movement theory, which emphasizes the nature of interaction between citizens 
and the state. A series of three case studies traces the genesis and development of civic 
organizations and protest movements in Russia, involving human, housing and property 
rights, in order to discern how Russian citizens perceive their relationship with the state 
and form (or do not form) strategies for collective action. In the first case, the NGO 
Public Verdict finds success in defending individual citizens from law enforcement 
abuses but is incapable of affecting systemic change. In the second case, local protests 
over housing-related issues evolve into sustained movements but are unable to coalesce 
in the face of a state that prefers ad hoc policymaking. And lastly, spontaneous protests 
over proposed limits on the import of used cars from Japan grow into one of Russias 
only sustained grass-roots social movements, capable of forcing the state into 
concessions and gaining a seat at the policy table. These studies are analyzed in the 
context of the political economy of Russia during the presidency of Vladimir Putin, 
during which the elite consolidated authoritarian rule while disengaging from the public 
and public policymaking. The difficulties Russians face in mobilizing, then, are seen as 
stemming from the privatization of power and the highly individualized nature of state- 
society relations. But when the state departs from its disengagement and acts in a way 
that allows Russian citizens to generate and maintain a perception of themselves as an 
aggrieved group, the latter prove capable of mounting and sustaining an organized 
response in defense of their rights and interests.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements 7
Chapter 1: The Puzzle of Russian Civil Society: An Introduction 9
What We Know about Russian Civil Society 13
The Morphology of Governance 18
The Place of Civil Society 18
Democracy & Authoritarianism 20
Civil Society in Movement 23
Approach to Research 27
Synopsis 32
Chapter 2: Perspectives on Civil Society 35
Introduction 35
Political Philosophy and the Concept of the Civil Society 37
The Philosophy o f Right, Democracy in America and the 43
Triumph of Empiricism
Marx, Weber and the Sociological Revolution 47
The Babelization of the Social Sciences 51
Social Capital, Structuration and New Thinking about 53
Institutions
The Prism of Transition 58
Civil Society and Social Movements 62
Conclusions 66
Chapter 3: The Resource Curse and Russias Potemkin Revolution 72
Introduction 72
The Club Good of Soviet Power 76
The Resource Curse in Russia 87
The Potemkin Revolution: Disengaged Authoritarianism in 91
Russia
Conclusions: Putins Russia 102
Chapter 4: Civil Society in Russia: What We Do and Do Not Know 107
Russian Civil Society in Laws and Numbers 109
Hypothesis 1: Culture & History 113
Hypothesis 2: Social Capital & Trust 116
Hypothesis 3: The Regime 120
An Agenda for Research 124
Chapter 5: Private Brutality and Public Verdicts: The Failure of Human 129
Rights in Russia
Introduction 129
The Beatings of Sergei Oleinik and Nikita Gladyshev 133
Pogroms in Sochi and Bezhetsk 138
Public Pressure: Injustice in the Media 141
Internal Pressure: Russias Criminal Justice System 147
The State-Society Relationship and the Meaning of Law in 149
Russia
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Conclusions 160
Chapter 6: Our Home is Russia: The Futility of Russias Housing- 163
Rights Movements
Introduction 163
The L 'gotniki: Setting the Stage 164
The Butovo Uprising: Anatomy of a Protest 166
Mobilization 168
The Broader Movement Environment 172
The State and the Movement 175
Conclusions 180
Chapter 7: Road Rage: Svoboda Vybora and the Automotive Rebellion 182
Theoretical Considerations 183
19 May: Genesis 186
Initial Intrusion and the Injustice Frame 186
Something from Nothing: the Germ of a Social 189
Movement
Choosing a Course of Action 192
The Authorities Reaction 194
Interim Conclusions 196
Svoboda Vybora: Development 196
New Challenges 196
Movement Identity 201
Patterns of State Reaction: Co-opt, Control, Concede 206
Consolidation: Whos in the Drivers Seat? 209
Crystallization of Conflict Lines 209
Alliances 212
Conclusions 217
Chapter 8: Context, Conclusions and Continuation: Power and 220
Opposition in Putins Russia
Appendix I: Methodology & Data Collection 243
Works Cited 244
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Table of Illustrations
Table 3.1 -  Size of the Central Committee (p. 79)
Table 3.2 -  Natural Resource Exports as a Percentage of Total Russian Merchandise 
Exports (p. 87)
Table 3.3 -  Percentage of GDP Spent on Public Health and Education in Post- 
Communist States (p. 95)
Table 3.4 -  Percentage of Tax Revenue from Individuals in Post-Communist States (p. 
Table 4.1 -  Total Number of Public Associations in Russia, 2000-2003 (p. 110)
Table 4.2 -  Total Number of Public Associations in Russia, 2004-2009 (p. 110)
Table 4.3 -  New Public Associations in Russia (p. I l l )
Table 4.4 -  Membership in Civil Society Organizations (p. 112)
Table 4.5 -  Sources of Influence on the Local Situation (p. 118)
Box 5.1 -  Oleinik Timeline (p. 134)
Table 5.1 -  Matrix of Cases (p. 150)
Table. 5.2 -  Victims of Crime: Which of the following has happened to you? (p. 152) 
Table. 5.3 -  What Sorts of Police Infractions do Citizens Face Most Often (p. 153) 
Table 7.1 -  Cars, Internet Access and Mobile Telephones in Russia (p. 191)
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Acknowledgements
This project has benefited from the support, guidance and insight of innumerable 
people, not all of whom I can name here. It goes without saying that I am forever 
indebted to the Russian citizens, activists, experts and well-wishers who informed this 
endeavor, including, but not limited to, all of those quoted in this thesis.
At the LSE, I would like to thank first and foremost Abby Innes, without whom this 
project would never have begun, but who was, unfortunately, unable to see it through to 
completion. Tremendous thanks go to Sarah Ashwin, who bravely took over from Abby 
as my supervisor and whose patient, tireless and skilled guidance shepherded me 
through a long and convoluted process. Likewise, Jennifer Jackson-Preeces last-minute 
addition to the team was invaluable in keeping the project on track. Terhi Rantanen and 
Chris Binns worked closely with this project in its early phases and provided the solid 
criticism that helped turn a nebulous idea into a doctoral thesis. And, of course, my 
colleagues at the School -  especially Natalia Leshchenko, Tome Sandevski and Stacy 
Closson, as well as the inhabitants of J14 -  offered the ideas, conversations and 
motivation that got me out of endless methodological, bibliographical and empirical 
labyrinths.
Elsewhere in the academic world, I have benefited immeasurably from the advice, 
criticism and friendship of numerous scholars, including Marat Shterin, Graeme 
Robertson, Inna Deviatko, Henry Hale, Tatyana Vorozheikina, Charles Kurzman, Ellen 
Mickiewicz, Judith Kelley, Floriana Fossato, Andrey Makarychev, Guillermo Trejo,
T.J. Shi, Bob Conrad, Mary McAuley, and Leah Gilbert. Special thanks go to my 
students in the Sociology Department of the Higher School of Economics in Moscow, 
whose open minds and fresh approaches challenged me to keep my own mind open and 
my approaches fresh. Early on in this project, I benefited tremendously from a 
dissertation development workshop at Harvard University, organized and funded by the 
U.S. Social Sciences Research Council; particular thanks go to the SSRC and to Cynthia 
Buckley and Tim Colton for their critiques and encouragement.
My fieldwork was made possible by two organizations that gave me a desk, a salary and 
the freedom to pursue my interests in Moscow. In the first instance, I must thank the 
Independent Media Program of the New Eurasia Foundation and my colleagues there,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
including Masha Eismont, Dima Sumin, Zhenya Antonov and Anna Averina, who 
tolerated me for an entire year. Even more patient have been my colleagues at the 
Carnegie Moscow Center, including Masha Lipman, Lilia Shevtsova, Nikolay Petrov, 
Audrey Ryabov, Alexei Malashenko and the three directors under whom I had the 
pleasure to serve, Andrew Kuchins, Rose Gottemoeller and Dmitri Trenin; tremendous 
thanks as well to Mary Frances Lindstrom and the Open Society Institute, who funded 
my position at Carnegie and thus made my fieldwork possible. I also benefited greatly 
from a six-month residency at Duke University, which took me in while my daughter 
was bom; special thanks go to Peter Lange, Francis Lethem and Natalia Mirovitskaya. 
In Russia, numerous activists and experts generously gave of their time and insight, 
including Lyudmila Alexeeva, Elena Kovalevskaya, Vyacheslav Bakhmin, Lyubov 
Alenicheva, Natalia Taubina, Oleg Novikov, Yury Samodurov and the staff of the 
Sakharov Foundation. In addition, I owe a debt of gratitude to the librarians at the 
British Library of Political and Economic Sciences at the LSE, the Perkins and Bostock 
Libraries at Duke and the Davis Library at the University of North Carolina. If I have 
gotten anything right in this project, it is because of the help of these and other 
wonderful people; if I have gotten anything wrong, it is entirely my own fault.
My enduring appreciation goes to the European Institute of the London School of 
Economics and Political Science, not only for admitting me and giving me both the 
freedom and the structure to pursue this project, but also for three departmental 
studentships, without whose financial support this project would have been untenable.
Finally, I owe the deepest gratitude to my wife, Anya, for keeping me grounded, and to 
our daughter, Elyana, for keeping me inspired.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Chapter 1 
The Puzzle of Russian Civil Society; An Introduction
On Saturday, July 15, 2006, as the leaders of the Group of Eight industrialized 
democracies gathered in St. Petersburg for their annual summit, attended by aides and 
throngs of journalists, the city itself was disturbingly quiet. Along the citys elegant 
main avenue, Nevsky Prospekt, squadrons of riot police in full battle gear stood on 
every second street comer. Police busses and armored personnel carriers idled on the 
side streets. There was not a hint of the anti-globalization riots that had plagued other 
cities unlucky enough to host G8 summits, but the police were ready nonetheless.
That same morning, three metro stops to the north of Nevsky Prospekt, Petersburgers 
lazily spilled out of the underground onto Krestovsky Island, one of the citys most 
beloved parks, occupying almost an entire island in the delta where the Neva River 
flows into the Gulf of Finland. Jugglers, clowns and balloon-twisters amused children, a 
small marching band played Strauss, teenagers lounged on benches or skated down the 
alleyways, and everyone went about the business of enjoying St. Petersburgs short but 
glorious summer.
Some of those leaving the metro, however, walked straight through the park, the entire 
length of the island, until they reached the citys old football stadium at the far end.
They made their way into a small tent, received a green nametag, and filed through a 
metal detector to get into the stadium complex. There, they joined several hundred 
protestors -  almost all Russian -  who had gathered to show the world that they were not 
part of the show the Kremlin was putting on for the G8. They wanted nothing to do with 
a regime that fixed elections, shuttered independent media outlets, jailed political 
opponents and continued to call itself a democracy. The Russia that President Vladimir 
Putin was showing his colleagues from the vantage of a lavishly restored tsarist palace 
was not their Russia. Theirs was an Other Russia, a concept bom only days earlier at a 
meeting in an equally lavish Moscow hotel, bringing together opposition leaders from 
across the political spectrum.
Of those who had been present in Moscow, only one -  the long-time human rights 
activist Lev Ponomarev -  came to St. Petersburg. Many of the activists from around the 
country who had planned to come never made it, having been pulled from planes, trains
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
and busses along the way. Some had their internal passports confiscated. Others were 
barricaded in their apartments. Those who did make it to the stadium found themselves 
surrounded by the Gulf of Finland on three sides and a long, high fence manned by riot 
police on the other, with only one gate. The city authorities had banned a planned march 
from the stadium through the city to the Cruiser Aurora, the ship that had launched the 
1917 Revolution when it fired on the Winter Palace. Small groups of participants 
attempted to stage running protests in the city center but were followed by the police as 
they left the stadium and detained as soon as they emerged from the metro anywhere 
near Nevsky Prospekt. They would not be a part of the Kremlins show, but the Kremlin 
ensured there would be no other.
As the day wore on, the organizers in the stadium gathered the remaining participants to 
discuss what to do. A few television cameras -  all of them foreign -  were present and 
ready to report on whatever the protestors did, if only they could decide on a plan of 
action. Holding an unsanctioned march was clearly impossible; the police would never 
let them out of the stadium. Eventually, two proposals were put up for a vote. The first 
was to march in circles around the stadium track ten times, in a symbolic show of 
futility. The second was to stage a sit-in at the gates of the stadium, in the hopes that the 
image of sitting protestors behind the iron bars of the fence and surrounded by police 
would gamer at least some publicity. In the end, the protestors selected the second 
option, climbed out of the stadium and made their way to the fence. There, they sat 
down, placards in hand, and began shouting Rights arent given, rights are taken and 
We need another Russia 1
Bit by bit, the crowd began to dissipate, protestors filing back through the metal 
detector, pulling off their green nametags and heading back through the park to the 
metro. Many of those who forgot to remove the nametags were detained when they 
reemerged elsewhere in the city, just as a precaution. Pictures of the protest were 
broadcast in Germany, France and Italy. In Russia, however, no one noticed. In the park 
on Krestovsky Island, where the band was still playing Strauss when the last protesters 
left, a boy asked his father why there were so many police down by the stadium.
1 In Russian, Prava ne daiut, prava berut  and 'Nam nuzhna drugaia R o ss iia respectively.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Must be a football game, the father answered. The police have to keep an eye on the 
hooligans.
The weakness of Russian civil society is well established and widely accepted.
Russians, on the whole, do not organize well and are difficult to mobilize, and they do 
not tend to join organizations or participate in public protests (see, for example: Fish 
1995 ; Domrin 2003 ; McFaul and Treyger 2004). Understanding why something does 
not occur, however, is perhaps the most difficult task in the social sciences. Some 
attempts have been made to explain the void of civic mobilization in Russia, 
predominantly by pointing either to macro-level social phenomena (low levels of trust 
and social capital, for example) or macro-level political phenomena (the resource curse 
or repression). But for every rule there is an exception, and so it is for all of the blanket 
explanations for the failure of civil society in Russia: along the margins, in unexpected 
comers and pockets of society, there is activism and engagement, and it is often 
sustained and sometimes fruitful. These exceptions are the focus of this thesis, which 
asks whether the rare instances in which Russian civil society does succeed can shed 
some light on the question of why, in the vast majority of cases, it does not.
Russia today, by most accounts, is in the process of institutionalizing the middle-ground 
between democratic and authoritarian governance. In that respect, Russia resembles 
what Marina Ottaway (2003) termed a semi-authoritarian regime. There is a large 
degree of individual freedom in Russia, as well as significant freedom of speech, 
association and assembly -  all of which are typically cited as the prerequisites of a 
democratic civil society. There is also significant funding available for a large number 
of initiatives, likewise a widely recognized pillar of organized civil activity. However, 
whereas Soviet civil society organizations relied on networks of dedicated volunteers, 
who were able to exert pin-pointed pressure on the government and frequently achieved 
their goals (whether freedom of emigration, tighter ecological controls or the 
clandestine distribution of articles), civil society in contemporary Russia broadly fails to 
match up in all of these categories. Thus, if we judge by the ability to mobilize public 
opinion and support and achieve defined goals (other than the attraction of grant 
money), civil society in Russia today is in some ways less effective at achieving its aims
2 The foregoing narrative was compiled from firsthand observation.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
than it was during the Soviet Union, when none of the above-mentioned freedoms 
existed. That, surely, appears to be a paradox.
From the perspective of the social scientist, this paradox is exacerbated by the lack of 
useful theory. The broadest studies of democracy, in order to achieve generalized 
relevance, take their definitions and categorizations to a level of abstraction that is 
scarcely useful to someone trying to understand why a particular country falters. Given 
its narrower focus and emphasis on dynamic processes, the specific study of democratic 
transition is often more useful. Transitology, however, also has its limits, a common 
criticism being that it may be too political a framework, in the sense that it ignores 
how underlying economic and social structures may persist despite democratic change 
and thus subvert political outcomes (Kubicek 2000). And yet even the most recent 
political economy studies of democratization have been unable to identify causal 
variables that go beyond the traditional triumvirate of economic modernization, political 
history and culture/religion, none of which are particularly helpful in applied analysis of 
country cases or small-N comparisons (Borooah and Paldam 2007).
The even narrower field of post-communist studies has yielded some valuable insights, 
particularly regarding the development of formal institutions, including political parties 
and infrastructure underpinning privatized economies. It is argued with increasing force 
and frequency that Russian citizens suffer from a post-communist syndrome, of which 
all of the above-mentioned pathologies are common symptoms. Public initiative of the 
kind generally associated with civil society is seen to be considerably lower in the 
former Soviet Union and Central and Eastern Europe than in other regions of the world 
(see, most prominently: Howard 2003). More broadly put, the entire post-communist 
space -  even in those countries that have created the most open political systems -  
appears to suffer from a deficit of democratic participation (see, for example: Anderson 
Jr., Fish et al. 2001 ; Grzymala-Busse and Luong 2002 ; Innes 2002). The most common 
explanation put forward for this generally centers on the problem of trust: Russians and 
other post-communist denizens are inclined to distrust both their neighbors and 
themselves (Rose 1994 ; Sztompka 1998 ; Lovell 2001).
But the identification of post-communist commonalities also has the unfortunate effect 
of obscuring important differences. And nowhere has this been more the case than in the 
study of civil society, where supposedly low levels of trust and social capital are cited
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
as a blanket explanation for the region-wide weakness of civic initiative (Howard 2003). 
The issue of trust notwithstanding, there is significant variation in the level and nature 
of civil-societal activity both within countries and from one post-communist country to 
another that cannot be easily accounted for by discrepancies in the degree of trust.
While the bulk of the literature on civil society tends to focus on broad, society-based 
explanations such as trust, some of the literature on transition -  both within and without 
the transitology tradition -  has begun to focus more attention on the behavior of elites as 
the source of civic weakness and atomization, with particular reference to Russia. Thus, 
both McFaul and Treyger (2004) and Kitschelt and Smyth (2002)3 suggest that the 
withdrawn and self-centered nature of elite competition in many post-communist 
countries, driven by the peculiarities of their political economies, effectively pulls the 
rug out from under potential civic initiatives. Indeed, while contemporary civil society 
theory tends to look in other directions, there is significant support for such 
considerations in social movement theory, where Tarrow places the behavior of elites as 
a central element in forming the opportunity structure of potential civic initiative 
(Tarrow 1998). What is missing from these arguments, however, is a detailed study of 
the specific processes and mechanisms that link one to the other.4
What We Know about Russian Civil Society
Beyond the general categorizations mentioned above of Russian civil society as weak, 
what do we really know about the processes that weaken it? By now, most analysts have 
abandoned notions that the political changes occurring since 1991 constituted a 
democratizing revolution. The views on why democratization failed are varied, and 
while they are dealt with more fully in chapter three, they can be generally summed up 
as follows. In one camp, Peter Reddaway and Dmitri Glinski, joined by Marshall 
Goldman, blame undemocratic elites for capturing and perverting a process of reform, 
subjugating political democratization to economic liberalization (Reddaway and Glinski 
2001 ; Goldman 2003a). To this, others add structural elements, such as the resource 
curse of oil, gas and mineral wealth, which stymied true economic liberalization and 
discouraged the development of parliamentary democracy (Fish 2005). Still others
3 While Kitschelt and Smyths argument in this case is specifically about political parties, there is nothing 
to suggest that their logic would not apply equally to non-party and civic actors as well.
4 Incidentally, more has been done in this area in Latin America. See, for example: Brian Wampler, and 
Leonardo Avritzer. Participatory Publics: Civil Society and New Institutions in Democratic Brazil. 
Comparative Politics 36, no. 3 (2004): 291-312.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
blame Russias democrats themselves, for being insufficiently determined, organized 
and unified (Garcelon 2005).
All regimes need a power base, which is simultaneously the source of its support, the 
object of its control and the group with which it will most intensely interact. In a Soviet 
Communist regime, although the classical conception has been that the regimes power 
base was the Party, the desire of the regime to maintain comprehensive control over all 
aspects of economic, political and social life means effectively that its power base was 
the entire population. Support for the regime did not have to be active; the way things 
were arranged, the mundane acts of participation in every-day life were all that was 
required. In the words of Vaclav Havel, the Soviet state  .. .occupies and swallows 
everyone, so that all should become integrated within it, at least through their silence 
(Havel 1988 390). As the Kadarists said in Hungary, i f  you re not against us, you re 
with us. This engagement with the whole of the population -  which is the hallmark of 
any truly totalitarian regime -  leaves open the possibility that the population at large can 
become a source of opposition, embodied in civil society; this is, arguably, what 
occurred in 1989 throughout much of Central and Eastern Europe.
In todays Russia, true political competition exists, but it is closed, not so much in the 
sense of barriers to entry (though these exist), as in the sense that the state organizes 
politics in such a way as to prevent competitors from creating a power base that draws 
support from outside the limited sphere o f administrative resources. Thus, in a limited 
authoritarian regime like post-Soviet Russia the regimes power base is considerably 
narrower than it was during the Soviet period. It derives its support not from the broad 
participation of the population in a highly centralized economic system, but from the 
subordination (through regulatory, forceful or clientelistic relations) of crucial groups, 
such as the oligarchy, regional strongmen or the security establishment. The population 
remains a resource, but one upon which the state depends only indirectly, in so far as 
the oligarchy, for example, may depend on it for labor. One result is a dispersal of the 
potential targets of blame and protest for mass dissatisfaction. In the Russian context, 
this arrangement is particularly effective at insulating elites from the public, and thus 
creating room for state autonomy, because the primary resources on which the oligarchy 
depends are natural, and thus even they depend on the population only indirectly. Civil 
society, then, finds itself doubly removed from access to power. A fundamental result of 
this arrangement is that the contemporary Russian state does not engage society at large.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Indeed, it actively works to exclude the public from the processes of government, not so 
much in order to control the public as to prevent uncontrollable elements -  such as a 
mass-based movement -  from entering the political arena. Thus, if  we conceive of civil 
society as a mediator between state and individual, the almost total disregard of one for 
the other might seem to obviate this function.
The result has been the dismantling of layers upon layers of institutions governing much 
of social life in Russia, including the way people work, study, communicate, participate 
in political and economic life, procreate and die. This has been replaced primarily by 
pervasive uncertainty -  uncertainty as to the future of the country, as to how much a 
ruble will be worth tomorrow, as to whether or not the rights I had yesterday will be 
respected today. As constantly changing rules of the game prevent the 
institutionalization of the formal institutions that constitute the state, so do the 
intermediary institutions fall away. There has been a general devolution -  what Michael 
Burawoy, Pavel Krotov and Tatyana Lytkina call involution -  of the center of life 
activity from collective institutions to the family. As Burawoy et al write, ...as 
industry and agriculture have disintegrated, the fulcrum of production and redistribution 
has moved from factory to household... (Burawoy, Krotov et al. 2000 43). They point 
to two involuted strategies, one defensive and the other entrepreneurial; in either case, 
however, the strategy is individualistic and highly suspicious of the collective.
This is bome out, meanwhile, by what we know about various sectors of civil society. 
The environmental movement, for example, is dominated by particularistic interests. 
As a whole, green groups fail to serve as state-society intermediaries in the classic 
civil-society sense. As Laura Henry writes: Instead, [their] activities represent efforts 
to provide services related to environmental protection or recreation that were once the 
responsibility of the state. Grassroots groups in particular have leapt in to fill the loss of 
recreation opportunities for children and public maintenance of city parks... (Henry 
2006 223). Likewise, migrants evident preference for informal networks instead of 
formal organizations suggests a similar particularistic logic:
.. .many migrants choose not to engage with nongovernmental organizations at the 
site of settlement. This choice may well be rooted in a mistrust of formal 
organization inherited from the Soviet period. However, the choice is also a 
positive one and a rational one, made in favor of a better option at the time. The 
trust and support offered by more informal networks of family and friends points to 
a thriving, responsible, and moral community that provides very real assistance to 
its members, rather than to isolated, atomized individuals and households, which 
would more likely impede the building of civil society (Flynn 2006 260).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Stephen Wegren (2003) suggests that this increase in self-reliance, rather than 
contributing to the sort of atomization that is seen as the antithesis of civil society, 
creates new assets for the development of civil society. He writes:
.. .increased independence by rural households limits future state incursions against 
individuals rights. For example, expanded land holdings, land lease relations, and 
the utilization of market-based channels o f food trade create significant political, 
economic, legal and psychological barriers that the political leadership most likely 
would be reluctant to breach (Wegren 2003 24).
Likewise, James Gibson follows a similar notion to dispute the widespread argument 
that Russians suffer from a deficit of trust and are atomized:
Russian social networks may well have emerged primarily as a response to the 
repressive state. Unable to organize publicly, Russians have substituted private 
social networks for formal organizations. But Russians are not atomized, and as a 
consequence, Russian social networks have a variety of characteristics that may 
allow them to serve as important building blocks for the development of a vibrant 
civil society. In addition to carrying considerable political content, these networks 
are characterized by a relatively high degree of trust. Because the networks are not 
closed (strong), they link Russians together to an extent not often recognized by 
most analysts (Gibson 2001 60).
It would be easy to accept this as the end of the story -  the state divorces itself from the 
public, the public say good riddance, and the two go their separate ways -  were it not 
for the fact that states and societies simply cannot go their separate ways. They are 
bound to share a common territory and common resources, and while they may do their 
best not to notice each other, they will inevitably come into contact and, thus, conflict.
If we accept that broad-spectrum political engagement and civic activism is effectively 
suppressed by the states disengagement from society, then we should be particularly 
interested in the content and meaning of the exceptions, the points at which conflict 
occurs and engagement ensues.
Two of the most remarkable recent works on Russian politics and society -  Andrew 
Wilsons Virtual Politics (2005) and Ellen Mickiewiczs Television, Power, and the 
Public in Russia (2008) -  frame this situation quite clearly. Wilson describes the 
Russian regime an edifice kept standing... [by].. .four key conditions...: a powerful but 
amoral elite; a passive electorate; a culture of information control; and the lack of an 
external counterpoint, i.e., foreign intervention (2005 43). In further chapters we will 
examine how this is achieved; suffice it for now to confirm that it is achieved, though 
with Wilsons own caveat: The post-Soviet states are not totalitarian. Other versions of 
reality creep in at the margins. The main priority of the powers-that-be is that their 
version of reality should predominate -  they know that it can never exclusively
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
But more crudely, they are happy simply to get away with it; not every loose end needs 
to be tied up (2005 45).
Loose ends do accumulate, however, and therein lies the potential for the sorts of cases 
this thesis examines. In her study of Russians reception of television news, Mickiewicz 
finds not only that viewers are deeply dissatisfied with what they receive, but that the 
ruling elite should be equally dissatisfied with the work of its media proxies.
Particularly when it comes to political news and election coverage, she writes,  .. .the 
Kremlins appropriation and suppression of televised diversity has not resulted in the 
expected acceptance of the broadcasters desired frame. The election story has become 
an expensive article of faith for its producers; for viewers, it is a confusing phenomenon 
that occurs with considerable regularity (since such stories form a single genre) and 
exists outside their own lives -  lives from which under other circumstances they derive 
the cognitive shortcuts so necessary for processing information (2008 87-88).
The issue Mickiewicz identified is not one of cognitive dissonance; Russians are 
perfectly able to interpret political information. The problem is that coverage of 
elections is unsatisfactory and off-putting because elections are deeply irrelevant to 
Russian citizens. They very clearly understand all of the virtuality of politics Wilson 
describes. What they do not understand is why so many in the West expect them to take 
active part in politics that are so obviously and thoroughly virtual. Faced with a 
disengaged elite, civic disengagement is a rational response. But we should understand 
that disengagement to be circumstantial and contingent, rather than cultural and 
absolute. Exceptions can and do occur, presenting themselves as instances in which 
citizenship and participation take on real content and meaning. It is important that we 
understand why.
In seeking to determine why Russian workers put up with privations, Sarah Ashwin 
argues that the key to understanding Russians endless patience is in  .. .linking the 
political behaviour of workers to the form and content of their lives; in particular,
 .. .workers reaction to the pressures of reform has exhibited both an attachment to the 
collective institutions of the past, and the active development of individual survival 
strategies (Ashwin 1998 195). Given that the collective institutions have been deprived 
of any useful function, the individual strategies naturally gain in preeminence. If we
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
look into the example of the Soldiers Mothers committees, one of Russias strongest 
grassroots movements (see, for example: Sundstrom 2006b), we might thus hypothesize 
that collective action reemerges in those instances, when individual strategies can be 
channeled through involved groups such as traditional familial and gender networks 
into effective modes of interaction with the state. To find these instances, though, it is 
not simply enough to run down the list of standard causes and look for the relevant 
NGOs. This is a highly specific process, contingent, as Ashwin writes, on the content 
of peoples lives. It requires a careful and unprejudiced approach.
The Morphology of Governance
The Place o f Civil Society
In their seminal text on democratization, Juan Linz and Alfred Stepan identified five 
arenas of a consolidated democracy: (1) civil society (defined as that arena of the 
polity where self-organizing groups, movements, and individuals, relatively 
autonomous from the state, attempt to articulate values ... and advance their interests); 
(2) political society (defined as that arena in which the polity specifically arranges 
itself to contest the legitimate right to exercise control over public power and the state 
apparatus); (3) rule of law; (4) a usable state bureaucracy; and (5) a stable economic 
structure (Linz and Stepan 1996 7). Bucking the dominant tendency to place civil and 
political society in inherent opposition to one another, Linz and Stepan wrote: For 
modem democratic theory, especially for questions about how to consolidate 
democracy, it is important to stress not only the distinctiveness of civil society and 
political society, but also their complementarity. This complementarity is not always 
recognized (Linz and Stepan 1996 7-8, italics in the original).
Some points of view, largely hinging on differences of definition, would no doubt 
dispute this assertion. I do not intend, however, to spend time debating definitions -  
particularly the always problematic definition of civil society -  here; I will address 
definitional issues in full detail in Chapter 2. It will suffice for now to note that most 
prominent definitions of civil society include at least some reference to the political 
(see, for example: Gellner 1994 ; Ehrenberg 1999 ; Kaldor 2003). Indeed, this tradition 
has strong historical roots. Locke, Rousseau and the philosophers of the Scottish 
Enlightenment all emphasized the role played by civil society in maintaining the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
subjugation of the power of the state to the democratic sovereignty of the public (Locke 
[1681] 1993 ; Rousseau [1762] 1968 ; Ferguson [1767] 1966 ; Hume [1772] 1994b).
Further developments in political philosophy would more clearly elucidate the location 
and role of civil society. Hegel famously defined civil society as the realm of 
difference, intermediate between the family and the state (Hegel [1820] 1896 185). In 
this view, civil society consists primarily of the organization of individual wants and 
their satisfaction into a corporatized economy, the protection of property by the 
administration of justice, and provision against possible mischances, and care for the 
particular interest as a common interest... (Hegel [1820] 1896 192). Tocqueville 
([1835] 1994) and Mill ([1848] 1970), meanwhile, both wrote that civil society is 
strongest when the public is included in the political process through open institutions.
The development of Marxist thought (Fromm 1963 ; Bobbio 1988 ; Marx [1844] 1970) 
and the rise of political sociology (Moore Jr. 1967 ; Duverger 1972 ; Giddens 1984 ; 
Polanyi [1944] 2001) together reinforced the notion that civil society reflects the 
surrounding institutions in a given state -  both the deep, historically informed 
institutions of social relations, and the surface institutions of political and economic life. 
Indeed, if civil societys role is to serve as an intermediary between the state and 
society, it seems only logical that it would take on the contours of its two interlocutors, 
much as molten metal poured into a mould.
The implication that civil society is contingent at least in part on political institutions, 
while unpopular with some normative theorists, is not overly controversial. However, 
the question remains of how that contingency operates. The immediate suggestion from 
historical political philosophy is that political openness is key; indeed, civil society is 
clearly stronger in democratic states than in totalitarian ones. This, too, seems logical: 
for civil society to mediate a conversation between two parties, both parties have to be 
interested in talking; if the state balks, civil society is left with not much to do (except 
start a revolution, which calls into question the designation civil) and could be 
expected to wither away.
Russia in Movement 
Democracy & Authoritarianism
S. A. Greene
The necessity of studying authoritarianism alongside democracy came into sharp focus 
as what Michael McFaul called the fourth wave of transition wore on: if the third 
wave had been a story of democratization, then the fourth was more ambiguous, as 
former members of the Soviet bloc embarked on processes of political, economic and 
social transformation with highly uncertain outcomes. This was a disheartening 
prospect, both for those who believe in democracy, and for those who study it. It was 
the third wave, after all, that had yielded modernization theory, as well ideas on elite 
pacts, constitutionalism and other institutional aspects that seemed to play predictable 
and reliable roles in the development of democracy. But unlike in the Third Wave of 
democratization, in which precarious balances of power encouraged democratic 
competition, democracy in post-communism emerged only in those cases when 
ideologically committed democrats enjoyed sufficient political hegemony to impose 
their favored system of governance (McFaul 2002). Where dominant elites had other 
ideas, obviously, they took their countries in other directions.
At the same time this was happening, the geopolitical recognition that democracy had 
become the only game in town meant that even dictators began holding elections, 
revising constitutions and ridding themselves of the formal institutions of autocracy that 
could make them seem less than honorable on the international scene. In theorizing 
semi-authoritarianism, Marina Ottaway (2003) describes regimes that combine formal 
democratic institutions -  many of which to a great degree outwardly resemble those 
described by Linz & Stepan -  but that nonetheless remain essentially authoritarian. To 
do this, she writes, they rely on four key deficiencies: 1) mechanisms that effectively 
prevent the transfer of power through elections; 2) non-institutional power structures; 
3) the lack of positive synergy between political and economic reform; and 4) 
repression of politically oriented civil society.
Similarly, in theorizing defective democracies, Wolfgang Merkel begins with the 
concept of embedded democracies, which he sees as grounded in five interdependent 
partial regimes that in some aspects resemble Linz & Stepans five arenas: [the] 
electoral regime, political rights, civil rights, horizontal accountability, [and] effective 
power to govern (Merkel 2004 36). He writes: Defective democracies are by no 
means necessarily transitional regimes. They are able to form stable links to their
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
environment and are seen by considerable parts of the elites and the population as 
adequate solutions to the extreme accumulation of problems in post-autocratic 
democracies (Merkel 2004 55).
These outwardly stable, seemingly sustainable regimes -  whether referred to as semi
authoritarian, defectively democratic or by any number of other adjectival 
democracies -  have been able to develop systems that allow them to govern with little 
or no regard for the consent of the governed; this is the outcome of the configurations 
that Ottaway and Merkel described. These are most often painted as the choices of 
elites, who are assumed to desire maximum autonomy and to have a penchant for rent- 
seeking, unless, perhaps, they are ideologically committed to more open rule, or bound 
by conditionality such as that imposed by the European Union. Often, but not always, 
this system is supported by the presence of abundant natural resources, as the so-called 
resource curse discourages elites from allowing competition and allows them to buy 
their way out of accountability (Ross 1999 ; Greene 2005 ; Herb 2005).
And yet, occasionally, societies appear to be able to break through. A series o f colored 
revolutions -  starting in Serbia, then in Georgia and Ukraine -  saw publics rise up to 
protest rigged elections, removing one set of political leaders and installing others 
through extra-constitutional but peaceful means. If the regimes in Belgrade, Tbilisi and 
Kiev had developed the equilibrium needed to sustain non-democratic rule over more 
than a decade, why did they so suddenly become so fragile?
Looking at the regimes themselves, Henry Hale categorized them as patronal 
presidencies, in which extremely powerful executives maintain control by 
simultaneously monopolizing and reinforcing the rent-seeking abilities of the elite (Hale 
2006). The competing necessities in these semi-authoritarian regimes of maintaining 
outward democratic legitimacy and the security of the elite means that, at certain points 
in the political cycle, they are subject to catastrophic uncertainty, creating opportunities 
that were capitalized on in the colored revolutions, Hale argues.
In a somewhat wider-ranging analysis, Michael McFaul identifies seven factors that 
underpinned the success of the anti-authoritarian opposition movements in Serbia, 
Georgia and Ukraine, including 1) a semi-autocratic rather than autocratic regime; 2) 
an unpopular incumbent; 3) a united and organized opposition; 4) an ability to drive
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
home the point that voting results were falsified; 5) enough independent media to 
inform citizens about the falsified vote; 6) a political opposition capable of mobilizing 
tens of thousands or more demonstrators to protest electoral fraud; and 7) divisions 
among the regimes coercive forces (McFaul 2005 7).
Neither of these explanations includes any real reference to democracy or 
democratization. Rather, they view the colored revolutions -  and in this are followed 
by the bulk of the literature -  as having been (more or less unique) political 
opportunities that allowed for an opening in the system of elite competition. There is 
nothing inevitably democratic about a change in rulers, nor does the ability of an 
opposition candidate to win a presidential election guarantee that all or even any future 
elections will be free and fair. Indeed, if we focus on the question of why these regimes 
were vulnerable, then democracy seems to have very little to do with the answer.
However, if we approach the question from a point of view that sees civil society as an 
integral part of any democratic system, then a different question arises: why were 
publics in Serbia, Georgia and Ukraine moved to defend their political rights in ways 
that citizens of other countries -  Russia for example -  are not? Russians, by all 
accounts, are under no illusions that their elections are free and fair, and while they 
profess support for their current president, they are manifestly unhappy with many of 
the policies that the regime pursues.
My suggestion stems from the supposition that citizens form their relationships to 
political regimes based not on formal institutional arrangements, but on the real 
products that these regimes deliver. In this view, normative expectations that elections 
should not be stolen are of little value. Rather, rights will be demanded and defended 
when they are perceived as useful, when the time and resources expended in the context 
of protest action or a social movement can be expected to bring commensurate 
dividends. This is, moreover, more than a problem of collective action or social capital: 
it gets to the very core of the nature of a political regime, a reality, I contend, that 
citizens feel and understand very well.
Russia in Movement
Civil Society in Movement
S. A. Greene
Civil society, in theory, exists at the nexus between the state and society, but the civil 
society literature finds the link between civil society and politics to be particularly 
problematic. Civil society, it is frequently argued, must be inherently apolitical, so as to 
be differentiated from political society (much in the same way that it is not profit 
oriented, so as to be differentiated from economic society). This approach has led to two 
dominant trends in the civil society literature -  one dealing with NGOs and the 
formalized third sector, the other dealing with less formal concepts of social capital -  
both of which tend to eschew politics.
Unlike more normatively guided civil society theorists, social movement theorists have 
generally recognized the importance of the political context. As Sidney Tarrow writes:
Whatever the source of contentious claims, it is political opportunities and 
constraints that translate them into action. They produce social movements by 
accessing known and flexible repertoires of contention; by developing collective 
action frames and collective identities; and by building mobilizing structures 
around social networks and organizations (Tarrow 1998 141).
Likewise, Dietrich Reuschemeyer, Evelyne Huber Stephens and John Stephens write:
.. .the state has many ways of shaping the development of civil society. It can ease 
or obstruct the organization of different class interests; it can empower or 
marginalize existing organizations; it may succeed in co-optation and, in the 
extreme, use whole organizational networks as conduits o f hegemonic influence.
The complex interdependence of state and civil society creates a wide variety of 
possible relations between the state and different social classes and, consequently, 
of conditions conducive or hostile to democracy (Rueschemeyer, Stephens et al.
1992 67).
Broadening out from social movement theory to civil society and reflecting back on 
social capital, Helmut Anheier and Jeremy Kendall start from Keanes view of civil 
society as permanently in tension with each other and with the state (Keane 1988 6), 
writing:
This tension-ridden and conflictual associational infrastructure creates 
opportunities and mechanisms for the generation of trust among citizens as either 
individuals or by virtue of their membership in organizations. These opportunities 
in the form of social inclusion and participation in extra-familial networks, in turn, 
create social capital, which becomes a major factor in social mobility at the 
individual level and for economic advancement of entire population segments 
more generally. Such opportunities may lead to the creation and maintenance of 
trust under two circumstances: first, if forms of social inclusion, participation and 
capital formation enforce beliefs in the basic legitimacy of the social order and the 
political system as rightful expressions of fundamental values; and second, if they 
strengthen confidence in the operation of society as [a] reliable and predictable 
system. Confidence can refer to either equity or efficiency considerations. The 
central point is that the relationship between trust and social capital is highly 
conditional, i.e., dependent on the structure of civil society and the legitimacy of 
the political system, and indirect, i.e., mediated through processes like social 
inclusion and participation (Anheier and Kendall 2000 15).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
This, then, places significant emphasis on the political regime, its ability to generate 
legitimacy, and the ways in which it manages power. If we define a regime as the basic 
pattern by which government decision-making power is organized, exercised, and 
transferred in a society (Dogan and Higley 1998 20), and if we take this pattern in the 
sense of a socially constructed institution, then the importance of how elites behave is 
clear. This is all the more true in transition, when regimes may be unconsolidated and 
the room for maneuver open to elites greater. Thus, this project operates with a model of 
civil society in which a crucial role is seen to be played by the political elite, by virtue 
of their nearly exclusive ability to determine the extent and character of the states 
interaction with society. That said, this is not a project about states and regimes. Rather, 
it centers on civil society, asking what the requirements are for its emergence and 
consolidation.
This approach, tying up civil society with the behavior of the political elite, takes direct 
inspiration from the literature on social movements. Social movements are self- 
referential, reflexive processes, in which actions affect other actions: actions are not 
just isolated, independent responses to external economic or political conditions -  
rather, one action changes the likelihood of subsequent actions (Oliver and Myers 2003 
1). Thus, while an actor-centered view sees social movements as an iterative process of 
interaction between challengers and the state, it may also be useful to conceive of a 
social movement as a distribution of events across a population of actors. Social 
movements rise when the overall frequency of protest events rises in a population, they 
become violent when the ratio of violent events to non-violent events rises, and so forth.
... The term event here is used very generally, so that adopting a belief or writing a 
document may be thought of as events, as can resource flows from one group to 
another (Oliver and Myers 2003 3). Two aspects of this point of view are particularly 
useful in the present investigation. First, it further frees us from the need to be too 
closely tied to organizations, allowing us to see movements more clearly in various 
stages of their development. And second, it allows us to see framing events as an 
integral part of social movements, on a par with a protest or a negotiation, rather than as 
an ephemeral artifact of social psychology.
Social movement theory and the sociological study of protest are particularly well 
suited to the task of this thesis, because, by investigating opposition in Russia, we are
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
interested in exceptions to rules. Charles Kurzman writes: The more unexpected the 
event, the greater the effort needed to make sense of it. Protest movements pose 
particular difficulties because they intentionally challenge the expectations of routine 
social behavior. Predicting these movements retroactively is thus one of the greatest 
quests in social science: to discover the regularities underlying irregularitythe rules 
underlying behavior that flouts the rules (Kurzman 2004 340).
Thus, to recap the theory briefly, we begin from the position that, in the study of civil 
society, it is crucial not to confuse the means with the ends. The ends of civil society are 
not achieved in the simple presence of the means; the existence of NGOs and the like 
may be a necessary condition for civil society (though this is highly debatable), but it is 
clearly not sufficient. Rather, the 'public good' at the heart of the concept of civil society 
is generated by an iterative process of action and interaction between the state (as 
represented by the ruling elite and/or more consolidated institutions of power) and 
society (as represented by civic initiatives). The process begins with the nature of the 
state's intervention in the sphere of private interests. Following social movement theory, 
exactly what these interests are is secondary and contingent on the specific political 
economy of a given state. Intervention that is concerted and coherent (as opposed to 
haphazard and individualistic) may be expected to generate a collective response. The 
state may then be expected to react, this reaction engendering a further civic reaction.
As iterations continue, there should ideally emerge a stable pattern of interactions, in 
which civic and state actors may reasonably judge the effectiveness of one or another 
course of action; this may be considered the consolidation of civil society.
As a corollary, two things may occur in this process to inhibit the consolidation of civil 
society. First, the state's intervention may be incoherent and haphazard, engendering a 
one-on-one relationship between individual citizens and individual officers of the state. 
In this case, collective action may not occur; the relationship between state and citizen 
(as opposed to state and society) is unstable and uninstitutionalized. (It would seem that 
the institution of state-citizen relations must be consolidated before the state-society 
relationship may experience meaningful development.)5 Second, in its reaction to
5 In this discussion, an institution is understood in the classic sociological sense as an ingrained set of 
generally accepted norms governing an aspect of social behavior and allowing actors to make predictions 
about the consequences of their actions with a reasonable degree of certainty. In this view, institutions are 
consolidated over time, as rules are established and transformed into norms through their repeated 
application by different participants in the given social relationship. In a complex social system such as 
the modem state, there exists a multi-layered web of institutions that interact with and build on each
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
collective civic action the state may fail to adhere to a coherent strategy, in turn 
preventing civic actors from settling into predictable patterns of action. In this case, 
civic initiative will fail to consolidate into civil society. This insistence on coherence in 
both the first and second instance should not be taken as redundancy: institutions are 
consolidated through iteration and reiteration, and for civil society to engage effectively 
with the state, the state must be consistent both in how it intrudes into private life, and 
in how it responds to civil societys reaction.
It has already been said that the genesis of civil society begins with the intrusion of the 
state into the private interests of its citizens. In the classical conception, as described by 
Tocqueville, this occurs when the workings of the state affect the interests of the owners 
of private property. (This, incidentally, may occur through both state action and 
inaction, i.e. the failure to defend.) This is the same as the middle class' model of civil 
society, in which the existence of private property is considered a necessary condition. 
This model, however, should not be taken as universal. Rather, the mobilizational 
interests are more properly seen as contingent on the specific political economy of the 
state in question. There is no sound theoretical reason to believe that the state's intrusion 
into other spheres of private interest - so long as those interests are sufficiently dear - 
may not provoke a civil-social reaction. Indeed, we observe in the West so-called 'post
industrial' civil society, organizing around interests that amount to little more than moral 
indignation; likewise, civil society in the communist world mobilized primarily on 
moral grounds. In even more recent experience, we have seen some post-Soviet 
societies organize against the infringement of their political rights. This, then, raises the 
operative questions: In what contexts may we expect civil-social mobilization around 
political interests? What determines the triggers and cleavages of such mobilization? 
What is the distribution of causation between structure and agency?
This theory, thus, consists of two elements, one concerning the emergence of civil 
society, and the other concerning its consolidation. In the view presented here, civil 
society emerges in response to a concerted and coherent intrusion by the state into the 
lives of its citizens, and the form and content of that response will broadly reflect the
other. Social relationships will rest on the highest level of consolidated institutions; if a particular 
institution is not consolidated, the relationship will settle one level lower. Thus, for example, if the 
institution of state-society relations is unconsolidated, the relationship between state and individual will 
be preeminent. Likewise, if the formal structures of state power are unconsolidated, the prerogative will 
fall to corporate or even individual interests within the governing elite.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
stimulus and the political-economic context. It is crucial that this intrusion be concerted 
and coherent; haphazard intrusion, such as bribe-seeking by corrupt bureaucrats, will 
elicit individualistic coping strategies. Thus, collective action arises in response to 
collective affliction, so to speak. The consolidation of civil society likewise requires 
coherence on the part of the state. As with any institution, the consolidation of civil 
society needs stable rules of play; if the ruling elite cannot or will not settle on a 
coherent strategy of engagement with civic initiative, civil society will face the need to 
continuously adjust and no institutional consolidation will occur.
Approach to Research
This project begins with a question about civic mobilization and engagement in Russia, 
asking whether it is possible to determine patterns according to which we might expect 
Russian citizens to organize for the collective defense of their rights. When talking 
about civil society, this thesis refers primarily to the phenomenon of grass-roots 
activism, which in turn involves at least some recognition of an overall political goal 
(without breaching the divide between civil and political society). The focus is on the 
genesis, consolidation and (when applicable) dissipation of civic initiative. In this view, 
the specific organizational form that is taken is only of secondary importance and is 
contingent on a number of factors, including the political, legal and economic 
environment and the specific history and traditions of the society in which these 
institutions are grounded. The research agenda reformulates the question as follows: 
What are the causes of civic discouragement in Russia? What are the specific obstacles 
that cause grassroots activism to struggle and fall? More importantly, what are the 
limitations of these obstacles -  in other words, under what conditions is civil society 
able to overcome them? Thus, if Ashwin asked why Russians appear to be so patient, 
this project begins by asking specifically in which circumstances they tend to lose their 
patience.
In seeking to address this question, we start from a theoretical assertion that the 
emergence of civil society requires concerted intrusion by the state into the private 
interest of citizens, and that the sustainability of civil society requires stable 
(institutionalized) patterns of interaction between state and non-state actors, then -  at 
least in the context of transition -  political elites should have the upper hand in
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
determining the relationship between civil society and the state. To test this hypothesis, 
however, this project looks down rather than up.
The most enlightening modem work on civil society -  such as that by Chris Hann 
(1996) and Marc Moije Howard (2002) -  has started from the notion that homogenized, 
normatively determined conceptions of civil society are unhelpful, seeking instead to 
study the detail of state-society relations. In a recent review of such developments in the 
study of civil society, Jan Kubik wrote (with specific reference to Howard and Hann):
... [the] next generation of studies on civil society must not concentrate merely on the 
levels of participation and the quantity of civil society associations and organizations ... 
but rather on their quality and connectedness with other domains of the polity and the 
international arena. To operationalize these features, we will have to find comparative 
need to heed Chris Hanns warning that these attributes and linkages do and indeed 
must take specific forms, congruent with their cultural and political contexts. The 
project of civil anthropologyproposed by Hann and supported by Howardneeds to 
specify functional equivalents of civil society in detail and offer proper tools for 
measuring them (Kubik 2005 119-120).
In keeping with this spirit and in seeking to understand the phenomenon of civil society, 
this thesis has begun from concepts originating in political science and philosophy. For 
the purposes of field research, however, I take my inspiration from sociologists and 
anthropologists. In the next several paragraphs, I will attempt to explain why this is so, 
as well as to justify the methodology that underpins the research presented in the 
following chapters.
In turning for inspiration to the social movement literature, this thesis takes certain 
methodological cues from sociology more broadly. Thus, Charles Kurzman, writing 
about the study of political change, quotes Mario Bunge to remind us that social 
relations pass through the heads of people, as well as that all forms of explanation 
must plausibly account for the inner states of the individuals who enact causation 
(Kurzman 2004 329-330).
Given, however, that movements can be both more and less than organizations, and that 
demarcating the boundaries of a movement... is extremely difficult, Doug McAdam 
asks, how to study them? The only way, he writes, answering his own question,  .. .is 
to shift the focus of analysis from these unwieldy abstractions known as movements to 
specific demonstrations, actions, campaigns, or other bounded forms of activism. We
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
can study the process by which an individual comes to participate in a particular 
instance of activism (McAdam 1986 67).
Much of the argument in this thesis is based on an examination of the frames, 
interpretations and discourses employed by movement participants. The aim is to 
[reveal] the interpretive repertoire of participants and/or leaders at a particular point in 
time during the movements development, a method repeated at various intervals in 
order to uncover process and development; the validity of the analysis is established by 
comparing what people say and do (Johnston 2002 67). Another methodology 
employed in this work is semi-structured interviewing, which is believed to be 
especially useful in studies where the goals are exploration, discovery, and 
interpretation of complex social events and processes and when combined with 
participant observation and/or documentary methods (Blee and Taylor 2002 93). In 
keeping with best practice and while trying to maintain a reasonable level of concision,
I have endeavored to present interviews in sufficient detail that a reader can judge the 
strengths and limitations of their interpretation (Blee and Taylor 2002 113).
The core argument of this thesis is that political elites, by structuring the political arena, 
exert a decisive influence on the patterns of collective behavior that make up civil 
society. Moreover, it seeks to test this theory by applying it to observable facts in 
historical and comparative perspective. Thus, the proof of the pudding, to botch a 
metaphor, is to be found in the shifting details of life. It is difficult to conceive of a 
viable quantitative study that would be adequate to the task at hand; the changes we are 
looking for will not be captured by voting patterns, membership statistics or quantifiable 
answers to formal questionnaires. What is needed is not a formal methodology, applied 
rigidly and in identical fashion across all cases, but a methodology that allows 
flexibility in the field in order to uncover results that can be compared in rigorous 
analysis.
The ensuing chapters delve deeply into the stories of organizations, events and, in some 
cases, individuals. Following Burawoy, I place the emphasis of my research on output 
rather than procedure. In every case, what I am interested in is a self-conscious 
evaluation of behavior. Certainly, it is important to know as exactly as possible what 
happened and when. It is just as crucial, however, to reach an understanding of why 
decisions were made and actions undertaken, based not on theoretical assertion, but on
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
close observation. In so doing, I do not limit myself to one or another method of field 
research. In order to draw as full and accurate a picture as possible, I rely on a broad 
range of sources, including documentary and archival records, interviews (structured, 
semi-structured and informal), participant observation, credible media reports, and, of 
course, the work of numerous other scholars in the field.
Clearly, an interpretivist or reflexive approach does not excuse this endeavor from the 
usual demands of rigorous scientific inference. Given such a strategy, as Burawoy 
writes, Objectivity is not measured by procedures that assure an accurate mapping of 
the world but by the growth of knowledge; that is, the imaginative and parsimonious 
reconstruction of theory to accommodate anomalies (Burawoy 1998 5). The task at 
hand, then, is to transform the myriad information from the field through sound analysis 
into well-reasoned and theoretically grounded conclusions.
In selecting cases and subjects for study, I have again taken inspiration from Burawoy, 
who writes that, A social order reveals itself in the way it responds to pressure 
(Burawoy 1998 17). Rather than trying to build the cleanest possible experiment, I have 
sought out a sample of subjects that are actively involved in processes of change and 
adaptation, spurred on by a number of different factors, believing that the fundamental 
nature of these subjects is to be found in those values, ideals and principles to which 
they hold fastest. Thus, many subjects are self-selected. In some cases, they were 
included because of their high visibility, given the assumption that visibility denotes the 
presence of deeper processes. Other subjects were selected because of something they 
In addition to looking for exceptional cases that stand out from the general background, 
case selection is driven in part by civil society theory at its most basic (and, possibly, 
uncontroversial), arguing that, at the most fundamental level, civil society organizes for 
the defense of the rights of citizens. To this end, my research focuses on initiatives that 
arise to defend rights. This project does not, however, adopt a research strategy or an 
analytical framework guided by exogenous normative considerations as to exactly 
which rights are to be defended, likewise seeking to avoid adopting problematic 
universalistic categories such as human rights. Rather, in keeping with the guiding 
theory, the local political and socio-economic context is allowed to determine the rights 
that are at stake, while the research focuses on their defense. (In the simplest of
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
justification for this approach, it seems obvious that people will not mobilize in the 
defense of rights that they do not feel to be both relevant and under threat. Moreover, 
Russians perceptions, guided by their specific experience, may differ substantially 
from our own feelings about what they should or should not perceive.)
Three case studies form the core of this thesis. The first is of a traditional human rights 
NGO of interest because it is both successful at defending rights in individual cases but 
unsuccessful at addressing more systemic issues. The second explores Russias various 
housing-rights movements, focusing in part on a high-profile conflict between 
residents and city authorities, asking why the protesters are able to generate heat but 
not sustain the movement. Finally, the third case follows the development of a protest 
movement of motorists, which grew into the only grassroots organization capable of 
exerting consistent policy pressure on the state. Each case study explores a different 
configuration of the independent variable identified in this project: incoherent state 
intrusion in the first instance, coherent intrusion but incoherent reaction in the second, 
and coherent intrusion and reaction in the third.
The case studies were selected as much as possible to exclude possible intervening 
variables that could have skewed the analysis. Organizations that have roots stretching 
back to the Soviet period (and, indeed, organizations with deep historical roots in 
general) were avoided, to rule out the influence of entrenched habits of behavior and 
path dependency. Organizations that had been recipients of significant Western grant 
funding were also avoided, with one partial exception, to exclude what in other studies 
have been shown to be the deleterious effects of such aid. Similarly, I have avoided 
transnational social movements and global civil society organizations, because what I 
am interested in is local discourse. In addition, in an attempt to add new information to 
the field and to avoid prejudging case outcomes, all three cases were selected in part 
because they had not previously been addressed by the academic literature.
To some extent, the selection of these cases was guided by availability and practical 
concerns. There is, for one thing, not an overabundance of protest movements in Russia 
from which to choose. The cases needed not only to exist, but also to offer sufficient 
information to be studied in detail, including interview subjects, archives, media reports, 
and so on. Study also needed to be feasible; while fascinating protest movements exist 
in the Northern Caucasus, for reasons of safety I have excluded them.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The case studies are framed in time by the second presidential term of Vladimir Putin, 
from 2004 to 2008. While reference is made to developments earlier in Russias post- 
Soviet history, and some discussion will extend beyond Putins presidency, the 2004-8 
period is arguably the zenith of what has become known as Putins Russia, during 
which that particular regime was consolidated.
The reader, meanwhile, may note that the case studies do not present the other side of 
the story, so to speak: while activists and ordinary citizens are interviewed and quoted 
at length, no concerted attempt is made to allow the political elite to explain its actions. 
Were this a journalistic endeavor or a work of history, that would be a serious oversight. 
However, the purpose of this thesis is to understand why Russian citizens behave the 
way they do, and they do not have access to the minds of the elite. I am interested in 
their perception and interpretation of events and in the justification and explanation of 
their actions, not in whether or not their judgments as to the intentions of the elite are 
correct. A parallel investigation into elite behavior is beyond the scope of one thesis.
Synopsis
What follows is a brief outline of the rest of this thesis.
In Chapter 2 ,1 review the literature on civil society and civic initiative in transition, 
leading to an exposition of the projects theoretical framework and setting out working 
definitions of key terms and concepts; most of these have been expounded earlier in this 
chapter. In the chapter, I will argue that the contemporary debate on civil society has 
become overly concerned with considerations of form, while the social movement 
literature both remains truer to the classical concepts emanating from Enlightenment-era 
political philosophy and provides more useful tools for analyzing the present day.
Chapter 3 lays out the political-economy background of the processes of change (and 
continuity) that led Russia to where it is now. Drawn primarily from the secondary 
literature, this analysis concentrates heavily on elite behavior and the functioning of the 
resource curse in post-Soviet Russia, outlining what will be evaluated as the causal 
variable for the rest of the thesis. The core of the chapters argument, briefly put, is that, 
from the late Soviet period onward, Russia has seen the gradual disengagement of the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
elite from the populace, accompanied by the consolidation of power as a resource- 
driven club good for a reconstituted elite. The exigencies of maintaining both the 
club and the good thus become key incentives in determining how elites and public 
officials at all levels behave when faced with challenges from below.
Chapter 4 reviews the existing literature on civil society in Russia, presenting statistical 
and survey evidence and examining the three most common sets of hypotheses used to 
explain the current state of affairs: history and culture; social capital and trust; and the 
political regime.
Chapter 5 traces the development of a rights-defense organization that arose in response 
to abuses committed by Russias law enforcement agencies. Based on interview, 
archival and contextual research of Obshchestvennyi Verdikt6, the chapter illustrates 
differences in civic responses to brutality and injustice, asking why a state intrusion that 
is capable of provoking individual outrage is not sufficient to provoke a collective 
response. In part by examining the vulnerabilities of the elite to pressure, the chapter 
argues that the most cohesive public initiative arises in response to the most coherent 
state intrusion, while the individual nature of police brutality, on the other hand, fails to 
engender a collective response.
In Chapter 6, attention turns to Russias various housing-rights movements. Arising in 
response to a variety of grievances, local protest organizations began to coalesce into a 
broader movement, consolidating around a common target: municipal authorities, who 
through sins of commission and omission threatened increasing numbers of Russians 
with the loss of their homes. The initial success at mobilization, however, was met with 
a diversity of ad hoc strategies on the part of municipal governments, which in turn 
encouraged protesters to revert to individualized strategies and back away from 
collective engagement.
Chapter 7 examines a case in which seemingly banal state intervention into the lives of 
citizens is nonetheless met by strong and concerted civic reaction. In this case, Svoboda
Vybora emerges as one of Russias strongest grassroots movements, in response to a 
proposed ban on right-side-drive cars. Bringing together motorists from around the
6 Public Verdict
7 Freedom of Choice
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
country, the movement latches onto conceptions of entitlement and accountability, 
pushing an expanding agenda on an elite that is eventually forced to acquiesce. The 
chapter demonstrates the importance of coherence and consistency in the states 
ongoing relationship with civic actors.
Finally, in Chapter 8, 1 conclude with an attempt to put the hypotheses developed and 
tested in the previous chapters in broader context.
Russia in Movement
Chapter 2
Perspectives on Civil Society
S. A. Greene
The only security against political slavery, is the check maintained over governors, by 
the diffusion o f intelligence, activity and public spirit among the governed. 
John Stuart Mill ([1848] 1970 313)
Introduction
In 1999, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) looked back on 
nearly a decade of work building civil society in post-communist Europe -  an effort 
into which it poured even more money than George Soros -  and was elated. In a region 
where there had once been authoritarianism and state domination, there was now 
freedom and a proliferation of non-governmental organizations (NGOs); civil society 
still needed support, but it was well on its way to fulfilling its crucial role in the 
construction of democracy, the agency argued (USAID 1999 v).
The end of communism in Central and Eastern Europe was initially seen as a source of 
new opportunities, both for the practice and study of democracy. Certainly, this has in 
many cases been true. But when the Iron Curtain was lifted, many social scientists ran 
headlong into a wall of misunderstanding. Nowhere has this been more the case than in 
the realm of civil society. Students of democratization -  or transitologists, as they began 
calling themselves -  brought with them ready-made concepts and categories and set 
about devising formulaic models of political development. In these models, notions of 
civil society, civic culture, social capital and, more broadly, trust, were often key. But 
the message being sent -  and the message so well absorbed by USAID and other donor 
organizations -  was that the question was one of institutions: build sustainable NGOs, a 
free press, and so on, and the problem of democratization is solved. If only it were that 
simple.
Most approaches to civil society in transition -  and, indeed, much of the literature on 
civil society in general -  suffer from a formalistic tendency that focuses on the specific 
institutions most often associated with the concept in the West. This obsession with 
form rather than function, or, rather, the habit of normatively equating form with 
function, is a serious impediment to the study of civil society in the post-communist
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
context, where institutions formally similar to their Western counterparts may not be 
their functional equivalents. Certainly, those institutions most generally associated with 
civil society writ large -  institutions such as interest groups, labor unions and the press 
-  could perform in the East the functions they do in the West. But their broad failure to 
do so does not mean, as some writers imply, that the societies in question are somehow 
dysfunctional. Citizens may act -  and frame their actions -  in ways that a formalistic 
approach to civil society would miss. If we are to understand the very real difficulties 
that civil society faces in Russia and elsewhere, we must pay more attention to the 
meanings and content behind forms and institutions than to those forms and institutions 
themselves.
The goal of this thesis, then, is to take a morphological approach -  in which form is
seen to follow function -  to the study of civil society after communism. A 
morphological approach, I emphasize, does not mean an anti-institutionalist approach. 
To the contrary: I will, toward the end of this chapter, begin to explore an institutional 
model to explain how the environment in which civil society operates determines the 
form that it takes and the ways in which it is able to achieve its ends. But for the 
purposes of analysis, our understanding of civil society must avoid being determined by 
considerations of form, or else civil society will be seen to perform no function at all.
This morphological approach -  or, more simply, the rejection of formalism -  is crucial 
to this project and thus must be well founded. Formalist approaches to civil society 
seem to get us nowhere in Russia. Counting NGOs, as did USAID, suggests great 
success in the endeavor to create civil society in Russia, but these NGOs have broadly 
been unable to serve the public interest. A focus on social capital -  essentially, counting 
relationships, rather than NGOs -  suggests the opposite extreme, a level of atomization 
that would preclude almost any civic initiative at all. Formalist definitions and 
formulaic mechanisms distract us from the reality on the ground. Were I to follow the 
methodological strictures of the dominant civil society literatures, the case studies 
presented in this thesis would be excluded. And I would, as a result, not be telling a 
story of civic engagement in Russia.
8 This morphological approach is distinct from a Parsonian functionalist approach. I mean to imply no 
determinism, but rather to present an alternative view to the formalist definitions that have come to 
dominate the discussion of civil society. Similar critiques of formalism have been made in the area studies 
and development studies literatures. See, for example, Jackson, R.H. and C.G. Rosenberg, 1982, Personal 
Rule in Black Africa. Berkeley, University of California Press.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
It might be tempting to tell that story without reference to the concept of civil society, 
abandoning the term along with the formalistic categories it has come to imply. I 
believe that would be unfortunate. As this chapter will show, the concept has a rich 
history, with significantly more content and meaning than has been inherited by much 
of the contemporary literature. It is a history in which civic engagement is seen as 
closely tied to politics and governance, and in which the concept itself evolves 
alongside the states inhabited by the authors who wrote about it and the citizens who 
lived it. Delving into this history will allow us to uncover the core concepts at the heart 
of civil society and repackage them into a working definition that will in turn give some 
cohesion to the case studies.
I have purposefully abstained thus far from providing a working definition of civil 
society. Many eminent scholars have attempted to define the concept, and the best of 
them have conceded that it seemed impossible to do so in a way that is both 
theoretically sound and empirically useful. Were I to put forward my own conjecture at 
this point, it would serve only as a bone of contention and immediately undermine the 
seriousness of the task at hand. The term civil society in the 20th century has come to 
be associated with a set of normatively defined categories of actors whose roles are 
reasonably believed to be crucial to the functioning of a capitalist, liberal democratic 
state. I have mentioned some of these actors already, and I will deal with them more 
fully later, but a comprehensive list at this stage would again confuse the point. In any 
case, a focus on actors themselves encourages the formalistic approach I am eager to 
avoid. What we are interested in here is the role that civil society plays. Thus, the bulk 
of this chapter is concerned with the evolution of our understanding of civil society, and 
it begins with a return to the concepts roots. This discussion will then lead into an 
effort to reconnect the idea of civil society with its function, before proposing a way to 
operationalize the concept in the study of transition. But first, to history.
Political Philosophy and the Concept of the Civil Society
The idea of civil society, relating to society in general and its cm/ized aspect in 
particular, begins in the classical era of political philosophy. Thus, Cicero linked the 
societas civilis to res publica and described it as an assemblage of people in large 
numbers associated in an agreement with respect to justice and a partnership for the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
common good.9 This concept proved remarkably long lived and indeed remained the 
standard understanding of the term civil society from its publication in the first
century before the common era well into the 19 century.
However, the reality of civil society, so defined, began to recede in Europe with the fall 
of the Roman Empire and the rise of Christian ideology, which saw society as organized 
for the service of G-d, rather than for the improvement of the human condition. Indeed, 
in an era where states (or at least their borders) were transient, and under the institutions 
of feudalism, which prevent the coalescence of an encompassing common interest, 
society was anything but civil. Thus, it was only with the development of Europes 
monarchies, and the ensuing regimentation of increasingly stable states, that the idea of 
civil society began to regain currency.
And so it was with an eye to the ancients that Locke, in the second half of the 17 
century, began to ruminate on the nature of civil society. It is not, he argued, organized 
for the pursuit of liberty, because absolute liberty is found in the state of nature. Natural 
liberty, however, he saw as imperfect, as it left a constant threat to mens livelihood, if 
not their lives. Thus, Lockes civil society consists in the voluntary abdication of liberty 
in return for a measure of justice, and that justice in turn is based on the preservation of 
property through equitable laws and their impartial enforcement. Thus, in his Second 
Treatise on Government, Locke wrote:
And so whoever has the legislative or supreme power of any commonwealth is 
bound to govern by established standing laws, promulgated and known to the 
people, and not by extemporary decrees; by indifferent and upright judges, who are 
to decide controversies by those laws; and to employ the force of the community at 
home only in the execution of such laws, or abroad to prevent or redress foreign 
injuries, and secure the community from inroads and invasion. And all this to be 
directed to no other end, but the peace, safety, and public good of the people 
(Locke [1681] 1993 327).
This is a model based on interaction between state and society to achieve an overarching 
end: justice. If justice consists in the preservation of property, no society is to be 
considered civil in which property can be arbitrarily seized, be it by a neighbor, a 
brigand or a sovereign. The corollary of this is that no society can be civil that is ruled 
by an absolute monarch, For he being supposed to have a l l ... power in himself alone, 
... no appeal lies open to anyone who may fairly and indifferently, and with authority, 
decide, and from whose decision relief and redress may be expected of any injury or
9 From Ciceros The Republic, quoted in Islamoglu 2001: 1891.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
inconveniency that may be suffered from the prince or by his order (Locke [1681]
1993 306). This combination of law with the subjugation of authority to common 
accountability -  accountability that, Locke argues, may justifiably be enforced through 
violent rebellion -  is the beginning of the modem recognition that civil society involves 
the participation of the governed in the production of the common good. This was, of 
course, a conclusion that would have seemed quite logical to Cicero; to most of the 
monarchs following the assassination of Julius Caesar, however, it would have been 
anathema.
It is notable that Europe rediscovered this notion at a time when monarchs, already 
comfortable in their thrones, were seeking to define and extend the role of the state 
inwardly, by formalizing its relationship with the church and other social institutions 
(Islamoglu 2001 1892). This effort effectively opened up at least the philosophical 
possibility of an alternative order, one in which civil society itself could conceivably be 
sovereign. This was not the order Locke was proposing. Rather than the public, he saw 
the common good as sovereign, and an extremely powerful (although not absolute) 
monarch as its surest guarantor. Society was the source of the states legitimacy, and 
thus men were to be given freedom, he argued, but not to the extent that they might 
interfere in the conduct of affairs of state or even in the general governance of society. 
In his Essay Concerning Toleration, he wrote:
There are some opinions and actions that are wholly separate from the 
concernment of the state, and have no direct influence on mens lives in society, 
and these are all speculative opinions and religious worship, and these have a clear 
title to universal toleration which the magistrate ought not to entrench on. ... [All 
other opinions and actions] have a right to toleration so far only as they do not 
interfere with the advantages of the public or serve any way to disturb the 
government (Locke [1667] 1993 201).
Nearly a century later, Rousseau began with Lockes conceptions of civil society and 
asked, essentially, the following question: If men sacrifice their liberty only in order to 
increase justice, why did he observe in Europe so little liberty and so little justice? 
Unlike Locke, however, he sought the answer not only in government, but in the human 
character as well. Exploring the differences between the subjects of an uncivil society 
and the citizens of a civil one, Rousseau wrote:
. ..Subjects prize public tranquility; citizens the freedom of the individual -  the 
former prefer security of possessions, the latter security of the person; subjects 
think the best government is the most severe, citizens that it is the mildest; the 
former want crimes to be punished, the latter want them to be prevented; subjects 
think it is a good thing to be feared by their neighbours, citizens prefer to be 
ignored by them; the former are satisfied so long as money circulates, the latter 
demand that the people shall have bread (Rousseau [1762] 1968 129-130).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
This dichotomy between subject and citizen, Rousseau argued in The Social Contract, 
was due to the way in which different forms of government organized relations both 
among residents and between residents and the state. Whereas Locke argued that the 
failure of a state to deliver justice should lead to a rebellion or a reversion to a state of 
nature, Rousseau observed that, in the absence of both justice and liberty -  in other 
words, under an illegitimate social contract -  societies behaved as though in a partial 
state of nature, with individuals guided exclusively by self-interest, and the collective 
in evidence only to the extent that the sovereign is able to exploit it.
Rousseau, then, goes beyond Lockes conception of a sovereign accountable for the 
public good and argues that, under a true social contract, the public itself is sovereign. 
Sovereignty, he writes, is a covenant of the body with each of its members (Rousseau 
[1762] 1968 77). Thus, Rousseaus prince or government properly derives authority 
from the general will, and any attempt to wield authority independent of that will is a 
breach of contract, resulting in the dissolution of the state. While not a departure from 
Lockes conception, Rousseaus assertion here goes farther in mandating direct 
accountability of the government to the people, and thus a significant role for the people 
in the conduct, or at least oversight, of government. Civil society, then, was not simply 
to legitimate government; it was to manage it.
Indeed, accountability is too soft a word; Rousseau uses the word subordination to 
describe the relationship between society and government, and argues that the entire 
arrangement of government institutions must be engineered to enforce this 
subordination. His theory thus lays the groundwork for later institutional thinking, and 
particularly the sociology of government and bureaucracy that would eventually arise in 
Weber. This view arises also out of the increasing tendency of European monarchies at 
the time to recruit a corps of professional bureaucrats, although the term had yet to be 
invented (Torstendahl 2001 1411). The government apparatus, Rousseau writes:
...must have a particular ego, a consciousness common to its members, a force, a 
will of its own tending to its preservation. ... The difficulty is to find a method of 
ordering this subordinate whole within the greater whole, so that it does not 
weaken the general constitution while strengthening its own, and so that its private 
force, designed for its own preservation, shall always be distinct from the public 
force, designed for the preservation of the state; in short, so that it will always be 
ready to sacrifice the government to the people and not the people to the 
government (Rousseau [1762] 1968 106).
Civil society, then, can be taken to mean not just the sovereignty of the public within
the state, but also the institutional arrangements necessary to achieve the subjugation of
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
the government to the public. Coupled with Rousseaus earlier thoughts on the way that 
the nature of the state influences the behavior of its citizens/subjects, we have the 
makings of an institutionalist theory to explain various constellations of state and civil- 
society organization, all informed by the goal of subordinating the state to society.
Meanwhile, as Rousseau was writing about government, the thinkers of the Scottish 
Enlightenment were exploring changes in society writ large, specifically as regards 
increasing specialization and thus differentiation of tasks. Locke, in his historical 
theorizing, had identified the opportunity for a more efficient allocation of labor, and 
thus the creation of wealth, as one of the primary drivers of humanitys decision to 
abandon the state of nature for civilization. Later, Ricardo picked up on the same 
theme in his economic theory of competitive advantage. In the context of Britains 
industrial revolution, however, a number of thinkers in Scotland -  particularly Adam 
Smith, Adam Ferguson and David Hume -  returned to an issue that seemed to be 
gaining ever greater currency.
Still within the realm of the political, Hume argued that the greatest liberty was to be 
found in systems that balanced monarchy with republic, such that the potential excesses 
of each are held in check. Like Locke and Rousseau before him, Hume identified the 
public as the guarantor of this balance, but unlike Rousseaus reliance on a public 
bureaucracy, Hume looked to an institution wholly independent of government: the 
press. Public opinion, he wrote in O f the first principles o f government, is the 
foundation of all governance, no matter how democratic or despotic (Hume [1772] 
1994b 16). Thus, in his O f the liberty o f the press, he writes:
It is apprehended, that arbitrary power would steal in upon us, were we not careful to 
prevent its progress, and were there not an easy method of conveying the alarm from 
one end of the kingdom to another. The spirit of the people must be frequently 
rouzed, in order to curb the ambition of the court; and the dread of rouzing this spirit 
must be employed to prevent that ambition. Nothing so effectual to this purpose as 
the liberty of the press, by which all the learning, wit and genius of the nation may be 
employed on the side of freedom, and everyone be animated to its defence (Hume 
[1772] 1994c 3).
Humes close colleagues, meanwhile, looked more closely at the bearers of this opinion. 
In The Wealth o f  Nations, Smith observed that, unlike other animals, consigned to self- 
sufficiency, In civilized society [a human being] stands at all times in need of the co
operation and assistance of great multitudes, while his whole life is scarce sufficient to 
gain the friendship of a few persons (Smith [1776] 1970 118). Rather than friendship 
or altmism, he wrote, we rely on the logic of the exchange:
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
As it is by treaty, by barter, and by purchase that we obtain from one another the 
greater part of those mutual good offices which we stand in need of, so it is this 
same trucking disposition which originally gives occasion to the division of labour 
(Smith [1776] 1970 119).
Smith expands this argument to make two assertions. First, presaging Ricardo, that we 
are better off when we specialize, as specialization leads to an increase in our talents 
and thus in our ability to satisfy our wants. This logic, meanwhile, should hold not only 
for economic actors, but for all in society, as the performance of any task is necessarily 
made less efficient by the introduction of unrelated concerns. And second, following 
Locke, the role of government is no more and no less than the preservation of property, 
by which Smith means the enforcement of the rules of exchange, such that force (or 
potential force) should not enter the equation.
Although writing somewhat earlier than Smith, Ferguson had foreseen this development 
and was troubled by its implications. He agreed with the prevailing argument that the 
commercial and political arts have advanced together, such that, A people, possessed 
of wealth, and become jealous of their properties, have formed the project of 
emancipation, and have proceeded, under favour of an importance recently gained, still 
farther to enlarge their pretensions, and to dispute the prerogatives which their 
sovereign had been in use to employ (Ferguson [1767] 1966 261-262). However, the 
growing propensity to guard politics and economics from one another, and the 
discouragement of participation in both simultaneously by one person -  in short,
Smiths and Ricardos very exhortation to specialize -  Ferguson saw as fatal to the 
liberal project. It is precisely the broadest possible participation of individuals in public 
affairs that Ferguson argued was the guarantor of freedom. He wrote:
The sovereign may dazzle with his heroic qualities; he may protect his subjects in 
the enjoyment of every animal advantage or pleasure: but the benefits arising from 
liberty are of a different sort; they are not the fruits of a virtue, and of a goodness, 
which operate in the breast of one man, but of the communication of virtue itself to 
many; and such a distribution of functions in civil society, as gives to members the 
exercises and occupations which pertain to their nature (Ferguson [1767] 1966 
270).
Thus, in Fergusons view, exactly a century after Lockes Essay Concerning Toleration, 
civil society consists not simply in Lockes hegemony of the public good, or in 
Rousseaus institutionalized subjugation of the government, or even in Smiths self- 
perpetuating prosperity, but also in the institutionalization of broad participation in 
public affairs. Central among these institutions, as we have seen, have arisen 
Rousseaus neutral public bureaucracy, Humes vigorous free press and Fergusons
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
activist civic sphere. But these ideas did not arise in a vacuum. Rather, they came about 
at a time when government in Europe was changing -  modernizing, if you will -  and 
taking philosophy along with it. Urbanizing societies, with growing mercantile classes 
independent of feudal loyalties, began to develop ever more complex systems of 
interests, along with new institutions to mediate them. This led to changes both in the 
way society related to government, and in the way that government itself was practiced. 
In the words of a contemporary observer:
But though all kinds o f government be improved in modem times, yet monarchical 
government seems to have made the greatest advances towards perfection. It may 
now be affirmed of civilized monarchies, what was formerly used in praise of 
republics alone, that they are a government of Law, not of Men. They are found 
susceptible of order, method, and constancy, to a surprising degree (Hume [1772]
1994a 56).
The Philosophy o f Right, Democracy in America and the Triumph of Empiricism
As the 18th century waned, two events -  one spectacular, one more subtle -  brought 
several of these philosophical questions into sharper focus. One was the American War 
of Independence, which, as Ernest Gellner would later write, represented the triumph of 
civil society over government and the state (Gellner 1994). It appeared to be the 
vindication of Locke and Rousseau, and even of Ferguson. It proved the potential force 
of the collective will.
The second -  lasting into the 19th century -  was the deepening of the industrial 
revolution in Europe, which again seemed to vindicate Fergusons fears of social 
atomization. It was in this context that Hegel wrote his Philosophy o f Right, less as a 
reaction to earlier writers than to what he saw around him in Germany. Industrialization, 
in addition to the routinization of economic activity, had brought the professionalization 
and routinization of government, which was becoming increasingly geared toward 
management of the economy. Far from Smiths vision of efficient separation, this was a 
government that Hegel observed to be deeply intertwined with the dominant economic 
interests, an aspect that would later be picked up on by Karl Marx.
Modifying Rousseaus argument that the state is the embodiment of the public will, 
Hegel redefined civil society -  in the earliest prominent usage of the term in a way 
resembling our contemporary understanding -  as the realm of difference, intermediate 
between the family and the state (Hegel [1820] 1896 185). In this definition, civil 
society consists primarily of the organization of individual wants and their satisfaction
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
into a corporatized economy, the protection of property by the administration of 
justice, and provision against possible mischances, and care for the particular interest 
as a common interest... (Hegel [1820] 1896 192).
This, then, makes civil society the scene of conflict to set the priorities of the state and 
to control government, or at least influence its agenda. Rather than being the governor 
of civil society, as Locke wrote, or the opponent of civil society, as later writers would 
suggest, Hegel saw government as an integral part of civil society, together with 
corporations, public organizations and whatever other institutions individuals might 
create to advance their interests. Although the hierarchy is redrawn, the Philosophy o f  
Right presents essentially an elucidation of prior theory -  with clear links to Rousseau 
and Ferguson -  based generally on contemporary empirical observation. Moreover, 
Hegels conclusion was not optimistic. Though he noted the broad participation that 
Ferguson argued was crucial to liberty, Hegel said it did not appear to be sufficient. 
Rather, those forces in civil society which were strong enough -  and here he 
foreshadowed Marx -  could gain enough influence to shut broader but less well 
represented interests out of the process of government. In these conditions, he wrote, 
the civic community affords a spectacle of excess, misery, and physical and social 
corruption (Hegel [1820] 1896 188).
At fault, Hegel argues, is the grounding of the universal interests of civil society in the 
particular interests of its members, and thus there is no universal interest at all, only 
a cacophony of competing wants. This, in turn, stems from nominal equality of political 
rights of participation and representation, regardless of status -  still, at that point in 
history, a fairly novel development in Europe. As counter-intuitive as it might sound to 
the modem reader, the dangers of equality to liberty -  particularly, the prospect that the 
sin of envy, given political enfranchisement in the context of economic inequality, 
might lead to unrest and even repression -  was a common theme in political thought at 
the time. It was also a major concern of Alexis de Tocqueville when he traveled, 
famously, to the United States.
It should be noted that the publication of the second volume of Democracy in America, 
in 1840, preceded only by approximately four years the start of Darwins work on the 
Origin o f the Species. Both were written in the growing spirit of scientific empiricism, 
in which the proof of theory, unlike in Lockes day, lay not in the eloquence of reason
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
but in the presentation of evidence. Certainly, Hegel had begun in this direction, 
although he was still first and foremost a philosopher. Tocqueville, however, remained 
unconvinced by the gloominess of views from Europe. These, he reasoned, could be 
conditioned by any number of factors peculiar to the history of the continent. Much as 
Darwin sought to study evolution in the isolation of the Galapagos, Tocqueville 
wondered whether democracy might not be better explored in the relative isolation of 
America.
Like Rousseau before him, Tocqueville was most concerned with the character of 
citizens and citizenship. Following the prevailing logic in Europe -  which saw equality 
at the root of social disharmony -  Tocqueville wondered why the unprecedented 
equality among Americans failed to engender the sort of strife Old World writers would 
have expected. The answer he found in public associations:
Americans of all ages, all conditions, and all dispositions constantly form 
associations. They have not only commercial and manufacturing companies, in 
which all take part, but associations of a thousand other kinds... . Wherever at the 
head of some new undertaking you see the government in France, or a man of rank in 
England, in the United States you will be sure to find an association. ... Thus, the 
most democratic country on the face of the earth is that in which men have, in our 
time, carried to the highest perfection the art of pursuing in common the object of 
their common desires and have applied this new science to the greatest number of 
purposes (de Tocqueville [1840] 1994 106-107).
Meanwhile, in an argument owing much to Hume, he singles out the press as crucial
amongst all other civil institutions, and argues for its near complete freedom. Nothing
but a newspaper, he wrote, can drop the same thought into a thousand minds at the
same moment (de Tocqueville [1840] 1994 111). Moreover, the very freedom and
diversity of the press -  and thus the opportunity it affords readers to participate in the
formation of their own world-view -  helps to strengthen the conviction with which
opinions are held (de Tocqueville [1835] 1994 188).
None of this is theoretically different from Hegel. Tocquevilles definition of an 
association -  as the public assent which a number of individuals give to certain 
doctrines and in the engagement with which they contract to promote ... those 
doctrines (de Tocqueville [1835] 1994 192) -  is essentially the same as Hegels 
universalization of the particular. But Tocquevilles observation of the phenomenon in 
the American context allowed him to highlight an aspect that Hegel missed, namely the 
role of ownership. Civic zeal, he argued, seems to be inseparable from the exercise 
of political rights (de Tocqueville [1835] 1994 243). This interest in the public welfare,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
in turn, appears best achieved by institutionalizing individual participation in the good 
of smaller groups, in other words, by making politics local. He wrote:
It is difficult to draw a man out of his own circle to interest him in the destiny of the 
state, because he does not clearly understand what influence the destiny of the state 
can have upon his own lot. But if  it is proposed to make a road cross the end of his 
estate, he will see at a glance that there is a connection between this small public 
affair and his greatest private affairs; and he will discover, without its being shown to 
him, the close tie that unites private to general interest (de Tocqueville [1840] 1994 
104).
Thus, in Tocquevilles view, ownership of private property, in conditions of political 
liberty and freedom to associate, allows individuals not only to feel part of a political 
community, but to feel that their livelihood is part of the collective livelihood, or the 
common weal, and to recognize that interests are most fruitfully defended in concert 
with others. Seen in the American context, then, Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of 
Happiness becomes not simply a statement of principles, but a system of social, 
political and economic organization. Its success as described by Tocqueville is, in 
effect, the empirical proof of Lockes initial assertion that the just society is the one that 
best preserves property.
In 1848, eight years after the publication of the second part of Democracy in America, 
John Stuart Mill wrote his Principles o f Political Economy, which was to stand for 
generations as a seminal text at Oxford and elsewhere. While not as famous as On 
Liberty, published 11 years later, the Principles mark the turning point of attention in 
political science away from the character of government and toward the character of 
public participation in government. At a time of increasing social dislocation and 
controversy over the extent of the franchise -  Charles Dickens published Hard Times in 
1854, while the young Karl Marx was grappling with the same issues politically on the 
continent -  Mill argued that it was the spirit of the public, rather than the virtue of the 
government, that was cmcial to justice. Drawing from Tocqueville, he wrote:
.. .this discussion and management of collective interests is the great school of that 
public spirit, and the great source of that intelligence of public affairs, which are 
always regarded as the distinctive character of the public of free societies (Mill 
[1848] 1970 313).
Taking that empirical lesson and reapplying it to the nearly two centuries of modem 
political theory that preceded him, Mill drew the conclusion that the cmx of just 
government lies in the public institutions that surround it. He set out this assertion in a 
passage so remarkable in its foresight -  and, in my view, unimproved by the ensuing 
150 years of political thought -  that I present it almost in its entirety:
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
A democratic constitution, not supported by democratic institutions in detail, but 
confined to the central government, not only is not political freedom, but often 
creates a spirit precisely the reverse, carrying down to the lowest grade in society the 
desire and ambition of political domination. ... In proportion as the people are 
accustomed to manage their affairs by their own active intervention, instead of 
leaving them to the government, their desires will turn to repelling tyranny, rather 
than to tyrannizing: while in proportion as all real initiative and direction resides in 
the government, and individuals habitually feel and act as under its perpetual 
tutelage, popular institutions develop in them not the desire o f freedom, but an 
unmeasured appetite for place and power: diverting the intelligence and activity of 
the country from its principal business, to a wretched competition for the selfish 
prizes and the petty vanities of office (Mill [1848] 1970 313-314).
On first glance, this may not read so differently from the writings of Locke or Rousseau. 
However, in the context of social processes about which earlier writers could only 
postulate, and given the empirical backing of writers such as Tocqueville, Mills 
revision of the theory carries much greater weight. And at the center of the theory -  
where once stood bare concepts of justice and efficiency, of virtue and right -  there are 
now institutions and actors, with specific, well-defined roles, involved in the 
maintenance of the public interest and the containment of government.
Marx, Weber and the Sociological Revolution
Powerful as it was, Mills revision of the theory left open important questions about the 
relationships between individuals and institutions and how those relationships inform 
and are informed by the character of the state. Broadly put, it was Tocqueville who had 
first pointed out the importance of these relationships, and Hegel who first attempted to 
theorize them. But it was Karl Marx who would first develop a dynamic, encompassing 
model.
Marx explicitly began with Hegel, critiquing the Philosophy o f  Right while still a 
student. He saw in Hegel a key insight that seemingly eluded earlier writers (although it 
was not foreign to Tocqueville), namely that civil and political society are indeed one 
(Marx [1844] 1970 76). In Marxs view, however, Hegel failed to take this assertion far 
enough. Having shown the possibility for civic institutions to be captured, and arguing 
that civil society sets the direction of the state, Hegel nonetheless placed the state and 
civil society in conflict. While Marx saw this as an accurate reflection of the current 
state of affairs, he believed that the broader relationship was one of collusion to the 
point of a unity of interests. In other words, because each depends on the other for its 
existence, the conflict between civil society and the state is illusory, as is the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
independence of civil society -  consisting of all of those intermediate institutions 
between the individual and the state -  itself. (Note, already, the beginning of the 
conflation of civil society with the institutions that represent it.)
This conclusion was a product of Marxs effort to reexamine history with an 
empiricists eye, developing the theory of historical materialism in order to identify and 
trace those factors which seemed to be crucial in determining individual and 
institutional behavior and change over time. Central to this theory was the assertion that 
individual behavior in capitalism is conditioned overwhelmingly by economic 
imperatives, imperatives which would necessarily overcome any other intervening 
factors. This was, in essence, a classical economists argument, postulating the 
dominance of rational choice, with the assumption that preferences are determined by 
class consciousness.
It was here that Marx departed from Hegel, who had written that offices of the state and 
civil society are carried out by individuals, whose behavior may be conditioned by the 
character of that office itself. This would mean that institutions could take on logics of 
their own, capable of overwhelming whatever motivations individuals might face on 
their own. Marx, on the other hand, wrote:
.. .it is ridiculous to say, as Hegel does, that it is in an external and contingent way 
that these offices are linked with particular persons. On the contrary, they are linked 
with them by a vinculum substantiate, by reason of an essential quality o f particular 
persons. These offices are the natural action of this essential quality. Hence the 
absurdity of Hegels conceiving the activities and agencies o f the state in abstract, 
and particular individuality in opposition to it. He forgets that particular individuality 
is a human individual, and that the activities and agencies o f the state are human 
activities. ... Thus it is evident that individuals, in so far as they are the bearers of the 
states activities and powers, are to be considered according their social and not their 
private quality (Marx [1844] 1970 21-22).
Owing to the alienation of the laborer from his product -  the same alienation of which 
Ferguson warned -  Marx argued that individuals are dominated by their socioeconomic 
circumstances, broadly regardless of their particular experiences or the social and 
institutional context in which they operate (Fromm 1963 25-26). Institutions, then, to 
the extent that they have discernible egos, are to be seen as determined by the interests 
of whatever group of individuals comes to dominate them. As a result, justice is not a 
question of the possibility of every citizen to dedicate himself to the universal in the 
form of a particular class, but of the capability of the universal class to be truly 
universal, i.e., to be the class of every citizen (Marx [1844] 1970 50). Lenin would
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
later take this argument to its logical conclusion, writing that the revolution that would 
capture the state would, in so doing, transform civil society and eventually obviate the 
need for both (Lenin [1917] 1962).
Beyond narrowing the spectrum of human motivations to a startling degree, Marxs 
placement of capital and economic imperatives at the center of his model negates the 
role of institutional frameworks and eliminates the possibility that institutions, including 
civil society actors, might take on the sort of independent ego that both Rousseau and 
Hegel had ascribed to them. He had come to this conclusion scientifically, by expanding 
the scope of his research from the study of the contemporary (which had been 
Tocquevilles realm) to a systematic reevaluation of history. Other writers, however, 
also looked to history, and the answers they found were quite different.
The essential question facing Max Weber was the same as that which had concerned 
Marx: Why and how do societies and states change? Weber, however, was unconvinced 
by an answer that assumed a universal logic across time, geography and culture. 
Historical materialism might be useful in describing certain aspects of observed history, 
he reasoned, but it could not explain why group and individual priorities seemed to 
differ according to circumstances. Weber noticed that societies, and subgroups within 
those societies, displayed mentalities or ethos that seemed to be more or less well 
suited to different modes of economic and political behavior (Parsons 1947 32-33). By 
examining the development of belief systems over time, Weber famously deduced that 
the success of certain European nations at modem capitalism seemed to derive from 
aspects of Protestant philosophy. Put more broadly, this would mean that states and 
societies were not the product of inexorable economic processes, but rather that those 
processes and the contexts in which they occur were themselves the products of 
complex combinations of social institutions, some tangible, others not. This, Weber 
reasoned, should hold true on all levels, from the state itself down to the smallest 
community.
Thus, whereas Hegel defined a corporation -  taken to mean any combination of 
individuals, for commercial, political, governmental or social purposes -  as the attempt 
to universalize the particular, and while Marx saw corporations as tools of the particular 
interests of those who control them, Weber saw much more room for the corporation to 
take on a life of its own. He wrote:
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
... [A corporate group] exists so far as there is a probability that certain designated 
persons will act in such a way as to express the true meaning of the laws governing 
the group; in other words, that there are persons who are determined to act in that 
sense and in no other when the occasion demands it. What causes such orientation, 
whether it is a case of emotional, traditional or value-related devotion to duty, any 
one of which may be involved in feudal fealty, loyalty to an office or to service, or 
whether it is due to expediency, as, for instance, a pecuniary interest in the 
accompanying salary, is conceptually of no consequence (Weber 1962 108).
An understanding of how ethos may be formed, meanwhile, allows a clearer view of 
what institutional frameworks might be most conducive to normative expectations of 
justice and efficiency. In Webers typology, he posited that the increasingly common 
mode of operation for corporate groups, states included, based on rational-legal 
authority could create an ethos that would be rule-bound, regimented and devoid of 
subjective motivations such as personal favoritism (Weber 1947 330-332). This, of 
course, is based on the bureaucratic systems Weber observed to be working most 
perfectly in Europe, and he was not the first to observe it. Indeed, Hegel had earlier 
made the argument that a civil service ethos could be bred through a combination of 
education, recruitment and proper encouragement, an argument which Weber would 
later develop in much greater detail.
If this were true -  if life were becoming increasingly regimented and professional -  then 
one would expect the role o f civil society as the realm of difference and conflict to 
shrink. This had been Fergusons fear, and it was a major concern of early sociologists. 
One pioneer, however, came to a different conclusion. Examining the development of 
legal canons, Emile Durkheim found no proof that the public sphere was shrinking; to 
the contrary, the growing body of positivistic law to enable it strongly suggested that 
civil society was gaining strength and importance (Durkheim [1893] 1984 152-153).
Clearly, then, both the Marxist and the liberal schools were mistaken in their predictions 
of the demise of civil society. Weber recognized this, and developed detailed responses. 
I will deal with Webers specific thoughts a bit later. Suffice it for now to say that his 
sociological approach had two important effects. The first was to provide a powerful 
alternative to Marxist conceptions of socio-political development. And the second was 
to leave open the suggestion that institutions could, at least in some respects, be 
engineered to deliver normatively desirable outcomes. As we will see, both results 
would turn out to be both useful and damaging, but the rise of sociology saved the study 
of civil society actors -  and institutions in general -  from the Marxist challenge.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The Babelization of the Social Sciences
Max Weber provided two profound opportunities to those social scientists who 
remained unconvinced by the simplicity of Marxian historical materialism. First, in 
positing the Protestant origins of Western capitalism, he offered a lucid and robust 
alternative to a model of historical development dominated by the role of capital. 
Second, in blazing a trail for organizational sociology, he brought scientific rigor to the 
hypothesis that individuals may indeed act on motivations other than the basest 
necessities of survival. It is not appropriate here to go into great detail on the specifics 
of Webers theories. Instead, I will identify what I believe to be the key advances 
relevant to our discussion.
As mentioned earlier, Marx ridiculed Hegels contention that the structures of an 
hierarchical institution -  in particular, standardized aspects of recruitment, training and 
interaction -  could in any meaningful manner condition the way individual actors 
within that institution behaved. Weber disagreed, noting the regularity with which 
members of certain institutions, particularly what he called rational-legal bureaucracies, 
acted in ways contrary to their best personal interests. Whereas Marx saw institutions as 
the embodiment of the interests of the individuals who control them, Weber 
demonstrated the existence of an impersonal order within organizations capable of 
producing and reproducing a specific ethos of office independent of the social, 
economic or class status of the office-holder (Parsons 1947 58). Indeed, Weber made 
that factor the definition of corporate groups, the very significance of which Marx 
sought to negate (Weber 1962 108).
This assertion had two important implications for the subsequent study of civil society 
and, in particular, of what I will call enabling actors -  actors such as the press, 
advocates or even the public bureaucracy, that, through normatively positive behavior, 
enable the functioning of democratic systems. First, it refuted both the claims of 
Marxists that class identification guides individual behavior, and the claims of 
classicists and moralists that normatively good behavior results from culturally 
ingrained ethical conceptions. And secondly, with its emphasis on the specific sub- 
institutional underpinnings of the rational-legal bureaucracy (Crozier 2001 1408), it
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
opened the door for several subsequent generations of social scientists to explore the 
internal logics of institutional actors.
The first of these effects dealt a mortal blow to classical Marxist doctrine, which 
eventually responded with an institutionalist approach of its own (Islamoglu 2001 
1895). But the second, ironically, has also been nearly fatal to the study of civil society. 
This endeavor has, throughout the second half of the 20th century and beyond, been 
dominated by investigations of the minutiae of the Weberian paradigm. Decades of 
research has elucidated ever more intricate chains of causality in the effort to understand 
institutional behavior, applying new methods such as rational choice and game theory; 
at their most useful, these studies have attempted to link these relationships to the 
aggregate output of these institutions, but even this is not always the case. The result has 
been more information, but not necessarily more understanding (for particularly good 
critiques, see Gellner (1994) on civil society, Splichal (2001) on the press, and 
Subramaniam (2000) on public administration). All too often, this has resulted in a 
babelization of the vocabulary of increasingly distinct sub-sciences, a dismaying result 
for anyone who believes that the issues involved are all intrinsically part of the same 
fundamental question: namely, how do people, in society, come together to improve 
their lives and manage their governance.
A more constructive result of the growing body of sociological literature, however, was 
to illustrate the degree to which modem capitalist democracies rested on institutional 
behavior, rather than the elites seeking votes conception advanced by Joseph 
Schumpeter (1942). It also made possible truly important developments, foremost 
among which was the elucidation by Mancur Olson of the logic of collective action 
(1982). Here too, though, there arose a dilemma: the refutation of Schumpeter seemed 
to show that the capacity of institutions to create a constructive ethos -  what would 
eventually come to be called the civic culture -  was important to democracy, but 
Olsons work equally convincingly argued that demands of institutions would often 
trump this ethos.
This tension found an outlet in a growing debate among political theorists, comparative 
political scientists and comparative political economists over the place of civil society 
in modem states. Those who saw civil society as the realm of charity posited that 
growing welfare states would eventually obviate it; those partial to Jurgen Habermass
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
idea of the public sphere saw civil society as the realm of discourse, often about the 
state itself, and thus inherently separate from and often in opposition to the state 
(Habermas [1962] 1995). Perhaps it was inevitable, given the debilitating theoretical 
deadlock in the study of civil society, but the debate led to a fracture in the conventional 
understanding of civil society, assigning away many groups, such as journalists, 
bureaucrats, political activists and even alms-givers, to other, more narrowly defined 
categories of society, and leaving civil society as the arena for debate on those issues 
seen (accurately or otherwise) as peculiar to post-industrial societies; in other words, 
civil society came to be seen as the stomping ground of movements and causes, whether 
on behalf of women, homosexuals or spotted owls.10 Definitions began to become 
increasingly formalistic; thus USAIDs equation of civil society to NGOs (USAID 
1999), or even Larry Diamonds oft-quoted realm of organized social life that is 
voluntary, self-generating, (largely) self-supporting, autonomous from the state, and 
bound by a legal order or set of shared rules (Diamond 1994 5). Gone are 
considerations of function, whether in the form of Habermass public sphere, or 
Tocquevilles creation of public interest, or Humes aggregation, dissemination and 
mobilization of public opinion. By the end of the 20th century, the academic conception 
of civil society had devolved from an institution critical to the functioning of democracy 
to a theoretically contentious gaggle of interest groups most rigorously studied in the 
narrow context of those interests than in aggregate.
Social Capital and New Thinking about Institutions
The growing difficulties involved with discussing civil society as a unified concept
coincided with a tendency in the late 20 century toward increasing abstraction in social 
thought. In many ways, these two trends complemented each other; thus, scholars of the 
practice of journalism and students of the medias role in Habermass public sphere 
frequently recognized, at least on some level, that they were studying different aspects 
of the same basic question. In other ways, however, the result was a growing gap in 
vocabulary. Ideas on social capital and trust gradually lost their link to practical 
research and were reappropriated by the realm of normative theory. Brilliant ideas 
arose, but they became increasingly difficult to operationalize. My goal in the remainder
10 For this critique of what he calls the post-industrial definition of civil society, I am indebted to Dr. 
Jerry Hough of Duke University.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
of this chapter is to propose an approach that will bring some of these ideas back down 
to earth in such a way that they might inform useful empirical research.
Writing on the development of bourgeois society in industrializing Europe, Jurgen 
Habermas observed:
In this stratum, which more than any other was affected and called upon by 
mercantilist policies, the state authorities evoked a resonance leading to the 
publicum, the abstract counterpart of public authority, into an awareness of itself as 
the latters opponent, that is, as the public of the now emerging public sphere o f civil 
society. For the latter developed to the extent to which the public concern regarding 
the private sphere of civil society was no longer confined to the authorities but was 
considered by the subjects as one that was properly theirs (Habermas [1962] 1995 
Note particularly how Habermas uses the idea of the public. In a departure from 
classical political theory, which saw the public as the progenitor and owner of the 
apparatus of state, the Habermasian public is the counterpart of authority within a larger 
whole. Together, the public and authority comprise the state. The implication is that, to 
the extent that one changes in form or content, the other is transformed in response.
Theorists of democracy, meanwhile, began picking up on this notion of a reactive (or 
constituent) public sphere as a new way of exploring the importance of civil society to
democracy that had been taken for granted since at least the 18 century. Evaluating the 
institutional makeup of liberal democracy, Maurice Duverger wrote, The political 
organization and structure of liberal democracy forms a well-patterned whole. It 
comprises popular sovereignty, popular elections, legislative assemblies, the 
independence of the judiciary, civil liberties, and political parties, all of which are 
complimentary to each other and derive from the same fundamental principles 
(Duverger 1974 50). And this cohesiveness is based, he argued, not as much on the 
design of institutions (though these are important, especially if incongruent) so much as 
on the patterns of social relationships that inform institutional arrangements (Duverger 
1972 69-70).
In the early 1960s, Gabriel Almond and Sidney Verba revisited Rousseaus observation 
on the differences in behavior between subjects and citizens and began reopening 
questions about what they called civic culture (Almond and Verba 1963). Democracy, 
they wrote, seemed to be underpinned by more than just formal institutions, and 
certainly more than Schumpeters simple elites seeking votes formula. Expanding on 
Rousseau, Almond and Verba elaborated three categories of political culture, the 
parochial, the subject and the participant, differentiated by patterns of individual
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
orientation toward political input and output mechanisms. Identifying the 
participant culture with democracy, they wrote,  ... the participant culture ... is one in 
which the members of the society tend to be explicitly oriented to the system as a whole 
and to both the political and administrative structures and processes: in other words, to 
both the input and output aspects of the political system. ... They tend to be oriented 
toward an activist role of the self in the polity... (Almond and Verba 1963 19). Their 
research consisted of interviewing 5,000 citizens of five Western democracies to 
evaluate attitudes towards their political environment and participation in that 
environment. Methodological issues aside, the key point for our discussion is that the 
questions asked in large part centered on issues of trust.
Ideas on social capital have been built on the centrality of trust in conceptions of civic 
culture. While its roots are older, the concept of social capital was popularized by 
Robert Putnam et al, who defined the term as features of social organization, such as 
trust, norms, and networks, that can improve the efficiency of society by facilitating 
coordinated actions (Putnam, Leonardi et al. 1993 167). Particular emphasis is placed 
by Putnam on networks of civic engagement, which lower the risks of opportunism 
and free-riding, reinforce norms of reciprocity, increase perceptions of 
trustworthiness and transmit the experience of success at collaboration (Putnam, 
Leonardi et al. 1993 4).
As Habermas and others before, Putnam and his colleagues argued that success in 
overcoming dilemmas of collective action ... depends on the broader social context 
within which any particular game is played, but unlike conceptions of the public 
sphere, for example, this broader social context does not include the political 
(Putnam, Leonardi et al. 1993 167). James Colemans somewhat broader conception of 
social capital -  which he sees as the aggregate product of any and all forms of social 
organization -  leaves open the possibility for the political environment to shape 
incentives but remains, in essence, apolitical (Coleman 1990 300-312). Francis 
Fukuyamas similarly broadly defines social capital as an instantiated informal norm 
that promotes cooperation between two or more individuals. ... By this definition, trust, 
networks, civil society, and the like, which have been associated with social capital, are 
all epiphenomenal, arising because of social capital but not constituting social capital 
itself (Fukuyama 2000 3); here, too, politics is absent. Indeed, all prevailing 
conceptions of social capital, for all definitional differences, share one thing in
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
common: They locate social capital in a pre-economic and pre-political civil society 
(Gamamikow and Green 2005 97).
And yet Robert Putnam posits social capital as the element essential to maintaining the 
legitimacy of elite rule in democracies (Putnam 1976 137-138, 156-157; Putnam, 
Leonardi et al. 1993 171). Social capital is thus somehow simultaneously pre-political 
and essentially political. The tension in that conceptualization -  indeed, I would argue, 
the untenability of that conceit -  becomes clearer in empirical application and is 
addressed later in this project. Suffice it for now to note the following: Pre-political 
conceptions of social capital assume either that the value of cooperation itself -  i.e., the 
reason that people seek to cooperate and thus place a value on social capital -  is either 
constant from one context to another or else irrelevant (i.e., people will always seek to 
cooperate, regardless of context). But everything we know about political behavior -  
and particularly the institutional and political sociology discussed earlier -  suggests 
exactly the opposite: the value of cooperation differs greatly from one political context 
to another. And if that is the case, then it would take a tremendous leap of faith to 
assume that the relative presence or absence of demand for social capital has no bearing 
on its production.
A more promising approach comes from the language of economics. Writing in 1957, 
Kenneth Arrow likened trust to a public good, a good that is non-excludable in 
provision, non-rivalrous in consumption and thus non-profitable in production, 
essentially because everyone can have it for free. Arrow wrote:
... trust has a very important pragmatic value, if nothing else. Trust is an important 
lubricant of a social system. It is extremely efficient; it saves a lot of trouble to have 
a fair degree of reliance on other peoples word. Unfortunately this is not a 
commodity which can be bought very easily. If you have to buy it, you already have 
some doubts about what youve bought. Trust and similar values, loyalty or truth- 
telling, are examples of what the economist would call externalities. They are 
goods, they are commodities, they have real, practical, economic value; they increase 
the efficiency of the system, enable you to produce more goods or more o f whatever 
values you hold in high esteem. But they are not commodities for which trade on the 
open market is technically possible or even meaningful (Arrow 1974 23).
Usually, public goods -  such as roads, parks and pollution controls -  are provided by 
government. There is nothing inherent in public goods, however, that demands that they 
be produced exclusively by government; as Arrow points out, any sufficiently 
encompassing collective institution will do. Thus, trust -  as one product of produced 
social capital, to continue the economic metaphor -  can be produced by civil society as
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
a collective institution, given the appropriate circumstances (an issue I will return to 
shortly). More recently, this idea has been revived in the context of the globalization 
debate (see, for example, Kaul, Conceicau et al. 2003).
Fukuyama and other writers on social capital reject this argument. He writes: This is 
clearly wrong. Since cooperation is necessary to virtually all individuals as a means of 
achieving their selfish ends, it stands to reason that they will produce it as a private 
good (Fukuyama 2000 3). This reasoning is flawed on two counts. First, it is an axiom 
of economics that cooperation is actually not necessary, and although its absence makes 
transactions more costly, sufficiently strong contracting can be devised to make 
transactions possible nonetheless.
More importantly, however, Fukuyama misunderstands the nature of public goods. All 
public goods, at the end of the day, are produced by private actors, even those that are 
procured by government. It is the very definition of public goods that their producers 
have little or no classical interest in producing them. The builder of a public park is 
first and foremost a builder, who needs a contract and a paycheck. A public school 
teacher may be devoted emotionally and professionally to the betterment of future 
generations, but he or she also eats and votes, and those more immediate interests may 
frequently take precedence over the public good, should the two come into conflict. 
Thus, the public good of a municipal park is really achieved not by the contractor 
hired to build it, but by the political and economic arrangement that allows public 
resources to be allocated to the contractor for that end. Similarly, it may be useful to 
separate the production of such societal public goods as trust from those actors that 
enable its production for the purpose of clarity. The enablers -  whether teachers, 
journalists, activists or civil servants, as individuals or collective institutions -  perform 
political and economic activities no differently than anyone else. In this view, ideational 
considerations are secondary and contingent. What is of interest to us here is the 
institutional or relational framework that channels such mundane activity into the 
production of vital public goods.
It is this same misunderstanding that bedevils the contemporary study of civil society. 
By placing the fundamental individual economic and political functions of individual 
and corporate civil society actors in direct conflict with our normative expectations for 
the production of social capital, we thrust ourselves into an insoluble dilemma. Social
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
scientists have tended to resolve this in their own minds by discarding one or the other, 
the political-economic or the normative. Neither conception, however, can lead to 
anything useful in the final analysis. A purely normatively constructed civil society can 
never exist, but an institution devoid of normative concepts ceases to be useful in any 
civil sense. The result is two schools of thought, one divorced from theory, the other 
from reality. The former, ignoring the entire conceptual evolution outlined above, picks 
up from the idea of social capital and travels to non-democratic states to engineer its 
emergence. The second has absorbed the theory, but despairs at ever applying it 
usefully.
The Prism of Transition
It was against this background that a dramatic sequence of events brought the idea of 
civil society back to the foreground of the social sciences. In 1989, as communist 
regimes across eastern Europe, and later Eurasia, began giving way in what were seen 
as liberalizing revolutions, civil society was the hero of the day (see, for example: 
Taylor 1990). Given the history of the concept described above, this fact should at the 
very least seem strange. Civil society, from Locke onward, was always seen as the 
attribute of a democratic society, something that arose after liberalizing revolutions had 
been accomplished. By definition, civil society could not exist under an undemocratic 
regime, nor could it be the force behind a revolution.
Such considerations, however, were of little consequence to the dissidents who adopted 
civil society as their battle flag. The concept itself -  a sphere of collective activity 
inherently independent from the state -  was powerful well beyond rhetoric. In the end, 
the growing popularity of such independent organizations as Solidarity in Poland, 
Charter 77 in Czechoslovakia, the Young Democrats in Hungary and the various 
national, professional and other groupings that arose in the USSR, and governments 
inability to control them, undoubtedly played an important role in the dissolution of the 
old regimes.
From the perspective of social scientists, meanwhile, the concept of civil society was 
reintroduced via newspapers and television screens, with disastrous consequences for 
theory. The dissidents, who first began to pick up on the idea in the late 1970s, saw civil 
society not merely as the rule of law and the institutions to check abuses of the state,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
but the emphasis was on self-organization, autonomy, solidarity and non-violence 
(Kaldor 2003 56). Thus, as the debate over form vs. function festered, the revolutions 
effectively decided the contest in favor of the formalists. Moreover, history seemed to 
be invalidating theory. Throughout the communist space there were interest groups, 
labor unions, samizdat publication circles, and myriad other underground networks 
organized to serve an entire range of purposes, except those mandated by the state. 
These organizations, movements and initiatives, which (appropriately or otherwise) had 
taken on the mantle of civil society, predated not only democracy but also the 
revolutionary moment, often by decades. The lesson here is that, even when the 
circumstances for civil-social behavior would seem to be missing, the desire remains; 
the corollary of this, meanwhile, is that where theres a will, theres a way. Thus, in the 
words of one observer, the civil society of Havel, Michnik and Konrad was a civil 
society in conspiracy (Sztompka 1998 193), a development unforeseen by all of the 
aforementioned theorists in this chapter.
Not only was civil society being observed in unexpected places, but it was doing 
unexpected things. Organizations were intended not to mediate between individuals and 
the state, as the classic definition goes, but to help individuals avoid the state. Thus, 
ideas such as networks of sympathy, anti-politics, living in truth, and the parallel 
polis involved generating a sphere of society that escapes the total hold of the 
overbearing state (Kaldor 2003 56). While many acknowledged the ultimate aim of 
using pressure from below eventually to force changes above, the more immediate goal 
was simply to exploit as far as possible those opportunities and niches for independent 
action that were available (Kis 1989). Because civil society for Eastern Europeans came 
to be inextricably linked with democratic ideals (Quigley 2000 194), this widened 
conception of civil society was in turn linked with a wider concept of democracy, one 
which goes beyond simply the organization of the state to encompass broader issues of 
behavior (Arato 2000 35).
As I will discuss shortly, this all points to a morphological definition of civil society, 
in which form is understood to follow function. Observers, however, interpreted it 
formalistically, redoubling their emphasis on the vaunted independence of the 
organizations involved, with little regard for the purposes they served. Most seemed to 
come to the conclusion that civil society consists only of voluntary associations that 
directly foster democracy and promote democratic consolidation (Carothers and
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Ottaway 2000 11). One unfortunate result, meanwhile, was that international donor and 
aid organizations, caught up in the frenzy to pick up on this (supposedly) new buzzword 
of civil society, spent much of their money on initiatives that were formally ideal but 
functionally useless (See, for example: Ottaway and Carothers 2000 ; Henderson 2003). 
Another is that many residents of the region, once so enamored with the idea of civil 
society, have begun questioning the utility of collective, independent initiative 
altogether (Averkiev 2003).
More generally, the issue of civil society and social capital in transition is well 
elaborated by the comparative politics literature in broad strokes, even if contentious 
and not well understood in its details. One line of thought, represented by authors 
including Seymour Martin Lipset and Samuel Huntington, sees democratization as 
resting on certain social requisites, including adequate levels of economic 
development and the presence of conducive social institutions, the latter of which is 
generally construed to include civil society (Lipset 1994). Others, including Dankwart 
Rustow, reject this socio-economic evolutionary approach, opting instead for a model 
based on institutional arrangements and patterns of conflict. In Rustows model, among 
other things, democracy arises when there is a sense of national unity, entrenched 
and serious conflict, a conscious adoption of democratic rules and politicians and 
[an] electorate ... habituated to these rules (Rustow 1970 361). In the context of our 
earlier discussion, these four prerequisites clearly imply a role for civil society. Thus, 
there was a consensus, summed up by Alfred Stepan just three years prior to the wave 
of anti-communist revolutions: The power of civil society to create and channel social 
pressures is extremely important (Stepan 1986 79).
In a robust early attempt to compare post-communist transitions to those elsewhere, 
Juan Linz and Alfred Stepan (1996) noted an apparent trend: civil society in Latin 
America, Southern Europe and Central and Eastern Europe had been instrumental in 
bringing about cooperative political change. True, there were also discrepancies. In the 
first two regions, pre-transition civil society was generally officially recognized, 
independent and well organized. With some exceptions, pre-transition civil society in 
Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) was officially banned, fragmented and poorly 
organized. Nonetheless, successful transition to democracy seemed to be associated 
with the ability of civil society to help coordinate an elite pact that would achieve
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Rustows requirements for conflict to be organized around democratic and accepted 
rules.
In theorizing this aspect of transition and democratic consolidation, Linz and Stepan 
argued that civil society itself must undergo a transition, from ethical civil society in 
opposition to political civil society in a consolidated democracy; among other things, 
this transition would involve a shift of emphasis from ideals to interests, a new 
willingness to cooperate with authority, and a new tolerance of internal dissent (Linz 
and Stepan 1996 272). Similarly, Arato writes that civil society would eventually have 
to learn to be self-limiting and to renounce the direct exercise of power in order for 
democracy to be consolidated (Arato 2000 78-80). This is, in effect, a simplification of 
an earlier model put forward by Marcia Weigle and Jim Butterfield, envisioning four 
stages of civil society development in transition: defensive, emergent, 
mobilizational and institutional (Weigle and Butterfield 1992). Both views relate 
directly to Adam Przeworskis conception of democracy as institutionalized conflict, 
with participants strategies determined by the surrounding institutional arrangements 
(Przeworski 1986). And they mesh with Claus Offes conception of civil society as a 
states associational substructure, determining the formulation and implementation of 
policy goals (Offe 1996 107, 113).
This strategy, meanwhile, generally manages to avoid equating the form and function of 
civil society actors, which, as discussed earlier, has been a critical error in other parts of 
the literature. Thus, when Weigle and Butterfield write that, when formal channels of 
interest articulation are closed to independent social actors ... groups utilize 
extrasystemic means of articulation, such as demonstrations, rallies and samizdat 
(Weigle and Butterfield 1992 17), what they are doing is concentrating on functional 
equivalents, rather than on formalistic categories.
Empiricists interested in civil society development in the region, however, reported a 
disturbing picture. In perhaps the most important such project, Richard Rose has 
overseen regular surveys to gauge public trust in and attitudes toward a variety of 
political and civil institutions, focusing on the same sorts of questions posed by Almond 
and Verba, and his findings have confirmed what any resident of the region would tell 
you outright: theres not much trust to go around. He found widespread distrust in all 
of the institutions in the survey (Mishler and Rose 1997 424). This phenomenon he and
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
others chalked up to a legacy of distrust holding over from the communist past (Rose 
1994 19). This and similar evidence has consistently been presented as evidence of the 
weakness of civil society in the region, and thus of a dearth of social capital.
It is my view that the approach taken by Rose -  while useful in the data that it provides 
about specific institutions -  is severely limited in what it can actually tell us about civil 
society in the region. By using Almond and Verba and other work on Western civic 
culture as a starting point, Rose and the New Democracy Barometer project equate 
civil society with those institutions that embody it in the West, with no regard to the real 
history of these institutions either in the East or the West. If these institutions, such as 
newspapers or interest groups, are not trusted in the post-communist East to the degree 
that they are in the West, the implication should be that they simply are not the 
functional equivalents of their counterparts in the West. Unfortunately, Roses approach 
is typical of the dominant, formalistic model of analysis. If we are unsatisfied with the 
prevailing approach, however, it behooves us to propose something new.
Civil Society and Social Movements
While political scientists, theorists and philosophers have had increasing difficulty with 
the concept of civil society, sociologists have had considerably more luck with the 
phenomenon of social movements. Social movements are the complex products of 
conflicts, perceptions and resources. They begin with the transformation of a threat into 
an opportunity, giving rise to reiterative patterns of contention between groups of 
actors, most commonly a more or less broad segment of non-elite society on the one 
hand and the ruling elites, in whole or part, on the other. As such, Charles Tilly writes,
.. .it is a mistake to think of a social movement as a group of any kind.
Instead, the term social movement applies most usefully to a sustained 
interaction between a specific set of authorities and various spokespersons 
for a given challenge to those authorities. The interaction is a coherent, 
bounded unit in roughly the same sense that a war or a political campaign is 
a unit. Such interactions have occurred from time to time ever since there 
authorities of any kind. The broadest sense o f the term social movement 
includes all such challenges. In a narrower sense, however, the national 
social movement draws its form and meaning from an interaction with the 
authorities who staff a national state... (Tilly 1984: 305, italics in the 
original).
For slightly more than a decade, a small group of analysts has posited the usefulness of 
social movement theory in revitalizing our understanding of civil society. Social 
movement theory, they argue, can help to move thinking on civil society out of the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
traditionalist, formalist trap of the strict, literalist interpretations of social capital that 
have led others to write of the death of civil society. A formalist interpretation sees the 
breakdown of traditional forms of parochial and local organization as fatal to civil 
society. However, by moving the focus to the process-oriented analysis embodied in 
social movement theory, it becomes clear that other mobilizational forms -  such as the 
often more geographically and structurally diffuse networks created by social movement 
organizations -  are equally capable of generating a vibrant civil society. Thus, Debra 
Minkoff argues that these organizations do four things worthy of note: they bear witness 
to denser social networks and social infrastructures of the sort applauded by analysts of 
civil society; they contribute to an enduring opportunity structure for activism; they 
promote the diffusion of collective identities by providing the infrastructure for 
mobilization by weak groups and linking otherwise isolated constituencies; and they 
promote public discourse and debate, strengthening the public sphere (Minkoff 1997).
Continuing the criticism of the dismal view of civil society most prominently 
represented by Putnam and, indeed, the debate that has centered around Putnams 
writings, Robert Sampson et al write, The positions of Putnam and his critics each 
have merit but tend to reinforce the way in which the debate on civil society has 
unfolded. Most of the data in dispute turn on trends in the individual-level backdrop to 
civil societyespecially declines in group membership and social-psychological states 
society debate has been waged on the potentially misleading perceptions, memberships, 
and behaviors of individuals as opposed to truly social, or collective, action (Sampson, 
McAdam et al. 2005 674-675). Rather, Sampson et al propose a strategy of inquiry 
based on an understanding of the social processes that give rise to and help sustain 
collective mobilization and action, an intellectual move that rejects the idea that 
collective action results simply from the aggregation of individual civic behavior 
(Sampson, McAdam et al. 2005 676). This shift of emphasis is all the more important 
because it sees civil society as influenced in its development by its social and political 
context. Thus, Sampson et al write, The main difference of note is that movements and 
related protest events are not just aggregations of individual participants; rather, they are 
social products bom of complex interactive dynamics played out within established 
social settings (Sampson, McAdam et al. 2005 678).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
A social-movement perspective recognizes that quantifiable facts -  actions and voiced 
opinions by politicians and challengers, for example -  must be seen in the context of 
their interpretation by the people in whose lives those facts exist. David Snow et al 
write, what is at issue is not merely the presence or absence of grievances, but the 
manner in which grievances are interpreted and the generation and diffusion of those 
interpretations (Snow, Rochford Jr. et al. 1986 466). Likewise, James Jasper writes that 
moral outrage depends on the interpretation of shocks in context, while shocks depend 
on preexisting patterns of affect, which channel the interpretation of announcements and 
revelations; thus, what people already know (or believe they know) about their 
contexts directly affects the meaning of what happens to them (Jasper 1998 409). How 
people understand their grievances and their underlying causes, then, is as important as 
the presence of those grievances in the first place.
The interpretation of grievances is, Charles Kurzman writes, a potentially confusing 
process, particularly in contexts when individuals are unable to form reasonably certain 
expectations as to the actions and reactions of authorities. This confusion, moreover, is 
different from uncertainty; Kurzman writes: To the extent that the rules of the game 
stay relatively constant, we expect the unexpected. But when we sense that the rules of 
the game are suddenly changed, and we no longer know what to expect, that is 
confusion. To attempt a more formal definition, confusion is the recognition of 
deinstitutionalization(Kurzman 2004 335). It is here that the iterative nature of the 
development of social movements becomes particularly important, as the process of 
action, reaction and interaction allows individuals to make estimations as to the 
contours and content of what Kurzman calls the civic environment. When the 
contours are in flux, then confusion prevails, and collective action becomes less 
prevalent, potentially less purposeful, but also less predictable, Kurzman suggests. 
However, what might we expect in an environment in which deinstitutionalization is 
permanent, rather than transient, as it is in the revolutions Kurzman studies?
The answer begins by understanding how grievances are formed and perceived. In 
exploring the genesis of political opposition, Gamson begins by understanding the 
frame of reference employed by citizens when deciding to agree or oppose. Key here 
are two seemingly very basic and yet easily overlooked concepts: that of the decision 
that is binding, and of the authorities whose position makes any given decision binding 
or not. The nature of authority here is also important, Gamson writes: If authority is
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
decentralized and diffuse, every member of the system may be an authority on at least 
some set of decisions, although these decisions may vary greatly in importance for the 
system (Gamson 1968 22). In this view, however, authority -  even absolute authority-  
is never without consequences. By impinging on the lives of others in the system, any 
decision inevitably creates partisans, some of whom may be unhappy with the way a 
given decision affects their welfare. These partisans, in turn, seek to influence the 
decision-making authorities (Gamson 1968 32-33). Moreover, highly centralized, well- 
structured and authoritarian states tend to run into a large numbers problem, by 
creating masses of partisans all disaffected by the same blanket decisions (Jenkins 1995 
It is, however, insufficient for citizens to formulate and correctly target grievances vis- 
a-vis the state. For the purposes of mobilization, those grievances must not only be 
shared, but also understood to be shared. In an authoritarian context, this is particularly 
difficult. On the experience of dissent in the GDR, Steven Pfaff and Hyojoung Kim 
write, Even in repressive mono-organizational regimes, general knowledge of the 
states poor performance is not difficult for citizens to obtain. What is often left secret is 
how widely grievances are shared among ones neighbors, particularly where extralocal 
communication is difficult and actors are clustered in localized, homophilous social 
niches. In the absence of such information, individual grievances remain too 
compartmentalized to fuel collective action (Pfaff and Kim 2003 408). Collective 
action, moreover, reaches its peak when grievances are sufficiently widely shared that 
dissenters can be assured of solidarity (Pfaff 1996).
Further, it is suggested that even an awareness of common grievance with properly 
directed blame is not sufficient for a movement to thrive. Francesca Polletta and James 
Japser write that movement participants are in need of a collective identity, which they 
define as an individuals cognitive, moral, and emotional connection with a broader 
community, category, practice, or institution, and that this identity is often galvanized 
only through action (Polletta and Jasper 2001). Thus, the shared experience of protest 
solidifies perceptions of shared grievances and shores up expectations of solidarity, 
while providing a common starting point for discussions of further action and 
organization.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The resource mobilization perspective on social movements likewise suggests that 
grievances are not enough, and that politics has a role to play. Thus, John McCarthy and 
Mayer Zald write, grievances and discontent may be defined, created, and manipulated 
by issue entrepreneurs and organizations (McCarthy and Zald 1977 1215). While this 
central thesis is not in dispute, it is unclear how many of the other tenets of the resource 
mobilization perspective are useful to our analysis. In large part, this is because the 
literature on the subject has been dominated by a heavily Western, and indeed a heavily 
American perspective, in which movement organizations are accustomed to wooing 
donors, lobbying legislators and interacting with a rich array of other organizations in a 
largely benign environment. This picture, needless to say, hardly resembles Russia.
Thus, when McCarthy and Zald write that, Society provides the infrastructure which 
social movement industries and other industries utilize ... [including] communication 
media and expense, levels of affluence, degree of access to institutional centers, 
preexisting networks and occupational structure and growth, one is left wondering 
whether they do not in fact mean that it is the political regime that provides (or fails to 
provide) the infrastructure they describe (McCarthy and Zald 1977 1217).
The perspective provided by the social movement literature, when taken in the context 
of the historical debate on civil society, brings us back full circle to the initial insights of 
the political philosophers, while rooting them in empirical investigation and analysis.
By seeing civil society not as a formally defined category of actor, but rather as the 
product of interaction between citizens and states, this perspective allows civil society 
to be simultaneously contingent in its form and content and purposeful in its action. It 
rids us of the necessity of determining what sorts of actors we may investigate, because 
it is interested in processes, rather than things. While we must not assume an inherent 
link between actors and function, it reminds us that actions have purpose and meaning. 
And it gives us useful tools for understanding how those purposes and meanings are 
created.
Conclusions
This chapter has traced the remarkable evolution of a beleaguered idea. Indeed, it is 
sometimes tempting to surrender to despair and declare that the concept of civil society 
has been so stretched, contorted and abused over the last several centuries that it should 
simply be abandoned. Nonetheless, leading thinkers of almost every generation since
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Locke have found themselves returning to this territory, which one way or another finds 
itself implicated in the more robust theories of politics. In each case, definitions have 
been offered, and though some degree of variation is to be expected, they often vary so 
widely that the associated theorists appear to be speaking different languages.
Recent history has both complicated matters further and suggested a solution. Despite 
the predominantly formalist approach taken to the study of civil society in transition, the 
way in which East European civil society defined itself up to and during the transition 
moment was essentially morphological. The goal they set out to achieve -  the collective 
avoidance or circumvention of the state in order to achieve individual sovereignty -  had 
not earlier been part of the civil society literature. It would thus be all too easy to 
forsake these activists as misguided and exclude them from consideration, as some 
observers have done (see, for example: Pelczynski 1988 368). But that would be a 
mistake, because it is precisely this development that allows us to see the common 
thread running through earlier conceptions -  that of public sovereignty, or, more 
broadly put, the structure of state-society relations.
Further exploration of pre-transition civil society in the communist space, meanwhile, 
warns us off of a formalist definition. Very few if any of the organizations active in 
Soviet-era civil society would meet the criteria mandated by the definitions that arose in 
their wake. Dissident movements, for example, generally put a premium on unanimity 
rather than pluralism and were less than democratic in their own decision-making 
processes (See, for example: Alekseeva 1984). Likewise, the publishers of samizdat 
failed miserably to achieve the standards of journalism demanded now from the press 
(See, for example: Feldbrugge 1975), and yet their success in the role Hume ascribed to 
newspapers is undisputed.
This excursion into history serves more than just a rhetorical purpose. Taken in the 
context of more than 300 years of political thought, the current vogue for conceptions of 
civil society that are either formalist (as in transitology) or pre-political (as in social 
capital) appears an anomalous blip. Rather, the line of inquiry and analysis pursued in 
the literature on social movements is more solidly rooted both in theory and in empirical 
fact, for it conceives of civil society as a truly social institution, embedded in the 
context of political and economic institutions.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
However, re-reading the long literature on civil society also reminds us why a focus 
exclusively on social movement theory can be problematic. For all its strengths, the 
social movement toolkit deals primarily with isolated instances (if long and complex 
instances) of interaction, and this narrowness of view can sometimes obscure the 
importance of seeing civil society as being an encompassing environment. Here, the 
concept of social capital, with its emphasis on the aggregate of norms and relationships, 
finds its strength, even while it lacks explanatory power. Civil society is infinitely 
broader, larger and more substantial; it is closer to the societas civitas than to the banal 
sum of NGOs. What is needed, then, is a definition of civil society that marries both of 
these observations, a definition that allows civil society to be discerned in the concrete 
facts of interaction between citizens and states but that also perceives civil society in the 
aggregate of those interactions.
Thus, I propose the following definition: Civil society is the non-violent means by 
which individuals collectively seek sovereignty vis-a-vis the state. As such, its form is a 
reflection of the state with which it interacts. Where possible, it may indeed subjugate 
the state itself to the public. Where this is not possible (or desirable) it may create ways 
for the public to claim sovereignty by circumventing the state. In any case, the function 
we are interested in remains constant, even as the form it takes and the quantities in 
which it is produced are variable. The specific types of organizations that might be 
included in this definition will depend on the surrounding environment. Whether such 
organizations as NGOs, newspapers, labor unions, chess clubs or political parties are 
included depends on the specific context.
This definition of civil society overlaps with other existing concepts, but is not 
concurrent with any of them. It involves social capital as the raw material with which 
civil society works, but goes beyond it. Nor is it identical to the Habermasian public 
sphere, which is much too limited a realm to achieve true public sovereignty. It has 
linkages with political society, but in this view the dividing line is drawn at that point 
where organizations seek formal power for themselves or their constituents.
The concept of public sovereignty also requires definition. To an extent, it is present in 
Charles Taylors three senses of civil society -  free associations, not under tutelage 
of state power; where society as a whole can structure itself and co-ordinate its 
actions through such associations which are free of state tutelage; and wherever the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
ensemble of associations can significantly determine or inflect the course of state 
policy (Taylor 1990 98). The sovereignty of people over the state is not something 
granted from above, as Locke would have it. In its most perfect form, when the state is 
subjugated to the degree that every individual is maximally autonomous (within the 
confines of Mills maxim of no harm done to others), it is something continually 
achieved and maintained from below, much as Rousseau described. But the absence of 
democracy need not rule out a realm of public sovereignty. Even in a totalitarian 
regime, civil society creates comers of opportunity for people to be free, in part by 
redefining freedom itself, much as Havel and others did with their moral dissent in 
Czechoslovakia. In this case, to use the economic jargon, freedom or sovereignty is a 
private or at best a club good, available only to those who are in one way or another tied 
to its production. Democracy, then, results when civil society is able to convert this 
private good into a true public good, enforcing the sovereignty of each within a unity of 
The collective nature of the action in question, too, requires explication. While the fact 
of civil society, to the extent that it structures relations between citizens and their state, 
may enable individuals to exercise their sovereignty, it is not this individual exercise 
that interests us. While citizens no doubt seek sovereignty for the benefits it brings to 
them individually, what makes society civil is the fact of achieving that sovereignty 
collectively. Therein lies the creation and maintenance of a public in the sense 
expressed by Habermas, and thus the potential for public sovereignty as expressed by 
Rousseau. And it is this combination of the individual and the collective in one 
definition that allows us to distinguish civil society from other phenomena, whether 
purely individual action or, to the contrary, collective action designed to subjugate 
rather than empower the individual.
The strength of this approach is that, without succumbing to eclecticism, it combines the 
approaches reviewed in this chapter and finds the common thread running through both 
those conceptions of civil society prior to 1989, and those that emerged from the 
transition literature. By focusing on the goal of sovereignty rather than on the act of 
mediation, this definition would be recognized by all of the major theorists, from Locke, 
Rousseau and Hume through to Michnik.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Furthermore, it salvages the key realization of Hegelian-Marxist thought on the subject 
(though not necessarily its Leninist continuation), namely that civil society is contingent 
on the environment and patterns of interaction established by the state (defined here not 
simply as that entity that monopolizes legitimate violence, but as the sum total of the 
institutions of coercive governance and their structurated aspects). But whereas Marx 
argued that civil society is captive, I argue that it is contingent.
This definition of civil society will allow me to make sense of the case studies that 
follow in this thesis. Without a common conceptual thread, these studies might seem 
little more than disparate, passing glimpses into socio-political life in Russia. Informed 
by a definition of civil society in which individuals strive for the sovereignty of the 
public, however, they become part of a broader story, in which Russians are engaged in 
constant contact with their state. Without a definition to guide analysis, it would be 
difficult to recognize the significance of sporadic, low-level protests or the antagonistic 
state responses they generate, and the line between entrenched informal institutions and 
unstructured patterns of behavior would be blurred.
Still, a definition is not enough. Missing from all of this, as Hanson complains, is a 
satisfying theory as to how civil societies with high levels of trust get generated within 
some institutional contexts but not others (Hanson 2001a 137). One solution, I submit, 
is to remember the nature of public goods as externalities, by-products of processes 
otherwise subject to their own logics. Civil society, like social capital, is always present 
in some quantity and form, a reflection, as Polanyi and Duverger wrote, of the political 
and economic institutions that surround it. As in the Habermasian public sphere, it 
mediates conflict and communication, but the end result -  the production of the public 
good, in this case public sovereignty -  depends not on the structure of the civil society 
so much as on the identities and interests of the participants in the communication and 
conflicts it mediates.
Finally, the application of the tools provided by the social movement literature, with 
their particular focus on the interpretation and reinterpretation of grievances and 
political contexts through an iterative and interactive process, allows us to 
operationalize the theory in a way that sees the production of civil society as a joint 
endeavor of both society and the state.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
This, then, gives us the beginnings of the model Hanson seeks. As Chapter 1 suggested, 
and as subsequent chapters will illustrate, the key factor would seem to be the nature of 
elite competition. But we are getting ahead of ourselves. The crucial achievement thus 
far, I submit, is an operationalization of the concept of civil society that is not only 
encompassing, but also allows for the application of analytical tools familiar to the 
social sciences, rather than the abstract reasoning of philosophy. That, I hope, will 
distinguish this thesis from many (though, of course, far from all) contemporary 
discussions on civil society, by relocating civil society squarely in the context of politics 
and contestation, identifying the institutional aspects of state-society interaction and 
telling a sociologically grounded story of how the nature of power in Russia influences 
the development of opposition.
In sum, if civil society is the realm of difference, then it is inherently defined by what 
surrounds it. As a mediator, it is conditioned by what actors want. As an enabler, it is 
constrained by what institutional frameworks allow. Civil society is not a force in and of 
itself. Rather, it is the means by which force is exerted, the tool with which aims are 
achieved, and the space in which conflicts are played out. Thus, the idea that a truly 
engaged civil society might somehow be engineered without concomitantly 
reengineering the state appears to me absurd. Civil society and the state inhabit the same 
territory and are always contiguous. One cannot change without altering the other.
The study of civil society, then, is most useful not as an end unto itself, but as a mirror 
held up to the state. By examining its successes and failures, we might learn much about 
how it itself works. But we learn much more about how states and citizens interact, 
about how they shape each others desires and abilities.
Russia in Movement
Chapter 3
The Resource Curse & Russias Potemkin Revolution
S. A. Greene
Introduction
On Tuesday, July 8, 2008, a dozen or so residents of the town of Protvino, about 100km 
to the south of Moscow, gathered in a meeting room in city hall for a public hearing. At 
the front of the room stood a somewhat disheveled Nikolai Velichko, deputy mayor in 
charge of planning and investment for the city of around 40,000, who proceeded 
monotonously, quickly and without particular enthusiasm to run through the details of 
the citys new short-, mid- and long-term development plans: x  number of schools to be 
renovated, y  amount of new homes to be built, and so forth.
Velichko was clearly not enjoying himself, but under federal law all such projects have 
to be presented at public hearings, and so there he was. A week before the hearing, the 
city posted flyers announcing the time and date -  at 2 oclock on a workday afternoon. 
As a result, almost all of those in attendance were retirees of the sort who made a habit 
of attending such meetings, predominantly in silence. One exception was a woman in 
her late twenties, Anna, currently on maternity leave and thus the only member of a 
small group of local community activists able to attend the meeting.
Is it true, Anna asked the deputy mayor, that the new industrial zone will be home to 
a large bottle factory?
Yes, Velichko answered, and then proceeded to list the number of jobs the factory 
would create, the amount of money the city would get in new taxes, how that would 
help improve public services, and so on.
Anna had intended to raise a number of issues that she and her fellow activists found 
disturbing. Why, they wondered, would a city that was built around science -  Protvino 
is home to the worlds first particle accelerator and still has a number of important high- 
energy physics laboratories -  need to invest so much in the low-tech business of turning 
sand into bottles? Who was the mysterious unnamed European investor behind the 
project? How much pollution would the factory create?
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
But it was not to be. The deputy mayor noticed Annas pen and notepad and became 
agitated.
Youre taking notes, he said. Are you a journalist?
No, she answered, although I was thinking of writing a letter to the newspaper. 
Who told you that you could come in here and take notes? Velichko demanded.
I thought this was a public hearing? she replied.
It is a public hearing. But you cant just come in here without warning and start taking 
notes. Maybe youd like to take pictures, too? How would you like it if  I came into your 
bedroom at six in the morning and started taking pictures, just like that, without warning 
and without permission? You have to respect a persons privacy
With that, Velichko asked whether there were any further questions, noted that, other 
than from Anna, there were none, and declared the meeting adjourned.11
This is the environment in which Russian activists find themselves today: one in which 
bureaucrats and public officials feel that public hearings are their private domain, one in 
which concepts of accountability and constituency seem foreign. Yuri Slezkine once 
wrote (albeit in a different context) that the Soviet Union resembled a communal 
apartment, in which ethnic communities, like families, were forced by circumstance and 
against their better judgment to live together and share resources (Slezkine 2000). 
Communal apartments are almost gone, and the various republics have gone their 
separate ways, but post-Soviet Russia continues to resemble an unnatural household, 
which the elite and the governing apparatus are forced to share with the general public. 
Walls are erected, privacy is demanded, and mutual disdain all but rules out civilized 
dialogue.
11 The foregoing narrative was reconstructed from the authors interview with Anna, the participant 
described, on July 12, 2008. The subject requested that her surname not be revealed.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
In the rest of this thesis, I will describe and analyze cases of civic mobilization, in 
which ordinary Russians attempt to seek collective redress of their grievances from the 
state. Throughout these cases, the state and its representatives will appear much as vice
mayor Velichko in the anecdote above: removed, callous, self-interested and devoid of 
any of the ideal qualities embodied in the term civil servant. More than that, we will 
see a state in which the law neither binds officials nor empowers citizens, but is instead 
a tool in the hands of the powerful, frequently used to afflict the powerless. Lines of 
accountability and control are contorted and perverted. Russian citizens are citizens in 
name only: they enjoy no real ownership of the state they inhabit.
Before launching into these cases, it is important to understand how the Russian regime 
works, and in order to do that we must understand how Russia evolved from a rigid 
totalitarian state, in which the government sought to control every significant aspect of 
public and private life, into an authoritarian but hyper-flexible state, in which freedom 
coexists with disenfranchisement.
My purpose in this chapter is not to explain the demise of the Soviet Union, but rather 
to demonstrate how processes of change and continuity shaped the practices of todays 
Russian elite. Because I hypothesize that elite behavior shapes civic mobilization, and 
because we are interested in institutions, we must understand that the patterns of state- 
society relations are ingrained, and thus some historical analysis is necessary.
Moreover, none of the off-the-shelf regime types are adequate to describe Russia today. 
And we are in any case interested in the regime from the point of view of the incentives 
it creates for citizenship, and that is not the focus of most regime typologies.
Modem political science recognizes many more flavors of regime than simply 
democratic and totalitarian, open and closed. There is now a growing literature on the 
gradations of authoritarianism (most notably: Ottaway 2003), and since at least the 
1960s researchers have explored differences in political culture among democracies 
(Almond and Verba 1963). In particular, Almond and Verba, as well as Robert Dahl 
(1971), suggest looking at orientations -  of states towards societies and of societies 
towards states -  as a way of understanding patterns of political and civic behavior. 
Indeed, many of those studying post-communist civil society -  particularly Richard 
Rose and his colleagues -  have followed Almond and Verbas tack quite closely,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
tracking individuals orientation towards the various input and output aspects of the 
state, and then using the resulting data as an explanatory variable in the development of 
civil society (see, for example: Rose 1994 ; Rose and Mishler 1994 ; Mishler and Rose 
1997). Clearly, as Rose and others have demonstrated, looking at the orientation of 
societies towards states does yield some explanatory power.
Much less, however, has been done to look at the orientation of states towards societies 
and the corresponding effect on civil society. This is despite the fact that a great deal 
has been written about the way states interact with constituents -  that portion of the 
governed who enable the ruling elites exercise of power. Clearly, just as constituents 
have choices in how to relate to the state, so too do states have choices in how to 
organize their relations with constituents. Whether or how to hold elections, the 
distribution of power and authority, the structure of taxation, and any number of other 
choices open to states continue to be thoroughly explored by social scientists. Indeed, 
the democratization and transition literatures are chock full of discussions of the 
implications of various choices political elites might make (to name just a few: Rustow 
1970 ; Higley and Burton 1989 ; Horowitz 1990 ; Linz 1990 ; Przeworski 1991 ;
Shugart and Carey 1992 ; Linz and Stepan 1996 ; Bunce 1999 ; Kitschelt 2000 ; 
Zielonka 2001). Unfortunately for our purposes, though, the vast majority of this 
literature focuses on constitutional choices and formal institutions. Only a small 
minority (for example: Bunce 1983 ; Innes 2002) looks seriously at the less formal but 
nonetheless ingrained institutions governing the way elites identify and interact with 
their constituencies, or at the sources of those institutions. And because formally 
democratic institutions are often systematically subverted by anti-democratic behavior, 
it may well turn out to be these less formal, underlying institutions that truly inform 
state-society relations and thus give form to civil society.
What do we know, in broad terms, about the Russian political system? We know, for 
one, that it is seemingly powerful. During his eight years as president, Vladimir Putin 
brought all major television channels under effective state control, disenfranchised the 
most uncooperative of the oligarchs and brought the others closer into line, effectively 
ended federalism, strengthened the military and the secret services, eviscerated the party 
system and the federal parliament, and made large-scale public protest nearly 
impossible.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
At the same time, Russias governing apparatus is not much of a system: while an 
authoritarian ruling elite and bureaucracy dominate the country and have considerable 
coercive capabilities, theirs, as Valeri Ledyaev (2008) writes, is power over (the 
ability to control reactively) rather than power to (the ability to govern proactively). 
Meanwhile, the most recent analyses of the behavior of public officials in Russia have 
shown that laws and norms tend to be manipulated rather than obeyed (Solomon Jr. 
2008), while those constraints that do exist on officials opportunism are weak and 
loose, and laws and constraints enable office-holders pursuit of individual and group 
interests rather than constraining them (Oleinik 2008 184, italics in the original).
Establishing this behavioral portrait of the regime is essential, because we hypothesize a 
link between the regime and strategies of civic mobilization (or the lack thereof). This 
chapter, then, seeks to understand the underlying institutions and practices that shape 
the Russian political regime and the behavior of bureaucrats and public officials from 
top to bottom. Because we see institutions as historically and socially ingrained patterns 
of behavior, I will begin with an analysis of the late Soviet period, in which power is 
transformed into a club good for the nomenklatura elite. From there, I suggest that the 
post-Soviet Russian elite inherited both this club good and many of the key habits of the 
old Soviet club that are required to maintain it, facilitated in large part by the countrys 
natural resource wealth. Finally, I will complete the portrait of a regime that is driven in 
its interactions with the public by the necessity of maintaining club power behind a 
fa?ade of democratic legitimacy.
The Club Good of Soviet Power
In 1994, the Russian liberal economist and former prime minister Egor Gaidar looked 
back on the end of the Soviet Union and, in a volume titled State and Evolution, 
mocked Lenin and the entire Marxist tradition. He wrote:
A complete history of the relationship between the Soviet nomenklatura and the 
Soviet nomenklatura state, the history of their torturous conflicts and the 
eventual alienation of the former from the latter has yet to be written. But for 
the moment we can posit at least this: the Soviet system was devoured from 
within, by its own ruling class. Marx wrote that the bourgeoisie was digging its 
own grave. Well, the Communist oligarchy, too, may have dug its own grave, 
but this was a shrewd and mercenary gravedigger, and it aimed to profit from 
its own death. More accurately, it aimed to turn a funeral into a party, a 
celebration of liberation from the old system and the birth of a new one  
which, by the way, it would also control (Gaidar [1994] 2003 60).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Gaidar went on to posit that his economic reforms -  and his rapid privatization plan in 
particular -  would thwart the nomenklatura's aims. It is another question whether or not 
his dreams came true. Our immediate task is to explore how it is that Gaidars initial 
observation came to pass.
In his landmark analysis of socialist political economy, Janos Komai identified four 
main pillars on which the classical socialist system stood (1992 42-43). These, in his 
view, were:
1. Ideology, which binds the Communist Party, together with the bureaucracy, into 
a more or less cohesive whole by providing a shared set of values, ideals and 
philosophical landmarks;
2. Power, the aim and motivation behind the ideology, as the ruling elite seek to 
maintain, consolidate and, in some cases, expand the control they exercise over 
society in order continually to reproduce the system;
3. Prestige and privileges that accrue to loyal members of the ruling elite more or 
less in accordance with their place in the bureaucratic hierarchy and, above and 
beyond ideology, constitute a powerful incentive for conformity, self- 
subjugation and continued participation; and
4. Coercion, which is available to the elite as a means of enforcing adherence to 
rules and punishing deviation from bureaucratic group interests, with a wide 
range of options from the removal of privileges to internal exile and execution.
Notably missing from this list is total state ownership of the economy, the institution 
that most liberal theorists -  including Gaidar -  tend to see as the original sin of 
socialism. Komai, however, disagreed, seeing state ownership as a tool for maintaining 
political control, rather than political control as a tool for maintaining state ownership. 
He wrote:
It is not the property formstate ownershipthat erects the political structure 
of classical socialism over itself. Quite the reverse: the given political structure 
brings about the property form it deems desirable. Although in this case the 
ideology plays a marked role in forming society, it is not the sole explanation 
for the direction of influence. The indivisibility of power and the concomitant 
totalitarianism are incompatible with the autonomy that private ownership 
entails. This kind of rule demands heavy curtailment of individual sovereignty.
The further elimination of private ownership is taken, the more consistently can 
full subjection be imposed (Komai 1992 362).
Meanwhile, increasing industrialization and the accompanying systematization of the 
Soviet government gave rise to a number of important trends in the Soviet elite. Most
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
importantly, despite Stalins purges the elite by the late 1930s was becoming 
increasingly specialized, and by the 1950s education in the Higher Party School was 
becoming important to political advancement (Mawdsley and White 2000 102, 116). 
This, in turn, helped give rise to the ambitious but disenfranchised elite to whom 
Khrushchev turned for support in the early years of his reign. Between 1956 and 1961, 
Khrushchev arranged the election of 458 new full and candidate members of the Central 
Committee, calculating that Expansion was a less painful means of renewal than 
turnover, and it was more profitable in terms of patronage (Mawdsley and White 2000 
137-138). This, in effect, laid the groundwork for the creation of the nomenklatura club 
referred to earlier, by expanding the ranks of the elite, stabilizing elite membership and 
deepening elites collective ties.
Khrushchev, however, like Lenin and Stalin before him perceived the need for system- 
wide reforms and a leading role more for himself than for the Party. Certainly, the fear 
and outright personal subjugation that accompanied Stalins rule had faded, and the 
professionalization of the elite continued apace. Nonetheless, high-level turnover 
continued, including 77% of the voting members of the Central Committee between 
1953 and 1961 (Hough 1976 3). In a matter of a few years, the elites initial gratitude 
for their physical security gave way to resentment of Khrushchevs reorganizations and 
interventions; as a result, the Central Committee that saved Khrushchev from a backlash 
in 1957 deposed him in 1964 (Hough 1976 7; Mawdsley and White 2000 137).
The 1964 putsch, then, represents the rejection of Khrushchevs autocratic control over 
the elite (even if his approach to society at large was relatively more liberal) and the 
coming together of an elite club, organized to effect stable, collective rule over an 
industrialized state and its attending resources. This development was made inevitable 
by the opportunity Khrushchev provided to elites to pursue both individual and group 
interests, with privileges and well-being owed less to the leader than to the benefits of 
holding a particular office in a particular sector. Leadership was delegated to a quartet 
of largely uncharismatic functionaries -  Brezhnev, Kosygin, Podgomyi and Suslov -  all 
of whom would remain in place for the bulk of what has become known as the 
Brezhnev era (Hough 1976 3).
This collective government, as Jerry Hough wrote at the time (1976), recognized the 
nomenklatura and Party/state bureaucracy as its electorate, in a way no previous
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Soviet regime had. An elite club, initially formed to defend group interests against an 
autocratic leader, was now essentially sovereign and moved to consolidate its position. 
Aside from continuing to increase the size of the top elite (see Table 3.1) and instituting 
the famous stability of cadres policy, guaranteeing a large degree of job security, 
Brezhnev et al instituted a number of policies beneficial to elites both as individuals and 
as more or less formally organized groups. These included allowing the scientific and 
research-and-development institutes a degree of autonomy, guaranteeing virtually all 
enterprises regular increases in investment, keeping production requirements stable and 
predictable, and promising access to policy-making and a minimum of central 
interference (Hough 1976 ; Bunce 1983). This corporatist arrangement, as Bunce 
termed it, gave elites unprecedented opportunities to satisfy their own personal goals, in 
exchange for adherence to a hierarchical system that would, in turn, guarantee and 
legitimize their positions and privileges. Brezhnev, as Robert Tucker wrote,  .. .offered 
consensual leadership for order and stability. He has been content with, and may owe 
his longevity in power to, his willingness to be first among equals in a truly oligarchical 
regime in which the various power blocs, including the military and the police, wield a 
heavy influence on policy (Tucker 1987 127).
Table 3.1 -  Size o f the Central Committee
1927 Ex pansion 1952 Expansion 1986
Full Members
Candidate
Members
Before After Before After
63 71 71 125 307 
43 50 68 111 170
(Source: Mawdsley and White 2000 103-104)
This newly empowered elite club faced all of the same systemic difficulties that had 
plagued their more autocratic predecessors. Returns on investment became increasingly 
meager, as crucial sectors of the economy -  from agriculture to industry to resource 
extraction -  faltered. To take one indicator, while in most economies energy efficiency 
increases over time, in the Soviet Union the opposite was true, and energy usage grew 
faster than industrial production over the entire period from 1940 to 1985 (Iasin 2002 
64). The planned economys inherent propensity to eschew innovation was reinforced 
by the alleviation of central pressure to increase productivity and became an obstacle to 
development even in such strategically crucial sectors of the economy as oil and gas 
extraction (Goldman 1980 ; Rosser Jr. and Rosser 1997). The governments refusal to 
address these issues -  indeed, its implicit promise to the elite that it would not address 
these issues in any fundamental way -  simultaneously freed and forced the elite (and
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
pretty much everyone else) to pursue the alternative, semi-clandestine strategies of blat 
and pseudo-market exchange that would quickly become the only means to keep the 
system functioning (Ledeneva 2000 ; Goldman 2003a). More on these strategies will be 
said later. Suffice it for now to quote Bunce:  ... instead of generating stability and 
growth, the corporatist deal generated neither, and political bankruptcy went hand in 
hand with economic bankruptcy (Bunce 1983 136).
Rather than erupt into crisis, however, the logic described by Komai -  combined with 
the failure of official reforms to rationalize that logic -  forced the adaptation of the 
systems participants to existence in what Naishul and Kordonskii termed the 
administrative market. This market, according to Kordonskii, can be defined as a
strictly but multifariously hierarchical syncretic system (the economic and political
components of which are inseparable even analytically), in which social status and
consumer wellbeing are mutually convertible according to defined, in part unwritten
rules, which change over time (Kordonskii 2000 11). Unlike the mechanisms that 
traditionally govern capitalist goods and services markets, in which buyers and sellers 
are on an equal footing and relations between them are horizontal, relations between 
buyers and sellers on the administrative market are arranged according to a hierarchy 
defined by values that have more to do with politics than economics. As such, 
Kordonskii wrote:
... Costs, goods, values, goals and the means for achieving them were fused into 
a single administrative whole, and the possession of means for achieving 
various aims divided people into strata, social groups within the socialist 
society. The economic situation of a member of these socialist social groups 
was singularly tied to his political status (with the specific meaning socialism 
gave to this concept). The system of political statuses (social background, 
education, position in society, place of residence, etc.) determined a Soviet 
significance) of all forms of activity was combined with an all-encompassing 
bargain between the owners of administrative rights and of consumer values.
The latter were always in deficit, and they could only be obtained by 
presenting ones administrative rights to them, having beforehand stood in line 
and negotiated with those who distribute the goods (Kordonskii 2000 14).
Even on an individual level, decisions that would otherwise be political take on 
economic significance, and vice versa. Positions are held not for money, prestige or 
even power, but for access and a place in the hierarchy; at virtually all levels, in
12 The term, popular in Russian academic thought, is less common in English. From the Oxford English 
Dictionary: aiming at a union or reconciliation of diverse beliefs, practices or systems. The connotation 
is that syncretic system attempts to combine elements that are inherently in tension with each other, in 
this case market relations and a political hierarchy.
13 All translations from Kordonskii 2000 are my own.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
virtually all spheres, the perks (legal or otherwise) became more important than the job. 
In the context of a state sustained by the total expropriation of property, this 
administrative market was reinforced by the consumer deficit inherent to the socialist 
command economy. For the average citizen, subsistence on what the state allotted was 
impossible. For the elite -  the nomenklatura, with its privileged access to goods and 
services -  such subsistence was undesirable. Every action becomes imbued with hidden 
meaning and is driven by motives that are ulterior and, because they run counter to 
official ideology, clandestine in nature. In other words, everyone in the system becomes 
to some degree a thief, expropriating from the expropriator (see, in particular, 
Kordonskii 2000 13). Ironically, by easing subsistence and providing opportunities for 
mobility, it was this thieving that sustained the system and staved off crisis.
Clearly, much more could be said on these and a number of other structural points. For 
our purposes, however, this analysis of the institutional political economy of really 
existing socialism is sufficient to suggest a model for analyzing late- and post-soviet 
institutional and elite developments. For help, I turn to the concept of collective goods, 
specifically club goods, to which I alluded earlier in describing the Soviet elite as a 
club. Like public goods, club goods are (usually) non-competitive in their 
consumption, but, unlike public goods, they are excludable in their distribution, with 
access limited only to members of an actively constituted group who agree to make 
more or less equal contributions to the production of the club good. For the club to 
operate and for the good to be produced, two conditions must be met. First, the 
members of the club must perceive a need for the good on a sufficiently regular basis, 
such that they would prefer the good to be in constant supply. And second, the good 
must be sufficiently expensive to produce, such that potential club members find it more 
beneficial to contribute to production even when they have no immediate demand for 
the good, rather than risk the necessity of having to produce the good alone at a later 
date. Should either of these conditions fail to be met, the club will dissolve and 
production will cease. Many clubs have enforcement mechanisms to prevent members 
from free-riding and/or deserting. If the bargain involved is substantially 
disadvantageous, however, no degree of coercion will be sufficient to hold the club 
together, especially as the coercers themselves will find it too costly to enforce their 
control.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The concept of club goods was promulgated by James Buchanan in 1965 as occupying 
the middle ground between private goods and public goods (Buchanan 1965). As 
such, club goods are semi-rivalrous, in that consumption of the good (or a unit of the 
good) by an individual reduces the marginal utility that can be extracted from the good 
by others (unlike with public goods, whose marginal utility is not reduced), but not to 
zero (unlike with private goods). They are also semi-excludable, in that the goods 
inherent degree of publicness (because it is semi-rivalrous) makes total exclusion 
inefficient, but a degree of exclusion remains relatively efficient.
If the above describes club goods, the question remains of how to define the club. 
Todd Sandler and John Tschirhart classically define the club as a voluntary group 
deriving mutual benefits from sharing one o more of the following: production costs, 
the members characteristics, or a good characterized by excludable benefits (Sandler 
and Tschirhart 1997 335). This definition subsumes six key characteristics (Sandler and 
Tschirhart 1997 336-338):
1. privately owned and operated clubs must be voluntary; members choose to 
belong because they anticipate a net benefit;
2. club goods, unlike pure public goods, involve sharing that results in congestion 
or crowding and, as a result, the net benefit enjoyed by club members must be 
sufficient to warrant forfeiting their ability to negotiate private (and thus 
potentially exclusive) access to the good;
3. club goods require an exclusive group whereby nonmembers are excluded;
4. Partitioning is what permits competition among clubs;
5. the presence of an exclusion mechanism that monitors utilization so that 
members can be charged tolls and nonmembers kept out;
6. club goods involve at least two allocative choices in contrast to the provision 
choice of pure public goods. Because exclusion is and should be practiced, 
membership size must be ascertained along with the provision level of the 
shared good. Insofar as the membership size affects the provision choice and 
vice versa, the decisions must be made simultaneously.
For analysis, it is useful to envisage the institutional structure of the Soviet regime -  all 
of the apparatuses of ownership, control and coordination that support the 
nomenklatura's campaign for maintained power -  as a club good. Thus, members of the 
ruling elite (the club) perceive the need for a collective mechanism (the good) that
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
will maintain and/or increase their power as a group, while guaranteeing each member 
access to a secure supply of privileges. As a contribution to the goods production, 
members agree to forego a degree of freedom and the potential for greater individual 
reward that might otherwise arise from individual economic and/or political 
entrepreneurship. As long as this collective agreement is able to provide secure benefits 
to the elite at a price below that which it would cost them to acquire similar benefits 
individually -  or to provide benefits that no lone individual could ever obtain -  the club 
will remain in place and the club good of Soviet control will be continually produced. 
This, essentially, is what Komai and Kordonskii are (separately) referring to when they 
speak of the propensity of the system to reproduce itself. As soon as the bargain 
becomes disadvantageous, however, enforcement mechanisms will break down or be 
overcome, and the institutional structure of the regime will be dismantled in favor of a 
new arrangement.
I regard this conception of collective rule as a club good as more than simply a 
metaphor. Over the course of this thesis, names and appearances will change. The word 
nomenklatura will fall out of use, elections will feature independent political parties, 
economies will be privatized. The argument, however, is that none of those things 
matter if the fundamental nature of power does not change. And in the last three decades 
or so of the Soviet Union, the cmcial and particular aspect of Soviet power was its 
concentration in the hands of a club, which sought to maintain position and privilege by 
means of broad economic, social and political control. But, just as Komai wrote that 
socialist ownership of the economy was a symptom rather than a cause of Soviet power, 
so too should we remember that the mechanisms with which the club exercised control 
are of only secondary importance. The key is the existence of the club and the 
maintenance of its position (the two are coincident). And the test of any revolution -  
whether in 1991 or 2004 -  is thus whether or not the club is dismantled.
The clubs rigid nature -  the fact that, once entrenched, it had every incentive to hoard 
power and little incentive to share -  eventually began to create socio-economic and 
political tensions. By allowing individuals to remain in high-level posts for long 
periods, the stability of cadres arrangement severely limited younger functionaries 
opportunities for career advancement. One result was to encourage officials and 
functionaries at all levels to maximize their extraction of privileges from the positions 
they occupied and were likely to occupy for the foreseeable future; this, in turn,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
supported the development of networks and horizontal relationships at middle and lower 
levels of the hierarchy. Another result of this increasingly Jurassic Party, however, was 
to create a generation of frustrated nomenklatura functionaries who had begun their 
careers under Khrushchev and were still young enough under Brezhnev to harbor 
ambitions for career advancement; notably, Gorbachev was among this generation 
(Bunce 1999 59). In other words, differentiation began to appear within the club, and 
its members were no longer wholly equal, even in principle. This potential conflict, as 
much as political stability and economic stagnation, was a key part of Brezhnevs 
legacy.
Macroeconomic troubles, meanwhile, only worsened the inbred inefficiencies 
associated with the shortage economy described by Komai. In the extractive 
industries, as in the economy at large, the Brezhnev government attempted a number of 
minor restructuring programs, most of which were designed to consolidate enterprises 
and clarify lines of communication. The Soviet system, however, had no administrative 
solution. What it did have, however, was a solution in the form of an informal 
institution, the under-the-table, off-the-books culture of transactions that allowed formal 
institutions to function and Soviet citizens to get by.14 Often referred to by the Russian 
word blat, sometimes called the USSRs second economy, this was actually more than 
either term suggests. In some respects, this was the Soviet Unions primary economy, to 
which the structures of the real socialist economy were nothing more than an access 
point.
Alena Ledeneva defines blat as
... a distinctive form of non-monetary exchange, a kind of barter based on a 
personal relationship. In the planned economy, money did not function as an 
equivalent in economic transactions; things were sorted out by mutual help, by 
barter. Apart from official rations and privileges allocated by the state 
distribution system to different occupational strata, every employee had a 
particular kind of access (dostup) which could be traded in blat relations. The 
relative unimportance of money in the command economy brought into being 
this specific form of exchange, lying somewhere between commodity exchange 
and gift giving (Ledeneva 2000 184).
14 In their categorization, Helmke and Levitsky identify blat and its attendant phenomena as an 
accommodating informal institution, which contradict the spirit, but not the letter of the formal rules 
in order to increase efficiency. It may be more appropriate, however, to classify them as competing 
informal institutions, which structure incentives in ways that are incompatible with the formal rules. 
(Helmke and Levitsky 2004 729) The informal economy in the Soviet Union clearly contradicted the 
strictures of socialism and most associated activities were punishable by law. The question, then, becomes 
why the regime largely ignored such violations.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Thus, in a manner of speaking, blat was the currency of the administrative market 
Kordonskii describes. With it one could buy what could not be bought in any other 
way, anything from education to country houses and -  as shortages intensified -  just 
about everything else. Ideologically, blat was anathema. The political elite, however, 
came to rely on it not only to make life livable, but more generally to make the 
economy as a whole function. Party officials, as Ledeneva writes, understood that, 
Maintaining informal contacts in order to loosen the rigid constraints of the system 
was part of their function (Ledeneva 2000 196).
This was not, moreover, simply a secondary function of officials ordinarily tasked with 
pursuing official aims. In the context of Brezhnevs stagnant economy -  the period that 
came to be known as zastoi15 -  numerous people made trading in blat their primary 
profession. On the consumer level, as Marshall Goldman describes, there were the 
fartsovshchiki16 selling goods on the black market, valiutchiki17 trading currencies, and 
the deltsy18 providing private services; on the industrial level, tolkachi19 moved goods 
and services, correcting the central planners ubiquitous oversights (Goldman 2003a 
123-124). In theory, all of these people were marginal. In practice, however, they were 
crucial; no factory manager could make do without a reliable tolkach.
In an inherently inefficient system, blat was an ideal currency. It sustained the 
socioeconomic status quo and allowed business to be conducted at all levels. Most 
importantly, however, it was not threatening to the elite club. Unlike money in a 
capitalist economy -  where income can be turned into wealth -  blat in the 
administrative market cannot be accumulated. It is allocated according to ones position 
in the hierarchy, and thus, unlike money, it cannot be turned into an independent source 
of power. Once its owner places him/herself in opposition to the system, his/her supply 
of blat loses all value.
Officially, of course, there was real money in the Soviet Union, and after blat had 
been employed to negotiate access to a good or service, this money was used to 
consummate the transaction. Blat, rather than money, determined whether a good could 
be acquired. There was, moreover, no direct connection between blat and money.
15 stagnation
16 apron-wearers
17 currency-men
18 dealers
19 pushers
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Money, as a general rule, could not buy blat, and because money on the internal market 
was only symbolic, there was no particular reason to use blat to acquire money. The 
exception to this rule was the black market, both in goods and currencies. Whenever a 
transaction involved a party outside the USSR, the most important use of blat was to 
acquire money, whether rubles or dollars, which would in turn buy access directly. This 
phenomenon could eventually become a threat to the system, especially were the 
government ever to lose control of the money supply, and indeed it did.
It is beyond the scope of this thesis to explain the demise of the Soviet Union. It is 
worth noting, however, what did not cause the system to collapse: There was no direct 
non-elite threat to the ruling elites ability to maintain control, nothing akin to Solidarity 
in Poland or the mass exodus of East Germans to the West. Many of the elements that 
formed a potent counter elite in Hungary and Czechoslovakia were either absent or 
successfully accommodated by Gorbachevs glasnost. Thus, there was no need for a 
negotiated exit from power, for a hand-over of control to the opposition. What was in 
demand, rather, was a liberation of members of the ruling elite to pursue individual 
strategies. This liberation would include, first and foremost, the end of the Communist 
Partys leading role in elite recruitment, promotion and hierarchical organization. 
Second, it would include the legalization of financial profit and personal enrichment. 
And, finally, it would give elites license to cash in the state resources available to 
them.20
The ruling club thus found itself in a qualitatively new situation. For a growing 
portion of the elite, the collective bargain that kept the club together was becoming 
increasingly unfavorable. If we recall the supporting components of the socialist system 
as laid out by Komai, two things become clear. First, as the potency of ideology to 
promote cohesiveness dissolved, more emphasis would theoretically need to be placed 
on coercion, the legitimacy of which was, in turn, diminished by the decline of 
ideology. Second, the degree of control and privilege allotted to the elite was becoming 
increasingly expensive, even as individuals within the elite began to see greater 
opportunities for enrichment outside the confines of the club.
With the parting of ways by elites and the evisceration of the Party came the flattening 
of the hierarchy, the opening up of vertical and horizontal mobility within the elite, and
20 How this was carried out will be explored in more detail in the following sections of this chapter.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
the looting of state property. Regardless of the extent to which these effects were 
intended, elites adapted to changing domestic and international circumstances, seeking 
to maintain as much control and -  more importantly -  privilege as possible. The 
potential of a specific set of institutions to produce a specific club good had been 
exhausted, and the members of the club accordingly sought new institutional 
arrangements. As further developments demonstrate, however, many of them in no way 
intended to give up their ruling positions.
The Resource Curse in Russia
If power in the Soviet Union was generated at the nexus of the state and the economy 
(which, incidentally, separates the Soviet Union from no other country in particular), it 
is reasonable to assume that economic factors would help shape post-Soviet Russian 
political life, as well. And so an examination of contemporary Russias political 
economy is in order.
Two things are notable about the post-Soviet Russian economy. For one, dependence on 
natural resources is considerable and growing. Oil alone (not including gas, metals, etc) 
accounts for about 50% of energy exports, 40% of total Russian export income, and 
20% of total budget revenue (Curkowski 2004 286). By relatively conservative 
estimates, the direct contribution to GDP in 2000 (not including multiplier effects) of oil 
and gas was 19.2%, while metals (ferrous and non) contributed 6.2% (World Bank 
2004c). Moreover, oil (again, alone) accounted for approximately one third of federal 
government revenues in the mid-1990s and some 80% of the growth in budget revenues 
since the 1998 financial crisis (Ivanova, Keen et al. 2005 17). Thus, despite continuing 
exports of weapons, automobiles and other goods to traditional markets, natural 
resources make up nearly 60% of Russian merchandise exports (see Table 3.2).
Table 3.2  Natural Resource Exports as a Percentage o f  Total Russian Merchandise 
Exports_________________________________________________________________
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Aggregate 53.15 57.05 54.23 53.47 60.58 60.97 59.41 59.89
Fuel 43.11 45.76 38.25 41.76 51.28 53.11 52.21 52.97
Ores & 
Metals
10.06 11.29 15.98 11.71 9.30 7.86 7.20 6.91
Source: World Bank World Development Indicators (April 2005)
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Secondly, ownership in the Russian economy is highly concentrated. At last count, 23 
so-called Financial-Industrial Groups (or FIGs), many until recently controlled by 
oligarchs, controlled 35% of total sales, and are most active in oil, raw materials and 
machine-building, including automobiles (World Bank 2004c 99, 105). By the end of 
the 1990s, the oil sector was dominated by 13 companies (2 state-owned), producing 
87% of total crude output and 88% of total refining output; another 113 small 
companies account for 10% of total value; the state-controlled natural gas monopoly 
Gazprom also controls some 3.2% of crude oil (Curkowski 2004 288). Whats more, the 
entirety of Russias pipeline infrastructure is controlled by two sets of (state-owned) 
hands. Notably, these FIGs compete amongst themselves considerably more on political 
rather than economic battlefields (Barnes 2003 ; Yakovlev and Zhuravskaya 2004).
Recent research has shed considerable light on the web of causal mechanisms that 
underpin the negative impact that abundant exportable natural resources seem to have 
on democracy -  the so-called resource curse. Most simply put, the presence of 
significant resource wealth -  particularly oil, gas and minerals -  is argued to have a 
gravitational pull on a countrys political elite, increasing the price they place on power 
(to the detriment of democratic practice) and decreasing the price they place on 
everything else (to the detriment of everything else). Clearly, though, the resource curse 
does not affect every country the same way; oil wealth does not skew politics in 
Norway the way it does, say, in Venezuela. In a static model, this seems easy enough to 
explain; as James Robinson and colleagues write, countries with good institutions get 
by just fine, while countries with bad institutions ... may suffer from a resource curse 
(Robinson, Torvik et al. 2003 5-6).
In an environment such as Russia, in which institutions are weak and fluid, things are 
more complicated. Some of the effects that might be predicted in theory -  such as a 
positive effect on regime durability -  have not stood up to empirical analysis (Smith
2004). Michael Ross (2001), however, identifies three primary effects within the 
causal relationship between resources (in this case, oil wealth) and democracy that do 
prove robust: the rentier effect (in which states are pulled into the orbit of rents and 
rent-seekers); the repression effect (in which elites use repression to maintain power); 
and the modernization effect (in which income leads to socioeconomic development 
and the effects predicted by modernization theory). I will focus here on the rentier 
effect.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Ross further breaks down the rentier effect into three sub-mechanisms (Ross 2001 332- 
334):
1. the taxation effect, which implies . that when governments derive 
sufficient revenues from the sale of oil, they are likely to tax their 
populations less heavily or not at all, and the public in turn will be less likely 
to demand accountability fromand representation intheir government;
2. the spending effect, which suggests that . oil wealth may lead to greater 
spending on patronage, which in turn dampens latent pressures for 
democratization; and
3. the group-formation effect, which . .implies that when oil revenues provide 
a government with enough money, the government will use its largesse to 
prevent the formation of social groups that are independent from the state 
and hence that may be inclined to demand political rights.
Taken as a whole, the rentier effect implies .. .that a states fiscal policies influence its 
regime type: governments that fund themselves through oil revenues and have large 
budgets are more likely to be authoritarian; governments that fund themselves through 
taxes and are relatively small are more likely to become democratic (Ross 2001 335).
In particular, Ross finds that the taxation effect alone accounts for some 17% of the total 
negative correlation between oil revenues and democracy (Ross 2001 348).
Testing these and other hypotheses on Russia and the resource-rich Central Asian 
Soviet successor states -  which, because of near identical initial conditions, provide a 
particularly effective laboratory for evaluating divergent outcomes -  Pauline Jones 
Luong and Erika Weinthal draw attention to the ways in which the distribution of 
benefits from resource wealth either reinforces or undermines entrenched patronage 
networks and patterns of political competition (Luong and Weinthal 2001 ; Weinthal 
and Luong 2001). In their research, they adopt an approach that does not view the state 
as captured by dominant economic interest groups but rather as captured by the interests 
of its own elites who are primarily concerned with staying in power; the analysis is 
thus based on two assumptions: that mlers are interested in maximizing sovereignty, 
and that
.. .all state leaders are concerned primarily with staying in power and that to do 
so they must satisfy those interests that support their rule and appease or defeat 
those that do not. More specifically, they must continue to satisfy the status quo 
set of political and economic expectations that the state is expected to fulfill.
This will vary according to the particular system of patronage and the particular
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
cleavage structure on which patronage is dispensed in a given state. State leaders 
in energy-rich states will therefore choose development strategies that enable 
them to achieve a maximum level of sovereignty over their natural resources 
without threatening their continued rule (Luong and Weinthal 2001 373-374).
In this context, the resource curse is seen to be worse when the related benefits flow 
directly to state actors, whereas Private ownership results in the dispersion of proceeds 
from resource wealth, and hence, the generation of new interests outside the state 
apparatus (Weinthal and Luong 2001 216-217). It should be noted, however, that the 
link between the diversity of beneficiaries and the private ownership of resource- 
extracting companies is contingent, both on the relationship between ruling elites and 
private owners, and on the nature and security of private property in a given state. 
Indeed, it is not difficult to imagine a situation in which state actors, with assistance 
from or in the guise of private actors, benefit directly from privately owned resource 
wealth. Thus, the lesson to be taken from this research is that, from a democratic point 
of view, the optimal distribution of resource wealth is one that supports the 
development of a diverse and competitive group of stakeholders.
The standard approach to the relationship between states and state-linked firms is as a 
game between the public, the politicians, and the enterprise managers, which assumes 
that, because the public is disorganized, politicians cater to interest groups, such as 
labor unions, rather than the median voter as well as that the relationship between 
politicians and managers is governed by incomplete contracts, so that residual rights of 
control rather than incentive contracts become the critical determinant of resource 
allocation (Shleifer and Vishny 1994 997). In this model, politicians use firms to win 
political points among their constituencies. Because the model is designed for electoral 
democracies, it assumes that this constituency comprises a broad electorate; the 
implications change, however, if the constituency is narrow.
In a number of post-communist countries -  including Russia -  reforms initially (or, at 
least, nominally) intended to create a broad democratic and pro-reform constituency 
instead created a narrow constituency that was certainly in favor of the freedoms 
implied by the market but not necessarily the restrictions implied by democracy. As Joel 
Heilman wrote, Instead of forming a constituency in support of advancing reforms, the 
short-term winners have often sought to stall the economy in a partial reform 
equilibrium that generates concentrated rents for themselves, while imposing high costs 
on the rest of society (Heilman 1998 204-205, italics in the original). Following
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Heilman, Venelin Ganev describes The Dorian Gray Effect, in which private groups 
strong enough to resist the government may also be strong enough to undermine the 
organizational basis of effective democratic governance (Ganev 2001 2). This is 
reflected in what David Woodruff calls Russias economic backwardness, in which 
Russia has created market institutions that function like their international models on 
the transactional level, but not on the juridical level (Woodruff 2000 439).
The presence in transition economies of what Heilman and colleagues call influential 
firms -  companies with either current or historical ties to the state and thus the ability 
to influence state policies and actions -  encourages other firms to engage in the capture 
of state institutions in order to compete (Heilman, Jones et al. 2003). Politicians and 
bureaucrats, in turn, may have their own rent-seeking interests, leading many to argue 
that Russia and others have replaced the invisible hand with the grabbing hand (Frye 
and Shleifer 1997). This grabbing might seem an unwanted cost, but recent research 
suggests that it may be more of a tax -  a price major economic interests are willing to 
pay for their extremely privileged positions (Heilman and Schankerman 2000). Indeed, 
these actors may even prefer to maintain insecure property rights, as it is precisely that 
insecurity that allows them to maintain their domination of politics, jurisprudence and 
the most lucrative sectors of the economy (Glaeser, Scheinkman et al. 2003 ; Sonin 
2003).
Taking all of these phenomena together, the result goes well beyond traditional 
conceptions of capture and intervention. Rather, what we are left with is a picture of 
almost total mutual permeation, in which the lines between the political elite and its 
very specific and narrow constituency are often blurred. Put in this perspective, the 
distinction between state and private ownership used as an explanatory variable for the 
resource curse becomes problematic. Therefore, before conclusions can be drawn about 
the impact of resource wealth in a country such as Russia, it is imperative to conduct a 
careful investigation of the relationship between political and economic interests.
The Potemkin Revolution: Disengaged Authoritarianism in Russia
During the early reform period, economic interests -  including oil companies -  and 
political interests were often at odds with each other. Taxation in particular was a sore 
point, as the government continually raised rates and firms found new ways to avoid
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
payment (Luong and Weinthal 2004 140). Shortly into Vladimir Putins first 
presidency, however, something of a truce was called, and the two sides appeared to 
come together around an agreement, at the center of which was a new tax code. To 
understand how and why this happened, and its broader significance, it is necessary to 
look a little further back into history.
Much has already been written about the degree and character of elite continuity in post- 
Soviet Russia. Early studies -  most prominently that by David Lane and Cameron Ross 
(1998) -  suggested that the transition had severely dislocated the nomenklatura and 
created significant opportunities for the advancement of new elites. The most recent and 
in-depth studies, however, have shown quite a different picture. Thus, Olga 
Kryshtanovskaia claims that as much as 77% of Russias political elite and 41% of the 
business elite in 2001 had their roots in the nomenklatura (Kryshtanovskaia 2002 34). A 
number of other analyses, meanwhile, have demonstrated the considerable overlap of 
and blurred distinctions between Russian political and economic elites, both the national 
level (see, for example: Hough 2001 ; Simonia 2001 ; Goldman 2003a) and on local and 
regional levels (see, for example: McAuley 1997 ; Hughes, John et al. 2002). Still 
others have echoed Kordonskiis administrative market thesis and questioned whether 
the Soviet system left any institutional room for the conception of embryonic 
autonomous elites (see, for example: Etzioni-Halevy 1993).
The key, however, is not which elites are in power, but how they got there. Many of 
Russias most important political figures -  the likes of Yeltsin, Putin, Luzhkov, 
Primakov, Chernomyrdin, Yakovlev, most of the regional governors, ad nauseam -  are 
old nomenklatura cadres. This is all the more true of Putins more recent appointments 
from the ranks of the old KGB. But even those figures who tend to be seen by Western 
academics as members of an old counter-elite -  Yavlinsky, Gaidar, Nemtsov, Chubais, 
etc -  rose to power through traditional nomenklatura mechanisms (Davydov 2000 ; 
Hoffman 2002). The same is true for much of the economic elite, not coincidentally. 
Berezovsky and Khodorkovsky are only two of the best examples (Goldman 2003a). 
This is not to say that they rose through the Komsomol and Party apparatus, although 
Yavlinsky and Gaidar did. Many of those in the elite whom Lane and Ross would see as 
newcomers relied on the old networks of patronage and cronyism to build their careers. 
Nemtsov, now an opposition leader, is an excellent example, for much of his career 
pushing his reformist agenda by currying favor with those, such as Yeltsin, who could
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
give him power (Davydov 2000 142-155). Some of his liberal colleagues -  Kirienko 
and Stepashin, most prominently -  continue to employ that strategy.
Throughout the government and the civil service, this had perpetuated an atmosphere 
not dissimilar to a royal court, in which service to superiors rather than service to the 
public or even the state was the surest way to advance (Afanasiev 1996). Indeed, a study 
by the Russian Academy of State Service found that fully 45 percent of those 
government officials surveyed believed personal relationships to be the key to career 
advancement; only 19 percent gave the same weight to performance (Afanasiev 1996 
153). This approach appeared to extend to the highest levels of power, as Yeltsin tended 
to select prime ministers and other key politicians based more on personal preferences 
and gut feelings than real policy concerns (Davydov 2000).
Reddaway and Glinsky suggest that the Yeltsin team made a conscious decision to 
preserve the old, closed channels of recruitment rather than open up the political system. 
Such a scenario [of an open system], they write, would threaten Yeltsin and his 
entourage by turning them into transitional figures for whom competition with rising 
politicians from outside the nomenklatura could end in their own weakening or even in 
their retreat from the political stage (2001 33). The result was that the old 
nomenklatura became the center of crystallization of the new Russian political elite, 
while outsiders, rather than coalescing into a counter-elite, grew into the body of the 
elite as a kind of service sector for the elite. ... More precisely, this second group 
was incorporated into the first in the course of structuring the new Russian political 
elite (Kodin 1998 76-79).21 This both facilitated and was facilitated by the 
concentration of power in a strong presidency.
A relatively smooth transition for the old nomenklatura from status-based wealth (by 
virtue of membership in the nomenklatura) to property-based wealth (by virtue of 
ownership of capital) could conceivably have been endangered by market-oriented 
reforms and privatization. That portion of the old elite that had elected to go into 
business, as it were, mobilized effectively to ensure that such threats were never brought 
to bear. Using their leverage through the Congress of Peoples Deputies (the holdover 
Soviet parliament until the new constitution in 1993), they demanded and won a 
privatization plan that favored insiders through a variety of means, including barring
21 All translations from Kodin 1998 are my own.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
substantial foreign participation and leaving significant room for corruption and back
room maneuvering (McFaul 1995 ; Glinski and Reddaway 1999 ; Luong and Weinthal 
2001). This arrangement also suited those who chose to remain in politics, as it allowed 
a wide range of valuable goods that could be traded on the administrative market 
(Luong and Weinthal 2001). Finally, it suited bureaucrats as well, who were only too 
happy to see a flourishing market economy, so long as there was sufficient (and 
sufficiently Byzantine) regulation to ensure a steady stream of rents (Al'bats 2004). 
Thus, as Heilman (1998) and Ganev (2001) both described, a coalition of initial winners 
essentially conspired to prevent further reforms from depriving them of their gains.
Clearly, some felt there were even further gains to be achieved through continued intra
elite competition, which explains why oligarchs and politicians spent much of the 1990s 
at odds. As Luong and Weinthal note, though, The August 1998 financial crisis, which 
resulted in enormous losses in profits and tax revenue ... revealed the extent to which 
these equally powerful actors were both vulnerable to global markets and, thus, the 
costliness of their previous failure to cooperate (Luong and Weinthal 2004 145). Both 
the state and the firms had an interest in clarifying what Berkowitz and Li call tax 
rights, i.e.  .. .the property rights that a government appropriates over its own tax base 
(Berkowitz and Li 2000 370-371). The result was something of a corporatist agreement, 
in which the FIGs agreed to a substantial real increase in their tax burden in return for 
nominal but -  as the dismemberment of Yukos Oil Co. has shown -  not entirely 
concrete guarantees of property rights.
This has led some analysts to reevaluate traditional notions of Russia as a weak and 
captured state. In a recent article, Philip Hanson and Elizabeth Teague argue that in 
Russia -  unlike many middle-income states, where the state is frequently captured by 
big business interests -  . .the state is in a position of strength vis-a-vis big business
that is unusual for a middle-income country -  or, indeed, for any country (Hanson and 
Teague 2005 657). In this context, they argue that Russia is closer to what Schmitter 
defined as state (as opposed to liberal) corporatism, in which  .. .the state unilaterally 
designates particular organizations as interlocutors and excludes others; it may still 
derive information useful for policy from these exchanges, but it sets the terms of the 
dialogue (Hanson and Teague 2005 658).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
One notable peculiarity of this supposedly corporatist arrangement, meanwhile, is the 
fact that it essentially excludes labor. Indeed, despite their considerable contribution to 
the economy and pride of place among the governing elite, the mining and extraction 
industries account for only 1.9% of Russian employment (World Bank 2004c 80). This 
dislocation of economic production from the bulk of the population also corresponds to 
a growing distance between the state and the population. For one, Russia provides a 
notably lower level of public services even than other post-communist states (see Table 
3.3). The governments recent unpopular decision to switch from indirect to direct 
monetary subsidies to pensioners, veterans, handicaps, students and others is another 
example of this dislocation.
Table 3.3 -  Percentage o f  GDP Spent on Public Health and Education in Post- 
Communist States
Country Item 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Bulgaria Health 3.48 4.14 3.94 3.91 4.45
Education 3.23 na na 3.53 na
Czech Rep. Health 6.06 6.04 6.03 6.31 6.40
Education 3.93 4.05 4.04 4.16 na
Estonia Health 4.83 4.90 4.21 3.97 3.89
Education 6.35 6.89 na 5.48 na
Hungary Health 5.46 5.36 5.02 5.11 5.48
Education 4.57 4.66 4.92 5.15 na
Kyrgyz Rep. Health 2.93 2.52 2.20 2.06 2.20
Education 4.92 3.44 2.94 3.09 3.09
Latvia Health 3.80 3.78 3.29 3.15 3.27
Education 6.30 4.78 5.43 5.53 na
Lithuania Health 4.54 4.50 4.48 4.50 4.32
Education na na na 5.92 na
Romania Health 3.10 3.76 3.94 4.14 4.15
Education 3.54 3.52 na 3.28 na
Russia Health 3.41 2.91 3.22 3.26 3.46
Education 3.57 na 2.94 3.11 na
Slovakia Health 5.22 5.30 5.11 5.11 5.27
Education na 4.19 3.95 4.03 na
Slovenia Health 5.90 5.81 6.08 6.22 6.22
Education na na na na na
Ukraine Health 3.51 2.96 2.90 3.05 3.34
Education 4.45 3.62 4.17 4.68 5.43
Source: World Bank World Development Indicators (April 2005)
Partly as a result of these dislocations, Russias tax system revolves to an unusually 
high degree around corporations (see Table 3.4). In comparing tax strategies in 
transition, Gerald Easter noted that, While Poland worked out a social pact with labor 
over household incomes, Russia developed a system of elite bargaining over corporate 
profits (Easter 2002 599).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Table 3.4  Percentage o f  Tax Revenue from Individuals in Post-Communist States
Country 1997 2003
Bulgaria 14.58 3.33
Czech Republic 11.60 21.30
Estonia 18.20 19.57
Hungary 31.37 22.77
Kyrgyz Republic 8.64 10.46
Latvia 8.74 11.50
Lithuania 31.92 26.04
Romania 21.55 6.73
Russia 3.91 0.19
Slovakia 17.48 15.99
Slovenia 25.84 24.63
Ukraine 12.74 0.00
Source: International Monetary Fund Current Government Finance Statistics
It was in this context that a new term came into being: administrative resources, 
shorthand for the ability to turn state goods into economic goods and vice versa. A 
new term, however, does not denote a new phenomenon; administrative resources 
simply refers to the liberated incarnation of what was once monopolized and selectively 
distributed by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Thus, over the course of the 
1990s, the old administrative resources were traded, consolidated, divided and 
multiplied. In some cases, they were used to control privatization, in others to maintain 
control of enterprises that had been privatized. Regional elites used them to consolidate 
power locally and then as bargaining chips versus the state (see, for example: Ross 
2000). (Indeed, much of the tension that developed between the federal center and the 
regions in the early and mid 1990s was both instigated and resolved by issues of 
administrative resources (see, for example: Hughes 2002).) The state, in turn, used 
administrative resources to create political parties and other movements that could 
counteract local leaders (see, for example: Hale 1999). The balance of resources was 
always uncertain. One telling (although possibly apocryphal) story occurred in the 
aftermath of the August 1998 financial meltdown, when then-Prime Minister Sergei 
Kirienko paid a visit to Gazproms then-CEO Rem Viakhirev to demand that the state- 
controlled natural gas monopoly begin paying taxes. Viakhirevs reply was reportedly 
abrupt: And just who do you think you are?
Also during this period, new, non-administrative resources began to develop, giving rise 
to new currencies that could be exchanged for political or financial capital. One group 
is fairly straightforward: economic resources. The opportunity for businesses to operate 
openly on international markets and at world prices meant that, unlike in the Soviet 
Union, money now had a meaning beyond that defined by the state. This was a resource 
that could be mobilized either to trump administrative resources or to purchase them.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The second group of resources, for lack of a better term, might be called civil. In a 
regime that does not practice outright repression, public opinion can, at least 
theoretically, be mobilized and used either against and/or within the administrative 
system. The best example of this sort of resource in Russia is the extra-administrative 
political power once wielded by such media magnates as Boris Berezovsky and 
Vladimir Gusinsky (see, for example: Mickiewicz 1999 ; Belin 2002). Another example 
is the clout wielded by Gusinsky and fellow oligarch Leonid Nevzlin as successive 
presidents of the Russian Jewish Congress. The result was a tremendous degree of 
uncertainty, as this expanded administrative market searched for the proper values of 
all of these various goods.
Here, even as we observe the Soviet club disintegrating, it is useful to return to the 
theory on club goods. The dynamics of how and why clubs form and thrive has made 
the concept rich for use in political economy, and thus in our case, as well. In laying out 
the initial theory of clubs and club goods, Buchanan noted that the optimal club size 
naturally changes depending on the size and nature of the resource base, with 
equilibrium reached at the point where the derivatives of the total cost [to members] 
and total benefit functions are equal (Buchanan 1965 8). Other writers, particularly 
Eitan Berglas (1976), showed that economic actors would prefer club arrangements to 
private markets only when they stood to gain other advantages for which they pay in 
the form of a loss of efficiency (Berglas 1976 119). In the most common instance, this 
advantage is to be found in segregation: while private, competitive markets most 
efficiently serve heterogeneous, clubs are the most effective arrangement for serving 
actors who derive utility from consumption in an artificially homogeneous environment 
(Berglas 1976 119-120; Berglas and Pines 1981 148-152).
Considerations of efficiency in private vs.club provision of a good also stem from the 
optimal size of the firm(s) providing the good. Thus, Berglas writes, whenever the 
optimal firm providing a service is small relative to the market and exclusion is 
relative to the market, then increasing returns are dominant and the competitive markets 
fail (Berglas 1976 121). In the case of Russian power, the question thus arises of why 
the political market favors a large firm size? While this question cannot be 
adequately answered here, the suggestion is that the answer will have to do with a
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
combination of the rentier effect and the weak diversification of political demand (due 
either to unanimity of demand or to unanimity of non-demand).
To Berglass conditions, Robin Broadway added the cost structure of the good, arguing 
that club goods will become efficient if  the club good [cannot] be expanded at constant 
cost (Broadway 1980 132). Berglas and Pines (1981 145) dispute this, to the extent 
that private provision of goods can survive such conditions, but the general argument 
should still hold, particularly in our Russian case, where the members of the club are 
essentially passive takers of the quantity of the good to be provided, due to the 
reliance on income from commodity exports.
The concept of club goods, since the inception of the concept in 1965, has worked its 
way deeply into the analysis of authoritarianism and such democratic political market 
failures as clientelism. Thus, Jonathan Hopkin writes that Club goods, such as fiscal 
or regulatory advantages for particular industrial sectors, or public investments for 
specific territories, are collective goods, but of more narrow scope than the purer public 
than an individual level (Hopkin 2006 6). In his study of authoritarian Portugal, Nuno 
Luis Madureira writes of industrial fishing concerns that forfeited commercial liberty to 
a Consortium, which became the key source of finance for the members in return for 
limits on production and effective price controls. Thus, In effect, the price controls 
established through the regulation of minimum prices for exports created a club good, 
which yielded the individual cost of a decrease in production (Madureira 2007 84). In 
the Portuguese case, then, actors agreed to the forfeiture of economic liberty in return 
for price controls, economic stability and political stability. Similarly, in the Russian 
case, economic and political actors agreed to the forfeiture of economic and political 
liberty (in particular, the right of permanent accumulation) in return for guaranteed 
access to large scale consumption of private goods. In the classical conception, 
members of the club contribute money (or flows of money) to obtain utility. In the 
Russian case, members contribute utility (in the form of competitive liberty) to obtain 
money.
Clearly, what is often described as the chaos of the Yeltsin era reflects the uncertainty 
involved in the apparent disintegration of the Soviet club. This also, however, explains 
what has often been described as the democracy of the Yeltsin era. The collapse of old
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
mechanisms of coordination, combined with the collapse of global commodity prices, 
made the maintenance of the old, Soviet club impossible. Without the club, 
competitors for resources and power will naturally seek a minimum of restrictions on 
the ways in which they can compete. Thus, the liberalization of political and economic 
institutions, following the explosion of the Party and its apparatuses, opened up myriad 
opportunities for political entrepreneurs. But that was not the end of the story. As in the 
case of Portugal alluded to earlier, liberalization also imposes costs, not least of which 
was uncertainty. It should have been at least conceivable, then, that the demand for a 
new club could arise, particularly if the elite should desire segregation from the 
masses as insurance against possible disenfranchisement. With the demand in place, all 
that was needed was supply, in the form of high and rising commodity prices.
The old administrative market, meanwhile, remained intact, and almost all of the new 
elites continued to act accordingly. Very little attention was paid to the development of 
de novo enterprises or even re-investment into old ones, as resources continued to be 
hoarded. Insider privatization ensured that political standing was still more important 
than managerial prowess, while enterprises were routinely mismanaged for the sake of 
political expediency.
What we might call the Putin era has seen some changes to this landscape, although not 
as sweeping as has sometimes been suggested. One change has been the re
monopolization of administrative resources under the Presidential Administration and 
its electoral wing, the United Russia party. This has been a gradual process, beginning 
by coopting a number of other parties (most notably the Fatherland bloc and associated 
groups loyal to Moscow Mayor Iurii Luzhkov, ex-Prime Minister Evgenii Primakov and 
a number of other regional and central politicians and businessmen), supported by 
domination of the federal and regional parliaments, and culminating (at least thus far) in 
the elimination of directly elected governors and parliamentarians (see, for example: 
Alekseev, Chernov et al. 2004 ; Drankina 2004 ; Konitzer-Smimov 2005 ; Lipman and 
Petrov 2007). This has been accompanied, meanwhile, by the renewed influence of the 
police, secret service and other coercive institutions (see, for example: Shevtsova 2004).
The second change has been an attempt to eliminate or at least marginalize non- 
administrative resources, evidently in order to ensure that no threats to the position of 
the elite can be generated from outside the club of those granted access to
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
administrative resources. The clearest example of this has been the effective 
nationalization of the two main independent television stations, NTV and ORT, early on 
in Putins first term. Another example is the infamous Yukos affair, in which the 
various political, coercive and economic forces collaborated to dismantle a business that 
had gained significant leverage vis-a-vis the state. These developments must be 
carefully interpreted. The seizure of television stations should not be confused with state 
censorship, though this exists, and some independent voices do remain on other media. 
The state, meanwhile, continues to encourage the development of large, powerful and 
private corporations, many of which remain owned and run by oligarchs (Hanson 2001b 
333; Goldman 2003b 326; Grivach, Gorelov et al. 2004).
The policies aimed at monopolizing administrative resources and marginalizing other 
sources of power are most clearly seen in aggregate. Thus, the Kremlin pushed through 
a variety of new election-related laws in 2002-2006: raising the barrier to entry in the 
Duma to 7% of the popular vote (and to as much as 10% in some regional parliaments, 
such as the Moscow City Duma); increasing state financing for parties that do overcome 
the barrier; eliminating district voting in favor of pure proportional representation; 
eliminating the none of the above option on the ballot; dropping the requirement that 
turnout top 25% and 50% for parliamentary and presidential elections, respectively, for 
those elections to be valid; increasing the number of signatures required to initiate a 
referendum by 450%; and increasing the regulatory opportunities for election officials 
to remove parties and candidates from the ballot (Aptekar' 2004 ; Aptekar' 2005 ; 
Guseva 2006 ; Kommersant 2007b). The outcome has been a dramatic reduction in 
parliamentary competition, with the liberal Yabloko and Union of Rightwing Forces 
parties unable to gamer 7% of the vote, and the remaining parties -  including the 
opposition Communists -  in one way or another owing their success to administrative 
support.
Similar tactics have been employed against civil society. Evidently spooked by the mass 
demonstrations that precipitated revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine, beginning in the 
spring of 2004 (after the Georgian revolution but before the events in Ukraine) the 
Kremlin and its friends in the Duma began devising mles that would allow them to 
more closely control the countrys streets and squares (Guseva 2004 ; Rudneva 2004 ; 
Sadchikov 2004 ; Riskin and Pipiia 2005 ; Stepovoi 2007). Indeed, the first reaction, in 
April 2004, was so draconian in its restrictions -  which would have banned protest in all
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
strategic locations, including in front of government buildings -  that Putin himself 
revised it.22 The new law still gave the authorities broad powers to decline permission 
for rallies, marches and other protest activities, without clearly stating the reasons that 
could be used to justify such a refusal. Protests could be held near the Kremlin or on 
Red Square only with the permission of the president. Meanwhile, in early 2007, as the 
country geared up for parliamentary and then presidential elections, the Moscow City 
Duma passed an ordinance banning protests near major thoroughfares, courts and other 
pipelines, factories and other potentially dangerous sites, a rule that has repeatedly 
been used to ban opposition marches along Moscows main streets. Likewise in an 
evident reaction to the revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine, which the Russian 
leadership saw as fomented by Western NGOs, in late 2005 the government increased 
regulation of Western non-profit groups operating in Russia, as well as Russian 
organizations that receive Western grant funding; again, a draconian law was eventually 
softened, and few NGOs have been closed down as a result, but the administrative 
pressure on NGOs has increased across the board (Redichkina 2005 ; Moskovkin 2006 ; 
Pavlikova, Mukhamed'iarova et al. 2006).
The Russian states newfound wealth has allowed it to be proactive in these endeavors 
as well. Thus, in addition to building the walls around itself described in the previous 
paragraphs, lavish resources have been spent on building what Andrew Wilson (2005 ; 
see also Sestanovich 2007) calls virtual politics, in which politics is virtual or 
theatrical in the sense that so many aspects of public performance are purely 
epiphenomenal or instrumental, existing only for effect or to disguise the real substance 
of inner politics. Thus, parties are invented, purportedly complete with platforms and 
constituencies, staffed by Kremlin loyalists, funded through the Presidential 
Administration, and then dismantled when no longer needed. Three state-run television 
channels offer ostensibly alternative views of the current events, all carefully 
choreographed and sanctioned from above (Lipman 2006). The Public Chamber, created 
in 2005 nominally to serve as a forum and platform for civil society, was filled through 
a rigged selection process, as a result of which only those approved by the Presidential 
Administration could gain access (Lipman and Petrov 2007). Rather than work with the 
institutions of Russian civil society, such as they were, the elite chose to build simulacra 
and, in effect, carry on the political conversation exclusively with itself.
22 Many observers at the time speculated that the initial law was written deliberately so that Putin could 
revise it, appearing liberal while maintaining a robust new set of rules.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Conclusions: Putins Russia
It has been argued, at times, that Putins Russia is a regime of personalized power (see, 
for example: Shevtsova 2007 ; or Kryshtanovskaia 2008). Certainly, Putin is more 
powerful than his predecessor. Yeltsin, similarly endowed with a strongly presidential 
constitution (of his own creation), wielded his tremendous formal and informal powers 
sporadically, frequently delegating them to (or allowing them to be usurped by) others. 
Putin was more consistent in his presidency, never leaving any doubt that he, 
personally, was at the center of the ruling apparatus.
I would argue, however, that Russias power structure is personified, not personalized. 
Personalized power implies that power accrues to the ruler by virtue of some attribute of 
the individual. In Russia, however, the ruler rules on behalf of an elite -  a competing, 
often chaotic group that I nonetheless refer to as a club -  rather than in place of that 
elite. Putin serves functions, both internal and external, vital to the survival of the club. 
Internally, he appears to be the arbiter of competing clans (Kryshtanovskaia and White
2005). Externally (and more importantly for this argument) he is legitimator. In the 
modem world, with its democratic sensibilities, a Russian regime that came to power 
without a modicum of free and fair elections would be unpalatable, with attending risks 
to the elites European lifestyles. An elite club cannot win an election, but a popular 
leader can.
All of the foregoing discussion in this chapter -  save for brief references to Komais 
analysis of the Soviet period -  is devoid of any mention of ideology. Ideology was, in 
the end, a burden on the Soviet regime, constraining elites and forcing them to maintain 
an expensive and problematic coercive apparatus. The post-Soviet Russian elite have 
carefully avoided this pitfall. Certainly, Russian has no transformative, totalitarian 
ideology, and Russian citizens are free to travel, read, worship (generally speaking) and 
speak (at least individually). Putins mling party, United Russia, has only the most 
modest mdiments of an ideology, proclaiming that Russia is following some evolving 
double-epithetic system (managed-democratic initially, then sovereign-democratic 
later). While sometimes coddling true nationalists, the state itself pursues only an idea 
of national unity, creating what Ken Jowitt refers to as a castle identity (Jowitt 
2008). It is, in essence, a hodgepodge, ideally suited to the sort of virtual politics
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
described by Andrew Wilson, in which ideology is stage decoration for a play with no 
plot.
The plot, of course, occurs behind the scenes and has no direct relationship to the 
ideology. A fierce competition for resources unfolds backstage, with only one clear rule: 
whatever the circumstances, no one is allowed to step through the curtain and appeal to 
the audience for sympathy. Those with backstage access agree to forego popular politics 
(and, thus, a degree of independence) and are rewarded with the opportunity to compete. 
It is the job of the legitimator -  in our case, Putin -  to take to the stage and entertain the 
audience. This job is, of course, empowering, because he can at any minute bring the 
whole thing (or any particular part of his choosing) crashing down merely by raising the 
curtain. But he himself is not the power structure; he simply represents it on stage.
If we agree that the system of relationships that make up the power structure is at least 
as important as the person who personifies that structure, then we arrive at a picture that 
is much more complex and rigid than the idea of personalized autocracy might initially 
imply. This may be, to some extent, why Putin had to stay on as prime minister and 
head of the United Russia party, even as democratic legitimacy demanded that he cede 
the presidency to Dmitrii Medvedev: the informal mechanisms that Putin used to 
mediate and perform are his own and do not transfer easily to the new president. 
Medvedev will have to develop such mechanisms for himself, if he is to wield them.
But may also be why Putin is unable (assuming he is willing) to deal with systemic 
inefficiencies: he is beholden to his constituency and cannot risk disrupting the 
backstage machinations for fear of undermining his own enviable position.
Looking more broadly, the terms in which I have described the Russian regime in this 
chapter may seem to suggest the symptoms of clientelism: the privatization of law, rent- 
seeking behavior, predatory relationships between bureaucrats and citizens and, 
crucially for our study of civil society, civic atomization and impediments to democratic 
political accountability (for a discussion of the definition and parameters of clientelism, 
see: Roniger 1994 3-5). Indeed, some authors have sought to attach the clientelism label 
to Russia, arguing that access to public and private goods [is] still largely the object of 
clientelistic exchange. These goods included government jobs, housing, medical 
services, and economic resources (Vorozheikina 1994 114).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The difficulty with this argument, however, is that clientelism in Russia, if  it is the 
dominant game, looks very different than it does in more classically clientelistic 
environments, such as Latin America. For one, classic clientelism generally involves the 
exchange of votes or political support for private goods (jobs, homes, and so forth) or 
public goods (social services or infrastructure projects), and often involves well 
developed political party structures on one side and well-entrenched social structures 
(such as religious, ethnic or regional groups) on the other. Neither is the case in Russia. 
Moreover, clientelism leads to the development of deep and durable relationships 
between patrons and clients, based on a degree of trust and on expectations of continuity 
(Auyero 2001 175-179); relations between citizens and bureaucrats in Russia, by 
contrast, are more often furtive and characterized by a lack of trust. Thus, while it might 
be tempting to blame the atomization or, perhaps more accurately, the individualization 
of Russian state-society relations on clientelism, the evidence does not support such an 
argument.
Rather, Russia may be a case of what Anna Grzymala-Busse (2008) describes as a 
predatory rather than a clientelistic regime, in which the lack of competition and the 
ability to avoid the social distribution of rents makes it possible for the elite to eschew 
the costly exchanges involved in maintaining patron-client relations. The deal-making 
between officials and citizens is corruption, devoid of the social meaning of patron- 
client relations (though not devoid of social meaning altogether; see Ashwin 1996). 
Claus Offe (2004) writes that corruption facilitates micro-level trust but undermines the 
development of macro-level trust of the kind that could be useful to collective action. In 
this view, then, corruption and predatory governance could, in theory, be enough to 
generate the individualized state-society relationships that seem to stymie Russian civil 
society.
This occurs, again, behind a stage set of democratic legitimacy. Russia has held and 
continues to hold elections that are outwardly competitive even if closely controlled. 
Official rhetoric proclaims Russias adherence to European, democratic values. The 
leadership enjoys high levels of popular support, for the maintenance of which it touts 
increased stability and economic welfare. The Russian public, on the other hand, very 
well understands the meaninglessness of formal political participation, but has no access 
to the informal political relationships, which are deeply unsystematic.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
What we are left with, then, is a political system that actively seeks to divorce the public 
from politics and policy, limiting competition to those within the elite who can be 
trusted not to bring down the system of unaccountable privilege and power, but 
without placing undue strain or burdens of consent on ordinary Russians. The balance 
struck is uneasy, and elites will find it easier to maintain stability by strengthening 
authoritarian institutions rather than by building democratic ones.
In this view, Putins reforms can be seen as a response rather than a solution to 
the developments of the Yeltsin era (Mohsin Hashim 2005). He has not truly resurrected 
the Soviet administrative market, nor dismantled Yeltsins. He has instead presided over 
a long-awaited codification of rules, a convening of a new, somewhat modified club of 
elite interests. Indeed, if we return to our club-good analysis, a conclusion suggests 
itself: The selective incentive of increased certainty for the controllers of administrative 
resources (and of those assets capable of generating such resources) proved sufficiently 
strong to encourage the reorganization of a club. This club leaves its members with 
substantially more leeway and room for personal advancement than did the Soviet 
system and even leaves open the opportunity for exit. What it does not permit, however, 
is the mobilization of extra-administrative resources for advancement, as this would 
endanger the integrity of the entire arrangement and, thus, the welfare of all of the 
clubs members. This, essentially, was the sin committed by Gusinsky, Berezovsky and 
Khodorkovsky, the reason why television had to come under central control, and the 
motive behind the increased pressure on NGOs.
It would be wrong, however, to ignore the fact that Russia, while authoritarian, is not a 
police state. Until the nervous election season of 2007, arrests of political activists, 
journalists and other potential troublemakers were few and far between. Opposition 
newspapers and radio stations continue to get their message out, and the Internet is rife 
with alternative opinions and news coverage. Holding protests has become more 
difficult, but it can be done. Opposition parties are harrassed, but they continue to exist 
and one (the Communists) is in the Duma. Owners of major businesses know that they 
must be servile to the state, but they are still allowed to get rich.
This is not meant to be an apology for authoritarianism or to minimize the significance 
of the changes in recent years. It is noteworthy, though, that none of this appears to have 
had a real impact on civic activism in Russia. Indeed, none of the contemporary cases
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
reviewed in the chapters to come are significantly affected by repression, even when 
they fail. This, and the fact of the failure of Russian civil society consistently since 1991 
to mobilize, suggests that the root cause is not to be found in the repressive policies of 
Putins Russia. Such repression is little more than a restraining order, an attempt on 
paper to draw boundaries between two parties who no longer enjoy each others 
company. The root cause, I argue, is deeper, the product of the long processes described 
in this chapter, through which Russian elites, enticed by power and privilege and inured 
to accountability by abundant natural resources, have divorced themselves from the 
Russian people.
By emphasizing simultaneously the continuity of elites and patterns of elite behavior 
and the discontinuity of the political regime, I am not suggesting that we have witnessed 
an authoritarian restoration or a backlash against the democratization of the 1990s. 
Rather, what I am arguing is that the mode of politics shifted -  first, in the early 1990s, 
towards greater democracy, and then, at the end of that decade, towards greater 
authoritarianism -  in response to changing political-economic opportunities available 
to elites. Simply put, what looked like democracy in the 1990s was indeed a form of 
pluralistic competition, but its emergence was driven by political economic necessity
rather than ideological adherence to democratic principles. At the end of the 20 
century, however, something happened that allowed the Russian elite to reconstitute a 
club similar in some respects (but not all) to what they had enjoyed in the Soviet period, 
and that something, I argue, was the reappearance of natural resource wealth as a 
significant source of rents.
This, then, is the backdrop against which my case studies of Russian civil society will 
unfold: a withdrawn, disengaged state, a regime built for the purpose of autonomy, 
fueled by revenues from natural resource exports, and an environment in which state- 
society relations are individualized by a system that empowers elites rather than 
citizens. We will see this from various angles in the proceeding chapters, as civic 
initiative is stymied by citizens inability to arrive at a stable working relationship 
with the state, but eventually flowers in the rare instances when the state, for various 
reasons, decides to act institutionally.
Russia in Movement 
Chapter 4
Civil Society in Russia: What We Do and Do Not Know
S. A. Greene
This project began with the assertion that civil society in Russia is weak, and nowhere 
in the existing literature is that assertion seriously contested. The causal factors behind 
that weakness, as well as its implications for Russias development more broadly, are 
hotly debated, however. As a result, before delving into the case studies that make up 
the heart of this project, it is worth reviewing what we do and do not know about 
Russian civil society in general.
To the extent that there is consensus in the literature regarding Russian civil society, it 
is as follows: Russians exhibit low levels of participation and mobilization and they face 
a significant degree of repression on the part of the state. It is not, however, a simple 
and straightforward story. Russia has a large (though shrinking) number of non
governmental organizations, including at least some high-profile social movements, and 
protest does from time to time occur. Moreover, the state, while far from democratic, is 
equally far from totalitarian, and there is a significant public space in which civil society 
can operate. There are three broad sets of hypotheses most commonly promulgated to 
make sense of this situation: the first concentrates on issues of culture and history; the 
second is built on arguments about trust and social capital; and the third focuses 
primarily on the regime. Each of these will be reviewed in this chapter, but prior to 
doing so it is worth delving a little deeper into the puzzle.
If the story of Russian civil society were a simple and cohesive one, it would probably 
read something like this: Russians, not socially and historically predisposed to 
collective action, are beset by an authoritarian state that only deepens those atomizing 
tendencies, thus effectively stymieing the development of civil society. While I do not 
want to prejudge my case studies here, it is worth noting even at this early stage that 
observation of Russian protest movements reveals neither deeply engrained social or 
cultural obstacles to mobilization, nor overbearing repression from the state. And there 
are facts that point to this disconnect between theory and observation even in the 
existing literature.
The first of these facts is the movement of soldiers mothers. Begun in the late 1980s, 
the movement, first in the Soviet Union and then in Russia, has evolved into perhaps
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Russias greatest civil society success story. Loosely united under the Union of 
Committees of Soldiers Mothers of Russia, the movement consists of regional and 
local committees of activists, almost all of them volunteers, throughout the country, 
who pursue a two-fold strategy of providing services to individual draftees and their 
families and lobbying the government and the military for reform to end brutality and 
the abuse of soldiers rights. They have been successful on both fronts, becoming an 
important resource for soldiers and an accepted participant in the policy discussion on 
military reform (such as it is) (Sundstrom 2006b). Were the simple, blanket explanation 
I described above to hold, no such movement would persist in Russia, while any 
exceptions would be seen as un-systematic aberrations. Yet there are movements that 
persist in Russia, and the purpose of this project is to determine whether they are truly 
as aberrant as the blanket explanations would suggest.
The second of these facts is the short-lived but remarkably powerful / gotniki 
movement. In January and February 2005, Russia saw a series of protests in cities 
across the country, in opposition to proposed reforms that would have replaced 
subsidized transport, pharmaceuticals and other goods for pensioners, students and 
others with monetary handouts. The timing and content of these protests is explored in 
more detail in a later chapter, but they are worth noting here as the largest protests held 
in Russia under the rule of Vladimir Putin. The extent to which they were spontaneous, 
grassroots phenomena is a matter of some debate; while many of the local protests, 
including the initial protest in St. Petersburg, were apparently led by non-organized 
citizens, the Communist Party, Yabloko, the National Bolsheviks and others seem to 
have played a role in helping spread the protests around the country (Robertson 2009). 
While the protests never posed an existential threat to the regime, the Kremlin was 
clearly nervous (perhaps because they followed so closely on the protests of the Orange 
Revolution in Ukraine) and, while working to keep protestors off the streets, gave into 
their demands almost completely (Robertson 2009). Thus, if Russian civil society is 
weak, the Russian state would appear to be even weaker; either that, or civil society is 
not as weak as we have been led to believe.
A review of the dominant hypotheses in the literature, and a recapitulation in that 
context of my own hypothesis, will suggest a way out of this dilemma through further 
research. First, though, it is worth reviewing the formal side of the picture. While I am, 
as described in previous chapters, reluctant to equate civil society with NGOs and, thus,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
to measure civic activity by counting numbers of organizations and levels of 
membership, statistics and survey data on such indicators are so widely used that I 
would be remiss not to review them here.
Russian Civil Society in Law and Numbers
Russian law recognizes non-governmental organizations as so-called public 
associations, and the Law on Public Associations,23 dating to 1995 and revised several 
times since then, recognizes five categories of such associations. These include:
 Public organizations, defined as organizations with membership, created to 
pursue collective activity in the defense of common interests and pursuant to 
the chartered aims of the organization;
 Public movements, defined as non-membership organizations pursuing social, 
political or other publicly useful goals, supported by participants;
 Public foundations, defined as a non-commercial foundation created to collect 
and disperse capital for publicly useful goals;
 Public institutions, defined as non-membership organizations that provide 
specific services in the interests of participants; and
 Community organizations, defined as non-membership organizations created for 
the collective solution of various social problems that arise at citizens place of 
residence, work or study, aiming at meeting the needs of an unlimited number of 
people.
Throughout most of the post-Soviet period and the entirety of the Putin period, the 
Russian State Statistics Committee (Goskomstat, by its Russian abbreviation) has 
published statistics on public associations, broken down by the categories in the Law, 
and accompanied by figures on labor unions, ethno-cultural autonomies, political 
parties and, since 2007, representations of foreign NGOs. For reasons not explained in 
the methodological documentation, however, the statistics change radically in 2004, 
with the total number of public associations jumping from 11,311 to 153,523, most 
likely representing a change in the way associations were counted. As a result, I am 
presenting the statistics below in two separate time series, one prior to the shift (Table 
1), and one after (Table 2). It should be noted, also, that for reasons that are similarly
23 Russian Federal Law FZ-82, Ob obshchestvennykh ob edineniiakh, 14 April 1995, last revised 23 
July 2008.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
unclear, the numbers do not add up; thus, in many years, the sum of organizations 
registered in each sub-category of public associations differs substantially (both 
positively and negatively) from the total number of public associations reported by 
Goskomstat. Also in 2004, Goskomstat began reporting the number of organizations 
created during the previous year; these are reflected in Table 3.
Table 4.1: Total Number o f Public Associations in Russia, 2000-2003 (Registered as o f
Jan. 1)
2000 2001 2002 2003
Public associations 38,798 19,863 13,506 11,311
Including: 
- Public 35,465 17,745 8,419 5,686
organizations 
- Public 26,846 679 481 253
movements
- Public 1,168 1,172 958 866
foundations
- Public institutions 142 127 85 64
- Community 23 26 32 21
organizations 
Labor unions 26,837 7,582 2,965 2,244
Ethno-cultural 72 66 45 35
autonomies
Political parties 832 748 248 2,061
Source: Goskomstat, Rossiia v tsifrakh, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003
Table 4.2: Total Number o f Public Associations in Russia, 2004-2009 (Registered 
Jan. 1)
as o f
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Public associations 
Including:
153,523 149,201 145,743 1[41,789 128,997 123,406
- Public 
organizations
64,850 63,125 61,943 60,246 56,067 54,351
- Public 
movements
3,056 2,847 2,709 2,452 1,932 1,882
- Public 
foundations
8,871 8,643 8,419 8,270 7,538 7,250
- Public 
institutions
874 859 783 757 690 647
- Community 
organizations
224 222 216 207 195 189
Labor unions 58,431 57,515 56,852 55,639 50,708 47,007
Ethno-cultural
autonomies
512 578 621 662 695 727
Political parties 47 43 38 35 16 13
Foreign
representations
Na Na Na 70 46 256
Source: Goskomstat, Rossiia v tsifrakh, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Table 4.3: New Public Associations in Russia (New registrations in calendar year)
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Public associations 9,256 6,040 4,998 5,096 5,718 4,912
Including:
- Public 4,309 3,528 3,313 3,234 3,804 3,454
organizations
- Public 165 151 119 118 109 122
movements
- Public 609 484 417 442 384 291
foundations
- Public institutions 46 41 34 34 33 39
- Community 30 11 9 12 19 15
organizations
Labor unions 2,400 1,132 572 582 553 338
Ethno-cultural 67 86 77 55 83 72
autonomies
Political parties 7 1 1 0 0 0
Foreign Na Na Na 0 1 20
representations
Source: Goskomstat, Rossiia v tsifrakh, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
Three immediate conclusions emerge from these figures. First, despite other studies 
showing that Russians have low levels of participation in the sorts of organizations 
formally associated with civil society, Russia has a large number of such organizations 
(though exactly what that number is, is difficult to tell, and there are no good 
comparative figures for country-to-country juxtaposition). The extent to which that is 
meaningful, however, cannot be estimated from the Goskomstat figures: the figures do 
not register membership in these organizations or the size of their budgets, thus 
preventing us from distinguishing between active organizations and those that exist 
primarily on paper, nor do they differentiate between truly grassroots organizations and 
so-called government-organized NGOs, or GONGOs.
Second, perhaps suggesting that the statistics overestimate the actual number of active 
organizations (although that is, admittedly, conjecture), the overall number of 
organizations has been declining steadily throughout the period of this study. This trend 
has been consistent and has affected all categories of associations, with the exception of 
ethno-cultural autonomies. Notably, this trend does not seem to have been affected in 
any meaningful way by the adoption in 2006 of a package of amendments to various 
laws governing the registration and oversight of NGOs, which many at the time feared 
would be the start of large-scale campaign to close down independent organizations and 
prevent the creation of new ones. While the downward trend continued in 2006 and 
thereafter, it did not appreciably pick up pace.
i l l
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
And third, despite the decline in the total number of registered organizations, the 
number of new associations registered each year has been fairly steady since 2004, with 
the exception of labor unions and public foundations. Again, as with the steady pace of 
decline, this fails to support the hypothesis that Russian civil society is beset primarily 
by an overbearing state.
Table 4.4: Membership in Civil Society Organizations (World Values Survey)
Category o f organization Membership (% of respondents)
Social welfare services for elderly people 1.6
Church organizations 2.4
Cultural organizations 1.2
Labor Unions 23.1
Political parties (national) 0.7
Local political organizations 0.9
Human rights organizations 0.1
Environmental groups 0.7
Professional associations 0.9
Youth organizations 0.6
Sports organizations 3.5
Womens groups 0.5
Peace movement 0.1
Health organizations 0.7
Other groups 1.2
Source: (Belyaeva and Proskuryakova 2008 22)
Finally, while Goskomstat provides no information on levels of participation in NGOs, 
the 1999 wave of the World Values Survey provides some estimate of the numbers of 
Russian citizens who take part in the work of NGOs (see Table 4). By these estimates, 
as many as 31.5% of Russian citizens are members of civil society organizations. And 
herein lies the difficulty in interpreting such macro-level figures: while 31.5% is not a 
comparatively low number -  despite the conclusions of Marc Moije Howard and others, 
using data from other WVS rounds, that Russian levels of participation are low -  all but 
8.4% of that is accounted for by labor unions. And the statistics we have, both on the 
numbers of unions and the numbers of participants, do not allow us to estimate how 
many of those are members of independent labor unions that aggregate and mobilize 
worker grievances, and how many are members of the dominant government-linked 
unions that serve primarily to suppress grievances.
Thus, understanding the underlying nature of Russian civic activism -  and, more 
broadly, the puzzle of why there is not more activism -  is for now the task of small-N 
studies that can look carefully and in a nuanced manner at how Russians do and do not
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
organize. Such studies, meanwhile, must be guided by informed theory, and so I turn to 
the hypotheses that have dominated the literature on Russian civil society to date.
Hypothesis 1: Culture & History
One set of hypotheses regarding the weakness of Russian civil society -  indeed, the 
weakness of the Russian democratic project more generally -  focuses on Russias 
culture and history as an obstacle to the adoption of new, democratic modes of behavior 
and interaction. While many Western writers have avoided such arguments, seeing them 
as deterministic and path-dependent, they remain popular among Russian writers and 
continue to influence analysis in the West, as well.
Among the first to put forward a systematically cultural argument was Oleg 
Kharkhordin, a St. Petersburg-based political scientist. He rejects what he calls 
Catholic conceptions of civil society, with their concentration of attention on the 
creation of free citizens associations that (potentially) oppose the state and educate the 
citizenry, because it assumes institutional structures found in Western contexts, but not 
in Russia; to create such a civil society in Russia, he writes, one has first to re-create 
the absent monopoly of legitimate violence (Kharkhordin 1998 963-964). Given what 
he perceives as the weakness of the Russian state, Kharkhordin suggests instead of 
trying to re-concentrate violencethat is now diffused among many actorsin the 
single hands of the state once again, one may counteract this diffusion of violence by 
the diffusion of a civil way of life -  what he refers to as the Orthodox or 
Dostoyevskian project of civil society (1998 963-964). Moreover, Kharkhordin suggests 
that the tendency towards such Orthodox conceptions is reinforced by historically 
engrained habits of particular forms of collective action, which persevered even through 
Soviet times, according to which collectives seek not to gain sovereignty over the state 
in an Enlightenment sense, but rather to protect members from the states more 
pernicious encroachments. Here, he echoes the leading Western proponent of path- 
dependent theories of Russian history, Richard Pipes, who argues that Russia continues 
to be beset by a self-reinforcing tendency towards patrimonialism, rooted in the 
failure of Russian statehood to evolve from a private into a public institution
(Pipes 2005 181).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Iurii Afanasev similarly -  but considerably more forcefully than Kharkhodin and with 
a more exclusive focus on the past rather than the present -  posits deep historical roots 
of Russias current dilemma, which rest upon a fully unique relationship between 
Russian Power (Vlast *) and the people. But whereas Kharkhordin and Pipes see the 
tradition of state and society as symbiotic in their relative dysfunction, in Afanasevs 
view the traditions of the state are clearly primary, and the traditions of society 
secondary. Thus, he writes:
Our vlast is not only peculiar, as every power is in one way or another. There is 
every reason to state that Russian Vlast is unique and worthy of being 
designated with a capital V. This type of power was formed through the many 
centuries of Russian history and entirely determined the general picture of 
Russias history itself. This power contains both the riddle and the answer. It 
combines the autocratic with the socialist, the personal with the communitarian, 
the creative initiative with destructive reactionism. It is lord and murderer. Great 
and useless. ... Our power has always been somehow outside of society, self 
sufficient, not dependent on society and yet always provoking and repressing it.
The population has been forced to develop concomitant strategies for dealing 
with that kind o f power and, in the end, developed such a strategy in the constant 
movement into the shadows, in a way of life that is distributed between the 
normative and the real, between lies and the truth (Afanas'ev 2001 20-21).
The depth of the roots of such archaic tendencies, however, is a matter of some debate. 
Kharkhordins argument itself differs crucially from Afanasevs, positing that the 
salience of historical modes of behavior is contingent on contemporary dysfunction 
(which it in turn reinforces), while Afanasev sees contemporary dysfunction as itself 
rooted in history. The bulk of the analysis in the literature seems to come down on the 
side of Kharkhordin, however. Andrey Ryabov, for example, argues that Russias 
current political structure is feudal, and in that respect mirrors some historical 
phenomena from Russias past, suggesting that the emergence of archaic [structures] is 
to a significant degree a reflection of the unpreparedness of the transition society for 
further change and the accompanying new risks; society instead seeks to steady itself 
not only on familiar forms of social existence, but also on those forms that are hidden in 
the deepest archetypes of mass consciousness (Ryabov 2008 7). The phenomenon, 
then, may have historical roots, but it is caused by contemporary realities.
Similarly, though less clearly, Risto Alapuro compares civil society discourses in Russia 
and Estonia and pins Russias comparative inability to establish connections between 
state organs and scholarly experts on historical/cultural aspects, and particularly the 
fact that Russia is an old state with an old statist tradition, whereas Estonia, by 
contrast, is a new state, or a state under reconstruction (2008 84). It might be asked, 
however, whether the causal difference lies not in the historical accident of oldness or
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
newness, but rather in the necessity of the newer state of engaging the nation in a 
constructive process of nation- and state-building, a process largely avoided in Russia. 
Indeed, the author writes: In Russia, scholars advocating the notion of civil society 
have not been closely affiliated with centres of power. The situation is different in 
Estonia. Their relative prominence has been made possible by the perceived needs of 
statemaking (2008 85). (Alapuro goes on, however, to posit that such perceptions in 
Estonia have historical, rather than contemporary, roots.)
Turning a clearer focus on culture, some writers have argued that the failure of some 
civil society organizations to mobilize the public successfully stems from a 
misalignment of cultural frames, caused in part by the influence of foreign donors, who 
pull activists in directions that may be too dissonant with discourses in Russia. Thus, 
Lisa McIntosh Sundstrom delivers a powerful indictment of the impact of foreign 
funding for Russian NGOs, based primarily on two observations. First, she writes,
 .. .foreign donors on the whole have focused heavily on internal development and 
professionalization of the Russian NGO sector, but have largely ignored external 
mobilization (2006a 17). Second, taking the example of organizations for the 
advancement of gender equality, she finds that:
Foreign assistance efforts have failed to produce significant NGO mobilization 
when emphasizing norms that are not universal in nature but instead are specific 
to Western contexts. Womens issues that are difficult to frame without using 
feminist principlessuch as workplace discrimination and sexual harassment 
are examples of areas in which foreign donor efforts have largely failed from the 
standpoint of developing democratic civil society (2006a 170).
The result, Sundstrom argues, is that those relatively few Russian activists interested in
such issues more easily align their frames with Western conceptualizations, which are,
in turn, poorly received by the broader public in Russia. (Valerie Sperling reaches
similar conclusions, also about womens movements, writing that movement
globalization may run the risk of leaving broad segments of the Russian population out
of the equation (Sperling 1999 265). While this seems true enough, it is worth asking
whether similar issues of frame alignment and misalignment might not have arisen just
as problematically without foreign donor support.)
In sum, then, while the historical and cultural arguments enjoy the benefit of a deep 
understanding of how action and reaction may be perceived in Russia and thus have 
important and powerful things to say about processes of framing, when it comes to the 
broader questions of the development of Russian civil society they are causally 
ambiguous: beyond being deterministic (which is, after all, more of a normative failure
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
than an analytical one), they cannot clearly distinguish between those effects that are 
truly historical and/or cultural in nature and those that are contemporary factors 
masquerading in historical guise. Moreover, because they rely on broad, all- 
encompassing categories from which no member of a society or polity is assumed to 
escape, historicist or culturist arguments inevitably deal poorly with diversity. 
Additionally, there is division within the literature between those who trace 
contemporary challenges back to problems of societal development and those who 
blame the character of the state. And while they may be convincing in the aggregate, 
such arguments do not provide useful analytical tools for explaining exceptions to the 
rule of low levels of civic mobilization. Some of these themes -  including the division 
between state-centric and society-centric viewpoints -  resurface below, in the 
discussion of social capital and of the Russian regime; while other, more 
contemporary approaches may provide more ready tools of analysis, they all, one way 
or another, return back to Russias history and culture.
Hypothesis 2: Social Capital & Trust
Those writers who have sought broad, if not to say blanket, explanations for the 
weakness of Russian society but who have been for whatever reasons dissatisfied with 
the historical and cultural arguments have turned to conceptions of social capital and 
trust. Such arguments also point to causes and effects that are pervasive and deeply 
engrained, but, unlike in the previous section, they are rooted in a clearer theoretical and 
empirical basis and thus may do a better job of dealing with diversity.
Unfortunately, the evidence on trust and social capital has proved vexingly hard for 
analysts to interpret. In his highly influential work on civil society in Russia and the 
former East Germany, Marc Moije Howard writes, a great number of citizens ... feel a 
strong and lingering sense of distrust of any kind of public organization, a general 
satisfaction with their own personal networks (accompanied by a sense of deteriorating 
relations within society overall), and disappointment in the developments of post
communism (Howard 2003 145). It is this, rather than an immutable set of cultural 
values and predispositions, he argues, that leads Russians to reject collective solutions 
to shared problems. However, an analysis by Nina Belyayeva and Liliana 
Proskuryakova (2008 83) of data from the 1999 World Values Survey found relatively 
scant differences in levels of generalized trust between members of civil society
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
organizations and non-members; thus, 28.3% of members of civil society organizations 
agreed that most people can be trusted, compared to 22.0% of non-members. While 
these numbers cannot be fully parsed without knowing the sorts of organizations to 
which respondents belong -  state-backed vs. independent unions, for example, or 
opposition groups vs. government simulacra -  it hardly appears a ringing endorsement 
of an argument that trust is a deciding factor in whether or not people participate in civil 
society, nor does it lend strong support to the conclusion that participation in civil 
society helps build significant degrees of generalized trust.
Polling data on generalized trust do not lend themselves to easy interpretation, neither in 
isolation, nor in the context of civic mobilization and participation. Levels of 
generalized trust (as measured by responses to the question, Can people be trusted, or 
do you need to be careful when dealing with people?) have indeed evidently declined 
in recent years. Thus, according to surveys conducted by the Public Opinion 
Foundation, 36% of respondents in 2005 said that people could be trusted, wile 58% 
said that caution was required; in 2008, those numbers shifted to 33% and 60%, 
respectively (Zvonovskii 2008 112). The propensity to trust is higher among those with 
higher incomes and more education, but still does not overcome the propensity to 
mistrust, with the exception of the highest income earners in 2005, and that trend has 
since been reversed (Zvonovskii 2008 117). There is nothing in the data to indicate, 
however, whether these are the results of more deeply historic trends or the outcomes of 
processes native to the post-Soviet era.
Looking at the question of trust from a political culture perspective that can be linked to 
civic participation, polling data reveal relatively low levels of confidence in citizens and 
civic organizations -  including NGOs, the media and political parties -  to deliver 
solutions to citizens problems (Table 5). Moreover, attempts at cluster analysis, 
dividing respondents into groups by their degree of involvement in organized civil 
society, including core civic activists, satellites of civil society, buffers between the 
active community and the inactive, the inactive periphery, and social outsiders, 
reveal very little in the way of meaningful differentiation. Core activists, unsurprisingly, 
are somewhat more likely to trust citizens and civic groups, but they also see a larger 
role for the federal (as opposed to local or regional) government, as well as for 
organized crime (though the implications of that are left unexplored). On the whole, 
however, there is general consensus across the various groups (Mersiianova 2008).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Taken together with the findings from Belyayeva and Proskuryakova (2008), then, this 
suggests that trust per se -  neither person-to-person, nor in collective and political 
institutions -  is not a strong determinant of civic participation and mobilization.
Table 4.5: Sources o f  Influence on the Local Situation (% o f respondents)
Who has the greatest influence on Population Groups
the situation in your city (town, 
village), in deciding issues of local 
life?
at large
Social base 
Satellite Buffer Periphery
Outsiders
Local government (mayor, 
administration, legislators)
72 75 76 71 72 59
Regional government (governor, 
administration, legislators)
40 43 45 35 41 29
Federal government (cabinet, 
ministries, State Duma)
19 24 20 17 20 16
President 14 15 14 13 15 13
Population 12 20 15 11 10 7
Local business, entrepreneurs 12 17 14 10 12 8
Enterprise managers 12 16 13 11 11 8
Criminal structures, mafia 9 14 11 7 9 5
Media (print, radio, TV) 7 14 9 5 5 2
Political parties, movements 4 7 4 3 3 1
Local self-government 3 6 3 3 2 2
Civic organizations and NGOs 2 5 3 2 2 1
No one 3 2 1 3 3 9
Difficult to say 6 3 3 8 6 16
Source: (Mersiianova 2008144)
Writers in the trust/social-capital school of thought have looked also at trust as actuated 
through social networks, but here, too, the evidence is contradictory, with writers falling 
broadly into two camps: those who are optimistic about networks and the associated 
social capital, and those who are pessimistic, believing that informal network solutions 
undermine formal institution-building. Among the optimists, James Gibson writes that, 
It appears from [the] data that social networks bear few scars from the era of 
communist domination in Russia... (2003 69), contradicting Howards conclusion that 
the Soviet past has undermined confidence in the motivations of fellow citizens who 
become involved in organized civic activity, and, consequently, in collective action. 
Gibson goes on to write:
.. .Russians have extensive social networks that are highly politicized and that 
often transcend family units. ... Unable to organize publicly, Russians may have 
substituted private social networks for formal organizations. But Russians are not 
atomized, and, as a consequence, Russian social networks have a variety of 
characteristics that may allow them to serve as important building blocks for the 
development o f a vibrant civil society. In addition to carrying considerable 
political content, these networks are characterized by a relatively high degree of 
trust. Because the networks are not closed (strong), they link Russians together to 
an extent not often recognized by most analysts (Gibson 2003 69-70).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Gibsons conclusion that Russians may use informal networks to replace formal 
organizations -  though the question of why these organizations are undermined, and 
whether it matters, is left to other researchers -  echoes the arguments of Burawoy, 
Ashwin and others cited earlier in this thesis. And it is echoed again by Richard Rose, 
who writes that networks of social capital are critical to welfare in Russia: for example, 
Social capital networks are the predominant source of income security in Russia today 
(1999b 19).
Writing on migrants, who tend to prefer informal networks to formal NGOs, Moya 
Flynn observes:
The existence of strong informal networks cannot be assumed to prevent 
interaction with more formal NGOs, although it does lessen the need for such 
interaction. Some migrants justifiably see the concerns of their individual 
everyday lives as best managed through informal networks, not by an 
organization that represents them as migrants. Furthermore, in some cases, 
informal networks o f family and friends may choose to adopt a more formal, 
although temporary, participatory public role when the need arises (Flynn 2006 
260).
In interpreting this evidence of the strength of some types of networks rather than 
others, writers on social capital have found a degree of common ground with the 
culturists and historicists. Thus, Rose writes that, in Russia, Pervasive anti-modem 
networks are ... an obstacle to democratization, (1999a 30) insofar as anti-modem 
behavior actively rejects modem organizations and procedures in favor of non
modem ones (Rose 1999a 6), a rejection motivated in part by historical affinities. But, 
as in the historicist arguments that could not clearly distinguish between historical and 
contemporary causes, Rose and other social-capitalists find more recent roots. Thus, 
Rose writes that anti-modem social capital in Russia is produced at least in part by the 
nature of the state:
In effect, the Russian Federation has begun democratization backwards, for it 
has introduced free elections before establishing institutions of the modem state, 
whereas in first-wave democracies the rule of law, civil society institutions and 
the accountability of governors was established before the introduction of free 
elections with universal suffrage (Rose 1999a 30).
Complicating matters further, it is increasingly frequently argued that the strong social 
capital sometimes observed in Russia does not have to be seen as a benefit to civil 
society. Rose first suggests this with his emphasis on anti-modem networks, and this is 
picked up on by Nicolas Hayoz and Victor Sergeyev, who:
stress the two-faced character of networks, particularly in underinstitutionalized 
Russia, where nothing works without networks of trust and power but where 
networks of trust are also useless if they are not connected or combined with the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
right networks of power. In Russia, the problem of unbalanced informal 
connections with power is particularly virulent. The chances of achieving a 
positive collective output are diminished because these networks risk adopting 
strategies of exclusion in order to maintain the existing power configuration.
These strategies of exclusion, enforced by a weak state, promote personal trust 
instead of institutional trust (Hayoz and Sergeyev 2003 56).
As a result, while empiricists working in the trust/social capital vein have more 
evidence and a more analytically robust theoretical basis with which to work, there is 
neither consensus about the facts on the ground nor, moreover, about causality. Trust is 
indicated as the decisive independent variable, but insights from interviews and focus 
groups (of the types conducted extensively by Howard) are not borne out by statistics. 
Social networks are observed to be strong, but this is shown to favor in Russia non
institutionalized mobilization rather than institutionalized (or institutionalizing) 
organization, and that is argued to support society (i.e., through helping migrants and 
bolstering income security), while damaging civil society. (The latter conclusion, of 
course, rests on an equation of civil society with formal organizations, an equation I 
have questioned earlier.) And this bent towards informal rather than formal organization 
is argued at turns to stem from historical or contemporary factors. Indeed, approaches to 
social capital dating back to Robert Putnams work in Italy, and even further, have seen 
the phenomenon as historically conditioned, stemming from long-established 
institutions and traditions. Thus, it is unclear exactly what the difference is between 
positing history and culture as the direct cause of contemporary effects, on the one hand, 
and positing social capital as the mechanism through which history and culture operate. 
The difference may be that social capital can be engineered, thus providing a way out of 
historical path-dependency, but that is a quandary for another project.
Leaving aside questions of theoretical taste, there are quite concrete elements in this 
body of work that bear further exploration in the case studies presented later, including 
two key questions. First, where does the preference for informal vs. formal mobilization 
come from, and what is its relationship to engrained patterns of (mis)trust? And second, 
how much does that perceived preference really affect outcomes in civil society?
Hypothesis 3: The Regime
A third set of writers has focused primarily on political factors -  and the structure and 
agency of Russias political regime -  as the independent variable in the equation of 
Russian civil society development. Under this political heading, there are at least two
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
broad (though overlapping) sets of arguments. One group looks primarily at structural 
arguments. Of these, emblematic is M. Stephen Fish (2005, see especially ch. 6), who 
argues that enduring economic statism, supported by the rentier effect of the 
resource curse, retarded the development of independent societal organizations and 
the socioeconomic bases for the development of such groups, and it circumscribed the 
autonomy of the organizations that did emerge (2005 192). Kelly McMann 
(2006)develops a similar argument, according to which the structure of the state and the 
economy deprive citizens of economic autonomy and thus stymie activism.
Any focus on regime structure, though, must inevitably recognize the very real 
differences between the Soviet Union and post-Soviet Russia, and numerous researchers 
have noted the proliferation of NGOs reflected in the statistics presented earlier, and the 
increasingly diverse strategies that those NGOs pursue. Thus, Diana Schmidt-Pfister 
opens her own recent chapter with the sentence, Throughout the 1990s, new 
possibilities of participation have triggered the emergence and development of a civil 
society or third sector in post-Soviet Russia (2008 37), going on to note that, Recent 
empirical evidence indicates the emergence of new strategies, reflection and adaptation 
on part of all parties involved and reaction to each others changing courses... 
(Schmidt-Pfister 2008 41).
A second group of arguments has focused more on agency. Thus, Michael McFaul and 
Elina Treyger (2004) note the depredations of the Putin regime on civil society, 
including pressure on domestic and international sources of funding, legal changes to 
allow the state to rein in labor unions, political parties and NGOs, attempts to co-opt 
civil society groups financially or otherwise, and the curtailing of independent 
broadcasting. This is not, however, an entirely one-way street. Writing on civil society 
organizations in Karelia, Ilkka Liikanen observed that civil society has been able to 
adapt and reorient itself to this shifting political landscape:  .. .it is possible that the 
ongoing change of political frame towards the federal level does not necessarily signal a 
mere shift in the balance of power between civil society and the state -  from the regions 
to the centre. It can be perceived even from below in terms of the formation of new 
alliances and hegemonic blocs operating within a federal frame (2008 34).
Vladimir Putin began his rule in 2000 with a passively ambivalent approach to civil 
society, suspicious of its independence, and particularly of its often foreign sources of
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
funding and thus its goals, but content to let the NGOs assumed to represent civil 
society function more or less freely while the state established tighter controls over 
political parties, media and business. Nonetheless, towards the end of his second year in 
power Putin began applying to civil society the same approach he had taken to other 
sectors, i.e., cooptation. Thus, he brought together a so-called Civic Forum, including 
some 4,000 NGO representatives from around the country, outwardly intended to 
establish new channels of communication between civil society and the state (Knox, 
Lentini et al. 2006 9). That initiative, repeated the next year, was formalized with the 
creation in 2005 of the so-called Public Chamber, a permanent body of 126 
representatives of NGOs, one third of whom are selected by the Presidential 
Administration, one third of whom are nominated by regional bodies, and the remaining 
third of whom are nominated by the first two groups together (Lemaitre 2006 397-398). 
As discussed in further chapters, members of the Public Chamber have at times taken up 
the causes of protestors, and they do issue reports on issues of social importance that are 
often critical of government agencies and the parliament, but the Chamber depends for 
its funding and, indeed, its membership and existence, on the presidential 
administration, and members are careful not to criticize the top leadership (Evans Jr. 
2008 349-350).
After the Orange Revolution in Ukraine in 2004, in which NGOs organized street 
protests against a falsified election and forced a transfer of power, however, the state 
took a more active stance vis-a-vis NGOs. In addition to cooptation, the Russian state 
added three other cannons in its arsenal:
1. Impede: Relying on the various laws governing the registration and oversight of 
NGOs, particularly as revised in 2006, the state places an onerous bureaucratic 
burden on the operation of non-commercial and non-governmental 
organizations, particularly those that have foreign funding (Lemaitre 2006 395). 
It should be noted, however, that this has not led to a large-scale closure of 
NGOs, nor has it had any noticeable effect on the overall number of NGOs 
operating in Russia, as discussed earlier;
2. Attack: The state and state-run media periodically engage in smear campaigns 
against individual NGOs and the sector in general, accusing them of being 
covers for espionage or otherwise serving foreign interests, and a handful of 
organizations have closed down as a result (Lemaitre 2006 396);
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
3. Replace: To displace and prevent autonomous mobilization, the state has 
generously funded so-called government-organized non-governmental 
organizations, or GONGOs, such as the Nashi youth group, a pro-government 
organization charged with occupying all of central Moscows main squares 
during the most recent presidential elections (Lemaitre 2006 396; Robertson 
2009).
Over time, the regime has apparently mastered an increasingly sophisticated repertoire 
of managing civil society, in which all of the above methods have been combined with 
the creation of GONGOs and virtual organizations designed to crowd out genuine 
mobilization; thus, Graeme Robertson writes, Within a political system that is a hybrid 
of open competition and authoritarian control, the Russian authorities are constructing a 
hybrid system of state-society relations in which independent organizations are allowed 
to exist, but where they compete with state-supported groups on a highly unequal basis 
(Robertson 2009 531-532). Similar strategies are seen to be applied to political parties 
(Wilson 2005 ; March 2009).
While these effects are doubtless real, it should be noted that it is difficult to measure 
their overall impact or differentiate among the effects of the various cannons in the 
regimes arsenal. The statistics from Goskomstat presented earlier do show a decrease in 
the number of NGOs in Russia, but this decrease began before the Putin eras ramping 
up of pressure on civil society and has not noticeably increased in speed since then; nor 
has there been a drop-off in the number of new organizations created each year, which 
we might expect to have seen if there was growing pressure on the sector.
If these regime-related factors are not direct, mathematical inputs into the equation of 
civil society -  and, in any case, we are not overly convinced of the value of numbers of 
NGOs as an indicator of activism -  it may still be the case that the nature of the regime 
and the way elites behave have some impact through the more sociological factors that 
emerged in the prior two hypotheses. As mentioned earlier, several of the writers 
focusing on social capital and networks pointed specifically to the nature of politics and 
the economy as determinants of the types of trust and networks that are valued by 
Russian citizens. And, if credence is placed in the historicist hypothesis, it may still be 
argued that the perseverance of archaic or historically engrained modes of interaction is 
predicated on the political elites refusal or inability to institute qualitatively new
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
relationships. Because various aspects of the regime are dealt with at length elsewhere 
in this thesis, I will not dwell on them here, other than to note that the regime is 
inevitably a part of any explanation.
An Agenda for Research
What we know about Russian civil society is at once a great deal and not much. There 
is a relative wealth of statistical data, a portion of which is presented at the beginning of 
this chapter, but which bears little direct relevance to questions of mobilization, 
participation or the sort of ground-up aggregation and mediation of grievance that this 
project understands to be at the heart of civil society. There is a rich literature on 
cultural and historical aspects that, while they cannot be asserted to be determining and 
are unable to shed light on the exceptions to the rule of civic inactivity at the core of this 
projects puzzle, must also not be discounted entirely without further investigation. A 
lively debate rages over the levels and meaning of trust and social capital observed in 
Russia, giving rise to important, unresolved questions about why Russians mobilize in 
some ways and not in others. And the study of the Russian state and the regime that 
governs it -  a discipline unto itself -  yields a panoply of potential causal mechanisms 
but very little systematic understanding of how they interrelate to produce the overall 
result of Russian civil society as we know it today.
As discussed in Chapter 1 ,1 have elected to pursue a series of case studies to help 
untangle this web of contradictory theory and evidence. Earlier, I have explained why I 
believe the cases presented in the following chapters -  a human rights organization 
failing to achieve systemic change; an array of housing rights protest groups that 
succeed in generating conflictual heat but fail to coalesce into a social movement; and 
a spur-of-the-moment motorists protest that evolves into a sustained and 
institutionalizing social movement -  are adequate to the task of resolving my research 
question of whether an examinations of exceptions to the rule of civic inactivity can 
yield better understanding of the rule itself. Inevitably, that also means sifting through 
the implications of this literature.
But they are not the only cases, and they must be situated in context, the broad strokes 
of which have been presented above. But three other exceptions from the rule have 
also been discussed in the literature, and they help frame the empirical and analytical
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
tasks I will pursue in the following chapters. The first two of these exceptions were 
described briefly at the beginning of this chapter.
The first of these is the Soldiers Mothers movement, arguably the most sustained 
social movement in post-Soviet Russia. A handful of studies have been made of the 
movement, the most prominent and thorough of which, by Lisa McIntosh Sundstrom, 
notes that the movements experiences diverge from Western theory on 
democratization, practices in foreign democracy promotion, and the experiences of 
American social movements specifically concerning successful mobilizational strategies 
in civil society (2006a 179). The key difference, she argues, is that the movement has 
not succeeded best through rights-based argumentation; rather, the movements 
success owes to its ability to mobilize universally held conceptions of justice and 
injustice, thus marshalling public support for the righting of wrongs, rather than the 
exercise of rights. Thus, Sundstrom attributes the soldiers mothers success to their 
ability -  in large part coincidental -  to frame their advocacy in terms that were already 
well aligned with existing (if immobilized) injustice frames in Russia, regarding such 
issues as the injustice of bodily harm, the role and responsibility of mothers, and 
antimilitarism (Sundstrom 2006a 185-188).
While Sundstrom does not use the social movement theory toolkit or engage with the 
sociological processes of framing injustice, the Soldiers Mothers case as she presents 
it provides an initial illustration of the hypothesis that emerges from my own 
interpretation of the social movement literature, specifically the importance of sustained 
interaction with a state that presents coherent and cohesive policy interventions into 
private life in ways that allows citizens to identify themselves as groups. The Soldiers 
Mothers act in reaction first and foremost to the draft and interact primarily with the 
military, which is a coherent and cohesive institution par excellence. While the 
movement has not been universally successful in achieving its stated aims -  far from it 
-  due to the institutional nature of its interlocutor it has been uniquely successful in 
consolidating and continuing its mobilization.
The second case also demonstrates the durability of injustice frames in Russia to a 
degree not predicted by those writers who focus on alleged apathy. In the aftermath of 
the I gotniki protests described at the beginning of this chapter, the Public Opinion 
Foundation conducted an almost year-long series of surveys, yielding an interesting
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
combination of observations. First, generally fewer than a quarter o f Russians at large 
said at any point during 2005 that they would be prepared to participate in benefits- 
related protests in their town, should they be held, whereas consistently more than half 
of those who would be affected by benefit reform -  the so-called / gotniki -  indicated 
that they would participate. This suggests that while more than half o f the population 
approved o f the protests themselves (Klimov 2008 156), there was no immediate 
connection between conceptions o f injustice and readiness to protest. Second, readiness 
to protest among Vgotniki themselves actually grew throughout 2005, from 54% of 
respondents in January to 68% in October, suggesting that the Vgotniki injustice frame 
was sufficiently stable to maintain opinion for a considerable period o f time and, 
indeed, strengthened even without the fact of ongoing protest. (See Figure 1.) This 
supports two key hypotheses: first, the experience o f successful mobilization appears to 
be sufficient to overcome any preexisting antipathies towards mobilization that 
Russians may harbor; and second, the resulting mobilizational and injustice frames are 
potentially durable.
Figure 4.1: Readiness o f  Russian Citizens and Lgotniki to Protest 
Readiness to participate in benefit protests (2005)
Population at large
 Lgotniki
Source: (Klimov 2008 158-159)
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The third exception was not described previously, but it serves to reinforce the prior 
observations. Through interviews and participant observation of housing movements in 
Astrakhan, Carine Clement eschews the statistical clustering that large-N studies 
sometimes pursue and developed instead a conception of three groups: ordinary citizens 
(obyvateli), situational activists and dedicated activists (Clement 2008). Rather than 
attribute membership in these three groups to socio-demographic factors, Clement sees 
group membership as a factor of experience, as a result of which the dominant 
obyvateVskiV frame shifts. According to Clements research, ordinary citizens tend to 
reject collective action either because they are egotistical and selfish, because they are 
generally apathetic, or because they harbor grudges against their fellow citizens (where 
these sub-frames come from is another question, which Clement does not address 
directly, but which is generally seen as stemming from combinations of all of the factors 
hypothesized earlier in this chapter). When faced with a crisis, and when there are no 
immediate social barriers disuniting the potential victims of that crisis, the frame may 
shift to one of situational activism. This shift is further predicated on a process through 
which citizens lose their faith in the ability of government to resolve the crisis, and in 
which some knowledge of the power of activism gained, either through first- or second
hand experience. A further process of action and interaction with the authorities -  very 
much in the mold of social movement theory, though Clement does not refer to that 
particular literature -  is seen to support the consolidation of the situational frame into a 
frame of committed activism.
For various reasons, I have not selected these cases for my own study. In the instance of 
Soldiers Mothers, the groups history stretches back into the Soviet past, and in order 
to gain purchase on the initial genesis of mobilization, my own observation needs to be 
present as close to the beginning of the story as possible. In the instance of the l\gotniki, 
while the protests were high-profile, they were not long-lasting, and there is as a result 
simply not enough data to work with. And in the third instance, the Astrakhan case is 
colored somewhat by Clements dual role as both a researcher and an activist, and many 
of the strategies pursued by the local activists were introduced by her.
These three exceptions, nonetheless, lend initial support to my core hypotheses and 
suggest some of the dynamics that I will be looking for in my cases, particularly 
regarding the nature of the states intervention and subsequent response, and the 
generation and consolidation of injustice frames. My cases must do more, however, than
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
simply describe three more exceptions to the rule: they must help shed new light on 
the broader theoretical and causal arguments described in this chapter.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Chapter 5
Private Brutality and Public Verdicts: the Failure of Human Rights in Russia
Introduction
If states are held to wield a monopoly on legitimate violence, and if the legitimacy of a 
regime stems from its defense of citizens lives and livelihoods, then it must be among 
the most important goals of civil society to defend citizens against abuse by those who 
act in the name of the state. Even under the most despotic regimes, when civic initiative 
withers in the face of repression, there invariably remain small groups who seek to bring 
the state to task for the violent injustices it commits against its subjects. Russia, though 
not such an extreme case in the period covered by this work, is no exception: numerous 
human rights organizations track the excesses of Russias coercive agencies, demanding 
justice and providing help to those afflicted.
This chapter explores the work of one such organization, Obshchestvennyi Verdikt, or 
Public Verdict. Launched relatively recently, in February 2004, Public Verdict and its 
network of partners provides legal and public relations support to the victims of 
physical abuse, unlawful arrest and other injustices committed by Russias law- 
enforcement agencies. With its staff of half a dozen employees -  including lawyers and 
administrators -  and a network of human rights lawyers around the country, the 
organization has been able to achieve significant results: In the period from July 2005 
through June 2006, Public Verdict dealt with some 136 cases, of which 95 (or 70%) 
involved the unlawful use of force by law enforcement officers. In the 10 cases in which 
verdicts were reached, 10 officers were jailed, three were given suspended sentences, 
and law enforcement agencies were required to pay 310,000 rubles (approximately 
$10,000) in compensation (Public Verdict 2006d). In all, in 2006 Public Verdict took on 
60 new cases; results of the organizations management of those cases and others 
continued from previous years included the opening of four criminal investigations that 
had been unlawfully stymied by prosecutors, the revocation of 10 unlawful decisions by 
prosecutors to close criminal cases, and charges filed in court against 30 law 
enforcement officers. Of those, 11 received guilty verdicts: five were jailed, four were 
given suspended sentences and two were ordered to pay fines (of 5,000 and 6,000 rubles 
respectively, or about $161 and $193). The other 19 cases are still in court. None of the 
accused have been acquitted. In addition, Public Verdict assisted in 16 civil lawsuits,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
seeking total compensation of 4.66 million rubles (approximately $150,000), of which 
only 768,200 rubles ($24,780) were awarded (Public Verdict 2007a).
It should be made clear from the outset that this chapter does not deal with a social 
movement. Public Verdict is a professional, non-profit organization of paid activists -  
some working full time, some on a case-by-case basis -  who are brought together by a 
shared belief in a common cause. (The term activist is, I believe, appropriate, despite 
the fact that the organizations members receive a salary or honoraria for their 
participation; invariably, the staff, most of whom are lawyers, could be earning 
considerably more if they were in commercial practice, and thus they are making a 
significant sacrifice for their cause.) As a result, Public Verdict could come in for much 
of the same criticism that a number of analysts level at Russias other human rights 
organizations -  that they are too professional, lack grassroots support networks, and 
thus may not be true mediators between the state and society (see, for example: 
Carothers 1999 ; Ottaway and Carothers 2000 ; Henderson 2003).
It is true that Public Verdict is not a grassroots organization, but that should not 
disqualify it from a study of civic activism. For one, the work that the organization 
does, regardless of whether its participants are reimbursed for their time, certainly 
qualifies as activism. And its twin stated goals -  to provide pro bono legal aid to victims 
of police and prosecutorial abuse and to create an atmosphere of intolerance toward 
violations of human rights by law enforcement -  are certainly civic. In interviews, as 
well as in the organizations promotional materials, the leadership and activists 
recognize the public component of their work. It is practically impossible to root out 
abuse in Russia by legal and judicial means alone, the group states on its website.24 As 
a result, significant emphasis is placed on public outreach: the organization manages a 
legal advice hotline that receives, on average, more than 1,000 calls a month; it 
conducts opinion surveys together with a leading sociological research center; and it 
works actively with the news media, leading to mention of the organizations activities 
in more than 2,000 articles since its founding.25
What Public Verdict does not do is seek significant public support for its activities. It 
was initially supported by grants from the Open Russia Foundation, until that
24 www.publicverdict.org
25 Based on a search for the organizations name in the EastView database of Russian newspaper 
archives.
http://www.publicverdict.org
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
foundation was closed in the aftermath of the jailing of its primary benefactor, the oil 
magnate Mikhail Khodorkovskii; it has been funded since then primarily by Western 
donors, including the European Commission and the Open Society Institute. It has made 
meager efforts to raise money publicly, but these have been entirely unsuccessful. 
Indeed, in the view of one foreign donor, these efforts were halfhearted because the 
organization never really expected to succeed. In any case, Public Verdict never set 
out to become a mass movement. (In that respect, it is no different from its predecessors 
in the Soviet human rights movement.)
I argue that Public Verdicts failure (or refusal) to become a grassroots social movement 
is not a failure in its own right. The literature on both the defense of human rights and 
the social construction of (injustice is remarkably focused on collective constructions -  
i.e., on acts of perceived injustice or violations of human rights that afflict and mobilize 
individuals by virtue of their (generally accidental) membership in pre-determined 
groups (see, for example: Moore Jr. 1978 ; Folger 1984 ; Shaver 1985 ; May and Milton
2005). Thus, movements for human rights and social justice become tied up with issues 
of identity and are thus more easily absorbed into the identity-specific social 
movements and other networks that grow out of socially ingrained institutions of 
ethnicity, religion, employment, gender, culture, and so on. What is so problematic in 
the Russian case, however, is that the injustice is inflicted upon individuals entirely 
arbitrarily, without reference to any categories they may happen to fall into. While it is 
true that non-Slavic individuals -  particularly from the Caucasus and Central Asia -  are 
disproportionately targeted for document checks (Adjani 2006), Public Verdicts case 
archive does not seem to indicate that non-Russians are significantly more likely to be 
the victims of abuse than ethnic Russians. Indeed, the risk group for police brutality in 
Russia, if there is one, is best defined as adult Slavic men with blue-collar jobs and a 
drinking habit. That is hardly fertile ground for identity politics.
Rather, it would be more appropriate to judge Public Verdict on the success with which 
it achieves the two goals, described above, that it sets out for itself, and with which it 
appeals for support from donors and the media: a) to help individuals in need; and b) to 
teach, by means of carrot and stick, the state to behave better. I will argue below that 
the organization is considerably more successful at the first task than at the second. In 
numerous cases, Public Verdict is able to achieve some measure of justice for those it
26 Interview with an anonymous representative of a Western donor, Moscow, 23 January 2007.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
represents, overturning decisions, jailing police officers and winning compensation. It is 
unable, however, to move the system in the direction of reform, and the punishments it 
is able to afflict on the state -  in some cases severe -  are demonstrably insufficient to 
induce systemic change.
Public Verdicts success in achieving justice for individuals suggests that the state 
apparatus, or at least the individuals who populate that apparatus, can be made to feel 
pressure. The evidence, though, suggests that pressure is only effective when it comes 
from within -  or at least is channeled through -  the system itself. Bureaucrats respond,
I suggest, not because they feel pressure from the public, but because of the realities of 
internal subordination and competition within the bureaucracy. This is important, 
because it will help to explain Public Verdicts failure to achieve systemic change. 
Elsewhere in this thesis, we will see civil society organizations challenge the state and 
force the political elite to change the way it devises and implements policy in an area in 
which the state intrudes into peoples lives. Here, too, there is a clear intrusion into the 
private lives of Russian citizens; indeed, what could be more intrusive than brutality? 
And yet, a professionally strong and outwardly successful organization is unable to 
budge the system. The reason, I will argue, is that when it comes to the abuse of the 
law by law enforcement agencies, there is no system at all: the relationship between 
individuals and the representatives of the state is essentially unstructured.
The chapter will continue with four brief studies of cases taken on by Public Verdict 
since its inception, falling into four distinct categories: a difficult and an easy case 
involving a single victim, and a difficult and an easy case involving large numbers of 
victims. From there, I will attempt to gauge potential public reception of these cases 
through an analysis of media coverage. In the absence of open public protest, coverage 
in the media is the next best indicator of public interest in a case; moreover, media 
coverage is among the most common potential mechanisms of pressure on the 
apparatus. And finally, based in part on what we know about the Russian legal and 
criminal justice system from other literature, I will attempt to sketch out a logic of 
interaction that will explain why the efforts of Public Verdict, while of immense value 
to the victims of the state, are, at the end of the day, unsuccessful in achieving lasting 
change.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The Beatings of Sergei Oleinik and Nikita Gladyshev
On November 16, 2000, Sergei Oleinik and a friend, Viacheslav Pigalev, walked into a 
mini-market in the city of Nizhnii Novgorod, where they bought cigarettes and vodka 
and joined two other friends at a small table in a comer of the store. Several minutes 
later, two local beat cops, Nikolai Khoriakov and Mikhail Frolov, walked into the same 
store, likewise to buy cigarettes. While the officers were in the store, the janitor noticed 
that Oleinik and Pigalev were smoking and asked them to move outside. When Oleinik 
and Pigalev did not immediately leave, the police officers approached them and 
repeated the janitors request, at which point all four men left the store.
Outside, Oleinik asked to see the officers badges and identification. The officers 
initially obliged. But when Oleinik decided to inspect Khoriakovs identification more 
closely, the officer became enraged, saying, What, you dont respect a Major?, and 
punched Oleinik in the face. While Pigalev ran for help, Khoriakov and Frolov 
continued to beat Oleinik, leaving him with a concussion, severe bmising to the face, 
abdomen and genitalia, and spinal trauma that will leave him handicapped for life. 
Oleinik was then taken to a local police station, where he was not booked, but where 
Khoriakov and another officer, Mikhail Nelidov, continued the beatings. As a result of 
his injuries, Oleinik was unable to maintain his commercial drivers license, depriving 
him of his livelihood and means of support for his two teenaged daughters.
Oleiniks case was one of the first taken up by Public Verdict, after a referral from the 
Committee Against Torture, a local human rights organization in Nizhnii Novgorod, to 
which Oleinik had appealed for help four days after his beating. Working together, the 
two organizations provided legal support and launched a media campaign to help 
Oleinik bring his attackers to justice and receive commensurate compensation.
The timeline of what happened next (see Box 4.1) is indicative of the difficulties that 
victims of police abuse -  even with significant help from qualified human rights 
lawyers -  generally face as they pursue their complaints.
Russia in Movement
Box 5.1  Oleinik Timeline27
S. A. Greene
Date Event
16 November 2000
20 November 2000 
15 December 2000
27 December 2000
30 January 2001
27 May 2001
31 July 2001
6 August 2001
28 August 2001
12 September 2001 
12 October 2001 
24 October 2001 
19 November 2001
12 December 2001
21 February 2002
22 April 2002 
21 August 2002
18 December 2002
15 December 2002 
28 May 2003 
5 June 2003 
12 August 2003
Oleinik is beaten by officers Khoriakov and Frolov
Oleinik appeals for help from the Committee Against Torture
Local police complete an internal review of the case, concluding that there was not
enough evidence to convict Khoriakov and Frolov of the beating, but that they
should be censured for failing to cite Oleinik for disorderly conduct
District prosecutor opens a criminal investigation
Local police censure Khoriakov and Frolov for failing to cite Oleinik for 
disorderly conduct
District prosecutor closes criminal investigation 
Oleinik complains to federal prosecutors
Federal prosecutors refer case back to district prosecutor, who reopens criminal 
investigation
District prosecutor again closes criminal investigation
After complaint from Oleinik, district prosecutor reopens criminal investigation 
Request by Oleinik to have the investigation assigned to a new prosecutor is denied 
District prosecutor again closes criminal investigation 
Oleinik complains to regional and city prosecutors, requesting reopening of 
investigation and assignment to a new prosecutor
District prosecutor reopens criminal investigation, investigating prosecutor remains 
unchanged
Investigation assigned to a new prosecutor 
District prosecutor closes criminal investigation
After repeated complaints, district prosecutor reopens investigation and qualifies 
Oleinik as victim
Court finds police officers guilty, gives them suspended sentences and awards no
compensation
Oleinik appeals
Court upholds initial ruling
Oleinik appeals
Court upholds initial ruling
After the August 2003 ruling, Oleinik abandoned further criminal proceedings and 
concentrated on a civil lawsuit against local and regional authorities, claiming 73,000 
rubles (approximately $2,354) in lost income and 100,000 rubles (approximately 
$3,225) in moral damages. The police offered a settlement of 2,000 rubles 
(approximately $65), which Oleinik refused. On February 28, 2006 -  more than five 
years after the incident -  a court finally found in Oleiniks favor (Anisimov 2006). At 
the time this was written, however, Oleinik had not yet received the money.
Two things are notable about the development of the Oleinik case that are not 
immediately evident from the timeline above. The first is the lengths to which the local 
authorities were willing to go to protect their own. While the police and prosecutors are 
formally independent of each other, in this case they clearly worked together to avoid an 
investigation that would incriminate the officers. In their own initial internal review, the 
police did not make it clear whether they were willing to see their own punished,
27 This timeline and the related narrative are reconstructed from the aggregated contents o f Public Verdict 
Case File No. 6. A summary of the case is also available at: 
http://www.publicverdict.org/topics/cases/oleinik.html
http://www.publicverdict.org/topics/cases/oleinik.html
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
writing only that, The testimony of S.P. Oleinik, V.V. Pigalev, M.F. Frolov and N.A. 
Khoriakov as to the cause of bodily harm to S.P. Oleinik contains significant 
contradictions, which cannot be overcome within the confines of an internal review, as 
further investigation is required.28 However, for reasons that are impossible to 
determine, the district prosecutor clearly decided that he would not bring charges 
against the officers. Thus, the police produced testimony from Gennadii 
Khavroshechkin, who said that he had seen Oleinik start the fight with Khoriakov and 
Frolov. That testimony was cited as decisive by District Prosecutor O.V. Kiriukhov on 
May 27, 2001, when he closed the criminal investigation for the first time; he wrote that 
only Khavroshechkins testimony could be trusted, because the other witnesses were all 
friends of Oleinik. (He also wrote that it was impossible to determine whether Oleiniks 
injuries were inflicted by the officers.)29 However, on May 29, 2001, Khavroshechkin 
delivered a sworn affidavit to the Committee Against Torture, recanting his testimony, 
which he said had been made to officer Nelidov under duress. In reality, he said, he had 
been nowhere near the site of the incident at the time it occurred.
The second is the inertia of the system. Oleiniks case was opened and closed four times 
before a fifth re-launch finally led to a court hearing in December 2002. (That is by no 
means a record, incidentally.) District prosecutor Kiriukhov repeatedly closed his 
investigation, making legal and procedural errors along the way; generally, he failed to 
provide new justifications for closing an investigation he had been ordered to reopen. 
Consequently, his superiors repeatedly forced him to reopen the investigation. Thus, 
two questions arise. First, if the prosecutors wanted to protect the police, why didnt 
they just close the case and keep it shut? And second, if  the prosecutors wanted to 
pursue the case, why didnt they take it away from Kiriukhov and assign it to someone 
else? Incidentally, when the district prosecutors office did reassign the case in February 
2002, the new investigator again closed it. Only once the case was taken over by the 
city prosecutors did it finally make progress. And even then, the officers never received 
any real punishment.
28 S.B. Rashupkin, Zakliuchenie sluzhebnoi proverki v otnoshenii sotrudnikov Kanavinskogo ROVD 
Frolova M.F. i Khoriakova N.A., 15 December 2000, photocopy in the archives o f Public Verdict, Case 
File No. 6.
29 O.V. Kiriukhov, Postanovlenie o prekrashenii ugolovnogo dela No. 522616, 27 May 2001, 
photocopy in the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 6.
G.I. Khavroshechkin, sworn affidavit to the Committee Against Torture, 29 May 2001, photocopy in 
the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 6.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Moreover, the Oleinik case is far from unique. Such dragging out of cases -  volokita, to 
use the more concise Russian term -  is common practice when citizens go up against 
the state, according to Public Verdicts activists. Nadezhda Smolianinova went through 
a very similar process when she pressed to have charges brought against police officers 
who, while interrogating her son, injected him with narcotics, as a result of which he 
died of an overdose. Smolianinovas case was opened and closed seven times before
finally going to court two years after the incident, resulting, with help from Public
Verdict, in a conviction but no compensation.
Volokita does not permeate all cases, however. When the authorities themselves are 
keen to get a conviction, they can move fairly quickly. When those convictions turn out 
to be false, however, they are slow to back down. The police and prosecutors, for 
example, wasted no time in charging and trying Evgenii Maininger of the murder of a 
newspaper editor in the city of Toliatti: after he confessed under duress on October 16, 
2003, he was in court by March 15, 2004. After he was acquitted on October 11, 2004, 
it took the prosecutors only seven days to file an appeal, which Maininger won in 
November of that year. Clearly, then, when the law enforcement agencies are interested 
in the swift resolution of a case, they are capable of abandoning volokita and acting 
quite quickly. In December 2004, Maininger filed suit against the police and 
prosecutors, claiming 10.37 million rubles (approximately $334,516) in damages. Four 
months later, on April 4, 2005, Maininger won, with legal assistance from Public 
Verdict, though he was awarded only 150,000 rubles (approximately $4,838). However, 
he was paid only on March 3, 2007.32
Similarly to the Maininger case, Airat Khalilov was, brought to trial in 1998 on charges 
of murdering a taxi driver, based on the testimony of only one witness, and despite 
exculpatory evidence. Over the course of six years, Khalilov was convicted three times, 
only to have the verdicts overturned by a higher court and sent back for retrial, until he 
was finally acquitted in August 2005. Similarly to the way in which Oleiniks case was 
repeatedly returned to the same investigator, Kiriukhov, Khalilov was repeatedly tried 
by the same judge, who wrote and re-wrote virtually the same guilty verdict, with no 
evident reflection on the reversals handed down from the higher court.
31 Information drawn from the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 62.
32 Information drawn from the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 15.
33 Information drawn from the archives of Public Verdict, Delo Khalilova (no case file number)
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
In this context, one case taken on by Public Verdict stands out. On April 6, 2006, three 
Moscow police officers responded to an alarm call from an apartment that was 
apparently being burglarized. When they arrived on the scene -  before even entering the 
apartment building -  they happened upon 13-year-old Nikita Gladyshev, who was 
walking out of the building, in which he lived. The officers stopped the boy, asked him 
where he lived, whether anyone was home, whether he had keys to the apartment, and 
other questions. Gladyshev became suspicious that he was being questioned not by 
police, but by would-be thieves, and ran away. When the police caught up to him, they 
handcuffed him (in violation of the law, which forbids handcuffing a minor who does 
not pose a threat) and roughed him up, leaving him bruised and with tom cartilage in his 
larynx.34 Unlike in the cases of Oleinik and others, however, in Gladyshevs case the 
authorities acted quickly. Eleven days later, on April 17, 2006, the prosecutors had 
finished their investigation, confirming that Gladyshev was the victim of a crime, and
the case was sent to court. On October 31, 2006, the Basmannyi District Court in 
Moscow -  the same court that convicted Mikhail Khodorkovskii and whose name is 
synonymous with perversions of justice -  convicted the three police officers to three 
years in prison and awarded Gladyshev 100,000 mbles in moral damages (Rogacheva
2006).
What distinguishes the Gladyshev case from Oleinik, Smolianinov, Maininger,
Khalilov and others? On the face of it, there are two main differences. First, Gladyshev 
is a minor, and the injustice inherent in abusing a young boy seems more glaring than in 
the abuse of a grown man. Indeed, recent research has shown that Russians (as, 
probably, most other people) tend to perceive a much stronger injustice frame when 
children are involved (see, for example: Sundstrom 2006b). The second factor is that the 
Gladyshev case happened in Moscow, whereas all of the others occurred in provincial 
cities. Given the concentration of media and political attention in Moscow, that fact 
alone may be enough to guarantee a larger degree of media coverage. However, while 
these two facts are undoubtedly important, it does not seem that they were sufficient to 
ensure the quick achievement of a positive outcome. Indeed, in early May, 2006, Nikita 
Gladyshevs mother Kira came to Public Verdict for help. She knew she would need it: 
Kira Gladyshev is a court bailiff in Moscow and based on her own professional
34 Information drawn from the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 06/30.
35 Basmannaia mezhraionnaia prokuratura g. Moskvy, Postanovlenie o f priznanii poterpevshim, from 
the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 06/30.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
experience felt that, without legal help and a PR campaign, her sons case would go 
nowhere.36
Pogroms in Sochi and Bezhetsk
On the evening of July 16, 2006, two off-duty officers of the OMON -  Russias riot 
police -  were enjoying drinks at the Oasis bar near the beach in the small town of 
Nizhnii Makopse, near the Black Sea resort of Sochi, when they decided to pick a fight 
with a group of patrons of Armenian descent. Outnumbered, the officers found 
themselves on the losing end of the brawl, but vowed revenge as they fled.
Two days later, late in the evening, some 30 OMON officers, uniformed, masked and 
armed, raided the bar. Some 21 patrons -  many of them teenagers, many of them 
Armenian -  were kicked, beaten with truncheons and shocked with stun-guns, before 
being forced to lie face-down in the sand, bound and then piled face-down on the floor 
of an empty bus. The OMON officers likewise rounded up potential witnesses, 
including the security guard of the nearby summer camp Druzhba,37 who approached 
the bus to find out why it was parked outside the gates of the camp. Some of the victims 
and witnesses managed to call the parents and relatives of those who had been rounded 
up, and by the time the raid was winding down, a number of distraught parents had 
shown up. They were not allowed to see their teenaged children, however, nor were 
they able to prevent the bus from leaving. Instead, they followed it to the police station, 
where they were prevented from speaking to their children for some four hours, until 
they were finally released at around 5 a.m., without being charged with any wrongdoing 
and having been forced to sign statements saying they had not been mistreated by the
<2Q ^
OMON. Two teenagers were hospitalized, one with a concussion, and the other with 
trauma to his internal organs (Glanin 2006a).
What became known as the Sochi OMON case came to the attention of Public Verdict 
from a local organization in Sochi, Mothers in Defense of the Rights of Arrestees and 
Inmates. That NGO, in turn, had learned of the incident after getting a telephone call 
from an E. I. Titov, a journalist at Vechemii Krasnodar, a newspaper in the local
36 Interview with Oleg Novikov, deputy director of Public Verdict, Moscow, 10 May 2007.
37 Druzhba, ironically, means friendship in Russian.
38 Information drawn from the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 06/57. See also: Perova, A. 
(2007). "Sochinskii OMON zachistil detskii sanatorii ot otdykhaiushchikh i mestnykh zhitelei." 
Kommersant. Moscow, 22 January: 6.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
regional capital. That referral set in motion a mechanism that had been developed after 
the notorious pogrom, in the Bashkir Republic city of Blagoveshchensk, in which local 
police rounded up and beat allegedly hundreds of local young men. To better coordinate 
response to such incidents, a network of human rights NGOs from across the country -  
including the Committee Against Torture in Nizhnii Novgorod, Man and Law in 
Ioshkar-Ola, and coordinated by Public Verdict in Moscow -  resolved to create joint 
mobile taskforces (JMTs). Consisting of half a dozen or so delegates from participating 
NGOs, these JMTs would travel immediately to the scene of a pogrom, support local 
rights defenders, collect and systematize information and testimony and, where 
possible, support local prosecutors in their investigations.
In the Sochi OMON case, the JMT was run by O.I. Khabibrakhmanov, from the Man 
and Law organization in Ioshkar-Ola, and was on site in force by July 23, 2006. Public 
Verdict provided financial support, including for an attorney to represent the victims, 
Nikolai Shakhovalov. As early as July 25, 2006, Khabibrakhmanov reported that, 
There is currently no reason to believe that the official investigation is being pursued 
ineffectively. In an e-mail to Public Verdict director Natalia Taubina, 
Khabibrakhmanov reported on progress as of August 2, 2006: the JMT, he wrote, had 
established a close working relationship with the local prosecutor, who by August 1 had 
arrested four OMON officers, including two who would not have been identified 
without the work of the JMT.40 By August 17, a further four OMON officers had been 
arrested. On January 31, 2007, the local prosecutors wrapped up their investigation and 
submitted the case to court, and hearings began in February (Glanin 2007 ; Titov 2007).
The work done by the JMT was evidently critical both to the speed and scope of the 
prosecutorial response to the Sochi OMON case.41 As is the case with most local 
prosecutors offices, the local investigators suffered from a lack of people and resources 
and would not have been able to conduct interviews of all victims and witnesses as 
quickly and as thoroughly as the JMT did. In addition, the fact that the JMT was made 
up of legal professionals meant that the materials they handed over to the prosecutors
39 O.I. Khabibrakhmanov, Zakliucheniia predvaritelnoi proverki po informatsii o massovykh 
narusheniiakh prav cheloveka, imevshikh mesto v noch s 18-go na 19-e iiulia 2006 goda v poselke 
Nizhnee Makopse Lazarevskogo raiona g. Sochi, 25 July 2006, from the archives of Public Verdict, 
Case File No. 06/57.
40 O.I. Khabibrakhmanov, Sluzhebnaia zapiska, sent to N. Taubina, 2 August 2006, from the archives 
of Public Verdict, Case File No. 06/57.
41 Interview with Oleg Novikov, deputy director of Public Verdict, Moscow, 10 May 2007.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
were drafted in accordance with proper legal practice, couched in legal terminology and 
generally suitable for direct incorporation into the prosecutors own reports. And, while 
the JMT mission to Sochi was eventually closed, advisers from the coalition of NGOs 
continue to support the prosecutors. Indeed, early in 2007, on the advice of members of 
the JMT, the prosecutors requested the case back from the presiding judge, so that they 
could improve various elements that might have otherwise been exploited by the 
defendants in court.42
This sort of cooperation should not be taken to mean, however, that everything went the 
NGOs way, or that the local authorities put up no resistance. In late July, 2006, men 
who presented themselves as police officers started making visits to the victims, trying 
to convince them to drop their charges, in some cases in exchange for promises of 
compensation 43 (None of the victims agreed.) In addition, the prosecutors refused to 
pursue charges of human rights violations that were sought by the victims and the JMT, 
limiting the case instead to charges of excessive use of force, which carries lesser 
punishment and has less potential to implicate higher level officials.44 In October 2007, 
three OMON officers were convicted and jailed in the incident. Various other aspects of 
the case, including the prosecution of some of the OMON officers and compensation for 
some of the victims, are still in court. Nevertheless, Public Verdict has never had a more 
successful experience of cooperation with local prosecutors.45
This stands in sharp contrast to the case of the Bezhetsk pogrom. In November 2004 
and March 2005, in the town of Bezhetsk, Tverskaia Oblast, local anti-narcotics police 
rounded up, publicly humiliated and then tortured 18 local citizens, in an apparent 
attempt to get them to confess to false charges of trading in drugs and guns. The first 
group of victims was rounded up in a raid on the local market on November 24, 2004, 
where they were beaten, held face down in the snow and then taken to a police station, 
where the beatings continued. On March 3, 2005, a second group was arrested in a local 
cafe, where the officers evidently forced one of them to call a third group and invite 
them for a drink. When that group arrived, they were dragged from their car, beaten, 
forced to lie face down in the snow and bound before being dragged inside the cafe, 
where the first group was already lying, bound, on the floor. Inside the cafe -  in front of
42 Ibid.
43 N.Iu. Serdiuk, Soobshchenie o prestuplenii v poriadke st. 144 UPK RF, sent to the prosecutor of the 
Lazarevskii district, Sochi, photocopy in the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 06/57.
44 O.I. Khabibrakhmanov, Zakliucheniia predvaritelnoi proverki...
45 Interview with Oleg Novikov, deputy director of Public Verdict, Moscow, 10 May 2007.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
employees and patrons, whom the police would not let leave -  the victims were stripped 
naked and searched, before being taken to a local police station. There, they were beaten 
and subjected to electric shocks. Unable to obtain satisfactory confessions, the police 
forced one of the victims to sign a statement saying he and others had resisted arrest, 
thus bringing their injuries upon themselves. Several of the victims were later 
hospitalized with severe injuries.46
Within days of the incident, a JMT was dispatched to Bezhetsk, where it began a long, 
slow process of trying to prod the local prosecutors into taking up the case. Eventually, 
in August, 2005, the prosecutors recognized that the victims had indeed suffered from 
criminal activity. However, in September, JMT leader Aleksandr Kokorin wrote to 
Public Verdict director Natalia Taubina, that The prosecutors general approach to me 
is negative. He cannot understand why, in whose interests, I keep coming to Tver from 
Izhevsk to work for [the victims] for free.47 The Bezhetsk and Tverskaya Oblast 
police accused the human rights organizations of bald-faced lies and threatened 
reprisal; General Aleksandr Mikhailov, head of the regional narcotics inspectorate, told 
a newspaper: If someone is using them behind the scenes, if  someone led them 
astray, then well force them to reveal their source of information. If they acted 
purposefully, then will force them to answer for their slander (Mandrik 2005). In 
November 2005, the prosecutor closed the case, citing the impossibility of identifying
the individuals to be charged. The case was eventually reopened, but it has gone 
virtually nowhere since then.
Public Pressure: Injustice in the Media
What might account for the discrepancies in the ways these cases were handled and the 
reception met by the NGOs? As we have seen in the case histories, the initial response 
by police and prosecutors in all cases was to ignore complaints and shield officials from 
prosecution. For reasons that are difficult to discern, however, prosecutors in the 
Gladyshev and Sochi cases eventually felt the need to break with tradition and push
46 Information drawn from the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 144., and Delo o zachistke v 
Bezhetske, no case file number; see also Sapozhnikova, G. (2005). "Bitie opredeliaet soznanie?" 
Komsomorskaia Pravda. Moscow, 11 May: 8.
47 A. Kokorin, e-mail to N. Taubina, 2 September 2005, printout, in the archives of Public Verdict, Case 
File no. 144.
48 Tverskaya Oblast Prosecutors Office, Case No. 065049, Postanovlenie o priostanovlenii 
predvaritelnogo sledstviia v sviazi s neustanovleniem litsa, podlezhashchego privlecheniiu v kachestve 
obviniaemogo, photocopy in the archives of Public Verdict, Case File No. 144.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
the cases forward. One partial explanation may have to do with timing: media coverage 
of the Gladyshev and Sochi cases began considerably sooner after the incidents than in 
the Oleinik and Bezhetsk cases, allowing the authorities to become more deeply 
invested in their strategies prior to the appearance of public pressure. But this does not 
appear to be a complete explanation. Without the ability to interview the prosecutors, I 
am left to hypothesize, and then to see whether the available evidence supports any of 
the hypotheses as to why this occurred more than the others.
There are two potential sources of pressure on prosecutors: sources emanating from 
within the system, and sources that come from outside, i.e. from the public. Inevitably, 
of course, these two sources coexist and influence one another. Thus, it seems likely 
that if public sources of pressure are sufficient to force a prosecutor to action, it will be 
because that pressure is somehow transmitted through internal channels, e.g. because 
the prosecutor answers to a superior, who answers to an elected official, who is afraid of 
the consequences of a public outcry. Indeed, I have already noted one potential 
hypothesis, stemming from existing literature and common perceptions, according to 
which the Gladyshev and Sochi cases were able to be more effectively pursued because 
they involved minors, and because the victims were more blatantly innocent than the 
victims in the Bezhetsk and Oleinik cases, who were grown men, some with history of 
run-ins with the law. In order to find support for the hypothesis that public pressure is 
capable of influencing prosecutorial decisions, we would need to find more public 
outrage over the Gladyshev and Sochi cases than in the Bezhetsk and Oleinik cases.
The difficulty, of course, is in assessing the degree of public outrage. No local or 
national public opinion surveys specific to these cases were conducted at the time, and 
even if there were sufficient resources to conduct surveys after the fact, subjective 
memories would not be sufficient to demonstrate a link between opinions at the time 
and the degree of public outrage discerned by the prosecutors. And, as mentioned 
earlier, I cannot ask the prosecutors themselves (and even if I could, it would be 
impossible to know if they were telling the truth). As a result, I am left to look for a 
proxy, something measurable and potentially analytically valid, the presence of which 
would either support or not support the hypothesis.
One option, and the route I have taken here, is to review media coverage of the incidents 
and ensuing investigations, looking for clues as to the public frame of reference. Media
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
coverage is obviously not the same as public opinion. At best, it is filtered public 
opinion, while, at worst, it is propaganda. To avoid the latter, I have reviewed only 
coverage from the print media, which is generally un-censored and subject to much less 
government pressure than television. There is, however, a logical connection to the 
hypothesis that supports the use of media coverage as a proxy: any public outcry must 
necessarily be mediated, and politicians and government officials perceive public 
sentiment as aggregated by the media. Moreover, media coverage has the analytical 
advantage of being cotemporaneous with the events at hand, and thus not blurred by the 
passage of time and the subjectivity of memory. That said, there are limits to what a 
crude content analysis -  and there are not enough articles available on these cases for a 
complex, quantified content analysis to be valid -  can achieve. As a result, I am asking 
only very basic questions: Is coverage emotional, or dry? Is the incident portrayed as 
clear-cut, or nuanced? How much credence is given to the polices justifications? If the 
hypothesis is to be considered supported, there should be discernible differences in the 
answers to these questions for the Gladyshev and Sochi cases on the one hand, and the 
Bezhetsk and Oleinik cases on the other.
In the Sochi49 and Gladyshev50 cases, the fact that the victims included minors is indeed 
accorded special significance. In all but one of the newspaper articles reviewed on the 
Sochi case, the presence of minors among the victims figured in the first or second 
paragraphs; in many, it was in the headline (Glanin 2006b ; Perova 2007). The same is 
true of the articles on the Gladyshev case. Closer analysis, however, reveals some 
differences. None of the articles on Sochi use the word child or children, though 
some do use the word offspring to refer to the people parents tried to rescue from the
49 Articles reviewed on the Sochi case: Elkov, I. (2006). "OMON na narakh." Rossiiskaia Gazeta. 
Moscow, 9 August: 7, Glanin, I. (2006c). "Skandal. Zhertvy deshevoi provokatsii." Vremia Novostei. 
Moscow, 25 July: 3, Glanin, I. (2006a). "Kriminal. Mest'pokhmel'nogo OMONa." Vremia Novostei. 
Moscow, 27 July: 2, Glanin, I. (2006b). "OMON protiv detei." Vremia Novostei. Moscow, 21 July: 3, 
Ivanov, S. (2006). "Rassledovanie. Sochinskii OMON prevysil polnomochiia." Kommersant. Moscow, 24 
July: 4, Lebedeva, A. (2006a). "Ne v sluzhbu, a v 'druzhbu'." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 31 July: 13, 
Lebedeva, A. (2006b). "OMONovtsev pereveli iz lageria v SIZO." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 10 August:
7, Glanin, I. (2007). "Ne dlia ekrana." Vremia Novostei. Moscow, 23 March: 3, Perova, A. (2007). 
"Sochinskii OMON zachistil detskii sanatorii ot otdykhaiushchikh i mestnykh zhitelei." Kommersant. 
Moscow, 22 January: 6, Titov, E. (2007). "V bor'be s OMONom pobedila 'Druzhba'." Novaia Gazeta. 
Moscow, 15 March: 7.
50 Articles reviewed on the Gladyshev case: (2006a). "Delo ob izbitom podrostke." Moskovskii 
Komsomolets. Moscow, 13 October: 2, (2006b). "Militsionerov posadili za izbienie shkol'nika." 
Moskovskii Komsomolets. Moscow, 1 November: 2, (2006c). "Militsionery, izbivshie 12-letnego 
shkol'nika, poluchili po tri goda." Sovetskaia Rossiia. Moscow, 2 November: 2, Alekseev, M. and K. 
Urban (2006). "Desiat' del otnogo goda." Kommersant. Vlast'(51): 26-30, Lokotetskaia, M. (2006). 
"Militsionerov sudiat za izbienie 12-letnego shkol'nika." Gazeta. Moscow, 13 October: 8, Rogacheva, M. 
(2006). "Militsionery poluchili srok za izbitogo podrostka." Izvestiia. Moscow, 1 November: 3, Zorin, I. 
(2006). '"Budesh' soprotivliat'sia - pridushim i zakopaem'." Gazeta. Moscow, 13 April: 8.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
police; generally, they preferred the colder, legalistic term minor. In contrast, articles 
on the Gladyshev case preferred words such as child, schoolboy and highlighted the 
fact that he was only 12 years old, while generally ignoring the fact that he was, at the 
time, 173 cm (58) tall (Lokotetskaia 2006). Indeed, the articles on Gladyshev are 
generally more emotive than the articles on Sochi. They include judgmental terms such 
as cruel beating (Zorin 2006) and shocking incident (Lokotetskaia 2006), which are 
not found in the Sochi articles. And while the Sochi articles are generally dry but 
thorough recounts of facts, the articles on Gladyshev are heavily laden with quotations, 
mostly from the boy and his mother, telling the story through their own eyes. While the 
point of view of the police is frequently missing in articles on Gladyshev, it is often the 
first point of view presented in articles on Sochi, most of which contain no quotations 
from victims at all. Over time, though, this dynamic began to change, and by the time 
the respective cases went to court, articles on Sochi treated the case as clear-cut, while 
some articles on Gladyshev began suggesting that the police -  while undoubtedly guilty 
-  perhaps did not deserve jail time. It is impossible to determine definitively whether or 
not the fact that the Sochi victims were mainly Armenian, while Gladyshev is an ethnic 
Russian, played any role in this discrepancy. However, the articles reviewed for this 
analysis on the Sochi case bear no evidence of ethnic prejudice or stereotyping; indeed, 
the Sochi victims were more likely to be referred to simply as minors than as 
Armenian.
What of the other two, supposedly less media friendly cases? With the exception of 
the focus on minors, it is sometimes hard to tell the difference between the two groups. 
Both the Bezhetsk51 and the Oleinik52 cases received significant amounts of coverage at
51 Articles reviewed on the Bezhetsk case: (2005b). "Mesto Sobytii. Militsiia poshla v zaboi." Novaia 
Gazeta. Moscow, 21 April: 4, (2005d). "Politika-Ekonomika. Ofitsial'no." Vremia Novostei. Moscow, 14 
April: 4, Khairullin, M. (2005). "Demonstratsiia sily. Uzhe polgoda siloviki derzhat v strakhe Tverskuiu 
oblast'." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 21 March: 18, Kondrat'eva, M. (2005). "Vnutrennie organy. Karandash 
v nos." Gazeta. Moscow, 16 March: 4, Konygina, N. i. (2005). "'Rossiia izbitaia' razoblachit 'oborotnei'." 
Izvestiia. Moscow, 29 July: 2, Konygina, N. i. and I. Spirin (2005). "Prokuratura vozbudila delo protiv 
narkopolitseiskikh." Izvestiia. Moscow, 25 March: 7, Mandrik, I. (2005). "Narkozachistka." Russkii 
kur'er. Moscow, 16 March: 1, Sapozhnikova, G. (2005). "Bitie opredeliaet soznanie?" Komsomol'skaia 
Pravda. Moscow, 11 May: 8, Sas, I. and R. Ukolov (2005). "Pravozashchitniki nashli 'Blagoveshchensk- 
2'. Sotrudniki Gosnarkokontrolia ne ponimaiut metanii Tverskoi oblprokuratury." Nezavisimaia Gazeta. 
Moscow, 25 March: 7, Sergeev, N. (2005). "Pravozashchita. Bit' nuzhno v kaif." Kommersant. Moscow, 
25 March: 5.
52 Articles reviewed on the Oleinik case: (2003a). "Novosti. Proisshestviia." Vremia Novostei. Moscow, 9 
June: 3, (2003b). "Protsessy." Kommersant. Moscow, 29 May: 4, Chelysheva, O. (2003). "Sustav 
prestupleniia. Uslovnym zashchitnikam - uslovnoe nakazanie." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 17 April: 15, 
(2004d). "Militsionery, sdelavshie zaderzhannogo invalidom, poluchili uslovnye sroki." N owe Izvestiia. 
Moscow, 24 August: 6, Goncharova, N. (2004). "Militsioneru dali uslovno." Nizhegorodskie Novosi. 
Nizhnii Novgorod, 28 August, Shamburova, A. (2004). "Opyt chastnogo soprotivleniia. Bityi chas."
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
the national level (at least in newspapers). The general tone of the articles on these two 
cases, however, is indeed different from those on the Sochi and Gladyshev cases. In the 
Bezhetsk case in particular, much more credence is given to the polices version of the 
story than in the articles on Sochi. Whereas the journalists writing about Sochi treated 
the case as fairly clear-cut, some of those writing about Bezhetsk were more 
ambivalent, at least in part because the victims were involved in running the local 
market, a business assumed to be tied up with organized crime (Mandrik 2005 ; 
Sapozhnikova 2005). On the whole, however, it is difficult to identify a systematic 
difference in form or content between the articles on Sochi and the articles on Bezhetsk. 
Indeed, most articles on the Bezhetsk case give significantly more space to the victims 
rather than the police and come to the conclusion that the police are guilty. Remarkably, 
even the tabloid Komsomolskaia Pravda -  a pro-government newspaper that generally 
supports strong-armed policing -  wrote, with characteristic irony:
So, what are we left with? Its like the series Brigada,53 without the 
wear the same leather jackets. Of course, this could just be the 
provincial fashion -  well, maybe the 300 kilometers that separate 
Bezhetsk from Moscow correspond to 10 years of history, and people 
here still live according to the old canons. But no: theres one perfectly 
hairy individual walking down the street, and theres another...
Incidentally, none of that changes the point: by law, you cant beat 
anyone -  not with shaved heads, not with long hair. Even those who 
themselves beat others (Sapozhnikova 2005).
Coverage of the Oleinik case is even less ambiguous than the Bezhetsk case. Despite the 
fact that Oleinik, a grown man, was drinking at the time of the incident, the articles gave 
little credence to the polices version of events and treated the incident as a clear case 
of a beating (Vremia Novostei 2003a). And while the articles on Oleinik are drier and 
less emotive than the articles about Gladyshev, they are generally indignant about the 
volokita and considered the suspended sentences given to the police officers to be unjust 
(Goncharova 2004 ; Anisimov 2006). Whats more, the police were never given the 
chance in any of the Oleinik articles to justify their actions, in contrast to all of the other 
cases.
Does the source of the coverage have any impact on content? Generally speaking, it 
does not. State-run publications, such as Rossiiskaia Gazeta, and pro-government 
publications, such as Komsomolskaia Pravda, Izvestiia and Gazeta, did not differ in
Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 27 September: 6-7, Anisimov, S. (2006). "Zhitel' Nizhnego Novgoroda piat' let 
dobivalsia material'noi kompensatsii." Nowe Izvestiia. Moscow, 1 March: 2.
53 Brigada was a popular television series in Russia about organized crime on the police, containing a 
notorious amount of violence.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
their coverage of these incidents, did not give more credence to the authorities and did 
not shy away from criticizing the actions of the police and prosecutors. There is, 
however, one notable exception to this finding: the opposition newspaper Novaia 
Gazeta. In almost all cases, Novaia Gazeta wrote longer articles, giving significantly 
more space to quotations from victims, and attacking the authorities with somewhat 
more bite. In some cases, Novaia Gazeta's articles were even written by the human 
rights defenders who were investigating the case (who were identified in their by-lines 
as special correspondents, rather than human rights defenders) (Khairullin 2005). If we 
disregard Novaia Gazeta, however, the tone of coverage from one newspaper to 
another, regardless of orientation or ownership, is remarkably consistent.54
Thus, the hypothesis with which I began this discussion is only partially supported by 
the evidence. While the presence of minors among the victims certainly does lend itself 
to more emotional coverage, and thus perhaps to clearer senses of injustice, in reality all 
of the cases reviewed received significant amounts of coverage, and all of the reports 
gave more credence to the victims than to the police. Moreover, almost all of the 
newspapers in all of the cases gave prominent place to the human rights organizations 
that became involved in the investigations, including Public Verdict, the Committee 
Against Torture and Man and Law. This is broadly true, again, regardless of a 
newspapers ownership or orientation. These findings suggest that the Russian media -  
or, at least, newspaper journalists, who are relatively more free than their television 
colleagues -  do not discriminate in their construction of injustice: if they become aware 
of an event, they are likely to give it standard coverage, regardless of where it happens 
or who is involved. This, incidentally, is good news for Russias human rights 
defenders.
If we move beyond the initial hypothesis, however, one important difference emerges. 
The coverage of the Sochi case began on July 21, 2006, three days after the incident 
itself; likewise coverage of Gladyshev began on April 13, 2006, less than a week after 
the incident. Coverage of Bezhetsk, on the other hand, began on March 16, 2005, only 
eleven days after the second round of beatings, but four months after the first round; 
even more egregiously, coverage of the Oleinik case began only on April 17, 2003, two 
and a half years after the incident. While it is impossible to know whether and how
54 The picture might have been somewhat different if television was also included, given the general 
reluctance of the national networks to cover such incidents. However, due to the lack of systematic 
archives of the transcripts of television news broadcasts, the sample was inevitably limited to newspapers.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
media coverage directly affected decisions made by police and prosecutors, it is 
noteworthy that the two cases where coverage began almost immediately were handled 
quickly, while the others suffered from volokita. Again, this is good news for Russias 
human rights defenders: getting the word into the media quickly seems to have an 
impact. This, then, does lend some support to the hypothesis, suggesting in particular 
that public opinion may be fruitfully mobilized early in a cases arc. The fact that I have 
not found more conclusive evidence for the hypothesis, however, suggests that the 
search continue.
Internal Pressure: Russias Criminal Justice System
There is another potential hypothesis alluded to in the case studies, which again 
differentiates the Gladyshev and Sochi cases from the Oleinik and Bezhetsk cases: the 
significance of location. The Gladyshev case occurred in Moscow, the capital and the 
focus of political and public life. Sochi is Russias most popular resort, site of Putins 
summer residence, and, at the time, a bidder for the 2014 Winter Olympics. The Oleinik 
case, on the other hand, took place in Nizhnii Novgorod, an important industrial center 
but a relative political backwater, while Bezhetsk, in Tverskaya oblast, is a small town 
of which Russians know little. This may help explain why the media reacted more 
quickly to the Gladyshev and Sochi cases: there is simply much more media attention 
focused on those cities than on Nizhnii Novgorod and Bezhetsk. But it also may help 
explain why -  given broadly uniform coverage of all four cases -  prosecutors in Sochi 
and Moscow felt compelled to react: there was a greater chance that their superiors (and 
their superiors superiors) would be paying attention.
This distinction alerts us the importance of internal sources of pressure. We might 
imagine a chain of accountability modified slightly from that outlined at the beginning 
of the previous section: a prosecutor answers to a superior, who answers to a politician, 
who is afraid not of electoral accountability, but of disfavor from above. This model of 
vertical accountability looks particularly attractive in the Russian context, where semi
authoritarian rule has been concentrated in the hands of the president, and transmitted 
downwards through the so-called vertical of power.
This hypothesis is considerably harder to test than the previous one, because there are 
no valid, measurable proxies. The proposition that scandals in Sochi and Moscow are
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
more politically sensitive than scandals in Nizhnii Novgorod and Bezhetsk is a fairly 
safe assumption. However, if we are to assert that this sort of political sensitivity is a 
stronger explanatory factor than public pressure, we will need first to examine how 
Russias legal and criminal justice systems function, not in terms of formal rules and 
procedures, but as living social institutions. If we are to put any credence in this 
hypothesis, then we should see an environment that somehow shields individual 
officials from public or even professional accountability, while simultaneously leaving 
them vulnerable to hierarchical pressure.
Recent research on the Russian bureaucratic elite has shown that behind the fa9ade of 
corporate solidarity, increasing centralization has given rise to fierce battles at all levels 
of power for a place in the hierarchy (see, for example: Petrov and Riabov 2007). As a 
result, the instinct to avoid accountability at all costs is forced to coexist with the reality 
that any lapse in judgment can be used by superiors or competitors to deprive a person 
of access. This is why prosecutors cover their rears by continuously reopening cases 
that they would much rather close once and for all. And it is also why a prosecutor in 
Sochi is more likely to cooperate than a prosecutor in Bezhetsk; should a mishandled 
case overshadow the citys Olympic bid or a summit at Putins summer residence, the 
career consequences could be catastrophic.
This may also explain the one major exception to Russian government agencies general 
reluctance to pay court-ordered compensation. Notably, Russia is fairly conscientious 
about paying the compensation ordered by the European Court of Human Rights to 
plaintiffs. No bureaucrat in Moscow wants to be responsible for causing Russia 
embarrassment in Strasbourg, lest a senior diplomat, parliamentarian, minister or even 
the president be asked an uncomfortable question while traveling abroad.
However, Russia has failed to make any of the systemic changes demanded by the 
ECHR (Jackson 2004). This was also noted by Anatolii Kovler, Russias delegated 
judge to the ECHR, who complained in an interview with Novaia Gazeta that the state 
has done virtually nothing to address the systemic nature of human rights violations 
(Nikitinskii 2007). Likewise, the experience of Public Verdict reveals virtually no 
learning process on the part of the authorities. Neither Public Verdict, nor indeed 
Russias total helplessness at the hands of the ECHR in Strasbourg, has succeeded in 
instilling a sense of discipline among Russian police, prosecutors or other public
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
officials. Infractions remain just as ubiquitous, reactions and remediation remain just as 
ad hoc. Clearly, embarrassment is capable of forcing remediation, but only on a case- 
by-case basis. Russia has attempted to remove the source of embarrassment by 
strengthening its representation in Strasbourg, or by punishing a police officer here or 
there, but not by rooting out the misbehavior that gets them there in the first place.
How does this interplay with the media effects discussed earlier? Given what we know 
about Russians relationship with their justice system, as well as about how the law is 
used by those who inhabit the system, we might posit that the media effect becomes 
meaningful because of the pressures it places on individual bureaucrats within the 
system, in an argument similar to the hypothesis we tested originally, but with one 
correction: the impact of the media effect is limited by the inertia created by the system. 
In other words, an immediate media response creates pressure on bureaucrats within the 
system to avoid a potentially costly scandal before investments have been made in 
avoiding the impact of the case itself. Once those investments have been made, in order 
to shield oneself or ones colleagues from accountability, and presumably in the absence 
of media pressure, the media effect seems insufficient to overcome the internal 
incentives to stay the course. Thus, the initial lesson, at least, seems to be that internal 
and external pressures cannot be demarcated in any satisfying way. External pressure, 
such as from the media, is effected inevitably through the mechanisms of internal 
pressure. And internal mechanisms, which have evolved in large part to avoid external 
interference, nonetheless cannot fully avoid pressure from without.
The State-Society Relationship and the Meaning of Law in Russia
Beyond the issue of why some of Public Verdicts cases succeed and some do not, there 
is the broader question of why the organization and its allies have been unable to effect 
systemic change. The failure is double: one the one hand, the regime and its agents 
seem impervious to any impetus to reform, while, on the other hand, the Russian public 
has not assimilated Public Verdicts appeal to see the issue of police and judicial abuse 
as systemic. Here, the cases suggest a different logic, which has more to do with public 
perceptions of state-society relations than with the inner workings of the law 
enforcement apparatus. Unsurprisingly, what the law means to Russian citizens is as 
important as what it means to Russian officials.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Returning for a moment to the press coverage and the discussion of external sources of 
pressure suggests one important distinction between the cases. Almost all of the articles 
on Bezhetsk and most of the articles about Sochi mentioned those incidents in the 
context of other police pogroms that had occurred across the country since the 
cleansing operation in Blagoveshchensk. Only one of the articles on Oleinik, however, 
and none of the articles on Gladyshev made any mention of other, similar beatings. (In 
the one exception about Oleinik, the article only mentioned another beating case 
because it had also taken place in Nizhnii Novgorod.) This suggests that the journalists, 
their editors and, perhaps, their readers see the relatively small number of beatings of 
large numbers of people to be systemic -  and thus in need of a systemic response -  
while the relatively larger number of beatings of individuals is not seen as being a 
collective issue.
Taken alongside the media effects described earlier, this distinction between group and 
individual grievances may provide part of the explanation of why Public Verdict is 
more easily successful in some cases than in others. With these two effects taken 
together, we begin to get a more complete picture, in which our four cases can be 
divided into a simple matrix based on two criteria: on one axis, whether the media 
responded immediately or with a delay, and, on the other axis, whether the case 
involved an individual or a group grievance (see Table 4.1).
Table 5.1 -  Matrix o f Cases 
Group grievance (pogrom)
Individual grievance
A quick media reaction, as in the Sochi and Gladyzhev cases, does seem to help prevent 
volokita, while the fact of a pogrom seems to support identification of the incident as 
symptomatic of a systemic problem. If in the previous sections we dealt with the issue 
of case-by-case success, here the question is one of the degree to which the grievance in 
a particular case can be generalized -  and assimilated as such -  by the public.
Immediate media reaction Delayed media reaction
Sochi case: quick reaction, 
systemic identification, 
partial success
Bezhetsk case: volokita, 
systemic identification, no 
success
Gladyshev case: quick 
reaction, no systemic 
identification, success
Oleinik case: volokita, 
almost no systemic 
identification, partial 
success
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
As discussed in other chapters, one of the keys to the development of an injustice frame 
is the question of who is to blame. Accordingly, frames in which the guilty are a very 
small number of individuals -  such as a handful of police officers, who can be relatively 
easily arrested and jailed -  may spawn short-term protests, up until the guilty are 
punished, but they are unlikely to give rise to enduring social movements, which aim to 
alter the system. Thus, for the development of sustained movements in the defense of 
human rights in Russia, it is of critical importance whether or not the sorts of 
infringements described above are seen as systemic or individual and random. Clearly, 
the professional human rights defenders who work for Public Verdict and their partner 
organizations see all of these cases as symptomatic of a larger, systemic problem, and 
their goal is to change the system. The question remains, however, whether the public 
sees it the same way.
Meanwhile, the publics view of the problem -  and of the sorts of collective solutions 
offered by Public Verdict and its partners -  will to a significant degree depend on how 
people in Russia view the legal and criminal justice system with which Public Verdict 
interacts. For one, if we are to accept the argument that the legal and criminal justice 
system is divorced from public accountability, then this should be reflected in the way 
the public relates to that aspect of the state. And second, a review of the state-society 
relationship in this area relates back to one of the core arguments of this entire project, 
namely, that an unstructured, individualized approach by the state to its subjects 
discourages collective responses to injustice.
To understand why this might be, we need to understand Russians relationship to their 
legal and criminal justice systems. According to surveys conducted by the independent 
Levada Center in September 2005, only 12% of Russians fully trust their police, while 
13% trust prosecutors and 16% trust the courts; meanwhile, 82% felt unprotected 
against abuse by law enforcement, and 73% believed that they could become the victims 
of such abuse (Dubin and Gudkov 2005 11). In their analysis:
Dissatisfaction with the police stems first and foremost from the fact 
that, without fulfilling the function of maintaining social order and 
defending citizens against crime, the police do not bear any 
accountability before civil society. Indeed, this distinguished and 
continues to distinguish the Russian police from the police institutions 
of Western democratic countries, seemingly analogous in their 
functions. The Russian system, and much less its Soviet predecessor, 
has never known such forms as municipal police, elected police chiefs, 
parliamentary oversight of internal affairs, etc. ... The coordinated 
efforts of authorities at various levels to stymie all attempts by society 
(civic organizations, parties and human rights defenders) to establish the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
accountability of coercive structures for violence and abuse is simply a 
continuation under new conditions of the old tendencies of corporative 
isolation of these agencies from independent external control, self 
defence against external forces, and the desire by the leadership of the 
police and the coercive structures to create a zone of autonomous 
management (Dubin and Gudkov 2005 13-14).
Most Russians opinion of the police is based either on their own personal experiences 
of dealing with law enforcement officers, or on that of their relatives and close friends 
(Shepeleva 2005). People want the police to defend their lives, wellbeing and property, 
although they do not actually expect the police to do so (Shepeleva 2005). Fully 41% of 
Russians and 56% of Muscovites are afraid that they themselves will become the 
victims of police brutality (Shepeleva 2005). People are aware of the fact that the police 
cut comers, refuse to open difficult cases and generally do not share complainants 
priorities, significantly undermining public trust in the police (Novikova 2005 ; 
Shepeleva 2005).
These opinions, meanwhile, are reflected in behavior. Despite relatively high levels of 
crime, Russians are remarkably reluctant to go to the police for help. (See Table 4.2.) 
And as shown in Table 2, while Russians do fear violence from the police, they are 
primarily worried that the police will be mde, ineffective and may even refuse to 
investigate their cases.
Table 5.2 Victims o f Crime: Which o f the following has happened to you? (% o f  
respondents in large Russian cities, N=1200)_______________________________
Was a victim 
of...
In the past 3 
years
In the past 
Reported to 
the police
Satisfied with 
police work
Criminal
caught
Pick pocketing 20 12 1 0.4 0.3
Attack by 
hooligans
15 10 2 0.3 0.6
Sexual assault 15 5 0.1 0 0.1
Fraud 11 7 1 0.1 0.1
Mugging 11 6 2 0.3 0.3
Theft from 
automobile
9 3 6 0.3 0
Blackmail,
racketeering,
extortion
5 3 0.3 0.3 0
Rape,
attempted rape
3 0.9 0.1 0 0
Theft of 
automobile
5 3 2 0.5 0.7
Apartment
burglary
2 1 2 0.1 0.5
Source: (Public Verdict 2004e)
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Table 5.3 -  What Sorts o f Police Infractions Do Citizens Face Most Often?
Ruden
Inactio
volokit
Extorti
Unlaw
arrest
Refusal
investig
Physic
violen
Blackm
threat of 
violence
Racketeer
Repressi
Entrepren
61 55 59 47 33 27 23 17 20 14
Company
director
  58   25 38 17  13
Middle-
managem
57 52 45 31 10
Office
worker
 55 51 42 36 25 19   8
Skilled
worker
61 53 53 46  25 18 18  
Unskilled
worker
58 53  48 31 31  --  
Unemplo
57  -- 57  35 21 18 17 13
Retiree          
Housewif
55    35     
Student 63 54 54 53 33 42 23 30 14 11
Source: (Public Verdict 2004e)
Incidentally, the values gap between the police and the public is not as large as it might 
otherwise seem. In particular, Russians appear to be somewhat ambivalent about 
violence by the police, to a certain extent sharing the polices conviction that illegal 
force may be justifiable. The difference comes in the definition of the target; the public 
does not share the polices evident view that suspects are guilty until proven innocent. 
Thus, 01ga Shepeleva writes:
.. .the average, law-abiding citizen is generally not opposed if a police 
officer beats up a criminal. ... At the same time, citizens preparedness 
to tolerate the excesses of law enforcers is not without its limits.
Infringements by law enforcement agencies are permissible only if they 
are undertaken in order to fulfill the function of defending society. A 
law-abiding person, who might agree with the beating of a criminal, will 
be extremely upset if  he learns that police officers beat an innocent man 
(Shepeleva 2005, on-line source, no page numbers).
This goes part way to explaining why the press reports on the case studies presented 
above reflect a feeling of more systemic injustice in cases of pogroms than in cases of 
individual beatings: it is hard to imagine that a large group of people, minding their own 
business, could all be simultaneously guilty of whatever infraction provoked the police 
to raise their truncheons. But it is clearly insufficient as an explanation. To understand 
public perceptions, we need to take a closer look at how Russias law enforcement and 
judicial institutions function in practice.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
It makes sense to start with the police, both as the front door of the criminal justice 
system and as the source of the injustice addressed by Public Verdict. The behavior of 
Russias police is shaped by their institutional environment, a centralized bureaucracy 
managed by the Ministry of Internal Affairs in Moscow. This management, perhaps 
inevitably for such a large and unwieldy machine, depends heavily on statistics. Thus, 
the salaries of individual police officers and the budgets of their departments depend to 
a significant extent on the number of cases they solve, without regard for the importance 
of the case. As a result, officers will often refuse to accept reports of crimes they do not 
think they can solve (such as purse-snatching or theft from an automobile), and will put 
off the investigation of major cases in order to pursue smaller, more easily solvable 
investigations. When the hierarchy becomes aware of a case that has drawn some degree 
of public or political attention, the police will pursue it but find themselves under 
tremendous pressure to cut comers in order to reach a swift conclusion. This modus 
operandi, incidentally, has not changed significantly since the Soviet era (Shelley 
1996).
Underpaid, understaffed, under-trained and under siege, police officers often take an 
adversarial view of society. One study found that:
If citizens mythology about the police is more or less accurate, the 
polices mythology [about citizens] abounds in negative stereotypes and 
is based, with rare exceptions, on an undifferentiated approach to 
society. Society is seen as a monolith. Yes, Im deeply convinced that 
our people, at least the average person, they still cant understand what 
can be done. You need to keep in mind the peculiarities of our country.
We either have hunger or terror, half of the country was sent to the 
camps, its been worked into peoples genes that we have to run after 
them with truncheons. The people go crazy at night, and we work 
like were on the front lines -  that is approximately how the situation is 
seen from within the police department (Novikova 2005, on-line source, 
no page number).
And so it may be unsurprising that the police seem to have few qualms about using 
excessive force, even when they know it violates the law. The Levada Center found that 
63% of police officers felt it was acceptable to use illegal force against suspects in 
criminal cases in the interest of solving the case, while only slightly less -  60% -  felt it 
permissible to use illegal force against people who insult a police officer (Dubin and 
Gudkov 2005 30-31). Again, these practices carry over from Soviet times (Shelley 
1996).
If the police, at least in theory, exist to enforce the law, the courts and prosecutors exist 
to uphold it. There is, unfortunately, little literature available on Russias courts, and
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
even less on its system of prosecutors. What literature is available, though, suggests 
that, as with the police, the dominant practices in the courts have their roots in the 
Soviet past. Tamara Morshchakova, a former constitutional court judge in Russia, 
wrote: [In the Soviet Union], the courts played the rule of a supporting agency of 
punishment, a secondary addition to the states other agencies of punishment. Courts 
were organs for the implementation of state policy. ... Courts were part of the law 
enforcement system and were not seen as an independent power (Morshchakova 2003).
Today, the court system remains -  like the police -  hierarchically organized, with the 
result that the independence of judges is increasingly infringed upon within the court 
system itself. Judges depend on chief judges, on higher courts and on material benefits 
(Morshchakova 2003, on-line source, no page numbers). This leads to two problems. 
The first, as noted by Frye (2002) and Hendley (1999), is a tremendous reluctance to 
rule against the state in cases that may involve overturning a bureaucratic decision or 
awarding compensation to the plaintiff. The second is what has become known as the 
no-acquittals policy:
.. .judges are afraid to render decisions consistent with their conscience 
and the pertinent legal rules, if such decisions would violate policies 
established the superior legal bureaucracy. For example, rendering a 
judgment fully exonerating the accused involves a serious risk to ones 
career, since it transgresses a no-acquittals policy imposed and 
consistently enforced by the regional court. The doctrine of no 
acquittals has never been articulated because it represents an obvious 
violation of law, both municipal and international. Nevertheless, it has 
been consistently applied sub silentio, with the message effectively 
conveyed (Pomorski 2002 112).
This, in turn, leads to bizarre situations. In his ethnography of criminal courts in the 
Siberian city of Krasnoiarsk, Stanislaw Pomorski found that:
In the majority of the trials observed, the prosecution was not 
represented at all. When prosecutors did attend, their performance was, 
in most cases, weak or worse. Thus, the legally mandated adversariness 
of the trials, with the prosecution shouldering the burden of proving the 
defendants guilt, remained an unqualified fiction. In reality, the judge, 
guided by the policy of no acquittals, sought to prove the defendants 
guilt (Pomorski 2002 114).
As a result, judges remain too closely linked to prosecutors (Solomon Jr. and Foglesong 
2000). Indeed, this has come back to haunt Russia in its cases at the European Court of 
Human Rights in Strasbourg, where, as William Jackson writes, Among the most 
problematic aspects of Russias legal system are the sweeping investigative powers 
assigned to prosecutors and police agencies and the inadequate rights possessed by 
defendants (Jackson 2004 26).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
There is also a third problem: courts in Russia are frequently unable to enforce their 
verdicts. As Nikita Gladyshevs mother knew well, bailiffs have insufficient resources 
and authority to force losing parties to pay their court-ordered compensation. Thus, as 
mentioned earlier, Sergei Oleinik is still awaiting the money he was awarded by the 
court. Vladimir Lukin, Russias human rights ombudsman, admitted in an interview 
with the state-run newspaper Rossiiskaia Gazeta that government agencies frequently 
go out of their way to avoid paying compensation, even when ordered to do so by a 
court (Kulikov 2007).
The resulting system of incentives for police officers, prosecutors and judges in many 
ways resembles Janos Komais (1992) description of the state of Soviet industry: the 
production of the nominally intended good (whether automobiles or justice) inevitably 
takes a back seat to the twin production of indicators (for consumption by superiors and 
the bureaucracy) and rents (for consumption by the individual functionary). Given the 
degree to which contemporary practices replicate Soviet practices, this is not surprising. 
The law, in the traditional sense of a more or less universally enforced set of rules, is 
thus much less important to the functioning of the system than abuse and volokita. 
Indeed, as with so much else in Russia (see, for example: Ledeneva 2006), these 
seemingly informal practices are not byproducts of a poorly functioning system: rather, 
they are the core practices that allow the system to function (however dysfunctionally 
from a normative standpoint).
The literature on Russians relationship to the court system is, unfortunately, less rich 
than that on the police. Scholars studying Russias arbitrage courts find a lack of trust in 
the courts on the part of would-be plaintiffs to rule against the state (Frye 2002). 
Likewise, Kathryn Hendley argues that Russia suffers from a deficit of demand for law, 
not because Russians are conceptually averse to the rule of law, but because in reality 
they are faced by a system in which the law is not generally a tool they can use to their 
own advantage. Hendley writes: Why should they place their faith in the lawand 
alter their behavior accordinglywhen they have so little experience with law as a 
means of protecting and advancing their interests and so much experience with law as 
an instrument of the state? (Hendley 1999 91).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Given the potential cost of litigation, both financially in terms of fears of reprisal, as 
well as the likelihood of failure, there is a tremendous first-mover problem, 
exacerbated by the fact that Russian law does not allow for class-action lawsuits. As 
Kathryn Hendley writes, The shift to a reliance on law makes sense only if  it is made 
almost simultaneously by a substantial majority of potential litigants (Hendley 1999 
92). This, then, may explain why Russians may be more likely to respond to pogroms 
than to individual beatings: the victims can challenge the state as a group.
Indeed, whenever a pogrom occurs, the case inevitably finds its way to Public Verdict 
and its partners. The same cannot be said, however, for the cases of individual beatings. 
It is difficult to determine an exact logic that would explain why some victims approach 
human rights defenders and others do not. A certain amount of the explanation is almost 
certainly accidental: a victim in a city with a strong and well known human rights 
organization, such as in Nizhnii Novgorod or Ioshkar-Ola, is much more likely to seek 
and receive help than a victim in a city with no such organization. In the analysis of 
Public Verdict itself, however, there is more to it than that. According to the 
organizations deputy director, Oleg Novikov, there appear to be two main groups of 
people who seek help: those, like Sergei Oleinik, who have been left without a 
livelihood and who are forced to seek compensation as a means of survival; and those, 
like Nikita Gladyshevs mother, who know that justice is possible but that they will 
need help to get it.55
In the vast majority of cases -  and we do not know how many people are brutalized by 
the Russian police each year -  the victim is likely to fall somewhere in between those 
two groups. As Dubin and Gudkov explained, the police have become privatized, 
insulated from the public and serving interests -  whether their own or those of 
politicians, big business or other clients -  that the public do not perceive to be their 
own. Indeed, this privatization of the law by those endowed by the state with power can 
be extended to the courts, prosecutors and entire system of justice. Vladimir Pastukhov 
writes:
Russian laws exist, but they do not regulate the real relations of those 
subject to the law. And one of the main reasons for this situation is that 
the real relations among those subject to the law in Russia are 
established in a unique dimension that is parallel to the one at which 
areas, Russian shadow spheres are formed not next to and contrary to
55 Interview with Oleg Novikov, deputy director of Public Verdict, Moscow, 10 May 2007.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
the state but, instead, within the states own functioning machinery and 
in collaboration with it (Pastukhov 2002 66-67).
What this means is that the law is a tool not in the hands of the citizen but in the hands 
of an individual employee of the state, whether a politician, a bureaucrat, a judge, a 
prosecutor or a policeman. The access to the law that they enjoy allows them to solve 
problems -  in particular, problems created by the publics own lack of access to the law. 
This is what allows a bureaucrat to demand a bribe in exchange for a building permit. It 
is also what allows riot police to beat teenagers as revenge for a lost bar fight, or a 
prosecutor to defend a police officer, or a judge to stymie the defense. As a result, 
whenever a citizen wants to negotiate access to the law -  whether for a building permit 
or to punish his abusers -  he or she must do so on an individual basis. The exception 
arises only when a number of citizens demand exactly the same access in order to 
achieve exactly the same result. Thus, the connection between Sochi and Bezhetsk is 
potentially more socially useful for the purposes of using the system than the 
connection between Oleinik and Gladyshev.56
This privatization and individualization of the law also helps explain why Public 
Verdict does not function as a grassroots movement. At various points in its short 
history, Public Verdict has attempted to gamer public support. In a six-month public 
fundraising drive, however, the organization was able to collect only about $140.57 
Some of Public Verdicts partners have been somewhat more successful, raising in-kind 
support from local printing presses, for example. But Russias human rights community 
continues to subsist on grants from foreign donors. (Incidentally, Public Verdict was 
initially the only exception, funded by the Open Russia Foundation, which was shut 
down in the aftermath of the arrest and imprisonment of its founder, oil magnate 
Mikhail Khodorkovskii.)58
561 would not, of course, go so far as to assert that this logic figured into the calculations made by 
journalists. It is more likely that pogroms, which are fewer, seem more alike each other than individual 
beatings, which happen more frequently. Nonetheless, the relative utility of the information remains 
unchanged.
57 Interview with Natalia Taubina, director of Public Verdict, Moscow, 1 August 2006.
581 have not attempted to undertake the empirical sociological and social psychological research that 
would be needed to determine exactly why the appeals of Public Verdict and other organizations fell on 
deaf ears. As a result, any explanation presented here should be taken as a best estimation based on theory 
and observation, but not as an assertion of fact. In any case, this has not been the object. The purpose of 
this chapter has been to examine the interaction between a civil society organization (in this case, Public 
Verdict) and the state. And because the defense of human rights does not require strength in numbers to 
be politically legitimate, I believe it is a valid and valuable exercise nonetheless.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The privatization of the law, however, has an important side effect: because each agent 
of the state wields the law individually -  in other words, because the law is not a public 
good, available for all without limit -  access to the law becomes an object of 
competition. State agents may be expected constantly to seek to expand their access to 
the law (and the ensuing rents), to defend their access against competitors, and so on; 
access and rents may also be used within the hierarchy to encourage loyalty and punish 
disloyalty.
To illustrate, I will return to the Oleinik case, whose drawn-out history and long paper 
trail makes it relatively easy to interpret. As already mentioned, lower-level prosecutors 
repeatedly blocked the cases progress, in the evident hope that it would simply 
disappear. That it did not disappear is due primarily to the stubbornness of Public 
Verdict and its partners, who repeatedly appealed for help in letters to higher-level 
prosecutors. These letters -  which require a formal response -  become tools of control 
and subordination within the system, as higher-level prosecutors, not necessarily 
interested in the cases but averse to clear violations of protocol that could haunt them in 
political struggles, wield them over their underlings. And so, when the case finally did 
move forward, it was because the prosecutors need to please their superiors eventually 
overcame their desire to protect their friends in the police. If there is a role for public 
opinion in this mechanism at all, it is in speeding up the process. Thus, a high-profile 
media case such as that of Gladyshev or Sochi with a strong human-interest hook may 
make the higher-ups antsier earlier, shifting the incentive structure for lower-level 
prosecutors. However, the failure to achieve any meaningful progress in the Bezhetsk 
case suggests that this shift need not ever occur.
Moreover, this instrumentalized use of law and procedure according to the logics of 
intra- and internecine politics rather than considerations of public policy seems 
inevitably to reinforce the privatization and individualization of the relationship 
between the citizen and the state. Without the law as a guide, an individual has no way 
of knowing what to expect from an interaction with a bureaucrat, while the bureaucrat 
manipulates procedure to his or her benefit in a manner and according to considerations 
that are not transparent to the citizen. That is why Gladyshevs mother, an insider to the 
law-enforcement system, went to Public Verdict for help: no amount of inside 
knowledge would have been sufficient to guarantee a satisfactory outcome, and thus 
another strategy was needed. That is also, meanwhile, why Public Verdict has been
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
unable to develop a consistently successful strategy of engagement with the state that 
would be comprehensible and attractive to a grassroots following; the states own 
inconsistency, driven by the highly atomized use of power, stymies common, collective 
solutions.
Conclusions
This chapter has attempted to answer the question of why Russian human rights 
activists have been successful in defending the rights of individual Russians, while 
failing in their stated goal of encouraging systemic change to ensure that fewer 
Russians have their rights abused. The approach has been to compare cases in which 
the organization at hand, Public Verdict, has more successfully defended individuals 
with cases in which it has faced more difficulties. This comparison was designed to 
uncover the sources of pressure that may force law enforcement officials to break from 
their usual routine of non-responsiveness and pursue a case of injustice.
It has been a complex and difficult investigation, beset by a lack of verifiable evidence 
and useable methodologies, but I have attempted to triangulate the available evidence to 
reach at least some sort of valid conclusion. And the conclusion is that the insulation of 
the system from the public as a whole, combined with the individualization of the 
relationship between the state and its subjects (the privatization of the law, so to speak), 
means that there is, in effect, no system to change. If civil society is meant to mediate 
between two parties, one of which is the state, then Public Verdict finds an interlocutor 
with which to engage on the defense of individuals, but finds none when it raises 
questions of policy. The reason for this, I have argued, is that a fortuitous confluence of 
external and internal pressures can create the right incentives for officials to act in 
citizens interests; there are, however, no evident circumstances in which the system 
will reform itself, or allow itself to be reformed, even in the defense of what would 
outwardly seem to be the regimes own interests. The system, in other words, does not 
work, but it can be worked. In the remaining paragraphs, I will reiterate and 
contextualize this conclusion.
In all states, Barrington Moore Jr. writes, What takes place ... is a continual probing 
on the part of rulers and subjects to find out what they can get away with, to test and 
discover the limits of obedience and disobedience (Moore Jr. 1978 18). This, of course,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
implies a learning process, like a rat in a lab experiment, faced with a choice between 
cheese and an electric shock. What is remarkable in the Russian case is that the 
experiment -  rather than being iterative, so that the subject can learn and correct its 
behavior accordingly -  is seemingly re-set each time, as though there were no prior 
experience. Clearly, there are limits to what the state (or those representing it) can get 
away with, and prices are paid when those limits are overstepped. But while it is hard to 
believe that Russias rulers prefer the shock to the cheese, these limits are not 
transmitted down the chain of command, to police officers, prosecutors and judges who 
continue to abuse the law as if Public Verdict had never won a case, or as if Russia had 
never lost in Strasbourg. An alternative explanation is that the price of reform -  and, 
thus, giving up the insulation and autonomy that the elite enjoy -  is significantly greater 
than the pain from the occasional shock. In either case, there do not appear to be any 
tools available to civil society to alter this equation, all of whose variables seem to lie 
within the system itself.
Without access to the minds of officials, it is difficult to know whether the problem is 
one of interests or perceptions. The activists at Public Verdict approach their work as 
though they were faced with a system in the proper sense, which can be subject to 
reform. The ruling elite, on the other hand, while recognizing the failures and 
infractions of individuals, cannot or will not affect mechanisms of control that could 
alter the unaccountability that pervades the system. To do so would imply that law and 
procedure exist to bind the bureaucrat -  whether public official, civil servant or law 
enforcement officer -  into coherent, predictable and logically transparent courses of 
interaction with citizens, ultimately accountable to the latter. That, in turn, is antithetical 
to the system of internal power relations, that underpins the functioning of the 
contemporary Russian state. Recalling the argument about Russian power as a club 
good made in the previous chapter, the regime and all of its agencies can be expected to 
act first and foremost to produce power and privilege for the clubs members while 
making sure that they are insulated in the enjoyment of that power and privilege. The 
effects of this arrangement are perhaps more starkly seen in this case study than in any 
other part of this investigation, in some instances costing Russian citizens their lives and 
health. But these effects pervade the remaining cases as well, as ad hoc policymaking in 
the defense of elite autonomy at turns stymies and encourages civic reactions.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
In the final calculation, interests and perceptions are part of one and the same process: 
elites perceive and approach the state in ways that are shaped by their interests, and 
these perceptions inevitably reflect on how they perceive those interests. They may, 
indeed, misinterpret threats, just as surely as activists may misinterpret the vulnerability 
of the elites to pressure. In any case, for the elite, the justice system is not a system at 
all, but rather a network of positions of power, each endowed with certain procedural 
and legal instruments, employed according to the judgment of whichever individual is 
fortunate enough to wield them.
This, then, suggests that the problem is systemic, but not systematic. And the public 
seem to incorporate this distinction into their own frame of reference, accepting (and 
thus socially reinforcing) the lack of a causal link between policy and outcome; they 
understand the way that bureaucrats use power, the way the state functions (or does not 
function). And if police maltreatment is not a matter of policy, there is accordingly no 
use in collective mobilization to alter policy. There remains only individual defense. 
Thus, Public Verdict, despite its name, remains a very private affair.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Chapter 6
Our Home is Russia: the Futility of Russias Housing-Rights
Movements
Introduction
The early years of Vladimir Putins second term as president of Russia brought 
discontent even to many Russians who havent been victims of direct abuses of their 
human and civil rights. In particular, two waves of protests began to sweep the country 
in late 2004, some of which are still reverberating today. The first was the protest of the 
so-called I gotniki,59 pensioners, invalids, students and others who were affected by a 
reform that aimed to replace subsidies with cash benefits. And the second is the protest 
of the so-called doVshchiki,60 investors in real estate projects who lost their savings and, 
in most cases, their homes. This chapter will focus on the latter.
Our theory predicts that civil society in general and social movements in particular will 
thrive when they are able to engage with patterns of intrusion by the state into the 
private lives of its citizens that are both coherent (in that they affect citizens as a group 
rather than as individuals) and consistent (in that they affect citizens in ways that are 
broadly predictable by and understandable to those citizens). In the previous chapter, we 
saw how the privatization of power in the hands of bureaucrats, in this case law 
enforcement, inhibits the development of collective, systemic responses to the 
ubiquitous problem of abuse of human rights by law enforcement officials. This 
happens, I argue, because the states intrusion was haphazard, the product of a 
dysfunctional system that made power a tool in the hands of individual agents with little 
or no reference to law and little or no attempt at systemic control. Because the state and 
the political elite fundamentally refuse to acknowledge the problem as a matter of 
policy, a political response is useless. Thus, neither of the two criteria were met, and 
civic action failed in its stated goal of changing the system.
This chapter examines a case in which the first criterion seems to be met fairly clearly: 
the policies pursued by the state in general, and the city of Moscow in particular, in the
59 From the Russian word Igoty, benefits; literally, receivers of benefits.
60 From the Russian word dolia, share, referring to what is known as dolevoe stroitelstvo, or share 
construction, in which an apartment project is built on money collected up-front from the future 
homeowners.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
realm of housing have created groups of disenfranchised citizens who stand to lose 
much -  in many cases, their homes -  and who are prepared, at least on occasion, to 
protest this injustice. What we will find, however, is a series of protests, some of them 
successful, that nevertheless fail to coalesce into a sustained movement. The reason, I 
will argue, is in the failure of the state to meet the second criterion: it is inconsistent in 
the way it deals with its citizens, even in matters that can be more or less clearly linked 
to policy. Citizens are unable to make reasonable predictions about what strategies 
might prove fruitful, and thus are unable to develop the repertoires of civic action and 
the stable patterns of interaction with the state that social movements need to be 
successful.
The L gotniki: Setting the Stage
Before examining the housing movements in clearer focus, it is worth taking a moment 
to review the case of the l\gotniki. Indeed, any study of protest in Putins Russia would 
be incomplete without at least a mention of the l\gotnikit whose uprising first 
demonstrated the current Russian regimes vulnerability to public sentiment.
On 2 August 2004, between 600 and 1,000 protestors took part in a rally organized by 
the Communist Party to demand that the State Duma reject a law that would replace 
subsidies on transport, education, health care and other needs for pensioners, students, 
invalids, veterans and others with cash benefits. Later that day, 30 members of the 
radical National Bolshevik Party staged a sit in at the Ministry of Health Care and 
Social Development, while members of two other youth groups, the Red Youth Avant- 
garde and the Union of Communist Youth, announced a hunger strike (Lenta.ru 2004a). 
The law, which would have affected more than 40 million people, was widely derided, 
with conventional wisdom holding that the amount of money distributed would not be 
enough to make up for the benefits, such as free transportation and medicine, lost in the 
process (Liubarskaia 2004). The Duma, dominated since late 2003 elections by a pro- 
presidential super-majority, ignored the protests and passed the law by the end of that 
week. For the most part, the protestors went home (except for the 30 National 
Bolsheviks, who went to jail).
Russians came back out onto the streets in January 2005, just days after the law took 
effect. On January 10 and 11, tens of thousands took part in protests in large and small
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
cities across the country, including Moscow, Nakhodka, Samara, Izhevsk, Penza, 
Podolsk, Khimki, and elsewhere; in Khimki, pensioners blocked Leningradskoe 
Shosse, the main highway connecting Moscow to Sheremetevo International Airport 
and St. Petersburg (Lenta.ru 2005c ; Prokhorov, Irdullin et al. 2005). The protests 
continued on into early February, spreading to Perm, St. Petersburg, Samara, Saratov, 
Kazan, Ufa, Ulan-Ude and Vladivostok, while taking on an ever angrier and more 
overtly political tone (Bondarenko and Migalin 2005). In Perm, protestors went as far as 
to storm city hall and bum Putin in effigy (Migalin and Zhukova 2005).
Initially, the Kremlin and the leadership of Edinaia Rossiia in the Duma placed the 
blame on regional governors and bureaucrats, whom they accused of failing to properly 
explain and implement the reforms; meanwhile, in a number of regions -  including in 
Moscow -  local authorities unilaterally (and probably illegally) annulled the changes 
and reinstated subsidies out of their own budgets. But by late January, the Duma was 
already backing away from the reforms, calling for heads to roll in the cabinet 
(Visloguzov 2005). And in February, Putin announced that the implementation of the 
reforms would be delayed and phased in over time, allowing many of the initial benefits 
to remain in place indefinitely, at a cost to the budget of some $10 million (Alekseeva 
2005 ; Grozovskii and Ivanova 2005).
With the bulk of their benefits restored, the / gotniki again went home. The protests, 
which had brought to the streets numbers of Russians unseen since the early 1990s, 
failed to yield any lasting organization; rather, protests appeared to be organized 
primarily by the local branches of the Communist Party, in some cases the Rodina 
party, which was gradually breaking its ties to the Kremlin, and various affiliated 
groups (Bondarenko and Migalin 2005). As a result, what was a protest movement 
failed to evolve into a social movement.
Nevertheless, the government thought it unwise to tempt fate, and Health and Social 
Development Minister Mikhail Zurabov in April 2005 announced that he planned to 
postpone reform of the so-called ZhKKh, the utilities complex, which would have raised 
rates for another 30 million or so Russians (Grozovskii and Ivanova 2005). Over the 
course of the rest of the year, however, Zurabov lost the battle with other ministers, and, 
in the end, regional administrations were given the choice whether or not to keep 
subsidies in their regions, starting from 1 January 2006. Thus, in a number of regions
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
pensioners, invalids, large families, veterans and others who had been paying subsidized 
rates for water, heat and electricity saw rates soar overnight by as much as 20-50%, 
while the bulk of the population saw a 10% increase (Selina and Riskin 2006). In 
response, during the second half of January 2006 protests flared up in cities around the 
country, including Izhevsk, Riazan, Toliatti and Cherepovets, with at least 5,000 
protestors braving temperatures of 25 to 30 degrees Celsius below zero (Selina and 
Riskin 2006). This time, however, the reforms remained in place -  with the blame 
placed squarely on local authorities -  and, eventually, the protests subsided. 
Nonetheless, according to polls taken two months later, 35% of Russians -  and 46% of 
Russians living below the poverty line -  said they were ready to participate in further 
protests (Chemega and Khamraev 2006).
The Butovo Uprising: Anatomy of a Protest
On June 8, 2006, city officials, accompanied by riot police and bulldozers, arrived at the 
one-story wooden home of Iuliia Prokof eva in the neighborhood of South Butovo, on 
the outskirts of Moscow, in order to evict its owner and her adult son and tear it down. 
The Prokof ev61 home was to be the first to go, with city officials preparing to demolish 
two streets full of single-family homes in order to make way for new high-rises. The 
injustice was almost poetic: most of the homes had been built in the 1930s by people 
evicted from pre-revolutionary buildings in central Moscow to make way for Stalins 
re-development of the city. Residents -  most of whom owned their homes but had been 
prevented by local officials for the better part of a decade from privatizing the land 
under the homes -  were offered small flats in buildings elsewhere in South Butovo, 
usually according to the state-established norm of 18 square meters per individual 
resident. Thus, Prokof eva and her son were offered one room in exchange for their 
house and garden, an offer they refused to accept. When the bulldozers arrived on June 
8, 2006, Prokof eva and her neighbors barricaded themselves in her house, called the 
media and refused to leave. Riot police succeeded in dragging most of the familys 
belongings out into the yard, destroying much of their furniture along the way, but when 
the scenes made national television, city officials stayed the eviction order and agreed to 
negotiations.
61 Many Russian surnames are gender specific, with feminine names often ending in the letter a; thus, 
Iuliias last name is Prokof eva, while her son is Prokof ev. Standard practice is to use the masculine 
variant as the generic name for the family unit.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
In the days that followed, neighbors and other Muscovites organized a permanent vigil 
outside the Prokof ev home, ranging from 20 to 200 protesters at any given time, 
complete with a tent camp and an almost permanent contingent of journalists. Within a 
few days, the protesters began receiving visits from members of the newly formed 
Public Chamber, a state-convened group of Kremlin-approved representatives of civil 
society charged with mediating between the public and the authorities. Two members 
in particular, the attorney Anatolii Kucherena and the television journalist Nikolai 
Svanidze, made a public show of excoriating city officials, including Mayor Iurii 
Luzhkov and City Duma Chairman Vladimir Platonov, while promising to seek action 
on behalf of the Butovo residents. After a month of protests, the city scrapped the 
eviction order altogether and agreed to seek a negotiated solution. A year later,
Prokof eva and her son accepted two apartments in Stalin-era buildings in the 
prestigious Kutuzovskii Prospekt neighborhood, and Prokof eva herself was made an 
adviser to the Moscow branch of the Kremlin-backed Spravedlivaia Rossiia political 
party. Less favorable outcomes have been offered to other residents, and conflicts flare 
up from time to time, but the city still fully intends to pull down all the homes in the 
neighborhood.62
I first visited the Prokof ev home on June 22, 2006, two weeks after the initial raid, 
when the protests had come off their peak but were still going strong. The house itself 
was covered in makeshift banners, with slogans including Force is not an argument, 
This is our land and One law for all. On one comer of the house, near the wall, 
hung a Russian flag, the state seal, the text of the national anthem and a portrait of 
Putin. Another wall was covered in news clippings and letters and telegrams of support 
from around the country. When I arrived, there was a core of about 20 protesters, 
congregated around the house and six tents, watching World Cup football on television, 
conversing with visitors from other neighborhoods, activists from opposition parties and 
journalists. By the time I left in the evening, the group had swollen to about 60, several 
announcements had been read out and a petition had been signed.
One protester, a woman in her late 40s and a neighbor whose house was also slated for 
demolition, described the situation as follows:
62 The foregoing narrative was reconstructed from the authors observation, including of the media, and 
interviews with Butovo residents. A summary of events can be found at 
http://www. lenta. ru/  storv/buto vo/.
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Question: How long have you been here?
Answer: Well, we have been trying to do this the right way, the normal way, for 
six years, from the moment they started to put pressure on us seriously. But weve 
been standing right here in this place since the eighth, when they first stormed the 
house.
Q: Do you have some sort of initiative group?
A: Yes, we have an initiative group in the village. They are people who have been 
dealing with legal issues, trying to prove our rights in court. ... They are residents 
of our village, who had just been studying the documents, someone had a legal 
education...
Q: Is this a fairly typical scene right now?
A: No. The thing is, right now theyre trying to solve the problem in courts, and 
with the authorities, to get the decision reversed. So right now its just a core group 
here, who get things organized, when we need to get people together for a 
message, or when we need to make a decision and get it out to people. We gather 
everybody here. There are always at least five or six people on duty here, on shifts, 
plus the tent city, where people live full-time.
Q: And the people on duty are all local?
A: All residents of the village, whose flesh and blood depends on what happens.63
The protesters were joined by activists from other Moscow neighborhoods and suburbs, 
including Sokolniki, Zhulebino, Kurkino, Kurianovo, Nizhnie Mnevniki and 
Krasnogorsk, where residents face similar threats to their homes, and who came to 
Butovo mostly to provide moral support. A van full of police officers was permanently 
parked outside the gate, but the officers did not interact with the protesters, and law 
enforcement was otherwise nowhere to be seen. Just in case, however, the tent camp 
housed around 10 muscular young men, in their 20s and 30s, whose function was to 
make it that much more difficult for the police to perform another raid. The protesters 
were periodically approached by representatives of opposition political parties, 
including the Communists and the Union of Rightwing Forces. Journalists were broadly 
welcomed, particularly from the national television channels and from foreign news 
bureaus, but the protesters angrily evicted a camera crew from TV-Tsentr, a television 
channel loyal to Mayor Luzhkov. Periodically, conversation outside the Prokof ev home 
was drowned out by the sound of demolition work on neighboring lots, where residents 
had already agreed to the citys terms and turned their homes over to the bulldozers.
Mobilization
The participants in the Butovo protest were a fairly motley bunch. At one end of the 
yard, nearest the Prokof ev house, stood the organizers, the professionals and activists, 
and the visitors from other neighborhoods and Moscow suburbs, such as Larisa 
Solomatina, a municipal legislator from the Moscow neighborhood of Sokolniki, who
63 Protester interview No. 3, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
came to Butovo with her neighbors and fellow activists in their local campaign to stop 
unwanted construction. At the other end of the yard, seven men in their 20s and 30s sat, 
accompanied by three young ladies, drinking beer, eating baked potatoes, smoking and 
watching World Cup soccer on a portable television. While they came from all over 
Moscow, unlike the visitors from Sokolniki they came not as part of a movement, but 
because they are neighbors or friends or friends of friends of people living in the 
neighborhood. While they asked that the tape recorder be turned off and that no notes be 
taken, one summed up the groups motivation as follows: I will never let anyone beat 
my friend. I came to defend my friend. Although they were clearly an integral part of 
the protest, they had little or no interaction with the professional activists, who tended 
to congregate closer to the house.
Between these two groups, what I will call accidental protesters were milling around. 
One of them, a man in his early 50s, wearing a tracksuit, explained his presence as 
follows:
Question: What brought you here?
Answer: I have the time. And nothing else to do. Also, I saw them on television.
And its all happening next door.
Q: So, out of sympathy?
A: Of course. I feel sorry for people who are being kicked out of their homes like 
dogs.64
Other, less accidental protesters included neighbors, owners of homes also slated for 
demolition, such as the 40-something woman quoted earlier. Their reasons for coming 
would seem to be clear: by defending the Prokof ev home, they are defending their own. 
Indeed, this neighbor, who Ill call Irina, confirms that in her outlook:
Question: Do you have the feeling that you can achieve some sort of result?
Answer: You know, I hope so. Im an optimist by nature. I hope. Its scary to think 
about how well go on living if  we dont achieve anything. Its just lawlessness.
Weve run into the fact that we have no way of defending our rights whatsoever.65 
But this is not a simple case of desperation leading to a need to act. One protester, who
Ill call Vadim, a man in his late 20s or early 30s who, like Irina, owns a home slated
for destruction, took a very different point of view:
Question: Are you a local resident?
Answer: Yes, Im local, and a homeowner.
Q: I understand that this battle has been going on for several years.
A: Yes, yes.
Q: Do you have any hope of success?
A: Personally, no.
Q: So, you figure youll end up living in one of those [big apartment] buildings?
A: For me, thats the worst possible scenario. In principle, I dont want anything. I
64 Protester interview No. 2, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
65 Protester interview No. 3, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
want to be left alone to live in my own home. But Im a realist and I understand 
that in the end, nothing good will come of this. Ill have to [move]...
Q: So why are you spending your time here [at this protest]?
A: Im an active sympathizer.66
This difference in outlook -  and thus the different mobilizational logics driving the 
protesters -  seems to stem primarily from personal experience. Irina and Vadim are a 
case in point. During our interview, I tried to challenge Vadim to explain his pessimism:
Question: But you dont think there will be any result...
Answer: I think that its such an uneven battle...
Q: And what do you think these people are counting on, then?
A: These people? Its just desperation, a reaction to injustice. A human reaction. I 
understand that.
Q: And the fact that people came from other neighborhoods...
A: Its the same thing, because somethings happening thats not right, and people 
just feel it.
Q: Does the solidarity make you feel better?
A: Personally, no. I think that if the authorities come to deal with me, I wouldnt 
call anybody to help me, Id take it calmly.
Q: Why?
A: Well, how to put it. I dont want people to waste their time, when its already 
clear how its going to end.
Q: And if someone called you to help, would you go?
A: Id go, yes. But I wouldnt call somebody for myself. Because, on the one hand, 
its just financially difficult. Count the dough, lost profits, count up the losses.
(Laughs) Its when theyve got your back up against the wall, when youve got 
nothing to lose, then its different... I had an episode, when my house here burned 
down. And I tried to get the right, although it sounds dumb, to rebuild it along the 
lines of the same foundation. Neither the district nor the prefecture would give me 
permission. And it was my only home. If my bathhouse hadnt burned down as 
well, I would have had to live in that, like in the olden days. After that, I gave up 
on it all, and I just built my house. On the lot my house used to be on, I built a 
house. I decided, in the end, Ive got to live somewhere. And then I was able to go 
to court to get the rights to the house. Believe me, it wasnt easy. It took from 2001 
to 2004. And to do that, you need to not work, you need to spend all of your time 
on it, and I wasnt the only one working on it. Its awful, really.67
Vadims pessimism, then, is not normative, nor does it stem from a feeling of mistrust 
of other citizens; indeed, he has nothing but goodwill for his neighbors. Rather, his 
outlook is based in personal experience, an experience he believed showed the futility of 
fighting with the state, or even of trying to use the state in any normal sense. Instead, 
Vadim puts stock in solutions that are first and foremost pragmatic, avoiding the 
authorities whenever possible, not because he has an ideological aversion to authority, 
but because, in his experience, dealing with the government makes life harder.
66 Protester interview No. 4, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
67 Protester interview No. 4, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Irinas relative optimism, by contrast, is driven by exactly the sort of desperation that 
Vadim talks about, but it is also bolstered by experience with other protests that have 
brought at least incremental success and that are closely tied with her local interests: 
Question: Do you consider yourself a politicized person?
Answer: I cant say Im politicized. But in any case, I stay on top of events and Im 
not oblivious to what happens.
Q: You vote...
A: I go to the elections, yes.
Q: And have you ever been to any protests or rallies?
A: To the protests that affect me, yes, I go to all of the protests about this village, 
about the sale of the Butovo forest, I was at the protest for that, too. If the problem 
affects me...
Q: In 1991 or 1993, did you go to the White House?
A: No, in 1991 and 1993 I wasnt at the White House, not directly, but I was on 
top of all the events, I worried about them, sympathized. So, in that regard, 
political life doesnt pass me by.68
The most optimistic of all of the protesters I interviewed, meanwhile, was a woman Ill 
call Viktoria, who came in with Larisa Solomatina from Sokolniki. In her interview, it 
became clear that her outlook derives directly from the experience of successful 
protests, described earlier in this chapter. To get a clearer picture, I asked her to describe 
how her movement got started:
Question: How long has your group existed? When was it organized?
Answer: In 2002. It was all started on Egerskaia street, when they wanted to build 
an illegal construction...
Q: Pin-point construction?
A: Yes, yes. It was all over the television. We got it all on camera, there were 
camera crews, in the newspapers, everywhere. Against the pinpoint construction.
The residents stopped it. We threw ourselves under the bulldozers. It was 
everywhere. [Deputy Mayor Vladimir] Resin himself came. They banned that 
project, and the lot is still empty.
Q: And your initiative still exists?
A: Yes, yes.
Q: What keeps it going? Are you still battling against the same project?
A: Well, see, we have Larisa Ivanovna [Solomatina], our deputy in the local 
municipal assembly. We are residents. So, we elected two deputies from among 
the residents. Shevelev and Solomatina, here, who support us, and the residents 
support them, and they defend residents rights in the municipal assembly. ...
Q: I understand. So, how many people take part in your initiative?
A: There are a lot of us.
Q: For example, 50, 100?
A: No. A lot. If theres this kind of situation, then very many. Because where we 
live, in Sokolniki, the abuse by the authorities is horrendous.
Q: Where do you get the resources?
A: From the residents. ...
Q: And has it been difficult to get people organized?
A: No.
Q: People have been eager to get involved?
were forming Residential Ownership Unions in our buildings so that we can at 
least somehow stand up to this abuse, as a legal entity, so we can talk to the 
authorities not just as simple residents. ...
Q: Four years ago, when this got started, did someone come to you and say, I can
68 Protester interview No. 3, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
help you, someone like Solomatina?
A: No, we did it ourselves. We got ourselves organized, and then, when we 
understood that we are residents and simply as residents we cant get anything 
done, we understood that we need our own people, so we can at least know whats 
going on there [in government]. And there was an election campaign, and we 
nominated candidates, and we had a very tumultuous electoral campaign... .69
Notably, Vadim, Irina and Viktoria share the same basic view of the political system as 
corrupt, impenetrable and stacked against the common citizen. The only place they 
differ is on the usefulness of protest: Vadim, having fought and lost, is pessimistic; 
Irina, having fought and survived to fight another day, is mildly optimistic; and 
Viktoria, having fought and won, firmly believes that solidarity brings results. 
Viktorias view was by far the rarer, while Vadims was easily the most common 
among the protestors present. This is perhaps unsurprising, except when taken in the 
context of much of the writing on Russian civil society, which generally argues that 
Russians are led by their Soviet past and their ostensibly low levels of social capital to 
be protest-averse. The observation of this protest, at least, suggests the opposite: 
Russians are willing to protest when they believe it might work, and they lose faith in 
protest and grassroots politics more generally when their initial hopes are dashed.
The Broader Movement Environment
The Butovo protests were in no way unique. Although they are rarely written about in 
the press, and even many experts are unaware of them, there are usually several small 
protests in Moscow every week, most of which involve housing: either demolition 
and/or eviction orders that are perceived as unfair, construction of new residential and 
commercial buildings in what used to be yards, parks and playgrounds, failure of local 
officials to provide adequate maintenance, and so on. Most of these protests are small, 
with the involvement only of a dozen or two local residents. The available evidence, 
however, suggests that they are not necessarily short-lived: from conversations with 
neighborhood activists, there is both a realization on the part of residents that 
mobilization is necessary, and no shortage of issues around which to mobilize. 
Moreover, the leaders of these protests frequently seem to become movement 
professionals (though not professional activists): they are aware of precedents in other 
neighborhoods and are in contact with the organizers of other protests.
69 Protester interview No. 1, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Perhaps the clearest example of this is the delegation from the northern Moscow 
neighborhood of Sokolniki to the Butovo protests. In 2002, local officials tried to carry 
out plans for what is referred to as pinpoint construction70, placing new buildings in 
the yards of older buildings, only meters away from existing structures. One of the 
Sokolniki protest leaders, Larisa Solomatina, later became a member of the local 
municipal council and now offers advice and moral support to protests across the city, 
including in Butovo. She recalls:
We had a situation in 2003, when they wanted to build a building five 
meters away from an existing structure. And its only thanks to the active 
position of residents [that we stopped it]. We fought for two months, 
brought in the media, CNN, BBC, we had radio, television, the same tents 
[you see here in Butovo]. They had already brought a truck with building 
materials, brought out the riot police, and people lay down under the 
bulldozers. Some of them ended up in hospital. And we understood that this 
is the only way we can defend our rights. Together, only together.71
Despite the activities of protest leaders such as Solomatina, however, most of these 
neighborhood protests remain disconnected from each other, and while protesters may 
recognize common grievances, they do not perceive a common agenda.
Networked protest movements involving housing issues have arisen primarily in 
response to problems that affect more geographically dispersed groups of citizens in 
more or less the same way. The clearest case of this is the so-called movement of 
defrauded co-investors or dol'shchiki, who bought the rights to apartments in buildings 
yet to be constructed -  most often selling their previous apartments to raise the cash -  
only to have the developers either go bankrupt or simply abscond with the money. 
Unable to obtain their apartments or their money back from the developers -  and 
unwilling to write off their losses in a city that saw property prices triple from 2004 to 
2007 -  the dolshchiki turned to city and federal authorities for help. This, however, has 
not been forthcoming, and protests have frequently been dispersed by riot police. To 
further their cause, the dolshchiki have come together in two ways. First, they have 
created coordinating councils of victims of particular firms, a logical step given that 
each developers case is unique in its detail. The biggest of these coordinating councils 
is made up of victims of the ironically named residential developer Social Initiative. 
Several attempts were made to bring these councils together under a single umbrella. 
While most of these failed to coalesce over strategy, the most recent attempt -  an 
organization called Pis mo Vlasti, or Letter to the Authorities -  seems to have
70 Tochechnoe stroitelstvo
71 Interview with Larisa Solomatina, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
succeeded by seeking to concentrate not on strategic engagement with the state but on 
transmitting a basic list of common demands to the government. In addition to writing 
open letters and petitions, though, the group has been instrumental in organizing joint 
protests and a major hunger strike.
Unlike other recent Russian protestors, such as the so-called Vgotniki, who rose up to 
demand that the government reinstate benefits and subsidies for retirees and the 
handicapped, the doVshchiki took to the streets to protest not what the government did, 
but what it didnt do: namely, it failed to protect them from one of the most destructive 
and widespread scams in post-Soviet Russian history. Over the course of the building 
boom that accompanied Russias rapid oil-fueled economic growth after the 1998 
financial crisis, ordinary Russians across the country invested in something called 
dolevoe stroiteVstvo, or share construction. Real estate developers would take 
payment up front from would-be apartment owners, prior to the construction of a 
building, and then use that money to finance construction, rather than taking debt or 
equity capital and building on speculation; in return for the wait -  which was usually 
meant to be one to two years -  buyers got deep discounts compared to the going rate for 
new apartments. For the majority of participants, it worked. However, in 2003 and 2004 
news reports started appearing about unscrupulous developers, who would sometimes 
sell the same unit two or three times prior to disappearing, leaving the buyers to sort out 
the mess in the courts, or, more frequently, abscond with the money without completing 
construction. By some estimates, some 10,000 people in the Moscow suburbs and 
200,000 across the country -  many of whom had sold their previous apartments to buy 
in -  were taken in by such scams (Morochenko 2005 ; Grishin and Tsikulina 2006).
The defrauded investors, who came to be known as dol shchiki, started holding small 
protests, in which they called for local and federal authorities to bring the developers to 
justice and help them recover their investments. In early 2005, the Duma enacted a new 
housing law, which came into effect in April of that year, banning share construction 
altogether and retroactively mandating recompense for those who had lost their 
investments (Ignat'eva and Finaeva 2005). By the end of 2005, however, only some 
6,500 people had seen their cases resolved (Granina 2005). As a result, the doVshchiki 
began stepping up their protests, focusing increasing attention on federal authorities, 
who they demanded intervene directly in their plight; unlike the Vgotniki, however, the 
doVshchiki did not criticize the government directly.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Events came to a head on 19 May 2006, when 1,500 doVshchiki from Moscow, 
Voronezh, Smolensk, Belgorod, Tambov, Orenburg and St. Petersburg gathered at the 
Gorbatyi Bridge, a symbolic place of protest outside the White House, the seat of the 
Russian cabinet of ministers (Petrenko and Stenin 2006). There, they set up a tent camp 
and vowed not to leave until someone from the government came out to meet them. 
Rather than ministers, however, they were met by riot police. The police set up a ring 
around the tent camp, with 600 doVshchiki inside. As the day wore on, the numbers of 
protesters dwindled, such that at midnight, when the police charged, there were only 
100 inside the tent camp. Of those, 34 were arrested, and the camp was smashed. On 22 
May, three days later, the leaders of the protest returned to the site, having been 
promised a meeting with ministers; instead, they were met by the head of the 
governments public relations department and asked to write a petition to Prime 
Minister Mikhail Fradkov and Regional Development Minister Aleksandr Iakovlev 
(Kozenko 2006). The petition included three demands, none of which its signers 
thought would be met: a meeting with Putin, a demand that they be fully compensated 
or that the government complete their buildings, and confirmation that they remained 
loyal to the regime (Kozenko 2006). Two days later, on 24 May 2006, the Duma 
leadership of Edinaia Rossiia demanded that the government meet the demands of the 
doVshchiki (Khmelev 2006). Whether that will actually happen remains to be seen; as of 
early 2009, no resolution had been reached.
The State and the Movement
In contrast to the Vgotniki, discussed briefly at the beginning of this chapter, the 
doVshchiki did develop an organizational infrastructure. Largely, this happened out of 
necessity, as the investors in each particular development formed more or less formal 
coordinating committees to handle criminal and civil lawsuits against the developers 
(Grishin and Tsikulina 2006 ; Utkin 2006). These, in turn, formed the Union of 
Coordinating Committees, which, in its turn, created an Internet site with a forum for 
discussing problems and potential actions, akin to that of Svoboda Vybora, examined in
more detail in the next chapter. However, conflicts eventually arose within the 
movement, regarding how best to approach the problem, what demands to press on the 
government, and whom to criticize. As a result, some of the leaders suggested that the
.ru/Campaign/Housing/ and http:
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
19 May 2006 protest may have been the last joint protest that the movement holds 
(Kozenko 2006). Nonetheless, at least some progress towards consolidation has been 
made, making the doVshchiki and the broader housing movement a useful case for 
study.
As a general tactic, the doVshchiki movement developed a straightforward set of 
demands and vowed to hold regular protests until the demands were met. The Pis *mo 
Vlasti umbrella organization published the demands as an open letter to the government 
and the public: We demand from the President of the Russian Federation, guarantor of 
the Constitution of the RF, the restoration of the abrogated rights and freedoms of the 
citizens of Russia suffering from abuse and fraud in construction. The letter 
contained three points of action: 1) recognition that the situation of the doVshchiki 
represented a national emergency; 2) the appointment of a person and the creation of an 
agency responsible for resolving the problems of the doVshchiki, with representation 
from the doVshchiki themselves; and 3) setting a deadline of 30 September 2007 to 
resolve each individual case.
In the preamble to the letter, the movement notes that Putin, in one of his regular 
teleconferences with the nation, ostensibly recognized the states guilt in the crisis, thus 
providing sufficient ground for the movements demands.74 The state, however, saw 
things differently. While Putin did from time to time decry the crisis, none of the 
demands were met. The closest the state came to compromise was creating a 
commission in the Public Chamber, led by Anatolii Kucherena, the same lawyer who 
had offered to help the Butovo protesters. The commission, however, is only an 
advisory body and has no executive or lawmaking authority.
The states unwillingness or inability directly to address the problem led to an 
increasing number of protests, many of which were broken up by riot police. In April 
2007, the doVshchiki held a hunger strike, occupying the ground floor of one of the 
unfinished buildings at the heart of the conflict. Law enforcement officials encircled the 
building with riot police, boarded up the windows and cut off electricity, and forbade 
the passage of water and medicine to the hunger strikers, suggesting that to do so would
73 http://www.pismo-vlasti.ni/priamoi-dialog-s-prezidentom-okc.html. last accessed 19 July 2007.
74 In fact, Putin said that the crisis had been created by irresponsible policies put in place in the 1990s, 
under Boris Yeltsin, which had opened the loopholes that developers later used to defraud buyers. See: 
http://www.president-line.ru. last accessed 23 August 2007.
http://www.pismo-vlasti.ni/priamoi-dialog-s-prezidentom-okc.html
http://www.president-line.ru
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
amount to aiding extremists. The strike received no coverage on national television. The 
Unified Coordinating Committee of the Victims of Construction, which organized the 
strike, wrote that even the terrorists who took the audience of the Nord-Ost musical 
hostage in Moscow were more humane than the authorities who dealt with the 
do lshchiki hunger strike.75
Reactions to protest by other parts of the broader housing movement have differed, 
however. As already mentioned, in the Butovo case the authorities called off the riot 
police, sat down with the Prokof evs and others and negotiated a solution. This, though, 
was only part of the difference. The conflict in Butovo was widely covered in the 
media, including on all of the Kremlin-controlled television channels, and most of the 
coverage was supportive of the protesters. Moscow Mayor Iurii Luzhkov himself came 
in for sharp criticism, while some of his cadres -  principally Moscow City Council 
Chairman Vladimir Platonov -  were forced to answer uncomfortable questions on 
television. While it is difficult to know exactly why this happened, it is clear that it was 
permissible to attack Luzhkov and the Moscow authorities for a local scandal, in a way 
that the media would not have been allowed to cover a national issue for which federal 
authorities might be held to account. Clearly, the political opportunity structure can 
make it possible for protesters to gain leverage, and this was certainly part of the story 
in Butovo.
That is not to say, however, that the state gave up. As mentioned earlier, the authorities 
identified the Prokof evs as ringleaders of the protest, offered them a settlement that 
removed them from the neighborhood, and continued the demolition of homes. 
Meanwhile, in Sokolniki, after local protesters were successful in stopping a 
construction project, city officials removed the district prefect and appointed a new one. 
In the words of local activist and councilwoman Larisa Solomatina, He is a military 
man, and he said, Im a specialist in dislodging enemy troops. And now that 
dislodging is going on in our neighborhood, through a combination of buy-outs,
7  fk
harassment and cooptation.
This inconsistent approach on the part of the state -  repressing in one case, undermining 
in another and acquiescing (at least temporarily) in a third -  impedes the development
75 See: http://pismo-vlasti.ru/forum/viewtopic.php?t=19. last accessed 19 July 2007.
76 Interview with Larisa Solomatina, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
http://pismo-vlasti.ru/forum/viewtopic.php?t=19
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
of the expectations that are needed for the movement to coalesce and institutionalize. As 
we have already seen, protesters expectations regarding outcomes, and thus their 
willingness to invest time, resources and effort in the movement, arise largely from past 
experiences. Wittingly or otherwise, by failing to be predictable the state deprives the 
movement of common experiences and expectations that cut across geography and time, 
with the result that protest is, at best, sustainable only on a very local level or on a 
narrow issue area.
There is an interesting, and perhaps unexpected, side effect of this mobilizational 
blockage, however. In theory, it would seem that there is common issue-oriented ground 
for the construction of an injustice frame that would unify the doVshchiki with 
protesters in places like Butovo and Sokolniki, namely the failure of the state to protect 
and enforce property rights (and, indeed, the states frequent complicity in their 
infringement). I have just suggested, and social movement theory generally suggests, 
that, without reasonable expectations of success, such common grounds are insufficient. 
Interestingly, however, the issue of property rights is only rarely discussed as such by 
the protesters and activists. To be sure, they universally demand that the state defend 
their right to live in their homes. But the conversation very quickly moves on to what 
they perceive to be the crux of the issue: the disconnect between the Russian state and 
the Russian people.
In Butovo, I asked Vadim whether he thought that the situation with housing and 
property rights would ever change. He replied, Given the current regime, I dont think 
so. He laughed, before continuing: For me, the situation is perfectly clear. As long as 
there is oil in the pipeline, none of these people are needed. There is a policy to destroy 
the population, naturally, or sort of naturally. Theyre counting on us to die off here on
our own. He laughed again. Not everyone has the same sense of humor, nor the same 
conspiracy theories, but the sentiment was almost universal. Thus, Larisa Solomatina 
said:
There are little shoots growing here and there of self-awareness, of civic dignity.
They are very small, but Im afraid that in Russian history, thats enough for an 
explosion. Theres a feeling in the air that everybodys fed up. Each in his own 
way, but everybody. Look, Im a councilwoman, and people come to me crying, 
and I dont know how to help them, even though I know exactly how the executive 
authorities could do in two minutes what they havent done in years. If they only 
had the will.78
77 Protester interview No. 4, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
78 Interview with Larisa Solomatina, South Butovo, Moscow, 22 June 2006.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
After numerous failed strikes, the dolshchiki, too, began to become convinced that no 
one on high really had the will to help. Starting from autumn 2006, most major threads 
on the largest doVshchiki Internet forum -  that of those defrauded by the Social 
Initiative company -  became dominated by discussions of politics, with only tangential 
references to the housing issue. A typical example is an exchange that took place in
October 2006. The thread was begun by a suggestion that the government might offer 
interest-free loans to the doVshchiki, which sparked an angry reaction from almost all 
activists, understandably indignant at the idea of paying again for apartments they had 
already purchased. Early into the discussion, one participant, using the nickname 
Shamov, wrote:
Why should we pay more? How can you pay again for what youve already paid in 
full? That would be like going to a store, paying the cashier 30 rubles for a packet 
of milk, and then having the salesman come up and say, Surprise Weve got a 
complicated situation here So, well need another 100 rubles for that milk.
To which another participant, nicknamed Pero-ok, replied:
Right, but thats in a normal store, where the laws to protect consumers function 
properly, and in our case the laws dont work
Shamov replied:
But is that really a reason to pay again? To my mind, its a reason to do something 
Another activist, paz, inteijected:
And what exactly, elect a new regime? The question is only, are we capable of 
doing that? Most residents of Russia are perfectly happy with the current situation.
And with this regime, I personally doubt that well be able to achieve anything.
To which Shamov replied:
Electing new people to power wont change anything at all. We simply have to 
constantly remind those in power that they serve the people, and not the other way 
around. Not directly, of course, but though those who sit higher up... through 
protests, expressing discontent. The majority of Russian residents -  who are they?
Even in Moscow far from everyone is happy. And the fact that they are silent 
certainly doesnt mean that they are satisfied with everything. Whats more, they 
even talk about their dissatisfaction, but for some reason only among themselves, 
where nobody can hear them.
It is striking that, despite differing levels of success, different expectations and the 
resulting difficulty of forming a coherent movement, all the sub-movements and proto
movements examined in this chapter share a common sense of injustice. This is of 
crucial importance, both practically and theoretically.
79 See: http://pismo-vlasti.ru/forum/, last accessed 19 July 2007.
http://pismo-vlasti.ru/forum/
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Conclusions
In the previous chapter, I suggested that the haphazard way in which law enforcement 
agencies interact with citizens inhibits the development of a coherent sense of injustice 
regarding abuses of human rights. In this case, by contrast, the sense of injustice is both 
clear and clearly shared. It is worth recalling here social movement theory, which 
argues that what is at issue is not merely the presence or absence of grievances, but the 
manner in which grievances are interpreted and the generation and diffusion of those 
interpretations (Snow and Rochford Jr. 1986 466; see also Jasper 1998 ; Kurzman 
2004). The fact of shared grievance -  and the perception, at least among some 
protestors, that their grievances are indeed shared -  helps in the development of what 
Gamson (1968) refers to as solidary groups, collections of individuals who think in 
terms of the effect of political decision on the aggregate and feel that they are in some 
way personally affected by what happens to the aggregate. This, again, was 
demonstrably absent in the previous chapter.
Moreover, it is notable that the greatest injustice is perceived not in the core movement 
issues of housing and property rights, but in the states failure to engage with the 
movement in meaningful and constructive ways, in the states propensity to repress and 
disperse rather than to address and negotiate. This, too, is predicted in social movement 
theory, and in particular by Gamson (1968), who writes that citizens who are 
systematically unable to achieve redress will begin to lose trust not only in their 
officials, but in the system of power relations itself.
It is remarkable how quickly the proto-movement and its participants rise above the 
ground-level issues to much loftier considerations of right and their relationship with 
the state. While the protests themselves are mostly local, and while slogans seek 
primarily redress of particular grievances, the protestors in conversation complain of 
much greater injustices. Rather than citing the mundane interests that may be behind the 
decision to raze any particular neighborhood, they rail against a state that refuses to take 
citizens seriously, that refuses to offer and play by consistent rules. Their despair is 
driven by a feeling of powerlessness that goes well beyond their specific grievances. 
And their hope is bolstered by the fact that they are joined in solidarity by protestors
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
from other neighborhoods who, despite differing particular problems, share the same 
generalized grievance and speak the same language of injustice.
And yet despite the movements successes at aggregating the grievances of its members, 
at framing those grievances politically, and at building a degree of solidarity, the 
mobilization remains a failure. While individuals are sometimes able to attain redress, 
and while some groups are able to obtain temporary victories, the state remains as 
unchastened as in the previous chapter. It is the protestors who rise up to a higher level, 
ready to discuss their general relationship with the state; the state, on the other hand, 
remains stubbornly mired in the mud of construction sites, unwilling or unable to talk 
about the bigger picture. Indeed, the protestors themselves -  and even the most 
optimistic among them -  do not believe that they can open up the system for their 
demands to be heard. Their only hope, they say, is to stand fast between the bulldozers 
and their homes.
Russia in Movement
Chapter 7
Road Rage: Svoboda Vvbora and the Automotive Rebellion
S. A. Greene
Nikolai Gogol once wrote that Russia suffers primarily from two problems: fools and
roads. The misery is thus doubled when the two intersect. After all, as most Russians 
would undoubtedly argue, the roads are most often built, driven on and policed by 
idiots. So, even to the casual observer, it comes as no surprise that Russians are 
perpetually perturbed by just about everything that has to do with automotive transport.
It was thus, perhaps, predictable that the government would meet some resistance when, 
in early 2005, it proposed banning all right-hand-drive cars. This would have posed a 
particular problem in Vladivostok, Khabarovsk and most other cities east of Lake 
Baikal, where large numbers of drivers own used cars imported directly from Japan; 
indeed, in Vladivostok it is extremely difficult to find a car with the steering wheel on 
the left side. By some estimates, there are 1.5 million right-side-drive cars in the country 
(Buranov 2005). Few if any, however, expected a reaction with the scale and scope that 
was eventually witnessed. Within the space of a year, the resulting movement -  which 
became known as Svoboda Vybora, or Freedom of Choice -  evolved into one of the 
countrys largest grassroots organizations, tackling issues well beyond the right to drive 
on the wrong side of the car. In this case study, we will ask how and, more importantly, 
Much of the analysis of Svoboda Vybora's internal dynamics presented here is based on 
a thorough review of six topical threads from the groups on-line forum, where issues 
are raised and debated and plans for action are developed and distributed. The threads 
analyzed run from 13 January to 1 August 2006 and comprise 816 individual messages 
or posts. The first two of the threads document the development, planning and 
execution of the groups largest protest in 2006. The third thread concerns interaction 
between group members and the authorities, particularly the traffic police. The fourth 
and fifth threads are dominated by discussion of potential new campaigns. And the sixth 
thread concerns the groups integration into the broader sphere of opposition groups in 
Russia. These are augmented by two in-depth interviews of the groups founder and 
leader, Vyacheslav Lysakov, conducted in Moscow on 20 February 2006 and 28 April
80 Duraki i dorogi. Whether Gogol actually wrote this or not is disputed, but this is the most widely held 
view. In any case, the phrase is common.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
2006. And all of this is supplemented by information drawn from dozens of publications 
in the Russian press.
Theoretical Considerations
Before launching into the case itself, it is worth our while to recap some of the 
theoretical considerations that will guide analysis. The primary task is to identify those 
aspects of social movement and collective action theory that will be most useful in our 
investigation. And the first question we must answer is whether the classification and 
analysis of the Svoboda Vybora case as a social movement is appropriate and, thus, 
whether the application of social movement theory is justified. Social movements are 
the complex products of conflicts, perceptions and resources. They begin with the 
transformation of a threat into an opportunity, giving rise to reiterative patterns of 
contention between groups of actors, most commonly a more or less broad segment of 
non-elite society on the one hand and the ruling elites, in whole or part, on the other. As 
such, Charles Tilly writes,
.. .it is a mistake to think of a social movement as a group of any kind.
Instead, the term social movement applies most usefully to a sustained 
interaction between a specific set of authorities and various spokespersons 
for a given challenge to those authorities. The interaction is a coherent, 
bounded unit in roughly the same sense that a war or a political campaign is 
a unit. Such interactions have occurred from time to time ever since there 
authorities of any kind. The broadest sense of the term social movement 
includes all such challenges. In a narrower sense, however, the national 
social movement draws its form and meaning from an interaction with the 
authorities who staff a national state... (Tilly 1984: 305, italics in the 
original).
Given this definition, Svoboda Vybora is certainly a social movement. It begins with a 
spontaneous, geographically and demographically broad-based challenge to a specific 
policy initiative of the Russian government. Over time, as we will explore shortly, the 
challenge broadens in scope, calling into question the policy-making legitimacy of the 
ruling elite; the opposing sides innovate and adjust their strategies, but both the conflict 
and the framework of its contestation remain essentially constant.
Moreover, the Svoboda Vybora case displays all of the symptoms classically associated 
with social movements. The first is the nature of the threat that provoked the challenge. 
As Sid Tarrow writes, social movements are likely to arise  .. .only when a threat is 
accompanied by perceived opportunities for action and seen as potentially irreversible if 
not stopped... (Tarrow 1998: 72). I will deal with the perceived opportunities for
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
action shortly; for the time being, it is important to note that the economic loss car 
owners feared was both significant and, clearly, irreversible. This threat, then, fits 
ideally into what William Gamson calls an injustice frame, the mobilizational 
potential of which requires a concrete target of anger and . .that motivated human 
actors carry some of the onus for bringing about harm and suffering (Gamson 1992: 
Moreover, over the course of its development Svoboda Vybora appears able to strike a 
successful balance between the narrowness of its target and the breadth of its social 
appeal. This, too, is predicted in theory. As Gamson writes, To sustain collective 
action, the targets identified by the frame must successfully bridge abstract and 
concrete. By connecting broader socio-cultural forces with human agents who are 
appropriate targets of collective action, one can get the heat into the cognition
(Gamson 1992: 33). This is echoed by Tarrow, who suggests that successful social 
movements are those whose organizational structures reflect the sort of balance Gamson 
describes. Tarrow writes:
The problem for movement organizers is to create organizational models that 
are sufficiently robust to structure sustained relations with opponents, but are 
flexible enough to permit the informal connections that link people and 
networks to one another to aggregate and coordinate contention. The 
argument... is that the most effective forms of organization are based on 
partly autonomous and contextually rooted local units linked by connective 
structures, and coordinated by formal organization... (Tarrow 1998: 124).
Thus, the issue that sparked the movement, by affecting an entire class of people in 
roughly the same way, and with blame traceable to a well-defined group, is sufficient to 
.. .produce a we feeling and causal attributions that denote a they which is held 
responsible for the collective grievances are needed for transferring routine ingroup- 
outgroup dynamics into political conflict (Klandermans 1997: 41, italics in the 
original).
The challenge to the Russian authorities that the Svoboda Vybora group presents is, of 
course, only one half of the conflict at hand. The other is the authorities themselves; 
whether we choose to see them as a distinct group of lawmakers and bureaucrats or as 
the ruling elite as a whole is a matter for further discussion. Generally, social movement 
theory, in defining the broad boundaries of the movement, sees the challengers 
counterparty as a monolithic regime. In careful study, needless to say, it is most often 
revealed that there are various groups and personalities within the regime, and the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
choices they make have some bearing on the course of the conflict. However, the 
reference to the regime as a whole is useful because it reminds us of the conflicting 
partys institutional nature. Thus, while individuals are free to make decisions, they 
exist in a relatively stable context and are constrained by entrenched patterns and 
strategies of action. As Hanspeter Kriesi writes,  .. .In combination with the general 
setting, these strategies in turn define (a) the extent to which challenging collective 
actions will be facilitated or repressed by the members of the system, (b) the chances 
of success such actions may have, and (c) the chances of success if no such actions take 
place, which may be either positive if the government is reform-oriented, or negative if 
the government in power is hostile to the movement (Kriesi 1995: 168).
Continuing this line of thought, Jack Goldstone and Charles Tilly write that
.. .different regimes will have different boundary lines governing their 
possible responses to protest, and different conditions of conflict -  that is, 
various levels of resources and popular support for the regime and opponents 
-  will determine how much in the way of concessions or repression will be 
needed to suppress a challenging movement. Thus, the dynamics of 
opposition action, state responses, and renewed action can take a variety of 
pathways (Goldstone and Tilly 2001: 190).
In particular, Goldstone and Tilly identify five possible pathways (Goldstone and Tilly
2001: 190-192):
2. Mounting protest, repression initially leading to greater protests, but then 
3. Mounting protest, repression initially leading to greater protests, then further 
repression and/or concessions leading to still greater protests, and so forth: the 
4. A spiral of protest, repressions, and expanding protest, but ending in massive 
These five scenarios present a conundrum for the student of Russia because, for the 
most part, they do not occur. Most often, there is either no protest at all, or the protest is 
entirely ignored and eventually dropped. In the case of Svoboda Vybora, however, not 
only was there a protest, and not only was the protest not ignored, but it led to 
something resembling the fifth scenario -  protests leading to concessions -  with a 
degree of speed and efficacy that would not have been predicted by the observation of 
previous conflicts. Figuring out why this should have been the case is the object of this 
chapter. Indeed, the determination that Svoboda Vybora represents a social movement, 
and even a relatively successful one, seems uncontroversial until that determination is 
placed in the context of post-Soviet Russia.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
In studying Svoboda Vybora, I am guided in part by Herbert Kitschelts admonition that 
too much emphasis should not be placed on movement objectives in explaining a 
movements development. He writes,
In reality ... movement goals are ambiguous and open to challenges and 
disagreements among the participants. Often the practices of protest 
behaviour and the internal organization of movements are more indicative of 
the motivations why people join and the potential impact of movements on 
society than their explicit discourses on objectives and strategies. In this 
situation, not a rational reconstruction, but only a contextual interpretation of 
actors practices, values, objectives, and aspirations helps to understand the 
patterns of collective behaviour (Kitschelt 1991: 332).
This investigation, he continues, should focus on . .three different levels of analysis,
the actors and their definitions of the situation, the institutions and formal movement
organizations in which they act and the overarching societal context (Kitschelt 1991:
338).
For all these reasons -  because social movements are processes rather than things, 
developed dynamically through action, reaction and interaction -  analysis requires not a 
static dissection of a movement at a given point in time, but a study of development 
over time. This is all the more true if we aim to draw out evidence relating to the 
hypothesis of this work, namely that the successful crystallization of civil society 
requires sustained engagement by the state over time. Thus, the structure of the case 
study to follow echoes the theory as presented in earlier chapters and as drawn from 
social movement theory more broadly. I will begin with the movements genesis, i.e. the 
initial incursion into the private sphere by the state, the public response and the states 
reaction; once all of those have occurred, the conflict has been bom. From there, I will 
review the development of interaction, as the movement and the state continue to 
challenge and push each other, trying to identify how and why strategies change and 
what, more importantly, remains constant. And finally, once that constant aspect has 
been identified, we can discuss consolidation.
19 May: Genesis
Initial Intrusion & the Injustice Frame
Cars manufactured by Russias remaining domestic automakers have seen little 
improvement in their comfort and reliability since Soviet days, when they were virtually 
the only cars available in the country. In order to shield them from competition, the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
government has periodically enacted various protectionist measures aimed at driving up 
the cost of imports. The most onerous of these have placed customs duties on used cars 
brought in from overseas that often exceed the value of the cars themselves. 
Nonetheless, many Russian drivers still prefer to pay more for a used import than for a 
new Lada. Almost on an annual basis, the government has continued to raise import 
duties, while the increasingly affluent middle class has shown its discontent only by 
continuing to pay for imports. Never have there been any significant protests.
In early 2005, the government upped the ante by proposing a ban on all right-hand-drive 
cars. As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, there are an estimated 1.5-2 million 
right-hand-drive cars in Russia, mostly imported used from Japan directly into the far 
eastern ports of Vladivostok and Nakhodka. Throughout much of the far east, left-side- 
drive cars are a rare sight, while Japanese imports with the steering wheel on the wrong 
side are not uncommon in Moscow and other major cities in European Russia and 
Siberia.
Thus, it is not entirely surprising that the movement that grew up in response to the 
proposed ban had its genesis in Moscow. According to its initiator, Viacheslav 
Lysakov:
On May 14 [2005], I was online and I read that the government was going to have a 
meeting about banning right-side-drive cars. Ive driven one since 1991, and I was 
upset. Within about 10 minutes, I started posting to a Vladivostok website81 where a lot 
of car owners of right-side-drive cars communicate.82 
Lysakovs suggestion was that he and other owners of right-side-drive cars drive by
government offices on May 19, the date the cabinet was scheduled to address the issue,
honking their horns and blinking their emergency lights. He continued:
The idea was to have one protest, not to create an organization. The initial reaction [to 
cars.83
Lysakov himself, though, was shocked by the scale of the response. By the 
governments own estimates, more than 6,000 cars took to the streets of Russian cities 
in protest (Rossiiskaia Gazeta 2005a). The largest protests were in Moscow, 
Vladivostok, Chita and Novosibirsk, with smaller protests in as many as a dozen other 
cities, with hundreds of cars in each city, decorated with home-made signs and flags,
81 www.auto.vl.ru. Unfortunately, the administrators of the site have deleted the relevant discussions from 
their archive, reportedly under pressure from the government.
82 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov, 20 February 2006, Moscow.
83 Ibid.
http://www.auto.vl.ru
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
forming columns, parading past government buildings and paralyzing traffic on central 
streets. The slogans were largely apolitical and were aimed specifically at the ban. 
While participants may have been angry at politicians, it was clear both from the events 
and from their coverage in the media that they had more to do with cars than with 
anything else. Typically, one participant said:
If [Prime Minister Mikhail] Fradkov wants to ride around in a Volga,84 let him. Ive 
been driving for eight years. Over that time, Ive had three cars. And not one of them 
has been Russian. Theyre trying to force us to drive cars that dont stand up to any 
comparison with our Japanese cars (Progonova, Gorbunova et al. 2005).
Despite the fact that the largest number of potential losers from the new ban were in 
Vladivostok and the Far East, the focus of attention was Moscow, where the plan was to 
drive in circles around the White House, the seat of the cabinet of ministers. However, 
when some 500 cars showed up -  as opposed to the 100 Lysakov had expected -  he 
decided instead to move the protest to Kutuzovskii Prospekt and its continuation, 
Rublevskoe shosse, the main thoroughfare high-ranking government officials use to get
to their suburban cottages.
The authorities initial reaction was mixed. Most immediately, the concern was to stop 
the protests at any cost, particularly in Moscow. The traffic police, Federal Guard 
Service (FSO)86 and Federal Security Service (FSB)87 quickly got involved, detaining 
Lysakov and closing off the roads (Buranov 2005). Lysakov was brought up on charges 
of disturbing the peace and tried before a judge that same day; the judge, however, 
threw out the charges (Martovalieva 2005b).
Before the day was done, however, the government announced that it would delay the 
ban on right-side-drive cars indefinitely (Progonova, Gorbunova et al. 2005). Thus, in 
essence, a mass protest that began with an e-mail message five days earlier had forced a 
change in government policy. Lysakov recalls:
I was euphoric.. ..That was a real lift, a feeling of freedom. We brought together an 
enormous number of people. People felt like they had gotten up off their knees.88
Why should this intrusion have provoked such a response, while all of the previous 
protectionist measures failed to elicit protest? My hypothesis on the importance of
84 A Russian automobile brand.
85 Ibid.
86 Charged with defending the government facilities, including the White House.
87 The internal secret services, one of the successors of the KGB.
88 Ibid.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
interaction between the state and civil society argues that intrusion into private interests 
must be concerted in order to provoke a collective response; in other words, it must 
afflict people as a group, not as individuals, as the result of a blanket policy. Certainly, 
an increase in customs duties is a blanket policy that could be considered as a concerted 
intrusion. There are, however, two key points of difference. First, the pain inflicted by 
an increase in customs duties is marginal compared to that inflicted by an outright ban 
on the use of right-side-drive cars. The previous protectionist measures cost would-be 
car importers a few thousand dollars extra, and from an economic perspective this cost 
could be at least partially recouped should the car be sold on. The new law, on the other 
hand, would have destroyed investments already made, prohibiting the use of existing 
cars and dragging their re-sale value down to nearly zero. This is the sort of potentially 
irreversible threat of loss that Tarrow identified as key to the development of social 
movements. And second, although the tariff hikes were no less concerted as a matter of 
policy than the Japanese import ban, as a matter of implementation the difference is 
important. The customs duties impact individuals in an identical manner but at different 
times, i.e. when each person crosses the border with a car to import. This thus disperses 
the timing of the impact. Individuals also have the opportunity to mitigate or even avoid 
the inconvenience of increased duties by deciding when and indeed whether to import a 
car. The right-side-drive ban, on the other hand, would have afflicted approximately 1.5 
million Russian car owners all at once and with no opportunity for mitigation. This 
difference in the facts of implementation is no less important than the actual content of 
the policies.
Something from Nothing: The Germ o f a Social Movement
On 30 May 2005, Lysakov and a handful of other activists opened a new website 
dedicated to the movement, at the center of which was a forum for exchanging 
information and ideas for future actions.90 They dubbed the movement Svoboda Vybora, 
referring to the freedom to choose what kind of car to drive, but the issues coming in on 
the forum began gradually to expand to include the various gripes common to Russian 
drivers. In particular, this meant the workings of the traffic police, notorious for 
demanding bribes for arcane infractions, and the privileges granted to the drivers of 
government officials, who are allowed to break just about every rule on the road.
89 www.19may.ru
90 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov, 20 February 2006, Moscow.
http://www.19may.ru
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
In the movements initial phase -  up through May 2006 -  membership in the 
organization came to mean registration in the on-line forum, which reached 4,500 by 
March 2006; it is unclear exactly how many others also participate as unregistered 
guests. The typical member is 30 to 50 years old, with a car (usually, but not always, 
imported), a mobile telephone and access to the Internet; says Lysakov: It is the middle 
himself as typical, although his personal background is somewhat out of the ordinary. 
Bom in 1953, he has a degree in health care, but has worked successively as a diamond 
cutter, a hair cutter, an ambulance technician, a doctor of traditional medicine, a 
masseur and a mechanic of Japanese cars; it was as a freelance mechanic that he was 
making his living at the time the movement got started. And, notably, prior to May 19,
2005, he had never been involved in politics or organized civic activity.91 What arose, 
then, was a network movement, existing entirely on the Internet, with no offices and no 
paid staff, although by the end of 2005 the movement had become a full-time (if 
unpaid) job for Lysakov. The initial idea was to stick to the original model, what 
Lysakov calls a motorized flash mob, in which drivers arrange on the Internet to hold 
quick protests whenever and wherever they appear to be needed.
Reliable statistics that would allow us to paint an accurate picture of the socio-economic 
profile of Svoboda Vybora's potential support base do not exist. As Table 6.1 suggests 
(below), those Russians who have imported cars, Internet access and mobile telephones 
are predominantly either part of the middle class or higher on the income scale. 
Moreover, according to data from VTsIOM, Russias largest polling group, the total 
number of households owning at least one car increased from 25% in 2002 to 37% in
2006, while in Moscow and St. Petersburg that figure reached 42%. Moreover, car- 
owners in Moscow and St. Petersburg are almost as likely to have a foreign car (52% of 
surveyed car-owners) as a Russian-made car (54%). Prior to the May 2005 protests, 
however, there was little or no socio-political infrastructure bringing drivers together. In 
some neighborhoods, car owners formed small groups to manage garages and parking 
lots cooperatively, and these could become politically active if there was a threat to their 
territory, such as from real estate developers. On a national level, State Duma Deputy
91 Ibid.
92 Ibid.
93 These results add up to more than 100%, because some households have more than one car. Data from 
http://wciom.ru/arkhiv/tematicheskii-arkhiv/single/3089.html (accessed 8 January 2008).
http://wciom.ru/arkhiv/tematicheskii-arkhiv/single/3089.html
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Viktor Pokhmelkin heads the so-called Drivers Movement of Russia (Dvizhenie 
Avtomobilistov Rossii), but the organization is essentially fictitious.
Table 7.1 -  Cars, Internet Access and Mobile Telephones in Russia (% o f households 
possessing in 2002)94 _______________________________________________
Lower Class Middle Class95
Imported Cars 3% 15%
Domestic Cars 17% 44%
Internet Access (at home) 1% 12%
Mobile Telephone 1% 23%
Source: (Maleva 2003: 357)
Russian car owners are, however, well served in terms of mass communication. There 
are numerous periodicals, many with nationwide circulation, offering a broad range of 
information for car owners, from reviews of cars and accessories to articles and advice 
on traffic rules, import regimes and other legal issues, as well as copious amounts of 
display and classified advertising. This is reinforced by a strong Internet presence. 
Russias leading Internet rating service lists 14,247 automotive sites, of which the top 
10 alone register approximately 170.6 million visits from 3.7 million visitors per 
month.96 The bulk of this is taken up by sites offering a combination of advertisements 
for cars, parts and car-related services, and user forums, in which car owners share 
information on cars, road conditions and various legal issues. That said, the sub
category of sites dedicated to Auto & Law, in which Svoboda Vybora's site is the 
most popular, is relatively small, includes 450 sites (3.2% of total automotive sites), 
registering 411,206 visits (0.2% of the total) by 59,102 visitors (1.6% of the total) 
monthly. A significant part of the content and user forums on other, broader-based 
automotive websites deal with similar issues, but the fact remains that legal and rights- 
defense issues do not appear to dominate car owners attention and communication -  far 
from it. Svoboda Vybora, then, did not tap into pre-existing current of activity or even 
discussion. Rather, it was able to succeed despite the fact that rights-related issues were 
outside the mainstream, even among car owners.
94 It should be noted that these data are already out of date and significantly pre-date the recent oil-fueled 
consumer boom. All of these categories can safely be assumed to have increased dramatically. Indeed, in 
the major cities mobile telephone penetration is reportedly nearing 100%.
95 Maleva uses a complex formula to determine the boundaries of the middle class, taking into account 
income, wealth, expenditures, geographical location, and other factors. By her estimates, 20.7% of 
Russian households may be considered middle class.
96 All data on site visits is from http://top.mail.ru and refer to the month o f October 2006. Data were last 
accessed on 15 November 2006.
http://top.mail.ru
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
When Lysakov issued his call to arms, he was addressing a community that was 
networked but not organized, and only weakly aware, if at all, of a group identity as 
political constituents. In choosing an Internet forum as his venue, he was tapping a 
resource he already knew would be effective, where he knew it would reach an 
audience. As mentioned earlier, the fact that the forum was on the Internet led to certain 
efficiencies in terms of the distribution of his idea and the ability of geographically 
dispersed participants to hold a coherent discussion. What Lysakov did not know -  
indeed could not have known -  was whether or not his message would resonate. Car 
owners had not to date been a political force and had never mobilized in their own 
defense. The fact that the 19 May 2005 protest gave rise to an evidently sustainable 
social movement is evidence that something can be created from virtually nothing.
Choosing a Course o f Action
Although Svoboda Vybora had struck an initial victory, they didnt have to wait long for 
another reason to protest. First, in the late summer of 2005 the customs authorities in 
Vladivostok revamped the procedures for importing cars, making them considerably 
more difficult. In October, local activists from Svoboda Vybora took to the streets of the 
city and delivered a petition to the customs office; on the day of the protest, local 
customs officials announced that they were scrapping the new rules (Klimov 2005).
Then, in the fall of 2005, the government announced a sweeping set of changes to the 
traffic laws, several of which caught drivers ire. In particular, members of the 
movement were incensed by changes that would have required owners of many 
American- and Japanese-made cars to change the color of their headlights and taillights 
(Buranov, Iablonskii et al. 2006 ; Sedel'nikov 2006). As a result, in late 2005 and early 
2006, hundreds of drivers, again honking and blinking their lights and carrying placards, 
drove through Moscow, St. Petersburg, Ekaterinburg, Tiumen and other cities. 
Immediately after the largest protests in January 2006, the rules were repealed 
(Sedel'nikov 2006).
As the number of protests increased, a pattern of action began to crystallize. Svoboda 
Vybora's tactics remained largely the same at each protest: cars would drive through 
highly visible parts of major cities, bearing placards and flags. In keeping with the 
philosophy set out early on by Lysakov, protests were kept apolitical:
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
We are generally critical, but we try not to get into our political preferences. It could 
become a point of conflict. If we bring up politics directly, the movement will fall 
apart. That was my decision, despite the fact that Im highly politicized myself.97 
Thus, none of the protests called for the resignation of officials, and while members of
the cabinet might be criticized, President Putin was generally left alone. It was decided
that there would be no alliance with any political party. In order to get the authorities
attention, however, two strategic decisions were made. First, protests would always be
held as centrally as possible. And second, cars would carry orange flags and banners,
the color of Ukraines revolution. Lysakov explains: Orange is a reflective color. It
 Q O
also annoys the hell out of the authorities.
Notwithstanding their use of orange flags and banners, in conducting their protests, the 
organizers actively sought to avoid confrontation or anything that could be seen as a 
provocation. To that end, instructions for protestors posted on the Svoboda Vybora 
website include the following:
We will move 30-40 kilometers per hour in the far right lanes. We can and should 
move faster if doing otherwise would cause a hazard to other drivers. But only if that is 
the case. Cars passing by at meteoric speed are hard for camera lenses to catch, and 
your neighbors on the road will have an easier time reading our slogans. Keep the 
number of reasons for a traffic stop to a minimum. Your car should be in perfect 
working order, you should have all of the documents for the car and for yourself, and 
your seatbelt should be fastened. We will not break the rules and we will behave 
properly and politely with other drivers. If someone wants to pass through the column, 
let diem. We should not cause traffic jams Obey the commands of the traffic police. If 
they stop one car, three will stop, the rest keep going. If they stop a column, everyone 
stops. If there is no clear place to park, stop somehow (just not in the middle of the 
road) and ask the officer where and how to park. Speak with the officer politely, 
though you are not required to get out of your car. While you are sitting in the car, your 
seatbelt should be fastened (passengers too). Ideally, there should be at least one 
witness present at every exchange with an officer.99
The ensuing discussion of these and other rules, which were posted prior to a protest 
scheduled for 28 January 2006, lasted nine days and included 83 separate posts. 
These, in turn, were divided just about evenly into two groups. The first dealt with the 
image and impression the protest was meant to create. Participants were asked to wash 
their cars (not a pleasant task in January in Moscow), and to affix to them home-made 
signs with Svoboda Vybora logos and slogans, Russian flags, and orange ribbons. A 
large portion of the discussion concerned the best way to get these items to adhere to 
cars in cold weather. Information was also posted regarding where and when television 
cameras would be filming, and how to create the most effective images for television
97 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov, 20 February 2006, Moscow.
98 Ibid.
99 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://19may.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=4033&pp=40. posted 18 January 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://19may.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=4033&pp=40
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
(drive slowly, flash your lights and sound your horns). The second group concerned 
how to deal with the traffic police. Participants were encouraged to bring video and still 
cameras and tape recorders in order to dissuade officers from pursuing fictitious 
infractions. To a certain extent, advice in this category contradicted the image-conscious 
advice given in other posts, as participants suggested that slow driving, flashing lights 
and honking horns could be interpreted as disrupting traffic and disturbing the peace. In 
the end, though, most the forum came to the conclusion that, however participants 
behaved, the police would harass them. This was seen as inevitable and, to the extent 
that it could attract media attention, even desirable.
The Authorities ' Reaction
As far as the authorities were concerned, the police were on hand at every event, and 
none of the protests went by without at least some drivers being fined. The severity with 
which the police reacted, however, seemed to be left up to local police chiefs to 
determine; in Moscow, fines and confiscation of licenses were ubiquitous, and the 
police seemed determined to disperse each protest as quickly as possible. In each case, 
however, the politicians gave in to the protesters demands quickly, generally on the 
same day as the protest.
The law enforcement reaction to Svoboda Vybora's protests seemed designed to achieve 
two aims: first, to disrupt the protest; and second, to discourage drivers from 
participating in further protests. Neither of these aims was achieved.
From the start, Svoboda Vybora's tactics presented a peculiar challenge for the police. 
Generally, Russian law enforcement agencies have little trouble putting a quick end to 
protests. Russian law requires that protest organizers inform municipal authorities of 
their plans, after which the authorities may ban the protest on various technical grounds, 
including the scheduling of another event in the same place at the same time, a threat to 
public security, the necessity of conducting urgent repair work to the pavement, and so 
on. As a result, very few opposition protests receive permission, despite the fact that the 
law does not actually require permission. Citing their constitutional rights to free 
assembly, many organizers go ahead with their plans regardless of the official ban, as a 
result of which they are usually rounded up by riot police, detained, questioned, fined 
and released.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Svoboda Vybora's chosen form of protest -  driving cars through public thoroughfares -  
does not lend itself to this sort of disruption. For one, because the protest would be in 
motion and did not require that any space be cordoned off, there was no legal need to 
request permission, and thus the protest could not be banned. Moreover, because the 
protesters would be driving rather than blocking the roads, they could not be accused of 
disrupting public order. And should the authorities nonetheless decide to break up the 
protest forcefully, it is not immediately clear how easily riot police with shields and 
clubs could clear several hundred cars off the roads without causing significantly more 
public disruption than the protest itself.
Nevertheless, the traffic police eventually developed a tactic that met with some 
success. First, they employed various means to break up the protest column into small 
groups, and then stop the drivers in each small group for one infraction or another. A 
particular favorite of the police was to take manual control of traffic lights, switching 
them rapidly to red as soon as a portion of the column crossed into the intersection. All 
of the drivers caught on the wrong side of the red light could thus easily be pulled over 
for failing to heed a traffic signal. The second aspect of their tactic was aimed at 
deterrence. Once stopped through whatever means, protesting drivers generally had 
their licenses confiscated and -  if there were no other licensed drivers among the 
passengers -  their cars impounded.100 That, however, is the full extent of retaliation, and 
with the exception of the initial protest, none of the movements members have been 
jailed or even detained, unlike participants in many human rights-oriented protests. 
Encounters with the police are reported on the movements Internet forum, collected in 
a central database and made available as press releases. Where necessary, volunteers -  
including lawyers -  assisted protestors in reclaiming their licenses and automobiles; in 
Moscow, Lysakov himself makes the rounds of police stations after protests and has 
been uniformly successful in reclaiming licenses and cars, usually without hassle.101 
Thus, while it is impossible to know the polices exact orders and motives, they seem to 
have established a tactic that involves dispersing any protest as quickly as possible, 
coupled with mild and generally ineffectual discouragement of further participation in 
such protests.
100 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://19mav.ru/forum/prmtthread.php?t=4186&pp=40. various posts from 28 
January through 29 May 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
101 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://l 9mav.ru/forum/printthreat.php?t=4186&pp=40. posted 3 February 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://19mav.ru/forum/prmtthread.php?t=4186&pp=40
http://l
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Interim Conclusions
In the initial phase o f Svoboda Vybora's emergence we see the genesis of a classic 
social movement, answering to all of the basic theoretical expectations. Sustained 
contention arises within an injustice frame that provides all of the necessary 
prerequisites: an imminent threat of irrevocable loss, a clearly identified human target of 
blame, and the ability to tap into a broader socio-cultural current. More pertinently for 
our thesis, the fact that this injustice frame develops how and when it does supports the 
theoretical argument presented here. General dissatisfaction erupts into action only after 
the government makes a concerted and coherent intrusion that affects an entire group of 
people identically. And action is repeated only when provoked by consistent state 
intrusion. Thus, a pattern of interaction begins to emerge, driven primarily by the state, 
which intrudes, retreats and intrudes again, allowing Svoboda Vybora to develop a 
repertoire of protest and a track-record of interaction (and successful interaction, at that) 
with its adversary.
Svoboda Vybora: Development
New Challenges
A key turning point for Svoboda Vybora came in early 2006. Several months earlier, in 
August 2005, Altai Governor Mikhail Evdokimov and his driver were killed when their 
Mercedes flew off a two-lane rural road, while attempting to pass another car at a speed 
of approximately 200 kilometers per hour. In the oncoming lane was Oleg 
Shcherbinskii, who failed to get out of the way of Evdokimovs car, forcing the latter to 
swerve and leave the road, after which it hit a tree (Sedel'nikov, Marchuk et al. 2006).
In February 2006, for failing to yield to a car he barely had time to notice, Shcherbinskii 
was sentenced to four years in a labor colony (Moshkin and Mel'man 2006). A month 
later, after massive protests organized primarily by Svoboda Vybora, the verdict was 
overturned by a higher court (Tepliakov and Kaspirshin 2006).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Svoboda Vybora adopted a two-pronged approach to this affair. Creating a new section 
of their website dedicated exclusively to defending Shcherbinskii,102 the movement 
announced a rolling series of protests, the largest of which were held in late February 
and early March 2006, in Moscow, St. Petersburg, Ekaterinburg, Vladivostok, 
Cheliabinsk, Magadan, Krasnoiarsk, Novosibirsk, Iakutsk and Barnaul (Chebotarev and 
Kostenko 2006 ; Chebotarev, Varshavchik et al. 2006 ; Shramenko 2006). At the protest 
in Barnaul on the day Shcherbinskiis verdict was due to be read out, some 2,000 people 
gathered, symbolically, on Sakharov Square (Tepliakov 2006). As before, the protests 
were not overtly political, although -  with the prominent slogan of We could all be the 
next Shcherbinskii -  they at least hinted at a goal that went beyond ensuring 
Shcherbinskiis acquittal (Butorina 2006). Parallel to the Shcherbinskii campaign, 
Svoboda Vybora launched another campaign against so-called migalki, the flashing blue 
lights that bureaucrats in Russia use to allow them to break traffic rules.
The second part of the campaign was to provide direct material support to Shcherbinskii 
and his family. Because the organization was still not officially registered, Lysakov 
provided his own bank account as a repository for funds, which could be wired in from 
all over the country, as did another activist from the Svoboda Vybora community in 
Barnaul. In all, the campaign raised some $8,000 over two months, approximately half 
of which flowed into Lysakovs account in Moscow and half into the account in 
Barnaul; $2,000 of the money raised covered the travel costs and other expenses of 
Shcherbinskiis attorney, who was working pro bono, while the rest was given to 
Shcherbinskiis wife.103
In defending Shcherbinskii, Svoboda Vybora hit on an issue that had tremendous public 
resonance. Some 216 articles were written in the nationwide Russian press about 
Shcherbinskii, and there was broad coverage on television, both of his trial (although it 
was closed to the press) and of the protests. According to a poll conducted in March 
2006, prior to the overturning of Shcherbinskiis conviction, 70% of Russians were 
aware of the case, and of those 90% felt that the verdict was unfair.104 During the affair, 
Svoboda Vybora's Shcherbinskii site reached the number two spot for hits in the 
Russian-language Internet.105
502 01eg.19may.ru
103 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov, 28 April 2006, Moscow.
104 http://www.levada.ru/press/2006041104.html
105 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov, 28 April 2006, Moscow.
http://www.levada.ru/press/2006041104.html
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
In developing its response to the Shcherbinskii case, the movement had to further refine 
the parameters of its injustice frame. Thus, if  in previous protests it was fairly easy to 
determine whom to blame -  the lawmakers who were attempting to ban right-side-drive 
cars and pass other unfriendly regulations -  in the Shcherbinskii case blame was less 
clear. Evdokimov, the governor whose death the authorities appeared to be avenging, 
was dead. Moreover, the authorities themselves seemed to be pursuing Shcherbinskii at 
least in part out of inertia, essentially because it felt like the logical thing to do. Thus, 
movement members began to feel that the system was at fault more than individuals. 
And this, in turn, gave rise to unending debates as to root causes and how to address 
them.
Thus, in planning a protest on the Shcherbinskii case, Lysakov -  under the nickname 
Moskvich -  wrote on the movements forum:
Because Oleg106 was the victim of a car with a migalka, the victim of 
inequality on the roads, of unearned privileges, which would seem 
outrageous in civilized countries, it would make sense to hold our Protest 
not only in defense o f Oleg, he is one of the victims, and any one of us, 
our friends and those close to us could be in the same position. In 
defending Oleg and showing what we think of this unjust verdict, lets 
place the main emphasis on our demands to get rid of all migalki 
altogether on Russias roads, except for ambulances, the police and fire 
trucks. I think this has grown into a nationwide problem, when we as 
drivers (and not only as drivers) have been divided into two groups, two 
castes -  untouchables and trash.107 That is why Oleg was given his 
sentence -  the untouchability of migalki dictates the rules of behavior, 
forms the psychology of the traffic cop on the road and the judge behind 
the coutroom desk. Olegs fate is the result of these circumstances. If we 
demand that they change, then Olegs fate will change as well, and many 
other fates in the future will not be broken so impudently, carelessly, 
defiantly.108
In response, a core activist using the nickname Sanych writes:
Getting rid of blat is a good goal. But are the central authorities to blame?
It happens at all levels of the bureaucracy. And a hit at any level is a battle 
with todays authorities. Im all FOR it. You?109
To which Lysakov responds:
106 Shcherbinskii
107 Lysakov mis-uses the combination of caste and untouchable; he is referring not to an underclass, as 
in the Indian sense, but to a group of people who are above the law. The word translated as trash in 
Russian is bydlo, which can also be translated as cattle, herd, or mob, and is meant to refer to the 
conception of the bulk of the population as expendable, unimportant and mindless.
108 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t::=4372&pp=40. posted 4 
February 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
109 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19may.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=4372&pp:=40. posted 4 
February 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Sanych, lets not get into global politics. We are talking about the concrete 
fate of a concrete individual, who was a victim of lawlessness in the 
courts. The cause lies in inequality on the ROADS, were talking about 
that now. We dont want ourselves or our friends or those close to us to 
end up in the same situation. Lets start by demanding that the Law be 
enforced or changed, rather than global political changes. No offence, but 
everything that goes beyond the discussion of this Protest of DRIVERS 
against this unjust judicial verdict, involving the fate of a concrete person 
and the existence of untouchables on the roads will be deleted from this 
forum. Otherwise well get lost in endless discussions. I ask for 
everybodys understanding.110
Another activist, nicknamed Badiboy, interjects:
I dont entirely agree. In this case Oleg actually IS NOT a victim of 
migalki. He is alive and almost unhurt. Oleg is a victim of a 
DEPENDENT investigative and especially judicial system. One that is 
biased and that takes orders from above. Would it not be logical, probably, 
to protest against that?111
Lysakov replies:
I ask again and for the last time that we leave all of the systems be except 
the roads. Well start putting the ROADS in order, and not in Mr. 
Ustinovs office.112 The first we can achieve, while the second will end up 
as hot air. In the best case.. .113
An activist using the nickname IZh2126 wrote:
I dont entirely agree with the emphases. Shcherbinskii was the victim of 
unfortunate circumstances and the victim of the authorities readiness to 
destroy an ordinary citizen to justify themselves. Migalki and whistles are 
only one of the symptoms of how the authorities relate to their people and 
to themselves. ... Our protest, in my view, might better be summed up as 
We are all Shcherbinskiis (regardless of whether you have an 
automobile).114
Some despaired. For example, Advokat:
The paradox of the situation in our country is that the caste of 
untouchables emerged a long time ago (it was present in Soviet times, at 
least) and its difficult to say whether it will ever end So, even if  all of a 
sudden they ban migalki and special number plates, nothing will change. 
We need to change peoples mentality.. . . 115
110 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=4372&pp=40. posted 4 
February 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
111 Svoboda Vybora forum, http:/Avww. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=4372&pt>=40. posted 4 
February 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
112 Ustinov at the time was prosecutor general. He was later made minister of justice.
113 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=4372&pp=40. posted 4 
February 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
114 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=4372&pp=40, posted 4 
February 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
115 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t:=4372&pp=40. posted 4 
February 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
http://www
http://www
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
In the end, the general opinion coalesced around the defense of Shcherbinskii and 
drivers in general, rather than a more generalized political agenda. The protests broadly 
adopted the slogan proposed by IZh2126, We are all Shcherbinskiis. One activist, 
nicknamed Bushmaster, summed up the position as follows:
People are fed up with all this chatter o f down [e.g., with the tsar...]116 
and for how long [e.g., will we put up with this.. -]?117. Lets leave the 
pretty slogans about justice in the world to those who make their career 
and money on such things. Our task (if Im not mistaken?) is to achieve 
equality of citizens before the law, rather than to get Oleg out of prison by 
the streets with slogans like No to migalkiV well be shown on TV, 
theyll do interviews with us and maybe even invite us to the Public 
Chamber. But lets be realistic. Migalki arent going to disappear from the 
roads as a result, nor will ordinary drivers cease to be obstacles in the 
path of their owners. As a result, people will get the impression (and 
already are) that SV is just another movement of democrats, and the word 
democrat for some time now has been a synonym for hot air. All the 
more so, because the state media will put maximum effort into making 
sure that this image is cemented as fast as possible. So, imho,118 we need 
to focus on a concrete case, i.e. Olegs case, and get a fair verdict at least 
() in this concrete episode, and from there we can develop further attacks.
As they say, its better to have a small victory than a big, loud loss.119 
What the movement decided, then, was to broaden its stance and its approach to the
state without biting off more than it felt it could chew, to oppose the states actions in an
area at least tangentially connected to the movements initial grievance but not to
become an opposition movement as such, taking on the state on all fronts
simultaneously.
Thus, Svoboda Vybora's mobilization in the Shcherbinskii case had the effect of 
broadening the movements injustice frame -  what Snow et al refer to as frame 
bridging, the linkage of two or more ideologically congruent but structurally 
unconnected frames regarding a partiular issue or problem (Snow and Rochford Jr. 
1986)- but only to a degree. While acknowledging systemic blame and calling into 
question the general issues of inequality and unfairness stemming from nomenklatura 
privilege, the movement would not expand its concrete demands beyond the removal of 
the specific irritants provided by the authorities: the Shcherbinskii verdict and the use of 
migalki. To some extent, this reflects Lysakovs anxiety that the movement would 
fracture if it moved too far beyond the specific issues that brought it together in the first 
place. But Lysakov himself was not in full control of the debate over how to approach
116 Doloi, in Russian
117 Dokole, in Russian
118 imho is a common abbreviation used on Internet forums and in other electronic media to mean in 
my humble opinion.
11 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=4372&pp=40, posted 4 
February 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
the Shcherbinskii campaign, and the conversation on the forum was dominated by other 
participants. In the end, participants seemed to recognize the potentially threatening 
diversity of their own viewpoints and chose instead to stick to common ground, even if 
that meant delaying the voicing of the broader political demands that many of them felt 
to be pressing.
Nonetheless, the process brought two key results. First, it conceptually re-centered the 
movement on an issue -  inequality before the law -  that was both highly contentious 
and unlikely to go away any time soon. This would increase the movements staying 
power, even if the government capitulated on specific demands such as the right-side- 
drive law and the Shcherbinskii verdict. And second, the Shcherbinskii case added a 
degree of solidarism to the movement. Prior to the Shcherbinskii protests, movement 
members had been either defending themselves directly against an imminent loss, or 
else had reason to believe that a similar loss was likely to afflict them in the future. 
However, it is statistically highly unlikely that many Russians will ever be accused of 
causing the death of a governor (or any other high official, for that matter) in a traffic 
accident. Representing a shared sense of both vulnerability and of outrage over the fate 
of one man, with whom many movement members could evidently identify, the slogan 
We could all be the next Shcherbinskii, then, is a classic example of the ethos of 
Gamsons solidary groups, whose members feel that they are in some way personally 
affected by what happens to the aggregate (Gamson 1968 35).
Movement Identity
The Shcherbinskii episode illustrates the difficulties that Svoboda Vybora underwent in 
shifting its targets from individuals to the system. As mentioned above, the movement 
consistently fell back on a narrow framing, with contention focusing on specific sins 
committed by the authorities, even if the definition of those sins gradually broadened. 
This internal discussion, however, led to another debate on how or whether to address 
broader sources of dissatisfaction. The activists of Svoboda Vybora, after all, are not 
only motorists. They are also voters, taxpayers, workers, and so on, and in their daily 
lives anger over road-related irritants inevitably mingles with anger over numerous 
other issues, including reforms of state subsidy and benefit systems, state-mandated 
increases to gas, heating and other utility bills, and so on.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
A typical example of this dynamic is a January 2006 exchange on the Svoboda Vybora 
forum between three activists, nicknamed PaNick, Sanych and Agdam, in which the 
question of targeting spills out into a broader political debate. PaNick starts it off:
One of the priorities of our protest should be as follows:
1) NO to abuse by the GAI/GIBDD/DP S120 
2) Accountability for the GAIH We demand investigations, that the 
guilty be punished, and that people be compensated for their losses
3) We demand the dismissal of Kirianov,121 who is incapable of putting 
his impudent and greedy ranks in order122
In response, Sanych writes:
1 share your justified anger at the traffic police, etc. But look deeper.
THEY are using all of this to distract us from the real problems. Have you 
received your utility bills yet? How do you like the reforms? Thats what 
we need to concentrate on now. Purely IMHO.123
And PaNicks reply:
Sanych, you didnt understand me. I understand what youre saying. But 
understand this: the authorities124 are faceless. Lets punish one 
individual for a start. Especially because his guilt is incontrovertible, his 
face is fat,125 and his underlings are real bandits in uniform. Then (if we 
punish this one) the next chief traffic cop will keep a stronger thumb on 
his underlings and will be more careful in his dealings with the people.126
Sanych:
Kolia I agree that we can start with any bureaucrat. Id be happy to. But 
the system is to blame. And until we rip up the roots of the weeds, THEY 
will keep coming back up. And we need to get out o f just automotive 
problems. I think everybody already understands that until we get rid of 
the root cause, we wont be able to deal with its effects.127
Agdam interjects:
2 Sanych. ... Lets not work towards any world revolutions. We havent 
even solved our automotive problems. If, for example, right-handers had 
come out on 19 May with slogans like Down with the tsar -  all power to
120 Various abbreviations for the Russian traffic police.
121 Head of the Russian traffic police.
122 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=3950&DP=40. posted 13 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
123 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ra/forum/printthread.php?t=3950&pp=40, posted 13 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
124 He uses the Russian word vlasti, which could also be translated as power or the powers that be.
125 The phrase his face is fat is translated from the Russian riakha zhima, which itself is a bastardization 
of the phrase zhimaia riakha or zhimaia riazhka, literally fat face but using an unpleasant colloquialism 
for face. The phrase is commonly used in relation to police officers, who are assumed to get fat on 
bribes and extortion.
126 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum'fointthread.php?t=::3950&pp=40. posted 13 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
127 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=3950&pp:=40, posted 13 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
http://www
http://www
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
the people theres no way we would have been able to defend our right- 
side steering wheels. Our demands need to be a little more concrete.128
Finally, PaNick comes up with some common ground:
.. .lets send one little bureaucrat into retirement. Let them be afraid. Right 
now theyre not afraid of a thing, because we havent set clear targets. And 
next time itll be the minister in charge of utilities reforms. And from 
there, things might go all the way up to Vovochka,129 the chief 
werewolf1 .131
After some further debate involving other participants, Agdam summarized the general 
consensus:
We shouldnt forget that we are an AUTOMOTIVE movement. And the 
problems that we raise are AUTOMOTIVE. All of the rest, of course, also 
concerns us as citizens. But we are not going to take the bread of the great 
number o f general profile political parties and social organizations.
Which, by the way, are unable to achieve their grand goals and get able- 
bodied people out onto the streets without paying them. If we follow the 
trail theyve cut, well dissolve in the fog.1 2
This sort of dynamic, common throughout much of the movements Internet forum, 
keeps Svoboda Vybora close to its roots. If, as described in the previous section, the 
movement had tended to mobilize generally in reaction to specific irritants created by 
the state, the exchange presented above suggests that the movements own repertoire 
and history becomes a guiding -  if not constraining -  factor. The movements 
reluctance to address non-automotive issues head-on does not stem from a lack of 
concern with those issues. Rather, it seems to arise from a fear of getting too far away 
from the factor that created the movement in the first place: cars. Cars -  and, in 
particular, the use of cars as a vehicle of protest -  made the movement visibly unique, 
and that fact is clearly perceived by participants as crucial to their success in forcing 
government concessions. But cars are also key to the movements collective identity. 
Indeed, movement activists may share myriad concerns, running the full gamut of 
Russian public and political life, but it was cars -  and only cars -  that brought them 
together.
128 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/fonirn/printthread.php?t:=3950&pp:=40, posted 13 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
129 Vovochka is a diminutive for Vladimir. PaNick is clearly referring to Vladimir Putin.
130 Werewolf -  oboroten  in Russian -  comes from the Russian phrase oboroten  v pogonakh (literally, 
werewolf in epaulets), widely used in the media to refer to law enforcement and military officers who use 
their official positions to commit crimes, particularly extortion.
131 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=::3950&pp=40, posted 13 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
132 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19may.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=3950&pp=r40, posted 14 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
http://www
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Shared concerns, however, do not mean that the movement is free from internal 
ideological conflict. There are significant differences among members in terms of how 
to relate to and, if possible, reform the current Russian regime. Thus, an activist using 
the nickname Advokat wrote:
I support dialogue with the authorities rather than their violent 
overthrow133
To which another participant, tatiana, replied:
And what slogans would you propose for those who have a normal 
political orientation, and not some sort of sado-masochism? People just 
dont understand this sort of love from the authorities anymore. We 
recently had a pensioner drown himself. In his suicide note he wrote: I 
have no money for medicine, nothing to pay my rent, I see no point in 
life. How long are you planning to negotiate?134
And Tolan writes:
How long can we keep changing our leaders? Things were bad under 
Gorbachev, they were bad under Yeltsin, and under Putin theyre still bad. 
They bring new faces into the government with them, and things for us are 
still bad.
The conclusion? There is NO POINT in a change of the guard up top.
So, instead of changing our leadership, we need to force it to live up to its 
obligations to improve our country.13
And Alex53 writes:
In recent times our laws have changed to such a degree that people who 
dont have connections in the government simply cant protest publicly 
without breaking the law. There arent yet any laws about automotive 
marches, and it would be pretty hard to do so, because were not asking 
for space, and thats the basic excuse for all sorts of bans. Its pointless to 
negotiate with todays authorities -  you can only fight and protest. These 
authorities dont have any moral principles and so will lie and lie again, ad 
infinitum. It seems that SV should be the kind of organization that doesnt 
negotiate, but that presents the authorities with reasonable solutions to 
emergent problems that would suit the majority of motorists in the country 
(and in the future not only motorists), and, in the event o f refusal, protest 
as much as possible. . . .136
And Plotnik writes:
Personally, Ive been able to adapt, plus, my work doesnt depend on the 
government. But that doesnt mean that it (the government) takes care of 
me. It means that it has forgotten about me, which makes me quite happy. 
Because, as soon as it remembered me, it immediately demanded by 
garage as a gift Its pointless to change the people in power, just as it is to
133 Svoboda Vybora forum, http:/7www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=3950&np=40. posted 16 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
134 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/foru m/printthread.php?t=3950&pp=40. posted 16 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
135 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t:=5690&pp:=:40, posted 27 April 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
136 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19may.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=5690&pp=40, posted 18 April 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
http://www
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
change the system. None of that will change their mentality. But we have 
to come up with effective levers of pressure. The only thing they 
understand is force... A protest is one such lever. So lets come up with 
slogans that our rulers will not just understand, but that have real bite. Not 
8 migalki', but Migalki only for the special services; not for a just 
court, but prosecutor, get your soap; not Put the Guarantor137 in a 
These differences, clearly, grow out of varying interpretations not of automotive issues 
but of broader socio-political issues. No one in the movements forum seems satisfied 
with the current state of affairs in Russia or with the countrys political leadership, 
Vladimir Putin included. But the movements broad geographic, demographic and 
socio-economic base inevitably means that members will have very different 
experiences and outlooks. This simultaneously reinforces and is ameliorated by the 
movements reluctance to stray too far from automotive issues.
Whats more, as the movement developed it seemed to be held together by an increasing 
sense of solidarity -  both within the movement and in a broader social context. Thus, in 
at least two cases the activity of participants in the organizations Internet forum has led 
it to get involved in issues that it might not have otherwise addressed. First, according to 
Lysakov:
Weve gotten involved in a case in Voronezh. On our site, someone wrote about a five- 
year-old story, about an accident, in which a drunk driver ran up on the sidewalk and 
killed two teenaged boys. They died instantly. Another girl died later, in the hospital.
The lawyer of the perpetrator is the son-in-law of the chief judge, and for five years 
this guy has avoided conviction. We have arranged for legal help and informational 
support for the parents of the children who were killed. Its ironic, but were defending 
the rights of pedestrians and trying to put a driver in jail. Our lawyer has volunteered 
his time, a journalist from Vedomosti donated money, and so did the drivers union. I 
called the Republican Party, and they called their local city duma deputy, who is now 
working with the parents. And the editor of Novaia Gazeta got the story into the
139paper.
And second:
We got a post in our forum about a woman who had twins, a boy and a girl, and the 
boy was sick. When the mother was well enough, she left the hospital with the girl, but 
left behind the sick boy. Someone who had been in the hospital with her and seen this 
happen started writing about it in the Internet, and it made it into our forum. Everyone 
was writing in, wanting to adopt the boy. The threat got 32,000 hits and 300 comments.
We had responses from all over the world, even from Boston. It turned out that the 
story wasnt quite true, that the mother came back later and got the boy, who had 
stayed in the hospital for treatment. But because we had seen such an emotional 
outpouring, we decided to create two new parts of the forum. The first is called Help 
Children, and its for transporting aid and donations from one place to another. Its a 
way for people who have something to send to find a driver who might be able to take
137 A reference to the president, who is referred to in the Russian constitution as guarantor of the 
constitution.
138 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19may.ru/forum/printthread.t>hp?t::=5690&pp=40. posted 27 April 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
139 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov28 April 2006, Moscow.
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
the package. And the second is called, Lets Talk about Children, for emotional 
discussion.140
Thus, while broad politically oriented mobilization is problematic, the movement has 
proved itself capable of solidaristic action outside the realm of its traditional concerns. 
Demanding that a driver be jailed for a crime on the road is not what one might initially 
expect from a movement created to defend drivers. Nor is the distribution of charitable 
donations to poor children clearly linked to automotive issues. Of course, neither of 
these is ideologically contentious, and that makes mobilization less risky. But neither 
are these activities direct responses to state intrusion. Rather, they are small steps 
towards proactive engagement by the movement, generated by a sense of solidarity and 
common purpose, which itself was generated through the gradual development of a 
successful repertoire of reactive engagement. The emergence of this solidarity is 
noteworthy, particularly because it is on such a philosophical level. Theory and 
hypothesis had already predicted that the cohesive and coherent nature of the initial 
intrusion -  the right-side drive ban -  would provoke a collective response, because a 
single policy decision threatened a large group of people by virtue of their membership 
in that group. What is remarkable here is that, having come to see themselves as a class, 
the members of the movement were able to develop a collective response to just the sort 
of law enforcement abuses that Public Verdict struggled with in Chapter 5. In other 
words, the movements identity was bom and weaned in reaction, and once weaned that 
identity begins to take on a life of its own.
Patterns o f  State Reaction: Co-opt, Control, Concede
As predicted in social movement theory (Tarrow 1998), various other political forces 
began trying to attach themselves to the movement. Thus, at the rally for Shcherbinskii 
in Barnaul, Svoboda Vybora was joined by the Republican Party (a liberal opposition 
party led by Vladimir Ryzhkov, a State Duma deputy from Barnaul), The Movement in 
Support of the Army (a populist/nationalist fraction of the Communist Party, associated 
with the outspoken anti-Semite Viktor Iliukhin) and Edinaia Rossiia, the Kremlins 
party of power (Tiazhlov 2006). None of these groups was invited by the protests
141organizers.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
In fact, the Kremlins interest in Svoboda Vybora began much earlier than the 
Shcherbinskii affair. Within two months of the first protest, Lysakov was called in for a 
meeting at the Presidential Administration, where it was strongly suggested that he get 
in with the vertical, a suggestion he rejected (Martovalieva 2005a). In response, the 
Administration appeared to adopt a strategy of making it look as though the movement 
and the ruling party were working in tandem. Local Edinaia Rossiia party leaders in 
Vladivostok glommed on to the protest against new customs rules organized there in 
October 2005 by Svoboda Vybora (Klimov 2005). After initially keeping silent about 
the Shcherbinskii case -  the deceased governor had been a party member -  as the 
protests grew Edinaia Rossiia also joined in, reportedly at the urging of the local party 
leadership in Barnaul (Nagomykh, Buranov et al. 2006). In response to the anti-migalki 
campaign and the related protests, the government offered to create a commission to 
look into the movements concerns (Chebotarev 2006). Government ideologues, 
however, attacked opposition parties for latching onto the movement and again tried to 
claim Svoboda Vybora as its own (Solovykh 2006).
The Administration likewise worked through unofficial channels, primarily through the 
journalist Vladimir Solovev, who hosts political talk programs on NTV television and 
Silver Rain radio, both loyal to the Kremlin. The radio station launched its own 
campaign in defense of Shcherbinskii and calling for bureaucrats to be deprived of 
migalki, distributing white ribbons to be tied onto car radio antennas, in contrast to 
Svoboda Vybora's orange ribbons. In a series of radio and television broadcasts, 
Solovev accused Svoboda Vybora of being unprofessional stooges of hidden interests, 
while portraying as the true protest the campaign organized by Silver Rain with the 
evident backing of Edinaia Rossiia.142
It was not only pro-govemment forces that tried to glom onto the movement however. 
Representatives of Garri Kasparovs United Civic Front -  a key organizer of the 
campaign to ensure that President Putin is not given a third term in office -  told 
newspapers that the Front had been working in close cooperation with Svoboda Vybora 
from the beginning (Chebotarev and Kostenko 2006). Lysakov acknowledged having 
meetings with Kasparov and his assistants, but said he had decided from the beginning 
that it would be best to avoid any association; Were not going in the same direction,
142 Ibid.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
he said.143 Nonetheless, when he was arrested during the first protest, Lysakov was 
defended by a lawyer from the oppositional Union of Right-wing Forces political party 
(Martovalieva 2005b).
As mentioned early in this chapter, the government also made consistent -  though 
consistently ineffectual -  efforts to suppress the movements protests. Unlike with other 
opposition movements, though, Russian law enforcement agencies avoided heavy- 
handed confrontations with Svoboda Vybora, and the repercussions for movement 
members rarely extended beyond the merely annoying and inconvenient. Also unlike 
with other opposition movements, meanwhile, the government has given in to most of 
the movements demands: the ban on right-side-drive cars was repealed, changes to the 
rules of the road and the criminal code were scrapped, Shcherbinskii was released, and 
at least some movement has been made towards limiting the number of cars with 
migalki.
Conducting contemporary political research, particularly in authoritarian contexts, is 
always to a certain degree impeded by the fact that we can never know why any real 
degree of certainty why the authorities adopt one course of action over another. In 
Russia in particular, the relevant decision-makers are not available for interview, and 
even if they were, the honesty of their answers would be colored by political exigencies. 
And so we are left guessing as to why the ruling elite in Russia held on so long to its 
migalki, provoking so much anger along the way.144 It should be noted, though, that 
elite privilege on the roads in Russia dates back to the days of the nomenklatura. In his 
seminal deconstruction of the life of the Soviet elite, first published in samizdat,
Mikhail Voslenskii devoted a section to the nomenklatura fleet of cars, with their 
special license plates, chauffeurs and privileged access to gasoline and other necessities 
(Voslenskii [1990] 2005: 317-318). With few cars on the roads, traffic then was sparse 
and migalki were not needed to speed passage. These have been added by the post- 
Soviet Russian elite, for whom personal chauffeur-driven cars with special number 
plates ensuring unhindered passage through traffic police checkpoints are evidently not 
sufficient. Again, we do not know why migalki are so dear to the Russian elite. But their
143 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov, 20 February 2006, Moscow.
144 At the time this was written, but after the research period had ended, the ruling party, Edinaia Rossiia 
had finally given in and backed a law limiting migalki to 1,000 cars nationwide, plus police, ambulances 
and fire brigades. In a show of populism, Edinaia Rossiia members handed their own migalki over to the 
police on national television, while party leader Boris Gryzlov announced: If you see a politician on the 
road with a migalka, it can only be a member of the opposition.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
reluctance to give them up, even in the face of overwhelming public disdain, suggests 
that a higher value is placed on privilege than on public politics. As in the Public 
Verdict case, when the authorities showed themselves unwilling to introduce 
accountability into law enforcement systems despite the high cost of losses in the 
European Court of Human Rights, here again the elite display a staunch unwillingness 
to surrender even a small measure of their impunity, such as the freedom that migalki 
give them on the road. But because this unwillingness is consistent, and because 
Svoboda Vybora has succeeded in incorporating it into a collective injustice frame, the 
movement is able to turn it into a salient political issue.
Consolidation: Whos In the Drivers Seat?
Crystallization o f Conflict Lines
In early 2006, Lysakov began looking ahead to May of that year, when Svoboda Vybora 
would celebrate its first birthday. What had been conceived of on a whim as a protest 
lasting at most several hours had evolved into a fully fledged social movement, with 
hundreds if not thousands of participants throughout the country. It had developed its 
own identity and solidarity. It had forced the authorities to retreat again and again. And 
it showed no signs of dissipating any time soon. Svoboda Vybora's first birthday, 
Lysakov decided, was an event worth celebrating. And what better way to mark the day 
than with another big protest?
Thus, in planning a protest for May 2006, Lysakov wrote the following wide-ranging 
letter to the forum, reproduced here almost in its entirety:
Were asking everybody to give us their ideas for holding a protest on 20 
May (form, scenario, route, concerts, etc.). You ideas will be systematized, 
evaluated by the Coordinating Committee, and the best will be developed 
and used.
From what has already been said, its clear that the majority cannot accept 
the general tightening of the Administrative Codex, as concerns motorists, 
without a symmetrical tightening of control over the traffic police and a 
fundamental change in the way they function (providing safety for 
everyone on the road, and not just the a chosen few, with personal 
responsibility for an officers section of road and with the officers career 
development depending on that basic factor).
It is unacceptable to have a system of punitive points that do not expire, 
which is double punishment and an ideal means of forcing bribes.
It is unacceptable to try to lower the number of accidents exclusively by 
putting pressure on drivers, without an adequate plan for radically 
improving the financing of construction and maintenance of the roads. The 
road infrastructure is bankrupt.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The states impotence is shameful in terms of controlling the quality of 
fuel, oils and other technical liquids (if tests in Moscow showed found 
30% counterfeit, then what must be happening in the provinces; specialists 
say that 50% of motor oil in Russia is fake).
The biggest problem is total corruption in law enforcement in general and 
the traffic police in particular. Giving an even sharper knife to someone 
who is less a surgeon than a highway robber is just to create even worse 
chaos on the roads. Why threaten law-abiding citizens with 15 days in 
prison, if it still wont get the real bastards off the streets? In order to have 
absolute power, especially in the periphery, where getting to the truth is 
often impossible and almost any criminal case can be openly fabricated?
Why should we make life easier for the werewolves?
But for driving through a red light or a pedestrian crossing, people should 
be punished, to the tune of 5,000 or 6,000, like they do in Latvia ($200 for 
crossing a zebra).
In other words, were FOR a packet of document that would make the 
roads safer, but we are not for amendments to the Administrative Codex.
Otherwise, the traffic police -  or, looking higher, the government -  will 
achieve it (road safety) the easiest way possible -  through total terror on 
the roads, technical bans on imports and on inspections, ridiculous prices 
for fuel (given its awful quality), and other great ideas for getting the likes 
of you and me off the road.
And lastly. The protest on the 20th is planned to support, first and 
foremost, the 8 migalki bill.145 We were asked to do this by the bills 
authors in the State Duma. But we wont forget the Administrative Codex, 
otherwise theyll soon be locking us away. They already are.146
Lysakovs call for ideas met with broad support. Indeed, forum participants 
unanimously agreed that the movement needed to be more proactive, raising issues of 
importance to its members without waiting for a provocation from the state. Thus, while 
it was decided that the May 2006 protest should maintain the focus on core Svoboda 
Vybora issues such as migalki, the consensus shifted towards making it clear to the 
authorities that the movement had a broader reformist agenda at heart, that it was 
seeking not just redress for motorists, but a qualitative change in the way governance is 
conducted. One leading activist, using the nickname Maxim22, summarized this 
consensus as follows:
We need a preemptive protest. Migalki and the dispute about them is in 
large part a creation of SV, and we need to hold the line here. ...
On the second point, its more complicated. It seems to me that we must 
not combine what SV does with what others are doing with SV, with they 
way they are trying to fence us in. Specifically: the so-called 
amendments...  on raising fines, creating punitive points, and tow trucks 
and everything else, is simply fodder for SV. They are forcing SV to 
react to the news, for the benefit of the puppet masters. They have no 
doubt that the logic of SVs response will provoke a constant tussle over 
nonexistent issues, such as, for example, the size of fines, whether to allow 
arrests, and so on. SV is being dragged into an inferno o f local conflicts, 
pushing it away from the issues that really matter. Should SV allow itself 
to be led like this?
145 Lysakov is referring to a bill introduced by the movements opposition allies in the Duma that would 
have limited the number of migalki in the country to eight; this is as opposed to the bill supported by 
Edinaia Rossiia, which would have limited the number of migalki to 1,000. Neither bill passed.
146 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=5690&pp=40. posted 14 April 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
It would be more proper to raise their level of understanding, to make the 
bureaucrats scratch their heads. The protest could, for example, draw 
attention to the need to weed out the fatal principle of passing laws that 
increase corruption in society, to introduce the concept of an immoral 
law, uncover the meaning of Democracy, the essence of higher, 
conceptual power. Let them see their place clearly. Let them think.147
Despite an official ban, Svoboda Vybora held a small protest on 27 May 2006, together 
with the Interregional Union of Professional Drivers, drawing some 200 cars and trucks 
(Buranov 2006a ; Buranov 2006b). The turnout was lower than in prior protests, 
perhaps reflecting some strain from the movements expanding range of issue areas, but 
it was also a proactive event, without a strong irritant to provoke a larger mobilization. 
On the same day, rallies were also held in Neriungri, Iakutsk, Magadan and Kirov, with 
support from the Union, as well as the Republican Party and the Communist Party 
(Chebotarev 2006). The rallies focused on a collection of issues that have come to the 
fore through the movements forum. Lysakov said:
Our main slogan now is No to Migalki'. The migalka is the symbol of inequality 
before the law, its an insult to civil society. We need to get rid of it. We are also 
asking for a review of the administrative code. It includes a major increase in fines and 
mandates 15 days in prison if you fail to see a traffic cops hand signal or if you get 10 
points on your drivers license. Whats worse, the points never expire. This is just a 
personal feeding trough for the traffic police. First, we want a law on corruption and a 
reform of the traffic police, and then you can raise fines. Give us normal roads, normal 
lighting, and so on.1 8
Notably, Lysakov and others -  both inside and outside the movement -started more 
frequently to use the term civil society. Asked about how he saw the meaning of the 
term and its relation to Svoboda Vybora, Lysakov said:
The West overestimates the activities of the human rights organizations, with all their 
legal and financial and other support for them. There is a lack o f balance. The general 
human rights organizations today in Russia have become divorced from real Russian 
civil society. The grass-roots organizations, created by society from below and not 
political parties, are the pieces of the puzzle of the new Russian civil society. Groups 
like us, like the ecological movements, which are starting to get in contact with us. All 
the Western aid is going only to the old organizations, and although we are not calling 
ourselves rights defenders, it is what we are doing.149
The general human rights organizations, meanwhile, appear to recognize Lysakovs 
argument. In an interview given to a Moscow newspaper in May 2006, Liudmila 
Alekseeva, head of the Moscow Helsinki Group, said:
Right now in our country the bulk of the population is inert, and active citizens are 
coming together in a very large number of small organizations.. ..But we are seeing a 
new kind of activism, from below. For example, the drivers movement. They dont
147 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=5690&pp==40. posted 15 April 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
148 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov, 28 April 2006, Moscow.
149 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov, 20 February 2006, Moscow.
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
have an office, a charter, they agree on their activities on the Internet. And when 
Shcherbinskii was in court, they held demonstrations in several cities all at once, and 
our independent court woke up quickly. Or some other ham-fisted decree comes 
around, like the one about red taillights, and they protest, unified, in different cities 
simultaneously, and the authorities annul the decree. Because its not a small group, 
but a popular movement (Kolesnichenko 2006).
The fact that Svoboda Vybora began looking towards more proactive engagement, 
coupled with its new civil society ideology, are evidence of an effort by the movement 
to develop a more consolidated role for itself than simply reacting to the states 
intrusion. As we saw throughout the development of the movements identity and 
strategy, after an extended series of intrusions and protests, the movements members 
knew more or less what they could expect from the state, felt that they understood the 
ruling elites agenda and clearly saw some benefit from collective action. Thus, at this 
stage -  again, as predicted by our theory in this thesis -  the importance of state intrusion 
begins to fade, and the relationship itself takes on a more significance.
Alliances
As Svoboda Vybora grew and became a more evidently permanent operation, the 
necessity of seeking support and alliances became increasingly pressing. In February 
2006, in the heat of the Shcherbinskii battle, Lysakov was pessimistic about the 
opportunities for sponsorship and, in any case, did not want to seek Western grant 
funding.150 Still working without a salary, Lysakov said at the time:
Im trying to get people to register, and to broach the idea of membership dues o f at 
least 200 rubles per month. In the meantime, were living off of small donations. The 
people who have come together are surprisingly decent people, surprisingly spiritual.
People have put money on the organizers mobile phone accounts... We have a lawyer 
working pro bono. One member donated $3,000 to buy a professional video camera.
Im looking for a sponsor who wont dictate our actions. I was approached by the 
organization Russia Without Narcotics, who offered to help with office supplies. The 
most important thing is not to get involved with political parties.151
On 5 April 2006, Svoboda Vybora was officially registered as an interregional public 
organization, with membership dues of $100 per year, close to Lysakovs initial 
estimate. The headquarters are in Moscow, with regional branches registered in 
Cheliabinsk, Magadan and Iakutiia; at the time this was written, branches in 
Krasnoiarsk, Izhevsk and Barnaul were in the process of registering. Still, the
150 Ibid. Just a month earlier, the national television channels had launched a high-profile campaign in 
which foreign governments and private foundations were accused of being covers for espionage; Putin 
likewise criticized Russian NGOs for being insufficiently selective in their sources of financing.
151 Ibid.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
organization had no rented office and no paid staff, and as of late April 2006, no dues 
had yet been collected. Lysakov explained:
Were starting from a blank slate, taking in new regional sections, new members.
Were asking local coordinating councils to get organized and delegate someone to the 
federal council. We do everything online. Were constantly in contact, almost daily 
discussing various issues. Every month we have an official meeting, not physically, but 
on-line. We have to have an annual conference by law. That will be difficult for us.
The distances are huge, and it will be very expensive. But it is a legal requirement. We 
are opening an account for membership dues and donations. But were flexible.
Pensioners, handicapped people, parents with large families can join free or with a 
discount, or we can extend their payments over a longer period. Activists who 
volunteer their time can also join without paying dues. About five people will be 
working full timemyself, an assistant, our site manager, our accountant and our 
lawyer. They all will need salaries.152
So far, however, the real support for the organization remains informal. During the 
Shcherbinskii campaign, Lysakov befriended Aleksandr Kotov, chairman of the 
Interregional Union of Professional Drivers, a trade union representing long-distance 
truck drivers. The two agreed on a strategic alliance between the Union and Svoboda
Vybora, and Lysakov was given the position of deputy chairman of the Union, a small
salary and limited financial support for Svoboda Vybora. In addition, Lysakov writes
regular columns for the newspapers Novaia Gazeta and Vedomosti, and has been paid
honoraria for giving interviews to international organizations such as the Cato Institute.
Taken together, that allows Lysakov to work full-time for Svoboda Vybora. At the time
this was written, all of the other activists maintained full- or part-time jobs.
Growth has not come without growing pains. Two of the initial movements largest 
regional sections -  in Novosibirsk and Vladikavkaz -  have fallen away. Lysakov 
explains:
Novosibirsk and the Pacific Marities have gone their separate ways. Novosibirsk in 
particular is trying to kick me out of my post and break up the organization. Our 
relationship with Novosibirsk has been ruined. We believe that the FSB was involved.
In the Maritimes, the local leader wanted to become a deputy in the local legislature 
and used the organization for his campaign. The organization is now dying slowly. We 
hope the activists will come back to us.154
In its current campaign -  the fight against migalki -  Svoboda Vybora has softened its 
stance on working with political parties. Indeed, by mid-April 2006, the relationship 
between Sbovoda Vybora and two opposition parties -  the Communists and the 
Republican Party -  was made public. Together, they proposed a law to reduce the 
number of migalki to from approximately 4,500 to eight. Republican Party leader
152 Interview with Viacheslav Lysakov, 28 April 2006.
153 Ibid.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Ryzhkov summed up the argument as follows: If a citizen is on his way to his wife 
who is giving birth, or to his father who has had a heart attack, or if he is late for his 
plane, thats his problem. But if a bureaucrat has to tear his rear end out of his chair and 
rush off to his boss, he can fly through the oncoming lanes and break all the rules.
Thats the logic of our bureaucracy (Zakatnova 2006). Lysakov explained the change 
of strategy as follows:
The political parties have started dancing in circles around us. We have been 
cooperating some with the Communist Party and the Republican Party, regarding our 
campaign against migalki. Because we are working with more than one party, and 
because we are the initiators, we are able to keep our independence and leadership.155
Early in the summer of 2006, Lysakov received an invitation to participate on behalf of 
Svoboda Vybora in a conference called The Other Russia. Convened by a broad 
spectrum of opposition groups -  ranging from Soviet-era human rights defenders to 
post-soviet nationalists -  The Other Russia was designed to show the world leaders 
descending on Russia for the G-8 summit that a significant portion of Russia society did 
not approve of the way Vladimir Putins government was running the country. Up until 
this point, as mentioned earlier, Lysakov had tried to keep Svoboda Vybora out of direct 
political engagement, except where it was necessary to lobby for or against a law of 
particular interest, such as in the migalki campaign. Svoboda Vybora was thus 
positioned as a motorists movement, not an opposition movement. Participating in The 
Other Russia would inevitably change that.
In justifying his decision to participate to the movement -  and to the Coordinating 
Committee in particular, which approved his decision -  Lysakov cited two groups of 
factors. The first was that the conference was being supported by several people and 
organizations whose goals and ideals Lysakov saw as being in line with the movements 
own. These included the newspaper Novaya Gazeta, for which Lysakov writes a regular 
column, the INDEM foundation run by anti-corruption campaigner Georgii Satarov, and 
the Moscow Helsinki Group.156 The second factor Lysakov cited was that, from the very 
first meeting he had with the Presidential Administration in May 2005, the Kremlin had 
clearly considered the movement to be oppositional; thus, in his estimation, there was 
nothing to be lost from participating.157
155 Ibid.
156 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t::=6372&pp=40. posted 4 July 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
157 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19may.ru/forum/printthread.php?t:=6372&pp=40, posted 6 July 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
The issue of whether or not to participate in The Other Russia sparked a considerable 
amount of debate in the movements forum. Strikingly, however, none of the comments 
opposed the decision for ideological reasons. Indeed, most of the participants voiced 
their approval; a posting by On-liner is typical:
.. .We really are another Russia. Those who arent among the 8,000,000 
people needed to service the oil sector and Gazprom. They dont need 
us. And now theyre even planning on doing without us at elections. So, 
were going to have to find our own way out.. .,158
The overall track record of success led to a considerable degree of confidence among 
the movements activists, reflecting two things that are uncommon in Russia: a lack of 
fear of reprisal and the belief that protest can being results. Thus, Alex53 writes:
To hell with the traffic police What can they really do to us? So they can 
take our licenses, but theyll give them back anyway. So they can fine us.
So what else? They wont confiscate our cars, they wont put us in jail 
(and if they do, only for three hours), they wont exile us to Kolyma How 
long can we keep on being afraid? Thankfully were no longer living 
under Stalin. The Russian Federation has signed so many international 
laws that the authorities should be afraid of our every fart, and here we are 
still being afraid of them. To hell with them... Lets build civil society and 
get rid of these monsters. Only one but: Everyone has to be involved, 
and all for one159
Similarly, Peter Tiger writes:
A quick thought. Our current authorities are deathly afraid of ANY 
demonstration. A year ago, a few hundred people blocked Leningradskoe 
Shosse and the result: revision of the benefit monetization law... If there 
will be a lot of cars, IMHO the authorities will turn tail... Theyll simply 
be FRIGHTENED.160
And an activist going by the nickname SerGT writes:
... A single traffic jam on the way into the center of the city is a lot more 
effective than making rings around the beltway Closing off all the exits 
from the Garden Ring for an hour -  that would resonate But only the 
beltway, you can ride around all day and the only person who will notice 
are people who happen to be driving by (if they even notice) and invited 
() journalists, while the bureaucrats and the government couldnt care less 
about such joy rides... And the journalists too are soon going to get sick 
of covering our traditional ring races...
The impact and resonance o f our protests must grow, so that even the 
intention of holding a protest would be enough to make the bureaucrats 
stop and think. And if  all of our protests are going to be of the traditional 
ring around the sausage variety, the authorities will learn how to slice the
158 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19may.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=6372&pp=40. posted 5 July 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
159 Svoboda Vybora forum, httt>://www. 19may.ru7forum/printthread.php?t=5690&pp=40, posted 25 April 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
160 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19may.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=3950&pp==40. posted 16 
January 2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
salami in such a way, that no matter how long it is, the pieces will be ever 
smaller and harder to see... imho.. .161
However, as Svoboda Vybora and Lysakov moved closer to the opposition, some 
participants, including Alex53, voiced reservations about what it might mean for the 
movements future:
Good evening, Vladislav.
This is an issue youre going to have to think about like no other. Youre 
being invited on an international level into the opposition to the existing 
regime. And, most likely, after taking part in this event they will close 
ALL of your channels of legitimate influence on the government. The 
results are fairly predictable -  either you can work with the government 
commissions, or you can go into strict opposition. The only question is, 
what are you ready for.162
Lysakov replied to Alex53 in a lengthy posting that laid out a new, more openly 
oppositional stance for the movement. He wrote:
Good evening
.. .Why should we, civic organizations, be afraid of civic activity?
Ecologists, soldiers mothers, citizens of Russia beaten and lied to and 
unified into communities, and now us, motorists -  what, are we all 
supposed to supplicate ourselves before the official ideology, taking on 
bended knee all of our social realities and ideological strictures from the 
hands of people, many of whom are nothing more than carpetbaggers? The 
era of totalitarianism is irreversibly slipping away, and it is slipping away 
because of the contributions that we all have made. We are the free 
citizens of a free country, and we simply must not forget that.
And finally. My speech at this event was more than balanced and sets us 
apart from the revolutionaries and radicals, confirming that the only 
acceptable way forward for us is evolutionary development, but 
nonetheless announcing our fundamental goal: control by civil society 
over the state. Which, actually, we have been dying to achieve since 19 
May 2005, remaining with in the interests of drivers, i.e. the whole range 
of problems and questions that concern us.
And we are going to continue to do this, whether anyone likes it or not.163
After the conference, Lysakov reported:
The decision to participate in the Conference justified itself a hundred 
times over.
And so. I made contact with 16 not entirely unknown people. Which 
surprised me. Whenever I handed out my card, saying Im Lysakov..., 
everyone answered I know you. )))164 
His contacts at the conference included a number of prominent members of the liberal
opposition, such as Alekseeva, Satarov, Ekho Moskvy radio journalist Evgeniia Albats,
and former Putin economic advisor Andrei Illarionov.
161 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=5690&pp=40. posted 18 April 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
162 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=6372&pp=40, posted 6 July 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
163 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=6372&pp=40. posted 6 July 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
164 Svoboda Vybora forum, http://www. 19mav.ru/forum/printthread.php?t=::6372&pp:=40, posted 12 July 
2006, accessed 18 August 2006.
http://www
http://www
http://www
http://www
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
It was never a foregone conclusion that Svoboda Vybora would end up in this company. 
From the beginning, Lysakov had sought to avoid outright opposition to the regime, and 
he said repeatedly during interviews that he felt the human rights defenders to be out of 
touch with reality and wasting donors money. While his affinity for Novaya Gazeta and 
his support -  though not broadly publicized -  for Ukraines Orange Revolution fairly 
clearly delineate his personal political leanings, he also recognized from the beginning 
that acting on his own preferences would be detrimental to the unity of the movement. 
Indeed, the available evidence suggests that Svoboda Vybora aligned itself with The 
Other Russia -  which later became a permanent opposition movement -  as the result of 
a general consensus. The lack of internal objections to Lysakovs participation certainly 
points in this direction. But even more importantly, participating in The Other Russia is 
a natural extension of the movements compromise between broadly held feelings of 
dissatisfaction and the desire to stick to campaigning on automotive issues. In its own 
activities, Svoboda Vybora thus remains true to its roots and does not dilute the core 
identity that holds it together, while a contribution towards wider political goals is made 
by standing shoulder-to-shoulder with like-minded movements in The Other Russia.
Conclusions
Svoboda Vybora, one of an exceedingly small number of civil society organizations in 
Russia capable of mobilizing true grass-roots support and of putting effective pressure 
on the state, began as a protest by motorists afraid of having their cars taken away from 
them and grew into a social movement fighting for government accountability, equal 
rights and the limiting of elite privilege. That a movement could have arisen in response 
to the initial intrusion -  the attempt to ban cars imported from Japan -  is predicted by 
classical social movement theory and the movements initial development follows all 
the laws of social mobilization and injustice frames. That the movements further 
development would take the course described in the pages above, however, was less 
obvious. That is not to say, however, that it was accidental.
My hypothesis argues that civic activism arises in response to concerted and coherent 
state engagement, regardless of the nature of that engagement. As discussed in previous 
chapters, the Russian state has broadly disengaged from the populous, demanding 
neither political participation nor ideological conformity, nor even much in the way of
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
taxes. In the two preceding chapters on human rights and housing, we have seen the 
haphazard, privatized use of power and the atomization of policymaking stymie other 
attempts at civic mobilization, despite the salience of the issues and the depth of the 
grievances. In this case, the intrusion -  on behalf of an industry lobby, first by 
attempting to ban Japanese cars, then by placing severe limitations on imports from 
America, and so on -  seems almost trivial in comparison. But it was sufficient, and 
sufficiently cohesive and coherent, to provoke massive protest.
What caused Svoboda Vybora to emerge and consolidate as a social movement is 
revealed in the pattern of interaction between the movement and the state. The state, in 
effect, plays a dual game with the movement, being at once confrontational and 
accommodating. Unwilling to risk a spiral of protest, the state consistently gives in to 
the movements specific demands. But the state cannot appear to be giving in, and so it 
makes a public show of repressing the protests (though without severe consequences for 
participants), minimizes the movements media coverage, and spins the movements 
achievements as its own. Thus, no one wins, and the battle becomes indefinite. There is 
a definite loser, however: the state. At the beginning of the process, the state was in the 
drivers seat, able at least in theory to cut off oxygen to the movement by ending its 
provocative intrusions. But by the time Svoboda Vybora joined The Other Russia, the 
situation was out of the states control. By continuing to engage, the state allowed the 
formation of a consolidated relationship between itself and the movement, on which the 
movement in turn could build an identity and develop a self-sustaining agenda. Svoboda 
Vybora as a social movement -  as a sustained interaction between dissatisfied citizens 
and the state -  had become an established feature of the Russian political landscape, one 
with which the ruling elite were now obliged to contend. At least in one policy area, the 
state lost its autonomy.
What is most interesting is how the elite chooses when to give in and when to keep 
fighting. The state gives in almost immediately to demands that the import bans be 
lifted, despite the fact that these bans were lobbied by a powerful industry. On the other 
hand, it drags out the battle over migalki, suggesting that elite privilege trumps even 
corporate interests in the Russian political equation. (Incidentally, loyalty here is not an 
issue. The government controls the largest Russian automakers.) Correspondingly, 
without departing from its automotive roots, Svoboda Vybora evolves into a full 
constituent of the Russian opposition, demanding equality, accountability and rule of
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
law. And this happened not because the movement was populated by dissidents, but 
because, as it turned out, it is impossible to defend the rights of Russian motorists 
without establishing equality, accountability and the rule of law.
The success and solidarity of Svoboda Vybora is remarkable not only against the 
backdrop of contemporary Russia, but when compared to the other cases in this thesis as 
well. Neither Public Verdict nor the housing movements were abject failures; the former 
succeeded in obtaining justice for many of its clients, while the latter produced a 
degree of solidarity where none had existed before and won temporary victories against 
the state. But the protagonists in both cases failed, I argue, not because of their own 
mistakes, or even for a lack of resources, but because of the failure of the state to 
provide the socio-political and institutional context in which citizens could begin to 
conceive of and develop strategies of collective action. If the reader were to approach 
these chapters from back to front, reading the stories from the end, numerous 
differences would emerge; indeed, Svoboda Vybora has a stronger ideological 
component, a more robust media component, a more flexible organizational structure, a 
larger support network, and so on and so forth. But causality does not work backwards 
through history, and we need to read the stories from the beginning. And in the 
beginning, the only thing that truly separates these cases is the nature of the states 
interaction. In the Public Verdict case, the state afflicted people individually, and 
collective action failed. In the housing case, the state afflicted people as a group but 
responded to them individually, and collective action faltered. But in the Svoboda 
Vybora case, the state afflicted people as a group and responded to them as a group, and 
collective action succeeded.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Chapter 8
Context Conclusions and Continuation: Power and Opposition in Putins Russia
This thesis began with a story about Russian dissidents, locked in a stadium surrounded 
by police and the Gulf of Finland, railing against the regime that ruled a country that 
could not -  or would not -  hear their cry. That distinction is crucial. Many authors and 
analysts, not to mention more than a few politicians, have come to the conclusion that 
Russian citizens are willfully deaf to civil society and its democratic mission. Others 
have argued that repression deadens the air. I do not believe either to be the case. If the 
rallying cries of Russian opposition fall upon deaf ears, it is not because Russians, for 
whatever reason, are incapable of hearing them.
Throughout this thesis I have tried to tell the stories of ordinary Russians faced with 
injustice and their failures and occasional successes in seeking redress. They have 
fought abuses of human rights, violations of their civil, political and economic rights 
and threats to their very livelihood. They have shown themselves to be in possession of 
solidarity and trust and more than capable of drawing conclusions -  even democratically 
informed conclusions -  about their predicaments. They see a deeply un-institutionalized 
environment, in which laws are neither binding nor empowering and in which the state 
is usurious, rather than useable. Russians are acutely aware of their political 
surroundings and of the opportunities and limitations those surroundings create for 
fruitful collective action. It is precisely because of that awareness, and not despite it, 
that Russian civil society seems so weak to a Western observer. Opposition, then, 
reflects the power structure that provokes it: individualized, ad hoc, opportunistic and 
unstructured. The cases presented in this thesis show that when, for whatever reason, 
the power structure behaves differently, opposition responds in kind.
To close out this thesis, I will recapitulate my key findings, place them in the relevant 
context and attempt to draw some conclusions regarding the broader implications of this 
study. Finally, I will look a bit beyond the timeframe of this research, to discuss Russia 
after Vladimir Putins presidency.
As is generally the case in academic endeavors such as this one, by the time this project 
has reached its conclusion the events described in the chapters preceding have ebbed 
into history. This investigation has been bounded in time by the presidency of Vladimir
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Putin, beginning in 2000 and ending in 2008.1 would argue, however, that the term 
Putins Russia in the title of the thesis and this concluding chapter remains relevant 
and, indeed, that the ascent of Dmitrii Medvedev to the Russian presidency, and the 
descent of Putin to the position of prime minister, signals no fundamental change. To 
the contrary: the arrangement by which Medvedev reigns and Putin governs only 
reinforces the analysis presented above. If it could previously have been argued that the 
presidency was the only remaining true political institution in Russia, then the decision 
to remove the locus of power from the presidency to the premiership -  and the ease with 
which that shift was accomplished -  suggests that there were and are no functioning 
political institutions in Russia in the true sense of the word.
Indeed, the Russian state presents a rare combination of tremendous power and 
tremendously little institutionalization. Writers including Fukuyama (2004) have 
underscored the need to pay attention to institutions and the fact that states must be 
strong to function. Weak states, accordingly, cannot be functioning democracies, and 
the desire of a state to become stronger is not necessarily a sign of authoritarian 
tendencies. But however weakly institutionalized Russia may be, the regime is not 
weak. De-institutionalization, paradoxically, is the source of the regimes strength. 
Having ensconced themselves in the residual apparatus of what used to be a highly 
institutionalized state, the new Russian ruling elite enjoy a remarkable degree of power 
and privilege, to a degree greater than in any democratic regime and even than in most 
authoritarian regimes. And they do so not despite but because of de-institutionalization: 
the regimes ability to control the rules of the game makes its position virtually 
unassailable. But the maintenance of power and privilege, both in current and potential 
terms, requires at least a degree of solidarity among a divided and competitive elite. 
They must act on the understanding that their personal power and privilege will persist 
only as long as the club persists; while they may compete, in the end they either sink 
together or swim together. Yet the creation of any institutional mechanisms that would 
enforce this solidarity would inevitably diminish the elites power and privilege, by 
making rules and outcomes predictable and, in so doing, decreasing the elites 
competitive advantage over other social groups and those who might leave the club to 
attack its position from outside. Thus, such institutions are rejected, and solidarity is 
enforced through de-institutionalization, which creates a degree of uncertainly sufficient 
to keep the elite in line. It is through the manufacture and management of uncertainty 
that the regime produces and reproduces power.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Prior to the ascent of Putin, Russian elites had access to a broad spectrum of 
competitive resources: private business, the media, independent political parties 
participating in unpredictable elections, and, of course, access to the bureaucratic 
apparatus. As explored in Chapter 3, Russias political, economic and bureaucratic elites 
began to reconsolidate in 1999, essentially reconstituting a version of the club that had 
controlled access to power and privilege under the Soviet system and adapting it to 
Russias new circumstances. The members of this club sought to maintain their 
unencumbered and unchallenged access to power and privilege in a system more stable 
and less risky than the all-out competition of the 1990s. This was accomplished by 
affecting a monopoly over all perceived potential sources of power. Thus, in Putins 
Russia, the state has monopolized the media and the political space, and business 
owners have little more than a tenuous leasehold on their property. All of these 
resources pertain to the club and may not be removed from the club; departure of an 
individual from the club implies the forfeiture of his or her resources. Competition for 
control over these resources within the club is conducted exclusively within and by 
means of the administrative apparatus. Competitors were persuaded to give up their 
prior freedom of maneuver in return for an implicit guarantee that all well-behaved 
members of the elite would enjoy power and privilege for as long as the regime stood.
In this context, a politics that is responsive to the public is not merely superfluous: it is 
antithetical to the spirit of the club and threatens the cohesion of the system. This both 
shapes and is reflected by the way that Russian citizens experience their state. It leads to 
maximized rent-seeking by public officials, for whom the law is first and foremost a 
tool of personal power. It also makes these civil servants (though the term seems 
particularly perverse in the Russian context) impervious to considerations of public 
accountability, to a rather shocking degree: it takes an extraordinary (for the Russian 
context) outpouring of protest to force the system to respond to demands from below 
and a tremendous amount of pressure to generate anything resembling institutional 
change. And this inevitably redounds to the development of civil society. Atomized, 
unstructured relationships between citizens and the state do not favor collective 
solutions, as problems are perceived as being primarily individual in nature. The 
evidence presented here shows that these perceptions change when the state, for one 
reason or another, departs from its usual repertoire. And then arises collective action, 
often in the form of proto-social movements. These movements (or, rather, movement
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
organizations) then face the difficult task of preventing the state from reverting back to 
its preferred stance of disengagement and ad hoc policymaking, which would otherwise 
undermine the movement. Or they must hope that the state, for whatever reason, itself 
stays the course of coherent and concerted intrusion into the lives of its citizens in such 
a way that those citizens are able to form injustice frames and movement identities.
This thesis has been driven by the puzzle of why we see so little evident civil-societal 
activity in Russia. Given the difficulties inherent in seeking to explain things that do not 
occur, I reframed the question as follows: by examining the exceptions to this supposed 
rule of inactivity, can we identify patterns that will help us to understand how and why 
Russians may be expected to organize for collective action? The result was intended to 
be an exploration of civic discouragement in Russia, of the disengagement of the 
populace from politics, as well as of the limits of that discouragement and 
disengagement. I hypothesized, based on the existing literature on Russia and other 
cases, as well as on the theory presented in Chapter 2, that civic engagement from 
below would arise in response to coherent and concerted engagement from above, and 
as a reflection of the nature and content of that top-down engagement.
It has been driven, then, not only by a dissatisfaction with the literature on Russia, as 
alluded to above, but also by a feeling that the contemporary study of civil society  
burdened by formalistic categories of analysis, insisting on limitations to the 
organizational forms and expressed interests of non-governmental, non-political and 
non-commercial organizations -  has become unproductive in the exploration of state- 
society relations, and nowhere is this more true than in the study of post-Soviet 
transition. In response, I have suggested and tried to operationalize an approach to civil 
society based on the literature on social movements. This has been the first systematic 
attempt to apply social movement theory to the study of Russian state-society relations, 
the real value of which, I have found, has been to place politics and contention at the 
center of the investigation.
As I review in Chapter 2, civil society, by virtually all accounts, exists in the space 
between individuals (sometimes the family) and the state, with at least some expectation 
that it will mediate the interaction between the two. Much of modem political thought,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
and the core of liberal theory, has been dedicated to proving the idea that the state- 
society relationship is a zero sum game: the stronger one side becomes, the weaker 
becomes the other. Those concerned with failing states have begun to suggest that this 
may not actually be the case, that strong societies require strong states (see, for 
example, Fukuyama 2004). Indeed, theorists of civil society who have looked beyond 
modem, Gramscian notions of the concept back to its roots in earlier political 
philosophy, note that the nature of civil society depends first and foremost on the nature 
of the state. Thus, Krishan Kumar writes: De Tocqueville, we may remember, noted 
that it was politics that spreads the general habit and taste for association. In other 
words, politics precedes civil society (Kumar 1993 391). It is this politics-centered 
viewpoint, rather than the apolitical focus on horizontal social relations that dominates 
much of the normative literature, that I have found useful here.
If we return the focus of study to the state-society relationship and the practice of 
politics and political engagement, it becomes clear that the weakness of Russian civil 
society is not solely explained by issues of trust, social capital or the Soviet legacy. I do 
not mean to suggest that such issues play no role in Russia. And this is not to say that 
there have been no obstacles. But the key obstacles faced by the Russian citizens 
involved in this projects cases have been of a different nature, the result of a 
disengagement by the state. Russias aggressively deinstitutionalized political space 
leads inherently to an atomized civic space. It is considerations of utility that stymie 
Russian civil society; they cannot and do not often identify with one another as a group, 
capable and motivated to act, not because of an aversion to groups, to action or to each 
other, but because of a calculation that such action would generally be useless. This 
assertion can be tested to a certain degree by seeking exceptions to the rule, the sorts of 
exceptions presented here. And in those exceptions we see clearly that, when the state 
does engage in a way that allows Russian citizens to form collective identities, 
collective action is both possible and potent.
An illustration of my hypothesis -  namely that the state, and, more precisely, the 
institutions of state-society relationships created by ruling elites, itself sets the stage for 
mobilization -  is provided by the history of dissent in the Soviet Union. In Chapter 3 ,1 
reviewed the development of the late-Soviet regime and the roots of the current Russian 
regime, arguing, in part, that the current nature of power as a club good for the elite 
has its roots in the Soviet system, albeit with very important adaptations in the post-
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Soviet era. I do not mean to suggest deterministic, path-dependent explanations; much 
has changed in Russia since 1991, and Russians have a very different relationship with 
their state than they did in the Soviet past, and that, I argue, has led to a very different 
kind of civic mobilization. A brief review of that past helps to underscore that 
difference. It also provides a closed-ended example of the logic of my hypothesis.
The classical conception of the development of civil society in the Soviet Union begins 
from the assumption that autonomous civil-social initiatives were inherently oriented 
toward dissent (see, for example: Hosking 1990 ; Weigle and Butterfield 1992). 
Certainly, there were people within these initiatives, and in some cases leaders, who 
began their activism with negative views on the Soviet political system and socialism in 
general. Individuals, however, should not be confused with the movements they 
represent. The Soviet human rights movement did not initially place itself in opposition 
to the regime, and it sought consistently over time to build a constructive working 
relationship with the state, even if the state did not respond in kind (Greene 2006). Nor 
did samizdat begin as a way to distribute alternative news and views; it began as a way 
for people to read and share the works of those poets and writers who, despite their non
political nature, were for whatever reason not published, and that role remained 
prominent throughout the movements history (Greene 2009).
It would be naive to say that opposition was forced on these movements by the Soviet 
regime. But it would be untrue to say that they came to the regime looking to pick a 
fight. People who felt that the regime was unjust and immoral believed that they had a 
responsibility to stand apart and act. They did not believe, however, that their activism 
was likely to being any results beyond a sense of personal satisfaction, nor did they 
generally seek to take risks greater than absolutely necessary. Unlike opposition parties 
in contemporary pluralist polities, they did not seek out those issues and strategies that 
would give them the greatest political traction and leverage. To the contrary, they began 
with issues and ideals to which they were dedicated and, often, bound by solidaristic 
and/or collegial ties.
The crucial point arises in the aggregate. At no point in post-Stalin history did civil 
society ever represent a real threat to the Soviet regime, nor did the regime ever 
represent a mortal threat to civil society. The civil society that existed in the Soviet 
Union, of course, bore no real resemblance to that described by Locke. It does,
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
however, fit the definition, presented in Chapter 2, of civil society as the non-violent 
means by which individuals collectively seek sovereignty vis-a-vis the state. 
Sovereignty, in this case, is not the democratic sovereignty of Tocqueville or Rousseau, 
but the still very real sovereignty enjoyed by people who cannot be stopped from acting 
as responsible citizens of a state that they conceive of as being their own. This was the 
sovereigny of Vaclav Havel and the Czech dissident writers, the sovereignty of the 
Danube Circle intellectuals in Hungary, and of the labor activists and Catholic believers 
in Poland. These movements did not achieve respect for human rights or freedom of 
expression in the Soviet Union or their respective countries. Yet human rights were 
defended and, by some, respected in the Soviet Union, and Soviet citizens expressed 
their views freely, thanks to the organized, consistent and collective efforts of 
individuals. That, and the fact that the state could not stop them, represents their victory 
and their sovereignty.
Samizdat and the human rights movement, or even the dissident movement more 
broadly, did not bring down the Soviet Union, but they did transform it. The dissidents 
in the human rights movement included prominent scientists, among the most 
priveleged members of society, but they were not alone: throughout Brezhnevs rule, 
the Soviet Union developed what Frederick Starr called an ever more assertive and 
potent public opinion (Starr 1988 34), capable of pushing back against state 
development and environmental policies. Among samizdat's most avid readers were not 
just dissidents, but also members of the nomenklatura elite, and the counterpoint that it 
provided to the official line hastened the bankruptcy of totaltarian ideology. It was able 
to do this in part because it extended the proverbial Russian kitchen table, that special 
place in which conversation is always open and honest. Samizdat, in effect, put 
everyone around the same kitchen table as Sakharov, Solzhenitsyn and anyone else of 
whom the regime did not approve, passing the same thoughts on onion-skin paper from 
one end of the country to the other.
This is more than a reconfirmation of Humes political philosophy. It is also a powerful 
illustration of the hypothesis put forward in this thesis. The way in which the dissident 
movement and samizdat combined to achieve their goals -  not of gaining control over 
the state but of creating a space for moral autonomy and public sovereignty outside of 
and despite the states control -  owes much to the states own behavior. It was, after all, 
the states refusal to countenance the views even of its favored sons that drove Sakharov
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
and his colleagues into dissent and, eventually, exile. And it was the fact of censorship 
that created samizdat in the first place. Moreover, the states predictable and repressive 
response to such activities, while certainly a deterrent for a large number of potential 
participants, lent a sense of certainty and purpose to those who nevertheless did take 
part. The repertoires of action and interaction were known to all and did not change 
significantly until the state itself changed. And it is perhaps most telling of all that, 
when the state that had given form to the movements began to fall away, the movements 
themselves disintegrated.
As Perestroika progressed the Soviet human rights movement proved ill-prepared to 
come in from the cold. Internal disagreements that had been overshadowed by the 
monolithic figure of the regime came to the fore as soon as the discussion turned to 
strategies for what promised to be a very new country. Unable to agree on a forward- 
looking vision, activists were barely able to agree on how to present the crimes of the 
past (Sakharov 1990 57-61). Human-rights movements outside Russia, such as the 
Ukrainian Helsinki Group, turned themselves into political parties and lobbied for 
independence (Lukyanenko 1991). In other words, as the regime began to invite the 
movement to the table, the movement could come up with very little to say.
Likewise, it was Gorbachev, rather than his much more repressive predecessor, 
Andropov, who brought about the death of samizdat. To a certain extent, this is 
intuitive. Asked when samizdat ended in the USSR, Liudmila Alekseeva replied:
When censorship ended (Alekseeva 2003). That, however, hides a more important 
phenomenon. By allowing freer access to printing and distribution, GlasnosV meant that 
the writers who had earlier fed samizdat could become traditional publishers as well 
(see, for example: Grigoryants 1989). Once that happened, the essence of samizdat -  the 
unification of the role of reader and publisher -  evaporated (Daniel' 2003). If only by a 
few years, the Soviet Union outlived samizdat, not because of successful repression, but 
because the medium itself had ceased to send a message.
The Soviet case, to summarize, provides a clear view of the iterative process at the heart 
of civil society: the state interfered through ideology and censorship, citizens reacted, 
the state treated that reaction as criminal dissent, and the interaction spiraled for years
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
and decades until the state, for reasons quite apart from civil society, was no more. In 
the new Russian state, the situation is radically different.
Leaving aside labels of authoritarianism or democracy, the way in which the 
contemporary Russian state interacts with its citizens is in many important aspects 
distinct from the Soviet experience. Russian citizens are free to travel (provided they 
have the means), free to speak (though not necessarily to broadcast and publish), free to 
worship (though not necessarily to establish a church), free to trade (though not without 
state interference), and free to determine their own strategies. The state provides no hard 
and fast rules for behavior and supports no overarching ideology. It has also abandoned 
cradle-to-grave services, abandoning a system that once gave citizens housing, jobs, 
education and healthcare. This is a radically different relationship from that that existed 
in the Soviet period. Russians are now responsible for their own welfare and behavior, 
and the restrictions placed on them -  unlike the rigid ideological strictures of high 
Soviet socialism -  are nebulous, unpredictable and movable.
Thus, in the Soviet Union, and, indeed, throughout the socialist space, dissidents were 
able to achieve sovereignty not over the state, but outside its moral and ideological 
boundaries. This was the meaning of Living in Truth, and it drove Sakharov just as 
surely as it drove Havel: one could not conquer the state, but one could refuse to be 
conquered by the state. This was made possible, though, by the fact that the state clearly 
established moral and ideological boundaries. With the end of the Soviet Union, 
however, the state abandoned these ramparts. Principled opposition no longer had 
windmills against which to tilt. Linz and Stepan (1996) and others have argued that 
post-authoritarian civil society needs to adapt itself to new, democratic modes of 
interaction. But even given the failure of democracy to develop, even if we remain 
within an authoritarian context, civil society must recognize shifts within authoritarian 
rule and find ways to engage with the state along those front lines where the state 
continues to engage its citizens.
It is at some of those points of intersection that this thesis has found its cases. In the first 
instance, in Chapter 5, we have seen an attempt by a highly professional group of 
activists to reshape the system that currently allows Russian law enforcement to abuse 
the civil and human rights of citizens. On one of its goals -  defending citizens who have 
been abused -  the activists have been remarkably successful. But they have been utterly
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
unable to affect any systemic change. Police, prosecutors and judges act as free agents, 
pursuing their interests in an institutional (or deinstitutionalized) environment that 
allows them to privatize the law, with little or no upward or downward accountability. 
Citizens recognize the chaos inherent in this arrangement, and no collective response 
arises to address a problem that is, in the end, highly individualized.
In the second instance, in Chapter 6, we have seen spontaneous protests grow into 
sustained resistance against various acts by state and private actors that put at risk 
Russian citizens housing and property rights. Faced with clear and immediate 
adversity, the citizens involved prove eminently capable of self-organization, solidarity 
and trust, quickly recognizing the collective nature of the threat and putting together a 
response that is successful in repelling specific threats. The state, however, refuses to 
perceive the diverse protest movements as reflecting a systemic problem -  one that 
stems from corruption, weak property rights and the lack of political accountability -  
and, instead, treats protestors either as small groups or as individuals, resolving conflicts 
on an ad hoc basis. As a result, the protestors themselves fail to consolidate into a 
horizontally integrated movement, and even the local movements begin to disintegrate.
In the final instance, in Chapter 7, a spontaneous reaction by motorists against an 
offensive government policy grew into a nationwide protest that in turn evolved into a 
sustained social movement, capable of forcing repeated reversals of government policy 
and gaining a permanent seat at the policymaking table. The state, in this case, began 
with an intervention into the private lives of citizens -  one that would have deprived 2 
million Russians of their cars -  that was consistent in its proposed application and 
allowed the protestors to identify themselves as an aggrieved group. And the civic 
reaction was similarly coherent. Arguably, Russias most successful and well known 
social movement, the Committees of Soldiers Mothers, evolved along this same path, 
developing a cohesive and powerful identity in response to the most coherent and 
penetrating of all state interventions into private life, the military draft.
Russian civil society thus reflects the state in its form and content, and this is true both 
on the particular and aggregate level. The ways in which the state or its agents intrude 
into the private lives of citizens provide the content and context for the development of 
the injustice frame found at the core of any protest or social movement: consistent and 
coherent intrusions elicit forceful and cohesive responses. On a more general level, to
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
the extent that the state is deinstitutionalized and ad hoc in its relations with society, 
civil society is atomized and discombobulated. When the state makes an exception to 
this rule, so does civil society.
At the core of this project has been a dissatisfaction with existing explanations of why, 
by and large, Russians fail to mobilize in the face of what would seem to an outside 
observer to be significant offences on the part of their state. This is why I have tried, in 
response to rather deterministic arguments about social capital, trust and historical 
legacy, to identify new answers by focusing on the exceptions to the rule, the relatively 
rare instances in which Russian citizens do mobilize, and the even rarer instances in 
which that mobilization is successful in achieving the citizens aims. Given the 
difficulties inherent in trying to explain things that do not occur, and the necessarily 
limited amount of data that can be presented in a study of this kind, I make no pretense 
of having arrived at definitive conclusions; that cannot be achieved in three case studies. 
But the evidence nevertheless suggests three conclusions, one about Russians, one about 
the Russian state and one about the study of both.
The first of these is that ostensibly low levels of trust and social capital do not 
adequately explain the variations in mobilization observed in my case studies. I argue 
that this is the case not only because none of my subjects mentioned or displayed the 
symptoms of mistrust or Tow social capital; it is, of course, possible that I have 
misinterpreted the evidence. Nor would I necessarily contradict the assertion that levels 
of social capital and trust may indeed be low in Russia. But we have seen Russian 
citizens respond quickly to grievances, follow patterns of social-movement 
development that differ little, if at all, from those described in the theoretical literature, 
and expend considerable personal, emotional and financial resources to achieve 
collective goals. Indeed, I suggest that the problem in Russia is not mobilization: the 
problem is sustained mobilization. And in that respect I have argued that the key 
difference between successful cases and those that fail to sustain mobilization lies not 
within the movement or its participants, but emanates instead from the state.
The second conclusion flows from the first: if the problem is not Russians themselves, it 
would seem to be the Russian state. All of the movements described in this project 
begin with strength and momentum, but only one would seem to be a success story. But
counter to what we might expect from authoritarian regimes, the other two fail not
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
because they are repressed, but because the targets of their mobilization -  the state and 
its agents -  cannot or will not engage with the movement (or, indeed, with citizens) on 
an institutional basis. In the successful case, attempts at repression actually strengthen 
the movement, because they are driven by and reflect the exceptionally (for the Russian 
context) institutional manner in which the Russian state addresses policy in that 
particular area, in this case regarding automobiles. An identical argument could be made 
about one of Russias oldest and most successful social movements, the Committees of 
Soldiers Mothers. Whereas the Soviet governments extraordinary degree of 
engagement with society opened the door for moral dissent, it would appear that the 
Russian governments extraordinary degree of disengagement has closed the door to 
policy dissent.
Finally, I would argue that students of Russia need to be careful in the ways in which 
we operationalize the various concepts popular in the study of civil society and to look 
more deeply into the relationships between Russian citizens and their state. I have 
argued earlier that there are obvious limitations to studies that focus on participation in 
the categories of organizations, such as NGOs and labor unions, that form the core of 
civil society activity in the West; such formal organizations are not the only means of 
mobilization. And while there is clear value to the macro-level studies of civic 
participation, such as that by Marc Moije Howard, such counting exercises need to be 
supplemented by a better understanding of how the state-society relationship is played 
out, particularly in the conflicts and contenstations at the heart of social movements.
This project has aimed to contribute to that effort.
Even more basic concepts are problematic, as well. I have written repeatedly in this 
project about Russians and their state, a phrase that implies a normative judgment that 
most Russian citizens would question. As the cases in this thesis have illustrated, the 
institutional relationship between Russians and their state has broken down to such a 
degree that many Russians would not identify the state (as opposed to the land and its 
resources) as belonging to them. And so asking Russians in opinion polls whether they 
trust their state or their president is virtually meaningless, unless we ask a follow-up 
question: what do they trust their state and their president to do? Most of the protestors 
who figure in my case studies were among the more than 70% who say they trust 
Russias leadership; they clearly do not, however, believe that the leadership will help 
them stay in their homes or keep their cars. Trust must be taken together with
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
expectations, and expectations are highly contingent on the contexts in which citizens 
live.
The hypothesis that the Russian regime seeks actively to disengage from the public -  
that it serves the purposes of the elite club to pursue deinstitutionalization -  seems 
clearly supported by the evidence that emerges from the case studies. Instances of 
cohesive and coherent policy-driven interaction with the public by the state, such as we 
saw in the Svoboda Vybora case, are the relatively rare exceptions to the rule of evasive, 
ad hoc and unsystematic reaction to citizens grievances.
But if we posit that this sort of behavior is at the core of how the Russian state 
functions, then we should be able to observe it not only at the micro level explored in 
the case studies, but it should be reflected as well in more macro-level regime behavior. 
In other words, we should see a regime that avoids policymaking of public relevance 
and that resists the creation of stable institutions of state-society relations, such as 
functioning legislatures and political parties. And, indeed, that is what we see.
Vladimir Putin began his first term with a major tax reform that proved a resounding 
success, drastically streamlining the tax system and bringing more revenue into the 
states coffers. Taken with other proposed pension, regulatory and benefits reforms, 
analysts at the time noted cautiously a potential shift from a politics of implementation 
to a politics of law-making, a change which could only be welcomed insofar as it 
strengthens the role of democratic institutions and improves the predictability of the 
business environment (Woodruff 2001 2). The author of that statement, David 
Woodruff, noted, however, that given the history of Russias reform processes, such a 
conclusion would be premature (Woodruff 2001 2). And, indeed, that proved to be the 
case.
Following the tax reform of 2000, no major policy initiative was successfully carried 
through during Putins tenure (Gontmakher 2007). Reforms of the pension, education 
and health care systems were attempted in fits and starts and then abandoned or 
eviscerated as soon as they ran into resistance from corporate interests (as in the case of 
pension reform) or social groups (as in the case of education reform). When the
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
government tried to push through a benefits reform in early 2005 and met protests on 
the streets, even the vaunted National Projects proclaimed by Putin in 2004 were 
essentially put on hold. Despite rising incomes and growing budgets, Putins time in 
office saw lower health care spending in 2000-2005 (6.0% of GDP) than Yeltsins did 
in 1997-1999 (6.4% of GDP) (McFaul and Stoner-Weiss 2008). Reviewing Putins 
achievements, Evgenii Gontmakher wrote: Thus, the reform wave of the early 2000s 
sputtered, despite the auspicious financial conditions [brought about by income from 
and implementing complex social reforms (Gontmakher 2007 152-153).
On the business and economic side, the picture has not been much brighter. By 2007, 
none of the major infrastructure projects aimed at uncorking bottlenecks in the 
Russian economy had been implemented (Milov 2007). According to the World Banks 
annual Doing Business report, there has been little or no positive change in the 
administrative burden on private enterprise: the number of days needed to start a 
business remained constant at 29 from 2004 (the first year the report was published) to 
2009, while the number of days required to enforce a contract jumped from 160 to 281 
in the same period (World Bank 2004b ; World Bank 2009a). According to the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Developments annual Transition Report, Russia 
has made no progress from 2003 to 2009 on privatization, enterprise reform, price and 
trade liberalization, or competition policy. And while some progress was made on 
banking reform and infrastructure reform (if not investment), Russia saw the share of 
the private sector shrink from 70% of GDP to 65% in the same period (EBRD 2009b).
While bad governance itself is not evidence of the clubs desire to maximize 
autonomy, this sort of performance takes on a different light in the context of Andrew 
Wilsons description of virtual politics. And while Wilson wrote in 2005, looking 
back at Putins first term, politics in Russia became only more virtual as time wore on. 
Yet more hollow catch-all parties were engineered to gamer public support in 
opposition to United Russia but in favor of Putin (March 2009). Fearful of Ukraine- 
style protest movements, the Kremlin occupied the streets not with groups seeking to 
channel or capture mobilization in a classically authoritarian trope, but rather with 
ideologically and programmatically empty vessels aimed simply at displacing genuine 
movements (Robertson 2009).
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
What is particularly striking -  and lends particular credence to the thesis of virtuality -  
is the fact that none of this had a significant impact on Putins popularity. Based on a 
series of surveys timed to presidential and parliamentary elections throughout Putins 
two terms in office, Timothy Colton and Henry Hale note that upwards of 80% of voters 
supporting Putin and the United Russia party did so because they expected 
continuations of the market reforms begun in the early 1990s and a further improvement 
of relations with the West (Colton and Hale 2009 480). Remarkably, this support 
persisted even when Putin and co. delivered precisely the opposite results. Virtual 
politics, then, appears to be a two-way street: the Russian public has accepted that 
formal politics are hollow, and citizens own engagement has become devoid of 
meaning.
This project has not ascribed to Russia a regime type, either taken from the typologies 
in the literature or of my own invention (as tempting as it might be to coin the term 
disengaged authoritarianism, political science does not need yet another double epithet 
with which to describe Russia). While I do make reference to concepts such as hybrid 
regimes, defective democracy and semi-, electoral-, competitive- and bureaucratic- 
authoritarianism, all are problematic, not least due to the uniqueness of Russias regime, 
about which I have argued above. More importantly, in a single-country study such as 
this one, with in-depth analysis of the regime, I have seen little added analytical value in 
assigning a label to the object of study. This investigation, rather, represents an attempt 
to see whether we can discern the nature of a regime from the citizens point of view. 
This has been attempted in the past, of course, primarily through large survey projects 
based on variations of Almond and Verbas political culture concepts (and, in some 
cases, using their original questionnaires). Such projects are complicated, however, by 
the difficulty of interpreting such survey data across countries where the social 
meanings of institutions, concepts and terms may vary significantly. Social movement 
theory provides a more labor-intensive but potentially more fruitful approach. As the 
sustained interactions of social groups and state authorities, centered on a social 
conflict, social movements provide the ideal setting for getting at the heart of a^regime. 
Properly dissected, they can reveal underlying socio-political institutions, mechanisms 
and frameworks in ways that survey work cannot. The true viability of such an 
approach, of course, will become evident only through arduous comparative study. That 
is a task well beyond the scope of this thesis, much less this concluding chapter.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Nonetheless, because I would like to situate this project in the broader literature and 
make some suggestions for further research, it is worth briefly revisiting the issue of 
regime type -  first through a critique of recent attempts to categorize Russias evolving 
regime, and then through a selective review of the broader comparative literature. The 
purpose, however, is not so much to fit Russia into a pigeon hole, as to use the 
comparative aspect to bring the questions addressed and raised by this project -  and 
their relevance to scholars not particularly interested in Russia -  into sharper focus.
In a recent issue of the Journal o f Democracy, a group of long-time students of Russia 
reflected on how to define, explain and understand Russias regime. Unsurprisingly, 
there was little consensus, with authors falling into two broad groups. The first 
described Russia as a fairly garden-variety authoritarian system, which, as Vitali Silitski 
wrote, can no longer be regarded as competitive (Silitski 2009 42). Resting on a 
combination of managed politics, the preemption of opposition (otherwise known as 
repression) and economic populism, the government in Russia manages a unique and 
diverse country through a vast and complex bureaucracy, and regime stability depends 
on the rulers ability to incorporate and make strategic deals with a multitude of 
powerful subjects. As do I, Silitski notes the marginalization of large parts of society, 
social polarization, widespread disengagement from public life, and the prevalence of 
low-intensity citizenship. This approach is echoed and slightly modified by Leon 
Aron, writing that the Russian regime is authoritarian of the softer variety: With 
notable exceptions, the regime has preferred to bribe, intimidate, or marginalize critics 
rather than actually jail or kill them. Like a classic authoritarian (as opposed to 
totalitarian) regime, it tolerates all manner of private liberties and freedoms (including 
the freedom to publish), so long as none of these affects national politics in any 
significant way (Aron 2009 66). They disagree on the issue of whether or not Russias 
regime is sultanistic. Silitski rejects the idea, arguing instead that the system more 
closely resembles the Soviet-era collective leadership. Aron, in contrast, argues that 
Russia more closely resembles a sultanistic regime in the Weberian sense, meaning by 
this a type of authoritarianism distinguished by patronage, nepotism, and cronyism.
The second group emphasizes various aspects of Russias political economy and 
geopolitical position, developing along the way highly specific labels. Thus, Andrei 
Piontkovsky sees Russia as an authoritarian petrostate with various peculiarities: This 
is gendarme-bureaucratic capitalism with the Father of the Nation at its head
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
(Piontkovsky 2009 52). Like Audrey Ryabov (2008), he notes aspects of feudalism, in 
which the sovereign distribute^] privileges and lands to his vassals and [can] take 
them away at any moment. They are joined by Ivan Krastev, who, as do I, rejects the 
social determinist arguments and leans (though not wholeheartedly) towards arguments 
of a political economy nature: the oil curse has replaced the soul curse (Krastev 
2009 73). Lilia Shevtsova concurs but reintroduces Arons emphasis on the power of 
the singular leader. She writes, The regime rests on personalized power, signaling a 
return to the traditional Russian political matrix. Authoritarian power structures, in turn, 
rest on a form of bureaucratic corporatism that makes the leader its hostage (Shevtsova 
2009 61). She, as does Piontkovsky, takes an agglomerative approach to regime typing: 
 .. .a hybrid of pseudodemocratic mimicry, a great-power syndrome, imperialist 
longings, and the politics of oil. ... Russia now finds itself ruled by a form of 
bureaucratic authoritarianism, with add-ons.
Most of the points raised in these approaches are reflected in this thesis, and the 
conclusions reached by the Journal o f Democracy authors (and their colleagues writing 
elsewhere) are by no means mutually exclusive. Fundamentally, I take issue only with 
the argument that Russias system is one of personalized power. I suggest that power in 
Russia is not personalized, but rather personified, by Putin as president and, since 2008, 
by the tandem of Putin and Medvedev. This is more than a semantic distinction. As I 
have argued, power seems to accrue not to the individual(s), but to the club, which the 
individual leader represents. This is not to suggest that the individual is not personally 
powerful, but that the power he wields is contingent on his ability to provide two key 
services to the elite. The first of these is mediation. Because any significant split in the 
elite would threaten the welfare of all members of the club, it is imperative that the 
leader manage conflict and competition in such a way as to avoid potentially 
catastrophic schisms; it is here that Yeltsin failed and Putin excelled, thus becoming 
much more personally powerful than Yeltsin ever was. The second service is 
legitimization. While Russians citizens, as we have seen, have relatively low 
expectations of their politicians, those in power cannot be seen as entirely illegitimate. 
And there is no conceivable way in which the club could itself acquire such legitimacy; 
in many ways, the perception that Russia in the 1990s was ruled by a clique of rich and 
powerful men undermined Yeltsins rule and to this day epitomizes all that was wrong 
with pre-Putin Russia. The club, then, needs a front, and that front is provided by the 
leader: even if democratically deficient, an individual leader can cultivate images of
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
power that are aesthetically and symbolically acceptable to the public, as well as to the 
international community. Here, too, Putin was more successful than Yeltsin.
What is more, a view of the top leadership as important and powerful but contingent 
and beholden is better supported by the evidence presented in this thesis than a view of 
the leadership as all-powerful. An all-powerful autocrat would, presumably, recognize 
threats to his legitimacy stemming from a bureaucracy and political class that behave in 
the ways that we have seen in the preceding chapters; he would thus cultivate 
mechanisms to enforce control. But in Russia we see a regime that is uninterested in 
controlling the behavior of those who represent it to citizens, even when that behavior 
repeatedly gets the regime into trouble.
It is when we begin to look deeper into the state-society relationship, however, that the 
discussion of regime type -  and, indeed, the broader comparative endeavor -  begins to 
suggest new questions for further research. Macro-level analyses that focus on formal 
institutions (and even on the less formal ways in which they operate, though still at the 
macro level) may allow Russia to be placed more or less easily into broad definitions 
like competitive authoritarianism (Levitsky and Way 2002), electoral 
authoritarianism (Schedler 2006) or limited multiparty authoritarianism (Hadenius 
and Teorell 2007). But Russia does not fit easily into categories when the analysis gets 
thicker. There are, nonetheless, two insights from important recent studies that may be 
of use here, both regarding the incentives faced by elites in deciding the degree to which 
they institutionalize state-society relations.
First, studying authoritarian regimes in Asia and Africa, Benjamin Smith (2005) writes 
that, Elites that face organized opposition in the form of highly institutionalized social 
groups ... and that have little or no access to rents are likely to respond to these 
constraints by building party institutions to mobilize their own constituencies. By 
contrast, rulers who face only scattered opposition and enjoy access to plentiful rents 
confront no such forced moves. As a result, they tend not to build much in the way of a 
party organization. This helps understand why, despite the massive amount of 
resources poured into Russias ruling party, United Russia, the party remains shallow 
from a mobilizational standpoint.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Second, in a broader study, Jennifer Gandhi and Adam Przeworski take the novel 
approach of understanding a regime (and predicting its behavior) based on the level of 
threat it faces (or perceives); they find that dictators are inclined in relatively non
threatening environments to acquire cooperation through policy concessions, rather than 
by sharing rents, while reliance on distribution of rents rises in response to the 
likelihood of rebellion (2006). If we reverse the theory to interrogate the Russian case, 
we may come to a surprising conclusion. The Russian elite, as we have seen, prefers to 
buy allegiance via the distribution of rents, rather than through policy; when influential 
actors lobby for and receive policy concessions, moreover, they generally center on the 
distribution or creation of rents. Does this suggest that the Russian regime fears 
rebellion? Perhaps. But the calculation might also be altered by the fact that rents in 
Russia are plentiful.
While the Smith and Gandhi and Przeworski studies are more interested in the state and 
the regime than in society and take the social context -  indeed, the entire socio-political 
structure -  as the independent variable that influences the development of the regime, 
my approach here, has been the opposite, using the regime as the independent variable 
that influences the development of civil society. Neither I nor they, of course, would 
argue that causality runs only in one direction; studies are simply limited in their scope. 
But a brief foray into the comparative context finds several hypotheses about other 
aspects of this causal relationship -  aspects which I could not fully address in this thesis 
-  and suggests questions for further exploration.
Authors studying authoritarian regimes around the world, including Amr Hamzawy and 
Nathan Brown (2005) in Egypt, Manuel Hidalgo (2009) in Venezuela, and Douglas 
Webber (2006) in Indonesia, have noted the ways in which engrained, horizontal social 
institutions -  by which I mean religious, ethnic, tribal, land-based, professional or other 
identity-linked and socially legitimate grassroots institutions that predate existing 
authoritarian regimes -  serve to hamper (if not always reverse) the ambitions of 
authoritarian leaders. While that is clearly not the case in Russia, in some parts of the 
country, including the Caucasus and parts of Siberia, where religious, ethnic and land- 
based institutions appear relatively stronger than in the country as a whole, such 
institutions do exist, and it would be a worthwhile endeavor to examine whether the 
development of social movements and civic engagement in those contexts is different 
from the general patterns portrayed in this thesis.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Of course, we know that social structures evolve and they change the dynamics of state- 
society relations even in the strongest authoritarian regimes. As in Putins Russia, 
Suhartos regime in Indonesia legitimated its authoritarian rule by managing continued 
and rapid economic growth and then proceeded to surprise the world when it collapsed 
and Indonesia democratized. Douglas Webber (2006 406) argues major socio
economic changes in a political system that remained more or less frozen gave rise to an 
increasingly pervasive sense of frustration in the country, eventually undermining the 
regime. Change in authoritarian regimes, however, does not have to come from the 
masses. A similar evolution away from authoritarian consensus can occur within the 
elite. A study of Brazil (Hagopian, Gervasoni et al. 2008) ascribes crucial importance in 
that countrys democratic consolidation to the strengthening of party orientation of 
legislators, which in turn evolved in response to programmatic cleavages created by 
market reforms. Beatriz Magalonis detailed study of the breakdown of the PRI 
monopoly on politics in Mexico (2006) echoes in many ways the above, as does Valerie 
Bunces analysis of communist breakdown in the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia (1999), 
in which the regimes own institutions engender such disparate interests among the elite 
that they are pulled apart from within. Indeed, Jason Brownlee (2007) in his broad study 
of contemporary authoritarianism identifies the ability to manage elite conflict as the 
key variable determining the longevity of authoritarian regimes.
Those studies, in turn, bring us back to the question of institutions. I have argued 
throughout this thesis and in these conclusions that Russias deinstitutionalization is 
both an important and a unique feature of its regime. To be fair, weak 
institutionalization has been cited as a factor in maintaining the rule of many autocratic 
regimes with strong leaders, though, I would argue, not to the extent seen in Russia. But 
many authoritarian regimes do rely on institutional frameworks, and many of them 
come to rely on them more over time. Some recent scholarship, meanwhile, cautions 
against discounting authoritarian institutions simply because they do not live up to 
normatively guided expectations of how institutions should function. Studying Jordan, 
Ellen Lust-Okar (2006) concludes that elections in authoritarian systems are not 
meaningless; rather, they have a meaning that is connected to patronage, rather than to 
representation and policymaking. Similarly, studying Malaysia, Dan Slater argues 
(2003) that personalized authoritarian regimes may still use institutions, but in ways 
different from how we tend to understand the role of institutions: Whereas democratic
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
institutions serve to provide predictable patterns of representation, authoritarian 
institutions primarily serve to provide a stable basis for domination. The raison d etre 
of authoritarian institutions is not to constrain despotic power, but to supply a regime 
with the infrastructural power necessary to implement its command over potential 
opposition in civil society and within the multiple layers of the state apparatus itself.
This brief review of the current literature on authoritarianism, then, raises an important 
question for further research having to do with two sets of institutions: horizontal social 
institutions and the institutions of authoritarian governance. The literature, both on 
authoritarianism and on democracy, strongly suggests that horizontal social institutions 
matter, and horizontal social institutions that preexist conflict with authoritarian regimes 
seem to matter most of all. This, moreover, is in line with the prevailing wisdom of the 
literature on social capital, with its emphasis on pre-political relationships and linkages. 
My findings, set as they are in a context of both social and state deinstitutionalization, 
raise new questions about the interaction between the development of social institutions 
and the development of political power. One angle on this question is whether there is a 
real difference between regimes that are institutional takers and those that are 
institutional givers, and whether the latter can evolve (or be forced to evolve) into the 
former. The Russian regime, I argue, has seen no need to grant its citizens -  or even its 
elites -  much in the way of institutionalization. I have argued that this is due in large 
part to the resource curse, though it is reasonable to assume that the lack of preexisting 
(and, thus, pre-political) social institutions may also play a role. More research will be 
needed to understand the relative importance of these variables; because this thesis has 
been about civic mobilization and not about regime development, I have not addressed 
that question directly here. But the evidence presented here demonstrates that citizens of 
an authoritarian state do not need preexisting, pre-political social institutions in order to 
mobilize and even to shape a new relationship with the state. Rather, what they need is a 
state that pursues coherent policies. In other words, my suggestion is that, where 
horizontal social institutions are lacking, an institutionalized (or at least 
institutionalizing) state-society relationship can be sufficient to provoke and inform a 
sustained civic response.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
There have been several enterprises at stake in this thesis. The simplest was to provide 
an empirical study of aspects of contemporary Russian civil society not yet explored in 
the literature. Another was to broaden our perspective on Russian civil society in 
particular and on the study of civil society more broadly. I have suggested that the 
analytical tools provided by the body of literature collectively referred to as social 
movement theory may be more useful than the normatively guided, formalistic 
categories of modem civil society, democratization and transitology theory; at the very 
least, these tools have been more helpful to me in interpreting the cases explored here. 
While I believe this to be the first endeavor of any scale to take this approach in Russia 
and the post-socialist space more broadly, it has been taken in other contexts, including 
Iran and Latin America. It should be the task of further projects to see whether such 
studies can be synthesized in such a way as to allow useful comparison; that will be the 
key to developing a bottom-up approach to regime typing, as suggested earlier.
Where the scholarship may go from here is relatively clear: more cases in Russia should 
be studied, particularly in light of the stresses of the global economic crisis that struck 
the country in late 2008, and the usefulness of this approach should be tested more 
broadly for studying state-society relations in authoritarian contexts. This work should 
contribute to the slowly growing body of literature seeking non-Westem -  and, more 
precisely, non-democratic -  approaches to the study of politics.
Where Russia goes from here is less clear. I have already argued that Putins Russia 
persists even into Medvedevs presidency. As these conclusions were written, however, 
various changes seemed to be afoot in Russia. The global economic crisis hit Russia 
hard, sending GDP down approximately 8%, nearly doubling unemployment, slashing 
incomes and plunging millions of Russians back into poverty after a decade of 
economic growth. To support domestic industry, the government has turned to old 
protectionist tropes, including slapping new import duties on used cars, sparking a new 
round of automotive protests. The largest of these protests, in Vladivostok, was quelled 
by squadrons of riot police flown in for the occasion from Moscow. In smaller industrial 
towns around the country, the shuttering factories sent hungry workers out into the 
streets, most prominently in the town of Pikalevo, where Putin himself flew in with a 
gaggle of oligarchs, whose arms he twisted on national television. Grievances are rising, 
and the government -  facing a massive budget deficit and falling reserves -  has very 
few policy tools with which to respond; it has, essentially, no effective economic tools
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
at its disposal. Instead, it has reacted with a combination of financial carrots and violent 
sticks, plus tighter controls over the media.
The arguments and evidence presented in this thesis would suggest that the harder the 
regime presses -  the tighter the control over the street and the public space, the more 
concerted the regimes attempts to keep control and the more abject its failure to prevent 
economic hardship -  the more likely it will be that Russian citizens will react. Just as 
state disengagement begets civic disengagement, so mass repression should beget mass 
mobilization. If there is a myth that this project should dispel, it is the idea that Russian 
citizens are passive. In my view, they are not: they are aggressively immobile. What 
Russians have in life, their livelihoods and their strategies for survival and development, 
are personal achievements, built often with the use of networks and connections, 
without recourse to stable, predictable and universal institutions or conventions. Their 
opposition or unwillingness to change does not signal support for the current system or 
even for their rulers. Rather, they fear that any change will undermine what they have so 
arduously built and maintained, causing their ramparts to collapse and throwing their 
lives into chaos. But change sometimes arrives uninvited, and when threats arrive at 
their doorstep, as we have seen, Russian citizens are more than capable of action.
If the state persists in responding to the crisis with riot police, those police themselves 
will inevitably become part of the frame, an institutional fact of Russian life. 
Alternatively, the elite could choose to rebuild participatory mechanisms, to provide 
channels for feedback, to invite new players to the table in search of stability, much in 
the same way that faltering communist regimes in Central and Eastern Europe created 
roundtables. Whichever way the regime turns, it will provide an opportunity to Russians 
to react, and to the Russian state to react in response. New relationships will engender 
new expectations. And a changing Russian state will help a new Russian civil society to 
emerge.
Russia in Movement
Appendix I: Methodology & Data Collection
S. A. Greene
Interview Methodology
Some of the information presented in this thesis was collected through semi-structured 
and unstructured interviews, the details of each of which are described in the 
accompanying footnotes. In all cases, interviews were conducted by the author, almost 
always in Russian, and subjects were informed of the purpose of the conversation. In all 
cases, notes were taken, and these are currently held by the author. Except as noted, all 
of the interviews in Chapters 6 and 7 were also tape recorded, and the microcassets are 
likewise held by the author. Some interview subjects, such as leaders of organizations, 
were selected specifically because of their position. Others, including participants in 
protests, were selected at random, as the author sought to interview as many potential 
subjects as possible; in the protest at Butovo, described in Chapter 6, for example, the 
author sought to interview all of those present.
Archival Materials
Chapter 5 of this thesis makes extensive use of the archives of Public Verdict, a Russian 
NGO, which were made available to the author for the purpose of this research.
Archival materials are referenced in footnotes by file number and document title, as 
they are presented in the archive itself. Excerpts from the archives are available on 
http://www.publicverdict.org, as are contact details for those wishing to arrange access 
to the full archives.
Internet Materials
Much of this thesis makes use of Internet materials, including on-line discussion 
forums. In each instance, a full description of the source and a direct URL, where 
available, are given in the accompanying footnote, together with the date the web page 
was last accessed for research purposes. While the author is not liable for materials that 
may have since been removed from servers, all of the URLs provided in this thesis were 
live as of March 15, 2010.
http://www.publicverdict.org
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Works Cited
(2003a). "Novosti. Proisshestviia." Vremia Novostei. Moscow, 9 June: 3.
(2003b). "Protsessy." Kommersant. Moscow, 29 May: 4.
(2004a). 30 natsional-bol'shevikov vorvalis' v zdanie Minzdrava. Lenta.ru.
(2004b). Doing Business 2004. Washington, The World Bank.
(2004c). From Transition to Development. A Country Economic Memorandum for the 
Russian Federation. Washington, World Bank.
(2004d). "Militsionery, sdelavshie zaderzhannogo invalidom, poluchili uslovnye sroki." 
N ow e Izvestiia. Moscow, 24 August: 6.
(2004e). Otnoshenie k militsii sredi zhitelei krupnykh gorodov. Rezul'taty 
kolichestvennogo issledovaniia. Moscow, Obshchestvennyi Verdikt.
(2005a). "Avtoklub. Pravyi bunt." Rossiiskaia Gazeta. Moscow, 10 June.
(2005b). "Mesto Sobytii. Militsiia poshla v zaboi." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 21 April:
(2005c). Po vsei Rossii proshli massovye aktsii protiv otmeny l'got. Lenta.ru.
(2005d). "Politika-Ekonomika. Ofitsiarno." Vremia Novostei. Moscow, 14 April: 4.
(2006a). "Delo ob izbitom podrostke." Moskovskii Komsomolets. Moscow, 13 October: 
(2006b). "Militsionerov posadili za izbienie shkornika." Moskovskii Komsomolets, 
Moscow, 1 November: 2.
(2006c). "Militsionery, izbivshie 12-letnego shkol'nika, poluchili po tri goda." 
Sovetskaia Rossiia, Moscow, 2 November: 2.
(2006d). Pytki v Rossii. Spravochnaia informatsiia po delam o pytkakh v proizvodstve 
rossiiskikh pravozashchitnykh organizatsii. Moscow, Obshchestvennyi Verdikt.
(2007a). Deiatel'nost' Fonda 'Obshchestvennyi Verdikt' v 2006 godu. Moscow, 
Obshchestvennyi Verdikt.
(2007b). "Kak pravilis' zakony o vyborakh." Kommersant. Moscow, 12 November: 4.
(2009a). Doing Business 2009. Washington, The World Bank.
(2009b). EBRD Transition Report. London, European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development.
Adjani, M. (2006). Ethnic Profiling in the Moscow Metro. New York, Open Society 
Institute.
Afanas'ev, I. N. (2001). Onasnaia Rossiia. Traditsii Samovlast'ia Segodnia. Moscow, 
RGGU.
Afanasiev, M. N. (1996). Praviashchie elitv i gosudarstvennost' posttotalitamoi rossii. 
Moscow, Izdatel'stvo "Institut prakticheskoi psikhologii".
Al'bats, E. (2004). "Bureaucrats and the Russian Transition: The Politics of
Accommodation, 1991-2003". PhD, Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University.
Alapuro, R. (2008). Russian and Estonian Civil Society Discourses Compared. Media. 
Culture and Society in Putin's Russia. S. White. Houndsmills, Palgrave.
Alekseev, I., D. Chernov, et al. (2004). "Okhota na izbiratelia." Vremia novostei. 
Moscow, 15 March: 2.
Alekseev, M. and K. Urban (2006). "Desiat' del otnogo goda." Kommersant. Vlast'(5Q: 
26-30.
Alekseeva, L. (1984). Istoriia inakomvsliia v SSSR. Noveishii period. Benson, Vt., 
Khronika Press.
Alekseeva, L. (2003). Rasskazy uchastnikov: Liudmila Alekseeva. Antologiia 
Samizdata. M. Barbakadze. Moscow, http://antology.igrunov.ru.
Alekseeva, N. (2005). "'Kak mozhno bol'she iarkikh liudei'. Putin s senatorami ishchet 
oshibki monetizatsii." Izvestiia, Moscow, 4 February.
http://antology.igrunov.ru
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Almond, G. A. and S. Verba (1963). The Civic Culture. Political Attitudes and 
Democracy in Five Nations. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Anderson Jr., R. D., M. S. Fish, et al. (2001). Postcommunism and the Theory of 
Democracy. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Anheier, H. K. and J. Kendall (2000). Trust and voluntary organisations: Three
theoretical approaches. Civil Society Working Papers. London, Centre for Civil 
Society, London School of Economics.
Anisimov, S. (2006). "Zhitel' Nizhnego Novgoroda piat' let dobivalsia material'noi 
kompensatsii." Novve Izvestiia. Moscow, 1 March: 2.
Aptekar', P. (2004). "'Protiv vsekh' ne schitaetsia." Gazeta, Moscow, 30 November: 1.
Aptekar', P. (2005). "K ume. Kreml' opredililsia s novymi pravilami vyborov." Gazeta. 
Moscow, 15 April: 4.
Arato, A. (2000). Civil Society. Constitution, and Legitimacy. Lanham, MD, Rowman 
& Littlefield Publishers.
Aron, L. (2009). "Reading Russia. The Merger of Power and Property." Journal of 
Democracy 20(2): 66-68.
Arrow, K. J. (1974). The Limits of Organization. New York, W. W. Norton & Co.
Ashwin, S. (1996). "Forms of Collectivity in a Non-Monetary Society." Sociology 
30(1): 21-39.
Ashwin, S. (1998). "Endless Patience: Explaining Soviet and Post-Soviet Social 
Stability." Communist and Post-Communist Studies 31(2): 187-198.
Auyero, J. (2001). Poor People's Politics. Peronist Survival Networks and the Legacy of 
Evita. Durham, NC, Duke University Press.
Averkiev, I. (2003). "Zachem cheloveku prava cheloveka." Civitas 2003(1): 17-30.
Barnes, A. (2003). "Comparative Theft: Context and Choice in the Hungarian, Czech, 
and Russian Transformations, 1989-2000." East European Politics and Societies 
17(3): 533-565.
Belin, L. (2002). "The Russian Media in the 1990s." Journal of Communist Studies and 
Transition Politics 18(1): 139-160.
Belyaeva, N. and L. Proskuryakova (2008). Civil Society Diamond. Civicus Civil
Society Index Shortened Asessment Tool. Report for the Russian Federation. 
Moscow, Interlegal Foundation.
Berglas, E. (1976). "On the Theory of Clubs." American Economic Review 66(2): 116- 
Berglas, E. and D. Pines (1981). "Clubs, Local Public Goods and Transportation 
Models." Journal of Public Economics 15: 141-162.
Berkowitz, D. and W. Li (2000). "Tax rights in transition economies: a tragedy of the 
commons?" Journal of Public Economics 76: 369-397.
Blee, K. M. and V. Taylor (2002). Semi-Structured Interviewing in Social Movement 
Research. Methods of Social Movement Research. B. Klandermans and S. 
Staggenborg. Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
Bobbio, N. (1988). Gramsci and the Concept of Civil Society. Civil Society and the 
State. New European Perspectives. J. Keane. London, Verso.
Bondarenko, A. and S. Migalin (2005). "Pensionery razuverilis' v dobroi vlasti. Na 
mitingakh v regionakh vse chashche zvuchat politicheskie trebovaniia." 
Nezavisimaia Gazeta. Moscow, 1 February.
Borooah, V. K. and M. Paldam (2007). "Why is the world short of democracy? A cross
country analysis of barriers to representative government." European Journal of 
Political Economy 23: 582-604.
Broadway, R. (1980). "A Note on the Market Provision of Club Goods." Journal of 
Public Economics 13: 131-137.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Brownlee, J. (2007). Authoritarianism in an Age of Democratization. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press.
Buchanan, J. M. (1965). "An Economic Theory of Clubs." Economica 32(125): 1-14. 
Bunce, V. (1983). "The Political Economy of the Brezhnev Era: The Rise and Fall of 
Corporatism." British Journal of Political Science 13(2): 129-158.
Bunce, V. (1999). Subversive Institutions. The Design and the Destruction of Socialism 
and the State. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Buranov, I. (2005). "Aktsiia protesta. Rulevye igry." Kommersant, Moscow, 20 May. 
Buranov, I. (2006a). "Aktsiia protesta. Avtomobilisty udarili po migalkam probkami."
Kommersant, Moscow, 29 May.
Buranov, I. (2006b). "Probki na dorogakh. Avtomobilisty vybrali MKAD vzletnoi 
ploshchadkoi." Kommersant. Moscow, 26 May.
Buranov, I., N. Iablonskii, et al. (2006). "Mitingi protiv novykh PDD." Kommersant. 
Moscow, 30 January.
Burawoy, M. (1998). "The Extended Case Method." Sociological Theory 16(1): 4-33. 
Burawoy, M., P. Krotov, et al. (2000). "Involution and destitution in capitalist Russia."
Ethnography 1(1): 43-65.
Butorina, E. (2006). "V tsentre vnimaniia. 'My vse mozhem okazat'sia Shcherbinskimi'."
Vremia Novostei, Moscow, 24 March.
Carothers, T. (1999). "Western Civil-Society Aid to Eastern Europe and the Former 
Soviet Union." East European Constitutional Review 8(3).
Carothers, T. and M. Ottaway (2000). The Burgeoning World of Civil Society Aid.
Funding Virtue. Civil Society Aid and Democracy Promotion. M. Ottaway and 
T. Carothers. Washington, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 
Chebotarev, A. (2006). "Dal'noboishchiki ugrozhaiut perekryt' Rublevku."
Nezavisimaia Gazeta. Moscow, 22 May.
Chebotarev, A. andN. i. Kostenko (2006). "Massovye aktsii teriaiut sviaz's politikoi."
Nezavisimaia Gazeta. Moscow, 7 February.
Chebotarev, A., S. Varshavchik, et al. (2006). "Klassovaia bor'ba pokatilas' na kolesakh. 
Aktsii v zashchitu altaiskogo voditelia Olega Shcherbinskogo okazalis' 
bespretsedentno massovymi, khorosho podgotovlennymi i demonstrativno 
apolitichnymi." Nezavisimaia Gazeta, Moscow, 13 February.
Chelysheva, O. (2003). "Sustav prestupleniia. Uslovnym zashchitnikam - uslovnoe 
nakazanie." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 17 April: 15.
Chemega, I. and V. Khamraev (2006). "Glas Naroda. Rossiianam vse chashche 
khochetsia protestovat'." Kommersant, Moscow, 5 April.
Clement, C. (2008). Ot obyvatelia k aktivistu (na primere dvizheniia zhilishchnogo
samoupravleniia v Astrakhani). Grazhdanskoe obshchestvo sovremennoi Rossii. 
Sotsiologicheskie zarisovki s naturv. E. S. Petrenko. Moscow, Institut Fonda 
"Obshchestennoe mnenie".
Coleman, J. S. (1990). Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard 
University Press.
Colton, T. J. and H. E. Hale (2009). "The Putin Vote: Presidential Electorates in a 
Hybrid Regime." Slavic Review 68(3): 473-503.
Crozier, M. (2001). Bureaucracy, Sociology of. International Encyclopedia of the Social 
and Behavioral Sciences. N. J. Smelser and P. B. Baltes. London, Elsevier. 
Curkowski, J. (2004). "Russian Oil: The Role of the Sector in Russia's Economy." Post- 
Communist Economies 16(3): 285-296.
Dahl, R. A. (1971). Polyarchy. Participation and Opposition. New Haven, CT, Yale 
University Press.
Daniel', A. (2003). Rasskazy uchastnikov: Aleksandr Daniel'. Antologiia Samizdata. M. 
Barbakadze. Moscow, http://antology.igrunQv.ru.
http://antology.igrunQv.ru
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Davydov, O. B., Ed. (2000). Rossiiskaia elita: psikhologicheskie portretv. Moscow, 
Laromir.
de Tocqueville, A. ([1835] 1994). Democracy in America, First Part. London, 
Everyman's Library, 
de Tocqueville, A. ([1840] 1994). Democracy in America. Second Part. London, 
Everyman's Library.
Diamond, L. (1994). "Rethinking Civil Society: Toward Democratic Consolidation."
Journal of Democracy 5(3): 4-17.
Dogan, M. and J. Higley (1998). Elites, Crises, and Regimes in Comparative Analysis. 
Elites. Crises, and the Origins of Regimes. M. Dogan and J. Higley. New York, 
Rowman & Littlefield.
Domrin, A. N. (2003). "Ten Years Later: Society, 'Civil Society,' and the Russian 
State." Russian Review 62(2): 193-211.
Drankina, E. (2004). '"Politkonsul'tanty vynuzhdeny rabotat' v vol'ere' (Interview with 
Marat Gel'man)." Kommersant Den'gif502k 54-55.
Dubin, B. and L. Gudkov (2005). Privatizatsiia politsii. Indeks nroizvola
pravookhraniternvkh organov. A. Novikova. Moscow, Obshchestvennyi 
Verdikt.
Durkheim, E. ([1893] 1984). The Division of Labour in Society. Houndsmills, 
MacMillan Press.
Duverger, M. (1972). The Study of Politics. London, Nelson.
Duverger, M. (1974). Modem Democracies: Economic Power versus Political Power.
Hinsdale, IL, Dryden Press.
Easter, G. M. (2002). "Politics of Revenue Extraction in Post-Communist States: Poland 
and Russia Compared." Politics and Society 30(4): 599-627.
Ehrenberg, J. (1999). Civil Society. The Critical History of an Idea. New York, New 
York University Press.
Elkov, I. (2006). "OMON na narakh." Rossiiskaia Gazeta. Moscow, 9 August: 7. 
Etzioni-Halevy, E. (1993). The Elite Connection. Problems and Potential of Western 
Democracy. Cambridge, Polity Press.
Evans Jr., A. B. (2008). "The First Steps of Russia's Public Chamber. Representation or 
Coordination?" Demokratizatsiva 16(4): 345-362.
Feldbrugge, F. J. M. (1975). Samizdat and Political Dissent in the Soviet Union.
Leyden, Netherlands, A.W. Sijthoff.
Ferguson, A. ([1767] 1966). An Essay on the History of Civil Society. Edinburgh, 
University of Edinburgh Press.
Fish, M. S. (1995). Democracy from Scratch. Opposition and Regime in the New 
Russian Revolution. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Fish, M. S. (2005). Democracy Derailed in Russia. The Failure of Open Politics.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Flynn, M. (2006). Formal and Informal Strategies of Migrant Populations: Migrant
Activity in Post-Soviet Russia. Russian Civil Society: A Critical Assessment. A. 
B. Evans Jr., L. A. Henry and L. M. Sundstrom. Armonk, NY, M.E. Sharpe. 
Folger, R., Ed. (1984). The Sense of Injustice. Social Psychological Perspectives. New 
York, Plenum Press.
Fromm, E. (1963). Marx's Concept of Man. New York, Frederick Ungar Publishing Co. 
Frye, T. (2002). "The Two Faces of Russian Courts: Evidence from a Survey of 
Company Managers." East European Constitutional Review 11(1/2).
Frye, T. and A. Shleifer (1997). "The Invisible Hand and the Grabbing Hand."
American Economic Review 87(2): 354-358.
Fukuyama, F. (2000). Social Capital and Civil Society. IMF Working Papers. 
Washington, IMF Institute.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Fukuyama, F. (2004). "The Imperative of State-Building." Journal of Democracy 15(2): 
17-31.
Gaidar, Y. ([1994] 2003). State and Evolution. Russia's Search for a Free Market. 
Seattle, University of Washington Press.
Gamamikow, E. and A. Green (2005). Citizenship, Education and Social Capital. 
Education for Citizenship. D. Lawton, J. Caims and R. Gardner. London, 
Continuum.
Gamson, W. A. (1968). Power and Discontent. Homewood, 111., Dorsey Press.
Gamson, W. A. (1992). Talking Politics. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Gandhi, J. and A. Przeworski (2006). "Cooperation, Cooptation, and Rebellion under 
Dictatorships." Economics and Politics 18(1): 1-26.
Ganev, V. I. (2001). "The Dorian Gray effect: winners as state breakers in
postcommunism." Communist and Post-Communist Studies 34: 1-25.
Garcelon, M. (2005). Revolutionary Passage. From Soviet to Post-Soviet Russia, 1985- 
2000. Philadelphia, Temple University Press.
Gellner, E. (1994). Conditions of Liberty. Civil Society and its Rivals. London, Hamish 
Hamilton.
Gibson, J. L. (2001). "Social Networks, Civil Society, and the Prospects for
Consolidating Russia's Democratic Transition." American Journal of Political 
Science 45(1): 51-68.
Gibson, J. L. (2003). Social networks, civil society, and the prospects for consolidating 
Russia's democratic transition. Social Capital and the Transition to Democracy. 
G. Badescu and E. M. Uslaner. London, Routledge.
Giddens, A. (1984). The Constitution of Society. Outline of the Theory of Structuration. 
Berkeley, CA, University of California Press.
Glaeser, E., J. Scheinkman, et al. (2003). "The injustice of inequality." Journal of 
Monetary Economics 50: 199-222.
Glanin, I. (2006a). "Kriminal. Mest' pokhmel'nogo OMONa." Vremia Novostei. 
Moscow, 27 July: 2.
Glanin, I. (2006b). "OMON protiv detei." Vremia Novostei. Moscow, 21 July: 3.
Glanin, I. (2006c). "Skandal. Zhertvy deshevoi provokatsii." Vremia Novostei,
Moscow, 25 July: 3.
Glanin, I. (2007). "Ne dlia ekrana." Vremia Novostei. Moscow, 23 March: 3.
Glinski, D. and P. Reddaway (1999). "The Ravages of'Market Bolshevism'." Journal of 
Democracy 10(2): 19-34.
Goldman, M. I. (1980). The Enigma of Soviet Petroleum. Half-Full or Half-Empty? 
London, George Allen & Unwin.
Goldman, M. I. (2003a). The Piratization of Russia. Russian reform goes awry. London, 
Routledge.
Goldman, M. I. (2003b). "Render Unto Caesar: Putin and the Oligarchs." Current 
History 102(666).
Goldstone, J. A. and C. Tilly (2001). Threat (and Opportunity): Popular Action and
State Response in the Dynamics of Contentious Action. Silence and Voice in the 
Study of Contentious Politics. R. R. Aminzade, J. A. Goldstone, D. McAdamet 
al. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Goncharova, N. (2004). "Militsioneru dali uslovno." Nizhegorodskie Novosti. Nizhnii 
Novgorod, 28 August.
Gontmakher, E. (2007). "Sotsial'nye ugrozy inertsionnogo razvitiia." Pro et Contra(4-5): 
147-159.
Granina, N. i. (2005). "Dol'shchikov Podmoskov'ia obmanuli na $240 mln." Izvestiia, 
Moscow, 28 December.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Greene, S. A. (2005). The Resource Curse and Civil Society: Does the Oil Economy 
Crowd Out Civil Society in Russia. Annual Meeting of the American Political 
Science Association, Washington.
Greene, S. A. (2006). "Gosudarstvo i obshchestvennyi suverenitet." Pro et Contra 10(1): 
25-39.
Greene, S. A. (2009). Shifting media and the failure of political communication in 
Russia. The Post-Soviet Russian Media. Conflicting Signals. B. Beumers, S. 
Hutchings and N. Rulyova. London, Routledge.
Grigoryants, S. (1989). "Political Samizdat in Moscow." Uncaptive Minds 2(5): 46-47.
Grishin, A. and S. Tsikulina (2006). "Sego Dnia. Nastoiashchikh buinykh malo." 
Moskovskii Komsomolets. Moscow, 23 May.
Grivach, A., N. Gorelov, et al. (2004). "Sekret dlia bol'shoi kompanii. Tsenu
'Iuganskneftegaza' ustanoviat chetyre chlena soveta direktorov 'Gazproma'." 
Vremia Novostei. Moscow, 3 December: 7.
Grozovskii, B. and S. Ivanova (2005). "Den'gi/Vlast'. Zurabov ne gotov." Vedomosti, 
Moscow, 11 April.
Grzymala-Busse, A. (2008). "Beyond Clientelism. Incumbent State Capture and State 
Formation." Comparative Political Studies 41(4/5): 638-673.
Grzymala-Busse, A. and P. J. Luong (2002). "Reconceptualizing the State: Lessons 
from Post-Communism." Politics and Society 30(4): 529-554.
Guseva, D. i. (2004). "Narod - pofigist. Rossiiane bezrazlichny k skandal'nomu zakonu 
o mitingakh." Vremia novostei. Moscow, 29 April: 4.
Guseva, D. i. (2006). "Iavka neobiazatel'na." Vremia novostei. Moscow, 9 November:
Habermas, J. ([1962] 1995). The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere. An 
Inquiry into a Category of Bourgeois Society. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Hadenius, A. and J. Teorell (2007). "Pathways from Authoritarianism." Journal of 
Democracy 18(1): 143-156.
Hagopian, F., C. Gervasoni, et al. (2008). "From Patronage to Program: The Emergence 
of Party-Oriented Legislators in Brazil." Comparative Political Studies 42(3): 
360-391.
Hale, H. E. (1999). The Party's On: The Impact of Political Organizations in Russia's 
Duma Elections. Working Papers. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University.
Hale, H. E. (2006). "Democracy or autocracy on the march? The colored revolutions as 
normal dynamics of patronal presidentialism." Communist and Post-Communist 
Studies 39: 305-329.
Hamzawy, A. and N. J. Brown (2005). Can Egypt's Troubled Elections Produce a More 
Democratic Future? Policy Outlook. Washington, Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace.
Hann, C. and E. Dunn, Eds. (1996). Civil Society. Challenging Western Models. 
London, Routledge.
Hanson, P. and E. Teague (2005). "Big Business and the State in Russia." Europe-Asia 
Studies 57(5): 657-680.
Hanson, S. E. (2001a). Defining Democratic Consolidation. Postcommunism and the 
Theory of Democracy. R. D. Anderson Jr., M. S. Fish, S. E. Hanson and P. G. 
Roeder. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Hanson, S. E. (2001b). "The Dilemmas of Russia's Anti-Revolutionary Revolution." 
Current History 100(648): 330-335.
Havel, V. (1988). Anti-Political Politics. Civil Society and the State. New European 
Perspectives. J. Keane. London, Verso.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Hayoz, N. and V. Sergeyev (2003). Social networks in Russian politics. Social Capital 
and the Transition to Democracy. G. Badescu and E. M. Uslaner. London, 
Routledge.
Hegel ([1820] 1896). The Philosophy of Right. Hegel's Philosophy of Right. S. W. 
Dyde. London, George Bell and Sons.
Heilman, J. S. (1998). "Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform in 
Postcommunist Transitions." World Politics 50(2): 203-234.
Heilman, J. S., G. Jones, et al. (2003). "Seize the state, seize the day: state capture and 
influence in transition economies." Journal of Comparative Economics 31: 751- 
Heilman, J. S. and M. Schankerman (2000). "Intervention, corruption and capture. The 
nexus between enterprises and the state." Economics of Transition 8(3): 545- 
Henderson, S. L. (2003). Building Democracy in Russia. Western Support for 
Grassroots Organizations. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press.
Hendley, K. (1999). "Rewriting the Rules of the Game in Russia: The Neglected Issue 
of the Demand for Law." East European Constitutional Review 8(4): 89-95.
Henry, L. A. (2006). Russian Environmentalists and Civil Society. Russian Civil 
Society: A Critical Assessment. A. B. Evans Jr., L. A. Henry and L. M. 
Sundstrom. Armonk, NY, M.E. Sharpe.
Herb, M. (2005). "No Representation without Taxation? Rents, Development, and 
Democracy." Comparative Politics 37(3): 297-316.
Hidalgo, M. (2009). "Hugo Chavez's 'Petro-Socialism'." Journal of Democracy 20(2): 
78-92.
Higley, J. and M. G. Burton (1989). "The Elite Variable in Democratic Transitions and 
Breakdowns." American Sociological Review 51(1): 17-32.
Hoffman, D. E. (2002). The Oligarchs. Wealth and Power in the New Russia. New 
York, Public Affairs.
Hopkin, J. (2006). Conceptualizing Political Clientelism: Political Exchange and 
Democratic Theory. Annual Meeting of the American Political Science 
Association. Philadelphia.
Horowitz, D. (1990). "Comparing Democratic Systems." Journal of Democracy 1(4): 
73-79.
Hosking, G. (1990). The Awakening of the Soviet Union. London, William Heinemann 
Hough, J. F. (1976). "The Brezhnev Era. The Man and the System." Problems of 
Communism 25(2): 1-17.
Hough, J. F. (2001). The Logic of Economic Reform in Russia. Washington, Brookings 
Institution Press.
Howard, M. M. (2002). "The Weakness of Postcommunist Civil Society." Journal of 
Democracy 13(1): 157-169.
Howard, M. M. (2003). The Weakness of Civil Society in Post-Communist Europe. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Hughes, J. (2002). Managing Secession Potential in the Russian Federation. Ethnicity 
and Territory in the Former Soviet Union. Regions in Conflict. J. Hughes and G. 
Sasse. London, Frank Cass & Co.
Hughes, J., P. John, et al. (2002). "From plan to network: Urban elites and the post
communist organisational state in Russia." European Journal of Political 
Research 41(3): 395-420.
Hume, D. ([1772] 1994a). Of civil liberty. Political Essays. K. Hankonssen. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Hume, D. ([1772] 1994b). Of the first principles of government. Political Essays. K.
Hankonssen. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Hume, D. ([1772] 1994c). Of the liberty of the press. Political Essays. K. Hankonssen.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Iasin, E. G. (2002). Rossiiskaia ekonomika. Istoki i panorama rvnochnvkh reform.
Moscow, GU-VShE.
Ignat'eva, I. and K. Finaeva (2005). "Zakon o dolevom stroitel'stve: grazhdane 
vooryzheny i dazhe opasny." Izvestiia. Moscow, 1 April.
Innes, A. (2002). "Party Competition in Post-Communist Europe: The Great Electoral 
Lottery." Comparative Politics 35(1).
Islamoglu, H. (2001). Civil Society, Concept and History of. International Encyclopedia 
of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. N. J. Smelser and P. B. Baltes. London, 
Elsevier.
Ivanov, S. (2006). "Rassledovanie. Sochinskii OMON prevysil polnomochiia."
Kommersant. Moscow, 24 July: 4.
Ivanova, A., M. Keen, et al. (2005). The Russian Flat Tax Reform. Washington, IMF. 
Jackson, W. D. (2004). "Russia and the Council of Europe. The Perils of Premature 
Admission." Problems of Post-Communism 51(5): 23-33.
Jasper, J. M. (1998). "The Emotions of Protest: Affective and Reactive Emotions In and 
Around Social Movements." Sociological Forum 13(3): 397-424.
Jenkins, J. C. (1995). Social Movements, Political Representation, and the State: An 
Agenda and Comparative Framework. Politics of Social Protest. Comparative 
Perspectives on States and Social Movements. J. C. Jenkins and B.
Klandermans. London, UCL Press.
Johnston, H. (2002). Verification and Proof in Frame and Discourse Analysis. Methods 
of Social Movement Research. B. Klandermans and S. Staggenborg. 
Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press.
Jowitt, K. (2008). "Rus United." Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 
24(4): 480-511.
Kaldor, M. (2003). Global Civil Society. An Answer to War. Cambridge, Polity Press. 
Kaul, I., P. Conceicau, et al., Eds. (2003). Providing Global Public Goods. Managing 
Globalization. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Keane, J., Ed. (1988). Civil Society and the State. New European Perspectives. London, 
Verso.
Khairullin, M. (2005). "Demonstratsiia sily. Uzhe polgoda siloviki derzhat v strakhe 
Tverskuiu oblast'." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 21 March: 18.
Kharkhordin, O. (1998). "First Europe-Asia Lecture. Civil Society and Orthodox 
Christianity." Europe-Asia Studies 50(6): 949-968.
Khmelev, M. (2006). "Deputaty vstupilis' za obmanutykh dol'shchikov." Izvestiia. 
Moscow, 25 May.
Kis, J. (1989). Politics in Hungary: For a Democratic Alternative. Boulder, Co., Social 
Science Monographs.
Kitschelt, H. (1991). Resource Mobilization Theory: A Critique. Research on Social 
Movements. The State of the Art in Western Europe and the USA. D. Rucht. 
Frankfurt am Main, Campus Verlag.
Kitschelt, H. (2000). "Linkages Between Citizens and Politicians in Democratic 
Polities." Comparative Political Studies 33(6/7): 845-879.
Kitschelt, H. and R. Smyth (2002). "Programmatic Party Cohesion in Emerging
Postcommunist Democracies. Russia in Comparative Context." Comparative 
Political Studies 35(10): 1228-1256.
Klandermans, B. (1997). The Social Psychology of Protest. Oxford, Blackwell 
Publishers.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Klimov, D. (2005). '"Edinaia Rossiia' podderzhala oranzhevykh." Novve Izvestiia, 
Moscow, 11 October.
Klimov, I. (2008). Permanentnyi bunt: reforma sotsial'nykh l'got 2004-2005 godov i 
novye formy protestnoi aktivnosti. Grazhdanskoe obshchestvo sovremennoi 
Rossii. Sotsiologicheskie zarisovki s naturv. E. S. Petrenko. Moscow, Institut 
Fonda "Obshchestvennoe Mnenie".
Knox, Z., P. Lentini, et al. (2006). "Parties of Power and Russian Politics. A Victory of 
the State over Civil Society?" Problems of Post-Communism 53(1): 3-14.
Kodin, M. I. (1998). Obshchestvenno-politicheskie ob"edineniia i formirovanie
politicheskoi elitvv Rossii (1990-1997). Moscow, Fond sodeistviia razvitiiu 
sotsial'nykh i politicheskikh nauk.
Kolesnichenko, A. (2006). "Predsedatel' Moskovskoi Khel'sinkskoi Gruppy Liudmila 
Alekseeva: 'Menia ni razu ne nazvali shpionkoi'." N ow e Izvestiia. Moscow, 12 
Kondrat'eva, M. (2005). "Vnutrennie organy. Karandash v nos." Gazeta, Moscow, 16 
March: 4.
Konitzer-Smimov, A. (2005). "Serving Different Masters: Regional Executives and 
Accountability in Ukraine and Russia." Europe-Asia Studies 57(1): 3-33.
Konygina, N. i. (2005). '"Rossiia izbitaia' razoblachit 'oborotnei'." Izvestiia, Moscow, 29 
July: 2.
Konygina, N. i. and I. Spirin (2005). "Prokuratura vozbudila delo protiv 
narkopolitseiskikh." Izvestiia. Moscow, 25 March: 7.
Kordonskii, S. (2000). Rvnki vlasti. Administrativnve rvnki SSSR i Rossii. Moscow, 
Komai, J. (1992). The Socialist System. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Kozenko, A. (2006). "Kvartimyi vopros. Soinvestorov razvel Gorbatyi most." 
Kommersant. Moscow, 23 May.
Krastev, I. (2009). "Reading Russia. The Rules of Survival." Journal of Democracy 
20(2): 73-77.
Kriesi, H. (1995). The Political Opportunity Structure of New Social Movements: Its 
Impact on Their Mobilization. Politics of Social Protest. Comparative 
Perspectives on States and Social Movements. J. C. Jenkins and B.
Klandermans. London, UCL Press.
Kryshtanovskaia, O. V. (2002). "Biznes-elita i oligarkhi: itogi desiatiletiia." Mir Rossii 
2002(4): 1-57.
Kryshtanovskaia, O. V. (2008). "The Russian Elite in Transition." Journal of 
Communist Studies and Transition Politics 24(4): 585-603.
Kryshtanovskaia, O. V. and S. White (2005). "Inside the Putin Court: A Research 
Note." Europe-Asia Studies 57(7): 1065-1075.
Kubicek, P. (2000). "Post-communist political studies: ten years later, twenty years 
behind?" Communist and Post-Communist Studies 33: 295-309.
Kubik, J. (2005). "How to Study Civil Society: The State of the Art and What to Do 
Next." East European Politics and Societies 19(1): 105-121.
Kulikov, V. (2007). "Proizvol - za schet kazny. Vladimir Lukin predlagaet programmu 
zashchity prav poterpevshego." Rossiiskaia Gazeta. Moscow, 24 April.
Kumar, K. (1993). "Civil Society: An Inquiry into the Usefulness of an Historical 
Term." British Journal of Sociology 44(3): 375-395.
Kurzman, C. (2004). "Can Understanding Undermine Explanation? The Confused
Experience of Revolution." Philosophy of the Social Sciences 34(3): 382-351.
Lane, D. and C. Ross (1998). The Russian Political Elites, 1991-95: Recruitment and 
Renewal. Postcommunist Elites and Democracy in Eastern Europe. J. Higley, J. 
Pakulski and W. Wesolowski. London, MacMillan Press.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Lebedeva, A. (2006a). "Ne v sluzhbu, a v 'druzhbu'." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 31 July: 
Lebedeva, A. (2006b). "OMONovtsev pereveli iz lageria v SIZO." Novaia Gazeta.
Moscow, 10 August: 7.
Ledeneva, A. (2000). Continuity and Change of Blat Practices in Soviet and Post-Soviet 
Russia. Bribery and Blat in Russia. Negotiating Reciprocity from the Middle 
Ages to the 1990s. S. Lovell, A. Ledeneva and A. Rogachevskii. Houndsmills, 
Basingstoke, MacMillan Press.
Ledeneva, A. V. (2006). How Russia Really Works. The Informal Practices That
Shaped Post-Soviet Politics and Business. Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press. 
Ledyaev, V. (2008). "Domination, Power and Authority in Russia: Basic Characteristics 
and Forms." Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 24(1): 17-36. 
Lemaitre, R. (2006). "The Rollback of Democracy in Russia after Beslan." Review of 
Central and East European Law 31: 369-411.
Lenin, V. I. ([1917] 1962). Gosudarstvo i revoliutsiia. Polnoe sobranie sochinenii. V. I.
Lenin. Moscow, Gosudarstvennoe izdatel'stvo politicheskoi literatury. 33. 
Levitsky, S. and L. A. Way (2002). "Elections Without Democracy. The Rise of 
Competitive Authoritarianism." Journal of Democracy 13(2): 51-65.
Liikanen, I. (2008). Civil Society and the Reconstitution of Russian Political Space: the 
Case of the Republic of Karelia. Media, Culture and Society in Putin's Russia. S. 
White. Houndsmills, Palgrave.
Linz, J. J. (1990). "The Perils of Presidentialism." Journal of Democracy 1(1): 51-69. 
Linz, J. J. and A. Stepan (1996). Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation. 
Southern Europe, South America and Post-Communist Europe. Baltimore, Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Lipman, M. (2006). Svoboda pressy v usloviiakh upravliaemoi demokratii. Carnegie 
Moscow Center Briefings. Moscow, Carnegie Moscow Center.
Lipman, M. and N. Petrov (2007). Vzaimodesitvie vlasti i obshchestva. Puti rossiiskogo 
postkommunizma. M. Lipman and A. Riabov. Moscow, Carnegie Moscow 
Center.
Lipset, S. M. (1994). "The Social Requisites of Democracy Revisited: 1993 Presidential 
Address." American Sociological Review 59(1): 1-22.
Liubarskaia, E. (2004). Putin poluchil pervoe preduprezhdenie. Lenta.ru.
Locke, J. ([1667] 1993). An Essay Concerning Toleration. Political Writings. D.
Wootton. London, Penguin.
Locke, J. ([1681] 1993). The Second Treatise of Government: An Essay Concerning the 
True Origins, Extent, and End of Civil Government. Political Writings. D. 
Wootton. London, Penguin.
Lokotetskaia, M. (2006). "Militsionerov sudiat za izbienie 12-letnego shkol'nika."
Gazeta. Moscow, 13 October: 8.
Lovell, D. W. (2001). "Trust and the politics of postcommunism." Communist and Post- 
Communist Studies 34: 27-38.
Lukyanenko, L. (1991). "From the Spirit of Helsinki to Independence." Uncaptive 
Minds 4(3): 53-54.
Luong, P. J. and E. Weinthal (2001). "Prelude to the Resource Curse. Explaining Oil 
and Gas Development Strategies in the Soviet Successor States and Beyond." 
Comparative Political Studies 34(4): 367-399.
Luong, P. J. and E. Weinthal (2004). "Contra Coercion: Russian Tax Reform,
Exogenous Shocks, and Negotiated Institutional Change." American Political 
Science Review 98(11: 139-152.
Lust-Okar, E. (2006). "Elections under Authoritarianism: Preliminary Lessons from 
Jordan." Democratization 13(3): 456-471.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Madureira, N. L. (2007). "Cartelization and Corporatism: Bureaucratic Rule in
Authoritarian Portugal, 1926-45." Journal of Contemporary History 42(1): 79- 
Magaloni, B. (2006). Voting for Autocracy. Hegemonic Party Survival and Its Demise 
in Mexico. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Maleva, T. i. (2003). Srednie klassv v Rossii. Ekonomicheskie i sotsial'nve strategii. 
Moscow, Carnegie Moscow.
Mandrik, I. (2005). "Narkozachistka." Russkii kur'er, Moscow, 16 March: 1.
March, L. (2009). "Managing Opposition in a Hybrid Regime: Just Russia and 
Parastatal Opposition." Slavic Review 68(3): 504-527.
Martovalieva, I. (2005a). "Politika/Rassledovaniia. 'My prosto khotim svobodno vybirat' 
vse - ot mashiny do prezidenta'." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 25 July.
Martovalieva, I. (2005b). "Politika/Rassledovaniia. I lentochki 'oranzhevykh' v 
glazakh." Novaia Gazeta, Moscow, 26 May.
Marx, K. ([1844] 1970). Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right. Marx's Critique of 
Hegel's Philosophy of Right. J. O'Malley. Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press.
Mawdsley, E. and S. White (2000). The Soviet Elite from Lenin to Gorbachev. Oxford, 
Oxford University Press.
May, R. A. and A. K. Milton, Eds. (2005). (Un)Civil Societies. Human Rights and 
Democratic Transitions in Eastern Europe and Latin America. Lanham, Md., 
Lexington Books.
McAdam, D. (1986). "Recruitment to High-Risk Activism: The Case of Freedom 
Summer." American Journal of Sociology 92(1): 64-90.
McAuley, M. (1997). Russia's Politics of Uncertainty. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press.
McCarthy, J. D. and M. N. Zald (1977). "Resource Mobilization and Social
Movements: A Partial Theory." American Journal of Sociology 82(6): 1212- 
1241.
McFaul, M. (1995). "State Power, Institutional Change, and the Politics of Privatization 
in Russia." World Politics 47(2): 210-243.
McFaul, M. (2002). "The Fourth Wave of Democracy And Dictatorship.
Noncooperative Transitions in the Postcommunist World." World Politics 54: 
212-244.
McFaul, M. (2005). "Transitions from Postcommunism." Journal of Democracy 16(3): 
5-19.
McFaul, M. and K. Stoner-Weiss (2008). "The Myth of the Authoritarian Model. How 
Putin's Crackdown Holds Russia Back." Foreign Affairs 87(1): 68-84.
McFaul, M. and E. Treyger (2004). Civil Society. Between Dictatorship and
Democracy. Russian Post-Communist Political Reform. M. McFaul, N. Petrov 
and A. Riabov. Washington, Carnegie.
McMann, K. M. (2006). Economic Autonomy and Democracy. Hybrid Regimes in 
Russia and Kyrgyzstan. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Merkel, W. (2004). "Embedded and Defective Democracies." Democratization 11(5): 
33-58.
Mersiianova, I. (2008). Sotsial'naia baza rossiiskogo grazhdanskogo obshchestva.
Grazhdanskoe obshchestvo sovremennoi Rossii. Sotsiologicheskie zarisovki s 
naturv. E. S. Petrenko. Moscow, Institut Fonda "Obshchestvennoe Mnenie".
Mickiewicz, E. (1999). Changing Channels: Television and the Struggle for Power in 
Russia. Durham, NC, Duke University Press.
Mickiewicz, E. (2008). Television, Power, and the Public in Russia. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Migalin, S. and N. i. Zhukova (2005). "Stariki napugali chinovnikov. Permskie
pensionery shturmuiut mestye administratsii." Nezavisimaia Gazeta, Moscow, 2 
February.
Mill, J. S. ([1848] 1970). Principles of Political Economy. With Some of their
Applications to Social Philosophy. Books IV & V. Harmondsworth, Penguin.
Milov, V. (2007). "Uzkie mesta rossiiskoi ekonomiki." Pro et Contra(4-5): 135-146.
Minkoff, D. C. (1997). "Producing Social Capital." American Behavioral Scientist 
40(5): 606-619.
Mishler, W. and R. Rose (1997). "Trust, Distrust and Skepticism: Popular Evaluations 
of Civil and Political Institutions in Post-Communist Societies." The Journal of 
Politics 59(2): 418-451.
Mohsin Hashim, S. (2005). "Putin's Etatization project and limits to democratic reforms 
in Russia." Communist and Post-Communist Studies 38: 25-48.
Moore Jr., B. (1967). Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. Lord and Peasant 
in the Making of the Modem World. Boston, Beacon.
Moore Jr., B. (1978). Injustice. The Social Bases of Obedience and Revolt. London, 
MacMillan.
Morochenko, I. (2005). "Zhilishchnyi vopros. Osen' obmanutykh dol'shchikov." 
Parlamentskaia Gazeta, Moscow, 8 November.
Morshchakova, T. (2003). "Na polputi k pravosudiiu." Otechestvennve Zapiski 2003(2): 
http ://www. strana-oz.ru/^numid^ 11 &article=43 8.
Moshkin, M. and D. Mel'man (2006). "Sego Dnia. Altaiskii Krainii." Moskovskii 
Komsomolets. Moscow, 4 February.
Moskovkin, L. (2006). "Obshchestvennikov zakopaiut v bukhgalterii." Moskovskaia 
pravda. Moscow, 25 October: 1.
Nagomykh, I., I. Buranov, et al. (2006). "Polittekhnologii. Spasti voditelia 
Shcherbinskogo." Kommersant. Moscow, 16 March.
Nikitinskii, L. (2007). "Tikho. Slushaetsia Rossiia." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 10 May.
Novikova, A. (2005). "Portrety riadovykh militsionerov v sovremennoi 
pravookhranitel'noi sisteme." Neprikosnovennvi Zapas 2005(4): 
http://magazines.russ.ru/nz/2005/2042/nov2014.html.
Offe, C. (1996). Modernity and the State. East. West. Cambridge, Polity Press.
Offe, C. (2004). Political Corruption: Conceptual and Practical Issues. Building a 
Trustworthy State in Post-Socialist Transition. J. Komai and S. Rose- 
Ackermann. London, Palgrave.
Oleinik, A. (2008). "Existing and Potential Constraints Limiting State Servants'
Opportunism: The Russian Case." Journal of Communist Studies and Transition 
Politics 24(1): 156-189.
Oliver, P. E. and D. J. Myers (2003). "The Coevolution of Social Movements." 
Mobilization 8(1): 1-25.
Olson, M. (1982). The Rise and Decline of Nations. Economic Growth. Stagflation, and 
Social Rigidities. New Haven, CT, Yale University Press.
Ottaway, M. (2003). Democracy Challenged. The Rise of Semi-Authoritarianism. 
Washington, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Ottaway, M. and T. Carothers, Eds. (2000). Funding Virtue. Civil Society Aid and 
Democracy Promotion. Washington, Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace.
Parsons, T. (1947). Introduction. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. M. 
Weber. New York, Free Press.
Pastukhov, V. (2002). "Law under Administrative Pressure in Post-Soviet Russia." East 
European Constitutional Review 11(3): 66-74.
http://magazines.russ.ru/nz/2005/2042/nov2014.html
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Pavlikova, O. g., L. Mukhamed'iarova, et al. (2006). "Nekommercheskie organizatsii na 
zametke u prokurorov." Gazeta. Moscow, 18 January: 3.
Pelczynski, Z. A. (1988). Solidarity and 'The Rebirth of Civil Society' in Poland, 1967- 
81. Civil Society and the State. New European Perspectives. J. Keane. London, 
Verso.
Perova, A. (2007). "Sochinskii OMON zachistil detskii sanatorii ot otdykhaiushchikh i 
mestnykh zhitelei." Kommersant. Moscow, 22 January: 6.
Petrenko, V. and A. Stenin (2006). Iz KPZ v Dumu. Gazeta.ru.
Petrov, N. and A. Riabov (2007). Vnutrennie problemy vlasti. Puti rossiiskogo
postkommunizma. M. Lipman and A. Riabov. Moscow, Carnegie Moscow 
Center.
Pfaff, S. (1996). "Collective Identity and Informal Groups in Revolutionary 
Mobilization: East Germany in 1989." Social Forces 75(1): 91-117.
Pfaff, S. and H. Kim (2003). "Exit-Voice Dynamics in Collective Action: An Analysis 
of Emigration and Protest in East German Revolution." American Journal of 
Sociology 109(2): 401-444.
Piontkovsky, A. (2009). "Reading Russia. The Dying Mutant." Journal of Democracy 
20(2): 52-55.
Pipes, R. (2005). Russian Conservatism and its Critics. A Study in Political Culture. 
New Haven, Conn., Yale University Press.
Polanyi, K. ([1944] 2001). The Great Transformation. The Political and Economic 
Origins of Our Time. Boston, Beacon Press.
Polletta, F. and J. M. Jasper (2001). "Collective Identity and Social Movements."
Annual Review of Sociology 27: 283-305.
Pomorski, S. (2002). "In a Siberian Criminal Court." East European Constitutional 
Review 11(1/2): 111-116.
Progonova, E., O. g. Gorbunova, et al. (2005). "Aktsiia. Oranzhevaia revoliutsiia 
avtomobilistov ne dala pravitel'stvu westi zapret na 'pravorukie' mashiny." 
Gazeta. Moscow, 20 May.
Prokhorov, G., A. Irdullin, et al. (2005). Na uglu Gagarina i Revoliutsionnoi. Gazeta.ru.
Przeworski, A. (1986). Some Problems in the Study of Transition to Democracy.
Transitions from Authoritarian Rule. Comparative Perspectives. G. O'Donnell,
P. C. Schmitter and L. Whitehead. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Przeworski, A. (1991). Democracy and the Market. Political and Economic Reforms in 
Eastern Europe and Latin America. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Putnam, R. D. (1976). The Comparative Study of Political Elites. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 
Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Putnam, R. D., R. Leonardi, et al. (1993). Making Democracy Work. Civic Traditions in 
Modem Italy. Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Quigley, K. F. F. (2000). Lofty Goals, Modest Results; Assisting Civil Society in
Eastern Europe. Funding Virtue. Civil Society Aid and Democracy Promotion. 
M. Ottaway and T. Carothers. Washington, Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace.
Reddaway, P. and D. Glinski (2001). The Tragedy of Russia's Reforms. Market
Bolshevism against Democracy. Washington, United States Institute of Peace 
Press.
Redichkina, O. g. (2005). "NKO budut zhit' po-novomu." Gazeta. Moscow, 26 
December: 2.
Riskin, A. and B. Pipiia (2005). "Organizatorov mitingov podvodiat pod stat'iu. V 
regionakh nachalis' presledovaniia initsiatorov aktsii protesta." Nezavisimaia 
gazeta. Moscow, 19 January: 1.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Robertson, G. B. (2009). "Managing Society: Protest, Civil Society, and Regime in 
Putin's Russia." Slavic Review 68(3): 528-547.
Robinson, J. A., R. Torvik, et al. (2003). Political Foundations of the Resource Curse. 
Working Paper. Paris, Departement et Laboratoire d'Economie Theorique et 
Appliquee.
Rogacheva, M. (2006). "Militsionery poluchili srok za izbitogo podrostka." Izvestiia, 
Moscow, 1 November: 3.
Roniger, L. (1994). The Comparative Study of Clientelism and the Changing Nature of 
Civil Society in the Contemporary World. Democracy. Clientelism and Civil 
Society. L. Roniger and A. Giines-Ayata. Boulder, Colo., Lynne Reinner 
Publishers.
Rose, R. (1994). "Rethinking Civil Society. Postcommunism and the Problem of Trust." 
Journal of Democracy 5(3): 18-30.
Rose, R. (1999a). Modem, pre-modem and anti-modem social capital in Russia. Studies 
in Public Policy. Glasgow, Centre for the Study of Public Policy, University of 
Strathclyde.
Rose, R. (1999b). What does social capital add to individual welfare? An empirical 
analysis of Russia. Studies in Public Policy. Glasgow, Centre for the Study of 
Public Policy, University of Strathclyde.
Rose, R. and W. Mishler (1994). "Mass Reaction to Regime Change in Eastern Europe: 
Polarization or Leaders and Laggards?" British Journal of Political Science 
24(2): 159-182.
Ross, C. (2000). "Federalism and democratization in Russia." Communist and Post- 
Communist Studies 33: 403-420.
Ross, M. L. (1999). "The Political Economy of the Resource Curse." World Politics 
51(2): 297-322.
Ross, M. L. (2001). "Does Oil Hinder Democracy?" World Politics 53: 325-361.
Rosser Jr., J. B. and M. V. Rosser (1997). "Schumpeterian Evolutionary Dynamics and 
the Collapse of Soviet-Bloc Socialism." Review of Political Economy 9(2): 211- 
Rousseau, J.-J. ([1762] 1968). The Social Contract. London, Penguin.
Rudneva, E. (2004). "Putin: protestovat' mozhno, no tikho." Gazeta.ru. 12 April.
Rueschemeyer, D., E. H. Stephens, et al. (1992). Capitalist Development and 
Democracy. Cambridge, Polity Press.
Rustow, D. A. (1970). "Transitions to Democracy: Toward a Dynamic Model." 
Comparative Politics 2(3): 337-363.
Ryabov, A. (2008). Vozrozhdenie "feodal'noi" arkhaiki v sovremennoi Rossii: Praktika 
i idei. Working Papers. Moscow, Carnegie Moscow Center.
Sadchikov, A. (2004). "'Nezorovykh ogranichenii' nam ne nado. Putin zapretil zakon o 
zaprete mitingov." Izvestiia, Moscow, 14 April: 3.
Sakharov, A. (1990). Moscow and Beyond. 1986 to 1989. London, Hutchinson.
Sampson, R. J., D. McAdam, et al. (2005). "Civil Society Reconsidered: The Durable
Nature and Community Structure of Collective Civic Action." American Journal 
of Political Science 111(3): 673-714.
Sandler, T. and J. Tschirhart (1997). "Club theory: Thirty years later." Public Choice 93: 
335-355.
Sapozhnikova, G. (2005). "Bitie opredeliaet soznanie?" Komsomol'skaia Pravda. 
Moscow, 11 May: 8.
Sas, I. and R. Ukolov (2005). "Pravozashchitniki nashli 'Blagoveshchensk-2'. Sotrudniki 
Gosnarkokontrolia ne ponimaiut metanii Tverskoi oblprokuratury."
Nezavisimaia Gazeta, Moscow, 25 March: 7.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Schedler, A., Ed. (2006). Electoral Authoritarianism. The Dynamics of Unfree 
Competition. Boulder, Co., Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Schmidt-Pfister, D. (2008). What Kind of Civil Society in Russia? Media, Culture and 
Society in Putins Russia. S. White. Houndsmills, Palgrave.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1942). Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. New York, Harper & 
Brothers.
Sedel'nikov, P. (2006). "Avtomobilistam prostiat krasnye povorotniki." Gazeta, 
Moscow, 27 January.
Sedel'nikov, P., M. Marchuk, et al. (2006). "Vlast' poluchila spetssignal." Gazeta, 
Moscow, 13 February.
Selina, M. and A. Riskin (2006). "Kommunalka zamedlennogo deistviia. V regionakh 
nachalis' massovye aktsii protesta v sviazi s rostom tsen na uslugi ZhKKh." 
Nezavisimaia Gazeta, Moscow, 23 January.
Sergeev, N. (2005). "Pravozashchita. Bit' nuzhno v kaif." Kommersant. Moscow, 25 
March: 5.
Sestanovich, S. (2007). "Putin's Invented Opposition." Journal of Democracy 18(2): 
122-124.
Shamburova, A. (2004). "Opyt chastnogo soprotivleniia. Bityi chas." Novaia Gazeta, 
Moscow, 27 September: 6-7.
Shaver, K. G. (1985). The Attribution of Blame. Causality. Responsibility, and 
Blameworthiness. New York, Springer-Verlag.
Shelley, L. I. (1996). Policing Soviet Society. The evolution of state control. London, 
Routledge.
Shepeleva, O. g. (2005). "Pravookhranitel'nye organy - naseleniiu: chego grazhdane 
zhdut i ne mogut poluchit' ot militsii." Neprikosnovennvi Zapas 2005(4): 
http://magazines.russ.ru/nz/2005/2042/sh2015.html.
Shevtsova, L. (2004). "The Limits of Bureaucratic Authoritarianism." Journal of 
Democracy 15(3): 67-77.
Shevtsova, L. (2007). Russia. Lost in Transition. The Yeltsin and Putin Legacies. 
Washington, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
Shevtsova, L. (2009). "Reading Russia. The Return of Personalized Power." Journal of 
Democracy 20(2): 61-65.
Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1994). "Politicians and Firms." Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 109(4): 995-1025.
Shramenko, M. (2006). "Voditeli - za Shcherbinskogo." Cheliabinskii rabochii. 
Cheliabinsk, 14 February.
Shugart, M. and J. Carey (1992). Presidents and Assemblies: Constitutional Design and 
Electoral Dynamics. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Silitski, V. (2009). "Reading Russia. Tools of Autocracy." Journal of Democracy 20(2): 
42-46.
Simonia, N. (2001). Economic Interests and Political Power in Post-Soviet Russia. 
Contemporary Russian Politics. A. Brown. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Slater, D. (2003). "Iron Cage in an Iron Fist. Authoritarian Institutions and the
Personalizatin of Power in Malaysia." Comparative Politics 36(1): 81-101.
Slezkine, Y. (2000). The Soviet Union as a communal apartment, or how a socialist 
state promoted ethnic particularism. Stalinism. New Directions. S. Fitspatrick. 
London, Routledge.
Smith, A. ([1776] 1970). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of 
Nations. Books I-III. Harmondsworth, Penguin.
Smith, B. (2004). "Oil Wealth and Regime Survival in the Developing World, 1960- 
1999." American Journal of Political Science 48(2): 232-246.
http://magazines.russ.ru/nz/2005/2042/sh2015.html
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Smith, B. (2005). "Life of the Party. The Origins of Regime Breakdown and Peristence 
under Single-Party Rule." World Politics 57: 421-451.
Snow, D. A. and E. B. Rochford Jr. (1986). "Frame Alignment Processes,
Micromobilization, and Movement Participation." American Sociological 
Review 51(4): 464-481.
Snow, D. A., E. B. Rochford Jr., et al. (1986). "Frame Alignment Processes,
Micromobilization, and Movement Participation." American Sociological 
Review 51(4): 464-481.
Solomon Jr., P. H. (2008). "Law in Public Administration: How Russia Differs." Journal 
of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 24(1): 115-135.
Solomon Jr., P. H. and T. S. Foglesong (2000). "The Procuracy and the Courts in 
Russia: A New Relationship?" East European Constitutional Review 9(4).
Solovykh, P. (2006). "Samopiarom - po spetssignalam" Izvestiia. Moscow, 29 May.
Sonin, K. (2003). "Why the rich may favor poor protection of property rights." Journal 
of Comparative Economics 31: 715-731.
Sperling, V. (1999). Organizing Women in Contemporary Russia. Engendering 
Transition. New York, Cambridge University Press.
Splichal, S. (2001). Journalism and Journalists. International Encyclopedia of the Social 
and Behavioral Sciences. N. J. Smelser and P. B. Baltes. London, Elsevier.
Starr, F. (1988). "Soviet Union: A Civil Society." Foreign Policv(70J: 26-41.
Stepan, A. (1986). Paths toward Redemocratization: Theoretical and Comparative
Considerations. Transitions from Authoritarian Rule. Comparative Perspectives. 
G. O'Donnell, P. C. Schmitter and L. Whitehead. Baltimore, Johns Hopkins 
University Press.
Stepovoi, B. (2007). "Mitingovat' pridetsia po novym pravilam." Izvestiia. Moscow, 5 
April: 2.
Subramaniam, V. (2000). "Comparative public administration: from failed universal 
theory to raw empiricism  a frank analysis and guidelines towards a realistic 
perspective." International Review of Administrative Sciences 66(4): 557-572.
Sundstrom, L. M. (2006a). Funding Civil Society. NGO Development in Russia. 
Stanford, Stanford University Press.
Sundstrom, L. M. (2006b). Soldiers' Rights Groups in Russia: Civil Society Through 
Russian and Western Eyes. Russian Civil Society: A Critical Assessment. A. B. 
Evans Jr., L. A. Henry and L. M. Sundstrom. Armonk, NY, M.E. Sharpe.
Sztompka, P. (1998). Mistrusting Civility: Predicament of a Post-Communist Society. 
Real Civil Societies. Dilemmas of Institutionalization. J. C. Alexander. London, 
Sage.
Tarrow, S. (1998). Power in Movement. Social Movements and Contentious Politics. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, C. (1990). "Modes of Civil Society." Public Culture 3(1): 95-118.
Tepliakov, S. (2006). "Avtomobilisty Rossii podderzhat Olega Shcherbinskogo." 
Altaiskaia Pravda, Barnaul, 21 March.
Tepliakov, S. and A. Kaspirshin (2006). "Oleg Shcherbinskii ne vinovat." Altaiskaia 
Pravda. Barnaul, 25 March.
Tiazhlov, I. (2006). "Polittekhnologii. 'Edinoi Rossii' ne udalas' avtomobilizatsiia." 
Kommersant. Moscow, 23 March.
Tilly, C. (1984). Social Movements and National Politics. Statemaking and Social 
Movements. Essays in History and Theory. C. Bright and S. Harding. Ann 
Arbor, Mich., University of Michigan Press.
Titov, E. (2007). "V bor'be s OMONom pobedila 'Druzhba'." Novaia Gazeta. Moscow, 
15 March: 7.
Russia in Movement S. A. Greene
Torstendahl, R. (2001). Bureaucratization and Bureaucracy, History of. International 
Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. N. J. Smelser and P. B. 
Baltes. London, Elsevier.
Tucker, R. C. (1987). Political Culture and Leadership in Soviet Russia. From Lenin to 
Gorbachev. Brighton, Wheatsheaf Books.
USAID (1999). Lessons in Implementation: The NGO Story. Building Civil Society in 
Central and Eastern Europe and the New Independent States. Washington, U.S. 
Agency for International Development.
Utkin, S. (2006). "Pod oblomkami stroitel'nykh piramid okazalis' tysiachi
peterburzhtsev, stavshikh uchastnikami dolevogo stroitel'stva." Sankt- 
Peterburgskie Vedomosti. St. Petersburg, 26 January.
Visloguzov, V. (2005). "Bor'ba s monetizatsiei. Pravitel'stvo soglasilos' na 'podstavuV 
Kommersant. Moscow, 22 January.
Vorozheikina, T. (1994). Clientelism and the Process of Political Democratization in 
Russia. Democracy. Clientelism and Civil Society. L. Roniger and A. Giines- 
Ayata. Boulder, Colo., Lynne Reinner Publishers.
Voslenskii, M. ([1990] 2005). Nomenklatura. Moscow, Zakharov.
Webber, D. (2006). "A Consolidated Patrimonial Democracy? Democratization in Post- 
Suharto Indonesia." Democratization 13(3): 396-420.
Weber, M. (1947). The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. New York, Free 
Press.
Weber, M. (1962). Basic Concepts in Sociology. New York, Philosophical Library.
Wegren, S. K. (2003). "The rise, fall, and transformation of the rural social contract in 
Russia." Communist and Post-Communist Studies 36: 1-27.
Weigle, M. A. and J. Butterfield (1992). "Civil Society in Reforming Communist 
Regimes: The Logic of Emergence." Comparative Politics 25(1): 1-23.
Weinthal, E. and P. J. Luong (2001). "Energy wealth and tax reform in Russia and 
Kazakhstan." Resources Policy 27: 215-223.
Wilson, A. (2005). Virtual Politics. Faking Democracy in the Post-Soviet World. New 
Haven, Conn., Yale University Press.
Woodruff, D. M. (2000). "Rules for Followers: Institutional Theory and the New
Politics of Economic Backwardness in Russia." Politics and Society 28(4): 437- 
Woodruff, D. M. (2001). Pension reform in Russia: from the politics of implementation 
to the politics of lawmaking? PONARS Policy Memo. Washington, Center for 
Strategic and International Studies.
Yakovlev, E. and E. Zhuravskaya (2004). State Capture and Controlling Owners of 
Firms. Moscow, Center for Economic and Financial Research.
Zakatnova, A. (2006). "Politika. Buket oppozitsii." Rossiiskaia Gazeta, Moscow, 5 
April.
Zielonka, J., Ed. (2001). Democratic Consolidation in Eastern Europe. Volume 1: 
Institutional Engineering. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Zorin, I. (2006). "'Budesh' soprotivliat'sia - pridushim i zakopaem." Gazeta. Moscow,
13 April: 8.
Zvonovskii, V. (2008). Indeks doveritel'noi strategii. Grazhdanskoe obshchestvo 
sovremennoi Rossii. Sotsiologicheskie zarisovki s naturv. E. S. Petrenko. 
Moscow, Institut Fonda "Obshchestvennoe mnenie".
