Russia's Internal Borders: 
Institutions, Territory, Identity
J. Paul Goode 
St. Antony's College 
University of Oxford
Submitted for the degree of
D.Phil, in Politics 
Michaelmas Term, 2004
Abstract
Russia's Internal Borders: Institutions, Territory, Identity
J. Paul Goode
St. Antony's College
Michaelmas Term 2004
This thesis examines the politics of post-Soviet Russia's internal borders. The central 
argument is that the dynamics of center-regional relations in Russia can best be 
understood by examing borders as social and political institutions. Borders configure 
interests, distribute resources, and regulate identity. While the institutional qualities 
of borders often lay hidden, they are laid bare by conflicts over their status and 
content. This thesis takes advantage of the centralization processes initiated by 
Russian President Vladimir Putin to examine the relationship of Russia's internal 
borders to the dynamics of federal reform, democratization, and state building. The 
bulk of the thesis compares four Russian regions - the Republic of Kareliia, the 
Republic of Buriatiia, Perm oblast', and Tiumen oblast' - in their responses to state 
centralization along several dimensions: the creation of the Federal Districts and 
Putin's reform of the institution of Presidential Representatives; the revision of 
regional charters and republican constitutions; the conduct of gubernatorial elections; 
and the push for regional enlargement. The analysis reveals that Putin's centralization 
found willing accomplices insofar as it opened up opportunities for regional elites to 
exploit the discourse and repertoires of centralization within their own regions. The 
politics of centralization demonstrate how the multiple linkages of internal borders to 
territory, regional identity, and federal status, established the parameters for political 
contestation on the regional level and regulated the directionality of center-regional 
relations.
The thesis makes use of qualitative data gathered through extensive fieldwork 
in Russia, primarily consisting of interviews and regional press archives. It makes an 
original contribution to the general political science literature in developing and 
applying the theoretical notion of borders as social and political institutions. It further 
makes a substantive contribution in suggesting why Russia's governors willingly gave 
up the autonomy gained in the 1990s when confronted with state centralization in 
Putin's first term.
Table of Contents
Note on Transliteration iii *
List of Figures and Tables yy
Acknowledgements w
Chapter One
Russia's Internal Borders in Theoretical Perspective 1
Chapter Two
A Brief History of Russia's Internal Borders 67
Chapter Three
Federal Districts and Regional Responses 109
Chapter Four
Constitutions, Charters, and Centralization 164
Chapter Five
Gubernatorial Elections in Putin's Russia 209
Chapter Six
The Push for Regional Enlargement 255
Chapter Seven
Institutions, Territory, Identity 310
Bibliography 322
Note on Transliteration
The transliterations in this thesis follow the Library of Congress method, which 
renders soft vowels such as "a" or "K>" with a preceding "i" ("ia" or "iu"), "H" as "y", 
and "H" as "i". Soft signs (') and hard signs (") are included for proper names (El'tsin 
or Rossel'), but are left out for terms that appear frequently in the text ("oblast" 
instead of "oblast"'). All footnotes and references are fully transliterated with soft and 
hard signs. Russian terms are italicized when introduced, though some terms are used 
frequently in this study and in Russian political discourse that they no longer warrant 
italics (such aspolpred for "Presidential Representive").
References to the Perm and Tiumen regions are often transliterated in Western 
studies, incorrectly, as Perm' and Tiumen'. While the names of the capital cities of 
these regions do end in soft signs, the oblast names do not. In the provinces, this sort 
of error is jokingly referred to as a "Moscow mistake" (moskovskaia oshibkd), 
typically committed by journalists in the central press. In this thesis, the use of the 
soft sign after Perm or Tiumen is only used with specific reference to the cities, not 
the regions.
List of Figures and Tables
Figures
5.1 Average Voter Turnout, 1991 -2004 248
5.2 Average Number of Gubernatorial Candidates, 1991 -2004 248
5.3 Incumbent Replacement in Gubernatorial Elections, 1991 - 250 
Tables
1.1 Donor Regions of the Russian Federation, 1993-2001 21
1.2 Declarations of Sovereignty, 1988-1991 28
1.3 Basic Demographic and Economic Indicators 67
2.1 Cycles of Regional Enlargement and Reduction 105
2.2 State Centralization and Regional Enlargement or Reduction 106
3.1 Backgrounds of Deputy Presidential Representatives, 2000- 120
3.2 Backgrounds of Main Federal Inspectors, 2000-2003 125 
4.1 Legislative and Nonlegislative Powers of Regional Chief 204 
Executives
5.1 Rankings of Regional Democratization 241
5.2 Gubernatorial Elections with Highest Voter Turnout, 1991- 247
5.3 Kremlin Support in Gubernatorial Elections, 2001-2004 251
5.4 Kremlin Support and Outsider Candidates, 2001 -2004 252
5.5 Governors'Strategies in Federal and Regional Politics 254
Acknowledgements
The research for this thesis could not have been completed without the generous 
support received from many sources. I am grateful to St. Antony's College for 
assistance through the Sassoon Scholarship in my first year and the Stahl Fund for 
topping up my research trip expenses. The Russian and Eurasian Studies Centre's 
Elliott Fund provided further help with occasional fieldwork funding, as well as 
extremely generous bursaries in 2002-2003 that greatly facilitated with the difficult 
writing up period. The bulk of my fieldwork in 2001-2002 was funded through the 
International Research and Exchange (IREX) International Advanced Research 
Opportunities Fellowship, and I am particularly indebted to IREX's staff in Moscow 
for tireless logistical assistance. I was fortunate enough to obtain additional research 
funds through the Scatcherd European Scholarship through the University of Oxford's 
International Office. The Department of Politics and International Relations was kind 
enough to extend a pair of Cyril Foster Grants for fieldwork expenses, as well as a 
departmental bursary in 2002. I would be remiss not to mention the gallantry of my 
parents in providing emergency help in desperate times for the replacement of a stolen 
notebook computer in 2002 and a further broken notebook in 2004. For all the years 
of love and support, this work is dedicated to them.
My fieldwork research in Russia would not have been possible without the 
help of innumerable scholars and local experts who gave willingly of their time. I 
would like to thank Kathryn Stoner-Weiss, Robert Orttung, Julie Corwin, and 
Elizabeth Teague, for helping with the important first step of identifying contacts in 
the field. William Smirnov helped me get oriented in Moscow, while Alia Chirikova 
and Natalia Lapina helped me prepare for the provinces. Thanks also to Tina 
Podplatnik for finding a cozy place to stay in Moscow which eventually became a 
convenient base of operations. I am indebted to Dr. Oleg Podvintsev and Nadezhda 
Borisova in Perm' for invaluable help and cheerful company during my first difficult 
experience with life outside of Moscow. In Petrozavodsk, Dmitrii Kislov and Dr. 
Oleg Reut helped me make the most of my short time in Kareliia. My research in 
Tiumen' benefited from the logistical support of Dr. Sergei Kondrat'ev and the tireless 
assistance of Anton Varaksin. In Ulan-Ude, Dr. Erdem Dagbaev gave much of his 
time in arranging interviews despite preparations for his own doctoral defense, and 
Boris Krianov provided illuminating insight into Buriatiia's electoral politics. 
Throughout my fieldwork, Kenneth Wilson and Nicole Evans volunteered precious 
closet space to save my stacks of books and documents posted from Russia's regions. 
Jackie Willcox provided much needed help and a sense of humor during various 
crises.
Most importantly, I would like to thank my supervisor, Professor Archie 
Brown, for his guidance and insight throughout this thesis. I will always count myself 
privileged to have benefited from his experience and deep commitment to his 
students.
Chapter One: Russia's Internal Borders 
in Theoretical Perspective
Introduction
Why did Russia not disintegrate in the 1990s? For nearly a decade, political analysts, 
Russian specialists, pundits, politicians, and even President Boris El'tsin warned that 
the country stood on the brink of collapse. It was thought that the forces that tore the 
Soviet Union asunder would continue their work within Russia's borders. Of the 
most striking political developments over the turbulent El'tsin era, one must surely 
include the simultaneous processes of political and economic decentralization, the 
rapid expansion of executive power at all levels of government, and the growth of 
regional autonomy - the latter reflected in part by the sheer variety of political 
regimes among Russian regions. As regional administrations began to flex their 
muscles, the requirements of democratization and the preservation of the Russian 
Federation presented contradictory mandates. The separatist politics pursued by the 
leading Russian republics, and the outright attempt at secession by Chechnia, seemed 
to confirm that post-Soviet Russia's birth certificate was issued with an expiration 
date.
But Russia did not cease to exist. After the deft transfer of power to Vladimir 
Putin, Russia's new president attacked the sources of regional autonomy and began a 
re-centralization of the state. The governors were removed from the upper house of 
parliament, the Federation Council (Sovet Federatsii). Regional legislation was to be 
brought in line with federal law in short order. The tax code was restructured in the 
center's favor and regions were encouraged to abandon bilateral agreements signed 
with Moscow during the El'tsin period. To monitor and coordinate politics in
Russia's 89 regions, seven Federal Districts (Federal'nye Okrugd) were created as an 
extra-constitutional reform of the Presidential Administration. And with few 
exceptions, Russia's governors capitulated almost overnight. Why? Did the 
disorganization of El'tsin's regional policy mask the brittleness of regional autonomy? 
Is Russia really an aspiring unitary state, temporarily masquerading as a federation? 
Possibly, but such arguments conceal the diversity of political regimes sheltered 
within the borders of Russia's regions, ranging from (relatively) democratic to 
sultanistic. Could such diversity persist if regional autonomy is on the decline? The 
one area which appeared to remain impervious to both outright change and credible 
threats from Moscow throughout the 1990s was the question of altering Russia's 
internal borders. Under Putin, the country's internal borders are on the move.
The change is not coincidental. Consider the difference that ten years can 
make: in 1991, internal borders could be promoted in federal status (often 
unilaterally), activated as salient components of ethno-national identity, identified 
with arbitrary and imperial Soviet central planning, and utilized to claim jurisdiction 
over natural resources and tax collection within a region's territorial boundaries. But 
by 2001, the asymmetrical federal structure that enshrined differences in regional 
status was under assault, the front runners of ethno-national separatism became the 
outliers 1 , anti-imperial claims all but vanished from center-regional relations, and 
Moscow was reclaiming its jurisdiction over taxation and natural resources. From 
this brief comparison it seems likely that the politics of Russia's internal borders is 
inextricably bound with the construction of the Russian state, the emergence of 
regional political regimes, and the content of regional (and possibly national)
1 "Obviously, time has revealed the 'ethnic' revival account of a potential disintegration of Russia as 
flawed, since non-compliance with federal state-building and secession potential has been a serious 
challenge in just two republics: Tartarstan and Chechnya." James Hughes, "Managing Secession 
Potential in the Russian Federation," in Ethnicity and Territory in the Former Soviet Union, ed. James 
Hughes and Gwendolyn Sasse (London: Cass, 2002), 40.
identity. 2
It is surprising, then, that there are no existing studies of Russia's internal 
borders. The reason for this has less to do with Russian studies than with the relative 
lack of attention to borders in political science. This study argues that borders are 
social and political institutions in their own right that are vital yet contingent 
components of the state. 3 Borders bear directly on the cultivation (or dissipation) of 
state capacity as reservoirs for identity and normative legitimacy. Border changes are 
rare, but often spectacular when they occur. Most of the time, they organize 
constituencies, resources, and interests below the level of political awareness as 
accepted rules of the game. When the state's territorial shape is in flux, however, 
borders are claimed and contested by actors on the national, provincial, and local 
levels of the regime. The outcomes of such "transforming episodes" define the shape 
of politics, the bases of the state's legitimacy, its potential capacity, and ultimately the 
nature of the regime. 4
The empirical touchstone for this study is Vladimir Putin's reform of center- 
regional relations during his first term in office from 2000 to 2004. Beginning with 
the creation of the seven Federal Districts, and culminating in the accomplishment of 
the first regional merger in December 2003, Putin's first term constitutes just such a 
"transforming episode" in which the decentralization of the El'tsin era was reversed,
2 This set of relationships is not unique to Russia. Duchacek's study of territorial communities 
suggests multiple historical analogies. Ivo D. Duchacek, Comparative Federalism: The Territorial 
Dimension of Politics (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1970), Ch.s 1-3.
3 "...the territorial shape of a state, qua institution, is one of its most salient contingent dimensions. 
Understanding patterns of change and stability in the territorial composition of a state thus entails 
analysis of processes of institutionalization and deinstitutionalization." Original emphasis. lan S. 
Lustick, "Thresholds of Opportunity and Barriers to Change in the Right-Sizing of States," in Right- 
Sizing the State: The Politics of Moving Borders, ed. Brendan O'Leary, lan S. Lustick, and Thomas 
Callaghy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 80.
4 "State borders are politically important because they serve as a constraint which advantage certain 
groups and rival elites within the state at the expense of others. Substantial changes in the territorial 
shape of a state represent institution transforming episodes. Struggles over the size and shape of the 
state must accordingly be understood as struggles over the 'rules of the game."' Ibid., 79.
the regime abandoned the rhetorical legitimacy of claims to demoralization in 
exchange for an etatist veneer, and the diminishing of Russia's central state capacity 
ground to a halt. As such, it provides an opportunity to re-evaluate the scholarly 
literature on Russia's center-regional relations in the 1990s. In particular, this study is 
concerned to resolve the puzzle of how Putin has managed to revive central state 
capacity, seemingly out of thin air.
While such an approach is something of a departure from the existing 
literature, examining internal borders as institutions provides greater leverage for 
understanding the puzzling trends in Russia's center-regional relations. In this regard 
it differs from existing studies of Russian regional politics, which take different pieces 
of the puzzle in isolation. It also reveals deeper issues that are often neglected in 
political science regarding the relationship of internal borders and territorial 
integration, to state-building and democratization. This is not to say that these issues 
have been altogether neglected. The bulk of Western literature on Russian regional 
politics to date has focused on idiographic case studies, though by the mid-1990s one 
could identify three broad areas of theoretical concentration: federalism, ethno- 
nationalism, and the dynamics of regime transitions. 5 Taken together, these studies 
show a collective movement in focus from suggesting why the Russian Federation 
was at risk of disintegration in the early-1990s, to puzzling over how it remained 
intact at the decade's end. The following sections take these approaches in turn with 
an eye towards the insights and limitations of each approach in application to Russian 
regional politics. The extent to which each of these approaches is found to be wanting 
sets the stage for the discussion of what it means to examine borders as political
5 Vladimir Gel'man, "Politics Beyond the Garden Ring: Rethinking the Post-Soviet Experience" (paper 
presented at the Ten Years since the Soviet Union, School of Slavonic and East European Studies, 
University College, London, 9-10 November 2001). Gel'man also includes studies of local government 
and regional elites in his list.
institutions and the "value added" of such an approach. The chapter concludes with a 
discussion of methodological issues involved in researching borders and the particular 
methods utilized for this study.
Russian Federalism
Federalism is a territorial arrangement for distributing power, meaning that the first 
crucial issue in establishing or designing federal institutions is to find the proper 
territorial base. 6 Post-Soviet Russia's federal system inherited its territorial base from 
the Soviet Russian Republic (RSFSR), and as of 2000 consisted of twenty-one 
republics, forty-nine oblasts (provinces), eleven autonomous okrugs (districts), six 
krais (territories), two cities "of federal significance" (Moscow and St. Petersburg) 
and one autonomous oblast. Of these, the republics and autonomous okrugs are 
ethnically defined, even if the "titular" group (the group for which the region is
named) constitutes a majority in only nine of these regions.
By far the largest amount of scholarly attention has focused on the ways 
Russia's federal institutions structure center-regional interactions, particularly in the 
form of bargaining games between central and regional elites. This bargaining did not 
establish the federal system, however, but took place after the emergent institutions 
were already in position. The implications for federal dynamics and the potential for 
secession are made clear by the general literature on federalism and federal systems. 
At a minimum, the short-term success of federal systems requires accommodation
6 Duchacek, Comparative Federalism. This is not to say that federalism is exclusively territorial, as 
non-territorial federal (or partial federal) arrangements are both theoretically possible and actively 
discussed. Thus it is worth bearing in mind Kahn's warning that, "to suggest that the only expression 
of federalism is territorial federation is of little help in interpreting the myriad combinations possible in 
the application of federalism." Jeffrey Kahn, Federalism, Demoralization, and the Rule of Law in 
Russia (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2002), 63.
7 According to 1989 census data, the titular group comprised a majority in seven republics (Checheno- 
Ingushetiia, Chuvashiia, Kabardino-Balkariia, North Ossetiia, Kalmykiia, Tatarstan, Tyva) and two 
autonomous okrugs (Agin-Buriatskii and Komi-Permiatskii). Note that the Republic of Checheno- 
Ingushetiia split into two republics, Chechnia and Ingushetia.
among elites, or Riker's notion of striking a "federal bargain." 8 By contrast, Russia's 
cumbersome system was the product of political expedience since redrawing the 
Russian map in 1992 proved to be unwieldy and divisive. As Lapidus describes,
conflicts arose over whether the constitutive elements of the federation would 
be the existing or new administrative units; whether these constitutive units 
would be equal hi local powers and representation at the center or whether 
distinctions should be made on the basis of size of population or ethnicity; and 
whether existing administrative units should be redrawn without regard to 
ethnic distinctiveness. 9
Rather than pry open this Pandora's Box, El'tsin attempted to side-step restructuring 
the federation. As a result, Russia's federal system remains saddled with Soviet 
institutional legacies, the most intractable of which remains the very territorial grid 
that defines the boundaries of regional autonomy while making "the production of 
loyalty to a common state authority problematic." 10
While there is a scholarly consensus that this system is improbably large, 
complex in Kafkaesque proportions, burdened with history and threatened by the 
onset of ethnonational mobilization along regional borders, there is disagreement over 
the binding or integrative features of Russia's asymmetrical federalism. Asymmetry 
may exist in terms of constitutional status (as with special rights or privileges 
accorded to individual regions or a subset of regions) and relative levels of socio- 
economic development. Some degree of socioeconomic asymmetry is inevitable 
(indeed, it may be necessary for the functioning of internal markets) and regardless 
could not be redressed without extraordinarily intrusive redistributive policies by the
8 William Riker, Federalism: Origins, Operation, Significance (Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1964), 
Ronald L. Watts, "Federalism, Federal Political Systems, and Federations," Annual Review of Political 
Science 1 (1998): 128.
9Gail W. Lapidus and Edward W. Walker, "Nationalism, Regionalism, and Federalism: Center- 
Periphery Relations in Post-Communist Russia," in The New Russia: Troubled Transformation, ed. 
Gail W. Lapidus (Boulder: Westview Press, 1995), 92.
10 Mark R. Beissinger and Crawford Young, "Convergence to Crisis: Pre-Independence State Legacies 
and Post-Independence State Breakdown in African and Eurasia," in Beyond State Crisis? Postcolonial 
African and Post-Soviet Eurasia in Comparative Perspective, ed. Mark R. Beissinger and Crawford 
Young (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2002), 22.
state. Likewise, constitutional asymmetry reflects "the extent to which component 
states share [or do not share] in the conditions and thereby the concerns more or less 
common to the federal system as a whole." 11 Asymmetrical federalism has attracted a 
great deal of scholarly and journalistic attention with particular regard to the special 
status accorded Russia's ethnically defined regions. The republics determine their 
own constitutions and presidents, state symbols, official languages, and anthems - in 
other words, they are allowed the vestments of state sovereignty, while the remaining 
regions possess mere charters and governors.
On the one hand, the extension of constitutional privilege to the ethnic 
republics arguably prevented these regions from mobilizing against the federal center 
and upgrading their declarations of sovereignty to outright secession. 12 Even if 
maintaining the Soviet-era administrative divisions was less than optimal for post- 
Soviet Russia, the center's overriding concern was to maintain the territorial integrity 
of the state. The fact that Russia has not disintegrated suggests that, however 
undesirable, the political expedient managed to fulfill this basic requirement of state 
building. But federalism is unlikely to endure in the long-term without the support of 
civil society and a political culture supportive of "federal constitutional-institutional 
arrangements and relationships." 13 In this sense, asymmetrical federalism has been a 
political liability in center-regional relations. The content and meaning of Russian 
federalism - particularly the notions of sovereignty and delineation of joint and 
exclusive jurisdictions - remains controversial. Among the regions denied special
11 Charles D. Tarlton, "Symmetry and Asymmetry as Elements of Federalism: A Theoretical 
Speculation," Journal of Politics 27, no. 4 (1965): 861. Tarlton continues that this form of asymmetry 
is inevitable as well, since "the federal relationship, in any realistic sense, means something very much 
different to nearly every participant unit in the system."
12 Though the likelihood that the international community would neither support nor recognize a 
secession attempt probably had a significant effect on the way that republican elites calculated their 
interests.
13 Daniel J. Elazar, "International and Comparative Federalism," PS: Political Science & Politics 26, 
no. 2 (1993): 192-3.
status (almost uniformly featuring ethnic Russian, or russkii, demographic majorities), 
the extension of constitutional privilege to the republics is a persistent source of 
discontent. The autonomous okrugs present an additional source of discontent, owing 
to their ambiguous constitutional status as simultaneously full subjects of the 
federation and constituent parts of a neighboring oblast or krai. 14 For the most part, 
however, this ambiguous status has a greater impact on the regions to which the 
autonomous okrugs are attached - the oblasts and krais already dissatisfied with the 
differential privileges accorded the federal republics. With regard to the latter, these 
privileges may be viewed as chiefly symbolic for presidents of perennially weak 
republics, while the diminutive title of governor does little to diminish the power of 
regional leaders of stronger oblasts and krais.
Russia enjoyed neither the short-term advantage of elite accommodation, nor 
the long-term stability of a federal political culture. If neither of these can explain the 
durability (however tenuous, at times) of Russia's federal system, the answer may 
have more to do with the system's ability to manage or defuse conflict and the 
incentives it generates for actors at both the central and regional levels. Yet the 
measures utilized to preserve the federation in the 1990s relied on personalist relations 
between El'tsin and republican presidents and extra-constitutional measures that only 
accentuated federal asymmetry by accommodating regions' particularist demands. 
Beginning in 1994, the central government began to sign bilateral power-sharing 
treaties with the federal republics and (gradually) some oblasts. By 1996 there were 
forty-six bilateral treaties between Moscow and individual regions, often extending 
authority over areas of specific interest to the regional administrations. The treaties 
were signed by the Russian President and the heads of regional administrations with
14 Since the autonomous okrugs are able to float candidates and participate in oblast or krai elections, 
the latter tend to share this discontent. Ironically, this may prove to be a force for the integration of 
regional administrations over the long-term (see Chapter Six).
no oversight or confirmation by either the federal or regional legislative assemblies. 
As Stoner-Weiss observes, "this rather arbitrary policy of assigning extra powers to 
some regions but not to others...has created the potential for further uneven economic 
(and political) development across the Federation." 13 In this sense, the bilateral 
treaties directly exaggerated elements of socioeconomic asymmetry in the Russian 
Federation.
The persistence of Russia's federal system despite the clearly debilitating 
elements of socioeconomic, constitutional, and ethnic asymmetry continue to puzzle 
experts and guide research. The literature on Russian federalism tends to examine the 
consequences of constitutional and socioeconomic asymmetry in explaining the 
trajectory of center-regional relations. The following sections examine these more 
closely.
Socioeconomic Asymmetry
The literature addressing the consequences of Russia's asymmetrical federalism tends 
to emphasize either socioeconomic or constitutional dimensions of asymmetry. The 
former tends to view socioeconomic asymmetry as informing regional preferences for 
maintaining constitutional asymmetry and exploiting extra-constitutional (or, for that 
matter, anti-constitutional) measures. It is ultimately the weakness of the federal 
center and the lack of unifying national institutions that regulate the devolution of 
power to the regional level. Adopting this perspective, Lapidus points out that the 
potential for Russia's republics to secede was exaggerated. She argues that the 
explanation lies not so much in the strength of the regions as in the weakness of the
15 Kathryn Stoner-Weiss, Local Heroes: The Political Economy of Russian Regional Governance 
(Princeton: Princeton UP, 1997), 88.
center - the real issue was not separatism, but regional assertiveness. 16
The overall picture is therefore less concerned with the divisive effects of 
constitutional asymmetry. Quite the contrary, "the demands of republic and regional 
elites tended to converge around similar issues: greater political and economic control 
over decisions affecting their regions or republics, and more favorable treatment with 
respect to taxation and resource allocation." 17 Center-regional elite confrontations 
concerned questions of political jurisdiction and resource allocation, though it was 
ultimately the growing weakness of the center and declining regional expectations 
that multiply the conflicts between center and periphery over jurisdictional and 
distributive issues as the regions sought to assert greater control over power and 
resources. 18
Approaching the matter from a game theoretic perspective, Solnick describes 
the dilemma of Russia's asymmetrical federalism in terms of devising effective 
mechanisms by which the federation becomes "jointly constraining" upon center and 
regions. The key to the coordination of regional action is to establish a commonly 
held understanding of when the center has "transgressed" against the regions, and a 
credible guarantee that a challenge to an individual region will be perceived as a 
challenge to all regions at once. 19 The problem is that regional preferences may 
derive as much from asymmetrical socioeconomic status as from constitutional status, 
such that the two are mutually reinforcing. If one region were strong enough to
16 Gail W. Lapidus, "Asymmetrical Federalism and State Breakdown in Russia," Post-Soviet Affairs 15, 
no. 1 (1999): 75-7. Some might even say the issue was regional survival. Indeed, case studies of 
individual cities and regions like Ruble's study of laroslavl' show local authorities struggling to make 
policy in a vacuum left by the center's paralysis. See: Blair A. Ruble, Money Sings: The Changing 
Politics of Urban Space in Post-Soviet Yaroslavl (Washington DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press; 
Cambridge UP, 1995).
17 Ibid.: 78
18 Ibid.: 80.
19 Steven L. Solnick, "Is the Center Too Weak or Too Strong in the Russian Federation?" in Building 
the Russian State: Institutional Crisis and the Quest for Democratic Governance, ed. Valeric Sperling 
(Boulder: Westview Press, 2000), 137-8.
oppose the center, it would have little incentive to make common cause with other 
regions; neither would the center have an interest in cultivating broad-based support 
among the regions when it could form selective coalitions that inhibit inter-regional 
cooperation against Moscow. 20 Solnick argues that the devolution of real power to 
the regional level was less a result of regional strength than the center's ability to 
maintain regional disunity.
Partly this arrangement was beneficial to the center, as regional 
administrations came to exhibit "increasingly diverse leadership strategies and 
capacities, making the Russian federation a virtual laboratory for testing different 
developmental models" in striving for greater self-sufficiency. 21 Stoner-Weiss also 
adopts a center-oriented approach, though she recasts the "central weakness" thesis in 
arguing that de facto autonomy on the regional level arose from the center's default 
on its jurisdictional responsibilities. 22 As illustrated by the bilateral treaty process, 
Russia's regions largely determined the pace of decentralization, given a federal center 
that was more reactive than proactive in its approach to the regions. Rather than 
undermine constitutional asymmetry, Stoner-Weiss estimates that the bilateral treaties 
served to reinforce differences in constitutional status. 23 This process was furthered 
by the tendency of democratization to shift the locus of accountability and the effects 
of marketization from the center to the provinces in encouraging increased devolution.
"If one region can unilaterally oppose transgression by the sovereign, the capacity of other regions to 
enforce cooperation will be eroded. The result will be an asymmetric equilibrium in which the center 
exploits weaker regions and shares the confiscated surplus with the strong region." Ibid., 139.
21 Lapidus, "Asymmetrical Federalism.," 81.
22 "Regions, to the degree that they are able, are left to fill the empty policy space as best they can. 
Others cannot afford to implement central policy and so have carved out for themselves a different sort 
of autonomy - the freedom to do nothing." Kathryn Stoner-Weiss, "Central Weakness and Provincial 
Autonomy: Observations on the Devolution Process in Russia," Post-Soviet Affairs 15, no. 1 (1999): 
23 "They have served to establish Russia's federal relations more on a contractual than on a national- 
constitutional basis, carving out far more freedom of action for the subjects of the Federation than the 
drafters of the 1993 Constitution had intended. ...the treaties and agreements in general contradict the 
declared intention of the Constitution to render all subjects of the Federation equal to one another." 
Ibid.: 92.
Meanwhile, the absence or weakness of potentially unifying national institutions 
frustrated attempts to counter these trends. 24
Where the center succeeded was in exploiting the divisions among regions 
through the use of selective benefits mechanisms, including the bilateral treaties and 
various forms of fiscal favoritism, though there is some controversy over 
appeasement's short-term impact and long-term viability. The dependence of the bulk 
of Russia's regions upon federal transfers and subsidies handed the center a set of 
extra-constitutional budgetary mechanisms ranging from budgetary transfers to the 
timely payment of wage arrears. Treisman suggests that center-regional 
confrontations served as integrative mechanisms in their own right, since the 
conditions of transitional uncertainty made anti-center protests the only credible 
means of signaling preferences. 25 In determining whether to mobilize against the 
center, regional leaders balanced the expected benefits of revolt against the expected 
costs of central sanctions. The absence of strong central sanctioning capacity meant 
that regional leaders had greater mobilization incentives. The center's regional policy 
of selective fiscal appeasement thus amounted to selective accommodation of those 
regions prone to staging "disruptive protest actions" and preventing bandwagons of 
regional protest. 26
Treisman's thesis has been challenged on methodological grounds for 
examining only direct financial transfers, whereas tax revenues-sharing rules often
f\ *7
constituted a much more substantial and opaque form of fiscal appeasement. In any
24 For a theoretical treatment of the problem of the lack of unifying national institutions for Russian 
federalism, see: Peter C. Ordeshook, "Russia's Parry System: Is Russian Federalism Viable?" Post- 
Soviet Affairs 12, no. 3 (1996).
25 It should be noted, however, that Treisman employs a paper-thin notion of integration, which appears 
to be the absence of disintegration. Daniel S. Treisman, After the Deluge: Regional Crises and 
Political Consolidation in Russia (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1999), Ch 1
26 Ibid., 22-24.
27 Russian Regional Report, 30 August 2000.
case, Stoner-Weiss argues that that,
Federal fiscal transfers are a bit of a clumsy instrument of control over 
regional governments anyway. If they did prevent some regions from actually 
separating from Russia in the early 1990s...they were far less successful in 
preventing less sensational, but almost as damaging forms of regional power 
grabs and pervasive regional noncompliance to the constitution and federal 
laws.
In addition, the federal government does not collect or publish data on the central 
government's own expenditures in the regions. 28 When calculated differently, fiscal 
appeasement can also be shown to have rewarded loyal regions and sanctioned
29separatist regions.
Most of these approaches rely on a thin concept of regional identity in 
explaining regional preferences and strategies when engaging the federal center. 
Approaches that analyze center-regional relations in terms of rational bargaining 
schemes tend not to distinguish between regional identities and the regional elite 
preferences. Instead, they portray identity as the product of instrumental 
manipulation by regional elites, deployed in negotiations (or confrontations) to raise 
the bargaining stakes or make common cause with elites in other regions. 
Alternatively, regional preferences and strategies are portrayed as emerging from the 
region's structural characteristics, particularly the concentration of a region's 
resources30 or a region's administrative status within the federal hierarchy. 3 
Instrumental and structural imputation of regional identity is often intertwined with 
the hypothesis that identity issues become salient in relations with Moscow depending
28 Alastair McAuley, "The Determinants of Russian Federal-Regional Relations: Equity or Political 
Influence?" Europe-Asia Studies 49, no. 3 (1997): 440. See also Treisman's rejoinder: Daniel 
Treisman, "Deciphering Russia's Federal Finance: Fiscal Appeasement in 1995 and 1996," Europe- 
Asia Studies 50, no. 5 (1998).
29 "Some regions may pay a greater share of their total revenues to the center, but then can be 
compensated via the transfer flows in the opposite direction. To complicate things further, taxes are 
not necessarily paid in regions where output is produced..." Vladimir Popov, "Fiscal Federalism in 
Russia: Rules Versus Electoral Politics," (2002).
on a region's strength and autonomy versus the center: weaker regions are more 
vulnerable to, or dependent upon, the federal center, while stronger regions are less 
vulnerable to federal intervention and are able to force increasingly particularistic 
demands on the center.
Similarly, the coordination of regional strategies - for instance, with the
_ ^ 
attempted Urals Republic in 1993 , the interregional association "Siberian Accord" 
(Sibirskoe Soglashenie)^ , or the "Fatherland-All Russia" (Otechestvo-Vsia Rossiid) 
regional movement led by Moscow's Mayor lurii Luzhkov and former Prime Minister 
Evgenii Primakov in the 1999 Duma elections - is often portrayed as reflecting shared 
elite interests. The articulation of regional identity thus depends on opportunity 
structures, but it does not independently shape the interests of regional elites, nor does 
it constrain the formation of regional elite strategies. Rather, it is the relative strength 
and autonomy of the federal center that regulates the salience of regional identity.
Constitutional Asymmetry
Approaches that emphasize constitutional asymmetry are sensitive to the salience of 
socioeconomic asymmetry, though they address the cultivated ambiguity in center- 
regional relations in less instrumental terms. Whereas studies focusing on 
socioeconomic asymmetry emphasize material power issues, those concerning 
constitutional asymmetry usually proceed from liberal assumptions about the 
institutional requisites of federalism and the boundaries of the polity. From this 
perspective, the election of regional administrations served to establish claims to
30 Stoner-Weiss, Local Heroes.
31 Daniel S. Treisman, "Russia's "Ethnic Revival": The Separatist Activism of Regional Leaders in a 
Postcommunist Order," World Politics 49, no. 1 (1997).
32 See: Gerald M. Easter, "Redefining Centre-Regional Relations in the Russian Federation: Sverdlovsk 
Oblast'," Europe-Asia Studies 49, no. 4 (1997).
33 See: James Hughes, "Regionalism in Russia: The Rise and Fall of Siberian Agreement," Europe-Asia 
Studies 46, no. 7(1994).
sovereignty (or at the minimum, significantly increased autonomy) that shaped 
regional elite understandings of the federal process as contractual "from the bottom 
up" (snizu werkh). 34 While the maintenance of the RSFSR's national-territorial 
structure was thus viewed as a compromise on the regional level, the center perceived 
it as a transitional arrangement that served as a short-term political expedient to 
maintain the country's territorial integrity. 35
Conflictual relations thus were built into the institutional structure of Russian 
federalism and prevented agreement over basic constitutive principles. The lack of 
consensus between the center and the provinces over federal principles not only 
prevents the resolution of constitutional ambiguities, but structures elite incentives to 
favor the same extra-constitutional measures that undermine the potential for 
achieving any such consensus. 36 Central weakness plays a role here, as well, though 
the emphasis is less on state capacity than on the absence of a coherent state ideology 
or a "federal culture." In this, the non-democratic fashion in which Russia's federal 
system was adopted, the questionable circumstances under which it was ratified by
national referendum , and the extra-constitutional means by which the center sought
34 Kahn, Federalism, Democratization, and the Rule of Law in Russia, Darrell Slider, "Elections to 
Russia's Regional Assemblies," Post-Soviet Affairs 12, no. 3 (1996), Steven L. Solnick, "Gubernatorial 
Elections in Russia, 1996-1997," Post-Soviet Affairs 14, no. 1 (1998).
35 Nicholas J. Lynn and Alexei V. Novikov, "Refederalizing Russia: Debates on the Idea of Federalism 
in Russia," Publius 27, no. 2 (1997).
36 That liberal and ultra-conservative central elites did not agree on the proper model of center-regional 
relations was, in this sense, less significant than the fact that neither were satisfied with the present 
model. Indeed, it was not unusual for regional administrations to publicly court ultra-conservative 
support while attempting to implement liberal economic policies. For instance, see Mikhail A. 
Alexseev and Vladimir Vagin, "Fortress Russia or Gateway to Europe? The Pskov Connection," in 
Center-Periphery Conflict in Post-Soviet Russia: A Federation Imperiled, ed. Mikhail A. Alexseev 
(New York: St. Martin's Press, 1999).
37 According to official statistics, the 1993 Constitution was supported by 58.43% of voters in the 
December 1993 referendum, though this only represented 30.7% of the total electorate. It has been 
repeatedly alleged that voter turnout was falsified and never reached the 50% threshold required for the 
referendum to be valid, though this has never been substantiated and ballot papers and area tallies were 
quickly destroyed. Richard Sakwa, Russian Politics and Society, 3rd ed. (London: Routledge, 2002), 
60. Moreover, the Constitution was outright rejected in 24 federal subjects, while it failed to be ratified 
in a further 17 federal subjects owing to low voter turnout. Combined with Chechnia's boycott of the 
referendum, this means that the Constitution was not ratified in 42 of 89 regions. Cameron Ross,
to hold the federation together combined to undermine the democratic content of 
Russian federalism. 38 Added to this are the regional constitutions and charters that 
often were drafted in outright violation of the federal constitution, and the presence of 
elected presidents and governors whose legitimacy was arguably greater than that of 
the federal presidency (at least until the 1996 presidential elections39).
Approaches focusing on constitutional asymmetry unerringly prescribe the 
adoption or consolidation of liberal governance institutions as necessary for ongoing 
federal integration. 40 In doing so, they rightly call attention to the debates behind the 
adoption of Russia's federal institutions, the preferences of key political actors, and 
the extent to which these processes were characterized by contrasting (if not openly 
conflictual) understandings of the nature of the process. While approaches that focus 
on constitutional asymmetries present a more nuanced account, they ultimately rely 
on the prevalence of socioeconomic asymmetry to explain the lack of regional 
integration. This tendency appears most often in the conflation of the center's strategy 
of bilateralism with the weakness of the Russian state. In doing so, they undervalue 
the role of Soviet institutional legacies and path dependence in constraining the range 
of institutional solutions available at the time. 41 One could further argue that 
constitutional-legal approaches focus almost exclusively on the role of Russia's 
federal republics, tending to view the remaining two-thirds of Russia's federal subjects
"Federalism and Democratization in Russia," Communist and Post-Communist Studies 33, no. 4 
(2000): 407.
38 "What is an exception to democracy, however, is the fact that Russia has forty-six aconstitutional, 
bilateral treaties...without being signed, or even shown, to the Russian Parliament. This occurrence is 
procedurally exceptional in a democratic federation." Alfred Stepan, "Russian Federalism in 
Comparative Perspective," Post-Soviet Affairs 16, no. 2 (2000): 144.
39 Though one could reasonably argue that the 1991 election for the Russian presidency (which brought 
El'tsin to power) was more fair than the 1996 election.
40 "...a stable, democratic and federal Russia must satisfy the same general theoretical principles of 
decentralized political institutional design that all other such states satisfy." Ordeshook, "Russia's Party 
System: Is Russian Federalism Viable?" 196-7.
41 "...institutions of bilateralism resulted from earlier institutional development and were not any longer 
subject to choice by the time of Russia's independence." Mikhail Filippov and Olga Shvetsova, 
"Asymmetric Bilateral Bargaining in the New Russian Federation: A Path-Dependence Explanation," 
Communist and Post-Communist Studies 32, no. 1 (1999): 63.
as riding the republics' coat tails. The presumed strength of republican initiatives lies 
in their ethnic mandate - Russia in this sense is a dual-federal system: partly 
ethnofederal (with regard to the republics) and partly territorial (with regard to the 
remaining federal subjects). This suggests that regional identity is a crucial factor 
almost exclusively for the republics. For this reason, much literature has focused on 
federal asymmetry in terms of the privileges and benefits accorded the republics on 
the basis of ethnicity.
Ethnofederal Asymmetry
It has become almost commonplace to observe that the ethnofederal structure of the 
USSR directly contributed to its fragmentation along the lines of the fifteen Union 
Republics.42 In assessing the nature of post-Soviet Russian federalism, the fact that 
this structure was left largely intact stimulated a number of studies on the effects of 
this institutional structure on the propensity for ethnic or nationalist separatism. With 
regard to the Soviet collapse, the Union republics' institutional development 
accounted for the ability of ethnic elites to mobilize effectively against the center. 
Though this explanation is convincing, it leaves aside the question of how to specify 
the thresholds at which institutional development facilitates the escalation of ethnic 
claims from obtaining greater autonomy to outright secession.43 Moreover, an
42 The literature on this subject is massive. For a few representative works, see: lan Bremmer, "Post- 
Soviet Nationalities Theory: Past, Present, and Future," in New States, New Politics: Building the Post- 
Soviet Nations, ed. lan Bremmer and Ray Taras (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 
Rogers Brubaker, Nationalism Reframed: Nationhood and the National Question in the New Europe 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), Carol Skalnik Leff, "Democratization and 
Disintegration in Multinational States: The Breakup of the Communist Federations," World Politics 51, 
no. 2 (1999), Philip G. Roeder, "Soviet Federalism and Ethnic Mobilization," World Politics 43, no. 2 
(1991), Yuri Slezkine, "The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State Promoted 
Ethnic Particularism," Slavic Review 53, no. 2 (1994).
43 The salience of ethnic or national identity is thus presented as a consequence of institutional and 
economic development. Such approaches proceed from the observation of regional ethno-national 
mobilization and attempt to explain it. This is methodologically suspect in that it amounts to selecting 
cases based upon the dependent variable, meaning that the relevant observations may obscure the other 
sources of regional identity.
underlying assumption of the argument is that (non-Russian) ethnic majorities 
translated into preferences for ethnic separatism, whereas regions with ethnically 
Russian majorities were presumed to be less inclined towards separatism. Thus, 
Treisman's examination of ethnic separatism in the early 1990s finds that "a region's 
administrative status lines up almost precisely with its level of activism," with 
Russia's republics proving to be the most separatist of all. 44
At the same time, there is reason to doubt whether investing federal 
institutions with ethnic content provides a sufficient basis for separatist (or, for that 
matter, integrationist) mobilization. Ethnicity and nationality are notoriously pliable 
concepts in both theory and practice. 45 Gorenburg's examination of Tatar and 
Bashkir communities on the border between Tartarstan and Bashkortostan helpfully 
refines approaches to ethnofederal mobilization, revealing that a panoply of state and 
regional incentives compel people to change their public ethnicity.46 If one adjusts 
the above hypothesis such that Russia's republics and autonomous okrugs were more 
prone to ethnic separatism by virtue of the institutional endowments flowing from 
their titular national designations, there remains a latent hypothesis that the oblasts 
and krais were more integrationist by virtue of their common ethnic (russkii) 
composition. Lapidus holds that the Russian Federation was less vulnerable to 
collapse than the USSR owing to the relatively homogeneous ethnic population of 
post-Soviet Russia and the lack of non-Russian ethnic majorities in over half of the
44 Treisman, "Russia's "Ethnic Revival": The Separatist Activism of Regional Leaders in a 
Postcommunist Order," 229. It is worth noting that Treisman examines republics and autonomous 
okrugs - 32 out of 89 regions - and only conjectures about the remaining oblasts and krais.
45 Lowell W. Barrington, ""Nation" and "Nationalism": The Misuse of Key Concepts in Political 
Science," PS: Political Science & Politics 30, no. 4 (1997): 712-7. Commenting on the lack of 
coherence in the field, King comments: "If it would be difficult to know a nation if we saw one, it 
would be even more difficult to know a theory of nationalism." Charles King, "Nations and 
Nationalism in British Political Studies," in The British Study of Politics in the Twentieth Century, ed. 
Jack Hayward, Brian Barry, and Archie Brown (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1999), 342.
46 Dmitry Gorenburg, "Identity Change in Bashkortostan: Tatars in Bashkirs and Back," Ethnic and 
Racial Studies 22, no. 3 (1999): 554-80.
republics. 47 Hanson makes the argument explicit in arguing that the larger number of 
ethnically-Russian regions (in post-Soviet Russia, as compared with the USSR) and 
the weaker local autonomy granted to the federal units of the RSFSR (as compared 
with the Soviet Union's republics) meant that "secession catalysts and potential 
followers are largely concentrated within the former autonomous ethnic regions, while 
the majority of Russian oblasts are integrationist in orientation"4*
Yet this approach, too, begs the question of what is meant by "integrationist"? 
Only if one adopts a minimal concept of integration as the opposite of disintegration 
could such statements bear up under empirical scrutiny. Moreover, such an approach 
has little to say regarding the emergence of non-ethnic regional identities. 49 One does 
not have to look far to find multiple examples of oblasts and krais in conflict with 
Moscow. Indeed, Treisman goes on to note that, "the demands and actions of 
Russia's ethnic regions seem in many ways similar to the bargaining ploys and 
pressure tactics employed by some of the country's non-etlnnic regions to extract 
benefits from the center."50 Upon closer scrutiny, then, the distinctiveness of 
republic-based nationalism lies not so much in the content of ethnic-based claims as 
in the ability of the republics to utilize ethnic claims to organize collectively in the 
defense of their common interests. 51 There has been a growing consensus that the key 
determinants of separatism and center-regional conflict have less to do with regional
47 Lapidus, "Asymmetrical Federalism.," 75.
48 Stephen E. Hanson, "Ideology, Interests, and Identity: Comparing the Soviet and Russian Secession 
Crises," in Center-Periphery Conflict in Post-Soviet Russia: A Federation Imperiled, ed. Mikhail A. 
Alexseev (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1999), 29. Emphasis added.
49 Cf.: Hughes, "Regionalism in Russia: The Rise and Fall of Siberian Agreement.", Jean-Charles 
Lallemand, "Politics for the Few: Elites in Bryansk and Smolensk," Post-Soviet Affairs 15, no. 4 
(1999), Marie Mendras, "How Regional Elites Preserve Their Power," Post-Soviet Affairs 15, no. 4 
(1999).
50 Treisman, "Russia's "Ethnic Revival"" p.247.
51 "Ethnic claims, therefore, have serves as a coordinating mechanism across different ethnic republics, 
distinguishing them from the Russian regions. Any proposal to eliminate the distinction between 
oblasts/krais and republics was recognized immediately by each of the republics as a direct threat to its 
own interests." Steven L. Solnick, "Federal Bargaining in Russia," East European Constitutional 
Review 4, no. 4 (1995): 51.
ethnocracies/7r se, and are more significantly related to ".. .the striking weakness of 
the Russian state, and the capricious and ad hoc quality of decision-making, that are 
largely responsible for the growing assertiveness of regional elites and that have 
encouraged the regions to act independently, and often in outright defiance, of central
authority." As with the literature covering the effects of socioeconomic and 
constitutional asymmetry, then, the focus of research on ethno-nationalism has drifted 
away from the regions toward the weakness of the center. In other words, regional 
identity and assertiveness are stylistically and analytically presented as mere functions 
of the state's weakness.
Insofar as regional identity is presumed to matter in confrontations with the 
center, strong regional identity presumably translates into rocky federal relations 
while weak regional identity is equated with federal domination. To a large extent, 
this perception emerges from the focus on the determinants of regional separatism, for 
which the notion of regional integration is as thin as the concept of regional identity: 
integration is merely the absence of disintegration. Such approaches thus miss the 
integrative or non-confrontational manifestations of regional identity. Yet regional 
identities may be strong even if a region is in a weak position vis-a-vis the center. 
Strong identities may in fact limit the repertoires of political action available to 
regional elites in their interactions with Moscow. If one correlates strength of 
regional identity with a region's status as a net "donor" to the federal budget or a 
"debtor" region, it is worth noting that the list of donor regions has varied on a yearly 
basis (See Table 1.1). Given the high rate of turnover in donor status, it would be 
difficult to maintain that regional identity ceases to play a significant role merely due 
to changes in a region's economic position relative to
52 Lapidus, "Asymmetrical Federalism.," 76-7.
other regions or the federal center. Even if one accepts that economic development is 
the primary influence on the formation or regional elite preferences, this does not 
automatically explain the choice of strategies to pursue those interests.
Furthermore, Hughes argues that asymmetrical federalism was helpful in 
managing potential ethnic conflict in Russia, rather than exacerbating it. 53 More to 
the point, he suggests that the alternative of symmetrical federalism "would mean a 
concentrated Russian domination of minorities, a politics of exclusion, and potentially 
more, not less, political instability since it would most likely be accompanied by a 
strong control regime for the management of multi-ethnicity." 54 Additionally, there 
appear to be even greater disparities - politically and economically - within rather 
than between regions. 55 While the literature on Russia's asymmetrical federal system 
does not address these within-region differences, approaches focusing on regime 
transitions are better suited to the task.
Regime Transition & Democratization
A transition is the interval between one political regime and another. In the case of 
transitions from authoritarianism, this period typically begins with the launching of 
liberalization and ends with the installation of the new regime. 56 While a full review 
of the transitions and democratization literature here would go beyond the scope of
53 "The institutional engineering of a refederalization of Russia was critical to its non-collapse and, 
moreover, this refederalization was undoubtedly shaped by other institutional choices made as part of 
Russia's broader attempt at transition to democracy after 1991." Hughes, "Managing Secession 
Potential in the Russian Federation," 39.
54 Ibid., 46.
55 For instance, Berezkin et al discovered significant discontinuities within regions with regard to the 
distribution of voter preferences during the 1996 presidential elections. At issue was not mere 
proximity to urban areas, but specific proximity to the region's political center. Andrei V. Berezkin 
Mikhail Myagkov, and Peter C. Ordeshook, "The Urban-Rural Divide in the Russian Electorate and the 
Effect of Distance from Urban Centers," Post-Soviet Geography and Economics 40, no. 6 (1999)
56 The endpoint of the transition is not necessarily democracy. Transitions may also result in half- 
measures, hybrid regimes (democradura or dictablandd), or authoritarian regression. Guillermo 
O'Donnell and Philippe C. Schmitter, Transitions from Authoritarian Rule: Tentative Conclusions 
About Uncertain Democracies (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1986).
this chapter57 , it is worth noting that there seems to be broad agreement concerning 
the sources of the Soviet state's disintegration. Yet as Brown points out, there are 
problematic analytical consequences when "the systemic transformation...is conflated
with the breakup of the Soviet Union." In particular, controversy exists over the 
manner in which the USSR was dismantled and the implications for post-Soviet 
Russia's "derailed transition." 59 How does one explain the fragmentation of political 
space and proliferation of regional political regimes? Prior studies of failed attempts 
at democratization have dealt with reversions to authoritarianism in predominantly 
unitary states which did not approach the degree of political and territorial 
fragmentation one witnesses in Russia today. 60
Part of the explanation surely lies with Rustow's argument regarding the 
necessity of national unity. 61 Democracy can be created without the demand of the 
masses, but it cannot be consolidated without them. Russia's transition has been an
57 There is an extensive literature on regime transitions and democratization. Representative works 
include: Robert A. Dahl, Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition (London: Yale UP, 1971), Giuseppe 
Di Palma, To Craft Democracies: An Essay on Democratic Traditions (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1990), Samuel P. Huntington, The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late 
Twentieth Century (London: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991), Juan J. Linz and Alfred Stepan, 
Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation: Southern Europe, South America, and Post- 
Communist Europe (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996), O'Donnell and Schmitter, 
Transitions from Authoritarian Rule: Tentative Conclusions About Uncertain Democracies, Adam 
Przeworski, Democracy and the Market: Political and Economic Reforms in Eastern Europe and Latin 
America, Studies in Rationality and Social Change (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1991), Dankwart 
Rustow, "Transitions to Democracy: Toward a Dynamic Model," Comparative Politics 2/3 (1970).
58 Archie Brown, "Transformational Leaders Compared: Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin," in 
Gorbachev, Yeltsin, & Putin: Political Leadership in Russia's Transition, ed. Archie Brown and Lilia 
Shevtsova (Washington DC: Brookings Institution, 2001), 11-12. See also the symposium of articles 
on the dismantling of the Soviet Union and systemic transformation in: Slavic Review 63, no. 2 (2004), 
459-554.
59 Cynthia Roberts and Thomas Sherlock, "Bringing the Russian State Back In: Explanations of the 
Derailed Transition to Market Democracy," Comparative Politics 31, no. 4 (1999). See also the 1994-5 
debate in Slavic Review. Valeric Bunce, "Paper Curtains and Paper Tigers," Slavic Review 54, no. 4 
(1995), Valeric Bunce, "Should Transitologists Be Grounded?" Slavic Review 54, no. 1 (1995), 
Philippe C. Schmitter and Terry Lynn Karl, "The Conceptual Travels of Transitologists and 
Condolidologists: How Far to the East Should They Attempt to Go?" Slavic Review 54, no. 1 (1994), 
Philippe C. Schmitter and Terry Lynn Karl, "From an Iron Curtain to a Paper Curtain: Grounding 
Transitologists or Students of Postcommunism?" Slavic Review 54, no. 4 (1995).
60 Juan J. Linz and Alfred Stepan, eds., The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1978).
61 "...the vast majority of citizens in a democracy-to-be must have no doubt or mental reservations as to 
which political community they belong to." Rustow, "Transitions to Democracy."
elite-driven process from the start and remains so today - more than a decade into the 
post-Soviet era, political power remains concentrated in the hands of executive and 
business elites at both the federal and regional levels. National unity has become a 
function of unity among federal and regional elites. Political and territorial 
fragmentation is more likely when elite consensus is accepted as a surrogate for 
national consensus, particularly in multinational settings.
As Linz and Stepan emphasize, democratization in multinational settings 
requires inclusive standards of citizenship, equal rights and a common "roof (in 
Russian, krysha). 62 While the first two of these criteria exist on paper in Russia, the 
absence of a government krysha clearly prevents them from becoming truly 
meaningful legal categories. Meanwhile, the "proper" sequencing of elections - 
regional elections only after Grafting a federal arrangement - was not followed in 
Russia. Instead, a Federal Treaty was signed in 1992 by just half of Russia's regions, 
only to be truncated in El'tsin's 1993 constitution. 63 Meanwhile, elections proceeded 
apace in the federal republics.
On the whole, El'tsin may have missed a number of crucial opportunities to 
capitalize on the transitional regime's early legitimacy to force through broader 
institutional changes: to stand for election as leader of a democratic national party, to 
craft a binding federal arrangement, to build a consensus for market reforms and put 
the appropriate institutions in place to mitigate the political effects of marketization 
on support for democratization. It is sometimes too easy, however, to identify missed
62 Linz and Stepan, Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation, Ch.s 1-2.
63 Graham Smith, "Federation, Defederation and Refederation: From the Soviet Union to Russian 
Statehood," in Federalism: The Multiethnic Challenge, ed. Graham Smith (New York: Longman, 
1995), 170. Only twelve of the twenty-one republics voted in favor of the 1993 constitution. 
Particularly upsetting for the republics was the omission of the right to secede, which was included in 
the 1992 Federal Treaty.
opportunities in retrospect. 64 As much as successful transition depends on timely 
action and proactive leadership, it may also be confounded by significant structural 
problems. Among these, the problem of bringing the state's territorial borders in line 
with the boundaries of the political community figures prominently in Russia. 65 
Despite the similarities between the transitions in Eastern Europe and the Soviet 
Union with prior transitions in Latin America and Southern Europe, the issue of 
territory combined with economic transformation and regime transition makes for 
what has become known as the "triple transition."66 As pointed out by Offe, the triple 
transition presents a particularly thorny paradox: producing a market economy 
requires some restraining of democratic rights, and only developed market economies 
provide the necessary social structural conditions necessary for stable democracy. At 
the same time, the introduction of the market is, itself, a political project which only 
succeeds if it has strong, explicit democratic legitimation. Given this problem of 
"mutual obstruction," the difficulty of cultivating the patience to accomplish 
simultaneous market and political transitions grows - in the absence of the 
appropriate mediating institutions, perceptions of exploitation are likely to arise from 
ensuing inequalities, potentially giving rise to demands to roll back the clock. 67
Still, it must be said that Offe does not confront the territorial issue head on, 
for the most part holding to analysis of how simultaneous market and political 
transformations interact. After some twenty years of scholarship on regime
64 And even in light of these missed opportunities, they still do not provide aprimafacie explanation 
for the proliferation and diversity of regional political regimes in Russia.
65 "When there are profound differences about the territorial boundaries of the political community's 
state and profound differences as to who has the right of citizenship in that state, there is what we call a 
'stateness' problem." Linz and Stepan, Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation, 16.
66 Claus Offe, "Capitalism by Democratic Design? Democratic Theory Facing the Triple Transitions in
East Central Europe," in Varieties of Transition, ed. Claus Offe (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997),
67 Ibid., 41-4. Hellman has provided compelling reason to doubt this scenario, however, illustrating
how the early "winners" in marketization attempt to stave-off further reform in order to consolidate
their gains, thus forming a "partial reform equilibrium." Joel S. Hellman, "Winners Take All: The
Politics of Partial Reform in Postcommunist Transitions," World Politics 50, no. 2 (1998).
transitions and democratization, however, it seems safe to say that the prior regime
type affects the trajectory of any transition as much as its institutional structure - 
particularly, whether the state is structured along unitary, federal or ethnofederal lines. 
With specific regard to the Soviet experience, the state's formally federal structure 
provided the organizational basis for ethnic cadres to expand and protect resources 
under their control, to blunt the redistributive consequences of all-Union policies, and 
to ensconce claims for autonomy in their region's federal status. 69 As Union 
republican national organizations sought a re-ordering of power relations with the 
center,
...democratization generally lent itself to the further demarcation of boundaries 
between political subsystems and diminished both the incentive and the 
capacity to build bridges across those boundaries. .. .The result was to 
decouple elite recruitment from central control and to lend institutional 
legitimacy and the claim of an electoral mandate to republican elites 
committed to changing the ethnonational bargain. 70
The territorial issue thus played a significant role, not merely in determining the mode 
of the USSR's (and Russia's) transition, but also in terms of Russia's spectacularly 
troublesome form of asymmetrical federalism as emerging from the institutional 
legacies of Soviet ethnofederalism. As Laitin observes, the inevitable consequence in 
such circumstances was declining state capacity. 71
In general, then, the chief problem in the Russian transition associated with its 
asymmetric federal structure and the chief source of weak state capacity was the
68 Barbara Geddes, "What Do We Know About Democratization after Twenty Years?" Annual Review 
of Political Science 2 (1999). Linz and Stepan, Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation, 
Ch.4.
69 Roeder, "Soviet Federalism and Ethnic Mobilization," 220.
70 Leff, "Democratization and Disintegration in Multinational States: The Breakup of the Communist 
Federations," 218-19.
71 "While a state may be able to handle administratively the separation of a region, a succession of such 
administrative procedures, coming from a ramifying set of smaller and smaller regions, will without 
doubt consume the administrative capacity of central elites. (Anyone who has observed Nigeria moving 
from three regions to twelve states in 1967, to thirty-one states in 1991, will have a good idea of the 
process.)" David Laitin, "Transitions to Democracy and Territorial Integrity," in Sustainable 
Democracy, ed. Adam Przeworski (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1995), 26.
instability in the definition of the polity and its impacts on center-regional relations. 
In the early 1990s, many regions claimed sovereignty and attempted to unilaterally 
upgrade their status, continuing the "parade of sovereignties" within Russia's borders 
(see Table 1.2). Regional elites continued through the decade to capitalize on anti- 
center sentiment and real central neglect to increase regional autonomy. The 
"capture" of federal actors in the regions was relatively easy given resource scarcities 
and the center's reluctance to support its agencies (especially worrisome with regard 
to the regionalization of armed forces, border guards, and tax police). In the absence 
of domestic investment, regions were forced to look abroad for investment partners. 
Those with a more developed economic base were better suited for the task and 
moved ahead, while other regions lost out in competition and fell further behind. In 
the absence of national unity and consensus on transitional goals, the citizens of 
"winner" regions attributed performance legitimacy to their regional administrations 
("in spite of legitimacy). By contrast, "losers" became increasingly dependent upon 
central subsidies, but the center's diminishing capacity left it constrained in its ability 
to impose conditionality on the extension of subsidies. This meant that regional elites 
had little incentive either to democratize or to continue with a painful economic 
transformation. Citizens often felt cut off from the center and deprived of their rights 
(when they are aware of their existence), encouraging sentiment in favor of rolling 
back the clock as a less-worse alternative to the status quo. Meanwhile, the "winners" 
were transformed into net "donors" to the federal budget, effectively subsidizing less 
successful regions. The resentment among donors towards "debtor" (dotatsionnye] 
regions further undermined interregional and national cohesion. Similarly, 
institutional legacies affected the distribution of skilled labor and management 
expertise, education, media outlets, and so forth. The disparities in development
among regions only increased over time as transition dragged on through the 1990s.
Table 1.2: Declarations of Sovereignty, 1988-1991
Estonia Nov 16
Lithuania May 18
Latvia Jul 29
Azerbaijan Sep 23
Georgia Oct 12
Belarus Dec 7
RSFSR Jun 12 Buriatiia Oct 8
Uzbekistan Jun 20 Koriak Oct 9
Moldova Jun 23 Komi-Permiak Oct 1 1
Ukraine Jul 16 Baskhkortostan Oct 11
N Ossetiia Jul 20 Kalmykiia Oct 18
Kareliia Aug9 lamal-Nenets Oct 18
Khakassiia Aug 15 Marii-El Oct 22
Turkmenistan Aug 22 Chuvashiia Oct 24
Armenia Aug 23 Gorno-Altai Oct 25
Abkhaziia Aug 25 Kazakhstan Oct 26
Tadjikistan Aug 25 Kirghizstan Oct 28
Komi Aug 29 Tuva Nov 1
Tartarstan Aug 30 Karachai- Nov 17
Udmurtiia Sep 20 Cherkessiia
S Ossetiia Sep 20 Checheno- Nov 27
lakutiia Sep 27 Ingushetia
Chukotka Sep 29 Mordova Dec 8
Kabardino- Jan 3 1
Balkariia
Dagestan May 15
Adygeia Jul 2
Note: Bold-face type indicates regions located within Russia.
Source: Kahn, Jeff. "The Parade of Sovereignties: Establishing the Vocabulary of the New Russian 
Federalism." Post-Soviet Affairs 16, no. 1 (2000): 58-89.
The regime transitions approach thus provides a reasonable understanding of 
how Russia's political space fragmented along regional lines, so much so that
...it seems useful in the analysis of regional political regimes in Russia to treat 
regional entities as if they were nation-states. Within this framework, federal 
authorities (as well as other actors outside a particular region) may be regarded 
as "external" actors. That is, one may consider their impact on regional 
politics as if one were analyzing the impact of international influence on 
national politics. 72
Taking a regional perspective on Russia's transition provides a useful corrective to 
treating Russia as a uniform political space where all authority resides in Moscow. In 
some regions, weak institutions and the concentration of political power in a single
leader closely approximated the model of "delegative democracy." Others veered 
closer to a "democratic situation" where no single actor dominates the others, working
72 Vladimir Gel'man, "Regime Transition, Uncertainty and Prospects for Democratisation: The Politics 
of Russia's Regions in a Comparative Perspective," Europe-Asia Studies 51, no. 6 (1999): 942.
73 Guillermo O'Donnell, "Delegative Democracy," Journal of Democracy 5, no. 1 (1994), Andrei 
Tsygankov, "Manifestations of Delegative Democracy in Russian Local Politics: What Does It Mean 
for the Future of Russia?" Communist and Post-Communist Studies 31, no. 4 (1998).
through formal institutions and utilizing compromise strategies. 74
Still, there are a few troubling aspects to the regime transitions approach. 
Among them, Linz and Stepan's argument about the sequencing of regional and 
federation-wide elections may hold for the Union republics of the USSR, but it is 
more ambiguous regarding the regions of post-Soviet Russia. Their argument is that 
federal elections should take place prior to regional elections in order to build up 
national coalitions and stimulate party formation. Otherwise, holding regional 
elections first threatens to fragment federal politics by focusing political mobilization 
on local interests. 75
In essence this is what appears to have occurred on the level of Russia's 
autonomous republics, where elections were held earliest. They were spurred in this 
direction by El'tsin's now (in)famous statement in Kazan' that the republics should 
"take as much sovereignty as they can swallow." 76 That El'tsin exploited the "parade 
of sovereignties" in his struggle with Gorbachev, however, is significant. Republican 
elections took place simultaneously with, and contributed to, the dismantling of the 
Soviet Union and sovereignization of Russia's borders. Moreover, they contributed to 
the fragmentation of political space in post-Soviet Russia, which was already crippled 
by the weak capacity of state institutions. 77 The resulting condition of "dual power" 
(which was experienced on the regional level as a condition of "no power") allowed 
republican elites to consolidate power within their respective territories largely 
without central intervention. Yet the goal of the emerging republican regimes could
74 V. Gel'man, S. Ryzhenkov, and M. Brie, eds., Rossiia Regionov: Transfer mats iia Politicheskikh 
Rezhimov (Moskva: Ves' Mir, 2000), 52-5.
75 Linz and Stepan, Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation, 34. Linz & Stepan rule out 
the 1989 all-Union elections to the Congress of People's Deputies because they were not multi-party 
(while one-third of the seats were reserved for the CPSU and affiliated organizations), did not produce 
a new government, and never produced a new constitution. Linz and Stepan, Problems of Democratic 
Transition and Consolidation, 379-82.
76 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 27 March 1992.
77 Soviet central institutions effectively doubled for republican institutions in the RSFSR, meaning that 
Russia lacked the 'proto-state' institutions of the other fourteen union republics.
not be categorized as seeking "liberation" or "independence"; rather, republican elites 
angled for more favorable terms of "integration" in the Russian Federation, 
culminating in the Federal Treaty of 1992. 78
If the "improper" sequencing of federal and republican elections is helpful in 
understanding the extent of variation in republican regime types, it is not so 
illuminating when considering the situation in the oblasts and krais. In addition to the 
Federal Treaty signed with the republics, separate treaties were signed in 1992 with 
the oblasts and krais, and with the autonomous okrugs. In contrast with the newly- 
elected republican regimes, the bulk of the oblast and krai executives were appointed
directly by El'tsin and elections for regional governorships were not held until 1995. 
The dismantling of local Soviets and subsequent introduction of regional legislative 
elections in 1993 were expected to allow El'tsin's appointed governors to consolidate 
power and ensure that anti-reform forces would not gain control of the regions. For 
most of Russia, the 1993 elections to the State Duma ought to have facilitated this 
process by accomplishing multiparty elections to a federal body two years prior to the 
larger round of regional elections. Yet one also finds significant variation in regime 
type among the oblasts and krais, signaling that weak state capacity and electoral 
sequencing do not uniquely explain varying regime outcomes, neither for the
republics, nor for the oblasts and krais.
Rather, these conditions transformed El'tsin's encouragement of republican 
elites (and appointment of other regional executives) from an institutional bargain into
78 This typology of claims is borrowed from: Bremmer, "Post-Soviet Nationalities Theory," 12-18.
79 An excellent account of this process is found in: Vera Tolz and Irina Busygina, "Regional Governors 
and the Kremlin: The Ongoing Battle for Power," Communist and Post-Communist Studies 30, no. 4 
(1998).
80 Prior to the 1993 elections, Hahn suggests an interesting counter-factual hypothesis that "nation-wide 
elections for governors might have produced greater regional support for the parliament in its struggle 
with the president." Jeffrey W. Hahn, "Democratization and Political Participation in Russia's 
Regions," in Democratic Changes and Authoritarian Reactions in Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and 
Moldova, ed. Karen Dawisha and Bruce Parrott (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1997), 166 (fh 22).
an invitation for personal loyalty while subnational elites put their respective houses 
in order. This points to a far more active regional politics during the transition than is 
commonly assumed. If the state's weakness made it possible for different regime 
types to take root in regional soil, it does little to explain why some regional regimes 
blossomed while others grew weeds. The explanation likely has as much to do with 
the assertiveness and opportunity structures for regional elites as with the structure of 
regional politics. Indeed, much of the scholarly literature on regional politics in the 
1990s shed light on this dimension through detailed case studies of individual regions. 
At the same time, idiographic studies suffer from treating regions in isolation from
one another, and even in isolation from the federal center. To some extent this is 
understandable, given that many regions are only distantly aware of decisions made in 
Moscow or even in their immediate neighboring regions. While one can arrive at an 
understanding of how regional politics have replaced "high politics," it is important to 
bear in mind that this analytic leap is only possible by extending analysis of 
institutional legacies of Soviet rule to include the territorialization of power in 
Russia's federal subjects. Moreover, this move leaves one with few tools to analyze 
how the regions attempt to exploit the territorial organization of power for their own 
interests, or to conceptualize the processes that might encourage (re-)integration of the 
regions into a uniform political space.
For instance, one prominent method for explaining variations in regional 
regime performance examines the role of civic community in promoting 
democratization. The civic community is characterized by high levels of civic 
engagement, political equality, societal trust and tolerance, and dense networks of
81 An important exception to this trend is: Gel'man, Ryzhenkov, and Brie, eds., Rossiia Regionov.
civic association. 82 If one views institutional performance as a form of solving 
collective action problems through the provision of public goods, the presence of 
civic communities fosters "features of social organization, such as trust, norms, and 
networks, that can improve the efficiency of society by facilitating coordinated
actions." In this sense, the civic community is a key source of social capital: "social 
organization constitutes social capital, facilitating the achievement of goals that could 
not be achieved in its absence or could be achieved only at a higher cost." 84 Social 
capital translates into better institutional performance through the fostering of norms 
of reciprocity and networks of civic engagement that undergird social trust.
In Putnam's study of regional administrative reform in Italy, differences in the 
quality of institutional performance between northern and southern Italian regions are 
explained by way of traditions of civic involvement - greater in the north while
lacking in the south. Putnam's evaluation of regional institutional performance is 
based on a model of governance in which government is responsive to societal 
demands and effective in implementing policy choices using limited resources. There 
is, to be sure, a normative (liberal) content to this notion of institutional performance, 
as the modes of explaining institutional performance (institutional design, 
socioeconomic factors, sociocultural factors) tested by Putnam's study bear no a
priori relationship to democratic governance.
Whether the content of institutional performance correlates with good 
governance or regime type is another matter, and it is a key concern emerging from 
Stoner-Weiss's examination of "local heroes" - regional governments which proved
82 Robert D. Putnam, Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy (Princeton: Princeton 
U.P., 1993), 87-9.
83 Ibid., 167.
84 James S. Coleman, Foundations of Social Theory (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1990), 304.
85 Putnam, Making Democracy Work, Ch. 5.
86 One might argue that the connection was drawn by the location of the study: the internal boundaries 
of Italy were presumed democratic, varying only in degrees and not in regime types.
to be higher performers than others during Russia's First Republic (1990-1993). 
Following Putnam, Stoner-Weiss sheds light on the reasons for the significant 
variation in the performance of regional government institutions. 87 She argues that 
the extent of regional economic concentration - itself an institutional legacy of the 
Soviet era - was related to the predisposition of regional political and economic elite 
interests towards cooperative arrangements. These arrangements ensured that 
economic concerns were included in the policy process and guaranteed a regional 
policy consensus. In turn, this meant that business elites helped promote the efficacy 
of regional political institutions and their legitimacy within civil society. While the 
short-term result proved to be more efficient and responsive institutions, the scope of 
responsiveness was largely limited to an elite constituency. Consequently, Stoner- 
Weiss warns that these hand-in-glove arrangements between political and economic 
elites on the regional level could stifle policy responsiveness to emerging regional 
interests over the long term.
While Stoner-Weiss's work is impressive and thorough, there are also 
significant reasons to be skeptical of its conclusions. As with Putnam's study, the 
normative implications of her research flow not so much from what is measured and 
observed as from what is presumed in the case selection and operationalization of key 
variables. In spite of her contention that "context matters," Stoner-Weiss argues that,
.. .whereas in Putnam's Italy, social context mattered most in accounting for 
variations in regional government performance, in post-Soviet Russia, where 
there was virtually no civil society nor a tradition of civicness and where a 
simultaneous change in economic institutions was (and is still) under way,
social context did not yet appear to matter much.
Such a restrictive conceptualization of social context is potentially self-defeating 
when context is reduced to a common set of paper powers owned by oblasts and the
87 Stoner-Weiss, Local Heroes.
88 Ibid., 23.
sectoral concentration of regional economies. Moreover, her case selection is 
justified on the grounds that one can hold institutional design and nationality factors 
constant by focusing exclusively on the oblasts to the exclusion of the national 
republics, autonomous okrugs, krais, and federal cities. The presumption behind this 
case selection is that there was little variation in the oblasts' political resources and 
capabilities at the time of the USSR's demise. It also assumes that regional elites 
were relatively insulated from their neighbors.
Additionally, there is a significant danger in assuming that an ethnic Russian 
majority in any region renders nationality politics unproblematic. Arguably, the key 
nationality problem in Russia is not so much the consolidation of minority ethnic 
identities as it is the fragmentation ofrusskii national identity. By ruling out the need 
to consider issues of identity politics, Stoner-Weiss's "local heroes" become little 
more than economic actors and administrators who happen to occupy Russian space. 
In other words, her methodological framework effectively decontextualizes Russian 
politics, rather than isolating and observing the influence of social context on 
institutional performance. 90
In order to overcome the concerns raised by this approach, one needs to take 
literally Stoner-Weiss's metaphorical observation that, "the performance of new 
political institutions depends on the ground in which these institutions are planted."91 
Whether a social capital approach is able to do this, however, is still a matter of doubt. 
Marsh's application of Putnam's framework to Russian regions finds a statistical 
correlation between social capital resources and the degree of democratization across
89 This perhaps explains why Stoner-Weiss modified Putnam's model of governance to focus on the 
interactions of regional business and political elites in overcoming collective action dilemmas.
90 At the same time, Stoner-Weiss is right to focus on elite arrangements. While her calculation of 
institutional performance is drawn from notions of popular legitimacy, the analysis suggests the greater 
salience of elite legitimacy. Of course, this form of legitimacy also requires contextualization, though 
it is a matter that I will return to in greater detail below.
91 Stoner-Weiss, Local Heroes, 3.
regions,92 while Petro's analysis of Novgorod oblast provides a qualitative account of 
how regional administrations can foster social capital through active social 
engagement, the institutionalization of economic and political reforms, and the 
framing of reforms in terms of shared regional histories and cultural traditions. 93 Yet 
two problems remain: first, statistical correlations of this sort are too sensitive to 
methods of variable selection. Marsh's study, for example, utilizes just two indicators 
to establish an index of democratization of Russian regions based on a polity's level 
of electoral competition and participation. 94 Second, it is unclear how social capital 
can be cultivated (or lost) across regional boundaries and in relations with the federal 
center. In taking Russian regions as one's unit of analysis, there is a risk of treating 
them in isolation from one another and then amalgamating the results to come to a 
general view of social capital across Russia.
Summing up: Territory, Institutions, Identity
Several points emerge from the above review. First, it is clear that the issue of 
territory is a persistent and common concern among all approaches. In general this 
appears unremarkable, given that control over a defined territory is an elemental 
feature of state sovereignty. In the post-Soviet case, however, the issue becomes 
more significant as a legacy of the Soviet era that shapes (and frustrates) the 
cultivation of state capacity and the organization of power in the Russian Federation. 
Second, agency and historical contingency "matter." Without some reference 
to strategic choices made by central and regional elites, it would seem difficult to
92 Christopher Marsh, "Social Capital and Democracy in Russia," Communist and Post-Communist 
Studies 33, no. 2 (2000).
93 Nicolai Petro, "The Novgorod Region: A Russian Success Story," Post-Soviet Affairs 15, no. 3
(1999). See also: Petro, Nicolai N. Grafting Democracy: How Novgorod has Coped with Rapid Social
Change. Ithaca: Cornell U.P., 2004.
94 Marsh, "Social Capital and Democracy in Russia." This is not an insuperable obstacle, however, as
the results of statistical analysis could be confirmed by controlling for alternative possible explanations
like relative degrees of socio-economic development among regions.
account for the sheer variety of regional political regimes and diversity of elite 
strategies relying on structural characteristics, alone. Yet the approaches above are 
often weak at specifying regional actors' preferences as deriving from anything other 
than socioeconomic structure.
Third, the predominantly institutional focus of the approaches calls attention 
to the importance of those institutions linking actors within and between territorial 
levels of governance, underlining the processes of territorial integration of the state 
and the negotiated status of its internal and external borders. The relative status of 
territorial and administrative borders relates both to the conditions of the dismantling 
of the Soviet state and the trajectory of center-regional relations in post-Soviet Russia. 
Borders are claimed by a variety of institutions linking actors from different political 
arenas. Insofar as borders constitute political resources, define the polity, demarcate 
jurisdictions and establish normative proximity, they are also related to the kinds of 
political regimes and elite strategies that inhabit them.
Most scholars recognize that territory forms an essential component of 
regional identity, though few in political science are willing to confront the means by 
which territory comes to form that component on either an empirical or theoretical 
basis: it seems that borders are in the blood, for they certainly are not in the books. 
The few studies that do exist on the topic suggest that borders serve a number of 
functional and cultural interests. Most significantly, they specify who are potential 
participants and objects of the political game.
From a theoretical and multi-disciplinary perspective, borders clearly 
demonstrate characteristics that, when taken together, deserve to be classified as
institutions. 95 This study argues that examining Russia's internal borders as 
institutions helps to overcome the blind spots in the analysis of center-regional 
relations and regional integrative processes in the literature on Russian federalism and 
regime transition. The difficulty lies in the shared liberal assumptions that undergird 
both bodies of literature while diverting attention away from the institutional 
characteristics and processes of regional borders. Centering analysis on borders qua 
institutions is thus a necessary first step in understanding the theoretical ramifications 
of the maintenance and contestation of borders for federalism and democratization. 
But doing so requires a different analytic framework, for which the "new 
institutionalism" is appropriate. 96
Borders and the New Institutionalism
The "new institutionalism" arose in response to the tendency of behavioral methods 
and rational choice theories to marginalize the role, autonomy, and influence of 
political institutions in analysis. As one might expect, the charge to "bring 
institutions back in" was led in the name of the state, but has since branched into 
broader linkages between the state and the polity. 97
The new institutionalism emphasizes institutional relations (formal and 
conventional) that bind the components of the state together, structure its relations
95 Institutions here are understood as formal or informal procedures, routines, norms, and conventions 
embedded in the organizational structure of the polity. Peter Hall and Rosemary C. R. Taylor, 
"Political Science and the Three New Institutionalisms," Political Studies 44 (1996): 938.
96 Though are several varieties of the new institutionalism in political science, economics, and 
sociology, the common themes in this literature mark it as a distinctive approach: the focus on formal 
and informal structures, the stability of institutions over time, the affect of institutions on individual 
behavior, and the attention to shared values and meanings. B. Guy Peters, Institutional Theory in 
Political Science: The 'New Institutionalism' (New York: Pinter, 1999), 18-19.
97 Joel S. Migdal, "Studying the State," in Comparative Politics: Rationality, Culture, and Structure, 
ed. Mark Irving Lichbach and Alan S. Zuckerman (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1997), J.P. Nettl, "The 
State as a Conceptual Variable," World Politics 20, no. 4 (1968), Theda Skocpol, "Bringing the State 
Back In," in Bringing the State Back In, ed. Peter B. Evans, Dietrich Rueshemeyer, and Theda Skocpol 
(Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985).
with society, and provide the context for the conduct of politics. From the 
perspective of historical institutionalism, institutions may be analyzed as independent 
variables in terms of how institutional change affects actors' identity, power and 
strategies. Taking institutions as dependent variables reflects "how institutional 
performance is conditioned by history."99 The key variables in new institutionalist 
analysis are the institutional distribution of power and the formation of political 
strategies. 100 With regard to the latter, individuals are not autonomous actors but are 
embedded in institutional milieux, selecting among institutional influences and 
interpreting the meaning of their commitments. Decision-makers' preferences are not 
exogenously given, nor must one assume their stability over time. The extent to 
which borders relate to these variables is suggested by Lustick: "The territorial shape 
of the state thus helps determine what interests are legitimate, what resources are 
mobilizable, what questions are open for debate, what ideological formulas will be 
relevant, what cleavages could become significant, and what political allies might be 
available." 101
With regard to the distribution of power, institutions act as "ligatures fastening
I ryy
sites, relationships, and large-scale processes to each other." The new 
institutionalism assigns a central role to norms and values within organizations in 
explaining political behavior and how institutions "affect the flow of history." 103 
Borders occupy a central place in this regard as "spatial and temporal records of
98 Peter Hall, Governing the Economy: The Politics of State Intervention in Britain and France (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 18.
99 Putnam, Making Democracy Work, 8.
100 Thomas A. Koelble, "The New Institutionalism in Political Science and Sociology," Comparative 
Politics 27, no. 2 (1995): 236.
101 lan S. Lustick, Unsettled States, Disputed Lands: Britain and Ireland, France and Algeria, Israel 
and the West Bank-Gaza (Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1993), 41.
102 Ira Katznelson, "Structure and Configuration in Comparative Politics," in Comparative Politics: 
Rationality, Culture, and Structure, ed. Mark Irving Lichbach and Alan S. Zuckerman (Cambridge: 
Cambridge UP, 1997), 103.
103 James G. March and Johan P. Olsen, Rediscovering Institutions: The Organizational Basis of 
Politics (New York: The Free Press, 1989), 18.
relationships between communities and between states." 104
In approaching the institutional roots of territorial identity, one is concerned 
with how they feature in discourse as loci of legitimation and "logics of 
appropriateness." They define a community's normative obligations, shaping and 
constraining political behavior such that changes in political space make specific 
types of political action not only conceivable, but compelling. 105 In examining post- 
colonial states, for example, Lustick points out that "stable borders are reflections of 
presumptive beliefs which remove potentially intractable questions of the composition 
of the political community from the political arena." 106
Borders and Institutional Change
By their nature, institutions are resistant to change and exhibit strong path dependent 
effects. Institutional change thus tends to be long-term and incremental. In general, 
institutional change may come about via three avenues: first, broad changes in the 
socioeconomic or political context can cause previously latent institutions to become 
salient with implications for political outcomes, as when old institutions are pressed 
into service for different ends as new actors pursue (new) goals. Old ("indigenous") 
institutions may be revived and pressed to new ends, particularly where they can 
claim an organic or historical link to the territory in question. Duchacek documents 
the case of the departements, or prefectures, introduced by Napoleon to break down 
territorial loyalties and provincial patriotism. By the time of de Gaulle, the 
departements were no longer practical under conditions of national economic 
planning and rapid transportation. President de Gaulle attempted to group the 95
104 Thomas M. Wilson and Hastings Donnan, "Nation, State and Identity at International Borders," in 
Border Identities: Nation and State at International Frontiers, ed. Thomas M. Wilson and Hastings 
Donnan (Cambidge: Cambridge UP, 1998), 5.
105 Brubaker, Nationalism Reframed, 23-5.
106 Lustick, Unsettled States, Disputed Lands, 38-9.
departements into 21 regions, yet
...the departements that had been artificial under Napoleon had over the past 
150 years become units reflecting not only the geographic limits of local 
administration but also corresponding economic activities, transportation 
networks, and a modest degree of vested interests. The new administrative 
regions...[were] criticized mostly on the grounds that they destroy what has 
become natural (although this was originally artificial). 107
In this sense, the constellation of social and political factors related to the drawing or 
activation of borders affects the form and content of political organization. In seeking 
to understand social change and cultural transformation as situated within inter- 
connected spaces, anthropological approaches to borders uncover the exercise and 
distribution of power at the state's margins. 108 The challenge for political science is 
to contend with political transformations that take place in the state's interstices.
Second, exogenous changes may generally produce a shift in actors' goals and 
strategies pursued within institutions. The changes wrought by nation- and market- 
building in political organization at the local level can challenge or confirm the same 
processes at a larger (state-wide) level. In this fashion, cultural boundaries often 
demonstrate their durability in outlasting the shifting borders of state and empire. For 
those who study borders within anthropology, there has indeed been an increasing
i f\c\ _
awareness of the historical continuities generated by borders. The impact of such 
continuities may be to reinforce separate identities. Berdahl's study of communities 
along the former border between East and West Germany provides a compelling case 
in demonstrating the persistence of an East German identity sustained by the very
107 Duchacek, Comparative Federalism, 30.
108 Malkki's (1992) genealogy of the conceptual mapping of refugee camps is instructive in 
highlighting the implicit exercise of power involved in assuming an organic link between culture and 
territory: "The territorialization expressed in the conceptual, visual device of the map is also (and 
perhaps especially) evident on the level of ordinary language. The term 'the nation' is commonly 
referred to...by such metaphoric synonyms as 'the country,' 'the land,' and 'the soil.'" Liisa Malkki, 
"National Geographic: The Rooting of Peoples and the Territorialization of National Identity among 
Scholars and Refugees," Cultural Anthropology 7, no. 1 (1992): 26.
109 wj^g Specif|c permanence and longevity of border peoples in forming lasting social bonds and in 
political economic struggle is crucial." Robert R. Jr. Alvarez, "The Mexican-US Border: The Making 
of an Anthropology of Borderlands," Annual Review of Anthropology 24 (1995): 462.
dynamics of political and market transformation that coincided with German 
reunification. 110 Borders may also serve integrative purposes. Donnan and Wilson 
point out that borders draw attention to local divisions, but that they also domesticate 
them via the exigencies of daily life. Local conflicts over ethnicity have the potential 
to escalate into a question of nationality, but this potential may be held in check by 
cross-cutting linkages (i.e., of common kinship, residence, economic interest) which 
make "open and continuous breach" unsustainable. 111
Third, institutional change may obtain when political actors adjust their 
strategies to accommodate changes in institutions, themselves (i.e., at moments of 
dramatic change, or as a result of ongoing struggles within the institution). 112 In 
examining the process by which the border between France and Spain was 
established, Sahlins finds that the nation "appeared on the periphery before it was 
built by the center." 113 Territorial disputes accelerated through the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries, advancing simultaneously with state-building processes:
As each state defined, through its land surveys, the precise territorial 
boundaries of the communities, the village communities themselves sought to 
defend their maximum territorial dimensions. The more visible and intrusive 
the state, the more likely the community was to identify and defend its own 
boundaries against neighboring communities. 114
110 Daphne Berdahl, Where the World Ended: Re-Unification and Identity in the German Borderland 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999).
111 Hastings Donnan and Thomas M. Wilson, Borders: Frontiers of Identity, Nation and State (New 
York: Berg, 1999), Ch. 2. This perspective owes much to the seminal work of Barth (1969), who asked 
why the boundaries between ethnic groups tend to persist despite the movement of people through and 
across them. His answer lay in the examination of ethnic groups as organizational types mediated by 
"a systematic set of rules governing inter-ethnic social encounters. ...Stable inter-ethnic relations 
presuppose such a structuring of interaction: a set of prescriptions governing situations of contact...and 
a set of proscriptions on social situations preventing inter-ethnic interaction in other sectors, and thus 
insulating parts of the culture from confrontation and modification." Frederik Barth, ed., Ethnic 
Groups and Boundaries (Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1969), 16.
112 Kathleen Thelen and Sven Steinmo, "Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Politics," in 
Structuring Politics: Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Analysis, ed. Sven Steinmo, Kathleen 
Thelen, and Frank Longsreth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992), 16-17.
113 Peter Sahlins, Boundaries: The Making of France and Spain in the Pyrenees (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1989).
114 Peter Sahlins, "State Formation and National Identity in the Catalan Borderlands During the 
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries," in Border Identities: Nation and State at International 
Frontiers, ed. Thomas M. Wilson and Hastings Donnan (Cambidge: Cambridge UP, 1998), 42.
It is perhaps in this vein that one should understand Malcolm Anderson's observation 
that, "The more closed the frontier, the stronger has been its impact as a practical and 
symbolic threshold, the stronger rulers' belief that strict control of the frontier was 
essential to the maintenance of their power." 115
While it is sometimes argued that a theory of institutional change needs to 
stipulate some cognitive mechanism by which organizations are capable of 
learning , work in sociological institutionalism reveals that institutional change may 
take place via different paths of coercion, mimesis, or professionalization. 117 In such 
cases, powerful structural forces compel organizations within a common field to 
become more similar (or isomorphic) to such an extent that the symbolic importance 
of organizational structure may ultimately displace organizational performance as the 
source of legitimacy and locus for change. 118
Other mechanisms of institutional (re-)production include: the tendency of 
systems of control to expand their jurisdiction; complex interdependencies of 
organizational practices and structures; and taken-for-granted assumptions which 
preclude their scrutiny. Rather than resulting necessarily in "lock in," these 
mechanisms generate tensions and contradictions that, in turn, become sources for 
institutional dynamism. Institutional change emerges as innovation from the 
periphery, where incentives for conformity are weakly embedded in broader 
institutional arrangements. "Multiplier organizations" change the rates at which other
115 Malcolm Anderson, Frontiers: Territory and State Formation in the Modern World (Cambridge: 
Polity Press, 1996), 5.
116 As a result, Peters (1999) argues that mechanisms of institutional change fundamentally involve the
question of how to change ideas - for instance, how policy learning leads to the reframing of policy
issues and the reframing of associate institutions. Peters, Institutional Theory in Political Science, 68-
117 Paul J. DiMaggio and Walter W. Powell, "The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and
Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields," American Sociological Review 48, no. 2 (1983): 150-
118 John W. Meyer and Brian Rowan, "Institutionalized Organizations: Formal Structure as Myth and
Ceremony," American Journal of Sociology 83, no. 2 (1977).
organizations are founded (or dismantled). Unsuccessful imitation occurs when 
organizational routines are transplanted across sociopolitical contexts, leading to 
partial diffusion or hybrid arrangements. Lastly, as organizations borrow from 
dissimilar sources, novel recombinations of familiar structures and practices may 
result. 119
Mann's analysis of state power draws attention to the structural forces of 
institutional reproduction that link state-building processes with territory. He argues 
that the source of the state's autonomy lies in its territorial reach and shape:
.. .the power of the state is irreducible in quite a different sociospatial and 
organizational sense. Only the state is inherently centralized over a delimited 
territory over which it has authoritative power. Unlike economic, ideological 
or military groups in civil society, the state elite's resources radiate 
authoritatively outwards from a center but stop at defined territorial 
boundaries. 120
As the state acquires infrastructural supports, it is increasingly able to regulate social 
and territorial relations. Mann predicts that this role increases in proportion with the 
state's infrastructural powers: the greater they become, "the greater the territorializing 
of social life." 121
In modeling West European center-periphery relations, Rokkan and Urwin 
contest radial depictions of the state's authority, such as the one suggested by Mann 
above. Instead, they describe state-building as a set of reciprocal relationships 
between processes of centralization and efforts at boundary accentuation. These 
processes occur simultaneously in the construction of military, administrative, 
economic, and cultural systems, and the differences in the rates of system-building 
explain tensions between political, cultural, and territorial boundaries. Despite the
119 Walter W. Powell, "Expanding the Scope of Institutional Analysis," in The New Institutionalism in 
Organizational Analysis, ed. Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1991), 197-9.
120 Michael Mann, States, War and Capitalism: Studies in Political Sociology (Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell, 1988), 16.
121 Ibid., 26.
consolidation of modern European states and the relative freezing of their frontiers, 
these basic tensions continue to generate territorial claims and contestation. In part 
this is also due to the periphery's awareness that,
spatial distinctiveness is counteracted by the lack or weakness of established 
procedures for the defense and control of the boundaries separating them from 
the outside world. The degree to which the political, economic and cultural 
boundaries can be penetrated has important consequences for the internal 
structuring of the peripheral populations. 122
In their estimation, then, the political salience of territorial borders is likely to be 
uneven across territorial divisions, especially across the state's internal borders. The 
reproduction of power relations in the form of internal borders, particularly when 
borders remain static through periods of regime change, is not just a subject for
historical investigation. As Chandler points out, "the question of boundary 
formation within the USSR is...integrally related both to the emergence of nationalism 
in the late Soviet period and to the renegotiation of federalism today within the 
Russian Federation." 124
Borders, Institutions, and Behavior
In evaluating the effects of institutions on individual and group behavior, two broad 
approaches emerge from the literature. Rationalist approaches focus on instrumental 
behavior based on strategic calculation of actors' interests and resources. Yet 
institutions alter goals and expectations about other actors' behavior such that they 
affect one's choice of action. Self-interested behavior from this perspective is
122 Stein Rokkan and Derek W. Urwin, Economy, Territory, Identity: Politics of West European 
Peripheries (London: Sage Publications, 1983), 4.
123 "Territorial boundaries may vary even though the formal lines on maps remain unchanged; the 
meaning attached to those boundaries in the image of the state may be challenged in a variety of ways." 
Joel S. Migdal, State in Society: Studying How States and Societies Transform and Constitute One 
Another (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2001), 26.
124 Andrea Chandler, Institutions of Isolation: Border Controls in the Soviet Union and Its Successor 
States, 1917-1993 (London: McGill-Queen's UP, 1998), 12.
meaningless without institutional context. 125 Institutions are "sticky" in part because 
deviations from established routines and practices make individuals or organizations 
worse off. 126 One consequence for political behavior is that actors commonly 
"satisfice": given limited time, material resources, and organizational capacity, they 
choose the first acceptable option rather than balancing all policy alternatives and 
objectively choosing the best option. As policy solutions become institutionalized, 
moreover, they acquire constituencies (and patrons) which seek to expand their range 
of applications: the solutions seek out new problems, rather than the reverse.
Sociological approaches emphasize the extent to which individuals rely on 
established routines and patterns of behavior. Because actors must be able to interpret 
a situation before making instrumental calculations, institutions provide cognitive 
shortcuts in the form of moral and rational templates for legitimate action. It is in this 
sense that March and Olsen argue that institutions constitute "logics of 
appropriateness" (vs. the more technical decision-making involved in "logics of 
consequentiality"). 127 When organizational structures and practices are highly 
institutionalized or embedded, they are more easily transmitted and reproduced 
without direct social control or personal intervention. Indeed, the sanction for 
deviating from institutionalized practices can be "a redefinition of the actor rather 
than the act." 128 In other words, not just interests but identities are constituted by 
institutional environments.
Both sets of accounts find purchase in the problem of the transformation of 
colonial administrative borders into state borders during decolonization. Borders
125 Thelen and Steinmo, "Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Politics," 7-8.
126 Hall and Taylor, "Political Science and the Three New Institutionalisms," 939-40.
127 March and Olsen, Rediscovering Institutions.
128 Lynne G. Zucker, "The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Persistence," in The New 
Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, ed. Walter W. Powell and Paul J. DiMaggio (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1991), 88.
usually are treated as accidents of history and geography which conspired together 
with politics to form today's international system of states. The process of 
decolonization called this image into question, however, where inherited colonial 
borders quickly became one of the most enduring and conflict-laden legacies of 
imperial rule. Significantly, the legal doctrine that emerged to regulate changes to the 
status of internal borders, uti possidetis, holds that "states emerging from 
decolonization shall presumptively inherit the colonial administrative borders that 
they held at the time of independence." 129 This doctrine remains the "default rule of 
international law" in cases of state failure and secession, including the dissolution of 
the USSR and Yugoslavia. 130
Yet from the standpoint of democratic theory, uti possidetis represents more of 
an organizational expedient than a theoretically-desirable policy option in determining 
the appropriateness of the democratic unit. In relation to Yugoslavia, the Badinter 
Commission ruled that federations could dissolve along the lines of their constituent 
units, but that there could be no reconsideration of borders ("no secessions from 
secessions"). The decision was justified in terms of maintaining the stability of 
frontiers and territorial integrity, but as Moore points out, "the external frontier was 
not disputed. There is also a significant moral distinction between insisting on the 
inviolability of borders against external aggression and insisting on it against the 
people themselves." 131 The doctrine thus disregards the variations in the historical 
salience of internal borders, which "reflect distinct identities and patterns of behavior, 
in particular, borders inherited from long ago, such as those of Scotland and
129 Steven R. Ratner, "Drawing a Better Line: Uti Possidetis and the Borders of New States," American 
Journal of International Law 90, no. 4 (1996): 590.
130 With particular regard to Yugoslavia, the Badinter Commission ruled that Croatia and Bosnia- 
Herzegovina did not declare independence so much as the federation fell apart. In doing so, the issue 
of secession (against which there are significant international norms) was sidestepped.
131 Margaret Moore, "The Territorial Dimension of Self-Determination," in National Self- 
Determination and Secession, ed. Margaret Moore (New York: Oxford UP, 1998), 139.
Bavaria." 132 In other words, uti possedetis was a product of satisficing during 
decolonization, and later emerging as an institutionalized solution to border problems 
in search of further applications.
Furthermore, uti possidetis appears to rehearse the problem of borders within 
liberal political theory. The fact that the state's borders are invariably a consequence 
and cause of historical injustice turns the reticence of liberal theory from an 
embarrassment to a silent scandal. The difficulty, as Dahl points out, is that
...we cannot solve the problem of the proper scope and domain of democratic 
units from within democratic theory. Like the majority principle, the 
democratic process presupposes a proper unit. The criteria of the democratic 
process presupposes the rightfulness of the unit itself. 133
One possible explanation for this conundrum is that the maturation of liberal theory 
occurred simultaneously with the emergence of modern nation-states. As a result, 
"liberal theory would take shape constrained by this parameter but would not itself 
subject that presupposition [of state borders] to rigorous critical examination." 134 
Regardless, this blind spot in liberal theory is replicated in legal doctrines (like uti 
possidetis}, in which the problem of borders is defined away: it does not matter how 
one draws the line as long as you fill the space between borders with the right sorts of 
institutions. From this perspective, uti possedetis constitutes a highly institutionalized 
practice for the territorial organization of power - a "logic of appropriateness" that is 
easily transmitted, while deviations from the practice is threatening to liberal theory 
and identification. The reason, to borrow from Gupta and Ferguson, is that "the 
presumption that spaces are autonomous has enabled the power of topography to
132 Ratner, "Drawing a Better Line: Uti Possidetis and the Borders of New States," 605.
133 Robert A. Dahl, Democracy and Its Critics (New Haven: Yale U.P., 1989), 207. Original emphasis.
134 Loren Lomasky, "Toward a Liberal Theory of National Boundaries," in Boundaries and Justice: 
Diverse Ethical Perspectives, ed. David Miller and Sohail H. Hashmi (Princeton: Princeton UP, 2001), 
conceal successfully the topography of power." 135
Borders, Legitimacy, and State Capacity
The recognition that borders developed simultaneously with the modern state draws 
attention to the manner in which borders function as repositories of power and social 
knowledge. As Mann describes, clearly defined borders are characteristic features of 
modern states that developed along with the growth of the state's infrastructural 
power. Mann's observation builds upon Weber's seminal analysis of the forms of 
legitimate domination, or authority. 137 According to Weber, the growth of rational- 
legal authority exercised through bureaucracy was a characteristic common to the 
development of modern states. 138 And Weber's definition of the state proceeded from 
the observation that the political content of a ruling organization derives from the 
extent to which "its existence and order is continuously safeguarded within a given 
territorial area by the threat and application of physical force on the part of the 
administrative staff." 139
There is a certain correspondence between the role of borders in the modern 
state and that of bureaucracy in the Weberian state. The practice of rule application
135 Akhil Gupta and James Ferguson, "Beyond "Culture": Space, Identity, and the Politics of 
Difference," Cultural Anthropology 7, no. 1 (1992): 8.
136 "...the increase in infrastructural penetration has increased dramatically territorial boundedness. 
This seems a general characteristic of social development: increases in state infrastructural powers also 
increase the territorial boundedness of social interaction." Mann, States, War and Capitalism, 28.
137 Weber identified three "pure types" of legitimate domination, or authority: 1) rational - resting on a 
belief in the legality of enacted rules and the right of those elevated to authority under such rules to 
issue commands (legal authority); 2) traditional - resting on an established belief in the sanctity of 
immemorial traditions and the legitimacy of those exercising authority under them (traditional 
authority); or finally, 3) charismatic - resting on devotion to the exceptional sanctity, heroism or 
exemplary character of an individual person, and of the normative patterns or order revealed or 
ordained by him (charismatic authority). Max Weber, Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive 
Sociology, vol. 1 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978), 215.
138 Ibid., 223.
139 Ibid., 54. Emphasis in the original. Weber also places territory at the center of his definition of 
political community as "a community whose social action is aimed at subordinating to orderly 
domination by the participants a "territory" and the conduct of the persons within it... The territory 
must at any time be in some way determinable, but it need not be constant or definitely limited." 
Weber, Economy and Society, 901.
by bureaucracies is implicated in the creation of social knowledge, for instance, in the 
definition of shared tasks, the creation and definition of new categories of actors, the 
creation of new interests for actors, and the transmission and reproduction of 
organizational models. Weberian bureaucracies exercise power because they appear 
to function impersonally and, therefore, outside of politics.
Borders implicitly and explicitly create and transmit social knowledge in each 
of these respects. In defining the territorial reach of the state, they define and frame 
the scope of programs for socioeconomic development. They also demarcate 
normative proximity, by which the obligations of a governing body to a people 
inhabiting any given region are denied to others nearby, justified and accepted by 
virtue of juridical or "natural" barriers. 140 In bounding the polity, they define 
categories of actors (electors, populations) as distinct from those on the other side of 
the border. If the interests of the state or its components varies depending on the 
resources (material, natural, organizational) at its disposal, the drawing or activation 
of borders creates those interests - including interests in fortifying or developing 
border structures, themselves. Insofar as borders are interlocking and are treated as 
interchangeable from legal and theoretical perspectives, they also implicitly suggest 
that models of political organization are transferable across borders.
To what extent, then, are borders related to the forms of legitimacy and 
organization of political regimes? This is a difficult question to answer, thanks in part 
to the analytic silence on the issue. What is clear, however, is that the question of 
state capacity is closely tied to the question of the legitimacy of the state's borders -
140 Campbell defines proximity as "the condition of possibility for the inter-human relationship of the 
one-to-one, the basis on which one cannot escape the universal demand of particular responsibility. 
The disturbance caused by the entry of the third party is the requirement of justice: in spatial terms, it is 
the functioning of state borders to diminish responsibility to one's neighbor." David Campbell, "The 
Deterritorialization of Responsibility," in Moral Spaces: Rethinking Ethics and World Politics, ed. 
David Campbell and Michael J. Shapiro (Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press, 1999), 36-40.
internal and external. The examination of the literature on constitutional and 
socioeconomic asymmetry in Russia converges on a common focus on state 
weakness, or lack of state capacity, as the root cause of the growth of regional 
autonomy and assertiveness. While much attention was drawn by the ethno-national 
movements in the federal republics in the early 1990s, the appearance of regionalist 
movements in the oblasts and krais with appointed governors indicates that ethno- 
national mobilization is neither a necessary nor sufficient explanation for the 
trajectory of center-regional relations and federal development.
Instead, a safer generalization is that the central state's weakness was a 
necessary condition for the activation of regional borders as means of organizing 
political interactions with the center, and for ensuring regional administrations' access 
to resources that would otherwise have been claimed by a strong central state. This 
conclusion is supported theoretically by O'Leary's observation that any theory of 
"right-sizing" the state must address: (1) the factors, from the perspective of central 
elites, governing the right-sizing of the state's domestic (and external) territorial 
shape; and (2) the factors governing the right size of the state's despotic and 
infrastructural powers. 141 Moreover, this conclusion is supported empirically by 
observations of increased regional autarchy and assertiveness in the wake of the 1998 
economic crisis, with some regions going so far as to ban imports from neighboring 
regions and erecting roadblocks at regional borders.
The literature on democratization in Russia, particularly as regards the growth 
of diversity in regional regime types, also proceeds from the starting condition of 
central state weakness. Here it is worth recalling Brown's distinction between the 
causes of the Soviet state's disintegration and the process by which it was
141 Brendan O'Leary, "Introduction," in Right-Sizing the State: The Politics of Moving Borders, ed. 
Brendan O'Leary, lan S. Lustick, and Thomas Callaghy (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 
10. O'Leary is specifically citing Mann's (1984) categories of state capacity.
\ f\
dismantled. The quasi-federal structure of the Soviet state is necessary for 
understanding why the USSR broke into its constituent parts along the borders of the 
Union republics, but it is not a sufficient condition for explaining why the process 
stopped at these borders. Nor is it sufficient for explaining the trajectory of political 
development within the borders of the regional regimes of post-Soviet Russia.
A problem common to both of these bodies of literature is the tendency to 
conflate the lack of state capacity with a lack of legitimacy. The importance of the 
distinction between state capacity and legitimacy emerges when confronted with two 
questions: when are borders legitimate? And when are borders legitimately activated 
or changed?
Within the context of regime transitions or transformations, it is the claim that 
the present set of borders is illegitimate that enables political actors to contest existing 
borders and lay claim to new ones. With particular regard to Russia, Brown observes 
the Soviet Union spectacularly illustrated Rustow's generalization about the 
problem of lack of agreement on the part of substantial minorities concerning 
the legitimacy of state borders and Dahl's related point on the impossibility of 
determining boundaries of the polity which would be in the best interests of 
everybody. 143
The "parade of sovereignties" grounded the promotion of internal borders as state 
borders within a nationalizing discourse. To the extent that this process continued 
within post-Soviet Russia's borders, the republican claims to national self- 
determination within their respective boundaries proved unassailable in the early 
1990s. At the same time, the practice of activating or promoting regional borders 
within the new post-Soviet Russian state did not remain tied to nationalizing claims. 
Rather, such exclusivist formulas generated countervailing claims among the so-
142 Brown, "Transformational Leaders Compared."
143 Archie Brown, The Gorbachev Factor (Oxford: Oxford U.P., 1996), 256.
called "non-ethnic" regions - the oblasts and krais - that focused less on the 
privileges of ethnic status and more on the disproportionate distribution of 
constitutional privileges and material benefits to the republics.
The legitimacy-seeking activities of regional elites shifted as they sought out 
alternative means to link territory with demands for greater regional autonomy. The 
sorts of claims generally fell into three categories. First, regional leaders sought to 
capitalize on their respective region's traditional or historical role and status. 
Lallemand provides the example of regional movements in Briansk and Smolensk 
oblasts:
regional elites cultivate the theme of the neglected periphery, in order to blame 
the center for the institutional disintegration and economic crisis. At the same 
time, the governments of each region try to mobilize their constituents around 
a kind of provincial patriotism, singing the praises of the Bryanshchina and 
the Smolenshchina, which are increasingly considered to be autonomous
. , . . 144
territorial entities.
Multiple other cases may be found among Russia's oblasts and krais. In Perm, for 
instance, the preferred historical referent is the Permskaia guberniia from tsarist 
times.
Second, some leaders exercised charismatic authority in galvanizing regional 
support for challenging the center and seeking the promotion of status. Eduard 
Rossel"s attempt to establish a "Urals Republic" in 1993 is perhaps the best known 
(some might say notorious) case. 145 Third, regional leaders claimed a unique ability 
to more efficiently utilize local resources for regional development and social welfare 
than the center. 146 Such concerns were particularly salient in regions with strong 
ecological concerns, such as the zone around Lake Baikal. In this form, the anti- 
imperial claims that characterized republican drives for sovereignty and pervasive
144 Lallemand, "Politics for the Few," 314.
145 Easter, "Redefining Centre-Regional Relations."
146 Alia Chirikova and Natalya Lapina, "Political Power and Political Stability in the Russian Regions," 
in Contemporary Russian Politics: A Reader, ed. Archie Brown (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2001), 388.
anti-Moscow sentiment in Russia's provinces were transformed into justifications for 
limiting the center's control over the material implements of administration.
As the range of legitimate claims expanded for the practice of activating 
internal borders, the exclusivist principles that made the efforts of republican 
nationalist elites so successful in the early 1990s were diminished in scope and 
influence. The alternative claims that appeared to support regionalist movements 
were equally open to contestation and appropriation by the center - whether by 
reference to the historical experience of Russian statehood, the occasionally 
spectacular charisma of Boris El'tsin, or the Kremlin's accusations that Russia's 
economic travails started at the local level. In this fashion, the attempts by regional 
leaders to expand the range of legitimate claims for augmenting the status of internal 
borders created opportunities for the center to legitimately reclaim control - an 
unintended consequence of regional leaders' drive for autonomy.
The question of whether the Kremlin would effectively make use of these 
opportunities is the subject of the empirical investigation that forms the rest of this 
study. But the brief historical sketch above is suggestive of the linkages between 
borders, legitimacy, and state capacity, in foregrounding the manner in which the 
practice of claiming and defending internal borders was institutionalized on the 
regional level.
First, the autonomy of regional borders was tied to the autonomy of regional 
political regimes. From the center's perspective, the diversity of appeals to regional 
uniqueness granted regional leaders a degree of electoral legitimacy that made it 
impossible to bypass (or for that matter, to dismiss) regional administrations. The 
center was also deprived of allies in the regions, for the growth of regional autonomy 
limited the appeal of working in central institutions for regional elites.
Second, the breakdown of hierarchical command relationships within central 
agencies was tied to the recognition of internal borders as sovereign or autonomous. 
The well-known result was the balkanization of central agencies and ministries. The 
diffusion of federal property among the regions and cooptation of federal agents 
further enhanced the autonomy of regional regimes. This was both a consequence of 
the lack of a coherent central policy towards the regions and an obstacle to the 
formulation of such a policy.
Third, the autonomy of regional borders proved an obstacle to inter-regional 
coordination and integration. Insofar as claims to particular regional interests 
reinforced the autonomy of regional administrations within their respective territories, 
they also limited the appeal of such claims to neighboring territories. A tangible 
consequence was the weak development of potentially unifying national institutions, 
in particular of national political parties that might otherwise have served to bring 
regional interests into conformity with federal interests. At the same time, vicious 
competition for foreign and domestic investment inhibited inter-regional economic 
coordination and reinforced regional preferences for bilateral negotiations with the 
federal center.
By the time that Vladimir Putin succeeded Boris El'tsin, the Kremlin's ability 
to bring the regions under control was constrained by the manner in which claims to 
legitimately change regional borders were institutionalized through the diversity of 
regional political regimes, the disruption of the center's control over its own agencies 
in the regions, and by the lack of horizontal integration among Russia's regions. The 
remaining chapters examine Putin's attempts to rein in regional autonomy and assert 
central control over regional borders. Chapter Two establishes the historical context 
of center-regional relations in Russia, beginning with the tsarist era through to the late
Soviet period. The chapter traces the attempts of the tsarist and Soviet regimes to 
manipulate Russia's internal borders to cultivate (or restore) central state capacity. 
Particular attention is paid to the four regional case studies and their evolution into 
their present borders. Analysis then turns to the processes by which regional borders 
were locked in place during the Brezhnev era and the extent to which center-regional 
engagements shaped (and were shaped by) regional identities in the Gorbachev and 
El'tsin eras.
Chapter Three begins with the arrival of Putin and his attempts to reform 
Russia's federal system, focusing on the creation of the seven Federal Districts. At 
issue are the various ways that their implementation was interpreted at the provincial 
level in terms of regional interests, autonomy, and institutional performance. The key 
question concerning Putin's centralizing measures is why regional administrations 
capitulated so quickly after a decade of decentralization under El'tsin? To the extent 
that Putin's envoys in the Federal Districts have been successful, the Russian case 
demonstrates the utility of institutional legacies for generating state capacity by 
inducing (or restoring) relationships of command and compliance - in a word, 
legitimacy - among elites.
Chapter Four continues with this theme, turning more explicitly to the 
composition of regional political regimes. The chapter focuses specifically on the 
revision of regional charters and constitutions, spearheaded by then-deputy head of 
the Presidential Administration Dmitrii Kozak. The revision of regional charters and 
constitutions provided opportunities for altering (or consolidating) the balance of 
power within the regions. At the same time, however, regional political space was 
increasingly demarcated by a mandate from the center. As a result, the governors 
may have grown stronger within their own domains, but possibly at the cost of greater
vulnerability to central intervention.
Chapter Five picks up the role of the governors in examing the conduct of 
gubernatorial elections and the activation of regional borders. The first competitions 
for regional office brought border issues to the forefront, such that regional elections 
provided dramatic evidence of their salience in the rejection of El'tsin's appointed 
governors. During Putin's first term, the Kremlin played an active and increasingly 
successful role in influencing the outcome of gubernatorial elections.
Chapter Six examines the question of regional mergers (ukrupnenie sub"ektov) 
and the ongoing delineation of jurisdictional powers between levels of governance in 
Russia. The chapter analyzes the first real attempts at combining regions and 
reducing the number of federal subjects, primarily focusing on the processes in Perm 
and Tiumen. Particular attention is paid to the central and regional debates on the 
merits and justifications for regional mergers, as well as the conditions enabling this 
dramatic change in the status of regional borders.
A final chapter provides some concluding observations. The open-ended 
beginnings of this project and the ambiguous status of borders in political science 
theory left some important questions to be answered, among them: How strong (or 
weak) are borders as institutions in Russia? How do borders constrain political 
behavior formally and informally? And do Russia's borders serve as sources of 
political stability or instability? The concluding chapter suggests tentative answers to 
these questions based on the research in the proceeding chapters, and speculates on 
the future of Russia's internal borders given the changes introduced in Putin's second 
term of office after the Beslan crisis.
Research Methodology
In investigating the role of internal borders as political institutions, this study is by 
nature exploratory and does not seek to test hypotheses in positivist fashion. To claim 
to be seeking "generalizable laws" from the study of four regions out of 89 would be 
foolhardy (at best) and duplicitous (at worst), particularly when branching into a field 
of study for which there is no coherent, developed body of literature - such is the 
study of borders in political science.
In methodological terms, this project perhaps comes closer to Eckstein's 
disciplined-configurative study: "In essence, the chain of inquiry in disciplined- 
configurative studies runs from comparatively tested theory to case interpretation, and 
thence, perhaps, via ad hoc additions, newly discovered puzzles, and systematized 
prudence, to new candidate theories." 147 The value of such studies stems from the 
generation of case studies from existing theory in such a way that "a case can impugn 
established theories if the theories ought to fit it but do not. It may also point up a 
need for new theory in neglected areas." 148 Constructing a new theory is not my 
pretense, but the problem of borders - internal and external - is shared to different 
degrees by all states. How Russian regions handle a future reduction in the number of 
their borders may have some resonance with, say, the reform of the system of 
departements in France, the reduction of administrative units in Nigeria, or the 
creation of new administrative units in Italy.
Though this project does not utilize variable analysis, it may be helpful to 
address briefly how borders might serve as independent or dependent variables. Like 
the various theoretical approaches to institutions, the meaning, status, and utility of
147 Harry Eckstein, "Case Study and Theory in Political Science," in Handbook of Political Science: 
Strategies of Inquiry, ed. F.I. Greenstein andN.W. Polsby (Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1975), 100.
148 Ibid., 99. The consequence of such an approach, according to Eckstein, is that theory-building 
appears to suffer, though I would argue that it is by definition impossible to jump directly to a crucial 
case study in the absence of competing theories.
borders vary depending on one's perspective. 149 A quick answer would be that 
borders appear to function most often as intervening variables, mediating between 
structural conditions of politics and individual decisions. This is necessarily the case 
since borders and internal boundary changes rarely are confronted head-on in politics.
In the Russian context, for example, claims regarding borders tend to be cast in 
terms of expectations regarding center-regional relations, particularly as related to 
regional autonomy and central intervention. Yet borders are not exclusively 
intervening variables. The question of regional mergers in Russia comes close to 
placing regional borders as dependent variables. But even here the debates and 
decisions about merging regions is shaped by the existing set of internal borders - that 
is, how they are perceived to contribute to (or detract from) central state capacity, the 
nature and malleability of the regional identities that they contain and represent, and 
the political practices that they shelter and reproduce - and by the position or source 
of the claims regarding internal borders.
One thus faces a choice between holding that borders are intervening 
variables, though with (potentially ever-increasing) exceptions, or holding that the 
question at hand is not whether internal borders are independent or dependent 
variables in analysis: rather, it is when are they treated as independent or dependent 
variables, under what conditions, and by whom in Russian politics? As detailed in the 
review of the "new institutionalist" literature above, I am attempting to incorporate 
the main strands of institutionalism in social science - rationalist, historical, and
149 "To rational choice institutionalists, institutions are an intervening variable capable of affecting an 
individual's choices and actions but not determining them. To the historical institutionalists, 
institutions play a determinant role since they shape the actions of individuals but are at times affected 
by collective and individual choices. To the sociologists, institutions are themselves dependent upon 
larger "macro level" variables such as society and culture, and the individual is a largely dependent and 
rather unimportant variable." Koelble, "The New Institutionalism in Political Science and Sociology," 
150 See: Lustick, "Thresholds of Opportunity.," 76.
sociological - to obtain a more comprehensive understanding of borders as 
institutions, both in theory and in specific reference to Russia's internal borders. This 
obviously comes at the cost of theoretical parsimony, though arguably with the 
benefit of increased accuracy and comprehensiveness of my research findings.
Analytical Framework
In choosing the Russian region as the unit of analysis, I take up Gel'man's observation 
that "...it seems useful in the analysis of regional political regimes in Russia to treat 
regional entities as if they were nation-states. Within this framework, federal 
authorities (as well as other actors outside a particular region) may be regarded as 
'external' actors." 151 Working with multiple regions within a single state has a 
number of methodological advantages, among them the potential ability to hold a 
greater number of conditions equal in analysis than in cross-country comparisons. 152 
At the same time, the ability to examine regional responses to state centralization in 
Russia also presents a unique opportunity - a "natural experiment" similar in scope to 
that studied by Robert Putnam in Making Democracy Work. The sheer variety of 
regional regimes and relative levels of socioeconomic development, when countered 
with the imposition of isomorphic state institutions in the form of Putin's Federal 
Districts, potentially provides an even greater degree of variation among intra-state 
units than is possible in established Western democracies.
But more important is the normative dimension - the question of how different
151 /-_n.Gel'man, "Regime Transition, Uncertainty and Prospects for Democratisation," 942. Gel'man was 
writing prior to Putin's arrival and the creation of the seven Federal Districts. Even before 2000, 
however, the federal authorities were somewhat more integrated than Gel'man suggests in regional 
politics. Indeed, this was an important element of variation among cases. 
152 "...comparability can also be enhanced by focusing on intranation instead of internation 
comparisons. The reason is again the same: comparative intranation analysis can take advantage of the 
many similar national characteristics serving as controls." Arend Lijphart, "Comparative Politics and 
the Comparative Method," American Political Science Review 65, no. 3 (1971): 689. See also: Gary 
King, Robert O. Keohane, and Sidney Verba, Designing Social Inquiry: Scientific Inference in 
Qualitative Research (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1994), 219-23.
mechanisms for regional integration relate to the quality of political life in post-Soviet 
Russia. The public rationale for Putin's centralization measures was to improve the 
quality of Russian democracy by clamping down on regional separatism, 
consolidating uniform administrative and information spaces, and bringing 
government "closer to the people." For their own parts, regional elites present a 
variety of cross-border claims in their interactions with central elites, particularly as 
regards other regions' economic obligations to their neighbors. In a number of cases 
this translates into attempts by regional elites to influence or even sabotage elections 
in other regions. By diving into this fray, one may acquire a sense of the role that 
regional identity plays in calculating the stakes of center-regional engagements.
It is worth pointing out that research on this project was begun in 2001, before 
it was certain that Putin's efforts at state centralization would take root and prove 
successful. In other words, the research was not designed to explain a known or 
anticipated outcome. Rather, the research process was investigatory in nature with a 
number of general and specific goals. Among the general goals were: to isolate the 
salience and influence of regional borders for regional identity and political 
engagements with the center among the case studies; to account for the stability or 
instability of regional borders; to examine the prevalence of border-related issues in 
daily political life, including their binding or constraining effects; and to probe the 
(potentially) integrative dimensions of internal borders. These general goals guided 
the examination of specific research questions, which formed the basis for each of the 
chapters: to explain the impact of the Federal Districts on the salience and meaning of 
regional borders; to evaluate the effectiveness of changes to regional constitutions and 
charters in the demarcation of regional political space; to assess the relationship 
between gubernatorial elections and the activation of regional borders; and to probe
the prospects and conditions for outright changes to regional boundaries, particularly 
through the merging of existing regions.
Fieldwork Methods
Fieldwork was conducted in regions located across four Federal Districts, primarily 
through interviews with Russian specialists on regional politics, members of regional 
administrations, legislatures and local government, as well as representatives of 
federal agencies. Interviews were semi-structured in that a common set of issues was 
raised in each session, tailored to the particular region concerned. 153 For the purposes 
of getting at representations of regional border issues, semi-structured interviews were 
useful in allowing respondents to re-phrase (or in some instances, to correct) my 
questions in local idioms. Such nuances would have been impossible to capture 
through a survey approach. 154 Moreover, I quickly found that even the "semi- 
structure" of my interview questions could prove stifling, diverting the respondent 
away from the stories and issues that mattered to their own perceptions. 155 While I 
sought to conduct interviews with people of analogous position in each region, this 
was simply impossible owing to too many individual schedules, variations in 
administrative structures among regions, and differing degrees of openness to foreign
153 1 am grateful to Alia Chirikova of the RAS Institute of Sociology for help with the drafting and 
editing of my interview questions.
154 "As implementation problems are often created by different understandings of policy language, it is 
as important for analysts to access these other interpretations - the local knowledge held by 
communities of meaning in constructed texts." Dvora Yanow, Conducting Interpretive Policy Analysis, 
Qualitative Research Methods (London: Sage, 2000), 10.
155 This does not seem to me to generate particular problems of reliability and validity, however, given 
the nature of the research design: "One cannot simply expect answers on one occasion to replicate 
those on another because they emerge from different circumstances of production. Similarly, the 
validity of answers derives not from their correspondence to meanings held within the respondent, but 
from their ability to convey situated experiential realities in terms that are locally comprehensible." 
James A. Holstein and Jaber F. Gubrium, "Active Interviewing," in Qualitative Research: Theory, 
Method and Practice, ed. David Silverman (London: Sage, 1998), 117.
interviewers. Most interviews were recorded on an unobtrusive, noiseless digital 
dictaphone with the respondent's permission. 157 In a few cases respondents either 
declined to be recorded or were so visibly uncomfortable with the notion such that I 
relied on taking notes by hand.
In addition to interviews, I made scans of articles from primary newspapers in 
each region for the year starting from the announcement of Putin's reforms. 158 Where 
time constraints applied, I bypassed papers that were otherwise available via the 
internet or online full-text databases. The scans allowed me to evaluate common 
themes and highlight significant differences in representations of Putin's reforms and 
other border-related issues. Every region has at least one newspaper attached to (or 
run outright by) the regional administration. Many have an additional newspaper 
attached to the legislative assembly and possibly a third paper that is independent or 
tied to the opposition within the region. This is not always the case, though, and one 
should be careful in claiming that representations in the press are illustrative of public 
opinion. This is not the claim made in this study. Rather, the press is taken to 
represent the public face of the regional administration as it seeks to cajole, mobilize, 
or sedate regional constituencies. 159
156 In one instance, I was denied an interview by an official in Tiumen's regional administration on the 
grounds that "it is the official's duty to refuse interviews to foreigners." The official in question was a 
former member of the KGB, which might have something to do with his interpretation of duty, hi 
another case in Kareliia, the process of working through receptionist, assistant (pomoshchnik), and 
deputy (zamestitel') to get to the official in question took weeks and even resulted in my being offered 
bogus phone numbers. Fortunately these were not typical instances, though there were always a few in 
each region.
157 All recorded interviews were later downloaded onto my laptop and recorded onto a CD for further 
158 Newspapers were selected after consulting with local experts on regional politics. I used a portable 
flatbed scanner and laptop computer. The scans were imported into Acrobat format so as to preserve 
their original layout.
159 Official regional websites present another potential source of this kind of information, though 
obviously targeted at different audiences.
Case Selection & Summaries
Cases were selected with an eye towards achieving as much variation as possible 
across relevant socioeconomic and demographic indicators. I also sought to vary 
federal status by choosing two federal republics and two oblasts (see Table 1.3). As 
demonstrated earlier in the chapter, most predictions of regional separatism were 
oriented around a combination of federal status (with republics being the chief 
suspects) and socioeconomic development (with the richest being the most difficult). 
In seeking to understand how borders can be integrative rather than divisive, cases 
were also chosen with regard to contrasting "border situations": the two republics had 
not gone the route of ethnic separatism, but attempted to mobilize different sides of 
the state border - Buriatiia cultivated ties with other Siberian regions, while Kareliia 
staked its hopes on relations with Finland and the European Union. The two oblasts 
had complicated federal relationships with ethnically-based autonomous okrugs in 
common, though their economic situations are radically different. 160 
Cases were also chosen so as to fall within different Federal Districts: North-Western, 
Volga, Urals, and Siberian. I purposely did not chose any district "centers" (capitals) 
in order to avoid the additional layer of confusion that this new identity might present. 
Altogether I conducted fieldwork in Moscow and the four regions during March-April 
2001, September-December 2001, March-June 2002, April 2003, and May 2004. I 
also conducted interviews in Komi-Permiatskii Autonomous Okrug and interviewed a 
few officials from Khanty-Mansiiskii Autonomous Okrug, though the primary focus 
in both cases with the relationship of the autonomous okrugs with their respective 
oblasts.
160 Russian analysts have come to refer to such regions as "complexly-constructed" (slozhnopostroenye 
or slozhnosostavnye).
Table 1.3: Basic Demographic and Economic Indicators
Region Name
Location (FD)
Population 
(thousands, 1999)
Ethnic composition
Primary industrial
sector(s)
Gross Regional 
Product (billions of 
rubles, 1997)
Avg monthly income 
(rubles, 1998)
Buriatiia
Siberian
1038.2
Buriat - 24% 
Russian - 70% 
Ukrainian - 2.2% 
Other -3. 8%
Energy (45. 9%)
Machine and 
metal working 
(12%)
11541
601.4
Kareliia
North-West
771.1
Karel-10% 
Russian - 73.6%
Belorussian -
Other - 9.4%
Logging & 
Paper (4 1.8%)
10067
1052.4
Tiumen
Urals
3243.5
Russian -
72.6%
Ukrainian - 
Tatar -7. 3%
Other - 
11.7%
(81.8%)
Energy 
(10.9%)
209198
Volga
2969.7
Russian -83. 8% 
Tatar - 4.9% 
Komi-Perm iak - 4% 
Other -7.3%
Chemical and 
Petrochemical
(20.6%)
Energy (18.3%) 
Fuel (14.6%)
51531
Source: Goskomstat. Regiony Rossii: Statisticheskii Sbornik. Tom 1. Moskva: Goskomstat Rossii, 
1999.
The Republic of Buriatiia (Respublika Buriatiia) lies between Lake Baikal 
and Mongolia in eastern Siberia, and was included in the Siberian Federal District. 
Though the majority population is Russian, the Buriat autonomous okrugs in 
neighboring Irkutsk and Chita oblasts have majority Buriat populations. The 
autonomous okrugs were originally part of Buriatiia until they were split apart by
Stalin. 161 Owing to these and other past grievances, as well as the republic's location 
on the border with Mongolia, in the early-1990s it was thought that Buriatiia would 
join the ranks of Russia's ethnic separatists. Instead, it has proven to be as quiet (and 
conservative) politically as its environs - the head of the republican administration 
has not changed since the Soviet era.
The Republic of Kareliia (Respublika Kareliid) is located in the north-west of 
Russia on the border with Finland. Owing to the presence of a Kareliian diaspora in 
Finland and a history of contentious borders, Kareliia was also thought to be 
vulnerable to ethnic separatism. 162 Like Buriatiia, these suspicions have proved 
unfounded. In recent years Kareliia has attempted to parlay its border position into 
the status of being Russia's gateway to the European Union.
Tiumen oblast lies on the edge of western Siberia, though the region was 
included in the Urals Federal District. Its impressive economic statistics conceal the 
disparities between the oblast and the autonomous okrugs attached to it. While the 
autonomous okrugs produce enormous amounts of gas and oil for the country, the 
oblast proper is largely agrarian and, until recent years, received little of the northern 
okrugs' revenues. This issue became significant in the 1990s, in what became known 
locally as the "war between north and south," during which Tiumen's governor sought 
Moscow's support in formally bringing the okrugs under the oblast's control. The 
matter was effectively resolved when Sergei Sobianin, a candidate from the okrugs, 
won the oblast governorship.
Perm oblast is very much the mirror-opposite of Tiumen. The region has 
always been considered part of the Urals, and the inclusion of Perm in the Volga 
Federal District was the source of much consternation. Perm is blessed with a diverse
161 See Chapter Two.
162 A popular joke in Kareliia following the collapse of the USSR was that Kareliia should declare war
on Finland... and immediately surrender.
economy and ranks among Russia's "donor" regions. Its own border problems 
stemmed from the Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug - an economic backwater that 
was deeply dependent upon the oblast's economy, but whose separate existence was 
justified by its ethnic status. Following a referendum held simultaneously with the 
2003 State Duma elections, the two regions were headed to become the first regional 
merger in post-Soviet Russia. 163
163 See Chapter Six.
Chapter Two: A Brief History of Russia's Internal Borders
Introduction
In late 2004, the flag of Vladimir oblast became a legal and historical battleground. 
In this traditionally loyal, ethnically Russian region in the country's center, the oblast 
government adopted a flag that reflected its accumulated history with the Soviet 
Union's hammer and sickle alongside the symbols of the Vladimir guberniia 
conferred by Ekaterina II. The oblast procurator charged that the tsarist-era symbols 
implied the strict subordination of the region to the center, essentially reducing the 
status of the federal subject to that of a vassal of the crown. Meanwhile, the Russian 
President's heraldic council argued that the inclusion of the hammer and sickle 
"usurps the state symbols of the USSR" and the RSFSR. l The difference in 
perspectives was revealing: while the oblast procurator saw the violation in terms of 
diminishing the region's status, the Presidential council perceived exactly the opposite 
problem.
The episode illustrates that the messy state of center-regional relations 
emerging from the 1990s did not develop in a vacuum, but neither was it the merely 
the result of history repeating itself. Rather, it was fostered by institutional 
continuities that shaped political roles, repertoires, and identities, stretching across 
regimes and revolutions. This chapter briefly examines these continuities in the 
development of Russia's system of internal borders, starting with the imperial age of 
Russia and continuing through to the late Brezhnev era. At issue is the extent to 
which Russia's experience with state-building reveals its internal boundaries to be
1 Kommersant, 4 October 2004. One of the deputies of Vladimir oblast's legislative assembly 
responded, "We will see what the heraldic council has to say after the State Duma adopts all of the 
president's proposals [concerning the elimination of gubernatorial elections]."
both constitutive of its external borders as well as vital institutions in the cultivation 
(or frustration) of state capacity. Of related interest is the extent to which internal 
borders, when activated as political and social institutions, come to be repositories of 
regional identity. To this end, the chapter focuses on the making of Kareliia, 
Buriatiia, Perm and Tiumen, throughout the imperial and Soviet periods.
In part, the material in this chapter serves as a helpful addendum to the El'tsin 
era debates concerning center-regional relations and Russian federalism (discussed in 
the introductory chapter), providing a historical perspective that is so often lacking in 
Western analyses. But it also helps to demonstrate the more salient theoretical point 
that internal borders are not mere products of state centralization or decentralization. 
Rather, they have featured as the primary instruments for achieving centralization or 
decentralization in Russia's history of state-building. As will be covered in later 
chapters, it is a point that the Putin regime seems to understand well.
The Tsarist Era: Internal Borders, Empire, and Modernization 
As an imperial power, the Russian state's expansion was characterized by the 
accretion (or annexation) of borderland territories which then became internal 
divisions within the empire. The Russian empire was distinctive for its lack of "blue 
water" territorial possessions - the empire expanded through the acquisition of 
contiguous rather than distant territories. As Russia entered the modern age, imperial 
expansion required the rationalization of the system of provincial government. 
Prior to the time of Petr I, the provinces were governed through feudal 
arrangements that were chaotic and difficult to control. Initial steps towards 
rationalizing provincial governance were taken in the 16th century when Ivan IV 
introduced the system of voevodstva to administer the border regions. Later, the
voevodstva were distributed across the rest of the country by the first Romanov, Tsar 
Mikhail Fedorovich, who viewed it as a means for centralizing the state after the Time 
of Troubles. It was also seen as necessary for developing more effective local 
governing mechanisms. Mikhail further established territorial divisions - the 
riazriady - that resembled Russia's present day military districts in their 
administrative and functional characteristics. 2
By the eighteenth century, Russia was divided unto 166 districts, called uezdy 
(also called kniazhskie zemli, udely.prikazy, razriady, and cheti) and volosti. Petr I 
sought to bring order to this system with his decree of 18 December 1708, which 
divided Russia into eight gubernii (governorships) and placed governors in charge of 
each. Initially the borders of the gubemii were based roughly on those of the 
razriady, though the number of gubernii climbed to eleven by the end of the Petrine 
era. 4 While Petr's governors were initially charged with broad responsibilities for 
regional development and administration, their powers would later be pared back with 
the further subdivision of the gubernii into provintsii (provinces) and uezdy (revived 
after a brief disappearance) in 1719. 5
The territorial reform was ambitious, though the empires' resources were 
stretched too thin to support the administrative network envisioned by Petr I. As 
Riasanovsky describes, "changes began in a somewhat haphazard manner, largely 
under pressure of war and a desperate search for money."6 Petr's reform had the 
unintended effect of decreasing central control over the activities of the local
2 A.G. Trifonov and B.V. Mezhuev, "General-gubernatorstvo v Rossiiskoi sisteme territorial'nogo 
upravleniia," Palis 9, no. 5 (2000): 19-20.
3 The original eight gubernii were: Ingermanlandskaia (later Peterburgskaia), Moskovskaia, Kievskaia, 
Smolenskaia, Arkhangelogorodskaia (Arkhangel'skaia), Kazanskaia, Azovskaia, and Sibirskaia.
4 Trifonov and Mezhuev, "General-gubernatorstvo v Rossiiskoi sisteme territorial'nogo upravleniia," 
5 Sergei Tarkhov, "Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh," Logos, 
no. 1 (2005). The provinces were later eliminated and the uezdy restored within the guberniia.
6 Nicholas Valentine Riasanovsky, A History of Russia, 6th ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2000), 232.
authorities. In theory, the local procurators were supposed to exercise legal oversight, 
but they lacked the political power to overturn the governors' decisions. Petr's 
governors focused on local concerns to such an extent that they ceased to be reliable 
agents for conducting the center's policy. Indeed, the disconnection between the 
center and the provinces made the system incapable of adapting to changes in the 
center's political and economic priorities. 7
By the end of Petr's rule in 1725, Russian provincial administration was a 
"tangled mess" that would task his successors for another half a century. 8 The 
number of gubernii continued to grow, reaching 23 by the middle of the 18th century. 9 
The governors had become more autonomous of the center and more capricious on 
their own turf, yet the bases of local power also became less secure. It was the 
inability of the provincial authorities to stop the spread of Pugachev's peasant 
rebellion in 1773-1775 that convinced Ekaterina II of the need for fundamental 
changes. Her decree from 7 November 1775 reduced the size of the gubernii and 
increased their number to 40 (plus 2 oblasts). Ekaterina rationalized the structure of 
internal administration by determining their boundaries solely on the basis of 
population, with gubernii holding between 300,000 and 400,000 people. 10 Historical 
and regional considerations were not taken into account in the drawing of the new 
boundaries. 11 But for the first time in Russian history, provincial boundaries were 
clearly and meticulously demarcated by special government agents who criss-crossed
7 Trifonov and Mezhuev, "General-gubernatorstvo v Rossiiskoi sisteme territorial'nogo upravleniia," 
8 Richard G. Robbins, The Tsar's Viceroys: Russian Provincial Governors in the Last Years of the 
Empire (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1987), 6-8.
9 O.V. Shul'gina, "Izmeneniia administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii: istoriko-geograficheskii 
analiz," Resursy regionov Rossii, no. 4 (2001): 17.
10 Robbins, The Tsar's Viceroys, 9. Each guberniia was in turn subdivided into districts containing 
approximately 30,000 inhabitants each.
11 Riasanovsky, A History of Russia, 261-2.
the map over a period of six years. 12 The size and borders of the majority of gubernii 
established in 1775-1785 did not change until the 1920s. It was during this time that 
the Perm and Tobol'sk gubernii were established, which eventually formed the bases 
for today's Perm and Tiumen oblasts. 13 By the end of her rule, the number of 
Ekaterina's gubernii reached 50 (plus one oblast). 14
An additional innovation of Ekaterina's was the creation of the governors- 
general (general-gubernatory, also called namestniki) to oversee the governors. The 
governors-general typically had authority over three or four gubernii each. Perm and 
Tobol'sk were joined in a single namestnichestvo with its center in the city, Perm'. 15 
The governors-general were granted sweeping powers, including the abilities to 
countermand governors' edicts and to bring criminal charges against governors. 
Indeed, their powers were sufficiently great (within their own domains) as to be seen 
as a potential threat by Ekaterina's son and heir, Pavel I, who eliminated the office in 
the majority of central Russian regions shortly after coming to power.
Pavel I instituted his own provincial reform, though far less sweeping than his 
mother's. Some gubernii were enlarged while thirteen were eliminated, reducing the 
overall number from 51 to 42, as the new tsar re-centralized power in St. Petersburg. 
Aleksandr I also pursued state centralization, though the most important development 
during his rule was the creation of the central ministries in 1802. 16 Contrary to what 
one might have expected, the gradual rise in ministerial power appears to have been 
related to the rising power of Russia's governors in the 19th century. The regions 
occupied a pivotal position in the imperial system of rule, straddling the divide
12 A. Ushakov, Kak upravlialsiapermskii krai ran 1 she i kak upravliaetsia leper' (Perm1 : Permskoe 
knizhnoe isdatel'stvo, 1958), 25. Riasanovsky (2000) points out that the survey of boundaries was also 
"an important step in legalizing and confirming landholdings."
13 Ibid., 24.
14 Tarkhov, "Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh."
15 1.S. Kaptsugovicha, Istoriia urala. Tom I (Perm': Permskoe knizhnoe izdatel'stvo, 1976), 126.
16 Robbins, The Tsar's Viceroys, 12.
between branch and territorial principles of rule. As Robbins describes, the governors 
came increasingly under the control of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), which 
sought to professionalize the service. At the same time, the MVD attempted to 
increase gubernatorial powers in order to make them into more effective local agents. 
As tension grew between the ministries and the emperor, the power of regional 
executives was further augmented. The governors presented the emperor with a 
mechanism for circumventing the developing bureaucratic structures, whether by 
appointing friends to governorships or assigning them special tasks to carry out in the 
emperor's name. 17
The creation (or elimination) of the gubernii and the carving up of Russia's 
internal boundaries was bound up with Russia's state-building project, rather than an 
organic process of a "gathering of lands." The overall trend during the 19th century 
was toward expansion and addition of gubernii and oblasty. A further ten gubernii 
were added, mostly in conjunction with Russia's expansion into Siberia, the Far East, 
and the division of the Caucasus into smaller gubernii.
In 1809, all of Finland was joined to Russia as an autonomous grand duchy. 
The territory between lakes Ladoga and Onega formed the Olonets guberniia, or the 
southern portion of today's Republic of Kareliia, while the Archangel'sk guberniia
contained the northern portion of Kareliia. During this time, however, the area of 
today's Kareliia was still more Finnish than Russian. Kareliia was claimed as a locus 
of Finnish culture with the Grafting of the Finnish national epic, the Kalevala, from 
folk poetry discovered in Kareliia in the early 19th century. As Paasi observes, "the 
boundary established between Finland and Russia (and later the Soviet Union), which 
remained in broad outline the same for the period 1833-1940.. .was regarded as stable
17 Ibid.,Ch.sl-2.
18 Ott Kurs and Rein Taagepera, "Karelia: Orthodox Finland," in The Finno-Ugric Republics and the
Russian State, ed. Rein Taagepera (New York: Routledge, 1999), 106.
and sanctioned by history." 19 In other words, this internal boundary of the empire 
simultaneously formed a cultural or national boundary between Russia and Finland. 
When Finland became independent in 1917, the internal border briefly became 
international.
In Siberia, the territorial grid of provincial administration evolved in pace with 
Russian colonization. Zamiatina describes this process as one of establishing 
"archipelagos" of power, by which administrative centers were prioritized over 
economic or commerce functions: "the ruling of Siberian territories was not so much 
the development of territory (osvoenie territorii), and not even the acquisition of 
territory (ovladenie territorii), so much as the establishment of ruling centers on the 
territory."20 At the time of Petr I's provincial reform, Russian penetration into Siberia 
was relatively limited and the whole of Siberia was enclosed within a single, massive 
guberniia. It was not until 1796 that the Siberian guberniia was divided into the 
Tobol'sk and Irkutsk gubernii. 21
This situation changed dramatically in the 19th century. In eastern Siberia, the 
Buriats were granted local autonomy in the 18th century in return for serving as 
Cossacks to guard Russia's frontier with Chinese Outer Mongolia. This autonomy 
was to be short-lived. Buriat territories were further subdivided to facilitate the 
acceleration of Russian colonization, eventually being split between the Irkutsk 
guberniia and the Transbaikal oblast (Zabaikal'e}. In addition, the two provinces fell 
under the authority of separate governors-general. As the number of settlers east of 
Lake Baikal grew, Buriats were removed from the border zone so that the area came
19 Anssi Paasi, Territories, Boundaries and Consciousness: The Changing Geographies of the Finnish- 
Russian Border (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996), 86.
20 N.Iu. Zamiatina, "Modeli politicheskogo prostranstva," Polls 9, no. 4 (1999): 30-31. Zamiatina 
argues that this explains the tendency in Russia to perceive cities as the center of government, in 
contrast to the the European perception of cities as centers of trade and industry.
21 A.A. Elaev, Buriatiia: put' k avtonomii i gosudarstvennosti (Moskva: Antal, 1994), 17.
to be inhabited exclusively by Russians. Forsyth argues that this resettlement policy 
was aimed at creating "an alien frontier zone devoid of native
population.. .corresponding to the empty zone formed by the Manchus on their side of 
the frontier."22
Ethnic, regional and geopolitical tensions continued to rise in eastern Siberia 
towards the end of the 19th century. The zemstvo reform of Aleksandr II permitted 
the emergence of oblastnichestvo - a social and cultural movement that focused on 
the specific character of individual Russian regions, and which promoted local 
customs and culture. Moreover, the elimination of serfdom in 1861 was equally 
crucial in encouraging the spread of regionalism, since "for the leaders of
oblastnichestvo, Siberia was a sort of serf for the Russian empire." On the southern 
flank of Siberia, the Transbaikal region was seen as a potential beach-head for 
Russian interests in Korea, Manchuria, and Northern China, but only if the proportion 
of Russian inhabitants dramatically increased. 24 The imperial government attempted 
to force through an agrarian reform to make room for Russian settlers, starting with 
the liquidation of native governing institutions and replacement with the volost'
system of rural government used in Russian peasant communities. This sparked 
several waves of nationalist sentiment as Buriats in Irkutsk and Transbaikal openly 
resisted the reform and, in 1905, established the first All-Buriat Congress. The 
Congress reduced tensions by formally acceeding to the center's reform, though it
22 James Forsyth, A History of the Peoples of Siberia: Russia's North Asian Colony 1581-1990 
(Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1992), 168-9.
23 Vladimir Shlapentokh, Roman Levita, and Mikhail Loiberg, From Submission to Rebellion: The 
Provinces versus the Center in Russia (Boulder: Westview Press, 1997), 50-1.
24 Elaev, Buriatiia, 23.
25 Forsyth, A History of the Peoples of Siberia, 172.
subverted central authority by merely renaming native boundaries at the lower level of 
administration (from the traditional aimakto buluk). 26
By 1914, the Russian Empire was divided into 60 gubernii and 21 oblasts. 
The oblasts were located along the edge of the empire, the majority of which were 
divided among four general-gubernatorstva (Irkutsk, Priamursk, Stepnyi, and 
Turkestan). Five additional oblasts in the Transcaucasus guberniia and three other 
oblasts (voiska Donskogo, Ural'skaia, Turgaiskaia) were independent of the 
governors-general and possessed the same status as the gubernii. 27
The Early Soviet Era: Imperial Legacies, Revolutionary Compromises 
The 1917 revolution ushered in nearly 50 years of instability as Russia's internal 
borders were drawn and re-drawn. The Soviet Union's state-building experience was 
bound-up with the seemingly endless quest begun during the tsarist era to find the 
optimal internal division of state power and territory. Regional boundaries continued 
to expand or contract in alternation, but the dynamics now followed somewhat 
different logics from those of the tsarist period. If the tsarist period sought to 
overcome the morass of inherited provincial boundaries and rationalize them in the 
interest of empire-building, the Soviet leadership found multiple uses for those 
boundaries - in pacifying the countryside during the Civil War, as vehicles of 
revolution, and as instruments for the consolidation of power. Lenin considered the 
tsarist system of gubernii to be medieval and inextricably bound with the repressive 
imperial state. He further criticized the system for ignoring the distribution of 
industry and other economic conditions, and for not giving due consideration to non-
26 Elaev, Buriatiia, 24-32.
27 Tarkhov, "Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh."
Russian nationalities. These latter two complaints essentially formed the dual 
principles for the re-drawing of Soviet Russia's internal boundaries.
With regard to the non-Russian nationalities, Slezkine details the extent to 
which the nature and function of internal borders were both instrumental to, and the 
essence of, the Bolsheviks' break with the ancien regime:
The most remarkable aspect of [Lenin's and Stalin's campaign for a strictly 
territorial definition of autonomy] was the assertion - rarely challenged either 
before or after 1917 - that all territorial divisions could be described as either 
"medieval" or "modern," with modernity defined as democracy (borders 
"based on popular sympathies") and with democracy resulting in "the greatest 
possible homogeneity in the national composition of the population."29
The Bolsheviks initially encouraged the non-Russian minorities' declarations of self- 
determination and secession, maintaining this position well into the Civil War. Their 
courting of the national minorities was aided by the White's refusal to tolerate 
secessionist tendencies. 30 The strategem perhaps confirmed for the Reds that national 
enmity in the tsarist colonies was a product of past oppression. If it did, however, it 
also underlined the extent to which the Bolsheviks underestimated its strength and 
appeal.
Lenin viewed nationalism as epiphenomenal, and expected that the national- 
territorial model of federal management would ultimately amount to a temporary 
arrangement. 31 Indeed, the Soviet leadership moved quickly to stem the tide of 
secession. Already in 1920, Stalin wrote in Pravda that, "the interests of the masses 
of the people render the demand for the secession of the border regions at the present
28 Shul'gina, "Izmeneniia administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii," 18.
29 Yuri Slezkine, "The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State Promoted Ethnic 
Particularism," Slavic Review 53, no. 2 (1994): 417. Slezkine is quoting from Lenin here.
30 Walker Connor, The National Question in Marxist-Leninist Theory and Strategy (Princeton: 
PrincetonUP, 1984), 46-7.
31 Gregory Gleason, Federalism and Nationalism: The Struggle for Republican Rights in the USSR 
(Boulder: Westview Press, 1990), 28-33.
state of the revolution a profoundly counter-revolutionary one."32 The right of self- 
determination continued to be respected and even institutionalized, but it was recast as 
a right belonging not to nations, but to national proletariats. Experts criss-crossed the 
land during the 1920s, marking internal boundaries in a manner somewhat 
reminiscent of the time of Ekaterina II. This time, however, the process was guided 
by the principle that administrative and ethnographic boundaries ought to coincide, 
"which meant that most of the imperial territory would have to be divided into 
borderlands and that professional ethnographers would have to play an important role 
in the endeavor."33
The initial volley of boundary changes occurred with the onset of Civil War 
(1918-22) as regions underwent a process of republicanization or sovereignization. 34 
In 1918, alone, five new republics were declared (Stavropol'skaia, Terskaia, Tavrida, 
Donskaia, Kubano-Chernomorskaia), as well as autonomies in Siberia, Kuban, 
Crimea, and the Far East. New soviet and non-soviet autonomies, and even 
independent states, were declared during 1918-1920 among the predominantly non- 
Russian gubernii and oblasts (in Ukraine, Belarus, the Transcaucasus, and Central 
Asia). Poland, the Baltics, Finland, and Bessarabia fully split off from the country. 
Between 1919 and 1922, at least four governments existed in the Far East and Siberia.
In Siberia, representatives from Irkutsk, Chita, and Verkhneudinsk (later Ulan- 
Ude) at the All-Buriat Congress held in April 1917 called for a single, continuous 
Buriat territory with its own Duma. 35 Their efforts were preempted by the October 
Revolution and the beginning of the Civil War. Buriats resisted Bolshevik rule during
32 Quoted in: Connor, The National Question in Marxist-Leninist Theory and Strategy, 50.
33 Slezkine, "The USSR as a Communal Apartment," 427.
34 The following section draws heavily on the original research of Sergei Tarkhov. Tarkhov, 
"Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh." I am grateful to Julia 
Sineokaya and Valerii Anashvili for providing me with an advance copy of Tarkhov's article.
35 Forsyth, A History of the Peoples of Siberia, 271.
the Civil War and, unsurprisingly, local Bolshevik leaders determined that Buriat self- 
government was neither feasible nor desirable. Nevertheless, they were overruled by 
the central leadership and autonomous Buriat regions were established, though 
territorially divided: the Buriat lands to the east of Lake Baikal (Zabaikal'e) were 
enclosed within the Far Eastern Republic, while the western Buriat lands fell within 
the territory of the Irkutsk Soviet. When the war ended in 1922, the Far Eastern 
Republic was absorbed into the RSFSR and the two Buriat autonomies were joined 
into the Buriat-Mongol ASSR (BMASSR) in 1923. 36
Along the Russian-Finnish border, the Kareliian Labor Commune (KTK) was 
formed in 1920 upon the initiative of emigre Edvard Giulling. Giulling had persuaded 
Lenin that a prosperous socialist republic on the border of Finland would serve the 
dual purpose of attracting exiled Finnish communists and inspiring northern Europe. 
Though Kareliians repeatedly took up arms against the Bolsheviks in 1921-2 (with 
some unofficial help from Finland), the uprisings were put down and some 33,500 
refugees fled to Finland. Meanwhile, several thousand defeated Reds from the 
Finnish Civil War travelled in the opposite direction and settled in eastern (Russian) 
Kareliia. Giulling secured significant economic autonomy for the border region and 
was able to sustain this autonomy until the 1930s thanks to Lenin's personal
involvement in forming the region, as well as the propaganda value that it provided. 
But autonomy came at a cost. The Olonets guberniia was dissolved in summer 1922 
and its territory added to the KTK. 38 When the KTK was upgraded to the Kareliian 
ASSR in 1923, its territory was increased by 31,000 km2, adding 72,000 people from 
eastern, predominantly Russian-inhabited areas. It is worth noting Baron's contention
36 Ibid., 273-5, E.E. Tarmakhanova, ed., Istoriia Buriatii, chast' II (1917-1998 gg.) (Ulan-Ude: Belig. 
2000), 21-24.
37 Nick Baron, "The Karelian ASSR," in Centre-Local Relations in the Stalinist State, 1928-1941, ed. 
E. A. Rees (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002), 117.
38 Tarkhov, "Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh."
that these moves were instigated by Kareliia's Finnish leaders, who privileged 
economic over national criteria and sought to prevent the rise of (non-Finnish) 
Kareliian nationalism by including ethnically mixed and non-Kareliian areas in the 
republic's territory. 39 As a result, the Kareliian population of the republic was diluted 
such that it was down to 37% by 1926. 40
As concerns the economic principle for drawing internal boundaries, the 1920s 
produced massive attempts at enlarging and combining regions known as economic 
"districting" (raionirovanie). Since the administrative-territorial divisions of tsarist 
Russia were considered "connected with the entire system of bourgeois-landed 
aristocracy government and reflected its interests," the Bolsheviks believed that the 
old divisions had to be destroyed and replaced with new ones before any serious local 
reform could be attempted. 41 The Civil War was helpful in breaking up the gubernii. 
In April 1918 it was decided to divide the Perm guberniia into two okrugs: Perm and 
Ekaterinburg. But in May 1918, the Urals Military District was founded, which 
included the Perm, Viatka, Ufa, Orenburg, and Kazan gubernii. At the end of 1919, 
the Perm guberniia was partially dismembered. The Ekaterinburg okrug was 
"promoted" to a separate guberniia, while another portion of the Perm guberniia was 
attached to the new Bashkir republic. 42 It was also during this time that the the 
Tobol'sk guberniia was divided into the Tiumen, Omsk, and Cheliabinsk gubernii. 43
With the formal establishment of the USSR in 1922, the Soviet leadership 
turned its sights on moulding the country's internal borders to conform to its vision of 
economic planning. Essentially, the idea was to replace the older, smaller gubernii
39 Baron, "The Karelian ASSR," 117.
40 Kurs and Taagepera, "Karelia: Orthodox Finland," 107-9.
41 Ushakov, Kak upravlialsiapermskii krai, 56.
42 Ibid., 56-60.
43 Tarkhov, "Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh."
with enormous oblasts that corresponded with Gosplan's economic raions. 44 Ideally, 
such a scheme would take into consideration "the concentration of industry, 
particularities of agricultural development, direction and character of transport 
infrastructure, gravitation of the populace towards one center or another, national 
content, population size and density."45 From 1923 to 1928, the tsarist gubernii were 
replaced with oblasts in Russian areas and krais in non-Russian areas, with the goal of 
enlarging administrative-territorial units at every level of the hierarchy. Hence, the 
next largest level would be the okrug (larger than the uezd), followed by the raion 
(significantly larger than the volost'). The Soviet government started work on the 
raionirovanie of the country on 3 November 1923 with the Central Committee's 
resolution on the creation of a massive Urals oblast. This new entity would include 
the territories of the former Ekaterinburg, Perm, Cheliabinsk, and Tiumen gubernii, 
with its administrative center located in Ekaterinburg (later renamed Sverdlovsk). 46 
Though the process began with the Urals, the overall trend moved from the 
outer edges of the USSR inwards. As Tarkhov points out, the last stage in the reform 
was accomplished with the Central Committee's resolution of 14 January 1929 on the 
complete liquidation of gubernii and creation of oblasts and krais in the remaining 
parts of the country - that is, the central Russian regions and the European north. In 
other words, the new regime focused on changing the country's internal borders at the 
periphery first, leaving the center and European north until the very last. By the end 
of the 1920s, then, the gubernii had been completely replaced with six oblasts and
44 The country was divided into 21 economic regions in 1921, but these divisions were used solely for 
planning purposes and were not accorded administrative status or institutions. lu.N. Gladkii and A.I. 
Chistobaev, Regionovedenie (Moskva: Gardariki, 2003), 48-50.
45 Ushakov, Kak upravlialsia permskii krai, 61.
46 1.S. Kaptsugovicha, Istoriia urala. Tom //(Perm 1 : Pemskoe knizhnoe izdatel'stvo, 1977), 159. 
47 Tarkhov, "Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh." The new 
oblasts created were: Zapadnaia, Ivanovskaia, Promyshlennaia, Nizhegorodskaia, and Tsentral'no- 
Promyshlennaia, as well as the Severnyi krai.
seven krais, which also contained within them 17 national-territorial autonomies. 
Alongside these new units stood ten autonomous republics (ASSR).
The 1930s: Reduction and Repression
Shortly after the completion of the re-drawing of borders in the 1920s, the USSR 
entered a new phase of reducing the size of its constituent regions. The enormous 
oblasts produced by the economic districting proved too difficult to manage and had 
to be broken down into smaller units. Once again the process began at the country's 
extremities, starting with the Far Eastern krai in 1932, and concluded with the interior 
regions at the end of the decade. As Shlapentokh points out, the process may have 
had a benign public justification, but "the decomposition of giant regions into smaller 
divisions during the period of mass terror, such as occurred with laroslavl, Tula, 
Kursk, Cheliabinsk, Arkhangelsk, Gorky, and many others, was also a result of
Stalin's completely unfounded fears."
In 1934, the Urals oblast was divided into three smaller oblasts - Sverdlovsk, 
Cheliabinsk, and Obsko-Irrysh (on the territory of today's Tiumen oblast). 49 Two of 
the national okrugs created in 1930, Ostiaksko-Vogul'skii (today Khanty-Mansiiskii) 
and lamal'skii (Nenetskii), were transferred to the Obsko-Irrysh oblast. But the latter 
was eliminated by the end of 1934 and its territory distributed between the new Omsk 
oblast and Cheliabinsk oblast, while the two national okrugs were merely transferred 
to Omsk oblast. 50 In October 1938, Perm oblast was split off from Sverdlovsk oblast 
once more. The Komi-Permiatskii national okrug, which had been created in 1925 
and originally subordinated to Sverdlovsk, was now transferred to Perm. By the end 
of the 1930s, no large oblasts or krais remained in the RSFSR. The new oblasts were
48 Shlapentokh, Levita, and Loiberg, From Submission to Rebellion, 62.
49 Ushakov, Kak upravlialsia permskii krai, 66.
50 Tarkhov, "Izmenenie administrativno-territorial'nogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh."
significantly smaller and to some extent resembled the tsarist gubernii. Indeed, the 
borders of the "new" Perm oblast virtually coincided with those of the Perm guberniia 
of 1919-1923. 51 In the summer of 1944, the Tomsk and Tiumen oblasts were 
established in western Siberia. Tiumen oblast was created from portions of Omsk 
oblast, including the two national okrugs to the north. Both Perm and Tiumen oblasts 
retain these borders to the present day.
For the non-Russian regions, ethnic identity was becoming ever more 
territorial in the 1930s, as "each individual got stuck with a nationality and most 
nationalities got stuck with their borders."52 Already the existence of a national- 
territorial division became recognized as evidence of legitimate claims to a distinctive 
national identity - part of what Brubaker has referred to as the crystallization of 
territorial-political identity. 53 This granted the Stalinist state a particularly effective 
weapon for containing expressions of national identity, insofar as the withdrawal of a 
national-territorial division would "denationalize" that community. 54 With the start of 
World War II, national groups considered to be "unloyal" found their territorial 
autonomies liquidated. Many of these groups were deported to Central Asia, 
Kazakhstan, and Siberia, while their territories were distributed among neighboring 
Russian oblasts and "loyal" autonomies. Changes to internal borders ominously 
reflected deportations of entire peoples, conspicuous by their absence - the Crimean 
Tatars and the Volga Germans, and particularly in the Caucasus. 55
Among the first regions to be affected by this tactic was the Buriat-Mongol 
ASSR. Possibly motivated by concerns of the rise of Japan in the Pacific and the
51 Ushakov, Kak upravlialsiapermskii krai, 69.
52 Slezkine, "The USSR as a Communal Apartment," 444.
53 Rogers Brubaker, Nationalism Reframed: Nationhood and the National Question in the New Europe 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996).
54 Slezkine, "The USSR as a Communal Apartment," 445.
55 Tarkhov, "Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh."
need to safeguard Russia's southern flank, the Politburo vivisected the BMASSR in 
September 1937: its territory north-west of Lake Baikal was turned into a separate 
national autonomy, the Ust'-Orda Buriat-Mongol national okrug, while the transfer of 
surrounding territory to Irkutsk oblast left the new okrug detached from the ASSR and 
isolated. Similarly, a portion of the republic's eastern territory was made into the 
Agin Buriat-Mongol national okrug, also separated from the BMASSR. The 
republic's leadership was replaced shortly afterwards.
Different explanations have been suggested for this move. The administrative 
justification was the desire to integrate the okrugs into the economies of the 
surrounding Russian oblasts - an argument, it is worth mentioning, that remains 
popular in Putin's Russia concerning regional enlargement in Irkutsk56 - while 
formally respecting the indigenous people's autonomy. Another possibility was the 
center's fear that Buriats, who are linguistically and culturally (at least as regards the 
predominant Buddhist culture) closer to Japan than Russia, might be tempted to 
collaborate with Japan. 57 Added to this was the fact that the Buriats were the largest 
nationality native to Siberia (with 237,500 people in 1926) and possessed a strongly 
developed national consciousness. 58 As a consequence of the territorial re-division, 
the ratio of Buriats to Russians within the BMASSR greatly diminished. Moreover, 
the effect was compounded by the migration of Buriats to Mongolia and Inner 
Mongolia in the wake of the 1937 boundary change, and by ongoing Russian in- 
migration to the area. If the overall population of the republic increased during 1926- 
1939 by 156,900 people (despite the reduction in its territory), the Buriat population 
decreased by 13,800 people while the Russian population during this period grew by
56 See Chapter Six.
57 A.A. Elaev, Buriatskii narod: stanovlenie, razvitie, samoopredelenie (Moskva: 2000), 216-7.
58 Forsyth, A History of the Peoples of Siberia, 330.
154,900 people. 59 In other words, the Buriats went from comprising 43.8% of the 
republic's population before 1937 to only 21.3% after 1937. 60
In Kareliia, the change of leadership preceded, or perhaps was viewed as 
preparation for, territorial change. Giulling and the republican leadership were 
arrested for "nationalist deviations" and replaced by figures from Leningrad. 61 From 
1935, the region was effectively under the control of Andrei Zhdanov, who had taken 
over in Leningrad following the assassination of Sergei Kirov in December 1934. 
Through the 1930s, Zhdanov's obkom effectively transformed the republic into "the 
local executive arm of Leningrad."62 As war in Europe grew more probable, the 
USSR sought to open negotiations with Finland to move the border further from 
Leningrad. Despite the Finns' willingness to make some concessions, the Soviet 
Union attacked Finland on 30 November 1939, starting the brief "Winter War." The 
war ended in March 1940 with Finland ceding large areas of Finnish Kareliia (and 
some northern portions of Finland), which were joined to the Kareliian ASSR. 63
The enlarged republic was formally upgraded at the end of March 1940 to a 
full union republic, the Karelo-Finnish SSR (KFSSR). The move was partly a means 
to prepare for the possible annexation of all of Finland, or at least to keep Finland 
continuously "under the gun." At the same time, portions of the Kareliian isthmus 
and the entirety of the coast of the Gulf of Finland were detached from the KFSSR 
and transferred to Leningrad oblast (in the Russian Republic) from 1940 to 1946. 64 
Finland (re-)occupied Kareliia during World War II (from 1941 to 1944), during 
which time about 70% of the republic's population was evacuated deeper within the
59 Elaev, Buriatskii narod, 218.
60 Forsyth, A History of the Peoples of Siberia, 334.
61 Khelena Yalta, ed., Chto takoe Kareliia (Helsinki: Soiuz Karelii, 1997), 30.
62 Baron, "The Karelian ASSR," 135.
63 Paasi, Territories, Boundaries and Consciousness, 106.
64 Kurs and Taagepera, "Karelia: Orthodox Finland," 109.
USSR. 65 This, combined with the departure of 420,000 inhabitants to Finland after 
the war and the slow pace of re-settlement, left Kareliia sparsely populated for the 
following decade. 66
The 1950s: Khrushchev's Sovnarkhoz Reform
The last round of changes to internal borders occurred during the Khrushchev era. 
The autonomies that had been liquidated during the war were restored by January 
1957 (with the exception of the Volga German autonomous republic). In July 1956 
the Karelo-Finnish SSR was enfolded within the RSFSR as an autonomous republic 
and its name restored to the Kareliian ASSR. Similarly, the Buriat territories dropped 
the "Mongol" from their names, so that the Buriat-Mongol autonomous republic 
became, simply, the Buriat ASSR. 67 In both cases it is reasonable to assume that the 
Soviet leadership sought to diminish the potential for territorial claims made on behalf 
of Finns or Mongols on the other side of the border.
Despite these elements of stabilization, Khrushchev launched a revision of the 
country's internal borders in February 1957, proposing to abolish the central 
economic ministries and replace them with a network of regional economic councils, 
or sovnarkhozy. The reform created 105 councils, or one for almost every province 
and region (68 within the RSFSR). 68 In effect, the reform was "roughly equivalent to 
replacing American states with a new set of territorial-administrative entities."69 In 
part the reform was aimed at disrupting tendencies toward "localism" (mestnichestvo)
65 Yalta, ed., Chto takoe Kareliia, 30.
66 Paasi, Territories, Boundaries and Consciousness, 113.
67 Elaev relates a story, which may be apocryphal, regarding the change in the republic's name: at a 
meeting with the republic's leadership in 1958, Khrushchev asked, "Why is your republic called 
Buriat-Mongol? Are there any Mongols there?" When the republican leadership responded that there 
were not, Khrushchev proposed that the republic's name be changed. Elaev, Buriatskii narod, 246-7.
68 Of the 68 within the RSFSR, 60 were based on existing regions while eight were formed by 
combining regions. Shlapentokh, Levita, and Loiberg, From Submission to Rebellion, 236.
69 William Taubman, Khrushchev: the Man and his Era, 1st ed. (New York: Norton, 2003), 303-4.
among the regions - and it is worth noting that no distinction was drawn between the 
Russian and non-Russian territories on this count. Yet the sovnarkhoz reform was 
predominantly an instrument for Khrushchev to deprive his rivals in the central 
ministries of a political base. 70 The reform's decentralizing nature also represented a 
concession to Khrushchev's supporters among the regional and republican party 
apparatus, "who had long resented and complained about the power of the central
ministries." The reform had little effect on the problem of mestnichestvo (except, 
perhaps, to exacerbate it) 72 , and decentralization was steadily reversed. First the 
sovnarkhozy were herded under 17 larger economic regions in 1961, then again under 
a single Supreme Sovnarkhoz in September 1963. The last vestiges of Khrushchev's 
experiment with decentralization were swept away by September 1965 as the central
ministries' positions were reinstated.
Along with the fading of economic decentralization, the national question 
started to fade from the public agenda at the start of the 1960s. The 1961 Party 
Program confidently proclaimed that,
The borders between the union republics within the USSR are increasingly 
losing their former significance, since all the nations are equal, their life is 
organized on a single socialist foundation, the material and spiritual needs of 
the people are satisfied to the same extent, and they are all united into one 
family by common vital interests and are advancing together toward a single 
goal communism. 74
70 Hough argues that this is a mischaracterization since "nearly all of the twenty-four ministers whose 
ministries were abolished were given strategic industrial positions in the sovnarkhoz period." Yet it is 
hard to imagine that either the USSR Minister of the Coal Industry, who was dispatched to Kemerovo, 
or the Ministry of the Fish Ministry, sent to head the sovnarkhoz in Murmansk, would view their new 
assignments outside of Moscow as status-enhancing. Jerry F. Hough, The Soviet Prefects: The Local 
Party Organs in Industrial Decision-making (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1969), 55-62.
71 William J. Tompson, "Industrial Management and Economic Reform under Khrushchev," in Nikita 
Khrushchev, ed. William Taubman, Sergei Khrushchev, and Abbott Gleason (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2000), 142-3.
72 Ibid., 145.
73 Gleason, Federalism and Nationalism, 68-9.
74 Quoted in: Ibid., 66.
In the wake of the re-centralization of the state, the Party began to debate whether the 
USSR should de-federalize. Though the results were indeterminate, they pointed to 
the ongoing relevance of the shape and status of the country's internal borders as "an 
extraordinarily sensitive matter" despite the Party's claims to the contrary. 75
The Brezhnev Era: Stabilizing Boundaries and Regional Identities 
The Brezhnev era was a time of relative stability in center-periphery relations. If the 
political upheavals of the previous decades coincided with the promotion, demotion, 
enlargement or reduction of regional borders, it is not surprising that internal borders 
stayed put during what came to be known as the era of political and economic 
stagnation. This raises interesting questions about the shaping of regional interests 
and identities within those borders. The activation of new borders, division of 
existing borders, or even the minor "adjustment" of borders tend to generate interests 
and bring identities into open contestation. The process of institutionalization, by 
contrast, develops gradually by augmenting prior-existing relationships among 
borders, interests and identities. Even if outright changes in borders are not observed 
during this period, then, one must still examine the processes that inhabit them and 
affect their status. Two crucial dimensions of regional development concerned the 
"nativization" of regional Party leaderships and the routinization of center-regional 
engagements.
The stabilization of regional boundaries in the Brezhnev era was matched by 
the relative stabilization of regional administrative cadres. It was common policy 
throughout the Soviet era to rotate members of the managerial and political elite 
through different regions during their careers as a way of broadening experience while
75 Grey Hodnett, "The Debate over Soviet Federalism," Soviet Studies 18, no. 4 (1967): 481.
diminishing individual ties to particular regions. Despite the overall centralizing 
trend of the Brezhnev era, the rotation of regional elites actually declined and 
"natives" increasingly were promoted to party leadership in their own regions. In his 
speech to the 24th Party Congress in 1971, Brezhnev even stressed the increasing 
number of "local" workers in regional leaderships as a positive development, 
emphasizing that outsiders had only been appointed in "exceptional cases." 76 As 
Moses reports,
Those "insiders" recruited from lower positions inside the very same region 
have increased from 44 to 65 percent of all [obkom] bureau members, with the 
corresponding proportion directly assigned from outside the region and the 
regional area declining from 45 to 25 percent. The data also seem to bear out 
Brezhnev's conclusion that more "local workers" have been elected obkom 
first secretary. Obkom first secretaries originally recruited to the bureau from 
a position in the same regional middle elite have increased from 16 to 39 
percent. 77
This trend towards the "nativization" of regional administration was concentrated 
among the more urbanized regions of the RSFSR, suggesting that status and the
stability of regional cadres went hand in hand.
This is not particularly surprising, perhaps, given that the career patterns of 
leaders in communist regimes (not just the USSR) generally exhibited successful 
periods of service in local or provincial administration. 79 In Soviet Russia, provincial 
leaders were held responsible for maintaining political stability, for plan fulfillment of 
all the enterprises and institutions within their region, and generally for the integrated 
economic development of the area. By the 1960s, the Kremlin had specific incentives
76 Quoted in: Joel C. Moses, Regional Party Leadership and Policy-Making in the USSR (New York: 
Praeger, 1974), 146.
77 Ibid., 218. While about half of regional first secretaries remained "outsiders," the increase in 
"natives" among the regional leadership was clearly palpable.
78 Ibid., 221.
79 Daniel N. Nelson, "Dilemmas of Local Politics in Communist States," Journal of Politics 41, no. 1 
(1979): 29. The exceptions to this rule were those leaders who directly participated in staging 
communist revolutions. This trend continues to the present day in China. Deng Xiaoping's successor, 
Jiang Zemin, became general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party following a successful stint in 
Shanghai province. Zemin's successor, Hu Jintao, had previous experience running China's poorest 
province, Guizhou, and Tibet.
to promote local cadres "from within." From a realpolitik perspective, regional 
cadres had been decisive in overcoming the attempt to unseat Khrushchev by the 
"Anti-Party group" in 1957, and equally decisive in approving his removal in 1964. 
The Brezhnev regime had a vested interest in co-opting, rather than antagonizing, the 
most powerful elements of the regional leadership. Hence, Party statutes adopted 
under Khrushchev in 1961 that mandated the turnover of one-third of the Party 
committees at each election were repealed by the 23rd Party Congress in 1966. 80 
From an economic perspective, central planners arguably became increasingly 
dependent upon regional elites for reliable information regarding plan fulfillment and 
for the implementation of planning directives. The need for privileged "insider" 
knowledge of the region became especially pressing since plan fulfillment often 
meant the redirection of resources or priorities within a region by "authorizing or 
requiring some specialized administrator to deviate from his directives or plans so that 
some other administrative unit has a better chance to carry out its mission."81
While increasing the "native" content of regional administration may have 
been politically expedient and economically necessary, it also carried its share of risks 
for the central authorities. In the Soviet system, the regional Party leaders often 
appeared all-powerful within their domains. Ironically, the ongoing bureaucratization 
of the Soviet state facilitated the growth of regional power. In a fashion somewhat 
similar to the tsarist era, conflicts among central departments and ministries opened 
space on the provincial level for the obkom secretary to gain more power:
80 Philip G. Roeder, Red Sunset: The Failure of Soviet Politics (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1993), 107. 
Roeder continues that the annual turnover of provincial first secretaries was significantly lower during 
the Brezhnev years as a result, though he does not analyze the extent to which this was related to 
changes in the rotation of elites among different regions.
81 Jerry F. Hough, How the Soviet Union is Governed (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 1979), 
the very multiplicity of regulations, plans, and directives flowing down the 
different governmental lines of command... inevitably come to contradict each 
other to some extent as Party policy becomes associated with different 
departmental emphases and self-interest. Because of these contradictions and 
divergencies, many conflicts inevitably arise among local administrators. It is 
precisely when the actions of one specialized hierarchy begin to interfere with 
the work and interests of other hierarchies and groups that apoliticheskii 
question emerges. It is here that the local Party organ has the authority to 
countermand an administrative order or regulation and to obligate an
QO ^"^
administrator to take action.
One should note that this is not the same as saying the regional secretaries were 
deliberately granted greater autonomy by the Kremlin, nor does it imply the regional 
leaders necessarily had greater input in central decision-making. 83 Rather, the growth 
of the provincial secretaries' discretionary powers, along with extended tours of duty 
in their "home" regions, points to a subtle process of local power accretion among
Soviet Russia's more developed regions.
Indeed, under such conditions it would be surprising if regional officials and 
party leaders did not develop group identities with intense affective or normative ties 
to "their" territory. The organizational boundaries of provincial administration 
became persistent markers of regional belonging and responsibility. As a 1964 
editorial in Partiinaia zhizn' argues,
[Prior to 1962] the administrative divisions of the country had been changed. 
The names of the organizations had been changed. But always within the 
boundaries of this or that administrative unit, there was a single Party 
organization which embraced all of the given area. The Party organ in this 
area united and coordinated the activity of all the Soviet, economic, and public 
organizations. It led and bore complete responsibility for all sides of the
political, economic, and cultural life.
82 Hough, The Soviet Prefects, 106. Original emphasis.
83 The point is worth belaboring since Shlapentokh et al. misconstrue Hough's analysis in this fashion, 
apparently, in order to reject it out of hand. Shlapentokh, Levita, and Loiberg, From Submission to 
Rebellion, 74-5.
84 The term is drawn from: Nelson, "Dilemmas of Local Politics in Communist States."
85 Quoted in: Hough, The Soviet Prefects, 124.
Understandably, the more tightly integrated that a provincial Party organization of 
"natives" became as a bureaucratic unit, the more likely it was to be resentful of 
Moscow's interference in local affairs. 86 This would be a natural result of 
(increasingly) "native" Party leaders seeking to improve the rational economic 
administration of their region, as was often the case. 87
This interpretation appears to be supported by analyses of regional interest 
articulation and the (re-)institutionalization of center-regional engagements. Despite a 
dip in the open articulation of regional interests during the 1960s, regional leaders 
became more open and forceful in voicing region-specific concerns by the late- 
Brezhnev era. By the 26th Party Congress in 1981, regional interest articulation was 
perceived to be acceptable and a routine step in the planning process. 88 Indeed, 
regional secretaries increasingly went beyond the confines of the Party congresses and 
published their demands and criticisms in the central press. Moreover, their concerns 
became more forceful and ambitious in scope: "In articulating the needs of their 
regions, [regional party leaders were] much more likely to seek solutions to local 
administrative, economic, and social issues in changes in national policy or in greater
devolution of authority to the region." The most demanding and assertive stratum
86 Moses, Regional Party Leadership and Policy-Making in the USSR, 143-4.
87 "The reasons for localism on the part of local Party officials go beyond the pressures of self-interest. 
Perhaps the most important of these reasons has been the absence of a rational price system and a set of 
success-indicators that would give local officials a reliable means of judging whether a proposal is 
indeed 'localistic.'" Hough, The Soviet Prefects, 266. Of course, one should not be too apologetic for 
regional Party elites. Manifestations of localism and anti-Moscow sentiment (particularly during the 
Brezhnev era) could easily point to the entrenchment of corrupt, sultanistic provincial elites. In such 
cases, however, one would expect the regional elites to seek to avoid drawing the center's attention, 
either for fear of prosecution or out of reluctance to share the spoils.
88 Howard L. Biddulph, "Local Interest Articulation at CPSU Congresses," World Politics 36, no. 1 
(1983): 39.
89 George W. Breslauer, "Provincial Party Leaders' Demand Articulation and the Nature of Center- 
Periphery Relations in the USSR," Slavic Review 45, no. 4 (1986): 655.
of provincial secretaries tended to be from regions of traditional political importance 
or high political status. 90
There are several conclusions that can be drawn from these observations. 
First, the rising tide of regional interest articulation, particularly as concerned 
demands for changes in national policy, was surely just the visible tip of the iceberg. 
The presence of anti-Moscow sentiment among the regions became abundantly clear 
only in the post-Soviet period. Second, regional status had concrete implications for a 
region's development prospects, as well as the career prospects of the regional 
leadership. Generally speaking, the fusion of political and economic power in 
communist regimes meant that, "just as access to political resources, for example, 
carries with it access to economic resources, so exclusion from political power 
necessarily implies exclusion from social and economic resources."91 Among the 
Soviet provincial leaderships, this translated into increasingly tough competition for 
development projects, allocation of central investment and priorities, personnel 
(especially the allotment of nomenklatura lists to regional leaderships), and so forth.
Finally, the combination of the above factors likely accentuated the sense of 
regional separateness as regional borders increasingly demarcated the prospects for 
economic and political survival. Requests (or even demands) by regional secretaries 
for more rational planning and distribution were oriented towards improving a 
region's economic self-sufficiency. Hough documents the presence of such demands 
already in the late-Stalin era. 92 In other words, even if regional leaders possessed a
90 Ibid.: 660-64.
91 Valeric Bunce, "The Political Economy of the Brezhnev Era: The Rise and Fall of Corporatism," 
British Journal of Political Science 13, no. 2 (1983): 132.
92 "Many obkom secretaries [at the Nineteenth Party Contress in 1952] proposed large-scale investment 
projects in their regions, even though this might mean more work and worry for them personally. The 
first secretary of the Khabarovsk kraikom, for example, stated that his territory needed timber- 
processing and chemical plants so that the large amounts of timber scrap there could be put to industrial 
use. The Rostov leader argued for the construction of a blast furnace at the Taganrog Steel Plant so 
that it could produce its own pig iron from local ore and would not have to import pig iron from distant
common variety of anti-Moscow sentiment, they were divided by their competition 
for the resources allocated by Moscow. The more "nativized" a region's leadership, 
the more that their success in maintaining or improving their region's economic 
performance was tied to the life opportunities of their families, friends, and 
colleagues.
How compelling is this interpretation of the stabilization of regional 
boundaries and the development of regional identity during the Brezhnev era? This 
author is unaware of any serious research on the matter, unfortunately, so one can 
only make a best guess based upon the strength of alternative explanations. 93 The 
analysis here suggests that formal federal or hierarchical status only partly explains 
the growth of local power accretion in Soviet Russia, since the salience of regional 
borders was expressed in terms of their implications for differences in regional status 
and prestige. Aside from economic or traditional status, another source of local 
power accretion in communist regimes was ethnic or national sentiment. 94 The 
explanation proposed here would be confirmed if the development of ethno-territorial 
identity within the borders of the RSFSR followed a similar trajectory to the 
development of regionalist sentiment in the "non-ethnic" provinces, even if the 
content of politics was tailored to a different variety of claims against the center.
Insofar as internal borders were drawn according to different principles - 
either to bring borders in line with compact, non-Russian nationalities, or to organize 
and unify regional economic production - one might expect that regional status also
enterprises. And from the Molotov obkom came an insistent appeal for the beginning of preparatory 
work for the construction of a hydroelectric station at Solikamsk on the Upper Kama River. Unless 
this was done, the Party leader warned, the new enterprises to be built in the oblasty in the next five- 
year plan would find themselves without sufficient electricity." Hough, The Soviet Prefects, 259.
93 Admittedly, the uncovering of regional disputes over the relocation of internal borders would provide 
much more leverage on the question, but this sort of historical research has not been undertaken and is 
beyond the confines of the current project.
94 Nelson, "Dilemmas of Local Politics in Communist States," 33.
fluctuated differently for borders of different categories, with certain regions 
designated as ethnic homelands while others (predominantly Russian) were ascribed a 
formally neutral administrative status. Questions of regional status affected the non- 
Russian regions in a myriad of ways, especially concerning the consequences of the 
drawing of internal borders for nation-building. For instance, education in one's 
national language depended upon residency in an autonomous republic - a point 
particularly salient to regions that had been dissected during the Stalin era, such as 
Buriatiia:
In a typical situation, approximately one-third of the group [assigned a 
republic within the RSFSR] was left outside of the republic's borders (a mean 
of 33.2 percent, a median of 31.2 percent). In only two of the twelve 
autonomous republics were the borders so drawn as to incorporate more than 
90 percent of the titular group's membership, and in two others they excluded 
a substantial majority of the titular group (62.7 percent and 73.2 percent). 
Recalling that residence within one's own autonomous unit became a 
prerequisite for schooling conducted in one's native language, the impact of 
this initial gerrymandering upon the rate of acculturation must have been 
considerable. 95
Regional status also extended from the choices made in lumping regions together (or 
splitting them apart) as economic units, regardless of their national content. The 
expansion of Kareliia's borders to include the former Olonets guberniia provides a 
vivid example. The fateful decision to tie the Khanty-Mansiiskii and lamalo- 
Nenetskii national okrugs to Tiumen oblast is another.
The Brezhnev era effectively locked in the consequences of boundary changes 
for the status and development of the national autonomies. The relative power and 
status of a region was more likely to derive from its economic indicators and relative 
input in central decision-making during this period. Thus, Hough's seminal study of 
regional leaderships and industrial decision-making proceeds from the premise that 
smaller Union republics like Moldova were on equal footing with, if not less powerful
95 Connor, The National Question in Marxist-Leninist Theory and Strategy, 304.
than, stronger "non-ethnic" regions within the RSFSR like Sverdlovsk oblast. 96 
While the "national question" did not fade from public discourse, the national content 
of regional political engagements with the center was occluded (or concealed) by their 
economic content. If national concerns were to be addressed, they would have to be 
framed in such a way that they reflected the greater interest of Soviet society: "what is 
good for Yakutsk must be justified as essential for the Union."97 Alternatively, they 
would have to be expressed through cultural or other putatively apolitical venues for 
expression.
Yet even if this fell within the broader discriminatory pattern of Soviet 
nationalities policy, the non-Russian nationalities and regions were not exclusively 
affected. In the 1960s and 1970s, the Brezhnev regime faced a creeping crisis of 
legitimacy as the official ideology lost its salience among society and the elite. In the 
non-Russian republics, party and government leaders sought out new sources of 
legitimacy "in the histories and traditions of the republics' titular nationalities, and in 
representing these nationalities' interests at all-Union fora."98 Similarly, Brezhnev 
and Mikhail Suslov tacitly cultivated Russian nationalism among the intelligentsia 
because it offered an alternative basis of legitimation that did not require political and 
economic reform. 99 At the same time, "the extraordinary attention to Russian 
nationalist concerns went hand in hand with an unwillingness to recognize the validity 
of these concerns or introduce policy changes in the areas where these concerns 
appeared to be justified." 100 The regime's attempt to compensate for the declining
96 Hough, The Soviet Prefects. Later, in his broader study of Soviet politics, Hough examines the 
national question only as concerns the Union republics. Otherwise he holds that "the oblast, krai, and 
autonomous republic are sufficiently comparable to be treated as identical..." Hough, How the Soviet 
Union is Governed, 483.
97 Biddulph, "Local Interest Articulation at CPSU Congresses," 30.
98 Vera Tolz, Russia, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), 204.
99 Yitzhak M. Brudny, Reinventing Russia: Russian Nationalism and the Soviet State, 1953-1991 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998), 16-17.
100 Ibid., 111-2.
salience of its official ideology thus had the opposite effect of what was intended, for 
Russia and the other Union republics. For the ethnically Russian regions, "localism" 
remained a dangerous political offense, and the Party secretaries in oblasts and krais 
were compelled to express region-specific concerns in terms of their ail-Union 
significance. The shape of those concerns had everything to do with the ways that 
regional boundaries were drawn or altered during the first decades of Soviet rule. 
Indeed, one could argue that they went further back since the majority of the RSFSR's 
internal borders (especially in European Russia) echoed the contours of Ekaterina IPs 
gubernii. The sense of discrimination from Moscow - even claims of colonial 
imposition - were present in the Russian regions well before the Soviet era, 
particularly in Siberia.
That the open expression of these claims, rooted in the social and cultural 
dimensions of regional identity, could not be openly addressed (at least, not without 
the forbearance of the Party's leadership and the KGB) surely contributed to the 
official impression that regional identity in the Soviet Union, insofar as it possessed 
political content, was almost exclusively ethnic and inextricably tied to the country's 
administrative-territorial divisions. Similarly, the possibility of different regional 
identities among the "non-ethnic" regions in the Soviet era has become the veritable 
"dog that didn't bark" in Western scholarship on Russian regional politics, and it has 
not been seriously scrutinized. 101 To be sure, one should be careful not to diminish 
the claims of systematic repression against non-Russian nationalities under the Soviet 
regime. When compared with the non-recognition of how regional identities were 
suppressed, however, it is possible to see the gap in reasoning in schematic fashion: 
concerning the Soviet Union's minority nationalities, national concerns tend to be
101 Though a collaborative work that makes an initial step in this direction is: Vladimir Gel'man and 
Ted Hopf, eds., Tsentr i regional'nye identichnosti v Rossii (Sankt-Peterburg: Izd-vo Evropeiskogo 
universiteta v Sankt-Peterburge; Letnii sad, 2003).
portrayed as privately held in spite of their public expression and official treatment 
(say, as economic or developmental concerns). 102 By contrast, the ethnically Russian 
regions were seen to be limited to the realm of particularist economic concerns 
precisely because of the way that they were publicly expressed, addressed, and 
prioritized. The implication was that regional claims emerged within a more 
"diffuse" form of authoritarian repression that was unrelated to the development of 
regionalist (as opposed to Union republican) sentiment or identity. The analytical 
assumption that the processes that (unexpectedly) cultivated nationalist sentiment in 
the national autonomies did not have similar consequences for the development of 
regionalist sentiment in the (predominantly Russian) oblasts and krais seems to have 
acquired de facto standing as fact in the absence of challenge. 103
The analysis above suggests that this assumption deserves greater scrutiny. 
Skeptics might still ask, for example, why the oblasts and krais of post-Soviet Russia 
did not join Chechnia in pushing for independence, or follow the separatist path of 
Tatarstan? The answer concerns the broader historical processes and dynamics of 
center-regional relations during the Gorbachev and El'tsin periods. 104
It is true that decentralization during the Gorbachev era was spearheaded by 
the Union republics in the name of national self-determination. Gorbachev was first 
confronted with the salience of the national issue in December 1986 when riots broke 
out in Alma-Ata following the replacement of Kazakhstan's First Party Secretary,
102 See: Mark R. Beissinger, Nationalist Mobilization and the Collapse of the Soviet State (Cambridge: 
Cambridge UP, 2002), 54.
103 This is the flipside of the argument discussed in Chapter One that the oblasts and krais in post- 
Soviet Russia were more likely to be integrationist than separatist due to their being predominantly 
Russian or "non-ethnic." Indeed, one is tempted to suggest that the ambiguity of the "Russian idea" in 
the post-Soviet era could be related to the fragmentation (or dilution) of Russian national identity along 
regional lines in the Soviet era.
104 Both periods have been covered extensively elsewhere and are only treated in cursory fashion here. 
The El'tsin period, however, receives constant attention throughout the rest of this study insofar as it 
relates to the Putin regime.
Dinmukhamed Kunaev, with an ethnic Russian, Gennadii Kolbin. 105 The national 
question gained further prominence with the outbreak of violence over Nagorno- 
Karabakh, the Armenian exclave located within Azerbaijan, in February 1988. In 
particular, the Armenian desire to reclaim Nagorno-Karabakh directly questioned the 
status and desirability of the USSR's internal borders. Once those borders became the 
target of open political contestation, any central response - even a lack of response - 
could not help but be politicized. Thus, Egor Ligachev's attempt to defuse the 
situation in Azerbaijan by forcefully articulating the Politburo's opposition to 
changing national territorial borders was interpreted as support for Azerbaijan's 
position. At the same time, Aleksandr lakovlev's similar efforts in Armenia were 
interpreted as supporting the Armenian position precisely because he neglected to 
address the border issue. 106 The imposition of direct rule from Moscow over 
Nagorno-Karabakh therefore did little other than freeze the conflict in place.
During the last three years of the USSR, the national issue gained momentum 
as Soviet troops clashed with nationalists. Among the most significant moments were 
the "Tbilisi massacre" in April 1989, when the Soviet army fired on peaceful 
demonstrators in the Georgian capital, and the army's crackdown on Lithuania in 
January 1991. The tragedy in Tbilisi effectively sealed Georgia's eventual exit from 
the Soviet Union, while the departure of the Baltic states was inevitable. Yet violent 
confrontation was not the exclusive route to the political assertion of regional identity 
and status. Gorbachev's policies ofglasnost ("openness") and perestroika 
("restructuring") encouraged the expression of regional interests. Of particular 
significance was the Nineteenth Party Conference's approval of Gorbachev's proposal
105 This is often considered one of Gorbachev's blunders, though Brown documents that it was Kunaev 
who advised Gorbachev to appoint a non-Kazakh. Archie Brown, The Gorbachev Factor (Oxford: 
Oxford U.P., 1996), 261. 
106 Ibid., 262.
to transform local and regional Soviets (councils) into elected assemblies. 107 After the 
elections to local councils began in 1990, "each successive turnover of control to a 
republican or regional authority left that institution that much less reason for 
allegiance to the center and that much more of an incentive to listen to the voices of a 
newly empowered local electorate." 108 Stoner-Weiss argues that the 1990 elections 
thus "initiated a struggle over the shape of the new Russian federal system and an 
ongoing power struggle between the Russian center and the periphery" that clearly 
was not limited to the Union republics and the autonomies. 109
As El'tsin moved the Russian republic into open confrontation with Gorbachev 
and Soviet central authority, the regions became key components in the struggle for 
Russia. Gorbachev took the lead in March 1990 with the creation of his Federation 
Council, an advisory body composed of the heads of the fifteen Union republics 
which served to diminish El'tsin's standing among other republican leaders. It 
quickly became apparent, however, that the autonomous republics and oblasts were an 
important, untapped political resource. During 1990-1991, both Gorbachev and 
El'tsin sought to outbid the other for the support of the autonomies. The first step 
towards activating this resource was the promulgation of the law, "On the 
Delimitation of Powers between the USSR and the Subjects of the Federation" on 26 
April 1990. 110 The law effectively drew no distinction between Union republics and 
autonomous republics, transferring economic rights under exclusive and concurrent
107 Kathryn Stoner-Weiss, Local Heroes: The Political Economy of Russian Regional Governance 
(Princeton: Princeton UP, 1997), 72.
108 Jeffrey Kahn, Federalism, Demoralization, and the Rule of Law in Russia (Oxford: Oxford UP, 
2002), 86.
109 Stoner-Weiss, Local Heroes, 73.
110 Cameron Ross, Federalism andDemocratisation in Russia (Manchester: Manchester UP, 2002), 20.
powers. By the end of 1990, Gorbachev's Federation Council had been expanded to 
include the heads of twenty autonomous republics. 1H
El'tsin's supporters feared that Gorbachev's moves to enfranchise the 
autonomies (most of which were located within the RSFSR) would threaten their 
position. 112 Russia's declaration of sovereignty on 12 June 1990 may have been 
interpreted as an attempt to maintain the RSFSR's position as a gateway to the 
autonomies. As the autonomous republics followed suit and began issuing their own 
sovereignty declarations, El'tsin increased the pressure on Gorbachev with his now- 
infamous exhortation in Kazan' for the republics to "take as much independence as
you can." On 15 December 1990, the Russian Congress of People's Deputies 
amended the republican constitution to raise the status of its sixteen autonomous 
republics to constituent republics. The following summer, the Russian Supreme 
Soviet approved the promotion of four autonomous oblasts (excluding the Evreiskaia 
AO) to republican status. 114
Yet the process of republicanization did not stop with the autonomies. In 
response to the ASSRs' declarations of sovereignty and unilateral promotion of four 
autonomous oblasts to republican status, some of the newly-elected oblast 
governments asserted themselves by threatening to withhold taxes from collection by 
the federal treasury. 115 By 1990-1, regional leaders were less inclined to respond to 
the economic demands of the center and frequently resorted to hoarding, such that 
"goods and foodstuffs were more readily available in some provincial towns than in 
the capital." 116 From 1990 to 1993, the "republicanization" process among oblasts
111 Kahn, Federalism, Democratization, and the Rule of Law in Russia, 93-5.
112 Ibid., 95.
113 Richard Sakwa, Russian Politics and Society, 3rd ed. (London: Routledge, 2002), 216.
114 Ibid., 207.
115 Stoner-Weiss, Local Heroes, 81.
116 Brown, The Gorbachev Factor, 270.
and krais gained momentum as various regions moved from economic protest to 
outright attempts at unilateral promotion in status. The proposals and demands during 
this time included a Pomor Republic centered in Arkhangelsk, a Central Russian 
Republic formed from eleven regions and centered in Orel, a Leningrad Republic 
centered in St. Petersburg, a Neva Republic for St. Petersburg alone, a Urals Republic 
centered in Ekaterinburg, a Southern Urals Republic formed around Cheliabinsk, a 
Siberian Republic based in Novosibirsk, an East Siberian Republic centered in 
Irkutsk, and a Maritime Republic with its capital in Vladivostok. Other oblasts sought 
to unilaterally and directly promote their federal status to that of republic. 117
The (attempted) republicanization of oblasts and krais in the late-Soviet and 
early post-Soviet periods points to the importance of sequencing in the activation of 
Russia's internal borders, the dismantling of the Soviet Union, and the problems in 
cobbling together a new "federal bargain" for post-Soviet Russia. Whereas the 
sovereignty declarations of the Union republics challenged Soviet rule, the non-
republican declarations challenged the Russian republic's authority. For a brief 
moment, however, these two processes were intertwined. Gorbachev's push to 
establish a new Union Treaty began with talks at Novo-Ogareva in April 1991. The 
negotiations were attended by the head of nine Union republics (Georgia, Moldova, 
and the Baltics did not participate). The autonomous republics were invited to attend, 
as well, but were not extended full negotiating rights in the proceedings. 119 
Gorbachev had a fleeting opportunity to enfranchise the autonomies, oblasts, and 
krais in the struggle for control of Russia and the Grafting of a new Union Treaty to 
preserve the USSR. As it happened, he did not appreciate the extent to which the
117 Shlapentokh, Levita, and Loiberg, From Submission to Rebellion, 109.
118 lan Bremmer, "Post-Soviet Nationalities Theory: Past, Present, and Future," in New States, New 
Politics: Building the Post-Soviet Nations, ed. lan Bremmer and Ray Taras (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997), 11.
119 Kahn, Federalism, Democratization, and the Rule of Law in Russia, 97.
interconnectedness of Russia's internal borders established the grounds for 
overlapping claims and grievances against both Union and republican authority. 
Instead, he focused exclusively on the non-Russian republics and autonomies, and 
arguably deprived himself of a potentially significant political resource: Russia's 
many oblasts and krais.
Gorbachev was not alone in this regard. Relations among the center and the 
regions in the El'tsin era exuded ambiguity, contradiction, and double-think. When 
talks resumed following the August Coup in the fall of 1991, El'tsin excluded the 
autonomous republics from the process. The El'tsin regime soon bowed to the 
regional opposition, however, in the drafting of Russia's constitutional structure. The 
constitutional commission established by the Russian Supreme Soviet in June 1990 
put forth several proposals for Russia's post-Soviet constitutional structure by fall 
1991. Among them, the suggestion that oblast boundaries be re-drawn to create larger 
zemli ("lands," similar to Germany's lander) from several regions met with resolute 
opposition from both republics and oblasts. The republics opposed the proposition on 
the grounds that they would lose their special status:
...republic authorities thought that the creation of zemli from the combination 
of several oblasts would mean effectively the creation of at least forty-five 
new republics with forty-five new presidents and forty-five new parliaments 
that would overwhelm the special interests of the ethnic republics in further 
negotiations with Moscow. 12
Oblast authorities viewed that plan as an attempt to do away with the most vocal 
regional leaders. 121 The center retreated and the Federal Treaty completed the 
massive decentralization of Russia's political system on 31 March 1992. The Treaty 
granted joint jurisdiction over public programs such as education, health care, and 
management of natural resources, and even stipulated powers reserved to the
120 Stoner-Weiss, Local Heroes, 84.
121 Ibid.
regions. 122 Oblasts and krais obtained full "subject" status (constituent regions) of the 
federation. The republics earned the right to secession, though Bashkortostan and 
Sakha-Iakutiia only signed after receiving special dispensions regarding their 
contributions to the federal budget. 123 Starting in 1994, the Presidential 
Administration and the heads of most republics began signing bilateral power-sharing 
treaties which fixed in place extra-constitutional privileges without legislative 
oversight or approval. 124
At the same time, El'tsin's encouragement of regional sovereignization 
movements came to an abrupt halt once his position at the apex of Russian politics 
was consolidated. One of the first steps taken by the new regime was the creation of 
the institution of Presidential Representatives in 1991. El'tsin's representatives in the 
regions were supposed to ensure some degree ofkontrol' ("oversight"), effectively 
filling the void left by the Communist Party. As Huskey points out, it was a measure 
in keeping with the traditions of Russian state-building, "with parallels to the 
namestniki of the tsarist era and thepolpredy of early Bolshevik rule. In each case, a 
fledgling central government placed personnel in the provinces to assist in the 
regathering of power." 125 The December 1993 constitution left out much of the 
Federal Treaty, putting into place a system of government that was "federal in form 
but unitary in content." 126 El'tsin attempted to strengthen the hand of his Presidential 
Representatives over regional administrations in 1997, but it was not until Vladimir 
Putin's reform of the system of presidential envoys that they began accumulating
122 Sakwa, Russian Politics and Society, 219.
123 Ross, Federalism and Demoralisation in Russia, 24. Bashkortostan also obtained to right to 
maintain a separate legal system. Tatarstan and Chechnia refused to sign the Treaty.
124 Most of these treaties are published in: M.N. Guboglo, ed., Federalizm vlasti i vlast'federalizma 
(Moscow: IntelTekh, 1997).
125 Eugene Huskey, Presidential Power in Russia (Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe, 1999), 191.
126 Ibid., 186.
power independently of regional governments. 127 As discussed in later chapters, the 
drafting of regional charters and constitutions, and the conduct of gubernatorial 
elections, similarly evidenced unsuccessful attempts by the El'tsin administration to 
rein in regional assertiveness and separatism.
Conclusion: Boundary-Making and State-Building
The historical narrative presented above suggests some broad conclusions regarding 
the relationship between state centralization and regional boundaries. First of all, one 
finds a rather pronounced cyclical pattern of territorial centralization and 
decentralization corresponding with regional enlargement (ukrupnenie) and reduction 
(razukrupnenie). Indeed, the alternation between enlargement and reduction that 
began with the creation of Petr Fs gubernii continues in fits and starts through to the 
present day (see Table 2.1). The number of subnational divisions appears to decrease 
when the salience of ethno-territorial principles for determining regional borders is on 
the decline, or with the rise of economic rationale favoring regional enlargement. Yet 
as Tarkhov observes, the products of enlargement were always too large: "large 
territories are hard to manage, their administrative centers are not accessible for the 
population, the level of spatial self-organization declines (owing to their size), and 
losses on communications and organization of large territories are disproportionate 
compared to smaller units." 128 By contrast, the number of subnational divisions 
increases as ethno-territorial principles and/or administrative rationale for 
decentralizing power are on the rise. Indeed, each cycle seems to create problematic 
conditions that beget the next.
127 See Chapter Three.
128 Tarkhov, "Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 vekakh."
Table 2.1: Cycles of Regional Enlargement and Reduction
Enlargement
Reduction
Imperial Russia
Petr Pavel 
Ekaterina
1917-
Soviet Union
1923- 
1934-
Russian 
Federation
1956- 
2003- 
present
1990-
What is not illustrated by this cycle is the relative "stickiness" of Russia's 
internal borders, many of which have remained in place for more than two or three 
centuries. The disappearance of regions during periods of enlargement is somewhat 
misleading in this regard. Particularly since the formalization of Soviet Russia's 
territorial grid, regions that have been enlarged or merged with their neighbors often 
persist as internal districts (raiony or okrugd). When they reappear, then, they tend to 
retain those previous borders. This illustrates a peculiar tendency in Russian politics 
to view territorial boundaries as more or less fixed, while the political arrangements 
binding them together are treated as temporary.
A second observation that emerges from this cyclical pattern concerns 
variation in the relationship between state centralization or decentralization and 
regional enlargement or reduction (see Table 2.2). During the Imperial and post- 
Soviet periods, decentralization has been accompanied by reduction in the size of 
regional units, while centralization has generally been implied by regional 
enlargement. During the Soviet era, this relationship was reversed such that 
decentralization was effected through enlargement, while reduction marked periods of 
centralization. For instance, the amalgamation of smaller regions into larger units was 
seen as a means towards increasing central control over the provinces in Imperial 
Russia, but in the Soviet period enlargement was seen as necessary for devolving 
limited decision-making authority. Correspondingly, the dominant rationale for 
enlargement and reduction reversed again between the Soviet and post-Soviet eras.
The ethno-territorial principle was employed in the reduction of the size of regions 
and the simultaneous intensification of central control under Stalin in the 1930s, while 
the same principle served the cause of decentralization and sovereignization of the 
former ASSRs under El'tsin in the 1990s.
Table 2.2: State Centralization and Regional Enlargement or Reduction
Imperial Russia_____Soviet Union Russian Federation
Enlargement
(fewer) 
Reduction (more)
Centralization Decentralization Centralization
Decentralization Centralization Decentralization
The main point here is that the way that political actors in Russia have defined 
the geographical and political boundaries of legitimate authority appears to affect the 
valence of center-regional relations (towards centralization or decentralization). 129 It 
also raises questions about the persistence of Russia's internal borders, state capacity, 
and regime type. Imperial Russia and Soviet Russia were governed by radically 
different principles, both political and economic, and yet both faced significant 
problems in generating and/or maintaining state capacity. One factor that remained 
constant across both periods, as illustrated by the experiences of Kareliia and 
Buriatiia, was the occasional revision of internal boundaries as a means to strengthen 
those international borders upon which they touched or overlapped, particularly 
during times of rising international tension. But the Soviet regime's notion of 
"strengthening" was closer to one of "thickening" by hollowing out territories along 
the border. As a result, Soviet Russia's longest border with Europe, Kareliia, was not
129 This borrows from the analysis of the alternation between national and juridical conceptions of 
sovereignty in the international system in: J. Samuel Barkin and Bruce Cronin, "The State and the 
Nation: Changing Norms and the Rules of Sovereignty in International Relations," International 
Organization 48, no. 1 (1994).
exploited as a vital and lucrative conduit for trade or exchange. On the contrary, it 
came to be known popularly as "the closest Siberia to Moscow."
Post-Soviet Russia provided the country's first extended experience with 
democratic forms of government, yet the El'tsin regime also saw state capacity drain 
away through the country's latticework of internal borders. One wonders whether it is 
the country's internal borders that weaken central authority and render it illegitimate, 
rather than the reverse? During both the Imperial and Soviet eras, the state created 
and manipulated the administrative/provincial grid in order to facilitate resource 
extraction, development, and political control. That this grid would form the basis for 
the development of regional and ethno-territorial identities was an unintended and 
unexpected development, and it was one that the Imperial Russian state was forced to 
redress repeatedly.
During the Soviet era, the compromise between the national and 
administrative components of the formally federal arrangement was no more 
successful. The Leninist formula of "national in form, socialist in content" essentially 
committed the same error as the liberal assumption of the neutrality of borders, even 
if it arrived there by a different route. 130 Meanwhile, the various attempts to alter the 
boundaries of the oblasts and krais foundered upon the center's inability to manage or 
control larger regional entities, or to break down regional resistance to central 
interference. By the Brezhnev era, the regime partially abandoned attempts to 
domesticate the regions and settled, instead, for the nativization of regional 
leaderships. In this fashion, the development of regional identity went hand in hand 
with the diminishing of state capacity and frustration of the center's efforts to restore 
130 See Chapter One for discussion of liberal political theory and the assumption of the political and 
normative neutrality of territorial borders.
Russia's internal borders thus appear to have stood expected historical 
processes on their heads. The drawing of borders was a primary instrument for, and 
not a result of, centralization or decentralization of the state. The changes were 
almost always initiated "from above," yet the center inevitably faced the problem of 
local power accretion. Indeed, the problem grew steadily as internal boundaries 
acquired bureaucracies and strong local executives. Rather than taming the regions, 
these became the vehicles for the developing sense of regional distinctiveness and, 
eventually, distinctive regional identities. Only when the central state is 
disintegrating do boundary changes emerge "from below." The first such instance 
occurred during the Civil War, and ended in the reconstitution of central control and 
the dashing of hopes for more democratic government. The second instance followed 
the breakup of the Soviet Union. El'tsin responded to the activation of regional 
boundaries with decentralization, yet this crippled the central state vis-a-vis the 
regions. When Vladimir Putin took power in 2000, he set out to restore central state 
capacity. And when viewed in historical perspective, it was entirely predictable that 
his first step would be to reconfigure Russia's internal borders - this time with the 
creation of the seven Federal Districts.
Chapter Three: Federal Districts and Regional Responses
Introduction
Throughout the 1990s, it was generally held that the status and trajectory of center- 
regional relations was regulated by the fundamental weakness of the central state. As 
discussed in the introductory chapter, the lack of central state capacity was used in 
analysis to explain the assertiveness of regional elites, the growth of regional 
autonomy, the growing diversity of regional political regimes, and the inability of the 
Kremlin to reclaim control over Russia's political space. At the minimum, this set of 
conditions predicted that the center could no longer dictate the terms of federation to 
its constituent regions, while the extreme prediction was the ongoing fragmentation of 
the Russian state and possible secession by well-placed regions.
The arrival of Vladimir Putin challenged these interpretations by the apparent 
ease with which his centralizing measures were implemented. Among Putin's 
reforms, the creation of seven Federal Districts (Federal'nye okrugd) and reform of 
the institution of Presidential Representatives (polpredy) was the most visible and 
controversial innovation. It was controversial precisely because the reform amounted 
to a reconfiguration of the country's political geography and (purportedly) the 
demotion of the status of regional borders. In the process, it raised important 
theoretical questions regarding how internal borders serve as reservoirs of legitimacy 
and locomotives for restoring state capacity. If the activation of regional borders was 
linked to the growth of regional separatism or autonomy in the 1990s, Putin's reform 
sought to activate their integrative features. To put it differently, how might the 
disintegrative features of internal borders be diminished or reversed? The Federal 
Districts demonstrated how internal borders might be pressed into service to reverse
the processes of political fragmentation. In this sense they appear as instruments and 
resources available to weak states mired in extended (or stalled) regime transitions. 
At the same time, internal borders are institutional legacies of the previous regime, 
suggesting that they are not only implicated in questions of legitimacy and the 
prospects for democratization but also in the potential for authoritarian reversal. 
This chapter begins by examining the processes by which Putin's Federal 
Districts were established, their legal and political content, and the challenges and 
interpretations arising as a result. This is followed by an analysis of the appointment 
and staffing decisions that structured the new institutions, and an extensive review of 
regional responses to the appearance of the Federal Districts. To put the reform 
within the broader context of Putin's centralizing measures, the process of selecting 
new senators to the Federation Council is considered with particular regard to the role 
played by the new presidential envoys. The chapter concludes with a theoretical re- 
assessment of the strengths of the new institution and its sources of power.
The Anatomy of a Decree
Putin signed the Federal Districts (FDs) into existence with decree (ukaz) n. 849 on 13 
May 2000. l The decree was drafted in the Security Council, which possibly accounts 
for the stronger wording of Putin's decree as compared to El'tsin's 1997 decree 
reforming the post of presidential representative. 2 It also explains why the FD 
borders were changed to correspond to the Interior Ministry districts rather than the 
existing inter-regional associations. This apparently was a last minute change, as the
1 "O Polnomochnom Predstavitele Prezidenta Rosiiskoi Federatsii v Federal'nom Okruge." Rossiiskaia 
Gazeta, 16 May 2000; "Polozhenie O Polnomochnom Prestavitele Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii v 
Federal'nom Okruge." Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 16 May 2000; "Perechen' Federal'nykh Okrugov." 
Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 16 May 2000.
2 Izvestiia, 16 May 2000. The new polpreds were appointed members of the Security Council shortly 
after the decree. Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 26 May 2000.
clause requiring the polpreds to coordinate their work with the inter-regional 
associations was left in the decree. 3 In fact, the decree bore all the markings of 
having been hastily-prepared and issued. This is perhaps best illustrated by the 
conspicuous absence of Moscow in the list of regions included in the Central District, 
which was corrected the following day. 4
The speed with which Putin moved to create the FDs and implement reform of 
the Presidential Representatives is easy to understand from a tactical perspective - the 
newly-inaugurated President wanted to send a clear message from the very beginning 
of his administration. All the same, the concept of the FD was not a new one to the 
Presidential Administration. Various plans to create a system of FDs were drafted in 
1994-5 within the Analytical Department of the Presidential Administration, the most 
radical of which foresaw districts whose borders did not correspond to existing 
regional or traditional economic district borders. 5 The 1995 plan envisioned a 
network of 23 districts consisting of two to six regions each. In order to prevent the 
new structures from falling under the control of regional administrations, the district 
capitals would be located away from regional capitals, taking advantage of proximity 
to the borders of neighboring regions and transport infrastructure. In 1998, Putin 
began making preparations for the consolidation of regions and reform of the
3 Natal'ia Zubarevich, Nikolai Petrov, and Aleksei Titkov, "Federal'nye okruga - 2000," in Regiony 
Rossii v 1999 g.: Ezhegodnoeprilozhenie k "Politicheskomu al'manakhu Rossii", ed. N. Petrov 
(Moscow: Moskovskii Tsentr Karnegi, 2001), 174. The FDs clearly were patterned after the MVD's 
districts, rather than the military districts (as is commonly assumed). Among the most significant 
differences, the Volga military district headquarters were located in Samara, not in Nizhnyi Novgorod, 
while the Siberian military district headquarters were in Chita and not Novosibirsk (though it was later 
relocated to the FD capitol).
4 "Utochnenie." Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 17 May 2000.
5 N.Iu. Zamiatina, "Sozdanie federal'nykh okrugov: proekt 1995 goda," Region: ekonomika i 
sotsiologiia, no. 1 (2001): 78.
6 Ibid.: 78-82.
Presidential Representatives as deputy chief of staff in the Presidential 
Administration, though his plans were put on hold when he left for work in the FSB. 7
Putin's decree of 16 May 2000 designated a three-month period in which the 
Russian government and the Presidential Administration would work out and affirm a 
territorial division of powers between the branches of executive power, "bearing in 
mind the necessity of its correspondence" with the new districts. The new envoys, 
themselves, were given a month to form their staff and have them approved by the 
then-head of the Presidential Administration, Aleksandr Voloshin. Within the same 
month, the Presidential Administration's Main State-Legal Administration (glavnoe 
gosudarstvenno-pravovoe upravlenie) was tasked with suggesting any necessary legal 
acts to be issued by the President in relation to the decree.
The provisions attached to decree 849 structured the work of the new envoys 
into overall tasks (zadachi), functions, rights, and organizational support. The 
polpredy were tasked overall with reinforcing oversight (kontrol'} over the branches 
of federal power in the regions and ensuring that the decisions of federal organs were 
implemented. In addition, the envoys were to oversee the realization of the center's
cadres policy in the FDs , and to issue regular reports to the president covering 
national security issues as well as the general political, economic and social situations 
within their respective districts.
The actual powers and functions delegated to the envoys have been a matter of 
dispute since the issuing of decree 849. As such, they are worth listing at length. 
According to the original decree, the envoys' functions included: coordinating of the
7 Eugene Huskey, "Political Leadership and the Center-Periphery Struggle: Putin's Administrative
Reforms," in Gorbachev, Yeltsin, and Putin: Political Leadership in Russia's Transition, ed. Archie
Brown and Lilia Shevtsova (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2001),
8 According to former presidential advisor Leonid Smirniagin, there are 410,000 federal employees,
with 30,000 in Moscow and 380,000 in the regions. The 89 regions taken together employ only half as
many, 190,OOO.Leonid Smirnyagin, "The Great Seven," EW1Russian Regional Report 5, no. 20 (2000).
activities of executive structures in the FDs; analyzing the effectiveness of law 
enforcement bodies; organizing the cooperation of federal executive organs with 
regional and local government, political parties, and other social and religious 
associations; cooperating with the existing inter-regional associations to work out 
programs for regional socio-economic development; approving all federal 
appointments within their respective districts; approving draft decisions of federal 
agencies which affect either district-wide or region-specific interests; approving and 
presenting state awards and honors recommended by regions within their districts; 
participating in the work of regional and local governments; organizing procedures 
for the resolution of conflicts between federal executive bodies and the regions; 
recommending the suspension of regional executive acts which conflict with the 
Russian Constitution, federal law, Russia's international obligations, or human and 
civil rights; and cooperating with the Main Monitoring Administration (glavnoe 
kontrol'noe upravlenie} and the procurator's offices in verifying that the center's laws 
are enacted in the regions.
In carrying out these functions, the envoys were granted a number of "rights" 
by the decree. They could request any "necessary materials" from the divisions of the 
Presidential Administration or governmental bodies at any level, and were entitled to 
use federal and presidential data banks and all state or governmental systems of 
communications. The envoys could further direct their deputies "to participate in the 
work of regional and local government. Though the extent of this involvement was 
unspecified, the envoys could organize inspections (proverki) of the implementation 
of presidential decrees and orders (rasporiazhenie\ the realization of federal 
programs within their districts, and the use of federal property and budgetary 
resources. In carrying out such proverki, the envoys could make use of personnel
from the Main Monitoring Administration and other executive organs as necessary. 
Further, they were able to investigate citizens' complaints regarding level of 
government. They could also investigate directors of federal bodies, though their 
sanctioning authority appears to have been limited to recommending disciplinary 
measures. In a particularly vague formulation, the envoys were also entitled to "form 
consultative organs." Equally ambiguous, the representatives had the right of 
"unrestrained access to any organization" in carrying out their duties.
Lastly, the envoys were organizationally subordinated to the head of the 
Presidential Administration, who confirmed the structure and number of staff for each 
envoy. The representative's apparat had the legal status of an independent branch of 
the Presidential Administration, though the Main Monitoring Administration's district 
inspectorate was automatically included hi each. The envoys' headquarters were 
located in the FD capitals, decorated by the Russian state flag and crest. Perhaps most 
significantly, the decree stated that all informational, documentary, legal, material- 
technical and transportational support (including the provision of property, residences, 
and medical and social services) for the work of the envoys and their apparat were 
ensured by the corresponding divisions within the Presidential Administration and its 
Administration of Affairs (upravlenie delami), as well as by regional executive bodies 
in agreement with the Presidential Administration. The expenses incurred for these 
facilities were based on estimates made by the Presidential Administration rather than 
regional authorities.
It is often argued that Putin's creation of the FDs avoided constitutional 
questions as, technically, he was reforming his own administration rather than directly
restructuring the Russian Federation. 9 Indeed, Article 78 of the Russian Constitution 
provides that, "The federal bodies of executive power in order to exercise their 
powers may create their own territorial organs and appoint corresponding officials." 
In addition, the Constitution grants the President broad powers in Article 80 in what 
many constitutional scholars refer to as the "hidden presidential powers." 10 In other 
words, Putin's decree was fully constitutional from the start, though partly because 
the substance of the President's powers is somewhat ambiguous.
Interpretations of the Federal Districts
Significantly, no justification for the reform or creation of the FDs was provided by 
the decree itself, leaving central and regional politicians alike to interpret the new 
institution's powers and intentions. The public rationale for the FDs was set within a 
hierarchy of long-term and short-term goals. At base, the reform, as part of Putin's 
moves towards state re-centralization, was intended to halt the disintegration of 
Russia and restore the "ruling vertical." At the most abstract level, this would involve 
the restoration of a "uniform legal space" and "uniform information space" within the 
country (some commentators also added the notion of a "uniform economic space" to 
this list). The first task assigned to the polpreds was to coordinate the reform of 
regional constitutions, charters, and legislation so that they no longer contradicted the 
federal Constitution and legislation. 11 After its first year of existence, the goal of 
reforming regional legislation was claimed to have been achieved and Putin directed
9 Robert Orttung, "Putin Creates Seven Federal Districts to Better Manage Regions," EWI Russian 
Regional Report 5, no. 19 (2000), Richard Sakwa, "Putin's New Federalism," EWI Russian Regional 
Report 5, no. 21 (2000).
10 Mikhail Aleksandrovich Krasnov, "O nekotorykh konstitutsionno-pravovykh aspektakh sozdaniia 
instituta polnomochnykh predstavitelei prezidenta RF v federal'nykh okrugakh," in Polprey Prezidenta: 
problemy stanovleniia novogo instituta, Nauchnye doklady (Moscow: Nauchno-issledovatel'skii institut 
sotsial'nykh sistem, 2001), 16. Article 80.2 reads: "[The President] shall adopt measures to protect the 
sovereignty of the Russian Federation, its independence and state integrity, ensure coordinated 
functioning and interaction of all the bodies of state power."
11 See Chapter Four.
his polpreds to focus on the problem of demarcating spheres of competency between 
central, regional, and local levels of government, and in particular to marginalize the 
role of power-sharing treaties in federal relations. 12 The polpreds also were 
encouraged to take a more active role in regional economic development, though the 
precise means were left to their own initiative.
In addition to these formally stated goals, the FDs were also to serve central 
goals with regard to specific regional administrations. Cherkesov's team in the 
North-West FD focused on finding ways to weaken and remove St. Petersburg 
governor Vladimir lakovlev, while Latyshev's staff in the Urals FD worked to 
diminish the influence of Sverdlovsk governor Eduard Rossel' and, more subtly, 
Tiumen governor Leonid Roketskii. Many speculated that the inclusion of Tatarstan 
and Bashkortostan in the Volga FD under polpred Sergei Kirienko was intended to 
dilute the influence of the regions' problematic governors.
Broadly speaking, the interpretations and nature of challenges posed by the 
new institution and its rationales followed the horizontal and vertical axes along 
which the polpreds and FDs were situated. The horizontal axis concerned how other 
central institutions (the central ministries, federal agencies, and Presidential 
Administration) related to the FDs. Central institutions shared an interest in the 
President's stated goals of restoring the "ruling vertical" in the provinces, but 
challenges to the new institution emerged with regards to its coordinating role and 
status. Within the Presidential Administration itself, the head of the Main Territorial 
Department, Sergei Samoilov, attempted to oversee the polpreds by establishing 
separate subdivisions for each of the FDs. 13 Samoilov and deputy head of the 
Presidential Administration Aleksandr Abramov grew increasingly uneasy over the
12 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 26 December 2000.
13 Huskey, "Center-Periphery Struggle," 130.
polpreds' activities, particularly as Volga FD envoy Sergei Kirienko (following 
consultations with the other polpreds) pressed for increased powers to control federal 
transfers to the regions, to verify the implementation of Government resolutions, and 
to directly control the territorial divisions of federal agencies. 14 The source of their 
unease was the fear that their department would be reduced to the purely technical 
role of supporting the work of the polpreds. 15 At the end of 2000, Putin moved to 
transfer the seven departments of the Main Territorial Department to the polpreds' 
staff, effectively reducing the size of Samoilov's department by two-thirds. 16 
Samoilov was dismissed in February 2001. But Putin also reminded the polpreds and 
their Main Federal Inspectors that the FDs were not new administrative-territorial 
divisions and discouraged the creation of "okrug governments." 17 By the end of 
January 2001, Putin issued a decree that placed the polpreds under the direct 
supervision of the head of the Presidential Administration, whereas previously they 
had answered only to the President. 18
Another significant horizontal challenge emerged from the Russian 
Government. This was an unsurprising development, perhaps, as the ministries were 
directed to establish working relations with the polpreds. In August 2000, vice-prime 
minister Viktor Khristenko was at pains to emphasize that the Government shared the 
aims of the President. Rather, the real issue was to work out a scheme for 
cooperation. 19 The result was a resolution that provided for the polpreds to attend 
monthly meetings of the Government, for federal agencies to establish divisions for 
coordinating with the polpreds, and for seeking the polpreds' approval on
14 Kommersant-Vlast', 12 December 2000.
15 RFE/RL Russian Federation Report, 20 December 2000.
16 Moskavskii Komsomolets, 27 December 2000.
17 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 26 December 2000.
18 "O vnesenii dopolneniy i izmeneniy v polozhenie o polnomochnom predstaviteli prezidenta RF v 
federal'nom okruge." Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 31 January 2001.
19 Kommersant-Vlast', 15 August 2000.
appointments to federal agencies. 20 As a number of ministries and federal agencies 
moved to re-organize their departments along FD lines, however, jurisdictional 
conflicts and overlap ensued. More specifically, the fact that the "power ministries" 
(except for the FSB) established offices at the FD level did not clarify the status of the 
new offices - were they directly subordinate to the central agencies, or were they 
accountable to the polpred?21 As a result, territorial branches became "subject to an 
awkward dual-subordination, with the [envoys] competing with the prime minister 
and his staff for the attention of the federal civil service."22 A 2001 survey of workers 
in the Volga FD office of the General Procurator and regional procurator offices 
provided a vivid illustration of the consequences of dual-subordination: those in the 
General Procurator's FD office gave the new FD institution a positive evaluation, 
whereas regional procurators had a difficult time even responding because they were 
uncertain of what the new office's powers were and lacked information about the 
results of its activities. Regional procurators further claimed that the new office took 
over all administrative (upravlencheskie) functions of the central apparat, often 
exceeding its powers and jurisdiction. In particular, the new office was accused of 
overloading (if not paralyzing) the regional procurators with additional tasks 
(zadaniid). Where the assigned tasks duplicated those required by the central agency, 
differences in deadlines led to further duplication and excessive paperwork. 23 More 
recently, conflicts have emerged between the Presidential Administration and the
20 Postanovlenie Pravitel'stva Rossiiskoi Federatsii ot 12 avgusta 2000 g. N 592 g. Moskva "O 
vzaimodeistvii Pravitel'stva Rossiiskoi Federatsii i federal'nykh organov ispolnitel'noi vlasti s 
polnomochnyrai predstaviteliami Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii v federal'nykh okrugakh i skheme 
razmeshcheniia territorial'nykh organov federal'nykh organov ispolnitel'noi vlasti." Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 
22 August 2000.
21 Rostislav Turovskii, "Federal'nye okruga: politiko-geograficheskii podkhod v teorii i na praktike," 
Federalizm, no. 1 (2003): 229.
22 Huskey, "Center-Periphery Struggle," 133.
23 V.G. Bessarabov, V.P. Riabtsev, and V.A. Makarchenko, "Upravleniia general'noi prokuratury 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii v Federal'nykh Okrugakh i puti sovershenstvovaniia ikh deiatel'nosti," Pravo i 
politika, no. 11 (2001): 28-30.
central ministries over the polpreds' roles in the strategic coordination of regional 
development, investment activities and inter-regional ties. 24
The vertical axis concerned relations as defined by the "ruling vertical" - that 
is, relations among branches of executive authority at all levels of government. Here 
it is important to bear in mind that the FDs were established within the context of a 
broad-based assault on regional autonomy, lending emphasis to the apparently 
coercive role of the polpreds. Under such circumstances, one would assume that there 
were few regional incentives for compliance, given the relatively weak legal standing 
of the polpred (deriving from a solitary presidential decree) and the governors' 
potentially greater base of resistance by way of their electoral legitimacy. The 
polpreds also had a weak foundation in the public consciousness: according to a 
VTsIOM survey, less than half of Russia's population even knew that the institution
existed one year after its creation. Moreover, it was often claimed that the new 
polpreds and their federal inspectors would be no less dependent upon the governors 
for office space and other amenities.
Yet challenges to the new FDs were muted. Part of the reason, as Turovskii 
incisively notes, was that the polpreds were introduced in a fashion similar to the 
revolutionary commissars, with the FDs established "along the political-cultural 
matrix of the party-state, in which the place of the CPSU was taken by the president." 
Within two years, however, relations between the FDs and the regions moved from 
intervention to partnership and even routinization. 26 A careful examination of the 
appointment and staffing decisions of the polpreds helps explain this evolution.
Federal District Appointments and Staffing
24 Turovskii, "Federal'nye okruga," 227-8.
25 Izvestiia, 2 1 May 2001.
26 Turovskii, "Federal'nye okruga," 223-4.
While Putin directly appoints the first deputy Presidential Representatives, the
polpreds appoint the rest of their deputies, staff and federal inspectors. The 
polpred's staff size (about 100 members) and policy portfolios of the deputy polpreds 
were similar across all FDs by the end of 2000, though the appointments and turnover 
among deputy PRs were revealing of the polpred's organizational preferences and the 
FD's utility for central and regional elites, alike.
Table 3.1: Backgrounds of Deputy Presidential Representatives, 2000-2003
Military
Special 
services
Central
Regional
City/local
Business/ 
non-govt.
Totals
Central
Southern
Volga
Urals
Siberian
Total
* Main Federal Inspector 
Source: Compiled by the author.
Much has been made of the military veneer of the new FDs - five of the 
original polpreds were generals, and the districts themselves were patterned after the 
existing Interior Ministry districts. If, however, one compares the distribution of 
selections of district deputies across the North-West, Volga, Urals, and Siberian FDs, 
the military and special services (nine deputies) were less well represented than 
federal agencies and ministries (thirteen) and combined regional and local 
governments (ten). The district with greatest representation by the siloviki (combined 
military and special services) was the North-Western FD (five), probably reflecting
27 Deputy Presidential Representatives technically are appointed with a resolution by the head of the 
President's Administration. In most cases this is a formality, though it does give the chief of staff so 
say over the composition of the polpred's team.
Viktor Cherkesov's tendency to see the staffing and functions of the polpred's office 
as an extension of the FSB's intelligence and public opinion functions. 28 In the Urals 
FD, however, Petr Latyshev's deputies were predominantly from regional government 
(four) with only two deputies chosen with FSB backgrounds. Siberian envoy 
Drachevskii also had two deputies from the FSB, but most were chosen from among 
his contacts in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry for CIS Affairs, and the 
central state bureaucracy. The emphasis on representation of central agencies was 
most pronounced in the Volga FD with seven central representatives and none with
military or law enforcement career profiles. In choosing his staff, Kirienko mostly 
selected from his contacts from the Komsomol, Krasnoe Sormovo shipbuilding 
company, Garantiia Bank, Norsi Oil, and the Fuel and Energy Ministry. 30
The Volga FD also demonstrated the most extensive turn-over in personnel, 
where only the first deputy polpred, Sergei Novikov, remained from the initial ranks 
of deputies by 2003. The remarkable turn-over was matched by the upward mobility 
of Kirienko's former deputies and staff, including five appointments to the Federation 
Council, Vladimir Zorin's appointment as Minister for Nationalities Issues, and 
Valentin Stepankov's appointment to deputy secretary of the Security Council. 31 In 
the North-West FD, first deputy Vladimir V'iunov left to become head of the North- 
West Customs Administration, while first deputy Aleksandr Kuznetsov was appointed 
first deputy Railroads Minister. Most prominently, polpred Viktor Cherkesov was 
brought to Moscow in 2003 to head a new agency to fight the drug trade and was
28 Alexander Duka and Peter Rutland, "North-West Federal Okrug," in The Dynamics of Russian 
Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, ed. Robert Orttung and Peter Reddaway 
(Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003).
29 Valentin Stepankov was the closest to a law enforcement official to be chosen with his background 
as General Procurator and good relations with local law enforcement agencies in Perm.
30 Gul'naz Sharafutdinova and Arbakhan Magomedov, "Volga Federal Okrug," in The Dynamics of 
Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, ed. Robert Orttung and Peter 
Reddaway (Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003).
31 Aleksandr Zarubin left to become chief advisor to the head of the Republic of Komi, though it is 
debatable whether this counted as a move upwards in status.
replaced by Valentina Matvienko. 32 Matvienko's tenure was brief, primarily making 
use of the office to secure her election as governor of St. Petersburg. 33 In the Urals 
FD, the office of the polpred was also the launching point for first deputy Sergei 
Sobianin's successful bid for governor in Tiumen (see next chapter). The only other 
departure was deputy Anatolii Antipin, who left the polpred's office in 2001 for work 
in the private sector with gas giant Novatek. 34 The sole departure from the Siberian 
FD was deputy Nikolai Reshetniak, who resumed his previous work as advisor to 
then-State Duma Speaker Gennadii Seleznev. 35
In addition to the career trajectories of the polpreds and their deputies, changes 
in the deputies' policy portfolios reflected both changing priorities and organizational 
development across the FDs. In the North-West, deputy Valerii Bol'shakov was 
initially tasked with coordinating federal agencies in St. Petersburg. With the removal 
of governor Vladimir lakovlev, his job changed to monitoring the implementation of 
federal law. Evgenii Makarov's broad mandate for "political-informational work" 
was now re-specified as relations with parties, social and religious organizations, and 
unions. Andrei Stepanov was appointed in September 2001 (on the decision of the 
Security Council) to concentrate on the situation in Kaliningrad. In the Volga FD, 
deputy Leonid Gil'chenko was appointed in July 2001 to coordinate with local self- 
government and the European Council's commission on local government. In both
32 After Matvienko's appointment as polpred for NWFD, first deputy Aleksandr Fedorov and deputy 
Sergei Sviridov were dismissed from office. Fedorov followed Cherkesov to Moscow.
33 As noted earlier, this was the culmination of the campaign begun by Cherkesov to remove St. 
Petersburg's governor, Aleksandr lakovlev. While several governors prior to Putin's decree #849 
appeared willing to give up their posts to become presidential envoys, the situation clearly changed 
once it became clear that Putin did not intend to eliminate the post of elected governors in the near 
future.
34 Antipin's departure is probably linked with Sobianin's election, though the official reason given for 
his departure was that he left of his own accord to move to Tiumen where his family lives. During the 
gubernatorial campaign in Tiumen, an alleged transcript of a conversation involving Antipin was 
circulated in which the deputy polpred explicitly discussed means of financial, administrative, and 
propaganda support for Sobianin's campaign.
35 Officially Reshetniak was dismissed in order to tend to an illness in his family, though there were 
many rumors of Drachevskii's dissatisfaction with his deputy's work.
the Volga and Urals FDs, the heads of the district inspectorate of the Main Monitoring 
Department were "promoted" to deputy polpred. In the Siberian FD, Valerii 
Khalanov assumed key responsibilities in negotiating the merging of Irkutsk and Ust'- 
Ordynskii Buriatskii autonomous okrug after his appointment as deputy polpred in 
March 2002. In other words, the common organizational template of the FDs 
provided flexible and convenient staging points for focusing on the Kremlin's target 
policy areas. Another subtle yet striking trend across all four FDs was that the 
polpreds were starting to promote from within their apparat rather than recruit from 
without (as was necessary when staffs needed to be cobbled together from scratch). 
Kirienko went furthest in formalizing this process through the institution of annual 
competitions for open positions hi the polpred's staff. This suggests that the FDs 
were developing mechanisms for maintaining organizational coherence despite 
changing mission objectives and personnel.
Federal Inspectors
In addition to the staff and deputies in the FD capitals, the polpred has a network of 
federal inspectors based within the district's constituent regions. The inspectorates 
are led by the Main Federal Inspector (MFI), whose job mandate derives from 
carrying out the functions of the polpred in the territories - in other words, a mandate 
with powers that are only vaguely-specified. In many cases the new MFIs took over 
the offices of the former Presidential Representatives (indeed, in many cases the 
former Presidential Representative simply became the new MFI). A key difference 
between the new network of MFIs and the former representatives was that all regions
of the Russian Federation were now covered. 36 The MFIs apparently were selected 
keeping "ethno-relevance" in mind, meaning that the MFIs should know the local 
language(s) and have some prior experience in the region. 37 In more troublesome 
regions, however, Muscovites were selected as MFIs (Bashkortostan, Tatarstan, 
Primorskii krai, Kemerovo). A number of regions were also combined into single 
inspectorates, primarily in the Far Eastern (three combined inspectorates) and 
Southern (three) FDs, as well as parts of the Siberian (three) and Volga (one) FDs. 38 
Perhaps more closely than the selection of deputies, the polpred's choice of 
MFI reflected his organizational predilections and strategy for dealing with the 
regions. In the North-West, four MFIs came from backgrounds in the siloviki and 
three were former Presidential Representatives. Kirienko's selections for the Volga 
FD drew heavily from regional governments and federal agencies or ministries, with 
only one representative bearing a military background. The Urals FD was split almost 
evenly among military, special services, regional government and city government. 
The latter were particularly well represented among Latyshev's staff, as well. 39 
Notably absent were any prior Presidential Representatives among Latyshev's MFIs. 
Drachevskii's choices for MFI reflected his own career in diplomatic service. The 
lion's share of MFIs in the Siberian FD came from the ranks of former Presidential 
Representatives (seven), in most cases merely transferred from their "home" region to 
another. While Drachevskii led all FDs in selecting former Presidential 
Representatives to be MFIs, this also reflected an over-all trend in appointments.
36 Previously coverage was spotty, with the representative's office often going unfilled or substituted 
by the head of the regional administration.
37 Zubarevich, Petrov, and Titkov, "Federal'nye okruga - 2000," 189.
38 Some of these combinations made sense geographically and politically, such as the combined 
inspectorate for Perm and Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug, or Irkutsk and Ust'-Ordynskii 
Buriatskii autonomous okrug. 
" Zubarevich, Petrov, and Titkov, "Federal'nye okruga - 2000," 191.39
Table 3.2: Backgrounds of Main Federal Inspectors, 2000-2003
FrmrPR
Military
Special 
services
Central
Regional
City/local
Business/ 
non-govt.
Totals
Central
Southern
Volga
Urals
Siberian
Total
Source: Compiled by the author.
Overall, the single greatest number of MFIs previously served as Presidential 
Representatives, followed closely by representatives of the military and special 
services. Representatives of federal agencies surprisingly ranked behind 
representatives of regional government (and even of business), contrary to the trend in 
the appointment of deputy polpreds. In comparing the distribution of deputy envoys 
and MFIs by backgrounds, however, the relative proportions of representatives from 
the military, special services, regional government and city government remain 
approximately the same. The key difference is the prominence of central agency 
representatives among the deputy envoys, which can largely be explained by the need 
of the new FD apparat to develop contacts and establish working relations with the 
central agencies. By contrast, it is reasonable to assume that the MFIs were drawn 
largely from the ranks of former PRs precisely because the polpreds required 
individuals experienced in interfacing with regional and local government. This 
would also explain the significantly greater representation of business among the
MFIs.
The job of the MFI was to provide a crucial link in the relationship of the 
seven polpreds with regional branches of federal agencies and regional governments.
Whether they were able to serve this function effectively appears to vary among 
cases. In Kareliia, the outgoing PR, Viacheslav Ushakov, put the plight of the 
incoming MFI, Valentin Shmykov, rather bluntly:
The inspector's salary is only one-third of what I received, and he has only 
one-third the staff. Moreover, he is subordinate to the presidential 
representative to the North-West Federal District rather than directly to the 
president, as I was. Plus he has much more work. Frankly speaking, I feel for 
Valentin Aleksandrovich. 40
Like Ushakov, Shmykov spent most his career in the KGB. From 1993 to 2000, he 
was head of the Kareliian branch of the federal tax police. Shmykov maintained a 
relatively low profile throughout his first year on the job, notably playing little or no 
role in the revision of Kareliia's republican constitution. From mid-2001 onwards he 
played an increasingly public role in chairing local commissions on the demarcation 
of joint and exclusive regional powers and the reform of local government charters 
and legislation. 41 A public reception office was also opened in September 2001 to 
hear public concerns twice a month in Petrozavodsk (and occasionally in the raions), 
similar to offices opened elsewhere in the NWFD under Cherkesov's program 
"Dialog."42 Shmykov described the role of the polpred's apparat as a transmitter 
(provodnik) for "the President's ideology in the regions," primarily through 
conducting regular meetings of the heads of federal agencies in order to make their 
work more efficient and harmonious. With regard to the conduct of regional
40 Russian Regional Report, 13 September 2000.
41 Severnyi Kur'er (Petrozavodsk), 30 August 2001.
42 Severnyi Kur'er (Petrozavodsk), 18 September 2001. The public reception is run by the MFI's staff 
and appears to be poorly attended (by both the public and the federal inspector). The author attended 
one reception at which it was advertised that the MFI would preside. Instead, an assistant appeared, 
explained that the MFI was ill, and provided a phone number to contact him at a later date (which 
proved to be fake). The public reception has a website (http://dialog.onego.ru/), though it does not 
appear to have been updated since 2002.
elections, he said the MFI should help parties and movements to find the best 
candidates for all levels of government - federal, regional, and local. 43
In Buriatiia, the MFI named by Drachevskii was the former PR, Boris 
Danilov. Danilov's career background was mostly centered in academia, though for a 
time he also served as head of the Buriat branch of the pro-government party, Nash 
Dom Rossiia, and president of the Buriat Chess Federation. The new MFI stated that 
nothing in his job mandate changed from his work as PR except that he would answer 
to the polpred instead of directly to the President. 44 He indicated that Drachevskii 
demanded information on sources of social tension in the region, including 
disruptions of inter-regional ties, crime, narcotics, and border issues. In describing his 
own duties, Danilov emphasized monitoring functions in relation to the federal 
agencies in Buriatiia, as well as preventing "mafia types" (mafioznaia lichnost'} from 
participating in elections. 45 The extent of his actual powers and functions, however, 
were questionable. Like the MFI in Kareliia, Danilov maintained a low public profile. 
It is likely that he was subject to the same organizational requirements as all MFIs - 
to inventory federal cadres and property, to create commissions to discuss the 
demarcation of powers, to open a public reception office - though one searches in 
vain to find any evidence of such activity. 46 Moreover, the attempt by the republic's 
legislative assembly to select disgraced ex-General Procurator lurii Skuratov as 
Federation Council senator (see below), and the schism within the republican branch
43 Kareliia, 20 November 2001.
44 Buriatiia, 5 September 2000. Indeed, in a laudatory article on Danilov published a year after his 
appointment, a number of regional officials continued to refer to him as the President's Representative, 
apparently oblivious to his change in title. Buriatiia, 7 November 2001.
45 Author's interview, Ulan-Ude, 5 June 2002.
46 According to the Siberian FD website (http://www.sfo.nsk.su/), a public reception office does exist in 
Ulan-Ude. Whether anyone in Ulan-Ude knows about it, however, is another matter.
ofEdinstvo prior to Buriatiia's 2002 elections47 were events that showed Danilov as 
left out of local politics, responding to events rather than shaping outcomes.
The MFI chosen for Tiumen was Sergei Smetaniuk, recruited by first deputy 
polpred Sergei Sobianin. At the time Smetaniuk was speaker of the Tiumen city 
Duma, which was in perpetual conflict with the regional administration of Leonid 
Roketskii. Given Sobianin's prior work as Duma speaker in Khanty-Mansiiskii 
autonomous okrug, it is likely that the first deputy polpred specifically sought out a 
popular candidate that could be counted as an ally against the oblast administration. 
The new MFI was allocated office space in the oblast Duma (which also opposed 
governor Roketskii), but was initially given meager resources: he inherited a two- 
member staff (out of three) from the former PR and took a significant pay cut. 48 
Smetaniuk took an active role in reforming the oblast charter and regional legislation, 
indicating that the process would continue to the level of local government. 49 
Significantly, he targeted the oblast's Property Management Committee, creating an 
inventory of federal property that was improperly managed and its employees. 50 The 
MFI also inventoried the 86 federal agencies operating in the oblast and prepared a 
list of priority problems that required federal intervention, most significantly 
strengthening the border with Kazakhstan. As with the other MFIs, Smetaniuk 
established oblast-level commissions to debate the demarcation of powers between 
central and regional levels.
47 See Chapter Five.
48 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 11 October 2000; Nashe Vremia (Tiumen'), 22 November 2000. On the pay
cut, Smetaniuk dolefully commented, "I don't even want to talk about it." He indicated that the size of 
the MFI's staff would likely only increase if he "earns it." By 2004, his staff had risen to eleven.
49 Author's interview, Tiumen', 16 May 2002. About 330 oblast laws required change or amendment 
to be brought into accordance with federal legislation.
50 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 11 October 2000. Smetaniuk somewhat belied his outsider status in expressing 
his surprise, "when a federal employee is given a tiny work space next to the toilet while nearby 
hundreds of square meters of federal property are occupied by stores and banks."
A public reception office was formed and immediately inundated with 
citizens' inquiries concerning all levels of government - federal, regional, and local. 
Judging from Smetaniuk's characterization of the evolution of the public reception 
office, its primary role has been to educate the public as to which level of government 
is accountable for certain problems. For the most part, citizens' complaints centered 
on the operations of the oblast procurator, the judicial branch in general, and housing 
and communal services. According to Smetaniuk, the primary result and benefit of 
the public reception was to clarity the division of powers and responsibilities, both for 
citizens and among governing institutions. 51
Perm's MFI was among the last to be appointed in the Volga FD. The long 
delay was interpreted by many as indicative of wavering over whether Perm would 
remain in the Volga FD or be transferred to the Urals FD, though it was clear early on
that the MFI would be a Permiak. Perm's MFI was officially named in late
September as Vladimir Solomonov. Solomonov spent the first part of his career in 
county (raiori) administration. After unsuccessfully running for mayor of Perm' in 
1996, he was appointed director of the territorial branch of the Anti-Monopoly 
Ministry on the recommendation of the oblast's former Presidential Representative. 
The regional press portrayed Solomonov as a "classic bureaucrat," identifying first 
and foremost with the department he serves and uncompromising in standing 
equidistant from the main political actors in Perm. 54 The new MFI was allocated 
office space within the oblast administration with a staff of two federal inspectors 
(one of them from Moscow) and a director of the public reception office. 55
51 Author's interview, Tiumen', 16 May 2002.
52 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 22 August 2000.
53 Perm oblast's inspectorate included Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug.
54 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 3 October 2000.
55 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 15 November 2000.
Solomonov described his work as facilitating the President's policy, 
particularly with regard to cadres, and monitoring the implementation of federal 
legislation in the region. Initial attention would be focused on bringing regional 
legislation into accordance with federal law, though Perm had few changes to make in 
comparison with other regions of the Volga FD. He also indicated that a key function 
would entail the organization of a system for crisis management - an extension of 
Kirienko's idea that the MFIs should play an active role in regional economic 
processes. In the meantime, his first task would be to prepare recommendations for a 
host of law enforcement appointments, emphasizing that the governor's consent 
would not be required: "we will consult, coordinate, and consider opinion. But 
consent - no." 56
Solomonov later admitted that he essentially was not able to start work until 
after Perm's gubernatorial elections in late 2000. 57 The first year of operations for the 
MFI saw a flurry of activity in creating regional structures designed to bring the 60 
federal structures in Perm back under the center's control, as well as organizing 
regular channels for interaction with the oblast and local governments. As in other 
regions, the MFI established a public reception office and a regional branch of the 
planning think tank, the Center for Strategic Planning. 58 In early 2001, the MFI 
started to convene a regular collegium of military and law enforcement officials to 
coordinate on security issues as diverse as the region's state of preparedness for crisis 
situations, the dumping of chemical and nuclear waste in Perm, relations between 
siloviki and Perm's governor, and relations between the Ministry of Justice and the
Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 3 October 2000. 
See Chapter Five.
58 Solomonov's Prikamskii Tsentr Strategicheskogo Planirovaniia was fashioned after the analogous 
structure created within Kirienko's apparat under Petr Shchedrovitskii.
procuracy. 59 Solomonov also established a commission for eliminating 
administrative barriers to the development of small business. The commission's 
members were heads of the oversight (kontrol'nye) structures in the region (tax, anti- 
monopolies, customs, and registration), who in turn would implement the 
commission's recommendations within their own organizations. 60
In January 2002, Solomonov left his post as MFI to become Federation 
Council senator for Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug. 61 His replacement was 
Nikolai Fadeev, an economist who previously served in Perm's city administration 
under former mayor (then-governor) lurii Trutnev. Fadeev led Trutnev's own think 
tank in 2001, the Center for Planning Strategic Initiatives (CPSI), created in parallel 
with the MFI's organization. As Fadeev described it, the CPSI initially focused on 
"how to interface" Trutnev's team with federal structures, essentially working to 
attract specialists working on the federal level. 62 Fadeev's appointment could be 
interpreted as an attempt to co-opt a talented bureaucrat from the oblast 
administration, particularly one focused on drawing talented cadres away from the 
center. But it was more likely a shift in priorities from Nizhnyi Novgorod, from re- 
establishing control over federal security and law enforcement agencies to 
strengthening budgetary and financial levers of centralization. As Fadeev described, 
his key instruments were forging (or forcing) consensus among the heads of federal 
agencies, utilizing a combination of moral suasion through appeals to the President's 
"general line" and threats issued through the procuracy. 63
59 Novyi Komparion (Perm'), 30 January 2000; Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 8 May 2001. Though 
organized under the MFI's authority, the meetings were in fact chaired by deputy polpred Valentin 
Stepankov.
60 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 19 June 2001.
61 Zvezda (Perm'), 4 January 2002. Kirienko played a decisive role in Solomonov's decision, telling 
him that he was needed more in the Federation Council than as MFI.
62 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 22 May 2001. 
Zvezda (Perm'), 12 December 2002; Russian Regional Report, 12 September 2003.63
When viewed in comparison, the appointments and activities of the MFIs for 
Kareliia, Perm, Tiumen, and Buriatiia reveal a common agenda among their 
respective FDs, but display striking differences in operational tactics. All MFIs were 
to provide on-site reporting to keep the polpreds abreast of key political developments 
in their districts, the most visible manifestation being the campaign to reform regional 
legislation. They were also expected to re-establish central control over federal 
agencies in the regions, including the crucial process of identifying and evaluating 
possible appointees to head the agencies. In general, their work was intended to 
provide kontrol' to ensure the implementation of the center's policy in the regions. In 
establishing public reception offices, the MFIs were also supposed to provide outlets 
for citizens to seek redress for problems they had been unable to solve through local 
or regional administration.
The MFIs in the four regions under examination took different approaches to 
their tasks. In Kareliia, Shmykov worked largely behind the scenes in a manner 
consistent with his prior work in the federal tax police. In Perm and Tiumen, the MFI 
sought out additional methods of inducing compliance with the center's demands, 
including the creation of regional collegia of the heads of federal agencies, creating 
inventories of federal property and its administration, and utilizing the public 
reception offices to clarify the division of responsibility among levels of government. 
In Buriatiia, there was little change in operation as the former Presidential 
Representative, Danilov, was kept on as MFI. While this ensured a degree of 
continuity and stability in relations between the center and Buriatiia, it also produced 
the least tangible changes in the re-affirmation of the center's power in the republic.
Regional Responses to the Federal Districts
Initially regional leaders were virtually unanimous in supporting Putin's formation of 
the Federal Districts, varying only in degrees of caution. To outside observers, this 
was more than a little surprising. After all, Putin and the Presidential Administration 
had reorganized Russia's political geography and armed his lieutenants with vaguely- 
specified powers without so much as consulting regional leaders (not to mention the 
Government or the Federal Assembly). Given that the FDs were established hi the 
midst of a broad-based attack on regional autonomy, it stands to reason that the 
governors were unwilling to make history by becoming Putin's first victims. But one 
should also remember that the governors had experienced (and often survived) 
attempts at centralization under the El'tsin administration. Rather than provoke the 
President outright, a more viable strategy was to wait for his intentions and resolve to 
become clear while attempting to broker a better deal in the new regime. As then- 
Federation Council chairman Egor Stroev indicated, many governors initially were 
willing even to give up their posts to become one of Putin's new polpreds. 64
Even after the polpreds were officially named, the opportunity for regional 
elites to become "anonymous presidential advisors" led even problematic regional 
leaders as Tatarstan's Mintimer Shaimiev and Bashkortostan's Murtaza Rakhimov to 
support the new presidential envoy. 65 At best, the new institution eventually would 
go the way of its predecessors and either be captured by regional elites or reshuffled 
out of existence. At worst, the governor who did not oppose the President would not 
give Putin cause to arrange for his immediate dismissal.
64 Izvestiia, 18 May 2000. At the time, many governors considered realistic the possibility the Putin 
would end gubernatorial elections and revert to the system of appointing governors.
65 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 18 May 2000.
A few regional leaders anticipated Putin's reform in proposing the resurrection 
of the (Tsarist-era) guberniia. 66 After the creation of the FDs, a number of regional 
leaders attempted to share credit with Putin. Most publicized were Moscow Mayor 
lurii Luzhkov and Sverdlovsk oblast Governor Eduard Rossel', both of whom had 
created mid-level administrative districts within their own regions. In Perm, First 
Deputy Governor lurii Belousov claimed that he serendipitously recommended 
similar measures to the Urals Economic Forum despite "not knowing anything about 
the presidential decree."67
Some like Perm oblast Governor Gennadii Igumnov commented on the new 
institution even before reading Putin's decree. Igumnov initially stated that it was 
time for such measures to be taken and that the creation of the FDs represented an 
attempt to improve the role of the center while not extinguishing the rights of the 
regions. He quickly added, however, that "in any case, this decree doesn't present 
any danger for the heads of regions who act strictly within the law."68
Tiumen oblast Governor Leonid Roketskii was somewhat bolder. In a 
meeting between regional leaders and Putin, Roketskii not only claimed credit for 
recommending the creation of a FD the previous year, but also recommended himself 
for the post of deputy Presidential Representative 69 He also warned Putin that 
locating the capital of the Urals FD in Ekaterinburg risked strengthening Rossel' to
66 Russian Regional Report, 15 March 2000.
67 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 17 May 2000. Belousov also stated that "practically everyone agrees" that 
Putin should have the right to remove governors and mayors (Mestnoe Vremia, 24 May 2000). 
Amusingly, both Perm's Governor Igumnov and Mayor lurii Trutnev publicly voiced opposition to 
appointing governors only two months prior (Novyi Kompan'on, 14 March 2000).
68 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 16 May 2000.
69 Tiumenskii Kur'er, 22 May 2000. Roketskii had not so much suggested the creation of a Federal 
District as attempted to subordinate federal agencies based in Khanty-Mansiiskii AO and lamalo- 
Nenetskii AO to those based in Tiumen oblast - to establish "unified federal structures." Nashe 
Vremia (Tiumen'), 1 June 2000.
the point that he might attempt once more to establish an Urals Republic. 70 
Otherwise, Roketskii made an effort to show his agreement with the President, though 
he appeared more concerned after a July meeting with Putin in Ekaterinburg, stressing 
that he did not want to see the FDs become super-regions. He also noted that there 
was no unified position among the regions of the Urals FD, and was careful to 
observe that, "I support Putin in all matters, even if I don't like all of it." 71
In Kareliia, Sergei Katanandov appeared upbeat (to the point of being 
defensive) following the May decree: "Under no circumstances could one consider 
this an attempt to reconstruct Russia's territorial divisions. I have no doubts that the 
country's internal borders will be maintained. As will remain the system of electing
the heads of regions." Rather than limiting the autonomy of the governors, 
Katanandov echoed Putin's claim that he would continue to rely on regional leaders
and not attempt to lower their status. Instead, he saw the brunt of the reforms as 
falling on the 60 federal agencies operating in Kareliia which "simply do not know 
what their job is." Apparently mistaking the thrust of Putin's reforms, Katanandov 
claimed that it was up to the governors to figure out which ministries to leave at the 
federal level and which to transfer to the regional level. 74
The response in Buriatiia was balanced. The speaker of Buriatiia's legislative 
assembly, Mikhail Semenov, stated that Putin's measures did not violate the 
Constitution and that the FDs would work as long as they did not infringe the region's 
powers. State Duma Deputy Bato Semenov voiced support for the reforms, holding
70 In 1993, Rossel' attempted to upgrade the federal status of Sverdlovsk Oblast (along with Orenburg, 
Cheliabinsk, and Kurgan oblasts) to that of a federal republic. The attempt failed and resulted in 
Rossel' being sacked by El'tsin. See: Gerald M. Easter, "Redefining Centre-Regional Relations in the 
Russian Federation: Sverdlovsk Oblast'," Europe-Asia Studies 49, no. 4 (1997).
71 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 20 July 2000. 
n Kareliia, 17 May 2000.
73 Kareliia, 24 May 2000.
74 Russian Regional Report, 24 May 2000.
that effective coordination of the work of federal agencies in the regions was needed 
"now more than ever."75 After Putin presented his envoy to the Siberian FD, Mikhail 
Semenov further commented that the FDs were intended to improve the efficiency of 
economic and legal administration, but that regions would not lose their 
independence. At the same time, he expressed frustration that he was unable to get 
answers to his questions regarding the fate of the Federal Treaty or the "future of 
national-territorial relations." 76
Regional Identity and Territorial (re-)Organization
Few regional leaders were willing to question Putin's right to reform the institution of 
Presidential Representatives, or the purposes for which the FDs were created. In part 
this was due to a lack of understanding of what the governors' role would be in the 
system. There also was concern about disruption of traditional regional and economic 
ties. Numerous regions were taken out of their traditional orbits, among them 
Bashkortostan, Udmurtiia, Komi, and Volgograd. Volgograd Governor Nikolai 
Maksiuta worried that inclusion in the North Caucasus FD would interfere with its 
work through the Great Volga Inter-regional Association, while Bashkortostan's 
leadership feared economic ties with the Urals would suffer as a result of its inclusion 
in the Volga FD. 77 In Perm, there was speculation that the Urals FD did not include 
"traditional" Urals regions (and all members of inter-regional association Great Ural) 
in order to keep Rossel' from eclipsing the new polpred. 78 Many regions also voiced 
status concerns related to the designation of district capitals. Samara's administration
75 Inform-Polis (Ulan-Ude), 24 May 2000.
76 Buriatiia, 31 May 2000. Buriatiia's President Leonid Potapov was noticeably silent throughout this 
period, though he attended the same meetings with Semenov.
77 Russian Regional Report, 24 May 2000.
78 "The fewer the powers of the polpred, the greater the influence of 'transregional' leaders like 
Shaimiev and Rossel'." Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 6 June 2000.
was clearly dismayed that the Volga FD capital would be Nizhnyi Novgorod, while 
the capital of the North Caucasus FD, Rostov-na-Donu, was concerned that it would 
become associated with the ethnic problems in the Caucasus. 79 Tomsk Governor 
Viktor Kress complained that Novosibirsk, the Siberian FD capital, "should stop 
thinking of itself as the capital of Siberia." 80 In the Urals capital, Ekaterinburg, the 
appointment of polpred Petr Latyshev caused some concern owing to his prior work 
as head of the UVD in neighboring Perm.
In Kareliia and Buriatiia, the territorial shape of the FDs did not generate any 
noticeable reaction as both republics were included in their traditional areas. In both 
cases, the NW and Siberian polpreds refrained from making explicitly negative 
comments about the republics. Kareliia's Katanandov did not meet individually with 
Cherkesov until October 2000 and their interactions were mostly limited to discussing 
problems related to federal funding of "northern privileges" and the reform of
regional legislation. In early 2001, Katanandov expressed unease over the possible 
changes to internal (regional) borders that might ensue, but cautiously supported the 
notion in arguing that, "in time, it is possible, that it will be necessary to re-examine the 
existing borders," but only "significantly later and after seriously developing and 
preparing this idea."82
In his first visit to Buriatiia, the Siberian polpred Drachevskii emphasized that 
cadre "rearrangement" was underway, and that "horizontal rotation will continue 
further now that we have come to a common understanding with the heads of oblasts 
and republics." Drachevskii continued that one of the FD's priorities would be to
79 Russian Regional Report, 24 May 2000. The North Caucasus FD was later renamed the Southern 
FD on the recommendation of polpred Viktor Kazantsev, in part because of concerns of some 
prominent regions of being considered part of the turbulent Caucasus area.
80 Russian Regional Report, 7 June 2000.
81 Kareliia, 11 October 2000; Kareliia, 20 December 2000.
82 Russian Regional Report, 24 January 2001.
create a uniform database of federal and regional cadres. He also focused on the lack 
of a "unified information and transport space" in Siberia, noting in particular that one 
could not fly directly to Ulan-Ude from Novosibirsk. On inter-ethnic relations, 
Drachevskii approved of Buriatiia's policy of proportional representation of Buriats in 
the republic's legislative and administrative structures. In the end, Drachevskii 
emphasized that he would not interfere with regional governments, saying that he did 
not intend to be a tolkach. 83
Tiumen and Perm, however, are instructive cases insofar as they were made 
into "internal borderlands," straddling the traditional Siberian, Urals, and Volga 
regions. Tiumen had always been considered part of Siberia and its inclusion in the 
Urals FD came as a surprise. Nevertheless, there was little in the way of public or 
elite outcry. The first visit by Urals polpred Latyshev to Tiumen passed relatively 
peacefully. Latyshev stated that his main task was increasing legality in the FD, 
starting with "bringing federal structures to life."84 The condition of border-crossing 
points with Kazakhstan was singled out as needing federal intervention. In addition, 
Latyshev pledged that he and his apparat would follow the upcoming elections in 
Tiumen closely. 85 It is worth recalling that Roketskii had been fighting a vicious 
legal and political struggle with the governors of Khanty-Mansiiskii and lamalo- 
Nenetskii autonomous okrugs since the mid-1990s. Roketskii interpreted the 
strengthening of federal power as benefiting Tiumen vis-a-vis its neighbors to the 
north, despite the fact that the FD headquarters were located in Ekaterinburg and the 
speaker of the Khanty-Mansiiskii AO legislative assembly, Sergei Sobianin, was
83 Buriatiia, 1 September 2000. A tolkach is a term often used in the Soviet era for a sort-of political 
enforcer.
84 Tiumenskie Izvestiia., 17 August 2000.
Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 22 August 2000.
appointed first deputy polpred. 86 By contrast, the head of Khanty-Mansiisk's mission 
in Tiumen, Nikolai Dobrynin, predicted that, "a number of surprises await us, 
including some that are not very welcome. There is no reason to doubt this."87 Both 
the autonomous okrugs quickly moved to join the Bolshoi Ural inter-regional 
association, but they also maintained membership in the Siberian inter-regional 
association, Siberskoe Soglashenie. In any event, the question of Tiumen's territorial 
attachment was effectively postponed until the gubernatorial election in January 2001 
(see next chapter).
Perm had always been considered part of the Urals, yet was unexpectedly 
placed in the Volga FD. Unlike Tiumen, this occasioned a great deal of confusion 
and concern, resulting in a somewhat confused interplay of central and regional 
interests concerning whether Perm would stay in the Volga or return to the Urals. The 
issue was particularly important in symbolic terms of traditional conceptions of 
membership in "the Urals" or "the Volga," but also in terms of organizing regional 
and central interests around the principles of inclusion in the new FD structures. 
After the official ceremony presenting Sergei Kirienko as the Volga FD's polpred, 
Putin surprised Governor Igumnov by admitting that Perm might have been included 
in the Volga FD mistakenly and stated he would be willing to consider moving Perm 
to the Urals FD. Petr Latyshev, the Urals FD polpred, was in favor of such a move. 88 
Though there were conflicting reports on whether Kirienko would support such a 
move, the region's transfer to the UFD was vigorously opposed by Kirienko's party, 
the Union of Right Forces (SPS). 89 Interestingly, the question of Perm's inclusion in
86 The staff of Urals polpred Latyshev also included a deputy governor from lamalo-Nenetskii AO and 
the former head of the FSB for Tiumen oblast'.
87 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 16 September 2000.
88 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 6 June 2000.
89 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 27 June 2000. The opposition was probably motivated both by interest in 
protecting Kirienko's turf and supporting Putin.
the Volga FD was raised not by Igumnov, but by Cheliabinsk oblast Governor Petr 
Sumin. Moreover, despite speculation regarding the historical rivalry with 
Ekaterinburg, Perm's transfer to the Urals FD was supported by Sverdlovsk's 
governor Eduard Rossel'. At the same time, Tatarstan's Shaimiev lobbied to keep 
Perm in the Volga. He characterized Perm's inclusion in the Volga FD as important 
and positive, citing the already extensive and expanding ties between the regions as 
providing the economic foundation for strengthening political integration within the 
framework of the FD. 91 The speed with which political actors outside of Perm moved 
to support or oppose its membership in the Volga FD revealed the extent to which 
regional interests territorialized along the lines of the Federal Districts.
In the end, Perm remained in the Volga, though it managed to keep one foot in 
the Urals. Initially, Igumnov consulted with heads of local government and 
enterprises, claiming that most appeared to be in favor of "returning" Perm to the 
Urals (including the mayor of Perm' and future governor, lurii Trutnev). 92 A written 
request on behalf of Perm's government was addressed to the Kremlin, as suggested 
by Putin. The request was denied, however, without any formal response. The 
situation provided a vivid illustration of the new President's political inexperience. 
On the one hand, allowing one region to change districts would establish a precedent 
and potentially cause dozens of other regions to make similar requests. The point was 
driven home by Igumnov, who couched the issue in terms of maintaining good 
relations with Kirienko: "If Volgograd, which very much wants to return to the Volga, 
succeeds in doing so, then we would have cause to return to our native Urals without 
offense to the president's representative."93 On the other, rejecting the request by
90 Cheliabinsk oblast was included in the Urals FD.
91 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 7 June 2000.
92 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 7 June 2000.
93 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 7 June 2000.
Perm's elite would damage Putin's credibility. The best option for the Kremlin was if 
Igumnov changed his mind and requested, instead, that Perm remain in the Volga FD, 
which is precisely what happened. 94 On Kirienko's first trip to Perm as polpred, he 
stressed that the FD borders "do not have any real significance from the perspective of 
economic associations," and that in any case the FD borders were determined by 
Putin, not the polpred. In the event, Igumnov tactfully stated that he would have 
"battled" to leave the Volga FD if someone other than Kirienko had been appointed 
polpred.
Perm's attempt to move to a different FD suggests that it is not only ethnic or 
national issues at the periphery that have the potential to escalate to the national level. 
Putin's federal reforms, not merely the new districts, provoked discontent that 
remained, for the most part, muted. Yet the possibility that Perm's transfer to the 
Urals FD would create a precedent for the fragmentation of Putin's districts - not least 
because of the fact that Perm's transfer was desired and opposed by other regions in 
both the Urals and Volga FDs - also suggests the extent to which the center required 
Perm's acceptance of Volga membership to provide a telling example for other 
regional administrations. Perm's compliance legitimated the new FD borders, but at 
the cost of the purposeful de-emphasis of their significance for regional identity. 
What Perm gained through compliance was the ability to appropriate the center's 
rationales in its relations with other regions. In publicly closing the debate on Perm's 
membership in the Volga FD, Igumnov argued that the region's inclusion in the Volga 
illustrated the organization of the FDs on the principle of equal rights among federal 
subjects. He had in mind the federal republics (especially fellow Volga FD members 
Tatarstan and Bashkortostan), which he had long criticized for claiming asymmetrical
94 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 18 July 2000. Igumnov went on vacation immediately afterwards and did 
not talk to reporters about his change of mind.
financial privileges and not contributing their share to the federal budget. At the same 
time, however, Igumnov stressed that inclusion in the Volga FD opened up 
opportunities to "work on two fronts" since it now occupied a bridging position 
between the Volga and the Urals, participating in both the Great Volga and Great Ural 
inter-regional associations. 95
Federation Council Appointments
While it is sometimes difficult to identify open challenges to the process of 
centralization initiated by Putin, the reform of the Federal Council and selection of 
new senators illustrated the role and involvement of the new FD structures within 
their respective territories. The reform of the Federation Council was initially 
opposed by the incumbent senators,96 who were motivated by the potential loss of 
privileged positions in federal politics and the weakening of their abilities to defend 
regional interests. 97 Perm's Governor Igumnov gave voice to this latter concern in 
complaining that people who work constantly in Moscow become "detached" from
their territory after two or three months and start "to think differently." In the 
compromise solution, the reformed upper house would be comprised of one senator 
chosen by the regional legislative assembly and a second senator appointed by the 
regional administration (and confirmed by the legislative assembly). As Remington 
points out, "there is every indication that the presidential administration was active in
Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 12 September 2000.
From 1995 to 2000, membership in the Federation Council consisted ex officio of the heads of 
regional administrations and legislative assemblies.
97 Matthew Hyde, "Putin's Federal Reforms and their Implications for Presidential Power in Russia," 
Europe-Asia Studies 53, no. 5 (2001): 729. Hyde also points out that Putin's representative to the 
Federation Council, Aleksandr Kotenkov, threatened that at least sixteen governors would face 
prosecution after losing parliamentary immunity. Most governors were clearly offended by 
Kotenkov's remark, though it is debatable whether any took the threat seriously.
98 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 31 May 2000.
coordinating this process, but its role varied from region to region."99 The cases 
under review here demonstrate the range of incentives and coercive pressures that led 
regional leaders to acquiesce to the reform of the Federation Council. Governors that 
complied with the center's interests (or that did not, at a minimum, offend the center's 
preferences) found the new senatorial appointments to be an opportunity for 
rewarding allies or removing political opposition, as was the case in Kareliia and 
Tiumen. In the case of Buriatiia, and to a lesser extent in Perm, the center was 
equally willing to intervene when legislative assemblies selected the "wrong" person 
for the job. In addition, the appointments also reflected salient concerns regarding 
"native" representation (as opposed to the recruitment of Muscovite politicians and 
businessmen) in the Federation Council.
Kareliia
Despite initial concern that the regions were not consulted in the drafting of Putin's 
package of reforms, Katanandov and Kareliia's other senator, Vladimir Shil'nikov, 
begrudgingly approved of the notion of appointing senators from the executive and 
legislative branches of the republican government. 100 Both Katanandov and 
Shil'nikov notably lacked enthusiasm, suggesting throughout that there was "no need 
to rush" the process. Shil'nikov doubted that the influx of non-elected bankers, 
businessmen and industrialists would be positive for the Federation Council. He 
later expressed concern that the upper house was "losing its functions," and that the
99 Thomas F. Remington, "Majorities without Mandates: The Russian Federation Council since 2000," 
Europe-Asia Studies 55, no. 5 (2003): 674.
100 Kareliia, 20 May 2000; Kareliia, 15 July 2000; Kareliia, 22 July 2000. 
m Kareliia. 9 June 2001.
manner hi which the new Federation Council was formed threatened to transform 
Russia from a federation to a unitary state. 102
Though the law reforming the Federation Council was passed by the State 
Duma in July 2000, the new senators from Kareliia were not appointed until 
December 2001. 103 While much journalistic attention was lavished on Putin's success 
in removing the governors from Moscow, in practice the reform also allowed some 
governors to name potential rivals as their senators and "deport" them to Moscow. 
Katanandov was able to remove from Petrozavodsk his predecessor and potential 
challenger in the April 2002 gubernatorial elections, Viktor Stepanov. 104 To replace 
Shil'nikov, the legislative assembly selected local businessman lurii Ponomarev as its 
senator. Ponomarev ran virtually unopposed. Three other candidates for the position 
were officially considered, but only as a formality required by law. When it came to a 
vote, they withdrew themselves from consideration leaving only Ponomarev's name 
on the ballot. 105 On the whole, the center appeared to take little interest in the 
selection of Kareliia's senators, though the lack of intervention regarding the voting 
process for Ponomarev suggests tacit approval. 106
Tinmen
Tiumen's new senators came from the ranks of the northern okrugs, which had long 
opposed Tiumen's previous governor. Both of the new senators were particularly 
beholden to Governor Sobianin for their new posts. Sobianin moved quickly to 
replace Roketskii in the Federation Council after the latter's defeat in the January
102 Kareliia, 15 January 2002; Severnyi Kur'er, 15 January 2002.
103 All four of Kareliia's deputies in the State Duma voted in favor of the law.
104 Gubernia, 19 December 2001; Russian Regional Report, 8 May 2002.
105 Press-sluzhba Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Respubliki Kareliia, 28 December 2001.
106 By contrast, the same voting process was targeted by Buriatiia's procurator in order to prevent the 
selection of lurii Skuratov as senator (see below).
2001 gubernatorial elections. The new senator was Aleksandr Gavrin, known for 
succeeding Sobianin as mayor of Kogalym in 1993, and more recently for serving as 
Minister of Energy in the Russian government since May 2000. 107 Gavrin was fired 
from his ministerial post on 5 February 2001 by Putin in connection with the energy 
crisis in Primorskii krai. Curiously, Sobianin appointed Gavrin to the Federation 
Council on 27 January 2001, ten days prior to his dismissal. In effect, Tiumen's new 
governor utilized the senatorial appointment to remove his predecessor's (Roketskii's) 
last position of influence over Tiumen politics, to salvage Gavrin's political career 
and simultaneously maintain an influential ally in Moscow.
The oblast Duma waited considerably longer to appoint its senator, eventually 
choosing Andrei Artiukhov in February 2002. Artiukhov had previously served as 
State Duma deputy for lamalo-Nenetskii autonomous okrug, as well as deputy in the 
Tiumen oblast Duma, and at the time of his appointment he had become deputy
i f\Q __ ___
governor in the oblast administration. For a while it appeared that Tiumen's 
senator would be deputy polpred Mikhail Ponomarev, but the delay in appointing a 
senator from the oblast legislature meant that the upper chamber's key positions had 
already been distributed and a post of sufficient status (allegedly) could no longer be 
secured. 109 In general, there was little in the way of central influence over Tiumen's 
senatorial appointments. At the same time, Sobianin's brief tenure as first deputy 
polpred in the Urals FD and apparent success in defusing tensions between the oblast 
and the northern okrugs gave him great latitude in securing appointments for local 
allies.
107 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 28 February 2001.
108 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 15 February 2002.
109 Biulleten' Analiticheskoi Informatsii Region-Politika. Prilozhenie k Regional'nomu Delovomu 
Zhurnalu "Aktsent-Tiumen"'. lanvar' 2002 g. No 1(3): 9-10.
Perm's new governor, lurii Trutnev, chose Oleg Chirkunov to be his senator in the 
Federation Council. Chirkunov was a close associate of Trutnev's, having run the 
governor's 2000 election campaign and previously having been a member of 
Trutnev's EKS business group. 110 Chirkunov quickly made a name for himself on the 
national level as the lone vote in the Federation Council against the new-old Russian 
state anthem. 111 He was also publicly critical of Putin's strengthening of the "ruling 
vertical" and the President's acquisition of a "controlling stake" in both the Federation
Council and State Duma.
The reform of the Federation Council was initially opposed by Perm's 
legislative assembly speaker, Nikolai Deviation, who favored either maintaining the 
existing composition of the upper house or amending the Russian Constitution to 
transfer its powers to the State Duma. 113 Perm's Duma again generated controversy 
when it came time to select its new senator. Businessman Vladimir Dobrosotskii was 
nominated by the speaker of Perm's legislative assembly, Nikolai Deviation, who had 
become acquainted with the nominee through his work in the upper house's 
agriculture committee. 114 The nomination occasioned a discussion over whether 
Perm's senator should be a local or a Muscovite (since Dobrosotskii lived and worked 
chiefly in Moscow). The fact that Dobrosotskii was born in Bashkortostan was raised 
in the legislative assembly as if to indict his loyalties to the region. 115 Deputy polpred 
(and native of Perm) Valentin Stepankov interceded on Dobrosotskii's behalf, arguing
110 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 26 December 2000.
111 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 20 March 2001.
112 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 24 April 2001. Chirkunov took the edge off his comments, however, by 
noting that he was cautiously optimistic now that Putin was making attempts at "concrete legal 
reform."
113 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 25 July 2000.
114 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 18 September 2001.
115 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 23 October 2001.
that a senator could be a more effective lobbyist of regional interests if he has contacts 
on the federal level.
Stepankov also suggested that the polpred's apparatus would not allow a 
regional legislature to mistakenly appoint a crook, stating cryptically that, "if a region 
doesn't have full information about the candidate, we try to get that information to the 
people who make the final decision." 116 After Dobrosotskii's candidacy had been 
endorsed by oblast Duma Speaker Deviatkin, Governor lurii Trutnev, and even 
polpred Kirienko, Perm's MFI Solomonov attempted to block (or at least to stall) 
Dobrosotskii's confirmation by leaking information that indirectly linked 
Dobrosotskii with court proceedings against the general director of a company where 
he served as deputy general director, as well as evidence of misuse of budgetary funds 
by a corporation where he was first deputy president in 1995-6. 11? The action was 
perceived as an attempt by Solomonov to insert himself into the selection process, 
though it perhaps did more to demonstrate the extent to which he had been left out.
Buriatiia
Buriatiia's leadership initially approached the reform of the Federation Council with 
equanimity. The speaker of the republic's legislative assembly, Mikhail Semenov, 
supported the nomination of senators, arguing that an elected upper house would only 
turn the upper house into a copy of the State Duma. 118 The republic's first new 
senator was Vladimir Agalov, appointed by the executive branch in January 2001. 
Agalov had been serving as first deputy head of Buriatiia's government and, in 
accordance with a decree by Buriatiia's President Leonid Potapov, would continue as
116 Navyi Komparion (Perm'), 18 September 2001.
117 The information was leaked through the newspaper Permskii obozrevatel', which was controlled by 
the MFI. Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 16 October 2001.
118 Buriatiia, 23 May 2000.
a member of the republic's government. As a career politician who worked in both 
local and regional government, Agalov's appointment was uncontroversial. When 
asked about the other regions that chose "politicians-Muscovites" as their senators, 
Agalov's laconic reply was, "that is their business." 119
Buriatiia's legislative assembly, the Narodnyi Khural (NKh), initially selected 
as its senator lurii Skuratov, the former General Procurator RF who left office towards 
the end of the El'tsin era in the midst of scandal. 12 Skuratov's nomination was made 
by a group of deputies belonging to a legislative faction affiliated with the Communist 
Party, the People's-Patriotic Union of Russia (NPSR). The only other candidate for 
the post was Sergei Mesenin, a deputy of the NKh with no experience at the federal 
level. Skuratov's chief claim to office was as the only native son of Buriatiia to have 
reached the upper echelons of government - someone perceived as having the 
contacts and professional reputation to be able to represent and defend Buriatiia's 
interests in the center. He stated that he was not ready to dispose of the treaty-basis of 
federal relations, and insisted on the need to bring federal legislation "in accordance 
with the constitutional-legal status of Russia's [federal] subjects." When questioned 
as to whether his selection would be viewed as "undesirable," Skuratov replied that 
"the family" 121 was on its way out from the Kremlin and would not present any 
problems. 122 The NKh appointed Skuratov as senator by a vote of 39-17. 123
The Kremlin responded within short order. The republic's Procurator 
protested that the NKh had violated procedural requirements of both federal law and
119 Buriatiia, 39 March 2001.
120 The Federation Council refused to accept El'tsin's dismissal of Skuratov until Putin came to power 
and won its approval.
121 The reference was to the clannish circle of friends and advisors in El'tsin's administration.
122 Vosemnadtsadtaia Sessiia Narodnogo Khurala Respubliki Buriatiia. 19 Noiabr' 2001 g. 
Stenograficheskii Otchet. Chasf I: 25-7.
123 Mysteriously, the vote for Mesenin was recorded as 12-44, indicating a discrepancy of (at least) five 
votes since deputies could only cast one ballot. In order for a candidate to receive a majority of votes 
from the 65-member chamber, a minimum of 33 votes would be required. Without the additional five 
votes, Skuratov's total would be 34 - still a majority, but only just.
the legislative assembly's own rules of order, first in not considering "multiple" 
candidates, and secondly in opting to bypass discussion of the candidates and 
proceeding directly to vote after the candidates' statements. The protest forced a 
special session of the NKh to decide whether to recall Skuratov. The debate was 
heated, during which deputies displayed disbelief, shame, and indignation at the local 
and national astonishment at Skuratov's appointment. Several deputies singled out 
the MFI, Boris Danilov, for making offensive remarks on television. 124 Many 
deputies felt that Skuratov had misled them about the state of his relations with the 
Kremlin, while others spoke of endless phone calls from polpred Drachevskii, the 
Russian government, and the heads of federal agencies in Moscow, threatening to 
bankrupt Buriatiia if Skuratov was not recalled. There were constant references to the 
sudden arrival of Muscovites and members of the Presidential Administration, even 
going so far as to identify the hotel room where a direct line to the Kremlin had been 
established (in the swankiest hotel in Ulan-Ude, no less).
Buriatiia's President Leonid Potapov published an editorial on the day before 
the proceedings hi which he detailed how previously he had supported Skuratov as 
General Procurator, but that he had decided to cease opposing the President with 
Putin's arrival. He also claimed that he traveled specially to Moscow and was told 
unequivocally that Skuratov would not be allowed to join the Federation Council. 
Lastly, Potapov stated that he had refused to appoint Skuratov as senator for the 
executive branch earlier that year, and that now he had asked Skuratov to remove his 
candidacy, arguing that, "as a countryman (zemliak), you should agree with my 
position." 125 On the day of the NKh session, however, Potapov (who was in
124 Even here, deputies continued to refer to Danilov by his previous title as "Presidential 
Representative." An attempt to open debate on the MFI's comments was diverted to committee and 
was not revived in ensuing sessions of the NKh.
125 Buriatiia, 27 November 2001.
attendance) tipped his hand by announcing that he had fired the advisors responsible 
for persuading him to support Skuratov and urged the NKh to correct their "gross 
error" (grubaia oshibkd) in order to protect political stability and prevent political 
isolation of the republic. 126
Skuratov's response to the procurator's protest and various charges was 
strident. He argued that the federal center respected neither federal nor republican 
constitutions,
Otherwise there would not be any phone calls from Prime Minister Mikhail 
Mikhailovich Kas'ianov... there would not be phone calls from Leonid 
Vadimovich Drachevskii... there would not be in Ulan-Ude an advisor of the 
Main Territorial Department of the Presidential Administration... There would 
not take place special meetings with [presidential Chief of Staff] Voloshin. 
There would not be new representatives of the Presidential Administration 
coming to Buriatiia.
Skuratov drew attention to the violation of the separation of powers by the executive 
branch in interfering with the selection of the legislative branch's operation. He also 
pointed out that MFI Danilov's claim that Skuratov opposed Putin was little more
i  127than an assertion.
In the end, Skuratov was recalled by a vote of 49-1 (with one abstention). 
The NKh quickly selected a new senator, Vladimir Bavlov, who previously served as 
a head of local government. 129 Despite the procedural issues that served as pretext for 
Skuratov's removal, there still was only one alternative candidate to Bavlov, who duly 
retracted his candidacy prior to the vote. This time, however, the procurator did not 
protest.
The Skuratov episode was revealing in a number of respects about Buriatiia's 
relations with the federal center. The exact comment by Danilov mentioned by
126 Vneocherednaia Sessiia Narodnogo Khurala Respubliki Buriatiia (Vtoroi Sozyv). 28 Noiabr' 2001 
g. Stenograficheskii Otchet: 32-3.
127 Ibid, 26-31.
128 Inform-Polis (Ulan-Ude), 5 December 2001.
129 Buriatiia, 20 December 2001. Bavlov was head of the Bauntovskii raion administration.
Skuratov was, "On the eve of elections for president of Buriatiia, we do not need any 
unnecessary shocks. Skuratov is famous for his opposition to the President of Russia. 
To reanimate him today is to provoke a confrontation with the Russian 
government." Linking Skuratov's appointment to Buriatiia's upcoming elections 
made plain the price of the Kremlin's support for Potapov's re-election. Skuratov 
received support from the Communists (as did Potapov), and was also supported by a 
number of prominent businesses in the republic, not to mention a significant 
proportion of the legislative assembly. Judging by Potapov's comments about firing 
his advisors, he clearly played a more supportive role in Skuratov's nomination than 
he claimed publicly. The debate over Skuratov thus became linked with the 
republican leadership's survival. Indeed, the extraordinary session of the NKh saw 
deputies opposed to Potapov lining up to support Skuratov. Nevertheless, Buriatiia's 
politicians displayed a surprising degree of naivety in nominating someone as 
notorious as Skuratov, particularly when his positions on federal relations clearly ran 
counter to the prevailing winds from Moscow and Novosibirsk. What made this 
naivety possible, clearly, was the republic's lack of channels of access to the 
Presidential Administration, or even the polpred's office. In selecting its new 
senators, the republican government and legislative assembly put a premium on 
choosing "its own" people, its zemliaki. When the full wrath of the Kremlin fell on 
Ulan-Ude's parliament, however, republican politicians began to calculate Buriatiia's 
interests differently - less as a matter of gaining in representation and status in the 
center, and more as a function of retaining office, as well as the four billion rubles of 
federal transfers that made up over 60% of the republican budget.
130 Inform-Polis (Ulan-Ude), 28 November 2001. Note that the elections Danilov mentioned did not 
take place until June 2002.
Despite the fact that the Kremlin succeeded in blocking Skuratov's 
appointment through an impressive mobilization of the Presidential Administration, it 
also revealed limitations in the center's powers of influence and information- 
gathering. The fact that Skuratov's candidacy went as far as it did demonstrated the 
under-developed surveillance capacities of the MFI's office, the Siberian FD, and by 
extension, the Presidential Administration. The procurator's protests were understood 
by all as procedural pretexts for political decisions already taken in Moscow, and the 
fact that they involved abuse of the procurator's power (in assuming jurisdiction over 
procedural issues regulated by the NKh's rules of order) and selective application did 
little to serve Putin's "dictatorship of law."
Assessing the Role and Significance of the Federal Districts
For all their apparent weakness and ambiguities, the polpreds with the Federal District 
structures and apparat moved quickly to establish themselves as key institutions in 
regulating center-regional relations. This point is worth reinforcing, for many 
commentators - academic and journalistic, alike - tend to view the FDs as ineffective, 
at best. In these accounts, analysis tends to focus on the overwhelming disadvantages 
of the new structures: first, the territorial shape of the FDs is unwieldy and 
"unnatural," taking many regions out of their traditional orbits; second, the status of 
the polpreds and FDs as an ongoing concern is tenuous, based on a solitary 
presidential decree and subject to the whims of the president; third, the polpreds must 
deal with overt and covert opposition from entrenched regional administrations; and
lastly, the polpreds lack concrete levers of economic influence and decision-making to 
force compliance from regional administrations. 131
Regarding the first pair of critiques, the polpreds have developed 
organizational responses to these weaknesses. If the territorial shape of the FDs was 
"unnatural," it also deprived regions of prior bases for coordinated action or 
opposition based on "natural" territorial groupings. The case of Perm was illustrative 
in that its placement in the Volga generated both interest and resistance from other 
regions in both the Volga and Urals FDs. Perm's acquiescence to remain in the Volga 
legitimated the FD borders and forestalled further challenges to the center's right to 
draw them without consulting the regions. At the same time, the opportunities for 
regional elite mobility through the FD apparat meant, in part, that the polpreds were 
able to "naturalize" the new territorial entities through manipulation of cadres policy. 
As one set of observers put it, the appearance of the FDs was a "cadre-quake" 
(kadrotriasenie), at least as significant as the achievement of a "unified legal
space." This was matched by processes "from below," as
[The Federal Districts] have begun to take root as elements of reality, forming 
the ontological map... Government enterprises in the sphere of geodesies and 
cartography will now map the country in terms of the Districts. Soon history 
will be studied in terms of Federal Districts, as is already the case with 
geography. Authors are re-writing textbooks, courses are being revised. 133
Even weather forecasts in Russia are now framed in terms of the FDs. 134 This is not 
to argue that regional borders have lost their significance. Rather, the polpred's 
selections for Main Federal Inspector revealed both sensitivity to local conditions and
131 On these last two points in particular, the most comprehensive treatment to date is found in: Robert 
Orttung and Peter Reddaway, eds., Dynamics of Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional 
Relations (Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003).
132 Zubarevich, Petrov, and Titkov, "Federal'nye okruga - 2000," 174.
133 Vladimir Kaganskii, Kul'turnyi landshaft isovetskoe obitaemoe prostranstvo (Moscow: Novoe 
literaturnoe obozrenie, 2001), 501.
134 The significance of this is suggested by Billig's mention of the role of weather broadcasts in the US 
as "banal" ways that the boundaries of the nation are patrolled in the media. Michael Billig, Banal 
Nationalism (London: Sage Publications, 1995).
an active search for allies in the regions. In this sense, the pursuit of strengthening the 
"ruling vertical" was in certain respects a means of activating the integrative features 
of internal borders. To the extent that Putin's Federal Districts were effective, it was 
in reorienting both regional-territorial affiliations and the point of contact in center- 
regional relations to coincide with the FD capitals.
To the question of tenuous legal status, it would appear that the polpreds 
managed to compensate with tactics of organizational inter-positioning. By 
exploiting the dual-subordination of territorial branches of central agencies, the FD 
apparat could paralyze regional governments and disrupt the work of the central 
ministries. In organizing collegia of the heads of federal agencies, the polpreds and 
MFIs introduced a degree of vertical, personal accountability to the operation of the 
agencies' territorial branches. The institution of public receptions has been used to 
provide a formal outlet for dissatisfied citizens to express discontent with local or 
regional administration (and, potentially, to provide the polpred with additional legal 
grounds for direct intervention in local affairs), as well as to resolve jurisdictional 
issues between federal agencies, regional government, and local administration. One 
should not forget, as well, that the polpreds also acquired gatekeeper powers to sign 
off on all key appointments to federal structures in their respective districts. The 
governors may have retained some say in the process of appointing federal officials to 
their regions, but ultimately their input depends on their working relationship with the
polpred.
The envoys' have buttressed their status by assuming increasingly important 
informal roles. Though their one-on-one meetings with Putin became less frequent, 
they were still well placed to represent the interests of regions within their respective
FDs and regional leaders increasingly sought to take advantage of this channel. 135 In 
addition, it became more common that the polpreds and their staff in the regions were 
called upon to mediate intractable disputes between the governors and regional 
Dumas, or between regional and local administrations. As Orttung points out, these 
roles suggest that the FDs potentially offered a source of pluralism in regions that 
formerly were dominated by the governor:
By establishing an alternative power center in the office of his envoy, Putin's 
reform opened up a wider space for differing viewpoints than existed before. 
His intention was to establish strong federal control to replace strong 
gubernatorial control. In reality, however, he weakened the governors by 
introducing a rival. Thus independent-rninded politicians, businessmen, and 
journalists can now maneuver between the federal and regional authorities to 
pursue their various goals. Such freedom did not exist when the governors 
held almost exclusive authority. 136
In analyzing these criticisms regarding territorial shape and status, then, it becomes 
clear that the FDs were organizational actors that did not rely exclusively on coercive 
measures to achieve their goals. Like any organization, the FDs had limited resources 
and capacity for achieving the goals set for them. This meant that the polpreds in 
some cases needed to cultivate good working relations with the governors by creating 
incentives for cooperation and compliance. It was not necessarily in the Kremlin's 
interests to replace governors with polpreds. Rather, the center's immediate interests 
would be better served by strong, loyal governors that carried out the center's 
directives and maintained political stability on the ground.
At the same time, the polpreds appeared to be working towards cultivating 
regional opposition, introducing a measure of pluralism in regional politics, and 
coordinating District-wide social and economic activities. This already suggests the
135 P.A. Fedosov et al., "Perspektivy rossiiskogo federalizma: federal'nye okruga, regional'nye 
politicheskie rezhimy, munitsipalitety," Polls, no. 4 (2002).
136 Peter Reddaway and Robert Orttung, "What Do the Okrug Reforms Add Up To? Some 
Conclusions," in The Dynamics of Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, ed. 
Robert Orttung and Peter Reddaway (Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004).
answers to the second set of criticisms regarding the governors' opposition and the 
apparent lack of economic levers of influence. Moreover, these critiques draw upon 
two sets of assumptions concerning the preferences of regional elites and the effects 
of socioeconomic structure on center-regional relations.
First, the critiques tend to assume that the preferences of regional elites were 
synonymous with the preferences of the region in which they are located. For elites 
from "strong" regions, it is assumed that their main policy preference was to limit 
central intervention, which in turn is taken as synonymous with expanding regional 
autonomy. Among weaker regions that were dependent upon federal transfers, 
regional elites are assumed to favor measures to maintain patron-client relations with 
the federal center. In this fashion, the preferences of regional elites are seen as 
inhering in the region's socioeconomic structure. Similarly, the center's preferences 
are assumed to be the diminishing (if not outright domination) of the role of strong 
regions in federal politics and maintenance of weak regions' dependence on central 
intervention. In other words, the preferences of regional and central elites are 
portrayed as exogenously determined and incommensurate in structure, thereby 
occluding the possible bases for convergence.
Second, the critiques reveal a structural assumption that the trajectory of 
federal relations was determined almost exclusively by the material distribution of 
power. The relative strength of center and regions is portrayed as a zero-sum 
relationship which rules out simultaneous increases in regional autonomy and central 
power (though the simultaneous loss of both regional autonomy and central capacity 
is not excluded). Consequently, center-regional relations are characterized in terms of 
the center's strategies of bribery and blackmail, regardless of whether one is 
discussing financial transfers or intervention in regional elections. Likewise, regional
strategies are depicted in terms of their ability to avoid blackmail and cultivate bribery 
from the center.
Ultimately, then, the critiques rely on regional socioeconomic characteristics 
for determining both the preferences of regional elites and the trajectory of center- 
regional relations. One problem with this approach is that it denies alternate bases of 
identification that transcend regional boundaries (for example, organizational 
affiliation with central ministries or agencies) at the same time that such bases are 
claimed to be appropriated or co-opted within regional borders. Similarly, the 
possibility that some form of regional identity could exercise an independent 
influence on center-regional relations is reduced to a deceptively simple calculation of 
the relative strength or weakness of the region in relation to the federal center.
A related problem is that this restrictive view of power denies the binding 
effects of legitimacy and authority in obtaining compliance or cooperation among 
central and regional agencies. To put it differently, authority is expressed and 
confirmed only in terms of the center's ability to impose coercive policies on the 
regions. Routine interactions between center and regions that do not result in public 
victory or defeat are thus treated as policy failure: when things are quiet, presumably, 
nothing of any significance is occurring. As Turovskii (2003) notes, the more that the 
polpreds are involved in real politics and the less "noise" they make on the federal 
level, the more one hears expectations that institution will be eliminated. 137
Yet the FDs were designed essentially as organizations that function to 
coordinate the work of central agencies and oversee the activities of the executive 
agencies at the regional and local levels. To most Western observers, such functions 
appear incomprehensible, if not outright superfluous, as the FDs do not conform to
137 Turovskii, "Federal'nye okruga," 225.
the model of a Weberian bureaucracy. They do correspond, however, to the sorts of 
organization identified by T.H. Rigby as "task-achieving" bureaucracies within a 
"goal-rational" system. Writing about the organization of power and legitimacy in 
communist systems, Rigby explained that such regimes are concerned with directing 
activities, not merely regulating them through rule application. Officials are judged 
by success in fulfilling tasks, not by success in achieving compliance with regulations. 
Rule violations are tacitly condoned in the interests of task-fulfillment. The supreme 
legitimating value ("communism") constitutes
a concept whose contours are sufficiently vague, like those of justice, order, 
democracy...which figure in other authority systems, but which differs from 
these in that it is not seen as an existing quality of the socio-political order but 
as something to be worked and fought for in the future... 138
In such a system, the distribution of power is dominated by those responsible for 
coordinating the activities of lower-order bureaucracies and vetting their 
performance. 139 Rigby's modification of Weber's categories of legitimacy helps to 
make sense of the authority exercised by the polpreds and the FD apparat. In post- 
communist regimes like Russia where the democratization process stalled early on, 
the concepts of democracy, justice, and order remain as vague as the ideological 
predecessor of communism.
Insofar as it is often claimed that Russia's Presidential Administration has 
supplanted the role played by the CPSU, the analysis offered by Rigby suggests that 
this is not merely an organizational continuity with the Soviet past. Rather, it is an 
ideological continuity that affects the distribution of power and the status attributed to 
organizations designed to achieve the tasks set by the President. In this manner, 
legitimacy inheres not in state-society relations, but in the relations among command-
138 T. H. Rigby, "A Conceptual Approach to Authority, Power and Policy in the Soviet Union," in 
Authority, Power and Policy in the USSR: Essays dedicated to Leonard Schapiro, ed. T. H. Rigby, 
Archie Brown, and Peter Reddaway (London: Macmillan Press Ltd, 1980), 19.
139 Ibid., 22.
administrative staffs - in other words, legitimacy is a function of relationships among 
political elites. In creating the FDs, Putin activated an institutional legacy of 
communism to achieve the compliance of regional elites and central agencies based in 
the regions. It is precisely this form of power and legitimacy that is missed by the 
critiques of the FDs as lacking coercive measures to overcome gubernatorial 
opposition.
To be sure, these critiques understate the range of instruments available to the 
polpreds to influence political outcomes in the regions. While the next chapter 
examines the question more closely in terms of the revision of regional charters and 
constitutions, for the moment it should suffice to point out the significant role played 
by the polpreds in the selection of Federation Council senators. "Loyal" regional 
administrations were able to pack off potential opposition to Moscow or to choose 
reliable members of their teams. By contrast, the Skuratov imbroglio in Buriatiia 
demonstrated the full wrath of the Presidential Administration at work. In this 
fashion, the polpreds were influential in managing regional representation in central 
institutions like the State Duma and the Federation Council. On the regional level, the 
rotation of elites through the FD and other federal structures granted the polpreds the 
ability to co-opt regional actors. One must also assume that the polpreds had access 
to a cache of kompromat on regional actors that may be deployed when deemed 
necessary.
As to the question of economic levers of influence and inter-regional 
coordination, generally no one discounts the fact that the FDs largely supplanted the 
inter-regional associations as the bases for long-term development planning, 
particularly with the establishment of FD branches of German Gref s think tank, the
Center for Strategic Planning. 14 More threateningly, the anti-crisis management 
program developed by Kirienko in the Volga FD provided for the possibility that the 
administrations of bankrupt or financially irresponsible regions could temporarily be 
replaced by professional (non-elected) managers appointed by the President on the 
advice of the polpred. 141
In sum, these criticisms of the FDs only provide a univocal interpretation of 
the districts' functions and significance, relying on a zero-sum conceptualization of 
power hi center-regional relations. But is such a conceptualization reasonable? After 
all, Putin emphasized repeatedly in meetings with the polpreds and federal inspectors 
that their job was not to interfere with regional government. While the polpreds were 
assigned general tasks to fulfill, they were left largely to their own devices in 
determining what role the districts would play and the strategies and tactics by which 
they were to achieve their objectives. In this sense, few clear criteria were issued 
from the center to determine the ongoing viability of the institution. Rather, the 
institution enjoyed a presumptive legitimacy from the start and sought to locate 
missions that would enhance and expand that legitimacy. Despite predictions to the 
contrary, the institution that was created with a weak legal basis for existence, 
vaguely defined mandates, and apparently inadequate resources for operation, quickly 
became "a universal matrix for the far-reaching reorganization of numerous federal
structures." 142
140 The one exception is the Siberian FD, where Dracheskii has chosen to coordinate directly with the 
association Sibirskoe Soglashenie.
141 This provision was eventually incorporated into the reform of local self-government.
142 Nikolai Petrov, "Federal reform, two and a half years on," Jamestown Foundation Russia & Eurasia 
Review 2, no. 1 (2003).
Conclusion
The analysis in this chapter suggests that the key advantage of the polpreds and FDs - 
the source of this presumptive legitimacy - was the authority of the "presidential line" 
to shape and fill Russia's political space. The ambiguity of the polpreds' mandate 
effectively allowed them to change roles and select tactics as necessary, playing the 
enforcer in some cases, arbiter among regional elites in others, or even act as 
spokesmen for regional interests. The flexibility of the polpred's organization and 
movement between tasks assigned by Putin, in many ways, reflected the "goal- 
rationality" form of legitimation that Rigby used to characterize the Soviet system of 
political order. 143 At base, the imposition of the institution of the polpreds and the 
FDs was a mechanism to regulate relations among central and regional elites, and as 
such called upon forms of legitimacy that inhere in relations between the ruling group 
and administrative staffs, rather than relations between the ruling group and society as 
a whole. Indeed, it has been noted that the process by which the new Federation 
Council senators were selected bears much in common with the nomenklatura system 
utilized by the CPSU to fill key administrative posts. 144
The point may be generally extended to the cadres policies initiated under 
Putin and his polpreds, for it is often observed that the horizontal rotation of cadres 
bears more than a passing resemblance with Brezhnev-era cadres policy. 145 This 
would certainly make sense given that the polpreds mostly came to political maturity 
during the Brezhnev era (though Kirienko and Matvienko are significant outliers in 
this regard). More significantly, perhaps, was that the appearance of the district 
structures disrupted the patterns of elite mobility established in the 1990s under
143 Rigby, "A Conceptual Approach to Authority, Power and Policy in the Soviet Union.", T. H. Rigby, 
"Introduction: Political Legitimacy, Weber and Communist Mono-organisational Systems," in Political 
Legitimation in Communist States, ed. T. H. Rigby and Ferenc Feher (London: Macmillan, 1982).
144 Remington, "Majorities without Mandates," 674.
145 Reddaway and Orttung, "What Do the Okrug Reforms Add Up To?"
El'tsin. The polpred's office presented opportunities for second- and third-tier 
regional elites to gain access to the center's resources and, from there, to rotate back 
into regional politics and contest higher offices or to move vertically into central 
political institutions. The most visible examples of this process included Tiumen's 
Sergei Sobianin and Valentina Matvienko in St. Petersburg. More generally, the 
working of the FD cadres policy revealed how Putin's re-centralization provided 
increasing points of contact with the central state through which regional interests can 
gain expression. These opportunities potentially offset the coercive elements of the 
structures. 147 But they also served to de-politicize the significance of Russia's 
regional borders as legal and metaphorical boundaries between central and regional 
levels of governance.
This process of de-politicization was aided by two dynamics facilitated by the 
institution of the FDs. In the first place, the polpreds and FD structures became focal 
points for regional lobbying and conflict mediation. Regional leaders quickly came to 
understand that the polpreds could be useful in communication regional interests 
through their meetings with the President and actively made use of this channel. 148 
The polpred became the point of appeal in instances of irresolvable executive- 
legislative conflict on regional level, as well as the first port of call for governors 
seeking to express their interests and appeal the Kremlin's decisions. This 
intermediary position reinforced the center's predominance insofar as the center could 
exercise discretion over whether to intervene at a region's behest. This power was not
146 For a description of regional elite mobility in the El'tsin era, see: Alia Chirikova and Natalia Lapina, 
"Regional Elite: A Quiet Revolution on a Russian Scale," (Zurich: Center for Security Studies and 
Conflict Research, 2001), Nikita Tiukov, "Geografiia rossiiskogo pravitel'stva: 1990-1999 gg.," in 
Regiony Rossii v 1999 g.: Ezhegodnoeprilozhenie k "Politicheskomu al'manakhu Rossii", ed. N. Petrov 
(Moscow: Moskovskii Tsentr Karnegi, 2001).
147 This is not to say that they necessarily serve democratic purposes, but neither do they automatically 
harbinger the onset of authoritarianism. Indeed, the Russian case suggests that re-centralization may 
actually threaten to decrease the state's autonomy relative to regional interests, but only to the extent 
that regional institutions are not colonized by the center.
148 P.A. Fedosov et al., "Perspektivy rossiiskogo federalizma."
unlimited, however, as the center's discretionary intervention was limited by the 
potential to set precedence for other regions to make common cause with the region- 
petitioner. Perm's failed attempt to move from the Volga to the Urals FD provided an 
early test case to this end.
Secondly, the de-politicization of regional borders had a "ratchet-down" effect 
within the regions. In other words, centralization on the national level ratified 
centralization processes at the regional level that served the interests of regional 
administrations. As discussed in the following chapter, the imperative of bringing 
regional legislation in line with federal and constitutional law presented regional 
executives with opportunities to redraft constitutions and charters and further 
consolidate their control within the regions. Similarly, opportunities arose to further 
enhance intra-regional control via mimicry of the FDs and repetition of central 
justifications for recentralization. "Successes" at the regional level thus did not 
necessarily require a heavy hand on the part of the polpred; rather, central rhetoric, 
justifications and institutional forms for the territorial organization of power provided 
the tools for regional executives to claim or re-assert control, while "success" at the 
regional level provided ongoing momentum for centralization on the national level.
Chapter Four: Constitutions, Charters, and Centralization
Introduction
In Russia's post-Soviet era, the constitutions of the federal republics demarcated and 
filled political space in claiming national self-determination, sovereignty, and control 
of natural resources. As discussed in Chapter One, the asymmetrical federal structure 
in Russia's Constitution granted the republics the most leeway in determining the 
structure and principles of regional governance. Republican constitutions became 
notorious in the 1990s for their assertions of sovereignty, of the right to conduct 
independent foreign policies, claims to land, water, natural and mineral resources, 
establishment of republican citizenship and official languages, and so forth. l This 
was due in part to the pervasive belief among republican elites that the federation was 
no more than the sum of its parts and that federal solutions should be constructed
"from the bottom up" (snizu vverkh). Arguably, the assertiveness of the republics 
promoted the impression that they tended to be separatist, while Russia's oblasts and 
krais were more integrationist in orientation.
Yet the scholarly focus on republican separatism often obscures the 
assertiveness of Russia's allegedly integrationist regions. Regional charters (ustavy), 
like republican constitutions, established the parameters of political contention in 
delineating what resources may legitimately be mobilized, which institutional 
arrangements count as formal or informal, and which actors may participate. In 
numerous oblasts and krais the regional charter violated the federal constitutional
1 All republics (except Ingushetia and Kalmykiia) asserted their status as sovereign states in their 
constitutions. A number of republics further claimed the superiority of republican law over federal 
law, including the power to ratify federal laws and the ability to suspend the Russian Constitution and 
federal laws on their territory. L.M. Karapetian, Fedemtivnoe Ustroistvo Rossiiskogo Gosudarstva 
(Moskva: NORMA, 2001), 101-2.
2 Jeffrey Kahn, Federalism, Demoralization, and the Rule of Law in Russia (Oxford: Oxford UP, 
2002), 147.
principle of the supremacy of the Russian constitution and federal law. 3 Herrera's 
study of claims to economic sovereignty among non-republican regions during 1990-3 
found that fifteen regions unilaterally changed their administrative (federal) status, 
four asserted that regional law took precedence over federal law, sixteen claimed the 
right to conduct independent foreign economic policy and nine claimed the right to 
control natural resources on regional territory. Equally telling was that only twelve 
regions showed no indication of economic separatism whatsoever. 4 Perhaps the most 
vivid illustration of regional activism was the case of Eduard Rossel"s attempt to 
upgrade Sverdlovsk oblast's status and establish a "Urals Republic" in 1993. Even 
after the attempt failed, Rossel' successfully managed to push a revised oblast charter 
through the regional assembly which fundamentally altered the landscape of regional 
politics. In particular, the new charter provided for gubernatorial elections, which 
conflicted with El'tsin's decree of October 1994 prohibiting elections for governors. 5 
The oblast Duma filed an appeal with the federal Constitutional Court, seeking 
reversal of the presidential decree. Eventually a compromise was reached by which 
the oblast Duma withdrew its appeal and El'tsin issued a new decree permitting 
Russia's first gubernatorial election to take place. Following Rossel"s election as 
governor, he immediately pressed for a bilateral treaty with Moscow to put the oblast 
on equal footing with the republics. 6
Thus, a significant problem emerging within the literature on Russian center- 
regional relations concerns the lack of attention to the content of regional charters
3 LA. Umnova, Konstitutsionnye osnovy sovremennogo Rossiiskogo federalizma (Moskva: Delo, 2000),
109-10.
4 Herrera utilized roughly the same measures of separatism as those used by Treisman (1997) to rank
57 regions. Yoshiko Herrera, "The Economic and Political Bases of Separatism: Imagined Economies
and Regionalism in Russia," (2001). (located at: http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/~herrera/)
5 Ukaz ot 4 oktiabria 1994 g. N1969 "O merakh po ukrepleniiu edinoi sistemy ispolnitel'noi vlasti v 
6 Gerald M. Easter, "Redefining Centre-Regional Relations in the Russian Federation: Sverdlovsk 
Oblast1 ," Europe-Asia Studies 49, no. 4 (1997).
outside of republican constitutions. The Russian constitution formally extends broad 
powers to the regions to establish their own structures of governance, and informal 
deal-making requires willing allies with resources. In both these respects, regional 
borders emerge as markers of political space and containers of regional political 
regimes.
Borders are not unidimensional, however, in establishing normative and 
political proximity. They are shaped as much from without as they are constructed 
from within. If scholars of regional politics in Russia have gone too far in assuming 
the integrationist orientation of the oblasts and krais, there has been a similar tendency 
to understate, misrepresent, or outright ignore the role of the center in regional 
politics. For instance, it was commonly observed by the end of the 1990s that 
regional governors had become more unruly and separatist vis-a-vis the Kremlin, but 
few (if any) pointed out that El'tsin cultivated strong governors in the wake of the 
October 1993 conflict with the Supreme Soviet. The standoff between president and 
parliament was replicated on the regional level, after which El'tsin sought to place 
allies in the regions that would be more loyal to the center. 7 Gel'man's analysis of 
regional political regimes treats the center as an "external influence" lacking 
consistent preferences or even sufficient capabilities to influence the trajectory of 
regional politics. 8 While his account was shaped by the center's apparent desertion of 
the regions in the wake of the 1998 economic crisis, his own work makes multiple 
references to instances of intervention by central institutions and actors.
A related difficulty concerns the journalistic impulse to treat all politics as 
dominated by strong, charismatic governors, where formal rules are trumped by 
informal lines of authority. Studies of regional regime types in Russia have focused
7 Darrell Slider, "Elections to Russia's Regional Assemblies," Post-Soviet Affairs 12, no. 3 (1996): 249.
8 Vladimir Gel'man, "Regime Transition, Uncertainty and Prospects for Democratisation: The Politics 
of Russia's Regions in a Comparative Perspective," Europe-Asia Studies 51, no. 6 (1999).
less on describing how powerful the governors are, and more on explaining the 
diversity of regional politics often hidden behind the assumption that the governors 
are uniformly dominant. For instance, a recent survey of 31 regions found that 
legislatures tended to be strong in the republics while oblasts were evenly split 
between strong and weak assemblies. 9 While governors are often the pivotal actors in 
regional politics, the assumption that all governors are dominant often serves to 
conceal variations in regional politics. Moreover, this tendency in analysis generates 
rather contradictory positions, whereby central institutions (formal or informal) are 
said to affect or regulate center-regional relations, but regional politics appear to 
develop in isolation from (or in outright opposition to) the center. This is difficult to 
square with the governors' constant pleas for consistency and stability in federal 
policy.
This chapter unpacks these assumptions regarding the role and content of 
regional charters and constitutions, their relationship to the structure of governance on 
the regional level, the role of the federal center, and their combined consequences for 
the status of Russia's internal borders. The process of revising regional charters and 
constitutions took center stage in Putin's first year in office, and it provides insight 
into the relative salience of the Kremlin's efforts at centralization and attempts by the 
regions to maintain the autonomy of regional boundaries. The chapter begins with an 
overview of the center's role in structuring regional government during the 1990s and 
Putin's legislative initiatives through 2003. It then proceeds with a narrative analysis 
of the process of revising regional charters and constitutions in the four case studies. 
This approach not only helps to flesh out the nuances of regional politics when
9 A.C. Kuz'min, N.Dzh. Melvin, and V.D. Nechaev, "Regional'nye politicheskie rezhimy v 
postsovetskoi Rossii: Opyt tipologizatsii," Polls 12, no. 3 (2002). Still, the authors hold that there is no 
stable correlation between constitutional status and informal domination by the executive branch.
confronted with the concerted federal effort at centralization, but also brings to light 
essential (and counterintuitive) commonalities in the process among these cases.
Structuring Regional Government
The Russian Constitution only mentions regional constitutions (for republics) and 
charters in passing. Article 66 indicates that regional status is regulated by the federal 
Constitution and regional constitutions (in the case of the republics) or charters. 
Article 77.1 permits the federation's constituent regions to adopt their own system of 
regional governance "independently and according to the principles of the 
constitutional system of the Russian Federation and the general principles of the 
organization of representative and executive bodies of state authority fixed by federal 
law." Presumably, then, the regions had a great degree of latitude in determining how 
to structure regional governance.
As Umnova points out, however, the substance of regional charters was 
regulated by a pair of presidential decrees from late 1993, while the decrees were only 
"recommended" for application in the republics. As a result, only the republics really 
exercised the constitutional ability to design their own systems.  Regional 
assemblies were limited in size to 50 deputies - many times smaller than the Soviets 
they replaced 11 - and the number of deputies working on a permanent salaried basis 
could not exceed two-fifths of the elected deputies. While the assemblies were 
extended the power to examine and confirm regional budgets, the heads of regional 
administrations had the exclusive power to draft and present the region's budget. In 
addition, the regional heads were generally charged with managing and disposing of 
the region's property, as well as taking "other measures to facilitate legality, the rights
10 Umnova, Konstitutsionnye osnovy sovremennogo Rossiiskogo federalizma, 153-4. 
11 Slider, "Elections to Russia's Regional Assemblies," 250.
and freedoms of citizens, the protection of property and social order, and to combat 
crime." 12
The decrees regulated the structure and operation of regional legislative 
assemblies to a much greater extent than regional executive branches. In this regard 
they reflected El'tsin's distrust of regional legislatures following the October 1993 
standoff with the Supreme Soviet (during which many regional legislatures sided with 
the national parliament) and his determination to control the reform of regional 
legislative structures. Outside of the republics, El'tsin continued to appoint the heads 
of regional administrations until 1995-6 and doubtless expected these governors to 
oversee the drafting of regional charters by the newly-constituted regional 
assemblies. 13 A federal law to regulate the structure and content of regional 
government was first discussed in the State Duma in 1994, though it was delayed by 
El'tsin for seven months in 1995, then subject to long debates in the State Duma and 
multiple vetoes by the Federation Council. 14 As a result, the law was not adopted 
until October 1999. 15 By then, however, the law could only codify the existing state
12 Ukaz ot 22 oktiabria 1993 g. N 1723 "Ob osnovykh organizatsii gosudarstvennoi vlasti v sub"ektakh 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii" (as well as attached "Polozhenie ob osnovnykh nachalakh organizatsii i 
deiatel'nosti organov gosudarstvennoi vlasti kraev, oblastei, gorodov federal'nogo znacheniia, 
avtonomnoi oblasti, avtonomnykh okrugov Rossiiskoi Federatsii na period poetapnoi konstitutsionnoi 
reformy"); Ukaz ot 22 dekabria 1993 g. N 2266 "O deistvii zakonodatel'stva Rossiiskoi Federatsii ob 
organakh gosudarstvennoi vlasti kraev, oblastei, gorodov federal'nogo znacheniia, avtonomnoi oblasti, 
avtonomnykh okrugov Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
13 "One of the most important items on the agenda of the new assemblies was the drafting of republic 
constitutions and oblast1 charters (ustavy) that formalize the governmental structure in each region. 
Given the lack of central direction over this process, the result will likely be regional governmental 
structures that are easily manipulated and controlled by the executive branch at the regional level and 
with minimal democratic supervision." Ibid.: 263-4.
14 The Federation Council vetoed the law on 11 June 1997, 20 May 1998, 17 July 1998, and 2 July
1999.
15 Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 06.10.1999 N 184-FZ "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii
zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov
Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
of affairs, as "all the regional constitutions and charters had already been adopted, and 
the political regimes hi several regions had been essentially consolidated." 16
The October 1999 law, "On the General Principles of Organization of 
Legislative (Representative) and Executive Governing Bodies in the Subjects of the 
Russian Federation," permitted greater room for regional assemblies to maneuver in 
determining the total number of deputies, their length of term (though not exceeding 
five years), and the number of deputies working on a permanent salaried basis. It also 
extended to assemblies the power to remove governors by a two-thirds vote of no 
confidence, but only following a court ruling that the governor had issued illegal 
decrees, violated regional or federal laws, or otherwise violated civil rights and 
freedoms on a mass scale. While deputies were prohibited from occupying any other 
government post (federal or regional), they were still permitted to work 
simultaneously in business or local government. 17
Insofar as the law reflected the gains of regional executives over regional 
assemblies, the governors appeared to be the dominant players in regional politics. 
Generally, the governors' powers were expanded, including the ambiguous ability to 
"participate in the work" of regional assemblies and to call extraordinary sessions of
___ -I O
regional parliaments. The new law limited governors to two terms and removed the 
standard feature in regional charters that required governors to be residents of the 
region. But the regional assemblies' power to remove governors via a vote of no 
confidence was complemented by the governors' power to dissolve the assemblies
16 Vladimir Gelman, "New Law on Regional Institutions Preserves Status Quo," Russian Regional 
/teport 4, no. 42(1999).
17 Gel'man argued at the time that the effect of this provision would be "to doom regional legislatures 
to serve as boards of directors or boards of municipal entities under the governor, rather than full- 
fledged legislative branches." Ibid.
18 Term limits were introduced in 80 regions following the law's passage in 1999. Izvestiia,3\ January 
2001. By 2001, only four regions had not introduced term limits: Republic of Kabardino-Balkariia, 
Komi Republic, Republic of Tatarstan, and Novogorod oblast'. Kommersant-Daily, 25 January 2001.
should the latter adopt legislation in violation of federal law or regional charters. 
Moreover, the governors required merely a court ruling to dissolve the assemblies, 
while the assemblies required both a court ruling and a two-thirds vote to impeach the 
governors. As for the Kremlin's control over the governors, it was largely limited to 
the President's ability to cancel any legal act (decree or resolution) issued by the 
governor or any part of the regional administration.
The October 1999 law provided for a two-year transition period, meaning that 
the regions were expected to have brought their charters and constitutions into 
conformity with federal law by October 2001. Observers at the time were split 
between those who thought the law was meaningless and those who thought it was 
toothless. Few expected that the center possessed the will or capacity to force the 
regions to implement the necessary changes, so attention focused instead on the 
December 1999 elections to the State Duma. After the surprise showing of Unity 
(Edinstvo) and the even more surprising resignation of El'tsin, however, post-Soviet 
Russia's second president, Vladimir Putin, appeared to have the resolve, political 
resources and opportunity to make the reform of regional charters and constitutions a 
priority. The process took on the dimensions of a Soviet-era campaign that was 
vigorously pursued on both the central and regional levels.
Putting the "Center" in Centralization
On the central level, the process began with the Constitutional Court's ruling on 7 
June 2000 that the provisions in the Altai Republic's constitution asserting republican 
sovereignty and claiming all land, water, mineral, and forest resources were 
unconstitutional. The Court further ruled that the decision was applicable to all
regional constitutions or charters with analogous provisions. 19 As a result, the 
Presidential Administration's agents in the regions were empowered to inspect 
regional charters without waiting for a court ruling in every instance. 20 On 27 June 
2000, the Court ruled that parts of the constitutions of six republics (Adygeia, 
Bashkortostan, Ingushetiia, Komi, North Osetiia, and Tatarstan) violated the Russian 
Constitution. This broadened the basis of the earlier ruling to apply to republics 
claiming sovereignty from the republican narod ("people"), as well as assertions that 
republican laws took precedence over federal laws. 21
The process continued in the State Duma with the amending of the 1999 
federal law "On the General Principles of Organization..." in July 2000 to give the 
president the power to remove governors and dissolve regional assemblies. 22 The 
range of violations for which the governors could be held accountable was expanded 
to include threats to the unity and territorial integrity of the Russian Federation, to 
national security and defensive capacity, or to the unity of its legal and economic
space. While the procedure for removing governors was cumbersome, the principle
19 Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 10 June 2000; Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 21 June 2000. Interestingly, the case was 
brought by the head of Altai Republic's administration, Semen Zubakin, in the attempt to roll back 
what he viewed as disproportionate legislative control over the republic's executive office. In 
particular, Zubakin protested provisions which prevented him from firing ministers without the 
assembly's approval and which granted deputies the potential to influence the recall of the governor, 
but which did not grant the governor the ability to dissolve the assembly. Kommersant-Daily, 1 June 
2000.
20 Kommersant-Daily, 7 June 2000.
21 Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 25 July 2000; Russian Regional Report, 12 July 2000. The Court also struck 
down the republican claims that they were subject to international law and that they owned the natural 
resources on their territory.
22 Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 29.07.2000 N 106-FZ "O vnesenii izmenenii i dopolnenii v federal'nyi 
zakon "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh 
organov gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
23 The procedural requirements stipulated that the governors were to be given two months to rescind or 
replace offending legal acts following a court ruling or a presidential decree canceling the act, after 
which the Russian President issued a warning to the governor or head of administration. If the problem 
persisted one month after the warning, the President could remove the governor from office. The 
governor could appeal the decision in the Supreme Court within ten days. It should be noted that the 
procedural requirements for dissolving regional assemblies were much more strict and time-consuming. 
In such cases, the assemblies were allowed six months to amend or remove offending legislation 
following a court ruling. If there was no change after six months, the Russian President would issue a 
warning, after which the assembly had three months to act. If there was no change after three months.
of central intervention and presidential authority along the "ruling vertical" was 
established. The fact that the Federation Council's veto of the law was overridden by 
the State Duma further underlined the strength of Putin's hand in parliament. 24 The 
amendment also granted the president the ability to appoint an interim governor in the 
event that regional charters did not establish guidelines for the succession of power in 
regional government, and it opportunistically afforded the president the right to 
temporarily appoint a replacement in the event that the General Procurator started 
criminal proceedings against a governor.
Additional amendments were passed throughout 2001-2. One of the more 
controversial of these was the February 2001 amendment, in which the term limits for 
governors was held to apply without consideration of the number of terms prior to the 
law's coming into force. In other words, governors elected to a second term before 
October 1999 were given the opportunity to run for two further terms. 25 In concrete 
terms, this meant that 69 incumbent governors obtained the right to run for a third 
term and 17 more for a fourth term. 26
In May 2002, another amendment forbade deputies in regional assemblies to
work simultaneously in the regional administration or local government. This hit
the President would introduce a bill to the State Duma to dissolve the regional assembly, which had to 
be considered within two months. The procedure from the initial warning to the passage of a federal 
law dissolving the regional assembly was not to take longer than one year.
24 Russian Regional Report, 19 July 2000. The State Duma's vote was 362-35, with 8 abstentions. The 
law provoked strong reactions from several governors, particularly given that the vote occurred during 
conciliation procedures regarding the structure of the new Federation Council. Russian Regional 
Report, 26 July 2000.
25 Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 08.02.2001 N 3-FZ "O vnesenii dopolnenii v federal'nyi zakon "Ob 
obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov 
gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
26 Kommersant-Daily, 25 January 2001; Obshchaia Gazeta, 1 February 2001. Among the most 
significant beneficiaries of the law were Moscow's Mayor lurii Luzhkov (third term) and Tatarstan's 
President Mintimer Shaimiev (fourth term). It is perhaps worth noting that the attempt to impose term 
limits in part motivated the Federation Council to veto the draft law on 2 July 1999 (by a vote of25-96- 
5) and recommend the formation of a conciliation council.
27 Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 07.05.2002 N 47-FZ "O vnesenii izmenenii v Federal'nyi zakon "Ob 
obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov 
gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
directly at the many regions where the governors hand-picked the heads of local 
government who, in turn, served as deputies in the legislative assembly. 28 A further 
amendment in July 2002 required that 50% of the deputies in regional assemblies (or 
50% of one chamber in regions with bicameral assemblies) be elected by proportional
representation.
By July 2003, a sizable package of amendments was passed after heavy 
lobbying by Dmitrii Kozak, then-deputy head of the Presidential Administration. 30 
The reform package was the culmination of an extensive effort begun with the 
creation of a commission within the Presidential Administration in June 2001 (which 
came to be known colloquially as simply "the Kozak commission") to examine the 
division of powers among federal, regional, and local levels of government. 
Originally the commission was to be composed of 22 members "from all levels" of 
government. 31 In practice, however, the commission's membership was heavily 
skewed towards the center with fourteen members from the central ministries, federal 
agencies, and Presidential Administration, while six members were drawn from
regional government and only two from local government. By 2003 the 
commission had expanded to 32, with all ten additions drawn from the center's 
representatives (including the seven Presidential Representatives), while the number
28 This practice in regional governments is identified by Kahn (2002) as a form of "intra- 
bicameralism."
29 Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 24.07.2002 N 107-FZ "O vnesenii dopolnenii i izmenenii v stat'iu 4 
federal'nogo zakona "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i 
ispolnitel'nykh organov vlasti sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
30 Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 04.07.2003 N 95-FZ "O vnesenii izmenenii i dopolnenii v Federal'nyi zakon 
"Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov 
gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
31 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 27 June 2001.
32 Ukaz Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii ot 21.07.2001 N 741 "Sostav komissii pri prezidente 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii po podgotovke predlozhenii o razgranichenii predmetov vedeniia i polnomochii 
mezhdu federal 'nymi organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti, organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii i organami mestnogo samoupravleniia."
of regional and local representatives remained fixed as before. 33 Analogous 
commissions were established under each of the seven Presidential Representatives to 
examine regional powers, as well as within each region by the Federal Inspectors to 
examine local government. 34 Urals polpred Latyshev claimed as early as mid-July 
2001 that independent 'sections' for working out recommendations had been 
established in each regions of the Urals Federal District and in some large cities. 
Siberian polpred Drachevskii described his job more diplomatically in terms of 
gathering as many ideas and suggestions as possible. 35
The majority of Kozak's reforms were aimed at federal relations - most 
explicitly towards minimizing the sources of regional autonomy by establishing 
legislative oversight for bilateral power-sharing treaties (which now required new and 
existing treaties to be approved by regional assemblies and the State Duma), and 
demarcating responsibility for constitutional areas of joint competency. 36 It also 
provided the first federal legislative regulation of relations among the so-called 
"complexly-constructed" (slozhnopostroenye) regions, or oblasts and krais with 
attached autonomous okrugs. 37 To some observers, Kozak's amendments whittled 
away at the dominance of the governors such that they were deemed a greater threat 
than the Federal Districts. 38 For the first time, the right of regional electorates to 
recall the head of administration was established by federal law, and under fairly
33 Updated list located at: http://www.kremlin.ru/state_subj/group39537.shtml (accessed 6 March
2003).
34 Izvestiia, 26 June 2QQl;Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 21 June 2001.
35 Izvestiia, 17 July 2001.
36 The amendment lists 41 powers within the areas of joint competency for which the regions would be 
responsible for executing and funding from regional budgets or targeted federal subventions.
37 To the autonomous okrugs were extended 18 of the 41 powers, including setting regional taxes and 
collection, and the ability to conduct external economic affairs. Irina Nagornykh, "Karaiushchaia 
vertikar-3," Kommersant Vlast', 30 June - 06 July 2003. The complex relationship among these 
regions is discussed in the chapter on regional mergers. The second portion of Kozak's reforms was 
directed towards local self-government.
38 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 22 October 2002.
OQ __
lenient conditions at that. The center also gained ground over the regions via 
provisions for temporary rule by Moscow in the event of natural disaster, legal 
infraction(s) committed with subventions from the federal budget, or where regional 
debt exceeded 30% of the region's budget revenue. 40
Despite these signs of domination by the center, the Kremlin ceded some 
ground during the draft law's evolution. Certain harsh provisions were included in 
the original draft to provide room for negotiation with the regions. For instance, the 
provision for temporary financial administration was initially to be directly under the 
Russian Government's authority. This was later changed to the Higher Arbitrazh 
Court, and then only after a court ruling on the abuse of federal funds by the region in 
question. The previous softening of term limits was again revised, this time starting 
the count from the first election held after 19 October 1999 in regions where there 
was no prior limitation on term limits. If such a limit already existed (as was the case 
in almost all regional charters and constitutions), the matter was left to the regional 
assembly to decide.
Taking Centralization to the Regions: Case Studies
On the regional level, the campaign relied first and foremost on the reinvigoration of 
central control over federal agents in the regions. The centerpiece was to be the 
newly-reformed Presidential Representatives in the seven Federal Districts. The first 
task assigned the new Presidential Representatives was to lead the process of revising 
regional charters and legislation to conform to federal law and the Russian
39 The law required a petition signed by 3% of the registered voters in the region to initiate a vote to 
recall the governor. A successful recall required only a simple majority of participating voters.
40 The idea of imposing external financial administration was drawn from polpred Kirienko's plans for 
crisis management in the Volga Federal District, though Kirienko's proposals were far more extensive 
in defining gross violations of electoral law and the use of "administrative resource" as kinds of crisis 
situations. Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 3 December 2002.
41 Nagornykh, "Karaiushchaia vertikal'-3."
Constitution. For this purpose, the polpredy tasked their Federal Inspectors with 
conducting an inventory of violations of federal and constitutional law within their 
respective region's charter or constitution. The inspectors would then coordinate with 
regional procurators to bring violations to court - for all appearances, a means (or at 
least a threat) to trigger the conditions for removal of the governor or dissolution of 
the legislative assembly. The threat was an effective one. The long-held attitude 
among the regional elite that compliance with federal law was merely a function of 
political convenience quickly changed "as the presidential envoys flexed their 
muscles and Putin's other proposals became federal law."42
During Latyshev's first year as Urals polpred, 350 laws were revised and all 
six regions in the Federal District amended their charters.43 In the Volga Federal 
District, procurators discovered 853 regional laws that violated federal norms. 
Kirienko claimed that 99% of these had been dealt with by the beginning of 2002. 44 
In May 2002, North-West polpred Cherkesov claimed as his major achievement the 
revision of 600 laws throughout the Federal District. 45 Siberian polpred Drachevskii 
fared less well, facing entrenched resistance and failing to stop certain regions from 
producing new laws which continued to violate federal norms. 46
Many observers regarded this process as an elaborate public relations exercise, 
presumably because regional laws were assumed not to matter in regional politics,
42 Kahn, Federalism, Democratization, and the Rule of Law in Russia, 25 1.
43 Sergei Kondrat'ev, "Urals Federal Okrug," in The Dynamics of Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of 
Federal-Regional Relations, ed. Peter Reddaway and Robert W. Orttung (Boulder: Rowman & 
Littlefield, 2003), 191.
44 Gul'naz Sharafutdinova and Arbakhan Magomedov, "Volga Federal Okrug," in The Dynamics of 
Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, ed. Robert Orttung and Peter 
Reddaway (Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003), 159.
45 Alexander Duka and Peter Rutland, "North-West Federal Okrug," in The Dynamics of Russian 
Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, ed. Robert Orttung and Peter Reddaway 
(Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003), 62.
46 Maksim Shandarov, "Siberian Federal Okrug," in The Dynamics of Russian Politics: Putin's Reform 
of Federal-Regional Relations, ed. Peter Reddaway and Robert W. Orttung (Boulder: Rowman & 
Littlefield, 2003), 218-9.
most of the changes to regional charters were more technical than substantive, or 
more importantly, regional charters were presumed to have little influence over the 
trajectory of center-regional relations. An analysis of the process by which regional 
constitutions and charters were amended, however, suggests that regional leaders 
converted the threat of centralization and diminished regional autonomy into political 
advantage. The quantity and extent of technical revisions needed to bring regional 
charters and constitutions into conformity with federal law varied across regions. 
This variation arguably was less reflective of the cosmetic aspect of the reform, 
however, than the very diversity among regional political regimes. If the end result 
was a relatively homogenous set of executive and legislative powers across all 
regions, it would be difficult to argue that the reform process has had little influence 
over the trajectory of center-regional relations. Moreover, a careful tracing of the 
reform process suggests that Putin's centralizing initiatives affected the tactics 
adopted by the heads of regional administrations and facilitated the governors' 
success in attempting to reduce the political weight of regional parliaments.
While politics in Perm is never quiet, it often gives the appearance of consensus. In 
part this consensus is the result of a certain sense of isolation from Moscow. 47 More 
generally, the regional political elite tend to deal with political conflicts by 
minimizing their visibility, or as McAuley characterizes the "Perm approach": 
"muffle them, smooth them out wherever possible."48 If this is a viable description of 
the political style in Perm, the region was fortunate to have Gennadii Igumnov as 
governor. Igumnov cultivated a "polycentric model" of regional government. In
47 This is typically expressed in the agonizing question among locals, "Why does Moscow always 
confuse Perm with Penza?'
48 Mary McAuley, Russia's Politics of Uncertainty (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1997), 163.
characterizing his own role in oblast politics, Igumnov stated: "I should be the center 
that can integrate the healthy forces in the oblast and try to do what is necessary so 
that they resolve issues irregardless of personalities."49
By comparison with other regions in the Volga Federal District, Perm's 
burden in revising regional legislation was relatively light. Perm's Main Federal 
Inspector, Vladimir Solomonov, indicated in October 2000 that over 300 laws in the 
Federal District needed to be brought into conformity with federal law, but in Perm 
only eight needed to change. 50 The process of amending the oblast charter got 
underway in late May 2000 with amendments authored jointly by Igumnov and 
assembly speaker Nikolai Deviatkin. On the face of it, the amendments balanced new 
executive and legislative powers as prescribed by federal law. The first major 
amendment introduced the means for the governor to dissolve the assembly, whereas 
previously the assembly could only be dissolved by its own decision. But the new 
charter also included a limit of two terms for the governor for the first time. The 
assembly also gained the power to remove the governor as well as any other member 
of the regional administration appointed with the assembly's approval. The term of 
office for governor and assembly deputies was increased from four to five years, but 
shifted the power of appointing the date for elections from the governor to the 
assembly. 51 While a provision was introduced that deputies in the legislative 
assembly could be recalled by the electorate, a similar provision allowing for the 
recall of the governor was excised from the revised charter.
The proposals caused a heated debate in the legislative assembly's Committee 
for Social Policy, provoking deputy Mikhail Kasimov to allege that they represented a
49 Quoted in: N. Lapina and A. Chirikova, Strategii Regional'nykh Elit: Ekonomika, Modeli Vlasti, 
Politicheskii Vybor (Moskva: INION, 2000), 161.
50 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 3 October 2000. In a later interview, Solomonov recalled the number as 
slightly higher (12 to 15). Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 8 May 2001.
51 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 24 May 2000.
"gentlemen's agreement." Deputy Arkadii Kats suggested the palpable sense of the 
center's hand in the process in contending that, "the issue is not the maintenance of 
equality between branches.. .but the preservation of any kind of power on the regional 
level." The deputies adopted the changes to the charter on its second reading in 
July, facing pressure both by the center's demand to reform the charter within six 
months, as well as the upcoming gubernatorial elections that fall. 53 In an editorial on 
the revisions, assembly speaker Deviatkin appeared to make common cause with the 
governor in voicing his opposition to empowering regional procurators to remove the 
heads of regional administrations. 54 On balance it would be difficult to claim that the 
revisions decisively favored the governor, though the regional legislature clearly 
exercised restraint. A proposal by Kasimov to make all deputy governors subject to 
dismissal by the legislative assembly was rejected on the grounds that it would 
infringe the governor's sphere of competency to determine the structure of his own 
administration. 55 The assembly further decided not to extend the right of legislative 
initiative to the region's mayors, instead granting it to the governor's Council of 
Heads of Local Administration. 56
A number of additional amendments to Perm's charter managed to evade 
coverage in the local press. The assertion that "all power in Perm oblast derives from 
its population" in the charter's preamble presumably steered too close to an assertion 
of regional sovereignty. The new draft replaced it with the formula, "all power in
52 Novyi Komparion (Perm'), 23 May 2000.
53 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 26 July 2000.
54 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 25 July 2000.
55 Perm's charter made four key committee chairs (committee for property management, committee for 
environmental protection, department for rational use of natural resources, and department of finance) 
subject to dismissal by the legislative assembly. This structure was essentially preserved in the new 
charter with only the two first deputy governors and the heads of the tax and finance ministries subject
to dismissal.
56 Zvezda (Perm'), 28 July 2000. Municipal assemblies retained the right of legislative initiative, but 
the head of the regional assembly's working group on the charter revisions, Liubov' Zotina, pointed out 
that "it is well known that in the majority of cases the heads of cities and raions are also the speakers 
of local assemblies."
Perm oblast derives from the multinational people of the Russian Federation." To the 
section delineating the borders of the region's administrative-territorial units was 
added that, "the oblast government can create economic districts containing several 
administrative-territorial units with common social-economic features, for conducting 
unified regional policy..." With this, the oblast administration acquired the power to 
create its own bodies analogous to the Federal Districts on the oblast level. 57 With 
regard to municipal government, the new charter made legislative projects on issues 
that affect the interests of local government subject to agreement by the 
municipalities. On paper, at least, this effectively granted a veto to local government 
in the drafting of oblast legislation. At the same time, the new charter provided the 
means to discipline local government by granting the governor the right to 
recommend that municipal government bring its laws into accordance with Russian 
legislation if they contradict federal or oblast law, and to take the matter to court 
should they fail to comply.
Altogether, the revision of Perm's charter was both extensive and balanced. 
This evinced certain institutionalization of the "rules of the game" within oblast 
politics, particularly insofar as the governor and assembly hastened to complete the 
revisions before the onset of the gubernatorial elections. At the time, the outcome of 
those elections was more or less decided as the only legitimate challenger, the mayor 
of Perm' lurii Trutnev, had agreed to stay out of the race and support Igumnov on the 
condition that Igumnov would endorse Trutnev for governor in 2005. The 
expectation of stability in the top rungs of the oblast leadership doubtless facilitated
the speedy revision of the oblast charter.
57 A key difference with the Federal Districts is that the oblast districts would have stronger legal 
footing than their federal analogs.
58 As discussed in the next chapter, however, these expectations proved to be misguided.
Tinmen
Of the four cases under examination here, Tiumen oblast made the fewest changes to 
its charter. Part of the explanation has to do with the fact that the charter had been 
under constant revision throughout the 1990s - from the charter's adoption on 15 June 
1995, it had been amended thirteen times prior to the adoption of the October 1999 
federal law. Main Federal Inspector Sergei Smetaniuk stated by November 2000 that 
there were "about thirty" laws that needed to be brought into accordance with federal 
law. 59
Yet the situation in Tiumen was far from quiet. Like Perm oblast, Tiumen was 
known as a "complexly-constructed" (slozhnopostroennyi) region, meaning that 
neighboring autonomous okrugs formally "entered into" the oblast at the same time 
that they were constitutionally recognized as separate federal subjects. The 
relationship between Perm and Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug were fairly quiet, 
largely due to the latter's economic backwardness and reliance on access to the 
oblast's resources. But the situation was reversed in Tiumen, where the oblast 
economy lagged far behind the autonomous okrugs to the north. Tiumen's governor, 
Leonid Roketskii, fought a vicious struggle with the autonomous okrugs in the second 
half of the 1990s over the applicability of oblast laws in the autonomous okrugs and, 
more significantly, the oblast's entitlement to the royalties the northern neighbors 
received from their oil and gas industries. 60 When gubernatorial elections were first 
held in the oblast on 22 December 1996, the autonomous okrugs boycotted them. 61 
The result was that Roketskii was elected by the oblast proper, but faced an oblast
59 Nashe Vremia (Tiumen'), 22 November 2000.
60 lamalo-Nenetskii autonomous okrug produces 90% of Russia's gas, and Khanty-Mansiiskii 
autonomous okrug produces over 60% of the country's oil.
61 The assembly of lamalo-Nenetskii autonomous okrug passed a resolution directing the okrug's 
population not to take part in the election. The administration of Khanty-Mansiiskii autonomous okrug 
exercised more passive resistance in refusing to organize the election on its territory. A.F. Fedorov, 
Rossiiskii Federalism: istoricheskii opyt i sovermennost' (Moskva: Nauchnaia Kniga, 2000), 118.
Duma elected from all three regions with fourteen deputies from the autonomous 
okrugs (four from lamalo-Nenetskii autonomous okrug, ten from Khanty-Mansiiskii 
autonomous okrug) and eleven from the oblast. By contrast, Perm oblast's legislative 
assembly was not only larger (with 40 deputies, as opposed to 25 in Tiumen), but the 
representation from Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug was limited to a purely 
symbolic number (two deputies) with no potential for legislative interference.
In September 2000, the oblast Duma attempted to change the region's charter 
so as to require the assembly's approval for the governor's appointments to the heads 
of raion administration. Deputy Governor L. Volkov objected that this would amount 
to an illegal increase in the assembly's powers. In attendance was deputy Urals 
polpred Sergei Vakhrukov, who supported the oblast administration's objection. 
Vakhrukov observed that the process of bringing regional legislation into conformity 
with federal law was proceeding slowly and only with the combined pressure of the
procurator and Federal District apparatus.
Changes to the oblast charter were passed by the regional Duma in its last 
session of the year with barely any mention in the local press. 63 As with most other 
regions, the terms of office for governor and deputies of the oblast Duma were 
lengthened from four years to five years. The governor's power to dissolve the 
assembly increased insofar as the only condition for dissolution in the old charter was 
the extended absence of a quorum. In accordance with the 1999 federal law, the 
governor in the revised charter could dissolve the assembly if the oblast Duma 
adopted legal acts that violated the Russian Constitution, federal laws pertaining to 
the exclusive and joint competencies of the Russian Federation, or the oblast charter, 
and if the contradiction was not removed within 6 months of a ruling by the court of
62 Sibirskii Posad (Surgut), 26 September - 03 October 2000.
63 Tiumenskie Izvestiie, 21 December 2000.
the "appropriate level." The governor thus made an incremental gain in the additional 
justification for dissolving the oblast Duma, though obtaining the necessary court 
ruling (much less determining "the appropriate level") probably would be no less time 
consuming and politically difficult than the previous standard. In addition, the 
required vote in the oblast Duma for adopting changes to the charter was increased 
from a simple majority to a two-thirds majority - an important change, given that the 
structure of territorial representation in the oblast Duma automatically gave the 
autonomous okrugs a majority.
Regarding the ability of the assembly to remove the governor, the revised 
charter effectively raised the burden for the oblast Duma in bringing the charter into 
accordance with the prescriptions of the 1999 federal law. However, the process was 
also made slightly easier than in the previous draft in that the constraint that the oblast 
Duma pass a resolution within one month of the court's ruling was removed. By 
contrast, the governor now had but one month to correct the offending legislation or 
normative legal acts - the shortest possible period allowed by law.
The situation in Tiumen oblast was so strikingly different from that in Perm 
that it is worth devoting some attention to the matter. Judging by the coverage (or 
rather, the lack thereof) in the Tiumen press, the reason ostensibly had to do with the 
timing of the upcoming gubernatorial elections. As noted above, Perm's regional 
assembly pointedly sought to amend the charter well in advance of the gubernatorial 
elections and quickly managed to arrive at a balanced formula. This met the center's 
expectations without sacrificing significant powers for either the legislature or the 
administration, though it was not expected that the incumbent governor would depart 
for another five years. In Tiumen, however, the process dragged through the fall and 
was overtaken by the gubernatorial campaign. Roketskii had neither the style, nor the
resources of Igumnov, and it was clear that the autonomous okrugs would not repeat 
the error of boycotting the oblast's gubernatorial election. In such a highly-charged 
political contest, any revision to the oblast charter could only be cosmetic as long as 
both the oblast administration and assembly were equally incapable of domination 
and compromise. The autonomous okrugs instead concentrated on capturing the 
oblast administration by uniting behind a common candidate, Sergei Sobianin - the 
former speaker of the Khanty-Mansiiskii autonomous okrug's legislative assembly 
and newly-appointed first deputy Urals polpred. The extent to which the "war 
between the north and the south" overshadowed the legislative changes was 
demonstrated at the final session of the oblast Duma: on the same day that the 
assembly passed minor revisions to the oblast charter, Sobianin pitched his proposal 
for economic-social cooperation among the three regions. The other "northern" 
candidate in the gubernatorial election, oblast Duma Speaker Sergei Korepanov (from 
lamalo-Nenetskii autonomous okrug), withdrew his candidacy at the same session and 
endorsed Sobianin. 64
Still, the situation might not have been as confrontational if Tiumen's charter 
did not seek to define and regulate relations with the autonomous okrugs. The charter 
placed relations with the autonomous okrugs in a pseudo- or mini-federal system, but 
maintained the provision that the autonomous okrugs "enter into" (vkhodiat v sostav) 
the oblast. The meaning and implications of "entering into," however, was a 
contentious legal and political issue, defined differently by each region. 65 For the 
autonomous okrugs, it meant that the oblast governor could act only as coordinator for
64 Tiumenskie Izvestiie, 27 December 2000; Tiumenskaia Pravda, 29 December 2000. While the 
election will be discussed in more detail in the following chapter, it is relevant to note that Sobianin 
won the election and Korepanov retained his position in the oblast Duma.
65 Fedorov, Rossiiskii Federalizm, 117.
oblast-wide programs, effectively diminishing the governorship to a symbolic role. 66 
The oblast charter made reference to coordinating bodies, such as the Council of 
Governors, and made provision for relations to be regulated on the basis of the 
Russian Constitution as well as treaties among the three regions. But in the absence 
of any federal law regulating relations among oblasts, krais, and autonomous okrugs, 
the ability to sign a treaty among the regions depended upon the ability of the 
leadership in the north and south to find willing allies.
In the context of Tiumen's gubernatorial campaign, this key section of the 
oblast charter became a crucial advantage for Sobianin as the candidate with the best 
chance of healing the breach between the oblast and the autonomous okrugs. Such 
issues took on a different dimension in Perm since its charter left relations with Korni- 
Permiatskii autonomous okrug on a more ambiguous footing. 67 In the course of 
Perm's gubernatorial campaign, Trutnev made unification with the autonomous okrug 
a key issue, but one that was relatively cheap to deploy since there were few legal 
repercussions after the charter's revision. Trutnev prevailed and unilaterally 
terminated Perm's power-sharing treaty with the Kremlin the following year, leaving 
the oblast's relations with the autonomous okrug to be regulated by the Russian
Constitution and the silence of federal law.
Buriatiia
Buriatiia was among the leaders of the "Parade of Sovereignties," declaring its
sovereignty in 1990 after Tatarstan and Sakha-Iakutiia. Much of the content of the
66 Tiumenskie izvestiia, 29 November 2001.
67 The revised charter stated that the division of areas of competency and jurisdiction between the 
Russian Federation and Perm oblast was regulated by Russian Constitution, the Federal Treaty, and the 
treaty on the division of competencies of the Russian Federation, Perm oblast, and Komi-Permiatskii 
autonomous okrug.
68 Perm, Nizhegorod, and Ulianovsk oblasts, along with the Republic of Marii El, were the first regions 
to unilaterally cancel their power-sharing treaties with the federal center. Izvestiia, 9 July 2001.
declaration was preserved when the republic formally adopted its constitution in 1994, 
including the right to suspend or contest laws that "violate the interests of the people 
of Buriatiia." Land, natural resources, and the economic potential of the republic 
were claimed as republic property. Both Russian and Buriat were designated as state 
languages. 69 On the ten year anniversary of the Republic of Buriatiia's declaration of 
sovereignty, the region's leadership attempted to situate the symbolic importance of 
the event within the realities of Putin's Russia. In almost apologetic fashion, 
president Leonid Potapov and assembly speaker Mikhail Semenov stressed that the 
declaration of sovereignty was dictated by the necessity of signing the Federal Treaty 
and becoming a full member of the Russian Federation. 70 The necessity of amending 
the republic's constitution was presented in a very similar tone.
In an interview in late May 2000, the Chairman of Buriatiia's Constitutional 
Court, Kapiton Budaev, listed extensive changes required to bring the republic's 
constitution in accordance with the 1999 federal law "On the General Principles..." 
and in response to the Russian Constitutional Court's ruling against several republics 
(see above). Budaev recommended substantial amendments, the most significant of 
which targeted: the requirement that changes to the republic's status be approved by 
more than half of the republic's ethnically Buriat population via referendum; the 
claims to the republican sovereignty and possession of natural resources; the claim 
that the Republic of Buriatiia represented the realization of the Buriat people's self- 
determination; the establishment of Buriat citizenship; the republic's right to protect 
Buriat citizens beyond its territory (including in other countries); the right to refuse to
69 Marjorie Mandelstam Balzer, "Dilemmas of Federalism in Siberia," in Center-Periphery Conflict in 
Post-Soviet Russia: A Federation Imperiled, ed. Mikhail A. Alexseev (New York: St. Martin's Press, 
1999), 143. 
70 Buriatiia, 1 October 2000.
allow the redeployment of its soldiers to other areas of the federation; 71 and the joint 
right with the federal government to limit the rights and freedoms of its citizens.
In addition, Budaev raised the possibility of extending the terms of office for 
republican president and deputies of the legislative assembly, the Narodnyi Khural 
(NKh) from four to five years and of making the assembly bicameral instead of 
unicameral. He further suggested that the republican president be accorded the power 
to dissolve the assembly (as stipulated by federal law). In the event that the 
republican president was incapacitated or removed from office, Budaev called 
attention to a separation of powers issue insofar as the speaker of the assembly was 
supposed to succeed the president in cases of the latter's incapacity or removal. To 
this end, he recommended the creation of the post of republican vice president. 
Lastly, he urged that the republican procurator be granted the right of legislative 
initiative, pointing out that over 800 "illegal legislative acts" were eliminated as a
result of the procurator's protests.
The republican assembly debated a number of changes proposed by Potapov 
in Fall 2000. Unsurprisingly, the least controversial issue was the extension of the
terms of office for assembly deputies and the republican president to five years. 
The hottest disputes to emerge during the assembly debates concerned executive- 
legislative relations, and the question of border changes. With regard to the former, 
the key issues concerned the extent of the republican presidency's powers. Debate 
focused broadly on three areas: the qualifications for the republican president, the
71 The republican assembly attempted to exercise this right in 1995 when it voted against sending 
Buriat soldiers to Chechnia. Balzer, "Dilemmas of Federalism in Siberia," 145.
72 Buriatiia, 23 May 2000.
73 At the end of 2001, the assembly additionally granted Potapov the possibility of running for a third 
term as president by removing the explicit two-term limit in the constitution and replacing it with the 
formula, "The President of the Republic of Buriatiia is elected for a five-year term in accordance with 
federal law." Inform-Polis (Ulan-Ude), 26 December 2001.
president's powers of appointment to the republican government, and the line of 
succession for the republican presidency.
The assembly recommended early on that the qualifications for the republican 
presidency be altered to remove the required length of residency in Buriatiia and 
maximum age, while the minimum age of 30 years ought to be retained. 74 More 
divisive was the requirement that the president have command of the Buriat language. 
The issue was avoided in public debates, though it persisted on the agenda 
throughout. 75 The republican Constitutional Court ruled that the existence of such a 
requirement was valid in principle since the republic had a system of education in the 
Buriat language and a republican law on official languages. 76 Some deputies in the 
assembly suggested that the requirement was ineffective insofar as a candidate for the 
presidency had only to study Buriat a few months prior to election. 77 The main 
concern emerging from the assembly debates, however, was to avoid a confrontation 
with the federal center, as deputies repeatedly attempted to solicit the opinions of the 
Siberian polpred Drachevskii, the republican electoral commission, and the republican 
procurator. 78 As explained by Tsydenzhap Batuev, chairman of the republican 
government's Committee for State-Building, Local Self-Government and Legality, 
the issue was resolved by way of legal finesse: while it might contradict federal law to 
require knowledge of Buriat, the republican constitution could legally require 
knowledge of the republic's state languages. 79 The criteria for evaluating the
74 Buriatiia, 1 October 2000.
75 Buriatiia, 22 November 2000. Anecdotal evidence suggests that Potapov was able to frighten off 
candidates by suggesting that campaign debates by held in Buriat.
76 Inform-Polis (Ulan-Ude), 11 October 2000.
77 Buriatiia, 18 November 2000.
78 Odinnadtsataia sessiia narodnogo khurala respubliki buriatiia (vtoroi sozyv), 2-3 oktiabria 2000 g. 
Stenograficheskii otchet, chast' I (Ulan-Ude, 2000): 69-85.
79 Inform-Polis (Ulan-Ude), 25 October 2000.
president's (or candidates for the presidency) knowledge of the language was left 
unspecified.
Concerning the president's appointment powers, Potapov had proposed that 
the assembly should have the right to confirm only the first deputy and deputy prime 
minister in the republican government, while all remaining ministers and committee 
chairs would be freely appointed or dismissed by the president. The president's 
proposal made specific reference to the wording of the 1999 federal law that the 
assembly should have the power to confirm the appointment and dismissal of 
members of the regional government, drawing in particular on the decision of the 
Russian Constitutional Court regarding Altai Republic's constitution. 80 The assembly 
opposed Potapov's proposal, seeking to retain the right to confirm the appointments 
of all cabinet ministers. In this, the NKh also made explicit reference to the situation 
in Altai Republic where the members of the government were "changed like gloves"
and included people "unfamiliar with the republic."
Assembly speaker Mikhail Semenov linked the importance of the decision to 
the broader weakening of the power of regional assemblies across the Russian 
Federation. 82 The Congress of the Buriat People elaborated on Semenov's concern in 
pointing out that the president's simultaneous role as head of the republican 
government meant that the president could remove the heads ofraion administration 
and independently hire or fire members of the republican government. It was feared 
that the assembly would lose its only powerful lever of voting no confidence in the
republic's government, making the president's powers virtually unlimited. Erdem
80 Odinnadtsataia sessiia narodnogo khurala respubliki buriatiia (vtoroi sozyv), 2-3 oktiabria 2000 g. 
Stenograficheskii otchet, chast' I (Ulan-Ude, 2000): 90.
81 Buriatiia, 25 October 2000.
82 Odinnadtsataia sessiia narodnogo khurala respubliki buriatiia (vtoroi sozyv), 2-3 oktiabria 2000 g. 
Stenograficheskii otchet, chast' I (Ulan-Ude, 2000): 96-8.
83 Buriatiia, 18 November 2000.
Dagbaev of Buriat State University characterized the problem as inhering in the 
republic's semi-presidential system. While the republican president had the ability to 
form the government, his appointments to (and dismissals from) the government 
required the approval of the Narodnyi Khural. In this sense, the republican 
constitution established dual accountability for each government institution before the 
president and the assembly. In attempting to limit the assembly's confirmation 
powers over appointments to the government, the president's proposals suggested a 
drift towards a more clearly presidential system in which the president's 
accountability increased at the expense of the assembly. 84 The end result was a 
compromise variant in which the republican president required the confirmation of the 
assembly in appointing the first deputy and deputy prime ministers, as well as the 
minister of the economy and minister of finance.
In a similar vein, the assembly fought to retain the constitutional provision that 
the president would be succeeded by the speaker of the Narodnyi Khural in the event 
of the president's inability to continue his duties. Potapov proposed that the first 
deputy prime minister should succeed the president, but Ts. Batuev pointed out that 
the removal of the president necessitated the immediate dismissal of the republican 
government and therefore pre-empted such a procedure. 85 Eventually the assembly 
voted to keep the provision for the speaker to become acting president, but added the 
constraints that the acting president could not introduce changes to the constitution or
dissolve the assembly.
84 "Today the President answers in the literal sense for everything, beginning with the payment of 
wages in every enterprise and ending with the quality of legislation... Now he will answer directly for 
the work of every minister and department." Buriatiia, 22 November 2000. Indeed, it was even 
rumored at the time that the term limits on the Buriat Presidency would be altogether removed in the 
new constitution. Inform-Polis (Ulan-Ude), 4 October 2000.
85 Odinnadtsataia sessiia narodnogo khurala respubliki buriatiia (vtoroi sozyv), 2-3 oktiabria 2000 g. 
Stenograficheskii otchet, chast' I (Ulan-Ude, 2000): 106-8
86 Chetyrnadtsataia sessiia narodnogo khurala respubliki buriatiia (vtoroi sozyv), 28 fevralia 2001 g. 
Stenograficheskii otchet, chast' II (Ulan-Ude, 2001).
The dispute over changes to the republic's borders was even more contentious, 
so much so that many deputies were reluctant even to discuss the matter. In 
introducing the issue to the assembly, Potapov pointed out that the existing 
constitution made changes to the republic's borders contingent upon a republic-wide 
referendum in which at least half of the titular nationality voted in favor. Given that 
internal passports ceased to indicate nationality in 1996, however, it would be 
logistically impossible to meet such a requirement without violating voters' rights to a 
secret ballot. Moreover, citizens could not legally be compelled to reveal their 
nationality. Instead, the assembly debated imposing stricter requirements than those 
stipulated in federal law by making border changes contingent upon referendum in the
affected areas as well as agreement of all municipalities. Potapov's representative 
to the assembly revealed that this arrangement was designed specifically to prevent a 
raion or municipality from leaving the republic and merging with a neighboring 
region. 88 The impetus came not from any specific threat, but rather from the latent 
threat posed by the centralization processes. Several deputies pointed out that the 
goal was to keep the federal center from depriving Buriatiia of its status by 
manipulating the republic's borders. 89 This implicitly expressed the lasting awareness 
of the damage wrought by Stalin's partitioning of Buriat lands in the 1930s. 90 Even 
the republic's Main Federal Inspector, Boris Danilov, suggested that the issue would 
be best left out of the republican constitution altogether, but that "the situation in the 
country compels us to look at the issue anew."
87 Buriatiia, 1 October 2000; Buriatiia, 25 October 2000.
88 Odinnadtsataia sessiia narodnogo khurala respubliki buriatiia (vtoroi sozyv), 2-3 oktiabria 2000 g. 
Stenograficheskii otchet, chast' I (Ulan-Ude, 2000): 53.
89 Ibid, 54-62.
90 See Chapter Two.
91 Buriatiia, 18 November 2000.
In order to pass the changes proposed by Potapov and approved by the 
assembly, the assembly had to vote to convene a Constitutional Assembly 
(Konstitutsionnoe sobranie). The extent of subterranean opposition to the changes 
was suggested in that the vote on convening the assembly was blocked three times 
until a roll call vote, at which point it was approved unanimously. 92 The 
Constitutional Assembly was broadly representative, comprised of 179 members: the 
president, 65 members from the Narodnyi Khural, 65 from executive agencies, 23 
heads of local government (ten of which also served as deputies in the republican 
assembly), 23 representatives of local assemblies, and three members of the 
republican constitutional court. The one day session occasioned little in the way of 
debate - the heavy lifting had already been done by the assembly - and the new 
constitution was overwhelmingly approved. 93
Kareliia
The process of re-writing Kareliia's constitution effectively began simultaneously 
with Putin's election. The republican government proposed to hold a referendum on 
two fundamental changes to the republic's constitution simultaneous with the Russian 
presidential elections in March 2000: whether the republic's chief executive, then 
known as "Chair of the Government" (predsedateT pravitel'stvd)?* would be re-titled 
as "Head of the Republic" (glava respubliki); and whether to change from a bicameral
92 Inform-Polis (Ulan-Ude), 22 November 2000.
93 Of the 179 members, 161 were present and 156 voted on the new constitution. The vote was by 
secret ballot with four ballots ruled invalid, the final vote being 147-5. Zasedanie konstitutsionnogo 
sobraniia respubliki buriatiia, 25 dekabria 2000 g. Stenograficheskii otchet (Ulan-Ude, 2000).
94 While the literal translation of predsedatel'pravitel'stva is "Chair of the Government," though it is 
commonly translated in English as "Prime Minister" on the federal level. The term "governor" is used 
here as interchangeable with the formal titles of "Chair of the Government" and "Head of the 
Republic."
to a unicameral assembly. 95 Both questions received overwhelming support in the 
referendum: the question for a unicameral legislative assembly received 68% support, 
while the change of title for the republic's chief executive received 58.5%. 96 
By May 2000, three constitutional projects were introduced into the 
Constitutional Committee of the assembly's lower house, the Chamber of 
Representatives (palata predstavitelei) - the first by the governor ("Chair of the 
Government") Sergei Katanandov, another by the Kareliian chapter of Our Home is 
Russia (Nash Dom - Rossiid), and the third by the social organization for the titular 
nationality, the Kareliian Congress (Karel'skii Kongress). 91 A fourth draft was 
proposed by several opposition deputies in the Chamber of the Republic (palata 
respubliki), but met with stiff opposition and was never considered by the Chamber of 
Representatives. 98 The deputies' draft differed from the other drafts on a number of 
significant points. It proposed a permanently-operating legislative assembly, whereas 
the other drafts envisioned a mixed body. Their draft also maintained the right of 
legislative initiative for social organizations, judges, the procurator and the 
Constitutional Court, while Katanandov's draft did not extend legislative initiative to 
these bodies. 99 The committee ruled that only Katanandov's draft did not contradict
95 An attempt by the local chapter oflabloko (registered as a social organization, not as a political 
party) to hold a referendum on whether Kareliia needed a new constitution was blocked by the 
Chamber of Representatives (palata predstavitelei) in Fall 1999. While agreeing with the need for 
making changes to the republic's constitution, the Chamber's constitutional committee argued that 
legislative initiative as concerns changes to the republic's founding law should not be open to social 
organizations. Kareliia, 25 September 1999. The Central Electoral Commission of the Republic of 
Kareliia later refused to register labloko's referendum initiative for multiple contradictions with the 
Russian Constitution. Kareliia, 6 October 1999.
96 Kareliia, 8 April 2000.
97 Kareliia, 20 May 2000.
98 Kareliia, 13 May 2000. The deputies were Aleksandr Chazhengin, Aleksandr Lukin, Sergei 
laskunov, Mikhail Maksimov, Sergei Ushakov, and Aleksandr Gavrilov. These deputies sought 
approval of their draft by the Chamber of the Republic's Committee for State-Building, Local Self- 
Government, and Nationalities Policy in order to introduce the draft constitution separately to the 
Chamber of Representatives. The Chamber of the Republic's committee refused to approve the draft, 
however, as well as the request to publish the draft in the government press.
99 Kareliia, 27 May 2000. A statement by two of the draft's authors was printed in the government's 
press only three days after the Chamber of Representatives voted to adopt Katanandov's version. In it,
the Russian constitution, though the Chamber's Speaker, Nikolai Levin, argued that 
the other drafts need not be discarded.
The constitutional draft was recommended by the Chamber of Representatives 
on its first reading on 24 May 2000. On the day of the vote, Our Home is Russia 
withdrew its draft from consideration and called on deputies to support Katanandov's 
draft. The Chamber's approval allowed the committee to begin preparations for the 
second reading in mid-October.
The influence of the centralizing processes unfolding in Moscow were 
palpable in the early stages of re-writing Kareliia's constitution. The first indication 
was an open letter by Chamber of the Republic deputies Lukin and laskunov, 
requesting in connection with Putin's decree on the Federal Districts and legislative 
initiatives to "reconstruct executive and legislative branches at all levels [of 
government]" that all draft constitutional projects be withdrawn until the Federal 
Assembly voted on Putin's package of laws. 101 Inevitably rumors began to circulate 
that Katanandov would seek to dissolve the parliament early in order to put the new 
unicameral assembly into place as soon as possible. The government's press service 
hastened to point out, however, that "in light of Putin's relations with the governors, it 
would not be prudent to make a sudden move." 102
In August 2000 the republic's procurator notified the Supreme Court that 
several portions of Kareliia's existing constitution were invalid. 103 In the next session 
of the parliament's Constitutional Committee, the deputies (led by the mayor of
the deputies made clear that the government silence on their project was matched by much noise and 
disinformation in the republican media.
100 Kareliia, 27 May 2000.
101 Kareliia, 20 May 2000.
102 Kareliia, 3 June 2000. Other factors mentioned included the necessity of maintaining a positive 
image in the European Union, as well as the time required to pass the new constitution and electoral 
laws for the new executive and legislative bodies. In any case, Katanandov's draft constitution 
included the provision that the existing executive and legislative structures would continue operating to 
the end of their terms in 2002.
103 Kareliia, 16 September 2000.
Petrozavodsk, Andrei Demin) were forced to delay their examination of the 
corrections recommended by the committee's working group because they lacked the 
corresponding legal review. Demin explained the committee's cautiousness: "We 
know what threatens the republic if we adopt laws that contradict federal legislation - 
dissolution of the legislative body. The President of Russia has warned of this." 104
The Constitutional Committee proposed some 200 changes and corrections to 
the draft constitution, which passed its second reading in the Chamber of 
Representatives on 19 October 2000. 105 The changes reflected the Kremlin's 
insistence on the primacy of federal law. Legal categories of "citizen of the Republic 
of Kareliia" and "people of the Republic of Kareliia" were eliminated, as was the use 
of the term "state" (gosudarstvo) as applied to Kareliia's government. In other places, 
standard caveats such as "if not otherwise stipulated by federal law" or "within the 
framework of power as determined by federal law" were used to avoid uncertainty. 106
Yet the old constitution's provision for two state languages for the republic 
(Russian and Karel) was effectively maintained (though softened with the neutral 
formula: "The Republic of Kareliia has the right to establish its own state 
languages"). 107 This inclusion was surprising, as Katanandov's administration had 
been waging a press battle against the rival draft constitution presented by the 
Kareliian Congress, led by Anatolii Grigor'ev, since the beginning of the process of 
constitutional revision. During the deliberations prior to the second reading, a highly 
critical editorial appeared in the government press that singled out Grigor'ev for trying
1 r\o
to establish constitutional privileges for Karels, Finns and Vepps living in Kareliia. 
This vividly expressed the extent to which the republican administration had grasped
104 Kareliia, 23 September 2000.
105 Kareliia, 21 October 2000. The draft constitution was published in Kareliia, 25 October 2000.
106 Kareliia, 25 November 2000.
107 Kareliia, 25 October 2000.
108 Kareliia, 1 July 2000.
the new political line from Moscow that ethno-political claims were no longer 
compelling, while the Kareliian Congress had failed to do so. After the draft 
constitution passed its second reading, Grigor'ev complained that not a single 
recommendation of the Kareliian Congress or other ethnic organizations was 
supported by either the working group or the Constitutional Committee. In effect, he 
claimed, the draft constitution ignored "the constitutional right of Karels, Finns, and 
Vepps to self-determination..." and accused the republican administration of "anti- 
Karel" policy. 109
Within a month, Katanandov introduced a series of additional changes that 
were presented as a startling change of opinion. In the first article of the constitution, 
he added that the Karel spelling for Kareliia, Kar'iala, was an equal official 
designation for the Republic of Kareliia (though to be used interchangeably, not in the 
sense of "Sakha-Iakutiia"). Immediately following this, he added that, "the historical 
and national specificities of the Republic Kareliia are determined by the Karels living 
on its territory." The revised Article 11 explicitly made Karel a second state 
language, though added that "the order of usage of Karel as a state language is to be 
determined by law." Where Article 21 of the draft constitution previously made 
reference to the necessity of protecting "small indigenous peoples" (korennye 
malochislennye narodd), Katanandov's amendment changed this to make specific 
reference to Karels, Finns, and Vepps. 110
While Katanandov did not provide a public justification for his volte face, 
there was speculation that representatives of the Kareliian Congress managed to 
persuade him to change. Given Katanandov's insistence on maintaining a neutral 
stance up to that point, this explanation seems unlikely. Perhaps more convincing
109 Kareliia, 21 October 2000.
110 Kareliia, 25 November 2000; Kareliia, 29 November 2000; Kareliia, 20 December 2000.
was the opinion voiced by Chamber of the Republic deputy Aleksandr Lukin. 
Lukin's argument, which is worth quoting at length, was that
if one pays close attention to political trends in the federal center, there is a 
sufficiently obvious tendency towards reducing the number of subjects of the 
Russian Federation... The idea of the impermissibility of adopting Karel as a 
second state language is very dangerous for the statehood (gosudarstvennost ') 
of Kareliia. It is as if to say to these federal actors: "look, there is nothing to 
distinguish us from any other region of Russia." And it may be that there, in 
the federal center, they decide, "What is this Kareliia? There are some Karels 
and there are Russians, [but] they only speak Russian so there's nothing more 
to think about." And henceforth there will no longer be Kareliia, but the 
Petrozavodsk raion of Leningrad oblast', or Murmansk, or Arkhangelsk. But 
the decision will not be made in Kareliia. 111
The Chamber of Representatives passed the draft constitution in its third and fourth 
readings, making minor changes but rejecting the explicit inclusion of Karel as state 
language. 112
When the draft was finally sent to the Chamber of the Republic, however, it 
was rejected and suggested to the Chamber of Representatives that a conciliation 
commission be formed. 113 The Chamber of the Republic recommended 25 changes to 
the conciliation commission. While most of the changes were minor in nature, two 
were of note. First, the draft proposed by Katanandov removed the legislative 
assembly's ability to confirm the appointments of deputy Prime Ministers, the 
Minister of Finance or the Minister of Economics, or to remove them with a vote of 
no confidence. These powers were restored in the commission's corrections. Second, 
the rather detailed and lengthy list of measures envisioned in Article 21 for the 
protection and development of Karel, Finnish, and Vepps cultures was drastically 
shortened to a single line: "In the Republic of Kareliia are measures taken for the
1 l l Kareliia, 16 December 2000.
112 Instead, the compromise version was changed to read, "The state language of the Republic of 
Kareliia is Russian. The Republic of Kareliia has the right to establish other state languages on the 
basis of the direct will of the population of the Republic of Kareliia, expressed by way of referendum." 
Press-sluzhba Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Respubliki Kareliia, 7 December 2000; Press-sluzhba 
Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Respubliki Kareliia, 20 December 2000.
113 Kareliia, 27 December 2000.
rebirth, protection and free development of Karels, Vepps and Finns living on its 
territory." The conciliation commission also made recommendations to ensure that 
current elected officials would serve out their terms in order to avoid the possibility of 
early elections.
The commission's recommendations were not positively received by 
supporters of the previous draft in the Chamber of Representatives, raising the 
possibility of a constitutional crisis: if the conciliation commission's changes were not 
accepted, the legislative assembly would be forced to start over with a new draft. Six 
months remained before the deadline to bring the republic's constitution in 
accordance with federal law. Failure to do so would mean the legislative assembly's 
dismissal, and work on the current draft constitution had gone on for eight months 
already. Seeking to avoid just such a scenario, the commission's recommendations 
were approved by the Chamber of the Republic before the Chamber of 
Representatives in a breach of existing (out-going) constitutional procedure. 115 
Recognizing \htfait accompli, the draft constitution was adopted in full by the 
Chamber of Representatives on 7 February 2000. 116
Of course, problems remained to be solved. Most significantly, the new 
constitution re-named the governor from "Chair of the Government" to "Head of the 
Republic," effective from its signing into force, but it also altered the governor's 
powers. The previous constitution allowed for the governor to dismiss the legislative 
assembly only by calling a referendum. If the governor "lost" the referendum, he 
would be required to resign. In the new constitution, no such procedure was 
envisioned and the governor's ability to dismiss the republican parliament was
114 Press-sluzhba Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Respubliki Kareliia, 26 December 2000.
115 Press-sluzhba Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Respubliki Kareliia, 16 January 2001.
116 Press-sluzhba Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Respubliki Kareliia, 7 February 2001; Severnyi Kur'er 
(Petrozavodsk), 8 February 2001.
checked only by a decision of the court "of the appropriate level" or by federal law. 
In addition, a briefing by the republic's Ministry of Justice following the adoption of 
the new constitution pointed out four "serious" contradictions with federal law, 
including the possibility that the governor might be recalled by the electorate. l ll 
Upon signing the new constitution into law, Katanandov indicated that he did so only 
to avoid the dissolution of the republican parliament, and that he would introduce 
additional corrections or else he would be forced to resign (which, in turn, would 
force elections for governor almost a year before they were expected to take place). 118 
The additional corrections were approved by both chambers of the legislative 
assembly in quick succession at the end of March 2001. 1 19 Kareliia had a new 
constitution at last. 12
Comparing the Revision of Regional Charters and Constitutions
A number of commonalities in the process of revising regional constitutions and 
charters emerge from the analysis of the four cases in this chapter. First, many 
regions took advantage of the ability to increase the length of office for both 
assemblies and governors from four years to five. Among the four cases under 
examination here, only Kareliia did not extend the length of office. The explanation 
may be as banal as the self-interested behavior of politicians seeking to lengthen their
117 Severnyi Kur'er (Petrozavodsk), 10 February 2001.
118 Kareliia, 10 February 2001.
119 Press-sluzhba Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Respubliki Kareliia, 21 March 2001; Press-sluzhba 
Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Respubliki Kareliia, 23 March 2001; Kareliia, 29 March 2001. 
120 Kareliia finally had a new constitution, though not everyone was happy. The republican Procurator 
immediately protested eight articles of the new constitution in the republican Supreme Court. On 14 
May 2001, the court ruled that several aspects of the new constitution were in violation of federal law, 
particularly the granting of additional powers to the republic's Constitutional Court and various norms 
that allowed a broad interpretation of the republic's jurisdiction. Kareliia, 18 August 2001. 
Opposition deputy Chazhengin succeeded in defending two articles of the new constitution that 
allowed the legislative assembly the right to have an independent budgetary-control committee, and 
that granted the right of legislative initiative to the Supreme and Arbitrazh Courts. Shortly thereafter, 
Chazhengin also succeeded in defending the article granting the electorate the right to recall the head of 
the republic in the Supreme Court in Moscow. Gubernia (Petrozavodsk), 24 May 2001.
tenure. It is also possible that the decision was taken with the foresight that future 
regional elections would not coincide with federal elections. The center typically 
took greater interest in regional elections when they coincided with federal elections, 
placing greater pressure on regional leaders to deliver votes. Regardless of whether 
the extension of term length was intended as a measure to increase regional 
autonomy, then, this was a practical result. Similarly, placing regional elections on a 
separate cycle from national elections meant that regional elections were more likely 
to be focused on region-specific issues.
Second, the process of revising regional charters was often initiated and 
guided by the governor (or republican president). This was clearly the case in 
Kareliia and Buriatiia. In Perm, the revisions were jointly initiated by the governor 
and assembly speaker, while the process in Tiumen was dominated by the assembly 
throughout. Judging from the examination of the revision process discussed above, 
this appears to accurately reflect the extent of the governor's ability to manipulate the 
assembly - strongest in Kareliia and Buriatiia, weaker in Perm, and weakest in 
Tiumen. One should also note that the position of the executive was stronger vis-a- 
vis the assembly in the regions where the most extensive revisions were required 
(Kareliia and Buriatiia) and weaker in regions requiring minimal revisions (Perm and 
Tiumen). This is a somewhat counterintuitive observation. Putin's centralizing 
initiatives appeared to target the republics most directly, and it was generally assumed 
that the republics would offer the greatest resistance by virtue of having the most to 
lose. In the cases of Kareliia and Buriatiia, however, the republican leadership 
initiated and vigorously pursued the revision of their respective constitutions. And in 
both cases, the leadership represented the revision of republican constitutions as both 
a legal imperative mandated by federal law, and as a political inevitability given the
resolve of Putin's administration to take the battle to the regions. The other side of 
this was that the republican leaders also cast themselves as doing what was necessary 
to preserve the territory and status of their regions at the same time that they 
demonstrated their loyalty to the Kremlin - positions that could hardly be challenged 
by regional assemblies. Putin's centralization thus offered incentives to the regional 
leaders who had to tackle the most extensive revisions of their charters and 
constitutions, as "one centralizing measure requires another concession to regional or
subregional elites." As a result, those who had the most to lose may also have had
the most to gain.
As an illustration of this, it is useful to compare changes in gubernatorial 
powers across constitutions and charters. Drawing on the method developed by 
Shugart and Carey, Table 4.1 breaks down gubernatorial powers in the four regions
i ^j'j _
before and after the revisions of their charters and constitutions. The first set of 
columns (from the left) covers the governors' legislative powers, while the second set 
covers nonlegislative powers. There was noticeable stability in legislative powers 
across all cases 124 , but the governors gained incrementally in three cases in terms of 
nonlegislative powers after the revision of regional charters and constitutions. One
121 Kimitaka Matsuzato, "From Communist Boss Politics to Post-Communist Caciquismo - the Meso- 
Elite and Meso-Governments in Post-Communist Countries," Communist and Post-Communist Studies 
34, no. 2 (2001): 176.
122 If this was the case for the oblasts, it appears to have been even more so with the republics. 
Russia's republics tended to have strong legislatures while oblasts were more diverse. Kuz'min, 
Melvin, and Nechaev, "Regional'nye politicheskie rezhimy," 150-3.
123 For a description of the method and operationalization of values, see: Matthew Soberg Shugart and 
John M. Carey, Presidents and Assemblies: Constitutional Design and Electoral Dynamics (New York: 
Cambridge UP, 1992), 148-52. This method was first utilized for categorizing regional regime types in 
Russia in: Kuz'min, Melvin, and Nechaev, "Regional'nye politicheskie rezhimy." The authors convert 
the measure to a dichotomous value ("strong" and "weak"), though they do not indicate to what extent 
they adapted Shugart and Carey's method to the context of Russian regional politics.
124 The apparently precipitous decline of presidential legislative powers in Buriatiia deserves mention 
here. The change in formal powers is somewhat exaggerated given that most were not exercised (for 
instance, the President of Buriatiia never attempted to introduce a state of emergency). Otherwise the 
loss of powers for exclusive introduction of legislation can be accounted for by the requirements of the 
1999 federal law "On the General Principles..." and not as a result of executive-legislative 
confrontation.
should also note that Shugart and Carey did not design these measures with the 
context of regional Russia in mind - significant areas of gain for the governors are not 
included here. Neither do these measures factor in center-regional, inter-regional 
or regional-local relations. At a bare minimum, however, the evidence indicates that 
the governors lost far less power within their own regions as a consequence of 
centralization than is often presumed. The cynic might reply that this only goes to 
prove the superfluous nature of regional law, though one would then be hard pressed 
to explain why the governors committed extensive resources and influence in 
pursuing the reform of regional charters and constitutions. 126
A third aspect of the process that was shared among the regions was that it 
provided an element of performance legitimacy to the newly-reformed institution of 
Presidential Representatives. The establishment of a "unified legal space" was the 
first significant task that Putin gave to his envoys. While the process technically 
began with the passage of the federal law "On the General Principles..." in October 
1999, it is generally agreed that the coercive veneer of the newpolpredy and their 
network of federal inspectors gave the reform its teeth. 127 Moreover, the envoys' 
involvement in the process established institutional channels for central intervention 
in regional legislation by establishing procedures and precedents for central oversight 
and regulation. The fact that the process of revising regional charters and 
constitutions occurred parallel to the establishment of the Federal District apparatus is 
significant in this regard.
125 For instance, the fact that the re-naming of the chief executive office in Kareliia's constitution from 
"Chair of the Government" to "Head of Republic" permitted Katanandov the chance to run for a third 
term of office.
126 Even if one accepts a limited electoral accountability in many Russian regions, the law still has 
consequences for intra-elite, center-regional, and local-regional political contests.
127 As Matsuzato observes, "federal districts have proved to be playing a pivotal, if not decisive, role, in 
particular in the campaign to overcome contradictions between federal and regional legislations." 
Matsuzato, "From communist boss politics," 177.
2 2 2 2 N
2 2 2
0 0 0 0 O
1 O1 0 0
e 3 3 3 3 3 3
4b 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 2 2 N
2 2 2
11 6 8 8 4 8 8 8
3 3 3 3 3
in 3 3
2C 3f 4 4 4 4" 4 4
s 3h 0 0 0 3 3
0 1 O1 1 0 1 l
0 10 8 7 8 11 11
Conclusion
Taken together, these commonalities underline the relationship between centralization 
on the federal and regional levels. It was in this context that the attention of regional 
administrations and assemblies inevitably focused on the status and regulation of the 
boundaries of administrative-territorial divisions within the regions. All regions under 
review stipulated that their boundaries and status could only be changed by agreement 
with neighboring regions and referendum within their respective territories, in 
accordance with federal law. Within the regions, however, the status of internal 
borders was left to regional governments. The formula for determining internal 
boundaries varied in degrees of ambiguity. Perm's charter merely stated that the 
boundaries of administrative-territorial divisions were regulated by regional law. In 
Kareliia, changes to internal borders were permitted "taking into account" (s uchetom) 
public opinion in the affected areas. At the other extreme, Tiumen's charter devoted 
two chapters to internal boundaries - one concerning relations with the autonomous 
okrugs, another concerning the status of the oblast's internal units. As the assembly 
debates on the status of municipal boundaries within Buriatiia revealed, the ability to 
manipulate the conditions for internal border changes was interpreted as a function of 
the integrity of a region's borders with its neighbors. Similarly, Tiumen's charter and 
Kareliia's constitution enumerated the regions' administrative-territorial divisions, 
meaning that any procedure for altering the boundaries, name, or status of their
internal units would require amending the charter or constitution.
In this important sense, regions maintained significant control over their own 
borders via control over their internal boundaries. In part this supports the broad 
hypothesis posed in the introduction that the internal boundaries of the state are linked
128 Such a list was not included in Kareliia's 1994 constitution. Its inclusion in the revised constitution 
is further suggestive of an increasing defensiveness regarding the republic's internal boundaries.
to the process of state-building and the constitution of its external boundaries. With 
specific regard to centralization in Russia, such cases illustrate the extent to which the 
process involved the "ratcheting down" of the state's authority: the regions are pulled 
further under the center's control, while the municipalities are pulled further under the 
regions' control.
This focus on the boundaries of internal units was motivated further by the 
example of the Federal Districts. Perm's revised charter included a new provision 
permitting the oblast government to establish internal economic districts 
(khoziaistvennye okrugd) "for the purpose of conducting a unified regional policy 
within them." In Kareliia, a plan to create analogous economic districts was floated in 
January 2001 by Vladimir Surzhikov of Kareliia's Ministry of Economics. The plan 
proposed dividing the region into five economic okruga, each composed of four or 
five raions. Like Putin's Federal Districts, Surzhikov's okrugs would be implemented 
as a reform of the republic's administration and would not require changes to existing 
legislation. 129 Proceeding from the premise that local self-government was guilty of 
failing to perform basic and necessary functions, the proposed okrugs would serve to 
"divide spheres of activity and, correspondingly, spheres of accountability of different 
levels of government," such that the republic would be able to make more efficient 
use of government resources and local government would concentrate on strictly local 
concerns, "not involving itself in global economics and politics." 130 Surzhikov 
initially described the proposed okrugs as an intermediate level of government, but 
quickly backed off and stated that the okrugs would "create a team of professional 
managers in the name of the government," "bring administrative organs closer to the 
territories," and would actually decrease the number of bureaucrats by eliminating
129 Gubernia (Petrozavodsk), January 11-17, 2001.
130 Severnyi Kur'er (Petrozavodsk), January 6, 2001.
departments (otdely) in the republic's ministries that dealt with raion-specific
131issues.
Nonetheless, Surzhikov's proposal created a minor sensation. Heads of local 
government voiced their concern, yet they were constrained by the obvious political 
correctness of the plan. 132 The head of Kaleval'skii raion, Cheslav Skripin, was blunt 
in his assessment: "the idea's logic is understandable and correct. It fits with the logic 
of a federal system of government administration: from anarchy to the principles of 
democratic centralism." 133 Surzhikov's plan faded from public discussion and was 
not revived, but it is significant that the plan was floated while the republic's 
legislators were re-writing Kareliia's constitution under threat of dissolution by 
Katanandov and the possibility of early elections. 134 The timing was not lost on the 
heads of local government who simultaneously served as deputies in Kareliia's 
Chamber of the Republic, which duly voted for the governor's draft constitution and, 
effectively, voted itself out of existence in approving the switch to a unicameral 
assembly. Ironically, distrust among leaders of local government increased while the 
potential for coordinated political opposition declined - in essence, opposition to the 
centralization of regional budgetary control was demobilized in much the same way 
that Putin demobilized regional opposition to his reform of budgetary federalism. 
This was accomplished while the regional government openly stated that local
131 Gorod (Petrozavodsk), January 19-25,2001.
132 The response of the head of Lakhdenpokhskii raion, Nikolai Lysenko, was largely typical: "if the 
economic strengths of the raions will be joined for the resolution of common problems thanks to this 
plan, then I am in favor of such okrugs. But if these new structures are created to put more bureaucrats 
in the raions, then I am against them. Even worse would be if these bureaucrats carried out control and 
oversight of local self-government." Kareliia, January 20, 2001.
133 Kareliia, January 20, 2001.
134 Gubernia (Petrozavodsk), February 22-28,2001.
government would be increasingly responsible for generating its own revenue without 
providing the legal basis for the use of local resources. 135
And similar to the power exercised by Putin to force the governors to bring 
regional charters and constitutions into conformity with federal law, the new charters 
and constitutions granted the governors the same powers to force local government to 
bring municipal charters and legislation into accordance with regional and federal 
law. The fact that the revision of regional charters and constitutions occurred 
simultaneously with the establishment of the Federal Districts and establishment of 
the "ruling vertical" had a knock-on effect on regional-local relations: Putin's 
centralization provided both political opportunity and the discursive weaponry for the 
governors to (re-)assert control over local government.
In addition to the forms of "goal-rational" authority evoked by Putin's Federal 
Districts reform, then, the revision of regional charters and constitutions as a process 
contributed performance legitimacy to both central and regional actors. The nature of 
that legitimacy, however, was framed by the relative salience of Russia's internal 
borders. For the Kremlin, the process confirmed Putin's goal of making Russia into a 
"uniform legal space" as a necessary step for restoring central state capacity. For the 
regions, the process opened up new opportunities to re-negotiate and preserve 
regional identities and status, which regional leaders then sought to consolidate 
through the ballot box.
135 In a manner reminiscent of Putin's first salvos of 2000, the republican administration's newspaper 
Kareliia started a "name and shame" campaign, regularly featuring articles about troublesome raions 
during this period. Olonetskii raion was the subject a particularly fierce attacks, perhaps related to the 
fact that Katanandov's most likely opponent in the upcoming elections for head of the republic was the 
mayor of Olonets.
Chapter Five: Gubernatorial Elections in Putin's Russia
Introduction
The previous chapters examined the re-imposition of central control over the regions, 
particularly through the establishment of the Federal Districts and the revision of 
regional charters and constitutions. While it is clear that centralization has been 
successful in re-connecting lines of vertical authority among federal agencies and 
diminishing the legal variations among types of regional regimes, there has been a 
trade-off at each stage of the process by which the governors benefited from a 
"ratchet-down" effect of centralization. If one judges by the relative changes in 
jurisdiction and control over internal borders, the Russian president's position 
improved in relation to the governors, while the governors' position was strengthened 
in relation to other regional and local forces. Putin may have purchased the 
governors' support for his initiatives that affected the balance of power in the federal 
center, but at the cost of leaving the governors even further entrenched in the regions. 
In this regard, the conduct and outcome of gubernatorial elections since Putin came to 
power ought to provide important indicators of the effects of centralization and its 
longer term prospects in regional politics.
It seems clear that gubernatorial elections were implicated in the various 
dimensions of the politics of Russia's internal borders, particularly the content of 
regional political regimes. It is commonly observed, for instance, that the switch from 
appointing governors to allowing gubernatorial elections contributed to the growth of 
regional autonomy during the 1990s. It has also been suggested, indirectly, that 
regional elections provided platforms for activating forms of regional identification - 
whether it lay in anti-Moscow sentiment, comparisons with neighboring regions, 
ethnic affiliation, or some combination of these. Taken together, then, gubernatorial
elections intersected the dimensions of regional autonomy in federal relations, 
democratization, and regional identity. This chapter begins with a theoretical 
discussion of the relationship between gubernatorial elections and regional 
democracy, taking into account post-Soviet Russia's accumulated history of 
gubernatorial elections throughout the 1990s. It then proceeds to analyze the conduct 
and outcome of gubernatorial elections during Putin's first term, utilizing election 
results from across Russia's regions as well as in-depth examination of elections in 
the four regional case studies.
Gubernatorial Elections and Regional Democracy
At first glance, gubernatorial elections were the most readily observable and 
identifiable indicators of democratization on the regional level. They were among the 
fiercest competitions across post-Soviet Russia, which is no surprise since the 
governor remained the single most important actor in regional politics. Election 
campaigns were highly visible, at times provoking the involvement of central actors 
(particularly the Central Electoral Commission) and in many cases attracting coverage 
by the national media. l The involvement of the latter potentially granted a greater 
degree of openness to the election, particularly where it provided a needed counter- 
balance to biased coverage in regional media. In addition there was a wealth of data 
available from regional electoral commissions made publicly available (including on 
their websites). 2 In principle, voters in gubernatorial elections ought to have better 
knowledge of the candidates, their positions, and obvious attempts to tamper with the 
electoral process. Moreover, there was ample reason to view gubernatorial elections 
as a barometer for democratization that links together the regional and national levels
1 This is not to say, however, that the national media was un-biased.
2 But only for a limited time, and the data generated by regional electoral commissions sometimes 
contradicted the results made available by the Central Electoral Commission.
of governance: "clean" elections on the regional level were positive signs, as were 
effective central interventions to ensure free and fair electoral competition.
Yet as regional political actors gained electoral experience, clearly identifying 
violations of electoral law, tampering, or subterranean central interventions became 
more difficult. Indeed, observers of regional elections were more often struck by their 
non-democratic aspects than the reverse. Incumbent governors were well known for 
employing a whole range of dirty tricks to preserve power, including the notorious use 
of "administrative resources" to boost voter turnout, the deployment of bogus 
opposition candidates (dublery or dvoiniki), the monopolization or intimidation of 
regional media, and various manipulations of regional electoral law. 3 The Kremlin 
also played an active role in regional elections, often seeking to prevent undesirable 
(sluchainye or "accidental") candidates from participating. The federal center could 
alter the balance of power at election time by manipulating key appointments and by 
the payment (or rather, non-payment) of federal officials in the regions. Informal 
channels for influencing the outcome of regional elections were equally significant: 
earning Putin's endorsement was a crucial advantage, as it also served as an implied 
threat to those backing the "wrong" candidate.
In assessing the democratic content of gubernatorial elections, then, there is a 
tragic irony in that Robert Dahl's dimensions of democratization - participation and 
competition4 - may equally serve as indicators of managed democracy 
(upravliaemaia demokratiid). In studies of regional elections in Russia, participation 
has been operationalized in terms of voter turnout, while the degree of
3 Cameron Ross, Federalism and Democratisation in Russia (Manchester: Manchester UP, 2002), 158-
4 Robert A. Dahl, Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition (London: Yale UP, 1971). Dahl presents
these dimensions as constituted by eight institutional guarantees: (1) The freedom to form and join
organizations, (2) freedom of expression, (3) the right to vote, (4) eligibility for public office, (5) the
right of political leaders to compete for support, (6) alternative sources of information, (7) free and fair
elections, and (8) institutions for making government policies depend on votes and other expressions of
preference.
competitiveness is sometimes represented by the number of effective candidates, the 
percent of votes cast against the winner, or the frequency of replacement of incumbent 
governors. While these may be viable criteria in established democracies, they can be 
dubious indicators for regional gubernatorial contests. Voter turnout can reach levels 
that rival European democracies (60-80%), but not without frequent allegations of 
falsification, tampering, and intimidation. The number of competitors for a given post 
may overlook the effect ofdublery or bogus opposition candidates. In the regional 
context, running for governor was also a means to become established in regional 
politics even if the candidate did not expect to garner more than a few percentage 
points. This was particularly noticeable when challengers failed to unite behind the 
leading opposition candidate in run-off elections. The frequency of incumbent 
replacement can miss cases in which the incumbent stepped aside for a designated 
successor, chosen from among the ranks of the regional elite.
Another tendency in the analysis of gubernatorial elections (particularly among 
journalistic accounts) was to judge their democratic content by the putatively 
democratic credentials of the victor. Yet the gap between words and deeds often 
widened to a gulf between democratic promises and the undemocratic means 
employed to obtain or maintain power. An added layer of complexity concerns the 
governors' relationship with the Kremlin. During the 1990s, some governors could 
adopt stridently anti-Moscow positions while implementing unexpectedly liberal 
policies at home. Personal loyalty to the president trumped a governor's democratic 
credentials. This latter trend was prominent during the El'tsin era and appears to have 
accelerated in Putin's Russia as incumbents and opposition, alike, claimed to have the 
Kremlin's support. 5
5 As Moses notes, this presented particular difficulties for the Presidential Administration in singling 
out genuine Putin loyalists among contenders. Joel C. Moses, "Political-Economic Elites and Russian 
Regional Elections 1999-2000: Democratic Tendencies in Kaliningrad, Perm and Volgograd," Europe- 
Asia Studies 54, no. 6 (2002): 912.
The Evolution of Russia's Gubernatorial Elections
The evolution of the regional governorship was bound up with Russia's emergence 
from Soviet rule. Following Gorbachev's proposal at the 19th Party Conference in 
1988 to transfer power from regional Party committees to the Soviets, the executive 
committees of regional Soviets (ispolkomy} were strengthened in 1990. El'tsin later 
proposed that executive power in the regions be transferred from the ispolkomy to the 
new post of "head of administration" (glava administratsii) during the RSFSR's 
presidential campaign in spring 1991. This new post was supposed to be subject to 
multi-candidate elections and the Russian Congress of People's Deputies adopted 
legislation for the election of heads of administration in October 1991. When El'tsin 
was granted emergency decree powers in November 1991, however, he was handed 
the power to appoint regional governors. Gubernatorial elections were postponed 
three times until December 1996. 6
In the few regions where El'tsin permitted gubernatorial elections (by decree), 
the results were disastrous for the Kremlin's appointees. In December 1992, the 
legislative assemblies in eight regions voted no confidence in the governor. 7 When 
gubernatorial elections were held in April 1993, incumbents lost to Communist- 
supported candidates in all but one region (Krasnoiarsk). 8 Only one election was 
allowed in 1994, while 13 elections took place in 1995. 9 Nevertheless, 45 out of 49
6 Vera Tolz and Irina Busygina, "Regional Governors and the Kremlin: the Ongoing Battle for Power," 
Communist and Post-Communist Studies 30, no. 4 (1998): 402, 10-11.
7 The regions were Amur, Briansk, Cheliabinsk, Lipetsk, Orel, Penza, and Smolensk oblasty, and 
Krasnoiarsk krai.
8 In Cheliabinsk the incumbent, El'tsin's appointee Petr Sumin, refused to leave office and El'tsin 
nullified the election results. Steven L. Solnick, "Gubernatorial Elections in Russia, 1996-1997," Post- 
Soviet Affairs 14, no. 1 (1998): 50. Republican elections were also held in Ingushetiia, Kalmykiia, 
Bashkortostan, and Chuvashiia.
9 The 1994 election was in Irkustk oblast and was won by incumbent lurii Nozhikov. Among the 1995 
elections, the most significant was the April 1995 election in Sverdlovsk oblast. In this case, El'tsin's 
former appointee, Eduard Rossel, contested the moratorium on gubernatorial elections in the 
Constitutional Court and forced a compromise in which the complaint was withdrawn in exchange for a
oblast governors were appointed by El'tsin (39 in the months following the August 
1991 coup attempt) until December 1995. 10 The first large round of gubernatorial 
elections occurred from June 1996 to March 1997 during which elections took place 
in 55 regions. In 48 of these regions (excluding republics), El'tsin's appointees faced 
election for the first time. 11 Incumbents suffered significantly throughout Russia's 
regions during the 1996-1997 election cycle. Of the 52 elections held in 1996, 
incumbents were defeated in 36 regions (69%), and in 1997 incumbents were defeated 
in nine regions out of 17 (53%).
The gubernatorial elections in 1996-1997 yielded a number of important lessons 
for the Kremlin and for local political elites. The widespread rejection of El'tsin's 
appointed governors may have reflected dissatisfaction with the center's lack of a 
regional policy, though an equally plausible interpretation is that the Kremlin lacked a 
consistent strategy for supporting El'tsin's appointees. The Presidential 
Administration often split over whom to support, tacitly supported challengers, or 
failed to provide adequate resources to incumbents. 12 Governors who were appointed 
in 1991-1993 fared the worst with few exceptions. 13 The most successful of El'tsin's 
appointees were those who came to power later in 1994-1996, who ran on platforms 
that there had been insufficient time for them to implement their goals. Among the 
opposition candidates, the most successful were those who had previously served as 
chairs of regional assemblies. 14
decree allowing the election to take place. Gerald M. Easter, "Redefining Centre-Regional Relations in 
the Russian Federation: Sverdlovsk Oblast'," Europe-Asia Studies 49, no. 4 (1997).
10 Jeffrey W. Hahn, "Democratization and Political Participation in Russia's Regions," in Democratic 
Changes and Authoritarian Reactions in Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova, ed. Karen Dawisha 
and Bruce Parrott (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1997), 157.
11 Solnick, "Gubernatorial Elections in Russia, 1996-1997," 48.
12 Ibid.: 62-4.
13 Among them were Nikolai Volkov in Evreiskaia autonomous oblast', Aleksandr Filipenko in 
Khanty-Mansiiskii autonomous okrug, Nikolai Poluianov in Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug, and 
Viktor Chub in Rostov oblast'.
14 Aleksandr Shatilov and Vladimir Nechaev, "Regional'nye vybory: osobennosti tekhnologii i 
kharakter predpochtenii," Svobodnaia Mysl', no. 6 (1997): 60.
At the time, it was suggested (optimistically) that this trend reflected "people's 
concern over the concentration of power in the hands of governors at the expense of 
the representative bodies." 15 More likely it reflected the degree of cohesion among 
the regional elite, as incumbents tended to lose in regions where the elite were divided 
or unconsolidated. 16 Two further elements that facilitated success in the 1996-1997 
gubernatorial elections were the strikingly apolitical nature of regional political 
discourse and opposition to the federal center. Regional contests often were 
determined by the personal characteristics of the candidate, particularly as related to 
administrative experience within, and knowledge of, candidates' native region. 
Regional identity became an important feature in gubernatorial contests across the 
board. This was facilitated by opposition to Moscow insofar as regional 
consciousness was formed in part through opposition to the center. 17 The very 
conduct of elections stimulated the ideological expansion of regional elites, such that 
"the establishment of a monopoly on the representation of all societal interests by the
local elite signified the completion of the formation of regional ideologies." In this 
regard, elections activated regional identities in ways that echoed the experience of 
Russia's republics in the early 1990s.
Regionalism combined with electoral legitimacy was a potent combination, 
reflected in the immediate rise in the durability of incumbent governors. The 
difference between El'tsin's appointed governors and the elected representatives of the 
regional elite was vividly illustrated by the next large round of gubernatorial elections 
in 1999-2000, in which incumbents lost in just 20 out of 59 contests (34%). 19
15 Tolz and Busygina, "Regional Governors and the Kremlin," 421.
16 E.V. Popova, "Problemnye izmereniia elektoral'noi politiki v Rossii: gubernatorskie vybory v 
sravnitel'noi perspektive," Polls, no. 3 (2001).
17 Shatilov and Nechaev, "Regional'nye vybory," 64-6.
18 Sergei Barzilov and Aleksei Chernyshov, "Manevry mestnoi elity: politika informatsii i manipuliatsii 
v regionakh," Svobodnaia Mysl', no. 3 (2001): 35.
19 Ross calculates similarly that "in 60 elections which were held over the period December 1999 to 
January 2001, incumbents won 68% of the seats." Ross, Federalism and Democratisation in Russia, 
Moreover, incentives for governors to cooperate with the Kremlin diminished and 
separatism ceased to be the exclusive purvue of the republics. Slider points out that 
deviations from federal laws and presidential decrees previously were more 
characteristic of the republics, but that gubernatorial elections changed this by 
providing a "shield of democratic legitimacy" for provincial leaders. 20
The importance of regionalism and the dominance of the governor among the 
regional elite appeared to be borne out by the variously inconclusive attempts to find 
alternate explanations for the ability of incumbent governors to retain power, 
particularly those explanations focusing on electoral manipulation. It has been noted 
that electoral manipulation was more likely in rural regions as evidenced by 
particularly exaggerated rates of voter turnout in the republics. 21 It has also been 
suggested that ethnicity played a role as there were significantly greater instances of 
electoral manipulation in the republics than in the ethnically Russian (russkie)
regions. As Hale suggests, the logic behind the two observations are related:
Since a farm represents an isolated cluster of residents, typically constituting a 
single electoral precinct, it is very easy for regional officials to determine which 
farms are loyal and which are not, making the threat of punishment very 
credible. In many ethnic republics, the minority groups are also clustered in 
rural areas, magnifying the potential for patron-client relationships in electoral 
politics. 23
Yet studies of democratization on the regional level find widespread disparities 
among regions of similar levels of socio-economic development. 24 Moreover,
20 Darrell Slider, "Pskov Under the LDPR: Elections and Dysfunctional Federalism in One Region," 
Europe-Asia Studies 51, no. 5 (1999): 765-6. In examining the case of Pskov oblast', Slider eloquently 
articulates the law of unintended consequences in noting that "political decentralization and the 
introduction of elections, instead of facilitating democratization and the creation of a free market 
economy, can have the opposite effect."
21 Valentin Mikhailov, "Regional Elections and Democratisation in Russia," in Russian Politics Under 
Putin, ed. Cameron Ross (Manchester: Manchester UP, 2004), 218.
22 D.B. Oreshkin, "Geografiia elektoral'noi kul'tury i tsel'nost1 Rossii," Polis, no. 1 (2001).
23 Henry E. Hale, "Explaining Machine Politics in Russia's Regions: Economy, Ethnicity, and Legacy," 
Post-Soviet Affairs 19, no. 3 (2003): 245.
24 Christopher Marsh, "Measuring and Explaining Variations in Russian Regional Democratisation," in 
Russian Politics Under Putin, ed. Cameron Ross (Manchester: Manchester UP, 2004), Kelly M. 
McMann and Nikolai V. Petrov, "A Survey of Democracy in Russia's Regions," Post-Soviet 
Geography and Economics 41, no. 3 (2000), Nikolai Petrov, "Regional Models of Democratic 
Development," in Between Dictatorship and Democracy: Russian Post-Communist Political Reform,
Mikhailov makes an important normative point in observing that, "administrative 
pressure and deception have no ethnic background, and their victims include both 
Russians and members of the titular population."25
Gubernatorial Elections in Four Regions
In the absence of clear structural cleavages, one is left with the deceptively simple 
conclusion that, "region as an independent variable does matter" - in other words, a 
regional effect exists beyond socio-economic or ethnic characteristics, though the lack 
of a coherent explanation for this effect "reflects our lack of knowledge about 
regional cultural differences and our limited ability to identify and assess differences 
in local political conditions."26 The following sections attempt to redress this gap in 
understanding by examining in detail the gubernatorial contests held in Perm, 
Tiumen, Kareliia, and Buriatiia during Putin's first term. As discussed in previous 
chapters, Putin's centralization had a chilling effect on expressions of regional 
identity on the federal level at the same time that it provided opportunities for regional 
elites to centralize and consolidate power on the regional level. One would expect 
these trends to be magnified in local contests for control of regional executive 
branches, where the stakes were higher than for any other position in regional 
government. At issue is the extent to which local political conditions adjusted to take 
account (or advantage) of the centralization processes unfolding in the center. The 
chapter concludes with a reappraisal of the relationship between gubernatorial power 
and political space in Russia's regions.
ed. Michael McFaul, Nikolai Petrov, and Andrei Ryabov (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, 2004).
25 Mikhailov, "Regional Elections and Democratisation in Russia," 219. He continues that, "In our 
view, any attempt to link the strength of administrative pressure and manipulation during elections with 
voters' ethnic make-up has no explanatory value."
26 Matthew Wyman et al., "Regional Voting Patterns in Post-Communist Russia," in Regional Politics 
in Russia, ed. Cameron Ross (Manchester: Manchester UP, 2002), 30-4.
Perm's governor in 2000, Gennadii Igumnov, was one of the few El'tsin appointees 
who managed to secure election in 1996. 27 Just six months before the December 
2000 election, Igumnov lacked any realistic challengers to his re-election. Possible 
competitors were considered to be State Duma deputies Pavel Anokhin and Viktor 
Pokhmelkin, Lukoil executive Andrei Kuziaev, deputy Volga polpred Valentin 
Stepankov, and Igumnov's opponent in the 1996 election, Sergei Levitan, though 
none of them seemed to pose a serious threat. 28 Similarly, the popular mayor of the 
oblast center, lurii Trutnev, trailed Igumnov by more than 25% in public opinion
polls. At the time, however, Trutnev and Igumnov had an informal agreement to 
support each other's bids for re-election: Trutnev would not run for governor until 
2005, at which time Igumnov pledged to support Trutnev as his successor.
By late August, the regional branch of Unity (Edinstvo) announced its support 
of Igumnov's and Trutnev's re-election bids, followed by Union of Right Forces 
(SPS) in early September. 30 Igumnov himself claimed to have the backing of Putin, 
Volga polpred Sergei Kirienko, and the Presidential Administration. 31 Then Igumnov 
unexpectedly withdrew from the race on 6 October 2000, officially because he was 
stunned by the extent of mud slinging aimed at him (including death threats), and
endorsed Trutnev for governor.
By all accounts the Kremlin was closely involved in this change. Igumnov's 
endorsement of Trutnev followed consultations in Moscow. It was later reported that 
Igumnov first raised the possibility of his withdraw from the race in a closed meeting
27 Igumnov was appointed by El'tsin in January 1996. Robert W. Orttung, ed., The Republics and 
Regions of the Russian Federation: A Guide to Politics, Policies, and Leaders (Armonk, NY: M.E. 
Sharpe, 2000), 425.
28 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 14 June 2000.
29 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 22 August 2000.
30 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 6 September 2000.
31 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 12 September 2000.
32 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 11 October 2000. Igumnov's withdraw followed the initiation of criminal 
proceedings against his daughter, Elena Arzumanovaia, and a week of rumors that business figures 
close to him were under investigation. Zvezda (Perm'), 12 October 2000.
of his informal political council, which included Trutnev, in late September. The 
council continued discussion in Moscow at the start of October in order to sound out 
the opinion of the Kremlin. 33 Trutnev flew to Moscow before Igumnov's 
announcement for consultations with the Presidential Administration and the Security 
Council. Following Igumnov's announcement, the head of the regional electoral 
commission stated that Igumnov could not transfer his signatures to Trutnev for 
registration, but that Trutnev probably still had time to collect them. Indeed, Trutnev 
needed only three hours to register his candidacy. 34
Igumnov flew to Moscow for further meetings in the Presidential 
Administration just a few days after his announcement. 35 On 12 October 2000, 
Igumnov decided to rejoin the gubernatorial campaign, but Trutnev refused to 
withdraw from the race. Both claimed to have been acting on orders from the 
Kremlin, though this was never confirmed by the Presidential Administration. 36 The 
local press in the oblast center was quick to support Trutnev's candidacy, seeing the 
tacit rationale of centralization in the developments if not the overt hand of central 
intervention. In one particularly insightful editorial, the weekly Novyi Kompan'on 
argued that a change of governors was necessary to break up regional patronage 
networks since new governors would no longer have their own people working in 
federal agencies and therefore be more reliant on the center for support. 37 In late 
November, pro-Kremlin ideologue Gleb Pavlovskii's characterization of Igumnov as 
part of the "governors' opposition" (gubernatorskaia oppozitsiid) on the pro-Kremlin 
website strana.ru circulated in the local press. 38 Volga polpred Sergei Kirienko
33 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 5 December 2000.
34 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 10 October 2000. The Volga polpred 's press secretary stated that 
Kirienko was not involved, but that he was informed throughout. He also categorically rejected the 
possibility that Valentin Stepankov would join the campaign. 
*5 Zvezda (Perm'), 10 October 2000.
36 In fact, the other two main candidates, Anokhin and Levitan, also made trips to Moscow prior to 
joining the race. Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 17 November 2000.
37 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 31 October 2000.
38 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 29 November 2000.
adopted a neutral stance regarding the candidates. One might reasonably argue that a 
neutral stance under such conditions would be perceived as a lack of support for the 
Igumnov and tacit support for Trutnev. More concretely, when Igumnov initiated 
legal proceedings against Trutnev in an attempt to remove him from the ballot, 
Kirienko personally intervened to persuade Igumnov to drop the action.39
Trutnev received indirect support, ironically, from one of his competitors - 
State Duma Deputy Pavel Anokhin. Earlier in 2000, Anokhin initiated investigations 
into official corruption in Perm oblast after writing directly to Putin and General 
Procurator Vladimir Ustinov. The General Procurator's office charged the head of the 
regional MVD, the regional procurator, the head of the regional tax police, and the 
head of the regional FSB with accepting bribes of 100,000 rubles or more. The head 
of the regional MVD eventually resigned and the region's procurator was sacked. 40 
When the gubernatorial campaign officially started, then, Igumnov's team could not 
rely on the regional siloviki in exercising its "administrative resource." The fact that 
Kirienko's newly-appointed deputy, Valentin Stepankov, was placed in charge of 
overseeing law enforcement during this time did not go unnoticed.41
In the election held on 3 December 2000, Trutnev won in the first round with a 
decisive 51.48% while Igumnov trailed with 34.95%. Trutnev's support was 
concentrated primarily in urban areas, while Igumnov fared better in rural areas.42 
There were, however, notable exceptions to the trend. Trutnev defeated Igumnov in 
almost all electoral districts in (predominantly rural) Komi-Permiatskii autonomous 
okrug. He also managed to garner the support of Perm's most depressed raions,
39 V.P. Mokhov, "Permskaia elita v period gubernatorskikh vyborov 2000 g." (paper presented at the 
Moscow Carnegie Center Seminar: Gubernatorskie vybory i problemy stanovleniia grazhdanskogo 
obshchestva na granitse Evropy i Asii, Perm1 , 21-23 February 2001). Available online at: 
http://www.carnegie.ru/ru/news/59387.htm
40 Kommersant-Vlast', 21 November 2000.
41 Stepankov blamed Igumnov for losing his re-election bid for the State Duma in 1999, claiming that 
the governor had instructed the heads of local administration and industry to oppose him because he 
was considered a potential threat in the 2000 gubernatorial election. Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 15 
February 2000.
42 Zvezda (Perm'), 5 December 2000.
organizing personal meetings with the heads of local government and capitalizing on 
dissatisfaction with the incumbent governor. He further won the support of Lukoil, 
which translated into electoral success among the sparsely-populated oil-extracting 
districts. 43
Perhaps most striking in the campaign was the speed with which the oblast elite 
deserted the incumbent governor for Trutnev. Igumnov caused unrest among the 
regional elite by supporting Pavel Anokhin's candidacy for the State Duma in 1999, 
only to have Anokhin turn on the governor in the run-up to the election season. 44 For 
the electorate, he no longer projected the image of honesty and stability that won him 
power in 1996. Igumnov remained the target of negative campaigning and charges of 
corruption after his decision to rejoin the race, while the decision itself "made him a 
political liability for key economic power holders in Perm."45 The change in 
administration left little doubt about the new center of power in the oblast. Upon 
coming to power, Trutnev replaced all but two members of Igumnov's administration 
with people from his city administration. Over 1000 people attended his inauguration, 
including Kirienko and Urals polpred Petr Latyshev, while only 27 of 40 invited 
guests bothered to attend Igumnov's farewell. 46
Tinmen
Tiumen's Governor Leonid Roketskii was elected in 1996 in the midst of the 
oblast's struggle to gain control over Khanty-Mansiiskii and lamalo-Nenetskii 
autonomous okrugs (AOs). Despite a presidential decree requiring the autonomous
43 N.V. Borisova, ""Permskii fenomen": Tendentsii transformatsii politicheskogo rezhima pod 
vozdeistviem eleictoral'nykh praktik" (paper presented at the Moscow Carnegie Center Seminar: 
Gubernatorskie vybory i problemy stanovleniia grazhdanskogo obshchestva na granitse Evropy i Asii, 
Perm 1 , 21-23 February 2001). Available online at: http://www.carnegie.ruyru/news/59387.htm
44 The move was controversial owing to Lukoil's monopoly position within the oblast - Anokhin was 
known as a representative of a financial-industrial group that was a daughter company of Sibneft'. 
Svetlana Fedotova, Vol'nyiputevoditel' (zametki o Permskoi oblasti) (Perm1 : Izdatel'skii dom 
"Kompan'on", 2001), 213-5.
45 Moses, "Political-Economic Elites and Russian Regional Elections," 921.
46 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 19 December 2000.
okrugs to participate in the election, lamalo-Nenetskii AO boycotted the vote. 
Khanty-Mansiiskii AO participated in the first round but declared the results to be 
void after turnout in the region fell below 25%. 47 The oblast Duma then lowered the 
turnout requirement for the second round to permit the governor to be elected with a 
sufficient turnout from within the oblast proper, such that Roketskii was elected 
without the participation of the autonomous okrugs. 48 Afterwards, the autonomous 
okrugs changed tactics: instead of attempting to separate from the oblast, they focused 
on capturing control of its administration in the next gubernatorial elections.
Preparations began in earnest in January 2000. Roketskii called a special 
session of the oblast Duma to attempt to move the gubernatorial election forward to 
coincide with the presidential election in March 2004. 49 Like many incumbent 
governors that year, Roketskii clearly hoped to ride Putin's coattails to re-election. 
Yet there were complications: federal law stipulated that gubernatorial elections could 
be moved forward by a maximum of nine months, but it was unclear how the law 
applied in the case of two-round elections. If one counted from the first round (22 
December 1996), as Roketskii intended, there would be no legal obstacle to the move. 
If one started from the second round (12 January 1997), however, the move would be 
rendered illegal. Despite the support of presidential representative Gennadii 
Shcherbakov50 and oblast Duma Speaker Sergei Korepanov, Roketskii's motion failed 
by a vote of nine to eleven. Leading the opposition was Andrei Artiukhov, who also 
served as speaker of the lamalo-Nenetskii AO's legislative assembly.
Roketskii was incensed and railed against the practice of assembly deputies and 
members of administration from the autonomous okrugs simultaneously serving as
47 Pete Glatter, "Continuity and Change in the Tyumen' Regional Elite 1991-2001," Europe-Asia 
Studies 55, no' 3 (2003): 417-8.
48 Robert W. Orttung, ed., The Republics and Regions of the Russian Federation: A Guide to Politics, 
Policies, and Leaders (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2000), 575.
49 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 18 January 2000.
50 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 20 January 2000.
oblast Duma deputies at the close of the session. Later he published an open letter in 
which he called attention to the fact that gubernatorial elections in both the 
autonomous okrugs had been moved forward to coincide with the presidential 
election. 51 The lamalo-Nenetskii assembly responded that it favored holding 
gubernatorial elections in January 2001 principally because the oblast's charter 
remained unclear regarding the governor's powers over the autonomous okrugs. 52 
When the oblast Duma resumed work in the fall, the gubernatorial election was set to 
correspond with assembly elections in the autonomous okrugs on 14 January 2001. 53
Both governors of the autonomous okrugs were re-elected by overwhelming 
margins on 26 March 2000. 54 During April and May, controversy erupted over 
allegations that the oblast administration had drafted a proposal for the Presidential 
Administration that would subordinate the laws and executive branches of the 
autonomous okrugs to the oblast. 55 Ultimately the debate was forgotten in the wake 
of Putin's reforms, though the matter did little to encourage dialogue and trust among 
the three regions. Indeed, Roketskii interpreted Putin's federal reforms as support for 
his struggle with the autonomous okrugs. 56
In July 2000, Putin appointed the speaker of Khanty-Mansiiskii AO's assembly, 
Sergei Sobianin, to be first deputy polpred in the Urals Federal District. His 
appointment immediately sparked rumors that Sobianin intended to participate in 
Tiumen's gubernatorial elections. As head of the Federation Council's constitutional 
legislation committee, Sobianin played a key role in getting Putin's laws passed 
through the Federation Council, allegedly in return for the Kremlin's promise of
Tiumenskaia Pravda, 20 January 2000. 
Tiumenskaia Pravda, 5 February 2000.
53 Sibirskii Posad (Surgut), 26 September - 3 October 2000.
54 In Khanty-Mansiiskii AO, Aleksandr Filipenko was re-elected with 90.82% and 67.96% voter 
turnout. lamalo-Nenetskii AO re-elected lurii Neelov with 88.1% and 68.66% turnout.
55 Tiumemkie Jzvestiia, 25 April 2000; Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 27 April 2000; Moskovskii 
Komsomolets v Tiumeni, 11-18 May 2000; Tiumenskaia Pravda, 27 May 2000.
56 See Chapter Three.
support in January 2001. 57 Roketskii was ambivalent about Sobianin's appointment, 
noting that he was unable to predict what impact he would have on the oblast's 
relations with the autonomous okrugs, but that, "in any case, I won't irritate 
(razdrazhat 1) him." 58
Sobianin was nominated for oblast governor in mid-November, though he 
largely refrained from commenting on the election until his registration was official. 
On the oblast's relations with the autonomous okrugs, he stated that the main obstacle 
was the difference in industrial potential between the north and south and that the 
main task would be integration to jointly raise the region's economy. 59 Without 
officially campaigning, Sobianin made numerous trips across the oblast in his new 
capacity as a federal official, focusing on the development of the region's fuel-energy 
complex and the south's machine-building industry.
Meanwhile, the governors of the autonomous okrugs made their intentions 
known. In a press conference in late November, lamalo-Nenetskii AO Governor lurii 
Neelov complained that the autonomous okrugs could not find an understanding with 
Roketskii and urged him to retire. He further made it explicit that the autonomous 
okrugs would not support Roketskii if he ran for re-election. 60 Khanty-Mansiiskii AO 
Governor Aleksandr Filipenko went a step further in signing an agreement on 14 
December 2000 with the mayor of the oblast capital, Sergei Kirichuk, in which the 
autonomous okrug pledged to invest 1.5 billion rubles for the construction of three 
suburbs, including apartments, schools, shops, service enterprises, roads, engineering 
networks, and so forth. 61 The two northern governors further issued a joint statement
57 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 15 July 2000.
58 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 20 July 2000.
59 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 14 November 2000.
60 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 29 November 2000.
61 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 15 December 2000; Tiumenskaia Pravda, 16 December 2000. The text of the 
agreement was published in: Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 19 December 2000.
on 21 December 2000 in support of Sobianin's candidacy. 62 They were shortly joined 
by oblast Duma chairman Sergei Korepanov, who was also a candidate in the race. 
Though Korepanov had been nominated before Sobianin, he admitted to being a 
"backup" candidate. He laid the oblast's problems in relations with the autonomous 
okrugs solely at Roketskii's feet, accusing the latter of violating the Russian 
constitution and regional law in his attempts to subordinate the okrugs to the oblast. 64
In the closing days before the election, Sobianin's campaign centered on his 
proposal for coordinating social-economic policy among the three regions. Sobianin 
presented the plan to the oblast Duma in its last session of the year. 65 Shortly 
afterwards, Korepanov officially withdrew from the race and endorsed Sobianin. 66 
Roketskii did not attend the debate in the oblast Duma. Speaking before the 
assembly, deputy polpred Sergei Vakhrukov made the case for greater integration of 
the regions in noting that there were closer ties between Sverdlovsk and Cheliabinsk 
than between Tiumen and the autonomous okrugs, and that the okrugs cooperated 
more with Kurgan, Perm, Sverdlovsk, and Cheliabinsk oblasts than with Tiumen 
oblast. 67
The election campaign was generally recognized as particularly dirty, even by 
post-Soviet standards. 68 The regional media swelled with polemics and kompromat 
leveled against the candidates, and both Roketskii and Sobianin attempted to remove 
the other candidate from the ballot (unsuccessfully) through the courts. 69 Whereas
62 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 21 December 2000.
63 Korepanov was put forward as a candidate only after lamalo-Nenets Governor lurii Neelov decided 
against running for governor of Tiumen oblast'. Prior to serving as speaker of the oblast Duma, 
Korepanov had been speaker of the lamalo-Nenetskii AO legislative assembly.
64 Tiumemkaia Pravda, 22 December 2000.
65 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 27 December 2000. The text of the proposal was published in: Tiumenskaia 
Pravda, 30 December 2000.
66 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 29 December 2000.
67 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 11 January 2001.
68 One of the best English-language accounts of the 2001 election is: Clatter, "Continuity and Change 
in the Tyumen' Regional Elite 1991-2001," 422-7.
69 Roketskii was particularly ambitious, submitting an 11-page complaint to the oblast' electoral 
commission that named Sobianin, Latyshev, Neelov and Filipenko, as well as the central and local
Roketskii was blamed exclusively for the deterioration of the oblast economy and 
relations with the okrugs, Sobianin was labeled "one of the best known ideologues of 
okrug separatism."70 In a press conference in late December, the head of the Russian 
Central Electoral Commission, Aleksandr Veshniakov, Urals polpred Petr Latyshev, 
and Urals procurator lurii Zolotov criticized the extent of violations, mudslinging 
(chernyi piar), and abuse of administrative resources. 71 Their complaint was later 
echoed by Vakhrukov, who had been tasked with monitoring the election. 72 Yet the 
Kremlin was not neutral in the contest. In a meeting with the three governors in late 
November, Putin stated that he "was not opposed" to Sobianin's participation in the 
election. Latyshev had been favorably disposed towards Roketskii when he started 
work as Urals polpred in mid-2000, but came increasingly to favor Sobianin (who was 
not required to leave his post as first deputy polpred for the campaign). Several days 
before the election, a telephone conversation between deputy polpred Anatolii Antipin 
(previously head of the FSB in Tiumen oblast) and head of the Urals department for 
organized crime Valerii Borisov was broadcast in which it was made clear that the 
region's siloviki supported Sobianin. 73
In the end, numbers were on the okrugs' side. Roketskii won a majority in the 
oblast (52.18%), but was trounced in the autonomous okrugs by Sobianin (74.4% in 
Khanty-Mansiiskii AO and 77.8% in lamalo-Nenetskii AO, versus only 23.87% in 
Tiumen oblast). The distribution of the electorate clearly favored the united front of 
the autonomous okrugs: the voting public in the oblast numbered 945,000, while
press as illegally agitating for Sobianin. The regional electoral commission examined over 200 
complaints by 1 January 2001, none of which went to court. Tiumenskii Kur'er, 11 January 2001.
70 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 1 December 2000.
71 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 25 December 2000. The election campaign was particularly striking for the 
involvement of consulting and PR firms from outside Tiumen, including Moscow, St. Petersburg, 
Ekaterinburg, Ufa, Nizhnyi Novgorod and Udmurtiia. S.V. Kondrat'ev, "Vybory gubernatora 
Tiumenskoi oblasti: pobeda severa nad iugom?" (paper presented at the Moscow Carnegie Center 
Seminar: Gubernatorskie vybory i problemy stanovleniia grazhdanskogo obshchestva na granitse 
Evropy i Asii, Perm', 21-23 February 2001).
72 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 12 January 2001.
73 Kondrat'ev, "Vybory gubernatora Tiumenskoi oblasti".
KhMAO had 920,000 and laNAO had 339,000. Sobianin became governor of 
Tiumen oblast, but he was elected by its neighbors -just the opposite of what 
transpired in 1996.
Kareliia
The mayor of Kareliia's capital, Sergei Katanandov, defeated Viktor Stepanov to 
become the head of the republican administration in 1998. Despite the fact that 
Katanandov made the political error of supporting Fatherland-All Russia rather than 
Unity in the 1999 elections, the republic's 2002 elections were not marked by a 
significant degree of central intervention. Indeed, the general course of state 
centralization worked to the advantage of the head of the republic. Though the 
elections did not take place until 28 April 2002, the campaign season effectively 
began in January 2001. 74 As discussed in the previous chapter, the process of 
revising the republican constitution unfolded under Katanandov's threat to resign and 
force early elections. The new republican constitution granted the governor broader 
powers to dismiss the assembly as well as conferring a change of title from "Chair of 
the Government" (predsedatel 1 pravitel'stvd) to "Head of the Republic" (glava
respubliki) in order to "facilitate the exercise of executive authority."
Equally significant was the change in the new constitution from a bicameral to a 
unicameral republican assembly. As in most Russian regions, the weakness of 
Kareliia's party structure and the relative lack of independent organized interests 
meant that politics was territorialized along the lines of the republic's 19 raions. The 
legislative stronghold for the mayors in opposition to Katanandov had been the 
republic's upper chamber, the Chamber of the Republic (Palata respubliki), where 
representation was structured on the territorial principle and mayors often served
74 Gubemiia (Petrozavodsk), 25 January 2001.
75 Kareliia, 10 February 2001.
simultaneously as assembly deputies. The move to a unicameral parliament 
threatened to diminish the salience of the legislative opposition to the governor, 
thereby raising the stakes for the upcoming gubernatorial election.
During 2001, Katanandov traded blows with the mayor of Petrozavodsk, Andrei 
Demin, and the mayor of Olonets, Vasilii Popov. In July 2001, the republican 
Ministry of Finance announced that Petrozavodsk would not receive thirteen million 
rubles as a result of changes to the republican budget. 76 Katanandov later defended 
the move in a meeting with the Petrozavodsk city council by blaming the federal 
government, claiming that the reason why the republican budget was growing faster 
than city budgets was due to increased budgetary demands on the republic for funding 
local projects. 77 Demin was personally subject to attacks for breach of authority in 
purchasing 25 Mercedes buses for 25 million rubles without first seeking the approval
of the municipal council.
Popov was also subject to a campaign of kompromat, though he managed to 
strike back and force the resignation of Deputy Governor Andrei Kriger under 
allegations of corruption. 79 Popov also publicized favorable treatment extended to 
local oligarch Leonid Beluga, including the sale of a major enterprise in Petrozavodsk 
for $250,000 to Beluga's in-laws. 80 Popov left his position as mayor of Olonets in 
January 2001 as he prepared to oppose Katanandov in the April 2002 election, stating 
that he did not want the raion's residents to suffer as a result of his opposition to the 
governor. 81 In particular, he feared the impending elimination of 300 jobs from the
76 Kareliia,3\ July 2001; Guberniia (Petrozavodsk), 2 August 2001.
11 Kareliia,\ September 2001.
78 Kareliia, 20 October 2001. Only ten buses were actually delivered, four of which were below
operating standards. .
 Guberniia (Petrozavodsk), 9 January 2002. Katanandov quickly appointed Kriger to a ceremonial
post in Moscow.
fc Kommersant-Vlast', 23 April 2002.
81 Guberniia (Petrozavodsk), 9 January 2002.
raion's key source of tax revenue, the Il'insk timber factory (which had been sold to 
Beluga with the help of the republican administration). 82
Before the campaign season officially began, Katanandov had a clear lead over 
all potential candidates in his bid for re-election though not a clear majority. His 
strategy focused first on co-opting potential competitors in advance of the campaign 
season - most prominent among them being the republic's previous governor, Viktor 
Stepanov, whom Katanandov named as his senator in the Federation Council in 
September 2001. In a survey conducted in the republican center in November 2001, 
36% of Petrozavodsk's residents indicated that they would vote for Katanandov, 
followed by State Duma Deputy Valentina Pivnenko (12%) and the general director 
of Karellesprom, Viktor Masliakov (8.5%). 84 Katanandov earned Pivnenko's 
endorsement for re-election, while Masliakov ran for mayor of Petrozavodsk with 
Katanandov's blessing.
Katanandov also worked to garner (and display when possible) the Kremlin's 
support for his re-election. Of particular note was a press conference in February 
2002, where he stridently supported ongoing centralization in stating that Russia's 
governors should be appointed by the president since "elections only interfere with 
the fulfillment [of governors'] functions, insofar as they are dependent upon the 
electorate." 85 The appearance of a potential outsider candidate in cosmonaut Sergei 
Avdeev was greeted with initial caution (and some degree of amusement in both the 
central and republican press). 86 The opposition press suggested that Avdeev was sent
by the Kremlin as a reflection of its dissatisfaction with Katanandov. Avdeev was a
82 Kareliia, 12 January 2002; Kommersant-Vlast'. 23 April 2002.
83 Guberniia (Petrozavodsk), 19 September 2001. Stepanov later admitted that he essentially agreed to 
support Katanandov when he consented to be his representative in the Federation Council. Guberniia 
(Petrozavodsk), 13 February 2002.
84 Severnaia Kur'er (Petrozavodsk), 8 November 2001.
85 Kareliia, 16 February 2002.
86 Severnaia Kur'er (Petrozavodsk), 31 January 2002; Kareliia, 5 February 2002.
87 Guberniia (Petrozavodsk), 6 February 2002.
rank amateur, however, who had little impact on the election campaign and withdrew 
from the race on the eve of the election. 88 Katanandov's efforts ultimately were 
rewarded with a personal audience with Putin in Moscow on 4 April 2002. As a 
result of the meeting, Putin instructed then-Prime Minister Mikhail Kas'ianov to 
extend financial support for the realization of two large projects in conjunction with 
celebration of Petrozavodsk's 300-year anniversary in 2003. 89 Two weeks before the 
election, Katanandov further received the endorsement of United Russia. 90
Having been marginalized by the republican administration, the opposition 
pinned its hopes on forcing a second round by denying Katanandov a clear majority in 
the first round and then uniting behind a common candidate. In a press conference on 
the steps of the State Duma in Moscow, opposition candidates Popov, State Duma 
Deputy Artur Miaki (SPS), the head of the republican branch of the KPRF, Boris 
Tiukov, and the head of the republican branch of Yabloko, Aleksandr Chazhengin, 
announced their intent to join forces to remove Katanandov from office. 91 The united 
front was anything but united, however, and may have facilitated its own 
marginalization. Popov (who came to be supported by Yabloko) and Miaki competed 
for the same liberal constituency, replicating national trends in their inability to join 
forces. 92 Tiukov was even less successful. The press conference with the "rightists" 
sowed dissent within the ranks of the republican communists, as well as generating a 
rift between the republican and national party organizations.
The absence of a united front left the opposition vulnerable to a vicious 
disinformation campaign, principally aimed at Popov since he was considered
88 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 19 March 2002. Indeed, the central press drew the conclusion that the 
Kremlin must have been satisfied with Katanandov, otherwise it would have put forward a more 
serious candidate than Avdeev.
89 Kareliia, 6 April 2002.
90 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 15 April 2002.
91 Guberniia (Petrozavodsk), 20 February 2002. Chazhengin did not participate in the gubernatorial 
election, but ran against Masliakov in Petrozavodsk's mayoral election.
92 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 19 March 2002.
93 Kareliia, 1 March 2002; Guberniia (Petrozavodsk), 27 February 2002.
Katanandov's most serious opposition. Popov's campaign focused primarily on 
reforming inter-budgetary relations, proposing specifically to cut 252 million rubles 
from spending on the republican administration and re-distribute the funds to the 
municipalities. 94 The proposal elicited a sharp retort from the republic's deputy 
Minister of Finance, who threatened that the result of such a plan would be "either 
anarchy or the appearance of 19 new subjects of the Russian Federation in place of 
the former raions."95 Rumors also circulated that Popov was supported by such 
notorious figures as exiled oligarch Boris Berezovskii and even Chechen field 
commander Shamil Basaev.96 There were multiple reports of various abuses of 
administrative resource by republican officials and attempts to silence or shut down 
the opposition press. While campaigning in Kareliia on behalf of Miaki, Boris 
Nemtsov alleged that Katanandov had attempted to block his visit to the republic 
through his contacts hi Moscow. He further claimed that Katanandov's team had 
threatened to fire factory workers to prevent them from attending SPS meetings.97
On election day, Katanandov won easily with 53.45% overall (voter turnout was 
50.36%) and did not lose in a single raion. The closest opposition candidate was 
Miaki (14.05%), followed by "against all" (10.72%) and Popov (10.37%). 
Katanandov's victory was all the more complete for Masliakov's defeat of 
Chazhengin in Petrozavodsk's mayoral race and United Russia's domination of the 
new unicameral assembly (31 of 57 seats), producing what the opposition press
dejectedly admitted to be a "pocket parliament."
94 Gubemiia (Petrozavodsk), 27 February 2002.
95 Kareliia, 2 March 2002.
96 Kareliia, 25 April 2002. Liberal Russia's co-chairman Viktor Pokhmelkin denied that the party had 
announced support for any candidate in the election. Gubemiia (Petrozavodsk), 13 March 2002.
97 Kareliia, 18 April 2002.
98 Severnaia Kur'er, 30 April 2002; Gubemiia (Petrozavodsk), 1 May 2002.
Buriatiia
Republican President Leonid Potapov had run Buriatiia effectively since he became 
the region's obkom secretary in 1990. In the republic's first presidential elections in 
1994, Potapov won in the second round and was re-elected in 1998 with 63% of the 
vote. In the fall of 2001, Buriatiia's electoral commission began studying Sakha- 
Yakutiia President Vladimir Nikolaev's attempt to run for a third term with an eye 
towards the possibility that Potapov might do the same." Buriatiia's 1993 
constitution placed a two-term limit on the presidency, but this limit was removed by 
the legislative assembly in December 2001. 100 The constitutional changes were 
presented on the legislative initiative of the president's office after careful study of the 
situation in Sakha-Yakutiia, as well as measures taken in Tartarstan, Chuvashiia, 
Tambov and Orlov oblasts. The revised constitution stated merely that term limits 
would be determined in accordance with federal law, and federal law established that 
the two-term limits began from the law's adoption in October 1999. 101
Consequently, the issue was no longer whether Potapov could run for a third 
term, but rather that he had only served one term since 1999. In parliamentary 
hearings, only two deputies spoke out in opposition to the constitutional changes, 
arguing that a protest from the procurator was needed in order to consider changes to 
the republic's constitution since the federal constitution was silent on the issue of 
term limits for regional leaders. In response, the chairman of Buriatiia's Supreme 
Court (Verkhovnyi sud), Anatolii Khorinoev, stressed the necessity of bringing 
Buriatiia's constitution in accordance with federal legislation: "We live in one
99 As reported by Strana.ru, 14 November 2001. Putin persuaded Nikolaev not to run for a third term in 
exchange for abandoning his preferred candidate and supporting the head of the Alrosa diamond 
company, Viacheslav Shtyrov. Russian Regional Report, 16 January 2002.
100 For discussion see Chapter Four.
101 Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 06.10.1999 N 184-FZ "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii   
zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov gosudarsrvennoi vlasti sub"ektov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
Russia.. .Let's live under one law." 102 One of the two dissenters was ridiculed for 
requesting a secret ballot on the matter. 103 The motion failed, 10-28, with three 
abstentions. The constitutional change was adopted with legislators voting 47-1 in 
favor with no abstentions. 104
In addition to congenial constitutional changes, Potapov's candidacy benefited 
from across-the-board political support from Buriatiia's parties and movements. In 
particular, Potapov was supported by the largest faction in the legislative assembly, 
the People's Patriotic Union of Russia (Narodno-Patrioticheskii Soiuz Rossii). 105 He 
was further endorsed by the Communist Party, the mayor of Ulan-Ude and 25 other 
heads of local government, 48 representatives in the legislative assembly, and three of 
the republic's State Duma deputies. 106 Veterans' organizations also threw their 
support behind the incumbent president, indignant at opposition candidate Bato 
Semenov's campaign slogan "From a Republic of Stagnation to a Republic of 
Dignity" (Ot respubliki zastoinoi - k respublike dostoinoi)
Potapov also enjoyed tacit support from Moscow. In justifying his decision to 
run for a third term, Potapov presented himself as a force for "stability" and 
"governability" (upravliaemosf). 108 Though Putin did not openly state a preference 
for any candidate, Potapov's line was supported by the deputy head of the Presidential 
Administration, Vladislav Surkov. 109 Potapov received further central blessing for
102 Deviatnadtsataia sessiia narodnogo khurala respubliki buriatiia , 18 dekabria 2001 g. 
Stenograficheskii otchet, chast' I (Ulan-Ude, 2001): 42-3.
103 Buriatiia, 20 December 2001.
104 Timing was on Potapov's side since the Russian Constitutional Court only began to examine the 
issue of third terms in April 2002. Even if the Court delivered a decision prior to the election, changes 
would need to be made to federal legislation, examined by both the State Duma and Federation Council 
and signed into effect by Putin. The fact that all candidates were registered and the date of elections 
already set effectively precluded the possibility that the federal government would be able to intervene. 
Pravda Buriatii, 6 June 2002.
105 Buriatiia, 14 June 2002.
106 Buriatiia, 21 June 2002; also reported by Strana.ru, 18 June 2002.
108 PoteDoTalso argued somewhat disingenuously that there had been insufficient time to realize the 
plans begun during his first two terms for Buriatiia's development. Moskovskii Komsomolets v 
Buriatii, 30 May - 6 June 2002.
109 Buriatiia, June 2W2.
his "sustainable development" program in a widely circulated article by Aleksandr 
Ushakov, head of the department of regional economics in the Russian Ministry of 
Economic Development and Trade. 110
Perhaps most significant, however, was Potapov's show of loyalty to the 
Kremlin in defeating the nomination of lurii Skuratov to the Federation Council. 
Skuratov had been seen as a potential candidate for the republican presidency, but the 
defeat of his senatorial bid left the republican parliament in disarray and incapable of 
uniting around an opposition candidate. 111 In the aftermath, Potapov's only 
significant competition came from State Duma Deputy Bato Semenov. 112 The 
remaining contenders for the presidency had little political experience. 1 13 Three 
candidates effectively served as dublery for Potapov, floated to soak up votes from 
Semenov's campaign. While Potapov refrained from directly attacking Semenov in 
his campaign, the other candidates took out articles in the local press to do the job for 
him. Vladimir Antonov was particularly active in this regard, printing a full page 
article on 6 June 2002 comparing the campaigns of "the main candidates for President 
of Buriatiia" - four paragraphs of which supported Potapov's program and the rest a 
scathing critique of Semenov's campaign. 114 Two days prior to the election (and the 
last day that candidates were allowed by law to issue pre-election campaign ads), 
Antonov's campaign fund took out two ads, the first of which was a half-page ad in 
support of Antonov and the second a full-page ad supporting Potapov. 115
110 Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 18 June 2002; reprinted in Buriatiia, 21 June 2002.
111 Kommersant-Vlasf, 18 June 2002. For discussion of Skuratov's nomination for Federation Council 
senator, see Chapter Three.
112 Semenov's political career started as head of the Zakamenskii sovkhoz (1986-1990) and later head 
of the Zakamenskii municipal administration (1991-4). He served two terms as a deputy in the 
Narodnyi Khural, becoming the republic's Minister of Agriculture and deputy chairman of the 
republican government in his second term. He was elected to the State Duma in 1999.
They were: Vladimir Antonov, Director of the National-Humanities Institute at Buriat State 
University; Innokentii Dagbaev, head of Bauntovskii Evenkiskii Raion; and Georgievich Gromov, 
industrialist and executive director of the nongovernmental pension fund "Buriatiia." A sixth candidate 
throughout most of the pre-election race was Narodnyi Khural Deputy Aleksandr Kardash.
114 Pravda Buriatii, 6 June 2002.
115 Argumenty i Fakty v Buriatii, 25 June 2002.
Semenov's challenge to Potapov was rooted in his appeal to ethnic Buriats, his 
leadership of the local branch of United Russia, and his ability to reach the republic's 
rural raions. Buriatiia's ethnic composition was almost 70% Russian and 24% Buriat 
(according to the 1989 census). In the 2002 election, Potapov was supported almost 
completely by the ethnic Russian population. Support for Semenov was greater 
among Buriats, though it did not constitute as large a portion of the population and 
was far from unified behind Semenov. 116 Semenov also had the support of Buddhist 
leader Damba Aiushiev. In general, the ethnic issue remained low-level and most 
sides refrained from attempting to publicly politicize ethnicity, emphasizing instead 
the republic's heritage of stable ethnic relations. Nevertheless, the ethnic issue 
remained salient even if it was not public. ] ] 7 Two of the dublery candidates were 
clearly intended to draw the ethnic vote from Semenov. 118 Regarding relations with 
the neighboring Buriat regions (Ust'-Ordynskii Buriatskii and Agin Buriatskii 
autonomous okrugs, located within Irkutsk and Chita oblasts, respectively), Potapov 
supported ongoing cultural and economic integration but categorically rejected 
suggestions of politically joining okrugs to republic. ] 19 As the election date 
approached, rumors began to emanate from the local chapter of the Communist Party 
that a victory by Semenov would turn Buriatiia into "a second Chechnia." This 
position was denounced on all sides as ludicrous.
As leader of the local chapter of United Russia, it was expected that Semenov 
would benefit from the party's support on both central and local levels. His campaign 
highlighted his experience in central politics and ability to lobby the republic's
116 Strana.ru (24 May 2002) reported that Semenov was primarily supported by local Buriat busine
and Buriat diaspora in Moscow.
117 In a visit to Semenov's campaign headquarters, this author observed that Semenov's staff active
tracked projected votes based on ethnicity in each of the republic's raions.
118 Potapov was ethnically Russian, while Antonov was western Buriat and Dagbaev was eastern
Buriat.
119 When pressed on the issue at an appearance at Buriat State University on 3 June 2002, Potapov
rejected out of hand the possibility of merging with the two Buriat regions and refused to discuss t
matter.
interests on the federal level. Ties to Moscow were particularly important for 
Buriatna since the region's economy was highly dependent on federal budgetary 
transfers. On 30 May 2002, the local chapter of United Russia voted to support 
Semenov in a closed session, though only 26 of 35 members were present (and of 
those, only sixteen voted in support of Semenov). 120 Shortly thereafter, eighteen 
members split with the earlier decision to support Semenov and voiced their support 
instead for Potapov on 4 June 2002. 121 In the ensuing confusion, the party's central 
executive committee issued a statement confirming its support for Potapov and called 
upon the local party organization to join ranks behind his candidacy. 122 On the same 
day, Aleksandr Veshniakov conducted meetings in Ulan-Ude with candidates, the 
republican siloviki, and the republican branch of United Russia. After the meeting, 
Main Federal Inspector Boris Danilov announced that he would seek the 
reorganization of the local branch of United Russia in Moscow and remove Semenov
I ^-5
from its leadership.
Almost all of Buriatiia's regional media were controlled by, or linked to, the 
republican administration, meaning that Semenov mostly had to rely on campaigning 
in Buriatiia's raions outside of Ulan-Ude. Editors and journalists from virtually all 
local newspapers criticized Semenov in an open letter, insinuating that his promise of 
a "unified Buriatiia" would mean the end of free press in the republic. 124 Generally 
speaking, Semenov did not receive any positive press coverage in any of Buriatiia's 
main newspapers. Many "analytical" articles in support of Potapov were re-printed 
across several newspapers with increasing frequency as the date of the election 
approached. One member of Buriatiia's electoral commission reported handling
120 Kommersant-Daily, 4 June 2002.
121 Buriatiia, 5 June 2002.
122 Buriatiia, 21 June 2002.
123 Kommersant-Daily, 24 June 2002.
124 Pravda Buriatii, 16 May 2002. The editor of the one newspaper which did not sign the letter (and 
from which Semenov's comments were taken), "Inform-Polis," was a relative of Semenov's. Reporte
by Strana.ru, 24 May 2002.
some 130 citizens complaints of electoral law violations, the majority of which were 
related to the press. 125
The largest media sensation in Buriatiia's election campaign, however, was the 
sound of silence. Since only seven of Buriatiia's 23 raions received television 
broadcasts, radio was crucial for reaching voters outside of the central regions - even 
more so for Semenov, whose campaign hinged on mobilizing voters in the raions. 
Nine days before the election, three of the republic's four FM radio stations (Purs- 
radio, Evropy plius, Avtoradio-Buriatiia) were shut down when inspections by a 
newly-appointed federal regulator found the stations to be lacking certain necessary 
documents. Pul's-radio's station manager stated that once the documents were 
produced and the station resumed broadcasting, its power was shut off. When the 
power was restored the following day, another station was already broadcasting on its
1 *) _
wavelength. A journalist from Evropy-plyus claimed that the station was warned 
by the regional administration in advance not to air election advertisements, but that it 
was shut down "just in case." Avtoradio-Buriatiia was closed under similar 
conditions. Following a protest to Buriatiia's procurator, all three stations were 
allowed to resume broadcasting just three days before the election. Semenov's camp 
suggested that the three stations were shut down specifically because they signed
agreements to air his campaign ads.
Semenov's campaign was outmaneuvered on virtually all fronts and was left to 
complain that Potapov was in fact running for a fifth term, counting his service as 
obkom secretary in 1990 and chairman of Buriatiia's Supreme Soviet in 1991. 
Semenov's camp instead targeted the issue of Potapov's age (he turned 67 in July
125 Author's interview with Boris Petrovich Krianov, Buriat State University, Ulan-Ude, 14 June 2002.
126 Inform-Polis (Ulan-Ude), 19 June 2002.
127 Kur'er (Ulan-Ude) 17 June 2002. The fourth radio station, "Russkn Radio, was to be closed, as 
well, but managed to produce the necessary documents at the last second. It was also the only radio 
station to sign the open letter to Semenov mentioned above.
2002) in drawing comparisons with Boris El'tsin's infirmity, even suggesting in his 
campaign literature that Potapov no longer ran the republic.
Despite Potapov's clear advantage, there were multiple allegations of use of 
"administrative resources" and disinformation. According to head of the republican 
electoral commission, Vladimir Larionov, bogus sociological surveys proved to be a 
large problem in past elections. 128 In the 2002 presidential election, an early survey 
by the "Center for Political Innovation" appeared in Semenov's campaign materials 
giving the impression of a neck-and-neck contest. The week running up to the 
elections saw the appearance of another survey commissioned by the survey group 
"Eidos," which gave Potapov a commanding lead. 129 The Eidos survey was printed 
in almost every major newspaper in Buriatiia.
Two days prior to the election, Potapov's camp announced that several 
thousand campaign leaflets were stolen from their typographer's and claimed that 
"one of the opposition candidates" planned to release them the day before the 
election, thus making Potapov appear guilty of illegal campaign agitation. It was also 
suggested that Potapov would be framed for other violations of electoral law, as 
well. 130 It was a shrewd tactic: though clearly implicating Semenov's camp, Potapov 
avoided fingering him directly. Moreover, the timing of the announcement 
effectively precluded any response from Semenov.
When the election took place on 23 June 2002, Potapov won his third term with 
a commanding lead of 68.79%, while Semenov managed only 23.5% (voter turnout 
was 53.77%). The third closest vote was "against all" with 2%, while all other 
candidates received less than 1%. Semenov won only a single electoral district and
128 Author's interview, Ulan-Ude, 11 June 2002. The only legitimate (that is, reasonably objective and 
financially independent) sociological survey group in Buriatiia was based at the Russian Academy of 
Science's Institute for the Study of Mongolia, Buddhism, and Tibet.
129 Buriatiia, U June 2002.
130 Buriatiia, 2\ June 2002.
came within 1000 votes in five others. As a result, Potapov will have run Buriatiia for 
17 years by the time his current term ends in 2007.
Comparing Elections
The four regional elections above suggest that electoral democracy in Russia's 
regions was weakly institutionalized, at best. Each election was marked by pressure 
on the local media and use of administrative resources. In Perm and Tiumen, the 
hand of the Kremlin was keenly felt, even though the Presidential Administration 
appeared to back both incumbent and challenger at different times. The two oblast 
elections also involved participants from outside their territories - in the multiple 
public relations and political consulting firms that were hired by all sides in Perm, and 
more clearly in the open attempt of Tiumen's autonomous okrugs to occupy the oblast 
administration by floating their own candidate. 131 The oblasts also featured more 
balanced political contests (however vicious) in which the incumbents faced 
legitimate challengers.
In Kareliia and Buriatiia, the Kremlin extended tacit (though noticeable) support 
to the incumbents. Outsiders were kept at arms length throughout both campaigns: 
Avdeev's brief candidacy foundered in Kareliia, while all of Buriatiia's candidates 
were natives of the region. The heads of republican administrations in both cases 
dominated the election contests from the beginning and, though never seriously 
challenged, did not shirk from using manipulative techniques to ensure a first round 
victory.
A common thread running through all four contests was that they took place in 
the midst of, or immediately following, revisions to the oblast charters and republican
131 One could add to this list the unsuccessful attempt of the Sverdlovsk-based organization "Mai" to 
win the governorship in Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug. One could further add Igumnov's 
successful attempt to remove the regions' incumbent, Poluianov, by backing Gennadii Savel'ev, though 
it is doubtful that Poluianov would have won regardless after failing to improve the country's poorest 
regional economy (second only to Chechnia).
constitutions. In addition, the candidates in all four contests kept close watch for 
signals from Moscow. No candidate dared to suggest that the centralization processes 
underway on the federal level were illegitimate, nor did they employ the sort of anti- 
Moscow campaign rhetoric that characterized gubernatorial contests in the 1990s. 
These common features are not insignificant. If one of the vexing questions facing 
analysts of regional politics in Russia is accounting for the "regional effect," a major 
part of the issue concerns how local political conditions are linked to federal politics 
through the conduct of regional elections.
Gubernatorial Power and Political Space
How and why governors won or lost elections were tactical matters that remained 
highly dependent on such capricious factors as timing and political acumen. A deeper 
issue here concerns how and why Russia's governors remained the most powerful 
office-holders in regional politics regardless of a region's federal status, particularly 
in the midst of Putin's centralization. The salience of the issue becomes clear when 
one considers that the four regions presented above are ranked by Petrov at very 
different points of the spectrum in terms of regional democratization (See Table 
5.1). 132 In other words, gubernatorial power does not necessarily depend upon the 
type of regional regime, either.
132 Moreover the democratization index employed by Marsh does not even include Kareliia or Perm in 
the top five. Marsh, "Measuring and Explaining Variations in Russian Regional Demoralisation, 
Table 5.1: Rankings of Regional Democratization
Ranking
Region
Republic of Kareliia 
Perm oblast
19 Khanty-Mansiiskii autonomous okrug
22 Republic of Buriatiia
26 Tiumen oblast
43 lamalo-Nenetskii autonomous okrug
56 Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug - - _ _ _ ~ _ -^-^^*^-^.* *-*--w^-.J-V^-*.iJ.V^ V*-t_J V^XVJL Vfc
Source: Petrov, Nikolai. "Regional Models of Democratic Development." In 
Between Dictatorship and Democracy: Russian Post-Communist Political 
Reform, edited by Michael McFaul, Nikolai Petrov and Andrei Ryabov, 239-67. 
Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2004.
Hale has argued convincingly that the combination of Soviet institutional 
legacies and transitional dynamics "translated into political forces, and left in place 
concentrations of power and resources that were fungible vis-a-vis elections." 133 The 
point is important in underlining the range of tools available to Russia's governors. 
As Hale goes on to note, the governors significantly influenced the arrangement of 
regional economies, especially via control over the privatization process in the 1990s, 
and exercised informal control over the courts and law enforcement agencies. 134 To 
extend his argument further, one of the key factors that separated the governor from, 
and elevated him above, other political actors on the regional level was his ability to 
convert one form of power into another - a capability that was unavailable to chiefly 
economic actors (which pursued interests within a given economic sector), mayors 
(who were dependent upon funding from regional budgets) or local assembly deputies 
(who were trumped by the greater magnitude of the governor's constituency). Indeed, 
it was unavailable to EJ'tsin's appointed governors, as well. In center-regional 
relations as well as center-local relations, the elected governor represented the whole
- Hale, "Explaining Machine Politics in Russia's Regions," 240. My emphasis. 
134 "When one combines these administrative powers with the aforementioned control over more 
directly "economic" levers (tax rates, flows of subsidies, price regulations, banking policies, and so on), 
savvy governors can often mobilize a dazzlingly powerful array of forces against wayward subjects, 
even those that seemingly have independent sources of influence and resources." Ibid.: 243.
range of interests based on the region's territory, and was therefore capab
le of 
bargaining and negotiating to a greater extent than any other political acto
r. The 
governors' extensive informal powers likewise served to reinforce this ga
teway 
position. 135 This supports the argument that the 1996-7 gubernatorial elec
tions 
depended more on the relative cohesion of regional elites than the public'
s concern 
over the concentration of power in the governors' hands.
This is not to say, of course, that governors came to be invincible. Rather
, it is 
to draw attention to the manner in which the centralization of power on th
e regional 
level was facilitated by regional political geography. It stands to reason th
at the 
effective use of power by regional governors affected state capacity in a v
ariety of 
ways. In general terms, the governor stood astride the various forms of sta
te power 
identified by Mann in its ideological, economic, military, and political dim
ensions. To 
cite a few concrete examples, these dimensions may be reflected in region
contributions to GDP (economic power), informal control over courts and
enforcement agents in the territories (military power 136), the cultivation of
 anti- 
Moscow sentiment or the production of large pro-Kremlin turnouts on elec
tion day 
(ideological power), and in pursuing courses of regional integration or iso
lation 
(political power).
The relationship between political space and gubernatorial power is furthe
revealed in the issue of legitimacy and relations with the federal center. W
Russia's governors became elected officials in the mid-1990s, they becam
e much 
more difficult for the Kremlin to replace. Yet this may have been less a fu
nction of
135 uInterested in denying power, elites of power favor exactly the forms most dif
ficult for recipients or 
third persons...to identify with confidence." William E. Connolly, The Terms of Political D
iscourse, 
3rd ed. (Oxford: Blackwell, 1993), 98. 
136 What Mann terms military power is the organizational wing of the state wh
ich provides disciplined, 
routinized coercion. Michael Mann, The Sources of Social Power: The Rise of Classes and N
ation- 
States, 1760-1914, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1993), 8-9. In Russia, the concept of
 the "power 
ministries" tends to blur the divide between the armed forces and regular law
 enforcement.
electoral legitimacy than the center's default on its jurisdictional obligations. 137 In 
this regard, it is worth recalling Upset's observation that, "legitimacy involves the 
capacity of the system to engender and maintain the belief that the existing political 
institutions are the most appropriate ones for the society." 138 During the 1990s, it was 
easier for authoritarian governors to retain control while the central state was nowhere 
to be found. Early surveys of popular trust in governing institutions revealed 
markedly higher trust in regional institutions during the early- to mid-1990s, 
reflecting the relative weakness of central institutions in responding to local 
concerns. The advantages of incumbency and administrative resources may have 
sufficed to support governors lacking popular legitimacy, but their prospects 
diminished when the central state became focused on forcing them to play by the rules 
(or even on removing them from power).
In the second decade of Russia's post-Soviet existence, governors had to 
contend with a resurgent federal government intent upon bringing the regions into 
line. The Kremlin increasingly contested the control and authority of the governors 
within their own territories. Orttung and Reddaway point in particular to the creation 
of the Federal Districts at the start of Putin's rule as providing additional points to 
appeal (and oppose) the governors' authority:
By establishing an alternative power center in the office of his envoy, Putin's 
reform opened up a wider space for differing viewpoints than existed before. 
His intention was to establish strong federal control to replace strong 
gubernatorial control. In reality, however, he weakened the governors by 
introducing a rival. Thus independent-minded politicians, businessmen, and 
journalists can now maneuver between the federal and regional authorities to 
pursue their various goals. Such freedom did not exist when the governors 
held almost exclusive authority. 14
137 Kathryn Stoner-Weiss, "Central Weakness and Provincial Autonomy: Observations on the 
Devolution Process in Russia," Post-Soviet Affairs 15, no, 1 (1999): 94.
138 Seymour Martin Lipset, Political Man: The Social Bases of Politics, 2nd ed. (London: Heinemann, 
1983), 64. My emphasis.
139 Josephine Andrews and Kathryn Stoner-Weiss, "Regionalism and Reform in Provincial Russia," 
Post-Soviet Affairs 11, no. 4 (1995).
140 Robert Orttung and Peter Reddaway, "What Do the Okrug Reforms Add Up To? Some 
Conclusions," in The Dynamics of Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, ed. 
Peter Reddaway and Robert Orttung (Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004), 285-6.
The governors thus appeared to be caught in a potential double-bind between 
maintaining legitimacy among the electorate as well as the elite situated along the 
"power vertical" (that is, Weber's "administrative staffs"). 141
In the most recent and comprehensive study of variations in political pluralism 
among Russian regions, Petrov documents that wide disparities still exist, most 
strikingly among regions that are "of geographical and socioeconomic proximity." 142 
The most obvious pair of inferences that may be drawn from this observation is that 
the center's willingness or capacity to intervene in regional politics to ensure free and 
fair electoral competition remained limited, while the political spaces demarcated by 
regional boundaries continued to be dominated by Russia's governors. State 
centralization may thus have negative effects in the long run by encumbering the 
system and limiting its ability to respond. 143 Insofar as the legislative branch was 
weakened in the course of strengthening the executive, Petrov comes the startling 
conclusion that governors in Putin's Russia could become "the last bastion of 
democracy." 144 Yet when one examines the conduct of gubernatorial elections in 
post-Soviet Russia, the achievements of, and prospects for, democratization on the 
regional level appear worrisome.
141 If one adopts the perspective that the governors were more concerned to respond to signals and 
directives from the Kremlin than from the ballot box (particularly the more authoritarian of the lot), 
then one is faced with the rather counter-intuitive hypothesis that Putin's centralizing initiatives may 
have increased the degree of pluralism in regional politics. In positivist terms, the null hypothesis 
would be that governors would not permit an increase in pluralism if the federal center did not 
intervene.
142 Petrov, "Regional Models of Democratic Development," 266. Another study which assesses an 
earlier version of Petrov's rankings finds similarly that "...levels of socio-economic development 
cannot explain the observed variation in the levels of democratization," despite arriving at a ranking 
that was almost exactly opposite. See: Marsh, "Measuring and Explaining Variations in Russian 
Regional Democratisation," 187. For Petrov's earlier ranking of regional democratization, see: 
McMann and Petrov, "A Survey of Democracy in Russia's Regions."
143 "Like a dinosaur, it takes too long for any signal to reach the brain, and thus for feedback to produce 
a reaction." Nikolai Petrov, "Federalism," in Between Dictatorship and Democracy: Russian Post- 
Communist Political Reform, ed. Michael McFaul, Nikolai Petrov, and Andrei Ryabov (Washington, 
DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2004), 236.
144 Ibid., 237.
In order to test the hypothesis that Putin's centralization may have increased the 
degree of pluralism in regional politics, it is helpful to turn to the argument that the 
"ethnic" regions (republics and autonomous okrugs) tended to be less democratic than 
the oblasts and krais. As Stepan demonstrated, republican elections in particular were 
overwhelmingly less competitive than other regional elections in the 1990s. This 
difference was linked to the power resources uniquely possessed by the republics: 
elected republican leaders were unsackable, republican constitutions had been adopted 
early without federal interference, and asymmetrical privilege was enshrined in the 
series of bilateral power-sharing treaties. 145 Putin's regime systematically eliminated 
each of these power resources, however, such that any governor could be removed 
from office, republican constitutions and charters were brought into compliance with 
federal law, and the bilateral treaties were under review. If Putin's centralization 
increased pluralism in regional politics, then, there should be a narrowing of 
differences between elections in the "ethnic" regions and elections in the oblasts and 
krais. 146
If one takes levels of voter turnout as an indicator of participation, an 
examination of the average voter turnout in gubernatorial (and presidential) elections 
from 1991 through the first half of 2004 provides some support for this hypothesis. 
As shown in Figure 5.1, the average voter turnout among republics and autonomous 
okrugs is consistently higher than in the oblasts and krais. At the same time, it should 
be observed that there is a steady and noticeable increase in voter turnout since 2001 
among the oblasts and krais while the numbers level out for the republics and 
autonomous okrugs. It is possible that the greater number of oblasts and krais (56) 
versus republics and autonomous okrugs (31) means that the more extreme cases
145 Alfred Stepan, "Russian Federalism in Comparative Perspective," Post-Soviet Affairs 16, no. 2
(2000).
146 1 have grouped the autonomous okrugs with the republics since they were usually seen as among the
least democratic of Russia's regions.
among the former diminished when averaged together. If all gubernatorial elections 
where turnout was 70 percent or greater are considered together (see Table 5.2), 
however, the oblasts and krais are only represented in eight cases while republics and 
autonomous okrugs comprise the remaining 20 cases. It is worth noting further that 
the regions with the most implausibly high turnouts (particularly Kabardino-Balkariia 
with 97.72% in 1997) are predominantly republics.
If one examines the number of candidates in gubernatorial elections as indicative of 
electoral competitiveness, an interesting pattern emerges when averages are 
segregated by federal status. As depicted in Figure 5.2, the average number of 
candidates is consistently greater in the oblasts and krais than in the republics and 
autonomous okrugs until 2002, at which point their positions reverse. The averages 
are somewhat misleading, however, as elections took place in only six republics and 
autonomous
Table 5.2: Gubernatorial Elections with Highest Voter Turnout, 1991-2004
Region
Kabardino-Balkariia
Chechnia
Mordoviia
Kabardino-Balkariia
Belgorod
Novosibirsk
Chechnia
Tatarstan
Bashkortostan
Tatarstan
Bashkortostan
Kalmykiia
Mordoviia
Sakha
Sakha
Saratov
Nenets
Ingushetia
Chechnia
Kodak AO
Smolensk
Kirov
Altai
Altai
Federal status
Republic
Republic
Republic
Republic
Oblast
Oblast
Republic
Republic
Republic
Republic
Republic
Republic
Republic
Republic
Republic
Oblast
Republic
Republic
Republic
Oblast
Oblast
Oblast
Oblast
Republic
Republic
Turnout
97.72%
87.7%
83.18%
82.52%
80.48%
79.37%
78.8%
77.76%
77.66%
77.33%
75.6%
75.54%
74.9%
74.64%
74.6%
73.74%
71.71%
71.4%
71.23%
71.23%
71.22%
70.95%
70.1%
Figure 5.1: Average Voter Turnout, 1991-2004
80 -, 

CM CO -^t
O O O
O O O
CM CNJ CNJ
+-- Republics & AOs 
A Federal Cities
Oblasts &Krais
Figure 5.2: Average Number of Gubernatorial Candidates, 1991-2004
CNJ CO
O5 O5
O5 O5
LO CD
O5 O5
O5 O5
CO O5
O5 O5
O5 O5
T- CNI
CNJ CNJ
CM CM
Republics & AOs 
Federal Cities
Oblasts &Krais
okrugs in 2003, while gubernatorial contests took place in sixteen oblasts and krais in 
which four cases had more than ten candidates. 147 In the first half of 2004. there were 
only two contests in the republics and autonomous okrugs (Republic of Udmurtiia 
with nine candidates, and Koriak autonomous okrug with ten candidates) as opposed 
to eight gubernatorial contests among oblasts and krais of which four races involved 
eight candidates or more. 148 More significant, perhaps, is the general upwards drift in 
the number of candidates across all levels since 1999. 149 When taken together with 
the upwards trends in voter turnout, one would be tempted to agree that centralization 
has encouraged greater pluralism in gubernatorial politics.
There is room for doubt, however, as Figure 5.3 shows an overall trend in 
declining rates in the replacement of incumbents since 1996. More voters, more 
candidates, and less change in power is more suggestive of electoral diversion than 
democracy. Indeed, the four case studies provide more contextualized evidence that 
regional democracy is increasingly stage-managed. At a minimum, such evidence 
suggests that the differences in gubernatorial campaigns among different federal 
levels narrowed since Putin came to power in 2000. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 
the Kremlin played an increasingly activist role in gubernatorial elections, though it 
was sometimes difficult to observe its various roles in any given contest. Governors 
sometimes claimed to have Putin's support without any supporting evidence, while 
different individuals within the Presidential Administration may back opposing 
candidates in the same race.
147 The regions were: Kirov oblast' (12 candidates), Tver oblast' (11), Magadan oblast' (12), and 
Sakhalin oblast'(14).
148 The regions were: Krasnodar krai (8 candidates), Riazan oblast' (10), Arkhangelsk oblast (13), and 
Murmansk oblast'(8).
149 The obvious exception here is St. Petersburg's gubernatorial election in 2003, though the case was 
exceptional for the early withdraw of Governor Vladimir lakovlev and the high profile support of the 
Kremlin for Valentina Matvienko.
Figure 53: Incumbent Replacement in Gubernatorial Elections, 1991-2004
80.00% - 
70.00% - 
60.00% - 
50.00% - 
40.00% - 
30.00% - 
20.00% 
10.00%
f- CM 
O) O) 
O> O)
^^^m^^^m
co ^r in CD h~
O) O> Oi O5 O) 
o> O) O5 O3 O)
 % of incumbent defeats
- Remaining regions
00 O) O 
O) O) O 
O5 O5 O
1- T- CNJ
<- CNI 
CM CM
----Republics &AOs ,
In a rough attempt to evaluate the minimum influence of Kremlin support, Table 5.3 
compares the number of campaigns in which the Presidential Administration 
expressed clear support for incumbents or challengers in gubernatorial campaigns 
since 2001. 150 The Kremlin's "success rate," or cases where candidates favored by 
the Presidential Administration were elected or re-elected, increased dramatically 
from 60% in 2001 to 88% in 2003. The equally dramatic fall in the first half of 2004 
to 33% was the subject of much discussion in the central and regional press. Among 
the most popular explanations were that the Kremlin was more focused on the March 
2004 presidential elections, that the regions in question were of little significance for 
the center, and even that the Presidential Administration was "experimenting" with
150 Data was drawn from an analysis of central press reports prior to each election, accessed through the 
Eastview database, as well as English-language reports by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and 
regional correspondents of the Russian Regional Report. Cases where incumbent and challenger were 
both supported by different individuals of the Presidential Administration were coded as support for 
each. Incumbents who failed to secure a first-round victory despite the Kremlin's support were coded 
as losses.
allowing voters to make their own decisions. 151 Perhaps more compelling was that 
the overall effect of state centralization had so diminished the governors' power on 
the federal level that gubernatorial campaigns became less of a priority for the 
Kremlin on the whole - a conclusion supported by Putin's proposal in September 
2004 to eliminate direct elections for governors altogether.
Table 5.3: Kremlin Support in Gubernatorial Elections, 2001-2004*
Year Total Elections Incumbent supported Challenger supported Wins Losses Success rate
73.3%
33.3%
* First half of 2004 only.
A more telling indicator of the influence of the Presidential Administration is 
found in elections where the main challenger was an "outsider" - that is, a candidate 
who was not a native of the region. This is a particularly salient indicator given the 
pressure placed on regional assemblies to remove the restrictions on candidacy for the 
governorship to residents of the region. 152 From 2001 to 2004, the Kremlin supported 
the winning candidate in eight out often cases (see Table 5.4). In Kalmykiia's 2002 
election, the Presidential Administration split over whether to support for entrenched 
leader Kirsan Iliumzhinov, resulting in a scandal involving an abortive attempt to 
replace the republic's chief of police and strike Iliumzhinov from the ballot. 153 In 
Altai krai's 2004 election, there was weak Kremlin support for incumbent Aleksandr 
Surikov's bid for a third term. Surikov was deprived of a first round victory by only
151 Kommersant-Vlast', 12 April 2004.
152 For general discussion, see Chapter Four.
153 Kommersant-Vlast', 14 October 2002.
2 /o. In the second round, he was left to his own devices and narrowly lost to 
comedian Mikhail Evdokimov.
Table 5.4: Kremlin Support and Outsider Candidates, 2001-2004
status supported supported Kremlin
Tiumen
Evenk
Penza
Ingushetia
Kalmykiia
St. Petersburg
Chechnia
Bashkortostan
Altai
Oblast
Oblast
Republic
Republic
Federal 
Republic
Republic
Oblast
,_ No
Yes (2nd round)
Yes (1 st round)
Outsider
Outsider
Incumbent
Outsider
Incumbent
Outsider
Incumbent
Incumbent
Outsider
Outsider
Conclusion
The analysis above suggests that the commonalities among the cases studies here are 
indeed greater than the sum of their differences. Differences in political pluralism 
among Russia's regions do appear to have narrowed over time, and particularly since 
Putin came to power in 2000. In particular, these differences diminished among the 
various levels in Russia's federal hierarchy such that the republics were no longer the 
outliers. The Kremlin could be effective in influencing the outcome of elections, 
though it is important to bear in mind that the Presidential Administration is an 
organizational actor that is limited in its organizational reach and political will. This 
means that it is sometimes forced to pick those battles it stands a chance of winning.
The upshot is that Russia's governors have been weakened by the process of 
centralization on the federal level, though one hesitates to support the claim that it is 
inducing greater pluralism on the regional level. What is one to make, then, of 
Stepan's (2000) claim that, "evidence suggests that the incentives to play a "defection 
154 Surikov's "missing" two percent were claimed by a dvoinik candidate with the same surname.
game" have decreased and that the incentives to begin to play a low-level 
"cooperation game" have increased" among Russia's governors under Putin? 155 The 
evidence in this chapter indicates that they have taken the opportunity offered by 
centralization on the federal level to pursue centralization within their territories. The 
distinction may be stylistically captured by comparing governors' incentives and 
strategies on both the federal and regional levels under El'tsin and Putin. The 1990s 
were characterized by an extraordinary degree of political decentralization. This was 
partly a function of the weakness of the central state, but also a response to El'tsin's 
style of rule. Governors had greater incentives to oppose the Kremlin on the federal 
level in order to maximize regional autonomy and take advantage of El'tsin's 
personalist approach to center-regional relations, best exemplified by the bilateral 
treaty process. Correspondingly, governors had greater incentives to cooperate with 
provincial elites on the regional level in cultivating anti-Moscow sentiment and co- 
opting federal agencies on their territories. This is not to say that governors did not 
come into conflict with other regional or local actors, but rather that regional elites 
shared a preference for keeping Moscow at arms length.
These incentives were turned upside down when Putin came to power. Under 
conditions of state centralization, governors shifted to cooperate on the federal level. 
This may have been a logical reaction to mitigate the effects of centralization, though 
it was also conditioned by the unassailably legitimate objective of strengthening the 
central state, not to mention the uncertainty over just how far Putin was willing to go 
in pursuing this goal. Yet the ratchet-down effect of centralization on the federal 
level meant that regional elites now had incentives to go it alone on the regional level. 
Governors who supported Putin's federal reforms expected some degree of latitude in 
conducting their own affairs within the regions, potentially becoming even more
155 Stepan, "Russian Federalism in Comparative Perspective," 170.
dominant in regional politics than during the 1990s. At the same time, the 
strengthening of the central state meant that regional elites opposed to the governors 
had additional points of appeal. Rather than cooperating with the governor, 
opposition elites could pin their hopes on securing his removal by making common 
cause with the Kremlin.
Table 5.5 Governor's Strategies in Federal and Regional Politics
Federal level
Regional level
El'tsin/ 
decentralization
Defect
Cooperate
Putin/ 
centralization
Cooperate
Defect
This is obviously a simplified take on the complex linkages between federal and 
regional politics. It does, however, point to fundamental shifts in perceptions of the 
legitimacy of state centralization and the role of regional borders in demarcating 
political space. Insofar as the change from the El'tsin regime to the Putin regime 
transformed the perception of centralization from threat to opportunity on the federal 
level, regional borders were transformed from vehicles for sovereignty (or autonomy) 
into tools for political integration - or in some cases, coercive assimilation - on the 
regional level. As discussed in the next chapter, the reduction in the number of 
regions by enlargement (ukrupnenie sub"ektov) was considered the next logical step 
in the process.
Chapter Six: The Push for Regional Enlargement
Introduction
While the study of post-Soviet Russia has focused significant effort on understanding 
the causes of regional separatism, relatively little scholarly work has dealt with forms 
of regional integration. This tendency was understandable during the El'tsin era when 
the central state appeared in retreat while regional autonomy grew unhindered. These 
trends came to a virtual halt under Putin and even began to reverse in spectacular 
fashion with the announced merging of Perm oblast and Komi-Permiatskii 
autonomous okrug towards the end of Putin's first term. Observers now regard the 
enlargement of Russian regions (ukrupnenie sub"ektov} and reduction in the number 
of federal subjects as a foregone conclusion - the only relevant question appears to 
be, "who's next?" 1
For a federation that appeared fragile and structured towards "power
deflation" , the central state seemed to have become unusually strong in a short time 
and with few resources at its disposal. The previous chapters have demonstrated 
various means by which the central state under Putin managed to reassert control and 
enlist allies on the regional level through the imposition of the seven Federal Districts, 
the revision of regional charters, and the conduct of regional elections. The reduction 
in the number of federal subjects and realignment of Russia's internal borders 
represents the culmination of these trends. Moreover, the issue of regional 
enlargement sheds light on the fundamental questions raised in the introduction
1 For instance, see: "Kto sleduiushchii v ocheredi na ob"edinenie?" Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 26 March
2004.
2 Alfred Stepan, "Russian Federalism in Comparative Perspective," Post-Soviet Affairs 16, no. 2
(2000).
regarding the relationship among internal borders, state capacity, and regional 
identity.
This chapter begins with an analysis of the background debates on regional 
enlargement in the 1990s and the development of the center's legal strategy. It then 
examines the role of regional leaders in the process of enlargement including the 
range of justifications and sources of political support. The chapter concludes with 
narrative examinations of the four regional case studies - the two republics whose 
borders were left untouched, and two oblasts whose borders were on the brink of 
change.
The Road to Regional Enlargement
Discussion of merging Russia's regions began early in the El'tsin era and continued 
sporadically throughout. The discussion coincided with major developments in 
federal politics: the signing of the Federal Treaty hi 1992. the adoption of the 1993 
constitution, and more recently with the onset of federal reform and state 
centralization since 2000. In the early 1990s, this took the form of 
"republicanization" among oblasts and krais/ Eduard RosseF's attempt to establish a 
"Urals Republic" was the best known (or. at least, most notorious) case4 , though there 
were also proposals to form Far Eastern, Siberian, and Southern Russian republics 
(among others). Another tactic was to demand the promotion of status within the 
regions' existing borders. In 1993, most oblasts and krais demanded rights and 
privileges that would put them on equal footing with the republics in what was known 
as the "ultimatum of the 32."5 With the adoption of the 1993 constitution, however, 
the question of regional borders was diverted to questions of regional status, in
3 Milena Gligich-Zolotareva, "Ukrupnenie sub"ektov federatsii: pro et contra." Federalism, no. 1
(2002): 94.
4 Gerald M. Easter. "Redefining Centre-Regional Relations in the Russian Federation: Sverdlovsk 
OblastV Europe-Asia Studies 49. no. 4 (1997).
5 Rossiiskaia Gazeta. 26 August 1993.
particular through the competition to conclude bilateral treaties with the federal 
center. Some viewed the eight inter-regional economic associations as possibly 
laying the groundwork for combining regions or, alternatively, for cultivating 
secession. Tomsk governor Viktor Kress, then head of the inter-regional association 
"Siberian Accord" (Sibirskoe Soglashenie) proposed in January 1999 that the inter- 
regional associations could be legislatively strengthened in order to reduce the 
number of federal subjects. 6 The adoption of the federal law formally regulating the 
activities of the associations in December 1999 effectively ended any such possibility, 
however, in holding that the associations could not receive part of the state's 
functions, form supplementary financial resources for resolving problems, or 
otherwise become prototype future subjects of the Russian Federation. 7
If the question of the federal status of Russia's regions was frozen from 1993 
to 1999, the issue of regional borders persisted in the background throughout. In the 
1990s there were over 30 territorial disputes among Russian regions that evaded
resolution. Partly these disputes were a function of historical legacy insofar as the 
centralized Soviet system made the clear delimitation of sub-national borders less of a 
priority. The proximate cause of the disputes, however, lay in the circumstances of 
Russia's political and economic transition. As territory acquired market value, it 
became the object of competition among regions - the best known case being 
Moscow city's struggle with Moscow oblast over the rights to the Sheremet'evo 
airport. The economic incentive led two raions in Kemerovo oblast to seek relocation
6 Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 23 August 2002.
7 Vladimir Klimanov, "Regional'noe Sotrudnichestvo," in Regiony Rossu v 1999 g.: Ezhegodnoe 
prilozhenie k "Politicheskomu al'manakhu Rossii", ed. N. Petrov (Moscow: Moskovskii Tsentr 
Karnegi 2001), 126-7. Interestingly, the law initially provided for the possibility that the federal center 
and regions could voluntarily transfer powers and financial resources to the interregional associations. 
The regions were "categorically opposed" to this and, as a result, the revised law was significantly 
weakened in its final draft. M.V. Zolotareva and T.Ia. Khabrieva, "Pravovye osnovy izmeneniia 
sostava sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii," Gosudarstvo i Pravo, 1 January 2001, 93.
8 Author's interview with Taliia Khabrieva, Deputy Minister for Federal Affairs, Nationalities and 
Immigration Policy, Moscow, April 2001.
within richer Sverdlovsk oblast's borders. 9 Moreover, elections to local and regional 
governments activated the issue of regional attachment. According to Valerii 
Kirpichnikov, First Deputy Minister for Federal Affairs, Nationalities and 
Immigration Policy in 2001, "before each election in St. Petersburg, discussion arises 
regarding merging (ob"edinenie) with Leningrad oblast. As soon as the elections are 
over, the issue is forgotten." 10 The populist appeal of regional borders sometimes 
leads candidates for local and regional posts to make claims in excess of their legal 
competencies. In the course of elections for mayor of Balakovo in Saratov, a key 
campaign issue became relocating to Samara oblast. In the Republic of Karachai- 
Cherkesiia, the 2000 elections even produced a proposal to turn Cherkesiia into an 
autonomous okrug within Stavropol krai. 11
Soviet-era territorial legacies and Russia's political and economic transitions 
thus conspired to create a situation unique by comparison with other federal states: 
whereas the borders of federal units (states, lander, cantons) typically were 
established prior to the establishment of the federal state, it was the establishment of 
the federal state along Russia's prior administrative-territorial divisions that induced 
inter-regional territorial disputes. 12 The ambiguity of the Russian Constitution did not 
facilitate resolution of Russia's internal borders, and to some degree exacerbated the 
problem. Formally, the federal status of a region and its territorial borders were 
separated. 13 All the same, no procedure for changes to either territory or status was 
stipulated in the constitution, aside from the general principle of mutual consent. 
Consequently, territorial borders and federal status were never fully disentangled.
Moskovskii Komsomolets, 24 April 2001. 
D Izvestiia, 14 April 2001.
11 Moskovskii Komsomolets, 24 April 2001.
12 T la Khabrieva, "Granitsy sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii i ikh izmenenie," Gosudarstvo i Pravo, 1
February 2002, 110.
13 Article 66.5 states that, "The status of a subject of the Russian Federation may be changed upon 
mutual agreement of the Russian Federation and the subject of the Russian Federation and according to 
the federal constitutional law." Article 67.3 states that, "The borders between the subjects of the 
Russian Federation may be changed upon their mutual consent."
The most troublesome cases involved nine of Russia's ten autonomous okrugs 
which had the status of equal federal subjects that simultaneously were parts of 
neighboring oblasts or krais. This arrangement served to generate tensions between 
the oblasts (or krais) and constituent autonomous okrugs throughout the 1990s. In the 
1993 constitution, the autonomous okrugs obtained the status of equal federal subjects 
with their own governors, legislative assemblies, budgets, and territorial branches of 
federal agencies. Yet since they were also constituent parts of neighboring regions, 
they participated in elections for governor of the "parent" oblast or krai and obtained 
representation to varying degrees in their assemblies. In other words, the border 
between oblast or krai and autonomous okrug effectively established a non-reciprocal 
relationship hi which the oblast could not contest power within the autonomous 
okrug, but the autonomous okrug could contest power within the oblast or krai.
Even more contentious was the economic dimension of relations within these 
"mini-federations." Some of the autonomous okrugs ranked among Russia's poorest 
regions and inevitably were tied to oblasts or krais with significantly stronger 
economies. In some cases, the border between the regions sustained differences in 
economic development. For instance, the primary source of revenue in Komi- 
Permiatskii autonomous okrug came from logging. All lumber processing was 
concentrated in neighboring Perm oblast during the Soviet era, however, which left 
the okrug in a difficult position under post-Soviet market conditions. According to 
Andrei Klimov, State Duma deputy from Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug, the 
ten-fold difference in price between raw and processed timber meant that Perm 
oblast's budget benefited from the increased tax revenue at the expense of the 
autonomous okrug.
14 Only the Chukotskii autonomous okrug did not have this dual status.
15 Quoted in: Ekspert, 29 March 2004.
Just the opposite situation prevailed in Tiumen oblast, where the economies of 
lamalo-Nenetskii and Khanty-Mansiiskii autonomous okrugs, rich in oil and natural 
gas, far outstripped the oblast's agricultural economy. The division between oblast 
and okrugs benefited large resource companies like Gazprom, Lukoil, Sibneft, and 
Yukos, which were reluctant to encourage closer relations among the regions. 16 
Generally, economically successful autonomous okrugs were largely considered to be 
dominated by large corporations that shared profits with the regional administration in 
exchange for a share of representation in the State Duma, the Federation Council, as 
well as local government. 17 Vladimir Lysenko, deputy chairman of the State Duma's 
Committee for Federal Affairs and Regional Policy, further elaborated that the 
separate status of the autonomous okrug amounted to about 500 jobs in territorial 
branches of federal agencies (such as customs and tax services), "a significant number 
of which are occupied by relatives and close friends of the regional leaders." 18 If 
obtaining representation at the central level meant that the federal government would 
have to reach a compromise with regional elites, however, the autonomous okrugs 
were not required by law to compromise with the oblast or krai. The federal 
constitution instead left matters to be sorted out by the regions concerned - meaning, 
in most cases, that there was no resolution to the problem throughout the 1990s. 19
16 Gary N. Wilson, ""Matryoshka Federalism" and the Case of the Khanty Mansiysk Autonomous 
Okrug," Post-Soviet Affairs 17, no. 2 (2001): 190-1.
17 Suggestive of this relationship in Tiumen oblast' was the joking reference to the mayor of Kogalym 
as the "office of public relations for Surgutneftgaz."
18 Politbiuro, 17 February 2003.
19 Article 66.3 states, "Upon the proposal of the legislative and executive bodies of the autonomous 
region or autonomous area a federal law on autonomous region or autonomous area may be adopted." 
Article 66.4 adds that, "The relations between the autonomous area within a territory or region may be 
regulated by the federal law or a treaty between the bodies of state authority of the autonomous area 
and, accordingly, the bodies of state authority of the territory or region." Until the adoption of Kozak's 
reforms in 2003 (FZ-95), no federal law regulated relations among oblast (or krai) and autonomous 
okrug.
The Kremlin's Legal Strategy
Towards the end of the 1990s, the Presidential Administration began drafting a 
federal law to regulate the resolution of territorial disputes among federal subjects but 
the law faced stiff opposition, and also suffered from the never-ending re-shuffling of 
the nationalities ministry. 20 The law was intended to be purely procedural, but as 
Kirpichnikov put it, "the question of territory is a question of war and peace."21 The 
State Duma rejected the draft law in its first reading in September 2003 with only 49 
deputies voting in favor. 22 The law failed in part because deputies were unwilling to 
raise the issue of territorial change immediately prior to the December 2003
elections. It was also suggested that the law failed due to opposition by the 
President and the Russian Government, as the absence of a law would permit the 
Kremlin a freer hand in manipulating Russia's internal borders. As expressed by 
State Duma deputy Viktor Iliukhin (KPRF), "If we do not find a solution for the 
problem, the executive branch will."24
Striking by comparison was the Kremlin's success in managing the adoption 
of a federal law that would permit the merging of regions to create a new federal
subject. As the law was being drafted, Aleksandr Blokhin, Minister for Federal 
Affairs, Nationalities and Immigration Policy, stated that it was intended merely to
20 Author's interview with Taliia Khabrieva, Deputy Minister for Federal Affairs, Nationalities and 
Immigration Policy, Moscow, April 2001. In its various incarnations, the nationalities ministry was 
reshuffled ten times in as many years.
21 Izvestiia, 14 April 2001.
22 Reported by Strana.ru, 9 September 2003.
23 Novye Izvestiia, 10 September 2003.
24 Quoted in: Tsentr razvitie demokratii i prav chelovek, Analitika, Obzor zokonov, Vypusk 62, "O 
rabote Gosudarstvennoi Dumy v sentiabre 2003 g. (9-17 sentiabria)." (located at www.demokratia.ru)
25 Federal'nyi konstitutsionnyi zakon ot 17 dekabria 2001 g. N 6-FKZ "O poriadke priniatiia v 
Rossiiskuiu Federatsiiu i obrazovaniia v ee sostave novogo sub"ekta." Printed in Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 
20 December 2001. The procedure for merging regions required that: the interested regions notify the 
President and provide accompanying documentation regarding the status of the common border and the 
likely consequences for socio-economic development and government structures; a referendum be held 
in each interested region on merging; if approved by referenda, the President would introduce a federal 
constitutional law to the State Duma, the approval of which (in accordance with Article 108 of the 
Russian Constitution) requires % of the State Duma and % of the Federation Council. Note that the law 
also allowed for foreign states of parts of foreign states to become subjects with the Russian Federation 
in accordance with international treaties.
establish the procedure for federal subjects to initiate changes in their status, as well 
as clarify the extent of participation of other interested regions. 26 Following the law's 
adoption at the end of 2001, however, it had become clear that legislators viewed the 
law as something more. The chairman of the Federation Council's Constitutional 
Committee, lurii Sharandin, viewed it as a catalyst for the process of regional 
enlargement. 7 The law was initially rejected by the Federation Council and 
recommended for conciliation precisely because senators were concerned that it could 
facilitate the creation of new regions via subtraction rather than addition. As 
explained by the co-chairman of the conciliation commission, Vitalii Vishniakov, the 
senators wanted to ease the process of regional enlargement "and complicate the 
opposite process."28 The law's final draft was silent on the division of regions to 
create new federal subjects, neither prohibiting it in principle nor establishing a legal 
procedure.29
In examining the divergent fates of these two laws - one concerning merely 
territory, the other approving the merging of regions into a new federal subject - the 
question arises as to why the first would generate more opposition than the second? 
In the first place, no regional leader would consider territorial change to be a neutral 
process. The transfer of a raion ("county") from one region to another, put simply, 
would mean a loss of resources, voters, and apparat. It would also mean denial of 
access to social or medical services within that raion to other residents of the region 
once transferred to another federal subject. Worse still, the success of any raion in 
bolting for greener pastures within a richer neighbor's borders could provoke a rush 
of other raions to follow suit. Given such scenarios, it is understandable why regional
26 Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 20 January 2001.
27 Vremia MN, 16 April 2002.
28 Vremia MN, 24 July 2001.
29 Some senators in the upper house did suggest that the law should include provision for splitting a 
region and merging its pieces with neighboring regions, but the proposal was roundly opposed in both 
chambers. Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 5 December 2001.
leaders would find little ground for agreement. Moreover, it becomes clearer why the 
constitutional requirement of mutual consent could prove an insurmountable barrier as 
long as territorial changes were perceived in terms of zero sum relationships.
If this reasoning explains the failure of the first law, it also goes some way to 
explaining the success of the second. The creation of a new federal subject as a result 
of merging establishes incentives for the political and economic elite in the regions 
concerned. The result of a merger would be, theoretically speaking, a positive sum 
resulting from the pooling of resources and personnel. 30 It would also mean that 
territorial disputes among regions could be resolved essentially by re-locating them 
within a sub-national government. As a result, changes to raion boundaries would be 
transformed from inter-regional disputes subject to federal and constitutional law - 
and therefore requiring federal intervention - to intra-regional procedures regulated 
by regional charters and legislation.
This explanation is too tidy, however, as it pays too little attention to the 
reigning ideological context and the inevitability of intervention by the federal center. 
As suggested by Vishniakov's observation above, regions were expected to merge in 
Putin's Russia almost as certainly as the Soviet empire was expected to break apart at 
the end of the Gorbachev era. 31 While there is some dispute over whether the law on 
territorial changes was opposed by the Kremlin or whether the timing of the law's 
introduction was merely unfortunate, the ongoing absence of such a law meant that 
the sole legal procedure for resolving territorial conflicts remained for regions to 
pursue enlargement. Moreover, the law on creating new subjects placed the President 
at the center of the process as the addressee of the regions' request to merge (and
30 As Sharandin explains, "the main thing is not the [new region's] name, but the unification of the 
existing nomenklatura" VremiaMN, 16 April 2002.
31 Mark R. Beissinger, "Demise of an Empire-State: Identity, Legitimacy, and the Deconstruction of 
Soviet Politics," in The Rising Tide of Cultural Pluralism: The Nation-State at Bay? ed. Crawford 
Young (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1993).
therefore in possession of an informal veto over the process32 ) and initiator of the 
federal constitutional law in the State Duma. By contrast, the draft law on territorial 
changes largely bypassed the President in focusing the process on the approval by the 
Federal Assembly. 33 In this sense, the Kremlin's legal strategy for territorial reform 
was bound up with the process of state centralization.
A similar tendency prevailed in the legislative resolution to the problematic 
relations among oblasts or krais and the autonomous okrugs. The reforms proposed 
by deputy head of the Presidential Administration, Dmitrii Kozak, devoted substantial 
attention to the demarcation of powers among oblasts, krais, and autonomous 
okrugs. 34 The law designated 41 powers from the list of joint competencies that 
regional governments were to fund from their own budgets (that is, without 
subventions from the federal budget). Of these, 24 powers were to be transferred 
from the autonomous okrugs to their "parent" oblast or krai when the law came into 
force in 2005. While the autonomous okrugs managed to maintain, for instance, the 
right to set local taxes and to fund local cultural archives, the oblasts and krais gained 
powers for implementing transport, education, and health programs across the region 
including the autonomous okrugs. These powers could be re-delegated to the 
autonomous okrugs, but only by way of a federal law regulating relations among the 
oblast or krai and autonomous okrugs concerned. Kozak's reforms were fiercely 
opposed by the economically successful autonomous okrugs. A telling exchange 
occurred during Putin's visit to Tiumen oblast in March 2003. In the President's 
meeting with governors of the Urals Federal District, Khanty-Mansiiskii autonomous
32 This point was confirmed by the author's interviews with members of Perm oblast's administration 
(in October-November 2001), who indicated that the absence of a juridical precedent for merging 
regions meant that all parties would wait for the go ahead from the President.
33 See text of: Proekt federal'nogo zakona "Ob izmenenii administrativnykh granits sub"ektov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii" M> 208899-3.
34 Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 04.07.2003 N 95-FZ "O vnesenii izmenenii i dopolnenii v federal'nyi zakon 
"Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov 
gosudarsrvennoi vlasti sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
okrug Governor Aleksandr Filipenko complained to Putin that, "when you take away 
half of a region's powers, what you get is half a region." In response. Putin quipped: 
"then half the regions need to be reduced (sokratit 1), unified, divided, or merged." 35
Regional Enlargement: Central and Regional Perspectives
The legal mechanisms enabling regional enlargement were established in the midst of 
a rising tide of central interest in reducing the number of federal subjects and general 
speculation that Putin intended to redraw Russia's internal borders. Immediately 
following the creation of the Federal Districts in May 2000, the new districts' 
ambiguous status and powers permitted many observers to see them as new "super- 
regions" that would supplant the existing set of regions. Throughout Putin's first term 
(and into his second), however, the Presidential Administration maintained that the 
process of regional enlargement must begin "from below," on the regions' own 
initiative, and only when approved by referendum. This is not to say that the 
Presidential Administration did not encourage regional mergers. In July 2000, Kozak 
took specific aim at the autonomous okrugs, stating that it would be "wise" to satisfy 
their desire to merge with oblasts and krais. Kozak added that, "if citizens think that 
it would be easier to live and work [in an enlarged region], it is their legal right."36 
To some extent, the presidential envoys to the Federal Districts (polpredy) 
attempted to facilitate (or at least not to impede) the process of regional enlargement 
within their respective domains. In the North-West Federal District, presidential 
envoy Viktor Cherkesov was particularly vocal. By the end of 2001, Cherkesov 
stated that the merging of regions was unavoidable - the main question was not 
whether to merge, but the scale and which part of the country. 37 The necessity of
35 Gazeta, 28 May 2003. Filipenko and Putin both used the term sub"ekt. For the purposes of clarity, it 
has been translated here as "region."
36 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 25 July 2000.
37 Argumenty i Fakty, 26 December 2001.
regional enlargement stemmed from the "artificial" division of Russia, which required 
reducing the number of regions by about half. 38 The envoy argued that it made sense 
to merge weaker "debtor" regions with "donor" regions, specifically suggesting the 
merging of Arkhangelsk oblast with Nenetskii autonomous okrug and Pskov oblast 
with Novgorod oblast. Cherkesov later indicated that regional enlargement was 
discussed in conjunction with the Federal District's strategy for socio-economic 
development through 2015, noting that the number of regions in Russia interfered 
with the realization of large-scale federal programs. 39
In her brief tenure as presidential envoy, Valentina Matvienko kept the issue 
on the agenda, stating in March 2003 that the merging of St. Petersburg and 
Leningrad oblast was possible as long as it made sense economically. 40 In April 2003 
she indicated that the federal center supported the merging of Arkhangelsk oblast 
with Nenetskii autonomous okrug, however she was careful to point out that the 
Kremlin would not demand the merger and that the process should start "from 
within."41 Matvienko's successor as polpred, Il'ia Klebanov, followed suit in stating 
that he was in favor of regional mergers and once again singled out Arkhangelsk 
oblast and Nenetskii autonomous okrug. This time, however, it was Nenets Governor 
Vladimir Butov who provided the qualification that, "under no circumstances should 
[regional mergers] proceed from the top down by administrative measures." Butov 
reminded Klebanov that, "it is the right of the people to decide in which region to live, 
and the issue of their merging may only be decided by referendum."
More cautious was Sergei Kirienko, most likely because Tatarsan and 
Bashkortostan were sensitive about the issue, and perhaps owing to his early
38 Severlnform, 24 May 2002.
39 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 17 June 2002.
40 Reported by Strana.ru, 21 March 2003.
41 Gazeta, 28 May 2003.
42 Reported by Strana.ru, 15 January 2004.
experience in dealing with the question of the Volga Federal District's boundaries. 43 
In late 2001, Kirienko characterized the issue of altering administrative boundaries as 
the weapon of the political provocateur. 44 Later he said that discussion of regional 
enlargement in the media was "utter gibberish," denying that any such plans or 
projects existed on the national level. 45 He remained cautious about holding the 
referendum on merging Perm oblast and Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug (see 
discussion below) simultaneous with the State Duma elections in December 2003. 46 
Yet there was a significant nuance to Kirienko's position throughout, insofar as he 
was not so much opposed to the idea of regional enlargement as he was opposed to 
the issue becoming a subject of public politics. Kirienko's Main Federal Inspector to 
Perm oblast indicated that the Volga polpred supported the merger of Perm oblast and 
Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug. And in spite of his caution, Kirienko earned 
the distinction of chaperoning post-Soviet Russia's first regional merger with the 
successful referendum on the creation of a new region, Permskii krai, in December 
2003. 47
Siberian polpred Leonid Drachevskii was particularly active in pursuing the 
merger of Irkutsk oblast with Usf-Ordynskii Buriatskii autonomous okrug. Repeating 
the Kremlin's mantra that 89 regions was far too many, Drachevskii emphasized that 
merging the two Siberian regions made sense given the extent to which they were 
already integrated. 48 Like Cherkesov, Drachevskii emphasized that the process 
should proceed first along the lines of merging donor regions with weaker neighbors. 
And similar to Kirienko, the Siberian polpred was wary of exposing the question of
43 See Chapter Three for discussion with respect to Perm's inclusion in the Volga Federal District.
44 Vek, 5 November 2001.
45 As reported in Regnum.ru, 16 June 2003.
46 Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 23 September 2003.
47 An alternative take from the perspective of Kirienko's sense of political survival is that the direct 
role played by Putin and prominent central political figures in encouraging the merger relieved of 
Kirienko having to play an open role in the process (or, for that matter, taking responsibility for any 
negative repercussions).
48 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 17 June 2002.
regional enlargement to public politics: "The problem should not be politicized 
through the prism of electoral campaigning. The possibility of merging, which is 
fully logical, needs to be thought out peacefully and fundamentally."49 In successive 
visits to Irkutsk, Drachevskii managed to cajole the two regions into establishing 
working groups on enlargement, then merging them into a joint working group under 
the direction of deputy polpred Valerii Khalanov. 50 Nevertheless, it took the direct 
intervention of deputy head of the Presidential Administration, Vladislav Surkov, to 
get the two regions to speed the process towards referendum in 2004. 51
Among the four Federal Districts examined here, only Urals polpred Petr 
Latyshev stood to the side of the debates over regional mergers. When rumors began 
to circulate regarding the possible splitting up of Kurgan oblast and the joining of its 
"pieces" to surrounding regions, Latyshev was nowhere to be found in the local press. 
Though the Urals polpred often stated his pleasure at the new-found cooperation 
among Tiumen oblast and its northern autonomous okrugs from 2001 to 2003, he 
pointedly refused to take a stand in the renewed hostilities52 (see discussion below) 
following the passage of the Kozak reforms in 2003.
If the Kremlin insisted that the process of regional enlargement should proceed 
"from below," many governors were more than willing to oblige. Throughout Putin's 
first term there was a deluge of proposals made by governors for merging with their 
neighbors. Novgorod oblast Governor Mikhail Prusak stated in early 2001 that his 
region would have no problems merging with Pskov oblast, to some extent 
preempting the suggestion of North-West polpred Cherkesov. But Prusak went even 
further in arguing that the number of regions should be no more than 50, and that
49 Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 23 August 2002.
50 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 27 February 2003.
51 Kommersant, 26 February 2004.
52 Reported by Uralpolit.ru, 26 April 2004. Latyshev's comment was that he preferred not to interfere 
in the process underway between oblast' and autonomous okrugs as long as it was unnecessary, 
suggesting that he might take an active role in the future should relations among the regions continue to 
degenerate.
these should be directly subordinated to "governor-generals" whom the Russian 
president would appoint. 53 The former governor of Chukotka autonomous okrug (and 
chairman of the Federation Council Committee for Northern Affairs and Indigenous 
Peoples), Aleksandr Nazarov, stated in a meeting with governors of the Far Eastern 
Federal District that Chukotka should be merged with Magadan oblast. Nazarov 
added that the process should continue with the merging of all regions within the 
Federal District. 54 Siberian leaders were even more vocal. The speaker of Altai 
krai's assembly, Aleksandr Nazarchuk, caused a stir in spring 2001 by stating that he 
would raise the possibility of merging with the Altai Republic. Nazarchuk's proposal 
was poorly received in the republic. 55 That did not stop Altai krai Governor 
Aleksandr Surikov from repeatedly raising the issue over the next two years until his 
electoral defeat in April 2004. 56 In Krasnoiarsk krai, Governor Aleksandr Lebed' 
claimed hi March 2001 that he had been ordered by Putin to prepare a scheme for 
merging the krai with the Evenk and Taimyr autonomous okrugs, to be presented to 
the president by the end of April 2002. The Presidential Administration later clarified 
that Putin merely did not exclude the possibility of merging the regions over the long 
term in talks with both Lebed' and Taimyr's Governor Aleksandr Khloponin. 57 In 
April 2001, the governor of Ust'-Ordynskii Buriatskii autonomous okrug, Valerii 
Maleev, stated that, "we are for merging [Irkutsk] oblast and okrug, but it should 
proceed in the event that residents of the okrug know the benefits of unification and
the national interests of the titular people are taken into account."
53 RFE/RL Russian Federation Report, 1 March 2001.
54 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 6 November 2002.
RFE/RL Russian Federation Report, 18 April 2001; Russian Regional Report, 30 May 2001.
Politcom.ru, 8 May 2003; Strana.ru, 29 March 2004; Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 30 March 2004.
Vremia Novostei, 29 March 2002. Lebed' previously claimed that the Presidential Administration 
was preparing decrees to reduce the number of regions and, in particular, that a decree eliminating the 
autonomous okrugs would be introduced by January or February 2001. See: RFE/RL Russian 
Federation Report, 3 January 2001; RFE/RL Russian Federation Report, 11 April 2001. 
58 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 24 April 2001.
A number of governors supported the idea of regional enlargement, but only 
insofar as it was economically rational. laroslavl oblast Governor Anatolii Lisitsyn 
suggested that the process begin with experiments conducted in either the North-West 
or Central Federal Districts by merging donor and debtor regions. Lisitsyn explained 
the economic rationale for regional enlargement in that debtor regions had little 
interest in developing the income basis for their budgets - the better they work, the 
less they receive. 59 He proposed that Kostroma and Ivanovo oblasts be joined to 
laroslavl oblast, but opposition was so intense that he further proposed that the 
governor of the new region be appointed by the president. 60 Another outspoken 
proponent of regional enlargement as a means to address the problem of debtor 
regions was Kemerovo oblast Governor Aman Tuleev. Tuleev proposed that the 
national republics be left alone, while the remaining regions be merged in groups of 
three or four and accorded the same constitutional status as the republics. 61 Irkutsk 
oblast Governor Boris Govorin stressed that Russia's administrative-territorial 
divisions did not meet the realities of the current economic system. In Govorin's 
opinion, a "proper" (gramotnoe) regional merger should lead to the strengthening of 
economic ties, growth in internal trade and general competitiveness, and facilitate the 
movement of capital. 62 After Aleksandr Khloponin left Taimyr autonomous okrug to 
become Krasnoiarsk krai's governor, he abandoned his previous opposition to 
regional enlargement. Khloponin suggested that the federal center should select 
strong regions that would serve as the basis for regional mergers. 63 While noting that 
the process of regional enlargement should not be pursued indiscriminately, he 
pointed out that many regions were artificially divided from the perspective of
59 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 24 June 2002.
60 Itogi, 3 December 2002.
61 Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 23 August 2002; Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 23 September 2003; Rossiiskaia 
Gazeta, 23 March 2004.
62 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 14 March 2003.
63 Politcom.ru, 29 December 2003.
production chains as a result of their inherited borders. Khloponin cited the example 
of a hydroelectric plant located on the border between Khakasiia and Krasnoiarsk, 
which provided 50% of the krai's energy but charged tariffs several times higher than 
those in the krai because it was registered in Khakasiia. 64
Some initiatives came from outside of regional government, occasionally 
being raised in academia or local government. In the North-West, a group of scholars 
from Arkhangelsk oblast attempted to push the local elite towards enlargement in a 
letter sent to polpred Matvienko and the governors of Arkhangelsk oblast, Murmansk 
oblast and Nenetskii autonomous okrug. The scholars drew attention to the regions' 
"common historical fate, similar natural climatic conditions, Russian (russkie) 
populations, economic structures, and identical socio-economic problems." They 
further pointed out that, "establishing a unified development strategy for northern 
territories, introduction of scientific regional policy, and unified rules of the game in 
economics are best decided with the establishment of a unified political and economic 
space."65 The head of one of the raions in Kurgan oblast warned in 2001 that the 
region could be broken up and divided among its neighbors, with two raions being 
transferred to each of Sverdlovsk, Cheliabinsk, and Tiumen oblasts. 66 The mayor's 
office in Voronezh stated in May 2003 that the oblast could lose its status and become 
a raion within Lipetsk oblast, allegedly proposed by deputy head of the Presidential 
Administration Dmitrii Kozak. The new region would combine Voronezh oblast, 
Tambov oblast, and Lipetsk oblast with the regional center in Lipetsk. The Kremlin 
denied any such plans, once more asserting that any regional mergers would take 
place only upon the regions' own initiative. 67
64 Profil\ 8 March 2004.
66 RFE/RL Russian Federation Report, 18 April 2001; Tiumenskaia Pravda, 5 May 2001.
67 Kommersant, 3 1 May 2003. It is highly unlikely that Kozak, a legal scholar, would have made such 
a suggestion in the absence of a legal framework to achieve such a result.
As regional and local leaders lined up with their proposals for regional 
enlargement, a broader discussion unfolded on the central level of the goals and 
political mechanisms for achieving enlargement. While almost any Russian politician 
at any level of government could be quoted to the effect that 89 regions was far too 
many, there was no clear idea of how many regions would be ideal for Russia, what 
status they should have, or upon what principles the new regions should be formed. 68 
Sergei Mironov, chairman of the Federation Council, proposed that the number of 
federal subjects ought to be reduced to 40. Tuleev also suggested that the optimal 
number would be 40 or 50 at most. The most radical proposal came, 
characteristically, from Vladimir Zhirinovskii, who held that the number of regions 
should be reduced to ten or fifteen. 69 One of the most interesting aspects of the 
discussions on regional mergers was that it united political actors of all stripes. For 
the Communist Party, regional enlargement would mean a return to Soviet economic- 
geographical principles in which the administrative unit should also be an economic 
district linked with the territorial-production complex. For United Russia, regional 
enlargement was seen as a means to increase the efficiency of administration and 
reduce the number of debtor regions. For the Union of Right Forces, regional mergers 
meant the removal of internal administrative and trade barriers which would facilitate 
the conduct of business. 70 For the ultra-nationalist Liberal Democratic Party of 
Russia, the reduction in the number of regions would be a midway point en route to a 
unitary state system. 71
The question of which regions to merge provoked a variety of proposals. 
Some observers were concerned that attempts to merge regions would spark ethno-
Gligich-Zolotareva, "Ukrupnenie sub"ektov federatsii: pro et contra." 99.
Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 23 September 2003. The 2003 electoral program for Zhirinovskii : s party, 
the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR), envisioned 15-20 guberniia with 7-10 million people 
each. Kommersant-Vlast', 14 July 2003.
70 Ekspert, 29 March 2004.
71 Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 23 September 2003.
national mobilization, particularly among the republics. 72 Alternatively, the process 
could serve to strengthen republican ethnocracies. Tatarstan's Mintimer Shaimiev 
implied as much in stating that there was no need for his republic to join to another 
region, but that he was not opposed to other regions being joined to Tatarstan. 73 The 
idea that donor regions should form the cornerstones for mergers with weaker regions 
quickly became a popular (if not dogmatic) rationale. As explained by Aleksandr 
Kazakov, chairman of the Federation Council Committee on Federal Affairs and 
Regional Policy,
regions within federal states ought to be self-sufficient in the sense that they 
possess the economic, financial, and social potential necessary for the 
fulfillment the functions accorded to them by the constitution and law, and 
their obligations before the people. Today there are many regions that are self- 
sufficient only in the juridical sense but not socially or economically. 74
The reasoning held that social problems in depressed territories could be resolved 
more easily by joining them with richer areas. At the same time, the gap between rich 
and poor regions would diminish. 75 As an added incentive, the Ministry of Finance 
introduced changes to the Budget Code in line with Kozak's reforms that allowed for 
the introduction of external (central) administration of regions that fall behind in their 
debt payments. According to the deputy chairman of the Federation Council's Budget 
Committee, Il'ia Lomankina-Rumiantsev, the measure fulfilled the need to provide 
direction and rationale for regional enlargement by answering the questions, "who, 
why, and to what ends?"76 In this sense, a region's financial insolvency could serve 
as a convenient justification for pursuing regional enlargement while maintaining an 
implied threat that governors who refused to comply could be faced with external 
administration.
72 Ekspert, 17 August 2001.
73 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 17 June 2002.
74 Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 1 April 2004.
75 Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 1 July 2003.
76 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 20 May 2003.
Most were unanimous in holding that the first order of business would be to 
eliminate the weaker autonomous okrugs in the "complexly-constructed" 
(slozhnosostavnye} regions. 77 More difficult and time consuming would be merging 
the richer autonomous okrugs (such as Khanty-Mansiiskii and lamalo-Nenetskii 
autonomous okrugs in Tiumen oblast), although the demarcation of financial powers 
in Kozak's reform may have resolved the issue. 78 In line with Tuleev's and Prusak's 
suggestions, there was also discussion of merging regions of equal status (including 
Sakhalin with Kamchatka, or Novgorod with Pskov). The merging of Moscow city 
with Moscow oblast, as well as St. Petersburg with Leningrad oblast, continued to 
lurk in the background as well, though few regarded these options with enthusiasm 
since the regions in both pairings were already considered to be sufficiently 
successful. 79 With particular regard to the latter, a survey of elites in St. Petersburg 
and Leningrad oblast indicated that most were satisfied with the degree of economic 
integration, but feared that formal political unification of the two regions would
adversely affect administration.
Another publicly claimed goal of regional enlargement was to optimize
administration, primarily through reducing the size of the apparat. Arguably, this 
reduction would involve decreased expenses, such as through the simplification of
licensing procedures for economic activities. Yet it was not clear that enlargement 
was the solution. In part the problem had to do with the rent-seeking interests of the 
apparat and the simultaneous lack of skilled administrators, or what was often referred 
to as "cadre hunger" (kadrovyi golod). In theory, it would be better to replace two
77 For example, see comments in: Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 25 July 2000; /tog/, 3 December 2002; 
Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 9 June 2003; Profil', 16 June 2003; Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 23 September 2003.
78 Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 1 April 2004.
79 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 9 June 2003.
80 A.V. Duka, ed., Regional'nye elity severo-zapada Rossii: politicheskie i ekonomicheskie orientatsii 
(Sankt-Peterburg: Aleteiia, 2001), 280-5.
81 Profil', 16 June 2003.
82 Parlamentskaia Gazeta, 1 July 2003.
sets of structures with a single set of highly-qualified administrators or managers. 
Once the weaker region was joined to a stronger region, however, it did not 
necessarily follow that the latter's apparaf (presumably the more effective and 
professional of the two) would be sufficient to administer the larger regional entity. 
As a result, there might be little actual change in daily administration. 83 Additionally, 
there was some disagreement over whether local and national oligarchs would oppose 
regional enlargement. On the one hand, the merging of regions was seen as a possible 
means for the oligarchs to increase and consolidate monopoly holdings. 84 On the 
other, corporations were likely to perceive enlargement as a threat to the regional 
lobbying structure and access to representation in central structures. 85
Given these potential obstacles, the juridical requirement of organizing a 
referendum on regional enlargement was perceived as less problematic than gaining
the agreement of local elites. Without question, the largest political payoff of 
regional enlargement would be for governors serving their last terms in office. The 
creation of a new federal subject would mean new administrative posts, titles, and 
powers. This in turn meant that governors already in their second terms (or perhaps 
their third) would be able to continue to contest regional elections for another eight to 
ten years. It would further provide a chance to re-write regional charters and possibly 
redress the balance of power within the region. 87 By 2007 there would be 70 
governors serving their last terms - a sizeable constituency that would stand to gain 
from regional enlargement. 88 Alternatively, the successful staging or regional 
enlargement could prove the key to upward mobility for governors seeking to get 
involved in national politics, as suggested by the elevation of Perm oblast's Governor
83 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 17 June 2002.
84 Politbiuro, 17 February 2003.
85 Profit', 8 March 2004.
86 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 20 February 2003.
87 Profit', 8 March 2004.
88 Gazeta, 8 April 2004.
lurii Trutnev to Minister of Natural Resources in March 2004 following the successful 
referendum on enlargement.
Nevertheless, debate on regional enlargement did not ignore the Kremlin's 
clear interest in reducing the number of federal subjects. Despite the insistence by the 
Presidential Administration that the process would not be forced, most observers 
continued to believe that it was induced (if not dictated) from above. Moreover, the 
central and regional press appeared to be engaged in a virtual planning debate over 
which cases for enlargement would be easiest and most appropriate. In effect the 
discussion of regional mergers served an important function hi clarifying the center's 
priorities towards the regions, and in establishing the official range of public 
justifications for enlargement: the debate not only identified the range of available 
targets for enlargement, but also helped to distinguish the desirable from the feasible. 
The distinction w?as crucial for determining when central tactics amounted to mere 
intimidation or a credible threat. Additionally, the distinction helped to interpret the 
choice and evolution of regional strategies of resistance, capitulation, or 
accommodation.
In terms of the dynamics of state centralization, the Kremlin's potential to 
conduct regional elections and obtain a greater number of loyal governors would be
significantly augmented if the number of regions was cut in half. Perhaps more 
fundamentally, some observers pointed out that the ability to assert control over 
Russia's internal borders had signified the strength of Russia's political leaders since 
the tsarist era. 90 This point is supported by the historical analysis presented in 
Chapter Two. and provides a parsimonious and contextualized explanation for why 
any hint of changes to Russia's internal borders provoked a firestorm of press 
coverage (and the Kremlin's pointedly ambiguous denials). In general terms, the
89 Profit 16 June 2003.
90 Moskovskii Komsomolets. 24 April 2001.
reconfiguration of internal borders has pragmatic political implications for state 
capacity, both on the regional level and in terms of center-regional relations. But it is 
important to recognize that the symbolic implications for a leader's political 
legitimacy are just as crucial, and Russian politics were hardly an exception. 91
The Dynamics of Regional Enlargement: Case Studies
The four cases under examination here vividly illustrated the various means by which 
internal borders became salient for the politics of state centralization under Putin. The 
borders of the two republics were not directly threatened, yet the question of altering 
internal borders (in terms of location and status) had a ripple effect on republican 
politics. The two oblasts are presented in more detail owing to the greater immediacy 
of the issue. Perm oblast became the first region to successfully achieve enlargement 
in post-Soviet Russia, while Tiumen oblast appeared to be ready to follow suit by 
spring 2004.
Buriatiia
In Buriatiia, the question of regional mergers had perhaps the greatest potential of the 
four case studies to generate political disturbance. The division of Buriat-Mongol 
ASSR in 1937 continued to weigh heavily on the Buriat elite, though there was a 
palpable awareness of the pragmatic and legal constraints on reunifying with the two 
Buriat autonomous okrugs - Aginskii Buriatskii autonomous okrug and Ust'- 
Ordynskii Buriatskii autonomous okrug. The republic's efforts at increasing the level 
of regional integration and coordinating policy with the other Buriat territories 
occurred against the backdrop of Putin's centralizing policies. The creation of the 
seven Federal Districts posed an unambiguous threat via the strengthening of the
91 In this regard, one should not confuse the salience with the visibility of the issue of changes to 
internal borders.
executive branch at all levels of government. 92 During the campaign to bring 
republican legislation in line with federal law, the deputy chair of the assembly's 
Committee for State Building, Local Self-Government and Legality, S. B. Alekseeva, 
stated that centralization "facilitated the strengthening of the role of the Federal 
Districts" and warned that merging the regions within the Siberian Federal District 
would be a huge mistake if the process was initiated "from above" (sverkhu).^ At the 
same time, members of the republican government accepted the rationale that regional 
mergers were appropriate if approved by the population, and if the regions stood to 
gain economically.
Starting in 1999, the republic began to actively pursue cultural and economic 
integration with the neighboring Buriat territories. The legislative assemblies of the 
three Buriat territories established an inter-parliamentary association to coordinate 
social and cultural legislation among the regions in early 1999.94 While the 
association established its own publication (Eblel) and information service 
(Buriatinform), these were chiefly funded by the republic. 95 In October 2001, the 
inter-parliamentary association changed to the Baikal Association of Parliaments and 
grew to include Irkutsk oblast and Chita oblast. 96 The decision to expand the inter- 
parliamentary association to include the oblasts (and especially Irkutsk, the most
92 The designation of Valerii Khalanov, former head of the FSB in Buriatiia, as deputy Siberian polpred 
with responsibility for Irkutsk oblast, Ust'-Ordynskii autonomous okrug, Chita oblast, Aginskii 
Buriatskii autonomous okrug, and the Republic of Buriatiia, probably did not go far to assuage the 
concerns of the regional elite.
93 Buriatiia, 15 September 2001.
94 Sbornik dokumentov, priniatykh na pervom zasedanii Assotsiatsiia parlamentov Aginskogo 
Buriatskogo avtonomnogo okruga, Respubliki Buriatiia i Ust'-Ordynskogo Buriatskogo avtonomnogo 
okruga. g. Ulan-Ude, 10 marta 1999.
95 Buriatiia, 13 September 2000.
96 Reported by news.buryatia.ru, 22 October 2001. The Baikal Association of Parliaments was 
formally established following approval by all five legislative assemblies in spring 2002. Buriatiia, 13 
March 2002. While formally the inter-parliamentary association continued to exist, the extent to which 
the Baikal Association was an extension of the prior association was suggested by hand-written edits to 
the association's charter (given to the author by a member of Buriatiia's Committee for International 
and Regional Ties, Nationalities Issues, Social Organizations and Religious Groups), in which 
references to "autonomous okrugs" were replaced with "oblasts," the stipulation that sessions would be 
conducted in Buriat as well as Russian was removed, and references to "all-Buriat issues" were 
replaced with "inter-regional issues."
economically developed region in the group) was a pragmatic move intended to 
facilitate regional integration.97 In addition, the republican authorities hoped that the 
five regions could form a united lobbying front in the Federation Council, particularly 
regarding the federal government's lack of attention to the Baikal region. 98
Yet it was clear that the association's early efforts would be mostly declaratory 
and that regional integration would be a long and arduous process. So much was 
suggested by the divergence of opinions regarding the very purpose of the association. 
For instance, Mikhail Semenov, speaker of Buriatiia's assembly, stated that, "We are 
going beyond the boundaries of unification on the basis of the national unity of the 
three Buriat territories in creating a genuine regional association." By contrast, the 
speaker of Irkutsk oblast's assembly, V. Borovskii, explained support for the 
association by way of the region's interest in energy tariffs and regulation, as well as 
strengthening the area's hand in the inter-regional association Siberian Accord, 
"where Western Siberia plays first violin." Borovskii's observation was ironic insofar 
as Siberian Accord (as well as the Siberian Federal District) was seen in Buriatiia as a 
necessary partner in resolving problems with Irkutsk over energy tariffs. 99 The only 
comments that revealed agreement among the other three assembly speakers present 
were those asserting each region's right to choose its own model of local self- 
government. 100
If the pursuit of regional integration through inter-regional diplomacy was 
meant to stave the hand of the Kremlin, it clearly failed. The process of merging Ust'- 
Ordynskii Buriatskii autonomous okrug with Irkutsk oblast may have been actively
97 Author's interview with Tsydenzhap Bimbaevich Batuev, Chairman of the Narodnyi Khural's 
Committee for State Building, Local Self-Government and Legality, Ulan-Ude, 6 June 2002.
98 Author's interview with Mikhail Aleksandrovich Kharitonov, Deputy Chairman of the Committee 
for Nationalities Affairs and Religious Groups, Presidential Administration of the Republic of 
Buriatiia, Ulan-Ude, 5 June 2002.
99 Author's interview with Aleksei Tsyrendorzhievich Idamzhapov, Chairman of the Committee for 
International and Regional Ties, Nationalities Issues, Social Organizations and Religious Groups, 
Ulan-Ude, 10 June 2002.
100 Statements by all five assembly speakers were printed in: Buriatiia, 27 October 2001.
covered in Buriatiia's media, but the republic itself had few levers of influence to halt 
or reverse the process. When the issue was raised before the inter-parliamentary 
association, the only result was a statement regarding the need "to establish a 
normative legal basis, to examine and adopt on the federal level a law regulating all 
legal, political, and social aspects of the autonomous okrugs" prior to unification. 101 
The republic's ethno-national intelligentsia offered moral and ideological support to 
their counterparts in the autonomous okrug. The All-Buriat Association for the 
Development of Culture (VARK) lobbied against the merger if it would mean the loss 
of cultural autonomy for the okrug. The president of VARK, Dandar Sanditov, 
expressed further concern that the Kremlin was interested in eliminating all national- 
territorial entities, not just the autonomous okrugs. In this regard, Sanditov warned 
that Irkutsk, Chita, and Buriatiia could eventually be merged into a single 
guberniia. 102 Members of the national elite reportedly proposed, as an alternative, 
merging the three Buriat territories together. 103
The Kremlin and the oblast administration kept the process focused solely on 
relations between oblast and autonomous okrug, however, to the exclusion of the 
republic. Siberian polpred Drachevskii played an active role as facilitator, spurring 
both oblast and okrug to form working groups on unification and later merging the 
groups together under the direction of deputy polpred Valerii Khalanov. 104 In early 
2004, deputy head of the Presidential Administration, Vladislav Surkov, intervened 
directly to persuade both governors to hold a referendum on merging by the end of the 
year. 105 Irkutsk's Governor Boris Govorin worked to calm the concerns of the
101 As reported by Regnum.ru, 18 February 2003.
102 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 17 June 2003.
103 Russian Regional Report, 8 April 2003. Calls for reunifying the Buriat territories were not 
uncommon, though none of the proposals suggested how to confront the problem that they lacked 
contiguous borders.
104 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 11 December 2002; Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 27 February 2003; Gazeta, 28 May
2003.
105 Kommersant, 26 February 2004.
autonomous okrug's ethno-national elite in stressing that any regional merger should 
strengthen economic ties, as well as facilitate growth in internal trade, general 
competitiveness, and the movement of capital. Govorin also framed the issue in such 
a way as to capture a more broadly-defined community, arguing that the people of the 
two regions saw the Baikal area (Pribaikal'e) as "a unified territory where residents 
have close familial and economic ties." 106 In doing so, Govorin capitalized on a 
growing sense of pragmatism among the okrug's national elite. 107 Ust'-Orda 
Governor Valerii Maleev played his own role in stating the autonomous okrug's price 
for sacrificing its status as federal subject: financial support for agriculture, 
completion of projects already started in social sphere, assistance in development of 
rural infrastructure, and maintenance of budgetary support the okrug's citizens (which 
was almost double that in the oblast) - altogether, about eight billion rubles (or over 
$275 million). 108
Within Buriatiia, the republican government stayed largely aloof of the 
process. While VARK attempted to mobilize opinion against changes to the borders 
of Buriatiia's neighbors, the republican administration kept a tight lid on any such 
discussions. The republican president, Leonid Potapov, and most of the political elite 
characteristically sought to keep ethno-national identity from becoming politicized, 
particularly as related to the contentious issue of the republic's borders and unification 
with the Buriat autonomous okrugs. 109 Potapov emphasized in 2002 that the republic 
was pursuing integration with its Buriat neighbors, but not in the sense of altering 
administrative-territorial boundaries. He approved the existing mechanisms for
106 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 14 March 2003.
107 For instance, a deputy from Ust'-Ordynskii Buriatskii autonomous okrug to the Irkutsk assembly, 
Mikhail Matkhanov, stated in 2001 that the autonomous okrug was too small to be economically 
viable: "I am a realist. It is better to live in Irkutsk than in Ulan-Ude." Russian Regional Report, 23 
July 2001.
108 Kommersant, 27 March 2004.
109 Perhaps emblematic was a meeting between Potapov and students of Buriat State University on 3 
June 2002, just prior to the republican elections. When asked if Buriatiia would pursue unification 
with the Buriat autonomous okrugs, Potapov boomed, "No, we will not" (Ne budem) with no further 
commentary.
integration - the inter-regional association and the work of V ARK - though remained 
silent on disagreement within those organizations over the desirability of regional 
mergers. This is not to say that members of the republican government necessarily 
supported regional enlargement along Buriatiia's borders. Rather, their public 
opinions were subject to self-censorship in upholding the Kremlin's formula that 
enlargement could only proceed if approved by referendum and given the appropriate 
economic conditions. ] ] 1
Kareliia
In the North-West Federal District, discussions of regional enlargement rarely 
touched upon the Republic of Kareliia. Most attention was riveted on merging 
Nenetskii autonomous okrug with Arkhangel'sk oblast, or various plans for merging 
several northern territories together. 112 Kareliia's governor, Sergei Katanandov, 
indicated early on that he was not opposed to regional mergers in principle, but he 
considered it to be a question for a later date. Otherwise, exarnining the issue would 
be damaging for "the very idea of federalism in the country, insofar far as there are 
not any preconditions (predposylok) for changing the number of regions, nor for 
internal borders." 113
The issue of changes to regional borders became the object of active 
discussion in mid-2001, when the Center for Strategic Projects "North-West" (TsSR- 
SZ) in St. Petersburg began working on a doctrine for development within the North- 
West Federal District. 114 Early discussions and seminars received detailed coverage
110 As reported by news.buryatia.ru, 30 March 2002.
1 '' Several interviewees in the republican government were careful to distinguish between their
personal opinions and their "official" opinions on this matter.
For example, see: Gazeta, 28 May 2003; Ekspert Severo-Zapad, 23 June 2003.
113 Kareliia, 13 January 2001.
114 The Tsentr Strategicheskikh Razrabotok - Severo-Zapad (TsSR-SZ) was an extension of German 
Gref s Center for Strategic Initiatives in Moscow, and its offices were housed within the headquarters 
of the NW Federal District's presidential envoy. The doctrine for socio-economic development was 
commissioned directly by Cherkesov. Guberniia (Petrozavodsk), 12 July 2001.
in Kareliia's official press, particularly as regarded existing administrative-territorial 
divisions. The Center's group of analysts (or ideologues), led by Petr 
Shchedrovitskii, emphasized that the concentration of political power and property 
rights in the regions was a primary source of the inefficiency of the administrative- 
territorial system and a barrier to finding other resources for development: "in 
defending the integrity of administrative borders, [regions] were caught unprepared 
when the market's borders ceased to coincide with the borders of state-administrative 
units, when social-economic development came to depend on the degree of a region's 
openness to the global world." 115 As a result, the centers of decision-making passed 
from the regions to integrated business groups with vaguely-defined territorial 
borders, more closely resembling an "archipelago Lukoil or archipelago Gazprom." 
From the perspective of the doctrine's authors, the area's key challenges were posed 
by globalization and the European Union, for which Kareliia's agreements with other 
regions and attempts to increase internal integration appeared to be futile. 
Katanandov reacted strongly, stating that he was unwilling to let the republic turn into 
an "island" or "archipelago": "If you would rather not have some outsider with a sack 
of money behind his back in place of an elected head of the republic, then there's no 
reason to place Kareliia under the influence of such investors." 116
As discussion of the doctrine for development moved into regional working 
groups, interesting differences of opinion appeared regarding the ongoing salience of 
regional borders and administration. 117 The doctrine's authors suggested the North- 
West Federal District as the best means for establishing a macroregion characterized 
by "state-society unity" (gosudarstvenno-obshchestvennoe edinstvo) and a "unified 
cultural-economic space." They recommended extending the powers of the
115 Kareliia, 17 May 2001.
116 Kareliia, 17 May 2001.
117 Kareliia was the first region in the North-West to sign a cooperation agreement with TsSR-NW. 
Severnyi Kur'er (Petrozavodsk), 5 June 2001.
presidential envoy to "synchronize" local development projects, though how much 
say the regions would retain in such a process was left unspecified. Kareliia's 
Minister of Foreign Relations, Valerii Shliamin, countered that joining globalization 
did not contradict the republican administration's "ideology" of self-sufficiency. 118
When the first public seminar on the doctrine was conducted in Petrozavodsk, 
representatives from the Center posed the question abruptly: "which path will Kareliia 
choose - autonomization or integration?" 119 As public discussion continued, 
however, the question was reframed as whether Kareliia would choose domination by 
Finland or St. Petersburg. 120 Apparently such discussions were not limited to Kareliia 
within the North-West as the Center was relieved of the duty to develop a "concept" 
to follow the "doctrine" by the polpred's office. When the doctrine was presented 
months later at a forum on regional development in Samara, the defensive claims 
regarding the challenges posed by the EU were softened, most likely a result of 
regional discussions of the doctrine. Nikolai Mezhevich of the Institute for Problems 
of Regional Economics expressed the issue pithily: "It's not Katanandov's fault that
it's easier to deal with Finland than Arkhangelsk."
The debate over the doctrine was revealing of central and local perceptions 
regarding the role and salience of regional borders, as well as their future prospects. 
The TsSR-SZ envisioned administrative-territorial borders as painful legacies of a 
prior era that only served the mercantilist interests of regional government. The onset 
of globalization called for increased centralization and corporatist-style planning, for
which the gradual elimination of existing regional borders was inevitable. By 
contrast, the republican leadership presented the region's internal borders as both a 
moral obligation to uphold as well as economic opportunity: as soon as the republic
u * Kareliia, 7 June 2001. 
119 Kareliia, 28 June 2001. 
m Kareliia, 5 Ju\y2m.
121 Kareliia, 27 October 2001.
122 P. Shchedrovitskii, ed., Doktrina Razvitiia Severo-Zapada Rossii (Sankt-Peterburg: Corvus, 2001).
ceded responsibility (say, to St. Petersburg) for the development of cross-border 
relations, it would lose its ability to reap the political and economic benefits stemming 
from Russia's longest border with the EU. Shliamin characterized the republic's 
unique position in terms of filling a crucial "niche" (which might otherwise be called 
a gatekeeper role). The republican government could be a partner for cross-border 
cooperation projects initiated at the raion or enterprise levels. At some point those 
projects would have to reckon with the territorial branches of federal agencies in the 
republic (customs, border guards, and so forth). As a partner for cross-border 
projects, the republican government could smooth relations with the federal agencies 
by vouching for the projects and coordinating their activities. As a legal entity, the 
republic would also be eligible to receive funding from the federal government or 
from external organizations or programs (such as TACIS) to devote to such 
projects. 123
In this vein, perhaps, the head of the Karelian Scientific Center (Karel'skii 
Nauchnyi Tsentr), Aleksandr Titov, supported Shliamin's position in arguing that 
globalization and regionalization processes occur simultaneously and do not 
contradict one another. 124 The fact that the first regional seminar discussion of the 
doctrine was held in Petrozavodsk was partly explained by personal connections 
among the republican government and members of TsSR, but also by the republic's 
interest in utilizing the new structure in search of models for cooperation, including 
promotion of its own projects and potential for participation in inter-regional 
"megaprojects." 125 When the doctrine was shelved, however, it is likely that the 
republican administration heaved a sigh of relief. The centralization of relations with 
Europe in St. Petersburg potentially threatened the republic's own attempts to become
123 Author's interview with Valerii Aleksandrovich Shliamin, Minister of Foreign Relations, Republic
of Kareliia, Petrozavodsk, 14 December 2001.
U4 Kareliia, 7 June 2001.
125 Severnvi Kur'er (Petrozavodsk), 13 July 2001.
Russia's bridge to Europe, most prominently through the promotion of the 
"Euroregion-Kareliia" project. m
Insofar as the republican administration saw the external border with Finland 
as a crucial economic and political resource for stimulating development within the 
republic, it was also crucially related to the question of the status of the republic's 
internal borders. Shliamin pointed out that the elimination of asymmetry in Russia's 
federal structure should be a goal, particularly with regard to the dual status of the 
autonomous okrugs. More importantly, he indicated that the reduction in the number 
of regions was not a goal in itself (samotsel'), but should follow from a strategy for 
development of the North-West to determine whether it would be economically 
rationale and to avoid wasting resources. In this sense, analysis should indicate the 
optimal number of regions. 127 The absence of such a strategy would mean that the 
republic retained its gatekeeper position at Russia's border with Finland, while the 
indeterminate goals of federal reform would mean that it also retained its existing 
borders with other Russian regions.
This does not mean, of course, that the threat of changes to internal borders
1 7Rwas unavailable to republican politics. The occasional suggestion that Kareliia 
might be merged with one or more of its neighbors never failed to provoke a 
thoughtful riposte from governor Katanandov. 129 Yet the republican government was 
not averse to adopting the center's justifications for centralization to pressure local
126 All the same, the republican authorities were careful not to appear to be conducting an independent 
foreign policy. The representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs RF in Petrozavodsk, Andrei 
Spiridonov, was a former deputy Minister of Foreign Relations for Kareliia. In his role as 
representative of the MFA, the bulk of his work (70-80%) already consisted of consular activities and 
phone calls to St. Petersburg. Author's interview, Petrozavodsk, 10 December 2001.
Author's interview with Valerii Aleksandrovich Shliamin, Minister of Foreign Relations for the 
Republic of Kareliia, Petrozavodsk, 14 December 2001.
128 It is worth recalling here the warning deployed during the course of revising Kareliia's constitution 
that the absence of a second state language would lead to the republic's transformation into "the 
Petrozavodsk raion of Leningrad oblast'." (see Chapter Four)
129 Most recently, Katanandov characterized the suggestion that Kareliia might be merged with 
Arkhangelsk, Murmansk, and Vologda oblasts to create a 'Karelo-Belomorskii krai' as a "strategic 
mistake." Reported in Regnum.ru, 13 April 2004.
government, as exemplified by the brief attempt to establish economic districts to 
oversee the republic's municipalities in 2001. 13 While the initiative brought short- 
term political dividends, it was not strictly necessary as the republic had already 
established the "ruling vertical" in the raions. 131 It is worth noting, however, that the 
proposal was never officially dropped, but was added to the republic's program for 
socio-economic development through 2010.
The issue of unification had been actively discussed in Perm oblast and featured 
prominently in Governor lurii Trutnev's election campaign in 2000. 132 A series of 
agreements between Perm and Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug (KPAO, or in 
local parlance, "Komi okrug") were signed during the 1990s 133 and the two regions 
conducted regular consultative meetings for the realization of joint projects. Though 
relations tended to be marred by ongoing differences over project priorities, funding, 
and leadership, the regional press reported in early 2001 that as much as 85% of the 
public favored merging. 134 It was even suggested that KPAO would not drag down 
Perm's economy, even if the salaries of all biudzhetniki were raised to Perm's level, 
since the okrug was so sparsely populated. 135
The situation was a bit more complicated within the regional administrations, 
however, judging by the positions adopted in the oblast and okrug governments.
130 See discussion in Chapter Four.
131 Author's interview with Nikolai Ivanovich Levin, Speaker of the Chamber of Representatives, 
Republic of Kareliia, Petrozavodsk, 5 December 2001.
132 See Chapter Five.
133 For example, see: Dogovor "O razgranichenii polnomochii mezhdu organami vlasti i upravleniia 
Permskoi oblasti i Komi-Permiatskogo avtonomnogo okruga" (1992); Dogovor "O razgranichenii 
predmetov vedeniia i polnomochii mezhdu organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti Rossiiskoi Federatsii i 
organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti Permskoi oblast i organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti Komi- 
Permiatskogo avtonomnogo okruga" (1996); Dogovor "Ob omosheniiakh mezhdu organami 
gosudarstvennoi vlasti Permsoi oblasti i organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti Komi-Permiatskogo 
avtonomnogo okruga" (1997); Soglashenie "O vzaimnom sotrudnichestve Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia 
Permsoi oblasti i Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Komi-Permiatskogo avtonomnogo okruga" (1999).
134 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 31 January 2001.
135 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 13 February 2001.
Governor lurii Trutnev considered the main obstacles to merging to be "chiefly 
technical" in nature, though the issues were broad in scope - the ambiguity of 
Russia's budget legislation on such matters, the lack of a juridical precedent for 
merging, the need for a mechanism to amend the Russian constitution, and the 
necessity of "explaining to the people" the reasons for the merger. 136 Deputy 
Governor Nikolai lashin further argued that the oblast already provided all social and 
infrastructural work in the okrug, that the only parts of the okrug economy that 
functioned effectively were branches of oblast enterprises, and that unification was
i-5 fj
inevitable. Meanwhile the okrug administration in Kudymkar had a different 
perspective. Deputy Governor Viktor Rychkov held that the economic structure of 
the okrug's raions presented little interest to the oblast, concluding that "in the final 
count, how we live depends on ourselves." 138 The okrug's assembly speaker, Ivan 
Chetin, argued from a very different perspective that the oblast was dependent upon 
the okrug for timber and food products. For Chetin, the two regions' legislation, 
people, and histories were already entwined such that relations between the regions 
were a model for others to follow. 39
The enlargement process gained momentum as Perm's governor, lurii 
Trutnev, became increasingly active in engaging the federal center. Along with 
KPAO's governor, Gennadii SavePev, Trutnev decided to cancel the region's power- 
sharing treaty with the Kremlin in July 2001. Trutnev justified the move by arguing 
that such treaties violated the constitutional provision of the equality of federal 
subjects, and that the treaty had not afforded any particular privileges to the oblast
136 Author's interview with lurii Petrovich Trutnev, Governor of Perm Oblast', Perm', 9 Nov
ember 
2001.
137 Author's interview with Nikolai Arsen'evich lashin, Deputy Governor of Perm Oblast', P
erm', 15 
November 2001.
138 Author's interview with Viktor Vasil'evich Rychkov, Deputy Head of Administration of
 Komi- 
Permiatskii Autonomous Okrug, Kudymkar, 2 November 2001.
139 Author's interview with Ivan Vasil'evich Chetin, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly o
f Komi- 
Permiatskii Autonomous Okrug, Kudymkar, 2 November 2001.
regardless. More crucially, the timing of the declaration was explained by the oblasf s 
desire to be involved in the process of reforming the demarcation of powers at the 
level of the Presidential Administration. 140 In particular, Trutnev linked the 
willingness to end the treaty to the necessity of contributing to the work of the Kozak 
commission. 141 His efforts were successful insofar as the Perm administration's 
senator in the Federation Council, Oleg Chirkunov, was named to the Kozak 
commission in May 2002. 142
While Trutnev was becoming more popular in the Kremlin, Savel'ev was not. 
The Main Federal Inspector for Perm oblast and KPAO, Vladimir Solomonov, was 
directed to increase focus on KPAO after the region's administration selected 
businessman Oganes Oganian as Federation Council senator against the center's 
wishes. In December 2001, Solomonov was called to Moscow on urgent business, 
during which tune Savel'ev was reportedly "informed" that Solomonov would be 
chosen by KPAO's legislative assembly as its Federation Council senator. 143 Shortly 
thereafter, Solomonov reported that Kirienko spoke in favor of the merging of regions 
at a meeting of Federation Council senators from the Volga Federal District. 
Solomonov's personal opinion was that, "small regions like KPAO should be merged 
with others since they do not play any significant role in the government." 144 Within 
two months, Oganian's position was almost indistinguishable from Solomonov's. 145
With the start of 2002, then, the question of unification became an active topic 
of discussion. Trutnev emphasized the extent to which the regions were breaking new 
ground politically and legally, but also showed concern about the center's response:
140 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 17 July 2001.
141 Mestnoe Vremia (Perm'), 18 July 2001.
142 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 21 May 2002.
143 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 27 December 2001.
144 Parma Novosti (Kudymkar), 4 April 2002.
145 Oganian stated that, "the process of joining our okrug with Perm oblast is unavoidable... Any 
negative statements regarding the process are due exclusively to the personal relations between the 
heads of KPAO and Prikam'e." Parma Novosti (Kudymkar), 18 April 2002.
The merging of regions has not yet occurred. We do not know the rules of the 
game. Let's say that we carry out a referendum and write a letter to the 
president requesting that our regions be merged. The president 
correspondingly makes requests to the government, Ministry of Finance, and 
so forth. MinFin [sic] works out a budget for the new region. We look at the 
budget and cry.
Reportedly a group of specialists from Perm started serious negotiations with the 
Ministry of Finance regarding funding for KPAO after merging with Perm. 
Meanwhile, the KPAO administration campaigned to discredit the idea of merging 
regions. Savel'ev caused a minor sensation in claiming that Trutnev was making 
preparations for unification in Moscow without consulting KPAO's administration. 148 
He also complained that KPAO remained the target of exploitation by Perm, as large 
companies (specifically Lukoil and a timber works factory in Solikamsk) continually 
promised to invest in the social sphere and reneged. 149
While Trutnev admitted to consultations with the Presidential Administration 
and the Russian Government, he argued that it would have been improper to discuss 
the matter publicly before it was known if the "technology" for unification existed. 
Perm's governor added that "the integration train is moving forward" and it would be 
best for the regions to be sitting "in the locomotive" if they hoped to benefit from 
being the first to merge. 15 Andrei Klimov, the State Duma deputy for KPAO, issued 
a statement together with Trutnev clarifying that the process of unification would 
require full agreement of both regions' legislative assemblies and administrations, 
consultations with the Presidential Administration, Government, and the Federal 
Assembly, followed by a referendum on unification in both regions. Only after the
146 Parma Novosti (Kudymkar), 7 March 2002.
147 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 16 April 2002; Parma Novosti (Kudymkar), 18 April 2002.
148 Permskie Novosti (Perm'), 26 April 2002.
149 Zvezda (Perm'), 23 April 2002.
150 Zvezda (Perm'), 30 April 2002.
successful passage of the referendum would the president initiate the legal process 
with a draft federal constitutional law. 151
The issue dominated public politics in KPAO by the end of April 2002. A 
special session of the okrug's assembly to discuss social-economic development (and 
specifically Savel'ev's program for the okrug's development from 2002 to 2006) 
quickly turned towards adopting a request addressed to Putin, the Government and the 
Federal Assembly regarding KPAO's merging with Perm oblast. 152 In June 2002, 
Trutnev made his first official visit to KPAO, traveling to the capital city Kudymkar 
as well as to a couple of raions in the company of Savel'ev. 153 In meetings with 
citizens the issue of unification with Perm became the key topic. 154
The official purpose of the visit was the signing of an agreement on "the 
realization of priority projects" between oblast and okrug. Unofficially, Trutnev also 
brought a draft letter from the oblast assembly to be sent to the federal Government 
regarding the process of unification with KPAO. The letter lay untouched for a 
month until a joint visit by Federation Council Chairman Sergei Mironov, Kirienko 
and Trutnev to Kudymkar. Mironov succeeded in convincing Savel'ev to start 
negotiations with Trutnev for unification by promising that the process would be 
overseen by the federal center and regulated by the Federal Assembly. Savel'ev later 
stated that the federal center's support would be the key factor in assuring the 
development of projects beneficial for the region's economy, including gas pipeline 
construction, the Belkomur railroad, and geological survey work, "even if the okrug 
becomes part of the oblast." 155
151 Profsoiuznyi Kur'er (Perm'), 8 May 2002.
152 Parma Novosti (Kudymkar), 2 May 2002.
153 Parma Novosti (Kudymkar), 6 June 2002.
154 Parma Novosti (Kudymkar), 14 June 2002. In Maikor, residents were indignant at Savel'ev's claim
that he had "15,000 signatures against unification on my desk." One replied, "we've seen this list It
didn't say anything about unification" Savel'ev's response was furtive: "I didn't collect the signatures
personally."
' 55 Parma Novosti (Kudymkar), 11 July 2002. Perm oblast's deputy governor Nikolai lashchin echoed
the point later on, indicating that, "today we can receive the support of the federal center [for the]
The process was fully underway by September 2002 when both governors 
established working groups on unification. 156 By February 2003, the KPAO 
legislative assembly agreed to submit a formal request to Putin for unification, issued 
jointly with Perm's legislative assembly and signed by both Savel'ev and Trutnev. 157 
Despite vocal opposition from a contingent of academics in Komi okrug, the region's 
deputies remained silent throughout the session and voted unanimously for 
unification. 158 The agreement was signed in Kudymkar on 17 February 2003. In 
March 2003, both governors met with Putin in Novo-Ogareva, where (according to 
Savel'ev) the president guaranteed that work would speed up on the construction of a 
gas pipeline, geological survey work, and investments in the development of all-year 
(as opposed to seasonal) roads. 159
Despite the agreement of Komi okrug's governor, some sources of opposition 
to the merger remained (or at least, were alleged) in public debates. Klimov 
suggested that forces in Ekaterinburg tied to the Uralmash organization were opposed 
to unification. 160 The KPAO branch of Liberal Russia actively opposed the merger, 
claiming that "many of the indigenous people [in the region] don't even speak 
Russian and consequently do not understand what is happening." The party's 
representative also took aim at the regional government for constraining media access 
for those opposed to merging, and further claimed that Klimov's assistant had offered 
her a $ 10,000 bribe to withdraw from the region's politics. 161 Somewhat more 
pragmatically, former okrug assembly speaker Ivan Chetin led the "Coordinating 
Council for the Future of Komi Okrug" (which included Liberal Russia) and
socio-economic development of Komi okrug. The infrastructure projects that could affect the economy 
of Komi okrug are supported politically by the federal center." Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 18 February 
2003.
156 Permskii Obozrevatel' (Perm'), 1 July 203.
157 Parma Novosti (Kudymkar), 16 January - 6 February 2003.
158 Novyi Kompan'on (Perm'), 18 February 2003.
159 Gazeta, 28 May 2003.
160 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 28 April 2003.
161 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 20 May 2003.
demanded to see the draft charter for the new region prior to the referendum on 
merging. In particular, Chetin sought a fixed quota for representation in the new 
regional assembly (six to eight seats out of sixty) and a veto over the new assembly's 
decisions if they ran contrary to the socio-economic interests of the okrug. 162 Perm's 
Deputy Governor Nikolai lashin quickly declared the oblast administration's 
willingness to consider these terms. 163
In September 2003 the wording of the referendum question was approved by 
the oblast assembly as follows: "Are you agreed that Perm oblast and Komi- 
Penniatskii autonomous okrug merge into a new subject of the Russian Federation - 
Permskii krai, hi which Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug will be an 
administrative-territorial unit with special status in the krai's charter in accordance 
with the legislation of the Russian Federation?" It soon appeared that opposition had 
emerged from within the Russian Government. During a visit to Kudymkar, Liberal 
Russia's Ivan Rybkin claimed that the Ministry of Finance was opposed to granting 
the okrug special status within the enlarged regions. 164 The document to which 
Rybkin referred was in fact authored by the Ministry of Economic Development and 
Trade, and opposed the granting of "special status" on the grounds that it would 
violate the federal law on the structure of regional governments. 163 The leaked 
document was quickly disowned and did not particularly damage the campaign for 
merging the regions, but its aftermath did reveal much about the ground that had been 
covered in the negotiations over the okrug's future status within the new region, 
lashin stated that representatives from KPAO in the working group on unification 
suggested making Komi okrug a municipal unit in the new federal subject. It would 
have a reserved quota of seats in the new assembly, while it was uncertain whether it
162 As reported by Novosti.perm.ru, 1 July 2003.
163 As reported by Novosti.perm.ru, 17 July 2003.
164 As reported by Novosti.perm.ru, 5 September 2003.
165 As reported by Novosti.perm.ru, 12 September 2003.
would receive a special veto since there was no such legal standard in other regions. 
The "special status" of Komi okrug would be written into the new charter, not the 
Russian Constitution, and would involve budget issues, the okrug's economy, and the 
transfer of government functions. 166
Approximately two months prior to the referendum, the central press 
concluded that the opposition to the merger lacked the power, finances, and media 
access necessary to halt the process. 167 In the run up to the referendum, there were 49 
initiative groups registered as officially supporting the merger and only one group 
registered in opposition. 168 Partly this was due to the oblast's use of "administrative 
resource." In particular, the oblast's Deputy Governor lashin set up a foundation 
called "Permskii krai" that distributed a free newspaper supporting enlargement, 
lashin lobbied regional business leaders to "use all of your authority and 
administrative resources" to convince their co-workers of the necessity of 
participating in the upcoming referendum, and offered them the chance to buy 
advertising space in the newspaper. 169
But unquestionably more decisive was the intervention of central politicians, 
and especially Putin. A veritable parade of political celebrities provided outspoken 
support for the merger, including Prime Minister Mikhail Kas'ianov, 170 Minister for 
Nationalities Affairs Vladimir Zorin, 171 and State Duma Speaker Gennadii 
Seleznev. 172 When Putin himself visited Kudyrnkar to express his support for the 
merger on 31 October 2003, he became the first Russian head of state to visit the 
region in 100 years. 173 Putin stated that raising the region's economy while
166 As reported by Novosti.perm.ru, 18 September 2003.
167 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 10 October 2003.
168 Permskii Obozrevatel' (Perm'), 12 November 2003.
169 Kommersant, 14 October 2003.
170 RIA Novosti, 27 August 2003.
171 As reported at Krai.perm.ru, 28 October 2003.
172 1A Novyi Region, 13 November 2003.
173 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 30 October 2003; Rosbalt, 3 November 2003.
maintaining the language and culture of indigenous peoples would prove an important 
example for other regions that are "formally independent." but incapable of attending 
to needs of indigenous peoples.
Immediately following his trip, Putin signed a decree "On the measures for 
social-economic development of Komi-Permiatskii Autonomous Okrug and Perm 
Oblast,'' detailing the full extent of federal support for the region through 2006. The 
decree called for federal investment of three billion rubles (more than $103 million) 
over the next three years, primarily intended for the okrug's infrastructural 
development but also to allow oblast businesses to participate in the realization of 
large projects. Federal funds were to be used for construction of the Ocher- 
Kudymkar-Kupros gas pipeline, completion of a 70 km stretch of highway along the 
Kudymkar-Syktyvkar route (to the border with Komi Republic) as well as a secondary 
bridge over the Kama River hi the oblast capital. Federal funds would continue to 
subsidize the okrug through 2009, after which it would independently participate in 
the budget process of Permskii krai. 174 Trutnev and Savel'ev resolved the question of 
the okrug's status within the new region by mid-November, announcing that it would 
become a unified municipal unit. The head of this municipality would be elected 
simultaneously with the governor of the new region in 2005 and the municipal 
assembly would consist of twenty deputies. After 2005, federal funding for the okrug 
would be distributed through the enlarged region's budget.
The referendum passed the support of both regions' populations by 
overwhelming margins: 89.69% in Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug and 84.89% 
in Perm oblast, with an overall turnout of 62.67%. 176 Putin quickly introduced a
174 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 3 November 2003.
175 IA Novyi Region, 12 November 2003.
176 Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 8 December 2003; Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 9 December 2003. Note that a 50%
turnout was necessary in both regions for the referendum to be declared valid. The results for Perm
oblast have been reported differently by various sources, though all accounts have the result as being
around 84%.
constitutional federal law for the creation of the new region, Permskii krai. The law 
was approved in three readings on a single day by the State Duma and confirmed by 
the Federation Council within the week. 177 The law established that Permskii krai 
would officially come into existence on 1 December 2005 and provided for a 
transitional period for the formation of its governing structures to end no later than 31 
January 2007. The krai's governor would be elected on 4 December 2005 and the 
krai assembly following the end of the current terms of the oblast and okrug 
assemblies in December 2006. The regions' current State Duma deputies and 
Federation Council senators would finish out their terms. Afterwards, Komi okrug's 
seat in the State Duma would be effectively retained in the maintenance of a single 
mandate district within the okrug's boundaries. One of the more interesting passages 
in the law limits the activities of the two regions' assemblies during the transitional 
period. During the period prior to the election of the krai assembly, the two existing 
parliaments were prohibited from signing treaties or agreements with other federal 
subjects, signing international or foreign economic treaties or agreements, adopting 
any laws (including the initiation of referendum) to halt the process of creation of the 
krai, or demanding the resignation of the governors or their appointees. For their own 
part, the governors were merely prohibited from dissolving the current assemblies.
Perm oblast's governor Trutnev was duly rewarded for his efforts, becoming 
the only governor to be appointed to Putin's new government as Minister of Natural 
Resources on 9 March 2004. In accordance with the federal constitutional law 
establishing Permskii krai, elections would not be held for an interim governor. Putin
177 Federal'nyi konstitutsionnyi zakon Rossiiskoi Federatsii ot 25 marta 2004 g. N 1-FKZ "Ob 
obrazovanii v sostave Rossiiskoi Federatsii novogo sub"ekta Rossiiskoi Federatsii v rezul'tate 
ob"edineniia Permskoi oblasti i Komi-Permiatskogo avtonomnogo okruga." Printed in Rossiiskaia 
Gazeta, 26 March 2004.
appointed Trutnev's close ally and Federation Council senator. Oleg Chirkunov. as 
acting governor until the election of the new krai's governor in 2005. 178
Tiwnen
If the "easy" case for regional enlargement was represented by Perm oblast and 
Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug, the "hard" case clearly was represented by 
Tiumen oblast, Khanty-Mansiiskii autonomous okrug (KhMAO, or "lugra"), and 
lamalo-Nenetskii autonomous okrug (laNAO, or "lamaF'). During the mid- to late- 
1990s. the relations among these three Western Siberian regions were confrontational, 
at best. By 2000, the governor of Tiumen oblast, Leonid Roketskii, complained "as a 
patriot of our krai" that the region was losing the last elements of its unity. In 
particular he noted that the oblast flag and crest were no longer displayed at official 
events in the autonomous okrugs. 179 The oblast's administration's conflict with the 
autonomous okrugs culminated in Roketskii "s defeat by the "candidate of the north."
Sergei Sobianin. hi January 2001. While Sobianin's victory was expected to ease 
relations among the three regions, no one predicted at the time that the oblast would 
continue to pursue Roketskii's goal of subordinating the okrugs to the oblast. Within 
a few years, however, the process appeared to be underway.
There were several key differences from the situation hi the 1990s. Foremost 
among them was the activation of intra-regional investment by the north into the 
oblast and revived policy coordination through inter-regional consultative institutions. 
Second, Sobianin quickly and effectively consolidated political control within the 
oblast via a spectacular reduction of local government from 295 municipalities to 22
178 Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 26 March 2004.
179 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia. 27 April 2000.
180 See Chapter Five for discussion of the election. Sobianin was former speaker of the Khantv- 
Mansiiskii legislative assembly and first deputy polpred in the Urals Federal District. He was endorsed 
bv the governors of both autonomous okrugs.
raions. Lastly, the center played an important role in reforming the distribution of 
powers among the matreshka regions and in the centralization of budgetary relations. 
Sobianin's victory in the January 2001 gubernatorial race was largely bought 
on credit as the northern okrugs promised to invest substantially in the oblast 
economy and infrastructure. In mid-December 2000, Khanty-Mansiisk promised to 
invest 1.5 billion rubles for the construction of three suburban complexes 
(mikroraiori), including apartments, schools, trade centers, service enterprises, roads, 
and engineering networks, as well as investing about 70 million rubles directly into
1 ft 1
the city's budget. This impressive display was followed by Sobianin's proposal for 
the coordination of socio-economic policy among the three regions. 182 With the 
signing of the agreement in February 2001, the governors of the northern okrugs 
promised to invest 15 billion rubles annually into the oblast economy. 183 In return, 
Sobianin vowed to maintain political stability and not to pursue regional enlargement, 
pledging that "no experiments will be conducted on Tiumen oblast's territory." 184
It is significant that the latter agreement was concluded within the framework 
of the Council of Governors (Sovet gubernatorov}. The Council was the 
organizational evolution of the administrative council established in 1991 by Tiumen 
oblast's first (appointed) governor, lurii Shafranik. While the Council initially 
facilitated the regulation of relations among the regions on a treaty basis, it became 
increasingly a decorative body from 1996-7 as relations declined. 185 After Sobianin 
replaced Roketskii as oblast governor, the Council was revived and gradually 
acquired structures for regional development. With the conclusion of the agreement 
on socio-economic cooperation, the Council's structure was enlarged with the
181 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 15 December 2000. Text of the agreement published in: Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 
19 December 2000.
182 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 23 December 2000. Text of the draft agreement published in: Tiumenskaia 
Pravda, 30 December 2000.
183 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 16 February 2001; Tiumenskaia Izvestiia, 16 February 2001.
184 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 16 February 2001.
185 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 28 November 2001; Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 29 November 2001.
forming of an economic council and inter-regional coordinating councils on 
regulating consumer markets, social policy, transport, and communications. 186 In the 
economic sphere, the Council became the basis for coordinating the regions' policies 
in diverse areas, including establishing a common tax policy and reinforcing the 
border with Kazakhstan. 187 The Council also became a focal point for informal 
political coordination. The date, order, and conditions for the December 2001 
elections to the oblast Duma were established by the Council prior to approval by the 
regional assemblies. 188 The Council also provided a forum for the governors to agree 
on their preferred candidates in the oblast Duma elections. 189 Moreover, proposals 
from the oblast Duma to reform the assembly's structure were postponed when 
Sobianin claimed that the Council did not have enough time to conduct the necessary 
legal analysis of changes to the oblast charter. 190
The Council of Governors thus went from being a declaratory institution with 
merely latent potential to an active forum for informal negotiation and policy 
coordination. In the sphere of political coordination, one could even say that the 
Council provided an extra-legal mechanism for the governors to take on powers 
granted by law to the legislative assemblies. In this fashion, the process of political 
and economic "integration" among the three regions contributed to the domination of 
the executive branch in relations with the regional assembly. If the balance among
186 Author's interview with Liudmila Il'inichna Ivanova, Administration of Affairs for the Council of 
Governors, Tiumen', 7 May 2002.
187 Sibirskii Posad (Surgut), 15 May 2001; Tiumenskaia Pravda, 18 September 2001. For example, the 
March 2002 session of the Council examined proposals for programs to fight AIDS, providing 
educational support, development of the fishing industry, passenger transport, energy conservation, and 
renovation of Tobolsk as a center for culture and tourism. Tiumenskaia Pravda, 26 March 2002.
188 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 23 June 2001. Note that federal law required that the regional assemblies 
determine the dates of elections, meaning that the Council of Governors provided an informal 
mechanism for the governors to steer the process as long as they were united.
189 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 18 September 2001.
190 Two projects to reform the oblast' charter were proposed at the time. The first would have 
introduced a bicameral assembly with the lower chamber elected exclusively from the oblast' and the 
upper chamber from all three regions. The second project sought to double the size of the oblast' 
assembly with half of the deputies elected by party list. Tiumenskii Kur'er, 26 June 2001. The party 
list reform was later mandated by federal law and some variant was expected to be introduced prior to 
the next oblast' Duma elections in 2006.
the regions would then be decided on the level of inter-personal relations among the 
governors, Sobianin was likely to remain dependent upon his northern patrons until 
establishing himself with an independent power base. To do this meant that the 
oblast's new governor, elected primarily from the autonomous okrugs, had to gain 
control within the oblast's borders.
Sobianin's plan for gaining control within the oblast's borders was, literally, to 
change the oblast's internal borders. In Tiumen oblast, the regional administration 
oversaw the work of 22 raions that were directly subordinate to the governor. At the 
same time, the oblast had 295 municipal entities, the mayors and assemblies of which 
were elected independently of Sobianin's administration and largely supported Leonid 
Roketskii in the January 2001 election. The new governor's task therefore was to 
liquidate the "political inheritance" of Roketskii. 191 Sobianin began by replacing the 
heads of thirteen raion administrations. 192 At the same time, the viability of the 
oblast's model of local government became the subject of intense scrutiny by the 
regional assembly. On the eve of a roundtable discussion on local government, the 
speaker of the oblast assembly, Sergei Korepanov, argued that Tiumen's model was 
inappropriate to the requirements of local government in contemporary Russia. In 
particular, he pointed out that the oblast administration could not monitor and verify 
the implementation of laws in 300 municipalities. The oblast administration could not 
even expect to accord one day apiece to each mayor, which would negatively affect 
the formation of the region's budget. By contrast, he claimed that such problems did 
not arise in the autonomous okrugs, where local government was exercised at the
191 Tiumenskii Kur'er, 11 August 2001.
192 The rest were allowed to stay following individual meetings with Sobianin. The governor 
commented that, "The main thing is that [the heads of raion administration] are up to the tasks set 
before them." Tiumenskaia Pravda, 18 April 2001.
level of the raion. Korepanov even recalled the operation of the Soviet era raikom as 
further evidence of the superiority of the model. 193
Within two months, referenda were planned in fourteen raions on whether to 
transfer local government to the raion level. If successful, elections for the heads of 
raion administrations and deputies for local assemblies would be held simultaneously 
with the December 2001 elections to the oblast Duma. The newly elected "mayors" 
would then appoint their own representatives (polpredy) to oversee the former 
municipal bodies. 194 During the transitional period in the change-over to the raion 
model, elections for the new raion assemblies would be set by the new heads of raion 
administration following the December 2001 elections. 195 The oblast administration's 
press began a virtual campaign in support of the referenda, drawing readers' attention 
to the senselessness of maintaining an "army of bureaucrats" at the local level that 
drained the oblast budget, as well as the superior economic rationale for changing 
over to the raion model. The chairman of the oblast administration's Committee for 
Local Self-Government, Vladimir lakovlev, argued that the bulk of municipal bodies 
were incapable of fulfilling their duties and should either transfer their powers to 
raion administrations or "form some kind of unified structure." 196
While the oblast administration continued to emphasize throughout that the 
initiative to merge with surrounding municipalities must come "from below," some 
heads of local government complained that the oblast was pressuring local assemblies 
to initiate the referenda. 197 When pressed on the question, the deputy chair of the 
administration's Committee for Local Self-Go vernment, Anatolii Mayshikin, 
sidestepped the question, stating instead that the present system of local government
193 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 24 April 2001.
194 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 15 June 2001.
195 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 17 October 2001.
196 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 26 June 2001.
197 The initiators of the referenda could be either a group of citizens or the local assembly. Tiumenskii 
Kur'er, 30 June 2001.
was forced upon the oblast by Roketskii and that a similar movement towards 
reducing the number of municipal entities was underway in Kurgan oblast. 198 
Meanwhile, the oblast administration's official press featured a steady tide of 
testimonials prior to the referenda in nineteen raions: a unanimous show of support at 
a roundtable on merging in Ishim 199 ; a similar roundtable discussion in 
Nizhnetavdinsk ; a report on the dire situation in Berdiuzhskii raion, where people 
were weary of weak local government201 ; an editorial from the Aromashevskii raion 
veterans' council in support of the upcoming referendum202 ; and so forth. By the end 
of August 2001, referenda on merging local government at the raion level 
successfully passed in all but two raions. The regional press criticized the "passivity" 
(passivnost^ of the heads of local government in almost all raion centers where votes 
in favor were lower than the over-all vote within the raion ("only" 55% in the raion 
centers, as opposed to the average support of 70%). 203 In the December 2001 
elections, all of Sobianin's appointees were elected to head the "new" raion 
administrations. 204
The evolution of Tiumen's governor as an independent actor with a 
consolidated base of support within the oblast was further augmented by central 
initiatives in budgetary centralization and the division of powers among oblast and 
autonomous okrugs. Under Roketskii, the oblast had long been dependent upon the 
royalties paid to the autonomous okrugs on the use of natural resources. The issue 
was sufficiently contentious insofar as Roketskii felt that the oblast did not receive 
nearly enough of the funds, while the okrugs felt that the royalty payments merely
198 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 10 July 2001. Malyshkin also stated, somewhat disingenuously, that 
the administration itself was surprised by the force of the movement for merging municipalities.
199 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 7 July 2001.
200 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 10 July 2001.
201 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 13 July 2001.
202 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 14 July 2001.
203 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 1 August 2001; Tiumenskaia Pravda, 8 August 2001. larkovskii 
raion planned to hold a referendum on merging its municipalities in December 2001, while the heads of 
local government in Tiumenskii raion resolutely opposed holding a referendum.
204 Tiumenskaia Pravda, 25 December 2001; Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 29 December 2001.
served to cover "gigantic holes" in the oblast's economy. 205 The initial agreements 
among the regions following Sobianin's election appeared to minimize the issue's 
salience by compensating the oblast with direct investment in the regional economy 
and infrastructure.
In late April 2001, Sobianin sounded the alarm in the oblast Duma. The 
governor announced that the draft federal law "On natural resources" (O nedrakh) and 
the second part of the Tax Code discussed in the State Duma would first count all 
payments on the use of natural resources into the federal budget and only then divide 
them among regions. The assembly's speaker, Sergei Korepanov, elaborated that 
under the existing system about 60% of the payments stayed in the okrugs and 40% 
went to the center, of which about half (18%) was returned to Tiumen oblast. Under 
the planned changes, the oblast budget would lose more than six billion rubles. 206 
Sobianin lobbied the regions' interests in Moscow throughout May and June,
reportedly achieving a promise from Putin to help in resolving the matter. The 
State Duma's decision followed intense negotiations and compromise. Instead of 
losing all payments and becoming wholly dependent upon federal transfers, the oblast 
succeeded in getting 5.5% of the taxes on resource extraction paid directly into the 
oblast budget (20% went to the autonomous okrugs and the remaining 74.5% to the 
federal budget). 208 Sobianin called the compromise the "greatest joy" of his first year 
in office, while his "greatest disappointment" was that the oblast did not get 7%. 209 
For the oblast, that 5.5% meant the preservation of some budgetary independence of 
the center (taxes on hydrocarbons accounted for 59.6% of the oblast's 2002
205 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 21 September 2000.
206 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 25 April 2001.
207 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 19 May 2001; Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 14 June 2001.
208 Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia, 10 July 2001.
209 Andrei Fateev, "Sergei Sobianin: Razgovory o likvidatsii okrugov i popytkakh zakhvata vlasti v 
Tiumenskoi oblasti - prosto domysly," Direktor, March 2002,46.
budget). The moment was further notable for the display of solidarity among the 
regions' governors and assemblies. Sobianin denied rumors of a growing rift with the 
governors of the autonomous okrugs, stating that they no longer discussed the 
apartment issue" (kvartirnyi vopros) - a euphemism for the complex relations among 
the regions - but that "everyone lives in isolated 'rooms' with all the 
conveniences."211 The regions' cooperation continued through 2002 in facing down 
the attempt by the Ministry of Natural Resources to terminate the "two key" system 
for granting licenses for natural resource extraction. 212
The situation appeared to have changed by 2003, however, as discussion of the 
Kozak reforms accelerated. Initially the oblast assembly resolved to support the 
amendments proposed by their counterparts in the assemblies of the autonomous 
okrugs. The amendments effectively sought to up-end Kozak's formula for regulating 
relations among matreshki regions: rather than transferring the majority of powers to 
the krais and oblasts by default (that is, in the absence of an agreement or treaty to the 
contrary), they proposed that the autonomous okrugs retain full powers by default. 
The oblast Duma predictably supported the okrugs, yet the reasoning bordered on the 
pragmatic (or even fatalist). As explained by Korepanov, there was no point in 
risking political confrontation with the autonomous okrugs over the matter, 
particularly since "our decision... [will not] affect the law's adoption."213 lugra's 
Governor Aleksandr Filipenko quickly adopted a defensive position, stating in an 
interview that the reduction in the number of federal subjects probably was inevitable 
and necessary, but that the process should proceed "from the perspective of the state's 
economic and societal security to determine the goals and criteria of regional
210 Andrei Fateev, "Tiumenskaia oblast': Slabost' Severa i sila luga," Direktor, February 2002. 71.
211 Fateev, "Serge'i Sobianin: Razgovory o likvidatsii okrugov.," 46-7.
212 As reported by Strana.ru, 15 November 2001 and 19 April 2002.
213 Tiumenskie Izvestiia. 26 February' 2003.
mergers." The speaker of lamal's assembly, Sergei Khariuchi, warned that the 
okrug would seek to fully separate from the oblast if the reform went through. 215 In 
contrast to his northern colleagues, Sobianin adopted a calmer tone in stating that he 
personally had nothing against the substance of the Kozak reforms and that any law 
was subject to compromise. 216
As rumors began to circulate about the impending liquidation of the 
autonomous okrugs, the oblast administration was stunned by an unexpected 
provocation. The Tiumen Youth League (Tiumenskii soiuz molodezhi) attempted to 
initiate a referendum over whether the three regions should become fully separate 
federal subjects. The move was immediately suspected of having been instigated on 
behalf of the northern okrugs.217 The group's organizer, Aleksei Deev, explained that 
after the passing of Kozak reforms, the situation in oblast was expected to get worse 
unless all three regions were merged or made fully independent. 218 The referendum 
did not occur, but the media stir was sufficient that the governors of the three regions 
issued a joint statement denying the rumors of the demise of the autonomous okrugs, 
expressing support for the work of the Kozak commission, and stressing that the 
status quo among the three regions would not change as long as the law remained the
same. 219
Once the law was passed, an uneasy silence covered relations among the three 
regions for the latter half of 2003. While the okrugs attempted to form working
214 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 27 February 2003. For an elaboration of this defense, see the article by the 
okrug's deputy governor: N.M. Dobrynin, "Rossiiskii federalizm: problemy i perspectivy," 
Gosudarstvo i Pravo, 30 November 2003.
215 Gazeta, 28 May 2003.
216 As reported by Uralpolit.ru, 18 February 2003.
217 As reported by Uralpolit.ru, 26 February 2003.
218 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 28 February 2003; Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 6 March 2003. The proposed regions 
would be Tiumenskaia oblast', lugorskaia oblast', and lamal'skaia oblast'. Deev later explained in an 
interview with this author that the referendum was never expected to happen, but rather that he 
specifically intended to push the issue of the regions' territorial status onto the agenda in order to 
achieve just the opposite effect - to bring about the unification of the three regions. Deev also 
suggested that his consulting group had been hired by the Presidential Administration to draft a plan for 
reducing the number of federal subjects, though there was no way to verify this claim. Author's 
interview, Tiumen', July 2003.
219 "Obrashchenie Gubernatorov," 4 March 2003, published at: http://adm.tyumen.ru
groups to establish a new treaty to delegate powers in accordance with the federal law 
"On the general principles...," Tiumen oblast's administration dragged its feet while 
continuing to express its readiness to cooperate. 220 In the meantime, the first regional 
merger in post-Soviet Russia between Perm oblast and Komi-Permiatskii autonomous 
okrug riveted national attention on the question of which regions would be next. The 
head of Russia's Accounting Chamber, Sergei Stepashin, stated in November 2003 
that Tiumen oblast and its autonomous okrugs should merge following Perm. 221 The 
legislative assemblies of Perm and Tiumen oblasts signed an agreement on 
cooperation in priority areas, including regional mergers, on 25 November 2003.222 
Commenting immediately after the successful referendum on enlargement in Perm, 
Korepanov expressed skepticism about applying Perm's experience to Tiumen. He 
argued that the process would take longer than in Perm, pointing out that the three 
regions could not even agree over the purpose of the regions' working groups: while 
the autonomous okrugs perceived the commission as actually intended to divide 
powers, the oblast saw it merely as establishing the mechanism for dividing 
powers. 223
It seemed clear that the Kozak reforms gave Tiumen's governor Sobianin the 
opportunity to re-think his relations with Khanty-Mansiisk's Filipenko and 
Salekhard's Neelov. Whereas Sobianin was elected governor in January 2001 
primarily by the autonomous okrugs, he had acquired an independent power base in 
the south of the oblast and strong central support by the start of 2004. After the 
implementation of the Kozak reforms, the only means for preventing the bulk of the 
okrugs' powers from being transferred to the oblast would be the adoption of a federal 
law regulating relations among the regions - meaning in effect that the oblast
220 Russian Regional Report, 3 February 2004.
221 Nezavisimaia Gazeta, 20 November 2003.
222 Reported by Uralpolit.ru, 18 March 2004. The speakers of both assemblies were careful to point out 
that the situations in the two oblasti were too different to compare (and then proceeded to do so).
223 Reported by Regnum.ru, 11 December 2003.
administration needed merely to wait to acquire more power. In anticipation of the 
Kozak reforms coming into force in 2005, the regions' bureaucrats and corporations 
were already re-orienting towards the south of the oblast in early 2004. 224
As of the writing of this chapter, events in Tiumen began to develop quickly. 
On 24 February 2004, Sobianin and Neelov issued a joint resolution on strengthening 
integration processes between Tiumen oblast and lamalo-Nenetskii autonomous
okrug. The governors issued a statement alongside the resolution regarding its 
timeliness, stating that "Today the full (kompleksnaia) integration of the region is on 
the agenda, possibly not excluding the administrative-political aspects connected with 
changes to the status of [the federal] subjects... comprising Tiumen oblast." The two 
regions established a working group to draft a program for integration to be presented 
to the federal and regional authorities by the end of 2004, and invited Khanty- 
Mansiiskii autonomous okrug to participate.226 lugra's administration was clearly out 
of the loop. Filipenko's press secretary, Anatolii Korneev, stated that the okrug was
not invited to the event, nor was it even informed of the proceedings. By the end 
of March, Sobianin and Neelov had signed a protocol announcing that agreement on 
economic and political unification of the two regions had been achieved in principle. 
Both governors stated that the Kozak reforms would be implemented in the form in 
which it was adopted. Sobianin added that maintaining three separate budgets only 
created additional expenses, concluding that "there is no sense in leaving the okrugs 
their powers.
224 Author's interview with Sergei Kondrat'ev, Tiumen State University, Tiumen', 16 April 2004.
225 "Usilienie integratsionnykh protsessov v Tiumenskoi oblasti," Tiumenskaia Liniia (t-l.ru), 24 
February 2004.
226 Zaiavlenie "Ob osnovnykh napravleniiakh uglubleniia integratsii Tiumenskoi oblasti i lamalo- 
Nenetskogo avtonomnogo okruga," printed by Uralpolit.ru, 25 February 2004; Kommersant, 25 
February 2004.
227 As reported by Uralpolit.ru, 25 February 2004.
228 Kommersant, 24 March 2004.
Once again, Filipenko's press secretary expressed lugra's distress: "Any 
statement of our governor regarding the protection of social and constitutional rights 
of the okrug's residents will be considered an attempt to interfere with the unification 
of the brotherly peoples of Tiumen and lamal."229 Filipenko responded by offering to 
contribute 20 billion rubles to Tiumen and Salekhard in exchange for retaining the 
okrug's powers in the social sphere. 230 A few days later, a social group in Khanty- 
Mansiisk sent a letter to Putin requesting the preservation of the region's 
constitutional status in order to safeguard its indigenous people. 231 Sobianin's press 
secretary, Aleksandr Romanov, retorted that the letter had nothing to do with society, 
but had been written by "okrug bureaucrats who were against the transfer of powers to 
Tiumen oblast from the start."232 While the regions continued to trade blows in the 
public relations arena, it appeared that there was little that Khanty-Mansiisk could do 
to dissuade Tiumen's governor or even its assembly that unification was inevitable. 
Even the oblast assembly speaker Korepanov, who many considered a 'man of the 
north' during the assembly's standoff with former governor Roketskii, showed an 
increasing resignation. On the ten-year anniversary of the establishment of the oblast 
Duma, Korepanov was asked if his take on relations between north and south had 
changed since he had become assembly speaker. Korepanov replied that he had not 
changed, but federal law had changed and, "as a law-abiding person, I should 
implement the law, doing everything possible so that the people of the oblast do not 
lose anything and start to live better in the process of realization of new laws."233
229 Kommersant, 24 March 2004.
230 Kommersant, 27 March 2004.
231 Russian Regional Report, 6 April 2004.
232 Kommersant-Ural, 1 April 2004.
233 Tiumenskie Izvestiia, 6 April 2004.
Conclusion
Taken together, the four regions examined above illustrate different aspects of how 
internal borders were implicated in the politics of state centralization during Putin's 
first term. While the republics were not directly threatened with the revision of their 
borders, the affect on neighboring regions influenced republican elite's strategies and 
tactics for engaging the federal center. Among the oblasts and krais of the matreshka 
regions, regional enlargement was seized upon by ambitious regional elites who were 
tacitly supported by the federal center. Perhaps most striking was that the issue of 
regional enlargement went from being a latent possibility at the start of Putin's first 
term to a virtual inevitability by the start of his second term.
Chapter Seven: Institutions, Territory, Identity
This chapter returns to the questions posed in the introductory chapter 
concerning internal borders as institutions: how strong are regional borders as 
institutions? How do they shape or constrain political behavior? Are they a source of 
stability or instability? What is the nature of their relationship to the development of 
state capacity, and do they vary with regard to regional identity or regime type?
The institutionalist approach to borders adopted in this study stands astride the 
rationalist and sociological approaches discussed in the introduction. In rationalist 
approaches, common interests among political actors are defined by relative 
administrative levels or position in the federal hierarchy. 1 The territorial shape of 
each administrative level determines the distribution of political and economic 
resources available to each group. Where the distribution of resources favors local 
administration, territorial reform is less likely since the stronger group has a de facto 
right of veto. The preservation of territorial structures (or the maintenance of the 
status quo) signifies the strength of local elites in national politics. Conversely, 
constant reforms of administrative-territorial divisions signify domination by central 
elites. Achieving cooperation among central and local elites requires "an identifiable 
level of politics focused on the territory, participation of territorial politicians in 
national political life, together with a willingness to engage in territorial and 
bargaining and compromise."2 Internal borders effectively are portrayed as resource 
containers that confer autonomy upon the actors who possess or control them.
1 D.A. Tikhonov, "Problemy admmisfrativno-territorial'nogo ustroistva sub"ektov Rossiiskoi 
Federatsii," Vestnik Moskovskogo Universiteta. Seriia 12: Politichaskaia Nauka, no. 2 (2002): 15-16.
2 Michael Keating, State and Regional Nationalism: Territorial Politics and the European State (New 
York: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1988), 244.
By contrast, sociological approaches suggest that the image of borders as mere 
resource containers" is deceptive insofar as it treats the concepts of interest and 
exchange as independent of identity and perceptions of what counts as a resource. Far 
from being passive objects of political trade, borders are repositories of identity that 
are constitutive of regional autonomy and state sovereignty. Insofar as the state is a 
structure of power that relies on the assumed correspondence between identity and 
territory, "boundary making and breaking within and between states is a political act 
which can be seen to support or oppose that structure."3
From an institutionalist perspective, the border is "the basic political 
institution," the juridical line necessary for organizing rule-bound economic, social or 
political life. Internal borders are instruments of state policy as governments attempt 
to change the location and function of borders to their advantage. But the degree of 
the state's control over internal borders also constrains its policies and practices, in 
part because borders serve as markers of identity and terms of discourse. 4 In a sense, 
one's calculation of interest and preferences for structuring relations with other actors 
depends on which side of the border you are standing, and where you stand in relation 
to the border. The difference is subtle yet salient. When borders are stable, they 
reinforce and stabilize the political relationship between identity and territory. 5 
Conversely, it is rare to find a case of destabilized borders that is not accompanied by
3 Hastings Donnan and Thomas M. Wilson, Borders: Frontiers of Identity, Nation and State (New 
York: Berg, 1999), 10.
4 This approach to internal borders is adapted from Malcolm Anderson's work on frontiers. Malcolm 
Anderson, Frontiers: Territory and State Formation in the Modern World (Cambridge: Polity Press, 
1996), 1-3.
5 "Accordingly, from the internal perspective of the state, stable borders are reflections of presumptive 
beliefs which remove potentially intractable questions of the composition of the political community 
from the political arena. .. .unless the border of the state is accepted as an immutable given, we can 
expect that different groups within the state will align their own perceptions of the proper border in 
light of the implications different borders, or different principles of inclusion and exclusion, may have 
for their chances to achieve and/or maintain political power." lan S. Lustick, Unsettled States, 
Disputed Lands: Britain and Ireland, France and Algeria, Israel and the West Bank-Gaza (Ithaca: 
Cornell UP, 1993), 38-9.
conflicts over identity and territory. Borders both constitute the formal organizations 
of the state and the procedures that structure political conduct. They shape how 
political actors define their interests and structure actors' relations of power with other 
groups. 6
From an institutionalist perspective, then, the question of changes to internal 
borders is not merely one of determining the distribution of resources, nor is it a 
referendum on the status quo. Its advantage over the rationalist perspective is the 
ability to unpack concepts like "interest" by examining the processes and mechanisms 
that sustain (or create) definitions of interest. At the same time, the advantage over 
sociological approaches lies in the acknowledgement that real world politicians do not 
perceive themselves as inhabiting worlds of discursive structures. Political actors do 
perceive material and political advantage, and they explain political decisions by way 
of economic necessity or political compulsion. The advantage of the institutionalist 
approach relative to constructivist approaches is in contextualizing analysis such that 
the evaluation of power in the abstract does not supplant concrete evaluations of how 
power is exercised.
More importantly, the institutionalist perspective proposed here gains 
theoretically by combining insights of both rationalist and sociological approaches. 
While there is theoretical recognition that borders may foster separatism or 
integration, the question of when and how borders become divisive or integrative is 
elided by the alternative approaches to the study of borders. The key insight is that 
changing borders means changing their valence - not just identity or territory, 
but the directional linkage between the two. In the case of post-Soviet Russia,
6 Paraphrasing Thelen's definition of institutions, in: Kathleen Thelen and Sven Steinmo, "Historical 
Institutionalism in Comparative Politics," in Structuring Politics: Historical Institutionalism in 
Comparative Analysis, ed. Sven Steinmo, Kathleen Thelen, and Frank Longsreth (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992), 2.
regional borders were activated during the "parade of sovereignties" in the name of 
regional identity. Those borders came to demarcate regional political institutions and 
regimes by the mid-1990s and regional economic orientations by the late 1990s. 
Changes to those borders necessarily entailed changes in the valence of internal 
borders, such that regional identity became the product of regional institutions and 
economic orientations rather than the root. 7
The examination of the regional enlargement processes in the previous chapter 
illustrates the change in the valence of Russia's internal borders, and its consequence 
for the trajectory of center-regional relations. Most obvious is the change in direction 
from decentralization and the activation of regional boundaries as institutions for 
demarcating power, to centralization and the activation of inter-regional boundaries 
for merging regions. The "parade of sovereignties" was sped along by El'tsin's 
infamous exhortation that the republics take as much sovereignty as possible, but he 
did so in the midst of the struggle with Mikhail Gorbachev for control of the RSFSR. 
The unanticipated consequence was that the "parade" shifted parameters as regions 
vied for improved position within the new state's federal hierarchy. Regional leaders 
had a different understanding of the process. Whereas El'tsin encouraged the regional 
autonomy movements to wrest control of the RSFSR from Gorbachev, many regional 
leaders mostly saw the sovereignty declarations as necessary steps towards improving 
their position in a new federal structure regardless of whether El'tsin or Gorbachev 
prevailed. 8 With the center destabilized and established channels of communication 
disrupted, the sovereignty declarations were blunt tools for signaling the intensity of 
regional preferences for a more decentralized state system. While regional leaders
7 Note that this does not mean that identity loses salience, nor does it necessarily require imputation of 
intentional action. What is being proposed here is that an institutional perspective on borders can 
account for their transformation from intervening variables into independent variables.
8 Nicholas J. Lynn and Alexei V. Novikov, "Refederalizing Russia: Debates on the Idea of Federalism 
in Russia," Publius 27, no. 2 (1997).
might have preferred to engage the center in bargaining and negotiation over their 
future status, these options were precluded by the chaotic institutional environment. 9 
The condition that enabled the mutually reinforcing pattern of behavior that became 
the "parade of sovereignties" was dvoevlastie ("dual power") and bezvlastie ("no 
power") at the top and the lack of institutional channels for negotiating federal status 
until the 1992 federal treaties.
Three further differences between the "parade of sovereignties" and the 
contemporary phenomenon of regional enlargement emerge from this depiction. First 
is the center's will and capacity to regulate the process. El'tsin was willing to 
encourage the regional sovereignty movements insofar as they served his interests, but 
he clearly did not anticipate that the movements could not easily be brought back 
under control. Putin was much more pragmatic and risk-averse than his predecessor 
and seems intent upon ensuring that the enlargement process moves steadily and 
predictably in the center's favor. The significance of the "Perm precedent" is that it 
made credible the Kremlin's commitment to sponsoring enlargement. Regional 
sovereignization under El'tsin was accompanied by the financial retreat of the central 
state, while enlargement so far has involved substantial central investment. Likewise, 
regional sovereignization was accompanied by the legal retreat of the central state and 
proliferation of sub-national regime types, while enlargement was preceded by the re- 
assertion of constitutional and federal authority and the revision of regional charters 
and constitutions. Regional elites may have been wary about accepting the center's 
promises of financial support during the 1990s, but the range of political and financial 
incentives offered by enlargement translates into a sort of "centralization by 
invitation."
9 The fact that El'tsin still managed to misinterpret these signals perhaps says more about his own 
perceptions as a leader and the general breakdown of center-regional linkages.
The second key difference concerns the matter of time compression. The 
"parade of sovereignties" occurred within a short period owing to the combined 
pressures of separatism at multiple levels of the Soviet Union's structure. The 
struggle for power in the center enabled regional actors to push further, while the 
sense that the struggle could not go on indefinitely provided short time horizons: 
applying pressure "from below" could make the decentralization of power 
irreversible, and that pressure had to be applied quickly to avoid an authoritarian 
reversal. With Putin, there were few illusions among the regional leadership about 
the goals and methods behind regional enlargement. Some regional leaders already 
had come to view enlargement as a means for enhancing regional (and personal) 
standing in Russia's increasingly unitary federal system. The fact that there has been 
a surge of proposals for enlargement from Russia's governors suggests that there was 
a decided interest in reducing the number of regions, and that the crucial factor that 
impels and regulates the process is the pivotal role of the Presidential Administration. 
As a result, the time compression that characterized the "parade of sovereignties" was 
reversed with the enlargement process. The Kremlin will no doubt seek to move most 
of the autonomous okrugs and their "parent" oblasts or krais towards enlargement by 
the end of Putin's second term in 2008, but this likely will be the initial stage of a 
decade-long process.
A third difference between the processes of regional sovereignization and 
enlargement is the ideological context: the keyword for enlargement is not 
sovereignty, but solvency. Given the lack of consensus over the goals and rationale 
for enlargement among regional leaders, the Kremlin's focus on economic rationality 
and increasing regional self-sufficiency proved effective. In activating a fundamental 
cleavage among "donor" and "debtor" regions, the center managed inter-regional
relations so as to prevent coordinated regional action against the center. It has also 
rendered invalid the ethno-national (and, for that matter, confessional) claims to 
sovereignty that characterized the early 1990s. Quite the opposite, the enlargement 
process began by merging the national autonomies with ethnically Russian regions. 
Even if the national republics were not directly targeted for enlargement, this 
threatened to disrupt the intimate link between territory and ethno-national identity. 
Indigenous groups would cease to be "titular" peoples, while the material advantages 
of claiming national autonomy would become less compelling (and possibly 
hazardous for one's career) on the central level.
For instance, Russian internal passports ceased to indicate nationality in 1997, 
though they continue to indicate place of birth and bear residency stamps. If the 
regions created through enlargement ceased to reflect ethno-national origin, the 
political and constitutional underpinnings of Russia's asymmetrical federal structure 
would start to dissolve. Proponents of enlargement tended to downplay ethno- 
national attachments and emphasize broader territorial affiliations: in Perm, it was the 
broader sense of belonging to Prikam'ye, while Irkutsk Governor Boris Govorin 
stressed the region's ties to the Baikal area as unifying Russian and Buriat peoples. 
During the revision of Kareliia's constitution in late 2000, it was just this possibility 
that motivated the concern that "Kareliia" would be transformed into the 
"Petrozavodsk raion of Leningrad oblast, or Murmansk, or Arkhangelsk." 10
Despite these rather significant differences between the processes of regional 
sovereignization and enlargement, there are a few crucial similarities. First, the 
processes came to appear inevitable once they were underway: another referendum on 
enlargement was slated for December 2004 in Irkutsk oblast and Ust'-Ordynskii
10 Kareliia, 16 December 2000.
Buriatskii autonomous okrug, while Krasnoiarsk has moved ahead of Tiumen in 
scheduling a referendum for February 2005 on enlargement with its autonomous 
okrugs. Second, the convergence of central and regional interests could only be 
temporary since central and regional elites appeared to have very different ideas about 
what enlargement signified and what was at stake. A prime example of this was the 
proposal by Eduard Rossel' in 2004 that Sverdlovsk be merged with Kurgan and 
Cheliabinsk oblasts. The idea's chilly reception prompted Rossel' to disown the idea 
and even deny that he'd ever mentioned it. 11 Third, power and autonomy devolves to 
those who regulate and determine the status of internal borders. In this sense, the 
process of enlargement was bound up with both the reform of federal relations as well 
as the reform of local government. In both cases, enlargement benefited the executive 
agency at the higher level of administration - the center benefited from the reform of 
regional boundaries, while regional administration benefited from the reform of local 
boundaries. Territorial reform involves the redistribution of political resources among 
elite groupings, and ongoing reform of administrative-territorial divisions potentially 
constituted evidence of domination by central interests. 12
This "ratcheting down" of centralization at the regional and local levels 
illustrates the direction of the new Russian federalism. Putin revived the 
organizational integrity of the state, though its functioning principles straddle the 
divide between bureaucratic and patrimonial forms of authority, where accountability 
resides in relations among elites rather than the electorate, best exemplified by the 
notion of the "ruling vertical." At the same time, the insistence of the Presidential 
Administration that the process of enlargement must begin at the regions' initiative 
and only by way of referendum should not be dismissed as a mere public relations
11 As reported by Uralpolit.ru, 27 April 2004.
12 Tikhonov, "Problemy administrativno-territoriarnogo ustroistva sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii," 
15-16.
exercise. Just as Putin's obvious popularity has been a source of his political 
autonomy, the popular approval of enlargement may eventually serve to enhance the 
autonomy of regional administrations vis-a-vis business and ethno-national interests. 
With regard to business interests in particular, the eventual elimination of the 
matreshka regions would shut down significant channels for regional and central 
lobbying efforts.
The extent to which enlargement continues to be successful is further 
suggestive of the relationship between Russia's internal borders and Putin's attempt to 
build central state capacity. Building state capacity involves compliance, first and 
foremost. During the El'tsin presidency, compliance with central directives was often 
achieved through a combination of bribery and blackmail. Federal relations appeared 
to be a function of the president's patronage powers, yet the weakened condition of 
the central state meant that central directives often were implemented at the 
governor's discretion once they reached a region's borders. Putin succeeded in 
achieving compliance in center-regional relations by different means. Material or 
economic power is but one means of building capacity, though potentially the easiest 
to observe and measure. Somewhat less tangible but potentially more compelling is 
the issue of legitimacy.
For observers of Russian politics, the reason why regional elites surrendered to 
Putin so quickly after he came to power remains a vexing issue. The answer lies 
partly in the common experiences of regional elites during the El'tsin years. Most 
regions did not benefit from Russia's market transition and became heavily dependent 
upon federal transfers. These transfers often served the rent-seeking interests of 
regional elites, but the center could just as quickly turn off the spigot, refuse to pay 
federal employees, or otherwise cause significant trouble for the administrations of
"debtor" regions. Elites in "donor" and "debtor" regions alike came to share a desire 
for stability and predictability in the center's regional policy 13 , and it was in this 
regard that many welcomed the centralizing movement. The Kremlin has also 
succeeded in focusing blame for ongoing friction in center-regional relations on those 
regions that benefited the most from country's asymmetrical constitutional system and 
the selective distribution of benefits via bilateral power-sharing treaties: the republics. 
The oblast and krai administrations were vocal throughout the 1990s about the 
republics' disproportionate share of the national wealth and constitutional privilege. 
After 2000, the republican pace-setters of regional separatism in the 1990s became the 
outliers in regional integration.
In short, there is an argument to be made that the regional elite desired stable 
and predictable rules of the game all along, and Putin's style of rule offered this in a 
way that El'tsin never could. As a result, the Kremlin's constitutional right and duty 
to intervene in regional politics gained recognition and acceptance (even 
begrudgingly) on the regional level. This reversal in regional orientations towards the 
federal center reveals the brittleness of regional autonomy in the 1990s. Stoner-Weiss 
was correct in identifying regional autonomy as "de facto autonomy," easily claimed 
when the center defaulted on its jurisdictional responsibilities in the provinces. 14 The 
reverse side of this is that de facto autonomy was easily re-claimed by the center once 
it acquired the political will to do so.
Equally significant is the extent to which Putin effectively drew upon 
organizational sources of legitimacy that are legacies of Soviet rule. These legacies 
include the political repertoires of managing internal borders detailed in Chapter Two,
13 Alia Chirikova and Natalya Lapina, "Political Power and Political Stability in the Russian Regions," 
in Contemporary Russian Politics: A Reader, ed. Archie Brown (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2001).
14 Kathryn Stoner-Weiss, "Central Weakness and Provincial Autonomy: Observations on the 
Devolution Process in Russia," Post-Soviet Affairs 15, no. 1 (1999).
and exemplified in Putin's first months in office by the creation of the Federal 
Districts as discussed in Chapter Three. In the Soviet regime, such measures were 
undertaken by what T.H. Rigby termed "task-achieving bureaucracies" within a 
"goal-rational" system. 15 Writing about the organization of power and legitimacy hi 
communist systems, Rigby explained that such regimes are concerned with directing 
activities, not merely regulating them through rule application. The supreme 
legitimating value (in the Soviet case, communism) constitutes, "a concept whose 
contours are sufficiently vague, like those of justice, order, democracy...but which 
differs from these in that it is not seen as an existing quality of the socio-political 
order but as something to be worked and fought for in the future." 16 Rational action 
in such a system is that which is deemed appropriate to achieving the tasks 
contributing to the overall goal. The distribution of power is dominated by those 
responsible for coordinating the activities of lower-order bureaucracies and vetting 
their performance. In this manner, legitimacy inheres not in state-society relations, 
but in the relations among command-administrative staffs - in other words, legitimacy 
is a function of relationships among political elites.
In Putin's Russia, the concepts of democracy, justice, and order remain as 
vaguely-defined as the ideological predecessor of communism. In the aftermath of 
the Beslan tragedy in September 2004, Putin proposed replacing the system of elected 
governors with a process of appointing them with the consent of regional legislative 
assemblies. Both his initiatives and the rationale behind them of strengthening 
Russia's internal security were accepted with little complaint. Perhaps most
15 T. H. Rigby, "A Conceptual Approach to Authority, Power and Policy in the Soviet Union," in 
Authority, Power and Policy in the USSR: Essays dedicated to Leonard Schapiro, ed. T. H. Rigby, 
Archie Brown, and Peter Reddaway (London: Macmillan Press Ltd, 1980), T. H. Rigby, "Introduction: 
Political Legitimacy, Weber and Communist Mono-organisational Systems," in Political Legitimation 
in Communist States, ed. T. H. Rigby and Ferenc Feher (London: Macmillan, 1982).
16 Rigby, "A Conceptual Approach to Authority, Power and Policy in the Soviet Union," 19.
noticeable by its absence was the concern that each region would have to revise its 
charter or constitution once more. Rather, the mechanisms for monitoring and 
changing regional charters established during Putin's first term remained in place and 
are being re-deployed for another tour of duty. Insofar as it is often claimed that 
Russia's Presidential Administration supplanted the organizational role played by the 
CPSU, the analysis offered by Rigby suggests that this was an institutional continuity 
with the Soviet past that affected the distribution of power and the status attributed to 
organizations designed to achieve the tasks set by the President. In creating the 
Federal Districts, Putin activated an institutional legacy of communism to achieve the 
compliance of regional elites and central agencies based in the regions. As regards 
regional enlargement, the feeling in today's Russia that it is necessary (even 
imperative) to reduce the number of regions without a clear underlying rationale, 
ideology, or end point falls squarely within this ruling tradition. Should the 
movement for regional enlargement gain momentum as regional leaders internalize 
the Kremlin's preferences and the procedures become institutionalized, Russia's 
regions might one day complement the "parade of sovereignties" with a "parade of 
enlargements." But it would be a "parade" of a different sort, as would be the Russia 
emerging from it.
Bibliography
(1) Documents
(2) Interviews by the Author
(3) Russian Language Sources
(4) English Language Sources
(1) Documents
(a) Constitutions and Charters
Konstitutsiia Respubliki Buriatiia. Ulan-Ude, 1994. (Located at http://egov- 
buryatia.ru)
Konstitutsiia Respubliki Buriatiia. Ulan-Ude, 2001.
Konstitutsiia Respubliki Kareliia. Petrozavodsk, 1994. (Located at 
http://gov.karelia.ru)
Konstitutsiia Respubliki Kareliia. Petrozavodsk, 2001. (Located at 
http://gov.karelia.ru)
Konstitutsiia Rossiiskoi Federatsii. Ofitsial'noe izdanie. Moskva: Izdatel'stvo 
"luridicheskaia literatura", 1997.
Ustav Permskoi Oblasti. Perm', 1999. 
Ustav Permskoi Oblasti. Perm', 2001. 
Ustav Tiumenskoi Oblasti. Tiumen', 1995. 
Ustav Tiumenskoi Oblasti. Tiumen', 2002.
(b) Stenographic Records
Odinnadtsataia sessiia Narodnogo Khurala Respubliki Buriatiia (vtoroi sozyv), 2-3 
oktiabria 2000 g. Stenograficheskii otchet. Chast' I (Ulan-Ude, 2000).
Zasedanie konstitutsionnogo sobraniia respubliki buriatiia, 25 dekabria 2000 g. 
Stenograficheskii otchet (Ulan-Ude, 2000).
Chetyrnadtsataia sessiia narodnogo khurala respubliki buriatiia (vtoroi sozyv), 28 
fevralia 2001 g. Stenograficheskii otchet, chast' II (Ulan-Ude, 2001).
Vosemnadtsadtaia sessiia Narodnogo Khurala Respubliki Buriatiia. 19 noiabr' 2001 g. 
Stenograficheskii otchet. Chast' I (Ulan-Ude, 2001).
Vneocherednaia sessiia Narodnogo Khurala Respubliki Buriatiia (vtoroi sozyv). 28 
noiabr' 2001 g. Stenograficheskii otchet (Ulan-Ude, 2001).
Deviatnadtsataia sessiia Narodnogo Khurala Respubliki Buriatiia . 18 dekabria 2001 
g. Stenograficheskii otchet, chast' I (Ulan-Ude, 2001).
Sbornik dokumentov, priniatykh na pervom zasedanii Assotsiatsiia parlamentov 
Agmskogo Buriatskogo avtonomnogo okruga, Respubliki Buriatiia i Ust'- 
Ordynskogo Buriatskogo avtonomnogo okruga. g. Ulan-Ude, 10 marta 1999.
(c) Treaties and Agreements
Dogovor "O razgranichenii polnomochii mezhdu organami vlasti i upravleniia 
Permskoi oblasti i Komi-Permiatskogo avtonomnogo okruga" (1992).
Dogovor "O razgranichenii predmetov vedeniia i polnomochii mezhdu organami
gosudarstvennoi vlasti Rossiiskoi Federatsii i organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti 
Permskoi oblast i organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti Komi-Permiatskogo 
avtonomnogo okruga" (1996).
Dogovor "Ob otnosheniiakh mezhdu organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti Permsoi oblasti 
i organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti Komi-Permiatskogo avtonomnogo okruga" 
(1997).
Soglashenie "O vzaimnom sotrudnichestve Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Permsoi 
oblasti i Zakonodatel'nogo Sobraniia Komi-Permiatskogo avtonomnogo 
okruga" (1999).
(d) Decrees
Ukaz ot 22 oktiabria 1993 g. N 1723 "Ob osnovykh organizatsii gosudarstvennoi 
vlasti v sub"ektakh Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
Ukaz ot 22 dekabria 1993 g. N 2266 "O deistvii zakonodatel'stva Rossiiskoi 
Federatsii ob organakh gosudarstvennoi vlasti kraev, oblastei, gorodov 
federal'nogo znacheniia, avtonomnoi oblasti, avtonomnykh okrugov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
Ukaz ot 4 oktiabria 1994 g. N1969 "O merakh po ukrepleniiu edinoi sistemy 
ispolniternoi vlasti v RF."
Ukaz ot 13 maia 2000 g. N 849 "O polnomochnom predstavitele Prezidenta Rosiiskoi 
Federatsii v federal'nom okruge"; "Polozhenie o polnomochnom prestavitele 
Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii v federal'nom okruge"; "Perechen' 
federal'nykh okrugov."
"O vnesenii dopolneniy i izmeneniy v polozhenie o polnomochnom predstaviteli
Prezidenta RF v federal'nom okruge." Rossiiskaia Gazeta, 31 January 2001.
Ukaz Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii ot 21.07.2001 N 741 "Sostav komissii pri
prezidente Rossiiskoi Federatsii po podgotovke predlozhenii o razgranichenii 
predmetov vedeniia i polnomochii mezhdu federal'nymi organami 
gosudarstvennoi vlasti, organami gosudarstvennoi vlasti suV'ektov Rossiiskoi 
Federatsii i organami mestnogo samoupravleniia."
(e) Laws
Proekt federal'nogo zakona "Ob izmenenii administrativnykh granits sub"ektov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii" Jfe 208899-3.
Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 06.10.1999 N 184-FZ "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii 
zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov 
gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 29.07.2000 N 106-FZ "O vnesenii izmenenii i dopolnenii v 
federal'nyi zakon "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh 
(predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
Postanovlenie Pravitel'stva Rossiiskoi Federatsii ot 12 avgusta 2000 g. N 592 g.
Moskva "O vzaimodeisrvii Pravitel'stva Rossiiskoi Federatsii i federallykh 
organov ispolnitel'noi vlasti s polnomochnymi predstaviteliami Prezidenta 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii v federal'nykh okrugakh i skheme razmeshcheniia 
territoriarnykh organov federal'nykh organov ispolnitel'noi vlasti." Rossiiskaia 
Gazeta, 22 August 2000.
Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 08.02.2001 N 3-FZ "O vnesenii dopolnenii v federal'nyi 
zakon "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh 
(predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
Federal'nyi konstitutsionnyi zakon ot 17 dekabria 2001 g. N 6-FKZ "O poriadke 
priniatiia v Rossiiskuiu Federatsiiu i obrazovaniia v ee sostave novogo 
sub"ekta."
Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 07.05.2002 N 47-FZ "O vnesenii izmenenii v Federal'nyi 
zakon "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh 
(predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 24.07.2002 N 107-FZ "O vnesenii dopolnenii i izmenenii v 
stat'iu 4 federal'nogo zakona "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii 
zakonodatel'nykh (predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov vlasti 
sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
Federal'nyi zakon RF ot 04.07.2003 N 95-FZ "O vnesenii izmenenii i dopolnenii v 
Federal'nyi zakon "Ob obshchikh printsipakh organizatsii zakonodatel'nykh 
(predstavitel'nykh) i ispolnitel'nykh organov gosudarstvennoi vlasti sub"ektov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii."
Federal'nyi konstitutsionnyi zakon Rossiiskoi Federatsii ot 25 marta 2004 g. N 1-FKZ 
"Ob obrazovanii v sostave Rossiiskoi Federatsii novogo sub"ekta Rossiiskoi 
Federatsii v rezul'tate ob"edineniia Permskoi oblasti i Komi-Permiatskogo 
avtonomnogo okruga."
(2) Interviews by the Author
(a) Republic ofBuriatiia 
V.K. Agalov, Federation Council Senator. Ulan-Ude, 13 June 2002.
Ts.B. Batuev, Chairman, Committee for State Building, Local Self-Government, and 
Legality, Narodnyi Khural. Ulan-Ude, 6 June 2002.
E.D. Dagbaev, Professor of Political Science, Buriat State University. Ulan-Ude, 15 
June 2002.
B.V. Danilov, Main Federal Inspector, former Presidential Representative. Ulan-Ude, 
5 June 2002.
A.Ts. Idamzhapov, Chairman, Committee for International and Regional Ties, 
Nationality Issues, Social Organizations and Religious Groups, Narodnyi 
Khural. Ulan-Ude, 10 June 2002.
B.P. Krianev, Head of the Political and Consultative Council of the President RB, 
Member of the Central Electoral Commission RB. Ulan-Ude, 14 June 2002.
V.G. Larionov, Chairman, Central Electoral Commission RB. Ulan-Ude, 11 June 
2002.
M.A. Kharitonov, Deputy Chairman, Committee for Nationalities Issues and
Religious Groups, Administration of the President of RB. Ulan-Ude, 5 June 
2002.
A,G. Krasnopeev, Deputy Chairman, Committee for Economic Policy, Use of
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection, Narodnyi Khural. Ulan-Ude, 
10 June 2002.
A.G. Lubsanov, Chairman, Committee for Economic Policy, Use of Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection, Narodnyi Khural. Ulan-Ude, 11 
June 2002.
M.I. Semenov, Speaker of the Narodnyi Khural. Ulan-Ude, 10 June 2002.
(b) Republic ofKareliia
D.V. Bazegskii, Head of Department, Ministry of Foreign Relations RK. 
Petrozavodsk, 6 December 2001.
D.S. Kislov, Lecturer, Department of International Relations, Petrozavodsk State 
University. Petrozavodsk, December 2001.
A.K. Kuleshov, Consultant, Ministry of Foreign Relations RK. Petrozavodsk, 6 
December 2001.
N.I. Levin, Speaker, Chamber of Representatives, Legislative Assembly RK. 
Petrozavodsk, 5 December 2001.
A.K. Morozov, Director, International Cooperation Center. Northwest Academy for 
Public Administration. Petrozavodsk.
O. Reut, Senior Lecturer, Department of Economics. Petrozavodsk State University. 
Petrozavodsk, December 2001.
A.I. Shishkin, Director, Institute of Economics, Kareliian Scientific Center RAS. 
Petrozavodsk, December 2001.
V.A. Shliamin, Minister, Ministry of Foreign Relations RK. Petrozavodsk, 14 
December 2001.
A.M. Spiridonov, Ministry of Foreign Affairs RF. Petrozavodsk, 10 December 2001.
V.N. Surzhikov, First Deputy Minister, Ministry of Economics RK. Petrozavodsk, 5 
December 2001.
G. Voevodin, Editor-in-Chief, Gorod. Petrozavodsk, December 2001.
(d) Moscow
I.M. Busygina, Department of Comparative Politics, Moscow State Institute of 
International Relations (MGIMO). Moscow, March 2002.
A. Chirikova, Institute of Sociology RAS. Moscow, September 2001.
T.Ia. Khabrieva, Deputy Minister, Ministry for Federal, National and Migration 
Policy RF. Moscow, April 2001.
A.V. Pavliushkin, Institute of Legislation and Comparative Law, Government of the 
Russian Federation. Moscow, April 2001.
O. Potemkina, Institute of Europe RAS. Moscow, March 2002. 
L.V. Smirniagin, Moscow Carnegie Center. Moscow, April 2001. 
V.V. Smirnov, Institute of State and Law. Moscow, April 2001.
(d) Perm krai (formerly Perm oblast' and Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug)
P.I. Blus', Head of Department for Social Development, Administration of Perm 
oblast'. Perm', 10 October 2001.
lu.N. Bogushevskii. Head of Department for Education and Science, Administration 
of Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug. Kudymkar, 1 November 2001.
O.A. Cherkesov, Advisor to the Governor of Perm oblast'. Perm', 16 October 2001.
I.V. Chetin, Speaker, Legislative Assembly of Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug. 
Kudymkar, 2 November 2001.
N.A. Deviation, Speaker, Legislative Assembly of Perm oblast'. Perm', 16 October 
2001.
N.I. Edel', Head of Department for Social Policy and Human Rights. Legislative 
Assembly of Perm oblast'. Perm', 15 October 2001.
S.L. Fedotova, Economic observer, Novyi Kompan'on. Perm'. 22 October 2001. 
N.A. lashin, Deputy Governor of Perm oblast'. Perm', 15 November 2001.
O.G. Kaniukova, Head of Department for Healthcare, Administration of Komi- 
Permiatskii autonomous okrug. Kudymkar, 1 November 2001.
I.K. Kirianov, Dean of Faculty of History and Politics, Perm State University. Perm', 
October 2001.
A.I. Klement'ev, Committee for Regional Policy, Legislative Assembly of Perm 
oblast'. Perm', 18 October 2001.
S.A. Klimov, Deputy, Legislative Assembly of Perm oblast'. Perm', 19 October 2001. 
A.A. Klimov ich. Mayor of Kudymkar. Kudymkar, 2 November 2001.
A.I. Koshcheev, Deputy Head of Department for International and Foreign Relations, 
Administration of Perm oblast'. Perm', 14 November 2001.
A.V. Kropachev, Head of Department for Social Relations, Administration of Perm 
oblast'. Perm', 11 October 2001.
I.V. Lobanov, Editor-in-Chief, Novyi Kompan'on. Perm', 22 October 2001.
N.A. Minullma, Head of Department of Culture, Administration of Komi-Permiatskii 
autonomous okrug. Kudymkar, 1 November 2001.
T.I. Margolina, Deputy Governor of Perm oblast'. Perm', 12 October 2001.
G.L. Pikhtovnikov, Head of Department for Cooperation with Local Self-
Government, Administration of Perm oblast'. Perm', 19 October 2001.
O. Podvintsev, Department of History and Politics, Perm State University. Perm', 
October 2001.
L.D. Rudaia. Head of State-Legal Department, Legislative Assembly of Perm oblast'. 
Perm', 14 November 2001.
V.V. Rychkov, Deputy Governor of Komi-Permiatskii autonomous okrug. 
Kudymkar, 2 November 2001.
V.S. Sazanov, Deputy, Legislative Assembly of Perm oblast'. Perm', 21 October 
2001.
S.V. Sergeeva, Consultant, Department of Social Relations, Administration of Perm 
oblast'. Perm', 11 October 2001.
D.S. Skrivanov, Deputy, Legislative Assembly of Perm oblast'. Perm', 18 October 
2001.
V.A. Sukhikh, Speaker, Perm' City Duma. Perm'. 16 October 2001. 13 November 
2001.
B.I. Svetlakov, Deputy, Legislative Assembly of Perm oblast'. Perm'. 21 October 
2001.
lu.P. Trutnev, Governor of Perm oblast'. Perm', 9 November 2001.
G.A. Volchek, Mass Media Manager, Lukoil-Perm. Perm', November 2001.
G.A. Zaitsev, former Presidential Representative. Perm', 5 November 2001.
S.B. Zubkov, Head of Department for Regional Policy, Legislative Assembly of 
Perm oblast'. Perm', 17 October 2001.
L.P. Zuev, Head of Department for Cooperation with Local Self-Government, 
Legislative Assembly of Perm oblast'. Perm', 12 October 2001.
(e) Tinmen oblast' 
N.P. Baryshnikov, Deputy Chairman, Tiumen oblast' Duma. Tiumen', 23 April 2002.
L.S. Berezin, Office of the Representative of lamal-Nenetskii autonomous okrug. 
Tiumen', 13 May 2002.
I.V. Bobrov, Department of Contemporary History and International Relations, 
Tiumen State University. Tiumen', 25 April 2002.
S.I. Chudnovskaia, Tiumen State University. Tiumen', April 2002.
A. Deev, Head, Tiumen Youth League. Tiumen', July 2003.
R.S. Gol'dberg, Editor-In-Chief, Tiumenskii Kur'er. Tiumen', May 2002.
L.I. Ivanova, Administration of Affairs, Council of Governors. Tiumen', 7 May 2002.
V.M. Kolunin, Director, Department of External Affairs and Trade, Tiumen Oblast 
Administration, 27 April 2002.
S.V. Kondrat'ev, Dean of Faculty of History and Political Science, Tiumen State 
University. Tiumen', April 2002, May 2004.
A.V. MaFchevskii, Chairman, Committee for Nationalities Affairs, Administration of 
Tiumen oblast'. Tiumen', 26 April 2002.
A.P. Novopashin, Head of Information Policy Department, Administration of 
Tiumen oblast'. Tiumen', 26 April 2002.
A.V. Romanov, Press Secretary for the Governor, Administration of Tiumen oblast'. 
Tiumen', May 2002.
V.V. Sadko, Deputy Director, Department for Information Policy, Administration of 
Tiumen oblast'. Tiumen', May 2002.
A.I. Sakhnov. Deputy Director, Department of External Ties and Trade, 
Administration of Tiumen oblast'. Tiumen', 6 May 2002.
G.A. Shcherbakov, former Presidential Representative to Tiumen Oblast, Tiumen', 
April 2002.
S.I. Smetaniuk, Main Federal Inspector. Tiumen', 16 May 2002.
S.L. Usol'tsev, Deputy Chairman, Permanent Committee on Budget, Tax and 
Finance, Tiumen oblast' Duma. Tiumen', 16 May 2002.
V.I. Ulianov, Head, Main Legal Department, Administration of Tiumen oblast'. 
Tiumen', April 2002.
O. Urlapov, Journalist. Tiumen', 14 April 2002.
(3) Russian Language Sources
Barzilov, Sergei, and Aleksei Chernyshov. "Manevry mestnoi elity: politika
informatsii i manipuliatsii v regionakh." Svobodnaia Mysl\ no. 3 (2001): 29- 
Bessarabov, V.G., V.P. Riabtsev, and V.A. Makarchenko. "Upravleniia general'noi 
prokuratury Rossiiskoi Federatsii v Federal'nykh Okrugakh i puti 
sovershenstvovaniia ikh deiatel'nosti." Pravo i politika, no. 11 (2001): 27-41.
Borisova, N.V. ""Permskii fenomen": Tendentsii transformatsii politicheskogo 
rezhima pod vozdeistviem elektoral'nykh praktik." Paper presented at the 
Moscow Carnegie Center Seminar: Gubernatorskie vybory i problemy 
stanovleniia grazhdanskogo obshchestva na granitse Evropy i Asii, Perm', 21- 
23 February 2001.
Dobrynin, N.M. "Rossiiskii federalizm: problemy i perspectivy." Gosudarstvo i 
Pravo, 30 November 2003, 85-9.
Duka, A.V., ed. Regional'nye elity severo-zapada Rossii: politicheskie i 
ekonomicheskie orientatsii. Sankt-Peterburg: Aleteiia, 2001.
Elaev, A.A. Buriatiia: put' k avtonomii i gosudarstvennosti. Moskva: Antal, 1994.
    . Buriatskii narod: stanovlenie, razvitie, samoopredelenie. Moskva, 2000.
Fateev, Andrei. "Sergei Sobianin: Razgovory o likvidatsii okrugov i popytkakh 
zakhvata vlasti v Tiumenskoi oblasti - prosto domysly." Direktor, March 
2002, 46-8.
    . "Tiumenskaia oblast1 : Slabost' Severa i sila luga." Direktor, February 2002, 
70-1.
Fedorov, A.F. Rossiiskii Federalizm: istoricheskii opyt i sovermennost'. Moskva: 
Nauchnaia Kniga, 2000.
Fedosov, P.A., S.D. Valentei, V.D. Solovei, and V.Ia. Liubovnyi. "Perspektivy 
rossiiskogo federalizma: federal'nye okruga, regional'nye politicheskie 
rezhimy, munitsipalitety." Polis, no. 4 (2002): 159-83.
Fedotova, Svetlana. Vol'nyi putevoditel' (zametki o Permskoi oblasti). Perm 1 : 
Izdatel'skii dom "Kompan'on", 2001.
Gel'man, V., S. Ryzhenkov, and M. Brie, eds. Rossiia regionov: Transformatsiia 
politicheskikh rezhimov. Moskva: Ves' Mir, 2000.
Gel'man, Vladimir, and Ted Hopf, eds. Tsentr i regional'nye identichnosti v Rossii.
Sankt-Peterburg: Izd-vo Evropeiskogo universiteta v Sankt-Peterburge; Letnii 
sad, 2003.
Gladkii, lu.N., and A.I. Chistobaev. Regionovedenie. Moskva: Gardariki, 2003.
Gligich-Zolotareva, Milena. "Ukrupnenie sub"ektov federatsii: pro et contra." 
Federalizm,no. 1 (2002): 93-108.
Goskomstat. Regiony Rossii: Statisticheskii Sbornik. Tom L Moskva: Goskomstat 
Rossii, 1999.
    . Regiony Rossii: Statisticheskiy Sbornik. Vol. 1. Moscow: Goskomstat Rossii, 
1999.
Guboglo, M.N., ed. Federalizm vlasti i vlast'federalizma. Moscow: IntelTekh, 1997.
Kaganskii, Vladimir. Kul'turnyi landshaft i sovetskoe obitaemoeprostranstvo. 
Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 2001.
Kaptsugovicha, I.S. Istoriia urala. Tom L Perm': Permskoe knizhnoe izdatel'stvo, 
1976.
    . Istoriia urala. Tom II. Perm': Pemskoe knizhnoe izdatel'stvo, 1977.
Karapetian, L.M. Federativnoe ustroistvo Rossiiskogo gosudarstva. Moskva: 
NORM A, 2001.
Khabrieva, T.Ia. "Granitsy sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii i ikh izmenenie." 
Gosudarstvo iPravo, 1 February 2002, 109-13.
Klimanov, Vladimir. "Regional'noe Sotrudnichestvo." In Regiony Rossii v 1999 g.: 
Ezhegodnoeprilozhenie k "Politicheskomu al'manakhu Rossii", edited by N. 
Petrov, 124-9. Moscow: Moskovskii Tsentr Karnegi, 2001.
Kondrat'ev, S.V. "Vybory gubernatora Tiumenskoi oblasti: pobeda severa nad 
mgom?" Paper presented at the Moscow Carnegie Center Seminar: 
Gubernatorskie vybory i problemy stanovleniia grazhdanskogo obshchestva na 
granitse Evropy i Asii, Perm', 21-23 February 2001.
Krasnov, Mikhaii Aleksandrovich. "O nekotorykh konstitutsionno-pravovykh
aspektakh sozdaniia instituta polnomochnykh predstavitelei prezidenta RF \ 
federal'nykh okrugakh." In Polpredy Prezidenta: problemy stanovleniia 
novogo instituta, 15-18. Moscow: Nauchno-issledovatel'skii institut 
sotsial'nykh sistem, 2001.
Kuz'min, A.C., N.Dzh. Melvin, and V.D. Nechaev. "Regional'nye politicheskie
rezhimy v postsovetskoi Rossii: Opyt tipologizatsii." Polis 12, no. 3 (2002): 
142-55.
Lapina, N., and A. Chirikova. Strategii regional'nykh elit: ekonomika, modeli vlasti, 
politicheskii vybor. Moskva: INION, 2000.
Mokhov, V.P. "Permskaia elita v period gubernatorskikh vyborov 2000 g." Paper
presented at the Moscow Carnegie Center Seminar: Gubernatorskie vybory i 
problemy stanovleniia grazhdanskogo obshchestva na granitse Evropy i Asii, 
Perm1 , 21-23 February 2001.
Nagornykh, Irina. "Karaiushchaia vertikal'-3." Kommersant Vlast', 30 June - 06 July 
2003, 22-4.
Oreshkin, D.B. "Geografiia elektoral'noi kul'tury i tsel'nost1 Rossii." Polis, no. 1 
(2001): 73-93.
Petrov, N., ed. Regiony Rossii v 1999 g.: Ezhegodnoeprilozhenie k "Politicheskomu 
al'manakhu Rossii". Moskva: Mosk. Tsentr Karnegi/Gendal'f, 2001.
    . Regiony Rossii v 1998 g.: Ezhegodnoe prilozhenie k "Politicheskomu 
al'manakhu Rossii". Moskva: Mosk. Tentr Karnegi/Gendal'f, 1999.
Popova, E.V. "Problemnye izmereniia elektoral'noi politiki v Rossii: gubernatorskie 
vybory v sravnitel'noi perspektive." Polis, no. 3 (2001): 47-62.
Shatilov, Aleksandr, and Vladimir Nechaev. "Regional'nye vybory: osobennosti
tekhnologii i kharakter predpochtenii." Svobodnaia My si', no. 6 (1997): 58-69.
Shul'gina, O.V. "Izmeneniia administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii: istoriko- 
geograficheskii analiz." Resursy regionov Rossii, no. 4 (2001): 14-19.
Tarkhov, Sergei. "Izmenenie administrativno-territoriarnogo deleniia Rossii v 18-20 
vekakh." Logos, no. 1 (2005).
Tarmakhanova, E.E., ed. Istoriia Buriatii, chast' II (1917-1998 gg.). Ulan-Ude: Belig, 
2000.
Tikhonov, D.A. "Problemy administrativno-territoriarnogo ustroistva sub"ektov 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii." Vestnik Moskovskogo Universiteta. Seriia 12: 
PolitichaskaiaNauka, no. 2 (2002): 15-27.
Tiukov, Nikita. "Geografiia rossiiskogo pravitel'stva: 1990-1999 gg." In Regiony 
Rossii v 1999 g.: Ezhegodnoe prilozhenie k "Politicheskomu al'manakhu 
Rossii", edited by N. Petrov, 266-71. Moscow: Moskovskii Tsentr Karnegi. 
2001.
Trifonov, A.G., and B.V. Mezhuev. "General-gubernatorstvo v Rossiiskoi sisteme 
territoriarnogo upravleniia." Polls 9, no. 5 (2000): 19-27.
Turovskii, Rostislav. "Federal'nye okruga: politiko-geograficheskii podkhod v teorii i 
na praktike." Federalizm, no. 1 (2003): 217-50.
Umnova, I.A. Konstitutsionnye osnovy sovremennogo Rossiiskogo federalizma. 
Moskva: Delo, 2000.
Ushakov, A. Kak upravlialsia permskii krai ran'she i kak upravliaetsia teper'. Perm1 : 
Permskoe knizhnoe isdatel'stvo, 1958.
Yalta, Khelena, ed. Chto takoe Kareliia. Helsinki: Soiuz Karelii, 1997.
Zamiatina, N.lu. "Modeli politicheskogo prostranstva." Polis 9, no. 4 (1999): 29-41.
    . "Sozdanie federal'nykh okrugov: proekt 1995 goda." Region: ekonomika i
sotsiologiia,no. 1 (2001): 76-83.
Zolotareva, M.V., and T.Ia. Khabrieva. "Pravovye osnovy izmeneniia sostava
sub"ektov Rossiiskoi Federatsii." Gosudarstvo i Pravo, 1 January 2001, 91-96.
Zubarevich, Natal'ia, Nikolai Petrov, and Aleksei Titkov. "Federal'nye okruga - 
2000." In Regiony Rossii v 1999 g.: Ezhegodnoe prilozhenie k 
"Politicheskomu al'manakhu Rossii", edited by N. Petrov, 173-96. Moscow: 
Moskovskii Tsentr Karnegi, 2001.
The following periodicals and newspapers were used throughout. Specific citation 
information is provided in the footnotes.
Moscow:
Ekspert
Federalizm
Gazeta
Gosudarstvo i Pravo
Itogi
Izvestiia
Kommersant-Daily
Kommersant- Vlast'
Moskovskii Komsomolets
Nezavisimaia Gazeta
Polis
Politcom.ru
Regnum.ru
Rossiiskaia Gazeta
Sotsis
Strana.ru
Svobodnaia My si'
Republic of Buriatiia: 
Buriatiia 
Inform-Polis 
News, bury alia, ru
Republic of Kareliia: 
Kareliia 
Severnyi Kur'er 
Gorod 
Guberniia
Perm krai (formerly Perm oblast'):
Mestnoe Vremia
Novosti.perm.ru
Novyi Kompan'on
Parma Novosti
Permskii Obozrevatel'
Zvezda
Tiumen oblast': 
Tiumenskie Izvestiia 
Tiumenskaia Liniia (www.t-l.ru) 
Tiumenskaia Pravda 
Tiumenskaia Pravda Segodnia 
Tiumenskii Kur'er 
Uralpolit.ru (Ekaterinburg)
(4) English Language Sources
Alexseev, Mikhail A., ed. Center-Periphery Conflict in Post-Soviet Russia: A 
Federation Imperiled. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1999.
Alexseev, Mikhail A., and Vladimir Vagin. "Fortress Russia or Gateway to Europe? 
The Pskov Connection." In Center-Periphery Conflict in Post-Soviet Russia: A 
Federation Imperiled, edited by Mikhail A. Alexseev, 167-204. New York: St. 
Martin's Press, 1999.
Alvarez, Robert R. Jr. "The Mexican-US Border: The Making of an Anthropology of 
Borderlands." Annual Review of Anthropology 24 (1995): 447-70.
Anderson, Malcolm. Frontiers: Territory and State Formation in the Modern World. 
Cambridge: Polity Press, 1996.
Andrews, Josephine, and Kathryn Stoner-Weiss. "Regionalism and Reform in 
Provincial Russia." Post-Soviet Affairs 11, no. 4 (1995): 384-406.
Balzer, Marjorie Mandelstam. "Dilemmas of Federalism in Siberia." In Center- 
Periphery Conflict in Post-Soviet Russia: A Federation Imperiled, edited by 
Mikhail A. Alexseev, 131-66. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1999.
-> -\ I
Barkin, J. Samuel, and Bruce Cronin. "The State and the Nation: Changing Norms 
and the Rules of Sovereignty in International Relations." International 
Organization 48. no. 1 (1994): 107-30.
Baron, Nick. "The Karelian ASSR." In Centre-Local Relations in the Stalinist State. 
1928-1941. edited by E. A. Rees. 116-48. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
2002.
Barrington, Lowell W. ""Nation" and "Nationalism": The Misuse of Key Concepts in 
Political Science." PS: Political Science & Politics 30. no. 4 (1997): 712-7.
Barth, Frederik, ed. Ethnic Groups and Boundaries. Boston: Little. Brown & Co.. 
1969.
Beissinger, Mark R. Nationalist Mobilization and the Collapse of the Soviet State. 
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2002.
    . "Demise of an Empire-State: Identity, Legitimacy, and the Deconstruction of 
Soviet Politics." In The Rising Tide of Cultural Pluralism: The Nation-State at 
Bay? edited by Crawford Young, 93-115. Madison: University of Wisconsin 
Press, 1993.
Beissinger, Mark R., and Crawford Young, eds. Beyond State Crisis? Postcolonial
Africa and Post-Soviet Eurasia in Comparative Perspective. Washington, DC: 
Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2002.
    . "Convergence to Crisis: Pre-Independence State Legacies and Post- 
Independence State Breakdown in African and Eurasia." In Beyond State 
Crisis? Postcolonial African and Post-Soviet Eurasia in Comparative 
Perspective, edited by Mark R. Beissinger and Crawford Young, 19-50. 
Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2002.
Berdahl, Daphne. Where the World Ended: Re-Unification and Identity in the German 
Borderland. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
Berezkin, Andrei V., Mikhail Myagkov, and Peter C. Ordeshook. "The Urban-Rural 
Divide in the Russian Electorate and the Effect of Distance from Urban 
Centers." Post-Soviet Geography and Economics 40, no. 6 (1999): 395-406.
Biddulph, Howard L. "Local Interest Articulation at CPSU Congresses." World 
Politics 36, no. 1 (1983): 28-52.
Billig, Michael. Banal Nationalism. London: Sage Publications, 1995.
Bremmer, lan. "Post-Soviet Nationalities Theory: Past, Present, and Future." In New 
States, New Politics: Building the Post-Soviet Nations, edited by lan Bremmer 
and Ray Taras, 3-28. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Bremmer, lan, and Ray Taras, eds. New States, New Nations: Building the Post-Soviet 
Nations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Breslauer, George W. "Provincial Party Leaders' Demand Articulation and the Nature 
of Center-Periphery Relations in the USSR." Slavic Review 45. no. 4 (1986): 
650-72.
Brown, Archie. The Gorbachev Factor. Oxford: Oxford U.P., 1996.
    . "Transformational Leaders Compared: Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris
Yeltsin." In Gorbachev, Yeltsin, & Putin: Political Leadership in Russia's 
Transition, edited by Archie Brown and Lilia Shevtsova, 11-43. Washington 
DC: Brookings Institution, 2001.
Brown, Archie, ed. Contemporary Russian Politics: A Reader. Oxford: Oxford UP, 
2001.
Brown, Archie, and Lilia Shevtsova, eds. Gorbachev, Yeltsin, & Putin: Political 
Leadership in Russia's Transition. Washington DC: Brookings Institution, 
2001.
Brubaker, Rogers. Nationalism Reframed: Nationhood and the National Question in 
the New Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Brudny, Yitzhak M. Reinventing Russia: Russian Nationalism and the Soviet State, 
1953-1991. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998.
Bunce, Valeric. "Paper Curtains and Paper Tigers." Slavic Review 54, no. 4 (1995): 
979-87.
    . "Should Transitologists Be Grounded?" Slavic Review 54, no. 1 (1995): 111-
    . "The Political Economy of the Brezhnev Era: The Rise and Fall of
Corporatism." British Journal of Political Science 13, no. 2 (1983): 129-58.
Campbell, David. "The Deterritorialization of Responsibility." In Moral Spaces:
Rethinking Ethics and World Politics, edited by David Campbell and Michael 
J. Shapiro, 29-56. Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press, 1999.
Campbell, David, and Michael J. Shapiro, eds. Moral Spaces: Rethinking Ethics and 
World Politics. Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press, 1999.
Chandler, Andrea. Institutions of Isolation: Border Controls in the Soviet Union and 
Its Successor States, 1917-1993. London: McGill-Queen's UP, 1998.
Chirikova, Alia, and Natalya Lapina. "Political Power and Political Stability in the 
Russian Regions." In Contemporary Russian Politics: A Reader, edited by 
Archie Brown, 384-97. Oxford: Oxford UP, 2001.
_____ "Regional Elite: A Quiet Revolution on a Russian Scale." Zurich: Center for 
Security Studies and Conflict Research, 2001.
Coleman, James S. Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP. 
1990.
Connolly, William E. The Terms of Political Discourse. 3rd ed. Oxford: Blackwell, 
1993.
Connor, Walker. The National Question in Marxist-Leninist Theory and Strategy. 
Princeton: Princeton UP, 1984.
Dahl, Robert A. Democracy and Its Critics. New Haven: Yale U.P., 1989. 
    . Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition. London: Yale UP, 1971.
Dawisha, Karen, and Bruce Parrott, eds. Democratic Changes and Authoritarian
Reactions in Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova. Cambridge: Cambridge 
UP, 1997.
Di Palma, Giuseppe. To Craft Democracies: An Essay on Democratic Traditions. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.
DiMaggio, Paul J., and Walter W. Powell. "The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional
Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields." American 
Sociological Review 48, no. 2 (1983): 147-60.
Donnan, Hastings, and Thomas M. Wilson. Borders: Frontiers of Identity, Nation and 
State. New York: Berg, 1999.
Duchacek, Ivo D. Comparative Federalism: The Territorial Dimension of Politics. 
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1970.
Duka, Alexander, and Peter Rutland. "North-West Federal Okrug." In The Dynamics 
of Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, edited by 
Robert Orttung and Peter Reddaway, 53-86. Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 
2003.
Duka, Alexander, and Peter Rutland. "North-West Federal Okrug." In The Dynamics 
of Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, edited by 
Robert Orttung and Peter Reddaway, 53-86. Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 
2003.
Easter, Gerald M. "Redefining Centre-Regional Relations in the Russian Federation: 
' Sverdlovsk OblastV Europe-Asia Studies 49, no. 4 (1997): 617-36.
Eckstein, Harry. "Case Study and Theory in Political Science." In Handbook of
Political Science: Strategies of Inquiry, edited by F.I. Greenstein and N.W. 
Polsby, 79-137. Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1975.
Elazar Daniel J. "International and Comparative Federalism." PS: Political Science & 
'Politics 26, no. 2 (1993): 190-5.
Evans Peter B., Dietrich Rueshemeyer, and Theda Skocpol. Bringing the State Back 
' In. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985.
Filippov, Mikhail, and Olga Shvetsova. "Asymmetric Bilateral Bargaining in the New 
Russian Federation: A Path-Dependence Explanation." Communist and Post- 
Communist Studies 32, no. 1 (1999): 61-76.
Forsyth, James. A History of the Peoples of Siberia: Russia's North Asian Colony 
1581-1990. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1992.
Geddes, Barbara. "What Do We Know About Democratization after Twenty Years?" 
Annual Review of Political Science 2 (1999): 115-44.
Gel'man, Vladimir. "Politics Beyond the Garden Ring: Rethinking the Post-Soviet
Experience." Paper presented at the Ten Years since the Soviet Union, School 
of Slavonic and East European Studies, University College, London, 9-10 
November 2001.
    . "Regime Transition, Uncertainty and Prospects for Democratisation: The 
Politics of Russia's Regions in a Comparative Perspective." Europe-Asia 
Studies 51, no. 6 (1999): 939-56.
Glatter, Pete. "Continuity and Change in the Tyumen' Regional Elite 1991-2001." 
Europe-Asia Studies 55, no. 3 (2003): 401-35.
Gleason, Gregory. Federalism and Nationalism: The Struggle for Republican Rights 
in the USSR. Boulder: Westview Press, 1990.
Gorenburg, Dmitry. "Identity Change in Bashkortostan: Tatars in Bashkirs and Back." 
Ethnic and Racial Studies 22, no. 3 (1999): 554-80.
Greenstein, F.L, and N.W. Polsby, eds. Handbook of Political Science: Strategies of 
Inquiry. Reading: Addison-Wesley, 1975.
Gupta, Akhil, and James Ferguson. "Beyond "Culture": Space, Identity, and the 
Politics of Difference." Cultural Anthropology 7, no. 1 (1992): 6-23.
Hahn, Jeffrey W. "Democratization and Political Participation in Russia's Regions." 
In Democratic Changes and Authoritarian Reactions in Russia, Ukraine, 
Belarus, and Moldova, edited by Karen Dawisha and Bruce Parrott, 130-74. 
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1997.
Hale, Henry E. "Explaining Machine Politics in Russia's Regions: Economy, 
Ethnicity, and Legacy." Post-Soviet Affairs 19, no. 3 (2003): 228-63.
Hall Peter. Governing the Economy: The Politics of State Intervention in Britain and 
France. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Hall Peter, and Rosemary C. R. Taylor. "Political Science and the Three New 
Institutionalisms." Political Studies 44 (1996): 936-57.
Hanson, Stephen E. "Ideology, Interests, and Identity: Comparing the Soviet and 
Russian Secession Crises." In Center-Periphery Conflict in Post-Soviet 
Russia: A Federation Imperiled, edited by Mikhail A. Alexseev, 15-46. New 
York: St. Martin's Press, 1999.
Hayward, Jack, Brian Barry, and Archie Brown, eds. The British Study of Politics in 
the Twentieth Century. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1999.
Hellman, Joel S. "Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform in Postcommunist 
Transitions." World Politics 50, no. 2 (1998): 203-34.
Herrera, Yoshiko. "The Economic and Political Bases of Separatism: Imagined 
Economies and Regionalism in Russia." 2001.
Hodnett, Grey. "The Debate over Soviet Federalism." Soviet Studies 18, no. 4 (1967): 
458-81.
Holstein, James A., and Jaber F. Gubrium. "Active Interviewing." In Qualitative
Research: Theory, Method and Practice, edited by David Silverman, 113-29. 
London: Sage, 1998.
Hough, Jerry F. How the Soviet Union is Governed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. 
Press, 1979.
    . The Soviet Prefects: The Local Party Organs in Industrial Decision-making. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1969.
Hughes, James. "Managing Secession Potential in the Russian Federation." In
Ethnicity and Territory in the Former Soviet Union, edited by James Hughes 
and Gwendolyn Sasse, 36-68. London: Cass, 2002.
    . "Regionalism in Russia: The Rise and Fall of Siberian Agreement." Europe-
Asia Studies 46, no. 7 (1994): 1133-61.
Hughes, James, and Gwendolyn Sasse, eds. Ethnicity and Territory in the Former 
Soviet Union: Regions in Conflict. London: Cass, 2002.
Huskey, Eugene. "Political Leadership and the Center-Periphery Struggle: Putin's 
Administrative Reforms." In Gorbachev, Yeltsin, and Putin: Political 
Leadership in Russia's Transition, edited by Archie Brown and Lilia 
Shevtsova, 113-41. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace, 2001.
Presidential Power in Russia. Armonk, NY: ME Sharpe, 1999.
Huntington, Samuel P. The Third Wave: Demoralization in the Late Twentieth 
Century. London: University of Oklahoma Press, 1991.
Hyde, Matthew. "Putin's Federal Reforms and their Implications for Presidential 
Power in Russia." Europe-Asia Studies 53, no. 5 (2001): 719-43.
Kahn, Jeff. "The Parade of Sovereignties: Establishing the Vocabulary of the New 
Russian Federalism." Post-Soviet Affairs 16. no. 1 (2000): 58-89.
Kahn, Jeffrey. Federalism, Democratization, and the Rule of Law in Russia. Oxford: 
Oxford UP, 2002.
Katznelson, Ira. "Structure and Configuration in Comparative Politics." In
Comparative Politics: Rationality, Culture, and Structure, edited by Mark 
Irving Lichbach and Alan S. Zuckerman, 81-112. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 
1997.
Keating, Michael. State and Regional Nationalism: Territorial Politics and the 
European State. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1988.
King, Charles. "Nations and Nationalism in British Political Studies." In The British 
Study of Politics in the Twentieth Century, edited by Jack Hayward, Brian 
Barry and Archie Brown, 313-44. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1999.
King, Gary, Robert O. Keohane, and Sidney Verba. Designing Social Inquiry:
Scientific Inference in Qualitative Research. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1994.
Kirkow, Peter. Russia's Provinces: Authoritarian Transformation versus Local 
Autonomy? London: Macmillan, 1998.
Koelble, Thomas A. "The New Institutionalism in Political Science and Sociology." 
Comparative Politics 27, no. 2 (1995): 231-43.
Kondrat'ev, Sergei. "Urals Federal Okrug." In The Dynamics of Russian Politics:
Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, edited by Peter Reddaway and 
Robert W. Orttung, 187-210. Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003.
Kurs, Ott, and Rein Taagepera. "Karelia: Orthodox Finland." In The Finno-Ugric 
Republics and the Russian State, edited by Rein Taagepera, 100-46. New 
York: Routledge, 1999.
Laitin, David. "Transitions to Democracy and Territorial Integrity." In Sustainable 
Democracy, edited by Adam Przeworski, 19-33. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 
1995.
Lallemand, Jean-Charles. "Politics for the Few: Elites in Bryansk and Smolensk." 
Post-Soviet Affairs 15, no. 4 (1999): 312-35.
Lapidus, Gail W. "Asymmetrical Federalism and State Breakdown in Russia." Post- 
Soviet Affairs 15, no. 1 (1999): 74-82.
Lapidus, Gail W., ed. The New Russia: Troubled Transformation. Boulder: Westview 
Press, 1995.
Lapidus, Gail W., and Edward W. Walker. "Nationalism, Regionalism, and
Federalism: Center-Periphery Relations in Post-Communist Russia." In The 
New Russia: Troubled Transformation, edited by Gail W. Lapidus, 79-113. 
Boulder: Westview Press, 1995.
Leff, Carol Skalnik. "Democratization and Disintegration in Multinational States: The 
Breakup of the Communist Federations." World Politics 51, no. 2 (1999): 205-
Lichbach, Mark Irving, and Alan S. Zuckerman. Comparative Politics: Rationality, 
Culture, and Structure. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1997.
Lijphart, Arend. "Comparative Politics and the Comparative Method." American 
Political Science Review 65, no. 3 (1971): 682-93.
Linz, Juan J., and Alfred Stepan. Problems of Democratic Transition and
Consolidation: Southern Europe, South America, and Post-Communist 
Europe. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996.
    , eds. The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1978.
Lipset, Seymour Martin. Political Man: The Social Bases of Politics. 2nd ed. London: 
Heinemann, 1983.
Lomasky, Loren. "Toward a Liberal Theory of National Boundaries." In Boundaries 
and Justice: Diverse Ethical Perspectives, edited by David Miller and Sohail 
H. Hashmi, 55-88. Princeton: Princeton UP, 2001.
Lustick, lan S. "Thresholds of Opportunity and Barriers to Change in the Right-Sizing 
of States." In Right-Sizing the State: The Politics of Moving Borders, edited by 
Brendan O'Leary, lan S. Lustick and Thomas Callaghy, 74-102. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2001.
    . Unsettled States, Disputed Lands: Britain and Ireland, France and Algeria,
Israel and the West Bank-Gaza. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1993.
Lynn, Nicholas J., and Alexei V. Novikov. "Refederalizing Russia: Debates on the 
Idea of Federalism in Russia." Publius 27, no. 2 (1997): 187-204.
Malkki, Liisa. "National Geographic: The Rooting of Peoples and the
Territorialization of National Identity among Scholars and Refugees." Cultural 
Anthropology 7, no. 1 (1992): 24-44.
Mann, Michael. The Sources of Social Power: The Rise of Classes and Nation-States, 
1760-1914. Vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1993.
   . States, War and Capitalism: Studies in Political Sociology. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell, 1988.
March, James G., and Johan P. Olsen. Rediscovering Institutions: The Organizational 
Basis of Politics. New York: The Free Press, 1989.
Marsh, Christopher. "Measuring and Explaining Variations in Russian Regional
Democratisation." In Russian Politics Under Putin, edited by Cameron Ross, 
176-97. Manchester: Manchester UP, 2004.
. "Social Capital and Democracy in Russia." Communist and Post-Communist 
Studies 33, no. 2 (2000): 183-95.
Matsuzato, Kimitaka. "From Communist Boss Politics to Post-Communist
Caciquismo - the Meso-Elite and Meso-Governments in Post-Communist 
Countries." Communist and Post-Communist Studies 34, no. 2 (2001): ITS- 
McAuley, Alastair. "The Determinants of Russian Federal-Regional Relatio
ns: Equity 
or Political Influence?" Europe-Asia Studies 49, no. 3 (1997): 431-44.
McAuley, Mary. Russia's Politics of Uncertainty. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1997.
McFaul, Michael, Nikolai Petrov, and Andrei Ryabov, eds. Between Dictatorship and 
Democracy: Russian Post-Communist Political Reform. Washington, DC: 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2004.
McMann, Kelly M., and Nikolai V. Petrov. "A Survey of Democracy in Ru
ssia's 
Regions." Post-Soviet Geography and Economics 41, no. 3 (2000): 155-82.
Mendras, Marie. "How Regional Elites Preserve Their Power." Post-Soviet Affairs 15, 
no. 4 (1999): 295-311.
Meyer, John W., and Brian Rowan. "Institutionalized Organizations: Form
al Structure 
as Myth and Ceremony." American Journal of Sociology 83, no. 2 (1977): 
340-63.
Migdal, Joel S. State in Society: Studying How States and Societies Transform and 
Constitute One Another. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2001.
    . "Studying the State." In Comparative Politics: Rationality, Culture, and
Structure, edited by Mark Irving Lichbach and Alan S. Zuckerman, 208-35. 
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1997.
Mikhailov, Valentin. "Regional Elections and Democratisation in Russia." 
In Russian 
Politics Under Putin, edited by Cameron Ross, 198-220. Manchester: 
Manchester UP, 2004.
Miller, David, and Sohail H. Hashmi, eds. Boundaries and Justice: Diverse Ethical 
Perspectives. Princeton: PrincetonUP, 2001.
Moore, Margaret. "The Territorial Dimension of Self-Determination." In National 
Self-Determination and Secession, edited by Margaret Moore, 134-57. New 
York: Oxford UP, 1998.
Moore, Margaret, ed. National Self-Determination and Secession. New York: Oxford 
'UP, 1998.
Moses Joel C. "Political-Economic Elites and Russian Regional Elections 
1999-2000: 
Democratic Tendencies in Kaliningrad. Perm and Volgograd." Europe-Asia 
Studies 54, no. 6 (2002): 905-31.
Regional Party Leadership and Policy-Making in the USSR. New York: 
Praeger, 1974.
Nelson, Daniel N. "Dilemmas of Local Politics in Communist States." Journal of 
Politics 41, no. 1 (1979): 23-54.
Nettl, J.P. "The State as a Conceptual Variable." World Politics 20, no. 4 (1968): 559- 
O'Donnell, Guillermo. "Delegative Democracy." Journal of Democracy 5, no. 1 
(1994): 55-69.
O'Donnell, Guillermo, and Philippe C. Schmitter. Transitions from Authoritarian
Rule: Tentative Conclusions About Uncertain Democracies. Baltimore: Johns 
HopkinsUP, 1986.
O'Leary, Brendan. "Introduction." In Right-Sizing the State: The Politics of Moving 
Borders, edited by Brendan O'Leary, lan S. Lustick and Thomas Callaghy. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
O'Leary, Brendan, lan S. Lustick, and Thomas Callaghy, eds. Right-Sizing the State: 
The Politics of Moving Borders. New York: Oxford UP, 2001.
Offe, Claus. "Capitalism by Democratic Design? Democratic Theory Facing the
Triple Transitions in East Central Europe." In Varieties of Transition, edited 
by Claus Offe, 29-49. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
Offe, Claus, ed. Varieties of Democratic Transition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1997.
Ordeshook, Peter C. "Russia's Party System: Is Russian Federalism Viable?" Post- 
Soviet Affairs 12, no. 3 (1996): 195-217.
Orttung, Robert W., ed. The Republics and Regions of the Russian Federation: A 
Guide to Politics, Policies, and Leaders. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2000.
Orttung, Robert, and Peter Reddaway. "What Do the Okrug Reforms Add Up To? 
Some Conclusions." In The Dynamics of Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of 
Federal-Regional Relations, edited by Robert Orttung and Peter Reddaway, 
277-301. Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2004.
Paasi, Anssi. Territories, Boundaries and Consciousness: The Changing Geographies 
of the Finnish-Russian Border. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
Peters, B. Guy. Institutional Theory in Political Science: The 'New Institutionalism'. 
' New York: Pinter, 1999.
Petro Nicolai. "The Novgorod Region: A Russian Success Story." Post-Soviet Affairs 
15, no.'3 (1999): 235-61.
Petro Nicolai N. Grafting Democracy: How Novgorod has Coped with Rapid Social 
Change. Ithaca: Cornell U.P., 2004.
Petrov, Nikolai. "Federalism." In Between Dictatorship and Democracy: Russian
Post-Communist Political Reform, edited by Michael McFaul. Nikolai Petrov 
and Andrei Ryabov, 213-38. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, 2004.
-. "Regional Models of Democratic Development." In Between Dictatorship 
and Democracy: Russian Post-Communist Political Reform, edited by 
Michael McFaul, Nikolai Petrov and Andrei Ryabov, 239-67. Washington, 
DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2004.
    . "Federal reform, two and a half years on." Jamestown Foundation Russia & 
Eurasia Review 2, no. 1 (2003).
Popov, Vladimir. "Fiscal Federalism in Russia: Rules Versus Electoral Politics." 
2002.
Powell, Walter W. "Expanding the Scope of Institutional Analysis." In The New
Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, edited by Walter W. Powell and 
Paul J. DiMaggio, 183-203. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Powell, Walter W., and Paul J. DiMaggio, eds. The New Institutionalism in
Organizational Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Przeworski, Adam. Democracy and the Market: Political and Economic Reforms in 
Eastern Europe and Latin America, Studies in Rationality and Social Change. 
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1991.
Przeworski, Adam, ed. Sustainable Democracy. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1995.
Putnam, Robert D. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. 
Princeton: Princeton U.P., 1993.
Ratner, Steven R. "Drawing a Better Line: Uti Possidetis and the Borders of New 
States." American Journal of International Law 90, no. 4 (1996): 590-624.
Reddaway, Peter, and Robert Orttung, eds. Dynamics of Russian Politics: Putin's
Reform of Federal-Regional Relations. Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003.
Rees, E. A., ed. Centre-Local Relations in the Stalinist State, 1928-1941. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.
Remington, Thomas F. "Majorities without Mandates: The Russian Federation 
Council since 2000." Europe-Asia Studies 55, no. 5 (2003): 667-91.
Riasanovsky, Nicholas Valentine. A History of Russia. 6th ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2000.
Rigby, T. H. "A Conceptual Approach to Authority, Power and Policy in the Soviet 
Union." In Authority, Power and Policy in the USSR: Essays dedicated to 
Leonard Schapiro, edited by T. H. Rigby, Archie Brown and Peter Reddaway, 
9-31. London: Macmillan Press Ltd, 1980.
. "Introduction: Political Legitimacy, Weber and Communist Mono- 
organisational Systems." In Political Legitimation in Communist States, edited 
by T. H. Rigby and Ferenc Feher, 1-26. London: Macmillan, 1982.
T. H., Archie Brown, and Peter Reddaway, eds. Authority, Power and Policy 
in the USSR: Essays dedicated to Leonard Schapiro. London: Macmillan 
Press Ltd, 1980.
Kigby, T. H., and Ferenc Feher, eds. Political Legitimation in Communist States. 
London: Macmillan, 1982.
Riker, William. Federalism: Origins, Operation, Significance. Boston: Little, Brown 
and Co., 1964.
Robbins, Richard G. The Tsar's Viceroys: Russian Provincial Governors in the Last 
Years of the Empire. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1987.
Roberts, Cynthia, and Thomas Sherlock. "Bringing the Russian State Back In:
Explanations of the Derailed Transition to Market Democracy." Comparative 
Politics 31, no. 4 (1999): 477-98.
Roeder, Philip G. Red Sunset: The Failure of Soviet Politics. Princeton: Princeton UP, 
1993.
    . "Soviet Federalism and Ethnic Mobilization." World Politics 43, no. 2 
(1991): 196-232.
Rokkan, Stein, and Derek W. Urwin. Economy, Territory, Identity: Politics of West 
European Peripheries. London: Sage Publications, 1983.
Ross, Cameron. Federalism and Democratisation in Russia. Manchester: Manchester 
UP, 2002.
-. "Federalism and Democratization in Russia." Communist and Post-
Communist Studies 33, no. 4 (2000): 403-20. 
Ross, Cameron, ed. Russian Politics Under Putin. Manchester: Manchester UP, 2004.
. Regional Politics in Russia. Manchester: Manchester UP, 2002.
Ruble, Blair A. Money Sings: The Changing Politics of Urban Space in Post-Soviet 
Yaroslavl. Washington DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press; Cambridge UP, 
1995.
Ruble, Blair A., Jodi Koehn, and Nancy E. Popson, eds. Fragmented Space in the
Russian Federation. Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2001.
Rustow, Dankwart. "Transitions to Democracy: Toward a Dynamic Model." 
Comparative Politics 2/3 (1970): 337-63.
Sahlins, Peter. Boundaries: The Making of France and Spain in the Pyrenees. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989.
~ - 'State Formation and National Identity in the Catalan Borderlands During the 
Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries." In Border Identities: Nation and State 
at International Frontiers, edited by Thomas M. Wilson and Hastings 
Donnan, 31-61. Cambidge: Cambridge UP, 1998.
Sakwa, Richard. Russian Politics and Society. 3rd ed. London: Routledge, 2002.
Schmitter, Philippe C., and Terry Lynn Karl. "The Conceptual Travels of
Transitologists and Condolidologists: How Far to the East Should They 
Attempt to Go?" Slavic Review 54, no. 1 (1994): 173-85.
    . "From an Iron Curtain to a Paper Curtain: Grounding Transitologists or 
Students of Postcommunism?" Slavic Review 54, no. 4 (1995): 965-78.
Shandarov, Maksim. "Siberian Federal Okrug." In The Dynamics of Russian Politics: 
Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, edited by Peter Reddaway and 
Robert W. Orttung, 211-42. Boulder: Rowman & Littlefield, 2003.
Sharafutdinova, Gul'naz, and Arbakhan Magomedov. "Volga Federal Okrug." In The 
Dynamics of Russian Politics: Putin's Reform of Federal-Regional Relations, 
edited by Peter Reddaway and Robert Orttung, 153-86. Boulder: Rowman & 
Littlefield, 2003.
Shlapentokh, Vladimir, Roman Levita, and Mikhail Loiberg. From Submission to 
Rebellion: The Provinces versus the Center in Russia. Boulder: Westview 
Press, 1997.
Shugart, Matthew Soberg, and John M. Carey. Presidents and Assemblies:
Constitutional Design and Electoral Dynamics. New York: Cambridge UP, 
1992.
Silverman, David. Qualitative Research: Theory, Method and Practice. London: 
Sage, 1998.
Skocpol, Theda. "Bringing the State Back In." In Bringing the State Back In, edited 
by Peter B. Evans, Dietrich Rueshemeyer and Theda Skocpol, 3-47. 
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1985.
Slezkine, Yuri. "The USSR as a Communal Apartment, or How a Socialist State 
Promoted Ethnic Particularism." Slavic Review 53, no. 2 (1994): 414-52.
Slider, Darrell. "Pskov Under the LDPR: Elections and Dysfunctional Federalism in 
One Region." Europe-Asia Studies 51, no. 5 (1999): 755-67.
   -. "Elections to Russia's Regional Assemblies." Post-Soviet Affairs 12, no. 3 
(1996): 243-64.
Smith, Graham. "Federation, Defederation and Refederation: From the Soviet Union 
to Russian Statehood." In Federalism: The Multiethnic Challenge, edited by 
Graham Smith, 157-79. New York: Longman, 1995.
Smith, Graham, ed. Federalism: The Multiethnic Challenge. New York: Longman, 
' 1995.
Solnick Steven L. "Federal Bargaining in Russia." East European Constitutional 
Review 4, no. 4 (1995): 52-8.
-. "Gubernatorial Elections in Russia, 1996-1997." Post-Soviet Affairs 14. no. 1 
(1998): 48-80.
 . "Is the Center Too Weak or Too Strong in the Russian Federation?" In 
Building the Russian State: Institutional Crisis and the Quest for Democratic 
Governance, edited by Valeric Sperling, 137-56. Boulder: Westview Press, 
2000.
Sperling, Valeric, ed. Building the Russian State: Institutional Crisis and the Quest 
for Democratic Governance. Boulder: Westview Press, 2000.
Stavrakis, Peter J., Joan Debardeleben, and Larry Black. Beyond the Monolith: The 
Emergence of Regionalism in Post-Soviet Russia. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
UP, 1997.
Steinmo, Sven, Kathleen Thelen, and Frank Longsreth. Structuring Politics:
Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1992.
Stepan, Alfred. "Russian Federalism in Comparative Perspective." Post-Soviet Affairs 
16, no. 2 (2000): 133-76.
Stoner-Weiss, Kathryn. "Central Weakness and Provincial Autonomy: Observations 
on the Devolution Process in Russia." Post-Soviet Affairs 15, no. 1 (1999): 87- 
    . Local Heroes: The Political Economy of Russian Regional Governance. 
Princeton: PrincetonUP, 1997.
Taagepera, Rein, ed. The Finno-Ugric Republics and the Russian State. New York: 
Routledge, 1999.
Tarlton, Charles D. "Symmetry and Asymmetry as Elements of Federalism: A 
Theoretical Speculation." Journal of Politics 27, no. 4 (1965): 861-74.
Taubman, William. Khrushchev: the Man and his Era. New York: Norton, 2003.
Taubman, William, Sergei Khrushchev, and Abbott Gleason, eds. Nikita Khrushchev. 
New Haven: Yale UP, 2000.
Thelen, Kathleen, and Sven Steinmo. "Historical Institutionalism in Comparative
Politics." In Structuring Politics: Historical Institutionalism in Comparative 
Analysis, edited by Sven Steinmo, Kathleen Thelen and Frank Longsreth, 1- 
32. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
Tolz, Vera. Russia (in series, Inventing the Nation, edited by Keith Robbins). New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Tolz, Vera, and Irina Busygina. "Regional Governors and the Kremlin: The Ongoing 
Battle for Power." Communist and Post-Communist Studies 30, no. 4 (1998): 
401-26.
Tompson, William J. "Industrial Management and Economic Reform under
Khrushchev." In Nikita Khrushchev, edited by William Taubman, Sergei 
Khrushchev and Abbott Gleason, 138-59. New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2000.
Ireisman, Daniel. "Deciphering Russia's Federal Finance: Fiscal Appeasement in 
1995 and 1996." Europe-Asia Studies 50, no. 5 (1998): 893-906.
Treisman, Daniel S. After the Deluge: Regional Crises and Political Consolidation in 
Russia. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1999.
- . "Russia's "Ethnic Revival": The Separatist Activism of Regional Leaders in a 
Postcommunist Order." World Politics 49, no. 1 (1997): 212-49.
Tsygankov, Andrei. "Manifestations of Delegative Democracy in Russian Local
Politics: What Does It Mean for the Future of Russia?" Communist and Post- 
Communist Studies 31, no. 4 (1998): 329-44.
Watts, Ronald L. "Federalism, Federal Political Systems, and Federations." Annual 
Review of Political Science 1 (1998): 117-37.
Weber, Max. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. Vol. 1. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978.
    . Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. Vol. 2. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978.
Wilson, Gary N. ""Matryoshka Federalism" and the Case of the Khanty Mansiysk 
Autonomous Okrug." Post-Soviet Affairs 17, no. 2 (2001): 167-94.
Wilson, Thomas M., and Hastings Donnan. "Nation, State and Identity at
International Borders." In Border Identities: Nation and State at International 
Frontiers, edited by Thomas M. Wilson and Hastings Donnan, 1-30. 
Cambidge: Cambridge UP, 1998.
Wilson, Thomas M., and Hastings Donnan. Border Identities: Nation and State at 
International Frontiers. Cambidge: Cambridge UP, 1998.
Wyman, Matthew, Stephen White, lan McAllister, and Sarah Oates. "Regional Voting 
Patterns in Post-Communist Russia." In Regional Politics in Russia, edited by 
Cameron Ross, 23-36. Manchester: Manchester UP, 2002.
Yanow, Dvora. Conducting Interpretive Policy Analysis, Qualitative Research 
Methods. London: Sage, 2000.
Young, Crawford, ed. The Rising Tide of Cultural Pluralism: The Nation-State at 
Bay? Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1993.
Zucker, Lynne G. "The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Persistence." In The 
New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis, edited by Walter W. Powell 
and Paul J. DiMaggio, 83-107. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
In addition, extensive use was made of the following internet sources:
Russian Regional Report (formerly EWI Russian Regional Report} 
RFE/RL Russian Federation Report 
RFE/RL Russian Political Weekly
