Between the Diaspora and the Nation-State:
Transnational Continuity and Fragmentation 
among Hmong in Laos and the United States
Sangmi Lee
D.Phil. Thesis
Institute of Social and Cultural Anthropology
Wolfson College
University of Oxford
Hilary Term 2015
ABSTRACT 
Based on fourteen-months of multi-sited, ethnographic fieldwork that compares two Hmong 
communities in Vang Vieng, Laos, and Sacramento, California in the United States, my doctoral 
thesis examines how the Hmong diaspora is constituted in the absence of a territorial ethnic 
homeland. Although scholars claim that the Hmong originated in the southwestern part of China, 
many Hmong are uncertain about their origins and have lost their connections to the ancestral 
homeland. This thesis suggests we examine diasporas as a dialectical process involving both 
transnational continuity and national differentiation. Despite their further migratory dispersal 
after the Vietnam War, Hmong in Laos and the United States have actively created a 
transnational diasporic community by maintaining their cultural practices across national 
borders, particularly in the domains of kinship practices and spiritual rituals.  
At the same time, diasporic Hmong have also created partial homes in the nation-states 
where they reside. Therefore, their ethnic traditions and perceptions are transformed according 
to different national contexts, such as local socioeconomic conditions, state policies, and access 
to economic capital. This results in cultural differences within the diaspora. In addition, Hmong 
in different countries disagree about their relative position in the diaspora in relation to each 
other, leading to discursive fragmentation. As a result, diasporas are refracted through different 
national affiliations. 
 Nonetheless, the sense of national belonging among diasporic Hmong remains partial 
because they continue to experience social, economic, and ethnic marginalization as an ethnic 
minority group in both Laos and the United States, which causes them to maintain a diasporic 
affiliation to Hmong scattered in other countries as an alternative source of ethnic belonging. In 
this sense, the Hmong are constantly positioned in-between the diaspora and the nation-state.  
Table of Contents 
Introduction  
The Diasporic Condition: Belonging Beyond and Within Nation-States . 3 
The Distinctiveness of the Hmong Diaspora ... 8 
Overview of Thesis  11 
A Globalized Ethnic Village: Dao Tha in Vang Vieng, Laos 16 
Urban Hmong Villages: Sacramento, California, United States 19 
Fieldwork and Methodology ...22 
Part I. The Making of the Hmong Diaspora: History, Multiple Homelands, and 
Ambivalent Belonging  
Chapter 1. History and the Making of the Hmong Diaspora 28 
The Formation of the Hmong Diaspora .29 
Miao in China and Hmong Abroad: Rethinking the Connections to China ..33 
From China to Laos ...38 
The Vietnam War and Predicament of Homeland .39 
Forced Displacement and Life in Refugee Camps in Thailand .42 
The End of Camp Life: Resettlement Abroad or Return to Laos? 49 
Return to Laos 51 
Hmong Refugees as Immigrant Latecomers to the United States .53 
Life Goes On ..56 
Chapter 2. In Search of Homelands and Belonging58 
Multiple Homelands and Diaspora 59 
The Uncertainty of China as the Ethnic Homeland ...64 
Paj tawj lag (the Land of Flowers) and the Imagined Homeland ..67 
Searching for Ethnic Homelands: Beyond China ..71 
Connecting to Co-Ethnics but Disconnecting from the Chinese Nation-State ..75 
Perceptions of Hmong in Laos toward Miao-Hmong in China .75 
Perceptions of Hmong in the United States toward Miao-Hmong in China .80 
Perceptions of Laos among Hmong in Laos ..83 
Perceptions of Laos among Hmong in the United States ..87 
Being Hmong and a Wandering People ..91 
Chapter 3. Local Contexts of the Hmong Diaspora: Being Ethnic Minorities in Partial 
Homes ..93 
Estranged Lives in the Natal Homeland of Laos....95 
Being Ethnic and Minority .95 
At the Margins of the National Economy ..99 
Living on American Dollars: Surviving through the Fragile Transnational Money  
Chain ..102 
In Foreign Hands: The Economic Participation of the Younger Hmong Generation  
and New Social and Ethnic Marginalization .104 
Partial Belonging among Hmong in the United States 109 
Structural Economic Marginalization among Elderly Generation Hmong 109 
Hmong-ness Endangered: Trauma, Loss, and Persistent Social Problems ..112 
The Hmong World Disrupted: Perceptions of Ethnic and Social Marginalization  
among the Young Hmong Generation ...118 
Beyond Partial Homes: Diasporic Ethnic Minorities and Generations ...123 
Part II. Transnational Ethnic and Cultural Continuity in the Hmong Diaspora   
Chapter 4. Kinship Hegemonies and Continuity in the Hmong Diaspora .125 
Kinship Hegemony as a Process ..128 
Defining Hmong Kinship: Clans, Surnames, and Biologized Discourses ...130 
Diasporas Hegemonies ...133 
Discourses about Ethnic Homeland and Diasporic Kinship Hegemony .135 
Clan Hospitality toward Strangers 136 
Clan Exogamy .141 
Lao Hmong and Attitudes toward Clan Exogamy ...142 
U.S. Hmong and Attitudes toward Clan Exogamy ..144 
Ethnic Endogamy 148 
Hmong in Laos and Ethnic Endogamy 148 
Hmong in the United States and Ethnic Endogamy 150 
Challenges to Kinship Hegemonies? ...152 
Clan Hospitality and Ethnic Endogamy ..153 
Clan Exogamy in Question in the United States...156 
From Hegemony to Ideology ...158 
Chapter 5: Transnationalism in the Diaspora: Commodification of Social Relationships in 
the Familial Economy ..161 
Extended Familial Social Networks and the Transnational Economy 161 
Transnational Familial Love Expressed through Money 164 
Money, the Expression of Familial Love: Hmong in Laos ..167 
Money, the Icons of the Heart?: Hmong in the U.S. 168 
Chapter 6. Transnationally Traditional: Hmong Shamanism and the Cultural Continuity 
of Spirit Calling .174 
Situating Localized Traditions across National Borders ...175 
Traditionally Transnational: The Birth of the Shaman and the Elements of Ua Neeb .177 
Who Becomes the Shaman? The Birth of the Shaman .179 
The Elements of Shamans Spiritual Rituals ...181 
Mobile Souls in Borderless Worlds .183 
Tradition in Transnational Contexts: Individualization and Commodification ...185 
Individualization ..188 
Benefits of Transnationalized Practices ..190 
Re-Localization of Transnational Tradition .192 
Commodification ..194 
Mutual Co-Existence: Shamanism and Biomedical Power in the Hmong Diaspora ...196 
The Inclusive Nature of Tradition: Embracing the Racial and Cultural Other ..200 
Continuity of Tradition in Transnational Context 202 
Part III. Cultural Difference and Discursive Fragmentation in the Hmong Diaspora  
Chapter 7. Cultural Differentiation in the Diaspora: National Differences in the Hmong 
New Year ...205 
The Two New Year Scenes 205 
New Years Day in Dao Tha, Vang Vieng, Laos .205 
New Years Day in Sacramento, California, United States .206 
Cultural Differences among Diasporic Communities in Transnational Context .207 
The Components of the Hmong New Year .208 
National Economic Differences in Diasporic Ethnic Traditions .211 
The Absence of Commodification in the Hmong New Year in Laos 211 
The Commercialization of the Hmong New Year in the United States 213 
Multiculturalism and State Discourses of Economic and Cultural Equality ...216 
State Cultural Control and Economic Equality in Laos ..217 
Multicultural Ideologies and Cultural Equality in the United States ..220  
Authenticity is Elsewhere: Discourses of Ethnic Tradition ..224 
Imagined Authenticity among Hmong in Laos 227 
The Natal Homeland and Authentic Tradition among Hmong  
in the United States ..229 
Authenticity Still Matters .233 
Diasporic Cultural Differences in Trans/National Contexts 234 
Chapter 8. Discursive Fragmentation and Hierarchical Positioning of Diasporas ...236 
National Differences and Hierarchical Ordering of Diasporas ...236 
Perceptions of National Economic Differences ...238 
A De Facto Difference: Wealthy America Versus Poor Laos .239 
Rich Body, Poor Heart: The Other Side of National Economic Hierarchies ...241 
Problems of American Wealth: Discourses of Immorality among Hmong in Laos .243 
The Power of Wealth: Discourses of Morality among Hmong in the United States 246 
Contested Economic Freedoms and National Hierarchies ..250 
Hmong in Laos: Social Freedom from Capitalist Economic Systems .251 
Hmong in the United States: Economic Freedom and Political Rights ..254 
Cultural Hierarchies among the Hmong Diaspora ...256 
The Perceived Cultural Superiority of the Hmong in Laos .256 
Cultural Power of the Hmong in the United States .260 
Political Differences and Hierarchy 262 
Contrasting Political Systems and Contested Claims of Superiority .262 
Lao Hmong Perspectives 263 
U.S. Hmong Perspectives 264 
Discursive Differentiation and Diasporic Communities .265 
Conclusion 267 
Conclusion ...268 
Diasporas and Nation-States ...268 
The National and the Transnational 272 
Further Research .277 
Appendix 1. ...279 
Bibliography .280 
Introduction 
Conceptualizing Hmong and Diasporas 
Although scholars claim that the Hmong originated somewhere in the southwestern part of 
China, many Hmong have expressed considerable uncertainty about their ethnic origins and 
have lost their transnational connections to the ancestral ethnic homeland. Their migratory 
dispersal from China to various countries in Southeast Asia occurred centuries ago, followed 
by their more recent forced migration after the Vietnam War and resettlement in various 
countries as refugees.  
However, despite the absence of a territorial ethnic homeland that unifies their 
diaspora, Hmong in Laos and the United States have developed various transnational 
relationships and maintained their diasporic community through the transnational continuity 
of cultural practices and socioeconomic interactions across national borders since their 
dispersal after the Vietnam War (1955-1975). These include economic activities, such as 
money transfers and circulation of ethnic goods and products, transnational social 
interactions, and shared cultural practices including traditional funerals, spiritual rituals, and 
the New Year celebrations, all of which are based on kinship networks.  
At the same time, Hmong have created homes to a certain extent in the various 
nation-states in which they have resided after their resettlement following the Vietnam War. 
This has caused their cultural traditions and practices to be reshaped and transformed 
according to different national contexts, such as local socioeconomic conditions, state 
cultural policies, and access to economic capital in each country. As a result, Hmongs 
transnational relationships and ethnic perceptions toward each other become inevitably 
divergent as they are refracted through different, albeit partial, national affiliations which are 
in turn, positioned in a hierarchical global order.   
This thesis is based on fourteen-months of multi-sited, comparative ethnographic 
fieldwork with two Hmong diasporic communities in Vang Vieng, Laos, and Sacramento, 
California in the United States, which have developed and maintained active transnational 
relationships across national borders. My thesis focuses on the transnational ethnic and 
cultural continuities in the Hmong diaspora as well as their cultural differentiation and 
discursive fragmentation influenced by various national differences. In sum, the 
transnational continuity and ethnic consciousness among Hmong coexists with significant 
differences and disagreements primarily shaped by the nation-states in which they reside.  
Nonetheless, their sense of national belonging remains incomplete because they 
continue to experience social, economic, and ethnic marginalization as an ethnic minority 
group in these local contexts, which further causes them to maintain a diasporic affiliation to 
Hmong scattered in other countries as an alternative source of ethnic belonging. In this 
sense, the Hmong are constantly positioned in-between the diaspora and the nation-state. 
This in-between-ness is an essential part of the Hmongs diasporic condition.  
The Diasporic Condition: Belonging Beyond and Within Nation-States 
The concept of the Hmong diaspora involves the juxtaposition of two words that may 
initially appear incompatible. On the one hand, the Hmong people, especially in the past, 
have often been represented as an isolated and localized hill tribe with a distinctive 
traditional culture at the margins of the nation-state in Southeast Asia and China (Symonds 
2004; Tapp 1988; Yang 2009; Young 1969). On the other hand, in more recent literature, 
they have also been represented as a diaspora (Pfeifer et al. 2013; Tapp and Lee 2004; Vang 
2010), a more contemporary notion which celebrates transnational mobility, cultural fluidity, 
and the hybridity of identity (Axel 2000; Braziel and Mannur 2003: 234; Clifford 1994; Hall 
1990: 235; Lavie and Swedenburg 1996: 8; Malkki 1992).  
How are these two contradictory scholarly representations of the Hmong people to be 
reconciled? Are the Hmong a village or tribal people to be understood in specific localized 
contexts within nation-states or are they a diasporic and deterritorialized people who 
transcend nations and reside in transnational communities? In my thesis, I argue that these 
two different conceptualizations of the Hmong people are not necessarily incompatible. The 
Hmong do live in a diaspora scattered across various countries and retain transnational social 
connections and ethnic cultural continuities that cannot be subsumed within specific nation-
states. Their diaspora is also not anchored by a specific nation-state that they identify as an 
ethnic homeland.  
Nonetheless, the Hmong also reside in nation-states, and these localized national 
contexts structure their ethnic experiences and produce affiliations and cultural 
differentiations that can fragment their diaspora. These different national conditions, such as 
local socioeconomic living conditions as well as cultural and political influences, have 
caused their ethnic traditions to be reshaped and transformed and have also led to national 
affiliations and localized differentiations that hierarchically order their diasporic community. 
Therefore, although I also represent the Hmong as diasporic, it is important to 
recognize that diaspora should not be used simply as an academic label for a group of 
people. Instead, we need to specifically investigate what makes a certain ethnic group 
diasporic. The diasporic condition involves not only a migratory history of dispersal, but the 
continued maintenance of a strong collective ethnic consciousness and transnational 
communities through cohesive ties to co-ethnics living in other countries. It is therefore 
important to remember that even Hmong in the past were not completely isolated, tribal hill 
people but have retained their cultural mobility across national borders and developed 
transnational connections to a certain extent.  
The classic scholarly definition of diaspora refers to a community of displaced 
people who experienced political or religious persecution and exile, which caused them to 
disperse from their ethnic homeland to multiple geographic regions around the world 
(Clifford 1994; Cohen 1997; Harris 1993: 34; Safran 1991; Tllyan 1996). Some scholars 
point out that the classic definition of diaspora is limited and should be expanded to 
understand other causes and types of diaspora in the world (Clifford 1994; Cohen 1997). The 
cause of modern diasporas is not just political persecution or coercion, but can also involve a 
complicated combination of multiple factors including voluntary migration.  
For example, Cohen (1997) argues that in addition to classic or victim diasporas, 
which fit Safrans initial notion of diaspora, there are also economic or labor diasporas (e.g. 
the Indian and Chinese diasporas), imperial or colonial diasporas (e.g. the British diaspora), 
as well as cultural diasporas (e.g. the Caribbean diaspora). The development of the concept 
of diaspora provides a broader understanding of the reasons and causes of peoples dispersal 
and diasporic movement in the contemporary world. 
Scholars have commonly agreed that defining diaspora is difficult and differentiating 
it from the concept of transnationalism can be challenging. It is partly because the two 
theoretical concepts are not completely independent but are related, especially when looking 
at groups of people defined as diasporic and/or transnational. According to a widely 
known definition, transnationalism provides a theoretical and analytical framework for how 
immigrants forge and sustain multistranded social relations that link together their societies 
of origin and settlement (Basch et al. 1994: 7). In general, transnational connections of 
immigrants consist of those between the immigrant-receiving host country and the 
immigrant-sending home country (the homeland), which enable interactions between people 
residing in the two countries across national borders. Much of the immigration literature 
analyzes transnational relations from this dual, homeland and host country framework. 
In contrast, because diasporas are based on a dispersal of ethnic populations from 
their original homeland to multiple nation-states, this expands the geographic coverage of 
cross-border transnational ties. Therefore, diasporas involve transnational interactions and 
affiliations between the ethnic homeland and numerous migrant communities scattered 
across a number of countries. In addition to these centripetal homeland ties, diasporas are 
also constituted by lateral transnational relations between dispersed co-ethnic communities 
in these various countries. Not all transnational communities consist of such extensive 
geographical dispersal based on experiences of group exile and displacement. Diaspora and 
transnationalism are not interchangeable in this regard. 
In a similar context, scholars differentiate diaspora from transnationalism by 
emphasizing the cohesive relationships among the dispersed diasporic communities held 
together by a distinctive, active solidarity, as well as by relatively dense social relationships, 
that cut across state boundaries and link members of the diaspora in different states into a 
single transnational community (Brubaker 2005: 6). Brubaker, following on earlier 
studies of diaspora, argues that diaspora should consist of dispersal, maintenance of a 
homeland orientation, and continuation of active transnational relationships between these 
multiple communities. In this sense, diaspora involves geographic scattering and 
disconnection but also the creation of subsequent transnational connections not only between 
people in the homeland and co-ethnic communities abroad, but between these dispersed 
communities as well. 
It is also possible that transnational ties are weaker among diasporic communities 
compared to traditional immigrant communities because they are most geographically 
extensive and multifaceted. In her book about the Indian diaspora residing in the United 
States and the United Kingdom, Sandhya Shukla (2003: 12) differentiates between 
transnationalism of immigrant communities, which involve more active crossing [of] 
national boundaries whereas diasporas seem to have a lesser degree of cross-national 
interactions or activities after the initial dispersal. In addition, transnational ties in diasporic 
communities may also weaken more quickly over time. Indeed, some scholars point out the 
possible erosion or ceasing of diasporas because of the permanent return of diasporic 
communities to their homeland (see Van Hear 1998). As argued in this thesis, although 
Hmong in Laos and the United States have retained strong lateral transnational relationships 
to each other, they lost their centripetal connections to the ethnic homeland long ago. 
The literature on homeland and belonging among diasporic peoples has mostly 
analyzed diasporic ethnic minorities in the context of their complex relationships to the 
nation-states in which they reside, and their former ethnic homeland (their country of 
ancestral/ethnic origin). These theoretical perspectives often analyze how diasporic 
communities are not always fully attached to nation-states as territorially bounded entities. 
They shift the academic focus to people in motion, their detailed cultural and ethnic 
backgrounds (Coutin 2003; Siu 2005; Vertovec 2011) the limits of national citizenship (Ong 
2006[1999]; Siu 2001; Soysal 1994), and the impact of a globalized world that allows people 
to move beyond national borders (Appadurai 1988, 1996).  
According to some scholars, diasporas are deterritorialized groups which cannot be 
sufficiently understood through territorialized nation-states. For instance, in his study of the 
postmodern diasporic identity of different political Sikh communities, Brian Axel (2000: 
22-24) notes that most diaspora studies ultimately say very little about the diaspora as a 
form of belonging and peoplehood and that they should look at diaspora as diaspora. His 
view seems to imply that the analysis of diasporas needs to overcome even a minimal 
examination of the nation-state as a destination of a diasporized peoples belonging.  
However, such perspectives do not fully consider how diasporic people are still 
physically residing in specific national territories and develop a sense of diasporic belonging 
that is not completely free from the nation-state. In fact, scholars have also expressed 
concern about the overt emphasis on the borderless status of refugees, immigrants, and 
diasporic peoples in their studies (Hindess 2004; Portes and Rumbaut 1996; Sparke 2004: 
278; Wahlbeck 2002: 233). They critically discuss the problems of overly celebrating the 
supposedly empowering ability of diasporic people to transcend the national boundaries (see 
also Gerson 2001), which risks condemning them to a permanent, liminal and stateless 
condition.  
In fact, other scholars have been concerned about studies that overemphasize 
diasporic states since they tend to ignore the adjustment and cooperation of diasporized 
ethnic minorities with host nations, and make it sound like these people are uncooperative 
and not capable of succeeding in national contexts (see Wong 1995). However, such 
perspectives also unintentionally lead to the position that diasporic ethnic minorities are 
always doomed to be under the control of the states integration policies and interact with the 
state as an object rather than as a subject. 
While valuing those critical approaches, I constantly recognize the importance of 
having a balanced stance toward a theory of diaspora, since I also do not wish to ignore the 
increasing power of borderless conditions that certain groups of people do clearly and 
predominantly experience. If the relationship between the nation-state and the diaspora is 
always viewed as antagonistic, this undermines the profound impact of diaspora on the 
nation-state and fails to explain the pervasive coexistence of both ethnic minority statuses at 
the national level and diasporic identity at the transnational level.  
Throughout my thesis, I demonstrate that diasporoic communities transnational 
affiliations across national borders and their commitments are not always in conflict with the 
sense of national belonging to host countries. This is readily apparent when we consider the 
establishment and development of diasporic belonging among a group of people which have 
been dispersed from their ethnic homeland. As will be revealed in my ethnographic work, 
diasporic people do not deny their sense of belonging to a territorial nation-state, when 
thinking about their current home or former homelands. In short, one can adopt a partial 
sense of national belonging within the nation-states territorial boundaries while 
simultaneously maintaining transnational diasporic connections and cultures beyond national 
borders. 
The Distinctiveness of the Hmong Diaspora 
There are a number of unique features that make the Hmong diaspora distinctive from other 
types of diasporas. Unlike many other diasporas, Hmong have not developed a collective 
diasporic affiliation to a specific territorial nation-state of ethnic origin or expressed desire to 
establish a new one. As a result, they do not commonly share a vision to return to a specific 
ancestral homeland. In other words, Hmong are a diasporic group who have developed a 
homing desire (shown by their continued search to identify the location of their ethnic 
homeland), instead of a desire for the homeland (returning to or regaining one) (Brah 1996: 
180). In this case, the lack of and uncertainty about their territorial ethnic homeland serves as 
the fundamental basis for constructing a collective ethnic consciousness across the diaspora. 
Cultures, practices, and identities that are shared across the diaspora do not always emanate 
from a country of ancestral origin, but are maintained, developed, and transformed within 
the various countries in which diasporic Hmong live.  
Therefore, what keeps the Hmong diaspora together is people rather than a 
territorial national entity. In fact, disaporas can be maintained through continuities in kinship 
and specific cultural practices which persist across different nation-states and not simply 
based on transnational connections and affiliations to a shared ethnic homeland. While many 
studies of diaspora focus on diaspora-homeland relations, my research examines how co-
ethnic diasporic communities dispersed in different countries maintain transnational cultural 
and social ties with each other.  
 As the Hmong have taken their ethnic traditions and culture to the various countries 
to which they have dispersed, these practices have become transformed in the specific 
national contexts in which they are deployed and enacted. Although traditions are often seen 
by local peoples as based on an unchanging continuity with an authentic past and homeland, 
they are constantly subject to change and modification through time and space. Therefore, 
diasporic Hmong are subject to their local socioeconomic conditions, national cultures, and 
ideologies, producing considerable differentiation in kinship, ethnic identity, and various 
cultural practices in the Hmong diaspora. In so doing, Hmong also affiliate themselves with 
the various nation-states in which they reside and hierarchically position themselves in 
relation to their co-ethnics in other countries. In fact, when diasporic peoples compare their 
lives with their co-ethnics in different countries, they consider their country better and 
increase their affiliation with it. This leads to discursive fragmentation as Hmong in different 
countries disagree about their relative position in the transnational diasporic community and 
how the diaspora is hierarchically ordered. 
By examining both continuities as well as cultural differentiation and discursive 
fragmentation in the Hmong diaspora, my research emphasizes that diasporas maintain 
simultaneous affiliations with both transnational ethnic communities and nation-states of 
residence. Therefore, my thesis looks at the relations between the diaspora and the nation-
state and the continuous presence and influences of both, instead of debating whether one 
group is truly a diaspora or not, or whether a dispersed ethnic group that has lost its ties to 
the ethnic homeland is still diasporic. This point resonates directly with what Avtar Brah 
(1996:16) refers to as diaspora space, a concept that simultaneously includes both 
diasporized people (those staying put in the various countries in which they have scattered) 
and those who are indigenous (who remain back in the homeland) (16) and the 
configurations of power that emerge from their intrinsically interconnected relationships 
across borders. Because Hmong do not have substantial relationship with an indigenous 
group back in the ethnic homeland, the power relations of their diaspora are between Hmong 
communities dispersed across different nation-states, such as Laos and the United States. 
It is therefore important to examine how individuals and collectivities are 
simultaneously positioned in social relations constituted and performed across multiple 
dimensions of differentiation (Brah 1996: 242). This ultimately understands diasporization 
as a process that is not completely stateless and deterritorialized, but is constituted through 
relations between nation-states of their newly resettled homes. 
In addition, the Hmong diaspora shows that diaspora is a historical process rather 
than a social state determined by a one-time geographical dispersal. Once a diaspora is 
initially formed, there can be subsequent migrations leading to the further development of 
the diaspora. In the Hmong case, there is a considerable time gap between different phases of 
dispersal and resettlement, which requires historical perspectives to construe their 
contemporary diasporic community. The history of the Hmong diaspora expands the scope 
of the analysis since it involves complicated power relationships with multiple nation-states, 
including China, Laos, Thailand, and the United States, all of which influence Hmongs 
diasporic condition to varying degrees. 
Overview of Thesis 
Part I of the thesis provides an overview of the Hmong diaspora and examines its history, the 
perceptions on their multiple homelands, and local socioeconomic conditions and ethnic 
relations of diasporic Hmong in Laos and the United States. In Chapter 1, I discuss the 
Hmong diasporas ethnic history of dispersal, migration, and resettlement that begins in 
ancient China and continues into the resettlement period after the Vietnam War. I examine 
the historical processes of diasporic formation in relation to different national historical 
events.  
Because Hmong have lost their connections to their country of ancestral origin 
during their long diasporic history, Chapter 2 illustrates how they have become uncertain 
about the location of their ethnic homeland. The chapter discusses Hmongs multiple 
theories about their ethnic origins and ambivalent perceptions they have about both China, as 
a supposedly lost ethnic homeland, and Laos, as a natal homeland. This chapter will 
ethnographically demonstrate that Hmongs ethnic continuity (a shared ethnic 
consciousness) is not grounded in or attached to a concrete territorial location of ancestral 
origin, but based on their fragmentary as well as shared historical memories of exile and 
migratory dispersal.  
Chapter 3 discusses the local socioeconomic status of Hmong in Laos and the United 
States and their ethnic relations to mainstream society, which are experienced as 
marginalization and evokes an ethnic minority consciousness across generations. Hmong 
constantly reaffirm their minority status and express a sense of ambivalent belonging to their 
partial homes of Laos and the United States because of their social and ethnic 
marginalization. In so doing, this chapter suggests the inseparable link between local 
contexts in which Hmong reside and their persistent diasporic ethnic consciousness and 
transnational affiliations with the diaspora, which is often based on partial belonging in 
nation-states. 
In Part II, I examine the ways in which diasporic Hmong living in Laos and the 
United States actually sustain and promote the socioeconomic, ethnic, and cultural continuity 
of their diaspora through the transnational maintenance of their clan-based kinship and 
marriage system, familial economic remittances and exchanges, and the practice of 
shamanistic rituals across national borders. Migratory displacement and geographical 
separation have not undermined the enduring nature of these practices, which have persisted 
both locally and transnationally in the diaspora, but rather promoted their cultural and social 
continuities.  
In this respect, Chapter 4 analyzes the transnational persistence and continuity of 
Hmong kinship practices across national borders, which are based on a socially constructed 
surname-based clan system. The chapter examines how diasporic Hmong in both Laos and 
the United States have faithfully adhered to three fundamental kinship principles: clan 
hospitality, clan exogamy, and ethnic endogamy. I first analyze the way such kinship rules 
have actually become hegemonic within the diaspora without having to be actively enforced 
by power structures. However, such kinship hegemonies are gradually coming under 
discursive critique when they are enacted under different national contexts, especially among 
Hmong American youth in the United States. 
While Chapter 4 analyzes the transnational cultural continuity of kinship practices, 
Hmong diasporic communities are also maintained by actual social networks across national 
borders. Therefore, this thesis also examines more concrete, everyday transnational 
relationships between Hmong in Laos and the United States. In particular, Chapter 5 
describes the way Hmong communities in the two countries have engaged in transnational 
economic relationships based not only on the direct family members but also on extensive 
clan networks. The chapter discusses the kinds of economic activities (remittances) and 
exchanges managed by Hmong across national borders and the social meanings of such 
transnational economic interactions. 
Such transnational social connections are also the basis for the maintenance of 
various Hmong shamanistic practices across national borders, which (like kinship) have also 
served as a continuing transnational cultural tradition in the diaspora. In Chapter 6, I 
examine the inherently flexible and mobile (borderless) nature of Hmong shamanism that 
enables the shaman to project spiritual power across national borders regardless of territorial 
distance. Hmong in the United States continue to arrange shamanistic services and 
treatments with shamans in Laos who conduct localized rituals that have transnational 
effects. I then further analyze how the transnational maintenance of Hmong shamanism in 
the diaspora has also caused the shaman/client relationship to become individualized and 
commodified across national borders in contrast to its practice in each local society as a 
collective, community event based on social exchange. In so doing, the chapter suggests that 
diasporic peoples cultural traditions continue to be maintained transnationally, but in a 
transformed and modified manner. 
As is the case with all diasporas, the Hmong diaspora is not simply characterized by 
social and cultural continuity across national borders. Part III examines how the Hmong 
dispersed across various countries produce considerable cultural differentiation based on 
national differences and global hierarchies between their communities in different countries. 
This simultaneously produces discursive fragmentation within Hmong diasporic 
communities based on their national affiliations with their respective countries of residence. 
Chapter 7 specifically compares the Hmong New Year celebrations in Laos and the 
United States and examines significant differences in this cultural tradition caused by 
divergent cultural policies and access to economic resources in the two nation-states. Not 
only has the U.S. New Year festival become much more elaborate and extensive, it is also 
considerably more commercialized than the version in Laos. Furthermore, the chapter 
analyzes how such national differences are grounded on a fundamentally similar discourse of 
equality for ethnic minorities in the two countries through which state cultural intervention 
or noninterference is justified. The changes and modification of the same New Year tradition 
eventually make Hmong in both countries hesitant to claim greater cultural authenticity but 
rather, they refer to an alternative place or past where they believe more authentic ethnic 
traditions can be found. 
In Chapter 8, I analyze the way Hmong in Laos and the United States hierarchically 
position themselves in relation to their co-ethnics elsewhere by comparing national 
differences in their lifestyles, economic and political freedoms, as well as cultural values. In 
general, Hmong in my study clearly recognize the socioeconomic inequalities, antagonistic 
political systems, and various other national differences between the two countries. 
However, they consider their own community and country to be better in the diasporic 
hierarchy, leading to contrasting discursive fragmentation in their ethnic perceptions of each 
other along the national lines. Although this diasporic fragmentation occurs mainly at the 
level of discourse and usually does not disrupt their continuing transitional social relations, 
such fragmented perceptions indicate that diasporic communities are not homogenous 
entities removed from specific national contexts. They can also be hierarchically ordered 
because of the impact of national differences and their affiliations with nation-states. 
Finally, in the Conclusion, I recapture the discussions on diasporic peoples dual 
affiliations to their transnational communities and to the nation-states in which they reside. 
The historical ethnic persecution that caused Hmongs initial forced migratory dispersal in 
the past has diminished and most people continue to reside in the host countries where they 
have resettled. In this sense, the Conclusion suggests that although there are currently no 
Hmong diasporic political movements to establish an independent nation-state as a new 
ethnic homeland, Hmongs efforts and search for alternative sources of diasporic continuities 
and ethnic consciousness remain significant as they maintain their cultural practices through 
transnational networks across their adopted homelands (Parreas and Siu 2007: 29). 
From Vang Vieng to Sacramento: Hmong in Laos and the United States 
Both Hmong communities in Vang Vieng, Laos and Sacramento in the United States are not 
completely new to me. Before my doctoral fieldwork that was started in the summer of 2011, 
I had preliminary field experiences in Vang Vieng for a total of fifteen months working as an 
undergraduate volunteer assisting various community development projects (between 2003 
and 2006). Earlier in my graduate study, I also developed contacts in Sacramento for a total 
of twelve weeks to conduct pilot studies with Hmong communities (between 2008 and 
2010). To some extent, I have become a transnational messenger that connects the two 
communities on the other side of the world by delivering the news and photos between the 
families apart. 
According to available published data, there are about 260,0731 Hmong in the United 
States while 449,6002 Hmong live in Laos. There are remarkable national differences 
between the two countries, including governmental policies, political systems, and 
socioeconomic conditions. Because I conducted multi-sited research in these two 
communities as part of the Hmong diaspora, a short introduction to each field site is 
necessary, focusing on living and residential environments.  
1 U.S. Census Bureau (2010), Asian Alone by Selected Groups (www.census.gov). 
2 National Statistics Center (2005), Results from the Population Census: www.nsc.gov.la (about 8% of Lao 
nationals, the third largest ethnic minority group in the country). 
A Globalized Ethnic Village: Dao Tha3 in Vang Vieng, Laos 
During my doctoral fieldwork, I lived in a village located in the Vang Vieng district in 
central Laos which I will call Dao Tha. Although the official demographic data are not 
available, according to some of the Dao Thas oldest residents, there are about 300 Hmong 
living in this village. Besides my main field site of Dao Tha, I also visited six other Hmong 
villages in the district for collecting fieldwork materials.  
As a residential unit, Dao Tha also has special history. Unlike the two other 
neighboring villages whose residents were of one ethnic group, Dao Tha was known as a 
very unusual village that consists of three different ethnic groups living in segregated, but 
adjacent communities: Hmong (officially named as Lao Soung, which means 
highlanders), Khmu (Lao Theung or upper middle-landers) and ethnic Lao (Lao 
Loum, the majority Lao ethnic group known as lowland residents). The initial formation 
of Dao Tha was directed by the government, which resettled Hmong returnees from Thai 
refugee camps in the village along with Khmu families, who were forced to leave their 
upper-mountain farmlands.4  
The majority ethnic Lao residents came to Dao Tha mainly because they were unable 
to reside in the other nearby ethnic Lao villages. In my very first visit to Dao Tha in 2003 as 
an undergraduate volunteer, the village was still new and very poor, compared to other 
ethnically homogenous villages built more than thirty years ago. I was repeatedly told that 
none of the three ethnic groups in the village had wanted to live there with other different 
ethnic groups and therefore it was difficult to implement new community rules or develop 
consensus for village development projects. 
3 Village names in Laos, as well as the interviewees names in both Laos and the United States, are all 
pseudonyms.  
4 When Khmu families resettled in the village in the 1990s, they were granted land to build their houses but 
were given no farmland. As a result, the children stayed in the village to attend school while their parents had 
to live separately on their farms located in the mountains and only came down to the village during breaks in 
the farming.  
 For this reason, each ethnic group continued to live in distinct and separated ethnic 
enclaves within the same village, despite the local government polices to implement multi-
ethnic housing and residential arrangements. In the village, the Lao Loum community was 
located closest to the main Song river, the Hmong community was further into the hills 
across the main road, and the Khmu community was located much further to the north, away 
from the two other ethnic communities. Unlike the two other ethnic groups, a good number 
of Hmong in Dao Tha were able to purchase their own rice fields with the financial support 
from their family and relatives residing in the United States. These fields are located behind 
their ethnic community and surrounded by mountains.  
Before my fieldwork in September 2011, whenever I talked to my former host family 
in Laos on the phone, I was warned that if I return to Dao Tha village in Vang Vieng, I 
wont be able to recognize anything from the past, because literally, everything has 
changed. Indeed, it would be my third visit to the same village but it had been more than 
five years since the last time I was there. Although tourism had already been entrenched in 
Dao Tha for a decade and was not really new to me, I was excited but also nervous about 
returning there with a completely different objective this time (namely, conducting research 
for my doctoral project). 
Sitting next to a serene river and surrounded by picturesque mountains and caves, 
Dao Tha and the area of Vang Vieng have grown to be one of the most popular attractions 
for foreign tourists.5 Oddly enough, Vang Vieng is called either a tourists paradise or 
ghetto by foreign visitors themselves.6 A popular tour guide book supports such a 
description: 
5 In fact, Vang Vieng initially gained its tourist reputation because of its dynamic natural environment, 
especially the mountain caves along the Song river. In the past, the first and largest tour company in the country 
developed an eco-tourism program, specialized for kayaking and cave mountain climbing in the area. 
6 Based on my conversations with the owners of the local tourism industry and estimates from four different 
guest houses and hotels in Vang Vieng, the top three largest groups of tourists are from Australia, the United 
Kingdom, and the United States, followed by Germany, France, and Israel.  
When you arrive in Vang Vieng, a usually unappealing town, youll be faced with a choice: 
fight or flight []. Vang Vieng became known as a mecca for those whose main aim was 
to take drugs and do little else []. Many are here simply to party on a circuit that 
stretches from Sydney to Koh Phan Gan in Thailand to Goa, India. (White 2010. 
Frommers Cambodia&Laos).  
Dao Tha is about four kilometers to the north of the town center of Vang Vieng, 
which is more than ten minutes ride by tuk tuk (a commonly-used motorized rickshaw and 
the main form of local public transportation) or twenty-five minutes by bicycle. It is deeply 
affected by the development of tourism since the early 2000s in Vang Vieng. The banks of 
the largest main river, the Song, which flows along the village, are now lined with countless 
tourist bars built with bamboo and wood panel that continue endlessly into the center of 
Vang Vieng. Tourists head directly to Dao Tha as a starting point for their activities, such as 
launching rubber tubes into the river, swimming, or (more often than not) drinking, dancing, 
and getting drunk as they move from one bar to another. The bars would play deafening 
Western rock music all the time. 
Although the rural, scenic beauty of the Vang Vieng area with its rivers, mountains, 
and caves remains, it no longer retained its serenity since the place is now overrun by global 
tourism. The Hmong and other ethnic groups in Dao Tha village are increasingly living in a 
globalized space where many types of peoples and their cultures intersect. In addition to 
foreign tourists, the village is also increasingly visited by NGO and development workers 
and volunteers, journalists, and governmental officers.  
The Hmong in Dao Tha live predominantly as self-sufficient rice farmers who grow 
their own food in plots of land adjacent to the village. However, like many others in Vang 
Vieng, they are also engaged in the tourism industry, but primarily as employees and not as 
owners of tourism businesses. The Hmong have been increasingly (and forcibly) inserted 
into a globalized village and encounter foreign tourists on an everyday basis. On their way 
home from their farms immediately outside of the village, they have to cross the bridge that 
connects the village road to tourist bars on the other side of the river. Some Hmong villagers 
lost their cows, who ran away when frightened by drunken and naked tubers along the river. 
Young students in the village were constantly cautioned to be extra careful when cycling 
back home after school in the afternoon when it is the peak time for tuk tuks delivering 
tourists to the river. In their rice fields located on the other side of the village far away from 
the river, Hmong harvest rice under the sun within earshot of the blaring noise of Western 
hip hop and techno music from the tourist bars.  
A couple young Hmong villagers worked for NGO projects as local coordinators and 
others worked in the tourism industry as restaurant cooks, hotel and guesthouse staff, tour 
guides, and tuk tuk drivers. Some young men without tourism jobs worked at factories 
owned by multinational corporations. Many other young farmers in the village who had no 
other source of income considered such Hmong youth with jobs lucky. Little children often 
swam deep in the river looking to collect dropped money and belongings from tourists at the 
bars, who often get drunk and unconscious after hours of drinking.  
I lived in a farm guesthouse run by a local Lao family right across the river and like 
other local residents, constantly heard the loud music that blared all day from the different 
bars along the riverbank. I was never able to even catch a short nap in my room during the 
hottest time of day. It was a strange juxtaposition as I lived in a small Lao farming village 
while hearing endless renditions of worldly known English pop songs, such as Adeles Set 
Fire to the Rain and Jay-Zs Empire State of New York. Ironically, these songs that I grew 
to hate during my fieldwork have become my favorites now (perhaps because they 
nostalgically remind me of my life there?). The people in Dao Tha did not really complain 
about the situation that seriously. Instead, they lived with it. 
Urban Hmong Villages: Sacramento, California, United States 
It was November 2012 when I was visiting California State University at Sacramento and 
giving a presentation about my research in progress to a group of Hmong student members 
of the Hmong University Student Association. Following Melau Lee, the Hmong student 
who gave me a ride that day, I scurried along campus, beautifully colored by autumn foliage. 
As soon as we entered the main student union building in the middle of campus, Melau 
directed me to the elevator and noted, so you will first meet the board members of our 
association. They are on the third floor, which we call the Hmong village. I suspected that 
I misheard, so had to ask her again, Did you just say we are going to the Hmong village? 
Melau laughed as if she expected my baffled reaction and said, Yeah, no one knows why, 
but we call the lounge area where we hang out the Hmong village. A lot of Hmong students 
are there, hanging out, doing homework, or just waiting for classes.  
The elevator door opened and before us, more than three groups of students were 
sitting at tables set along the round wall in an open lounge area. I glanced around this 
Hmong village located inside a modern and renovated university building. The groups of 
students were chatting, listening to music, browsing the Internet, working on laptops, or 
eating their lunches while reading papers. Melau said hi to one of the groups and gestured 
to me to approach the group so that she could introduce me. 
While I certainly had not expected to find a Hmong village in the middle of an 
urban university campus, this is effective indicative of the geographic layout of Hmong 
communities in Sacramento, California. Hmong residential patterns in the city and local 
neighborhoods with high concentrations of Hmong certainly resemble mini-ethnic enclaves 
and Hmong villages in Laos. Certain streets, intersections, school districts, and sections of 
city are understood to be areas heavily populated by Hmong residents. In particular, many 
Hmong in my study lived in the northern and southern parts of the city of Sacramento in 
predominantly non-white minority communities, where they interact with a wide range of 
ethnic groups, including other Southeast Asians, African Americans, and Hispanics. On the 
other hand, a substantial number of Hmong families in upward mobility moved to the city of 
Elk Grove (right south of Sacramento), a newer residential community with more expensive 
homes.7 
In fact, the residential clustering of the Hmong community in Sacramento is not a 
coincidence. When Hmong families purchased their individual houses, they did so through 
their ethnic networks and therefore rented or bought homes in the same location. This was 
especially possible because real estate is one of the ethnic businesses in which Hmong are 
active, along with insurance. While the Hmong village primarily reflects the proximate 
geographic locations of Hmong residences, it also symbolizes close relatedness of 
emotional distance within the community based on ethnic networks and clan support. 
Living in the same city and within close distance, Hmong families found it convenient and 
easy to visit each other. They spend time together during the week and weekends, not only 
for Hmong cultural activities and ethnic events such as New Year, weddings, and funerals, 
but also for American holidays and activities, including Fathers Day, Independence Day, 
Valentines Day, Christmas, Halloween, as well as bridal and baby showers.  
Besides the city of Sacramento, I also travelled to other locations within the 
Sacramento County to attend various family or community events and conduct interviews. 
This includes Galt (a well-known flea market for Hmong sellers and customers) and the 
cities of Stockton, Marysville, Chico (to the north), and Fresno (to the south, where the one-
week International Hmong New Year festival is held). 
The Hmong actually constitute close to six percent of the total Sacramento city 
population of 479,686.8 California is the state with the largest Hmong population, followed 
by Minnesota and Wisconsin, and the capitol city of Sacramento has the second largest 
population of Hmong (26,996) in the state after Fresno (31,771).9 Initially, Hmong were 
7 During my fieldwork, I stayed in a rented room in a house in this neighborhood. 
8 Sacramento Census Data (2013): http://data.cityofsacramento.org/dashboards/8456/sacramento-census-data. 
9 Hmong National Development Census Report (2013: 13). 
resettled in other locations (such as Chicago, Illinois, Denver, Colorado, and Spokane, 
Washington) because of the presence of non-Hmong American sponsors, charity groups, or 
some previously resettled relatives.  
However, they gradually moved from these cities to West Coast and Midwestern 
cities with large Hmong communities in order to live with family members and relatives in 
the same area. Therefore, subsequent internal migration further consolidated the Hmong 
refugee communities in California, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. In the United States, the 
Hmong are the ninth largest Asian population in the nation and are outnumbered by non-
Hmong Laotians10 (186,013), who also fled the country after the Vietnam War. 
Fieldwork and Methodology 
My doctoral research was enabled by my ten-year long relationship with the Hmong and 
other villagers in Dao Tha since my second year as an undergraduate student in 2003. 
Through a non-profit organization in my home country, I had an opportunity to live in Dao 
Tha village for seven months and learn about their local lives while helping the local 
villagers to promote and manage community development projects. At that time, my main 
responsibilities were assessing the financial needs and mediate communication between the 
organization and the villagers.  
However, when I arrived in the village, one of the first things I was asked to do was 
actually teach English to the children and young students in the village. My Lao Loum host 
family, the owner of the farm and the local development project coordinator in Dao Tha, told 
me that a small group of the Hmong and Lao Loum students in the village already had about 
a month-long English learning experience at the farm with an American long term tourist. 
Because of the great interests and enthusiasm from the village youth, my host family wanted 
to promote English class to the entire village and develop it for a long term project. Although 
I was initially not sure if teaching English would really help the future of young students in 
10 The ethnic name Laotians (or Laotian Americans) in the United States usually refers to ethnic Lao (Lao 
Loum). 
the village, my experiences through English class generated considerable positive impacts on 
my social relationships with people in various ways. 
The reason that I became particularly interested in the Hmong among the other ethnic 
groups in the village was because of a brief encounter with one of the Hmong students in my 
English class. One day, the student, then only a first-year middle school student and now a 
young father of three little babies, did not go home after class but stayed and talked with me. 
He asked me a question to which I could not respond: Do you think Hmong people have a 
country? Where do you think Hmong are from? I became interested in why a young Hmong 
student would wonder about the ethnic origin of his peoples, even though they had been 
living in Laos for a very long time. What are their historical experiences that led him to ask 
such question? I eventually came to learn more about the lives of Hmong and their 
uncertainty about their ethnic history as well as their inseparable, highly transnationalized 
ethnic ties with their co-ethnics residing in the United States.  
My doctoral fieldwork in Vang Vieng, Laos, lasted seven months from September 
2011 to March 2012. In Sacramento, I continued fieldwork for another seven months starting 
June 2012 until January 2013. During my fieldwork, I used qualitative research methods, 
mainly semi-structured, in-depth interviews with a total of 111 individuals in the two 
countries (48 in Laos and 63 in the United States). The interviews in Laos include two 
Hmong individuals from the United States and one from France while the interviews in the 
United States include two Hmong (officially known as Miao ethnic minority group in 
China) visiting scholars from China. During the interviews, the national Lao language was 
primarily used in both countries while Hmong, English, and some Thai were also used 
depending on the interviewees preference.11  
11 It is known that Hmong have at least two main sub-groups based on minor linguistic differences between 
Hmong Leng and Hmong Der. However, such distinctions usually do not hinder social interactions or mutual 
communications, although both groups occasionally expressed stereotypes about each other.  
I tried to obtain a sample that was balanced in terms of gender and ages as well as 
personal background in both countries. However, because of the nature of qualitative 
research, interviews were not always based on purposive sampling but were also dependent 
on the availability and willingness of individuals to participate. In Laos, I conducted 
interviews with 15 female and 33 male participants. In terms of education, only four 
interviewees had college education (and they were all male) and most of my other 
interviewees had no formal education or degrees. 
In the United States, I interviewed 24 female and 39 male participants. This includes 
10 American-born second generation Hmong youth or young 1.5 generation individuals in 
their twenties (who were born in Thai refugee camps but raised in the United States). As 
former refugees, all Hmong adults are either naturalized American citizens or permanent 
residents. My U.S. interviewees have more diversified personal backgrounds. In addition to 
college students, thirty individuals have Bachelors or higher degrees and some of the elderly 
people also had education (up to secondary school level) in Laos, although their educations 
in the United States often started with high school (after they took English as Second 
Language [ESL] courses).  
The occupations of U.S. Hmong people in my study are also quite varied. A number 
of them were public school teachers, real estate agents, and insurance sales people, 
nurse/healthcare service assistants, and social worker. Nonetheless, half of my interviewees 
(who were not enrolled students) were unemployed (often from previous factory assembly 
line jobs) or elderly first-generation Hmong who are supported by monthly governmental 
welfare assistance, such as Supplemental Security Income (SSI).  
 Based on former contacts I made during preliminary fieldwork in the two Hmong 
communities, I started with the snowball sampling approach but also obtained new contacts 
through participant observation and by using community resources and published materials 
(in the United States), such as business directories, community newspapers and magazines, 
and advertisements posted at Hmong markets. Besides interviews, I conducted extensive 
participant observation and had numerous daily conversations with many Hmong while 
attending every possible social and community event, which enabled me to compare Hmong 
cultural activities in both countries, like New Year festivals, wedding ceremonies, and 
funeral and spiritual rituals. I also participated heavily in everyday Hmong activities in both 
countries.  
In Laos, I worked in the rice fields and vegetable gardens, visited local markets, 
helped with community projects, and attended family meetings and gatherings. In the United 
States, during the first month of my stay with a Hmong family, I participated in housework 
such as cooking, cleaning, and babysitting, which then expanded to other group activities 
such as grocery shopping, family meetings, various community ceremonies and banquets. I 
also accompanied Hmong to their work places and clinics and attended the Hmong Christian 
Church on Sundays. Besides doing interviews and participant observation, I conducted one 
focus group interview with thirteen elderly Hmong and collected surveys (self-administered 
questionnaires) with a total of 83 Hmong students from three different universities in the 
Sacramento area.12  
Almost all interviews (and daily conversations) were recorded with the informants 
verbal or written permission using a digital voice recorder. Field notes were either written 
down by hand (both countries) or typed into a smart phone (U.S. only) during participant 
observation and expanded later using a laptop. During a nine-month period after fieldwork, 
all interviews and field notes were transcribed and then coded separately by country 
according to recurring and dominant themes using ATLAS.ti, a qualitative ethnographic data 
management program. In most cases, the same codes were used to organize the qualitative 
data from both countries, but additional country-specific codes were also created, which 
12 California State University-Sacramento (40), Sacramento City College (19), and the University of California-
Davis (24). 
helped to compare socioeconomic national differences as well as changing ethnic cultures 
and perceptions.  
Part . The Making of the Hmong Diaspora:  
History, Multiple Homelands, and Ambivalent Belonging  
Chapter 1. History and the Making of the Hmong Diaspora 
Although the notion of diaspora is based on the dispersal and displacement of an ethnic 
group from the ancestral homeland, more empirical and ethnographic studies have 
demonstrated the continuing national presence in diasporic communities established abroad 
by examining the impact of both the homeland and the hostland (Butler 2001: 190-191). An 
exploration of the Hmongs diasporic ethnic history can also be contextualized in relation to 
different nation-states in which they have lived. However, the history of the Hmong diaspora 
involves multiple nation-states, namely China, Laos, Thailand, and the United States, not 
simply homeland-diaspora relations. The Hmong have developed ambivalent and varying 
degrees of affiliation and belonging to these national communities depending on their 
individual experiences as well as memories about different historical events. 
This chapter primarily aims to provide introductory historical background of Hmong 
as an ethnic minority group that has lived in multiple nation-states and experienced a number 
of different historical events. This includes a series of wars and conflicts, displacement, and 
migratory dispersals that span from ancient China to the Vietnam War. In so doing, the 
chapter further attempts to provide the background about how experiences and memories of 
diasporic dispersal have impacted or even conditioned their current ambivalent perceptions 
and attitudes toward different nation-states, especially their ancestral homeland of China and 
the natal homeland of Laos.  
In the absence of organized historical accounts and documents, the Hmong diaspora 
is based on a number of uncertainties about its ethnic origins, which has produced 
incongruent theories of ethnic homeland among different narrators of ethnic history 
including scholars, officials, and the Hmong themselves. Inevitably, such uncertainty has led 
to differing accounts of Hmong history, making it impossible to produce a unified narrative 
of the Hmong diasporas ancestral origins and subsequent dispersals. In this sense, this 
chapter will start with arguably the earliest historical period in which Hmong were first 
recognized as an ethnic group and their historical experiences of initial dispersal from China 
to Southeast Asia and their global dispersal after the Vietnam War. This provides 
background context for Chapter 2, which discusses the multiple theories that contemporary 
Hmong in both Laos and the United States have of their ancestral origins. This historical 
context is also important for understanding the Hmongs simultaneous affiliation with their 
transnational, diasporic ethnic communities and the different nation-states in which they 
reside, which will be explored in subsequent chapters.  
The Formation of the Hmong Diaspora 
Based on the available sources, the Hmong diaspora is currently dispersed across about 
thirteen countries around the world.13 Jacques Lemoine (2005:7) claims that there were 4 to 
4.5 million Hmong around the world in 2000, including an estimated 2,777,039 Hmong 
language speakers in China. Lemoine bases these figures on available scholarly and 
governmental publications about Hmong in China and Southeast Asian countries, as well as 
estimates of the Hmong population in other countries such as French Guyana, France, 
Canada, Argentina, and Australia, which are based on a Hmong students doctoral thesis in 
France.14 Lemoines estimate is widely accepted and repeatedly cited in scholarly work and 
Internet sources15 when discussing the entire population of the Hmong diaspora dispersed 
around the world. 
In general, China has been considered to be the Hmong peoples possible ethnic 
homeland, since many scholars claim that one of the Miao ethnic minority groups currently 
residing in southwest China are actually the Hmong, who are assumed to be co-ethnics of 
the Hmong in the diaspora. However, in China, Miao is a general ethnic category that 
13 For the estimate of population of the Hmong diaspora, see Appendix 1. 
14 This is a former Hmong French student, Kaoly Yangs doctoral thesis entitled, Natre et grandir: les 
processus de socialisation de lenfant en milieu hmong, Universit d'Aix-Marseille. When I contacted the 
author in person in order to ask for the original references for the Hmong population data, she referred to Jean-
Pierre Hassouns book Hmong du Laos en France: Changement social, initiatives et adaptations as the original 
source of her data. 
15 An example is Wikipedia, which perhaps has the most impact on the public understandings of the Hmong 
population in the diaspora.  
encompasses many other ethnic minorities which are grouped together as Miao, despite their 
distinctive linguistic, cultural, and geographical differences. In contrast to these scholarly 
discourses, diasporic Hmong whom I interviewed in Laos and the United States have 
expressed uncertainty about their ethnic homeland and do not always agree that China is 
where they originated. Instead, they have produced multiple theories about their ethnic 
homeland and ancestral origins. At the same time, they seem to have developed a sense of 
ethnic affinity and emotional connections to the specific group of Miao whom they believe 
to be co-ethnic Hmong (see Chapter 2). In this context, I use the term Miao-Hmong in my 
thesis for the particular Miao group supposedly known as Hmong in China, instead of 
referring to them as universally Hmong.  
There is a relationship between historical research on the Hmong diaspora and the 
Hmong peoples own understanding about their ethnic history. Early scholarly history about 
Hmong ethnic origins and homeland was often based on Hmong oral traditions and cultural 
practices that narrate their persecution in, and displacement and exile from ancient China 
(see Barney 1967). Although some Hmong themselves have consulted this scholarly 
research about their history, it is not always clear the extent to which their own beliefs and 
discourses are based on such scholarly perspectives. Instead, they tend to refer to their own 
oral histories and traditional narratives when speaking about their ancestral homeland and 
ethnic origins in relation to China.  
In addition to research about Hmong ethnic origins that focus on Miao-Hmong 
history in China, there are also other scholarly theories about the ethnic homeland of the 
Hmong. In sum, these theories can be grouped into three main types:  
1)  The Hmong originated in China. 
Hmong outside China are part of the Miao in China. In earlier literature on the 
Hmong residing in highland of Southeast Asia, researchers heard oral stories from 
the Hmong about their ancestry in China and they made the historical links between 
diasporic Hmong and the Miao in China (e.g., Geddes 1976: 5-25). 
2)  The Hmong originated in Mongolia. 
This theory is discussed in literature as a mythical history (e.g., Lee 1998). 
3)  The Hmong have a Caucasian ancestry and their ethnic homeland is Russia or the 
Iranian plateau.  
An American historian Keith Quincy (2000) claims that the racial features of the 
Hmong indicate their ancestral connections to Eurasian Caucasians, although there 
have been changes in their original appearance (such as eye and hair color) over time.  
Among these theories, dominant scholarly opinion finds the first hypothesis (the ethnic 
homeland of China) to be the most reliable theory.  
While it has become a general practice to include all Hmong dispersed in the world 
in a single diasporic community, it is important to note that the origins of the ethnic group 
that is currently called Hmong also remain uncertain and Hmong themselves express 
ambiguity about their ethnic history as well. In fact, it is not clear when exactly the name 
Hmong appeared and started to be used to refer to the group. Some scholars suggest that 
the name Hmong was introduced as recently as the 1910s (Culas and Michaud 2004: 70). In 
my personal interactions, some Hmong people mentioned that a prominent Hmong scholar 
(Dr. Dao Yang) named their ethnic group as Hmong in the 1970s. Others also said that their 
former military leader General Vang Pao is the one who coined their ethnic name. Therefore, 
when examining the history of the Hmong diaspora, it is important to note that there has not 
even been a consensus about the origin of the ethnic name Hmong and it is not sure 
whether Hmong is an ethnic name that has persisted from ancient times. 
There have been at least two historical phases which led to the current formation of 
the Hmong diaspora: 1) The initial migratory dispersal of Hmong from their supposed 
ancestral homeland of China to various countries in Southeast Asia; and 2) their subsequent 
dispersal after the Vietnam War, when they were resettled as refugees in various countries 
around the world. It is important to note that there is a significant time gap of centuries 
between these two dispersals, which may explain why the Hmong have lost contact with 
their initial ancestral homeland and become unsure of their ethnic origins in general.  
Scholars suggest that Hmong were one of the various migratory people who settled 
and resided in the central land of China in ancient times, and predate the Han Chinese 
(Hostetler 2000; Jenk 1994; Tapp 1998). This ancient group of Hmong was gradually pushed 
to the southwestern part of China (the exact historical period is uncertain), due to constant 
conflicts and wars between them and other groups. During the Qing dynasty of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth century, it is known that Hmong and possibly other small ethnic 
minority groups crossed the border from China to neighboring countries of Southeast Asia in 
response to these conflicts and resettled in the northern border areas of the region including 
present-day Laos, Thailand, Vietnam, and Burma. 
After the forced migration from China to Southeast Asia, the most well-known 
historical incident that caused the further geographical dispersion of the Hmong diaspora 
occurred much later. During the Vietnam War (1955-1975), Hmong were recruited by the 
United States Central Intelligence Agency as soldiers who fought against Communist forces 
in Laos. As a result, after the war, the Hmong were forced to flee Laos to refugee camps in 
Thailand and were later resettled to various countries around the world, such as Germany, 
France, French Guiana, the United States, Canada, Australia, and Argentina.  
Between the forced migrations from China and Laos, there is more than a two-
hundred-year time gap that has become a significant historical disjuncture. This makes it 
difficult to investigate the extent and strength of transnational relationships of Hmong 
scattered in Southeast Asia to their ethnic kin residing in China during their earlier history 
going back to ancient times. Nonetheless, it is clear that the migratory dispersal of Hmong 
started in the distant past even before they were recognized with the ethnic name of Hmong 
and they have experienced a series of geographical scattering since then. As a result, they 
lost their connection to their ancient ethnic homeland through time.   
Miao in China and Hmong Abroad: Rethinking the Connections to China 
Like other ethnic histories, Hmong history is considered uncertain and many parts of it 
remain unclear, partly due to the lack of reliable historical documents and other sources. 
Almost all scholars who study Hmong history commonly point out this problem and attempt 
to address it. In this sense, an overview of early Hmong ethnic history in relation to China 
leads at least to two major concerns. One is the disparities in how the relationship between 
contemporary diasporic Hmong and the Miao-Hmong in China is defined and understood by 
Chinese officials, academic scholars, and the Hmong themselves. Currently, Chinese 
officials do not recognize Hmong as an independent ethnic group but only use the term 
Miao, which is one of the officially identified ethnic minorities in southwestern China. 
Therefore, if one explores the history of Hmong in China from the Chinese states official 
perspective, there is a fundamental problem from the beginning, because the ethnic category 
of Hmong does not officially exist in Chinese national historiography. Only the loose 
category of Miao has been used rather indiscriminately. This inherently creates confusion in 
definitions and discussions of the relations between Miao-Hmong in China and Hmong in 
the diaspora in terms of how their ethnic connections should be understood.  
In contrast, while generally agreeing that the ancient Hmong history is difficult to 
clearly define, scholars clearly distinguish Hmong from other ethnic minorities classified as 
Miao in China. In addition, although scholars problematize and generally disagree with the 
official categorization of Hmong as Miao and argue that Hmong are a distinct ethnic group 
who have their own self-designations, there is not much scholarly ethnographic information 
about actual Miao-Hmong ethnic identifications in China. Nonetheless, a good number of 
Hmong in Laos and the United States identify with Miao-Hmong in China and often include 
them as part of the same ethnic diaspora, even if they dislike the ethnic name of Miao in 
general. 
Before a certain subgroup of Miao received the ethnic name of Hmong outside of 
China, their history in China goes back to as early as the Qin dynasty (221-206 B.C16), when 
they were living as various individual groups dispersed in the central area of the country 
(Jenks 1994). Scholars write that, since the late sixteenth century, the constant conflicts and 
wars between those different groups and the expansionist Manchus, the ruling group of the 
Qing dynasty, resulted in the forced migration of those groups further to the south and 
southwestern provinces at the frontier of China (Diamond 1988; Hostetler 2000; Lee 2007: 
2-3).  
These continuing conflicts killed or displaced a large portion of the Miao group and 
eventually forced them to migrate to other neighboring countries in Southeast Asia 
(Entenmann 2005; Hillmer 2010; Tapp et al. 2004; Tapp and Lee 2004; Tapp 1998). 
Although it is impossible to establish the exact timeline of migration within and from China, 
it is suggested that the Hmong (Miao, at that time) were considered a pivotal threat by 
Chinese rulers because of their incorrigible and inassimilable nature (Bernatzik 1970; 
Jenks 1994; Mottin 1980) and they played the most visible and vital roles in the fight against 
the ruling Manchus (Hamilton-Merritt 1993; Vang 2013). However, I must note that it is 
difficult to agree with the kind of ethnic characterization of the Hmong by some scholars as 
violent, brave, or free people based on limited information we have of their ancient history.  
According to scholars, the official Chinese recognition of Miao already began in the 
mid-sixteenth century Ming dynasty throughout the seventeenth Qing dynasty (Hostetler 
2000: 626; Lee 2007). During those periods, the Miao were referred as miaoman, literally 
meaning southern barbarians or broadly, all minorities who had been forcibly dislocated 
and had resettled in the southwestern areas of what is today Yunnan, Sichuan, Hunan, and 
16 Qin dynasty (221-206 B.C.) is different from Qing dynasty (17th-18th centuries). 
Guizhou provinces. Deal and Hostetler (2005) translate and introduce the Miao Album, one 
of the few available earlier official documents about Miao, produced by the Qing dynasty, 
which lists about ninety ethnic groups residing in Guizhou and includes paintings and 
observational accounts. Each subgroup classified as Miao has a suffix of miao at the end 
of the name.  
Regarding the dubious Miao category used in the officially-created Miao Album, 
Deal and Hostetler (2005: xxvii) note that those numerous groups defined as Miao in 
Guizhou were derived from characteristics of their outward appearance (including 
hairstyles, the color and womens skirt patterns and clothing design, behaviors and body 
movements, daily customs, and dwelling places). As a result, different ethnic minority 
groups were given names such as Big flowery Miao, Black Miao, and White Miao 
depending on the visible features of their clothes. Those features became decisive ethnic 
markers that not only characterize all ethnic minority peoples categorized as Miao today but 
are also the basis for certain images and common facts about Miao ethnicity.  
As Hostetler (2000: 624) argues, the Qing dynasty could already be considered a 
modern state in the seventeenth century and therefore sought to culturally and politically 
differentiate the rulers authority and the Other living on the frontier. In this sense, Miao 
Album is often interpreted as the Chinese modern nation-states desire to acquire more 
scientific knowledge of its internal Others. For this reason, it is not surprising to see that 
some other ethnic groups which had no similarities or relations with actual Miao customs 
and traditions were unwittingly put together in the Miao Album, such as Zhuang, Luluo (Yi), 
and Gelao. 
It was not until 1949 when the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) identified fifty-six 
official minorities and declared them to be ethnic nationalities (minzu) (Cheung 2004; 
Schein 2000: 68) in contrast to the majority Han ethnic group. Miao was recognized as one 
of those minzu and the fifth largest ethnic minority group in the nation and it is reported that 
more than nine million Miao currently reside in China. However, since the ethnic name of 
Hmong does not officially exist in China, such estimates include all other sub ethnic 
minorities in southern China considered as Miao and does not specify the actual Hmong 
population. Apparently, there is an inherent disparity in the way the state defines Miao as its 
nationals and the way these people actually perceive themselves. As scholars noted, some of 
them may not accept their homogeneous categorization as Miao (Harrell 1995; Schein 2000; 
Tapp 1998, 2002; Yang 2009).  
Scholars of Miao in China have critically examined how Chinese official ethnic 
categories do not correspond to the way ethnic minorities actually identify and perceive 
themselves. They commonly question whether Hmong in China, supposedly the largest 
group classified as Miao, can be an inclusive category that represents and encompasses all 
other Miao ethnic minorities (Lee 2007:2; 1996; Tapp 2002). Based on this, the scholarly 
definition of Miao is more specific than the official one, which disregards internal 
differences and self-identifications among the various ethnic subgroups. Scholars are also 
concerned about differentiating the real Hmong from other ethnic minority groups who 
falsely claim to be Hmong, as if doing so provides them with certain advantages (Schein 
2000; Tapp 2002). 
In general, scholars divide Miao into four major groups: Hmong, Mhu, Quo Xiong, 
A Hmao17 (Enwall 1992; Lemoine 2008; Tapp 2002:79) and differentiate Hmong from the 
other three groups mainly based on language and geographic residence. From a linguistic 
perspective, Tapp argues that the Hmong in China are a particularly clearly identifiable 
group who do refer to themselves customarily as Hmong, and who speak dialects of the 
17 Depending on the pronunciation, scholars use slightly different names to indicate the same groups. For 
example: Hmong, Hmu, Kho Hsiong; Hmong, Hmu, Mong, Hmao (Mottin 1980: 5).  
Western or Chuanqiandian branch of the Miao language in the Miao-Yao18 language family; 
one of the three main branches of this Miao language (2002: 78).  
His view is based on an earlier scholarly work from 1930s, conducted by David 
Graham, that the Chuan Miao in southwestern part of China called themselves Hmong. 
Another anthropologist of the Miao in China, Schein (2004: 275) also states that only a 
portion of those identified as Miaothe ones distributed over western Guizhou and parts of 
Yunnan, particularly the border areascall themselves Hmong in their own language. In 
his short article, Enwall (1992: 2) also writes that the Miao themselves use various self-
designations and the Chinese traditionally classified them according to the characteristic 
colour of the womens clothes (as red, black, white Miao).  
However, Norma Diamond, an anthropologist of Miao in China who does not 
specifically focus on Hmong, writes that Miao like others, were participants in localized 
multi-ethnic economic systems whose members shared some features in common and who 
were at the same time distinguished from each other by specialized production and activity 
(1995: 97). In addition, Culas and Michaud (2004: 70) claim that a British missionary, who 
traveled in southwest China and encountered ethnic minorities there, first introduced the 
ethnic name Hmong in 1911. Considering this, it is highly possible that those different Miao 
ethnic groups were not isolated but had engaged in frequent social interaction with each 
other since the distant past. As a result, they not only share customs, lifestyles, and 
languages but also influenced each others cultures in various ways. Therefore, not only is it 
difficult to accurately identify who the true Hmong are in China but also equally 
problematic to isolate Hmong from other ethnic Miao groups because of complicated 
18 Also known as the Hmong-Mien linguistic family. Sharing the similar history of dispersal with Hmong, 
Yao are an ethnic group currently understood as (Iu-)Mien, residing in southwest China as well as dispersed 
around Southeast Asia and also in the United States. Although it is believed that Hmong and Mien share 
linguistic commonalities, their languages today are no longer mutually intelligible. For more research on 
contemporary (Iu-)Mien identity formation outside China, see Jonsson (2005) and MacDonald (1998). 
relationships between official views and various ethnic minority groups own perspectives 
about the Miao category.  
In addition to linguistic markers of ethnic difference, genetic research has also been 
conducted through a DNA project, which collected over 500 individual blood samples and 
claims that Hmong in Southeast Asia have close relatedness to current Miao in Hunan 
province (southwest region) and also have genetic similarities with the ethnic Han people in 
northeast China (Lee 2007: 9-11). Some Hmong scholars have used this finding as valid 
evidence that the ethnic origin of Hmong is southwestern China and also claim that the 
Hmong predate ethnic Han Chinese (see Lee 2007: 24). 
From China to Laos 
It is still questionable when exactly the Hmong started living in Laos. Some earlier studies of 
Hmong outside China suggest that their migration from China and their arrival in Southeast 
Asia occurred between 200 to 400 years ago (Geddes 1976: 27). There are some records 
about the Hmong in different periods of Lao history that document the interactions between 
the Hmong and nation-state, especially in relation to the French colonial era and the Vietnam 
War. Although only limited sources are available about the situation and status of the 
Hmong during the French colonial presence in Laos between 1893 and 1945, there are some 
documents about their social activities and ethnic interactions during that time. Therefore, it 
is possible to partially understand the relationship of Hmong with the French colonial 
administration and their lives before their involvement in the Vietnam War.  
Initially, Hmong were both voluntarily and involuntarily contributors to the Lao 
nation-state under French colonialism by being subject to taxes and the civil duties imposed 
by the colonial regime (Lee 2004: 441; Tapp 1989a). Some studies also mention that the 
Hmong fought for the French government to repel foreign invasions, such as Japanese 
expansion into Southeast Asia in 1940 (McCoy 1970: 68). It is also known that the Hmong 
assisted with French domination of Laos because they hoped to realize their dream of 
establishing an autonomous and independent ethnic district for themselves in the Nong Het19 
area in return for their cooperation (Chan 1994: 8). 
According to the Hmong families that I interviewed in the United States, there have 
been Hmong individuals who lived in the capital city of Vientiane during French colonialism 
and worked as government employees, especially those with some formal education under 
the French colonial system. Their position in the government may not have been of the 
highest rank, but their work experiences with government officials enabled them to acquire 
some official information and language skills, which much later became useful when they 
had to evacuate the country during and after the Vietnam War. 
Toward the end of the Twentieth Century, Hmong in Laos were subject to the 
governments nationalist projects that resembled the Chinese states ethnic unification policy 
in the 1950s. When the Lao Communist state started to open its doors to foreign countries 
for economic development in 1997, it also declared a single (one) ethnicity, one nationality 
project, which designated all ethnic minority groups as equal Lao nationals throughout the 
country. Based on this context, each of the three largest ethnic groups in Laos was given a 
new official name universally preceded by Lao followed by their residential patterns based 
on the different elevations in which they used to live. As a result, the major ethnic groups in 
Laos are officially classified and recognized as Lao Loum (low-landers, referring to the 
majority ethnic Lao), Lao Theung (upper-middle-landers, Khmu), and Lao Soung (high-
landers, Hmong).  
The Vietnam War and Predicament of Homeland 
As I mentioned earlier, the Hmong had already lived in other Southeast Asian countries of 
Vietnam,20 Burma, Cambodia,21 and Thailand before the Vietnam War long after their forced 
19 Nong Het is a district located in Xieng-kwang province in northern Laos. It has one of the largest Hmong 
populations in the country. It was also where much of the fighting connected with the Vietnam War took place 
in Laos. 
20 It may be interesting to further study about the reasons that Hmong in Vietnam were not recruited or 
participated in the war despite the fact that their population is larger than the Hmong in Laos. 
displacement from China. The Hmong in these other Southeast Asian countries (including 
many Hmong currently residing in the northern provinces of Thailand) had little connection 
to the war and therefore have different historical experiences from those living in Laos, who 
left the country after the war and temporarily stayed in refugee camps in Thailand.  
The Vietnam War not only precipitated the fundamental cause of Hmongs 
contemporary diaspora but it also redefined the ethnic consciousness and connections of 
Hmong to Laos and the United States, as well as to other parts of the diaspora. The 20-year 
involvement of the United States in the Vietnam War was unsuccessful, leaving multiple 
political and ethnic conflicts, social destruction, as well as tragedy and trauma for many 
individuals. The impact of the war is still present in peoples everyday lives today in 
different ways, for both Hmong who returned to Laos after residing in refugee camps and 
those living new lives as a resettled ethnic minority in various countries outside of Southeast 
Asia.  
 In Laos, the Vietnam War is also known as the Secret War because of many 
unrecorded and furtively treated facts about the destruction and consequences that it brought 
to the country. In accordance with Cold War global geopolitics, the Lao nation-state was 
internally divided between the Royal Lao Army (the non-Communist successor of the 
former Kingdom of Laos) and the Communist Pathet Lao, which initiated the Communist 
regime that eventually established the current Lao Peoples Democratic Republic (Lao PDR) 
after the U.S. withdrawal that ended the Vietnam War. Such severe national political 
divisions and Cold War politics at the local level created ethnic divisions among Hmong in 
Laos as well. Both the United States CIA and the coalition between Communist Pathet Lao 
and North Vietnam recruited Hmong soldiers, going to each village and mandating that at 
least one or more sons of each family should participate on their side of the conflict. As 
many of my interviewees put it, the war was remembered as the worst thing that can ever 
21 Hmongs presence in Cambodia is based on the general speculation given by different Hmong individuals 
and scholars but any official data and published research are not found. 
happen in ones life that one never, ever wants to see happen again. They also stated, these 
tragedies are because of America and the Soviet Union, and had nothing to do with Laos.22  
Although it is widely known that Hmong entered into a military alliance with the 
CIA to fight against the Communist Pathet Lao during the Vietnam War, it is also important 
to note that not all Hmong individuals were unified in support of the CIA, but were divided 
into at least two political factions. The majority of Hmong fought for the CIA against the 
Communists under the Hmong General Vang Paos23 leadership. General Vang Pao also 
hoped the collaboration of Hmong with the United States would eventually allow them to 
establish part of Laos as the Hmong homeland. This is similar to the reason why they 
previously collaborated with the French colonial authorities, which highlights their 
continued historical desire to establish an ethnic homeland.  
The Hmong who fought for the United States were forced to flee Laos after the war 
to avoid persecution by the new Communist Lao state and ended up in refugee camps before 
they were resettled to the United States and other countries. However, other Hmong soldiers 
who fought against the CIA and fought for the Communist Pathet Lao remained in Laos after 
the war and are currently recognized by local Laotian governments and some of them are 
given a military pension. The historical legacy of intra-ethnic political conflict can still be 
observed today in many Hmong households in the diaspora. For example, Hmong in Laos 
have pictures of their Communist political leaders and the Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh 
at home whereas pictures of General Vang Pao are hung on the walls of Hmongs houses in 
the United States. 
The Hmongs historical cooperation with different regimes, such as the French 
administration, the Royal Lao Government, the Communist Pathet Lao, and the U.S. CIA 
can be viewed as efforts by the Hmong leadership to gain independence from political 
domination and to establish their own ethnic state because of their discontent with various 
22 Quotes from various interviews. 
23 General Vang Pao resided in the United States after the Vietnam War and died in 2011. 
Lao ruling groups. For some Hmong political leaders in the past, such a future ethnic 
homeland was possibly imagined as an independent nation-state. However, the Hmong in the 
contemporary diaspora no longer seem to support such an idea and realize that establishing 
an autonomous Hmong district in Laos (as an independent ethnic homeland) is not possible 
nor justified. In this sense, the former political ambitions of General Vang Pao and his 
followers to take over part of Laos as their own homeland has produced ambivalent and 
contentious debates, especially among the U.S. Hmong community.  
Therefore, Hmongs complicated roles and changing political engagement with 
different state regimes need to be carefully considered in order to deconstruct the 
homogenous and stereotypical (and often misleading) ethnic characterization of Hmong as 
freedom fighters, hill tribes, jungle guerillas, the Lao states virulent enemy, or even CIA 
collaborators. If we take into account all these different political relationships of the Hmong 
to different political regimes in Laotian history, it becomes harder to define a unified and 
politicized ethnicity for Hmong.  
Forced Displacement and Life in Refugee Camps in Thailand 
Fleeing from Laos after the Vietnam War in the mid-1970s, Hmong families started to cross 
the border as a group from different parts of Laos, especially in the northern areas where 
they were particularly involved with the war on the side of the U.S. CIA. For most of them, 
leaving behind their homes was not a voluntary or easy decision at all. They could not 
outwardly share or discuss their plans with others. Many families had to flee by night and 
suddenly abandon their homes with no warning or preparation. 
Once they left home, they had a long journey through Laos and then from Laos 
across the border to Thailand. Many Hmong people today still have vivid memories of the 
night of their border crossing. Similar to how differently people remember and experienced 
camp life (which will be discussed later), the border crossing experience was also 
remembered somewhat differently depending on the individual and families. Shoua Yang, a 
professional woman in her late forties currently living in the United States, for example, 
mentioned that her family had a relatively endurable journey crossing the border between 
Laos and Thailand. She said: 
My mom was very smart. She was a single mom, but well-prepared and planned. So 
crossing the border was not too difficult for our family, because she already paid Laotian 
people to transport us here and there. We carried our clothes, blankets, pots, pans, and rice, 
so we had all those materials to survive. 
On the other hand, many other families crossed borders with incommensurable fears 
and anxiety. For example, Steve Thao, a successful businessman in his early forties in the 
United States, remembered the traumatic night that his entire family fled Laos at the end of 
the Vietnam War when he was only a child. Crossing the Mekong river in complete 
darkness, his oldest brother, who was only twenty years old and a young soldier under 
General Vang Pao, was shot in his leg on the Lao side of the border. As soon as the family 
reached the Thai border, they urgently took the brother to a hospital for treatment but one of 
his legs ended up permanently crippled.  
Similarly, Peng Xiong in the United States still vividly remembered the thirty-day 
devastating journey of his family to Thailand without knowing the correct route or having 
proper transportation. They simply followed the mountain ranges in the dark and slept in the 
bushes. He described a night that was truly dreadful: 
People would whisper to parents with little kids crying in the middle of night, you either 
silence your kid, or we will all be killed, because the military soldiers could hear the noise 
and find us. In fact, that happened to one of my little nephews. We had to feed him opium 
to silence him. We were able to revive and save him later, but he could have been almost 
killed []. If we hadnt done that to him, I am sure he could have been a much smarter 
person. But yes, we all could have died.  
Regardless of how differently they experienced the journey and border crossing, 
many Hmong came to be situated temporarily in a stateless condition in refugee camps in 
Thailand without being able to make plans for their own future. Their lives and future homes 
were very much subject to institutional agencies such as the United Nations High 
Commissioner Refugees (UNHCR), which temporarily housed the Hmong refugees from 
Laos in several camp sites in Thailand, such as Ban Vinai (the largest refugee camp), 
Chiangkhan, Nam Yao, and Phanat Nikhom as well as Wat Tham Krabok.24 Each family 
stayed and spent different lengths of time at the camps, depending on when they were 
designated for resettlement and how quickly the family made a decision to leave. However, 
at the community level, refugee camps were the very site where the anxiety and uncertainty 
about the future were experienced.   
Writing about Hmongs refugee life and camp experiences would be one of the most 
challenging and emotionally difficult things for anyone to do. There are various common 
experiences of refugee life that have significantly impacted Hmongs shared ethnic and 
diasporic consciousness of displacement and trauma. However, the narratives can also be 
understood based on notable individual differences in age, gender, socioeconomic status, and 
familial and kin support available in different camps.  
Certain aspects of refugee camp life in Thailand are remembered differently, both 
negatively and positively, despite the commonly experienced economic hardships, confined 
living conditions, and physical and emotional struggles. Narrating individual accounts and 
personal stories is therefore crucial in order to understand the way individuals make 
connections to the past and develop selective memories in remembering their traumatic 
experiences. The diversity and complexity of reality emerges, especially when Hmong 
people describe their refugee experiences. My interview questions about this subject were 
24 Wat Tham Krabok is a Buddhist temple that provided a shelter for Hmong refugees who needed to be treated 
for illnesses and could not leave Thailand. This camp became the last place for Hmong, especially those who 
prolonged their decision to leave Thailand and return to Laos or resettle in the United States. 
rather open-ended and often broad, but that encouraged Hmong to express their feelings 
freely and recall memories that they wished to talk about first or remembered the most. This 
also provides the context for understanding how Hmong have developed ambivalent feelings 
about the multiple nation-states in which they have experienced and currently resided: Laos, 
Thailand, and the United States. 
 In the first place, the refugee experiences at the camp were unquestionably difficult 
and full of hardship, producing shared memories of everyday distress and anxiety among 
individuals. For example, Xou Her, a tuk-tuk driver in his forties, who spent about five years 
at the refugee camp and then returned to Laos (instead of resettling in the United States), 
recalled the difficulties, especially the uncomfortable living situation with limited space and 
freedom to move around. Life in the camp for him was very much confined, compared to his 
previous life in Laos. Xou said: 
Life at the camp was very difficult. You could not go anywhere. Once a week, UN and 
Thai officers distributed food for us to eat. There was no independent house for each 
family. Everyone lived in the same place together. Some were relatives, but some didnt 
know each other. But they randomly grouped us and made us live together under the same 
roof. After living like that, coming back to Laos was more comfortable. But it was just 
difficult to buy a piece of land, a car, a house, or find a job after arriving here, because we 
had no savings.  
For many Hmong resettled in the United States, the camp experience was also 
remembered as a life of extreme hardship. For example, Chong Her, one of the Hmong 
Christian church members in his mid forties, shared his memory of sufferings in the refugee 
camp, which eventually made him convert to Christianity as a way to survive in the face of 
both destitution and illness. His family moved three times to different camps within Thailand 
until he ended up in Ban Vinai, where he spent the last five years (out of a total of thirteen) 
before eventually moving to the United States. Chong said: 
My life in the refugee camps? [laugh] Many people told me that I should write a book 
about it. The only way we were able to survive was because of the United Nations. Once a 
week, they provided us food like rice. We pretty much did everything possible to survive. 
Even though we were officially not allowed to go outside the camp, sometimes, we 
sneaked out into the forest and hunted birds and squirrels. We also had lots of bamboos 
just to eat. So for me, life in the refugee camps, I will never be able to forget it.  
In a different interview, Yer Lee, a retired man in his late fifties who resettled in the 
United States, also recalled the poverty and difficulties with survival during his refugee 
camp experience. In fact, various Hmong families shared his description. Yer elaborated: 
In the camp, we basically had difficulties with everything. At the very beginning of our 
arrival in Thailand, we had no supporting agencies that helped with water or food. When 
our pocket money ran out, we had to beg the people at the Catholic charity groups or the 
monks at the temple. If that also became impossible, we had to go to Thai neighborhoods. 
[With their permission,] we worked for Thai people to get some money, like cultivating 
their lands or cleaning the weeds. If not, there was definitely nothing to eat. In that case, 
everyone just starved and got skinny. We also had no houses, of course. I dont know how 
else I can describe enough the hardship of life in the camp. 
Like Chong and Yer, many Hmong in their mid-forties and older particularly remembered 
the difficult side of camp life and talked about the negative experiences in the camp.  
On the other hand, there are other sides of camp life since many individuals also 
recalled memories which were not simply about trauma, impoverishment, and desperation. 
During our interview, another Hmong man in his thirties, Chi Her in the United States 
reminded me of the need to consciously preserve a balanced understanding about what 
refugee life was like for Hmong as both a person and as a member of the ethnic community. 
Besides the experience of his own family, Chi also learned about differences in refugee life 
by repeatedly listening to the Hmong radio program25 for two hours every night. He said: 
Well, yes, life wasnt easy at the camps, but there was also fun. Hmong in the U.S. 
sometimes say that Soun (Ban) Vinai (the largest refugee camp) was a village of heaven, 
like having festivals every day because there were a lot of social gatherings. I mean, 
people had different experiences and memories. For some people whose parents had more 
money than others, the refugee camps could be a place for fun and good memories. But for 
other people, who had hard journeys and were poor, life in camp must have been 
miserable, like my uncle. I can understand that the degree of danger and hardship varies a 
lot, depending on the way individuals remember it.  
Chis statement suggests that we differentiate and take into account individual memories 
and expressions into more multi-layered and detailed contexts before reducing them only 
to a collective and homogenous group experience. Indeed, while Hmong had to deal with 
anxiety and uncertainty about their futures in the refugee camps, they also started to 
learn how to manage difficulties, new changes, and challenges for their survival.26  
Chis view indeed represents those who made more positive remarks on their refugee 
experiences, especially among Hmong women in Laos and some Hmong in the United States 
who experienced the camp as young children. In Laos, for example, Yeng Thao, a 
grandmother in her seventies recalled camp life more neutrally. According to her, as a 
mother of many children, her life did not change that dramatically between Laos and the 
Thai refugee camps. Yeng explained as follows:  
Life over there [in the camp] was good since I was able to sit down and concentrate on paj 
ntaub [(pan dau) traditional sewing embroidery]. And we didnt have to pay for food since 
25 The Hmong radio program, hosted by and broadcasted for the local Hmong community in the United States 
can be accessed through a phone or a radio. It has become a popular channel for many elderly Hmong to listen 
to and also freely talk about various topics about the past and present. 
26 For ethnographic study on Hmong peoples daily lives in Thai refugee camps, see Lynellyn Longs book Ban 
Vinai: The Refugee Camp (1992). 
we got it for free. So it was a OK life. At that time, a lot of people wanted to stay longer in 
the camp, but the Thai government did not allow that and sent us back to Laos or relocated 
us to different places. 
Both Xou, who expressed frustration about refugee life earlier, and Yeng were actually 
related to each other by clan affiliation, stayed in the same camp in Thailand, and also 
resettled in the same village in Laos. Although their living circumstances and external 
environment might not have been that different, the overall memories that they recalled and 
spoke about are quite different.  
In fact, young Hmong girls in their late teens in Laos who spent their childhood in 
Thailand recalled that they actually enjoyed being there because there were more 
opportunities for them as girls, like learning the Hmong alphabet (taught by Western 
missionary volunteers) and starting to make pocket money by selling their embroideries. 
However, after they returned to Laos and resettled, many of them ended up not being able to 
pursue an education, not simply because their parents were reluctant to send their daughters 
to school but also because the public schools rejected them because they were too late for 
primary education but too ignorant for higher levels of education. 
Hmong in the United States who experienced the camp when they were relatively 
young also had some positive memories. These individuals are usually in their mid thirties 
and early forties and described their camp experiences rather as fun, because they had 
nothing to worry about as a kid unlike their parents. Steve Thao, for example, shared his 
memory from a refugee camp life at the age of eight. Although he gave the earlier 
description about his dangerous border crossing at the end of the Vietnam War that wounded 
his older brother, he spoke about the enjoyable moment in the camp because of his brother: 
You know, my [oldest] brother is a good-looking man. Because of that, I was beloved by 
many female nurses at the camp in Thailand. They were interested in my brother so treated 
me really nicely. Whenever I was waiting in line for distribution of a meal, they would 
smile at me, wave their hands secretly, and call me to come see them. I got extra chocolates 
and candies that no other kids could get [laugh] 
It is possible that this seemingly enjoyable childhood memory has become a coping 
mechanism for Steve that can mitigate his traumatic refugee memories. However, many 
other Hmong in the United States often confirmed that they did have a life in the camps 
despite their confined refugee status. Those currently in their early forties actually met their 
current spouses, dated, and married in the camps, which indicated that the life of hardship 
and uncertainty briefly turned into a special and memorable moment of their personal lives. 
In addition, ethnic and cultural consciousness as Hmong is also portrayed through the 
performance of the New Year ceremony in the Ban Vinai refugee camp. In short, efforts to 
promote ethnic consciousness and Hmong culture continued despite their displacement and 
uncertainty about their ethnic futures and lives.  
Of course, the constructive and even positive memories still do not dilute the fact that 
the war and refugee experience was difficult and the most traumatic part of their recent 
diasporic history of displacement and dispersal. However, it is equally important to 
understand different individual memories that somewhat contrast with the collective and 
homogenous discourse that focuses on loss and trauma as ways in which individuals make 
connections to the past. 
The End of Camp Life: Resettlement Abroad or Return to Laos?  
Both Hmong and international agencies knew that the refugee camps in Thailand were only 
a temporary shelter and that the Hmong must eventually be relocated and resettled. Hmong 
initially could not choose the country of refugee resettlement when leaving the refugee 
camps (Hillmer 2010: 215-220; Long 1993). They were eventually sent to the countries 
through screening and interviews with foreign agencies and organizations with little 
consideration of their previous lives. During the screening process, Hmong were also asked 
for their personal information, such as name, date of birth, and village of residence in Laos 
in order to determine the extent to which they had been affiliated with anti-Communist 
military forces during the Vietnam War. This subsequently influenced their chances of 
resettlement in the United States and other Western countries.  
However, those seemingly simple questions were not easy to answer for many 
Hmong because the way they remember their personal information did not meet the 
universal standard required by international agencies. For instance, many of them did not 
know their exact year of birth or age, because they were not familiar with a Western 
calendar-based system. Regardless, if Hmong refugees did not give the right types of 
answers, they were often suspected by officials of giving false accounts of their participation 
in the war. As a result, they were not allowed to leave the camps but were left behind or the 
members of families often got separated and resettled in different countries. 
On the other hand, there were rumors and horror stories about life in the United 
States that spread through the camps and made Hmong people reluctant or even resistant to 
resettlement in that country. Stories like the one from some of my interviewees were spread 
and shared by many refugees in the camps: When Hmong people were still in the camp, 
they watched movies and saw tall, giant Americans. They started believing that those 
Americans will turn Hmong into food and eat them As a result, Hmong had a lot of fears 
and hesitation to leave for the U.S. There are of course many other complicated factors that 
made Hmong hesitant about making quick decisions about whether to leave or stay in the 
camps. As some of my interviewees noted, it is true that some elderly Hmong also had the 
fear of losing their tradition of polygamy and cultural marriage practices and that they would 
have to discard after resettlement to Western countries. 
Decades later, the Thai government in 1997 made a final announcement that all the 
refugee camps must officially be closed. Many Hmong were sent back to Laos around that 
time while some of them still could not leave immediately and involuntarily became 
protracted refugees (Hein 1995; Hillmer 2010; Long 1993). However, more recently, those 
Hmong left behind in protracted refugee situations were eventually moved to the United 
States in 2002, 2005, and 2007 and joined their family members already living there. These 
groups that migrated recently to the United States are currently undergoing remarkable 
distress from the process of adjustment, similar to those resettled family members and 
relatives who arrived decades earlier. 
Return to Laos 
During my fieldwork in Laos, Hmong often shared their memories with me about the day of 
their return to Laos after years in the refugee camps in Thailand. As a resettled returnee in 
the Dao Tha village in the mid 1990s, Pao Her and I often had conversations about his 
experience after spending four years at the Thai refugee camp with his family and relatives. 
One day, I asked: 
Author: At that time in the refugee camp, didnt you want to go to America? 
Poa Her: Well, I wanted to, but it was because the [resettlement] project was ended. I  
mean, the UN did not continue to help the remaining people go to the U.S. They said there 
are no more countries that will take us and we have to go back to our hometown in Laos. 
They also told us that if we go to America, everything will be very difficult. We will have 
to depend on the governments help, which is not stable, and we dont know the language 
so cant freely move around. We will end up being drug addicts [laugh] They explained 
this to us and we listened. I kept thinking about it and thought to myself, Okay, if they 
still send us to America, I would go. But since the project was over, well, thats okay. I am 
a Lao citizen. I decided to come back to Laos. 
Author: Was it a difficult trip to come back to Laos then? 
Poa Her: No, it wasnt difficult. The UN helped us again with trucks and sent us home. 
When we crossed the Mekong river bridge, we changed into a big bus again. Thats the 
first time I came back to my home country after many years. 
Like Poas family, many Hmong families left Laos from different parts of the 
country, not only because they participated in the war but also because of the broader 
consequences caused by Hmong military actions during the war. Poas family got separated 
in the refugee camps and his oldest brothers family and the first daughter (who was married 
at that time and followed her husband) went to the United States while he and his younger 
siblings returned to Laos together. Kinship and clan membership played a critical role for 
many Hmong families during the refugee experience and they tried to stay together when 
they fled Laos, lived in refugee camps, and returned to Laos. That explains why many 
families currently live in the Hmong community of Dao Tha in Vang Vieng are related to 
each other by kin affiliation and clan membership. 
 After crossing the Thai-Lao border, the Hmong in the Vang Vieng village were 
relocated at least three times within the district before they were finally resettled in Dao Tha. 
During their transition back to Laos, these families suffered from inadequate living 
conditions, no proper water, food, or housing systems. Most of all, young families often 
suffered from the sudden death of their babies during the processes of return and 
resettlement because of illness and impoverished living conditions. I did not learn about their 
babies who died during this period until much later because the parents did not (or could not) 
include them when introducing their current children to me. Indeed, it was disheartening 
when I realized that families initially did not mention children who died during the earlier 
refugee experience and would only talk about them later when discussing past memories. 
The loss was too painful to remember, as one of those parents who lost the second 
daughter, Xou Her, said.  
 Those Hmong families eventually moved to several small villages and established a 
stable life, including at my own field site of Dao Tha village. When they resettled in 
different villages, each household was entitled to a piece of land to build their own house. 
The sizes and locations of villages varied depending on the available land, which sometimes 
caused contention about land distribution and unequal reintegration of various Hmong 
groups. However, among the total of six Hmong villages formed after the relocation projects 
in the district that I visited, the degree of social tension and economic development varied. In 
particular, one village which I call Phu Sok is known not just as another ordinary resettled 
Hmong village but as a controversial group of returnees from the Ban Vinai (the largest 
one) and Wat Tham Krabok (the last one) camps who resisted coming back to Laos until the 
last minute.  
Although there were active social interactions between the Phu Sok villagers and 
other Lao civilians as well as Hmong visitors from overseas, I was often reminded by other 
Hmong people to remain careful when approaching the villagers in Phu Sok. According to 
them, the local government would not consider it ordinary if a foreigner like me developed 
frequent contact with the Phu Sok villagers without official permission (which is difficult to 
get anyway) and there can be unforeseen problems in obtaining the villagers trust. Despite 
the short distance and easy travel from my field site of Dao Tha village, I was not able to 
visit Phu Sok until much later when a few students from there, who lived with their married 
siblings residing in Dao Tha, invited me to their homes.  
Therefore, the refugee resettlement and reintegration process of Hmong in Laos have 
produced differences such as between Dao Tha and Phu Sok, where the villagers have still 
maintained their lifestyles and connections from their former refugee camps, such as a 
Christian Church. Indeed, it is necessarily to take into account such specific contexts and 
differences when understanding the larger social background of Hmongs contemporary 
lives in Laos. 
Hmong Refugees as Immigrant Latecomers to the United States 
The Hmong in the United States have over forty years of immigration history since the mid 
1970s after their first official arrival in the country from different refugee camps in Thailand. 
The resettlement process from Thailand to the United States took a number of years, since 
Hmong families came from multiple refugee camp locations at different times. Upon the 
arrival, they were initially sent to various cities depending on the sponsoring agencies, which 
were mostly U.S. religious and charity organizations, or the location of relatives who had 
already resettled in the country. However, they later moved internally within the United 
States, often following other family and clan members. Currently, the largest Hmong 
population resides in the states of California, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. In the United 
States, Hmong are usually grouped together as Southeast Asian or Indochinese war refugees 
along with Vietnamese, Cambodians, and Laotians and mainly recognized by their military 
cooperation with the CIA during the Vietnam War. It is important to note that Hmong are 
known independently as Hmong by the U.S. government in its official documents and not 
as Laotian, which refer to the majority ethnic Lao (Lao Loum). 
There are a number of publications that detail and describe Hmongs experiences of 
resettlement in the United States written by both Hmong writers and non-Hmong authors 
(Chan 1994; Donnelly 1997; Faderman 1999; Koltyk 1993, 1997; Vang 2010; Yang 2008). 
These books deftly convey peoples narratives, personal accounts, oral histories and 
autobiographies, all of which can be the basis of understanding the history of the Hmong 
diaspora through peoples lived experiences. Instead of summarizing them, it is meaningful 
to reflect on the past experiences and memories of my interviewees about the processes and 
experiences of resettlement in America. When listening to Hmong peoples stories, 
particularly about their first arrival and refugee resettlement process in the United States, I 
realized that their real hardship was actually not over after they left Laos and the refugee 
camps in Thailand.  
Although many of the Hmong had lived in the refugee camps before they resettled in 
the United States, most have experienced continuous economic hardship and had devastating 
memories of the initial period of their resettlement in America, which was not exactly a 
land of opportunity. An elderly Hmong man in his sixties, Tou Lee, recalled his first arrival 
in Washington D.C. in August 1978 at a temporary shelter before he moved to other major 
cities: 
At that time, the IRC (International Red Cross) took my family to the 8th floor of a hotel, 
which had just a very small room. I lived there for one month. Some days, I didnt even 
have anything to eat. I only knew the Lao language, but the person who came as an 
interpreter [a service assistant] was a Vietnamese. I had a lot of children, too. But I didnt 
know how to go to the market to buy things or how to make money. When my babies were 
so hungry and crying, there was no one to visit or take care of us. OhI was so frustrated 
() About a month later, I started a job washing dishes at a big factory from sun-rise to 
sun-set. My life back then was very difficult. 
When Hmong families first arrived in the country and were put in temporary 
governmental housing, there were not enough professionals like social workers and family 
specialists who could regularly visit them and help out with the process of resettlement. The 
language barrier also made overall communications difficult between Hmong families and 
their caretakers, which often discouraged them from expressing their frustrations or 
explaining their problems.  
Sai Lee, one of the earlier Hmong who resettled in the United States, told me about 
the hardship of resettlement and adjustment to a completely new life among new refugee 
arrivals. Shortly after his arrival, Sai started to work as a social worker for Hmong 
communities based on his previous experiences assisting foreign medical volunteer teams in 
Thai refugee camps. One day, he visited a Hmong family and found out that the family did 
not know how to use the stove in the kitchen and therefore could not cook at all and got sick, 
because they barely ate any food for a few days. On his daily visits to different houses, he 
also made sure to explain and teach families that the water in the toilet is not drinkable while 
distributing food stamps and aid items to them. 
Even for some Hmong professionals who currently hold reputable positions in the 
community because of their successful careers, their frequent stories of hardship and 
struggles were not that different. A public elementary school principal in Sacramento, Chue 
Yang, shared with me his life history of economic hardship before he became a community 
representative. He spoke about how his family was initially rejected for government-
sponsored low income housing, because he was too poor to be qualified. He was laughing 
when talking about this as if it were a delightful memory from the distant past.  
Mai Lor, who worked as a program coordinator at a Hmong community organization, 
also laughed about her difficult childhood after resettlement. In Utah, the first state where 
her family lived before moving to Sacramento, she remembered that their lives back then 
were kind of dark, because they could not go anywhere freely but just stayed home. The 
weather was brutally cold, too. One day, her parents talked about driving a car. Her father 
told her mother, To go somewhere, we need a car. Every time I look outside, I see everyone 
drives. I mean, if everyone can drive, why cant I? Both her parents were able to get a car 
from her neighbor and actually tried to drive it as soon as they got in. They almost crashed 
into the garage door and were barely able to stop the car. Mai also could not stop laughing 
when telling me the story.  
Life Goes On 
There is no published study that explores the relations between Hmongs ethnic minority 
experiences as resettled refugees in both Laos and the United States and their search for 
homeland or a place of belonging. From ancient times in China to their more recent 
migration and dispersal after the Vietnam War, many of my interviewees shared experiences 
and memories from the past in different ways. Facing both economic and sociocultural 
hardships in the various countries in which they have lived, they truly have diasporic 
histories based on multiple displacements and forced dispersal to numerous countries.  
However, this diasporic history is not based on a definitive ethnic homeland, a 
country of ancestral origin, which can anchor their dispersed transnational community and 
serve as a place where they fully belong and can return. Instead, it has been a history of 
multiple forced migrations and resettlements in various countries, which in the past led to the 
desire of some Hmong to establish an alternative country or land that they can call their own 
and where they can live together. Such imaginings and longings for an ethnic homeland can 
serve as an escape from their current hardships, political conflicts, and migratory 
displacements that they endured. In this context, the next chapter will explore Hmongs 
multiple theories of origin and their search for the alternatives to the absence of an ethnic 
homeland in the Hmong diaspora and examine their diverse perceptions to their supposed 
homelands.
Chapter 2. In Search of Homelands and Belonging 
Unlike other geographically dispersed ethnic groups, the Hmong do not have a clear and 
definitive ancestral homeland at the center of their diaspora that is the basis for their ethnic 
unity and transnational communities. Although the predominant scholarly theory claims that 
the ancestral homeland of Hmong is China, the Hmong themselves express considerable 
uncertainty about their origins as a diasporic peoples and do not always adopt scholarly 
discourses that assume that it is China. Instead, they have developed multiple, incongruent 
theories of ethnic ancestry and homeland which circulate among different individuals, 
indicating that China remains a possible, but also contested ethnic homeland. Although they 
express a sense of co-ethnic affiliation with the Miao-Hmong minority in China, they do not 
identify or affiliate with the nation-state as a place of ethnic origin. 
In addition, it is important to realize that Hmong, like other diasporic peoples, have 
multiple homelands. Although their ethnic homeland (the country where their ethnic group 
originated) is a product of their initial migratory dispersal from (what scholars claim) 
southwestern China, the contemporary Hmong diaspora was also constituted after the 
Vietnam War when Hmong living in Laos were again dispersed to various countries as 
resettled refugees. As a result, Laos is the natal homeland of diasporic Hmong, since it is the 
country of origin where they were born.  
However, the attitudes and perceptions of Hmong toward the natal homeland of Laos 
have been quite ambivalent because they have been a socioeconomically and politically 
marginalized ethnic minority and were forced to flee from the country after the Vietnam War 
due to fear of persecution by the Communist Lao government. As a result, although China 
and Laos are both homelands in terms of their diasporic ethnic history, neither really feels 
like a true homeland for them to which they feel strong emotional attachment and 
affiliation). Their ambivalent relations to both China and Laos indicates that they have a 
diasporic ethnic minority consciousness in which they do not feel they fully belong to either 
nation-state.  
This chapter examines Hmongs own conflicted and ambivalent perceptions about 
both China and Laos and how they therefore constitute themselves as a diaspora that does 
not really belong to either nation-state and are therefore a peoples without a true homeland 
or country. In addition, since their relations to homelands remain uncertain and contested, I 
will also examine the way Hmong have engaged in an ongoing search for their ethnic origins 
and have explored various possibilities and theories about it.  
Although Hmong do read scholarly work on their ethnic history as part of their 
search for ancestry, their theories about their ethnic homeland are inferred and retrieved 
from their oral history, songs and chants, and cultural ritual activities. This chapter will 
further argue that diasporas do not necessarily have to be based on a definitive ethnic 
homeland as a territorial center. The transnational ethnic affiliations that keep diasporic 
communities together can be based on emotional attachments and affiliations with co-ethnic 
communities dispersed in the diaspora across multiple countries rather than with a dominant 
nation-state of ethnic origin. 
Multiple Homelands and Diaspora 
When I began my fieldwork in Laos, I hoped to find some concrete answers about the ethnic 
origins of the Hmong people and the location of their ethnic homeland, since this has been 
an issue that Hmong in Dao Tha village in Vang Vieng often spoke about. My Hmong 
interviewees indeed expressed their personal interest in the topic and actively gave me their 
opinions. However, at the same time, I was asked numerous times why I chose such a 
complex and difficult topic, since it will be difficult for me to find the right answer. A 
twenty-year old man Yer Lee in Laos was one of them. He was always curious about his 
peoples ethnic origins even if his daily life may have nothing to do with his ancestral ethnic 
homeland. One late afternoon on a dry day in November, Yer rushed up to me as if he had 
really striking news to tell me. He was coming from a downtown Internet Caf in Vang 
Vieng. Catching his breath but smiling, he said: 
Yer: You know, I just went to an Internet Caf and looked up Hmong on the Internet I 
found out something special and really interesting. It was in thesomething likean 
online source. 
Author: You mean, like an encyclopedia, like Wikipedia? 
Yer: Oh yeah. It said Hmong maybe came from Mongolia. I think I kind of heard about 
that in the past. But it was really there [in print] So what do you think? Before we only 
knew about China, but now it seems we may also be from Mongolia. 
Being fluent in English and capable of using computers, Yer spent most of the 
afternoon searching about his own ethnic origins online. Although he was aware of the 
dominant scholarly theory that China is the Hmong ethnic homeland, he apparently 
remained unsure and wanted to find more information. I was impressed by his enthusiasm 
and persistent interest in tracing his ethnic ancestry ever since I had first met him several 
years earlier. In fact, he seemed to become less certain of these scholarly claims once he 
found other theories online about where Hmong are from. 
After speaking with Hmong like Yer, it became clear to me that resolving the 
question of where exactly Hmong really came from was a futile exercise. Instead, I wanted 
to understand Hmong perceptions about their ethnic origins and their current uncertainty 
about their ethnic homeland. What is it like to live without clearly knowing where your 
ethnic group originated? 
I later realized that perhaps this was why many Hmong people had emotional 
reactions at the end of my interviews after talking about their confusion, uncertainties, and 
sometimes frustrations because they did not have concrete knowledge or agreement about 
their ancestral ethnic roots. They are a diasporic people, but unlike most other diasporas, that 
seem to lack coherent, territorial ethnic homeland. There is no definitive country or place of 
ethnic origin and belonging to which diasporic Hmong feel a sense of affiliation that would 
promote ethnic unity among them across national borders. As a result, Hmong have 
wondered about the ancestral history of their ethnic group and have referred to oral stories, 
legends and myths reproduced over generations, as well as other available resources, such as 
books and existing scholarly research.  
Indeed, many different types of homeland and multiple theories of ethnic origins 
have coexisted and changed over time among Hmong in the diaspora. There is inevitable 
discrepancy and conflict between an individuals current home (place of residence) and 
homeland, as one moves across national boundaries. Although Laos can be considered a 
natal homeland of birth, it is certainly not their ancestral ethnic homeland where their ethnic 
group originated in ancient times. As a result, Hmong in the diaspora have also developed 
affiliations to multiple homes and homelands while continuing their search.  
For example, Kia Smith, a 1.5 generation woman in her early thirties (born in Thai 
refugee camp and grew up in the United States) shared with me her long-lasting and 
complicated search for ethnic belonging during our interview: 
I have asked my [non-Hmong] husband about my homeland: If someone asks me about it, 
what do you think I should say? He said, You should say China, because thats where 
you were originally from. But when I heard that Hmong were from China, I was initially 
very resistant to thatbecause my dad said that we were from Laos. So I went back to talk 
to my dad. He said, Oh, you know, your great, great grandfather probably first came from 
China. Okay, that was very important information that he could have told us earlier, 
because we always thought Laos is where Hmong came from. If you asked me [about 
homeland] in the past when I was very hesitant to say that my people were from China, I 
would have said, I was born in Thailand [refugee camp] so thats my homeland. But since I 
am now working with the Hmong community and teaching them our history, I would say 
China.  
Because of the uncertainly about her ethnic homeland, Kias non-Hmong white 
American husband ironically helped to verify the origin of her ethnicity. Kia continued to 
discuss her ongoing search for homelands as follows: 
But now, as I grow older, I would say my homeland really is America. Do you know what 
I mean? When I see myself in the next fifty years, I see myself investing in this country, 
voting for people to represent my interests, becoming fiscally invested in the community, 
and moving certain things forward, so this country becomes my homeland. 
While speaking of homeland in her own terms, Kia concluded that the United States, her 
current country of residence where she grew up, would be where her future belongs and 
thereby eventually become her adopted homeland, in contrast to her natal homeland of 
Thailand, her parents homeland of Laos, or the possible ethnic homeland of China. 
In fact, this interview identifies the limitations of the concept of homeland, which is 
often essentialized as a unitary entity and defined in terms of national belonging, and does 
not fully encompass the experiences of diasporic people like the Hmong, whose ethnic 
consciousness is shaped beyond a single nation-states territorial boundaries. In this chapter, 
I first introduce and discuss multiple theories of ethnic origins and the search for homeland 
among Hmong in the diaspora and then specifically examine how Hmong perceive their 
supposedly lost ethnic homeland of China as well as Laos, the natal homeland after the 
Vietnam War (1955-1975). 
A territorial ethnic homeland is often understood to be located at the center of the 
diaspora and anchors peoples dispersed across the world by promoting their ethnic unity 
through an emotional attachment to their country of origin (Tllyan 1996; Safran 1991). 
These studies recognize that such territorial ethnic homelands cannot be taken for granted 
and that diasporic communities have complicated relationships with it. For example, in her 
study of the Palestinian diaspora, Helena Schulz (2003: 186-187) demonstrates that diasporic 
people actually expand the meanings of homeland more flexibly and develop multiple 
homes in different countries as a way to overcome their state of homelessness because of 
their exile from the ethnic homeland of Palestine.  
Similarly, focusing on the Armenian diaspora, Susan Pattie (1999: 86) illustrates the 
multiple national centers of the diasporic community that provide a substitute for a single 
territorialized ethnic homeland, while emphasizing the equal importance of recognizing the 
presence of the ethnic homeland depending on the individuals subjective perceptions (see 
also Lee 2009). Although the literature acknowledges that homeland is not always a singular 
and territorially coherent nation-state, the existence of a definite place of ethnic origin for 
diasporic peoples is still assumed. For the Hmong, however, the location of their ethnic 
homeland remains uncertain and they have different theories of where they ethnically 
originated.  
Nonetheless, because the official history about the Hmong, presented in books, 
encyclopedia, mass media, and public resources, dominantly claims that Hmong are an 
indigenous ethnic minority which originated somewhere in China, researchers have hardly 
questioned or reexamined the way Hmong themselves develop multiple hypotheses about 
ethnic ancestry and express uncertainty about their ethnic homeland. It is therefore important 
to examine Hmongs own perceptions toward different nation-states as their homelands, 
which reveal the untold or dismissed narratives contained in official and national histories 
(see Duara 1997:4). Although Hmong in both Laos and the United States do not affiliate 
themselves with the Chinese nation-state, they do express ethnic affiliations to the Miao-
Hmong minority currently residing in China. Hmong in both countries have also developed 
ambivalent perceptions toward their natal homeland of Laos and do not naturally develop an 
affiliation with it as a common homeland for Hmong scattered in the diaspora. 
In sum, neither China as a lost ancient ethnic homeland or Laos as a more recent 
natal homeland serves as a place of origin that unifies the Hmong diaspora and produces a 
collective ethnic consciousness or common ethnic identity across borders. The special 
feature of the Hmong diaspora is that Hmong peoples diasporic consciousness is based on a 
transnational affiliation to co-ethnic people across borders instead of a strong identification 
with their former natal homeland or to an old, supposedly lost original ethnic homeland.  
The Uncertainty of China as the Ethnic Homeland 
Although many scholars have defined China as the most plausible ethnic homeland of the 
Hmong, it is not always clear to what extent scholarly research has impacted Hmongs own 
perspectives about their ethnic ancestry and history. It is true that Hmong do consult and 
even read scholarly literature about their history, which, for instance, is sold at Hmong New 
Year festivals in the United States. This is quite remarkable considering that not all Hmong 
immigrants in the U.S. have strong educational backgrounds and indicates their interest in 
and search for their ancestral origins. However, such books and published materials are not 
equally accessible or available for most Hmong in Laos. More importantly, although Hmong 
who do believe that their ethnic homeland is China refer to scholarly literature about this, 
they tend to base their claims more on Hmong folklore, oral history, and ritual narratives and 
practices, as will be shown below. Such oral traditions about their ethnic history do reference 
the Hmong presence in ancient China, but they also assume that Hmong are a more ancient 
people who predate their experience in China. 
 One example are the chants and songs that are part of funeral rituals, which are of 
great importance to Hmong communities. In Hmong funerals, the soul of deceased person 
is considered mobile and borderless, must leave the body, and is sent back to its original 
place to reunite with the ancestors. The chanter, who conducts the ritual for sending the soul, 
narrates the entire journey for up to two or more hours by pointing out each stop that the soul 
needs to pass by until it reaches its final destination. The soul has a long trip of adversity 
going through multiple places and encountering different people and overcoming various 
hardships.  
In particular, the chanting becomes lengthy and dramatic when it describes the 
conflicts and fights against the Chinese enemy in distant times. According to my 
interviewees who conduct such chanting rituals for the community, once the soul overcomes 
such crisis induced by the war with Chinese groups, they will finally send the soul to its 
ultimate destination, which they cannot name, but is supposedly a peaceful and beautiful 
place where their ancestors originated. Some of my interviews interpreted such Hmong 
mythical and oral history to mean that Hmongs ultimate ethnic origins are an unknowable 
location that predates their ancient history in China.  
Therefore, although roughly half of my interviewees in both Laos and the United 
States mentioned China as their possible ethnic homeland, they remain rather uncertain 
about its plausibility since they believe there may have been a more ancient homeland. 
Indeed, Hmong in my study who told me that they believe their ethnic ancestors were from 
somewhere in the southern part of China spoke about it in an uncertain manner. For 
example, one of my interviewees in the United States, Neng Her, pointed this out and 
remarked, before the Hmong settled in Laos and Vietnam, they were from China. But thats 
the farthest that we may have physical evidence for and we are not sure before that. Maybe 
some still have relatives over there but thats like the earliest that we can remember.  
When people expressed certainty about China as their ethnic homeland, they also 
added or implied that there might be another place of origin before China of which they have 
no concrete evidence. In an interview with Sheng Her in the United States, who often 
conducts funeral rituals for the community, he initially expressed certainty about China as 
follows: 
Absolutely [Hmong are] from China. Beyond that, I dont know. If you do your 
anthropological work, people might have different theories. Maybe we were from 
Mongolia before China. We have folklore stories that kind of indicate that we were from 
Mongolia. But when you compare those people (Mongolians) to us, Hmong are different. 
So the actual, original homeland of Hmong, we dont know.  
In this manner, Shengs remarks that stressed his certainty about China as the ethnic 
homeland are based on greater uncertainty about prior places of ancestral origin. In addition, 
he was well aware of other theories of ethnic origin that were considered credible by other 
Hmong. 
During an interview with Chong Her at his workplace in Sacramento one afternoon, 
he took a thick book entitled Operation China: Introducing All the People of China from his 
bookshelf and put it on the table in front of me. He told me that he likes to read such 
scholarly books about the ethnic origins of Hmong and is personally interested in their 
history. However, Chong did not seem to subscribe to the scholarly notion that Hmong are 
one of the original peoples of China. Instead, he felt there was an even more ancient 
homeland for Hmong: 
I personally believe that Hmong people came from Mesopotamia, before they went to 
China. We have someone who has a theory that they lived in Mesopotamia, which is the 
area of Iraq and Iran nowadays. Thousands of years ago, they moved to Russia, to the west 
to Mongolia, and they finally settled down in southern China for thousands of years. I truly 
believe that the Hmong originally come from there and we are the same family and same 
clan. 
Hmong in Laos have also shown similar attitudes and perceptions about the uncertain nature 
of their ethnic origins in China. According to a short report written by a Hmong college 
student in Laos in 1972, it was already mentioned that uncertainty over and the search for a 
homeland was not a new issue: Mostly they [Hmong ancestors] did not remember their 
history well and sometimes told you a mythical history if you asked them a question where 
did Hmoob [Hmong] come from? The answer could be from Tuam Tshoj or China (Thao 
1972: 9). Implicit in this perspective is that some elderly Hmong people depend on their 
memory about a mythical history while others do not relate this myth to their ethnic 
homeland. Although many Hmong in Laos believe that they have enough evidence (through 
oral histories) about their presence in ancient China, they are convinced that there must have 
been a true (but unknown) original ethnic homeland before that period that accounts for the 
territorial origins of Hmong. 
Therefore, Hmong in both Laos and the United States have not completely adopted 
the scholarly discourse that claims that China is the Hmong ethnic homeland because their 
oral history seems to indicate that their ancestral origins are found in the more distant past. 
In fact, existing scholarly debates and research about China and Hmongs ethnic origins do 
not always seem to influence Hmong opinions about this issue nor always correlate with 
their actual understanding and interpretation of their own ethnic history.  
In fact, some ordinary Hmong are aware of DNA research (discussed in Chapter 1) 
that claims to provide reliable scientific evidence that China is Hmongs ethnic homeland. 
The result of the DNA research was actually mentioned by about one fourth of my Hmong 
interviewees during my fieldwork in both Laos and the United States. However, among 
Hmong who felt their ancestors originated in China, only one individual referred to the DNA 
study as evidence of his certainty about the historical connections between diasporic Hmong 
and China going back to ancient times. Even those who were aware of the DNA test results 
clearly pointed out that such scientific tests are not the basis for their opinions. In sum, 
Hmongs understandings about ethnic homeland tended to be based on oral traditions and 
practices passed down through the generations rather than simply referencing scholarly 
research, with the exception of a small group of individuals.  
Paj tawj lag (the Land of Flowers) and the Imagined Homeland 
For the reasons noted above, Hmong in the contemporary diaspora remain unsure about 
whether China is their ancient and original homeland and they have not adopted or 
completely accepted the scholarly discourse on this subject. However, they continue to 
search for and hope to find an exact and concrete territorial location for their diasporic 
origins. Instead of remaining permanently uncertain as a peoples without an ethnic 
homeland, they continue to search for a territorial land that they can claim as a homeland in 
the absence of any existing nation-state of their own. 
In her extensive study of Pakistani Muslim community in Manchester, U.K., Pnina 
Werbner (2002) examines the transnational dimensions of Pakistanis in Britain and how they 
embrace multiple positions and affiliations, such as a Pakistani national identity, Punjabi 
regional identity, and diasporic identities such as South Asian and Muslim (or the umma, a 
transnational religious community). Such multiple, hybrid elements that constitute the 
Muslim diaspora in large are critical for Pakistani communities and enable them to 
simultaneously maintain and mange identities based on these different positions through 
their production of imagined narratives, political discourses, and extensive cultural 
performances.  
Werbner further argues that these Pakistanis negotiate conflicts and social tensions 
within their immigrant communities and with majority British society (including their 
demonization as religious extremists in Western politics and public media) by imagining 
diasporic identifications with broader transnational communities of Muslims and South 
Asians. This constitutes the diasporic public sphere, the very site of creative locus of the 
new imaginaries which allow them to position themselves in such conflicts by separating 
and intermingling different identities (2002: 251-253). 
 However, imagined diasporic communities are not simply based on transnational 
ethnic and religious affiliations with those living in other countries. For diasporic peoples 
like Hmong who do not have a territorialized country of ethnic origin to begin with, the 
ancestral homeland at the core of the diaspora itself is often imagined. Because they were 
displaced from an unknown ethnic homeland long ago and have lost their connections to it, 
they feel a constant need to recover a place of ancestral origin in an imagined form by 
producing a historical consciousness reiterated and remembered through their cultural 
practices, rituals, and oral stories. Therefore, although Hmong may not have the same type 
of imagined connectivity to diasporic co-ethnics around the world, their multidimensional 
diasporic identifications are partly based on an affiliation with an imagined ethnic homeland.  
During interviews with Hmong in both Laos and the United States about their 
perspectives on China, ancestral origin, and homeland, I often came across a name of a 
region called paj tawj lag ([pa-tarl-laang])27 which literally means land of flowers in the 
Hmong language. The land of flowers is an abstract, imagined ethnic homeland for Hmong 
which is also associated with heaven and paradise because it is considered the final 
resting place for deceased ancestral souls, as noted before. Since I have never encountered 
this name in scholarly literature about Hmong origins, it appears to be a product of Hmong 
mythical folklore, where this imagined homeland/heaven is initially not associated with any 
specific territory or country. 
While Lao Hmong has not suggested any specific name of location, U.S. Hmong 
have started to associate paj tawl lag with Wenshan (28), which is located in Yunnan 
province, China. Although the land of flowers is more of a literary expression and no one 
knows how it first appeared in Hmong community discourse, these Hmong have come to 
believe that it is a small prefecture in China where the predominant population of Miao-
Hmong currently live. It is also known that the Miao group currently residing in that 
particular region share a similar and mutually intelligible language with diasporic Hmong in 
27 As will be discussed later in this chapter, the origin of the name paj tawj lag (literally, land of flower) is not 
known. However, paj tawj lag has come to refer to Wenshan, the actual region in China, and gradually believed 
by Hmong especially in the U.S. as the possible original place of ethnic Hmong (Miao-Hmong) in China.  
28 Known as Miao autonomous prefecture.  
other countries, and are linguistically and culturally distinct from other Miao in other regions 
of China.  
However, there are also different interpretations of paj tawj lag and debates over 
whether or not it exactly means Wenshan, since many people recognize the arbitrariness of 
matching an imagined homeland from Hmong mythology with a specific place in China. In 
the United States, when I interviewed the two Miao-Hmong visiting scholars from China 
who were affiliated with local universities, I asked both of them whether they have heard 
about Wenshan prefecture, which was frequently mentioned by Hmong as a possible 
location of their ethnic homeland. Both Miao-Hmong scholars responded that the 
identification of paj tawj lag with Wenshan may be a product of recently developed ethnic 
interactions between some Hmong American tourists who have visited the Miao in 
southwestern part of China. According to Fei Yang, one of the Miao-Hmong scholars from 
China, the association of Wenshan with the Hmongs ethnic homeland seems to be a relative 
new conception among U.S. Hmong: 
I dont know how and why Hmong outside China found out about Wenshan [laughs]. 
Yeah, its very interesting Since 2000, more Hmong people from the U.S. have started to 
visit Guizhou and Yunnan provinces [where Miao groups reside]. I suspect when they 
returned to the U.S., they talked to other people about those provinces and thats how more 
Hmong people came to know about Wenshan. 
Feis explanation has interesting implications on two main levels. On the one hand, 
diasporic Hmong living outside of China (not the Miao-Hmong themselves) are the ones 
who have connected their imagined ethnic homeland (the land of flowers) to a real 
territorial place existing in China. Because Wenshan is the area highly populated with Miao-
Hmong, it is not coincidental that Hmong American visitors came to refer to that place as the 
actual name of their ancestral homeland.  
Therefore, U.S. Hmong have been actively involved in an ethnic homeland-making 
process as they try to find a precise and concrete location for their imagined homeland and 
reconstruct their long-lost ethnic ancestry. Although my interviewees in the U.S. noted that 
the enthusiasm about visiting the Miao-Hmong region of China seems to have decreased 
over time, for many of them, the mythical place known as the land of flowers has now been 
associated with a real location in Wenshan, China. In contrast, although Hmong in Laos also 
use the term paj tawj lag to refer to their imagined ancestral homeland, since they have never 
been to China, they do not necessarily associate the land of flowers specifically with 
Wenshan. 
Searching for Ethnic Homelands: Beyond China 
Although Hmong discourses about ethnic homeland tended to center on China, my 
interviewees also suggested a diverse range of other theories about their ancestral origins 
which are impossible to simply characterize. In fact, it is not possible to list here all the 
different versions and individual theories of ethnic homeland that I encountered since 
multiple locations were given for the Hmongs ethnic origins and there was no coherent and 
unified historical narrative. This again suggests that instead of attempting to resolve the issue 
of where the Hmong really originated and examining whether China is their true ethnic 
homeland, we should first look at how people themselves understand and make sense of 
heterogeneous and sometimes conflicting historical narratives of ethnic origin. 
Because of these different understandings of where the Hmong people are from, 
there was no consensus among my interviewees about the ultimate origin of the Hmong 
diaspora. Instead, the result is disagreement and competing discourses about their ethnic 
ancestry and history. For instance, some Hmong exposed a theory that they originally came 
from Mesopotamia or Mongolia. However, Sai Lee, in an interview in the United States, 
mentioned such theories but also disagreed with them: 
Worldwide, the Hmong population is very large. But we dont know where we originated 
from [laugh]. It always leaves a question mark for me, too. Well, based on the readings, 
although there is no scientific evidenceI think Hmong might have originated from 
southwest China. The concept that Hmong might have originated from Mongolia or 
MesopotamiaI kind of do not buy that idea.  
While collecting these multiple individual Hmong theories of ethnic origin, I remembered 
the comments of Moua Ly, a Hmong man in his fifties who migrated to France in 1979 
whom I met in Laos while he was traveling there. It is very difficult to be certain about 
where our original homeland is because there are no documents or written historical 
records, he remarked. According to Hmong oral history, Hmong originated from 
Mongolia, and the name of the country sounds so similar to Hmong.29 But we can only 
speculate. 
Other theories among Hmong I frequently encountered included one from Mor Thao, 
an elderly man in his seventies in Laos, who spoke about his knowledge of Hmong ethnic 
origins. On a late Sunday morning, I was invited to lunch at his place with his family. 
Showing his interest in my interview topic, he shared his theory with me and explained: 
Mor: Initially, Hmong lived in the U.S.A. a long time ago and then they migrated to 
China after many wars. I dont know the details and who took our ancestors to China 
but after many days of darkness during the journey, Hmong finally reached the land of 
light. That was how Hmong ended up being in China after escaping from America and 
no one knows the exact timeline of that. We suspect that our original place was Alaska 
in the U.S. Once we left Alaska, everywhere was dark. In Alaska, about half of the year 
is dark and another half is bright, right? 
Author: Ah..I guesshave you seen people in Alaska? Do you think they are the same 
29 The written Hmong language, known as Romanized Popular Alphabet (RPA), was created by a French 
missionary in the 1950s. However, the accurate pronunciation of Hmong is actually [mong], as mentioned in 
the interview (see also Leepreecha 2008). 
ethnic people as Hmong? 
Mor: I am not sure. But I would say Alaska was the original Hmong country once 
upon a time. 
Indeed, Alaska was one of the last places on earth I would think of as a possible ethnic 
homeland of the Hmong. However, ten months later, I came across the same theory during 
my fieldwork in the United States. In fact, a number of Hmong in Sacramento subscribed to 
this theory. For example, Tou Vang, a retired man in his late fifties, gave me a series of 
migratory destinations in Hmong diasporic history. He said: 
According to older Hmong people, the Hmong originated from Alaska in America, 
then they migrated to Mongolia, and then to China. Some old people like my father 
believed that by coming to America and living here now, we have returned to our 
original homeland. When we look at Alaskan Eskimo cultures, there are some 
similarities to Hmong culture. Some people deduced this based on lifestyle and 
tradition, such as bows and arrows and the millstones when making tofu. So the 
Eskimos also do that kind of grinding just like Hmong. 
This seemingly arbitrary connection between the Hmong and Eskimos in a faraway land, 
however, is articulated based on personal observations and understandings of similarities in 
cultural behavior and physical appearance, as well as geographic knowledge. 
Among Hmong in Laos, one dominant perception was that their ethnic homeland is 
Mongolia, a theory that was also shared by some U.S. interviewees. This competed with the 
narrative that Hmong come from China. For example, Teng Xiong, a man in his late thirties 
who had higher education from abroad, explained the logic of this theory based on mythical 
history as follows:  
In the distant past, when Mongolia was the most powerful country, there was a 
General in charge of the whole Asian region. He sent an army to China to ask the 
people to cooperate with Mongolia. But when Mongolia became weaker, the General 
tried to take the army back to his country but many soldiers did not want to go back. I 
think maybe Hmong were a part of those soldiers who did not want to return to 
Mongolia. So it is possible that those Mongolian soldiers were the ancestors of Hmong 
in China.  
While speculating on the ancient history of Hmong ancestors as warriors, Teng further 
elaborated upon his reasoning and continued:  
I heard old people saying that in the past, Hmong were much stronger and better than 
Chinese during wars. Indeed, Hmong were very good at shooting [arrows]. This was how 
they had been warriors for many thousands years, just like the Mongolians today. 
Otherwise, Hmong would not have been able to survive through all the wars. Based on 
these facts, I believe Hmong were once the warriors of Mongolia.  
The more I talked with people, the clearer it became that Hmongs perceptions about 
their ethnic homeland are not as simple or coherent as indicated by official reports and 
scholarly writings. The other places of ethnic origin suggested by Hmong for various reasons 
ranged widely from the northern border of India to Siberia, the Iranian plateau, Australia, or 
even Korea. Others, like Lena Thao, a representative of one of the Hmong community 
organizations in Sacramento, could not identify a specific name or territorial nation-state as 
the Hmong ethnic homeland and suggested the following argument:  
In Hmong funerals, special songs are sung based on the oral history about traditional 
homelands that refer to the land of snow without naming a country of origin. The 
soul of the dead is asked to go back to that place with warm shoes and clothes since it 
will be cold and snowy. If we think about this, China does not have many days of snow. 
So it must be somewhere else different from China, which has a lot of snow. 
On the other hand, Neng Her, a young Hmong college student in the United States, 
had a different conclusion based on similar reasoning and speculation based on Hmong 
folklore, which caused him to point to a specific location as the possible homeland of ethnic 
origin. Neng said:  
Based on storytelling and songs from txiv xaiv30 [txisai] and zaj tshoob31 [jachong], they 
call the Hmongs ancestral homeland as where the sun never shows up, which some 
people suspect is Siberia. If you look at the pictures of Siberian people, they really look 
like Hmong, too.  
Instead of simply relying on official scholarly histories, Hmong oral tradition from funeral, 
religious ritual, and wedding ceremonies has provided them with material to speculate about 
their ethnic origins in an attempt to trace their ancient and ultimately unknown ethnic history. 
An abstract location, such as a land of snow mentioned above not only expands the 
geographic positioning of the ethnic homeland but also leaves room for varying 
interpretations as shown in Lenas above comments.  
Connecting to Co-Ethnics but Disconnecting from the Chinese Nation-State 
Perceptions of Hmong in Laos toward Miao-Hmong in China 
Although diasporic Hmong remain uncertain about whether China is their actual ethnic 
homeland and have not developed a strong emotional connection to it as the country of 
ancestral ethnic origin, this does not prevent them from developing emotional connections 
and an attachment to the Miao-Hmong residing in China. Hmong outside China do not 
identify themselves as Miao in their own national contexts partly because the word Miao 
sounds like cat (meo) in Lao language and has a derogatory connotation.  
Nonetheless, Hmong in both Laos and the United States did express a remarkable 
sense of ethnic affiliation with Miao-Hmong living in China. Hmong in Laos feel ethnically 
30 The last song sung for the rituals at funerals. 
31 Traditional songs for the wedding ceremonies. 
attached to the Miao-Hmong in China through their daily interactions with Chinese Miao-
Hmong peddlers, who travel to Laos for business. Likewise, Hmong from the United States 
have traveled around China and met various ethnic minorities in the southern part of the 
country and also expressed their feelings of ethnic commonality to the Miao-Hmong in 
China. However, such affiliations are not a national attachment to China as the country from 
which the Hmong originated but is a sense of attachment to co-ethnics living in that 
supposed ethnic homeland.  
As will be discussed in the next chapter, Hmong in Laos are exposed to a highly 
globalized local environment and actively interact with various transnational Hmong visitors 
from abroad. A number of them have encountered Miao-Hmong peddlers from China, who 
visited different Hmong villages in Laos on their motorbikes carrying bundles of herbal 
medicines claimed to be authentically grown by Miao in China and various products like 
traditional Hmong clothes, jewelry, and other miscellaneous articles.32 
Calling these Miao-Hmong peddlers from China as the same people, or brothers 
and sisters, Hmong in Laos were certain about their common ethnic identity as Hmong. 
They recognized their ethnic connections to these Chinese Miao-Hmong because of 
similarities in dress, cultural traditions, as well as the clan system based on the same shared 
last names. They learned that Miao-Hmong in China still carry on the same cultural 
traditions like funeral rituals and the New Year ceremony, although some details may have 
changed due to their geographic separation.  
The connections that Hmong in Laos feel to Miao-Hmong from China are not simply 
based on some presumed and abstract sameness that encompasses the entire Hmong ethnic 
group. Instead, they also believed that Hmong life in general is characterized by constant 
hardship and perceived this as a shared and universal destiny of Hmong everywhere. They 
even expressed more sympathy to the Hmongs hardship in China compared to their own 
32 Some local Hmong in Laos have also occasionally heard about or encountered Miao-Hmong laborers from 
China, who came to Laos as Chinese labor migrants and work in development projects.  
situation and believed that Hmong in China are living in a sterile land that is inhospitable 
for farming and therefore, are very impoverished. 
In fact, when I asked one of my interviewees, Chong Lee, a senior man in his sixties, 
about differences between the Hmong in China and Laos, he noted a common ethnic identity 
that they share, regardless of the national differences based on the countries in which they 
live. He said, You know, the life of Hmong consists of waking up really early in the 
morning, going to the hill, carrying corn, rice, and pumpkins back home, pounding those 
crops, and then finally being able to eat them. This is the life of Hmong, regardless of where 
they live. According to Chong, all Hmong share such activities, regardless of time and 
space. This does not mean that Hmong are forever living an impoverished life in a timeless, 
isolated world. Rather, this kind of generalized understanding of the Hmong way of life 
enables Hmong in Laos to imagine a shared ethnic experience and sense of affiliation with 
Miao-Hmong in China, whom they have never met or known. 
 Some of my interviewees had positive perceptions to the Miao-Hmong in China and 
even felt proud of their capability and achievements, simply because of their ethnic affinity 
and connections as co-ethnic peoples. Many Hmong in Laos believed that Hmong-Miao in 
China might have preserved their traditional culture better than they have in Laos, given that 
they apparently brought real and authentic Hmong stuff from China, especially the 
traditional clothes made of old fabrics and designs. As a result, they felt that Hmong in 
China are smarter than them and more capable of producing really beautiful hand-made 
traditional clothes for the Hmong New Year, which they no longer make in Laos.33 The 
shared affinity of Hmong in Laos to those in China is also illustrated by the following 
comments from Toua Her: 
33 In fact, I also noticed that the production of hand-made traditional Hmong clothes and sewing (paj ndau 
[pandau]) have remarkably decreased and were rarely found in the Hmong villages, compared to my last visit 
in 2006. 
When Hmong peddlers came from China, I also asked many questions to them. Hmong 
[Miao-Hmong] in China know how to make books and they are very good and smart. But 
their government is the Chinese government and there are more Chinese than Hmong. So 
even if Hmong are smart enough to publish something, they have to publish in Chinese. 
For people who dont know the details, they would believe that those books are written by 
some Chinese. But in reality, we Hmong made them. So with that cleverness, if Hmong 
from all over the world come together and live in one place, then you wouldnt have to 
yearn for other countries at all.  
Despite having no direct relations to the people or to the country of China, Toua 
expressed his shared feelings of happiness and pride for the achievements of his unknown 
co-ethnics in China while affiliating with both their marginal status and its potential 
disadvantages. Indeed, a similar type of indiscriminate ethnic affinity is shown even more 
clearly when the Hmong develop much stronger emotional connections and attachments to 
their co-ethnics based on their extended kinship with those from the same Hmong clan (see 
Chapter 4). In fact, Hmongs extensive kinship system is based not only on actual biological 
relatedness but also on social relatedness, which is indicated by sharing one of the eighteen 
clan names. As a result, they recognize the members from the same clan with the same last 
names as their own family or relatives, despite the notable absence of actual biological 
relations as well as the salience of regional or national differences.  
In fact, when Miao-Hmong peddlers suddenly showed up in the Hmong villages in 
Laos, they asked around and sought Hmong from the same clan with the same last name and 
stayed with that family. I was always impressed with the process of turning a total stranger 
into a very close family member simply because the person shared the same last name and 
therefore are technically a member of the same clan. This general and extended clan system 
encompasses Hmong elsewhere and therefore overcomes national differences inherent 
among Hmong living in various countries in the diaspora, eventually promoting a common 
sense of kinship across national borders. I repeatedly had similar conversations with people 
in Laos about the immediate inclusion of the Miao-Hmong from China based on the 
extended kinship system. A good example is the following discussion I had with Nou Thao: 
Nou Thao: Sure, they [the Miao-Hmong peddlers] can speak Hmong. Those from China 
were Hmong Thao [same last name], so they are our relatives since we are from the same 
family. When they came to do business here, they stayed with us. 
Author: Really? So I assume they contacted you before they came here? 
Nou Thao: No, they never contacted us because they did not know about us until they 
arrived here. They initially came to do business in Lak 52.34 One time, there was a Hmong 
guy from China and he was like our brother-in-law. His last name was Yang, but his wife 
was from the Thao clan. So we are relatives. 
Author: Do you know where in China he was from? 
Nou Thao: He said that he lives in paj tawj lag [pa-tarl-laang]. 
Author: How did you feel when you first met him? 
Nou Thao: He said, Oh, I am Hmong [last name] Yang but my wife is a Hmong Thao. So 
I am your brother-in-law. So I was of course very happy. We shared food. He ate whatever 
we had and stayed with us. 
It is certainly remarkable (in some sense, even magical) that this extended clan 
membership system is indiscriminately applied to all Hmong regardless of the actual 
circumstances and has an immediate power to cordially include anyone in the same clan 
from the Hmong diaspora across national borders. However, Hmong people in Laos noted 
that their genuine hospitality for such unexpected visitors from China was rewarding, since 
they developed contacts, exchanged news about Hmong peoples life in their respective 
34 This literally means 52km from the capital city, Vientiane and is known as one of the largest urban cities 
populated predominantly by Hmong people. 
countries, and eventually welcomed the same visitors in subsequent years.  
Perceptions of Hmong in the United States toward Miao-Hmong in China 
Similar to their co-ethnics in Laos, Hmong in the United States have also shown ethnic 
affinity and extensive kin affiliations with the Miao-Hmong in China. However, the basis of 
such ethnic consciousness is somewhat different from the way Hmong in Laos have 
interacted with Miao-Hmong. They seem to be more influenced by individual experiences 
based on actual visits and trips to China. Because U.S. Hmong have access to greater 
economic resources compared to Hmong in Laos, more U.S. Hmong have taken trips to visit 
different places in China and had opportunities to interact with the Miao-Hmong living in 
that country. About twenty-five percent of my U.S. Hmong interviewees have been to China 
for different reasons. They traveled around different Miao residential counties in China 
(which do not necessarily have Miao-Hmong populations) and video recorded the peoples 
daily activities and events. After returning to the United States, some of them turned their 
personal recordings into DVDs, circulated them around the community, or sold them at 
Hmong supermarkets or community events. 
According to my interviewees, the purpose of their trip was sightseeing and pure 
tourism, such as exploring the famous cities like Beijing and Shanghai, and was not 
necessarily to visit Miao villages or search for their ethnic origins. Some of them made 
business trips or were on academic exchanges while others did not even visit any Miao 
villages located in rural southwest China. In fact, U.S. Hmong did not indicate that they 
went to the Miao residential provinces primarily to trace their ethnic roots and explore their 
ethnic homeland. Instead, they mostly noted that they also wanted to see the rural life of 
China and observe Chinese society and local living conditions from the perspective of 
American tourists, not as a returnee experiencing an ethnic homecoming in an ancestral 
homeland that had been lost in ancient history. Nonetheless, those who did visit different 
Miao-Hmong villages expressed their joyful experiences, sharing moments with me when 
they discovered similarities in cultural activities, appearance, and artifacts.  
In fact, U.S. Hmong were struck by what they perceived to be the low standard of 
living of the Miao-Hmong. A Hmong woman in her late fifties, Mai Xiong, who went to 
China twice with a group of people from her Hmong Christian church, compared the 
situation between Hmong in Laos and China from her American perspective in terms of their 
socioeconomic condition. In Laos, even if you dont have education you still have the land, 
she noted. You can at least become a farmer and can survive there. But China, oh my God, 
its much more difficult No land, no water, no place to live. Indeed, from the perspective of 
Hmong in the United States, their co-ethnics in a remote Chinese village seemed to be very 
impoverished.  
The Hmong in China dont live in the city, Lao Vue, another interviewee noted 
based on his travel experiences and continued, They dont have much education, or a piece 
of land, either. The land is very limited. From my observation, I think Hmong in China are 
much poorer than Hmong in Thailand and Laos. Likewise, many people referred to their 
emotional sympathy and ethnic connections to the Miao-Hmong in southwest China by 
saying that they were excited but also sad, because a lot of them were still very poor 
without better means to improve their condition. In a different interview, Chong Her made 
immediate ethnic connections to the Miao-Hmong when he recalled his two visits to China: 
One thing that amazes me is that I really feel connected to the Hmong in China because of 
their customs and culture there. Wherever you go from one village to another, you really 
feel that the same culture and same Hmong values are still there. If they realize that you 
are also part of Miao-zu35 like them, they would come to talk to you. Also, its the Hmong 
traditional clothes. If you see their fabrics and dress at the supermarket or other places in 
China, you can tell oh, they are Hmong people and you are able to connect to them.  
35 The Chinese term that refers to a broad official ethnic category in China that encompasses all sub Miao 
groups including Miao-Hmong.  
Indeed, Hmong from the United States are not part of Miao-zu (Miao people), since it is only 
an official Chinese ethnic minority label in a national context. Therefore, for people like 
Chong, the ethnic connection with the Miao-Hmong in China is based on cultural similarities 
and not any national affiliation with the Chinese state.  
Leng Thao, who also visited China and traveled around the country for a total of 
three weeks, had a similar view. When I asked him whether he felt the Miao-Hmong in 
China he met were of the same ethnicity even if it was difficult for him to communicate, he 
responded: 
I believe that they are still the same Hmong because of their culture. The marriage 
custom, the flutes like qeej and raj [traditional bamboo pipes], all are the same. Dress is 
the same. You can tell they are Hmong and Hmong dress. Its just that they dont speak 
the exact same language. But it is not really that difficult or different, either. For 
example, we say noh-moh [eat food, have a meal] while they say, noh-wah. Noh-
wah is more like baby talk.  
Even if U.S. Hmong have never been to China or seen any Miao-Hmong people in person, 
they still expressed feelings of affinity toward the Miao-Hmong based on cultural 
similarities. For example, Sheng Her, who was initially certain about China as the Hmongs 
original homeland explained as follows:  
The reason I am certain about China [as the ethnic homeland] is because we have the same 
last name with the Hmong in China. Another simple thing that we understand is the 
bamboo pipe. They blow the bamboo pipe, not exactly the way we blow. But you hear the 
sound and understand what they are blowing about. Thats one of the things that really tell 
us that we are related. The Hmong in China, I dont know where they migrated from, but 
they have been living there for many long years.  
In sum, a good number of Hmong in the United States have visited China for 
different reasons and interacted with Miao-Hmong as tourists. Although such trips were 
apparently much more frequent and active in the past, before the economic downturn in 
the U.S., their experiences have enabled some members of the U.S. Hmong community 
to develop ethnic affinity with the Miao-Hmong in China. In so doing, they have 
explored possible ancestral connections between Miao-Hmong and themselves that have 
been lost for hundreds of years despite the fact that they do not strongly identify with the 
Chinese nation-state as an ethnic homeland of Hmong.   
Laos as the Natal Homeland: The Heart of the Hmong Diaspora? 
If Hmong in the diaspora do not have an attachment to China as their ethnic homeland, to 
what extent can Laos be considered a homeland of sorts? Hmongs national affiliation with 
the Laotian nation-state varies greatly depending on the individual. To begin with, Laos is 
not the ethnic homeland of the Hmong diaspora since it is not where their ethnic group 
initially originated from, but a more recent, natal homeland of birth for many Hmong who 
dispersed from that country after the Vietnam War. While accepting Laos as their country of 
birth, many Hmong in Laos expressed the sense of ambivalent belonging based on their 
common ethnic minority consciousness and shared historical experiences.  
On the other hand, there are some Hmong in the United States who feel alienated 
from their country of residence and expressed a stronger sense of belonging to Laos. 
However, others felt that they belong to the United States and had developed ambivalent 
perceptions toward Laos. In sum, although Hmong in my study had a much stronger 
affiliation to the nation-state of Laos than China, it still does not seem to serve as the 
immediate source of the Hmong diasporas collective ethnic consciousness.  
Perceptions of Laos among Hmong in Laos 
In general, Hmong in Laos seem to have a common understanding that Laos is their natal 
homeland since they were born and have lived there for a long time. They also had a sense 
of national belonging to some extent, defined by their citizenship status and the concomitant 
social duties and rights as the legal members of the nation-state. Their common self-
identification of Hmong with Lao nationality [sansaat Lao] by birth seems to legitimize 
Laos as a common homeland. In fact, almost all of my interviewees referred to Laos with 
some feelings associated with the homeland, not simply because they were born there, but 
also because they recognized what their status as Laotian nationals defines their identity.  
For example, Youa Her, a fifty-year-old man, confirmed that Laos is his country by 
asserting that I have rights here and I own my land as a normal Lao national. He then 
continued to elaborate how the situation is similar with Hmong elsewhere. Right now, we 
have a comfortable life here [Laos]. Hmong in different countries also have education, good 
jobs, and development. Like the Hmong in Thailand, they have government jobs as Thai 
citizens. Those who went to the U.S. are the same. We all are the same siblings but have 
different citizenships. But they can visit us. Thats it. 
In another interview, Lee Yang, a man in his early fifties, and I had a discussion of a 
similar issue. When I asked whether he has thought about Hmong peoples homeland, he 
answered: 
Lee Yang: Since I was born and have been living here, I would say Laos is my homeland. 
Author: What about China? 
Lee Yang: Thats already over. Thats for a much older generation of people, born in 
China and who migrated from there, but they passed away. The descendants were born 
here, so our homeland is the same homeland as the Lao [Lao Loum] people.  
Author: What about the Hmong in the U.S. or other countries like Vietnam and Thailand? 
Are their homelands different from yours? If that is the case, isnt it difficult to preserve 
Hmong ethnicity?  
Lee Yang: No, its not difficult. Like the Hmong in America, the old people who migrated 
there are getting old and will eventually die there. For the younger generation born in the 
U.S., their homeland will be replaced by America.  
However, such a sense of belonging to multiple homelands for Hmong people is 
not always a natural outcome based on a certain period of time spent in a specific 
country of birth. In fact, Hmong people in Laos expressed a simultaneous double-sided 
sense of belonging that includes both their natal homeland and the diaspora. A good 
example was Nia Her, a man in his late thirties, who talked about his sense of belonging 
and ethnic identity in the following manner: 
As I said, I was born and live in Laos but I am Hmong, that will never change. Those 
living in England, France, or America, can be the citizens of those countries, as they 
achieved legal nationality [sansaat] after they migrated. But before that, they are always 
ethnic Hmong [sonpau Hmong] who happen to live in that particular country. 
At first, Nias sentiments seem to be based on his own national belonging and other Hmong 
peoples different national belonging to each respective nation-state of residence. However, 
this needs to be differentiated from a simple type of legal belonging as national citizens to a 
particular country, which is not associated with a sense of ethnic or cultural origins. For 
Hmong in Laos, their national belonging to Laos defined by legal citizenship gives them 
some feeling of social belonging and security. However, it is often qualified by their 
consciousness of membership in the Hmong diaspora, which is seen as the true source of 
Hmong ethnicity. Therefore, their sense of national belonging is associated with a necessary 
precondition: as long as they remain Hmong, regardless of the actual country in which 
their citizenship is defined. In this way, one can reconcile the discrepancy between a sense 
of belonging to their current territorial nation-state where they live and the broader diasporic 
ethnic community.   
In fact, Nia further made a distinction between his own individual homeland and the 
common homeland for the entire Hmong diaspora. In the interview, we talked about the 
difference in homelands between Hmong in Laos, including himself, and those in other parts 
of the diaspora.  
Nia Her: I would say my homeland is here in Laos for me [laugh]. 
Author: What about other Hmong dispersed in many different countries? 
Nia Her: WellI guess there is no homeland for all of them. I was born here, but I guess 
for those born in America, America will be their homeland. But if I think about every 
Hmong in Vietnam, China, Laos, Thailand, France, I would say there is no such Hmong 
homeland for all together. 
Nias perspective illustrates that the current Hmong diaspora can be based on multiple natal 
homelands in the absence of a country or place that serves as a common ethnic homeland for 
all Hmong.  
Although most current Hmong diasporic communities in the world are based on 
migratory dispersion from Laos, the country is not a taken-for-granted homeland for all 
Hmong in the diaspora. Perhaps, Laos can be one of many homes for Hmong dispersed in 
different countries, to which certain Hmong may feel the closest. In another interview, Xao 
Lee, a senior in his mid-sixties, had a similar understanding about the current diasporic 
condition of the Hmong and expressed his regret about the absence of a coherent ethnic 
homeland that can unite the diaspora since he had a strong desire for a unified ethnic identity 
as Hmong. He became emotional and got into tears when he stated that my feeling is that if 
you were born as Hmong, you are Hmong regardless of where you reside currently. I am 
very sad that Hmong have no country so everyone has to live wherever they are.  
Hmong in Laos have also developed ambivalent perceptions of their current natal 
homeland because they are very conscious about their status as an ethnic minority which 
does not always fit in mainstream society (see Chapter 3). Instead of emphasizing how Laos 
is the most proximate homeland for the Hmong diaspora from which they most recently 
dispersed, many people in Laos felt that Hmong live in a perpetual, marginalized diasporic 
state and therefore a country of recent origin like Laos cannot encompass or accommodate 
their co-ethnics dispersed around the world. Therefore, it is inevitable that Hmongs 
affiliations to Laos are rather partial and the country does not truly represent the unity of 
Hmong in the diaspora nor anchor their common Hmong ethnic identity. The perceptions of 
Hmong in the United States toward Laos are similarly ambivalent. 
Perceptions of Laos among Hmong in the United States 
While Hmong in the United States perceived Laos as the natal homeland and have emotional 
affiliations to it to a certain degree, they expressed a wide range of different and more 
ambivalent perceptions toward the country. Their perceptions and attitudes are divided 
between people who express almost unconditional emotional affiliation with Laos and those 
who have negative perceptions, especially because of its political system and 
underdeveloped national economy. It can be aptly said that Hmong in the United States have 
developed a love-hate relationship with Laos.  
To discuss the diverging perceptions among U.S. Hmong toward Laos, generational 
differences are also important, since for U.S.-born Hmong and the younger 1.5 generation 
(born in Thai refugee camps but raised in the United States), Laos is clearly not their natal 
homeland. For the first generation (mostly elderly Hmong) and older 1.5 generation Hmong 
(born in Laos and left the country as a child, spent teenage in the refugee camps in Thailand, 
and then moved to the United States), although the United States is not a homeland per se, 
over time, it has become a home where they are comfortable and well-situated that has 
therefore become impossible to abandon. Thus, it is highly possible that the U.S. Hmong 
community does not share a single meaning of homeland when thinking about Laos (just as 
they do not agree about the location and meaning of the ethnic homeland). 
Although many Hmong in the United States have visited and stayed in Laos freely, 
many other elderly Hmong men in the United States still felt they could not return to their 
natal homeland. They expressed their fears because they were worried that the Lao 
government may not let them into the country since they left the country because of their 
anti-Communist military affiliation with the U.S. CIA during the Vietnam War. They still 
had memories of the repressive Communist state that they fled after the war and worried 
they might still be politically persecuted if they return. As a result, they continued to feel a 
strong emotional longing for the nation of Laos but could not return because of the 
Communist state. This disconnect between the nation and the state was further elaborated, 
for instance, according to Tou Lee, a retired man in his sixties:  
If Laos becomes a democracy tomorrow, I will return tomorrow. I miss the life of nature. 
This country [U.S.] is very rich, we all know that. But people like me, we still remember 
the small things in life, such as nature. For people who were initially from there [Laos], if 
the country becomes a democracy, about 95 percent of us will want to go there, I believe. 
Now we cant go. As you know, everything over there is Communist. All we can do is just 
talk and think. We cant help but just miss the life in Laos in the past. 
It was apparent that elderly Hmong had emotional connections to Laos that continued 
to persist. Similar to Tou Lee above, Sai Lee, a Hmong man in his fifties, clearly 
remembered his childhood in different local regions in Laos before the Vietnam War. He 
shared with me his emotional reaction when he visited Thailand and went to the land border 
between that country and Laos. It was the first time he glimpsed Laos since he fled as a 
refugee in 1979. However, he did not actually enter Laos because he was afraid the Laotian 
immigration officer would object if he is mistaken as a former Hmong soldier who fought 
against the Lao Communist party. He recounted the experience as follows: 
I put one foot on the so-called land of Laos and the other foot still on Thailand, and I was 
crying [laughs]. My older brother [who accompanied him] said, You are crazy [for 
crying] I said, No This is the land of my birth. But I cannot step into the country I 
wanted to go see the village where I was born, and maybe the last place that my school 
was inI really have a dream to return there someday before I die. 
Indeed, Sai has maintained his strong emotional affinity to his natal homeland, which 
he had been kept in his heart for over thirty years despite living comfortably in his newly 
resettled home in the United States. At the same time, he has recognized the social benefits 
and privileges of his current life, which makes him now consider the United States his 
home where he enjoys a much higher standard of living than he did in his former natal 
homeland.  
However, Sai spoke of a possible future time when Laos becomes a democratic 
society and he will return to that country. He added that in that case, Laos will become his 
primary home and the United States would perhaps become his secondary home. He even 
pictured his life in the true homeland in Laos and said, with my ability and knowledge we 
can contribute more to that country. So one day, it is possible that Laos can be our 
destination [of his return]. Therefore, it is important to note that Sais emotional connection 
to his natal homeland and ultimate desire to return is not unconditional, but rather predicated 
on Laos becoming a democratic society.  
Although the nation-state is always used interchangeably, it is important to remember 
that when diasporic peoples express nostalgic longing for their homeland, they may feel an 
emotional attachment to the peoples but not to the state, which they may dislike for political 
reasons. This is the basis for the conflicted relations that diasporas often have with their 
homelands. Nonetheless, some U.S. Hmong noted that even if their dream of a democratic 
Laos comes true, a permanent return to their former homeland would still not be possible 
because they have been living for such a long time in the United States as naturalized 
Americans. From a practical standpoint, it is hard to imagine and assume that they would 
abandon the privileges that they have earned in America simply because of their nostalgic 
longing for Laos. As many of them said, these include a much higher economic standard of 
living, healthcare, social welfare, insurance, investments, property, education, and economic 
freedom (see Chapter 8). 
Therefore, the sense of longing toward Laos as the natal homeland continues to be 
ambivalent and contingent on political conditions as well as practical considerations. Even if 
it is highly unlikely that they will ever return to Laos permanently, the nostalgic desire to 
return to the natal homeland is reminiscent of the longing that diasporic peoples have toward 
their ethnic homelands. In fact, an expression that still lingers in my mind from a focus 
group interview is: I still feel like I belong over there, even though my body is here 
Despite such inexplicable emotional affinity to Laos, they are well aware of the impossibility 
of permanently residing in that country after long term separation for various reasons, as one 
of them remarked, so I buried my homeland in my heart because my home is here.  
In addition to their fear of the Lao Communist state, there were other reasons the 
political legacy of the Cold War made some U.S. Hmong reluctant to return to their natal 
homeland of Laos. This was indicated in various interviews, for example, with Kao Vue, 
who presented himself as more affiliated with Thailand, although he was born in Laos and 
spent an equal amount of time in both a Thai refugee camp and the United States. He 
recently made plans to go back to Laos and serve as a long term volunteer for rural Hmong 
communities. However, after receiving serious objections from his family about going back 
to Laos, he instead went to China. Kao explained the situation as follows: 
Personally, I wanted to do something very much like what you did. I like to go overseas as 
a volunteer and teach. That was always my dream. So I applied for a teaching project in 
Vang Vieng [Laos]. They accepted me, but they wanted me to live with a majority Lao 
family. I wanted to share that with my family here, but they told me not to go, because 
they believed that the Lao family will try to poison and kill me [laugh]. 
Indeed, the older U.S. Hmong express their concerns and fears about the continuing 
political conditions in Laos which eventually prevents them from feeling fully at home in 
their natal homeland. This was based on stories about negative experiences in Laos that they 
had heard from other U.S. Hmong or from ungrounded and fearful rumors about the dangers 
of the country. In the literature, similar examples can be found in Skrbiss study of Croatian 
residents in Australia and their refusal to return to the homeland due to their concerns about 
the contentious political conditions (1997: 443; see also Winland 2002). In fact, political 
conflicts are often the central source of the divisions and conflicts between a diasporic 
community and its homeland (e.g. Bernal 2004, 2005).  
Likewise, Hmong from the United States that I met during my research in Laos, who 
were visiting their relatives and friends, also initially had the similar kinds of concerns and 
worries about their trip. A journey to their natal homeland was not always a joyful 
homecoming process, although once they arrived in Laos and reunited with their family, 
their fears did not hinder their emotional attachment to the country and unforgettable 
memories of their past lives. 
Being Hmong and a Wandering People  
It is quite clear that Hmong are a diasporic people without a definitive ethnic homeland to 
which they retain transnational connections and emotional affiliations. Despite scholarly 
claims that Hmong are originally from China, my interviewees in Laos and the United States 
did not feel affinity to the Chinese nation-state as their country of ethnic origin and have 
instead produced multiple theories of their ethnic ancestry. However, they expressed feelings 
of connection and attachment to their Miao-Hmong co-ethnics residing in China in ways that 
seemed to supercede national differences and borders. Although Laos is not an ethnic 
homeland, it has become a natal homeland for many diasporic Hmong since they have lived 
there for centuries and were born in that country. Nonetheless, Hmong in both Laos and the 
United States have developed different perceptions toward Laos. While Hmong in Laos have 
shown national belonging to their country to a certain degree, their co-ethnics in the United 
States have developed more ambivalent perceptions to it because of their past political 
persecution by the Communist Lao state.  
The Hmong diasporas transnational community is based on cross-border ethnic 
connections between Hmong who are geographically scattered in various nation-states, such 
as Laos and the United States as well as China, and not centripetal linkages to these 
countries. However, although these nation-states in which diasporic Hmong currently reside 
have become their permanent homes, they continue to feel only partial belonging to these 
nation-states. In this respect, the following chapter will illustrate the current lives and 
socioeconomic status of Hmong in both Laos and the United States as necessary local 
contexts for understanding their ethnic experiences as a diasporic people. 
Chapter 3. Local Contexts of the Hmong Diaspora: Being Ethnic Minorities in Partial 
Homes 
In this chapter, I will examine the local socioeconomic conditions and the ethnic minority 
experiences of Hmong in Laos and the United States. While discussing local socioeconomic 
contexts and ethnic relations with mainstream society in these two countries, I will focus on 
how these factors constantly impact Hmongs ethnic minority consciousness and continued 
sense of partial belonging to the nation-state. With an analytical emphasis on generational 
differences, this chapter examines the ways in which Hmong in each country have continued 
to feel and express their feelings of socioeconomic, and ethnic marginalization from 
mainstream society.  
While many of the local conditions under which Hmong live in Laos are shared 
among both the older and younger generations, the sense of partial belonging by elderly 
Hmong is initially based on the lack of economic opportunities in an underdeveloped 
national economy. Despite the prospering tourism economy, they are still economically 
confined to subsistence rice farming and do not have sufficient sources of income. As a 
result, most of them rely on unstable and irregular transnational remittances from their co-
ethnics in the diaspora. In addition, their historical and cultural marginalization evokes an 
ethnic minority consciousness among them.  
Such ethnic minority and historical consciousness seem to have been passed down to 
younger Hmong to a certain extent. However, Hmong youth are better integrated in 
mainstream Lao society, receive public education, and are able to participate in the broader 
economy to a greater extent, as well as interact more with other ethnic groups. On the other 
hand, they have become the subject to employment insecurity and ethnic marginalization as 
ethnic minority laborers in a changing Lao national economy and are vulnerable to the 
control of foreign, multi-national owners, such as the tourism industry and the factories and 
mines of multinational corporations.  
In the United States, the Hmong immigrant first generation (and some of older 1.5 
generation Hmong) have not been able to find stable and well-paying jobs since their 
resettlement. Some of them were able to find work in the factory assembly lines and other 
low skilled occupations due to their lack of educational qualifications and language barriers. 
In addition to their persistent economic hardship as immigrant late-comers, elderly Hmongs 
feelings of marginalization are profoundly based on their emotional difficulty and distress 
adjusting to new lives in the United States. They are troubled by spousal conflicts, health 
problems, drastic cultural differences, and the gang involvement of Hmong youth, all of 
which are inseparable from their lower socioeconomic condition in the United States as 
former refugees who do not truly belong in their new home.  
In contrast to the elderly Hmong and their parents, most 1.5 generation and U.S. born 
second generation Hmong have better economic opportunities and a number of them are 
receiving college educations. However, because they have more social interactions with 
mainstream American society, they experience more racialized ethnic minority status to a 
greater extent in their daily interactions. As a result, younger generation Hmong have 
expressed feelings of ethnic marginalization from experiences at school, the workplace, and 
various public spaces, as well as from multiethnic peers. 
Although the Hmong diasporic communitys generally low socioeconomic status and 
feelings of marginalization may not always be the direct and evident cause of their ethnic 
minority consciousness in these two countries, their experiences certainly reflect how they 
consider their current nation-states of residence as only partial homes. This sense of partial 
belonging emphasizes how they are positioned in-between the nation-state and the diaspora. 
In fact, the diasporic condition is often characterized by marginalization from the countries 
in which diasporic peoples reside as ethnic minorities, and this partial exclusion from the 
nation-state evokes the desire to maintain transnational affiliations with co-ethnics in both 
the ethnic homeland and the diaspora.  
Estranged Lives in the Natal Homeland of Laos 
Being Ethnic and Minority 
As explained in Chapter 1, the Dao Tha village in Vang Vieng was established in the late 
1990s in order to resettle the Hmong returnees from Thai refugee camps and attempt to 
ethnically integrate them with the majority Lao Loum and minority Khmu groups. Ever 
since my first visit to the village in 2003, many elderly villagers repeatedly told me that I 
should be aware of the subtle ethnic tensions in the village. In this context, the head of the 
village was annually elected and rotated between the three ethnic groups in the name of 
equal political leadership. Of course, even in the past, there are individual differences in 
the way people developed ethnic relationships and friendships. The ethnic relations have 
also changed over the years and there has been much more interaction among the ethnic 
villagers in their daily lives.  
Nonetheless, the history of ethnic tension in Dao Tha is deeply embedded and not 
easily surmountable. At times, majority ethnic Lao Loum villagers continue to perceive 
Hmong as former anti-Communist guerillas during the Vietnam War. In everyday lives, they 
also show various stereotypes about the Hmong ethnic minority. For instance, one chilly 
morning in early December, I woke up feeling sick and had no appetite. I came out of my 
room, went inside the kitchen for some leftover steamed rice and hot water, and then sat at a 
large family table outside. I did not take any side dishes, sauces, soup or cooked vegetables 
to eat with the rice but just put hot water in the bowl of steamed rice. As soon as I took a 
mouthful of it, Kham, the distant niece of my Lao Loum host family, suddenly started 
laughing out loud. Pointing her finger at me, she exclaimed, Sister, you eat like Hmong, 
indicating her surprise that I was eating food that was typical for impoverished Hmong. I 
did not explain to her that I ate like Hmong because I was sick and it was how I ate when I 
would become ill as a child in Korea. Instead, I laughed and simply admitted that Yes, I am 
eating like Hmong.  
 Hmong villagers are conscious of the persistence of derogatory ethnic terms like meo 
(cat) to refer to their ethnic group, making them constantly aware of their ethnic minority 
status. Elderly Hmong explained to me that this derogatory label arose because the Chinese 
ethnic category of Miao (which includes Hmong in that country) sounds like meo in the Lao 
language. They make sure that I understood that the term is demeaning and that I should 
never accept it if I heard someone using it. Although younger Hmong are no longer called 
meo by their non-Hmong peers (who learned not to use in their formal education), they 
were clearly aware of the term and its derogatory connotation. A group of Hmong youth 
actually told me that if they call us meo (cat), Ill call them ma (dog). 
Indeed, in their everyday lives, there are various ethnic markers and stereotypes that 
other Laotians use to define the Hmong. They can be based on physical appearance, cultural 
practices, language, or simply, their distinctive Hmong names. The way other ethnic groups 
perceive the Hmong has indeed been influential and has even changed Hmong cultural 
practices to a certain extent. According to them, they no longer wear traditional ethnic 
clothes on a daily basis because they do not want to be picked on and teased by other 
ethnic groups as old-fashioned rural people [kohn ba:n-no:k]. Indeed, one of my 
interviewees, Xou Her explained, In our real Hmong culture, we are supposed to wear 
traditional dress in daily life. I also have a set of daily clothes for mensimple black pants 
and a top. But Hmong no longer put it on everyday, because we are shy in front of Lao 
people. Now we only put the traditional dress on and take pictures for special occasions like 
the New Year. 
When I asked Xou about the reason of his shyness, Xou further elaborated, Its 
because many people no longer put on traditional clothes every day. If we do, everyone will 
notice that we are Hmong. I am shy. In my real opinion, I know we shouldnt be ashamed 
because it is our culture. But we cant do that all the time as other people think Hmong are 
people from the distant past [kohn kkao]. In a different interview, Cha Thao gave me a 
similar response when I asked his opinion about why Hmong could not wear traditional 
Hmong dress any more in everyday life. You can. But if you are the only person wearing 
Hmong traditional cloth, it is embarrassing, he remarked. Everyone will say, Oh, you 
wear the old traditional Hmong dress wherever you go? They will mock you [laugh]. 
It is not always clear whether Hmong really stopped wearing traditional clothes 
because of the disdain for their cultural customs from other ethnic groups or for other 
reasons. However, it is well-known that Hmong cultural practices have continuously and 
increasingly been the target of national assimilationist projects to minimize and reduce 
ethnic differences by unifying (rather than eradicating from a state perspective) different 
ethnic cultures through new national regulations and policies, whenever it was deemed 
necessary to change, control, and reconstruct them.  
As Jan Ovesen (2004: 215) notes, in various national events promoted by the Lao 
government, such as sports games, beauty contests, and national festivals, ethnic minorities 
are invited and particularly encouraged to actively participate in the name of Lao national 
cultural unity. Despite scholarly efforts to critically examine the way the Lao government 
fails to achieve its motto of unity by equal status for all ethnic minorities in national 
development (Ireson and Ireson 1991), history (Pholsena 2010; Stuart-Fox 1997) and 
governmental cultural policies (Ovesen 2004), it still remains unclear how these are actually 
done in practice and to what extent ethnic minorities are affected.  
While acknowledging the limited resources on the current ethnic status and 
engagement of minority groups in Laos, I will introduce an example of such cultural control 
through the Lao states unification policy based on my daily interactions with Hmong 
students in the village as part of extra curricular activities at the community center. I 
remember how surprised I was when I first learned that Hmong students recently adopted a 
Lao first name at school and in official documents as required by the government. These 
names are based on the national Lao language and completely different from their original 
Hmong names.  
According to the students, they were asked to register with their newly created 
Laotian first name at their current school. In official documents at school, their Laotian 
names would be written and used by teachers. To me, this new rule initially denoted more 
aggressive cultural enforcement against ethnic Hmong. However, the Hmong students and 
their families did not seem to be bothered by this newly implemented policy, simply because 
they did not take their Lao names seriously in their everyday lives and continued to use their 
Hmong names except in schools and other public institutions. 
In addition, the Lao state has also required that Hmong shorten their ethnic 
celebrations so as not to reduce their educational and economic productivity (and their 
contribution to the national economy), as will be further discussed in the context of the 
Hmong New Year in Chapter 6. The Hmong have again complied, leading to an 
impoverishment of their public celebrations. Considering these cultural policies, Ovesen 
(1995: 14-15) offers more neutral observations and stresses the governments improved 
treatment of Hmong: 
It should also be emphasized that nowadays the government of the Lao PDR in many ways 
makes honest attempts to improve the conditions for the countrys ethnic minorities, 
including the Hmong, and to include them into the mainstream of the society. If the 
Hmong are still in certain respects relatively disadvantaged, this is primarily a reflection of 
the particular magnitude of cultural and political-historical differences between this 
particular ethnic minority and the Lao majority population.  
Although it is important to recognize that the states relationship with its ethnic 
minorities is subject to change and policies of inclusion can be seen as more positive, what 
Hmong actually experience in their daily lives is not merely a matter of difference from the 
majority Laotians but constantly reaffirms their ethnic minority status. In other words, the 
daily experiences and negative individual interactions caused by ethnic differences can 
certainly result in the subjective feelings of their marginal status as they are forced to 
conform to the states changing cultural control policies without hesitation or resistance.  
At the Margins of the National Economy  
Although the Lao national economy transitioned from agricultural subsistence to limited 
development of industry and tourism, it is still in a state of underdevelopment and provides 
Hmong few economic and educational opportunities. In addition to being one of the few 
countries in the world that remain steadfast as a socialist and Communist state regime, the 
Lao government has relied considerably on foreign donors to support the national economy 
(Case 2010: 204; St. John 2006: 175-176; Ireson and Ireson 1991). Nonetheless, the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), one of the international organizations that are 
heavily involved with the domestic economic development of Laos, classified the country as 
one of the 48 Least Developed Countries (LDCs) in the world and reported that the country 
did not yet graduate from the LDC status because of low income, human assets, and 
economic vulnerability.36  
Hmong in Dao Tha village have retained persistently marginal economic status in the 
Lao national economy and their only source of viable income are remittances from their 
families and relatives in the diaspora abroad. As a result, Hmong clearly have somewhat 
better economic status than Khmu ethnic people in Dao Tha or Hmong living in more 
remote and poorer rural villages, who do not have access to transnational financial networks 
and support from their co-ethnics abroad. However, their socioeconomic status is 
considerably worse than majority Lao Loum villagers, who have experienced very dramatic 
increases in income and social mobility in a short time because of their participation in the 
global tourism industry in Vang Vieng.  
Hmong used to be swidden (slash-and-burn) farmers, but when this was banned, they 
became predominantly subsistence rice farmers. Although there is slight variation in the 
36 UNDP, The Lao Development Journey toward Graduation from LDC Status (2008). 
socioeconomic status of various Hmong households in Dao Tha, their livelihoods mainly 
rely on rice farming, small vegetable gardens, and raising chickens around their house as 
well as cows (owned by about one third of families). However, farming or tending livestock 
is not a sufficient source of income and they usually face a shortage of rice at the beginning 
of summer, forcing them to buy it on the market at fluctuating prices.  
A small group of Hmong mothers would occasionally go to the local market to sell 
their garden vegetables, such as corn, cucumbers, egg plants, squash, and lemongrass during 
the harvest season. Since they do not even have stalls, they simply sit on the ground with 
their produce. However, because there is an abundance of this type of produce during that 
part of the year, they face considerable competition at the market and their main customers 
are limited to those who have stopped small-scale gardening and vegetable farming, such as 
Lao Loum who work in the tourism industry.  
During my earlier visits to Dao Tha between 2003 and 2006, the vast majority of the 
houses in the village were shacks built of wood and thatch. The only homes built from 
concrete were owned by a couple majority Lao Loum families and about five rich Hmong 
families in the village who had access to U.S. remittances. By the time I returned to Dao Tha 
in 2011 for my fieldwork, the tourism economy had fully penetrated the region and there 
were many more cement homes which had been built by majority Lao using their profits 
from the tourism industry. In contrast to previous years, those without cement homes were 
now considered to be poor with no economic resources.37  
By 2011, the Hmong community in Dao Tha appeared to be more economically 
privileged because a good number of houses were now built with sturdy wood or materials 
like cement, concrete, laminate, and bricks because of the flow of remittances from abroad. 
However, it is important to note that the economic disparities among the villagers have 
37 The thatch houses that were left were mainly temporary belonged to young students who had moved to the 
village to learn English in Vang Vieng, temporary labor migrants who were connected to village clans, or 
newly-wed couples.  
remarkably widened due to the development of tourism. The most immediate (and perhaps 
the only) beneficiary was the Lao Loum villagers who lived in the closest proximity to the 
river where the tourists spend their time and therefore could take advantage of business 
opportunities. On the other hand, the local economic livelihoods of elderly Hmong (as well 
as Khmu) were just as limited as before and not improved significantly with tourism. 
The majority of Lao Loum had quickly transformed themselves from poor peasants 
to rich bar owners catering to foreign tourists. Those Lao Loum who did not own a bar also 
had plenty of opportunities to work for their neighbors lucrative businesses. As a result, 
they not only built two or even three-story cement houses, but also bought multiple 
motorbikes, cars, and trucks, sent their children to schools in the capital city, and organized 
group tours and social parties in town. Many of the villagers attributed their success to their 
communication skills and sociability, which must have been effective to get official 
permission to enter the tourism business from the district officials, who are also culturally 
and ethnically the same ethnic Lao.  
In contrast to the drastic economic transition of the Lao Loum villagers, none of 
Hmong or Khmu in the same village established their own bars or directly engaged in or 
profited from the tourism economy. An exception would be the youth from both ethnic 
groups who were able to get a part-time job at these bars. However, only a minority of youth 
in the village were working at the river bars. Others worked for other tourism sectors in town, 
because the bar cultures were too difficult and different for them to deal with. As many of 
youth jokingly said, they cannot drink and get drunk, do drugs, smoke, and stagger around 
all day long like them [the tourists at the river bars].  
 Indeed, the seemingly nicer concrete houses that some elderly Hmong lived in are 
now contrasted with the continued poverty of their everyday lives. Hmongs economic 
activities had not changed at all for the several past years despite the rapidly changing local 
economy and increasing economic opportunities. Instead, it generates more contrasting and 
ironic images when elderly people walk to their farms and rice fields with bamboo baskets 
coming out of their modern cement house. Most of the modern concrete homes still do not 
have bathrooms inside except for a few who could afford such extra spaces because of 
remittances.38 Many Hmong do have TVs, DVD players, or radios, which other people in the 
village also owned even before electricity was provided to the village in early 2000, when 
such devices were run on batteries. Other basic home appliances are simply too expensive 
for Hmong to afford, and even if they could buy them, they would not be able to pay for the 
electricity to run refrigerators and fans.  
The Hmong villagers share two public water taps inside their own community. In the 
past, many of them walked to the Song river in the evening to bathe, wash their clothes, and 
draw water for daily household use. However, as illustrated in the Introduction, the Song 
river is no longer usable by the villagers (because of tourists and water pollution) and most 
of them now use individual hoses to connect to the public taps and divert water to large 
water tanks at the back of their houses or simply to several small buckets. This often caused 
frequent water shortages for the entire community. 
In sum, Hmong people are not merely the poorest in an already poor nation-state, 
but their economic condition has not improved or changed over the years and they have 
limited access to financial resources and economic capital in a national economy hampered 
by inconsistent foreign aid, problematic development schemes, and exploitation by 
multinational corporations in a global economy.  
Living on American Dollars: Surviving through the Fragile Transnational Money Chain 
What little socioeconomic mobility Hmong have had in the Lao national economy is not 
purely based on individual achievement and ability but more (as they say) a matter of luck. 
In other words, it is made possible by financial support through their transnational 
38 According to Hmong in the United States who helped their co-ethnics in Laos to build cement homes, the 
cost of construction normally exceeds US$40,000. This is significant from a Laotian economic standard, 
considering that all construction materials have to be imported from abroad (Thailand) and that they tend to be 
very expensive and overpriced.  
connections with their kin members residing in the United States, who send them 
remittances irregularly.  
Despite the impoverished social and economic life of Hmong, it is true that some of 
them are increasingly taking part in different economic sectors with better opportunities 
which sometimes may not be available to other ethnic groups. In Dao Tha, besides 
individual homes, my interactions with Hmong mostly happened in their fields and farms 
while cutting rice and planting seeds. However, I also met some Hmong individuals engaged 
in other occupations. Two Hmong men in the village were tuk tuk drivers (a commonly-used 
motorized rickshaw and the main form of public transportation), and I would often encounter 
them on the main road in the center of Vang Vieng. In the local market, vendors were 
increasingly Hmong from different villages in the district, selling not only vegetables, but 
numerous other items, such as jewelry, clothing, fabric, toys, cell phones, CDs and DVDs, 
and so on.  
In addition, I also met and interacted with a group of young students at both the local 
college and the only national university of Laos. Another group of youth, who studied 
English with me when I was helping with community development projects before my 
doctoral fieldwork, were actively involved in the tourism industry. I was also introduced to a 
few Hmong officers in governmental institutions, the post office, and the bank and had a 
number of conversations with them. Three young Hmong women in their early twenties in 
the village shared their working experiences with me in the garment factories in Vientiane 
(the capital city), which were owned and operated by multinational Thai, Lao, Chinese, and 
Vietnamese executives. Sometimes parents proudly introduced their sons, daughters, 
nephews, or nieces who had become successful professionals, including teachers, nurses, 
doctors, and development workers as well as soldiers.  
These diverse working experiences of Hmong are notable and unusual, especially 
given that other ethnic minority groups outside Vang Vieng may not commonly experience 
such diversified economic occupations. However, many of these economic opportunities 
were made possible by remittances sent by family and relatives from the United States. Such 
funds were often used to send children to college, which enables them to leave farming and 
pursue other careers. Likewise, the two Hmong men in Dao Tha who worked as a tuk tuk 
driver were able to buy the tuk tuk with remittance money. 
Therefore, if Hmong in Dao Tha village could not rely on remittances and the 
economic power of their co-ethnics in the diaspora, they would have no means to deal with 
their economic marginalization in their limited participation in the Lao national economy. In 
other words, if this informal but essential transnational money chain is broken, it would 
have severe repercussions on Hmongs daily subsistence, because they have not been able to 
establish their own economic niche in the domestic economy. This also means that Hmongs 
economic survival in Laos is susceptible and even vulnerable to the changes and conditions 
of the U.S. economy as well.  
In Foreign Hands: The Economic Participation of the Younger Hmong Generation and New 
Social and Ethnic Marginalization 
Many older Hmong are well aware of the continuing problems of the Lao economy, and are 
quite concerned about their childrens futures. Even some educated Hmong youth in non-
agricultural jobs remain insecure and they are still marginalized in the current national 
economy. The occupations that these educated Hmong youth have entered are highly valued 
and desired in general, but do not necessarily pay well, such as teachers, governmental 
officers, and post office workers.39 Therefore, these jobs are respected not because of their 
competitive salaries, but rather because they require higher education and social mobility.  
In contrast, many young Hmong in Dao Tha village who do not have any higher 
education eagerly seek wage labor opportunities at mines and factories and in the tourism 
industry, which are often low skilled and low-status occupations. While young Hmong who 
39 In 2011, monthly salaries of teachers at public school were 500,000 Lao Kip (the Lao currency, 37 British 
pounds) (compared to 300,000 Lao Kip [22 British pounds] in 2007).  
were doing such work were hardly respected or praised by their parents and other villagers, 
they were actually seen as economically successful and competitive, especially because of 
their much higher salaries compared to poorer Hmong. Given that the monthly salary of a 
daily laborer at the Australian-owned mines was usually over US$120 up to US$200 (78-130 
British pounds) depending on the project, being miner was considered extremely attractive 
and desired. Therefore, many formerly unemployed young Hmong in such jobs were willing 
to endure the inadequate and exploitative working environment.  
Nonetheless, their economic status continues to be unstable and precarious in various 
ways. Many of these young workers increasingly experience various social problems caused 
by the greater coercive power of foreign owners and managers of multinational corporations, 
which produces considerable job insecurity, ethnic tension, and social manipulation. In order 
to examine the issue of socioeconomic marginalization caused by the dominant foreign 
capital system, I will mainly focus on the case of a mine that had significant impact on 
Hmong youth workers. 
Since 2010, an Australian mining company has launched multiple satellite project 
sites around the Vang Vieng district and started to excavate mountains and hills that 
surround the villages in order to develop new mines for copper, gold, and silver materials. 
This initially seemed to lead to the recruitment of local workers and improve the 
employment rate of the young villagers in Vang Vieng, including Hmong. However, Hmong 
youth working at this mine soon started to worry about employment insecurity as well as 
increasing tensions with workers from other ethnic groups. This was exacerbated by foreign 
mine owners, who work with Laotian middle men to manage their businesses in the multi-
ethnic local environment. Without proper knowledge or local understanding of ethnic 
divisions, these foreign owners hired and appointed majority Lao Loum employees as 
managers and directors of subordinate, mostly ethnic Hmong workers. Thus, Hmong often 
complained about misunderstandings with their foreign employers caused by mistranslation 
or unfair assessments given by their Lao Loum supervisors.  
It was also reported that Hmong workers were not asked to continue to work for 
additional projects at different sites without notice, regardless of their work ability and 
diligence, because their productivity was not fairly graded and reported by their Lao Loum 
managers. These Hmong workers subjective feelings of ethnic and socioeconomic 
marginalization seem inevitable and persist in other jobs that are globally operated and 
managed by foreigners, who usually do not appreciate cultural and ethnic sensitivities in the  
local context.  
Besides the uncertainty of job insecurity and ethnic tensions, many multinational 
corporations like mining often mistreat local villagers and ignore their needs and local social 
dynamics. One remarkable example is how young Hmong men are usually recruited by these 
companies as workers. When the mining corporation sets up a new project site, only the 
nearest village that will be affected the most and generate tangible side effects by the 
construction of the site is granted employment opportunities. For example, when a new mine 
had to divert electricity provided to a Hmong village called Pha Boua in Vang Vieng for 
mining operations, they compensated the villagers by accepting fifteen young Hmong men 
from that village as workers.  
No further negotiations were later made with Pha Boua or other villages for other 
consequences, such as additional electricity power shortages, serious environmental 
pollution, and unexpected industrial accidents caused by poor working conditions and 
mismanagement. Eventually, the power outages started to affect other villages in Vang 
Vieng, including Dao Tha, which was not compensated for the negative impact of the local 
mine. The entire village repeatedly went through random blackouts during my fieldwork due 
to the heavy energy consumption of the mine (as well as the tourist bars lined along the 
river). Despite the shortage of electricity, the mine was operating all day and the river bars 
still played loud music (partly because they also put batteries in the large speakers to make 
sure that the music can be turned on all the time even during power outages). People in the 
village always put candles and lighters near the meal table in the evening, in case the lights 
suddenly went off again while having dinner. Although the villagers were subject to this 
kind of foreign corporate control, they did not receive any benefits from it simply because 
their village was not located next to the mine. 
In fact, the Australian mine is merely one example of the many ways in which 
foreign and global capital forces, which have already commandeered the Lao economy, are 
now having an adverse impact on local Hmong villages, perpetuating their socioeconomic 
marginalization. Hmong often expressed their concerns about the Chinese, Thai, Vietnamese, 
and other multinational companies and the way they operate and manipulate the local 
economic system. After observing three different types of power transmission towers that 
were built in the village mountains, one elderly man in the village told me: 
You see the gigantic electricity poles on the mountain? The first one, pretty old, was built 
to provide electricity to Lao people and the second new one was shared by both Lao and 
Chinese people. The last one is so new and it doesnt even have wires yet. I heard people 
saying that one will extract electrical power from Laos and then be exported to China 
directly without benefiting Lao people. 
A similar remark was made by Yer Lee, another Hmong man in the village, who 
once told me about a new cement factory in town that will produce cement not for local use, 
but for export to China directly. Yer added that unlike the two other previous cement 
factories also funded by China, the new factory brought their own migrant workers directly 
from China and did not hire any local Lao people. He then asked my opinion about this 
economic development: So what do you think? Do you think China will eat [kkin] Laos 
in the future after all? 
Therefore, because of their local socioeconomic marginalization, Hmong have 
become dependent and subject on two external sources of income that they ultimately cannot 
control. The first are the remittances through their transnational economic network, which is 
in the hands of their co-ethnics residing in the United States who determine when and how 
much to remit. In other words, economic marginalization persists not simply based on 
poverty or underdeveloped national economy but also based on the lack of power over their 
own economic livelihoods.  
In addition, they have now become subject to foreign global capitalist economic 
control, which has provided them some, but highly exploitative and unstable employment 
opportunities, and also has had a negative impact on their lives. Although the young Hmong 
generation has started to pursue more economic opportunities created by global capital, this 
has not necessarily improved their economic conditions or really ameliorated their 
marginalization while also generating various socioeconomic problems.  
It is true that in contrast to older Hmong, the younger Hmong generation have greater 
economic opportunities in the local Lao economy and have a chance to earn their own 
incomes as wage-laborers instead of simply relying on remittances or being rice farmers. 
They have been able to participate to a greater extent in expanding new industries, especially 
tourism and factories and mines of multinational corporations, and international 
development projects, all of which have become dominant sources of national income for the 
country. However, young Hmong toil on the margins of these expanding industries and are 
vulnerable to the temporary, insecure, and exploitative nature of their jobs. The main 
difference is that instead of simply experiencing local economic marginalization from the 
underdeveloped national economy, they are now subject to the control of foreign capital and 
the global economy. 
Partial Belonging among Hmong in the United States 
When elderly Hmong in the United States spoke about the ambivalent relationship with their 
former natal homeland of Laos, many also described their experiences of constant economic 
hardship, social and ethnic marginalization, and various struggles with social problems in the 
United States, which also eventually discouraged them from fully affiliating with the U.S. 
nation-state. This is despite their legal status as either citizens or permanent residents as well 
as the greater material affluence and economic resources they have compared to their 
previous lives in Laos. Their partial sense of belonging to the nation-state in which they 
reside again emphasizes their ethnic minority status and is also reproduced through the 
generations as it was in Laos. 
In fact, many Hmong in the United States are conscious about their history of 
economic, social, and ethnic marginalization in the United States since their arrival as 
refugees in the 1970s. They also currently deal with severe social problems that challenge 
the Hmong community and their supposed traditional culture. As late comers to the U.S. 
ethnic minority immigrant community, Hmong still experience and suffer from significant 
cultural, political, and socioeconomic marginalization from mainstream society (Fujiwara 
2008: 53; Hein 1993; Zucker 1983). In the literature, the suicide rate among teenage and 
female Hmong is discussed as an indicator of the struggles and conflicts that they have to 
confront in dealing with the social pressures associated with cultural and social assimilation 
(Fujiwara 2008; Rumbaut 1997; Xiong and Jesilow 2007).  
Structural Economic Marginalization among Elderly Generation Hmong 
The Hmongs low socioeconomic status and level of education in the United States have 
been a major concern of scholars as well as the community leaders and members (Chan 
1994; Xiong 2013). According to the U.S. 2013 Census Review, a report published by the 
Hmong National Development organization, the overall poverty rate among Hmong in the 
United States was estimated as 25 percent in 2010 (HND Report 2013: 6), which was 
considerably higher than the poverty rate of 15 percent for the entire U.S. population that 
year. This is commonly perceived as a significant challenge for U.S. Hmong community. In 
particular, the report presents poverty among Hmong in the three major states where they 
live, in comparison to the overall poverty rate of the general population. The poverty rate of 
Hmong in California is 31 percent, which is considerably higher than the overall rate of 11 
for the state. In Minnesota, 26 percent of Hmong are considered to live in poverty while the 
states poverty rate is seven percent. Hmong in Wisconsin have a 19 percent poverty rate 
while that of the general population in that state is eight percent (HND Report 2013: 26).  
 In order to fight poverty, many Hmong organizations and individuals from different 
cities have engaged in nationally-organized events and conferences to improve their 
communitys overall socioeconomic conditions. Some of the young Hmong college students 
also participate as audience members, deeply sharing the communitys concern and social 
challenges caused by poverty. After attending a national conference for Hmong youth, 
education, and poverty, a college student, Sao Lee, shared with me his experience and 
thoughts. Sao said: 
At the conference that I attended, people presented statistics about all Asian minorities as 
well as all other different ethnic groups in the U.S. I saw Hmong people have the highest 
high school dropout rates and the lowest college graduate rates. The lowest income too, 
about $32,000 a year, on average. I do want the Hmong community to know that we are 
Hmong so we need get more involved. 
The average economic status of Hmong in the United States should also be 
understood more specifically in the context of internal class differences within the 
community, especially between working and middle-class families. Working class families 
are often barely above the poverty line and are perhaps the ones who suffer the most. As my 
interviewees put it, they are not poor enough to qualify for social welfare and government 
support but they are not wealthy enough to fully support themselves. This reality is very 
clearly addressed by Chi Her, who has been working at an assembly line for the past years: 
Oh, life in America is very difficult. Everything is under government economic control 
over household [home economics]. () Its like we are getting poorer, especially for those 
people who have less education. If you are really poor, you might get a little help. 
Otherwise, you can be super rich so that you arent affected, even if there are many things 
to pay for. But its very difficult for those people in the middle, who arent the poorest but 
are not well-off either.  
In fact, Hmong families that considered themselves middle-class with a relatively 
comfortable financial situation do not seem to feel that different from those defined as the 
working poor as in the case above. In other words, the problem of poverty for the Hmong 
community goes beyond the simple measure of low incomes. Middle-class families also 
suffered from other types of financial difficulties in different ways. For example, Shoua 
Yang, who works as a nurse at a county hospital and introduced me to her own family as a 
typical middle-class Hmong household, invited me to lunch at her house, which was 
relatively recently built in Elk Grove (known as a newly developed residential city).  
Unlike many U.S. Hmong families in my study that have multiple children (usually 
more than four), Shoua has two children, both in high school. Talking about her only 
daughter, who was about to go to college that year, Shoua inadvertently said, in this country 
if you are middle-class, life is very difficult. She has been concerned about her daughters 
college tuition and subsequent expenses that the family could not fully support and will 
therefore limit her educational choices. Her statement is an indication that the economic 
hardship that the Hmong community faces is not limited to a homogenously poor group but 
rather can be pervasive among community members of differing economic status. This kind 
of economic status of middle class Hmong families actually indicates that economic 
hardship also needs to be understood in a broader context of a general American middle 
class problem that universally exists among different ethnic groups.  
Since I repeatedly visited the same Hmong community in Sacramento each year after 
2008, I have learned of peoples worsening economic condition, especially because of the 
American economic recession. Hmong women who used to work multiple part time jobs to 
take care of their family were laid off. Men working at assembly plants, food processing 
factories, and in other types of manual labor also lost their jobs due to the economic 
downturn. Some of those who were still employed in these companies continued to work 
from four in the morning to the late afternoon and were barely paid a minimum wage (less 
than US$2,500 a month). Hmong also lost their homes during the housing market crisis, 
simply they could not continue to pay the mortgage. Many asserted that their life did not 
seem possible without social welfare assistance, such as SSI (Supplemental Security 
Income), and other government financial aid programs, which had also been reduced 
because of government budget cuts.  
Hmong-ness Endangered: Trauma, Loss, and Persistent Social Problems 
In addition to economic struggles, elderly Hmong in the United States also experienced 
emotional distress because of the various social problems that their community confronts, 
which constantly reminds them of the loss of what they perceive to be their traditional 
cultural values. Similar to other recent immigrant communities from diverse cultural 
backgrounds as discussed in Aihwa Ongs book on Cambodian refugees (2003), Hmongs 
cultural values and practices often receive considerable criticism from the mainstream 
American public. In the U.S. media, various Hmong customs practiced in different states 
drew public attention and controversy, such as their marriage practices (permitting early 
marriage under the age of thirteen), hunting activities on open land, and animal slaughter for 
rituals (see Chapter 7).40  
When facing frequent public criticism and legal restrictions of their cultural 
traditions, Hmong constantly dream of a life outside the United States (namely back in Laos) 
or some unidentified third place where they can freely practice their ethnic culture without 
public pressure or regulations. This reflects how Hmong regard the United States as a partial 
home where they do not completely belong and how such experiences can even cause them 
to long for their former natal homeland of Laos. In addition, the Hmong immigrant 
community has also suffered from traumatic experiences after their resettlement in the 
United States, which transformed family life into one of violence, crisis, and separation. In 
particular, many Hmong families have struggled with health problems, the difficult familial 
relationships between parents and children and between spouses, as well as domestic 
violence. The community has also confronted social problems among youth some of whom 
have become involved with gangs, drugs, and crime. 
These problems often cause Hmong to develop discourses about how they have lost 
their Hmong-ness, namely what Hmong should be like and have become subject to the 
negative social environment of the United States as both culturally and economically 
impoverished and marginalized ethnic minorities. Based on this, Hmong also developed a 
diasporic longing for a life in the past when they were free of such problems and were more 
peaceful and more Hmong-like, and hope to return to such an idealized past. Such 
romanticized desires illustrate their sense of non-belonging in the United States and a 
yearning for different place and time.  
This was illustrated by a Hmong professional mental health therapist at a major 
hospital in Sacramento and former counselor, who has been working for the Hmong 
40 Various media reports about these issues can be found through local newspapers and broadcasts, such as 
Minnesota Radio, NPR Wisconsin, Sacramento Bee, Fresno Bee, Hmong Times, and Hmong Today. 
community for the past fifteen years. During the interview, Mia Vang summarized and 
explained this social situation and social distress found among many elderly Hmong: 
My patients are kind of mid-age, like my parents. Because of their social struggles of 
adjustment, language difficulties, and differences in cultural acculturation with their kids, 
we are not just dealing with mental illness but with all these factors. I feel like its more 
difficult than the general population, who are able to get more support. Knowing that I am 
Hmong, my patients kind of tell me everything: parenting issues, kids, spouses, these all 
can play into depression. It seems like the treatment is slower, because there are so many 
importantenvironmental and social factors that affect their mental health. 
One of the communitys major concerns is about increasing health problems. Not 
only have a lot of studies and government-funded research been conducted on this issue with 
the Hmong community, many Hmong complained that they frequently suffer from 
unexpected diseases like diabetes, heart attacks, and high blood pressure. Meeting with 
people with such diseases and their families, I learned that people call these American 
diseases and believe that they were never found among the Hmong in Laos. For example, 
Mo Lee, a retired man in his sixties, expressed his concerns about the impoverished nature 
and health environment of the United States. He said, If I can live as I wish, living in Laos 
would be better. Nature there is just the same as when I was born. I am used to that 
environment. Food here is not natural/organic at all. You have to put it in a freezer and it 
contains chemicals. Its not natural food. Like fruits, in the U.S., there are not a lot compared 
to Thailand or Laos. Nothing is fresh here. 
As indicated here, such health problems were believed to be more American and 
caused by the particular living environment in the United States, which Hmong 
characterized as no exercise because of lack of physical labor, too much artificial food, and 
too much stress, that did not exist in their previous lives in Laos. Mo Lee continued, The 
climate here is very different, too. It is better to be there [Laos]. The weather there is not too 
cold or not too warm, so theres no high blood pressure or blood sugar. Hmong in Laos 
never see people who suffer from heart attacks or stroke. Many Hmong who came to 
America have those. Again, for Mo, the difficulties that Hmong experience in their partial 
home in America makes him nostalgically long for a past life in the natal homeland. 
In my interviews and surveys with college students, gang involvement and criminal 
activities are repeatedly reported as one of the most serious problems that the Hmong 
community has confronted. Visiting different families, one of the things that I carefully did 
was look at the family photos hung on the walls in living rooms. During one visit, I 
unknowingly pointed to the youngest boy in a family photo, who indeed looked cute and was 
smiling, and asked the woman standing next to me, who is he? She paused and answered in 
a low voice, My youngest brother. He is locked up [in prison] and added, He used to be 
the smartest, most beautiful one in our family. Similarly, elderly people in my study 
expressed their disheartening emotional disappointment and sadness about the criminal acts 
of Hmong youth.  
In fact, there were a good number of parents either had a son who was a gang 
member and/or was the victim of their criminal behavior. In general, they never mentioned 
or introduced children who were involved in criminality or in jail. When I learned about 
them later, other family members secretly told me that the parents could not include those 
children in their conversations because the parents loved the children deeply in their heart 
and therefore had to disown them. In fact, the consequence of serious crimes can result in 
trauma for the parents of children who were criminal offenders or victims of rival gang 
activity. Therefore, while some parents suffer from the metaphorical loss of their loved ones 
(to gang activity or imprisonment), others had actually lost children who had been tragically 
killed by gang activity. 
A number of my interviewees wondered why Hmong gang activity had become a 
problem in their communities and suspected that it is because they live in America a 
country that does not allow them to maintain real Hmong culture or the way they used to 
be in their former [natal] homeland. In fact, the discourses of deteriorating Hmong culture 
and social problems in the United States are issues commonly mentioned by Hmong in both 
the United States and Laos. The problematic local conditions that destroy and exacerbate 
parent-child and marital relationships in the United States are viewed critically by many 
Hmong. For instance, Moua Xiong, a seventy five-year old man, shared his experiences with 
For people like me, born in Laos and who came to the U.S. some time ago, life is not that 
difficult. Only my youngest daughter was born here. But when I look at other families who 
have more than two or three children born in the U.S., they have so much difficulty. My 
kids [who were born in Laos], they respect and listen to us. When we taught them, you 
dont steal other peoples belongings, you dont do this or that, they will not do such bad 
things. But oh, right now, the young children in the U.S., we all have such headaches 
Look around the neighborhood here and Hmong families. They are not my real children, 
but they still concern me a lot.  
He then compared Hmong lives in Laos and the United States: [In terms of economic 
standard of living], it can be said it is about seventy percent better in America. But the 
problems of youth are a much bigger issue here. Social problems like crime are much worse 
in America than Laos.  
Elderly Hmong of Moua Xiongs age and many Hmong parents often attributed 
social problems among Hmong youth in the United States to generational tensions within 
families and the greater difficulty that parents have raising and controlling their children in 
the United States. For instance, Mo Lee, who earlier pointed out the problem of deteriorating 
health among the Hmong, also got disillusioned by the American social system, which 
supposedly protects the rights of children, but ironically forbids their parents from engaging 
in traditional and strict childrearing practices. Mo said:  
In Laos, when the children do not listen to their parents, they can teach or correct their 
children. But in the U.S., you cannot say anything. If you do something to the children, 
they will tell their teachers and cause problems. You know, democracy gives you many 
rights in this country, but not for the parents. I dont like it.  
In a different interview, when I asked Steve Thao, who was often responsible for 
resolving family conflicts in his clan, he first reacted by saying, Okay, you are talking about 
the most challenging things here and observed that The young kids, when they abuse the 
word freedom, they can get into a lot of trouble. Not being in school, not getting good 
grades, getting trouble with the law. He then moved on to another community problem of 
marital relationships among Hmong couples in the United States: Mid-age marital life crisis 
is also an issue. Spouses again claim freedom and say, Hey you know what, if I am not 
happy with you, you are free to leave and I am free to leave. And I am not willing to work 
something out. Thats a social trend found in the Hmong community here and the divorce 
rate is going up fast. 
In this manner, older Hmong can have a negative perception of the cherished 
American value of individual freedom. As a result, my interviewees felt that the Hmong 
community started to struggle with these new social problems only after they migrated to the 
United States and they lost their perceived traditional values and cultural norms they had in 
Laos. Ultimately, it is emphasized that those social problems are out of their control and 
against supposedly traditional Hmong culture and values. In the interview with Steve Thao, 
the related nature of Hmongs cultural frustration and the new U.S. living environment was 
again discussed. He stated: 
Yes. Hmong people are really against divorce. They will do anything to try to work out 
their problems and keep the relationship and marriage together. But because they exercise 
too much freedom here in the U.S., they dont go to the Hmong elders to resolve the 
problems anymore. A few people might go to the Hmong elders, but the couples wont 
accept their cultural mediation during family meetings. I dont want to be negative about it, 
but thats the truth. 
As a result, Hmong, especially the elderly people, continue to experience an ambivalent 
sense of national and social belonging in the United States, not exactly because of any 
political persecution or oppression but rather because of the loss of cultural and ethnic norms 
along with persistent life struggles and economic hardships in American society. This leaves 
a challenging dilemma to the U.S. Hmong community while reaffirming their status as an 
ethnic minority with a traditional culture that is being lost in the United States.  
The Hmong World Disrupted: Perceptions of Ethnic and Social Marginalization among 
the Young Hmong Generation 
Although young Hmong have enjoyed better social integration and education in the United 
States, their greater exposure to American ethnic discrimination and racialization can also 
produce a sense of partial belonging to the country. Many Hmong college students and youth 
faced a similar dilemma about their ethnic marginalization in U.S. society because of 
unintended racialization caused by lack of knowledge and ignorance by other Americans, the 
absence of recognition in the U.S. national history, and pervasive ethnic prejudice in their 
daily lives.  
Some Hmong youth are bothered by the fact that relatively few Americans know 
about the Hmong, indicating how they feel they are more marginalized than other ethnic 
minorities among the American public. For example, Lor Vang, a senior at college, gave me 
the following story about his experience of racial and ethnic relations:  
There was a guy on the light rail and asked me whether I am Chinese. I said, no. Then he 
went through other Asian groups, like Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, to find out who I 
am. I said Im Hmong, and he looked confused. He asked right away, What is that? I 
was like, Where should I start? So if I usually start with how my parents were initially 
from Laos, then people normally respond, Oh, so you are Laotian. Wellnot 
reallyLong time ago, Hmong people lived and came from China. Then they go, Oh, 
then, you guys are Chinese Oh, well, I have no idea what to say 
In fact, Lors and many other young Hmong peoples similar daily encounters further imply 
that their ethnic marginalization experience is caused from ignorance and lack of knowledge 
from multicultural society, confirming their status in the United States as a minority without 
an ethnic homeland that can identify an individual original belonging. Some of them 
pointed out that if Hmong had their own country, they would at least be recognized. As a 
result, the Hmong community has been actively working to promote their ethnic visibility in 
American society.  
When I began research about the U.S. Hmong community, I did not quite expect that 
Hmong youth, including those who were born in Thai refugee camps but raised in the United 
States and the U.S.-born second generation Hmong would continue to feel that their ethnic 
group is marginalized in the country in various ways. Among many young Hmong who 
expressed such concerns, a good example was Lily Moua, a U.S.-born college student, who 
spoke about the marginalization of Hmong from the countrys national history as follows: 
You know, in history classes, they always bring up American history. They talk about 
Russia, America, and all other countries but almost always avoid Laos. I always wondered 
why they dont teach about those Southeast Asian countries like Laos. Even if they talk 
about the Vietnam War, they never really talk about Hmong and how we contributed. Ive 
always wondered why they do not teach that. 
Sao Lee, another college student had the same concern and complained about the overall 
underprivileged ethnic status of Hmong and said, It sucks in high school, you learn histories 
about other races, but we never see anything about Hmong.41 
For many Hmong youth who learn about U.S. national history at school or those who 
41 This can be compared to history education and textbooks in Laos which actually recognize the existence and 
roles of ethnic minorities including Hmong based on the national agenda to promote ethnic unity. 
study it for their citizenship tests, the erasure of the historical contribution of their own 
ethnic group seems perplexing. Indeed, U.S. national history, which is supposedly about all 
American nationals, does not deal with the Hmong, although their parents and grandparents 
played a critical role during the Vietnam War in Laos. In general, Hmong did not perceive 
themselves as simply another group of immigrants or ethnic minorities. According to them, 
they are a special group, who sacrificed themselves and confronted the danger of being 
exiled from their natal homeland as refugees because they fought for the United States 
during the war. This is a generally accepted discourse among many Hmong adults in terms 
of their roles in U.S. national history, as summarized below by Ker Cha, a Hmong language 
teacher at local high school. Ker said: 
In a lot of ways, mainstream Americans think about whether immigrants came to the U.S. 
legally or not. It is true that for other immigrants, they came to the U.S. because they told 
themselves, I need to work hard to make myself better. Thats different from what is the 
most challenging and different thing to deal with for Hmong people. We came to America 
because Americans came to the Hmong [in Laos] and kind of disrupted and destroyed our 
lives.  
The lack of recognition for their contributions to U.S. history makes Hmong feel 
ethnically marginalized from the nation-state. Indeed, ethnic marginalization is not always 
based on overt processes of oppression or discrimination of minorities by the majority group. 
It can also be caused by the deliberate exclusion of these groups from a countrys history and 
nation-building projects. In other words, ethnic marginalization has as much to do with 
historical amnesia as it does with ethnic discrimination and exploitation. 
While the issue of race and ethnicity must be understood in historical context, the 
ethnic experiences of those from different backgrounds, age, and social status constantly 
signify that the official representations of multiethnic diversity that appear in national history 
or public education do not necessarily improve the public awareness of the Hmong. In fact, 
the problem of ethnic recognition of the Hmong in U.S. society is an ongoing issue, even to 
a thirteen-year-old boy such as Ryan Thao, in his interaction with his friends from different 
ethnic backgrounds at his middle school. One day, a couple of Ryans friends at school 
asked him, What is Hmong? As he realized that he could not give a succinct definition, he 
and his friends decided to go online to search for information about Hmong. Instead of 
Hmong, his friend typed monk in the web search engine. Ryan had to stop his friends and 
said, What are you typing there? I am not a monk He added that his friends picked on and 
teased him that Hmong is a stupid language. As this shows, such lack of knowledge or 
ignorance about Hmong ethnicity can sometimes unintentionally lead to derogatory and 
discriminative experiences even in highly multiethnic and multicultural society.  
In fact, much of the ethnic struggles that young Hmong experience are related to 
subtle ethnic and racial tensions rather than visible discrimination and conflict or blunt 
racism. That is perhaps why both Hmong elderly people and youth noted that they do not 
have harsh feelings about their ethnic experiences and felt like they could deal with it or 
ignore it while continuing to articulate their concerns, problems, and tensions as an 
impoverished ethnic minority group. But such discriminatory remarks and prejudices are 
what the second generation and Hmong youth constantly deal with, especially in choosing 
their dating partners from different ethnic communities.  
One of my interviewees oldest sons has been dating a Vietnamese American 
girlfriend for years but continue to face uncertainty about the future because of her familys 
serious objection about his Hmong ethnicity. Likewise, Tony Cha, a college student also 
shared his difficulty with his romantic relationship with his Filipino girlfriend and attributed 
it to ethnic prejudice: 
When my girlfriend first brought me to her dad, he was saying to my girlfriend in front of 
me, If you date a Hmong guy, you are going to suffer. A lot of Hmong guys, they tend to 
simply use girls. I was like, Im trying to get away from that stereotype about Hmong 
men using girls. Throughout my life, if I date a girl, I will try to be loyal to that one girl. I 
guess her father thought that if she dates a Hmong guy, she would eventually be 
heartbroken. 
According to Jeremy Heins study of Indochinese refugees to the United States, 
ethnic tensions were not just between whites and ethnic minorities but also between ethnic 
minorities themselves. He claims that activities against refugees are closely tied to local 
conditions and take different forms among whites and blacks and the existence of different 
ethnic minorities in the same neighborhood can also cause conflict among ethnic minorities, 
in contrast to the image of dominant versus subordinate groups (1995: 69).  
Likewise, Hmong peoples discriminatory social and racial experiences are not 
always with the majority, dominant group, but often originates from other equally 
marginalized, ethnic minorities (such as other Southeast Asians who were former refugees 
and African Americans) or from economically marginalized members of the dominant ethnic 
group (poor whites). This is revealed in daily life experiences among many young Hmong 
such as Sao Lee: Growing up in Stockton,42 I guess everybody didnt like Hmong people. 
Even other Asian people didnt like Hmong. There were a lot of Cambodians in Stockton, 
they always picked on Hmong people, and then Vietnamese picked on us, and African 
Americans did that, too.  
In addition, the government assistance that Hmong receive as former refugees 
ironically caused African Americans and other Southeast Asian neighbors to develop 
negative perceptions of Hmong, as competitors for social welfare and job opportunities. In 
short, it seems difficult to completely overcome the feelings and personal experiences of 
ethnic marginalization. Instead, Hmong have to deal with it constantly across the generations, 
as long as they live with their ethnic neighbors and interact with the broader society. 
42 A city about 76km away from Sacramento, known to be the recent resettlement home of many Southeast 
Asian former refugees. 
Beyond Partial Homes: Diasporic Ethnic Minorities and Generations 
This chapter has examined the local socioeconomic and ethnic experiences of Hmong which 
confirm and evoke their ethnic minority status and marginalization in both Laos and the 
United States. Although not all Hmong may experience ethnic marginalization in the same 
way, their perspectives show that they do not fully develop a sense of national belonging to 
the nation-state in both their natal homeland of Laos and in their new home in the United 
States, where they resettled as refugees. Such partial exclusion is experienced by both the 
older and younger generations in both countries in different ways.  
In this sense, the lack of full incorporation in local societies is an important part of 
the diasporic condition. The partial exclusion from the nation-state not only causes Hmong 
to question their sense of national belonging, but also eventually encourages them to reach 
out to the diaspora and maintain transnational ethnic and cultural affiliations with each other 
across national borders. In sum, ethnic marginalization is not only a matter of national 
politics or overt discrimination but also perpetuated by global power and its continued 
presence, such as foreign capital in Laos and Cold War geopolitics and their historical 
impacts on both Hmong communities in Laos and the United States.   
Part . Transnational Ethnic and Cultural Continuity in the 
Hmong Diaspora 
Chapter 4. Kinship Hegemonies and Continuity in the Hmong Diaspora 
It was in the early evening of a cloudy and humid day in February in Laos. I was returning to 
the village from the town of Vang Vieng. From a short distance, I recognized a Hmong man 
walking toward me, who had just arrived at the farm (where I stayed) yesterday. He walked 
up to me and asked in Hmong, Are you Hmong? He might have wondered because I look 
like a Hmong person as he told me later. I answered in Hmong, I am not Hmong. We both 
laughed. Coming back to the farm together, I gave him my card with my name and school 
affiliation on it. His name was Moua Ly43 (Lee) and he told me that he is happy to see that 
my last name is also Lee just like his. 
Moua was a Hmong man in his fifties who resettled in France after the Vietnam War 
and was visiting and traveling around Laos by himself. He told me that it was 
disappointment for him to see how the village had changed because of the tourism and he 
could no longer deal with the noise from the bars along the river. So he planned to leave the 
farm guesthouse that day and stay with his relatives who lived in the village. I became 
curious. By that time, I came to know every Hmong family in the village but I had not heard 
about anyone who had mentioned that a relative was coming from France to visit them. So I 
asked,  
Author: Who are your relatives? 
Moua: I dont know yet, because I have never met them. But I found out where their house is. 
Author: Didnt you just say that you are staying with your relatives? 
Moua: Yes, they are my relatives.  
He sounded so certain and firm that I had to inquire further. 
Author: But you never met them before and dont know who they are at all? 
43 The Hmong of the Lee clan who resettled in France adopted the spelling of Ly for their surname. 
Moua: No, I dont. But I know they are my relatives for sure, because their last name is 
also Lee. 
At first, I thought Moua was joking, because I could not understand why Hmong with 
the same last name would be considered relatives if they have never known each other 
before. However, since he was so sure of his kinship to a family in the Hmong village by 
virtue of the same family name, I came to wonder how that family would react to him. The 
next day morning, I went to one of the Lee family houses that I knew about to see if Moua 
had really found his relatives and was able to stay with them. The father of the Lee family, 
who was sitting outside in a circle with Moua, introduced him to me and said, This is my 
brother from France. His son added that the whole family was very happy to meet his uncle 
from France for the first time, so they shared food with him and allowed him to sleep over 
at their house.  
************ 
It was finally the first day of the annual Hmong New Year festival in Sacramento which the 
Hmong community had been eagerly anticipating. Instead of celebrating the American 
tradition of the Thanksgiving at the end of November, Hmong gathered in Cal Expo, the 
state fairground to celebrate and participate in a three-day traditional New Year event. I 
attended the event with a married Hmong Lee couple that I grew to know quite well. At 
their home, they encouraged me to dress up in a traditional Hmong New Year outfit and lent 
me one of the traditional New Year dresses that their daughter owned. Mrs. Lee, who helped 
me put on the dress, commented that she thought pink would be my color. She said my 
outfit was the Chinese Miao New Year dress style and she had bought it at a local Hmong 
supermarket at a discounted price of sixty-five dollars. Mrs. Lee wore a more traditional 
northern Lao Hmong style outfit, which was mainly black. 
We were looking for the official entrance to the New Year site to make sure that we 
would welcome and celebrate the New Year properly. This year, the New Year Organizing 
Committee created eighteen44 banners that contained each Hmong clans surname (xeem 
[seng]) and encouraged every family to pick up their own clan banner and take photos with it 
in front of a large model of a qeej [kkeng], a traditional bamboo pipe used as the symbol of 
the main festival gate. The female assistant at the entrance, in a splendid gold New Year 
dress with a large bull-shaped silver crown on her head, asked our surname in order to find 
the right banner. Sorting through the eighteen identical banners, she quickly found one that 
said Hmong Lee and directed us toward the qeej gate to have our photo taken. A good 
number of families were already there having fun taking photos and changing poses while 
holding the banner with their clan surname. 
Waiting in line for our turn, Mr. Lee turned to me and jokingly said, You are 
technically Hmong Lee, referring to my Korean last name, which is pronounced and 
spelled in English the same way. The Lee couples humorous comment made me laugh but 
also helped alleviate my slight nervousness about pretending to be a Hmong simply because 
I have the same Hmong clan name. I stood next to the Lee couple and handed my cell 
phone to the assistant and asked her to take a photo of the three of us holding the Hmong 
Lee banner. No one pointed out that since I am not Hmong, I should not hold the banner of 
the Lee clan. Indeed, I was Lee. 
What makes Hmong clan kinship, based on a simplified surname system, so 
dominant and inclusive that it allows even a non-Hmong foreigner like me, who happened to 
have the same sounding last name, to fake identification and ethnic affiliation with the 
Hmong Lee clan? The fact that the Hmong in Sacramento have created this ritual at the 
entrance of their New Year festival symbolizes how the New Year has become a celebration 
44 The eighteen surnames in English (and Hmong in the parenthesis) are: Cha or Chang (Tsab), Cheng 
(Tsheej), Chue (Tswb), Fang (Faj), Hang (Ham), Her (Hawj), Kha or Khang (Khab), Kong (Koo), Kue 
(Kwm), Lee (Lis), Lo or Lor (Lauj), Moua (Muas), Pha (Phab), Thao (Thoj), Vang (Vaj), Vue (Vwj), 
Xiong (Xyooj), Yang (Yaj). 
and congregation of the Hmong clans around the world. In fact, the continuity of the Hmong 
clanship system, which has persisted across national borders despite centuries of dislocation 
and migratory dispersal, is a critical aspect of the Hmong diaspora.  
Kinship Hegemony as a Process 
The transnational persistence of Hmong kinship practices is based not only on immediate 
biological kin and genealogical ties but their extensive clan system, which is simplified to 
and represented by eighteen Hmong surnames. Hmong clanship generates a socially 
constructed sense of familial affinity in both local and transnational contexts and is also the 
basis for marriage, since Hmong are forbidden from marrying a member of the same clan. 
This chapter examines how diasporic Hmong in both Laos and the United States have 
continued to adhere to three fundamental kinship principles: clan hospitality, clan exogamy, 
and ethnic endogamy. These kinship practices (or rules) are seen as a fundamental aspect of 
being Hmong and the extent to which members of the Hmong diaspora conform to them is 
quite remarkable, obviating the need for disciplining institutions or the coercive exercise of 
power through families, community organizations, or state control.  
In this sense, I analyze the hegemonic nature of Hmong kinship within the diaspora 
as an uncontested order that does not need to be actively and continuously enforced by 
power structures. In other words, hegemony consists of systems of belief that have become 
so pervasive and taken-for-granted as the natural order of things that they no longer have to 
be imposed by the agency of the powerful. They remain unquestioned and uncontested by 
ordinary individuals, who obey them through their implicit consent (see Comaroff and 
Comaroff 1991:23-24). 
Clearly, hegemonies are not simply the purview of nation-states. Gramscis (1971) 
concept of hegemony is primarily about the state, in terms of both government and larger 
political civil society, and is operated and maintained by ideological control of the ruling 
class. However, diasporas can also develop hegemonies that are equally effective and 
powerful, such as kinship in the case of the Hmong diaspora. The three main practices of 
Hmong kinship (clan hospitality, clan exogamy, and ethnic endogamy) elicit conformity of 
its members, which ultimately contributes to establish an imagined kin community (cf. 
Anderson 2006). In some sense, kinship rules are more liable to become hegemonic, because 
they are often biologized and essentialized through a self-evident discourse of family lineage 
and blood ties. In addition, the absence of ethnic homeland for diasporic Hmong becomes 
another compelling reason and justification for them to adhere to their kinship rules. Hmong 
repeatedly claim that because they do not have an ethnic homeland, their clan and kinship 
system is what allows them to maintain their ethnicity across national borders and remain as 
Hmong. 
In fact, these kinship rules continue to be pervasive in the Hmong diaspora in both 
Laos and the United States. Almost everyone voluntarily complies with them, often 
unconditionally, and there are very few violations which are reported. Hospitality toward 
clan members, even those who are complete strangers, showed remarkable continuity across 
national borders and I heard of no cases where Hmong refused to embrace those of the same 
clan as family. During my ten-year contact with the Hmong community in both countries 
(since my first visit to Laos), there was only one violation of clan exogamy that was 
repeatedly mentioned to me, where a Hmong person in the United States pursued a romantic 
relationship with another Hmong with the same surname. In terms of ethnic exogamy, I have 
heard of a total of seven cases (in both countries) of Hmong who did not marry other Hmong 
and engaged in interracial or interethnic marriage. 
However, hegemonies (including kinship hegemonies) are never absolute and 
impenetrable, but can become vulnerable to critical discursive awareness. This can 
eventually cause them to be challenged and disrupted, especially in diasporic contexts when 
they are enacted in different national contexts. In both Laos and the United States, the clan 
hospitality rule, which is extended to even strangers who only share the same surname is 
considered to be in danger of weakening among the younger generations. Hmong in the 
United States are particularly exposed to social forces that can disrupt ethnic endogamy, as 
they have lived in the society where ethnic exogamy (interracial and interethnic marriages) is 
common and frequent, especially compared to Laos.  
As a result, U.S. Hmong tend to become more conscious about making agentive 
efforts to sustain their kinship system in response to contrastive sociocultural pressures. 
Indeed, Hmong of the younger generations in the United States have started to question their 
dominant clan exogamy rule as well as ethnic endogamy (to a lesser degree) by pointing out 
the contradictory logic embedded in the theory of biological relatedness. Therefore, as 
diasporic kinship hegemonies have been transplanted from Laos to the United States, they 
have become more susceptible to challenge and possible change, although a vast majority of 
Hmong continue to adhere to them. 
Defining Hmong Kinship: Clans, Surnames, and Biologized Discourses 
Hmongs kinship system consists of patrilineal clanship based on eighteen different 
surnames. According to Timothy Dunnigan (1982) in his study of Hmong kinship network in 
the U.S., the agnatic sub-lineages (the eighteen clans) are the basic units for Hmong refugee 
communities, and this clan system eased their resettlement process and helped them establish 
a successful economic network. As Dunnigan notes (1982: 127-131), each segmentary 
family lineage not only forms an economic unit based on genealogical ties and marriage, it is 
the foundation of the Hmongs social and political kinship system as well. In their daily lives, 
the Hmong use the word xeem [seng], which means surname, but also refers to the clan to 
which an individual is identified and belongs. This clanship is the foundation for Hmong 
social organization, not only in local contexts but also transnationally across national borders 
in the diaspora. It is also the basis for socioeconomic resources and the flow of remittances. 
Members of a Hmong clan include those who simply share the same surname and are 
not necessarily biologically related. They express the feelings of an immediate kin 
connection and affinity to the same clan members and extend familial hospitality to them, 
even if they are complete strangers from a foreign country. Similar to other clan systems, the 
Hmong also practice clan exogamy and can only marry Hmong from another clan. These 
kinship rules and cultural understandings are shared by the Hmong across borders and are 
considered a principle that cannot be violated or changed.  
Indeed, exchanging last names is an important and basic part of daily Hmong life 
since they wish to identify their clan membership and make appropriate kin connections. The 
kinship affinity that Hmong feel toward other clan members seems primarily based on a 
social construction. When Hmong meet another Hmong person for the first time, their first 
question is, What is your Hmong last name? (Koj yog xeem dlaab tsis?). This is 
especially important when Hmong youth explore possible romantic relationships, since they 
have to find Hmong from another clan to date. In other words, the simplified Hmong clan 
system based on last name expands the primary meanings of biological kinship to much 
more flexible, non-conjugal social groups.  
Hmong kinship practices initially reaffirm scholarly efforts to define kinship more 
extensively and analyze it as a social and cultural construct that consists of systems of 
symbolic meanings based on social relations rather than a naturalized system (Parkin 1997: 
3; Peletz 1995: 356-357; Schneider 1980: 4-6). The boundaries of kinship membership 
become flexible and are constantly blurred as demonstrated by scholars who redefine and re-
conceptualize kinship through their ethnographies (Carsten 2004; Clarke 2008: 155; 
Schrauwers 1999: 314-316; see also Kuper 1982: 81).  
  As these researchers also note, Hmongs socially and culturally constructed kinship 
system is still based on biologized discourses that refer to blood-relatedness. In fact, even if 
we examine non-conjugal and non-biological forms of kinship, it is undeniable that such 
expanded and more flexible kin relations are still conceived through dominant, genealogical 
metaphors by local peoples. It is true that the Hmong sense of extended kinship based on 
clan membership is understood through heavily biologized discourses of family. Clan 
members are not real sisters, sons, or parents by blood. However, they are referred to by 
such kin and affinal terms and become similar to members of the family in various ways, 
although they are not accorded equal positions as blood-related, immediate family members. 
Likewise, hospitality needs to be extended to all clan members because they are like a 
family and marrying a clan member is analogous to marrying a family member and 
therefore forbidden. Therefore, Hmong clanship includes individuals without blood ties but 
only based on the premise that they are likely (and hypothetically) genealogically-related.  
Hmongs flexible inclusion of clan members as kin is made possible because they 
hypothetically believe that each of the eighteen clans were descended from one ancient 
ancestor and that they are therefore the children of the same parents. It is generally believed 
that an individuals clan lineage can be traced by elderly peoples memories of ancestral 
genealogies. This kinship belief does not merely exist as an abstract idea about affinity but 
has actual practical impacts in their everyday lives. In fact, the same clan members are 
entitled to receive social and emotional hospitality as well as financial support from each 
other. However, if simply claiming the same last name is the sole way to identify clan 
members, the system becomes somewhat unreliable, since anyone can claim such affiliation 
based on the same surname.  
Because even kinship systems and rules considered to be social constructions are 
based on such genealogical reasoning and biologized discourses, they are more likely to 
become essentialized and therefore taken-for-granted and uncontested. In other words, they 
become hegemonic. If a Hmong individual does not treat a clan member like family, it 
becomes similar to rejecting a brother or sister (or another blood-related family member) 
who has come to visit (or is asking for financial help). In similar context, Hmong are strictly 
prohibited from marrying a clan member with the same surname because that would be like 
marrying a family member and is therefore considered incestuous and taboo. 
In this sense, Hmong clanship is similar to the concept of universal kin, defined as an 
unifying source of the African diaspora (Gilroy 1991; Hall 1990; Helmreich 1992). Since the 
current African diaspora is established based on unidentifiable national origins, it is 
suggested that its members can alternatively pursue a common sense of kin identity as part 
of a unified African race based on a shared historical consciousness. This concept of 
universal kin is emphasized as a way for resettled African diasporic communities to 
overcome subordination and deliberate exclusion by nation-states that are established upon 
the specific racial origins (Gilroy 1987).  
However, as Helmreich (1992: 245) critically points out, the idea of universal kin has 
the possibility to resemble how nation-states naturalize their members, borders, and 
territories in the name of a single, unified national race. He further questions whether such 
pan-African ethnicity based on common, shared black experiences under colonization can 
be achieved without excluding individual differences in a manner similar to the othering 
processes of the nation-state (1992: 245). Although Helmreich does not go into the similarity 
between national kin and diasporic kin affiliations in terms of hegemony, it can be argued 
that diasporas can also develop and promote a homogenous ethnic and kin identity to counter 
nationalist hegemonies through a similar notion of universal, biologized kinship.  
Diasporas Hegemonies 
Gramscis original notion of hegemony has become a versatile theory applied to various 
scholarship across disciplines in many different contexts. For Gramsci (1971: 12-13), 
hegemony is the property of the ruling group and perpetuates the states ideological 
formation with consent of the dominated rather than through coercion by the dominant group 
(see also Brow 1988; Burawoy 2012: 189; Glassman 2011: 32; Hall 1986: 16; Kunnath 
2013: 51).  
In her review article, Alonso (1994: 382) succinctly writes, Hegemonic strategies, at 
once material and symbolic, produce the idea of the state while concretizing the imagined 
community of the nation by articulating spatial, bodily and temporal matrixes through the 
everyday routines, rituals, and policies of the state system. In this chapter, I specifically 
focus on this particular aspect of hegemony as a constant process and ongoing project that 
can be sustained by persistent cultural inscription (Alonso 1994: 381). Based on this, my 
use of the concept of hegemony emphasizes how it consists of belief systems that are so 
culturally engrained and pervasive that subjects are no longer conscious of being dominated.  
However, I also recognize that hegemonies must first be created and manufactured, 
which is a process that does involve relations of power. In the case of the Hmong diaspora, 
the initial creation of the hegemonic kinship system is not a product of ruling groups or 
intellectuals who represent state ideologies. Instead, kinship beliefs become effective as an 
unchallenged hegemonic system, because they are repeatedly taught to children by parents 
through the socialization process. As a result, they seem to become culturally engrained and 
taken for granted in the minds of children in their daily lives, obviating the need for the 
parents to constantly enforce kinship rules once their children become young adults. This 
seems to be especially the case for the clan exogamy principle. 
In addition, ordinary Hmong in the diaspora constantly justify and legitimate their 
adherence to the hegemonic kinship system by the biologization of clan social relations (as 
discussed above). More importantly, they emphasize the need for Hmong to comply with the 
kinship system in the absence of an ethnic homeland that can sustain Hmong ethnicity across 
national borders. Therefore, although hegemonic systems are naturalized and taken-for-
granted, individuals do not simply obey them mindlessly. Diasporic Hmong are aware of the 
hegemonic kinship system and provide compelling reasons why they must adhere to it 
faithfully. In other words, hegemonies are subject to discursive awareness, but unlike other 
cultural beliefs, they are not subject to critical discursive consciousness, since they are 
accepted as part of the natural order. The rest of this chapter will ethnographically 
elucidate and highlight the process of kinship hegemony and how Hmong constantly 
reaffirm it in the face of challenges that threaten to undermine it. 
Discourses about Ethnic Homeland and Diasporic Kinship Hegemony 
While biologized discourses of family naturalizes Hmong hegemonic clanship rules, the 
continuing historical consciousness of Hmong as a formerly persecuted and dispersed people 
who have lost their ethnic homeland also serves as another compelling reason to legitimize 
hegemonic kinship practices across the diaspora. Because diasporic Hmong constantly 
reproduce discourses of an absent homeland, identification with their kinship and clan 
system becomes a feasible and attractive alternative means for them to sustain their 
collective ethnic identity. This in turn solidifies and justifies their kinship hegemony. I do 
not aim to provide a causal link between the absence of ethnic homeland and Hmongs 
development of kinship hegemony but rather point out that such discourses and 
consciousness provide the context of how Hmong kinship operates as a hegemonic system. 
During my fieldwork in both Laos and the United States, about 90 percent of my 
interviewees mentioned that their kinship rules are what make Hmong identify and maintain 
their ethnic identity despite their geographic dispersal and separation. These interviews 
indicate that Hmong strictly conform to their kinship rules because they believe there is no 
other concrete way to actually maintain their scattered ethnic community across national 
borders in the absence of a territorial homeland, government, or ethnic leaders. To put it 
differently, with the enduring power of their clan kinship beliefs, they can reaffirm and be 
reminded of what it means to be Hmong. Below are three examples selected among the 
numerous individual narratives that make such claims: 
(1) Neng Her: In my opinion, I think the reason why Hmong work together and stay 
together without a homeland is because of family ties, especially the last name. If families 
have the same last name, they treat each other better than people who have other last 
names. Going through the difficult wars in China [in Hmong history], the clan system 
must have made Hmong stay together.  
(2) Author: [conversation continued in the context of clan hospitality] For me, even if I 
encounter Koreans abroad who have the same last name as mine unexpectedly, they wont 
express any special feelings unless they are really my family.  
Sao Lee: I guess its probably because you guys have your own country. There are so 
many Koreans from Korea so you are used to seeing other Koreans in a foreign country. 
For Hmong people, we are scattered all over the world, so far from each other.  
(3) Author: In your opinion, what makes Hmong people keep their Hmong ethnic 
consciousness and identity despite geographic separation and how do they maintain it? 
Malina Xiong: It is because of our surnames. Even if I do not know the person directly, if  
the person is from the same clan, they are like family to us. Indeed, we know that we are 
somehow connected to each other, one way or another, even if they live far away. 
As shown here, when Hmong refer to their diasporic history, the strong 
consciousness that they are a people without a country supports the existential legitimacy 
of their kinship hegemony and why it must elicit their unquestioned consent. In essence, they 
suggest it as a way to counter the fragmenting forces of the diaspora, including national 
differences which have emerged between Hmong living in different countries. The next three 
sections will describe each hegemonic principle of Hmong kinship and examine how 
transnationally pervasive they are in the Hmong diaspora. 
Clan Hospitality toward Strangers 
In their everyday lives, it is a common practice for Hmong to provide family-like hospitality 
and support to the members of the same clan identified by surname, even if the person is a 
complete stranger. This was illustrated with the example of Moua Ly at the beginning of this 
chapter, a Hmong from France who received immediately extended family hospitality by 
clan members in Laos. This phenomenon was frequently discussed during my interviews in 
both Laos and the United States. In Laos, for example, Poa Moua spoke about the broad 
sense of kin affiliation and common clan identity across national borders: 
For example, if you are of the Vang clan, it doesnt matter which country you live in or 
which city you choose to reside. You are just the same Vang like before. This is not 
something that you can change. You should love other Vang and you will be beloved by 
other Vang. If you are from a certain family clan, you will know about everything related 
to that specific clan, like their specific funeral rituals.  
Because of this emphasis on surname as the decisive arbiter of ones clan identity, 
Hmong broadly imagine the kin connections to anyone that shares the same last name 
regardless of the nation-state of residence, even if they have never met them nor will do so in 
the future. This was discussed, for example, by Bea Her in Laos: 
In Vietnam, there will be a lot of people whose last name is like mine, Her. The last name 
Her does exist in China, too. When some Hmong from China came to Laos to sell things, I 
asked them whether there are Her families in China. They would answer, Of course, there 
are a lot of them in China. So that means there are many of my Her family and relatives 
living there. 
This kinship rule is also applied regardless of which country the person is from and 
thus supercedes national differences. In so doing, this clan-based kinship is applied 
universally to reaffirm and strengthen their ethnic identity not only locally but also 
transnationally within the diaspora. Because of this extensive clan-based kinship system, 
receiving hospitality, care, and support from the same clan members is not a one-time event 
that coincidentally happens for a few lucky individuals. Many Hmong shared with me their 
experiences as either the recipient or the provider of family-like hospitality after they 
unexpectedly encountered Hmong from other places who were part of the same clan. For 
example, Cha Lee in Laos willingly served as a host for a Hmong peddler from China whose 
surname was also Lee. Specifically using the word unity (samaki) in Lao, he emphasized: 
The unity among the same clan is very strong. There was a man from China whose last 
name was also Lee. He came to Pha Boua [his village], asked people around for the Lee 
family in the village, and heard about my family. We were really happy to see him for the 
first time so we let him stay in my house and killed a chicken to cook and treat him well. 
We felt like real brothers. The bond among the members from the same clan is so strong 
and special like this. 
These perspectives expressed by Hmong in Laos also resonate with Hmong in the 
United States, who also believe in the continuity of clan identification and kin affiliations 
across borders. For example, Lena Thao, as a young 1.5 generation (born in Thailand and 
raised in the United States), considered such extended kin and clan relations as one of the 
main reasons why the Hmong dispersed around the world continue to feel connected to each 
other despite their long history of migration and geographic dislocation. She similarly 
imagined a kin community across national borders and expressed her faith in the emotional 
connections to members of her same clan whom she has never met. Lena elaborated: 
We have an extended clan system and we value our kinship very much. Although we have 
been separated for many years, we know that we are still related to each other. If I go to 
Germany right now, I will try to find a Thao family. I know they will treat me as a family. 
I would call them aunt, uncle, and so on, even though I dont know who they are.   
Based on this belief, Lena further speculated that Miao-Hmong in China must also retain 
their last names like Hmong outside China. Although sometimes they may be forced to take 
on Chinese names in order to work in the cities, they must still preserve their clanship, she 
concluded.  
In a different interview, Ying Thao in the United States explained the hospitality 
provided to clan members with the same surname on unexpected occasions: 
It is the last name that makes us Hmong. Even if I never knew you from before, if you 
mention that you are from the Thao family, I will treat you like a real family. Generation 
after generation, Hmong should never forget where they are from, what family they belong 
to, and our Hmong nationality. You hear Hmong say, When you travel, I dont want you 
to spend money for hotel, food, or transportation. You should stay with us. Nobody 
provides free food or a free room like the Hmong. Many other people call us jungle 
people, because Hmong have poor knowledge since the war45 but we have a good mind 
and good heart. 
In fact, during my fieldwork, I often observed in both countries how clan hospitality 
in the Hmong diaspora is mutually assumed and universally practiced among the Hmong 
even in their first encounters with each other. One example is when Miao-Hmong scholars 
from China visited U.S. Hmong communities in different parts of the country and were 
immediately accepted by those who share the same surname as a member of that family. The 
Miao-Hmong from China, Fei Yang, was surprised and impressed with the spontaneous and 
well-organized treatment by various members of the entire Yang clan during her two month-
long stay in different cities of the United States.  
Upon her arrival for academic research at a local university in Colorado, the airport 
pick-up, accommodation, local transportation, meals, and other activities were already 
arranged and provided for by different family members of the Yang clan in the area, whom 
she has never met or known before. Feis subsequent visit to California, where I met and 
interviewed her, was also arranged by Yang family networks between the two states that 
wanted to welcome a new, real Hmong relative from China and develop a kin connection 
to her. After doing an interview with Fei, I ran into her during almost every important 
45 In the subsequent conversations with Ying Thao, it is noted that the Vietnam War not only caused Hmong to 
be separated from Laos but also destroyed their opportunities to participate in education and economic 
development. Ying often expressed that the war dispelled the possibility of modernization of Hmong as an 
ethnic people. 
community event that I attended including community memorial services, local community 
cultural events, and the New Year festival in Fresno.  
On every occasion, different Yang clan members took turns accompanying and 
guiding her around and introduced her to me by saying that she is like their niece, aunt, or 
sister (depending on their age and gender position in relation to her). As Fei and I ended up 
greeting each other numerous times in different places, we both laughed when we again ran 
into each other at an event and started talking about the way Hmong in the United States 
treated her like a VIP. To me, its like a mystery, Fei remarked. In fact, she introduced 
herself to me as half Hmong because her father is Miao-Hmong but her mother is ethnic 
Han Chinese and she cannot speak Hmong properly. Thus, Fei actually does not feel 
completely related to the entire Yang clan in the United States, because of her different 
cultural and personal background influenced by her mother side as well as her national 
background. According to Fei, although she clarified this background and her ethnic 
difference to many Yang clan members in the United States, she was still assumed and 
treated as the same Yang family member, simply because she inherited the last name from 
her Hmong father.  
In fact, the application and expansion of clan-based kinship is so inclusive that 
Hmong can sometimes hypothetically embrace a complete foreigner like myself based on 
my last name as illustrated at the beginning of the chapter. Sometimes, elderly Hmong 
mistook me for a Hmong woman and asked for my Hmong last name. Of course, I made it 
clear that my last name sounds identical to the Hmong clan name of Lee in English, but the 
correct Korean pronunciation of it in my home country is yi, so that I am actually not a 
member of the same Hmong clan But later on, after being asked the same question 
numerous times, I ended up answering that I am Hmong Lee, which often made people 
laugh.46 This led to amusing discussions about whether to include me in their clan system as 
a new Korean Hmong. 
Clan Exogamy 
In their daily lives, both Hmong men and women are strictly banned from engaging in any 
romantic relationships with members of the same clan even if they are complete strangers 
from other countries, because they could hypothetically be genealogically related if they 
trace their ancestry back to the original clan founders in antiquity. Because of such 
reasoning, Hmong feel that clan exogamy is extremely important and must be passed down 
to all the descendants of the diaspora.  
According to classic studies of kinship, exogamous marriage practices prevail among 
clan-based groups rooted in specific territories (Kuper 1982:76).47 In terms of gender, this 
was generally discussed in earlier studies on kinship as based on the exchange of women. 
For example, in his book Kinship and Marriage, Robin Fox (1967: 54-69) discusses that 
general exogamy (based on conjugal relations) is a product of the incest taboo (pertaining to 
sexual relations) and he explores its possible reasons. However, compared to his discussion 
of incest, his explanation of clan or lineage exogamy seems rather simplified as he calls it a 
connubiuma system of martial exchanges (1967: 176) of women that maintains 
alliances between opposing groups and brings collateral peace in their relations.  
However, Hmong peoples emphasis and continuity of clan exogamy is not directly 
related to the resolution of conflict among the clans through the exchange of women, 
although I do not deny that it may have initially arisen from the need to reduce clan disputes 
and maintain harmonious clan relations. Moreover, this exogamous marriage practice has 
become one of the most important cultural constructs that can reaffirm a common and 
46 The similarities of clan names between Hmong and other cultures are quite interesting and can be a subject 
for future study. Some of the eighteen Hmong clan names are similar to how Korean last names are 
pronounced, such as Her, Xiong, Yang, Khang, Lee, Vang, and Cha. Some of these names are also found among 
Han Chinese in China.  
47 Kuper (1982:77) notes that Rivers (1924) considered common descent rather than a common territory. 
persisting Hmong identity across national borders in the absence of a territorial homeland 
and in the face of a long history of dispersion, migration, and resettlement. 
Instead of simply viewing Hmong clan exogamy as an exchange system of women 
that maintains inter-clan harmony, I want to analyze it as a hegemonic system that applies 
equally to both genders. Despite the connotations of the term, exchange of women, Hmong 
clan exogamy does not only put restrictions on womens marriageability, but mens 
marriageability as well.  
In everyday lives, children of both genders are taught the clan exogamy principle by 
their parents. A number of my interviewees in both Laos and the U.S. spoke of the need for 
intentional parental education in order to pass down their cultural and kinship traditions to 
their children in the diaspora. This would apparently ensure that their children fully accept 
kinship rules at an early age, with the hope of making future resistance among youth less 
likely. For instance, consider the following statement from one of the similar responses: 
Absolutely, I taught my kids the [kinship] rule when they were young. I told that it doesnt 
matter whether the person is pretty or handsome. If you have the same last name, it means 
you are siblings so you never get involved. Thats been taught for many, many generations 
and we still believe in it very strongly. We need to tell our kids, You are family by the 
same last name, so you are not allowed to date or marry.  
When I asked him whether he taught this principle to only his sons or daughters, he 
responded, Of course, I taught it to both, all [six] of them. 
Lao Hmong and Attitudes toward Clan Exogamy 
In Laos, during my daily visits with Hmong youth who worked at a community center 
building in the village, I started to notice that Meng Xiong, one of the Hmong girls working 
part-time for a Hmong embroidery sewing project, frequently received phone calls from 
unknown Hmong men asking her for a date. I was told that young Hmong men obtain phone 
numbers of single women from acquaintances and relatives in order to make a phone calls 
and start a romantic relationship. The phone calls were made by Hmong men from different 
villages, cities, or provinces in Laos but also transnationally between Laos and other 
countries like the United States, France, China, and Thailand. This has become a popular and 
preferred way to meet a potential dating partner not only for many young Hmong people of 
marriageable age, but also for divorced and widowed elderly Hmong who seek a new 
romantic relationship from abroad.  
When Meng received calls from unknown men while working on her sewing project, 
she hurriedly signaled to us to lower our voices so that she could focus on talking on the 
phone. The other girls giggled and whispered to me, She got a phone call from her puubao48 
(a young, marriageable man). When she received such calls from potential future 
boyfriends, I realized that the first thing she said right after the initial hello was my 
surname is Xiong. I am Meng Xiong in Vang Vieng, which indicated that the callers first 
question was about her last name. Such exchanges of surnames are to make sure that they are 
not from the same clan and are therefore qualified to start a romantic relationship. 
In fact, marriage customs based on clan exogamy have become a fundamental aspect 
of Hmong identity. In Laos, the relationship between a commonly shared Hmong ethnic and 
cultural identity and this marriage rule was an important topic. For example, Lee Yang, a 
man in his fifties, explained as follows: 
Because we Hmong are a single ethnic group, we care about being mother, father, uncle, 
grandparents, and so on. In our ethnic groups culture, we cant marry a person from the 
same clan. If someone from the Yang clan marries another person from the same Yang 
clan, this will be the biggest problem. Clan Yang can marry anyone except someone else 
from the Clan Yang. This is our special Hmong culture.  
48 The Laotian term, puubao, can simply mean young man, but it usually refers to young single men 
interested in marriage who pursue a courtship. 
In another interview, Youa Her, another man in his fifties, stressed the power of clan 
exogamous dating and marriage rules and how Hmong obey them despite geographical 
separation and national differences. By emphasizing family relations among the same clans, 
Youa said: 
Lets say I am a single man and go to America to marry a Hmong woman over there. 
When I see a beautiful woman, I must ask first of all, What is your last name? If she 
says Xeem [seng] Her, then I would say right away, Oh, my sister I cant create a 
family with her. This is a Hmong cultural rule that is observed in the same manner in 
Thailand, Vietnam, America, Australia, every country. If they have the same last name, it 
means they are brothers and sisters who have simply been separated for so many years.  
Since the surname that one is born with is the key to defining a Hmong cultural and 
ethnic identity in general, many Hmong expressed their confidence in the continuity of the 
clan exogamy marriage rule even into the future. For example, a fifty-year-old man Cha Lee 
in Laos said, We still preserve the clan like our ancestors did in the past. For example, I am 
Hmong Lee, so if I go to Thailand, the same Hmong Lee clan will still uphold the marriage 
rule. You cant marry them in Thailand if they are also Hmong Lee. This rule is what has 
been preserved the most, the longest. And we cant change this in the future. 
U.S. Hmong and Attitudes toward Clan Exogamy 
Although clan exogamy has been practiced by Hmong in Laos for many generations, it is an 
unusual practice in the U.S. national context and Hmong are of course aware that it is quite 
different from standard American marriage customs. As a result of such national differences, 
their adherence to this kinship rule becomes a more intentional and conscious act, instead of 
an unreflexive reproduction of a prescribed habitus (Bourdieu 1977; see also Johnson 2013). 
For instance, when I interviewed Chong Her in the United States at his workplace, his wife 
Kia was present and listened silently, although I encouraged her to engage in our 
conversation. When I asked her for her last name, which was Yang, Chong used this 
occasion to explain why her last name was different from his because he was aware of 
traditional U.S. marriage custom where the wife adopts the husbands surname: 
Yes, she still keeps her maiden name. In Hmong culture, when we marry, we dont change 
our last name. Some young [Hmong] women who were born and grew up here [in the 
United States] may have changed their last name [after marriage], but as far as I know, 
they still keep their last names, too. The reason behind this is that if you are a woman and 
marry and change your last name to your husbands, people will misunderstand and think 
you married your sister or brother [i.e., a person from the same clan]. But that shouldnt be 
the case. Thats why Hmong women intentionally dont change their last names after 
marriage. 
 In general, from a scholarly perspective, retaining Hmong womens surname 
after marriage may be seen as the achievement of gender equality whereas adopting the 
husbands last name (or combining it with their maiden name) implies gender 
subordination in which the wife is subsumed within the husbands family identity. For 
instance, Scheuble and Johnson (1993:747) observe that the examination of marital 
naming for both prominent and ordinary women is important because it challenges 
societys idea of womens identities and roles. They further argue that: 
the cultural expectation that women are to change their birth names to that of their 
husbands at the time of marriage is part of the language system which underscores 
traditional roles in a patriarchal society (Scheuble and Johnson 1993: 747).  
According to this perspective, Hmong people should have achieved the highest level of 
gender equality since womens clan (maiden) name is preserved after the marriage and 
doing so is highly encouraged and even mandated to some extent. However, in most 
cases, such naming practices have little to do with whether married Hmong women 
actually experience gender equality.  
Instead, the Hmong practice of retaining the wife maiden name is grounded on a 
very different logic as elaborated by my interviewees above, which was also explained 
by many other married couples. Instead of gender equality between wife and husband, it 
is intended to indicate that the clan exogamy rule has been preserved. For couples, 
retaining their original clan name after marriage confirms that they had a culturally 
legitimate marriage with someone from a different clan and conformed to the clan 
exogamy principle.  
Such self-justifications of Hmong naming practices based on clan exogamy become 
necessary in the United States, where the traditional conjugal practice has been for the wife 
to adopt her husbands family name. In contrast, in Laos, such a marriage custom does not 
exist and therefore, the Hmong tradition of retaining maiden names is not incompatible (and 
had no problem) with mainstream Lao culture. Similar explanations of Hmong marital 
naming practices were given to me on many other occasions by other spouses in the United 
States, especially when they thought it necessary and important to explain their kinship 
culture to a foreign scholar like me in an Americanized context. Therefore, their previously 
habitual or uncontested compliance with the habitus of clan exogamy has become a more 
conscious practice that needs to be legitimated in the United States because of national 
cultural differences.  
A similar narrative was repeatedly given by Hmong in the United States, when they 
explained to me what makes Hmong still maintain their ethnic affiliations with other Hmong 
dispersed across the diaspora. This was succinctly emphasized, for instance, in the following 
quote from one of my U.S. Hmong interviewees:  
I dont know why we are so attached or feel that way [despite geographical dispersal] but 
one thing that really keeps us together is, if you are of the same last name, it makes us the 
same family. If you are Thao, you never ever marry a Thao person. If you do that, its [an 
incest] taboo. Say, even if you are Thao [and living in] in Korea, you are still considered as 
a family and relative member. Other ethnic groups like Laotians, Thai, Koreans can marry 
people from the same clan []. But for us, it is never, ever allowed. 
In this sense, the hegemonic compliance with the clan exogamy rule in the Hmong diaspora 
is not simply based on biologized discourses about how the members of the same clan are 
like family. According to my interviewees, it has become closely associated with Hmong 
identity and is a fundamental part of what makes them Hmong, enabling them to overcome 
national differences in the Hmong diaspora. Therefore, to violate this kinship rule is not only 
tantamount to incest, but would be a denial of Hmongness. 
In fact, in both Laos and the United States, I heard of only one violation of the clan 
exogamy rule that happened a while ago. This was a case of a young Hmong couple in the 
United States, who initiated a same-clan marriage in spite of the severe opposition from both 
sides of their extended family. The cost of breaking this fundamental Hmong kinship 
tradition is that the story of this couple has been constantly retold as a disgraceful example 
by both Lao and U.S. Hmong communities and how it jeopardizes Hmong cultural identity. 
During the interviews, almost all people in both countries repeatedly mentioned this single 
case, despite the fact that it apparently occurred sometime ago, in order to describe their 
personal concern and shock. It is known that the womans father refused to hold any kind of 
traditional wedding ceremony for the couple, which in Hmong culture is considered a most 
serious expression of anger and disapproval of the parents toward their offspring. People 
asked the husbands father why he did not stop his son from engaging in that kind of 
marriage. It is certainly disrespectful and a disgrace for the whole clan., one of my 
interviewees remarked.  
Ethnic Endogamy 
In addition to clan hospitality and clan exogamy, ethnic endogamy is another kinship 
principle that elicits hegemonic compliance despite national and generational differences 
within the diaspora. Similar to clan exogamy, ethnic endogamy is applied equally to both 
genders. In other words, men do not necessarily have greater freedom to marry non-Hmong 
compared to women. In fact, throughout my time, I encountered or heard about only a few 
cases of ethnic exogamy (interracial or interethnic marriages with non-Hmong) in both Laos 
and the United States.  
In Laos, I knew of two young Hmong men in their late twenties that had non-Hmong 
spouses. They were actually brothers and both had been educated abroad, worked as 
governmental officers, and lived in the capital city of Vientiane. There were no cases of 
ethnic exogamy among Hmong families in Dao Tha village or other Hmong villages in Vang 
Vieng as far as I learned. In the United States, I have known or heard about only five Hmong 
interethnic or interracial marriages since my first visit to the community in 2008. Although 
there are no specific data about the ethnic endogamy rate among Hmong of each country, it 
seems remarkably pervasive in both Laos and the United States, even among the younger 
Hmong generations. 
Hmong in Laos and Ethnic Endogamy 
In Laos, ethnic endogamy as a practice seems to be taken-for-granted by Hmong without 
questioning its logic or legitimacy and cases of interethnic marriage are extremely rare. 
However, although they obey the ethnic endogamy principle, the attitudes of Hmong youth 
in the village toward ethnic endogamy vary and are not uniform. About half of the youth I 
interviewed and talked to expressed their strong preference for Hmong partners. However, 
an equal number of young Hmong were not against ethnic intermarriage and said it is okay 
to marry non-Hmong, as long as the couples do not have the same family name, can 
communicate well, and really love each other.  
Nonetheless, the youth who initially seemed open to intermarriage in principle also 
said they had no intention of ever pursuing their own romantic relationships with non-
Hmong. This made me wonder whether they were strictly prohibited from interethnic dating 
by their parents. On the contrary, it seems that they were voluntarily complying with ethnic 
endogamy on their own and it was not being actively imposed on them, again indicating its 
hegemonic status. In fact, when I spoke to Hmong parents, many of them said that they are 
not against intermarriage to non-Hmong and were surprisingly tolerant about youth pursuing 
ethnic exogamy. Parental responses to my questions about this issue were surprisingly 
uniform. For example, Yeng Thao and Chue Moua, both in their seventies, expressed their 
tolerant attitudes toward ethnic exogamy in a similar manner: 
Yeng: It is up to them [the youth]. If they [an interethnic couple] love each other seriously, 
then that is fine. If the farang49 [foreigner] is going to marry Hmong, we only check if 
their last name is the same as the Hmongs. If different, then they can marry. 
Chue: As long as Hmong marry foreigners who dont have the same last name, it is okay 
to marry. But among the same Hmong clan, they cant marry each other.  
These two answers resonate with all other elderly Hmong interviewees in Laos, who 
commonly said something like, as long as the non-Hmong person does not have the same 
surname as Hmongs, they can marry. If the couples find true love for each other, thats the 
best and most important thing.  
However, this apparent leniency of Hmong parents and elders toward ethnic exogamy 
needs to be examined more carefully. First of all, the possibility that non-Hmong or 
foreigners would have the same last name as the Hmong is very remote (only some Chinese 
and possibly Koreans share several surnames with coincidentally similar pronunciation). The 
two other major ethnic groups in the country, the Lao Loum and Khmu have completely 
49 In Laotian language, farang actually means French but it has become a common local designation that 
universally refers to all Western (white) people regardless of their national origin. 
different family name system from the Hmong. Therefore, it is questionable to what extent 
the parents are aware of such fact and say that they are willing to accept ethnic exogamy as 
long as the non-Hmong spouse has a different family name. In fact, this rather seems to 
indicate how older Hmong in Laos emphasize and have faith in the overwhelming 
importance of obeying clan exogamy and its prevalence. As a result, they seem to be more 
willing to entertain the possibility of ethnic intermarriage for their children as long as they 
obey the clan exogamy rule.  
In addition, because Hmong have complied with the hegemonic principle of ethnic 
endogamy for generations without the use of coercive force, Hmong parents may not see the 
need to overtly enforce the rule by using their disciplinary power. Therefore, they can 
profess tolerant attitudes (especially to foreign anthropologists) because they have observed 
that hardly any youth have ever married non-Hmong. In fact, a good number of Hmong 
youth in the village expressed skepticism about their parents lenient attitudes about ethnic 
exogamy. It is definitely easier said than done, one of them emphasized and elaborated: 
They [elderly Hmong and parents] can maybe just say in principle that its okay to marry 
foreigners or non-Hmong but if it really happens, I am sure they will change and seriously 
object. If you think about it a little further, there are many problems with marriage 
between Hmong and non-Hmong families. No mutual communication, no cultural 
similarities are possible. () They speak totally different languages to begin with. 
Hmong in the United States and Ethnic Endogamy 
At first glance, ethnic endogamy appears to be hegemonic in the United States as well. 
According to a survey I conducted with eighty-two Hmong college students in the 
Sacramento area, ethnic endogamy is still prevalent among the young generations of U.S. 
Hmong, most of whom were born and/or raised in the country. In response to a set of 
questions related to ethnic preferences about marriage and dating partners, 96 percent of 
Hmong students (twenty-three out of twenty-four) who were already in a romantic 
relationship answered that their current dating partners ethnicity is Hmong. The only person 
who answered that his/her dating partner is non-Hmong was in a relationship with a person 
of Indian descent.  
Young Hmong in the United States who preferred someone of Hmong ethnicity as 
their romantic partners, spoke about their voluntary compliance with the endogamy rule. For 
instance, Lena Thao, a younger 1.5 generation woman was one of a smaller number of 
young interviewees who actually believed that elderly Hmong are no longer seriously 
against ethnic exogamy. Instead, she explained that her desire to marry a Hmong man was a 
personal preference by saying, I dont think intermarriage would be a problem with my 
parents. It is my personal preference to date or marry Hmong. I want somebody that would 
fit well with my parents and Hmong culture. It is just something that I would like to 
continue. By concluding that ethnic endogamy is something that she voluntarily wants to 
pursue, it seemingly confirms that her compliance is voluntary and does not have to be 
imposed on her through the disciplinary power of her parents.  
 Similarly, in a different interview, a U.S. born, freshman college student, Lily Moua 
expressed her attitude toward marriage in the following exchange: 
Lily Moua: AhI actually prefer a Hmong person but I am not a racist [laugh] I mainly 
just want to keep our culture together. If I were to marry someone from another culture, I 
feel like I kind of lose my own culture. 
Author: So what kind of culture can you keep if you have a Hmong partner? 
Lily Moua: I would definitely say the Hmong language. If I were to lose my language ability, 
its like I lose myself, too, because my language is what makes who I am.  
It is remarkable that both individuals expressed their preference and voluntary choice for a 
Hmong romantic partner in order to maintain their culture and traditions in a manner than 
resembles the desires of their parents and the older Hmong generation.  
On the other hand, not all Hmong parents in the United States are lenient or flexible 
about the ethnic exogamy of their children. In fact, many of them seemed to be less tolerant 
of interethnic marriage than their counterparts in Laos and said they preferred that their 
children to marry other Hmong. Parents who were flexible about this possibility were far 
fewer than in Laos. This may be an indication that the ethnic endogamy principle is not as 
hegemonic in the United States anymore (see discussion below) and that therefore, parents 
may feel a greater need to enforce it unlike Hmong parents in Laos.  
In practice, U.S. Hmong youth who are in romantic relationships are overwhelmingly 
complying with the hegemonic endogamy norm in practice, as shown in the survey 
discussed above. However, the general attitudes of Hmong American youth toward 
interethnic marriage are different from this reality and they are actually quite open to the 
idea of dating or marrying non-Hmong. According to my multiple-choice survey question 
about their ethnic preferences regarding future dating partners or spouses, the majority of 
students (68 percent) continued to chose Hmong. However, 40 percent chose people of East 
Asian descent (Chinese, Japanese, and Korean descendants), 22 percent chose other 
Southeast Asian descendants, 20 percent chose ethnic whites, 15 percent chose Hispanic, and 
8 percent chose African Americans. The other thirty-two percent answered that they had no 
ethnic preferences (respondents were allowed to choose multiple ethnic groups). In addition, 
there are a few young individuals in the United States who have started to openly and 
critically question the legitimacy and logic of ethnic endogamy and expressed disagreement 
with the principle. 
Challenges to Kinship Hegemonies? 
Hegemonies are never absolute and always subject to possible critical awareness, eventually 
disrupting the unspoken consent of their subjects on which they are based and making them 
vulnerable to challenges and resistance. This is especially the case when they are enacted in 
diasporic contexts in various countries and subject to national cultural differences. My 
Hmong interviewees in both countries suspected that the kinship principles of universal 
hospitality toward the clan members and ethnic endogamy are being gradually challenged, 
resulting in internal, generational disagreements. Elderly Hmong in both Laos and the 
United States commonly pointed out how the younger generations are no longer interested in 
their distant clan relatives living abroad whom they have never met or known before and 
may not unconditionally maintain clan hospitality toward them in the future, which usually 
requires a considerable amount of time, effort, and financial responsibility.  
In addition, second generation Hmong youth who were born and raised in the United 
States have already started to question the credibility, practicality, and contradictory logic of 
both clan exogamy and ethnic endogamy, which indicates that Hmongs marriage customs 
are no longer taken-for granted. Instead of unanimous consent, they are being increasingly 
subject to critical discursive awareness, which may eventually cause hegemonies to be 
challenged and even violated in actual practice. These remain future possible threats to 
Hmong kinship hegemony, since, as indicated in this chapter, none of these principles is 
being seriously violated in practice at this point. Their dominance is currently being 
questioned at the level of attitudes and discursive consciousness. In fact, the last section of 
this chapter briefly discusses how such discursive challenges among U.S. Hmong youth have 
caused Hmong parents to make conscious efforts to reinforce and reproduce the hegemonic 
dominance of clan exogamy. 
Clan Hospitality and Ethnic Endogamy 
Many elderly Hmong in both Laos and the United States are not certain whether the younger 
Hmong generations will continue to adhere to the culture of clan hospitability toward 
extended kin members in the diaspora. For example, Long Her in Laos spoke about this 
concern as follows: 
In our childrens generation, it will be like I dont know them [members of the same clan] 
and they dont know us. Whenever I think about this, I feel frightened [ttok jjai]. Hmong 
American kids will not know about their relatives in Laos. They only look at book (study) 
or pictures but do not come here to see or love us.  
In the United States, Chi Her had a similar opinion: 
I think in the future, Hmong will change and become more like the non-Hmong 
community. The young generations already do not want to call clan relatives to come and 
share food. Even when you are in the same place at family gatherings, they wont know 
who their [clan] relatives are and how they are related to each other.  
Both interviewees are quite concerned that family hospitality toward clan kin will be 
significantly reduced in the diaspora in the future and may be only extended to immediate 
blood-related nuclear family members living in close geographical proximity. However, 
since few Hmong youths are heads of household yet, this kinship principle is not being 
seriously undermined at this point in actual practice. Nonetheless, Hmong elders seem to 
increasingly feel that measures need to be taken to enforce this kinship principle among 
youth to prevent it from weakening in the future.  
As discussed earlier, ethnic endogamy remains hegemonic in Laos with hardly 
anyone marrying outside the ethnic group. Although some Hmong youth mentioned they 
would be willing to marry non-Hmong, they are not actively challenging this hegemonic rule 
or actually dating non-Hmong from outside of their ethnic group. In the United States, 
however, more young Hmong are increasingly questioning and criticizing the ethnic 
endogamy principle, leading to disagreements and some tensions with their parents. This is 
not surprising, since many young Hmong college students in the United States were born 
and/or raised in the United States and they are also exposed to an American marriage culture 
to a much greater extent than their immigrant parents. They also have much greater 
opportunities to interact (and become romantically involved) with non-Hmong individuals.  
In addition, interracial and interethnic marriage has been socially accepted and 
common in the multiethnic U.S. society. Interracial marriage between Asian Americans and 
non-Asian Americans has become increasingly prevalent, and interethnic marriage between 
Asian ethnic minority groups is gradually on the rise as well (Kitano et al. 1984: 179-180). 
All of these can provide the context causing more young Hmong to critically reconsider the 
kinship hegemony of ethnic endogamy. 
About 78 percent of my college student survey respondents answered that they think 
Hmong parents and communities are somewhat to very much against ethnic exogamy. 
This indicates the high possibility that the majority of the parents would object if the 
students were to date and marry a non-Hmong person. Although I did not extensively ask in 
my interviews or in the survey whether Hmong find their parents objections and demands 
oppressive or unfair, it seems likely that at least some of them are dating Hmong because of 
parental pressure against interethnic romantic relationships or facing significant objections.  
For instance, Tony Cha, a freshman at a local university, discussed how he was 
currently dealing with the tensions from his family regarding his propensity to date non-
Hmong girls. He explained why he insisted on dating a non-Hmong girlfriend at that time 
despite the objections from his grandfather and other members in his extended family: 
Because I dont wanna marry a Hmong girl. I never dated Hmong girls []. I find them to 
be like my cousins. To me, every Hmong person is related somehow. [Author: Even if 
they do not have the same surname as yours?] Yeah. Somehow I may be related to them 
through like second or third marriages or as some distant cousins. So either way, I think of 
myself as a cousin of every Hmong person in the end. Thats why I dont date Hmong 
girls. Its not that they are unattractive. 
Clan Exogamy in Question in the United States 
There is no sign that Hmong in Laos are starting to question the hegemony of clan exogamy 
and there have yet been no violations of the rule mentioned. Even the younger generation 
continues to take it for granted without hesitation. In contrast, the clan exogamy rule faces 
even greater discursive challenges among the younger Hmong generation in the United 
States than ethnic endogamy. This is because they often compare the exogamy rule to other 
mainstream American marriage standards where such clan expectations are virtually unheard 
of among other (Asian) ethnic minorities. As shown in my survey, because the majority of 
younger generations still practice ethnic endogamy, they are certainly expected to 
unconditionally obey the hegemonic clan exogamy rule when they pursue these Hmong 
romantic relationships. 
However, according to some of young Hmong, Hmong kinship rules prohibit same-
clan marriages but ironically permit, if not encourages, cousin marriage (as long as the 
person has a different surname). This has caused those Hmong youths in the United States to 
discursively challenge hegemonic clan exogamy rules since they question the logic of a 
system that forbids marriage with a clan member who has no blood ties, but allows cousin 
marriage that has much higher possibility of biological relatedness. This is related to the 
influence of American society, where cousin marriage is anathema. Most Hmong American 
youth use their Americanized objection to Hmong cousin marriage to question to logic of 
clan exogamy. Among them, Chai Xiong, a second generation Hmong American in his mid 
twenties, critically pointed out the contradiction between the clan exogamy rule and cousin 
marriage:  
In some sense, I disagree [with the Hmong clan exogamy system], because it allows you to 
date and marry your own cousins. If my siblings are married to different family clans, then 
their kids and my kids can marry each other. So thats okay because your last name is 
different, although you are related by blood? But if you are from the same clan and have 
the same last name, then its not okay to get married, even if you are not [biologically] 
related at all? This does not make any sense. 
Chai Xiongs critical comment was indeed shared by many young U.S. Hmong who 
raised similar objections to clan exogamy by noting how Hmong allow those who are 
biologically-related (cousins) to marry but prohibit marriage with clan members by claiming 
that they are biologically related. In other words, Hmong youth ironically employ the same 
biologized reasoning that (older) Hmong use to justify clan exogamy by applying it to cousin 
marriage, exposing the logical flaw of the hegemonic Hmong clan exogamy system in their 
discourses.  
Nonetheless, despite the increasing prevalence of such critical discourses among U.S. 
Hmong youth, violations of clan exogamy still remain extremely rare in the Hmong diaspora 
in both countries. It is still significant that the only violation I heard of during my extensive 
fieldwork was among a young Hmong couple in the United States. However, as more 
Hmong Americans become adults and marry in the future, there may be more challenges to 
this kinship hegemony in actual practice. In fact, older Hmong in both Laos and the United 
States constantly expressed their concerns about whether violations of clan exogamy will 
increase among Hmong youth in the future by constantly bringing up the example of the 
U.S. couple who married within the clan. For example, Sheng Her in the United States 
referred to this extreme case and noted that the kids here in America today, they dont 
know. There was a case where they marry each other even if they have the same last name. 
But what can you do when they say, Here, its America. You can do it. I mean, the parents 
of both sides should have really stopped [this couple], because you cannot really disown the 
children. 
From Hegemony to Ideology 
This chapter has analyzed the concept of hegemony in the context of diaspora and kinship, 
instead of simply in the context of the nation-state. Diasporas can also have their own 
hegemonies, which have become removed from critical discourse and thus become a source 
of cultural continuity across borders. Nonetheless, diasporic people remain conscious of their 
hegemonies and provide justifications and legitimating discourses as an indication of their 
consent. This also motivates their compliance with hegemonic norms that can counter the 
varying national contexts in which they live, even without oppressive power structures of 
enforcement and control.  
In fact, kinship rules are more likely to become hegemonic because they can be 
readily biologized and naturalized. In addition, in the case of the Hmong diaspora, the 
persistence and continuity of their clanship and marriage systems across national borders and 
across generations is regarded as an essential aspect of being Hmong since they lack an 
ethnic homeland that can become the basis for Hmong ethnicity and identity. 
However, like all hegemonies, the Hmong kinship system is not impervious to 
questioning and critique. This is especially true for diasporic hegemonies that must be 
reproduced transnationally in different countries in the face of varying social and cultural 
pressures from various nation-states. Therefore, not only do hegemonies in diasporas have to 
be maintained through time (from one generation to the next), but also across geographical 
space because of the apparent impacts of nation-state of residence. As a result, they can 
increasingly come under discursive critique, especially among the younger generations in 
countries where these hegemonic norms are incompatible with the mainstream culture. 
Therefore, this chapter has also examined how the dominant kinship hegemony of the 
Hmong diaspora is increasingly facing discursive challenges among youth, especially in the 
United States. They are beginning to question the logic of clan hospitality and exogamy as 
well as ethnic endogamy as they are increasingly exposed to alternative ways of cultural 
norms. However, although U.S. Hmong youth critique the dominant kinship system in their 
discourses, they are still complying with it in their actual behavior as discussed in this 
chapter. In other words, their discursive resistance has not yet been translated into practice 
and the dominant system is not currently in serious danger of being undermined.  
In fact, from a Gramscian perspective, a complete overthrow or abandonment of 
powerful hegemonies is impossible. By referring to different historical events as a process of 
revolution followed by restoration of the dominant hegemonic structure, Gramsci explains 
why these events were not permanent revolutions (1971: 113). Although Gramscis 
premise makes any kind of revolutionary movement rather unlikely, his assertion seems to 
have provoked some scholars to seek the possibility of resistance in his theory (see 
Glassman 2011; Scott 1985).  
However, because the dominant Hmong kinship system is facing discursive 
challenges and pressures from youth, Hmong parents may have to engage in an agentive and 
conscious effort to maintain and defend it from more serious future threats. It seems that the 
Hmong kinship system is being transformed from a diasporic hegemony whose pervasive 
dominance and assumed universality does not need to be enforced by structures of control to 
an ideology, a particular and relative cultural framework that needs to be actively imposed 
by those in power (parents in this case) on subjects (children and youth) (see also Comaroff 
and Comaroff 1991:23). This leaves two questions to further explore: 1) To what extent will 
Hmong families (and perhaps Hmong communities) eventually have to exert disciplinary 
power and coercive forms of punishment, such as withholding familial and parental support 
from members who violate kinship rules? 2) Will this be sufficient to deal with challenges 
and help restore the previous state of hegemony?   
Although it is possible that such attempts to exert ideological power may be 
effective, it is more likely Hmong kinship rules will continue to be challenged in the future 
(and thus require more actively enforcement by families as well as the broader community), 
especially in the U.S. national context. Therefore, they may cease to be truly hegemonic and 
instead become an ideological cultural practice that has to be constantly imposed by 
institutional structures of power.  
Regardless, it is evident that Hmong kinship is currently believed one of the most 
concrete sources of cultural continuity and ethnic solidarity in the diaspora. Although other 
traditional cultural practices may not have as much hegemonic power as kinship, they still 
enable Hmong in the diaspora to maintain and promote continuity across national borders. 
The next example of diasporic cultural continuity I will discuss is Hmong shamanism, which 
initially appears to be a highly localized and traditional cultural practice, but has shown 
remarkable resilience and effectiveness when applied to transnational, diasporic contexts. In 
order to do so, I will first discuss the nature of transnational socioeconomic relations 
between Hmong in Laos and the United States, which is the basis for the continuity in their 
shamanistic cultural practices. 
Chapter 5: Transnationalism in the Diaspora: Commodification of Social Relationships 
in the Familial Economy 
As noted in the Introduction, diasporas are fundamentally transnational communities of co-
ethnics dispersed across numerous nation-states. In contrast to most transnational immigrant 
communities that are constituted by social connections between migrant sending and 
receiving countries, the transnationalism of diasporas is geographically broader since they 
consist not only of centripetal, cross-broader ethnic relations between those living in the 
ancestral homeland and co-ethnics scattered across multiple countries, but also lateral 
transnational social ties and interactions between these dispersed diasporic communities as 
well. However, because of their greater quantity and geographical scope, such transnational 
connections across national borders may be relatively weaker (or attenuate faster over time) 
than those of migrant communities that consist only of two nation-states.  
Indeed, as discussed in Chapter 2, Hmong have lost their transnational ties to their 
original ethnic homeland, resulting in considerable uncertainty about whether their country 
of ancestral origin is China or somewhere more ancient. Because of the absence of a 
territorial ethnic homeland as a centralizing and unifying force in the Hmong diaspora, 
lateral transnational social relations between dispersed Hmong communities in the diaspora 
have become the key factor that keeps their diasporic community together. In turn, these 
social connections across national borders are the fundamental basis for the cultural 
continuity and shared ethnic customs that sustain and unify the Hmong diaspora, as will be 
shown in the next chapter on shamanism. This chapter will therefore provide an overview of 
Hmong transnational socioeconomic relations and interactions between Laos and the United 
States. 
Extended Familial Social Networks and the Transnational Economy 
After the Vietnam War, Hmong migrated as refugees from Laos to the United States in 
collective groups that consisted of households, clans, and previous residential villages rather 
than as individualized migrants. After staying together in different Thai refugee camps, 
many families in the same clan were forced to move as a group to Laos and the U.S., as well 
as to many other countries. For this reason, when Hmong in my study identified the 
members of families and relatives that they stayed in touch with or assisted financially 
across national borders, they did not simply speak of their immediate, blood-related family 
members but included more broadly-related people from the same clan. In sum, Hmong 
transnational social and economic interactions are between collective groups of extended 
families as well as clan members rather than individualized nuclear families. 
Since their further dispersal as refugees, Hmong in Laos and the United States have 
developed transnational familial social networks, maintained contacts and communications 
with each other, and have engaged in the transnational economy through the exchange of 
goods (herbal medicine, cosmetics, cultural artifacts, and traditional clothes and handmade 
embroideries, and other industrial goods) as well as through financial, monetary transactions. 
Among the total of 32 Hmong households that I interviewed in Laos, every household except 
two had at least one or more family members and relatives of the same clan in the U.S. They 
not only maintained direct communications on the phone with them but also received either 
regular or intermittent financial support from those in the U.S. In the United States, among 
my 61 interviewees, only seven individuals responded that all of their close family members 
including siblings had moved to the U.S. together and they had no substantial transnational 
relationships with Hmong in Laos. 
During my fieldwork in Laos, I frequently accompanied Hmong youth to local post 
offices and banks, when they went to collect money sent from members of their clan in the 
U.S. In the United States, I came to understand the process of economic remittances more 
clearly, since Hmong in Laos call their relatives and clan representatives and ask for money 
for different reasons. The request can range from supporting childrens education (buying 
books and bicycles), helping with daily subsistence (buying food and home goods) to paying 
for health care for someone in the family and expenses for major events, such as New Year 
festivals, funerals, spiritual rituals, and so on (as will be discussed in the context of 
shamanism in Chapter 6). In such cases, Hmong in the U.S. would either send money or 
checks to Laos by using MoneyGram or call other clan members to announce the request and 
ask for additional monetary contributions, depending on the sum of money requested. 
Remittances are often one-directional, since many Hmong in the U.S. usually remit 
with no expectation of return from their co-ethnics. Most Hmong in Laos acknowledge the 
receipt of money from their families in the U.S. and express their gratitude when their clan 
members call them to make sure they received the money properly. However, a good 
number of Hmong families in Laos develop further transnational economic interactions by 
sending various items and products locally grown or bought in Laos to their U.S. family and 
clan contributors in return. Many Lao Hmong families in my study have actually collected a 
range of items, such as herbal medicine, rice, teas, and handicrafts and sent them 
collaboratively to their families in the United States.  
In the United States, 22 out of my 61 interviewees have been to Thailand50 and Laos 
to visit their family and relatives. More than half of them had made multiple visits to one or 
more of these countries. Almost all of those who have never travelled back to Thailand or 
Laos expressed interest in visiting in the future for various personal reasons. A very small 
number of elderly Hmong expressed no interest in going back to Thailand or Laos mainly 
because of their former engagement in the war as soldiers and concerns about their safety, 
security, and political conditions in their natal homeland of Laos. 
Through existing transnational social networks between families and clan members 
in the two countries, Hmong communicate with each other and stay connected across 
national borders in various ways. In addition to traveling to visit each other and sending and 
receiving money, they also maintain social relations across national borders and exchange 
50 Because many Hmong lived in Thailand for an extended amount of time in former refugee camps, Hmong in 
both countries expressed their emotional attachment to and longing for their time in Thailand. 
news by using phones, the Internet, e-mails, social media, as well as through a Hmong radio 
program operated in the U.S., which is also transmitted to and available in Laos. However, I 
must note that the relative ease of international travel and virtual communications in a 
globalized world does not always mean every individual can choose to engage actively 
with and connect to their families directly and maintain close affinity to family and clan 
members across national borders.  
In fact, it is impossible for diasporic families engaged in transnational social and 
economic relationships to completely overcome their physical absence and the lack of face-
to-face interactions. There are also limitations with transnational virtual communication, 
especially because Hmong in Laos have limited access to email, the Internet, social media, 
and even phones (many Lao Hmong households did not have phones at home, although 
some youth use cell phones). Even U.S. Hmong, who suffer from persistent economic 
hardship as the late comers to U.S. immigration do not readily have access to the Internet or 
international phone calls. Although the globalization of communications technology may 
enhance the proximity of the world, it does not do so equally for all populations.  
Much of the transnational social interactions and emotional affection involved in 
cross-border relations is based on the circulation of U.S. dollars sent to families in Laos for 
various purposes on numerous occasions. In turn, the presence and impact of money is well-
received and highly valued by Hmong in Laos in the name of familial love as will be 
ethnographically illustrated below in terms of the social meanings inscribed to the 
transnational familial economy. 
Transnational Familial Love Expressed through Money 
On a hot midday of late January in Laos, I was visiting Seng Yang, who was in his fifties, 
for an interview. On my way to his house, which was located in the middle of a hill and 
somewhat isolated from other clusters of houses in the Hmong village, I ran into a young 
friend Yer, who also knows Seng very well. He accompanied me and we both walked to 
Sengs house. Seng was at home, remembered that I was coming that day for an interview, 
and took three small flat wooden stools from inside of his house for all three of us. Sitting on 
a small wooden stool in front of his house, we started talking. Like many of the families in 
the village, Seng also had family members who went to the United States after the Vietnam 
War and have been living there since then. His close relatives, about four or five people 
including his older brothers son, were living in California and Minnesota. I asked him a 
rather obvious question, Do you miss them? Seng responded right away: 
Sure, of course I miss them. In Laos, we miss them a lot but we dont know if they 
miss us just as much as we miss them. Sometimes, we call them and they pick up 
the phone. But they actually dont really call us. That is probably because they are 
not really interested in our lives anymore. That has become the reality of everyone 
in Laos and the U.S. these days.  
Noticing the notable decline of the interaction and communications across borders 
with his family members in the U.S. and his underlying regret and sadness, I inquired further 
how he manages his feelings of loss and longing for his relatives who no longer contact him 
that often. Seng told me that If I miss them, I ask for money. If I have no money, I miss 
them. So when I dont have money, I call them. 
As soon as I heard this, I paused for a moment, recalling how many times I heard 
similar answers from other people during earlier interviews. During my fieldwork, people 
often mentioned that they miss their family members and relatives living in other countries 
and made the similar connections between money and familial love. I finally realized that the 
inseparable link between money and feelings of longing for families living abroad are not 
simply subjective justifications for financial assistance or an overemphasis on material over 
familial relationships.  
  When I encountered people in Laos speaking of the interchangeability between 
money and love in terms of their transnational relations with family, relatives, and clan 
members in the U.S., I often thought to myself, You miss your family living 
abroadbecause you dont have money?. In my mind, money was simply money. In 
contrast, missing someone in the family living abroad seems to be an emotional expression 
and sense of longing, which to me could not be readily commodified or expressed in 
financial terms. However, I soon realized that I took for granted the separation between the 
material and emotional realm and did not really interrogate the value and power of money in 
reassuring familial connections for many Hmong who engage in transnational social and 
economic relationships between Laos and the U.S. Indeed, seemingly simple and 
materialistic monetary contributions are not just an insufficient or superficial medium to 
connect families living transnationally but they are actually an effective way for Hmong in 
Laos and the U.S. to continue their relationships and social obligations across national 
borders among extended family members of the same clan. 
This becomes clearer when considering the cultural context of Hmong transnational 
communities, especially when physical co-presence and simultaneous participation are no 
longer possible for important cultural activities and community events. In Hmong culture, 
providing physical labor for families and communities and being physically present for 
family and cultural events are considered extremely important. Simply giving money as a 
substitute for labor and physical absence would be considered insufficient for local cultural 
and community events. In local family relationships, it is also required and expected that 
extensive family members of the same clan will provide physical labor, social and 
community support, and simultaneous participation. However, it is mostly impossible for 
Hmong in Laos and the U.S. to be present at each others social events and fulfill such 
requirements and expectations for their family, clan, and community. As a result, Hmong in 
the U.S. send money and material goods to those in Laos in order to alleviate their economic 
impoverishment and therefore partially fulfill their family/clan responsibilities by 
transnationally assisting those back in the former home country.  
In this sense, although remittances and economic transactions are often seen as 
symbolizing a rather materialistic and inauthentic kind of human relationship, it is 
perceived positively or even accepted as the proper means to express love, longing, and 
emotional sentiment in transnational, diasporic contexts and replace the lack of personal, 
face-to-face interactions and commitments. In order to illustrate that money is actually not a 
limitation but an enabling and legitimate means to express familial love and affection across 
national borders, I will discuss the particularity of Hmong communities in each country in 
terms of transnational social and economic relationships.  
Money, the Expression of Familial Love: Hmong in Laos 
In the middle of my fieldwork in Laos in January 2012, I was talking with three Hmong men 
from different age and clan groups sitting on a wooden bench outside a house in the village. 
All three of them confirmed that they have family members and relatives including a 
daughter, sister, and uncle in the United States living in California and Minnesota. Their 
family and relatives visited them at least once or more in the last twenty years. They have 
also received financial support from their families in the U.S. multiple times, especially 
when there were important family or clan events in the local community, such as ua neeb 
(soul calling rituals for healing), funerals, weddings, and New Year celebrations. But they 
also frequently received smaller amounts of money, a couple hundred dollars at various 
times, which they believed they must have used for daily needs and living expenses. 
One of our conversation topics was about how or in what way they feel that their 
familial love continues to be maintained despite being geographically apart from their loved 
ones for such a long time. One of them told me, Yes, we still love each other, of course. For 
example, my relatives in the U.S., they still send us money to help us. It is because they love 
us. Another man continued and said he cries when he misses his family in the U.S. I was 
surprised to hear this because I did not expect that his emotional reaction and longing for his 
family in the United States would continue to be that strong after being apart for so many 
years. He added, Yes, I miss my relatives so much. So I tell them to send money to help 
It is not always clear whether materialistic desire precedes emotional yearning and 
attachment to the family or the latter leads to the desire to request materialistic contributions 
and commodities. In fact, the two seemingly contrasting valuesmoney as a symbol of 
economic value and the emotional sense of longing are conflated to produce a 
materialized familial love and commodified social relationships in transnational contexts. In 
the series of interviews in Laos, there was no clear distinction between money and love at 
all. The money sent from families and clan members and acquaintances has come to 
symbolize the continuity of social relationships and family networks and it is understood to 
be the evidence of familial love across national borders.  
Money, the Icons of the Heart?: Hmong in the U.S. 
While Hmong in Laos expressed materialized longing by making inseparable 
connections between money and familial love, Hmong in the U.S. did not explicitly 
express their transnational social relationships in such a manner. Although they believed 
and hoped that remittances can partially compensate for their physical absence or fulfill 
their expected roles or commitments to the local Hmong family and clan members in 
Laos, there was no indication that it is a sufficient way of showing their transnational 
love for their families. Despite living in one of the most capitalistic countries in the 
world, U.S. Hmong often mentioned that money is quite insufficient and too 
materialistic to express real love. Many Hmong individuals in the U.S. sent remittances 
to family and clan members in Laos because they felt it was the least they can do and 
the most convenient way to help. However, they rather critically pointed out that such 
emphasis on money (mostly made by their co-ethnics in Laos) should not be 
misunderstood as a proper form of expressing or showing love.  
 Like many U.S. Hmong who have been in contact and communicated directly with 
Hmong in Thailand and Laos and have also been back to visit their relatives in those 
countries, Kheng Xiong in his early fifties, also went to Thailand twice in 1996 and 1997 
mainly to visit his friends and make video recordings of his trip. His wife Ka Lee was born 
in Laos and spent at least five years there until she moved to and stayed briefly in a Thai 
refugee camp and came to the United States. In contrast to her husband who has vivid 
memories and longing for his young life back in Laos and Thailand, Ka said that she hardly 
remembers her childhood in Laos and was not sure about the exact location of her village. 
Although Ka was also interested in traveling to Laos someday, she still had concerns about 
accommodations, safety, and other unforeseen dangers travelling to Laos. We continued our 
conversation about transnational familial ties between the two countries based on their own 
experiences:  
Author: Do you stay in touch with them (relatives in Laos and Thailand)? 
Kheng: Yes, we keep in touch, make phone calls, and listen to the people there 
about how they are living. 
Author: Are you really close to them as relatives? 
Kheng: We are distant cousins. Its like my grandfather and their grandfather 
are distant brothers. 
Author: When you mentioned that you still stay in touch with your family and 
relatives, do you frequently help them financially? 
Kheng: Sure. In Hmong culture, because we are a family and we live as a 
group, whenever our relatives have some major events over there [Laos], each 
of us here contributes maybe about US$20-50 to help them with the expenses. 
Also, a couple years ago, we contributed money for our relatives in Laos to 
buy a tractor for their farm. We didnt buy it for individuals, but for all of 
them to share, so one family can pass it around. We do that all the time. 
Author: So who is in charge of managing these transactions? 
Kheng: Yeah, we have a contact person in our clan over here. Over there 
[Laos], in all the cities, we have the contacts (from the same clan). They will 
contact us and say, Oh, we have an emergency. Could you help and send us 
some money? So here [the U.S.], you call everybody to collect money to send 
them. 
Author: How often do you think this happens? 
Kheng: Well, we only do this for the major events. We used to send money for 
the New Year over there, several hundred dollars. We know some families are 
not rich in Laos. They may not have enough, so we contribute a little bit for 
them to share for major events like clan funerals or weddings.  
In order to explain the context of remittances to kin in Laos, Kheng first 
distinguished between living conditions and economic disparities between the two 
countries. He continued, Over there [Laos], they can still farm so they can survive. But 
here, we cannot survive without money (laugh). So we can only contribute for major 
events in Laos. I think most other Hmong here contribute money to Hmong Laos in the 
same way. According to his explanation, in principle, the monetary contribution of 
Hmong in the U.S. is limited to emergencies and extensive family events in the Hmong 
communities in Laos, because he sees farming as the major subsistence economic 
activity and source of income for Hmong. In reality, this principle is not always followed 
as many Hmong in Laos ask for emergency remittances quite often not only for day to 
day survival but also for purchasing extra consumer and home goods (such as 
refrigerators, TVs and DVDs, and kitchen appliances). 
Many U.S. Hmong who have visited their families and clan relatives in Thailand and 
Laos discover that they are expected to bring additional money with them. For example, 
Cheng Her still has a sister, cousins son, and a lot of others living in a Hmong village in 
northern Laos. He not only has been in contact with them regularly, but also sent money to 
them upon their request. He and his wife traveled once to Laos and once to Thailand for a 
total of one month, more than fifteen years after they came to the U.S. As a father of 11 
children, this one-time trip meant a lot to Cheng since he had to accumulate many years of 
savings despite the economic hardship he experienced as a laborer at an assembly line since 
resettling in the U.S. He estimated that he must have spent a total of US$8,000 for the entire 
trip buying his flight tickets and providing funds for his relatives in Laos, which included 
paying for a cow and pigs for a feast to celebrate his visit to the village. Even before and 
after the trip, his monetary contribution and financial support had continued. We discussed 
this further as follows: 
Author: Have you ever thought that it is difficult to keep helping your Hmong 
relatives in Laos while taking care of your own family in the U.S.? 
Cheng: The people living back in Laos and Thailand, if they are ill, they need 
money to go to the hospital or to do ua neeb (spirit calling ritual). Thats why I 
send them money. I send them the money for the funerals, too.  
Author: Do you miss them? 
Cheng: Yeah, I do. When I call my sister [making crying sounds], she cries 
every time. (laugh) 
Author: So what do you tell her? 
Cheng: I say, Its okay, dont cry. I will send you a little money, so stop 
crying, haha (laugh) 
Author: How do you think about their life in Laos? 
Cheng: There are some rich families there, but that is not my family. My 
cousin, my sister, and my relatives have no money. They are still poor. 
It is critical that Cheng responded to his sisters emotional reaction and longing by 
assuring her that he would send her money. Although he did not necessarily believe that his 
longing can be expressed through and compensated with the promise of monetary 
contribution, he acknowledged and accepted the way his family in Laos interpreted and 
valued it. Indeed, money follows the heart, emotional connections, and a sense of longing, 
all of which are translated into the term love by many Hmong in Laos. When money and 
love are closely connected to each other, sending and receiving money is actually a mutual 
way to express and feel familial affection. Although money is not always understood 
mutually as love and sometimes it is simply a convenient way for transnational families 
living apart to compensate for their physical absence, it certainly plays a significant role and 
enables them to stay connected and maintain their social relationships transnationally across 
national borders.  
To conclude, Hmong transnational social relationships between Laos and the U.S. 
have become quite materialized and commodified, enabling them to remain socially engaged 
across national borders through the transnational familial economy of sending and receiving 
money. In this sense, familial affinity and emotional connections among people in the 
diaspora cannot be taken for granted or simply dismissed as purely materialistic. Instead, 
they have become an integral part of the transnational social connections that keep the 
Hmong diasporic community together. The next chapter will continue to analyze such 
transnational socioeconomic connections and exchanges by focusing on Hmong shamanism, 
which has also become highly transnationalized and maintained through familial social 
networks between the Hmong in Laos and the United States. The transnationalization of 
cultural practices such as Hmong shamanism and spiritual rituals have produced various 
changes and modifications among the Hmong in the two countries but also enabled them to 
continue their social relationships and cultural traditions across national borders.   
Chapter 6. Transnationally Traditional: Hmong Shamanism and the Cultural 
Continuity of Spirit Calling 
One morning in early March 2011 during my fieldwork in Laos, the loud ring of my cell 
phone awoke me. It was just past six oclock, quite early in the morning. The room was still 
dark and it felt very cold, although it was at the peak of dry season and would get extremely 
hot midday later on. With my eyes still closed, I barely looked at the tiny screen of my cell 
phone to check the caller identity but could not recognize the number. As soon as I picked it 
up, Ji Xiong, one of the Hmong students in the village, started talking. He sounded excited 
and it seemed he had already been awake for quite some time. He said I should come to his 
house as soon as possible because the shaman, whom he had talked about for days, had come 
from Vientiane the night before and was about to resume his counseling service in the 
morning and conduct ua neeb ([wua neng], spirit calling ritual) later on. I jumped out of bed 
and rushed to Jis house. His family was busy with preparing for ua neeb which was 
anticipated to take up to seven or eight hours because it was planned for the entire family 
and therefore a very important event.  
Jis family members who had gathered included the oldest son, who lives in another 
town and funded the ritual. They had bought pieces of rectangular-shaped grey joss paper 
that symbolizes money in order to represent the equivalent of 4,000,000 Lao Kip (320 
British pounds51) for the ritual. Unknown amount of joss paper was already piled up at the 
corner of the house, waiting to be burnt after ua neeb. The family invested a lot of time, 
effort, and necessary materials to prepare for this ritual. Ji told me that the prime concern of 
this ua neeb was to ameliorate the intense poverty and also deteriorating health of the father 
that the family has been enduring for a long time. After the ritual was complete, the shaman 
announced that the problem was caused by the grave of their ancestor. The grave of the 
familys grandfather was located in the wrong place and the deceased was not properly 
51 The amount of money was decided by shaman who conducted the entire process of ritual and believed that it 
was requested by the deceased ancestors. 
buried. As a result, the family was told that they could not improve their economic situation 
and that their health would also deteriorate over the generations.  
Situating Localized Traditions across National Borders 
Ua neeb ([wua neng]), refers to both shamans and soul calling rituals conducted by them. It 
is one of the most frequently mentioned Hmong cultural and religious practices, which has 
become an integral part of their religious, medical, and cultural life in both local and 
transnational, diasporic contexts. Hmong shamans are present in both Laos and the United 
States as well as other parts of diaspora and conduct various spiritual rituals like ua neeb in 
each country for their local Hmong community.  
However, Hmong shamanism has also become transnationalized between Laos and 
the United States in various ways. Hmong people in the United States contact shamans in 
Laos, communicate with them to arrange spiritual rituals on the phone, and have the 
shamans conduct the necessary rituals for them in Laos, which are seen as effective in the 
United States even if the shaman is living far away. This demonstrates that the shamans 
power is not geographically restricted, but can be projected across national borders. 
Therefore, in addition to conduct rituals in each nation-state, Hmong communities in both 
Laos and the United States are able to maintain and practice spiritual rituals and continue 
their healing and religious traditions extensively despite their geographic separation.  
When shamanism and spiritual practices are arranged transnationally from the United 
States with shamans in Laos, this produces a number of important changes and differences 
compared to locally performed spiritual rituals and services. In Laos, shamanistic rituals, 
especially ua neeb, are a collective and group activity that usually involves a large gathering 
and food sharing of family, relatives, and clan members. In contrast, when shamanism is 
transnationalized between the two nation-states, it becomes individualized and also 
commodified, indicating how practices that are considered tradition are subject to constant 
modification.  
In this chapter, I examine the ways Hmong shamanistic practices and rituals are 
maintained transnationally between Laos and the United States but are also transformed in 
the process. My analysis explores the factors that enable shamans knowledge, effects, and 
healing powers to persist and continue across national borders among Hmong between the 
two countries. One important reason that shamanistic healing and services are 
transnationally effective is because shamans rituals are believed to be an exploratory 
journey in the spirit world to reach ancestors through a communication between the souls of 
the dead and living, which is not limited by the constraints of physical space in the material 
world.  
Spirit calling is done in the world of mobile souls, where there are supposedly no 
national borders or geographical boundaries. This mobile nature of the soul in turn enables 
the shamans power to be effective across national borders and allows him to connect the 
souls of his living clients and their dead ancestors regardless of where they live or are buried. 
Because of their unique position as the connector and medium of the souls, Hmong shamans 
have played an important role for Hmong in the diaspora to maintain transnational familial 
and ethnic linkages across national borders. 
Hmong not only conduct ua neeb rituals transnationally, but also continue to share 
their shamanistic tradition with the wider societies in which they live. In other words, the 
Hmong shamans healing power also works for non-Hmong, demonstrating that it is 
indiscriminately effective across ethnic boundaries as well. In addition, the Hmong are also 
aware that modern medical treatment (as well as their increasing conversion to 
Christianity,52 especially in the United States) and the shamans healing power are not 
incompatible but can coexist. In sum, Hmong shamanism is inherently flexible and it is not a 
cultural tradition that will die out under modernity but has become a source of cultural 
52 For more research on how Christianity takes a critical stance toward indigenous religious practices as 
uncivilized and not modern see Chua 2012; Hefner 1998; Kammerer 1990; Ngo 2010; and Smith-Hefner 
1994.  
continuity in the Hmong diaspora in a globalized world while also being constantly 
reconfigured and modified in highly transnational social settings. 
Traditionally Transnational: The Birth of the Shaman and the Elements of Ua Neeb 
Hmongs spiritual rituals and ceremonies consist of different types of practices with several 
specific terms, such as ua neeb [wua neng], hu plig [hou plee:] and xi plig [si plee:]. In 
relation to Hmongs funeral practices, xi plig refers to the chanting ritual conducted after the 
burials for retrieving the soul of the deceased to return to the grave site and be fed by the 
family. It is believed that after thirteen days of the funeral, the dead soul completes its 
journey, reaches the final destination, and reunites with the ancestors. To celebrate and 
recognize the successful trip of the soul, the family prepares for a meal and conducts a soul 
calling ritual to re-invite the soul right next to the grave.  
On the other hand, the difference between ua neeb and hu plig is not always clear, 
since both deal with the souls of living people for the purpose of healing and often take place 
simultaneously. In general, ua neeb is understood as more of a broader process that often 
includes hu plig. Only shamans can perform ua neeb for healing and curing illness whereas 
hu plig can be conducted by ordinary people for celebratory occasions like the wedding and 
New Year. In other words, ua neeb is mainly performed when it is perceived that someones 
serious illness is caused by the loss of the soul and therefore a treatment and cure by 
shaman is crucial.  
According to the Hmong perception of illness, when someone becomes ill, that 
persons soul is in trouble and has gotten lost. Their explanation is that such spiritual 
problems are the cause of physical symptoms and other illnesses and therefore, they need to 
communicate with the souls of both clients and their ancestors in order to find out the exact 
causes and status of the illness. A shamans services are requested by those who seek advice 
and guidance from the ancestors since shamans are believed as the medium between the 
souls of the ancestors and their living descendants through ua neeb. During ua neeb, the 
shamans literally ask the clients ancestors about the causes of the illness and their assistance 
to help to cure and resolve the ailment.  
More specific and narrow meanings of shamans ua neeb refer to actual ritual 
procedure which involve the shaman covering his face with a black, non-transparent veil 
while constantly rattling bells made of iron or bronze in each hand.53 If the ua neeb ritual 
needs to be more elaborate and extensive, there should be an assistant next to the shaman 
who constantly hits the gong while the shaman speaks out during ua neeb. Such moments 
can be understood as practicing or conducting ua neeb (the exact moment of 
communicating between the patients soul and the ancestors soul) and are characterized by 
the high tone of the shamans voice and his incomprehensible chanting.  
On the other hand, ua neeb also exclusively means the entire process of the spirit 
calling ritual, which has various complicated subsequent steps. For example, when people 
mention that there is ua neeb, it usually means there will be a large group gathering, animal 
sacrificing, and food sharing as well as preparation of various items before and after the 
specific ua neeb performance. To sum up, ua neeb refers to both the shaman and the whole 
process of shamans spiritual healing ritual followed by group gatherings, as well as the very 
specific moments that the shaman actually speaks and calls to the soul. 
 In order to demonstrate the continuities and modifications of what are considered to 
be shamanistic traditions in transnational contexts, this chapter focuses on spiritual rituals in 
a broad sense, which includes ua neeb and other daily services of shamans such as 
consultations and smaller scale rituals that do not always entail extensive ua neeb 
preparations. When I specifically refer to ua neeb, it means the action and performance 
through which the shaman calls the soul. For other cases when I use the word shamanistic 
53 Jean Mottin (1984) provides the descriptions about each step of ua neeb in chronological sequence (105-107). 
For a detailed description of ua neeb and shamanic practices, see Tapp (1989b: 75-80) and for specific 
definitions of Hmong terminology, see Cha (2010: 131-164). 
rituals, it includes not only ua neeb but also other spirit-oriented practices54 like nyuj dab 
[new da:] (calling the spirits of deceased parents and offering them a cow/buffalo on behalf 
of the eldest son, many years after their death). Because shamans have multiple roles in 
peoples ordinary lives as a consultant, religious guide, and medical healer who provides 
assistance for various individual concerns, such as emotional distress, anxiety, financial 
stability, childrens futures, and family relationships, it is therefore necessary to discuss the 
different types of services and rituals that have become highly transnational.  
Who Becomes the Shaman?: The Birth of the Shaman 
 Although it is noted that some shamans can be taught and acquire knowledge to become a 
shaman through intensive education from other senior shamans (Mottin 1984: 103), it is 
generally understood that Hmong shamans are destined to be shamans by birth. Being born 
as a shaman means that the persons soul is chosen and imbued with spirits by the 
ancestors.55 Refusing this innate status seems extremely difficult and rather uncommon. This 
sense of a shamans destiny was evident in one of my interviewee in Laos, Lee Yangs 
comments: 
Anyone can oversee other kinds of customs like weddings and funerals if one is taught, but 
in terms of a shaman, you cant learn to become one. If you can learn, then anyone could be 
a shaman. Shamans are born, because their soul was selected by ghosts [pee, spirit]. 
Whether a shamans power comes to you or not is totally uncontrollable [supernatural].  
We cant give up this ua neeb culture and we have continued it up until now. 
  When I was attending ua neeb ceremony at Jis house in Laos (mentioned at the 
beginning of the chapter), the mother of a young shaman said that a foreigner like me must 
be unfamiliar and scared to meet a Hmong shaman conducting an ua neeb ritual and she 
recounted how her son became a shaman: 
54 For example, a ritual of simply asking the ancestors souls with buffalo horns about the causes of illness 
(saib neeb saib yaig [sai neng sai yang]) is a spiritual practice and service. 
55 This is a summary of who becomes a shaman commonly and repeatedly given by Hmong in my study. 
My sons birth was very special and absolutely extraordinary from the very beginning. He 
was born in 12 months, you know, much later than normal. When he was born, he was 
really small like a fist. Because of his unusual birth, he became a very capable and famous 
shaman for the effectiveness of ua neeb. My son became a shaman, not because he was 
bedeviled but because our ancestors special soul treasured him so much and got into his 
soul when he was still in my womb. So there is no need for you to be afraid of him. 
  This narrative reemphasizes the innate status of a shaman, which also indicates that 
the birth of shaman is unavoidable and even blessed since the shamans soul is particularly 
special and therefore selected (often translated as possessed) by their ancestors. I came to 
wonder whether one cannot give up being a shaman after being chosen or what would 
happen if one refused the role. One of the interviewees in the United States, Neng Her said, 
Well, it may be avoidable in some cases. If you give up being a shaman, you just become 
really sick and your body will start shaking all the time, forever. But if you want to stop 
shaking and being ill, you have to become a shaman and just dont practice it. You just feed 
the spirit once a year, thats it. 
The fact that people become shamans by birth has important implications for the 
transnational cultural continuity of shamanistic traditions because it means that there is 
always a possibility that a new shaman will be born in any Hmong community dispersed 
across various countries in the diaspora. Thus, the presence of shamans and the tradition of 
ua neeb are not geographically restricted to one place like an ethnic groups homeland. 
Shamans can be born anywhere, regardless of gender, age, geographical locations, 
generations, and other personal determinants. They can perform with their healing power, 
even among the younger generations. In fact, there are new generations of shamans born in 
the United States who appear in their community magazines and local newspapers, portrayed 
as the successor of their important ethnic tradition.56  
In terms of gender, there are both txiv neeb [tzi neng] (father [male] shamans) and 
niam neeb [nia neng] (mother [female] shamans57) who can conduct ua neeb equally and 
provide consulting services. Also, there can be very young shamans in their early age who 
perform the same rituals and provide the same effective services. All of this nature of being a 
shaman therefore alleviates concerns that this traditional Hmong practice will eventually die 
out under the pressures of diasporic migration and modernity in different nation-states of 
resettlement. 
 In addition, because Hmong do not have a stable and definitive original ethnic 
homeland where they could locate their distant ancestors, the geographical positioning of 
shamans becomes relatively unimportant. There can be individual differences in terms of 
whose rituals have more powerful effects and good reputations, but there are no judgments 
and evaluations of their relative efficacy based on territorial location and whether the 
shaman lives in Laos or the United States. For these reasons, many senior Hmong shamans, 
who were born in Laos and are currently residing in the United States, are not concerned 
about the eventual discontinuation of ua neeb in the United States because that is not 
something that people can choose to inherit or discard. 
The Elements of Shamans Spiritual Rituals 
Below are illustrations of general spiritual rituals and shamanistic practices locally 
conducted by shamans and shared by Hmong communities in both Laos and the United 
States. Each local Hmong community has preserved the common aspects of the ritual, 
including ua neeb and hu plig that entail the shamans chanting and spirit calling as well as 
larger group gatherings and sharing food afterwards. This also means that Hmong in both 
communities arrange for animal sacrifices and provide necessary materials and food, such as 
56 For example, see a story of U.S. born female shaman featured in a local newspaper based in Minnesota: 
http://www.tcdailyplanet.net/news/2013/04/02/next-wave-hmong-shamans-sandyci-mouas-story. 
57 During my fieldwork, I met two female shamans, although I have not seen them conducting ua neeb. 
joss paper, candles, rice, and good portions of all kinds of meat. Therefore, in contrast to the 
Hmong New Year tradition and festival, which has been considerably altered in the United 
States (see Chapter 7), the contents and format of traditional shamanistic rituals remain 
substantially similar in both countries. Indeed, Hmong shamanism is an example of 
remarkable transnational cultural continuity as it has traveled across borders to different 
countries.  
Cha Thao, a senior shaman in his sixties in Laos, explained to me how ua neeb 
generally works and is practiced by giving me a short example: 
Lets say you fell in the water, like the river, and soon, you became seriously ill. One 
minute, you feel so warm and then another minute, you feel cold and shake your whole 
body. In this case, your shaman should do ua neeb in the river.58 You kill two chickens: 
one for your forefather and the other for your foremother. Take them to the doorstep of 
your house, call the soul to come back, and feed the soul. Then you will get well.  
In the local contexts, the shamans ua neeb is territorialized and is conducted at the site of 
the event like the river mentioned in the quote above. Assistance from others and 
conducting the ritual with a group are also very important parts of ua neeb process. The 
importance of collective participation in the ritual was explained in other interviews. For 
example, according to Melau Xiong in the United States, whose mother-in-law is an active 
shaman, the gathering of the community (clan) members, communal cooking and eating, and 
mutual assistance are all important aspect of ua neeb. Melau explained: 
Hmong have a lot of gatherings, especially for ua neeb. If your kids get sick, they call the 
shaman to do ua neeb and have the family members come over. Everyone together wishes 
them to get well. There is a lot of cooking, too. When you cook, its not just for your own 
family but also for the larger group. You need to set up long tables and serve a lot of food 
58 The original place where the soul was supposedly lost. 
for the people who helped and participated. 
Instead of giving more details of each stage of the shamans ua neeb ritual and the 
specific terminology used, I simply point out that Hmongs understanding of the soul is the 
fundamental basis that enables the shamans ua neeb to be conducted transnationally and 
remain effective across borders.  
Mobile Souls in Borderless Worlds 
When shamanistic spiritual rituals that were initially practiced in local communities become 
transnational and are practiced between Laos and the Untied States, it is important to 
understand that the Hmong concept of soul and its mobility is the traditional element that 
enables shamans to perform their rituals transnationally, making their power effective across 
national borders. Because the souls of both the living client and the dead ancestors can travel 
freely, ua neeb can be arranged and practiced transnationally without the clients physical 
presence in a specific locale. In narratives about the souls journey at funerals, the mobile 
soul has to travel continuously until it reaches its final destination, which is supposedly an 
unknown place where the ancestors reside.  
However, even after the soul arrives at the right place and settles with the ancestors, 
the soul still has to travel frequently back to its descendants whenever they offer food to it as 
well as when the shaman calls through ua neeb. The spiritual rituals mentioned earlier, such 
as xi plig (retrieving souls of the dead at the grave) and nyuj dab (offering a cow/buffalo 
many years after the parents death) are also good examples that cause the dead soul to travel 
and come back to join the feast. The mobile soul is deeply associated with the loss of the 
Hmongs ethnic homeland. Because there is no agreed to, final destination or territory for the 
deceased parents and ancestors, their souls have to continue to wander. This feature is well-
narrated in funerals, where a special song is chanted along with the sounds of a bamboo pipe 
(qeej) in order to send the wandering soul back to be together with its ancestors.  
 During the funeral at the Hmong Palace Church59 in Sacramento, Sheng Her, the clan 
representative in his late forties, explained the relations between mobile souls and the loss of 
the exact location of ethnic homeland. Because the ethnic homeland is unknown, the soul of 
the deceased cannot be sent to the exact origin place of Hmong. Sheng elaborated: 
The soul first goes to the place you were born. When a baby is born, the family is 
supposed to bury the placenta under the bed on the ground. At my aunts funeral like 
this, the chanting will send her soul back to the house [her birthplace] in Laos where her 
placenta was buried. We dont know where the real homeland is, so the soul cannot 
really be sent to the homeland. For a lot of us here, our placentas were buried in Laos. So 
our souls will first be sent to Laos. 
Once the soul goes back to its birthplace and collects the placenta, the journey 
continues until it reaches to the next major stops like China. In different interviews, it was 
added that once the soul reaches China and tries to cross the border again to wherever the 
next destination is, it needs to be particularly careful, because there will be attacks by the 
old Chinese enemy. In that case, the soul needs to pay the Chinese, symbolized by joss 
paper, so that it can be let go. As discussed in Chapter 1, Hmongs ethnic history in the 
supposedly lost ethnic homeland, China, is reasserted here, reflecting the conflicts and 
persecution they endured in ancient times. Indeed, according to this reasoning, the Hmongs 
coffin is decorated with joss paper, food (rice and rice wine), shoes, umbrellas, and extra 
clothes, all of which symbolize the necessary materials for survival during the unknown 
journey. Once the soul passes across the border of China, then it can continue its journey to 
wherever the ancestors soul rests in peace.60 
59 The Hmong Palace Church is the name of community hall rented by Sacramento Hmong community to 
proceed with funerals and it has no relation to the Christian churches. 
60 In Hmong terms, lib ntuj ([li nyu]) is translated and alternately used to refer to heaven and sky (see Cha 2010: 
133). But this is different from the heaven of the God in Christianity, since lib ntuj is believed to be where the 
deceased ancestors reside. 
In addition, the concept of soul for the Hmong is not confined to the deceased or 
dead persons soul but the soul of a living person can also be separated and detached from 
the body temporarily when the ua neeb ritual is performed. The moment of detachment of 
the soul from the body is when the shaman is communicating with and connecting to the 
soul of the ancestors, which is understood as being possessed by the spirits. In any case, the 
shamans are possessed by spirits of both the client and the ancestors as the medium between 
the two worlds. 
  Because the shamans power is manifested through completely mobile soul that can 
easily travel, clients do not have to live in the same country as the shaman and they do not 
necessarily need to be physically present in the same place at the same time. This is true 
even if the ancestors of Hmong in the United States died in Laos. In sum, localized Hmong 
shamanistic practices have become a transnational ritual practice that remains effective 
across geographical space because souls themselves live in a borderless world. In this sense, 
both the shamans birth and the mobile nature of the soul are the basis for the transnational 
cultural continuity of spiritual rituals and religious and healing traditions across the Hmong 
diaspora. 
Tradition in Transnational Contexts: Individualization and Commodification  
The scholarship on transnational religion often points out that the role of religion in 
transnational social relationships and the continuity of ethnic culture has been understudied 
in general (Cadge and Ecklund 2007; Ebaugh and Chafetz 2002: 4-6; Levitt 2003: 849; Tapp 
2013: 103). However, there has been a recent increase in studies of the role and impact of 
religion on transnational communities and scholars have examined how religion is involved 
in the experiences of immigrants, refugees, and diasporic peoples in the host country.  
For example, in his study of the Haitian diaspora in the West Indies, Brodwin (2003: 
93) demonstrates that Pentecostal worship is used as both a response to local 
marginalization, poverty, and discrimination and as a means to narrate peoples shared 
experiences of migration in the diasporic community. On the other hand, religion can be a 
source of conflict in transnational communities as analyzed in Bowens (2004) work on 
Muslims in France, who face internal political conflict between the French states 
domestication of religion in the name of a legitimate Islam of France and the universality 
of Islam. 
Some scholars have also noted that newly resettled immigrant communities in the 
host society experience dynamic changes in social relationships, especially in terms of 
traditional gender roles after their conversion to mainstream religions like Christianity (Ong 
2003; Smith-Hefner 1994; Winland 1994). While these studies focus on the continuing 
relevance of religion brought from the homeland or newly introduced in the host country, 
they mainly refer to mainstream religions such as Islam and Christianity. On the other 
hand, non-major religious belief systems like shamanism which have not been 
institutionalized and domesticated by the state and are not based on universalist discourses 
seem largely neglected, partly because they were often seen as more locally bounded, 
territorialized, and particularistic and thus even outdated to some extent. As Jane Atkinson 
(1992: 307-308) discusses in her article, shamanism has been the target of criticism by some 
anthropologists as an outdated topic in anthropology, although the exact reasons of this 
criticism are not clearly addressed. 
However, shamanistic religious systems can also be mobile and transnationally 
effective in the everyday lives of many transnational ethnic communities in different 
countries, demonstrating their continued relevance in a modern, globalized world. Despite 
the challenges and difficulties that they encounter as they are transferred and implemented in 
different societies, such religious practices continue to persist and indeed thrive both locally 
and transnationally. Hmong peoples religious belief in ancestor worship, represented by 
Hmong shamans and ua neeb is an appropriate example in this respect. In fact, the 
transnational practice and power of the Hmong shaman was illustrated by one of my 
interviewees in Laos, Lee Yang: 
A Hmong shamans power is absolute. His healing power can be effective all over the 
world and across countries. In America, when people get really ill, they might go to the 
hospital, but they still do not get well since they do not know the exact cause or reason for 
the illness. So they ask around their relatives in order to find an effective and well-known 
shaman who lives here in Laos. They will contact and talk to the shaman on the phone and 
send information about the symptoms of the patient. After hearing about the problems, the 
shaman in Laos will try to figure out what happened to the patients soul: whether the soul 
had a bad dream, got into an accident, or fell into the water. He will need some time to 
process the proper healing rituals. It can take three days, seven days, one month, or even up 
to three months. The shamans treatment is not over at this point. After the patient gets 
well, the family will contact the shaman again and send the updates about the recovery of 
the patient. Then, the shaman in Laos performs the ritual again to thank the patients 
ancestor soul, who guided his ua neeb and cured the patient. The power of shaman still 
works just like before [even when it is enacted in transnational contexts]. 
While the cultural continuity of shamanism still persists transnationally across 
national borders, when shamans perform ua neeb and provide services to the diasporic 
community in the transnational context, a number of changes emerge because of geographic 
separation. First, U.S. Hmong tend to contact shamans in Laos to conduct ua neeb rituals and 
other spiritual services for them (more than Lao Hmong clients contact U.S. Hmong 
shamans). Because the clients family and the shaman do not live in physical proximity, a 
large group gathering of extended members of clan in Laos cannot be convened since the 
family is not present. As a result, the shamans ua neeb is individualized as it is usually 
performed by the shaman alone without the family (client), who is subject to the ritual, or a 
group of participants who assist with the ritual. This also means that animal sacrificing, 
cooking, and sharing of food are left out. 
Individualization 
For such transnational shamanism, the Hmong family in the United States would call the 
shaman residing in Laos and discuss their concerns and problems first. The shaman will 
practice informally his spiritual rituals, such as asking and communicating with the 
ancestors souls in order to decide whether it is necessary to conduct more extensive ua neeb 
for the family. The shaman will do a brief check by throwing buffalo horns61 to examine the 
problems and foresee whether an actual ua neeb ritual is necessary. At this stage, 
transnational interactions and communications between the shaman in Laos and the family in 
the United States occur exclusively on the phone during the consultation. It is possible that 
shaman can already tell the causes of problem and provide instruction about how to deal 
with it without performing ua neeb. But if the shaman makes the decision to conduct an 
actual ua neeb ritual, he or she will further speak with the family in the United States and 
inform them about the necessary steps and further plans.  
 The shaman and the family will communicate further with each other in order to 
decide on the right dates for the ritual and share the contents and plans for it. The choice of 
date of ua neeb can be influenced by whether the family in the United States will actually 
take a trip to Laos and be present during the ritual or whether they will use the services of a 
different shaman in the United States to practice locally.  
However, since Hmong believe that the physical presence of the client at the time of 
the ritual does not impact its effectiveness or ability to resolve the problem, in many cases, 
when travel back to Laos is not feasible or possible, the shaman conducts the ritual by 
himself in Laos without the presence of the family. In this case, both the family in the United 
States and the shaman in Laos have flexibility to schedule and plan the actual date of event. 
Depending on the shaman, some objects that symbolize the clients body and substitute for 
61 During normal occasions, the horns are not necessarily used for fortune telling. They are used to fix specific 
dates, confirm special events, or take care of life expectancy, diseases, and health problems. 
his/her physical absence can be requested. For example, one of my interviewees in the 
United States mentioned that when his mother was treated for her illness and receiving ua 
neeb from a shaman in Laos, the shaman asked her to send him her T-shirts that would 
represent her body.  
In fact, I also frequently observed such informal and individualized spiritual rituals 
on my way to peoples houses during my fieldwork in different Hmong villages in Laos. 
They took place on the side of the road, in a corner of a house, under the trees, or in the 
middle of the hill, where individual shamans proceeded with their rituals for families and 
relatives residing in the United States.  
One February day in Laos, one of the oldest shamans in the village just completed a 
ritual under the tree in the middle of the village road for his six-year old granddaughter 
living in the United States, who fell on the floor and was injured. He performed the healing 
ritual by himself alone for the granddaughter, whom he had never met but had only seen in 
photos. After he completed his chanting, he spread rice wine around the corner of the tree 
and distributed cooked rice, pieces of boiled chicken, and two cooked eggs.  
When I learned that he was actually doing a spiritual ceremony for thanking the 
ancestors after his granddaughters recovery from her injury, I had a chance to ask him 
further about his transnationalized ritual and service. I asked whether his shamanistic 
performance in Laos would be able to bridge souls between the United States, where his 
granddaughter lives and the spirit world where the ancestors reside, even from a 
geographical distance. He responded right away, Of course, my ua neeb worked very well. 
Living in a separated land [distance and geographic separation] does not matter at all Its 
the same thing.   
In another example, Pia Lee, a shaman in his sixties, was busy holding an individual 
ceremony by himself at one corner of his house right before the New Year in Laos in order 
to check the necessity of conducting an ua neeb ritual to treat the illness in his distant 
cousins family in California, the United States. With two small buffalo horns, he was 
constantly chanting while occasionally flipping the horns on the ground in different 
directions.  
In fact, he has been frequently doing individualized and informal ua neeb for his 
relatives in the United States. Earlier that year, he already did ua neeb several times in order 
to cure the sickness among his cousins sisters relatives in different cities in the United 
States. Such rituals were based on transnational communications and arranged between the 
families in Laos and the United States through international phone calls. The landline phone 
at Pias house was bought for this particular purpose by his U.S. cousin when she visited in 
2004. Since then, Pia was able to communicate with his cousin and other relatives in the 
United States and has continued his ua neeb for those families. 
In the process of ua neeb, Pia conducted the ritual by himself inside his house 
without a witness. Depending on the seriousness of the request and concerns, Pia could have 
done a more extensive ua neeb at his house which would include sacrificing an animal, but 
he noted that it did not happen yet. About ten days after performing ua neeb, I usually 
received good news from the family on the phone that their situation and problems were 
resolved., Pia remarked. Because his successful ua neeb services could be provided 
transnationally, Hmong in the United States continued to contact and ask him to conduct ua 
neeb rituals for various issues, especially when family members who were seriously ill did 
not recover even with Western medicine or surgery. As a reward, those families sent Pia 
about US$ 250-300 in return.  
Benefits of Transnationalized Practices 
Although the content of the transnational shamanistic rituals conducted for U.S. Hmong does 
not include any extensive community activities, the transnationalized version is not really 
conditioned or confined by the geographical and physical proximity of the client but has 
become deterritorialized. As a result, it has become transformed from a socially rich, 
collective event to an individuals performance by the shaman without the participation of 
the family and clan members as witnesses and helpers. Indeed, the healing power of the 
shaman is believed to supersede the limits of both time and space in terms of its permanence 
and transnational effectiveness, demonstrating the flexible and contextually adaptive nature 
of what are perceived to be traditional cultural practices. Therefore, the rituals of 
shamanism, regardless of geographical location, are an important source of cultural 
continuity in the Hmong diaspora that has been effectively transferred from Laos to the 
United States.  
For Hmong in the United States, transnationally arranged ua neeb can be an attractive 
option and a way for them to continue their Hmong cultural practices because it is believed 
that the shamans power remains equally effective, regardless of where it is exercised. This 
also obviates the need to hold an extensive event for the entire clan in the United States that 
demands a significant amount of money, time, and labor. This individualized and 
deterritorialized nature of shamanism indicates that the Hmong family in the United States 
cannot witness the ua neeb performed in Laos and no evidence through photos or video 
recordings are provided by the shaman or requested by the U.S. family. This is why many 
U.S. families rely on shamans back in Laos, who are relatives or family members they can 
trust. More importantly, the best evidence of the effectiveness of the shamans transnational 
power is when the patient recovers from the illness.  
This does not mean that ua neeb will be practiced only in Laos and its use will 
decrease in the United States. As mentioned earlier, shamans who can conduct ua neeb also 
exist in the United States and continue to provide their healing and religious services locally 
for U.S. Hmong communities. In addition to senior shamans who have migrated, those who 
are born as shamans will also be present in the diaspora, allowing diasporic Hmong to enlist 
the services of local shamans. In fact, this is another important reason why Hmong 
shamanism has persisted transnationally, providing continuity in cultural practices in the 
local context across the diaspora. 
During my fieldwork, the majority of U.S. Hmong actually suggested that 
performing ua neeb transnationally is based on ones choice. In other words, whether they 
choose a shaman living in their own community or one in another country is up to the 
individual and their families. Regardless of where the shaman lives, as long as the person is 
reliable and experienced, the family will contact them locally or transnationally. There are 
other possible factors that may influence such decisions, such as the cost of the ritual and the 
time that is saved when it is performed transnationally from Laos.  
However, it should be noted that such shamanistic rituals cannot always be freely 
transnationalized and deterritorialized. If it is clear that the patients family must host a more 
complicated ritual to cure a serious illness and that a larger group gathering and animal 
sacrifice would be necessary, then the ritual must be performed in the local community in a 
territorialized and collective manner. 
Re-Localization of Transnational Tradition 
Although the processes of consultation and preparation can be arranged and organized on the 
phone across borders, it is possible that the patient and the family can actually travel to Laos 
for the day of ua neeb. This is the other way in which shamanism is transnationalized in the 
diaspora through actual travel of families across national borders back to the natal homeland. 
Apparently, if the patient is actually at the site in Laos, ua neeb and other spiritual rituals can 
be less individualistic because a larger group gathering and the sharing of food become 
possible, resembling how it is conducted in the local community.  
  In fact, it was not uncommon to observe Hmong from the United States visiting their 
relatives and families in Laos in order to actually participate in ua neeb as well as other 
spiritual rituals, especially nyuj dab. When the first son of a family gets seriously ill, injured, 
or has a dire accident, the shaman examines the causes and methods to cure such conditions. 
If it is discovered that the deceased parents who passed away many years ago want a cow or 
buffalo (the symbol of wealth, strength, and value), then nyuj dab should be performed by 
sacrificing the cow/buffalo and offer the proper food. 
  For example, Kong Lee in the United States and his cousin Chong Lee in Laos 
arranged an extensive nyuj dab ritual months before Kong took a trip to Laos with his wife. 
Over a month, they talked on the phone frequently in order to discuss overall preparations 
and make sure everything would be ready by the time Kong and his wife arrived (including 
the communal gathering and sharing of food). Chong Lees family in Laos bought and killed 
a cow for US$500 and prepared all the materials including rice, cow, chickens, joss paper, 
and drinks in addition to contacting the clan members in local villages to gather for the 
occasion.  
  The cost for the entire ritual was fully paid by Kong before he arrived in Laos as he 
transferred the money from the United States, which he estimated to be a few thousand 
dollars for both nyuj dab and the group gathering. In this case, the shamanistic ritual was 
initially arranged transnationally across national borders, but the actual nyuj dab was 
localized again in Laos through Kongs transnational mobility and physical presence at the 
ritual, and all the subsequent traditional ceremonial procedures were followed. To put it 
differently, initially transnationalized cultural practices, such as ancestral worship, 
commemoration, and other related rituals were eventually practiced locally again. 
Although there are other Hmong people in the United States like Kong Lee who visit 
their families in Laos with the purpose of participating in extensive rituals, not all 
individuals can actually travel to Laos. The cost of travel and funds for the ritual are 
expensive and it is also difficult to schedule a mutually convenient and exact time for the 
event. In this case, the shamanistic rituals are limited to the shamans individual and 
localized performances in Laos and their power is projected transnationally to the United 
States through the spirit medium.  
Commodification 
When shamanistic rituals are performed transnationally across national borders, it is not only 
individualized, but also increasingly commodified. When shamans in Laos practice for the 
local community, they ask that the family prepare certain items and buy animals for 
sacrifice, but they usually do not request cash payment for their services. After the ritual is 
over, the family is certainly obligated to give the shaman something in return, such as the 
head of the pig (which is believed to be the symbol of shamans worship) and/or the best part 
of the cow meat sacrificed during the ua neeb ritual. Giving choice cuts of meat by a male 
representative (the head of household) is not merely a part of the ritual, but conveys the 
message that the shamans hard work is highly valued and heartfelt by the whole family. In 
this manner, the ritual becomes an act of reciprocal social exchange or gift-giving for 
services rendered. 
In contrast, when shamanism is practiced transnationally in the diaspora, it is not 
possible for the U.S. family to arrange for an animal sacrifice or communal feast in Laos in 
their absence or send meat from the United States to the shaman in Laos. Because they 
cannot express their gratitude to the shaman through fresh meat as a form of reciprocal social 
exchange, they instead commodify the shamans services by sending money. Interestingly, 
some Hmong in the United States mentioned that they are ambivalent about Hmong shamans 
in Laos receiving cash payment for performing ua neeb transnationally while also noting the 
cases of shamans in the United States being paid for their local services. For example, one of 
my U.S. Hmong interviewees, Xiong Lor felt that Hmong shamans in Laos must practice 
pure and genuine ua neeb and that is why some Hmong in the United States seek out 
shamans in Laos. In principle, in both Laos and the United States, shamans services are 
understood to be a socially beneficial and benevolent service and not a type of work for 
economic profit. 
It might still be debatable whether the transfer of money from the United States to the 
shaman in Laos should be seen as payment defined in economic terms or a material 
expression of gratitude toward the shaman. Nonetheless, it is clear that when shamanism is 
transnationally practiced in diasporic contexts across national borders, the geographical 
separation between shaman and client causes the relationship to become inevitably 
commodified.  
Instead of being a symbolic act of social reciprocity of benevolence with gratitude, 
the ua neeb ritual becomes an economic transaction where the client pays the shaman for 
his/her work. This undoubtedly simplifies the overall process of ua neeb for Hmong in the 
United States and makes it much more convenient, since they do not have to spend the time 
and effort to arrange a sacrifice and feast in their own local community (or travel there). 
Instead, they can transfer money to the shaman in a manner which resembles economic 
remittances sent between families in the two countries.  
Ironically, it is also quite clear that this transformation/commodification of 
shamanism is what makes its transnational practice possible and promoted as a new but 
equally important form of cultural continuity in the diaspora. If Hmong in the United States 
are not allowed to replace the meat-giving practice with cash payment to shamans in Laos 
for their services, it would become much more difficult for them to enlist the shamans 
services across national borders, possibility leading to its decline or inactivity in the 
diaspora. 
In fact, my interviewees in Laos confirmed that cash payments for shamans have also 
become more common in that country. They observed how Hmong shamans in Laos have 
become used to being paid by U.S. Hmong for their services (or have heard of shamans in 
the United States being paid) and have begun to charge even local families in Laos a fee as 
well. Therefore, it is important to realize that the transnationalization of shamanism in the 
diaspora works both ways. Not only do shamans in Laos influence U.S. Hmong across 
borders, U.S. Hmong have also changed shamanistic practices in Laos. As a result, the 
commodification of shamanism has itself become transnationalized and spread through the 
diaspora from the United States to Laos. 
The transnational continuity of shamanism in the Hmong diaspora is certainly a 
product of its adaptability to various different national contexts. Not only are souls 
themselves mobile and readily travel across national borders, shamanism has proven to be a 
quite flexible tradition, allowing it to become individualized and commodified in order to 
adapt to the exigencies of transnational, diasporic life. This is also shown by the ability of 
shamanism to co-exist with other contrasting forces of modernity, such as Western 
biomedicine and Christianity and its flexibility and inclusion of racial and ethnic others 
(non-Hmong) in each country. This is another important reason for its cultural continuity and 
transferability across national borders in the Hmong diaspora. 
Mutual Co-Existence: Shamanism and Biomedical Power in the Hmong Diaspora 
In general, shamans in both Laos and the United States commonly face increasing 
difficulties in maintaining their ancient healing practices because of the encroachment of 
Western biomedical systems. Although biomedicine is much more predominant in the 
United States, medical doctors and modern hospitals in Laos are also drastically increasing 
and highly valued and desired among the Hmong. As a result, the presence of certified and 
professional medical practitioners in both countries has created some controversy about 
traditional ways of healing both within and outside Hmong communities.  
A Hmong pharmacist in Sacramento, for example, who identified himself as a 
believer of Hmong shamanism despite his medical training, pointed out that shamans roles 
as medical service providers are not valued compared to the Western medical perspectives. 
According to him, this is because beliefs about ancestor spirits lack research and 
development of scientific, accurate knowledge. One Hmong author argues that the extensive 
labor and effort required for Hmong ua neeb rituals and practices discourage some Hmong 
groups from maintaining their healing practices. This is believed true for relatively small 
clans that do not have much labor power to conduct ua neeb extensively (Cha 2010: 131-
132).  
In Laos, Hmongs healing practices can also be regarded as under the pressures of 
modernity, especially since the country has been investing in the development of a Western 
biomedical system. For example, the Lao government is financially supporting the overseas 
training of its medical students and inviting foreign countries to develop modern medical 
systems in Laos. A young shaman his early thirties in Laos, Poa Moua, shared with me his 
struggles and dilemmas as a shaman in current Laotian society. He noted that the shamans 
authority can possibly be looked down upon, because their status is not approved or 
recognized by official and authoritative institutions like the government or other national 
organizations. Poa said: 
I am a herbal medical doctor. But because I am not a real medical doctor, my life is not 
always easy. For medical doctors, patients always visit hospitals to see them. But for a 
shaman, I have to be the one that goes to visit each individual patient to practice rituals 
inside their homes. Medical doctors tend to get more credit when they treat patients 
because of their formal education and official degree in medicine.  
However, my actual discussions with Hmong shamans in Laos and the United States 
indicate that they do not perceive Western biomedicine as a threat to what they believe to be 
their traditional practices and way of life in simple binary terms. Although there may be 
disadvantages to being a shaman in a society that is increasingly prioritizing biomedicine, 
this does not mean that the Hmong shamans healing power has been jeopardized and their 
practices are considered outdated by Hmong. Instead, some Hmong medical doctors 
themselves actually understand the complexities of both traditional healing and the 
professional and modern medical systems and regard both systems as complementary and 
co-existing. In this sense, although tradition is often understood to be inherited from the 
distant past, it is not incompatible with modernity. 
In Laos, one day I was attending a familys nyuj dab ceremony for their parents, who 
passed away a long time ago in a different Hmong village. A young man was proudly 
introduced to me by the elders at the site as a promising medical doctor working at the 
hospital in town. Trained at a major hospital in Vientiane for seven years, the young Hmong 
doctor asked my opinion about the increasing criticism that Hmong healing rituals are 
receiving. He shared his thoughts on this issue as follows: 
If someone is hurt or gets injured, Hmong will want to be healed by ua neeb rituals 
according to our customs rather than Western medical treatment. It is because Hmong 
value the ancestral power very much and highly respects the spirit, as well as having 
deeper faith in their tradition. But doctors and new religions like Christianity dislike and 
criticize our tradition, because they believe that when someone gets sick or hurt, chanting 
and superstitious rituals cannot heal them. In my opinion, conducting rituals is purely 
based in an individuals faith, respect, and is a voluntary action. So I believe the action 
itself should not be the target of criticism.  
Although the young doctor did not explicitly identify his position, I realized that he 
had been concerned about this for a long time, despite being a doctor trained according to 
the Western medical system. He was clearly aware of the differences between what he 
perceived to be Hmong cultural healing traditions and beliefs and his medical education and 
training, but did not identify a clear struggle between the two or argue that the latter should 
replace the former.  
This perspective of Hmong in Laos resonates with the personal opinions of many 
Hmong in the United States despite living in the quintessential modern society. Almost all 
elderly Hmong in the United States felt that their cultural traditions like ua neeb are not 
really in conflict or incompatible with modern American society. In Sacramento, I visited a 
senior shaman, Moua Xiong in his seventies, who had served for 45 years for in both the 
Hmong community in Laos and the United States. During the interview, we talked about the 
elderly peoples reluctance to go to hospitals and receive medical treatment, especially in the 
United States but in Laos as well. 
Moua Xiong: Well, they are afraid that the staff at the hospital will tell them what to do. 
You must do this and that. You should take this medicine or that. You will live or die. 
But we are not sure whether that treatment will really cure us or whether the symptoms 
will remain. But if you practice ua neeb, you will be told, Oh, now you are fine. You will 
not die. Everything will be alright. So people will be relieved. 
Author: What do you think about the American medical system personally? Do you also 
go to the hospital? 
Moua Xiong: Yeah, for me, it is completely fine to go to the hospitals. Actually, my [US-
born] youngest daughter is a nurse working at the hospital. In the past, she would not want 
to listen to me at all. She said, Your way is old and incorrect. But right now, she says its 
50 and 50. She means that American doctors cannot be right 100 percent of the time, just 
as ua neeb cant be 100 percent right. You see? The value of ua neeb increased up to fifty 
percent for her [laugh]. She changed her mind and understands better now. If a person is 
almost dying, the family will bring the sick person to practice ua neeb. There are cases that 
those people actually became able to keep living like normal. But if ua neeb fails, the 
person will die too. Other people who couldnt be cured by ua neeb might go to the 
hospitals and can get better. Do you understand what I mean? It is different depending on 
individuals.  
Although Hmong shamans are well aware that the social pressure and influence of 
biomedical power are unavoidable, they do not perceive their apparent traditions to be in 
fundamental antagonism with modern medicine. In contrast to depictions of Hmong 
shamanism in the United States as completely incompatible with and opposed to mainstream 
American medical culture (see Fadiman 1997), Hmong themselves do not resist or reject 
Western biomedical care but adopt a much more accommodating position.  
Indeed, Hmongs understandings of this complex reality and their flexibility to 
engage both systems of healing is one important factor that can problematize discourses of 
tradition, which often situate it in opposition to modernity. Such perspectives should be 
constantly reconsidered in critically understanding the inherently flexible role of specific 
traditional practices, along with other critiques about misrepresentation and racialization of 
the culture of differences (Chiu 2004-5: 8; Taylor 2003). In turn, the flexibility indicates 
that specific cultural and healing systems like Hmong shamanism can continue to persist and 
indeed thrive in the Hmong diaspora, even as their transnational community is increasingly 
subject to the pressures of modernity in various countries.   
The Inclusive Nature of Tradition: Embracing the Racial and Cultural Other 
In addition to the ability of Hmong tradition like shamanism to function in the increasingly 
modernized contexts of the Hmong diaspora, Hmong shamanism is inherently inclusive and 
can be adapted to multiethnic and racially diverse societies as well. Not only is the shamans 
power effective across national borders within the Hmong diaspora, it also works for non-
Hmong people as well. In other words, it operates across both territorial and ethnic 
boundaries. Therefore, while serving as a source of cultural continuity for the transnational 
Hmong ethnic community, shamanism can also be incorporated for ethnic others in the 
various countries in which Hmong reside. 
There have been occasions when shamans frequently provide services to non-Hmong 
individuals in both Laos and the United States. Despite the particularism often attributed to 
local and indigenous religious practices, they can be based on discourse of universality akin 
to the worlds great religions. Although the ethnic universalism of Hmong shamanism was 
not exclusively discussed during my interviews, it was demonstrated that the shamans 
healing power can be used to heal and cure racially and cultural different, non-Hmong 
individuals. The following story was told by one of the elderly shamans in Laos about an 
American doctor treated by a Hmong shaman in the United States: 
Once there was a white American doctor in the U.S., who got into a car accident. After 
being treated and released from the hospital, he got seriously ill again. He went back to the 
hospital, took medicine, and did everything possible, but he still did not recover. The 
doctor thought to himself, I am a medical doctor, but how come I cant take care of 
myself?, and he became sad. One day, the doctor remembered his Hmong friend and went 
to consult him. He told the friend, I am still young. I dont want to die yet. But I am so 
sick, from sunrise to sunset. After listening to him, the Hmong friend said, You should 
go to see our shaman. Perhaps our culture can do something for you. His Hmong friend 
took the doctor to a Hmong shaman. After some tests, the shaman said, Your soul is 
troubled and very sick. It fell down from the airplane Now you have to do ua neeb so that 
your soul can come back. Then, you will get better. I can help you. The shaman cured the 
doctors soul and he recovered after ua neeb. Now the doctor respects the shaman like his 
parent, because it was like, he was once nearly dead but regained his life with the 
shamans help. If his dead parents soul didnt help him, he would have died.  
Although it is not clear to what extent the story of the American doctor offers 
credibility since it is being told indirectly, this is an important example of how the shamans 
power is universal regardless of ethnicity and does not discriminate on the basis of racial or 
cultural difference. Similarly in Laos, I was also told stories about the friendship between 
Hmong shamans and two elderly men from the majority Lao Loum ethnic group who were 
living in the same village. They became friends after undergoing ua neeb for their illness 
and distress in the past.  
In everyday life, I often ran into those Lao men, sitting in front of the house with the 
oldest and well-known Hmong shaman. Greeting and asking them what they were doing, 
they laughed and told me, Nothing, just killing time with friends [laugh]. One of the Lao 
men particularly helped the Hmong shamans family to purchase a second-hand truck from 
a company in the capital city using his knowledge, personal network, and business skills as 
the former taxi (tuk tuk) driver in town.  
While there have always been interactions between majority Lao and Hmong despite 
their geographically segregated residential communities, the development of such 
relationships through ua neeb is considered special and remarkable for various reasons. As 
Buddhists, ethnic Lao Loum of course do not seek Hmong shamans and their treatment or 
visit Hmong families just to spend leisure time together. My observations over a number of 
years indicate that the social interactions between Hmong and Lao are often limited to 
official occasions (when there are meetings between government officials and villagers) and 
issues pertaining to illegal drug (opium) dealing among some individuals. In addition, one 
cannot ignore subtle tensions that still exist among these two ethnic groups because of the 
long history of ethnic stereotyping as well as the legacy of the Vietnam War. Therefore, it is 
remarkable that Hmong shamanism can overcome such ethnic/racial and cultural 
differences. 
Continuity of Tradition in Transnational Context 
Hmongs various spiritual shamanistic practices have been maintained locally but have also 
served as a continuing transnational cultural tradition in the diaspora. Hmong shamanism is 
traditionally transnational because of the inherently flexible and mobile (borderless) soul 
and the birth of shamans regardless of geographic location. What makes a cultural practice 
traditional is not its unchanging nature, but its ability to adapt in face of transnational 
modernity. These fundamental elements enable the shaman to project power across national 
borders by connecting spiritual worlds.  
On the other hand, when shamanistic practices are transnationalized, the 
shaman/client relationship also becomes individualized and commodified across national 
borders in contrast to its practice in the local contexts as a collective, community event based 
on social exchange. Therefore, diasporic peoples cultural traditions can be maintained both 
locally and transnationally because of innate flexibility and broad applicability while being 
constantly transformed and modified in transnational contexts. 
Part . 
Cultural Difference and Discursive Fragmentation 
 in the Hmong Diaspora  
Chapter 7. Cultural Differentiation in the Diaspora: National Differences in the Hmong 
New Year 
The Two New Year Scenes 
New Years Day in Dao Tha, Vang Vieng, Laos 
On the 25th of December 2011 (Christmas Day), the Hmong New Years celebration started 
in Dao Tha. Nonetheless, the village was strangely quiet as I passed by the houses. In fact, if 
I had not run into a group of little girls in their colorful New Year Hmong dresses, I would 
have no idea that the New Year celebration had started. After taking several photos for the 
children and following them to a small open area between the houses in the middle of the hill, 
I finally found a small group of teenagers in the corner of the village who had lined up in 
two rows facing each other.   
Each youth standing in one line was tossing a tennis ball (pov pob [bbo bbo:]) to a 
counterpart standing in the other line. Three girls in the group, dressed up with a pretty hat 
and Hmong traditional outfits, found me standing there and asked me to join the ball tossing. 
I did not recognize any of the boys, who were not dressed in traditional clothes, but simply 
wore jeans and black jumpers. They were from the other villages and came to Dao Tha to 
meet the girls. In addition to the group of youth tossing balls, little kids were running around 
and some of their grandparents were watching them.  
There were almost no older young adults in the ball tossing area, especially those in 
their early twenties since they went to work in the town as usual. In fact, only the little girls 
who wore the newly-bought Hmong dresses seemed enthusiastic about the New Year 
celebration. Except for these girls and the small group of ball-tossing youth, the village did 
not look that different from an ordinary weekday. As many people noted to me, this year, the 
local Lao government had just stipulated that the Hmong New Year celebration should only 
last for three days, including the weekend. Indeed, that new policy seemed quite successful. 
During the three-day celebration, there were far fewer festivities compared to previous years, 
when the village was filled with people of all ages wearing colorful New Year dresses who 
engaged in various outdoor activities and celebrations for the entire week. 
New Years Day in Sacramento, California, United States 
On the 22nd of November 2012, I arrived at the Cal Expo fairground with a Hmong couple 
on the first day of the four-day Hmong New Year festival in Sacramento.62 It was still early 
in the morning and during the weekday (Thursday), but the huge car park was already almost 
full and we had to circle around the area several times in order to find a spot. Walking 
toward the entrance area, from a distance, there were several long lines of visitors waiting to 
enter the site and paying admission fees. Many adults, youth, and kids dressed up in their 
traditional New Year outfits and were talking to each other as well as taking photos, 
demonstrating the serious and elaborate nature of the celebrations. The New Years 
festivities seemed to have already started even outside the official site.  
After a long wait passing through the security checkpoint, I saw rows of countless 
individual vendor stalls and booths, each with different signs and banners welcoming the 
visitors on the first day of the New Year celebration. A couple of vendors in the fruits and 
vegetable aisle told me that they arrived at the Cal Expo at four oclock that morning so that 
they could be ready by seven. I decided to walk around the entire New Year venue first in 
order to get a general sense of the scale of the festival and the activities before talking to 
individual vendors. I was initially bewildered by the large number of vendors and crowds of 
people, as well as the various activities, which included fashion shows, music and dancing, 
and contests. Meanwhile, the group of my female friends asked me to join them to examine 
the clothing vendors to check out the new fashions for Hmong female dresses. Then they 
added with a laugh: You will become exhausted because even a full day will not be enough 
to see everything 
62 Sacramento is one of many venues for the Hmong New Year. A list of a number of New Year times and 
venues in California for 2012-2013: Oroville: 6th-7th October, Stockton: 10th-11th November, Chico: 8th 
December; Sacramento: 22nd-25th November, Marysville/Yuba City: 3rd-4th November, Merced: 20th-23rd 
December, San Diego: 22nd-24th December, Fresno: 26th December 2012-1st January 2013. 
 Cultural Differences among Diasporic Communities in Transnational Context  
The two above scenes illustrate the palpable differences in the Hmong New Year practices 
and festivities in the two different countries of Laos and the United States. Of course, these 
two countries in which the Hmong diaspora is situated have contrasting political and 
economic systems as well as completely different social environments. On the surface, such 
national differences are certainly the product of varying levels of economic development, 
since the advanced capitalist economy and material resources of the United States may 
enable more ornate and elaborate celebrations of ethnic traditions to some extent. However, 
another fundamental cause of the dramatic differences in the way New Year festivals are 
celebrated at the local community level is based on different national discourses of 
equality.  
In Laos, Hmong New Year celebration has been reduced because of newly 
introduced rules by local government, requiring Hmong to confine their public celebrations 
to under three days (including the weekend). The state control of the Hmong New Year is 
justified by discourses of economic equality for all based on the equal right to receive formal 
education and engage in national economic development. In contrast, Hmong in the United 
States have organized more extensive and highly-commercialized New Year festivals across 
the country. Ethnic festivals like the Hmong New Year are consistent with the celebratory 
American ideology of multiculturalism, which emphasizes the equal cultural right of ethnic 
minorities to maintain their cultural practices and ethnic tradition. Hmong in the United 
States are free to organize an elaborate and long New Year festival with various cultural 
performances and shows and promote their ethnic businesses.  
As a result, because of the different economic and ideological conditions in the 
countries in which they live, Hmong communities in Laos and the United States have come 
to practice their ethnic traditions in quite different ways. Such cultural differentiation in the 
diaspora often leads to discourses of where authentic traditions are understood to reside. 
However, because diasporic Hmong have lost their connections to their ethnic homeland and 
acknowledge that their New Year festival has dramatically changed in varying national 
contexts, neither Hmong in Laos or the United States claim to have more authentic and 
proper New Year celebrations. This also creates self-critical discourses about the 
inauthentic way tradition is practiced in each respective community and causes them to 
imagine and idealize other places (namely older homelands) as the location of authentic 
traditions. 
Hmong in Laos recognize that their New Year has become culturally impoverished 
whereas their counterparts in the United States realize their version is excessively 
commodified. This in turn causes them to imagine that an idealized and authentic cultural 
tradition resides in the past or elsewhere. By comparing the Hmong New Year in Laos and 
the United States, this chapter will examine how national economic and sociopolitical 
differences in the two countries generate differences in the same cultural tradition among 
Hmong diasporic communities as well as produce discourses of inauthenticity. 
The Components of the Hmong New Year 
Similar to the uncertainty about the Hmongs ethnic origins, the exact history of the Hmong 
New Year is also unknown. However, it is considered to be one of the oldest cultural 
traditions maintained in the Hmong diaspora. In general, Hmongs New Year can be 
distinguished from other well-known New Year traditions that were recognized and 
celebrated locally by other ethnic groups, such as the Lao New Year (Boun Pimai in April, 
based on lunar calendar system), the East Asian Lunar New Year (dates change each year 
depending on the lunar calendar system), and the Western New Year (January 1st).  
The main purpose of the Hmong New Year is to express gratitude to the ancestors for 
a successful harvest, send away bad luck from the previous year, and wish for good fortune, 
health, and wealth for the family in the upcoming New Year. The Hmong New Year is based 
on the lunar calendar system and usually falls around the end of November or December 
after the harvest season. Because of the tradition of thanking the ancestors for a fruitful 
harvest of rice, which is an important and basic economic activity during the entire year, it 
can sometimes be compared with American Thanksgivings, which coincides with the 
Hmong New Year celebration period in Sacramento (the fourth weekend of November).  
There are some fundamental and basic practices associated with the New Year 
celebration which have been retained by Hmong in both Laos and the United States. The 
core of the New Year tradition consists of hu plig ([hou plee)] and noj peb caug ([noh pe 
jau], translated as Eat 30), which refers to spirit calling rituals followed by the sharing of 
the New Years Eve dinner with a large group of clan members at individual households. As 
shown in the shamanistic rituals (ua neeb) in Chapter 6, the New Year also involves ancestor 
worship and indicates how the lives of Hmong are inseparable from their ancestral spirits. In 
this context, the ritual of hu plig and noj peb caug require extensive preparation at home as 
the most essential and important component of the New Year celebration. Similar to ua neeb, 
hu plig is a ritual for calling the dispersed and mobile ancestral souls to visit their living 
descendants and join their New Years Eat 30 feast.  
During the morning of New Years Eve, the preparation starts with a father or 
grandfather (as the head of household) chanting as he sweeps every corner of the inside of 
the house using handmade brooms made of bamboo sticks and tree leaves. This symbolizes a 
sweeping-away of bad luck, misfortune, and any regrets that the family experienced during 
the past year. After the sweeping and chanting is complete, the household head sits on the 
ground and throws the split buffalo horns numerous times onto the floor while continuing to 
chant in order to foresee and wish for good luck in the coming year.  
The family also renews the altar in the middle of the living room by replacing 
incense sticks and joss paper (which represents money). In front of this altar, cooked 
chickens (one must be a rooster) are offered as well as boiled eggs,63 which symbolize the 
wealth, prosperity, and love of the entire family. In the same evening, noj peb caug (Eat 30, 
the New Years Eve dinner) should be conducted at each individual house by offering more 
cooked chickens with freshly cooked rice to the guests, who are mostly from the clan 
members.  
In short, the common structure of the Hmong New Year in both Laos and the United 
States has three basic components. Based on the individual household, the hu plig (soul 
calling) ritual is performed in preparation of the New Year celebration. This is followed by 
noj peb caug, which is a dinner-gathering of clan members and then, during the New Years 
day, public celebrations are held with a few day-long entertainment activities, such as pob 
pov (ball tossing with pairs of men and women) within the community. Among these three 
components that constitute the entire Hmong New Year celebration, Hmong in both Laos 
and the United States believe that hu plig and noj peb caug have changed the least and have 
been maintained by both communities with little variation. Indeed, these private, small-scale 
celebrations at home are considered to be a continuing and essential foundation for the New 
Year tradition regardless of which country Hmong reside in the diaspora. 
Over time, there have been a few minor changes to these fundamental elements of the 
Hmong New Year depending on different national contexts. For example, during the noj peb 
caug dinner on New Years Eve, the gathering and sharing of large meals in each household 
were usually done in one night in Laos, because each family from the same clan takes turns 
visiting surrounding clan households in the same village. Family visitors are repeatedly 
served cooked chickens and rice along with alcoholic drinks.  
In the United States, however, because families live in different parts of the city, the 
only time they have for visiting clan members for dinner is on weekends. Therefore, noj peb 
caug had to be scheduled on different weekend dates before the actual start of the New Year 
63 The numbers of eggs are said to be the same number of people in the family, normally with an extra one that 
symbolizes the wealth and well-being of the family.  
festivals in Sacramento. As a result, all four weekends in the month of November ended up 
being fully reserved for visiting different families for the Eat 30 dinner.  
National Economic Differences in Diasporic Ethnic Traditions 
In contrast to the private aspects of the New Year celebration, which has generally remained 
similar in the two countries except for such practical modifications, significant national 
differences have emerged for more public New Year ceremonies and events in the Hmong 
diaspora. In fact, while reviewing my fieldwork materials, I am struck by how little materials 
I have about public New Year celebrations in Laos in contrast to the abundance of data I 
collected during the U.S. Hmong New Year festivals in three different cities in California.  
The much more extensive and elaborate nature of the U.S. Hmong New Year seems 
to partly reflect the significant economic disparities between Laos and the United States. 
Hmong diasporic communities in the United States have greater access to economic 
resources to commercialize their ethnic traditions and celebrate them lavishly. On the other 
hand, the Hmong New Year in Laos lack materials, special markets, or other economic 
activities to enhance the scale and festivities of the celebration.  
The Absence of Commodification in the Hmong New Year in Laos 
As discussed in Chapter 3, many Hmong in Vang Vieng are socioeconomically marginalized 
as peasant farmers or wage workers in tourism or mining industries, which does not provide 
them with sufficient income or economic resources. Therefore, their main source of income 
tends to be irregular remittances from their families abroad. Most Hmong families in Dao 
Tha village relied on economic remittances from their transnational kin networks in the 
United States and other parts of the world in order to meet their financial obligations for the 
New Year. However, even with the financial support from their co-ethnics in the United 
States, Hmong do not have enough economic means to develop a more expansive New Year 
celebration that they desire.  
Before the New Year celebration, Hmong villagers go to nearby local markets to buy 
food and goods they need to conduct the spirit calling rituals (hu plig) and the Eat 30 dinners 
(noj peb caug). The costs of necessary supplies and food, such as meat, clothes, drinks, joss 
paper, and candles, rise steeply during that time of the year. For example, chickens are in 
great demand for ceremonial rituals (hu plig) and for treating guests during the large group 
dinners. Although almost all Hmong households raise chickens at home, the actual numbers 
of fully-grown chickens ready to be eaten are quite limited and cannot meet the high demand 
during the New Year season, causing them to buy large numbers of chickens from local 
markets and farm owners. As a result, during the Hmong New Year celebrations, the price of 
chickens suddenly increases because of high demand. This often caused bitter complaints 
and concerns among many Hmong families with limited budgets.  
Only a few families were able to purchase a small pig (300,000 Lao Kip, 25 British 
pounds) or large portion of red meat (usually over 70,000 Lao Kip per kilo, six British 
pounds) from the markets using extra financial support and remittances from their family 
and relatives residing in the United States. This allowed them to provide more food and host 
a fancier feast. During the noj peb caug (Eat 30) visits to different families in Dao Tha, one 
family served a bigger portion of grilled pork with other regular dishes like rice and boiled 
chicken. However, even this family was apologetic about the impoverished food for his 
guests and explained, In the past, our parents lived in the farthest highlands so they were 
able to raise pigs, cows, and had much wealthier New Year celebration. Right now, we cant 
raise that kind of livestock and became poor, so we can only perform smaller scale 
celebrations like this with small amount of meat. This indicates how Hmong in Laos have 
become unable to celebrate the New Year to their satisfaction because of economic 
constraints. 
Some elderly Hmong often compared the gradual impoverishment of their New Year 
celebration in Laos with their past New Year in Thai refugee camps and said that even 
during that uncertain and unstable time, their celebrations involved more economic activities 
and were more vibrant than in current day Laos. There was also more selling and buying of 
goods in temporary informal markets within the major refugee camps and extensive ball 
tossing activities for many days throughout the festivities (see also Long 1993: 169-172). 
The overall lack of economic resources partly accounts for the small scale of the 
Hmong New Year celebration that are mainly confined to individual households. As a result, 
there was also little collaboration between different Hmong villages in Vang Vieng in order 
to hold collectively-organized economic markets for New Year festivals together. Instead, 
the celebrations are dispersed among single villages, each of which have their own activity 
like pob pov (ball tossing) and therefore kept small in scale.64 
The Commercialization of the Hmong New Year in the United States 
In contrast to their co-ethnics in Laos, Hmong in the United States clearly have many more 
economic resources to mobilize and host their New Year festival extensively. There are also 
plenty of Hmong ethnic businesses which can participate in order to promote their goods and 
services. In addition, Hmong are able to charge fees for admission, booth rentals, and 
parking. As a result, they have the means to organize a much more extensive, elaborate, and 
longer New Year events, which draw Hmong from different communities throughout the 
country. Not only do local Hmong communities (such as in Sacramento) have ornate New 
Year festivals, an international New Year festival is held annually in Fresno, which 
organizers estimate is attended by about 25,000-30,000 people. The members of the 
International Hmong New Year committee in Fresno expect that the number of attendees 
64 This may be the case especially in central regions of Laos like Vang Vieng where the Hmong population is 
relatively small, in contrast to northern Laos or the outskirts of the capital city of Vientiane. For example, 
northern areas of Laos and the city of Lak 52 (52km from the capital, Vientiane) with substantial Hmong 
populations may possibly have longer and more public New Year festivals. 
will increase significantly each year, since they are now able to host the festival in the citys 
Fairground.65 
Similar to many other ethnic festivals in the United States, such as the Chinese New 
Year in San Francisco (see Yeh 2008) and the Nisei Week of Japanese Americans in Los 
Angeles (see Kurashige 2002), the Hmong New Year has also become an important site of 
economic activity for both Hmong businessmen (vendors) and potential customers (festival 
visitors). Many individual businessmen, shop owners, insurance sales persons, and realtors 
set up booths to advertise their services. Overall, the range of items and commodities sold in 
the New Year markets is diverse and very extensive. As many Hmong observed, one can 
find everything at the New Year. 
Ethnic food vendors can be found at booths for barbeque meat, drinks, papaya salads, 
various snacks, and even Chinese style hot pot. Other individual vendors sell ordinary 
consumer items (clothing, accessories, daily necessities), produce (fruits and vegetables), 
harvested rice, herbal and pharmaceutical medicines from Thailand, Laos, and China, and 
numerous DVDs and music, including songs and videos by Hmong artists and directors and 
popular foreign dramas. The sale of informally imported goods (based on personal networks) 
demonstrate the transnational economic reach of U.S. Hmong in the diaspora. There were 
also photo booths for visitors wearing traditional dress to take photos with specially 
decorated and painted background images of nature and villages in Laos.  
Other popular booths sold books and published materials related to Hmong history, 
autobiographies, literature, culture, and lifestyles. I encountered and spoke with many 
Hmong of different ages at these booths who expressed personal interest in learning about 
their own history and collecting published materials about it. Therefore, Hmongs ethnicity, 
history, and cultural identities can be readily commodified and commercialized in American 
65 In the past, there have been two different sites for the New Year in Fresno organized by a general 
organization committee consisting of eighteen clan representatives. As of 2012, this clan association has been 
discontinued. 
society. For example, a good number of vendors created T-shirts and fashion accessory items 
using the name Hmong and phrases that can promote their ethnic visibility. This is a form of 
ethnic self-representation for their own community, but also targets non-Hmong festival 
visitors.  
Some vendors at the festival site even commercialized the former Hmong military 
leader, General Vang Pao66 by selling posters with his image, small statues, and portraits as 
well as books and documentary DVDs about his life. Other items included commemorative 
wall clocks, decorative badges, and accessories with the Generals image. In addition to 
these diverse economic activities, the New Year is also the main site for promotion and 
advertisement by individual non-profit organizations, such as local university student 
organizations, social workers and local health centers, and religious organizations, all of 
which distributed brochures and pamphlets as well as provided consultation services inside 
the booths.  
There are also plenty of cultural performances and contests, such as the Hmong 
Beauty Pageant, pop singing, dancing, acting contests, and fashion shows with traditional 
Hmong outfits, as well as other traditional games which are played during the entire New 
Year period. Representatives from the Hmong radio station and TV programs as well as 
online Hmong film rental services (e.g. Hmongflix67) were also present. They were also in 
charge of videotaping and broadcasting the various festival activities.  
Like many other ethnic beauty contests in the United States, the Hmong Beauty 
Pageant promotes the public image of Hmong as socially well integrated, good American 
citizens. These narratives are found during the interviews with individual beauty contestants 
on stage and considered important criteria to qualify as a beauty queen. For examples, 
66 In the past, the Hmong New Year usually started with a commemoration of their refugee experiences during 
the Vietnam war. For this reason, the former military leader General Vang Pao used to give a keynote speech 
on the very first day to officially open the New Year. After the Generals death in 2007, this official event has 
been replaced by an announcement by the organizing committees representative. 
67 The copied version of American online movie rental website Netflix. 
interview questions included, How will you bridge the Hmong community and broader 
American society as Miss Hmong?, What are the virtues one should have as Miss Hmong 
and a public representative of the whole community?, and How will you contribute to and 
promote our community? In this sense, the standard of beauty in the contest is not always 
about outer appearance but also requires a proper Hmong ethnic identity and cultural 
representation of their community to the wider society.  
Finally, the Hmong New Year festivals in the United States involve not only local 
Hmong but those from other cities and states as well as other countries of the diaspora. They 
are widely publicized online through websites as well as through social media, none of 
which are available for Hmong in Laos. The largest Hmong New Year in Fresno uses 
International in its festival title and there are numerous individuals visiting from countries 
such as Australia, Canada, and France. Some Hmong from China, Thailand, and Laos were 
also present (their trips were funded by their families in the United States). The public and 
international promotion of the festival, along with the economic opportunities for ethnic 
businesses and consumers are important reasons why it is well-attended and generates much 
more interest and enthusiasm than the New Year in Laos.  
Multiculturalism and State Discourses of Economic and Cultural Equality  
However, economic reasons alone cannot sufficiently explain the differences in the New 
Year celebrations in Laos and the United States. For instance, although Laos is technically 
underdeveloped, not all festivals and holidays in the country are impoverished or small-scale 
with low public visibility. In fact, Laotian national holidays have become remarkably 
commercialized and extensively celebrated in Laos.  
During my fieldwork, it was quite a contrast to see how national holidays including 
the Lao New Year (Boun Pimai in April) were promoted, advertised, and commodified in 
the center of the capital city, Vientiane. Numerous vendors and sales booths selling various 
consumer goods and expensive items imported from Thailand, Vietnam, and China were set 
up along the Mekong riverbank and competed to attract customers (similar to the Hmong 
New Year in the United States). In such cultural events, the Lao government not only allows 
the promotion and expansion of commercial activities, many important government officers 
show up to give speeches and participate in opening ceremonies that are video-recorded and 
broadcast through the national media. 
State Cultural Control and Economic Equality in Laos 
The reason that the Hmong New Year in Laos is diminished in scale is not simply the result 
of a lack of economic resources, but also governmental cultural control in the name of 
economic equality. During my three visits to Laos over a ten-year period, one of the 
remarkable changes in the Hmong community was the reduction in the length, size, and 
scale of public celebrations during the Hmong New Year. Public group activities and 
outdoor events, which normally lasted from at least a full week to months, were shortened to 
a maximum of three days (including weekends) due to recent governmental mandates, which 
caused the New Year to be mainly celebrated in private among individual families rather 
with the larger community. This reduction of the New Year celebration was a product of a 
meeting that was held in 2011 between local government officers and Hmong village heads 
and clan leaders in the district of Vang Vieng. 
Hmong villagers were informed about the New Year policy and asked to conform to 
it after the decision was made. During the interview, Kong Her, one of the village elders 
clearly explained this outcome as follows: 
Our culture and traditions like the Hmong New Year must conform to theirs [the Lao 
ruling group], since we live with Laotians, who are Buddhist. In the past, we tossed the 
balls and dressed up with traditional clothes for at least a full seven days. In some 
Hmong villages, it lasted even for a month. We would not stop until our parents came 
and finally said, Okay, we need to finish the New Year. We should now go back to the 
rice fields. Right now, we are not allowed to celebrate that long anymore with the new 
governmental law. Students should go to school and workers should go back to work. 
Its quite different from when we were living far away in the mountains.  
After repeatedly being given similar explanations for the reduction of the Hmong New Year 
by different individuals, I had an opportunity to interview a Hmong governmental officer in 
the local district office and speak about governmental policy and changes to the New Year. 
According to Cha Lee, a Hmong administration officer in his fifties, the new policy was 
inevitable and necessary because of the need for Laos to become a modern country by 
increasing its citizens commitment and diligence to education and hard work as well as 
improving their time management.  
From the official perspective of the Lao government, such cultural control over the 
Hmong New Year was not intended to reduce ethnic traditions and cultural diversity but 
simply to make their traditions more adaptable and appropriate for a modern country with a 
higher national standard of living. It was meant to enable every ethnic group to fully 
participate in national economic development by granting them equal rights to pursue 
educational opportunities and increase their economic productivity. In fact, the ideological 
justification for this policy is contained in the Lao national constitution, which states: 
The State pursues the policy of promoting unity and equality among all ethnic groups. 
All ethnic groups have the right to protect, preserve and promote the fine customs and 
cultures of their own tribes and of the nation. All acts creating division and 
discrimination among ethnic groups are prohibited. The State implements every measure 
to gradually develop and upgrade the socio-economic levels of all ethnic groups. (Article 
8. Constitution of The Lao Peoples Democratic Republic, 2003.) 
In this constitution article, two different values, the equal right to preserve ethnic 
customs and partake in national socioeconomic improvement are treated as if they were the 
same or could be achieved simultaneously. Therefore, the Lao government seems to have a 
certain type of ethnic multiculturalism. However, it is clearly implied that if minorities 
celebrate cultural differences too much, it prevents the state from upgrading the 
socioeconomic level of all ethnic groups. The Hmong New Year is a good example which 
demonstrates that the preservation of distinctive ethnic cultural traditions and practices can 
be in conflict with economic productivity and social mobility as defined by the state. 
According to this perspective, if Hmong were allowed to truly develop their cultural 
activities and festivities like New Year ceremonies, it would interfere with their economic 
productivity.  
As a result, such ethnic activities are implicitly disapproved by the state, which 
prioritizes national economic growth through development and education as the most 
important agenda for its citizens. Therefore, although it is not explicitly stated in the 
constitution, ethnic groups are allowed to perform their distinctive ethnic cultures and 
traditions only within the permission of the state. This can be rather a conditional and 
ambivalent type of multiculturalism. 
In fact, the distinctive cultures of ethnic minorities, positioned at the margins of the 
nation-state, are often seen as a threat to state regimes to promote national unity (Eriksen 
2002[1993]: 121-122; Toland 2009[1993]:1). In particular, the cultural traditions of such 
minorities have been at the center of nation-states dual project of modernization and 
marginalization. Government policies and state agencies in Southeast Asian countries treat 
various ethnic minorities ambiguously as both the subject of civilization and modernization 
and a threat to national security and unity (Duncan 2004: 1-3; see also Leng 1980). Because 
of this ambiguity, states often produce self-contradicting and selective policies for their 
ethnic minorities either by glorifying or reducing their cultural differences and diversity 
(Clark 2001: 427; see also Salemink 2007). This demonstrates the limits of national unity 
and true accommodation of minority cultures while reproducing oppressive state control in 
different ways.  
In this manner, traditional ethnic cultures and multicultural differences are tolerated 
but ultimately subject to nationalist projects of modernity, defined by both national 
economic development and the creation of a unifying and dominant national culture. 
Although the policy to promote education and development seems to apply to all ethnic 
groups in Laos, it specifically targets the Hmong, given that they are the only ethnic group 
that celebrates the New Year distinguishably and publically instead of simply participating 
in the state-promoted Laotian National New Year celebration. 
In addition, ethnic traditions that are publically visible are especially subject to state 
control, since they are seen as conflicting with national priorities. This is especially true 
when considering Hmongs other traditional practices besides the New Year. Although the 
Hmong have been told to modify and reduce their New Year festivals to conform with state 
agendas, other aspects of Hmongs traditional culture have not been targeted, such as 
marriage customs, religious practices (ua neeb), and funeral rituals, all of which are 
undertaken privately within individual Hmong homes. 
While scholars point out that the Lao government has consistently promoted equal 
rights and espoused egalitarian relations with its ethnic minorities and cultures at the official 
level (Bourdet 1996: 78; Stuart-Fox 1997), they also analyze how these ideologies are still 
rooted in the viewpoints and centrality of the dominant ethnic Lao group (Cincotta-Segi 
2010: 1; Ovesen 2004: 222-223; Pholsena 2002). Following a Leninist socialist definition of 
ethnic diversity, the Lao ethnic policy similarly emphasizes national equality by preserving 
and promoting the minority traditional culture through schools of dancing, music and 
handicrafts in order to achieve the highest level of assimilation and (material) historical 
progress (Pholsena 2002: 181-183). Indeed, national equality for all, defined and granted by 
the Lao state and narrated in state policies, the national constitution, and official 
governmental documents, is highly conditional and based on unequal ethnic positioning.  
Multicultural Ideologies and Cultural Equality in the United States  
On the other hand, the U.S. government does not regulate or control ethnic minority festivals 
because of multicultural ideologies that permit and even encourage different minority groups 
to maintain their ethnic cultures. In general, multiculturalism is based on the notion that all 
cultures are equal and should be preserved by granting ethnic minorities the right and 
freedom to practice and display their cultural differences.  
Based on this, the U.S. multiculturalism does not perceive ethnic festivals and 
minority cultural traditions to be a threat to national unity. It rather assumes that the 
manifestation of cultural differences by immigrants and ethnic groups will not impede their 
inevitable social and cultural assimilation, thus making it unnecessary for the state to exert 
power over minority cultures. In addition, as cultural diversity has become part of American 
national identity, the government is not concerned about how ethnic festivals may reduce 
national economic productivity. Therefore, the state minimizes its control over minority 
cultural events, and its presence during the Hmong New Year festival is limited to law 
enforcement in order to prevent crime and violence and ensure public safety.  
Some scholars have problematized the celebratory nature of multiculturalism, 
pointing out that such ideologies fail to recognize internal politics and economic disparities 
among different ethnic groups (Eller 1997; Yeh 2008). Schiller et al. (1995: 50-52) argue 
that multiculturalism allows immigrants to maintain sentiments toward their homeland 
(through cultural practices and identity) without developing substantial transnational 
connections with it, which enables them to be fully embedded in American society. 
Multicultural ideologies also essentialize ethnic cultural differences while ignoring the fact 
that the actual inclusion of these ethnic and racial others remains insufficient. Those who 
question multiculturalism also note that it creates social separation instead of promoting 
national unity (Eller 1997: 250-251). 
It is true that multiculturalism incorporates the seemingly contradictory objectives of 
achieving the preservation of cultural differences while promoting the incorporation (and 
assimilation) of ethnic minorities into mainstream society. In fact, it is not always clear to 
what extent the multicultural ideologies actually empower the Hmong communities to 
promote and substantiate cultural identity and representation. What enables the ornate and 
extensive Hmong New Year celebration in the United States is largely because Hmong 
freely and eagerly pursue economic opportunities and voluntarily engage in the self-run 
capitalist market system. Therefore, it is important to critically approach the various 
shortcomings of U.S. multiculturalism on different ethnic minority cultures.  
Nonetheless, although U.S. multicultural ideologies do not necessarily cause Hmong 
to engage in extensive New Year festivities, it does grant them the freedom to do so without 
substantial governmental scrutiny and control. The lack of U.S. state intervention in minority 
cultures is based on both multicultural ideologies and the entrenched and hegemonic nature 
of capitalism in the American economy, giving minorities like the Hmong the freedom to 
extensively and freely engage in ethnic festivities. In the following section, I will discuss the 
specific case where the state intervenes when there is a perceived threat to public security 
and safety during the New Year events.  
The only manner in which the U.S. state is a political presence and exercises control 
over the Hmong New Year is through police surveillance and law enforcement that require 
mandatory security and safety rules for all ethnic community events. The presence of 
security guards and law enforcement agencies in ethnic festivals has not been discussed in 
the literature. It is perhaps another example that shows cultural events of different ethnic 
groups are initially considered ordinary and not political by the local governments. Many 
ethnic festivals simply do not have any local policemen at the sites.  
However, the intervention and control of the state become visible and immediate 
when the cultural events involve any possible violence and criminal activities. This is shown 
in a number of previous incidents at the Hmong New Year festivals, when Hmong gang 
alliances and their fights and shootings caused local state governments to immediately shut 
down and cancel the rest of the New Year events at various sites. 
During my fieldwork in the United States, some young Hmong that I became 
acquainted with suggested to me to come to the Hmong New Year in their different 
hometowns, such as Stockton, Marysville, Chico, and Merced, all in California. Before the 
main New Year festivals in Sacramento and Fresno, I decided to attend the New Year 
festival in Stockton first. It was held earlier in November only for a weekend and at a 
smaller scale because of the relatively small Hmong population and financial situation of the 
city.  
After arriving at the festival site in Stockton and waiting in line to enter at the 
entrance, a security guard was screening the visitors and checking their bags and purses 
individually. After the long wait, when it was my turn, I was asked to open my small purse 
by a male security officer. I felt like I was going through the airport security checkpoint. 
Indeed, it was unfamiliar and a bit uncomfortable for me to do so at the Hmong New Year 
festival. This new experience of security and safety was indeed repeated and became routine 
everywhere else at Hmong New Year festivals. Security checkpoints may be a way to 
prevent unforeseen conflicts and violent activities with weapons, but it has become a 
standard practice after 9/11 with increased concerns about national security and the war 
against terrorism. The Hmong New Year organization committee members pay careful 
attention to meet the security standard enforced by the city of the New Year location. This 
often leads to the creation of security and safety associations by Hmong volunteer groups as 
part of their cooperation with local law enforcement offices. 
In October 2014, while writing this chapter, there was a news report about a shooting 
among groups of young Hmong men during the Hmong New Year festival in Chico, 
California as reported in the local newspapers: 
Several Asian men from two cars were allegedly firing at each other before crashing 
separately in the parking lot behind Panda Express. () According to police, the 
suspects were in the area for the Hmong New Year celebration at Bidwell Junior High 
School. The event was supposed to continue Sunday, but officials determined the event 
should be canceled following Saturdays incident. (5th October 2014, Police release 
names Saturdays gang shooting suspects, Action News Now.) 
Similar to the previous years, a series of shootings, conflicts, and gang-related fights 
led to an immediate cancellation of the festival and an increase in police officers and 
security guards at other New Year venues in different cities and states. 
Authenticity is Elsewhere: Discourses of Ethnic Tradition 
The practice of ethnic traditions that have become different in the diaspora ultimately raises 
issues of cultural authenticity as different communities position themselves along a scale of 
authenticity based on the extent to which their cultural forms resemble those originally 
practiced in the ethnic homeland. However, because Hmong communities in Laos and the 
United States have lost their ethnic homeland as a point of reference and realize that their 
New Year practices have been dramatically modified in different national contexts, neither 
of them claim to have retained the original, authentic New Year tradition. For Hmong in 
the United States, the excessive commercialization of their New Year in a highly capitalistic 
society is seen as the cause for the loss of cultural authenticity.  
Meanwhile, for Hmong in Laos, the serious reduction imposed on their New Year 
festivities by limited economic resources and the Lao state indicate that they have come to 
practice a more impoverished version of New Year compared to the past. While critically 
reflecting on the way their New Year festivities are no longer authentic, they imagined and 
idealized an older and more remote homeland as the location where a more genuine New 
Year tradition can be found. For U.S. Hmong, this is the natal homeland of Laos whereas for 
Hmong in Laos, China as the possible original place for a pure and more authentic tradition. 
As a result, they do not have a coherent or congruent discourse of authenticity of their New 
Year tradition in terms of its location and time. 
 The ongoing experience of authenticity and inauthenticity among Hmong is relevant 
to long standing debates about authenticity and tradition. In the Introduction of the well-
known book The Invention of Tradition, Eric Hobsbawm asserts that invented tradition is a 
set of practices, normally governed by overtly or tacitly accepted rules and of a ritual or 
symbolic nature, which seek to inculcate certain values and norms of behavior by repetition, 
which automatically implies continuity with the past (1983: 1). He further argues that 
nation-states utilized invented traditions as part of their political agenda to produce a 
unifying national identity and solidarity and homogenize certain groups of people (see also 
Babadzan 2000: 134-135). According to postcolonial scholars, the colonizers, instead of 
nation-states, are the agents which represent authenticity by establishing the contrastive 
images of the colonized in order to consolidate the racial hierarchies (Bhabha 1994; see also 
Taussig 1993). 
Because Hobsbawm emphasizes how invented traditions repeat and mimic certain 
aspects of the past as a continuation of previous cultural forms, they inherit a great amount 
of content from earlier cultural forms as they attempt to establish continuity with past 
traditions. Therefore, his theorization is still based on the assumption that there are traditions 
which are authentic that have been passed down from the past (Hobsbawm emphasizes 
rigidity to define such authentic traditions) and inauthentic (invented) which have been 
created and deployed for political purposes and nationalist agendas.  
This has led to other criticisms among different scholars. For example, Mark Phillips 
in his edited book points out, most if not all traditions could be seen as invented, at least in 
their beginningsa thought that must surely be followed by the realization that any lasting 
tradition must be in process of continual reinvention (2004: 5). Anthropologists have also 
commonly argued that tradition is the product of constant (re)construction in the process of 
reforming identity68 and the concept of authentic tradition is often illusory (Linnekin 1983: 
241) and more or less Western/European-centered (Handler 1986:2; Vann 2006). Some 
scholars defend tradition as an actual continuation of modernity, not the opposite (Graburn 
2001: 10) with constant changes and disruptions (see also Bruns 1991: 6-8). Thus, one 
should examine the impact of multiple factors and discourses about how people perceive 
authenticity and traditional identity (see Clifford 1988; Jackson 1991, 1995; see also Jackson 
and Ramirez 2009). 
In short, the scholarly literature emphasizes that trying to gauge the authenticity of 
specific cultural forms is futile, because all traditional practices that may have once been 
considered authentic must have always been invented at some point and they have constantly 
changed over time. Given that Hmong in both Laos and the United States continue to 
imagine and pursue an alternative and older place (the homeland) as the source of authentic 
tradition, it seems that authenticity cannot be achieved or established on an absolute basis. It 
is rather in constant flux as traditions are continuously modified and reconfigured under the 
pressures of a capitalist modernity or ideological state control.  
In this sense, Hmongs discourses of authenticity are gauged not only by temporality 
but also spatiality. When authenticity is understood in transnational context, geography and 
space become important for the diasporic communitys understanding of authentic traditions, 
which are usually understood to be spatially located in the ethnic homeland. Cultural 
practices among peoples in most diasporas are seen as newer modifications of older 
traditions passed down from their country of ancestral origin. In other words, time is mapped 
onto space, so that the ancestral homeland is seen as the place where ancient and old (and 
68 In the case of authenticity and tradition, scholars broadly discuss the causes of identity to claim authenticity 
in terms of cultural (Linnekin 1983; Clifford 1988), ethnic and indigenous (Jackson 1995; Jackson and Ramirez 
2009), and national (Handler 1988) identities. 
thus authentic) traditions reside and diasporic communities scattered across different 
countries are where newer (and thus less authentic) traditions have been generated.  
However, because diasporic Hmong are uncertain of the location of their ethnic 
homeland and have lost their transnational connections to it, they do not have a precise 
spatial basis for locating cultural authenticity. Therefore, when discussing their New Year 
festivals, Hmong in both Laos and the United States generate discourses about authenticity 
and tradition based on multiple territorialized places of origin (that is, both the natal and 
supposed ethnic homelands). For this reason, those who are critical about how the New Year 
is practiced in their respective country still seem to believe that once there was a correct 
form of tradition in another country in the past, and there still might be somewhere, although 
they cannot always precisely determine exact time and place. For diasporic peoples like the 
Hmong who are spatially and temporally displaced and detached from ancient (and 
supposedly unchanging) homelands, authentic tradition is never in the here and now, but 
always somewhere else and in the distant past.  
Imagined Authenticity among Hmong in Laos 
Because Hmong in Laos have significantly reduced and truncated their New Year festival 
due to financial and state ideological pressures, they do not claim decisive ownership of a 
truly authentic and traditional New Year. In particular, many Hmong in Laos expressed their 
concerns and regrets about the loss of their traditional New Year. Some of them lamented 
how the ornate dresses that used to be sewn and worn in the past by both men and women of 
all ages have disappeared in recent times, especially among the younger generations, who 
have lost traditional sewing skills.  
For example, Ying Cha, an elderly villager in his seventies, expressed his opinion 
about this generational sense of loss and how he believes that China is where Hmong still 
produce traditional New Year dresses and costumes. He said, In the past, Hmongs life was 
all about sewing. But if you look at the young generation now, they do not have any 
knowledge about it. Its not the same as Pa-tal- lang69 in China. The traditional dresses you 
see now in Laos are brought from China. Our traditional cloth making is forgotten here. 
Although Ying Cha did not elaborate on the reasons why young Hmong generations do not 
practice or know about traditional sewing, it is clear that many young female Hmong are 
busy with school, careers, or household duties and do not have time or opportunities to 
continue sewing all day at home.  
During my short visit to another Hmong village in Laos, a group of villagers sat 
around and also had a discussion about their disappearing New Year dress-making traditions. 
During the conversation, Cha Thao first stated in a critical manner, We are also lazy and 
dont make our own clothing. But thats not the only reason. He continued, Hmong do not 
have our own factory that can make a lot of traditional New Year clothes. We have to do 
everything by hand, 100 percent hand-made.  
Sia Yang, a young mother who did not know how to sew New Year dresses, joined 
our conversation and supported what Cha said. She explained that these days, Hmong 
women buy New Year dresses from the Hmong peddlers from China or at the large Hmong 
market in various cities. Sia elaborated another practical economic reason for the loss of 
New Year dress making: If dresses are really hand-made by Hmong women, they will be 
very expensive and we cannot afford them, although we know they are of high quality. If 
any factories do produce the Hmong New Year dresses and sell them at the markets, Hmong 
will buy and wear them, because they will be more affordable. But we dont have factories.  
As another Hmong women also pointed out, Hmong New Year dresses for women 
were currently sold at between 800,000 and 1,000,000 Lao Kip (60-80 British pounds) for a 
full set (hat, top, inner blouse, and skirt excluding silver jewelry), which is too expensive for 
69 Land of flower, known as Hmongs supposedly unknown, lost ethnic homeland. It does not refer to a name 
of any existing place but is speculated to be somewhere in Wenshan prefecture, southwest China. For more 
discussion on this imagined place of Hmongs ethnic homeland, see Chapter 2. 
most Hmong to afford.70 Sias statement confirms that currently in Laos, the production of 
New Year dresses by Hmong has declined, forcing them to purchase machine-made clothes 
from Hmong vendors from China or in bigger cities in Laos.  
This reminded me of an interview with elderly Hmong people in Dao Tha village, 
when I asked them whether they think their New Year practices have not changed as much 
as the Hmong New Year in the United States. Instead of making a temporal claim on 
authenticity by arguing how Hmong culture in Laos is original and more traditional than 
their U.S. co-ethnics, they felt that Hmong in neither country had preserved their cultural 
traditions properly. Most of them remarked, I dont think Laos truly carries on the real New 
Year anymore because we do not celebrate it that extensively like before. Maybe Hmong in 
China practice the real New Year, because they still continue to make a lot of traditional 
clothes by hand. 
Although Laos is an older (natal) homeland for Hmong in the contemporary diaspora, 
the changing conditions in local society and the discontinuation of past ethnic practices 
actually discouraged Lao Hmong from claiming that they are the original and authentic 
practitioners of Hmong tradition in the diaspora. Therefore, by making temporal and spatial 
assessments about their loss of authenticity over time, some Hmong in Laos vaguely 
imagined that China would be the original place where authentic Hmong cultural traditions 
have been preserved. According to Hmong in Laos, China has a greater association with the 
distant past compared to Laos as the possible location of the ancient Hmong ethnic 
homeland.  
The Natal Homeland and Authentic Tradition among Hmong in the United States 
On the other hand, Hmong in the United States make a different claim about cultural 
authenticity by imagining Laos as the place of unchanging and therefore authentic traditions. 
70 The monthly salary for jobs in the public sector, such as school teachers and administrators, was below 
500,000 Lao Kip (40 British pounds). Although some younger Hmong have such jobs, most older adults are 
still engaged in subsistence farming and do not have significant incomes. 
Hmong criticize their own New Year festival as inauthentic and no longer traditional 
because it has become excessively commercialized and commodified. Similar to how 
Hmong in Laos speculated that their New Year traditions might be practiced more 
authentically in China, this results in assumptions and idealization of Laos as the place of 
authentic, pure, and never-changing Hmong tradition.71 In this sense, their temporal 
judgments about authenticity also have a spatial/territorial dimension similar to their co-
ethnics in Laos. 
In discussing historical and theoretical perspectives on authenticity, Lionel Trilling 
notes that concerns about authenticity in modern times are based on the anxiety of a loss of 
sincerity as the evidence of ones existence. Starting from the sixteenth century, Trilling 
argues that the meaning of sincerity, which is used to define a life that is sound, pure, and 
the whole has come to refer to the absence of dissimulation or feigning or pretence (1971: 
13). He then continues a Marxist discussion of how a state of anxiety is caused by a loss of 
humanity through the domination of money in human life. He concludes that money, in 
short, is the principle of the inauthentic in human existence (124). Trillings perspective can 
contextualize the particular way Hmong in the United States have come to feel that their loss 
of authenticity and their New Year traditions are a product of the predominant capitalist 
condition under which they live.  
Because Hmong in Laos are seen as living in a less capitalistic and poorer society, 
Hmong in the United States feel the New Year there is more authentic in contrast to their 
lives dominated by money and commodities, which makes them feel less pure and less 
culturally sincere. In this sense, their discourse of authenticity is also based on economic 
status (money), not just on time and place that makes them feel the way they practice culture 
is less authentic. 
71 On the other hand, many Hmong in the United States in the next chapter claim that they have done a better 
job of preserving traditional Hmong culture because they have more economic and community resources. 
However, such discourses are far different from making authenticity claim on Hmong tradition and it is rather 
based on the way they maintain the tradition by promoting and systemically organizing it. 
For example, Keng Xiong, a state government officer in his early fifties, felt that 
since the New Year in Laos is not as commercialized as it is in the United States, Hmong 
there must be able to maintain more extensive and proper New Year celebrations. Although 
he has not returned to Laos and observed the New Year there since he left the country after 
the war, Keng still believed:  
In Laos, the Hmong New Year it is very traditional and important. Here, it is too 
Americanized We have to spend a lot of money and celebrate the New Year at different 
times toward the end of the year and in different places. So we need to charge visitors 
[admission fees at the New Year festival], to financially support it and not be in debt. But in 
Laos, they dont spend any money because they still celebrate it only once during the year, 
for more than one week, and everyone does it together.  
Other Hmong in the United States similarly expressed the firm belief that Laos 
is the location of a more authentic Hmong culture based on self-criticism of their 
materialistic and capitalistic market-oriented New Year festival. Another interviewee 
Brandon Xiong, in his mid-forties, particularly regretted the commercialization of the 
New Year in the U.S. national context and strongly reacted as follows: 
It is sad to say that nowadays the Hmong New Year in the United States is becoming 
more and more a money-making event. The Hmong New Year has been contaminated 
and it is not really about the Hmong New Year at all. If you go there, it will only be 
about selling food and other goods, just like going to a flea market. Our New Year 
cannot be like that, if you really want to preserve tradition and say, This is the real 
Hmong New Year. 
Indeed, Hmongs self-criticisms of their highly capitalistic New Year contribute to 
the idealization of the same tradition as performed in Laos. Many Hmong in the United 
States believe they have lost cultural sincerity, as their New Year tradition is determined by 
materialistic conditions and has become all about marketing, advertising, making money, 
and selling things. According to them, this contrasts to the supposedly sincerer and true 
nature of Hmong traditions in Laos, their natal homeland where people are still uncorrupted 
by money and capitalist profit.  
It is not surprising that Hmong in the United States express their faith in the Hmong 
New Year in Laos and its authentic nature by assuming that Laos is a more traditional and 
static society that keeps old traditions alive in contrast to the constantly-changing (and 
inauthentic) capitalist modernity of the United States. A Hmong woman in her forties, Ka 
Lee, also idealized her natal homeland in terms of its cultural authenticity: The New Year 
has been one of the most important parts of Hmong tradition for many generations. For the 
older generations, it is very important for them to continue to maintain that custom for 
younger generations. I know in Laos it will never change because that is the most important 
aspect of Hmong life there. 
However, such emphasis on the preservation of past cultural traditions in the natal 
homeland does not seem to consider the changing nature of ethnic cultures in Laos and the 
pressures of modernity that Hmong in that country have also come to face. Undoubtedly, 
even a traditional and less capitalistic society is never immune to change due to economic 
development and states changing policies over ethnic minority cultures. As discussed earlier, 
Hmong in Laos can no longer extensively celebrate the New Year as they had in the past and 
felt this cultural tradition had become diminished and impoverished because of their lack of 
economic means and state pressure in the name of economic equality.  
In addition, many younger Hmong in Laos are also not interested in or aware of 
traditional dress making methods and as a result, the handmade clothing production had 
ended several years ago.72 Although these are the issues at stake for Hmong in Laos, their 
co-ethnics residing in the United States do not seem to be aware of or recognize them but 
72 In fact, that is what I first noted in Dao Tha when I returned to Laos for fieldwork, six years after my 
previous visits. 
still tend to unknowingly idealize and ascribe temporal continuity and authenticity of 
tradition to Hmong living in the natal homeland of Laos. 
Authenticity Still Matters 
Such discourses among Hmong in Laos and the United States clearly reveal that both 
communities believe that they have lost their authentic Hmong New Year tradition but 
imagine that it can be found elsewhere. The search for an authentic culture has both a 
temporal and spatial dimension, since such traditions are seen as belonging to and inherited 
from the past and also geographically located in homelands. For Hmong in Laos, 
authenticity belongs to their ancient ethnic homeland of China, and for Hmong in the United 
States, it exists in the natal homeland of Laos. Diasporic Hmong imagine that in both 
countries, ethnic traditions have been better preserved, providing a temporal continuity to the 
past.   
In this sense, discourses of authenticity in the diaspora depend on the extent to which 
the conditions of the country of current residence change ethnic minority traditions and 
cultures and cause them to deviate from what they believe as past traditional and pure forms. 
In contrast to U.S. Hmong, who criticize that capitalist wealth and money corrupts a pure 
and traditional ethnic culture, Hmong in Laos actually felt that it was precisely their lack of 
money that made them unable to produce and purchase traditional New Year dresses and 
fancier materials and food and maintain their authentic cultural practices like in the past.  
Therefore, authentic traditions are not always incompatible with economic modernity 
since they can provide people with the resources necessary to maintain their ethnic 
traditions. This perhaps explains why Lao Hmong did not overtly resist or criticize the 
states control over their New Year in the name of economic equality and opportunity. If the 
promise of economic modernity ever reaches the Hmong, it would eventually enable (not 
threaten) the authentic practice of their traditions.  
For Hmong in the United States, however, capitalist American modernity has ruined 
authentic Hmong tradition with excessive commercialization and commodification, which 
provides the basis of the idealization of Laos as the host of original tradition. This implicitly 
reveals that the U.S. multicultural ideology of cultural equality may allow ethnic minorities 
to freely preserve their traditional cultures to some extent, but does not always produce 
satisfying, authentic experiences, especially under predominantly capitalistic economic 
systems. As many U.S. Hmong have indicated, cultural traditions cannot be practiced 
authentically in a market-oriented multiculturalism.  
I would therefore like to suggest that the notion of authenticity continues to matter 
not because it can be clearly measured or judged, but because it is a relative construct based 
on the positionality of diasporic communities in relation to each other (as well as to their 
homelands) through time. Thus, the discourses of authenticity become indispensible for both 
peoples in the diaspora, as well as those in natal and ethnic homelands, all of which are 
constantly subject to the changes of modernity and the nation-state as they practice their 
cultural traditions in multiple local societies. 
Diasporic Cultural Differences in Trans/National Contexts 
Substantial cultural differences have emerged between the way Hmong in the diaspora 
practice their New Year tradition depending on the national differences of the countries in 
which they reside. Because of varying levels of national economic development, there is no 
doubt that Hmong in Laos do not always have the economic means to organize large, 
extended, and elaborate New Year festivals, like their co-ethnics in the United States. 
However, this cultural differentiation in the diaspora is also based on differing national 
ideologies. The nation-states of both Laos and the United States espouse multicultural 
ideologies based on ethnic equality.  
Although both the Lao and U.S. governments emphasize equality for minorities, 
what they mean by ethnic equality is quite different and they implement it in their own ways: 
equal economic opportunity in the case of Laos versus equal cultural opportunity in the case 
of the United States. Ironically, the same ideological principle of equality for minorities 
allows the Lao state to engage in cultural control by restricting ethnic minority festivals 
(because from the states perspectives, they conflict with equal participation in economic 
productivity as well as educational development) whereas it causes the U.S. state to 
withdraw from direct cultural control (since it would conflict with the right of all ethnic 
minorities to maintain their equally-valued cultural differences).  
Hmong in Laos and the United States recognize the inevitable changes and 
modification in the way they practice the New Year tradition because of the different social, 
political, and economic conditions in their own country. Because of these changes 
influenced by national contexts in the Hmong diaspora, neither the Lao or American Hmong 
communities feel that they have properly maintained authentic New Year practices from the 
past. Therefore, diasporas can develop substantial discourses about cultural inauthenticity 
and view genuine ethnic traditions as located in the past and in homelands of natal or ethnic 
origin.  
Because diasporic Hmong have lost the original ethnic homeland to which they can 
ascribe authenticity in their traditions, they do not have a uniform discourse about 
authenticity. Instead, they have come to idealize and imagine other co-ethnics in the diaspora 
as the possible authentic community that maintains proper and unchanged traditions from 
the past. In short, the Hmong New Year is the complex site that is influenced by both 
national economic conditions and state ideologies about ethnic cultures and traditions, which 
in turn generates incongruous discourses of in/authenticity among diasporic members. 
Chapter 8. Discursive Fragmentation and Hierarchical Positioning of Diasporas  
During an interview in his large living room in Sacramento, Moua Xiong, an elderly Hmong 
man in his mid-seventies, was explaining to me why he believes Hmong in Laos and the 
United States have remained similar despite their long separation since the Vietnam War in 
two countries with remarkable national differences: 
Our culture depends on our place of residence because Hmong have no homeland. We do 
not have a country of our own, so we dont have a special place in America where we can 
practice Hmong rituals like funerals. Whatever we want to do here, we need to borrow a 
place from them [by which he meant, the government, non-Hmong ruling group]. This is 
the same in Laos, as Hmong must always follow what they require. There has been no real 
change. [emphasis mine] 
Moua Xiong clearly noted that Hmong in Laos and the United States are not that 
different from each other because as a people without their own country, they have to remain 
a permanent ethnic minority in any nation-state and must seek permission from them. 
However, although Moua indicated that Hmongs positionality as a minority has never 
changed, this can also mean that diasporic Hmong living in different countries have not 
remained the same. Although Hmong are similarly positioned as ethnic minorities 
everywhere, they are subject to the power structure of different countries. Therefore, their 
minority experiences as diasporic Hmong are not homogeneous but refracted through the 
nation-state. This can eventually cause them to position themselves hierarchically in the 
diaspora by constructing national differences in the process of imagining and differentiating 
themselves from their co-ethnics living abroad.  
National Differences and Hierarchical Ordering of Diasporas 
Many Hmong in Laos and the United States reflect on the extent to which their ethnic 
communities have become different after living apart for more than three decades. They 
predominantly compared and discussed national economic differences between the two 
countries and the resulting impact on their lives. Almost all Hmong I interviewed, regardless 
of their age, gender, and personal experiences, noted that the two countries in which Hmong 
live have remarkable disparities in terms of national economic growth, development, and 
living standards and their resulting global economic status. Indeed, differences in the 
national economic status of Laos and the United States may be the most obvious and 
straightforward way for them to make status distinctions among Hmong in the two countries.  
However, internal diasporic hierarchies are not simply based on economic 
development and national wealth, but are also a product of other types of social positioning, 
which do not always privilege the United States over Laos. This is especially true in the case 
of Hmong in Laos, who do not consider themselves less important or inferior to the Hmong 
community in the United States simply because Laos suffers from an impoverished national 
economy.  
While acknowledging the large disparities in economic status between the two 
countries, Hmong discuss how national differences have produced cultural differences in the 
diaspora. In turn, these comparative comments serve an important basis for Hmong to 
hierarchically position themselves in relation to each other, producing contrastive claims 
about how their country provides better or superior conditions of living over the other. I 
refer to this as discursive fragmentation in the diaspora since Hmong in different countries 
do not agree about their relative assessments about each other. 
This chapter explores the extent to which national differences are believed to cause 
diasporic people to competitively position themselves in a hierarchical order by focusing on 
the discourses of Hmong in Laos and the United States and the way they construct national 
differences. Not only do they critically ascribe different negative cultural characteristics to 
each other, they attribute them to different aspects of the two nation-states which they regard 
unfavorably. As a result, certain national images and characteristics are created, such that 
U.S. Hmong are less respectful, unhealthy, spoiled while having less individual social 
freedom under the dominant capitalist American system. On the other hand, Hmong in the 
United States ascribe the images of politically corrupted, economically and culturally 
deprived to their co-ethnics in Laos by referring to its Communist government and 
economically impoverished condition as the determinant of such characteristics. These 
national differences are believed to be the main cause of the cultural and political differences 
between the two groups of Hmong and are used as the basis for claiming a superior 
hierarchical position in the diaspora.  
Thus, the way they make references to the economic, cultural, and political aspects of 
the nation-state as the manifested contributor of differences among diasporas is not self-
evident but markedly relational. In other words, diasporic Hmong represent their countries 
not as coherent nations in entirety but through the selective discourses. Instead of being 
nationalistic or simply adopting national agendas, they rather use a particular feature of the 
nation-state to make evaluative generalizations about themselves and their co-ethnics. The 
nation here is seen in relation to the diaspora. 
In this manner, not only do Hmong imagine transnational continuities in their 
diasporic community based on shared cultural customs and ethnic solidarity, they also 
imagine differences between their separate national communities. They do not agree on the 
nature of these national differences in the diaspora, leading to discursive fragmentation. 
Nonetheless, such fragmented discourses based on transnational relationships across national 
borders make diasporic Hmong more conscious of their own lives in their current nation-
states of residence. Thus, diasporas and nation-states are not antagonistic but are relational 
constructs that inform each other.  
Perceptions of National Economic Differences 
The gap in national economic status between Laos and the United States is probably the 
most prominent difference that both Hmong communities address when comparing 
differences among each other. Because of the salient and factual national economic 
differences, there are some initial agreements on them among the members.   
A De Facto Difference: Wealthy America Versus Poor Laos  
The perceptions that Hmong in the United States have about their co-ethnics in Laos are 
predominantly based on differences of national economic status. The higher economic status 
of their country is what U.S. Hmong affiliate with the most and is an obvious means to 
compare themselves to Hmong in Laos. For instance, Lena Thao, in her late twenties, clearly 
noted that the economic differences between Hmong in Laos and the United States is the 
most noteworthy, a sentiment shared by many other U.S. Hmong. She said: 
There are a lot of differences, like economic growth. After we came to America, we have 
become assimilated to a wealthy society. But in Laos, its still a Communist, poor country 
so whatever resources or money they have are what their relatives in the U.S. sent. And 
thats all they have. I have friends who went to Laos to visit. They said that Hmong there 
are still living like how they lived 30 or 40 years ago.  
Economic disparities between the two countries were frequently emphasized during 
other interviews. Malina Xiong, in her forties who visited Laos a couple years ago, first 
mentioned that she is still very sad, whenever I think about Hmongs poverty in Laos. She 
shared her observation from her previous trip to Hmong villages in the northern part of Laos. 
To her, poverty is the biggest problem for Hmong in Laos, which has also become strikingly 
different from her own life in the United States. Malina continued: 
Its obvious that poverty is everywhere back in my country73 [Laos]. Some of the major 
cities may be growing and people move there but their national economy is still the 
same. The population grows but there is no work for them. [] Also, when people live 
73 Malina constantly referred Laos as my country after clearly defining that she feels the United States is her 
home country (not technically same thing as homeland) since she belongs there. However, she often called both 
Laos and the United States as her home country in a distinguishable manner. 
in the city, they dont have a good school system for kids. If the city kids cannot access 
good education, it could be even worse in the rural areas. 
Like Malina, many Hmong in United States continued to refer to Laos as their 
home and my country. This is an important aspect of the Hmong diaspora that reveals 
that Hmong in the United States are still emotionally connected to their former homeland 
and co-ethnics residing there. However, this emotional affiliation with the co-ethnics in the 
diaspora coexists with salient disparities of national economies that produce perceptions of 
considerable inequality between the two communities. In a different interview Leng Thao 
also called Laos his own country, even though he previously defined the United States as the 
country where he belongs. Based on his trip to Laos in early 2000, Leng succinctly 
compared Laos and the United States in terms of economic differences. He said, If you are 
not lazy, you wont die in this country. You have choices to go to school, to work, and you 
can do whatever you can to earn money. But back in our country, because of the Lao 
economy, you dont have choices to make things work out. Its very different.  
In fact, some Hmong interviewees in Laos supported those views of U.S. Hmong and 
had positive assessments of their counterparts in the United States, acknowledging that the 
greater socioeconomic development of the United States has led to a higher state of general 
knowledge among Hmong living in that country. For instance, Poa Moua pointed out that 
U.S. Hmongs higher economic status can also produce more advanced knowledge and 
better intellectual capacity among them, although the causal relations between the two are 
not always self-evident. Poa said, The U.S. is a very rich country and here [Laos] is a 
developing country. I think people living in a rich, developed country also have higher 
thoughts and better ideas. But people in developing countries do not yet develop their 
knowledge, so they have lower understanding. 
Likewise, Lee Yang explained how differences in national socioeconomic levels in 
the two countries certainly influence individual knowledge and skills and the way Hmong 
make a living: 
Since Hmong have been living in the U.S., they have higher knowledge, because they 
have a lot of educational institutions. They can also work in various places. Living style 
and dietary culture have also become different. In Laos, on a daily basis, if we want to 
eat, we must do physical labor by using our hands and feet. But for them, if they want to 
making a living, they use their brains and knowledge [shomong].  
In a series of interviews with Hmong in both Laos and the United States, it is commonly 
assumed that national socioeconomic conditions determine the way people make a living, 
manage their social and familial relationships, and even how they think (in terms of ideas 
and knowledge). Therefore, some Hmong in Laos seemed to agree with U.S. Hmong about 
their superior positioning based on global economic hierarchies. However, other Hmong in 
Laos did not assume that the greater economic status of the United States simply produced 
benefits for Hmong living there and pointed out some of the negative aspects of living in a 
country with economic wealth. This produces discursive fragmentation where different 
diasporic communities do not agree about their relative positioning in relation to each other. 
Rich Body, Poor Heart: The Other Side of National Economic Hierarchies 
Although Hmong in both Laos and United States recognize the clear national economic 
differences between them, Lao Hmong differentiate between economic wealth and general 
social well-being, claiming that the latter does not always correlate with the power of the 
national economy. According to them, simply because the United States is wealthy, it does 
not mean that the country provides the highest level of social well-being for its residents. In 
fact, this perceived discrepancy between national economic growth and individual well-
being is encapsulated in the frequent expression, poor heart ([tuk nai-jjai]), rich 
(comfortable) body ([tua sabai]), which refers to U.S. Hmong.  
In contrast, Lao Hmong characterize themselves as having a rich (comfortable) heart 
([sabai74 jjai]), poor (tired) body ([tua meu-oi]). This discourse that contrasts life in the 
advanced capitalist United States with life in the underdeveloped Lao national economy is 
shared among many Hmong in Laos and some of their co-ethnics in the United States. For 
example, in Laos, a middle-aged male farmer, Tou Yang said:  
The good thing about living in the United States is the value of money since the American 
Dollar has a higher value than Lao Kip. But inside their heart, Hmong in America are poor 
([tuk nai-jjai]). Here, we cant make much money, but our heart is comfortable ([sabai 
jjai]). Its up to you here [Laos]. If you want to work, you can work, but if you dont, you 
dont have toLiving a leisurely life is fine. 
This view was shared by some Hmong residing in the United States, like Chi Her, 
who has been working at a local assembly plant for a number of years. Like many other 
Hmong adults, born and raised in Laos, Chi has living experiences in both Laos and the 
United States, which serve the basis of his perception and judgment of the difference 
between the two countries. He spoke to me about the overall national differences between 
Laos and the United States by also employing the rich body, poor heart discourse: 
The life of Hmong in the U.S. is very different from those in Laos. In Laos, everything is 
sabai (comfortable). Things are up to you and you can do anything you want in the 
mountains, hills, and fields. You can also own your gardens and dont have to waste 
money paying taxes. The only difficulty is that the national economy is still undeveloped. 
This country, America, is sabai in terms of food. But things are not easy here and there are 
many bills to pay. You may earn a lot but you also have to spend as much as you earn. This 
gives many people headaches and hardship.  
74 Sabai in the Laotian language is used frequently in various occasions with positive meanings of well-being, 
happy, comfortable, sound, and good. It is also a key term that Hmong in the two countries repeatedly use to 
talk about their national differences.   
Problems of American Wealth: Discourses of Immorality among Hmong in Laos 
Despite the incommensurable and obvious national economic gaps between Laos and the 
United States, diasporic Hmongs perceptions about them further diverge in contrasting 
ways. The comments that Hmong in Laos had about the changes of behavior and values of 
the U.S. Hmong were often critical in nature, ascribing the changes negatively to the highly 
developed economic status of the United States. They believe that U.S. Hmong are less 
altruistic and more selfish as they have become Americanized, referring to their 
predominantly economy-oriented lifestyles. In so doing, Lao Hmong seem to make a rather 
arbitrary causal connection between the higher national economic status of the United States 
and the negative characteristics it supposedly produces among U.S. Hmong.  
Many of my interviewees in Laos attributed the perceived cultural differences 
between themselves and U.S. Hmong to economic inequalities between the two countries. 
For example, Xou Her, who recently bought a tuk tuk (a commonly-used motorized 
rickshaw and the main form of public transportation) with his relatives remittances from the 
United States, spoke critically about how life in the United States had changed the behavior 
of his relatives: 
In the past, we lived together so our nitsai [nature/personality] was the same. But now, they 
moved to America and have lived separately for a while, so they have forgotten about us in 
Laos. If I ask my old friends in the U.S. who used to live in the same hometown and hang 
out together, We are old friends, can you help me financially?, they would answer, Oh, I 
have a lot of debts. Although I have cars and a house, I dont have money to help you. 
Their nature has changed. They are forgetting us.  
Xou Her also added that he is more concerned about the future generations of Hmong 
in the United States who might eventually become detached from the Hmong in Laos and 
stop caring about them. The U.S. Hmongs relative economic wealth has given the 
impression to Hmong in Laos that their co-ethnics social relationships and even cultural 
behavior have been changed by living in a wealthier country and they no longer share the 
value of helping, caring, and supporting others with money. 
This is not merely a personal account, but also has broader implications for the larger 
diasporic group, since helping each other economically is believed as an essential part of 
being ethnically Hmong. In other interviews, similar critical comments were frequently 
made in terms of how Hmong in the United States have become selfish and less caring in 
contrast to the way Hmong are supposed to be. According to Pao Her, a farmer in his late 
fifties, Hmong are supposed to look after each other, in terms of our living condition and to 
make sure everything is all right with our families, relatives, and friends. I only know a little 
about America, but they do not seem to know how to live together and take care of each 
other. They have become Americans and they live like Americans.  
Likewise, many Hmong in Laos attributed other negatively-perceived cultural 
differences of U.S. Hmong to the greater economic status of the United States. As Cha Lee 
in his fifties, who has been working at a district office, stated, Hmong in Laos and the 
United States have come to think differently. Hmong in Laos respect people more. In the 
United States, the Hmong community there has changed and does not have much respect 
anymore since they are economically developed (patanaa).  
In a different interview, Tou Yang, a farmer in his late forties, similarly and critically 
pointed out that the way Hmong in the United States manage social relationships is less 
emotional and intimate but more formal and strictly organized, reflecting the general 
characteristic of American sociality. While explaining national and cultural differences, he 
opined as follows: 
Oh, everything is different [between Hmong in Laos and the United States]. Nothing can 
be similar. For example, here [in Laos], if I want to visit somebody to have fun, talk, and 
be with them, I can certainly do that anytime. But there [the United States], its 
impossible. If you just visit your friends without giving them a phone call [advanced 
notice], they will close their door in front of your face. So different  
 In a different interview, Kong Her, a farmer in his late fifties, had more poignant 
reaction to how Hmong in the United States have changed in the way they treat and respect 
elderly Hmong: 
Hmong in the U.S. go to study, get educated, and live in a place where they dont see any 
relatives or family around. All they do is go to school, come back, and study. So even 
when the grandparents go to visit their grandchildren they dont take care of their 
grandparents anymore. They would say, Oh, why do these old people come to stay with 
us for this long? Go away75 
In fact, Kong Her explicitly compared the U.S. situation to Laos by saying, In Laos, we 
dont act like that. I would say we still know how to love other Hmong and how to respect 
their grandparents and great-grandparents. Over there [in the United States], what kids learn 
is only English and they no longer respect the Hmong language and culture. 
Therefore, many Hmong in Laos do not believe that the superior economic 
development of the United States always leads to positive outcomes for their ethnic 
community and instead, they point to the negative consequences of living in a wealthy 
society. Such comparative evaluations allow them to claim a higher cultural status in the 
diasporic order by indicating that Hmong in Laos have maintained proper (respectful) 
cultural behavior and are therefore better than U.S. Hmong, who are losing what are 
considered to be traditional cultural values because of the corrosive effect of American 
75 Although Kongs statement appears subjective and somewhat biased, his negative perception is not 
completely imagined but based on the information that he learned from his relatives and acquaintances, who 
actually visited their families in the United States and shared their experiences. 
society and its excessive modernization.  
However, such discourses among Lao Hmong about their co-ethnics in the United 
States directly conflict with how U.S. Hmong portray themselves, producing considerable 
discursive fragmentation between the two diasporic communities. They strongly emphasize 
how they use their superior economic status to financially help and economically develop the 
Hmong community in Laos. Many Hmong in the United States perceive the Hmong in Laos 
as subjects who need the financial, educational, and charitable assistance that is enabled by 
their economic power. Indeed, their discourses about national economic differences 
emphasize how they transform their economic superiority into a moral consciousness based 
on ethnic sympathy toward their co-ethnics in Laos.  
The Power of Wealth: Discourses of Morality among Hmong in the United States 
Hmong in the United States perceive themselves as members of a nation-state at the top of 
the global economic order and recognize their overall higher status compared to their poorer 
compatriots in Laos. They often regard their community as the center of the Hmong diaspora 
because of the greater socioeconomic and political power of the United States compared to 
other countries in which Hmong live and feel that they can possibly assist them to develop 
their national economies and promote unity among the Hmong diaspora.  
Although U.S. Hmong often emphasized their lower socioeconomic status in the 
United States and how they suffer from economic marginalization in the local contexts, 
when asked to reflect on the lives of their co-ethnics in Laos (and elsewhere), they feel well-
off in comparison as members of a wealthy nation-state. They are therefore empowered 
internally within their diasporic community. In this manner, U.S. Hmongs nationalized 
economic discourse and relative diasporic positioning also reproduce the global hierarchy of 
nation-states. To some extent, Hmong in the United States seem to have internalized 
American discourses of the countrys economic power and the need to assist the less 
fortunate living in underdeveloped countries. For example, Steve Thao, a professional man 
in his forties, said the following: 
I believe that all eyes are on the Hmong in the United States. I havent been to China, but 
from the stories that I heard from other people, when Hmong Americans visit them, Hmong 
in China are very happy and they are waiting for us to support them. I heard they even call 
us Hmong from the big land. The United States is not necessarily that geographically big, 
but its a prestigious and powerful country. Hmong in Thailand and Laos also want the 
support, contribution, and leadership from the U.S. So if I just generalize, I would say 
Hmong in the U.S. will be the leading group of Hmong [in the diaspora] in the years to 
come. 
Similarly, Lena Thao also confirmed this view of U.S. Hmongs capacity to help 
their co-ethnics by saying, We have Hmong [in the U.S.] serving in higher offices and law 
agencies, or the United Nations, working for policies for global Hmong people. So I would 
say Hmong in the U.S. have more economic means and political power to hold the 
leadership and help the whole Hmong community.  
Even some young U.S.-born Hmong Americans who have no experience living in 
Laos similarly compared the economic and political conditions of the United States and Laos 
and were convinced that their country is the most important community among the Hmong 
in the world. Lily Moua, a female college student, explained why the Hmong in the United 
States should play a leading role as a representative of the entire Hmong diaspora because of 
their economic development and democratic capabilities: 
I would honestly say that America has more economic resources and definitely has more 
money than Laos. We have perhaps better laws, too and living in democracy, we have a lot 
more rights as citizens and are more educated as opposed to people in Laos. They are 
passive and do what they were told by the government, especially the Hmong women and 
children, who are in a weaker position. 
  In fact, a good number of Hmong in the United States felt that their superior access to 
resources in the country should be the basis for assisting and looking after other less 
developed, and poorer Hmong communities elsewhere in the diaspora. When I asked Hmong 
people in the United States, I received similar answers, such as the following of Peng Xiong, 
another professional in his early thirties: 
I think in terms of education, experiences, and in terms of having more freedom, Hmong 
Americans are in a better position to impact and [influence] policy changes, non-
governmental actions, and even governmental actions in the world (). I think we do 
have those advantages () and I really hope that Hmong Americans take leading roles 
and reach out other Hmong folks in the world. [emphasis mine] 
In a different interview, Ying Thao, a former veteran from the Vietnam war in his sixties, 
also had such benevolent sentiments: 
I think the leading role [in the diaspora] should be taken by the United States in the 
future, because there are Hmong who care and look after Hmong groups everywhere in 
the world. They [Hmong Americans] have a good idea of how to communicate with 
other Hmong in the world. In some rural areas and the countryside in China, we still 
have Hmong who are very poor and have no education. We feel for them and Hmong 
here will have a good idea about how to help them.  
Likewise, Yia Lor, a real estate agent in her thirties, tended to idealize the overall 
sociopolitical and economic conditions in the United States by saying, Honestly, I would 
say America is the most important country in the world, because we are in the American 
tradition that has more kindness and fairness to teach and learn how we can [financially] 
help other Hmong in the world. If they were to find people to represent the Hmong 
community, I think it would be better to have someone from the U.S. 
  Keng Xiong, a man in his early fifties working at a state enforcement office, directly 
related lack of political freedom to poverty (lack of economic freedom) in Laos by pointing 
out that Hmong in Laos still suffer economically because the Communist Lao government 
discourages and controls efforts by U.S. Hmong to financially assist their co-ethnics and 
improve their economic situation. As former refugees that fought against the Communist Lao 
state during the Vietnam War and fled the country, a number of Hmong in the United States 
do not feel free to return to help their co-ethnics in Laos, especially for the long term and 
through visible participation in Hmongs everyday lives. Keng expressed this concern and 
elaborated that the difficulties to improve Hmongs economic status in Laos are caused by 
political conditions in Laos: 
I would say, if Laos were free like any other countries, we would go over there and help 
the Hmong financially, making their lives easier. But because that country is not free for 
us to go help Hmong or educate and teach them, thats why they are so poor. If we can 
help them to change, their life in Laos will be better. [] So Hmong in the U.S., we 
have a better life here. 
In fact, it is generally known that international NGOs (Non-Governmental 
Organizations) in Laos must closely work with and conform to governmental policies 
and regulations. There is a very informal but taken-for-granted expression describing 
this situation: In Laos, NGO is really GO [Governmental Organizations]. Therefore, 
U.S. Hmongs discussions of national economic differences between Laos and the 
United States not only lead to moral discourses about assisting less fortunate peoples, 
they are further developed into discourses about the lack of political freedom in Laos, 
as will be discussed below.  
The discussions of national economic differences between Laos and the United 
States are further developed into the discourse of freedom, between U.S. economic 
freedom to pursue economic opportunities and individual social freedom from 
capitalist economic controls for Hmong in Laos. The contested definitions of freedom 
reveal how the same concept of freedom is deployed differently when refracted 
through different national contexts, although the concept is difficult for Hmong 
themselves to clearly define. 
Contested Economic Freedoms and National Hierarchies 
Hmong in both Laos and the United States repeatedly mentioned freedom when comparing 
their lives, claiming that they enjoyed greater freedom than their co-ethnics counterparts, 
therefore positioning their community as better and higher in the diaspora. However, what 
the Hmong mean by freedom is quite different in each country and is influenced by the 
different economic, political, and social conditions of the nation-state, revealing how the 
hierarchical ordering of the Hmong diaspora remains fundamentally contested and unsettled 
based on discursive fragmentation. 
In contrast to scholars concerned with universal definitions of freedom and 
philosophical debates, anthropologists focus on how freedom is manifested in social 
relationships and contexts. In this sense, freedom in anthropological perspective is 
commonly defined as a relational and contextual concept and the antithesis to unfreedom76 
(Leach 1963: 74). This means that when people evaluate the degree of freedom that they 
possess, they usually do so by comparing themselves to what is not freedom among other 
social groups or different societies. In fact, the understanding among U.S. Hmong about the 
unfreedom of their co-ethnics in Laos is what enables them to positively reflect on and 
appreciate the greater freedoms they enjoy as American citizens and permanent residents in a 
democratic and capitalist society. Not surprisingly, Lao Hmong have contrasting discourses 
76 Leach defines unfreedom as a state of servitude. 
about freedom which again emphasize the negative aspects of living in the American, 
capitalist nation-state compared to Laos. 
Hmong in Laos: Social Freedom from Capitalist Economic Systems 
Hmong in Laos claim that they have more social freedom in their country, ironically because 
of their underdeveloped economy and the non-capitalistic, subsistence-farming economy 
under which most of them live. They compared the freedoms they enjoy to what they 
perceived to be the absence of freedom among their co-ethnics in the United States who live 
in an oppressive, over-worked capitalist economic system that leaves little time for leisure. 
For example, for Nia Her, a young farmer in his mid thirties, village life in Laos allowed him 
considerably more flexible work schedules unlike the American capitalist system based on 
wage-labor and control over worker productivity: 
For me, Laos is a better country for living, because I can freely live a natural life and go 
wherever I want. In America, it is a life constrained by time. Every day at 7:00am, you 
must go to work. If you miss just one hour, they wont pay you for that hour. Also, if I 
want to go visit my relatives here in Laos, I can of course go anytime. But for them [in the 
U.S.], it is difficult to do that, because they only have one day off from work each week. 
This means that they will have just one or two weeks to visit their relatives over the entire 
year. So living in my own village here in Laos is better.  
Another interviewee Toua Her, also a farmer in his forties, compared the two 
countries in terms of economic disparities. He did acknowledge that their economic lives in 
Laos are insufficient since they still rely on farming and added that even some wage-
workers in Laos are day laborers without a secure and stable income while workers in the 
United States earn a monthly salary in addition to receiving benefits. However, when 
comparing his country and the United States, Toua actually claimed that lack of individual 
freedom, implicitly defined as free time for leisure, is the problem of an American capitalist 
economy based on wage-labor. He explained: 
When you live as a farmer in Laos, even if you just stay home because you dont want to 
work, no one will complain or scold you. As long as you harvest your crops and keep 
sufficient rice in storage for the rest of the year, you will have enough freedom to do what 
you want. Over there in the U.S., you get upset easily [ook jja], because if you take one day 
off, your salary will be reduced right away. You have to worry whether you have enough 
money to pay for many things all the time. [emphasis mine]  
Based on this observation, despite the lack of economic wealth in Laos, Toua felt that 
life in Laos is much better. It is more comfortable here. 
The discourses of freedom among Hmong in Laos again emphasize the negative 
aspects of the wealthy American capitalist system, which restricts freedom to socialize and 
pursue a leisurely life. Although they acknowledge global economic hierarchies between the 
United States and Laos, they do not perceive themselves to be subordinated or inferior in 
such a system. In fact, they regard their own economic system as superior in regards to 
freedom.  
The underdeveloped Lao economy and the countrys relatively weak government 
also provide other (economic) freedoms for Lao Hmong as well, since they are less subject 
to governmental and bureaucratic control in terms of paying bills and taxes. In fact, during 
my fieldwork, I frequently observed that the local government in Laos has recently started 
collecting utility (electricity) bills. Hmong in the village explained that billing is a relatively 
new practice and they were not familiar with it in the past. However, the Lao government 
bill collectors did not strictly enforce or effectively collect money from each household. 
When the bill collectors went around the Hmong village on their motorbikes, they shouted to 
people in the house from the street, Pay your utility bills for the past month You havent 
paid for several months. Your fees are now 25,000 Lao Kip (two British pounds)  
In response to such requests, Hmong from inside their house would simply respond, 
I have no money yet. Please come back next time, Ill pay then The collectors would then 
soon leave the house and move to the next one (which would likely respond similarly) 
without making another appointment or leaving a warning notice. Currently, paying bills and 
taxes are indeed a very informal and flexible practice for both Hmong residents and 
government agents in Laos, which also shows the lesser degree of subjugation to 
governmental control compared to the United States. 
  In this case, the contrast is not between completely different economic systems of 
Laos and the United States, since both countries have utility bills and taxes like other 
countries. It is more about how Hmong in Laos do not yet feel completely subjected to the 
national economic system, mainly because of the lax and ineffective enforcement by state 
power. This of course does not mean that Lao Hmong experience no state economic control 
at all. As discussed in Chapter 6, the Lao state has effectively imposed cultural control over 
the Hmong New Year celebration in the name of promoting national economic development 
and productivity.  
Therefore, it is still questionable to what extent Lao Hmong will continue to 
reconcile their national poverty (lack of economic power and freedom to pursue wealth) 
with their relative social freedom from the dominant capitalist economic system as the 
country continues to develop economically. Perhaps Hmong in Laos may not necessarily be 
completely free from economic pressures (such as keeping work schedules or paying taxes 
and bills) but they subjectively feel more freedom compared to the much more strict U.S. 
economic system to which their co-ethnics are subject. Such seemingly simple national 
economic differences further indicate that Hmong in Laos partly affiliate themselves with 
the nation-state (its relatively less developed economic condition) and use it to position 
themselves in the diasporic hierarchy by comparing their lives with their co-ethnics abroad. 
This may help alleviate the frustrations about national poverty that Lao Hmong have 
persistently expressed (see Chapter 3). 
Hmong in the United States: Economic Freedom and Political Rights 
On the other hand, Hmong in the United States believe that the underdeveloped national 
economy in Laos lacks economic freedom to maintain a decent standard of living and that 
restricts consumption of goods. Most Hmong in the United States did not consider their 
current economic lives and working conditions to be oppressive or exploitive but rather took 
it for granted as members of a hegemonic capitalist system. Instead, they cherished their 
economic power and freedom as a most essential right that enables them to enjoy a better 
life, which seemed to mainly refer to materialistic affluence and financial power as 
consumers in a capitalist market.  
Such perceptions again reveal their discursive fragmentation with Hmong in Laos, 
who perceive U.S. Hmong to be less free because they lack the social freedom from the 
constraints of wage-labor and the capitalist system. The perceptions of Hmong living in the 
United States generate interesting and fundamentally different, if not opposed, 
understandings of the concept of economic and social freedom as claimed by Hmong in 
Laos. Ultimately, Hmong in the United States claim that their country is better because it 
provides greater economic freedom compared to Laos, thus reversing their hierarchical 
positioning in the diaspora by using a different definition of freedom. 
Mee Lee, a retired Hmong woman in her late fifties, viewed the wealth of the United 
States as the basic way to gain freedom, which she implied was based on economic means 
and income. Because for Hmong living in the United States, freedom to fully participate in a 
capitalist economy and earn wages is an unquestionable and fundamental right, it is obvious 
for them that their country allows that freedom as a highly developed economy. Mee said, 
The difference is that here [United States], its a free country so you can do whatever you 
want to make money as long as you dont do anything bad. But in Laos, you have to work 
really hard [because its a poor country]. Of course, if you work hard, you will feel free, too, 
but their country is just too poor and not the same as here. 
Interestingly, her statement directly contrasts with the way in which Hmong in Laos 
characterized their co-ethnics in the United States as lacking freedom to live a leisurely life 
in a capitalist system. In another interview, Neng Vang, an insurance sales agent in his late 
forties, also pointed out that Hmong people in Laos lacked economic freedom. By stating 
that nobody can stop people from pursuing and achieving their economic goals in the 
United States, he emphasized how education can lead to economic freedom, such as running 
a business, making money, and improving ones standard of living. Since Neng noted that 
educational opportunities are not readily available in Laos, he simultaneously implied that 
the country is in a lower position than the United States:  
Most of my family and other Hmong in Laos do not have education. They just go to the 
farm and work in the fields. Of course they dont have freedom. This country, you have 
education and you know how to run a business and make money. Thats freedom. You can 
go to school and nobody can stop you from making your dream come true. [emphasis mine]  
  The tendency of Hmong in the United States to emphasize economic freedom 
indicates that they do not find their current national economic system oppressive, which can 
also reveal how they have become subject to capitalist national hegemonies to some extent. 
Indeed, most U.S. Hmong consider the economic freedom of accumulated wealth to be an 
indispensible precondition for other kinds of freedom. This resembles Zygmunt Baumans 
discussion on freedom, which defines individualistic freedom in the context of capitalism. 
Bauman argues that Modern renderings of freedom and definitions of capitalism are 
articulated in such a way that they presume the necessity of an unbreakable connection 
between the two and make the supposition that one can exist without the other logically 
flawed, if not absurd (1988:44).  
Indeed, capitalism is fundamental to discourses about freedom and unfreedom, 
especially for diasporic Hmong. For U.S. Hmong, capitalism provides them with the 
freedom to pursue economic opportunities whereas Lao Hmong cherish their social freedom 
from capitalist control. In short, Hmong in both countries maintain critical perspectives on 
their co-ethnics relative lack of freedom (influenced by their own national economic 
condition), thus reproducing hierarchies on the basis of the different national discourses in 
which they are embedded. Such contested discourses reveal how the same concept of 
freedom is deployed differently when refracted through different national contexts, 
regardless of what their actual economic living conditions are really like. 
Cultural Hierarchies among the Hmong Diaspora 
The Perceived Cultural Superiority of the Hmong in Laos 
In contrast to national economic status, ethnic culture was considered especially important 
for Hmong in Laos when positioning themselves in relation to their counterparts in the 
United States. In contrast to Hmong in the United States, who regarded their modernity as an 
ethnic asset that enables them to better preserve and transmit a perceived traditional Hmong 
culture, Hmong in Laos tended to feel that it was precisely this American modernity that had 
caused their co-ethnics to lose traditional Hmong ethnicity and proper cultural practices.  
The majority of Hmong in Laos felt that different national social contexts have 
produced significant differences in how Hmong practice and perform their cultural practices. 
They commonly pointed out that lack of ethnic villages and availability of communal 
facilities among Hmong in the United States limits their ability to perform certain customs 
properly. As a good example, funeral rituals based on cow sacrifice were commonly brought 
up as an essential part of funeral practices.  
Sacrificing cows in public spaces in front of the house is considered the highlight of 
the funeral ritual, because it is believed that the cows soul is connected to and should be 
exchanged with the dead bodys soul through the ritual. However, in the U.S. social 
environment, animal slaughter in public spaces for private purposes is not tolerated and 
Hmong cannot perform the required ritual of cow sacrifice at the funeral site. This limitation 
and difference were illustrated and compared, for instance, in the interview with Kong Her 
in Laos, a man in his late fifties: 
Our relatives have been living in the U.S. a long time so whatever they do is like what other 
Americans do. For example, in our funeral tradition, when someone passes away, Hmong 
Americans can only go to a community center for the funeral that they rented for the ritual. 
But it is not their real home or village, and they dont own that place. For us Hmong in 
Laos, this is not allowedfunerals must be done at home in the village. 
The emphasis on proper practice of funeral customs was also similarly made by 
Chong Lee, another man in his fifties, during our interview: 
In the U.S., Hmong cannot practice our culture in the same way as we do in Laos, for 
instance, in terms of funerals. When someone passes away [because the casket is placed in 
a community hall instead of a private home], anybody can show up at any time whenever it 
is convenient [regardless of clan affiliation]. So the family cannot properly pay respects 
toward the deceased first. Usually, Hmong should go outside the house to sacrifice the cow, 
but Hmong Americans cannot do it outside, so have to stay inside everyday until the end of 
the funeral. So they no longer really know who the Hmong truly are.  
Such discourses about cultural differences in funeral practices caused by the constraints of 
living in the United States imply that Hmong in Laos have done a better job of apparently 
preserving Hmong traditions and that the country therefore enables them to practice a more 
proper ethnic culture. By critically stating that Hmong in the United States no longer know 
who the Hmong truly are, Chong is implicitly placing them lower in a cultural and diasporic 
hierarchy of authenticity. 
In fact, because the United States prohibits ritual sacrifice of animals in public 
spaces, during a funeral in Sacramento that I attended, the cow sacrifice was performed 
separately on an American farm, where a Hmong family had purchased cows for ritual 
slaughter. At the proper moment during the funeral, the clan representative directing the 
proceedings called a group of Hmong men on the farm to initiate the ritual sacrifice. Later, 
about seven cow carcasses were delivered in a truck to the funeral site (a community hall 
named the Hmong Palace Church, rented for the purpose of conducting funerals) for 
butchering, cooking, and consumption by the guests. This is a good example of how 
diasporic Hmong living as ethnic minorities in different nation-states have come to conform 
to different national regulations and modify their cultural practices accordingly. 
In addition to funeral customs, a number of my interviewees in Laos claimed that 
they also conduct other cultural practices more properly and traditionally than Hmong in 
the United States. According to Cha Thao, an elderly man in his late sixties, the major rituals 
of the New Year are also better maintained among the Lao Hmong community: 
Hmong in Laos perform our culture better and more beautifully. Hmong here always 
celebrate the New Year between December and January, because it depends on the 
completion of the harvest and when we have new, fresh rice. This is a correct way to 
practice the New Year. In America, its different because they celebrate the New Year on 
various dates during different months. So I think Laos is more important and better. 
Similarly, Kia Her, who discussed the relative positionality of Hmong communities in Laos 
and the United States, also believed that the U.S. Hmong community does not sufficiently 
maintain what she considers to be traditional Hmong culture. Kia said, I think Laos is more 
important than the U.S. A lot of Hmong in the U.S. said that Hmong culture there has 
changed as the Hmong went to live with them [Americans]. In my opinion, their culture in 
the U.S. is impoverished [tuk yak77]. Whatever they practice, it is not the same as Laos 
anymore. 
However, it is important to note that Kias comparative cultural assessment was 
made after he initially discussed national economic differences that position Laos in a much 
lower and impoverished condition than the United States. According to him: 
Laos is very different from the U.S. There are not enough things to eat, and not enough 
jobs. In the U.S., whether you have education or not, theres always work for you. You can 
wash clothes (laundry business), wash the dishes, work as a cook, or make dolls. There are 
also jobs like cleaning buildings and making candies or snacks []. Nothing is available in 
Laos. Life is very hard. 
Therefore, although the advanced state of the American national economy is acknowledged 
and valued, such economic superiority is not seen as necessarily promoting ethnic customs 
or subverting hierarchical orders, indicating that not all individuals subordinate culture to 
economic development.  
In fact, it is important to remember that Hmong in Laos were actually reluctant to 
claim cultural authenticity (in a way, cultural superiority) due to the changes in their local 
practices caused by the state policies as discussed in Chapter 6. However, they persistently 
consider themselves to be in a better position to maintain more a traditional and correct 
culture compared to their co-ethnics in the United States. In other words, their culture may 
no longer be considered that authentic compared to the past, but it is still more authentic than 
the ethnic culture of U.S. Hmong. Therefore, what is important is not whether national 
contexts are producing cultural differences among diasporic Hmong. Instead, the relational 
and relative positioning among diasporic communities is what produces hierarchical 
discourses about national differences. 
77 Original definition is being poor, poverty. 
Cultural Power of the Hmong in the United States 
In contrast to the criticism of Hmong in Laos about the way ethnic cultures are practiced in 
America, the U.S. Hmong do not stress perceived differences in such cultural tradition as the 
main factor that determines their hierarchical positioning in the diaspora. They either think 
their cultural customs have not changed that much in the United States compared to Laos or 
even claim that the U.S. Hmong community has better economic resources and capacity to 
practice and maintain Hmong culture compared to their co-ethnics in Laos.  
For example, according to Kao Vang, a woman in her late fifties, Our culture is 
almost similar, just a little bit different in the funeral. In Laos, the dead body should be 
placed in the house and open to the visitors. But here [in the United States], the body is put 
in the casket. Sitting next to us, Kaos husband agreed with his wifes view of the cultural 
similarities and continuity among Hmong in the two countries, implying that whatever 
differences have emerged are miniscule and do not ruin the essence and meanings of 
funerals.  
In a different interview, Chi Her explained that Hmong in the United States are even 
better at maintaining and promoting traditional Hmong culture because of their better 
resources and organizational capacity based on their higher economic position and power. In 
his statement, it is implied that Americas economic position in the global order and the 
greater educational and social opportunities in the country can promote Hmong culture and 
perceived traditions more effectively. According to Chi: 
In terms of culture, if I compare Hmong in Laos and the U.S., Hmong in the U.S. do not 
dress up in traditional clothes as much, but they learn about our tradition much more 
extensively. In Laos, everyone is very poor so they are just busy making a living and forget 
about learning our traditions. Here, people learn a lot. Even very small kids already know 
how to play the qeej [a bamboo pipe instrument], because they learned at cultural 
organizations or with some elderly Hmong instructors. If you have kids and want them to 
learn Hmong traditional culture, you can take them to those places. We can afford to pay a 
little bit of money to teach our kids these traditions.  
This perspective reflects many other views of Hmong in the United States, who 
actually consider themselves in a better position to maintain and perform their culture and 
ethnic customs, including promoting and embellishing them. In terms of cultural hierarchies 
between Laos and the United States, Brandon Xiong, a school principal in his mid-forties, 
claimed that: 
Culture and heritage continue to change as they adapt to different environments. Hmong in 
this country will do things a little bit different from Hmong in Laos, France, and so on, 
because of different living environments and laws. But I think we [Hmong in the U.S.] do 
things better and more extensively by expanding our knowledge because we have seen 
other people do certain things and added those to ours. For example, funerals. Ten years 
ago, we did not see Hmong hiring flower services to decorate the top of the casket but now 
we go to every single funeral, you see the caskets decorated, more beautifully. 
Therefore, for Hmong in the United States, there is no inherent tension or 
contradiction between modernity and tradition. In fact, it is believed that the 
economic and social resources of modern societies like the United States enable ethnic 
and cultural traditions to be maintained, indicating how tradition is not incompatible 
with modernity. They feel that they are also at the center of the diaspora in terms of 
Hmong culture, despite living in a highly economically modernized society. It is 
precisely their claim over modernity and economic development that they believe will 
preserve and further improve what they perceive to be Hmong ethnic traditions.  
As a result, some of my interviewees argued that U.S. Hmong should be the most 
important and leading community in the diaspora not simply because their country is the 
most modernized and economically developed, but also because this provides them with the 
greatest economic and educational capacity to maintain Hmong ethnic culture. In other 
words, their justifications for the superior hierarchical positioning of the United States is also 
based on ethnic culture and tradition, which is enabled by (instead of opposed to) 
modernity. This is shown in an interview with Mia Vang, who observed that: 
Here [in America], people are in many research fields and have high education so they can 
keep our culture alive. Even though the Hmong are spread out within the U.S., I think we 
are more equipped to continue the culture because of the higher educational system here. 
Other countries like Thailand and Laos are maybe a little bit underdeveloped to do so, 
although I dont know much about China. 
This again indicates that such hierarchical discourses among diasporic peoples are very 
much based on partial affiliation to the nation-states in which they live. 
Political Differences and Hierarchy 
Contrasting Political Systems and Contested Claims of Superiority 
In his edited book on freedom from an anthropological perspective, Bidney (1963: 20), 
writing during the Cold War, argues that the world is divided into two conflicting political 
systems: Communism (which he defines as Totalitarian Democracy) and Liberalism 
(Constitutional Democracy). According to him, Both sides profess themselves as the 
champions of freedom and appeal to the uncommitted peoples of the world for support and 
allegiance (Bidney 1963: 20). Although we no longer live in such a starkly bipolarized 
world, considering that Cold War geopolitics continue to be relevant to the Hmong diaspora, 
it seems inevitable that both Hmong communities in Laos and the United States not only 
claim ownership over freedom based on conflicting economic systems, but political systems 
as well. 
 For Hmong living in the democracy of the United States, political freedom is 
regarded as unimaginable in Communist Laos. However, Hmong in Laos reject such 
assumptions and praise the individual political success of Hmong in the country, believing 
that similar political opportunities are limited for Hmong in the United States. While this 
discursive fragmentation is the basis on which members of the two communities claim 
higher political status over each other, they also show that both are highly influenced by 
contrasting state ideologies and political discourses. 
Lao Hmong Perspectives 
Unlike Hmong in the United States, Hmong in Laos hardly mentioned political systems in 
comparing themselves to their co-ethnics in the United States. However, in another 
illustration of discursive fragmentation, the Communist Party system in Laos, which was 
regarded negatively by U.S. Hmong from a democratic context, was perceived positively by 
some Hmong in Laos. This is because it has enabled members of the Hmong minority group 
to become successful government officers.  
The global political hierarchy (that places liberal democracies higher than 
authoritarian and Communist regimes) is challenged, if not inverted by Hmong in Laos, 
producing their own positioning of diasporic communities. As a governmental administrator, 
Vang Lee compared national political systems between Laos and the United States and 
positioned the Lao Hmong community higher in terms of political opportunities and 
achievement as an ethnic minority. Vang explained: 
Hmong in Laos are entitled to a lot of opportunities and are placed in the highest position in 
the government. Do you know that in the National Assembly, the first member ranked the 
highest out of 11 is a female Hmong person? This means that Laos has already achieved 
gender equality and equal rights for all. This kind of achievement and success is very 
unique for Hmong in Laos and cannot be found anywhere else in the world.  
By pointing out the examples of a few Hmong individuals who achieved political power and 
status in the nation, Vang highlighted Hmongs political success as only possible within the 
Lao political system. He also prioritized the political achievements of the Hmong over 
national economic hierarchies by saying: 
The U.S. is the most developed and richest country in the world but its citizens cannot be 
compared to Hmong here in terms of individual political success. The highest status that 
Hmong Americans can achieve is still lower, like a city mayor or some local governmental 
officer. However, if you go to the national museum here [in Laos], you will learn that the 
most prominent national hero in Lao history is a Hmong.78 This shows that our country 
really values Hmongs contribution. The only problem that Hmong in Laos have is that 
there are still many households with poverty and low knowledge overall. 
Vang emphasized that the statue of this Hmong individual is the biggest one displayed in the 
museum and therefore, he believes that the political contribution of the Hmong to Lao 
national history is highly valued and recognized by the Lao government. 
U.S. Hmong Perspectives 
While Hmong in Laos emphasize ethnic cultural practices and did not extensively discuss 
the impact of the different political systems of the two countries, Hmong in the United States 
frequently mentioned the political problems of Laos. They discussed how the current Laotian 
political system has produced negative cultural and ethnic consequences among Hmong 
between the two countries. Just as Hmong in Laos felt modernized American culture and 
lifestyles had led to undesirable cultural characteristics among their counterparts in the 
United States, U.S. Hmong had critical comments about certain behaviors of Hmong in 
Laos, which they believed was a product of their Communist political system. This 
illustrates another discursively fragmented discourse between the two diasporic communities 
along national lines.  
 Hmong in the United States attributed ethnic differences to the divergent political 
78 This Hmong national hero that Vang Lee refers to is a young Hmong leader in Lao national history who was 
recognized as a freedom fighter by the country during the Japanese invasion. (Later, I visited the Lao 
National Museum and found the statue that he described.) 
systems, focusing especially on the Communist political system in Laos. According to Mo 
Her, a retired man in his fifties, the U.S. Hmong are (General) Vang Pao Hmong (the 
political military leader of the Hmong who initiated the alliance with the CIA during the 
Vietnam War). In contrast to this, Mo coined the term that Lao Hmong are New Hmong, 
who stayed with the Communist regime for over thirty years in Laos and therefore have 
become socialist.79 
In a different interview, after expressing no interest in visiting Laos, Ker Cha, a 
public school teacher in his forties, also explained the reason of his disillusioned image of 
Laos, which he attributed to the negative behaviors among Hmong living in a Communist 
country. He asserted, I know the living environment in Laos and what life is like there. 
Because there, it is a corrupted Communist country, you never know what to expect. In 
recent years, Hmong people in Laos have also become corrupted, greedy, and perhaps a little 
brazen in terms of finding ways to get money. 
 Since Ker also has a long personal history of sending remittances to financially 
support his (distant) relatives in Laos whom he never met, he seems acutely aware of how an 
underdeveloped Communist economy contributes to economic hardship of many Hmong in 
Laos. He uses this as the basis to speculate on the Lao political system and imagine the 
negative consequences of living there. 
Discursive Differentiation and Diasporic Communities 
Despite being members of a transnational diasporic community, Hmong have developed 
affiliations with their different countries of residence, positioning their own country as 
superior because they have better cultural, economic, and political status as well as enjoy 
greater freedom than their co-ethnics living in other nation-states. When dispersed and 
resettled minority communities constantly position and think of themselves in a diasporic 
context, they do so by comparing themselves to co-ethnics residing in other nation-states.  
79 Because Laos became a Communist country after the Vietnam War, the present Hmong community in Laos 
are considered new since they are living in a new national political system. 
However, because of their ethnic and socioeconomic marginalization within the 
nation-states in which they reside, their affiliations with these countries become meaningful 
and positive only in comparative diasporic context, because they feel better-off in contrast to 
their co-ethnics elsewhere. In this respect, diasporic communities national affiliations are 
not necessarily based on a genuine adoption of nationalist perspectives but rather constructed 
in relation to each other. 
 Although many Hmong in the United States believe their capitalist economy, 
namely freedom to pursue economic wealth and engage in various labor opportunities, 
places them in a better position than their co-ethnics abroad, Hmong in Laos actually find 
that the American capitalist economic system constrains and limits individual freedom as a 
social being. In addition, both communities engage in highly contrastive and contested 
discourses that hierarchically position themselves in a better and higher status based on the 
various other criteria, including cultural customs and political systems. 
It is important to note that such discursive fragmentation does not necessarily cause 
actual social fragmentation between Hmong in Laos and the United States, either by 
disrupting or causing tension in transnational social relations across borders or by causing 
conflicts in social interactions between them when they visit each other. However, it can 
provoke diasporic communities to critically rethink assumptions of transnational ethnic 
homogeneity and social cohesion and recognize the importance of the national contexts in 
which all diasporic peoples live. Therefore, diasporas continue to be positioned in-between 
forces of the nation-states and their own diasporic communities. There is certainly 
transnational cultural and ethnic continuity among diasporic peoples across borders, but also 
differences and discursive fragmentation along national lines. 
Conclusion 
 Conclusion 
Diasporas and Nation-States 
We never had a government of our own, but we live as a people, Nou Thao, a Hmong 
villager in Laos, remarked at the end of the interview in a calm but robust tone as he stared 
into light of the sunset that came into the dark room through his half-open wooden door. 
Nous succinct response reflected similar sentiments by many other Hmong with whom I 
spoke.  
Indeed, because the Hmong do not have a definite ethnic homeland, they identified 
first and foremost as a diasporic people, instead of as nationals who are members of 
particular nation-states. My thesis has explored what it really means to live as a people 
without a country and attempted to understand what makes the Hmong preserve such a 
diasporic consciousness while residing in specific nation-states. I have analyzed how they 
participate in shared daily social, cultural, and economic activities across national borders 
despite their geographic dispersal and the lack of a specific homeland or ethnic and cultural 
origins.  
Because of the absence of a country of ethnic origin that serves as a territorialized 
center of a diasporic identity and community, the Hmong diaspora consists of co-ethnics 
scattered across various nation-states. Nonetheless, Hmong do not passively accept their 
homelandless condition with an attitude of resignation. Instead, they continue to discuss how 
it affects their lives as minorities in various nation-states and actively search for ethnic 
origins and belonging, even if they are simply imagined homelands. 
Belonging to a geographically scattered group of Hmong people instead of a nation-
state has multiple possible meanings for diasporized groups. It enables them to live beyond 
the nation-states territorial boundaries to a certain extent, since they are embedded in 
transnational networks across national borders and develop ethnic affiliations with diasporic 
co-ethnic communities located elsewhere. They can also freely imagine a cohesive ethnic 
community and a collective ethnic solidarity in the diaspora that overcomes national 
boundaries and territorial presence. However, this does not consign diasporic people to a 
permanent stateless status, because the concrete presence of the nation-state remains 
significant in their daily lives. This condition contextualizes how Hmong also positions 
themselves transnationally in the diaspora based on the countries to which they partially 
belong. Diasporas are relational since they can be defined by some sense of belonging to 
multiple nation-states. As a result, the Hmong diaspora continues to persist as a community 
by partially adopting a sense of belonging within nation-states while simultaneously 
maintaining their diasporic cultural and social continuities beyond national borders.  
Nonetheless, diasporic Hmong continue to be socioeconomically, culturally, and 
ethnically marginalized in these two countries as ethnic minorities and feel that they still 
partially belong to the nation-state. Therefore, in addition to not having their own country, 
they have developed ambivalent feelings toward the origin country of Laos and their adopted 
country of the United States. Although Laos is the geographic center as the de facto natal 
homeland of much of the contemporary Hmong diaspora, Hmong in both countries have 
ambivalent perspectives and relationships to it because of the Communist government and 
their continued status as ethnic minorities in the country. Instead of being a definite 
homeland of the Hmong that provides centripetal unity to the Hmong diaspora, Laos has 
rather become one of the lateral transnational communities of dispersal that are 
hierarchically positioned in relation to other nation-states in which Hmong reside.  
In the United States, Hmong are latecomers to the U.S. immigrant community who 
suffer from economic hardship and social problems. Although some members of the Hmong 
American second generation can consider the country as an adopted homeland, it remains a 
country of partial belonging because many of them have not yet become full members of the 
ethnonational community.  
In short, diasporas are characterized by partial alienation to multiple nation-states, 
which is historically constituted through both international politics that produce forced 
dispersal as well as internal national inequalities that can result in socioeconomic and ethnic 
marginalization. Such a condition of national non-belonging is exacerbated among diasporas 
without ethnic homelands, making the Hmong truly a people without their own country. This 
distinctive situation of the Hmong diaspora contextualizes its ongoing effort and actions to 
promote diasporic affiliations and ethnic affinity across national borders through 
transnational cultural and social continuities and connections. This partly overcomes national 
boundaries and produces a collective diasporic ethnic identity across national borders. 
This thesis has therefore examined how Hmong have maintained their diasporic 
community by continuing their cultural practices and ethnic traditions across national 
borders based on extensive transnational social kin networks. In order to examine such 
transnational continuities in the diaspora, I focused on Hmong kinship practices and 
shamanism. The dominant kinship principles based on surname clans are not merely a 
practice continued locally by Hmong in Laos but continued to operate across national 
borders in the diaspora and have indeed become hegemonic in diasporic contexts to evoke a 
common ethnic identity and solidarity. Members of the same clan are considered kindred 
and subject to reciprocal hospitality and Hmong are expected to conform to clan exogamy 
and ethnic endogamy. The biologization of kinship, along with recurring discourses of the 
absent ethnic homeland causes the Hmong to adhere unconditionally to their kinship system 
despite different national contexts and discursive challenges from the younger generation of 
U.S. Hmong.  
Another cultural continuity in the diaspora is Hmong shamanism, based on the notion 
of mobile souls, shamanistic births, and religious and spiritual healing rituals. Although 
shamanism is often seen as traditional, localized practices, the Hmong ancestor worship 
culture has been flexible and adaptable and persisted transnationally in the diaspora while 
being simultaneously transformed in local context. The shamans spiritual rituals remain 
effective across national borders while being individualized (from a social, community-
oriented event) and commodified when practiced in transnational contexts. Both kinship and 
traditional shamanism have had a powerful effect for diasporic Hmong and counter the 
forces of fragmentation in the diaspora, allowing them to continue their Hmongness across 
national borders. 
Despite the importance of transnational communities that maintain socioeconomic 
and cultural continuity in the Hmong diaspora in ways that partly transcend national 
boundaries, the diasporic Hmong community has also been influenced by the different 
nation-states in which they currently reside. My thesis therefore also focused on diverging 
ethnic perceptions among Hmong in Laos and the United States and the differences in 
cultural traditions and contrastive discourses which reflect the impact of different local 
socioeconomic conditions, cultural policies, as well as political conditions in each nation-
state. In particular, I examined how Hmong cultural practices have become differentiated by 
analyzing the traditional New Year celebrations in both countries and how the mutual ethnic 
perceptions of these two diasporic communities are discursively fragmented according to 
national differences. 
The Hmong New Year effectively illustrates the impact of national differences, 
specifically the remarkable economic disparities and contrastive political systems between 
Laos and the United States. Depending on the accessibility to economic resources in each 
country, Hmongs celebration of the New Year has been reduced in length, public visibility, 
and complexity in Laos while it has become an elaborate, well-attended, and excessively 
commercialized ethnic festival in the United States. This change becomes further salient in 
the context of multicultural policies in the two nation-states, which result in cultural 
restrictions by the Lao government in the name of equal economic opportunity, and limited 
government control in the United States because of the equal right of minorities to maintain 
cultural traditions and differences. 
National differences in the Hmong diaspora have also produced contested and 
sometimes negative perceptions about co-ethnics abroad. Hmong in Laos and the United 
States have contrasting perceptions of and disagreements about the in/authenticity of their 
cultural traditions, economic versus cultural superiority, and ideologies about freedom and 
different political systems. These diverging perceptions highlight how diasporas can often be 
discursively fragmented and cause different diasporic communities to position themselves 
hierarchically in relation to co-ethnics elsewhere. They also illustrate the partial affiliations 
of diasporic peoples to different nation-states.  
Throughout my thesis, I have therefore grappled with a double-edged condition of 
the Hmong diaspora. On the one hand, there are compelling transnational continuities in 
cultural and kinship practices that ensure Hmong in Laos and United States stay connected 
to and actively engage in various relationships with each other across national borders as a 
diasporic people. On the other, their cultural practices and mutual perceptions have become 
refracted through different national contexts, producing cultural differentiation and 
discursive fragmentation that reflect the influence of their respective nation-states.  
The National and the Transnational 
In this sense, my research on the Hmong diaspora contributes to an alternative way to 
understand theories of diaspora and diasporic communities. First, it suggests that we should 
examine how diaspora as a social formation resulted from the mutual reconfiguration of the 
national and the transnational. Scholars have pointed out the co-existence of national and 
transnational and their impact on migrants and their hosts (Brah 1996; Glick Schiller et al 
2006). They argue that localized studies of particular ethnic migrant communities should not 
neglect the way the migrants lives are influenced by national policies, politics, and cultures. 
Likewise, scholars emphasize the impact of transnationalism on non-migrant domestic 
citizens residing in nation-states by noting that many contemporary national social 
circumstances are now influenced by cultures and economies brought by migrants from 
abroad in an increasingly transnationalized world.  
As scholars on transnational migration point out, transnational influences on local 
peoples are connected to migration and mobility, since migrants maintain socioeconomic 
and cultural connections with their country of origin (see Smith 2006; Vertovec 2001). 
However, it is important to remember that individuals do not always have to migrate in order 
to become transnational and conduct lives which are socially linked to other countries. Those 
who do not move across national borders and remain in the sending country also develop and 
maintain transnational relations with co-ethnics who have migrated abroad. They can 
therefore be equally affected by cross-border social forces as those engaged in transnational 
mobility.   
In this context, my study has attempted to clarify and specify the nature of both 
national and transnational influences on localized diasporic Hmong residing in Laos and the 
United States. Lao Hmong are definitely shaped by the national economic and ethnic context 
of Laos, but they are also influenced considerably by the shared transnational socioeconomic 
and cultural space that incorporates their co-ethnics living in the United States. They do not 
always migrate transnationally across national borders, since there is little contemporary 
Hmong migration from Laos to the United States except for marriage migration (see below). 
However, while remaining within the confines of the nation-state, Lao Hmong lead 
transnational lives that are embedded in cross-border cultural and socioeconomic relations 
with the United States, which may be just as important for their daily social and economic 
well-being as the influence of national conditions in Laos.  
Likewise, U.S. Hmong are also impacted greatly by the national socioeconomic 
conditions and mainstream cultural influences in the United States. While also being 
embedded in transnational connections with Lao Hmong, they are perhaps less dependent on 
them since they do no rely on their co-ethnics for their economic livelihood and social 
activities. They seem to have greater agency in the transnational relationship, since they are 
the ones who send remittances to support loved ones in Laos, make return trips to visit them, 
and help sustain their community events and cultural rituals. Therefore, the transnational 
relations that constitute diasporic communities may be more significant for the Hmong in 
Laos than they are for Hmong in the United States. Hmongs everyday lives and cultural and 
socioeconomic activities ethnographically illustrated in my thesis indicate that the impacts of 
trans/national power are not the same for different groups in the diaspora.  
Second, my thesis demonstrated the importance of internal difference and conflicts 
that many diasporic groups experience. Much of this is the result of the clear national 
socioeconomic and cultural differences in which they are embedded, as shown in this thesis. 
However, the hierarchical differentiation and internal fragmentation of diasporic 
communities is also a product of cultural continuities that are the outcome of their 
participation in transnational connections and interactions. This is not to represent the 
distinctive nature of each diasporic community as a homogenous entity by neglecting the 
clear national differences causing internal tensions and disagreements among diasporic 
transnational peoples. Rather, it is to point out that discursive fragmentation often emerges 
because diasporic communities are committed to maintain the same cultural practices and 
ethnic traditions across national borders through an interest in the political and social 
conditions of their co-ethnics in other countries. Indeed, disagreement in the diaspora is 
based to some extent on commonality, mutual participation, and congruent ethnic interests. 
National difference is generally assumed to be the source of the Hmong diasporas 
fragmenting discourses and ethnic perceptions. Indeed, different political systems and 
national conditions between Laos and the U.S. are considered seriously by both Hmong 
communities in critically reviewing their own lives in each country in relation to their co-
ethnics residing abroad, regardless of whether their understanding of these national 
differences are based on personal experience, transnational communications, or simply their 
imaginations.  
Nonetheless, Hmong peoples discursive fragmentations and disagreements in both 
countries are also about remarkably common and interconnected aspects of their lives and 
the sharing of similar values and objectives. These include the desire for greater economic 
development and wealth, the importance of retaining ethnic culture and traditions, and the 
equal value they place on social and political freedom that commonly exist in both countries. 
In other words, disagreements about shared and common aspects of life can often create 
internal tensions between national communities in the diaspora as well as ambivalent 
feelings toward each other. This may also be the case with broader global issues and 
international relations. In Biao Xiangs (2014) analysis of the Chinese publics perception of 
transpacific relations with the United States, he argues that the interconnectedness of the 
seemingly conflicting political and economic regimes of the two countries reveals a Chinese 
desire to become similar in order to compete with the U.S. 
This point was specifically illustrated in Chapter 7 about the Hmong New Year 
festival and in Chapter 8 about diverging discourses between the Lao and U.S. Hmong 
communities. The two chapters particularly illustrated the ways and strategies that each 
Hmong community has chosen to take, in order to promote common Hmong ethnic and 
cultural identities within their local communities as well as transnationally. Indeed, both 
communities active engagement and extensive participation in the same ethnic cultural 
practices provided the fundamental source of different discourses and incongruent 
perspectives, including the relative authenticity of their shared ethnic traditions. Their 
assessments of national differences in terms of social freedom, economic wealth, and 
lifestyles between Lao and U.S. Hmong in the diaspora were also based on these shared 
common values. In short, diasporic communities experience complicated daily politics and 
different perceptions toward each other based on shared and common transnational 
interactions and communications.  
My research focused on such transnational relations and argued that we not only 
examine those between the diaspora and its original homeland but also lateral transnational 
linkages between dispersed co-ethnic communities residing in various countries. In this 
sense, transnationalism is important not only for understanding the extent to which diasporic 
groups are involved in common interactions and exchanges with each other across national 
borders but also to compare the differences and disparities that exist among the co-ethnic 
communities dispersed across multiple nation-states.  
Finally, I wish to point out that a transnational perspective allows us to examine the 
way diasporic groups selectively and strategically position themselves in a global context. 
The fact that diasporas are often based on transnational continuities and commonalities of 
course does not mean their specific communities are characterized by egalitarian relations. 
As noted in Chapter 8, diasporic communities in different countries are not only discursively 
fragmented but also position themselves hierarchically in relation to each other, which 
reflects the global inequalities between the nation-states in which they are located. This 
illustrates how the members of diasporas are also embedded in and affiliate themselves with 
different national ideologies. Such global positioning is critical for understanding many 
contemporary diasporic peoples who have experienced the shared processes of persecution, 
exile, and displacement from their homelands and resettlement in new countries.  
In this sense, scholars need to further consider how diasporas are constituted and 
internally differentiated by hierarchical orders of national power and their impact on the way 
diasporic members transnationally connect to each other and produce discursively 
fragmented ethnic discourses. Over time, nation-states become more salient for diasporas as 
its members live in them for extended periods and eventually develop new nationalized 
homes. 
In sum, my research on the Hmong diaspora suggests another way to examine how 
diasporas are a social formation that results from the mutual reconfiguration of the national 
and the transnational. In this sense, this thesis sheds light on how diasporic practices are 
based on shared transnational commonalities but are also nationally defined and locally 
manifested. This overcomes binary analyses that posit the nation-state against the 
transnational nature of diaspora. In so doing, my thesis suggests we examine diasporas as a 
dialectical process involving both transnational continuity and national differentiation across 
borders.   
Further Research 
My perspective on diasporas can be expanded to include a number of related topics for 
future research. In particular, I would like to explore the gendered and religious dimension 
of the Hmong diaspora through further multi-sited fieldwork. The gendered aspect of Hmong 
diaspora can be examined through a study of marriage migration from Laos to the United 
States. Unlike other diasporas that continue to develop through subsequent labor and family 
reunification migration and return migration to the homeland, marriage migration is perhaps 
the only predominant type of transnational mobility in the contemporary Hmong diaspora.  
As discussed in the thesis, Laos and the U.S. exhibit considerable economic 
disparities as well as different social and political systems and cultural policies. Marriage 
migration patterns thus far have consisted predominantly of Hmong women moving from 
Laos to the United States to marry U.S. Hmong men. Recently, however, young Hmong men 
in Laos have started to engage in romantic relationships with older women from the United 
States and some of them eventually migrated to the U.S. for marriage. This trend is slightly 
different from a traditional perspective on marriage migration, which involves women as 
the dominant migratory subject.  
By examining different patterns of marriage migration, I would like to investigate the 
extent to which socioeconomic inequalities between the two nation-states influence the 
gendered relationships between the spouses. This will allow me to further examine the 
impact of national hierarchies on daily politics among individuals as well as transnational 
diasporic communities. In addition, I would also like to explore how the two diasporic 
communities in Laos and the U.S. respond in a critical manner to the processes of marriage, 
migration, and settlement. 
As part of my work that contextualizes the complex ethnic experiences of 
diasporized Hmong in different local societies and analyzes their transnational dimensions, I 
am also interested in the emerging power of Christianity, especially among Hmong in the 
United States. In addition to shamanism, this is another important religious dimension of the 
Hmong diaspora. It is important to understand the internal differences and diverging 
perspectives among diasporic communities caused by the advent of this new religious 
orientation among Hmong in the United States and its possibly transformative impact on 
Hmong cultural practices. Although Hmong Christians in the United States have developed 
transnational influence in the diaspora by differentiating themselves from the ethnic 
traditions of non-Christian Hmong (such as shamanistic rituals and funerals), they have also 
attempted to integrate their religious values in traditional Hmong activities, including New 
Year festivals.  
In this context, further research should closely look into how Hmong American 
Christians develop discourses about universalism and modernity in contrast to the 
particularistic nature of traditional Hmong culture in the U.S. and during their missionary 
trips to Hmong communities in Southeast Asia. Such future research will further strengthen 
the main theme of my thesis, which argues that diasporic communities are embedded in local 
and national differences while continuing to be influenced by transnational interactions and 
affiliations across national borders.  
Appendix 1. 
[Estimate of Current Population of the Hmong Diaspora] 
 Estimate Source Estimated Year Data Collection 
China 4-4.5 millions Lemoine (2005) N/A N/A 
Laos 449, 600 NSC Lao 
PDR80 
2009 Self 
calculation81 
Thailand     
Burma     
Vietnam 896, 239 CEMA82 2003 National survey 
Cambodia     
France     
Germany 77 Yang (2003) 2002 Unclear 
Australia 2,190 ASB83 2006 National survey 
Canada     
United States 260,07384  Census Bureau 2010 National survey 
French Guiana 2,120 Clarkin (2005) Unclear Unclear85 
Argentina     
80 National Statistics Center, Results from the Population Census 2005: www.nsc.gov.la. 
81 8% of total Lao nationals. 
82 http://cema.gov.vn/index.php. 
83 Australian Statistics Bureau. 
84 U.S. Census Bureau 2010. Asian alone by selected groups: http://www.census.gov. 
85 The authors personal estimate based on the interviews he conducted. 
Bibliography 
Alonso, Ana M. 1994. The Politics of Space, Time and Substance: State Formation,  
Nationalism, and Ethnicity. Annual Review of Anthropology 23: 379-405. 
Anderson, Benedict. 2006. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of  
Nationalism. Verso Books. 
Appadurai, Arjun.  1988. Introduction: Place and Voice in Anthropological Theory. Cultural  
Anthropology 3(1):16-20. 
______. 1996. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis:  
University of Minnesota Press. 
Atkinson, Jane M. 1992. Shamanisms Today. Annual Review of Anthropology 21: 307-330. 
Axel, Brian Keith. 2000. The Nations Tortured Body: Violence, Representation and the  
Formation of a Sikh Diaspora. Durham: Duke University Press. 
Babadzan, Alain. 2000. Anthropology, nationalism and the invention of tradition. 
Anthropological Forum 10(2): 131-155. 
Basch, Linda, Nina Glick Schiller, and Cristina Szanton Blanc. 1994. Nations Unbound:  
      Transnational Projects, Postcolonial Predicaments, and Deterritorialized Nation-states.      
      Amsterdam: Gordon and Breach. 
Barney, G. Linwood. 1967. The Meo of Xieng Khouang province, Laos. In P. Kunstadter  
      (ed.), Southeast Asian Tribes, Minorities, and Nations. Princeton: Princeton University    
      Press, pp. 271-294. 
Bauman, Zygmunt. 1988: Freedom. Philadelphia: Open University Press. 
Bernal, Victoria. 2004. Eritrea Goes Global: Reflections on Nationalism in a Transnational  
Era. Cultural Anthropology 19(1): 3-25. 
______. 2005. Eritrea On-Line: Diaspora, Cyberspace, and the Public Sphere. American  
Ethnologist 32(4): 660-675. 
Bernatzik, Hugo A. 1970. Akha and Miao: Problems of Applied Ethnography in Farther  
India. New Haven: Human Relations Area Files. 
Bhabha, Homi K. 1994. The Location of Culture. Psychology Press. 
Bidney, David (ed.). 1963. The Concept of Freedom in Anthropology. Hague: Mouton&Co. 
Bourdet, Yves. 1997. Laos in 1996: Please Dont Rush Asian Survey 37(1): 72-78. 
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Vol. 16. Cambridge: Cambridge  
University Press. 
Bowen, John R. 2004. Does French Islam Have Borders? Dilemmas of Domestication in a  
Global Religious Field. American Anthropologist 106(1): 43-55. 
Braziel, Jana Evans., Anita Mannur (eds.). 2003. Theorizing Diaspora: A Reader. Malden,  
Mass.: Blackwell. 
Brah, Avtar (1996). Cartographies of Diaspora: Contesting Identities. London: Routledge. 
Brodwin, Paul. 2003. Pentecostalism in Translation: Religion and the Production of  
Community in the Haitian Diaspora. American Ethnologist 30(1): 85-101.  
Brow, James. 1988. In Pursuit of Hegemony: Representation of Authority and Justice in Sri  
 Lankan Village. American Ethnologist 15(2): 311-327. 
Brubaker, Rogers. 2005. The Diaspora Diaspora. Ethnic and Racial Studies 28(1): 1-19. 
Bruns, Gerald L. 1991. What Is Tradition? New Literary History 22(1): 1-21. 
Burawoy, Michael. 2012. The Roots of Domination: Beyond Bourdieu and Gramsci.  
Sociology 46(2): 187-206. 
Butler, Kim D. 2001. Defining Diaspora, Refining a Discourse. Diaspora 10(2): 189-219. 
Cadge, Wendy., and Elaine H. Ecklund. 2007. Immigration and Religion. Annual Review of  
Sociology 33: 359-379. 
Carsten, Janet. 2004. After kinship. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Case, William. 2011. Laos in 2010. Asian Survey 51(1): 202-207. 
Cha, Ya Po. 2010. An Introduction to Hmong Culture. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co.,  
Publishers. 
Chan, Sucheng. 1994. Hmong Means Free: Life in Laos and in America. Philadelphia:  
Temple University Press. 
Cheung, Siu-Woo. 2004. Miao Identity in Western Guizhou: China during the Republican  
Period. In Nicholas Tapp et al. (eds.). Hmong/Miao in Asia. Chiang Mai: Silkworm 
Books, pp. 237-272. 
Chiu, Monica. 2004. Medical, Racist, and Colonial Constructions of Power: Creating the  
Asian American Patient and the Cultural Citizen in Anne Fadimans The Spirit Catches 
You and You Fall Down. Hmong Studies Journal 5:1-36.   
Chua, Liana. 2012. Conversion, Continuity, and Moral Dilemmas among Christian Bidayuhs  
in Malaysian Borneo. American Ethnologist 39(3): 511-526. 
Cincotta-Segi, Angela R. 2011. The Big Ones Swallow the Small Ones. Or Do They?  
Language-In-Education Policy and Ethnic Minority Education in the Lao PDR. Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 32(1): 1-15. 
Clarke, Gerard. 2001. From Ethnocide to Ethnodevelopment? Ethnic Minorities and  
Indigenous Peoples in Southeast Asia. Third World Quarterly 22(3): 413-436. 
Clarke, Morgan. 2008. New Kinship, Islam, and the Liberal Tradition: Sexual Morality and  
New Productive Technology in Lebanon. The Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute 14(1): 153-169. 
Clarkin, Patrick F. 2005. Hmong Resettlement in French Guiana. Hmong Studies Journal 6:  
1-27. 
Clifford, James. 1988. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnography,  
Literature, and Art. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
______. 1994. Diasporas. Cultural Anthropology 9(3):302-338. 
Comaroff, Jean. and John L. Comaroff. 1991. Of Revelation and Revolution: Christianity,  
Colonialism, and Consciousness in South Africa. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Cohen, Robin. 1997. Global Diasporas: An Introduction. Seattle: University of Washington  
Press. 
Coutin, Susan B. 2003. Cultural Logics of Belonging and Movement: Transnationalism,  
Naturalization, and U.S. Immigration Politics. American Ethnologist 30: 508-526. 
Culas, Christian, Jean Michaud. 2004. A Contribution to the Study of Hmong (Miao)  
Migrations and History. In Nicholas Tapp et al. (eds.). Hmong/Miao in Asia. Chiang Mai: 
Silkworm Books, pp. 61-96. 
Deal, David., Hostetler, Laura. 2005. The Art of ethnography: A Chinese Miao Album.  
Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
Diamond, Norma. 1988. The Miao and Poison: Interactions on Chinas Frontier. Ethnology  
27(1): 1-23. 
______. 1995. Defining the Miao. In Steven Harell (ed.). Cultural Encounters on Chinas  
Ethnic Frontiers. Seattle and London: University of Washington Press, pp. 92-116. 
Donnelly, Nancy D. 1994. Changing Lives of Refugee Hmong Women. Seattle: University of  
Washington Press. 
Duara, Prasenjit. 1995. Rescuing History from the Nation: Questioning Narratives of  
Modern China. Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press. 
Duncan, Christopher (ed.). 2004. Civilizing the Margins: Southeast Asian Government  
Policies for the Development of Minorities. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Dunnigan, Timothy. 1982. Segmentary Kinship in an Urban Society: The Hmong of St.  
     Paul-Minneapolis. Anthropological Quarterly 55(3): 126-134. 
Ebaugh, Helen R., Janet S. Chafetz. 2002. Religion Across Borders. Rowman Altamira. 
Eller Jack D. 1997. Anti-Anti-Multiculturalism. American Anthropologist 99(2): 249-260. 
Entenmann, Robert. 2005. The Myth of Sonom, the Hmong King. Hmong Studies Journal 6:  
1-14. 
Enwall, Joakim. 1992. Miao or Hmong? Thai-Yunnan Project Newsletter, Number 17, June. 
Eriksen, Thomas H. 2002[1993]. Ethnicity and Nationalism. New York: Pluto Press.  
Faderman, Lillian. and Xiong, Ghia. 1998. I Begin My Life All Over: The Hmong and the  
American Immigrant Experience. New York: Allyn and Bacon. 
Fadiman, Ann. 1997. The Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down: A Hmong Child, Her  
American Doctors, and the Collision of Two Cultures. New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. 
Fox, Robin. 1967. Kinship and Marriage: An Anthropological Perspective. Cambridge:  
      Cambridge University Press. 
Fujiwara, Lynn. 2008. Mothers Without Citizenship: Asian Immigrant Families and the  
Consequences of Welfare Reform. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.  
Geddes, William R. 1976. Migrants of the Mountains: The Cultural Ecology of the Blue  
Miao (Hmong Njua) of Thailand. London: Oxford University Press. 
Gerson, Judith M. 2001. Immigrants in between States: National Identity Practices among  
German Jewish Immigrants. Political Psychology 22(1):179-198.  
Gilroy, Paul. 1987. There Aint No Black in the Union Jack. Chicago: University of Chicago  
Press. 
______. 1991. Cultural Studies and Ethnic Absolutism. In Lawrence Grossberg et al. (eds.).  
Cultural Studies. New York: Routledge, pp. 187-197. 
Glassman, Jim. 2011. Cracking Hegemony in Thailand: Gramsci, Bourdieu and the  
Dialectics of Rebellion. Journal of Contemporary Asia 41(1): 25-46.  
Graburn, Nelson H. H. 2001. What Is Tradition. Museum Anthropology 24(2/3): 6-11. 
Gramsci, Antonio. 1971. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. [Edited and translated by  
Hoare, Quinton., Geoffrey N. Smith.] London: Lawrence&C Wishart. 
Hall, Stuart. 1986. Gramscis Relevance for the Study of Race and Ethnicity. Journal of  
Communication Inquiry 10(2): 5-27. 
______. 1990. Cultural Identity and Diaspora. In Jonathan Rutherford (ed.). Identity:  
Community, Culture, Difference. London: Lawrence and Wishart, pp. 222-237. 
Hamilton-Merritt, Jane. 1993. Tragic Mountains: The Hmong, The Americans, and the  
Secret War for Laos 1942-1992. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Handler, Richard. 1986. Authenticity. Anthropology Today 2(1): 2-4. 
______. 1988. Nationalism and the Politics of Culture in Quebec. Madison: University of  
Wisconsin Press. 
Harrell, Stevan (ed.). 1995. Cultural Encounters on Chinas Ethnic Frontiers. Seattle and  
London: University of Washington Press. 
Harris, Joseph E (ed.). 1993. Global Dimensions of the African Diaspora. Washington:  
Howard University Press. 
Hefner, Robert W. 1998. Multiple Modernities: Christianity, Islam, and Hinduism in a  
Globalizing Age. Annual Review of Anthropology 27: 83-104. 
Hein, Jeremy. 1993. Refugees, Immigrants, and the State. Annual Review of Sociology 19:  
43-59. 
______. 1995. From Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia: a Refugee Experience in the United  
States. New York; London: Twayne Publishers.  
Helmreich, Stefan. 1992. Kinship, Nation, and Paul Gilroys Concept of Diaspora. Diaspora  
2(2): 243-249. 
Hillmer, Paul. 2010. A Peoples History of the Hmong. St. Paul: Minnesota Historical  
Society.  
Hindess, Barry. 2004. Citizenship for All. Citizenship Studies 8(3): 305-315. 
Hmong National Development Report. 2013. 
Hobsbawm, Eric. 1983. Introduction: Inventing Tradition. In Eric Hobsbawm and Terence  
      O. Ranger (eds.). The Invention of Tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,    
      pp. 1-14. 
Hostetler, Laura. 2000. Qing Connections to the Early Modern World: Ethnography and  
Cartography in Eighteenth-Century China. Modern Asian Studies 34 (3): 623-662. 
Ireson, Carol J., Randall W. Ireson. 1991. Ethnicity and Development in Laos. Asian Survey  
31(10): 920-937. 
Jackson, Jean E. 1991. Being and Becoming an Indian in the Vaupes. In G. Urban and J.  
Sherzer (eds.). Nation-State and Indian in Latin America. Austin: University of Texas 
Press, pp. 131-55. 
______. 1995. Culture, Genuine and Spurious: The Politics of Indianness in the Vaupes,  
Columbia. American Ethnologist 22(3): 27.  
Jackson, Jean E., and Maria C. Ramirez. 2009. Traditional, Transnational, and  
     Cosmopolitan. American Ethnologist 36(3): 521-544. 
Jenks, Robert D. 1994. Insurgency and Social Disorder in Guizhou: The Miao Rebellion  
1854-1873. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Johnson, Mark. 2013. The Aesthetics of Diaspora in Colonial Fields of Power: Elite  
Nationalism, Art and the Love to Die for. Ethnos 78(2): 175-199. 
Jonsson, Hjorleifur. 2005. Mien Relations: Mountain People and State Control in Thailand.  
Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Kammerer, Cornelia A. 1990. Customs and Christian Conversion among Akha Highlanders  
of Burma and Thailand. American Ethnologist 17(2): 277-291. 
Kitano, Harry H. L., Wai-Tsang Yeung, Lynn Chai, and Herbert Hatanaka. 1984. Asian  
American Interracial Marriage. Journal of Marriage and Family 46(1): 179-190. 
Koltyk, Jo Ann. 1993. Telling Narratives through Home Videos: Hmong Refugees and Self- 
Documentation of Life in the Old and New Country. Journal of American Folklore 
106(422): 435-449. 
______. 1997. New Pioneers in the Heartland: Hmong in Wisconsin. New York:  
Allyn and Bacon. 
Kunnath, George. 2013. Compliance or Defiance? The Case of Dalits and Mahadalits.  
Journal of Anthropological Society of Oxford V(1): 36-59. 
Kuper, Adam. 1982. Lineage Theory: A Critical Retrospect. Annual Review of Anthropology  
11:71-95. 
Kurashige, Lon. 2002. Japanese American Celebration and Conflict: A History of Ethnic  
Identity and Festival, 1934-1990. Berkeley; Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
Lavie, Smadar., Swedenburg, Ted (eds.). 1996. Displacement, Diaspora, and Geographies  
of Identity. Durham: Duke University Press. 
Leach, Edmund. 1963. Law as a Condition of Freedom. In David Bidney (ed.). The Concept  
of Freedom in Anthropology. Hague: Mouton&Co., pp. 74-90. 
Lee, Gary Y. 1996. Cultural Identity in Post-Modern Society: Reflections on What is a  
Hmong? Hmong Studies Journal. 1: 1-14. 
______. 2004. Transnational Adaptation: An Overview of the Hmong of Laos. In Nicholas  
Tapp et al. (eds.). Hmong/Miao in Asia. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, pp. 441-456. 
______. 2007. Diaspora and the Predicament of Origins: Interrogating Hmong Postcolonial  
History and Identity. Hmong Studies Journal 8: 1-25.  
Lee, Mai Na. 1998. The Dream of the Hmong Kingdom: Resistance, Collaboration, and  
Legitimacy under French Collaboration. Hmong Studies Journal 2: 1-23. 
Lee, Sangmi. 2009. Searching for the Hmong Peoples Ethnic Homeland and Multiple  
Dimensions of Transnational Longing: From the Viewpoint of the Hmong in Laos. 
Hmong Studies Journal 10: 1-18.  
Leepreecha, Prasit. 2008. The Role of Media Technology in Reproducing Hmong Ethnic  
Identity. In Don McCaskill et al. (eds.). Living in a Globalized World: Ethnic Minorities 
in the Greater Mekong Subregion. Chiang Mai, Thailand: Mekong Press, pp. 89-114. 
Lemoine, Jacques. 2005. What Is the Actual Number of the (H)mong in the World? Hmong  
Studies Journal 6:1-8.  
______.  2008. To Tell the Truth. Hmong Studies Journal 9:1-29. 
Leng, Lee Y. 1980. Race, Language, and National Cohesion in Southeast Asia. Journal of  
Southeast Asian Studies 11(1): 122-138. 
Levitt, Peggy. 2003. You Know, Abraham Was Really the First Immigrant: Religion and  
Transnational Migration. International Migration Review 37(3): 847-873. 
Long, Lynellyn D. 1993. Ban Vinai: The Refugee Camp. New York: Columbia University  
Press. 
MacDonald, Jeffery L. 1997. Transnational Aspects of Iu-Mien Refugee Identity. New York:  
Garland. 
Malkki, Liisa. 1992. National Geographic: the Rooting of Peoples and the Territorialization  
of National Identity among Scholars and Refugees. Cultural Anthropology 7(1):24-44.  
McCoy, Alfred W. 1970. French Colonialism in Laos, 1893-1945. In Nina S (eds.), Laos:  
War and Revolution. New York: Harper Colophon Books, pp. 67-99. 
Mottin, Jean. 1984. A Hmong Shamans Sance. Asian Folklore Studies 43(1): 99-108. 
Mottin, John. 1980. History of the Hmong. Bangkok: Odeon Store Ltd.  
Ngo, Thi T. T. 2010. Ethnic and Transnational Dimensions of Recent Protestant Conversion 
 among the Hmong in Northern Vietnam. Social Compass 57(3): 332-344. 
Ong, Aihwa. 2003. Buddha Is Hiding: Refugees, Citizenship, the New America. Berkeley:  
University of California Press.  
______.  2006 [1999]. Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural Logics of Transnationality.  
Durham: Duke University Press. 
Ovesen, Jan. 1995. A Minority Enters the Nation State: A Case Study of a Hmong  
Community in Vientiane Province, Laos. Uppsala, Sweden: Uppsala University. 
_____. 2004. All Lao? Minorities in the Lao Peoples Democratic Republic. In Christopher  
R. Duncan (ed.). Civilizing the Margins: Southeast Asian Government Policies for the 
Development of Minorities. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, pp. 214-240. 
Parkin, Robert. 1997. Kinship: An Introduction to the Basic Concepts. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Parreas, Rhacel., Lok Siu. 2007. Introduction. In Rhacel Parreas and Lok Siu (eds.). Asian  
     Diasporas: New Formations, New Conceptions. Stanford: Stanford University Press, pp.    
     1-24. 
Pattie, Susan P. 1999. Longing and Belonging: Issues of Homeland in Armenian Diaspora.  
PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review 22(2): 80-92. 
Peletz, Michael G. 1995. Kinship Studies in Late Twentieth-Century Anthropology. Annual  
Review of Anthropology 24: 343-72. 
Pfeifer, Mark E, Monica Chiu, Kou Yang. 2013. Diversity in Diaspora: Hmong Americans  
in the Twenty-First Century. Manoa: University of Hawaii Press. 
Phillips, Mark., Gordon Schochet (eds.). 2004. Questions of Tradition: Exploring the  
Concept of Tradition Across the Disciplines. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Pholsena, Vatthana. 2002. Nation/Representation: Ethnic Classification and Mapping  
Nationhood in Contemporary Laos. Asian Ethnicity 3(2): 175-197. 
Portes, Alejandro., Rumbaut, Ruben G. 1996. Immigrant America: A Portrait. (2nd Edition)  
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.  
Quincy, Keith. 2002. Harvesting Pa Chays Wheat: The Hmong and Americas Secret War  
in Laos. Spokane, Washington: Eastern Washington University Press. 
Rumbaut, R.G. 1997. Assimilation and its Discontents: Between Rhetoric and Reality.  
International Migration Review 31(4): 923960. 
Safran, William. 1991. Diasporas in Modern Societies: Myths of Homeland and Return.  
Diaspora 1: 83-99.   
Salemink, Oscar. 2007. The Emperors New Clothes: Re-Fashioning Ritual in the Hue  
Festival. Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 38(3): 559-581.  
Scheuble, L. K., and D. R. Johnson. 1993. Marital Name Change: Plans and Attitudes of  
      College Students. Journal of Marriage and Family 55(3): 747-754. 
Schein, Louisa. 2000. Minority Rules: The Miao and the Feminine in Chinas Cultural  
Politics. Durham: Duke University Press. 
______. 2004. Hmong/Miao Transnationality: Identity beyond Culture. In Nicholas Tapp et  
al. (eds.). 2004. Hmong/Miao in Asia. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books, pp. 273-294. 
Schiller Nina G., Linda Basch, and Cristina Szanton B. 1995. Transmigrant: Theorizing  
Transnational Migration. Anthropological Quarterly 68(1): 48-63. 
Schneider, David M. 1980. American Kinship: A Cultural Account. Chicago: The University  
of Chicago Press. 
Schrauwers, Albert. 1999. Negotiating Parentage: The Political Economy of Kinship in  
Central Sulawesi, Indonesia. American Ethnologist 26(2): 310-323. 
Schulz, Helena Lindholm. 2003. The Palestinian Diaspora: Formation of Identities and  
Politics of Homeland. London; New York: Routledge. 
Scott, James C. 1985. Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance. New  
Haven: Yale University Press.  
Shukla, Sandhya. 2003. India Abroad: Diasporic Cultures of Postwar America and England.  
      Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Siu, Lok. 2001. Diasporic Cultural Citizenship: Chineseness and Belonging in Central  
America. Social Text 19(4): 7-28. 
______. 2005. Memories of a Future Home: Diasporic Citizenship of Chinese in Panama.  
Palo Alto: Stanford University Press. 
Skrbis, Zlatko. 1997. Homeland-Diaspora Relations: From Passive to Active Interactions.  
Asian Pacific Migration Journal 6(3): 601-610. 
Smith-Hefner, Nancy J. 1994. Ethnicity and the Force of Faith: Christian Conversion among  
Khmer Refugees. Anthropological Quarterly 67(1): 24-37. 
Smith, Robert. 2005. Mexican New York: Transnational Lives of New Immigrants. Berkeley:  
      University of California Press. 
Soysal, Yasemin N. 1994. Limits of Citizenship: Migrants and Postnational Membership in  
Europe. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.  
Sparke, Matthew. 2004. Passports into Credit Cards: On the Borders and Spaces of  
Neoliberal Citizenship. In Migdal, Joel S (ed.). Boundaries and Belonging: State and 
Societies in the Struggle to Shape Identities and Local Practices. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 251-283. 
St. John, Ronald B. 2006. The Political Economy of Laos: Poor State or Poor Policy? Asian  
Affairs XXXVII (II): 176-191. 
Stuart-Fox, Marin. 1997. The Challenge for Lao Historiography. South East Asia Research  
14(3): 339-359. 
Symonds, Patricia V. 2004. Calling in the Soul: Gender and the Cycle of Life in a Hmong  
Village. Seattle; London: University of Washington Press. 
Tapp, Nicholas. 1988. Geomancy and Development: The Case of the White Hmong of North  
Thailand. Ethnos 53: 228-238. 
______. 1989a. Sovereignty and Rebellion: The White Hmong of Northern Thailand.  
Singapore: Oxford University Press. 
______. 1989b. Hmong Religion. Asian Folklore Studies 48(1): 59-94. 
______. 1998. The Hmong/MIAO in Asia. Anthropology Today 14(6): 23. 
______. 2002. Cultural Accommodations in Southwest China: The Han Miao and  
Problems in the Ethnography of the Hmong. Asian Folklore Studies 61(1): 77-104. 
______.  2013. Religion and Mobility in a Globalising Asia. Asia Pacific Journal of  
Anthropology 14(1): 102-112. 
Tapp, Nicholas., Gary Yia Lee. 2004. The Hmong of Australia: Culture and Diaspora.  
Canberra: Pandanus Books. 
Tapp, Nicholas., Jean Michaud, Christian Culas, and Gary Y. Lee (eds.). 2004. Hmong/Miao  
in Asia. Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books. 
Taussig, Michael T. 1987. Shamanism, Colonialism, and the Wild Man: A Study in Terror  
and Healing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Taylor, Janelle S. 2003. The Story Catches You and You Fall Down: Tragedy, Ethnography,  
and Cultural Competence. Medical Anthropology Quarterly 17(2): 159-181. 
Thong, Thao. 1972. The Hmoob Had Organized after Kublai Khan Founded the Mongol  
Dynasty. Sage Collection (9 pages). 
Toland, Judith D. (ed.). 2009[1993]. Ethnicity and the State. New Brunswick, NJ:  
Transaction Publishers.  
Tllyan, Khachig. 1996. Rethinking Diaspora(s): Stateless Power in the Transnational  
Moment. Diaspora 5(1):336. 
Trilling, Lionel. 1972. Sincerity and authenticity. London: Oxford University Press. 
Vang, Chia Y. 2010. Hmong America: Reconstructing Community in Diaspora. Urbana;  
Chicago; Springfield: University of Illinois Press. 
Vang, Thomas S. 2013. A History of the Hmong: From Ancient Times to the Modern  
Diaspora. Unknown Publisher. 
Van Hear, N. 1998. New Diasporas: The Mass Exodus, Dispersal and Regrouping of  
      Migrant Communities. London: UCL Press. 
Vann, Elizabeth F. 2006. The Limits of Authenticity in Vietnamese Consumer Markets.  
American Anthropologist 108(2): 286-296. 
Vertovec, Steven. 2011. The Cultural Politics of Nation and Migration. Annual Review of  
Anthropology 40: 241-256. 
Wahlbeck, sten. 2002. The Concept of Diaspora As an Analytical Tool in the Study of  
Refugee Communities. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 28(2): 221-238. 
Werbner, Pnina. 2002. Imagined Diasporas among Manchester Muslims: The Public  
      Performance of Pakistani Transnational Identity Politics. Oxford: James Currey. 
White, Daniel. 2010. Frommers Cambodia&Laos. Hoboken: NJ. Wiley Publishing, Inc. 
Winland, Daphne. 1994. Christianity and Community: Conversion and Adaptation among  
Hmong Refugee Women. The Canadian Journal of Sociology 19(1): 21-45. 
______. 2002. The Politics of Desire and Disdain: Croatian Identity between Home and  
Homeland. American Ethnologist 29(3): 693-718. 
Wong, Sau-ling C. 1995. Denationalization Reconsidered: Asian American Cultural  
Criticism at a Theoretical Crossroads. Amerasia Journal 21(1, 2): 1-28. 
Xiang, Biao. 2014. The Pacific Paradox: The Chinese State in Transpacific Interactions. In  
      Janet Hoskins and Viet T. Nguyen (eds.). Transpacific Studies: Framing an Emerging      
     Field. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, pp. 85-105. 
Xiong, Machiline., Paul Jesilow. 2007. Constructing a Social Problem: Suicide,  
Acculturation and the Hmong. Hmong Studies Journal 8: 1-43. 
Xiong, Yang S. 2013. An Analysis of Poverty in Hmong American Communities. In Pfeifer,  
Mark E. et al (eds.). Diversity in Diaspora: Hmong Americans in the Twenty-First 
Century. Manoa: University of Hawaii Press, pp. 66-105. 
Yang, Kao K. 2008. The Late Homecoming: A Hmong Family Memoir. Minneapolis: Coffee  
 House Press.  
Yang, Kou. 2009. Commentary: Challenges and Complexity in the Re-Construction of  
Hmong History. Hmong Studies Journal 10: 1-17. 
Yang, Tou T. 2003. Hmong of Germany: Preliminary Report on the Resettlement of Lao  
Hmong Refugee in Germany. Hmong Studies Journal 4:1-14. 
Yang, Zhiqiang. 2009. From Miao to Miaozu- Alterity in the Formation of Modern Ethnic  
Groups. Hmong Studies Journal 10: 1-28. 
Yeh, Chiou-ling. 2008. Making an American Festival: Chinese New Year in San Franciscos  
Chinatown. Berkeley; Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
Young, Gordon. 1969. The Hill Tribes in Northern Thailand. Bangkok: The Siam Society. 
Zucker, Norman L. 1983. Refugee Resettlement in the United States: Policy and Problems.  
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 467: 172-186. 
	LEE (1)
	LEE (2)
