Searching for New Particles at the Large Hadron Collider: Theory and Methods for Extradimensional Supersymmetry
Searching for New Particles at the
Large Hadron Collider:
Theory and Methods for
Extradimensional Supersymmetry
James Scoville
University College
University of Oxford
A thesis submitted for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Trinity 2015
Abstract
The hierarchy problem of the electroweak scale is an intriguing puzzle which can
conceivably be solved during upcoming runs of the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). Super-
symmetry (SUSY) is an attractive potential solution to this problem, though the fact that
no supersymmetric particles have been discovered thus far raises fine tuning of most mod-
els to O(1%). Extradimensional SUSY is especially interesting in light of this fact since
certain models are easier to reconcile with LHC data. This thesis discusses two differ-
ent extradimensional SUSY scenarios: auto-concealment and Maximally Natural SUSY
(MNSUSY). The auto-concealment mechanism applies when the lightest ordinary super-
symmetric particle (LOSP), a brane localized state, promptly decays to the Kaluza-Klein
(KK) tower of a bulk lightest supersymmetric particle (LSP). This dynamically realizes
the compression mechanism for hiding SUSY as decays into the more numerous heavier
KK LSP states are favored. LHC limits on LOSP squarks weaken to . 450 GeV while
limits on LOSP right-handed sleptons evaporate. Slepton searches perform poorly in this
case because LHC analyses are blind to compressed slepton spectra. To help fill this
gap, this thesis presents a monojet-like search sensitive to the very compressed range
3 GeV < ml  m01 < 24 GeV. The analysis should allow LHC14 with 100 fb
1 to
search for degenerate left-handed selectrons and smuons in the compressed region up to
mlL . 150 GeV. In addition, it should be sensitive to mlL . 110 GeV for auto-concealed
SUSY. To expand the class of extradimensional SUSY models the LHC is able to test this
thesis also describes the Lagrangian and mass matrices of MNSUSY, which are needed
to implement this model in the Feynman rules generator program FeynRules for use in
Monte Carlo programs for collider simulations. It also describes benchmark scenarios
useful for the first collider phenomenology studies.
For my family.
Acknowledgements
I offer my deepest thanks to my advisors John March-Russell and Alan Barr
for their incredible dedication, guidance, enthusiasm, advice, and support not
only during the preparation of this thesis but during my entire time at Oxford.
Without them my research would have been impossible and it was a fantastic
privilege and delight to work with both of them.
I also gratefully acknowledge the support and teaching I received from my
collaborators at Stanford: Savas Dimopoulos and Kiel Howe. Not only did
they enable, strengthen, and refine my research, but they also made my studies
far more enjoyable.
I would like to thank the many other people, in Oxford and abroad, who
helped fill the numerous gaps in my knowledge and who offered advice on
various parts of this work. This includes Juan Rojo, Ulrich Haisch, Guido
Bell, Joseph Conlon, Emanuele Re, Isabel Garca Garca, Mireia Crispin-
Ortuzar, William Kalderon, Alexandru Dafinca, Claire Gwenlan, William
Fawcett, Koichi Nagai, and Jonathan Burr. I am also deeply indebted to
Jonathan Patterson who worked me through difficulties with the Oxford com-
puting cluster on countless occasions, including many nights and weekends.
Most importantly the gratitude I have towards my family is beyond words.
Without my parents unconditional love and support I would have not reached
where I am today. Likewise my wifes family has always been available when
I needed them most. My kids are the constant heartbeat of joy in my life and
I am grateful for every moment with them. Finally, my wife is the love of my
life and the first officer of our home  with her by my side we have conquered
the toughest challenges in our lives. Thank God for them all
Finally, I gratefully acknowledge support from the United States Air Force
Institute of Technology. The views expressed in this work are my own and
do not reflect the official policy or position of the United States Air Force,
Department of Defense, or the US Government.
Statement of Originality
This thesis is based on original research and contains no material that has
already been accepted, or is concurrently being submitted, for any degree or
diploma or certificate or other qualification in this university or elsewhere. To
the best of my knowledge and belief this thesis contains no material previously
published or written by another person, except where due reference is made
in the text.
James Scoville 2015
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Motivations for new physics at the TeV scale 3
2.1 The Standard Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 Open problems in the Standard Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2.1 The hierarchy problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2.2 Other open problems in the Standard Model . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3 Supersymmetry in extra dimensions 12
3.1 4D supersymmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.1.1 The structure of SUSY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1.2 Broken SUSY and phenomenologically viable theories . . . . . . . 21
3.2 Extradimensional SUSY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4 Monte Carlo simulations of hadron colliders 29
4.1 From Lagrangian to Feynman rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2 From Feynman rules to simulated collisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2.1 Parton distribution functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2.2 Parton showers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2.3 Jet matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.2.4 Hadronization and decays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.3 From simulated collisions to analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5 LHC, ATLAS, and BSM search strategies 38
5.1 LHC and the ATLAS detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.2 Object identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3 Classic SUSY search strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6 Auto-concealment of supersymmetry in extra dimensions 48
6.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.2 Decays to the bulk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6.2.1 Bulk spectrum and profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2.2 Brane couplings and decays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.3 SUSY limits and auto-concealment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6.4 Probing extra dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
6.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7 Monojet-like search for compressed sleptons at LHC14 64
7.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
7.2 Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
7.2.1 Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
7.2.2 Slepton signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7.2.3 Backgrounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
7.3 Beating the backgrounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.3.1 Key variables: m2 and mT2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.3.2 Analysis cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
7.3.3 Controlling background systematics: SF-DF . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
7.4 LHC14 reach with 100 fb1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
7.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
8 Benchmark models for Maximally Natural Supersymmetry 80
8.0.1 Conventions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
8.1 Field content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
8.1.1 5D SUSY field content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
8.1.2 Scherk-Schwarz supersymmetry breaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
8.1.3 MNSUSY field content . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
8.2 Lagrangian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
8.2.1 Gauge multiplet Lagrangian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
8.2.2 Hypermultiplet Lagrangian . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
8.2.3 Brane localized terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
8.2.3.1 Brane localized third generation fields . . . . . . . . . . 89
8.2.3.2 Brane localized Yukawa interactions . . . . . . . . . . . 90
8.3 Soft masses and field mixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
8.4 FeynRules implementation and user manual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
8.5 Benchmark simplified models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
8.6 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
9 Summary and conclusions 104
References 105
Chapter 1: Introduction
The absence of supersymmetry signals at the LHC is not only evidence for
supersymmetry but also for extra dimensions. (Savas Dimopoulos1)
The Standard Model (SM) is an incredibly successful theory of subatomic physics. It
has passed a dizzying array of experimental tests, with its most recent success being the
discovery of the Higgs boson in 2012 [1, 2]. Nevertheless, there are a number of reasons
to expect that it is not the final word in fundamental physics. Notably, it fails to address
questions such as: What is the origin and nature of neutrino masses? Do the forces of
nature unify? What is dark matter (DM) and dark energy? Why is the electroweak scale
so small compared to the Planck scale. The last question is known as the hierarchy or
naturalness problem and is a large motivating factor behind this thesis.
While there are a number of competing theories beyond the Standard Model (BSM)
which seek to answer some of these questions, none address them all. One of the most
popular theories, Supersymmetry (SUSY), manages to tackle several questions by postu-
lating a new symmetry of nature under which every fermion comes with a boson partner,
and vice-versa. These new partners are known as superpartners or sparticles. One of
the most important phenomenological predictions of SUSY (or at least of SUSY which
addresses the hierarchy problem) is the existence of sparticles in a range which should be
detectable by the Large Hadron Collider (LHC).
Unfortunately for SUSY supporters there have been no SUSY signals at the LHC
so far [3, 4]. This has put into question SUSYs ability to address the hierarchy prob-
lem [5]. Recently, however, a number of studies have come forward investigating the
phenomenology of extradimensional SUSY to help relieve this tension, either by weaken-
ing collider limits on new particles  as in the auto-concealment mechanism [6]  or by
reducing the level of fine tuning in the model  as in Maximally Natural Supersymmetry
(MNSUSY) [7, 8]. These models have yet to undergo dedicated analysis by the LHC
collaborations. This thesis was written to discuss challenges associated with searching
for extradimensional SUSY and to introduce tools to help experimentalists confront these
theories at the LHC.
1In jest, to be sure.
The structure of this work is as follows. Chapter 2 briefly reviews the SM and some
of its weaknesses, with a particular focus on the hierarchy problem. Chapter 3 introduces
SUSY in higher dimensions. Chapter 4 focuses on both the theory and methods of Monte
Carlo collider simulations, which were the primary tools used to conduct the work in this
thesis. Chapter 5 gives an overview of the LHC and the ATLAS detector with a specific
emphasis on how the design of these machines affects SUSY searches. Chapter 6 then
addresses how a specific extradimensional SUSY mechanism known as auto-concealment
can weaken current LHC limits on sparticle masses. Chapter 7 introduces a new search
strategy designed not only to fill a gap left by auto-concealment, but also to address a
blind spot in current searches for less exotic SUSY models. Chapter 8 describes FeynRules
code and benchmark models for collider pheno studies of a 5D SUSY model MNSUSY.
Finally, ch. 9 summarizes this work.
Chapter 2: Motivations for new physics at
the TeV scale
In this chapter we briefly review the main concepts of the SM before moving on to discuss
motivations for exploring beyond it. In particular, we will address the hierarchy problem,
which is perhaps the strongest reason to expect new physics at the TeV scale. Other open
questions in the SM will be covered in less detail. Much of the information covered in
the following section can be found in various textbooks  I used ref. [9] extensively.
2.1 The Standard Model
The SM is built upon the machinery of quantum field theory and relies heavily on symme-
tries to describe subatomic interactions. At its heart lie the global symmetry of Poincare
invariance and three local (gauge) symmetries. The fields in the SM and their interac-
tions can be described via their transformations under specific representations of these
symmetry groups.
Under the Poincare group (or more properly its subgroup, the Lorentz group, which
describes boosts and rotations) SM fields fall under one of four representations of the
algebra so(1, 3) = su(2)su(2), where the lower-case letters denote the groups algebras.
These representations are summarized in table 2.1.
Fields in the (0, 0) representation of su(2)  su(2) transform as scalars under the
SO(3) subgroup. The Higgs field H is the only fundamental scalar in the SM. Fields
in the representations (12 , 0) transform as left-handed Weyl spinors while those in (0,
transform as right-handed Weyl spinors under SO(3). The two are related by conjugation
therefore it is notationally convenient to define all right-handed spinors as those appearing
su(2) su(2) (0, 0) (12 , 0) (0,
so(3) 0 12
2 1 0
Table 2.1: Irreducible representations of the Lorentz algebra su(2)su(2) and its decomposition
into the so(3) subalgebra of rotations. The representation under so(3) describes the particles
spin. Table adapted from [9].
with a dagger , and left-handed spinors as .1 The SM has five types of spinors: Q, L,
e, d, and u. Consistent with our conventions, we have put daggers on the last three to
indicate they are right-handed; the bar above them is simply part of the Weyl spinors
names and does not denote any kind of conjugation. As an example, e is often called eR.
Defining fields in this way will make the jump to SUSY a bit easier, in which e will form
part of a left-chiral superfield. For each type of spinor field there exists three generations
or copies of the field, each with a different coupling to the Higgs field  why this should
be so is unclear.
Finally, fields in the (12 ,
2) representation transform as a scalar (0) and a vector (1)
under SO(3). In fact there are no SM fields which transform as both a scalar and a vector.
The scalar must be removed by the correct choice of the kinetic term in the Lagrangian.
There are three types of vector fields in the SM represented by B, W, and g.
As already mentioned, in addition to the global Poincare symmetry of the SM there
also exists three local symmetries: U(1)Y , SU(2)W , and SU(3)C . Each of the spinors and
scalars transform under these symmetries as   U(x) with
U(x) = exp(ia(x)T a) (2.1)
where U is a representation of the local group (either the fundamental or trivial represen-
tation). The matrices T a form the algebra of this representation. To keep the Lagrangian
invariant under this transformation requires replacing ordinary derivatives by covariant
derivatives
  D =   igAa(x)T
a. (2.2)
where the field Aa(x) transforms as
Aa(x) A
(x) +
a(x) fabcb(x)Ac(x). (2.3)
and the parameter g gives the strength of the coupling between the fields. For abelian
fields one may replace T a by the  fields U(1) charge and set fabc to zero.
Thus a local symmetry requires the introduction of a new vector field Aa(x). This
field is in the adjoint representation and must have its own kinetic term. In the SM
these vector fields are precisely those already mentioned: B, W, and g corresponding
1We adopt the conventions of Martins SUSY Primer [10] when discussing spinor products.
Name SU(2) Components SO(3) SU(3)C , SU(2)W , U(1)Y
g  1 (8,1, 0)
W (W 1 ,W 2 ,W 3) 1 (1,3, 0)
B  1 (1,1, 0)
Qi (uLi, dLi) 12 (3,2,
Li (Li, eLi) 12 (1,2,
i  12 (3,1,
2 (3,1,
i  12 (1,1,1)
H (G+, 1
(v + h+ iG0) 0 (1,2, 12)
Table 2.2: Group transformation properties of the SM Field Content. Following the conventions
of ref [10], daggered spinors indicate that they are right-handed and the bar over them is simply
part of their name  it does not denote any kind of conjugation. The indices i on the spinors
runs from 1 to 3 and indicates that they each come in three generations.
to the gauge groups U(1)Y , SU(2)W , and SU(3)C respectively. The subscripts stand for
hypercharge, weak, and color  the names of the forces that result from exchange of the
gauge fields. The color force is also called the strong force due to the fact that its coupling
g is the largest of the three; so large in fact that perturbation theory breaks down below
energies of about 1 GeV  a fact important for its phenomenology. The various group
transformation properties of the SM field content are summarized in table 2.2.
The Lagrangian of the SM is renormalizable and satisfies the symmetries just dis-
cussed. It is neatly summarized by
F aF
a + ii
Di + |DH|2 + 2|H|2  |H|4
(uiyuijQj H + diy
ijQjH
 + eiyeijLjH
 + h.c.)
(2.4)
where F a = A  A + gfabcAbAc are the gauge field strength tensors, i are
the SM spinor fields, and Qj  H = QjaabHb = Qj1H2  Qj2H1 denotes the invariant
product over SU(2)W indices. The spinor-spinor-scalar terms are known as Yukawa
interactions. Mass terms for the fermions are forbidden for all fields except the Higgs by
gauge invariance. Interestingly, the field content of the SM is such that gauge invariance
enforces an accidental global U(1)BL symmetry where   exp(i(B  L)) with
Figure 2.1: Spontaneous symmetry breaking of a complex scalar  field due to a negative
quadratic term in its potential V (). The minima of the potential is no longer at  = 0 (the
top of the hill) where the symmetry of the potential is manifest, but rather at the bottom of
the potential. Figure taken from [11].
LL = Le = 1, BQ = Bu = Bd = 1/3, and BL = Be = LQ = Lu = Ld = 0. This will
be important later.
The theory described thus far is made much richer by the fact that the SU(2)W
symmetry is spontaneously broken by a vacuum expectation value (VEV) for the Higgs
field  a process known as Electroweak Symmetry Breaking (EWSB). This occurs because
the sign of the quadratic term in the Higgs potential V (H) = 2|H|2 +|H|4 is negative
(2 is defined to be positive). Why this mass term should be negative is an unanswered
question in the SM. Nevertheless, this sign means the vacuum energy is minimized when
the Higgs field develops a non-zero VEV. We can choose a SU(2) basis such that
h =
 0
 (2.5)
with v = 247 GeV. This remarkable fact means that even though the SM Lagrangian has
a SU(2)W gauge invariance, the vacuum does not This spontaneous symmetry breaking
can be visualized using the famous mexican hat potential shown in fig. 2.1.
Substituting the Higgs VEV back into the Lagrangian one finds that the W 1,2,3 gauge
bosons mix with the B gauge boson to form three massive vector bosons W+ , W ,
and Z0 as well as one massless vector boson , the photon, which is associated with the
residual U(1)EM gauge symmetry. The U(1)EM has coupling strength e = g sin(W ) where
SO(3) Particle Type Name Symbol Mass SU(3)C , U(1)EM
W boson W 80.39 GeV (1,1)
1 gauge boson Z boson Z 91.19 GeV (1, 0)
photon  0 (1, 0)
gluon g 0 (8, 0)
up u 2.3 MeV
charm c 1.275 GeV (3,+2/3)
quark top t 173.2 GeV
down d 4.8 MeV
strange s 95 MeV (3,1/3)
1/2 bottom b 4.18 GeV
electron e 0.511 MeV
muon  105.7 MeV (1,1)
lepton tau  1.778 GeV
electron neutrino e < 2 eV
muon neutrino  < 2 eV (1, 0)
tau neutrino  < 2 eV
0 Higgs boson Higgs h 125.7 GeV (1, 0)
Table 2.3: Physical particle content of the SM. Masses are taken from the Particle Data Group
[12].
tan(W ) = g/g is the ratio of the U(1)Y to SU(2)W couplings. Three of the complex
Higgs doublets degrees of freedom G, G0 provide the extra degrees of freedom necessary
for the vector bosons to become massive. One neutral scalar Higgs field h remains with a
mass m2h = 2v2 = 22. Additionally, the fermions acquire Dirac masses proportional to
the strength of their Yukawa couplings. When the dust settles after EWSB the physical
spectrum consists of one real scalar field h, types of massless vector bosons  and ga, three
massive vector bosons W+ , W , and Z0, three u-type Dirac fermions, three d-type Dirac
fermions, three e-type Dirac fermions, and three -type fermions. This is summarized in
table 2.3
As a final note in discussing the SM content, its worth mentioning that since the
discovery of neutrino oscillations, it is now well known that the SM must be augmented
by a mechanism for generating neutrino masses [12]. There are several ways of doing
so, either through higher dimensional operators, Yukawa interactions involving a gauge
singlet , and (optionally) a Majorana mass for  along with the see-saw mechanism.
Since it is not yet known whether the neutrino mass is Dirac or Majorana one cannot say
which method is correct.
2.2 Open problems in the Standard Model
The SM has been beautifully confirmed in countless experiments since its inception, with
its capstone placed in 2012 when the LHC discovered the Higgs boson [1, 2]  the last
missing particle in the theory. Nevertheless, the SM has a number of unexplained features
which demand attention. Perhaps one of the most frequently discussed has ironically
become more urgent after the discovery of the Higgs. This is the infamous hierarchy or
naturalness problem. Though it is not necessarily the largest open problem in the SM
it is the best reason to expect new physics at the TeV scale within reach of the LHC.
Therefore, we address this problem in the following section. Other open questions in the
SM are mentioned in sec. 2.2.2.
2.2.1 The hierarchy problem
Ken Wilson taught us that coefficients of operators with dimension less than four are
relevant in the sense that they are sensitive to the details of short distance physics which
describes the UV completion of a theory [13]. Thus, if any new physics exists at energies
above the EW scale, the details of this theory should have a large impact on the only
relevant operator in the SM: 2|H|2, or equivalently the Higgs mass (or any other measure
of the EW scale, such as the Z mass). This is a concern because we expect new physics
at energies above the EW scale  if nothing else a UV completion to gravity should exist
at the Planck scale around 1019 GeV.
This problem can be made clearer by considering the size of quantum corrections to
the mass ms of a scalar  arising from a new fermion f of mass mf  ms due to the
interaction fff . Writing m2s = m2s bare + s we obtain
is =
2  3m2f log
+ ...
(2.6)
where we have introduced a cut-off  to regulate the integral.
Two problems become evident when looking at this expression. The first is that
quantum corrections to the Higgs mass squared appear to have a quadratic sensitivity
to the cut-off . However this sensitivity is not present in all renormalization schemes.
Indeed, this divergence appears as the typical 1/ when using dimensional regularization
and can be removed using counter terms as usual. Thus it is not clear that the first term
in this expression really denotes a sensitivity to UV physics.
The second term, however, appears regardless of the regularization scheme and is
definitely a problem. This term is proportional to the square of the fermion mass m2f ,
which we are assuming to be much heavier than the Higgs. Thus the Higgs mass appears
to be highly sensitive to UV physics.
This sensitivity to high scale physics is in stark contrast to quantum corrections to the
mass of a fermion. In this case the size of the correction is proportional to the fermions
own mass. Going through the same exercise as before we obtain
if =
+ ...
(2.7)
A simple way to see why this must be so is to notice that left and right-handed fermions
such as eL and e are only coupled via their mass (or equivalently, their Yukawa interac-
tions)  as in me(eLe+ h.c.). If one sets me  0, then an additional custodial symmetry
appears under which eL and e have opposite charge: eL  eieL and e  eie. Since
this symmetry is exact, me will stay zero to all orders in perturbation theory. If we
once again introduce me then every diagram which violates custodial symmetry must
be proportional to the only thing which does the violating: me. Therefore, quantum
corrections to me must be proportional to me itself. If this parameter starts off small
then quantum corrections will not do much to change this. The mass of a fermion is
technically natural [14].
To quantify the Higgs sensitivity to UV physics it is useful to introduce the concept
of fine tuning [15]. Fine tuning is defined as the fractional sensitivity of an observable O
(like the Higgs mass) due to a change in a UV parameter  (such as the mass of a heavy
fermion) divided by the fractional change in that UV parameter. Or more succinctly
FTO =
%change in O
%change in 
 logO
 log
(2.8)
If there is more than one relevant variable i then the total fine tuning with respect to
each of these variables is usually added in quadrature.
As an example, suppose that a new fermion near the Planck scale  1019GeV couples
to the Higgs with an order one coupling. Then adjusting this parameter by a factor of
1034 will result in an order one change to the quantum correction for the Higgs mass
and a fine tuning of 1034. This rather extreme example shows that there must be a very
fine cancellation of parameters to arrive at a Higgs mass so much lower than the Planck
scale. This would appear to be quite an unnatural situation.
There are a number of ways to deal with this problem. It could be, for instance,
that the Higgs is not a fundamental particle but is rather composite as in Technicolor
models [16]. Or it could be that the fundamental UV cutoff is much lower than the
Planck scale, or that there is simply no new physics between the EW scale and the
Planck scale. If none of these are true then one is lead to assume that either the universe
is fundamentally unnatural or there must be some new symmetry responsible for the
miraculous cancellations between quantum corrections which could feed into the Higgs
mass. One such new symmetry is SUSY, which we discuss in ch. 3.
2.2.2 Other open problems in the Standard Model
Besides the hierarchy problem there are a number of other open questions in the SM. We
discuss two for which SUSY offers a possible explanation in order to provide context for
later discussions.
The first problem or question comes from the fact that the three gauge couplings
have drastically different values at low energies. In particular the strong force coupling
becomes non-perturbative at energies below about a GeV  the confinement scale where
bound states of quarks (hadrons) form. However, the gauge couplings experience different
renormalization group runnings and come intriguingly close to the same value near the
Figure 2.2: RG running of 1 = 4/g2 for all three gauge couplings. The dotted lines show
the RG running in the SM, while the solid lines show the running in the MSSM (addressed in
ch. 3). Figure taken from [10].
Grand Unified Theory (GUT) scale of 1016 GeV. This has lead many to speculate that
the three gauge forces may in fact be one force which is spontaneously broken at the GUT
scale [1719]. In this case three free parameters in the SM are reduced to one  a very
attractive picture. The simplest SUSY model, the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard
Model discussed in ch. 3, brings the couplings into near perfect agreement, as shown in
fig. 2.2 .
The second issue we mention is the apparent existence of Dark Matter (DM). DM
neither absorbs nor emits light to any significant degree but its presence can be inferred
from gravitational effects on galaxy rotation rates, galaxy clusters, gravitational lensing,
big bang nucleosynthesis, structure formation, and the cosmic microwave background
[20]. Unfortunately, the SM provides no viable DM candidates. However, the lightest
supersymmetric particle (LSP) can be one if it is neutral.
There are a few other open problems in the SM which certain SUSY models can
explain such as the muon magnetic moment anomaly [21] and the source of EW symmetry
breaking [10, 22]. A discussion of these issues provides less relevant background for the
chapters which follow so we pass on it here. Instead we move on to discuss SUSY in both
4D and in higher dimensions.
Chapter 3: Supersymmetry in extra
dimensions
3.1 4D supersymmetry
As we discussed in sec. 2.2.1, the hierarchy problem arises from the fact that the squared
mass of a scalar particle receives large quantum corrections proportional to the squared
mass of any new heavy particles. This is true whether the heavy particle is a boson
or a fermion, but with the intriguing difference that a fermion loop carries the opposite
sign. This observation leads to one potential solution to the hierarchy problem: perhaps
every boson comes with a fermion partner with couplings such that all large quantum
corrections to the Higgs mass are canceled.
With this as motivation consider a complex scalar, which we suggestively call a
sfermion f , that couples to the Higgs. Then its contribution to the Higgs mass is
is =
2 m2
+ i m2f2f
822f
(3.1)
where we have replaced v 
2mf/f in the last term which is true for SM fermions.
Comparing this expression to 2.6 we see that if we had two complex scalars for every
Dirac fermion (or equivalently one complex scalar for every Weyl spinor), if f = 2f , and
if mf = mf then the radiative corrections would cancel, resolving the hierarchy problem.
Such a complex relation between bosons and fermions as well as their couplings implies a
new symmetry known as supersymmetry or SUSY. This chapter reviews the basics of 4D
SUSY  for more information one should turn to ref. [10], where much of this information
can be found.
3.1.1 The structure of SUSY
Schematically, a supersymmetric transformation takes
Q|boson  |fermion and Q|fermion  |boson. (3.2)
From the form of 3.2 we see that the generator of SUSY transformations, Q, must itself
be a spinor. To be more concrete, the generators Q and Q satisfy the algebra [10,23]
{Q, Q
} = 2
P, {Q, Q} = {Q
, Q
} = 0
[Q,M ] = Q, [Q, P
] = 0
(3.3)
with M obeying the Lorentz algebra
[M ,M] = i(M +M M M). (3.4)
From [Q, P ] = 0 we see that SUSY preserves the four momentum p of a particle;
therefore particles within a supermultiplet should have the same mass. For a massless
supermultiplet with p = (E, 0, 0, E)
{Q, Q
} = 2
P  2E(
0 + 3) = 4E
1 0
(3.5)
so that Q2 = 0 and Q1  Q is the generator of supersymmetric transformations in this
representation. The structure {Q,Q}  1 is the same as for ladder operators and the
equation [Q,M ] = Q implies
[Q, J3] = 12
11Q = 12Q
 J3Q = Q(J3  1/2)
(3.6)
Thus Q lowers the helicity of a particle by 1/2 while Q raises it, in agreement with the
schematic form given in eq. 3.2 [23]. Multiple applications of Q and Q annihilate the
state due to {Q, Q} = 0. An infinitesimal SUSY transformation can be parameterized
using the left-handed Weyl spinor  and takes the form Q+ Q.
To understand the Q operators a little more fully we introduce the concept of super-
space, which we will encounter again in chs. 6 and 8. Superspace makes it especially easy
to write down N = 1 SUSY Lagrangians. It is parameterized by the coordinates
(x, , ) (3.7)
where x is the spacetime coordinate, and ,  are anticommuting spinor coordinates.
The reason we introduce these new coordinates is that it allows us to combine the com-
ponent fields of a supermultiplet into one object S(x, , ) called a superfield, and it
also allows us to represent supersymmetric transformations as translations over the new
coordinate space. In the end it makes building SUSY Lagrangians fairly straightforward.
One can expand S(x, , ) in a power series over the anticommuting coordinates.
Since there are two independent coordinates in both  and  the expansion always
terminates with at most two s and two s. Thus a general superfield can be written:
S(, ) = +
2+F+F +V+++
D (3.8)
where the factors of
2 and 1/2 are added for convenience. Note that the product
of superfields can similarly be expanded in terms of Grassmann coordinates and is a
superfield in its own right. So, for example, one can ask for the F -term or the 2
component of the product superfield S = s1s2 by writing 1
S|2 = (s1s2)|2 = 12 + 1F2 + 2F1. (3.9)
This type of operation is encountered frequently when constructing a SUSY invariant
theory, as we will see shortly.
Just as the operator P generates spacetime translations, Q and Q generate trans-
lations over the coordinates  and  respectively. Similarly, just as one can represent
the abstract operator P as a differential operator in spacetime P  i the opera-
tors Q and Q can be represented by differential operators in superspace Q and Q. To
find the explicit form of the Qs, consider a group element representing a translation in
superspace [24]
G(x, , ) = exp
i(xP + Q+ Q)
. (3.10)
1Since
d  = 1 it is also common to see this operation as an integral over the superspace coordinates
d2 s1s2.
To find the differential form of Q, we use two subsequent group translations
G(0, , )G(x, , ) = exp
i(Q+ Q)
i(xP + Q+ Q)
(3.11)
Using the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula
eAeB = eA+B+
2 [A,B]+higher commutations (3.12)
and the fact that the SUSY algebra with the coordinates ,  uses commutators instead
of anticommutators
[Q, Q] = 2P
[Q,P] = 0
(3.13)
one finds [10,24]
G(0, , )G(x, , ) = exp
(x + i + i)P + ( + )Q+ ( + )Q
(3.14)
So a motion in parameter space is given by
g(, )(x, , ) = (x + i + i,  + ,  + )
i  ()
+  (i  ())
(x, , )
= (Q+ Q)(x, , )
2(x, , )
(3.15)
where the factor of
2 in the last line is a convention matching ref. [10], and where
Q  i
 ()
Q  i
 ().
(3.16)
This is the differential form of the Q operators which we were seeking. Applying this to
the general superfield in eq. 3.8 we see the SUSY transformations are given by [10]
 =  + 
 = F 
()(V + i)
 = F  +
()(V  i)
F =
 


 + 
 + 
 =
D  i()F  
()V
D  i()F +
()V
D = 
+ 
(3.17)
Note, in particular, that the SUSY transformation for the D-term is a total derivative,
which vanishes when integrated over all space to produce an action. Thus one can build a
SUSY invariant theory from the D-term, also known as the 4 component, of a superfield
(which can itself be the product of multiple superfields)
LSUSY  S(x, , )|4 . (3.18)
To construct SUSY invariant Lagrangians a final concept is necessary; one needs a way to
take derivatives with respect to the anticommuting coordinates that is SUSY covariant:
(DS) = D(S). (3.19)
This can be achieved with [10]
 i()
  

+ i()
(3.20)
which satisfies
{Q, D} = {Q, D} = {Q, D
} = {Q, D
} = 0. (3.21)
This is useful for defining the most frequently encountered superfield, the chiral superfield.
A left chiral superfield is defined by
  0. (3.22)
The product of multiple left chiral superfields is also a left-chiral superfield due to the
Leibnitz property of D as a differential operator: D(12) = (D
1)2 + 1(D
2) =
0. One can check [10] that
 = +
2 + F + i
 +
 (3.23)
satisfies eq. 3.22. Looking at this expression its easier to see why  is called left chiral
 it contains left handed Weyl fermions but no right handed fermions. Its conjugate 
is called a right chiral superfield. s field content is two complex scalar fields,  and F ,
and a left handed Weyl fermion field . We will see shortly that F is a non-dynamical
auxillary field, which can be removed from the theory by solving its equation of motion.
The purpose of this field will become clearer in a moment.
By inserting the explicit expression for  into the general SUSY transformation in
eq. 3.17 one obtains
 = 
() = i()+ F
F = i.
(3.24)
This agrees with the schematic SUSY transformation given at the beginning of this sec-
tion, eq. 3.2; it takes a boson to a fermion and vise versa. The presence of the auxiliary
field in the second term is needed to make the SUSY algebra close off-shell. One can see
the problem by counting the fermions off-shell degrees of freedom: four vs. the scalar
s two. F provides the two extra scalar degrees of freedom needed when the fields are
off-shell.
One very important point to take from the SUSY transformations 3.24 is that F trans-
forms as a total derivative for a chiral superfield, just as D did for a general superfield.
Therefore the F -term of a chiral superfield integrated over spacetime is SUSY invariant
and can be used in a SUSY invariant action. Since the product of chiral superfields is
also a chiral superfield, the F -term of any holomorphic function of the chiral superfields
W () can form part of the Lagrangian. W () is called the superpotential and for the
simplest phenomenologically viable SUSY model, the MSSM, it takes the form
W () =
mijij +
yijkijk. (3.25)
Thus, we can create a real and SUSY invariant action using the Lagrangian
LWZ = ii|4 + (W ()|2 + h.c.). (3.26)
This is known as the Wess-Zumino model [25]. Expanding the fields out in component
form, one obtains
LWZ = ii + i
i + F i Fi 
ijijW + FiiW + h.c.
(3.27)
where W = 12mijij +
6yijkijk is the superpotential written in terms of scalar fields.
The F s do not have a kinetic term and they can easily be eliminated by solving for their
equations of motion: F i = iW . Substituting this back into the Lagrangian we arrive
LWZ = ii + i
i  |iW |
ijijW + h.c.
. (3.28)
We should pause for a moment to take notice of the fact that the form of the terms
involving W demand that the scalar quartic couplings are the square of the Yukawa
couplings, just as was needed to cancel loop corrections to the Higgs mass
|iW |
mijj + 12yijkjk
2
ijijW = 
mij +
yijkk
(3.29)
Following chiral superfields, the next most important type of superfield are vector
superfields. Like regular vector fields they are real and are therefore defined by
V = V . (3.30)
While a detailed derivation of the transformation properties and the Lagrangian of these
fields is outside the scope of this chapter it is worth taking a brief look at them so that
ch. 8 is made more clear. We will focus mainly on abelian fields. For a more thorough
look at vector superfields there are several excellent references [10, 23,24,26].
A clever way to write vector superfields is [10]
V =+  +  + f + f  + V+
(

) + ( 
) + (
).
(3.31)
It turns out that the fields , , and f are unphysical and can be supergauged away. To
see this, note that if we shift V by a chiral superfield  as in
V  V + i(  ) (3.32)
then the components of V in eq. 3.31 transform as [10]
 + i(  )
    i
f  f  iF
V  V + (+ )
D  D
(3.33)
so that only  and D remain untransformed while V undergoes a normal gauge trans-
formation. Thus, if supergauge transformations are a symmetry of the Lagrangian then
normal gauge symmetry is automatically satisfied and one can put the vector superfield
in the Wess-Zumino gauge
VWZ = V + +  +
D. (3.34)
V is the usual gauge vector field,  is its superpartner known as the gaugino and D is a
non-propagating auxiliary field which permits the SUSY algebra to close off shell, as F
did for chiral superfields.
Given that vector fields transform as normal gauge transformation under a supergauge
transformation it is not hard to guess that chiral superfields will transform in an analogous
way to the non-supersymmetric case
 ei2gq,   ei2gq
 (3.35)
where the factor of two is included to obtain the standard transformations of component
fields. Then to keep the chiral kinetic terms in the Lagrangian supergauge invariant it
must be modified to
LSUSY  e2gqV |4 (3.36)
The exponential can be evaluated as a power series in s, which terminates after V 2 =
V V for the Wess-Zumino gauge. For non-abelian vector fields this generalizes
LSUSY  e2gT
aV a|4 =DD+ iD + F F
(T a)a + h.c.
+ g(T a)Da
(3.37)
with D the usual gauge-covariant derivative.
Building the kinetic terms for V is a less intuitive process so we will simply quote the
results of refs. [10, 23]. They show that the chiral superfield
W =
DDDV
= + D +
()F + i()
(3.38)
is supergauge invariant. Since it contains the field strength tensor F the productWW,
which is also chiral, will contain the kinetic term. As with other chiral superfields, we
use the real part of its F -term to obtain the SUSY invariant action.2.
LSUSY 
WW|2 + h.c. (3.39)
or for non-abelian fields (and neglecting the possible  term)
WaWa|2 + h.c. = 
F aF a + i
aD
DaDa (3.40)
with Da = a + gfabcAbc the covariant derivative of a.
To summarize, one can build a SUSY invariant action with the Lagrangian
LSUSY =ie
2gTaV ai|4 +
WaWa +W (i)
) 
+ h.c.
F aF a + i
aD
a +DiDi + i
Di+
(iT
ai)a + h.c.
(iT
ai)2+
 |iW |
ijijW + h.c.
(3.41)
2The D-term V |4 can also show up in the Lagrangian and can play a role in SUSY breaking. For
more information see ref. [10]
Figure 3.1: Massless hypermultiplet of N = 2 SUSY showing how the generators QA, QB relate
fields of different helicity. This can be decomposed into two N = 1 multiplets.
In this expression we have removed the F s and Da using their equations of motion. For
Da this is Da = g(iT ai).
Up to this point we have considered SUSY transformations with a single generator
Q, called N = 1 SUSY. It turns out it is possible to build more complex SUSY theories
by including additional generators. For the massless case, the SUSY algebra generalizes
to {QA , Q
} = 2 AB 
P, where A, B label the generator. SUSY with N > 1
is important when reducing higher dimensional supersymmetric theories to 4D SUSY,
as we will see in sec. 3.2. However, when considering phenomenologically viable SUSY
theories it is worth noting that it is not possible to have chiral fermions that transform in
the fundamental representation of a gauge group (as in the SM) inN > 1 SUSY [23]. This
is because higher N multiplets necessarily contain a spin one particle which transforms
in the adjoint representation. The exception to this is the N = 2 hypermultiplet, built
starting from a helicity  = 1/2 particle and applying each of the helicity raising
operators once to obtain a supermultiplet with two scalars and two chiral spinors. This
is shown schematically in fig. 3.1.
3.1.2 Broken SUSY and phenomenologically viable theories
Though unbroken SUSY solves the hierarchy problem of the EW scale, it cannot be
realized in our universe; since superpartners must interact with the same gauge coupling
strengths as SM particles they would be quite conspicuously produced in nature and in
colliders if they had the same mass as their SM partners. If SUSY does exist it must be
broken, though the masses of superpartners should not be too large or else the hierarchy
problem is reintroduced. Though there are many ways to perform the necessary breaking
there is no way to see which method (if any) is correct since we have yet to discover any
SUSY particles One method, known as Scherk-Schwarz symmetry breaking, involves the
use of boundary conditions for fields in an extra dimension. This is discussed in detail in
ch. 8.
Regardless of the method used to break SUSY it can be parameterized by including
all possible terms with couplings of positive mass dimension, consistent with the models
symmetries. Dimensionless couplings are not included because otherwise they will rein-
troduce the hierarchy problem due to an incomplete cancellation of terms, as in
(s  2f )
2. (3.42)
SUSY breaking with only positive mass dimension couplings is called soft breaking and it
can introduce mass terms for sfermions m2
f f and gauginos 12m( + h.c.) explaining
why superpartners are heavier than their SM cousins.
Parameterizing SUSY breaking in this way one can write down the simplest phe-
nomenologically realistic SUSY theory  the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model
(MSSM). The MSSM field content is shown in table 3.1, and its superpotential is
W = HuHd + uyuQHu  dydQHd  eyeLHd. (3.43)
Note that since W must be holomorphic the MSSM uses another Higgs field Hd (which
also acquires a VEV) to give mass to the down-type quarks and leptons.
Unfortunately, unlike the SM Yukawa terms the MSSM superpotential does not in-
clude all possible renormalizable gauge invariant terms. One could also include, for in-
stance, 1LQd+2ud d. Both terms have a non-zero BL and if allowed would mediate
tree level proton decay making us all rather short-lived. In the SM these types of terms
were forbidden by the accidental B  L symmetry.
To prevent these dangerous terms one usually assumes a conserved R-parity PR =
(1)3(BL)+2s where s is the particles spin. Including spin in this parity definition has
the nice property of giving all SM particles PR = +1 and their superpartners PR = 1.
If R-parity is conserved then the lightest superpartner is stable. If it is also neutral then
it provides a nice DM candidate. For collider physics the important phenomenological
consequence of this is that sparticles must be produced in pairs and each must decay
Type Name SU(3)C , SU(2)W , U(1)Y
g (8,1, 0)
Vector Multiplet W (1,3, 0)
B (1,1, 0)
Q (3,2, 16)
u (3,1,23)
d (3,1, 13)
Chiral Multiplet L (1,2,12)
e (1,1, 1)
Hu (1,2, 12)
Hd (1,2,12)
Table 3.1: MSSM supermultiplet content. Note that by convention all chiral multiplets are
defined to be left-handed. Excluding Hu and Hd the chiral multiplets each come in three
generations.
to an odd number of sparticles. If the sparticle decay is prompt then the neutral LSPs,
which are invisible to a detector, can carry away large amounts of momentum so that
the detected momenta does not sum to zero. We will discuss this and other classic SUSY
signatures in ch. 5.
As we mentioned in ch. 1, SUSY signals have yet to be found at the LHC. If SUSY
does exist it seems sparticles must be a bit heavier than was initially hoped, reintroducing
the hierarchy problem. Some attempts to alleviate the tension between natural SUSY
and LHC data rely on extradimensional SUSY [6,7], a topic which we turn to next.
3.2 Extradimensional SUSY
To extend SUSY to higher dimensions one must consider how component fields of a
multiplet change with extra dimensions. Scalars are easiest: one simply replaces (x)
with (xM) where M runs over all the space-time dimensions. Vectors get slightly more
complex  they gain a new degree of freedom for each new dimension as one goes from
A(x) to AM(xN), but the form of the equations doesnt change otherwise.
Spinors, on the other hand, require a bit more work. One requires a set of gamma
matrices M to write down the Dirac equation (MMm) = 0. As in four dimensions,
the gamma matrices are defined by the Clifford Algebra
{M ,N} = 2MN (3.44)
which can be used to construct generators of SO(1, D  1) [23,26]
MN =
[M ,N ]. (3.45)
These satisfy the Lorentz algebra 3.4 as usual.
Explicit representations of the Dirac Matrices can be built out of Pauli matrices,
though it is easiest to do so if one starts by assumes a Euclidean metric
{M ,N} = 2MN . (3.46)
For example, the generalized Weyl basis for arbitrary spacetime dimension is as follows:
1. Start with 0 = 1, 1 = 2, 2 = 3. These satisfy eq. 3.46.
2. For even spacetime dimension 2n
0 = 1  1
m+1 = 2  m
 = 3  1
(3.47)
where m are the Euclidean gamma matrices of 2n  1 spacetime dimensions, the
rank of 1 matches m, and  is the generalization of 5 (the  sign matches the
convention PR,L = 12(1)). It is not too difficult to see that these s also satisfy
3.46.
3. For odd spacetime dimensions 2n+1 use  for the next highest Dirac matrix. The
sign is arbitrary.
4. Repeat steps 2-3 until reaching the desired spacetime dimension. Then multiply all
the space-like M by i for the mostly minus metric MN = diag(1,1,1, ...).
When complete the Dirac matrices take the usual form
 0 
 , M  {0, 1, ...2n 1}
 = ()i2n =
1 0
(3.48)
with generalized  matrices
M = {1, m}, M = {1,m}. (3.49)
As an explicit example the five dimensional Euclidean gamma matrices are
0 = 1  1
1 = 2  1
2 = 2  2
3 = 2  3
4 = 3  1.
(3.50)
If we multiply the last four of these by i then 0  3 are the normal four dimensional
Weyl representation gamma matrices we are familiar with. Going up to six spacetime
dimensions the Euclidean gammas are
0 = 1  1 = 1  1 1
1 = 2  0 = 2  1  1
2 = 2  1 = 2  2  1
3 = 2  2 = 2  2  2
4 = 2  3 = 2  2  3
5 = 2  4 = 2  3  1
 = 3  1 = 3  1 1.
(3.51)
Again, multiplying the space-like gammas 15 by i we obtain the correct Minkowski
metric in the Clifford Algebra.
From this it is easy to see that for even space-time dimensions one can build off
block-diagonal s which produce block diagonal s. In other words the Lorentz algebra
dim Majorana Weyl Dirac rank min components
2 yes self 2 1
3 yes - 2 2
4 yes complex 4 4
5 - - 4 8
6 - self 8 8
7 - - 8 16
8 yes complex 16 16
9 yes - 16 16
10 yes self 32 16
11 yes - 32 32
Table 3.2: Properties of spinors in various dimensions. Weyl spinors labeled as self are
conjugate to themselves while those labeled complex are conjugate to each other [27].
is reducible and spinors in even dimension can be chiral. However, for odd dimensions
one must use the  matrix to build the new space-like 2n+1 and the Lorentz algebra
becomes irreducible  Weyl spinors do not exist in odd dimensions.
More general arguments which dont rely on a specific representation can be made
using symmetries of the M [26] or raising and lowering operators [23]. The bottom line
is that in even D = 2n and odd D = 2n + 1 dimensions the size of the Dirac basis is 2n
with 2n+1 real components. Weyl spinors, which can only exist in even dimensions, have
half the number or real degrees of freedom and can thus be considered more fundamental.
Majorana spinors, which satisfy the condition  = C0 where C is the charge con-
jugation matrix defined by CMC1 = (M)T , also have half the degrees of freedom of a
Dirac spinor and so can be considered more fundamental. To be consistent, C0C0 = 1,
which turns out to only be possible if D = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 mod 8. For D = 2 mod 8 a spinor
can be both Majorana and Weyl [23]. Table 3.2 summarizes the types of spinors possible
in various dimensions, along with the number of real components the minimal spinor has.
Spinors, vectors and scalars are the only particle types we will need in our review
of higher dimensional fields. To see how these fields behave in 4D we must discuss
dimensional reduction, the process of recovering the four dimensional theory from a higher
dimensional one. Gravitational experiments rule out extra dimension larger than about
O(10) m [28]. Thus extra dimensions must be smaller than this and the behavior of
fields in the extra dimensions is specified by their boundary conditions therein. The
simplest case to consider is one extra dimension y which is compactified to a circle with
radius r. Since y is periodic, fields which propagate in this extra dimension have discrete
Fourier modes
(x, y) =
n(x) exp
. (3.52)
Then the 5D action for a massless free scalar field becomes [23]
S5D =
d5x M(x, y)M(x, y)
n(x
)n(x)
|n(x)|2
n(x
)n(x)
|n(x)|2
(3.53)
The factor of 2r can be absorbed into the definition of . We see in the end that this
type of compactification results in a Kaluza-Klein (KK) tower of massive states starting
with zero mass and increasing as (n/r). Other types of compactification schemes are
possible  we will meet a more complex example in ch. 8.
When a 5D vector field is dimensionally reduced the extra degree of freedom separates
into a scalar

. (3.54)
Spinors will also split. In the 5D case a spinor splits cleanly into massless left and right-
handed Weyl fields and massive Dirac spinors,
S5D =
d5x iMM
An + iB n
B n 
(AnB n + h.c.)
(3.55)
The easiest way to determine the field content of an extradimensional N = 1 SUSY
multiplet is to consider the minimum spinor degrees of freedom the multiplet must have.
For instance, in five dimensions the simplest N = 1 SUSY multiplet contains one fermion
with eight real degrees of freedom off-shell. Since this corresponds to two 4D Weyl
fermions the field content must be the same as 4D N = 2 SUSY after dimensional
reduction. As a simple example we consider a 5D abelian vector supermultiplet. The
Lagrangian for this multiplet is
L5D = 
FMNFMN +
|M|2 + iMM+
XaXa (3.56)
where Xa is a triplet of auxiliary fields and  is a real scalar field [29]. After dimensional
Figure 3.2: Four dimension N = 2 vector multiplet, which is equivalent to a 5D N = 1 vector
multiplet after dimensional reduction. This can be further decomposed into one 4D N = 1
vector multiplet and one chiral multiplet.
reduction the extra scalar field from AM combines with  to form a complex scalar . It
is  which completes the 4D N = 2 multiplet as show in fig. 3.2.
We conclude this chapter by noting that higher dimensional SUSY theories can be
efficiently written down in terms of 4D N = 1 superfields. We will take advantage of this
fact in ch. 8.
Chapter 4: Monte Carlo simulations of
hadron colliders
The ability to compare SM and SUSY theoretical results to actual data from collid-
ers relies heavily on Monte Carlo simulations of particle collisions. In this chapter we
will outline the tools available to perform such simulations, from Lagrangian to exclu-
sion/discovery. We will also cover some of the important theory behind the tools.
4.1 From Lagrangian to Feynman rules
Before any simulation can begin the Feynman rules associated with a given model must
be worked out in detail, as must the physical spectrum. Deriving the Feynman rules for
a new model has been made much simpler by the invention of two Mathematica based
codes built for this purpose: FeynRules [30] and SARAH [31]. Currently, computation
of Feynman rules is only possible at leading order, though work is underway that will
enable NLO computations of many types of BSM models [32]. Both SARAH and Feyn-
Rules require (at minimum) particle content, local symmetries, and a Lagrangian written
in four-dimensional space-time. Each is capable of handling supersymmetric theories,
though their approach to doing so is different and gives each distinct strengths and weak-
nesses. This author found SARAH to be a far easier to use, while FeynRules is a bit more
flexible in terms of the types of models it can handle.
To determine the physical particle spectrum (i.e. masses and mixings) both codes rely
on support from external programs. FeynRules uses ASperGe to perform automatic mass
diagonalization while SARAH uses SPheno [33,34]. Impressively, SARAH calculates two-
loop renormalization group equations (RGEs) for SPheno to allow for parameter running
when calculating masses.
4.2 From Feynman rules to simulated collisions
Once the Feynman rules for a model have been computed they can be imported into a
Monte Carlo event generator capable of simulating collisions between particles and all the
physics contained within this process. There are several Monte Carlo event generators on
the market, each with differing capabilities in terms of handling BSM models, working
beyond leading order, and treating infrared (IR) physics like hadronization. These pro-
grams include MadGraph5 aMC@NLO [35], Sherpa [36], CalcHEP [37], Whizard [38,39],
Pythia [40], and Herwig++ [41].
Monte Carlo techniques are ideal for collider simulations in part because they provide
an efficient way to perform the high dimensional phase space integration necessary to
calculate cross sections. Feynman rules for a given model are used to generate Feynman
diagrams corresponding to the user-defined initial and final states, which then define
the matrix element. Roughly speaking, to calculate a cross section the Monte Carlo
generates random four-momenta for the final state particles and weights these by the
matrix element. In fact, the process is more complex than this and the Monte Carlo
adapts to the analytic structure of the matrix element by generating more random
four-momenta where the amplitude is largest. Details of this process can be found in [42].
Though this process can accurately model the interaction of a few particles it starts
to be computationally impractical when the final state includes more than about a half-
dozen particles, due to the large phase space. Moreover, it is unsuitable in regions where
the matrix element develops singularities or when the relevant coupling constant become
non-perturbative. Since hadrons are inherently non-perturbative objects and since final
states of hard collisions typically involve a great deal of particles, the physics and methods
one needs for an accurate simulation can be quite involved. We give a brief overview of
what is needed in what follows. Much of what is contained within this can be found in
refs. [9, 28,43].
4.2.1 Parton distribution functions
A proton consists of group of interacting quarks and gluons collectively known as partons.
At energies below QCD  mp the strong coupling constant becomes large and calculations
for parton interactions using perturbation theory break down. On the other hand, the
strong coupling constant is weaker (and perturbative) at the higher energy Q at which
hard collisions take place. Since momentum is exchanged between proton constituents at
time scales of  1QCD while hard collisions take place at time scales  Q1, one might
hope that hard scale physics would happen so fast as to decouple from the IR physics
within the proton. In this case, one could treat the protons constituents as essentially
free particles and could account for the low-energy parts of the problem using classical
probabilities fi(x)dx for a particle to interact with a parton species i carrying a fraction
x of the protons momentum. Then the total cross section for a particle to interact with
a proton is given by
dxfi(x)i +O
(4.1)
where i is the cross section for an interaction with parton i. The ability to separate low
scale physics from high scale physics in this way is known as factorization.
In fact factorization has been proven for a few examples and appears well justified
by experiments such as deep inelastic scattering [44]. The low energy physics of protons
can be encapsulated in the fi(x), known as parton distribution functions (PDFs). These
functions have some scale dependence in them which can be computed in perturbative
QCD. Once the functions are measured at one scale, they can be computed at another
using renormalization group techniques. The DGLAP evolution equation, which governs
the evolution of f(x, ) from one scale to another, is given by
fi(x, ) =
Pij(x/)fj(, ) (4.2)
where the Pij(z) are known as DGLAP splitting functions, calculable from perturbation
theory [4547]. The DGLAP evolution equation is actually a set of coupled integro-
differential equations relating multiple PDFs.
The parton distribution functions for several particle types at two different energy
scales are shown in Figure 4.1. One important observation from this figure is that for low
x the gluon PDF is far larger than that of the quarks (the scale for the gluon PDF has
been divided by 10 so that it is visible on the plot), especially at higher energies. Thus
the LHC is mainly a gluon collider.
In summary, PDFs provide a way to treat initial state protons in terms of its con-
stituent partons, so that instead of modeling pp  qq one can model (for instance)
gg  qq. This can be done for all the proton constituents, weighted by PDFs to get a
Figure 4.1: Parton distribution functions at the scales 10 GeV (left) and 104 GeV (right). Note
that the gluon line is divided by 10 so that it is visible on the graph. Figure taken from NNPDF
set described in [48].
total cross section. Unfortunately, this is still not enough to accurately model hadron
collisions since partons will shower many particles as they evolve from one scale to an-
other (in a similar way to electrons emitting photons as they are accelerated) and due
to the fact that one cannot actually measure a final state such as qq due to confinement.
We will set aside the latter problem for the moment and focus on the former.
4.2.2 Parton showers
The origin of a parton shower can be quickly understood from the matrix element for the
splitting process
p+ k k
(p+ k)2
2E2z(1 z) sin2 
(4.3)
where t is the virtuality of the mother parton,  is the angle between the daughter partons,
z and (1z) are the fractions of the mother partons energy carried by the daughters, and
this expression is valid for massless partons. The matrix element diverges when either z
(or 1  z) is small (soft) or  is small (collinear). Physically, it represents the fact that
partons, once produced at a hard scale Q, will emit a large number of soft and collinear
quarks and gluons in a collimated spray known as a jet until they reach the hadronization
scale QCD. The dominant effects of this process are reasonably modeled using parton
showers [9, 28].
Parton showers work in the limit t Q. If the differential cross section before splitting
was dn then in this limit the cross section after splitting dN+1 is approximated by
dn+1 = dn
Pij(z) +O
, (4.4)
where Pij(z) is the same splitting function encountered earlier and gives the distribution
of the fraction z of energy of the mother parton i carried by the daughter j [9,28]. Here,
t is known as the evolution variable which we will assume is the virtuality but can, in
principle, be any variable such as p2T or  that causes the matrix element 4.3 to diverge
in the collinear limit. The splitting cannot take place with all the partons on-shell and
the dominant contributions come from configurations where t is strongly ordered so that
it is largest near the hard subprocess and decrease as the shower evolves away from this,
emitting further partons as it goes. The upper limit on t is set by the momentum transfer
at Q, while the lower limit is usually at the hadronization scale t0 = QCD.
The expression 4.4, while encapsulating the dominant physics of splitting, does not
account for virtual corrections at the same order. These are accounted for by running
couplings and by multiplying each line that ends in a split by the Sudakov form-factor
given by
i(t1, t2) = exp
  t1
 zmax(t,t0)
zmin(t,t0)
Pij(z)dz
 (4.5)
which can be interpreted as the probability for a parton not to split as it evolves from
t1 to t2. Then modeling a parton shower in a Monte Carlo can proceed as follows. For
a each parton produced in a hard process, generate a random between 0 and 1 as the
probability for this parton not to split, i(t1, t2). Use this to calculate the corresponding
t2 at which the parton splitting occurs. Repeat this for the daughter partons, stopping
the process once they reach t = t0. The total cross section is then given by the hard cross
section multiplied by 4.4 and 4.5 for each intermediate parton which ends at a split.
If the initial state particles are also partons  as in a hadron collider  then a similar
process has to be accomplished for the initial state. This proceeds backwards from the
hard process so that the initial particles gain energy and lose virtuality as they evolve
backwards in time. Besides this the only other major difference from the final state parton
shower is that the Sudakov factor must be modified to include the ratio of the parton
distribution functions at the two scales to account for the probability that the parton
being evolved would have come from the proton to begin with.
4.2.3 Jet matching
Though the parton shower scheme accurately models jet evolution in the dominant region
t  Q it fails when t  Q. Specifically, parton showers typically under-produce events
with widely separated energetic jets. Fortunately, this is precisely where the matrix
element method works well. Therefore one can include events with extra jets in this
region of phase space during the matrix element calculation to help fill the gap. One is
able, for instance, to combine the process p p t t with p p t t+ j (where j represents
a mother parton which will evolve into a jet) to model top pair production along with a
possible extra jet. Unfortunately, after putting p p t t through the parton shower it will
sometimes gain an extra jet in a region of phase space already covered by p p  t t + j,
effectively double counting this process. This double counting must be accounted for and
removed by a process known as jet matching.
Just as there are several evolution variables one can use to perform the parton shower
there are several jet matching schemes. One, called the shower k scheme [49], uses the
ordering variable pT (as measured from mother parton) and demands that any additional
jets that the matrix element generator produces are greater than some intermediate cutoff
scale Qcut. These events are then fed into the parton shower. If the parton shower for
one of the lower multiplicity inputs (p p  t t in our example) produces a new splitting
with pT larger than Qcut then the event is rejected. For the highest multiplicity state
(p p t t+ j in our example) shower pTs may be larger than Qcut and are only rejected
if greater than the softest parton pT produced by the matrix element generator.
Though jet matching may seem like a technical detail, in practice it is important
for the average physicist wishing to study collider search strategies for BSM models. In
such cases it is common to use one program to generate the hard process and another to
handle the parton shower. Then one must take a very hands-on approach to jet matching.
For SM processes this is less of an issue as many programs combine the matrix element-
Figure 4.2: Uncertainty on ISR jet pT distribution (as measured from the beam) for squark pair
production (mq = 500 GeV). Uncertainty is given for the first, second, and third hardest jets,
from left to right. Green shows parton shower uncertainty (from Pythia) while red and blue
show matched jet uncertainties for two different matching schemes. Uncertainties were obtained
by varying algorithm parameters such as Qcut by factors of two, which should have no effect on
the physics. Figure taken from [50].
parton shower matching into a single package. Fig. 4.2 shows the effect of matching vs.
not matching on jet pT uncertainty for squark pair production with initial state radiation
(ISR).
4.2.4 Hadronization and decays
As we stated previously, hadronization is a non-perturbative process. Modeling this
using rigorous but computationally expensive techniques such as lattice QCD is out of
the question for large scale Monte Carlo simulations so researchers must instead content
themselves with capturing the essential features of this process using phenomenological
models based on general features of QCD.
There are several models of hadronization employed by different MCs. One of the
most commonly used, known as the Lund string model [51] implemented in Pythia, is
based on the fact that in lattice QCD simulations the potential energy between quarks
increases linearly with distance. This is apparently due to gluon self-attraction which
causes the gluon field to collapse into a string or flux tube. The string model simulates
this flux tube with a string of constant potential energy per unit length. The string model
is easiest to visualize with a quark-antiquark pair. As the pair is created the particles fly
apart stretching the flux tube between them. The potential energy of the tube grows until
it becomes energetically favorable to break the tube by producing a new quark-antiquark
pair. These pair up with the original quarks in color singlet states which fly apart and
may repeat the process.
After hadronization the final step in the collision simulation is to decay any resulting
unstable hadrons. MC generators rely on large tables of experimental data for this
purpose. Since this data is incomplete and occasionally contradictory MC authors must
make choices to ensure (for example) branching ratios add to one. Differences between
programs also arise in how accurately decays are treated  whether, for instance, spin
correlations are included for a given process or not. In the end no one generator addresses
all of these issues better than the others.
4.3 From simulated collisions to analysis
Following the MC event generation, large numbers of events can be imported into one of
several particle detector simulations. Those in widest use among theorists are Delphes
[52], PGS [53], and AcerDet [54]  experimentalists use proprietary simulations to model
their own detectors. Various properties of the simulated detector such as tracking cov-
erage and resolutions are configurable to more accurately match an actual detectors
performance. Details of the LHCs ATLAS detector are given in ch. 5, and may help
some readers more closely follow the discussion below.
For every final state particle, detector simulations create a simulated track (if the
particle is charged) and a calorimeter deposit (if it leaves one). From this information
physical objects such as electrons, photons, muons, and jets are reconstructed just as
in actual high energy physics experiments. Detector simulations introduce effects such
as jet energy smearing and jet type tagging efficiency (tau-jet, b-jet, ...) which may be
important in determining the effectiveness of a proposed new collider search strategy.
Most will not, however, include effects such as pileup.
After the detector simulation, an analysis of the data is needed to determine if one
is able to differentiate the events produced by particles in a given BSM model from the
(usually large) background of similar events produced by particles within the SM, and
if so over what range of parameters this is possible. This is a highly non-trivial task,
though we will cover some of the basics of BSM search strategies in ch. 5. Suffice it to say
that unless the analysis code and associated backgrounds are publicly available, recasting
existing searches to look for particles in a new model can be a very time consuming process
requiring simulations of both the BSM signal one was looking for, as well as many different
types of SM processes. However, the release of the relatively new program CheckMATE
changes this [55]. Within this code is a Delphes detector simulation more highly tuned to
match the performance of the ATLAS detector. More importantly, it comes with many
existing ATLAS (and a few CMS) analyses built in, along with experiment event counts
and a statistical package to make a final 95% confidence excluded or not determination
for a given model. Another program called Rivet exists to compare SM measurements to
event generators [56] and includes many more analyses.
To summarize, using the Monte Carlo tools described within this chapter one is able
to determine if a given process in a specific BSM model with a specific parameter set is
excluded by the LHC starting from the model Lagrangian. More importantly, new search
strategies can be invented and tested within this framework. We emphasize, however,
that final exclusion determination must still be left to experimentalists with access to
more accurate detector simulations and actual data.
Chapter 5: LHC, ATLAS, and BSM search
strategies
5.1 LHC and the ATLAS detector
The LHC is a true wonder of science  one of the most complex machines ever built by
mankind. It is a circular proton-proton collider which sits in a 27 km circumference tunnel
between the borders of Switzerland and France and is part of the European Organization
for Nuclear Research (CERN) complex. It is the most powerful particle accelerator built
to date with a center of mass energy initially at 7 TeV (3.5 TeV per beam), rising to
8 TeV by the end of Run 1 and currently at 13 TeV in Run 2. It has a planned integrated
luminosity of 300 fb1 after the first ten years of its life, a figure that will rise by an order
of magnitude after the High Luminosity (HL) upgrade [57].
LHC beams consist of short bunches of protons  in Run 1 bunches contained about
1011 protons. Many bunches circle the collider at once with a maximum number of 1374
during Run 1 with intersections occurring every 50 ns. Multiple protons collide during
each bunch crossing (a situation known as pileup)  for Run 1 the maximum average rate
was 37 per bunch [58]. Up to 1000 particles emerge from each collision vertex [57].
Situated along the main ring are the big-four experiments ATLAS, CMS, LHCb,
and ALICE, inside of which the particle collisions take place. ATLAS and CMS are both
general purpose experiments designed to study the SM and search for physics beyond
it. LHCb specializes in heavy flavor physics while ALICE studies lead-lead ion collisions.
Though ATLAS and CMS are broadly similar in their designs and objectives it is ATLAS
which I will focus on due to my close working relationship with ATLAS members. Much
of the information about the ATLAS detector presented here can be found in ref. [59].
ATLAS (A Toroidal LHC ApparatuS) is a large multi-layered detector with fast
radiation-hard electronics and sensor elements. Its main detector elements are the in-
ner tracker, the electromagnetic calorimeter, the hadronic calorimeter, and the muon
tracker. Both the inner and muon trackers are immersed in strong magnetic fields (from
a superconducting solenoid and toroid respectively) to measure particle charges and mo-
menta.
Figure 5.1: Cutaway view of the ATLAS detector with major components labeled. Figure taken
from reference [59].
The coordinate system used to describe the detector has z starting at the center and
running along the beam axis with the x y axis in the transverse plane. The azimuthal
angle  is measured around the beam axis and the polar angle  is measured from the
beam. The pseudorapidity is defined as  =  log(tan(/2)) and the distance R is
defined as R =
2 + 2.
The inner detector is itself a layered system. Starting at a radius of 5 cm from
the central axis, 7 layers of silicon detectors (pixel and strip) form concentric cylinders
around the beam1. Outside this a large number of straw-tubes, filled with a xenon-based
gas mixture, are able to generate and detect transition radiation. Together, these systems
precisely track particles as they leave the impact point, and allow for secondary vertex site
determination for heavy-flavor and  lepton tagging. Tracking is possible up to || < 2.5.
The 2 T magnetic field combined with the precise instrumentation allows for a transverse
momentum resolution on the order of 1%.
The high granularity electromagnetic calorimeter is liquid argon (LAr) and covers the
pseudorapidity range || < 3.2. The hadronic calorimeter uses a mix of LAr technology
1During the LHC Run 2 upgrade ATLAS installed the Insertable B-Layer; a new pixel layer with an
inner radius of 3.1 cm [60]
Table 5.1: Examples of pT thresholds and object identification criteria for various triggers at
three Luminosities. Table taken from [61].
along with a scintillator-tile detector and covers a range || < 4.9 (including the forward
calorimeter). It has coarser granularity that the EM calorimeter as it is designed primarily
for jet reconstruction and EmissT measurements. Both calorimeters are generally thick
enough to provide protection against punch-through into the muon system.
The muon spectrometer, with dimensions roughly 25 m 25 m 44 m, is quite large
and combined with its strong magnetic field is able to provide enough bending power to
resolve 1 TeV transverse momenta to 10%, independent of the inner tracker. It covers a
region || < 2.7.
One critical limitation for both ATLAS and CMS is an inability to write information
to disk at close to the speed at which it is collected from the detector. At the LHCs
design luminosity the proton-proton interaction rate is about 1 GHz while technology
and resources constrains the event data recording rate to about 200 Hz. This situation
necessitates the use of triggers which decide, real time, weather to discard an event or
keep it for further processing. ATLAS uses three trigger levels. The Level-1 (L1) trigger
uses a subset of the detector information to decide whether to continue processing an
event. Following this are the Level-2 (L2) trigger and event filter, which collectively
reduce the data rate to a manageable 200 Hz. Together the triggers form a trigger chain,
of which there are several hundred different types within ATLAS [61].
Triggers can look for single objects, multiple objects, or for patterns in several regions
within the detector. They are extremely important for physics studies because without a
trigger for the type of signal one is looking for the desired information will not be saved
to disk. An example of various trigger thresholds is show in Table 5.1.
The object identification criteria listed in this table (e.g., loose, medium, tight) de-
scribe the degree of certainty the detector has on a given object classification. Tight
criteria rely on more stringent rules to label an object and contain fewer false positives;
however they also incorrectly reject more false negative events. The reasons for using a
particular set of identification criteria vary based on the desired signal and the relevant
backgrounds.
We will discuss more details about object identification in the next section.
5.2 Object identification
As was introduced in the discussion of ATLAS triggers above, the identification of objects
within a detector, though well understood, is not always straightforward. Perhaps the
largest limitation of a hadron collider, in contrast to lepton colliders, is that the true
center of mass and collision energy of the process of most interest is unknown. This
is due to the fact that on the time scale of collisions each of the hadrons acts like a
loose bag of partons, with each parton carrying an unknown fraction the hadrons overall
momentum. Nevertheless, the momentum transverse to the beam is known (zero by
definition) providing enough information to help object identification.
The five main categories of objects identifiable at ATLAS are muons, electrons, pho-
tons, jets, and missing transverse momentum. We will briefly describe how these are
identified in what follows. This discussion is made easier to follow by referring to Fig-
ure 5.2, which is a greatly simplified view of the signature left by various objects in the
detector.
Muons are perhaps the easiest fundamental particles for ATLAS to identify since (in
the absence of punch-through) they are the only objects which leave tracks in the muon
chamber. They can be reconstructed either from the muon chamber alone or by matching
muon chamber tracks with those in the inner detector tracks [62].
Following this, electrons and photons are fairly easy to identify from their shower
profile in the EM calorimeter. The two are distinguished by the track the electron leaves
in the inner detector which is absent for the neutral photon [63,64].
Figure 5.2: Schematic of particle signals left in various portions of the ATLAS detector. Figure
taken from ref. [62].
Hadrons, while leaving quite obvious signals in the calorimeter, nevertheless require
subtle treatment. As discussed in ch. 4, if a hard parton is produced in an event it will
result in a collimated spray of particles (a jet) which leave a tell-tale cluster of energy
in the hadronic calorimeter. Of course there are a wealth of soft hadrons spraying out
from collisions, and there can be many jets, so identifying individual jets requires an
algorithm. There are several types of algorithms, but for most purposes the anti-kT is
the favorite [65,66]. It is IR and collinear safe, in that emissions of this sort do not change
the observable. This algorithm uses the distance measure dij between two particles i and
j to sequentially combine particles with the lowest dij into jets, until the dij reach a size
R. For the anti-kT algorithm dij is given by
dij = min(k2Ti , k
y2ij + 2ij
, (5.1)
where kT is the transverse momentum, yij is the difference in rapidity, and  is the
azimuthal separation. ATLAS often uses a size R = 0.4 and requires pT > 20 GeV for its
jets.
Obviously, knowing what sort of particle produced a given jet is enormously helpful
in physics studies. While this is not always possible, algorithms exist to identify particles
based on their jet energy profiles or displaced vertices. For instance, b quark tagging
algorithms rely on the fact that hadrons containing these particles live long enough to
move a detectable distance before decaying. They connect the dots between hits in
the inner detector to determine if the particles emerged from a secondary vertex some
distance from the primary vertex. For b quarks this requires finding a secondary vertex
about  0.1 mm from a primary vertex. Incredibly, ATLAS is able to locate vertices to
an O(10 m) accuracy, enabling such algorithms [67]  quite a feat considering the inner
detector starts at a 5 cm radius.
The last major category of identifiable objects at ATLAS is missing transverse mo-
mentum, or missing transverse energy (commonly ~EmissT , but also ~pmissT or MET). It is
the only signal left by neutral weakly interacting particles such as neutrinos, and is
identifiable by that the fact that transverse momentum in the detector should sum to
zero. Though the name is a bit of a misnomer since it implies energy is a vector, it makes
a bit more sense when one considers that it is primarily measured using calorimeter infor-
mation. To avoid confusion we will call ~pmissT the vector quantity and EmissT its magnitude,
implicitly assuming that the particles involved may be treated as massless. Then ~pmiss
(not transverse) is defined as
~pmiss = 
calo cell i
Ei~ui +
muon j
 (5.2)
were ~ui is a unit vector to the ith calorimeter cell with a reconstructed object calibrated
energy Ei, and ~pj are the muons momenta as measured in the muon spectrometer (since
muons are not stopped in the calorimeter) [68]. Then ~pmissT is the component of ~pmiss trans-
verse to the beam. Systematic uncertainties in ~pmissT come primarily from jet energy mis-
measurement (particularly from soft jets) and calorimeter cell energy mis-measurement
for cells not associated with reconstructed objects.
5.3 Classic SUSY search strategies
By reconstructing physical objects within the ATLAS detector and comparing the number
of and distributions of these objects as compared to theory, one is able to make accurate
Figure 5.3: Schematic of generic signal for SUSY production in a collider. Two sparticles 1,2
are produced, decaying to visible final states  and , and invisible final states p and q. In
addition to these, further debris or ISR from the collision may be produced, represented by g.
Figure taken from [69].
tests of the SM. Large excesses in the production of certain objects can point to new
physics or indicate a weakness in theoretical calculations. Modeling of both the SM and
new physics at the LHC relies heavily on Monte Carlo simulations, as we discussed in
ch. 4. In this chapter we focus on a few of the techniques which can be used to separate
SUSY from large SM backgrounds.
As we discussed in ch. 3, SUSY theories with R parity demand that sparticles are
produced in pairs and, if they decay, will each do so to an odd number of sparticles. The
LSP is usually assumed to be neutral and will leave the detectable signal of missing
transverse momentum as it leaves the detector. Therefore, typical SUSY searches usually
assume sparticle pair production, where each sparticle is fairly massive (heavier than
LEP limits, usually  100 GeV [3]) and promptly decays into at least one neutral stable
sparticle. The primary signal, then, is energetic SM decay products in association with
missing transverse momentum. This is shown schematically in fig. 5.3.
The sort of SM processes which mimic this signal often involve neutrinos or mis-
measured jets (resulting in missing transverse momentum) produced as a result of, or in
association with, heavy SM particles. Top quarks, W s, and Zs each fit the bill for a heavy
SM particle and are all capable of producing neutrinos during their decays; therefore these
often constitute significant backgrounds.
Since a SUSY signal and its backgrounds each produce the same types of objects in
a detector one must use differences in their kinematics to separate them. There is a very
large (and still growing) list of kinematic variables which aid in this process. One well
known variable is mT2,2 colloquially called the stransverse mass for its similarity to the
transverse mass mT and its ability assist in sparticle identification [6971].
Transverse mass mT is similar to the invariant mass of a parent particle mparent which
decays to two daughters with energy-momentum p1 and p2
m2parent = (p1 + p2)
2 = m21 +m
2 + 2(E1E2  ~p1  ~p2). (5.3)
This expression is useful for reconstructing the parent mass when one knows the energy-
momentum of both of the daughters, however it is less useful when one of the daughters
is invisible and the center of mass is unknown, as is the case in a hadron collider. Then
the best one can do is provide a event-by-event lower bound on the parent mass using
the transverse information in the detector,
m2parent  m
T  m
miss + 2(E1 TE
T  ~p1 T  ~p
T ), (5.4)
where ET 
p2T +m2. If there are two parents each decaying semi-invisibly then things
become more complex since pmissT must somehow be shared between two invisible particles.
Nevertheless, one can still construct a maximum lower bound on the parent mass using
mT2(pT 1, pT 2;minv) = min
mT(pT 1, qT;minv),mT(pT 2, pmissT  qT;minv)
(5.5)
which is also implicitly dependent on m1 and m2.
One can use Monte Carlo simulations to plot mT2 distributions of both SUSY models
and SM background processes to determine if there are regions where sparticle production
will be detectable. Where SM processes dominate events are cut away leaving only
regions in which new physics should produce a significant number of events. If there are
no large data excesses in these regions then one may be able to exclude some portion of the
parameter space for a given SUSY model. Fig. 5.4 shows an example of this in an ATLAS
search for slepton pair and chargino pair production, with each sparticle decaying to a
2A variable as glamorous as its proponents  take a look at the first page of Barr et al. [69].
Figure 5.4: mT2 distributions for two representative SUSY signals and SM backgrounds in an
ATLAS SUSY search for charginos and sleptons. The objects used for constructing mT2 are
two same-flavor leptons + EmissT . mmiss is assumed to be zero, appropriate for the backgrounds
involving neutrinos. Standard model backgrounds dominate below  90 GeV, therefore events
with mT2 less than this are cut. Figure taken from [72].
lepton plus neutralino LSP. Significant backgrounds from W pair production, for instance,
are removed by taking only events with mT2 > mW (in actuality the requirement is a bit
higher than this).
In practice one usually uses several kinematic discriminants, the list of which may or
may not include mT2, to separate signal from background. For a generic SUSY search
this usually results in limits with general features similar to those shown in fig. 5.5. The
process considered for this schematic plot is sparticle pair production with each sparticle
 promptly decaying to a SM particle (which may undergo further splittings or decays)
and a neutral LSP 01. As the trial mass of the sparticle  increases its production cross
section decreases since PDFs mostly decrease with momentum fraction. This results in
fewer expected SUSY events and thus weakened sensitivity to models as m increases.
On the other hand, many searches also lose sensitivity to models as m approaches the
kinematic limit m  m01 +mSM particle, which is represented by a dashed line in fig. 5.5.
This is because the decay products lose momentum in this limit making them harder to
pick out of backgrounds or causing them to fail trigger requirements. Exactly when a
search loses sensitivity in this region depends heavily on the nature of the backgrounds
excluded region
low production  
cross section
low production 
& weak decays
Figure 5.5: Generic form of SUSY limits plot and reasons for exclusion weaknesses. In this
representative example, a pair of sparticles  each decay to a LSP 01 plus a SM particle, which
may or may not undergo further decays or hadronization. Searches will not have sensitivity to
new physics when the production cross section is too low (because the mass of the new particle
m is too high) or when the decay products have such low momentum that they drown in SM
backgrounds or fall below the detectors trigger levels.
and on the trigger levels.
One technique to get around the problem of weak decay products and to fill in the
gap just described is to search for ISR instead of sparticle decay products. This also
works in searches for invisible particles, such as 01 pair production. In short, before
the hard collision takes place one of the partons may emit an energetic transverse jet as
it evolves in virtuality from the scale of the proton to the hard scale. This will boost
the heavy particle center-of-mass along with the final state particles in the transverse
direction. If the final state particles are invisible then the signal will be a single hard jet
and missing transverse momentum. This strategy is used in generic DM searches such as
those described in [73,74]. On the other hand, if the final state particles are visible they
can be boosted and may be used to assist the analysis [7577].
The strategies discussed here, while giving a general idea of how a generic SUSY search
works, is by no means comprehensive. Still, it is enough to understand what is covered
in the rest of this thesis. We will now proceed to investigate how an extradimensional
scenario known as auto-concealment affects current ATLAS SUSY limits.
Chapter 6: Auto-concealment of
supersymmetry in extra dimensions
This chapter is based on [6], work done in collaboration with Savas Dimopoulos, Kiel
Howe, and John March-Russell.
6.1 Introduction
In this chapter we present a mechanism by which SUSY signals at a hadron collider
are dynamically degraded. We consider a framework in which the SM particles and
their SUSY-partners live on a brane that is embedded in a (flat) 4 + d-dimensional
supersymmetric bulk whose dimensions are bigger than 1014cm  1/(few GeV). SUSY
breaking is felt softly on the brane, and the MSSM superpartners may be produced at
colliders1. As we will show, many realizations of this scenario have additional light bulk
states that are associated with SUSY breaking or additional sequestered sectors. In such
cases, the lightest R-parity odd sparticle, the bulk LSP, will propagate in the 4 + d
extra dimensions, and the lightest ordinary-sector SUSY particle (LOSP) will decay to
this state.
Couplings between bulk and brane states are necessarily higher dimensional operators,
and if the fundamental scale, M, is not too high, decays of the LOSP can occur on collider
timescales. From a 4D perspective, the LOSP decays to a distribution of KK-modes of
the bulk LSP of mass mn with bulk phase space factor  md1n . This favors decays to
the heaviest KK states, thus suppressing both visible energy and EmissT in the decay, and
so, as we will argue in detail, severely weakening LHC limits on SUSY for certain classes
of visible sparticle spectra. The basic mechanism is illustrated in Figure 6.1.
Specifically, we show that two-body decays of the brane-localized LOSP of mass (M)
to a SM state and a bulk LSP are typically dominated by decays to bulk KK-modes with
masses mn & 0.4M  0.8M depending on the nature of the coupling and the dimension
of the bulk. This leads automatically to signatures similar to a compressed spectrum,
1In contrast, studies of brane-worlds with supersymmetric bulks have focused mostly on the case that
SUSY is realized only non-linearly on the brane [7885].
Visible sparticle
spectrum
~0 GeV LSP
Bulk sparticle
KK spectrum
LSP(1)
LSP(2)
LSP(3)
Extends to M
>1.5 TeV
Figure 6.1: Schematic representation of the basic idea behind the auto-concealment mechanism,
in which the LSP is a bulk state propagating in d  1 extra dimensions. The visible sparticle
spectrum has a lightest state, the LOSP, which decays promptly to the full tower of KK exci-
tations of the LSP. As the spectral density of KK excitations behaves as  md1n (as a function
of the KK mass, mn), decays to the heavier KK states are favored, dynamically realizing the
compressed spectrum mechanism of hiding SUSY with reduced EmissT and visible energy. As the
masses of the KK-tower of the LSP extend from  0 GeV to the underlying gravitational scale
M the LOSP mass is automatically within this tower. Transitions from visible sector to the
bulk sector are prompt if M is not too high depending on the nature of the bulk LSP. In the
case that transitions are not prompt, the auto-concealment mechanism no longer functions, but
instead the decays of the LOSP can provide a powerful search method for extra dimensions.
where super-partners with large production cross sections are concealed if they decay to a
nearly degenerate invisible LSP [50,8692]. Cascade decays that produce a highly boosted
LOSP are not as effectively hidden, but nonetheless we find that a variety of motivated
and potentially low-fine-tuned spectra are successfully auto-concealed. In this work, we
focus primarily on limits from searches for prompt decays, which restricts M from above.
For higher scales of M, searches for displaced vertices and out-of-time stopped decays
become relevant, and their sensitivity is also likely to be affected, though a study of this
possibility is beyond the scope of this work.
If superpartners are discovered at future colliders, then observations of the LOSP
decay can be the leading signature of the extra-dimensional nature of the theory. Some
probes of the properties of bulk states through prompt decays of a new non-supersymmetric
colored states have been studied in refs. [93,94]. Because the visible sparticles are charged
under the SM gauge group and brane-localized, their production and subsequent decay
Figure 6.2: Colored regions display the form of LOSP decay as a function of the LOSP mass,
M , and the fundamental gravitational scale, M. The bulk LSP is taken to be a modulino,
the LOSP to be a sfermion, and we show the case d = 4. The auto-concealment mechanism
applies in the region of prompt decays. In the regions of displaced decays or stopped LOSP
out-of-time decays the auto-concealment mechanism no longer functions, but the decays of the
LOSP can provide a new search mechanism for extra-dimensions with reach much greater than
that provided by contact operators. In the gray hatched region to the far right, the splitting
between KK states becomes large compared to the mass of the LOSP, 1/(ML) & 0.1 (all of
the decays to the left of this region have lifetimes  . 1 yr). The hatched region to the far left
shows the range of M excluded by current LHC contact operator searches for extra-dimensions.
will be the dominant production mechanism for bulk modes, especially whenM is so large
that the LOSP decay is displaced or occurs after the LOSP is stopped in a detector. This
can extend the reach for the fundamental gravitational scale as high as M < 10
9 GeV,
far above the reach of the usual contact-operator based searches for extra dimensions.
As an example of the scales of interest, in Figure 6.2 we show the relevant regions of the
M-M plane for the case of a bulk modulino LSP with d = 4 extra dimensions (Figure 6.9
in Section 6.4 shows the d = 2, 6 cases).
6.2 Decays to the bulk
We now turn to a detailed discussion of the mechanism. The decay of a brane-localized
LOSP of mass M into a bulk state propagating in d extra dimensions of size L  1/M
can be described by an effective theory for the bulk-brane interactions [95101]. The
description of the brane states as point-localized objects in the d bulk dimensions is
taken to be valid up to a scale b < M, where M is the fundamental gravitational scale
of the theory, and M < b by assumption so that the decay is well described by the
effective theory.2
To be concrete we start by studying the decays of a brane-localized eR LOSP to the
fermion  of a bulk chiral multiplet3 . While we now focus on this case as a simple
example, there are a variety of other strongly motivated possibilities. In addition to
a slepton LOSP, the case of a stop/sbottom LOSP and the case of degenerate first and
second generation squark LOSPs provide particularly interesting examples from the point
of view of collider phenomenology which we study in detail in the following section. The
results derived in this section apply to any sfermion decaying to its massless SM fermion
partner and a bulk modulino.
6.2.1 Bulk spectrum and profiles
We study the bulk states by expanding in KK-modes in the extra dimensions,
fn(yi)n(x),
where x are the (3+1) coordinates, yi are the extra bulk coordinates, V is the volume of
the bulk, and each KK mode has mass mn. In flat extra dimensions and in the absence
of any bulk mass terms for the state, there is a zero mode, m0 = 0 and the splittings
between KK-modes are of order the size of the bulk mn  1/L. We will be interested
in cases where the decays from the brane states are highly-localized compared to the size
of the bulk; in this case, the decays are insensitive to the exact form of the boundary
conditions for bulk fields far away from the MSSM brane and can be well described in
the continuum approximation, mn  0.
The spectrum of KK masses and profiles of a bulk multiplet will be perturbed by
the presence of mass terms, which may be spread along the entire 4 + d dimensional
space occupied by the bulk state or be localized in some of the extra dimensions (for
2At distances shorter than 1/b, the embedding of the brane in the d bulk dimensions may be non-
trivial; these effects could be taken into account by the presence of higher dimensional operators including
terms with bulk derivatives. The scale b could correspond to the fundamental gravitational scale M
or to an intermediate scale related to the extension of the brane embedding in the transverse directions.
3The bulk theory has at least N = 2 extended SUSY from the 4D perspective, and this N=1 chiral
multiplet must in fact have bulk partners that fill out a full higher dimensional hyper-multiplet or vector
multiplet, although these states need not couple to the brane. We use the N=1 superfield field notation
of Ref. [97].
example localized on the MSSM brane). A mass term m4+d spread along the full (4 + d)
dimensional space lifts the start of the KK-tower to m4+d. We assume such terms are
negligible compared to the mass scale of the decays. Mass terms that are localized in
some of the d dimensions have their effects suppressed by the volume of the remaining
space, and are generally only relevant if they are localized near the MSSM brane, in which
case they can affect the wave function profiles near the brane fn(0).
For example, a mass term for the fermion components of  localized on the MSSM
brane has the form
L = d(y)
()
+ h.c. (6.1)
where the fermion  is normalized as a bulk field with mass dimension (3 + d)/2. The
effect of the on-brane mass is to reduce the profile fn(0) of the KK states near the
brane, which suppresses the coupling to brane-localized states. For KK masses mn  b
and co-dimension d  3, the perturbation of the wave function at the brane fn(0) is
independent of mn: for small perturbations  . b, fn(0) is unsuppressed, while for large
perturbations   b, fn(0)  0 and the leading operators coupling brane fields to the
bulk field will be those containing bulk derivatives  yb (this latter case is the correct
description for instance when orbifold conditions in the fundamental theory force the
wave function to vanish on the brane). For co-dimension d = 1, fn(0)  mn for mn . ,
and for d = 2 there is a logarithmic dependence on mn. Overall, the localized mass terms
typically increases the efficiency of auto-concealment by decreasing the relative coupling
of lighter KK-modes to the MSSM brane states. As the sizes of the localized mass terms
 are only weakly constrained, to be conservative we assume they are negligible for the
rest of this work.
6.2.2 Brane couplings and decays
For a simple and well-motivated example, we take  to couple to the MSSM states as a
modulus in the Kahler potential with a gravitationally suppressed coupling
L = d(y)
( + )eReR
(d+2)/2
]
. (6.2)
After making the KK expansion, the decay rate of a selectron with mass M to each
Figure 6.3: Differential distribution of KK masses for the decay eR  e +  from Eq.(6.4)
for d = (3, 6) (solid curves with peaks from left to right, respectively). Also shown dashed
is the distribution for a 500 GeV stop decaying in d = 6 as tR  t + , with the definition
x  mn/(mtR mt).
individual mode of mass mn < M that follows from Eq.(6.2) is
8M2+d V
. (6.3)
For co-dimension d, the number of states with mass  mn grows as  md1n (this assumes
the extra d-dimensions are flatwe later comment on the more general case [102]). For
this particular example, the rate to heavier KK states is further enhanced by a factor
m2n/M
2 due to a helicity suppression of decays to lighter modes. Therefore, even in
d = 1 the distribution will be peaked towards higher KK masses  the extra-dimensional
nature of the LSP is still crucial to provide the continuum of accessible states, but the
enhancement of decays to heavier states is due completely to the matrix element. Going
to the continuum limit, the total decay rate is
tot =
mn<M
8M2+d
(2)d
xd+1(1 x2)2dx, (6.4)
where d is the surface area of a (d1)-sphere and x  mn/M . The resulting differential
decay rate with respect to the KK mass of the modulino is shown in Figure 6.3. The most
likely KK mass is  (0.6  0.8)M , and this can have striking observable consequences
for collider phenomenology. (For the case of a stop LOSP with decay t  t + , the
non-negligible top mass modifies the distribution as shown in Figure 6.3.)
6.3 SUSY limits and auto-concealment
To understand the effect of auto-concealment on collider searches, it is useful to consider
the limit that the LOSP decays to a very narrow distribution of bulk LSP KK states
peaked at mn  M . In this case there is no visible energy from the LOSP decay4, and
events involving only direct pair production of the LOSP are invisible at colliders. This
is identical to the case of exactly degenerate compressed spectra [50]. In this kinematic
limit, missing and visible transverse energy arise only when the system recoils against a
radiated jet or photon  dominantly ISR  and SUSY searches are significantly weakened.
A realistic distribution of KK masses as shown in Figure 6.3 does not completely
realize this limit; the distributions peak below M and they have a non-negligible width.
Nonetheless, they remain in the regime where most LOSP decays produce little visible en-
ergy and pair production events with large missing and visible energy are still dominantly
due to hard ISR. The effect on experimental limits remains substantial. To illustrate this,
we re-interpret existing 8 TeV LHC sparticle searches for three interesting cases of LOSP
pair production followed by decays to a bulk modulino LSP: a right-handed slepton LOSP
eR/R  e/+, a right-handed stop LOSP tR  t+, and degenerate first and second
generation squarks qu,d,c,s  q+. We simulate sfermion pair production processes with
MadGraph5 [103] with shower and decays5 in Pythia6 [40] and MLM matching of up to
one additional jet. With one exception,6 experimental limits were recast using validated
analyses in CheckMATE [52, 55, 65, 66, 105, 106]. While we expect the results of these
simulations to broadly characterize how auto-concealment affects current SUSY search
limits, it is up to the experimental collaborations to set definitive bounds.
The first process we consider is pair production of degenerate right-handed sleptons
decaying to a bulk modulino eR/R  e/+ . The dominant limit is from a 20.3 fb1
ATLAS l+l+EmissT search [107] based on the kinematic variable mT2 [6971]. The effect
4Decays of the bulk KK states among themselves producing visible energy on the brane are possible,
but they are irrelevant on collider time scales due to the volume suppression of couplings to the brane.
5To implement LOSP decays to a KK-tower of fermion LSPs we introduced N  20 new gauge neutral
spin 1/2 states in Pythia. The masses of these states mj fell into N evenly spaced bins from 0 to the
LOSP mass M . The mass mj of the jth state was given by the branching ratio-weighted average of
masses in the jth bin, and the branching fraction to this state was determined by the integrated width
over the bin.
6With the exception of [104], all of the analysis used in this chapter to recast limits have been validated
by CheckMATE. It was felt important to include this unvalidated analysis since it provided the only
exclusion limits for stops decaying to a modulino in d = 6.
=150 GeV
0 50 100 150
mT2 HGeVL
Figure 6.4: Differential distribution in stransverse mass mT2 for the decay eR  e +  for
a slepton of mass M = 150 GeV to a single massless LSP (black) and a bulk modulino LSP
(blue and green) as in Eq.(6.4) for d = 3, 6. The preselections of Ref. [107] have been applied,
including a cut on missing energy, Emiss,relT > 40 GeV, which leads to the different total number
of events for each case. Shown by a dashed line is the signal region cut mT2 > 90 GeV used to
reduce backgrounds such as W+W production. Definitions of Emiss,relT and mT2 can be found
within Ref. [107].
of auto-concealment on missing energy-related observables is dramatic, as illustrated in
Figure 6.4, which shows the signal mT2 distribution after typical cuts used to reduce
backgrounds. For the case of d = 3, the number of events satisfying the signal region
cuts is very significantly reduced, while for d = 6 essentially no events pass cuts for
the illustrated case of MlR = 150 GeV and 20.3 fb
1. The effect on exclusion limits is
predictable. Figure 6.5 shows the strongest cross section exclusion limit (at 95% CLS)
from the ATLAS searches [107,108]. A monojet search [109] was also considered to pick up
ISR but the analysis had no effect on limits as it vetoed events with isolated leptons. The
existing LHC8 limits of MlR > 225 GeV for direct production of right-handed sleptons
decaying to a massless LSP are completely eliminated, with only the much weaker LEPII
limit of MlR > 95 GeV for very compressed slepton decays still applying [111115].
Limits on 3rd generation squark production can also be dramatically reduced. We
studied tR pair production with tR  t + . As depicted in Figure 6.3, the distribution
of KK states in the decay is slightly modified from the result for a massless SM fermion
7Note that direct production of left-handed sleptons is already concealed independent of the existence
of a bulk LSP as the EW symmetry breaking mass splitting between the heavier charged and lighter
neutral members of the LH slepton doublet is small enough that a compressed spectrum is automatically
realized.
d=6 excluded
d=3 excluded
MSSM
validation
ATLAS excluded
100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240
HGeVL
l R+
l R-
Figure 6.5: Strongest upper bound on degenerate R, eR slepton pair production cross sections
from ATLAS l+l +EmissT mT2 [107] and razor analyses [108]. A monojet search was also con-
sidered [109] but did not affect limits. The top two curves corresponds to sleptons promptly
decaying to the KK-tower of a massless modulino in d = 3 (blue) and d = 6 (green) extra
dimensions. The mT2 analysis is more effective at higher masses; below 140 GeV (170 GeV) for
d = 3 (d = 6) the razor analysis sets stronger limits. Solid red (lowest) curve gives the observed
ATLAS upper bound on the RH slepton production cross section from [107] for decays to a
massless LSP. For validation, a dashed red curve gives the same bound using our simulation.
Black curve gives the predicted NLO direct production cross section [110] with other superpart-
ners decoupled, illustrating that RH sleptons are excluded up to  225 GeV for decays to a
massless LSP. For the searches considered, present limits on direct production of RH sleptons
evaporate in the presence of the auto-concealment mechanism.
fermion, eq.(6.4), due to the non-negligible top mass. The dominant validated analysis in
CheckMATE was the ATLAS 20.3 fb1 all hadronic 6 (2 b) jet +EmissT search [116], while
the unvalidated 2 lepton stop search [104] provided the strongest limits below  360 GeV.
Figure 6.6 shows cross section limits for these searches. For prompt decays to a massless
LSP the limit is mt & 680GeV, while limits reduce to  350  410 GeV for decays to a
bulk modulino in d = 3, 6. A number of other searches are expected to provide similar
limits, for example the ATLAS and CMS semi-leptonic searches [117, 121] and the most
recent all-hadronic searches [121,122] which perform better than [116] at low stop masses
in the compressed region.
We finally study pair production of degenerate first and second generation squarks
with qi  qi +  assuming the gluinos and 3rd generation squarks are decoupled. The
dominant limits shown in Figure 6.7 are from the ATLAS 20.3 fb1 2 6 jets + EmissT
analysis [123], except for squarks below 200 GeV where limits are driven by the monojet
search [109]. These searches have hard cuts on missing and visible energy and are sub-
d=6 excluded
d=3 excluded
MSSM
validation
ATLAS2013-024 excluded
200 300 400 500 600 700
10.00
HGeVL
t R*
Figure 6.6: Strongest upper bound on stop pair production cross sections from ATLAS
6 (2 b) jet + EmissT [116] and 2 lepton stop [104] searches. A razor analysis [108], a one lep-
ton stop search [117], and two monojet searches [109, 118] were also considered but did not
strengthen the exclusion limits. The upper two curves corresponds to stops promptly decaying
to a top + the KK-tower of a massless modulino in d = 3 (blue) and d = 6 (green) extra
dimensions. The all hadronic analysis is more effective at higher masses; below  360 GeV
the two lepton analysis sets stronger limits, however it should be noted that this analysis is
not yet validated by CheckMATE. Solid red (lowest) curve gives the observed ATLAS upper
bound on the stop production cross section from [116] assuming prompt decay to a top + a
massless LSP. For validation, a dashed red curve gives the same bound using our simulation.
Black curve gives the predicted NLO direct production cross section [119,120], thus illustrating
that stops are excluded up to  680 GeV for a single massless LSP. For the search considered,
present limits on direct production of stops drop to  350  410 GeV in the presence of the
auto-concealment mechanism.
stantially affected by auto-concealment. While for a decay to a single massless LSP the
limit is M & 800 GeV, for decays to a bulk modulino in d = 3, 6 the limit is reduced
to only  450 GeV. We have assumed no D-term splitting leading to decays between
the left-handed squarks, but we do not expect that these soft decays would significantly
affect the results.
We have seen that auto-concealment significantly reduces bounds on direct production
of superpartners, dynamically realizing the signatures of a compressed spectrum where
a single LSP is nearly degenerate with the LOSP. It is important to emphasize that the
auto-concealment mechanism, like the compressed case, does not alleviate bounds on all
forms of visible sparticle spectra. This is because of the possibility of highly energetic
cascade decays before the decay of the LOSP. To distinguish the bad cases from the
good it is useful to define deep cascade decays as ones where the splitting between the
parent visible-sector sparticle and the LOSP are large, m &M , and conversely, shallow
=Hu+d
LR+L
d=6 excluded
d=3 excluded
MSSM
validation
ATLAS excluded
0 200 400 600 800
 HGeVL
Figure 6.7: Strongest upper bound on pair production cross sections for degenerate first and
second generation squarks from ATLAS 2 6 jets + EmissT [123] and monojet [109] searches.
A razor analysis was also considered [108] but its limits were weaker. The top two curves
corresponds to squarks promptly decaying to the KK-tower of a modulino in d = 3 (blue) and
d = 6 (green) extra dimensions. The hadronic search is the more effective of the two analysis
except below  200 GeV. Solid red (lowest) curve gives the observed ATLAS upper bound on
the squark production cross section from [123] assuming prompt decay to a LSP with mass 
40 GeV. Dashed red curve gives our bounds for a single massless LSP for validation. Black curve
gives the predicted NLO direct production cross section when gluinos are decoupled [119,120],
thus illustrating that degenerate squarks are excluded up to 775 GeV for a single massless LSP.
For the searches considered, present limits on direct production of squarks drops to  450 GeV
for d = 3, 6 in the presence of the auto-concealment mechanism.
cascade decays as ones involving parent-LOSP splittings m . M . Auto-concealment
does not substantially ease bounds on spectra driven by large cross-sections for deep
cascade decays to the LOSP. The reason for the failure of efficient auto-concealment in
this case is that deep cascades produce highly energetic visible particles (e.g., jets or
leptons) recoiling from a highly boosted LOSP, which is transformed primarily into EmissT
in the final decay of the LOSP to the LSP KK-tower.
}~C+EW~
~0 GeV
~ 500 GeV
>1.5 TeV
~0 GeV
~150 GeV
>1.5 TeV
~TeV } C EW~ ~+
~0 GeV
~0 GeV
few 100 GeV
Figure 6.8: Schematic sparticle spectra for which efficient auto-concealment applies, cases (a)-
(c), and for which it fails (d). In case (d) colored particles, here generically denoted C, are light
enough,  1 TeV, that they can be copiously pair produced at the LHC and simultaneously
EW sparticles, among which is the LOSP, are substantially less massive,  few  102 GeV.
In this situation there are many deep cascade decays of the heavier colored particles to the
LOSP producing both highly energetic jets, and a boosted LOSP which leads to a boost of the
EmissT produced in the final decay of the LOSP. Conversely, in case (a) all the heavier colored
sparticles, C  are so massive as to have small pair production cross sections at the LHC, while
the lighter colored sparticles (e.g., the 3rd generation squarks) are not too far separated from
the EW sparticles, so only leading to shallow cascade decays before the final decay of the LOSP
to the LSP KK-tower. In (b) all colored particles are too heavy to be substantially produced
at the LHC mC > 1.5 TeV, while the copiously produced light EW sparticles have only shallow
cascade decays before LOSP decay. In case (c) all sparticles apart from the LSP are moderately
heavy and roughly comparable in mass, and the dominant production through the colored states
undergoes only shallow cascades to the LOSP.
A common example where auto-concealment fails to weaken limits is when squark
LOSPs of mass M are accompanied by a gluino of mass . 2M [5]; even though direct
production limits could allow squark LOSPs as light as  450GeV, we estimate gluino pair
and associated production with decays to squarks sets much stronger limits Mg > (1.5
2) TeV 2 (450 GeV). On the other hand there are a variety of visible-sector sparticle
spectra for which auto-concealment is efficient. For example Dirac gluinos can naturally
have a mass Mg  2M , yielding a sufficiently small production cross section for deep
cascades that auto-concealment is effective. To illustrate this point more generally we
show in Figure 6.8 four examples of visible-sector spectra, one of which (d) fails the
condition for efficient auto-concealment, while (a)-(c) satisfy the condition.
A number of search strategies using leptons to detect compressed SUSY spectra have
been developed (since leptons typically have softer pT cuts than jets) and will likely be
useful in detecting shallow decays and discovering auto-concealment signatures. For this
purpose ref. [124] developed a ll + EmissT super-razor search, while ref. [125] proposed
modifying cuts on existing lepton searches. Additionally, refs. [75, 126, 127] have sug-
gested modifying monojet searches to include soft leptons as a way of picking out shallow
electroweak decays with hard ISR.
6.4 Probing extra dimensions
While decays of the LOSP to a KK-tower of a bulk LSP can erode limits from standard
promptly decaying super-partner searches, they also have the potential to open a new
window for probing extra dimensions if SUSY particles are discovered. Decays of the
LOSP are potentially observable over a wide range of lifetimes through prompt decays
in the detector, in-flight decays (1 mm . c . 10 m), or decays of stopped particles
(100 ns .  . 1 yr). As shown in Figs. 6.2 (d = 4) and 6.9 (d = 2, 6), this corresponds to
a range of fundamental scales that can far exceed the current reach8 M & 5 TeV [128,129]
of traditional collider searches for KK graviton emission and contact operators9 [131137]
and searches for the effects of Higgs mixing with bulk states [138]. This reach can also
greatly exceed that of astrophysical searches10 [139] and reaches values of M which
are consistent with cosmological limits for a large range of reheat temperatures. This
motivates studying strategies to distinguish decays to a bulk LSP from other scenarios,
for instance two- and three-body decays to a single massive LSP, and further to distinguish
different numbers of bulk dimensions and different bulk LSP candidates. A detailed study
8We assume the contact operators have O(1) coefficients suppressed by the scale M, corresponding
to a weakly coupled UV completion of gravity.
9In addition to contact operators for SM states, operators contributing to sfermion production have
also been studied in refs. [101, 130]. The lower dimension contact operators contributing to sfermion
production described in ref. [101] can set stronger bounds for certain SUSY spectra, but can also be
forbidden if some R-symmetries are preserved near the brane to energies below the fundamental scale.
10Astrophysical searches can also easily be avoided by modifying the low energy KK spectrum [102,137].
Figure 6.9: Companion to Figure 6.2 in the Introduction. Colored regions display the form of
LOSP decay as a function of the LOSP mass, M , and the fundamental gravitational scale, M,
for d = 2 (left panel) and d = 6 (right panel). In the gray hatched region to the far right, the
splitting between KK states becomes large compared to the mass of the LOSP, 1/(ML) & 0.1
(all of the decays to the left of this region have lifetimes  . 1 yr). The hatched region to the
far left shows the range of M excluded by current LHC contact operator searches for extra-
dimensions. In the left panel we also show the region that can potentially be excluded by neutron
star observations [139]. This exclusion, however, depends on the far IR part, mKK < 100 MeV,
of the KK spectrum of the graviton which is highly dependent on the assumption of perfectly
flat extra dimensions. In the more general case of curved (but still unwarped) extra dimensions
the neutron star limits no longer apply [102,137].
of this possibility is beyond the scope of this work, but we describe briefly some of the
relevant issues.
For prompt decays, a variety of LHC studies have demonstrated that features of
mT2 and similar generalized distributions could determine the LSP mass in some spectra
(for a review, see ref. [140]) using 100  1000 BSM events after cuts (corresponding to
 2.0 2.5 TeV squarks and gluinos at the high luminosity LHC13). Such observations
should be sensitive to the absence of a single mass for the LSP, and may be adaptable
to identify a bulk LSP. The possibility of measuring the properties of a distribution of
DM particles with different masses at the LHC has been studied in the particular case of
three-body decays of a scalar color octet in Refs. [93,94]. For a light enough or electroweak
dominated spectrum, measurements at a e+e collider may be more promising [141144].
If the LOSP decay is displaced in the detector or is long-lived on collider time scales
then a great deal more information becomes accessible. The lifetime can be directly
measured [145147] and if the LOSP is charged or colored, its mass is directly observ-
able through timing and ionization measurements [148151]. Proposals have been made
to study the kinematics of production and in-flight decays [151155] as well as decays
of charged/colored LOSPs stopped in the existing LHC detectors [145147, 156158] or
a dedicated stopper-detector [159, 160]. Tracking of particles from in-flight decays with
large displacements or decays of LOSPs stopped in dense regions of detector material
may be challenging. However, measurements of the kinematic features of in-flight and
stopped decays have two primary advantages compared to techniques for prompt decays:
i) backgrounds are very small and require fewer cuts which affect the kinematic distribu-
tions of the decay, ii) the rest frame and mass of the parent particle can be determined
independently from the decay. Combining sufficiently precise measurements of the LOSP
decay with mass and lifetime measurements could give strong evidence for the nature of
the bulk LSP, the number of bulk dimensions, and the scale M
6.5 Conclusions
We have presented a mechanism  auto-concealment in extra dimensions  which signif-
icantly weakens present search limits for some SUSY models. Auto-concealment applies
to theories wherein the LOSP is a brane localized state while the LSP is a bulk state,
producing a dense KK-tower of LSP excitations with increasing mass, mn, that automat-
ically brackets the LOSP mass without further tuning. The increased density of states
at higher mass due to the bulk phase space factor  md1n favors LOSP decays to the
heaviest KK states, dynamically generating a quasi-compressed spectra, as discussed in
Section 6.2.2 and shown in Figures 6.1 and 6.3. If the scale M is such that decays
from the LOSP to the LSP are prompt, typical handles used in SUSY searches such as
visible energy and EmissT are then dynamically suppressed as we discussed in Section 6.3.
This reduces both EmissT and visible energy in SUSY events (unlike R-parity violation for
example, which increases visible energy).
Auto-concealment can occur for a variety of visible-sector LOSP candidates. In par-
ticular, we find that LHC limits on right-handed slepton LOSPs evaporate in the case of
prompt decays to a bulk modulino (see Figure 6.5), while the LHC limits on stop LOSPs
weakens to  350  410 GeV (see Figure 6.6). Present LHC limits on direct produc-
tion of degenerate first and second generation squarks similarly drop to  450 GeV (see
Figure 6.7).
As discussed in Section 6.3 the mechanism is effective for a variety of visible-sector
superpartner spectra, but not for all kinds. In particular, auto-concealment does not
significantly weaken limits driven by deep cascade decays to the LOSP. In addition, the
mechanism is most effective when the bulk LSP propagates in > 2 large extra dimensions.
Thus we find that a wide variety of visible-sector SUSY spectra and LOSP candidates lead
to efficient auto-concealment. The auto-concealment mechanism also applies to more than
just SUSY theories, broadly speaking to any theory wherein a discrete quantum number
is shared between brane and bulk states and where the analog of the LSP is a bulk state.
Though discovery becomes more difficult for SUSY spectra without common deep
cascade decays to the LOSP, it is not impossible. For the examples of stops and squarks of
the first two generations we found searches designed to pick out compressed spectra [104]
and monojets [109] remain effective, albeit at lower masses than traditional searches.
For the case of sleptons, searches modified to keep lower-energy leptons in the signal
region [75,124127] could be useful.
If superpartners are eventually discovered then observations of LOSP decays may
prove to be a powerful window into extra dimensions. This is especially true if the scale
M is large enough to lead to LOSP tracks in the detector, displaced vertices, or stopped
out-of-time decays. As we discussed in Section 6.4 searches for such signals could probe
the underlying gravitational mass scale up to M < 10
9 GeV
Finally, we caution the reader that although we expect the limits obtained from
validated CheckMATE analyses to provide a good estimate of the best current limits
from the LHC experiments, there may be increased uncertainty because these searches
are particularly sensitive to the tails of kinematic distributions and some of the most
recent analysis updates are not presently available. We hope that this work motivates
further study of these signals by the experimental collaborations.
Chapter 7: Monojet-like search for
compressed sleptons at LHC14
This chapter is based on [77], work done in collaboration with Alan Barr.
7.1 Introduction
In R-parity-conserving SUSY, in which the LSP is stable and invisible to the detector,
methods commonly used to separate signal from backgrounds take advantage of the sig-
nals large missing transverse momentum (EmissT ), numerous jets from emitted partons,
or highly energetic leptons [161]. However, this becomes more challenging in the case of
electroweak (EW) SUSY production where cross sections are modest, and is especially
difficult for compressed EW SUSY scenarios in which the mass difference between the
produced sparticle and the LSP is small. Compressed SUSY scenarios result in less ener-
getic final state radiation and less EmissT . Not only are such processes harder to pick out
of backgrounds during an analysis, but they may not even pass trigger requirements for
the LHC detectors. As a result, both CMS and ATLAS remain insensitive to compressed
EW SUSY scenarios involving sleptons with ml m01  m . 60 GeV [72,162].
One way to circumvent the challenges of compressed SUSY is to search for events
with an energetic jet from ISR [50, 163165]. In such events the sparticles will recoil
against the ISR, increasing both the energy of visible decay products and EmissT . Such a
strategy was used, for instance, by both ATLAS and CMS to search for top squarks with
masses close to the LSP [118,166]. However monojet searches are typically not designed
to find EW sparticles and therefore those analyses veto events containing leptons in order
to suppress unwanted backgrounds. Recently, several groups investigated the possibility
of using a monojet, large EmissT , and soft leptons to pick out Higgsinos in a compressed
spectrum [75, 127, 167]. Motivated by their strategy and the current absence of slepton
limits from the LHC for compressed models, we investigate the possibility of performing
a similar search to discover sleptons.
We rely on a high-pT ISR jet to boost pair-produced sleptons, which promptly decay to
two neutralino LSPs and a same flavor opposite sign (SFOS) lepton pair (pp l+lj 
l+l01
1j). Like refs. [75,167] we search for a hard jet in the central rapidity region, large
EmissT , and a soft SFOS lepton pair. However, unlike these studies we find it difficult to
pick the signal out of the large backgrounds from leptonically decaying tt and W+Wj
using a veto on large mll alone; since signal leptons come from opposite legs of the
decay chains their angular separation is not always small. Therefore, we use the leptons
stransverse mass mT2 [6971] to compress signal events into a narrow window and make
the signal competitive with backgrounds.
However, even this is insufficient to pick out the signal if there is O(20%) systematic
uncertainty in the remaining backgrounds. Thus we use a different-flavor lepton pair
control region (i.e. e) to subtract away these backgrounds, similar to the CMS study in
ref. [168]. With this we are able to investigate the potential exclusion reach of the LHC
s = 14 TeV (LHC14) with 100 fb1 if no excess in signal events are seen.
In addition to the normal compressed spectrum scenario, we also consider one of the
auto-concealed (AC) SUSY scenarios that we investigated in ch. 6. As we discussed in
that chapter, in this extra-dimensional SUSY model the slepton can decay to a nearly
continuous Kaluza-Klein (KK) tower of neutral states, with a denser number of states
closer to the parent mass ml. The effect of the multiple states is phenomenologically
similar at colliders to a compressed spectrum of near-degenerate particles. The result is
that current LHC searches are not sensitive to direct slepton production in auto-concealed
scenarios [6].1
7.2 Simulation
7.2.1 Tools
We investigated the prospect of discovering slepton production in near-degenerate slep-
ton/LSP scenarios at the LHC using simulations of pp at
s = 14 TeV, assuming an
1During the preparation of the paper upon which this chapter was based, two searches were published
which also attacked the compressed spectrum slepton problem. The first to do so [169] used vector boson
fusion and missing transverse momentum to reduce SM backgrounds, but required around 3000 fb1 of
data. The second [76] proposed a solution remarkably similar to ours, also using a high-pT monojet
to help generate EmissT and employing a moving mT2 window to distinguish signal from background.
However some of the details of signal selection differ and in particular they do not address background
systematics as we do in this chapter using the different flavor control region.
integrated luminosity of 100 fb1. To generate signal events and SM backgrounds we
used MadGraph5 aMC@NLO [35] at tree level paired with Pythia 6 [40] for showering
and hadronization. With the exception of taus, decays into leptons were done at the
matrix element level (within MadGraph5) thus retaining spin correlations and increasing
generator efficiency. Taus were decayed using Tauola [170] within Pythia.
For both the SUSY signal (pp  l+lj) and the dominant background (pp  tt)
we used MLM matching with up to one additional jet (e.g. pp  l+ljj). For all
backgrounds we used a generator level cut Rll 
2 + 2 > 1.0 between leptons
and for all non-MLM matched processes we used a generator level cut on the leading jet
pT > 80 GeV to increase efficiency (both of which were looser than the final analysis level
cuts and were checked to not impact the results).
Events were then fed into an analysis built by the authors within the program Check-
MATE [55, 65, 106], which includes an improved ATLAS detector simulation in Delphes
[52]. In our analysis, jets and isolated leptons were assigned as follows:
 Jets were defined using the anti-kT algorithm [66, 105] with a distance parameter
0.4, || < 4.5, and pT > 20 GeV. The assumed b-jet tagging efficiency is 80%.
Further details on the b-tagger can be found in ref. [55].
 Isolated leptons were defined to mimic ref. [171]. Electrons (muons) were required
to have || < 2.47, pT > 7 GeV and to not be within R < 0.4 of a reconstructed
jet or R < 0.1 of another isolated lepton. The pT sum of tracks above 0.4(1) GeV
within R < 0.3 was required to be less than 16(12)% of the lepton pT. Electrons had
the additional requirement that the sum of energies within R < 0.3 was required
to be less than 18% of the electron energy.
7.2.2 Slepton signal
We consider two cases: a classic compressed SUSY scenario and an auto-concealed SUSY
scenario, described in further detail below. For the classic scenario we use a simplified
model with a bino LSP and degenerate selectrons and smuons, both left or right-handed,
with all other sparticles decoupled. The sleptons decay with a 100% branching ratio to a
lepton of the same flavor plus the LSP. In this simplified model at leading-order slepton
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Figure 7.1: Differential decay rate for sleptons in an auto-concealed SUSY scenario. Here
sleptons decay to the KK-tower of a bulk modulino LSP living in d = 6 (green) or d = 3
(blue) extra dimensions. The modulino mass is given as a ratio to the slepton mass ml on the
horizontal axis. Since the number of KK-modes grows like  md1, the d = 6 scenario results
in a more compressed spectrum.
production and decay depends on the physical masses and the gauge couplings but not on
soft SUSY parameters. Therefore, a spectrum generator was not used and we simply set
the physical masses of the sparticles to their desired values in the MadGraph parameter
cardthe masses of the decoupled sparticles were set to 8 TeV.
In the auto-concealed SUSY scenario, sleptons are constrained to live on a brane in a
4+d dimensional bulk and can decay promptly to a lepton and a nearly continuous tower
of bulk LSP KK-modes. As we saw in ch. 6, the branching ratio to modulino KK-modes
with mass m is given by
(2)d
8Md+2
)d+1 (
, (7.1)
where ml is the parent slepton mass, d is the surface area of a (d 1)-sphere, M is the
fundamental gravitational scale, and tot is the slepton total decay width. Assuming the
relevant scales are such that the slepton decay is prompt, this leads to a quasi-compressed
spectrum as shown in fig. 7.1.
We approximate the continuous spectrum as in ch. 6 by introducing N = 20 new
gauge neutral spin 1/2 states in Pythia. The masses of these states mj fell into N evenly
spaced bins from 0 to the slepton mass ml. The mass mj of the jth state was given by
the branching ratio-weighted average of masses in the jth bin, and the branching fraction
to this state was determined by the integrated width over the bin.
7.2.3 Backgrounds
We estimate SM backgrounds in the 2 leptons + 1 jet + EmissT channel by modeling
the processes below. Tops and W s are decayed leptonically within MadGraph. In all
processes except (Z/)j, leptonic decays include taus (which are then decayed in Tauola);
(Z/)j decaying to taus is included in the j background. The backgrounds were:
1. +j.
2. tt.
3. W+Wj.
4. l+l(Z  )j where the leptons are primarily from Z/. We will simply refer to
this process as ZZj.
5. l+lWj. Despite the fact that this process produces three visible leptons, its
relatively large cross section combined with the possibility of losing a lepton makes
this background more significant than ZZj. We will refer to this process as WZj.
6. tW with jets defined to come from light-flavor or b-quarks. To increase generation
efficiency it is required that the jet pT be greater than 80 GeV.
7. tq with jets defined to come from light-flavor or b-quarks and the same jet cut is
imposed as in tW .
8. l+lj where the required missing transverse momentum comes primarily from mis-
measured jets. We will refer to this process as Zj.
We also investigated the rare processes ttW and ttZ but found contributions from these
processes were negligible.
At this point it is worth noting that these backgrounds are similar to what were
considered in refs. [75,167] which looked for Higgsino pair production plus an additional
jet, although there are a few differences. First, like ref. [75], backgrounds from single-top
and WZj processes, while sub-dominant, are non-negligible (refs. [167] did not consider
these backgrounds). Second, unlike ref. [75], we did not include a k-factor enhancement
of the tt cross section for two reasons (ref. [75] included a NNLO+NNLL enhancement of
1.72). The first is that at least some of this enhancement will come from tt events with
additional ISR which would then be preferentially rejected by our second-jet veto; thus it
is questionable whether one should simply scale up the leading order cross section. The
second reason is that we do not include NLO enhancements for any of our backgrounds
or our signal, despite the fact that SUSY signal k-factors can be substantial.2 Clearly,
a better option would be to generate both signal and background events at NLO  an
option we do not pursue for this first study.
Finally, although neither refs. [75] nor [167] considered the background from Zj plus
mis-measured EmissT , we find that it provides a potentially substantial background; albeit
one that is easily dealt with by requiring a large separation R between the leptons and a
cut on reconstructed m2 . Both studies used a m2 cut which would have likely dealt with
the majority of this background, although their definitions of this reconstructed variable
differ from each other as we discuss in sec. 7.3 below.
7.3 Beating the backgrounds
7.3.1 Key variables: m2 and mT2
The SM backgrounds discussed in sec. 7.2.3 are much greater than the SUSY signal we
are seeking. To reduce the background we use a series of kinematic cuts, including cuts on
the reconstructed m2 designed to separate the j background, and on the stransverse
mass mT2, with which we define our final signal windows.
To reconstruct the di-tau invariant mass squared m2 we follow ref. [75] and use the
fact that taus recoiling against a 100 GeV jet are highly relativistic and their decay
products will be nearly parallel. Thus in a fully leptonic di-tau decay we write the sum
of the neutrinos transverse momentums as
~pmissT = 1~p
T + 2~p
T , (7.2)
where ~pmissT is the missing transverse momentum vector and n is a scale factor relating
2For instance, ref. [172] found a k-factor of 2.3 for neutralino pair + jet production.
the transverse momentums of the nth tau daughter neutrinos to the transverse momentum
of the daughter electron or muon ~p lnT . Using this set of two equations we solve for the
unknowns 1 and 2, with which we find the four-momenta of the taus: pn = (1 + n)pln .
Then the di-tau invariant mass squared is
m2 = 2(1 + 1)(1 + 2)pl1  pl2 . (7.3)
This definition differs from ref. [167] in that it allows for a negative invariant mass squared
if  < 1 for a single . From eq. (7.2) we see this can occur for a missing transverse
momentum vector nearly opposite to a leptons ~pT and pmissT > plT. For example, this
may happen in WWj when a neutrino and a lepton (possibly coming from different W
decays) are nearly back-to-back. Though having a negative invariant mass squared is
clearly unphysicalwhich motivates ref. [167] to scale energy by |i| rather than iwe do
not concern ourselves with this fact since the approximation ~p 1T  1~p
T is not always
valid and in practice we find this definition slightly more effective at separating signal
from background.
To determine the final signal regions we use the kinematic variable mT2, defined as
mT2(pl1T , p
T ;m01) = minqT
mT(pl1T , qT;m01),mT(p
T , p
T  qT;m01)
(7.4)
where m01 is the mass of the neutral particle which produces E
T and
mT(plT, qT;m01) =
m2l +m201 + 2
T  ~pT  ~qT
. (7.5)
In a two-body semi-invisible decay, the stransverse mass variable mT2 provides an
event-by-event bound in the space of masses of the parent and the invisible daughter
particle. In practice, it is usually employed as a function which takes as an input the
invisible particles proposed mass, and returns the maximal lower bound on the mass of
the parent particle. For example, in a pair-decay of sleptons of mass ml to leptons and
LSPs of mass m01 the function mT2(m01) is always smaller than ml when the correct
LSP mass is input. Since the same is not necessarily true for background processes, we
can preferentially select the signal by imposing a requirement that mT2(m01) < ml for
our trial LSP and slepton masses. In this way, we can scan the ml  m01 plane.
HZ*L j
All other BG
-60 000 -40 000 -20 000 0 20 000 40 000 60 000
0.001
2 HGeV2L
Figure 7.2: Reconstructed m2 distributions after cuts 1-4 for backgrounds (histograms stacked)
and two different signal scenarios: degenerate left-handed selectrons and smuons with mass
mlL = 104 GeV each decaying to a lepton plus either a 96 GeV neutralino LSP (solid black)
or an auto-concealed modulino KK-tower (dashed black). The gray area indicates the region
removed in step 5 of the analysis. This cut significantly reduces the j and Zj backgrounds.
7.3.2 Analysis cuts
Using the variables m2 and mT2 as defined above we use the following analysis cuts
to enhance the slepton signal relative to the much larger SM backgrounds which also
produce 2 leptons + 1 jet + EmissT :
1. Veto events with a tagged b-jet to reduce backgrounds involving top quarks.
2. Require one hard central jet with || < 2.5 and pT > 100 GeV. Veto events with a
second jet with || < 4.5 and pT > 40 GeV.
3. Require EmissT of at least 100 GeV. Also require || > 1.5 between the hard jet
and ~pmissT . This helps to reduce backgrounds from Zj with EmissT coming from
mis-measured jet energy.
4. Require two SFOS isolated leptons with R > 1.3 between them. The large R
requirement significantly reduces backgrounds involving Z/ (in particular the
otherwise large WZj background in which one lepton escapes detection) and is
more effective than a soft invariant mass veto since this would also veto signal
leptons which tend to be soft.
5. Veto events with a reconstructedm2 between10, 000 GeV
2 < m2 < 34, 000 GeV
This is very effective at reducing the j background and also helps pare down Zj.
All other BG
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
0.001
minHR j lLEl HGeV-1L
Figure 7.3: min(Rjl)/El distributions after cuts 1-5 for backgrounds (histograms stacked) and
two different signal scenarios: degenerate left-handed selectrons and smuons with mass mlL =
104 GeV each decaying to a lepton plus either a 96 GeV neutralino LSP (solid black) or an
auto-concealed modulino KK-tower (dashed black). The gray area indicates the region removed
in step 6 of the analysis.
The m2 distributions of backgrounds and representative signal models are shown
in fig. 7.2.
6. Require min(Rjl)/El > 0.02 where min(Rjl) gives the minimum distance R between
the hard jet and the leptons and El is the energy of the lepton closest to the jet.
Cutting small Rjl helps to isolate tops since their b-jets are closer to their leptons
than the decay products from signal sleptons, which recoil against the hard ISR
jet. This is more effective than an invariant mass cut on min(mjl) since leptons
from compressed spectra decays are softer than leptons from top/W decays and this
partially compensates for the closer distance between the jet and lepton. We take
advantage of this fact by dividing Rjl by the lepton energy, further differentiating
tops from signal while also cutting into the WWj background. The min(Rjl)/El
distributions of backgrounds and representative signal models are shown in fig. 7.3.
7. Require the two leptons invariant mass mll < 70 GeV. This cuts away hard leptons
from top and W decays. While cutting even lower on mll can slightly extend the
mass reach of the search, this comes at the expense of weakening the reach for
larger m, since sleptons further separated from the LSP will have harder leptons.
The mll distributions of backgrounds and representative signal models are shown
in fig. 7.4.
All other BG
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
0.001
ml l HGeVL
Figure 7.4: mll distributions after cuts 1-6 for backgrounds (histograms stacked) and two differ-
ent signal scenarios: degenerate left-handed selectrons and smuons with mass mlL = 104 GeV
each decaying to a lepton plus either a 96 GeV neutralino LSP (solid black) or an auto-concealed
modulino KK-tower (dashed black). The gray area indicates the region removed in step 7 of
the analysis.
8. The final signal regions are defined using the stransverse mass as a function of the
trial LSP mass mT2(01) as discussed in Sec. 7.3.1, requiring mT2(01) to be less
than the trial ml. In this way, we scan the ml  m01 plane. To evaluate the auto-
concealed model, where multiple states play the role of LSP, we use three bins to
evaluate the signal mT2(ml24 GeV), mT2(ml16 GeV), mT2(ml8 GeV) < ml
and choose the one with the largest signal significance. The mT2 distribution for
m01 = 96 GeV is shown in fig. 7.5.
 tt WWj ZZj WZj tW tq Zj l+L l
MG cuts 3769013 5077488 74580 3478 21820 158000 2497581 4955268 10590
1) b-veto 3167916 902842 61618 2883 18187 38262 795944 4240902 9302
2) hard jet 417284 56546 19345 866 4548 8296 87754 1342713 1845
3) EmissT 130135 25823 9855 478 1723 2784 46904 46654 1477
4) SFOS ll 1751 4423 1726 186 289 553 169 570 327
5) m2 230 3511 1438 144 229 443 141 209 269
6) Rjl1/El 196 1613 905 75 141 171 137 115 248
7) mll 174 713 397 8 25 85 113 60 229
8) mT2 94 256 164 3 8 32 67 30 227
Table 7.1: Background and signal counts for pp collisions with
s = 14 TeV and an integrated
luminosity of 100 fb1. This table shows the number of events which pass the MadGraph (MG)
generator-level cuts described in sec. 7.2.3 and analysis cuts 1-8. The mT2 cut in this instance
requires that mT2(96 GeV) < 104 GeV. This corresponds to the signal model (ml,m01) =
(104, 96) GeV. The far right column shows the cutflow for the matching model with degenerate
left-handed selectrons and smuons with mass mlL = 104 GeV decaying to a SFOS lepton pair
plus two neutralinos of mass 96 GeV.
All other BG
95 100 105 110 115
mT2Hm
0=96 GeVL HGeVL
Figure 7.5: mT2(m01) distribution after cuts 1-7 for backgrounds (histograms stacked) and
signal using m01 = 96 GeV for both. Note that the vertical axis is not log-scaled. Two
different signal scenarios are shown: degenerate left-handed selectrons and smuons with mass
mlL = 104 GeV each decaying to a lepton plus either a 96 GeV neutralino LSP (solid black) or
an auto-concealed modulino KK-tower (dashed black). When scanning the (ml,m01) plane the
expected signal and backgrounds at (ml,m01) = (104, 96) GeV are evaluated in step 8 using
mT2(96 GeV) < 104 GeV. For the auto-concealed model, where multiple states play the role of
the LSP, we use three bins to evaluate the signal  mT2(80 GeV), mT2(88 GeV), mT2(96 GeV) <
104 GeV  and choose the one with the largest signal significance.
Cutflows for the background and representative signal samples are show in table 7.1.
Unfortunately, even after cuts 1-8 a significant number of background events from tt,
WWj, and j remain, as can be seen in fig. 7.5. Since we will evaluate the signal
significance as s = S/B where S is the expected number of signal events and B is the
total background uncertainty, even a moderate B (O(20%)) will overwhelm the signal.
If we use
B + 2B sys (7.6)
where B sys is the systematic uncertainty of the background, and B is the expected
number of background events,3 then it is clearly necessary to have good control over
background systematics to obtain a detectable signal significance. We attack this problem
in the next section.
3Here and in what follows we will use the Gaussian limit to approximate Poisson statistical errors as
B stat =
All BG
95 100 105 110 115
mT2Hm
0=96 GeVL HGeVL
Figure 7.6: Different flavor subtracted mT2(pl1T , p
T ;m01) distribution after cuts 1-7 for back-
grounds and signal using m01 = 96 GeV for both. Two different signal scenarios are shown:
degenerate left-handed selectrons and smuons with mass mlL = 104 GeV each decaying to a
lepton plus either a 96 GeV neutralino LSP (solid black) or an auto-concealed modulino KK-
tower (dashed black). Backgrounds are subtracted as described in Sec. 7.3.3. The results are
shown in this figure, not including the mT2 cut described in step 8.
7.3.3 Controlling background systematics: SF-DF
To reduce background systematics, we estimate the size of the expected background using
a different flavor (DF) di-lepton control region containing e +  events which pass the
equivalent of cuts 1-8. Since sleptons are produced in same flavor (SF) opposite sign pairs
only, while the dominant backgrounds produce different flavor lepton pairs as often as
same flavor pairs, the DF control sample can be used to estimateand hence subtractthe
majority of the remaining backgrounds.
To do so we use a background subtraction scheme similar to that used in a CMS
BSM search [168]. Inside each signal region, we multiply the number of events in the DF
control region BDF by a normalization factor n to account for the different efficiencies
in detecting muons and electrons. We then subtract the number of normalized control
region events from the number of background signal region events BSF to obtain the
final background count: B = BSF  nBDF. The residual systematic uncertainty in the
corresponding number of background events should now come from uncertainty in n,
which was determined to within 4% in the CMS study. We therefore take this as an
estimate of our systematic uncertainty. This comes at the cost of inflating the statistical
uncertainty since the total background uncertainty is now
( B
2SF stat +
2DF stat +
BSF + n2BDF +B2DF2n (7.7)
where SF stat, and DF stat are the statistical uncertainties in BSF and BDF respectively
and n = 0.04n is the total uncertainty in n assumed in this study. Despite the increased
statistical error in this expression as compared to its non-background subtracted coun-
terpart eq. (7.6), the lower systematic error more than compensates for this and reduces
the total uncertainty. For example, if we estimate B sys = 0.2BSF in (7.6), then for the
typical backgrounds present in our study the background subtracted expression for B in
eq. (7.7) reduces the total error by more than 60%.
To summarize, we define our signal significance as s = S/B with B = BSF  nBDF
and B defined in eq. (7.7). An example of the signal as compared to the remaining
background is shown in fig. 7.6.
7.4 LHC14 reach with 100 fb1
To evaluate the potential 95% confidence level (CL) exclusion reach of this analysis we
demand a signal significance of 1.96. As fig. 7.7 shows, LHC14 with 100 fb1 of data will
be sensitive to sleptons with 3 GeV < m < 24 GeV up to nearly mlL ' 150 GeV. As can
be seen from the figure, this analysis will allow the LHC to explore beyond mlL > 100 GeV
in the compressed region for the first time, though it will not completely close the gap
between the compressed region and current ATLAS limits (m & 60 GeV). On the other
hand, the production cross sections for right-handed sleptons are such that this analysis
will only just reach mlR = 100 GeV with 100 fb
1, and therefore will not improve on
LEPII limits; at least until the LHC has more data.
The analysis is constrained to work in the region m . 24 GeV because it relies on
mT2 to concentrate the signal events into a narrow mass range. The closer ml is to m01
the more concentrated the signal events become and the better chance we have of beating
the backgrounds. However this only works down to about m ' 3 GeV because below
this fewer leptons have enough energy to be tagged by the detectoreven considering the
ATLAS excludedLEP2 excluded
100 120 140 160 180
Figure 7.7: Potential 95% CL exclusion reach at LHC14 with 100 fb1 for degenerate left-
handed smuons and selectrons. Yellow area indicates the region excluded by this analysis, while
orange areas indicate regions already excluded by LEPII [173] and ATLAS [72].
fact that their parent sleptons are boosted from jet recoil.
In the case of AC SUSY, detection becomes more challenging. Fig. 7.8 shows the
expected LHC14 100 fb1 reach for excluding the production cross section of AC sleptons
decaying to the KK-tower of a modulino LSP which lives in either d = 6 or 3 extra
dimensions. The analysis will be able to exclude left-handed AC sleptons in d = 6 (3)
up to 110 (100) GeV. Again it will not be sensitive to right-handed AC sleptons except
where LEPII should have already been able to discover them.
Clearly, AC sleptons present a bigger detection challenge than a normal compressed
spectrum. The reason for this is twofold. First, the largest branching ratios are to
particles with masses  80% and  70% of the slepton mass for d = 6 and 3 respectively
(see fig. 7.1). For 100 GeV left-handed sleptons this puts m just inside the reach of the
analysis in the first case, and just outside in the second. As ml increases, the effective m
only gets larger taking the model outside of the detection range. The second challenge is
that the differential branching ratio distributions are quite broad. Therefore mT2 is not
able to concentrate signal events into a well defined window starting at the LSP mass.
d=3 excluded
d=6 excluded
MSSM
100 110 120 130 140 150 160
HGeVL
l L+
l L-
d=3 excluded
d=6 excluded
MSSM
100 110 120 130 140 150 160
HGeVL
l R+
l R-
Figure 7.8: Potential 95% CL exclusion reach at LHC14 with 100 fb1 for the production cross
section of auto-concealed sleptons decaying to a modulino KK-tower in d = 3 (green) or d = 6
(blue) extra dimensions for left-handed (left plot) or right-handed (right plot) sleptons. The
black line shows the tree level production cross section for pp  l+ lj indicating that, with
this amount of data, the LHC should be sensitive to left-handed sleptons for d = 6 (3) up to
110 (100) GeV. The production cross section of right-handed sleptons is smaller, requiring more
data for sensitivity.
Despite these challenges, it is encouraging to see that for the auto-concealed scenarios
the sensitivity of the analysis improves as the number d of extra dimensions increases, in
contrast to what was observed in ref. [6], where higher d cases were more difficult. Higher
integrated luminosities and/or reduced systematic uncertainties would further increase
sensitivity.
7.5 Conclusions
We have presented an analysis built to detect sleptons with small ml  m01 . We use
the pp l+lj  l+l0101j channel, where the neutral, collider stable 01s are inferred
from EmissT and the jet (which is required to have pT > 100 GeV) comes from ISR. The
jet requirement distinguishes this search from classic slepton analyses but is similar to
monojet searches, and recent Higgsino search proposals [75, 167]. The jet requirement
selects events with ISR, and thus boosted sleptons. The resulting events tend to have
large EmissT and daughter leptons with pT above the detection threshold.
After a series of cuts to remove background events a significant number of unwanted
backgrounds remain, most notably from the leptonic decays of tt and W+Wj. Two
final steps help to distinguish the signal from these processes. First, we take advantage of
the stransverse mass mT2 to concentrate signal events into a window between the trial
ml and m01 . Finally, we use the fact that signal leptons come in SFOS pairs while the
major remaining backgrounds produce different flavor pairs as often as same flavor pairs.
We use the different flavor pairs to subtract away the majority of the remaining back-
ground. Though this introduces additional statistical error, this data-driven technique
significantly reduces the systematic uncertainty and makes the signal detectable.
The analysis presented in this chapter should allow LHC14 with 100 fb1 to search
for degenerate left-handed selectrons and smuons in the compressed region 3 GeV <
mlL m01 < 24 GeV for mlL . 150 GeV. This area is beyond LEPII limits and currently
unexplored by the LHC. In addition, it should be sensitive to the challenging case of
auto-concealed left-handed sleptons decaying to the KK-tower of a modulino LSP which
lives in d = 6 extra dimensions up to mlL . 110 GeV. In both the compressed spectrum
and auto-concealed scenarios this analysis will need more data to improve on LEPII limits
for right-handed sleptons.
Chapter 8: Benchmark models for
Maximally Natural Supersymmetry
This chapter is based on [174], work done in collaboration with Kiel Howe.
As we discussed in ch. 4, collider searches for BSM physics necessarily rely on Monte
Carlo programs to describe signal events and SM backgrounds. Such programs, in turn,
typically rely on the Mathematica packages FeynRules [30] or SARAH [31] to efficiently
convert a new BSM model Lagrangian into the Feynman rules necessary for the Monte
Carlo to run. In this chapter we describe the implementation of MNSUSY in FeynRules,
intended for eventual public release, and flesh out the model details. We also present
benchmark models intended for future phenomenology studies and provide a short users
manual for the model file.
MNSUSY is a five dimensional N = 1 SUSY model (corresponding to N = 2 four
dimensional SUSY) compactified on a S1/Z2  Z2 orbifold using the Scherk-Schwarz
Symmetry Breaking (SSSB) Mechanism. The compactification length scale 1/l is on
the order of several TeV and the theory is not well approximated by 4D softly-broken
N = 1 SUSY. Higgsinos and gauginos are Dirac fermions. Higgsinos, gauginos, and first
and second generation sfermions obtain masses at ml  /2l, while third generation
sfermion masses can be substantially below this since the latter particles will be brane
localized. Soft SUSY breaking terms contain no large logarithms due to the super-softness
of SSSB mechanism, protecting the Electroweak scale [175177]. Only Hu obtains a
Vacuum Expectation Value (VEV) and is automatically SM-like. Unlike the MSSM and
its cousins, there is no  term and Higgsinos need not be light to ensure low fine-tuning.
Fine tuning of the model is O(50%) [7].
We will begin our discussion of MNSUSY by briefly addressing conventions, before
moving on to derive the 4D Lagrangian as well as describe the mass matrices necessary
to implement the model in FeynRules. A description of benchmark models will follow
this.
8.0.1 Conventions
We adopt the mostly minus metric of FeynRules (+1,1,1,1, ...). Capitalized
space-time indices M,N run over 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, while lowercase greek letters ,  run
over 0, 1, 2, 3. We will often separate out the compactified fifth dimension as {x, y}.
Consistent with the discussion in ch. 3, our basis for Dirac matrices is:
M = {, y} =
 0 
 ,
i 0
 (8.1)
with  = (1, ~) and  = (1,~). Note that in this basis, iy =   i0123 where
 is usually referred to as 5 in physics literature and is related to the projection matrices
PR = (1 + )/2 and PL = (1 )/2.
When considering Weyl spinor indices we will use the conventions of [10] and when we
need to explicitly write the antisymmetric tensor ij we use 12 = 21 = 21 = 12 = 1.
N = 1 superfields are written (using the FeynRules convention) as
V a(V, ) = V a  i
2a + i2a +
22Da, (8.2)
(, ) = +
2  2F + i
2 
22
. (8.3)
Non-abelian gauge fields appearing without a superscript are VM = gV aMT a and simi-
larly for their N = 2 superpartners and auxiliary fields. The gauge covariant derivatives
for fields in the fundamental representation are DM = M  iVM and in the adjoint
representation are DM = Mi[VM , ] where the implicit T a is in the fundamental rep-
resentation in both cases. When considering the trace of generators in the fundamental
representation, we use the typical physics convention Tr[T aFT aF ] = TF ab = ab/2.
Note that our conventions, while consistent with FeynRules, differ by factors of two
and minus signs with several other popular works [10,95,97,98].
8.1 Field content
8.1.1 5D SUSY field content
In five dimensions the smallest fermion is a Dirac spinor, equivalent to two 4D Weyl
spinors i labeled by i = 1, 2. We have explicitly written the spinor index  to emphasize
that i is not a Weyl spinor index.
In 5D it is often convenient to write the Dirac spinor as a symplectic-Majorana spinor
[26,95,98] carrying a SU(2) index i related to the 4D Weyl spinor label and defined as
 i
 . (8.4)
The height of the indices i, j only matters in ij, for which we are consistent with our
conventions in sec. 8.0.1; for fields we simply write them lowered. A very explicit example
may be helpful in understanding symplectic-Majorana spinors  using 8.1 one can write
the kinetic term for a 5D fermion as
iMDMi =
ijj 
)i
 Dy 
 D i
 i
=ii
Di 
ij(iDyj + iDy
(8.5)
with Dy the covariant derivative in the y direction. From this expression it is easier to
see why the ij is necessary in eq. 8.4  its antisymmetry cancels the antisymmetry of
the covariant derivative Dy (assuming proper boundary conditions) under the exchange
iDyj  jDyi and prevents the Dy term from vanishing.
Since the minimal 5D fermion is a Dirac spinor with four on-shell degrees of freedom
(DOF), a 5D vector multiplet must contain a five dimensional vector field (three on-shell
DOF), a Dirac fermion (equivalent to two 4D Weyl spinor fields with four on-shell DOF),
and a real scalar field (one DOF). More succinctly, Va = {V aM , a, a, a} with a = a1
and  a = a2; the subscripts 1, 2 are the explicit index i. We use the  notation to match
the conventions of refs. [8, 98]. Off-shell, three more auxiliary scalar degrees of freedom
are required.
Similarly, an on-shell 5D hypermultiplet contains a Dirac fermion composed of two 4D
Weyl spinor fields and two complex scalar fields  = {, c, , c}, where we have named
1   and 2  c. From 8.4 it is easy to see that  and c have the same gauge
transformation properties and therefore  and c must have conjugate transformations,
justifying their names. Off-shell, four more axillary scalar degrees of freedom are required.
When writing the Lagrangian it will be convenient to write N = 2 superfields using
N = 1 terminology. In this language gauge supermultiplets are
V a(V a , 
a),a(a, a)
(8.6)
with a = 1
(a + iV ay ) while matter hypermultiplets are
 = {(, ),c(c, c)} . (8.7)
For more information about supersymmetric transformations between these fields using
either 5D or 4D language see refs. [26, 98,178].
8.1.2 Scherk-Schwarz supersymmetry breaking
The S1/Z2  Z2 orbifold of MNSUSY is visualized by compactifying the 5th dimension y
on a circle as shown in fig. 8.1 where fields must satisfy (y) = PZ2(y) and (l+ y) =
PZ2(l  y) with the Z2 parities PZ2 = 1. Equivalently, one may view the distance
l as more fundamental than the orbifold and demand that fields have either Neumann
or Dirichlet boundary conditions at y = 0, l [178, 179]. Either way, after integrating
the Lagrangian over the 5th dimension y to obtain the effective 4D action, 5D Lorentz
symmetry is broken down to 4D Lorentz symmetry plus a Kaluza-Klein (KK) tower of
massive modes for each field due to their discrete momentum modes along y. The four
possible combinations for (PZ2 , PZ2) result in the following field profiles along y
++m(xM) = N(m) cos
m(x)
+n(xM) = N(n) cos
(2n 1)y
n(x)
+n(xM) = N(n) sin
(2n 1)y
n(x)
n(xM) = N(n) sin
n(x)
(8.8)
Figure 8.1: S1/Z2Z2 orbifold of MNSUSY. Field profiles are constrained to be either symmetric
or antisymmetric at the fixed points y = 0 and y = l.
for modes n = {1, 2, 3...} and m = {0, n}. The field normalizations
N(m) =

l, m = 0
2/l, m = n
(8.9)
are necessary to keep the kinetic terms for n(x) canonically normalized after integrating
out the fifth dimension. Additionally, gauge couplings must be normalized as g5 =
l g4.
We will usually keep these transformations implicit and simply refer to the couplings as
In SSSB each component field within a bulk N = 2 supermultiplet has a different
(PZ2 , PZ2) parity. The differing parities under one Z2 symmetry breaks N = 2 SUSY
into N = 1 SUSY, while a second Z2 breaks the remaining N = 1 SUSY. Due to the
non-local nature of SSSB, loop corrections to the effective 4D soft terms come without
cutoff-dependent log enhancements so fine tuning in the model remains exceptionally
mild [7].
8.1.3 MNSUSY field content
MNSUSY contains one N = 2 bulk vector superfield V = {V (V, ),(, )} for each
of the SM gauge fields, one bulk hypermultiplet for an up-type Higgs and another for a
down-type Higgs Hu,d = {Hu,d(hu,d, hu,d), Hcu,d(hcu,d, hcu,d)}, and a bulk hypermultiplet for
Figure 8.2: Lowest KK-modes of the minimal field content of MNSUSY. The (Z2,Z2) parities of
each of the fields is indicated by a pair of  subscripts. Note that the SM fields are all massless
before EWSB and loop corrections.
the first two generations of each of the SM fermions (U1,2, D1,2, E1,2, Q1,2, L1,2), which
we generically call F1,2 = {F1,2(f1,2, f1,2), F cu,d(f c1,2, f c1,2)}. The third generation fields are
brane localized and form 4D left-handed chiral supermultiplets F3(f3, f3). This is the
minimal field content of MNSUSY.
The orbifold Z2 parities for each of the component fields is given in fig. 8.2, along with
the resulting field profiles along y for the lowest modes. As can be seen from this figure,
the bulk SM fields all have massless zero KK-modes.
As we will see in sec. 8.3, masses for scalar Higgs fields hu,d and third generation
sfermions f come from loop corrections and other interactions. SM fermions pick up their
masses after EWSB in the usual way. Yukawa interactions must be brane localized due
to the chiral nature of this interaction. Since third generation fields are brane localized
the required normalizations between 5D and 4D Yukawa couplings are y5ij = l3/2y4ij,
y5i3 = ly4i3, y533 = l1/2y433. This results in an automatic mass suppression of the
first two generations fermion field masses. As with gauge couplings, we will usually
not distinguish between 5D and 4D Yukawa couplings and let context indicate which we
mean.
In addition to the minimal field content already discussed, MNSUSY contains a gauge
singlet brane localized chiral superfield X, which develops a vacuum expectation value
(VEV) in its F term FX. As we will see in sec. 8.2.3.2, this allows one to write
Yukawa interactions using a single Higgs superfield Hu, with interactions involving down
type quark superfields D and lepton superfields E, L arising from higher dimensional
operators [7, 8]. The benefits of this scheme are twofold. First, only one Higgs must
obtain a VEV, h0u = v/
2 and h0u is automatically SM-like. Second, the masses of
the bottom and tau are suppressed as compared to the top due to the fact that they
come from higher dimensional operators. Rather than including the X superfield in our
FeynRules model file we add its effects using effective operators.
8.2 Lagrangian
8.2.1 Gauge multiplet Lagrangian
The 5D SUSY Yang-Mills Lagrangian can be written [97,98]
Lgauge =
Tr(WW)
+ h.c. + Tr
{eV , yeV }+
(eV eV + eV eV )
)2 
(8.10)
with y the 5th dimension partial derivative, V  gV aT a,   gaT a, W  gW aT a,
Tr[T aT b] = TF ab, and T a a generator in the fundamental representation. The typical
physics convention (and the one used by FeynRules) is TF = 1/2 so it is the one we
adopt. This expression and the ones that follow are easily generalized to the abelian case
by eliminating the trace along with any commutators and setting TF = 1.
FeynRules includes functions to evaluate the kinetic term for , therefore it is conve-
nient to split the second term of 8.10 into the kinetic term and terms involving y. The
second term becomes (in the Wess-Zumino gauge)
Lgauge 
eV e2V eV + (yV )2 
2 (yV + [V, yV ])  + h.c.
)) 
. (8.11)
The first term in this expression is easily handled by FeynRules.
To write the Lagrangian in terms of the component fields one performs the integrals
over superspace coordinates and eliminates the auxiliary fields using their equations of
motion
F = 0, D = (y i[Vy, ]) = Dy (8.12)
with D  gDaT a,   gaT a, and where Dy is the y component of the covariant deriva-
tive. Redefining 1  i1 the Lagrangian takes the standard form for a 5D super-Yang-
Mills multiplet1 [95]
Lgauge =
F 2MN +
(DM)2 +
MDMi 
i[,i]
. (8.13)
After Scherk-Schwarz symmetry breaking, the effective 4D Lagrangian for the lowest
modes is
Lgauge 4D =
F 2 +
(D)2 
(2ml)22 +
(DVy)2 
[, Vy]2
+ (iD ml) +
 ([,] + i[Vy,])
(8.14)
where ml  2l and we have introduced the Dirac gaugino   ( 
c)T. Thus SSSB gives
the gaugino  a Dirac mass ml and the scalar field  a mass 2ml. The pseudoscalar Vy is
eaten via the Higgs mechanism by the first non-zero mode of the vector field V which
also acquires a mass of 2ml. Only the lowest mode of the vector field remains massless.
Another effect of SSSB is to change certain field interaction strengths by factors of
compared to generic 4D SUSY, as in the [,] term for example.
8.2.2 Hypermultiplet Lagrangian
The 5D hypermultiplet Lagrangian is given by [98]
Lhypermultiplet = (e2V  + ce2V c)
+ h.c.
. (8.15)
Once again, performing the integration over superspace and eliminating the auxiliary
fields using their equations of motion one obtains
F = (Dy + )c,
c = (Dy  ),
F a =
2gT ac,
Da = (Dy)a + g(T a cT ac).
(8.16)
with (Dy)a = ya + gfabcV by c, DM = M  iVM, and similarly for other fields in
the fundamental representation. This is equivalent to the similar set of equations given
in ref. [98] except for the term involving fabc, which was omitted in that work.
After making the axillary field substitution the 5D Lagrangian can be put into canon-
1The phase transformation needed to put the Lagrangian into its canonical form depends on the
choice of basis for y.
ical form
Lhypermultiplet =DMiDMi + i
MDM
2(c1 + 2 + h.c.)
 i
2i 
(i (
m)ijT aj)2
(8.17)
with   ( c)T, {1, 2}  {, c}, and m are the three Pauli matrices.
To derive the 4D effective theory there are two versions of SSSB we must consider: H
field boundary conditions with a zero mode scalar and F field boundary conditions with
a zero mode fermion. For the H type field, keeping only the lowest modes we obtain
LH4D =i(D ml)
( i5Vy) (c1 +
22 + h.c.)
+ |Dc|2  (2ml)2cc 
c(2 + V 2y )
(cT ac)2
+ |D|2  (2 + V 2y )
(T a)2
 2g2(cT a)(T ac) + g2(T a)(cT ac).
(8.18)
Similarly, for F type fields
LF4D =iD +
2( c) + h.c.
+ icDc 
(c + 
)c + c(+ iVy) + h.c.
+DiDi  (ml)
ii  
2 + V 2y )i 
(iT
ai)2
 g2(cT a)(T ac) +
(T a)(cT ac)
(8.19)
Though it does not appear in the second expression, c obtains a Dirac mass of 2ml with
the first non-zero mode of . Thus SSSB once again gives masses to the non-zero KK
mode fields and changes the interaction strength in various terms as compared to generic
4D SUSY. Only the scalar Higgs bosons h and the SM fermions f remain massless after
SSSB.
8.2.3 Brane localized terms
We now turn to the Lagrangian for brane localized fields. As we discussed in sec. 8.1, the
chiral superfields F3 and X are brane localized at y = 0. This leads to an action of the
d5x (L5 + (y)L4) . (8.20)
A minor complication arises after solving the auxiliary fields equations of motion  one
obtains terms in the action proportional to (y)2. As we shall see in the following section,
these terms are removed using various field redefinitions. For more in-depth discussions
of the field redefinitions we refer the reader to [95,178,180].
8.2.3.1 Brane localized third generation fields
The Lagrangian for the third generation brane localized fields is the standard one for a
chiral superfield
LF3 = (y)
2V 3. (8.21)
The subscript 3 reminds us that in MNSUSY it is the third generation superfields which
live on the brane. Solving the auxiliary equation of motion for D as before we obtain
Da = (Dy)a + g(T a cT ac + (y)3T
a3). (8.22)
where we have allowed for the presence of bulk scalar fields  and their 5D partners c
as in sec. 8.2.2 along with the brane scalars 3. Thus the D-term Lagrangian is
LD =
ya + g(y)3T
a3 + ...
(8.23)
Since the term ya appears nowhere else in the Lagrangian one can shift
a  ya +
(y)
a3 (8.24)
without much trouble. The factor of 1/2l is needed to maintain the 2l periodicity of the
odd function  (refer to figs. 8.1 and 8.2) since
ady = 0
(y)
dy = 0. (8.25)
Substituting 8.24 back into eq. 8.23 the singular terms cancel and one is left with
LD =
(Dy)a + g(T a cT ac +
(8.26)
Note that this results in (otherwise absent) effective interactions between the brane lo-
calized fields 3 and the odd fields c and .
8.2.3.2 Brane localized Yukawa interactions
Yukawa interactions involving chiral fields are forbidden in the bulk, therefore the SM
Yukawa terms must be brane localized. MNSUSY uses the usual superpotential term
to couple up-type quark superfields to Hu. Down-type quark and lepton superfields are
coupled via higher dimensional operators with the brane localized singlet superfield X
which, as we mentioned in sec. 8.1, develops a F term VEV FX [7]. Therefore,
LYukawa = (y)
UyuQ Hu
(DydQHuX
 + EyeLHuX
+ h.c.
(8.27)
where Q  Hu is the usual SU(2) invariant product QiijHuj = Q1Hu2  Q2Hu1. This
has the advantages that only one Higgs field needs a VEV, so that Hu is automatically
SM-like, and the tau and bottom masses are naturally suppressed compared to the top.
The cost is the need to introduce the X field, since one cannot build a holomorphic
superpotential out of Hu. However from a practical standpoint, we need not include the
gauge singlet X when coding the Lagrangian into FeynRules. Since F X will eat up
the integrals over 2 we may drop X in eq. 8.27 and simply integrate over 2. Then
LYukawa takes the general form.
LYukawa = (y)iyijjH()u
+ h.c. (8.28)
where we have absorbed various factors of FX and M into the definition of the Yukawa
couplings, and the () indicates that some terms contain the conjugated superfield Hu.
The SU(2) invariant product, where necessary, is left implicit.
In this case the auxiliary fields are given by
Fi = (Dy + )
i + (y)y
F3 = y
FHuj = (Dy + )h
u + (y)u
yuq
(8.29)
The bulk F-term Lagrangian includes (y)2 factors which can be handled in the same
manner as for D-terms.2 For bulk sfermion fields one obtains
LFi = F
iFi
yci + (y)yijjh()u + ...2
Dyci + ci+ 12lyijjh()u
2
(8.30)
which, after SSSB gives the following cubic effective operators
LFi4D = 
u + h.c. + ... (8.31)
along with various quartic interactions.
8.3 Soft masses and field mixing
Since the third generation sfermions are brane localized, they do not pick up a mass
at ml in contrast to their first and second generation cousins, nor are the Higgs bosons
hu,d massive at tree level. Instead, they pick up 1-loop soft-SUSY breaking masses given
by [7, 181]
m2i =
7(3)
162l2
I=1,2,3
CI(i)g2I + Ct(i)y
 (8.32)
where (z) is the Riemann zeta function, yt is the top Yukawa coupling, g1,2,3 are the
gauge couplings for U(1)Y , SU(2)w, and SU(3)c respectively and where
C(tR) = {4/9, 0, 4/3, 1} C(q3) = {1/36, 3/4, 4/3, 1/2}
C(bR) = {1/9, 0, 4/3, 0} C(l3) = {1/4, 3/4, 0, 0}
C(R) = {1, 0, 0, 0} C(hu,d) = {1/4, 3/4, 0, 0}
with the CI given by the first three numbers in each set (these are the squared hy-
percharges and quadratic Casimirs for SU(2) and SU(3) respectively) and Ct given by
the last. In addition, higher dimensional operators including interactions with the brane-
localized X can alter soft masses, trigger EWSB, and induce field mixing [7,8,182]. With-
out these additional interactions 8.32 implies the stau R is the LSP. For the benchmark
scenarios described in sec. 8.5 we will follow [7] and assume that additional interactions
2One may worry that F1,2 scalar fields will require a compensating factor other than 1/2l due to the
4l periodicity of (+) and (+) fields. This, however, is compensated by the fact that the orbifold
conditions require a second delta function at y = 2l and the factors of two conveniently cancel.
N = 1 Superfield Boson Fermion
V (V, ) 0 +1
(, ) 0 1
Hu,d(hu,d, hu,d) 0 1
Hcu,d(hcu,d, hcu,d) +2 +1
F1,2,3(f1,2,3, f1,2,3) +1 0
F c1,2(f c1,2, f c1,2) +1 0
X = (x, x) +2 +1
Table 8.1: R-charges of component fields. Table adapted from [8].
lift R mass above l so that 3 is the LSP after EWSB. Other possibilities exist, such as
a gravity sector LSP [7].
To understand the possible types of field mixings, we note that unbroken N = 2
SUSY includes a global SU(2)R symmetry, in an analogous way to the global U(1)R
symmetry which exists in unbroken N = 1 SUSY [10]. In MNSUSY, after SSSB an
accidental global U(1)R symmetry remains in the theory, which is exact in the absence of
gravitational interactions [8]. The fields R-charges affect which mixings are allowed and
are useful in classifying the physical field content. We therefore list the fields and their
R-charges in table 8.1 [8, 182].
From this table we see that interactions of the form
(bHuH
uHu + bHdH
dHd + bHuHd + bqQ
3Q3 + ...)
(8.33)
are allowed and generate soft-SUSY breaking scalar masses after X gets its F -term VEV
FX. Rather than focus on specific sources of SUSY breaking we will simply parametrize
possible mass/mixing terms allowed by all symmetries in the model using matrices b
for each set of fields with a mass of around ml or less.
We start by considering the neutralino and chargino sector. In MNSUSY, this sector
is very similar to that of R-Symmetric models [182] but simpler since only hu develops
a VEV h = v/
2 and interactions between Hu,d and B,W are governed by gauge
couplings. From Table 8.1 we see that the R-symmetry prevents mixing between  and
 while allowing Dirac masses, as noted in sec. 8.2.1. While the same argument holds for
higgsinos, mixing between gauginos and higgsinos is allowed  indeed EWSB generates
such mixings.
Before examining the neutralino and chargino mass matrices it is convenient to first
rotate the gauginos in the same way as their gauge field counterparts
A = (cwB + swW3) W+ =
(W1  iW2)
Z = (swB + cwW3) W =
(W1 + iW2)
where cw and sw are cosine and sine of the weak mixing angle respectively. An identical set
of equations holds for the fields B and W . Then, in the basis 0R+ = (iA iZ h
d )T,
0R = (A
 Z  h0u h
d)T (the R indicates the R charge of the Weyl spinor field) the 4D
neutralino mass Lagrangian is:
= 0TR+ (M0 + b0)
R + h.c. (8.34)
with the tree level mass matrix
M0 =

ml 0 0 0
0 ml mZ 0
0 mZ ml 0
0 0 0 ml

. (8.35)
where we have used the relation mZ = (v/2)
g2 + g2. Thus, in the limit that b0 = 0,
A and Hd decouple from the other neutralinos at tree level due to the fact that only
hu obtains a VEV. After the field rotations U0
0R and U0
0R+ with

1 0 0 0
0 c s 0
0 s c 0
0 0 0 1

, U0

1 0 0 0
0 c s 0
0 s c 0
0 0 0 1

(8.36)
  arctan(mZ/ml)/2 (8.37)
M0 is diagonalized with the real positive masses
mA = mHd = ml
m02 = m03 =
m2l +m2Z .
(8.38)
For ml > mZ there is little mixing between the neutral higgsino and zino.
In what follows we will leave the soft SUSY breaking mass matrices b implicit and
continue to evaluate the mass matrices in the limit that they vanish. For charginos in the
basis +
R+ = (iW
+ hc+d )T, 
R = (W
 hd )T, 
R = (W
+ h+u )T, 
R+ = (iW
 hcu )T
the tree level chargino mass Lagrangian is
L = TRM
R+  
R+Mu 
R + h.c. (8.39)
ml 0
 Mu =
 ml 
2mW ml
 . (8.40)
The latter matrix is diagonalized in a similar manner to the neutralino case and the
mixing angle is obtained via the replacement mZ 
2mW in eq. 8.37. The masses are
mW1 = mHd = ml
mW2 = mHu =
m2l + 2m2w
(8.41)
and once again, there is little mixing between the gaugino W2 and higgsino Hu .
When considering sfermions it is conventional to work in the basis where the scalar
fields undergo the same rotations as their fermion cousins: f = U f fflavor where fmass =
ffflavor.3 It is convenient to also make the change of basis f ci = f cflavor j(Uf )ji, where we
have to be explicit about the indices since f c carries only two flavors. We then write
fields with the same R-charges as fL = (f1 f2 f3 f
2)T and fR = (f 1 f 2 f 3 f c1 f c2).
Note that the dagger in the second expression gives fR the same electric charge as fL but
opposite R-charge. In this basis the sfermion mass Lagrangian is
L = f LMfL fL  f
RMfR fR (8.42)
3The dagger on Uf is a matter of convention. In the quark sector, for instance, one usually chooses
up like quarks to be diagonal in the mass and flavor basis. Then dmass = V CKMdflavor.
MfL =

m2l + m2fL1 0 0
mlmf1 0
0 m2l + m2fL2 0 0
mlmf2
0 0 m2
+ m2
mlmf1 0 0 m2l + m2fc
mlmf2 0 0 m2l + m2fc

(8.43)
fL1,2
v2g21
v2g22
m2f1,2
v2g21
v2g22
+m2f3
fR1,2
v2g21
(8.44)
where m2
is the loop induced squared mass from expression 8.32, mf1,2 are the f1,2
fermion masses, Yf is their hypercharge, and the minus sign in the v2g2 terms is for the
upper component of the sfermion SU(2) doublet while the plus is for the lower component.
Similar expressions hold for MfR .
In contrast to the neutralino/chargino cases, the near degeneracy of the diagonal
terms result in almost maximal mixing between the fields fLi and f cRi (and similarly for
fRi and f cLi). The sparticles obtain an average mass squared of m2l + (m2fLi + m
with a splitting 2
8(mlmfi
)2 + (m2
 m2
Finally, we note that in the limit b  0 there is no mixing between the scalars hu
and hd. For simplicity, we have only implemented this limit in the MNSUSY FeynRules
model file. In this case Re(h0u) = h becomes the physical Higgs at 125 GeV while hus
other degrees of freedom are the Goldstone modes of the W and Z bosons. The masses of
the neutral scalar Re(h0d) and pseudoscalar Im(h0d) are m2hd 
1 + g22) while the mass
of the charged scalar hd is m2hd +
8 (g
1 + g22) where m2hd is obtained from eq. 8.32.
We should mention that additional interactions are needed to induce EWSB and give
h the correct mass and vacuum expectation value. One possibility is through a U(1)
interaction as described in ref. [7]. In the FeynRules model file we remain agnostic to the
mechanism and simply set the Higgs mass to its needed value and shift the value of the
quartic coupling to be consistent with the VEV, which is set by the W mass.
In the next section we will describe how one can easily obtain the mass spectra and
field mixings for a given MNSUSY parameter set using FeynRules and its associated tools.
8.4 FeynRules implementation and user manual
FeynRules is capable of computing the Feynman rules of a quantum field theory expressed
in four-dimensional spacetime. Therefore, to implement MNSUSY within FeynRules re-
quired computing the effective 4D theory. To do so we wrote the Lagrangian in FeynRules
using N = 1 SUSY language, neglecting y terms. The bulk fields were then split into the
product of the y profile of their lowest mode times their x profile as in eq. 8.8. Then the
extra dimension y was integrated out  this accounted for changes in coupling strengths
by e.g. factors of
2 as covered in secs. 8.2.1-8.2.3. Operators involving y, including
mass terms, were implemented using effective operators. Third generation superfields
were included as separate fields from their first and second generation cousins; the CKM
matrix only includes Cabibbo mixing due to complexities introduced by this aspect of
the model.
To use the MNSUSY model file FeynRules must be loaded within a Mathematica
notebook as usual, using the command
<< FeynRules`.
For more details on using FeynRules see ref. [30]. The MNSUSY model file is loaded with
LoadModel[MNSUSY.fr]
and the Lagrangian is obtained with the command
It should be noted that computing the Lagrangian can take several minutes and the
output is very large so it is worth saving the results to file using
lagr = Lag;
Definition[lagr] >> lagr.dat
so that lagr can be accessed in future runs using
<< lagr.dat.
To obtain the mass spectrum for a given set of model parameters one can use the
C++ add-on package ASperGe. The command
WriteASperGe[lagr]
writes the ASperGe source code into the folder <modelname> MD. Model parameters are
set in the file <modelname> MD/input/externals.dat. Running
RunASperGe[]
computes field masses and mixings and loads these back into FeynRules. It also creates
a SLHA file which can be used in Monte Carlos. Further information on ASperGe can
be found in ref. [183].
To port the Feynman rules into Monte Carlos, such as MadGraph5 aMC@NLO, the
command
WriteUFO[lagr,<options>]
writes model file information in the Universal FeynRules Output (UFO) format; <options>
represents output options. For most tree level applications four scalar interaction vertices
are unnecessary, therefore we recommend using the option Exclude4Scalars -> True
which speeds up the output. Users should consider whether this is appropriate for their
specific needs.
Once the UFO files are loaded into the Monte Carlo, one may conduct simulations of
a given MNSUSY model with a specific mass spectrum. In the next section we present
several simplified spectra which are of interest to the LHC.
8.5 Benchmark simplified models
The masses described in sec. 8.3 lead to a spectrum in which third generation sleptons
and hd have masses of about  0.1ml while third generation colored sparticles masses
are  0.25ml. Higgsinos, gauginos, and first and second generation sparticles all have a
mass of  ml. As we have already discussed, the identity of the LSP is dependent on
higher dimensional operators; for this work we assume the LSP is  . In this case the
left-handed stau will be the next-to-lightest superpartner, with an EWSB mass splitting
given by eq. 8.44. Given this, we lay out six simplified models as MNSUSY benchmark
scenarios, shown in fig. 8.3. For each of these the most interesting scenario to consider for
the LHC is third generation colored sparticle production followed by three-body decays
via off-shell gauginos/higgsinos. The final states involve multiple jets (often including
massmass
(b)(a)
(e) (f)
(d)(c)
Figure 8.3: Benchmark simplified models for production of third generation colored states.
Models (a) and (b) have a right-handed sbottom and stop respectively with third generation
left-handed sleptons below, split by eq. 8.44. Cases (c) and (d) are similar but with intermediate
right-handed staus. Case (e) contains left-handed squarks split by eq. 8.44. Case (f) contains
both left and right-handed stops split by eq. 8.32, along with the left-handed sbottom.
several b and/or  jets), along with missing energy.
For the simplified models we use ml = 2.5 TeV; in this case eqs. 8.44 and 8.32 give
m = 212 GeV, m = 219 GeV, mbL = 616 GeV, mtL = 637 GeV, and mtR = 662 GeV.
This is the spectrum used in model (f) shown in fig. 8.3. Models (a)-(e) use the same
left handed slepton masses but differ in their heavier sparticle spectra. For purposes of
comparison, the lightest colored sparticle in each model was set to 616 GeV.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
number of b tagged jets
0 200 400 600 800 1000
first b jet pT
Figure 8.4: Number of b-tagged jets (left) and pT of the leading b-tagged jet (right) for models
(a)-(f). The larger colored state production cross sections of models (e) and (f) is readily evident,
as is the fact that all models typically give at least one b-tagged jet.
Models (a) and (b) have third generation right-handed squark pair production with
three-body decays to a quark plus a third generation lepton/slepton pair via an off-shell
gaugino/higgsino. For (a) this gives the decay modes bR  b++  L and bR  b+ + 
while for (b) the large top Yukawa coupling causes tR  b+ +  L to dominate, even for
the small higgsino/gaugino mixing resulting from eq. 8.40. R charge is conserved since
tR, bR, and  L all have negative R charge. Staus undergo a further three-body decay via
an off-shell W to the sneutrino and a jet pair or lepton pair.
Models (c) and (d) are similar to (a) and (b) except that they contain intermediate
right-handed staus, which we set to a mass of mR = 300 GeV. Cascade decays involving
these intermediate staus result in higher multiplicity final states. For the masses we chose
this has a greater effect in the bR model, which undergoes the decay bR  b + + + R
about 50% of the time.
Model (e) has a left-handed third generation squark pair separated by the mass split-
ting given in 8.44; model (f) is as described three paragraphs earlier. Models (e) and (f)
can also undergo cascade decays within the colored states resulting in higher multiplicity
final states. The total production cross section of colored states in (e) and (f) are about
2 and 2.5 times the production cross sections of colored states in models (a)-(c).
Other important simplified models include bulk first and second generation colored
sparticles with mass ml. We do not consider these here but leave them for future work.
To determine the possible collider signatures of our simplified models we simulated
pair production of the colored states using MadGraph5 aMC@NLO [35] with up to one
additional jet. This was matched to Pythia6 [40] using the shower-kT scheme [49] with
0 1 2 3 4
number of  tagged jets
0 200 400 600 800 1000
first  jet pT
Figure 8.5: Number of  -tagged jets (left) and pT of the leading  -tagged jet (right) for models
(a)-(f). Models (a), (c), (e), and (f) will occasionally produce at least 1  -tagged jet. Model (c)
produces more  -jets than (a) due to cascade decays involving R. Models (b) and (d) produce
fewer tau jets since the dominant decay mode is tR  b +  + 
L due to an off shell mixed
higgsino/gaugino, as discussed in the text.
0 2 4 6 8 10
number of jets with pT > 50GeV
0 200 400 600 800 1000
first jet pT
Figure 8.6: Number of jets with pT > 50 GeV (left) and pT of the leading jet (right) for models
(a)-(f). Each of the simplified models produces between 2-8 jets with pT of the leading jet above
about 200 GeV.
a matching scale of 200 GeV. The results were then fed into a Delphes simulation [52] of
the ATLAS detector, within the program CheckMATE [55]. The CheckMATE team has
more carefully tuned their detector simulation to match the performance of ATLAS.
We investigate b-tagged jets (fig. 8.4),  -tagged jets (fig. 8.5), energetic jets with
pT > 50 GeV (fig. 8.6), leptons (both muons and electrons) (fig. 8.7), and missing trans-
verse energy (fig. 8.8). Jets were tagged using the anti-kT algorithm with R = 0.4.
b-jets were tagged with an efficiency of 0.8, while  -jets were tagged using the medium
identification criteria with an efficiency of about 0.6. Electrons were tagged using the
medium identification criteria while muons required hits in both the muon chambers
and inner tracker. For more information on object identification in the ATLAS detector
simulation see ref. [52].
As can be seen in figs. 8.4-8.8, the most promising signals for each of the models are
2-8 hard jets (pT > 50 GeV) with at least one jet b-tagged, and large amounts of EmissT
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
number of leptons
0 100 200 300 400
first lepton pT
Figure 8.7: Number of leptons  both muons and electrons  (left) and pT of the leading lepton
(right) for models (a)-(f). Models (a), (c), (e), and (f) occasionally produce leptons; models
with cascade decays produce more. Models (b) and (d) produce fewer leptons for the same
reason as discussed in the caption in fig. 8.5.
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Figure 8.8: EmissT for models (a)-(f). Models (b) and (d) produce more missing energy than
those with cascade decays, in part because the majority of decays produce both neutrinos and
sneutrinos. However, this is tempered by the fact that the vector sum of missing momentum
from the three body decay involving both  and  is in less than or equal to the scalar sum of
missing momentum carried by these particles. This is known as the hiding missing energy in
missing energy effect and is described in detail in ref. [184].
(> 100 GeV). Leading backgrounds will include top production (both single and pair),
W + jets, Z + jets and diboson. Though searching for  -tagged jets and leptons could
potentially improve the signal to background ratio this is not universally true for all of
the simplified models.
When considering collider search limits of the simplified models we have described, it is
worth noting that the three-body decay of light squarks can have important consequences.
For instance, in the decay bR  b +  +  the vector sum of missing momentum from
the three body decay involving both  and  is less than or equal to the scalar sum
of missing momentum carried by these particles. Therefore, some of the events energy
will be hidden in EmissT . This is known as the hiding missing energy in missing energy
effect and is described in detail in ref. [184]. Subtleties such as this might prevent one
from obtaining MNSUSY limits by simply rescaling MSSM limits involving two body
decays (like b  b + 01) according to the new models production cross section and
branching ratios; instead it may demand a recasting of existing searches or entirely new
search strategies. Existing searches which may be sensitive to these benchmark models
include [185191]. Of course the current 13 TeV run of the LHC should be able to exclude
similar simplified models with even higher values of ml.
8.6 Conclusions
MNSUSY offers an intriguing answer to the question: why have we yet to see physics
beyond the SM at the LHC? Naively using the current LHC limits on stops ( 700 GeV)
and gluinos ( 1.4 TeV) MNSUSY has an exceptionally low fine tuning of one part
in two due to the absence of large logarithms in its soft terms [7]. However, as we
discussed in sec. 8.5 the limits on these particles are likely to shift in MNSUSY due to
the unusual decay topologies for this models typical low energy spectra. Setting more
realistic limits requires recasting existing searches with detailed Monte Carlo simulations.
This, in turn, requires a long list of Feynman rules which are most easily obtained via
programs like SARAH [31] or FeynRules [30]. This is made especially challenging in the
case of MNSUSY due to the unusual structure of its 4D effective theory.
In this chapter we announce the creation of a MNSUSY FeynRules model file along
with several benchmark models interesting for studying the collider phenomenology of
this theory. Additionally, we give a detailed description of the model Lagrangian starting
from its formulation in N = 1 superfield language, through Scherk-Schwarz symmetry
breaking, and ending with the 4D theory. We outline the masses and mixing matrices
necessary to implement this model within FeynRules and describe the benchmark models
which are of greatest interest. We also provide a short users manual for those wishing to
use the MNSUSY FeynRules model file to set up collider simulations. Our hope is that
this tool enables a recasting of existing searches for MNSUSY specific spectra and decay
topologies, or better yet inspires new search strategies optimized for this theory.
Chapter 9: Summary and conclusions
The SM provides a remarkably successful description of fundamental particle interactions,
though it leaves a number of open questions. One question that is particularly relevant in
the LHC era is: what stabilizes the electroweak scale? As we have seen in ch. 2, the Higgs
mass is very sensitive to high scale physics so that any new massive particles should pull
the Higgs up to their scale. DM and gauge unification provide two compelling reasons to
believe that new physics does indeed exist. Thus, if the Higgs is truly a fundamental scalar
one is either led to believe that there is a remarkable accidental fine tuning of constants
such that all large corrections to the Higgs mass cancel, or that the cancellation is a result
of some new symmetry. SUSY, introduced in ch. 3, is an example of the latter and is
all the more compelling since the LSP is a viable DM candidate and the MSSM seems
to imply gauge coupling unification. Most SUSY models with low fine tuning predict
that colored states should exist in the few hundred GeV to few TeV range  an exciting
prospect given that this should be within reach of the LHC. Chapter 3 also introduced
some of the basic concepts needed to understand extradimensional SUSY, which was the
specific point of focus for this thesis.
To search for new physics at a collider requires separating the desired signal from
large SM backgrounds. To do so usually requires Monte Carlo simulations, which were
the focus of ch. 4. In that chapter we covered some of the tools which exist to recast
existing LHC searches to hunt for new models, starting at the level of the Lagrangian
written in N = 1 superfield language, through detailed Monte Carlos and ending with
the searches themselves.
Details of the LHC along with the ATLAS detector where given in ch. 5. Our dis-
cussion focused on the types of objects which are identifiable in the detector due to its
construction. We also gave a very general overview of classic SUSY search strategies,
giving an idea of how they worked and where they sometimes failed. In particular, we
noted that regions in parameter space where sparticles are nearly degenerate to the LSP
in mass (a compressed spectrum) are often difficult to detect since the decay products are
not very energetic and the missing transverse momentum is reduced so that the signal
can fail detector triggers or be buried under backgrounds.
In ch. 6 we went on to investigate the limits of a class of models which dynamically pro-
duce a quasi-compressed spectrum via the auto-concealment mechanism. In this, brane
localized ordinary superpartners decay to the Kaluza-Klein tower of an extradimensional
bulk superpartner. Since the number of KK states increases as  md1n this favors decays
to states closer to the mother particle in mass. We recast several searches to look for
auto-concealed models and in all cases found that limits were weakened. In the most
extreme example, right-handed slepton pair production, LHC limits disappeared entirely.
In ch. 7 we presented a new search designed not only to improve on auto-concealed
slepton limits but also to help close off the classical compressed slepton region which
is currently unexplored by the LHC. Ultimately, the search proved more successful at
detecting the compressed spectrum of MSSM-like models than the quasi-compressed auto-
concealed spectra.
Finally, in ch. 8 we provided a detailed description of the Lagrangian and mass matri-
ces of MNSUSY, an extradimensional SUSY model with exceptionally low fine tuning [7].
With this information we were able to code the theory as well as several benchmark mod-
els into FeynRules  both of which will eventually be public and will enable collider
searches of this theory at the LHC.
Despite (or perhaps because) no signs of SUSY have been seen at the LHC, SUSY
in higher dimensions is an intriguing alternative to classical MSSM-like SUSY models.
Auto-concealment loosens LHC limits while MNSUSY has lower fine-tuning that the
MSSM. Therefore, some have argued that these extradimensional SUSY models are more
compatible with current LHC data. It will be interesting to see how the tools presented
in this thesis, from the compressed slepton search to the MNSUSY FeynRules model file,
affect this statement in the upcoming runs of the LHC.
References
[1] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Observation of a new particle in the search for
the Standard Model Higgs boson with the ATLAS detector at the LHC, Phys. Lett. B716
(2012) 129, [arXiv:1207.7214].
[2] CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et. al., Observation of a new boson at a mass of 125
GeV with the CMS experiment at the LHC, Phys. Lett. B716 (2012) 3061,
[arXiv:1207.7235].
[3] Particle Data Group Collaboration, K. O. et al., Searches for Monopoles,
Supersymmetry, Technicolor, Compositeness, Extra Dimensions, etc., Chin.Phys. C38
(2014) 090001.
[4] P. Bechtle, T. Plehn, and C. Sander, Supersymmetry, in The Large Hadron Collider:
Harvest of Run 1 (T. Schorner-Sadenius, ed.), pp. 421462. 2015. arXiv:1506.0309.
[5] A. Arvanitaki, M. Baryakhtar, X. Huang, K. van Tilburg, and G. Villadoro, The Last
Vestiges of Naturalness, JHEP 1403 (2014) 022, [arXiv:1309.3568].
[6] S. Dimopoulos, K. Howe, J. March-Russell, and J. Scoville, Auto-Concealment of
Supersymmetry in Extra Dimensions, JHEP 1506 (2015) 041, [arXiv:1412.0805].
[7] S. Dimopoulos, K. Howe, and J. March-Russell, Maximally Natural Supersymmetry,
Phys.Rev.Lett. 113 (2014) 111802, [arXiv:1404.7554].
[8] I. Garca Garca and J. March-Russell, Rare Flavor Processes in Maximally Natural
Supersymmetry, JHEP 1501 (2015) 042, [arXiv:1409.5669].
[9] M. D. Schwartz, Quantum Field Theory and the Standard Model. Cambridge Univ. Pr.,
Cambridge, UK, 2013.
[10] S. P. Martin, A Supersymmetry primer, Adv.Ser.Direct.High Energy Phys. 21 (2010)
1153, [hep-ph/9709356].
[11] J. Ellis, Higgs Physics, Tech. Rep. arXiv:1312.5672. KCL-PH-TH-2013-49.
LCTS-2013-36. CERN-PH-TH-2013-315, Dec, 2013. 1522578.
[12] Particle Data Group Collaboration, K. Olive et. al., Review of Particle Physics,
Chin.Phys. C38 (2014) 090001.
[13] K. G. Wilson, The Renormalization Group and Critical Phenomena. I. Renormalization
Group and the Kadanoff Scaling Picture, Phys. Rev. B 4 (1971) 3174.
[14] G. t Hooft, C. Itzykson, A. Jaffe, H. Lehmann, P. K. Mitter, I. M. Singer, and R. Stora,
Recent Developments in Gauge Theories. Proceedings, Nato Advanced Study Institute,
Cargese, France, August 26 - September 8, 1979, NATO Sci. Ser. B 59 (1980) pp.1438.
[15] R. Barbieri and G. F. Giudice, Upper Bounds on Supersymmetric Particle Masses, Nucl.
Phys. B306 (1988) 63.
[16] K. D. Lane, An Introduction to technicolor, in Theoretical Advanced Study Institute
(TASI 93) in Elementary Particle Physics: The Building Blocks of Creation - From
Microfermius to Megaparsecs Boulder, Colorado, June 6-July 2, 1993, 1993.
hep-ph/9401324.
[17] J. C. Pati and A. Salam, Lepton Number as the Fourth Color, Phys.Rev. D10 (1974)
275289.
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1207.7214
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1207.7235
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1506.0309
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1309.3568
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1412.0805
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1404.7554
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1409.5669
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9709356
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9401324
[18] H. Georgi and S. Glashow, Unity of All Elementary Particle Forces, Phys.Rev.Lett. 32
(1974) 438441.
[19] H. Georgi, H. R. Quinn, and S. Weinberg, Hierarchy of Interactions in Unified Gauge
Theories, Phys.Rev.Lett. 33 (1974) 451454.
[20] K. Garrett and G. Duda, Dark Matter: A Primer, Adv.Astron. 2011 (2011) 968283,
[arXiv:1006.2483].
[21] D. Stockinger, The Muon Magnetic Moment and Supersymmetry, J. Phys. G34 (2007)
R45R92, [hep-ph/0609168].
[22] L. E. Ibanez and G. G. Ross, Supersymmetric Higgs and radiative electroweak breaking,
Comptes Rendus Physique 8 (2007) 10131028, [hep-ph/0702046].
[23] F. Quevedo, S. Krippendorf, and O. Schlotterer, Cambridge Lectures on Supersymmetry
and Extra Dimensions, arXiv:1011.1491.
[24] J. Conlon, Introduction to supersymmetry, lecture notes. http://www-
thphys.physics.ox.ac.uk/people/JosephConlon/LectureNotes/SUSYLectures.pdf.
[25] J. Wess and B. Zumino, Supergauge Transformations in Four-Dimensions, Nucl. Phys.
B70 (1974) 3950.
[26] D. Z. Freedman and A. Van Proeyen, Supergravity. Cambridge Univ. Pr., Cambridge,
UK, 2012.
[27] J. Polchinski, String theory. Vol. 2: Superstring theory and beyond. Cambridge, UK.
[28] Particle Data Group Collaboration, J. Beringer et. al., Review of Particle Physics
(RPP), Phys.Rev. D86 (2012) 010001.
[29] P. C. West, Introduction to supersymmetry and supergravity. 1990.
[30] A. Alloul, N. D. Christensen, C. Degrande, C. Duhr, and B. Fuks, FeynRules 2.0 - A
complete toolbox for tree-level phenomenology, Comput.Phys.Commun. 185 (2014)
22502300, [arXiv:1310.1921].
[31] F. Staub, SARAH 4: A tool for (not only SUSY) model builders,
Comput.Phys.Commun. 185 (2014) 17731790, [arXiv:1309.7223].
[32] C. Degrande, Automatic evaluation of UV and R2 terms for beyond the Standard Model
Lagrangians: a proof-of-principle, arXiv:1406.3030.
[33] W. Porod, SPheno, a program for calculating supersymmetric spectra, SUSY particle
decays and SUSY particle production at e+ e- colliders, Comput.Phys.Commun. 153
(2003) 275315, [hep-ph/0301101].
[34] W. Porod and F. Staub, SPheno 3.1: Extensions including flavour, CP-phases and
models beyond the MSSM, Comput.Phys.Commun. 183 (2012) 24582469,
[arXiv:1104.1573].
[35] J. Alwall, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, F. Maltoni, et. al., The automated
computation of tree-level and next-to-leading order differential cross sections, and their
matching to parton shower simulations, JHEP 1407 (2014) 079, [arXiv:1405.0301].
[36] T. Gleisberg, S. Hoeche, F. Krauss, M. Schonherr, S. Schumann, et. al., Event
generation with SHERPA 1.1, JHEP 0902 (2009) 007, [arXiv:0811.4622].
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1006.2483
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0609168
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0702046
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1011.1491
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1310.1921
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1309.7223
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1406.3030
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0301101
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1104.1573
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1405.0301
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0811.4622
[37] A. Belyaev, N. D. Christensen, and A. Pukhov, CalcHEP 3.4 for collider physics within
and beyond the Standard Model, Comput.Phys.Commun. 184 (2013) 17291769,
[arXiv:1207.6082].
[38] M. Moretti, T. Ohl, and J. Reuter, OMega: An Optimizing matrix element generator,
hep-ph/0102195.
[39] W. Kilian, T. Ohl, and J. Reuter, WHIZARD: Simulating Multi-Particle Processes at
LHC and ILC, Eur.Phys.J. C71 (2011) 1742, [arXiv:0708.4233].
[40] T. Sjostrand, S. Mrenna, and P. Z. Skands, PYTHIA 6.4 Physics and Manual, JHEP
0605 (2006) 026, [hep-ph/0603175].
[41] M. Bahr, S. Gieseke, M. Gigg, D. Grellscheid, K. Hamilton, et. al., Herwig++ Physics
and Manual, Eur.Phys.J. C58 (2008) 639707, [arXiv:0803.0883].
[42] F. Maltoni and T. Stelzer, MadEvent: Automatic event generation with MadGraph,
JHEP 0302 (2003) 027, [hep-ph/0208156].
[43] R. K. Ellis, W. J. Stirling, and B. Webber, QCD and collider physics,
Camb.Monogr.Part.Phys.Nucl.Phys.Cosmol. 8 (1996) 1435.
[44] J. I. Friedman and H. W. Kendall, Deep inelastic electron scattering, Ann. Rev. Nucl.
Part. Sci. 22 (1972) 203254.
[45] G. Altarelli and G. Parisi, Asymptotic Freedom in Parton Language, Nucl. Phys. B126
(1977) 298.
[46] Y. L. Dokshitzer, Calculation of the Structure Functions for Deep Inelastic Scattering
and e+ e- Annihilation by Perturbation Theory in Quantum Chromodynamics., Sov.
Phys. JETP 46 (1977) 641653. [Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.73,1216(1977)].
[47] V. N. Gribov and L. N. Lipatov, Deep inelastic e p scattering in perturbation theory,
Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 15 (1972) 438450. [Yad. Fiz.15,781(1972)].
[48] NNPDF Collaboration, E. R. Nocera, R. D. Ball, S. Forte, G. Ridolfi, and J. Rojo, A
first unbiased global determination of polarized PDFs and their uncertainties, Nucl.Phys.
B887 (2014) 276308, [arXiv:1406.5539].
[49] J. Alwall, S. de Visscher, and F. Maltoni, QCD radiation in the production of heavy
colored particles at the LHC, JHEP 0902 (2009) 017, [arXiv:0810.5350].
[50] H. K. Dreiner, M. Kramer, and J. Tattersall, How low can SUSY go? Matching,
monojets and compressed spectra, Europhys.Lett. 99 (2012) 61001, [arXiv:1207.1613].
[51] B. Andersson, G. Gustafson, G. Ingelman, and T. Sjostrand, Parton Fragmentation and
String Dynamics, Phys.Rept. 97 (1983) 31145.
[52] DELPHES 3 Collaboration, J. de Favereau et. al., DELPHES 3, A modular framework
for fast simulation of a generic collider experiment, JHEP 1402 (2014) 057,
[arXiv:1307.6346].
[53] J. Conway, Pgs 4 pretty good simulation of high energy collisions, 2012.
[54] E. Richter-Was, AcerDET: A Particle level fast simulation and reconstruction package
for phenomenological studies on high p(T) physics at LHC, hep-ph/0207355.
[55] M. Drees, H. Dreiner, D. Schmeier, J. Tattersall, and J. S. Kim, CheckMATE:
Confronting your Favourite New Physics Model with LHC Data, arXiv:1312.2591.
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1207.6082
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0102195
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0708.4233
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0603175
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0803.0883
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0208156
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1406.5539
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0810.5350
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1207.1613
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1307.6346
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0207355
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1312.2591
[56] A. Buckley, J. Butterworth, L. Lonnblad, D. Grellscheid, H. Hoeth, et. al., Rivet user
manual, Comput.Phys.Commun. 184 (2013) 28032819, [arXiv:1003.0694].
[57] L. Rossi and O. Bruning, The High Luminosity Large Hadron Collider: the new machine
for illuminating the mysteries of Universe. Advanced series on directions in high energy
physics. World Scientific, Hackensack, NJ, 2015. Will also be published as a special issue
of International journal of modern physics A.
[58] M. Lamont, The LHCs first long run, CERN Courier (Apr, 2013).
[59] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., The ATLAS Experiment at the CERN Large
Hadron Collider, JINST 3 (2008) S08003.
[60] M. Capeans, G. Darbo, K. Einsweiller, M. Elsing, T. Flick, M. Garcia-Sciveres,
C. Gemme, H. Pernegger, O. Rohne, and R. Vuillermet, ATLAS Insertable B-Layer
Technical Design Report, Tech. Rep. CERN-LHCC-2010-013. ATLAS-TDR-19, CERN,
Geneva, Sep, 2010.
[61] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Performance of the ATLAS Trigger System in
2010, Eur.Phys.J. C72 (2012) 1849, [arXiv:1110.1530].
[62] J. Pequenao and P. Schaffner, A computer generated image representing how ATLAS
detects particles. Jan, 2013.
[63] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Electron reconstruction and identification
efficiency measurements with the ATLAS detector using the 2011 LHC proton-proton
collision data, Eur.Phys.J. C74 (2014), no. 7 2941, [arXiv:1404.2240].
[64] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Measurement of the inclusive isolated prompt
photon cross section in pp collisions at
s = 7 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Phys.Rev.
D83 (2011) 052005, [arXiv:1012.4389].
[65] M. Cacciari and G. P. Salam, Dispelling the N3 myth for the kt jet-finder, Phys.Lett.
B641 (2006) 5761, [hep-ph/0512210].
[66] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam, and G. Soyez, The Anti-k(t) jet clustering algorithm, JHEP
0804 (2008) 063, [arXiv:0802.1189].
[67] ATLAS Collaboration, Commissioning of the ATLAS high-performance b-tagging
algorithms in the 7 TeV collision data, Tech. Rep. ATLAS-CONF-2011-102, CERN,
Geneva, Jul, 2011.
[68] M. Testa, Refined reconstruction and calibration of the missing transverse energy in the
ATLAS detector, .
[69] A. Barr, C. Lester, and P. Stephens, m(T2): The Truth behind the glamour, J.Phys.
G29 (2003) 23432363, [hep-ph/0304226].
[70] C. Lester and D. Summers, Measuring masses of semiinvisibly decaying particles pair
produced at hadron colliders, Phys.Lett. B463 (1999) 99103, [hep-ph/9906349].
[71] H.-C. Cheng and Z. Han, Minimal Kinematic Constraints and m(T2), JHEP 0812
(2008) 063, [arXiv:0810.5178].
[72] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for direct production of charginos,
neutralinos and sleptons in final states with two leptons and missing transverse
momentum in pp collisions at
s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 05 (2014)
071, [arXiv:1403.5294].
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1003.0694
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1110.1530
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1404.2240
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1012.4389
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0512210
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0802.1189
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0304226
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9906349
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0810.5178
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1403.5294
[73] CMS Collaboration, V. Khachatryan et. al., Search for dark matter, extra dimensions,
and unparticles in monojet events in protonproton collisions at
s = 8 TeV, Eur. Phys.
J. C75 (2015), no. 5 235, [arXiv:1408.3583].
[74] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for new phenomena in final states with an
energetic jet and large missing transverse momentum in pp collisions at
s = 8 TeV
with the ATLAS detector, Eur. Phys. J. C75 (2015), no. 7 299, [arXiv:1502.0151].
[75] H. Baer, A. Mustafayev, and X. Tata, Monojet plus soft dilepton signal from light
higgsino pair production at LHC14, arXiv:1409.7058.
[76] Z. Han and Y. Liu, MT2 to the Rescue  Searching for Sleptons in Compressed Spectra
at the LHC, arXiv:1412.0618.
[77] A. Barr and J. Scoville, A boost for the EW SUSY hunt: monojet-like search for
compressed sleptons at LHC14 with 100 /fb, JHEP 04 (2015) 147, [arXiv:1501.0251].
[78] D. Atwood, C. Burgess, E. Filotas, F. Leblond, D. London, et. al., Supersymmetric large
extra dimensions are small and/or numerous, Phys.Rev. D63 (2001) 025007,
[hep-ph/0007178].
[79] C. Burgess, J. Matias, and F. Quevedo, MSLED: A Minimal supersymmetric large extra
dimensions scenario, Nucl.Phys. B706 (2005) 7199, [hep-ph/0404135].
[80] J. Matias and C. Burgess, MSLED, neutrino oscillations and the cosmological constant,
JHEP 0509 (2005) 052, [hep-ph/0508156].
[81] M. Cicoli, C. Burgess, and F. Quevedo, Anisotropic Modulus Stabilisation: Strings at
LHC Scales with Micron-sized Extra Dimensions, JHEP 1110 (2011) 119,
[arXiv:1105.2107].
[82] I. Antoniadis, K. Benakli, and A. Laugier, D-brane models with nonlinear
supersymmetry, Nucl.Phys. B631 (2002) 342, [hep-th/0111209].
[83] E. Dudas and J. Mourad, Consistent gravitino couplings in nonsupersymmetric strings,
Phys.Lett. B514 (2001) 173182, [hep-th/0012071].
[84] M. Klein, Couplings in pseudosupersymmetry, Phys.Rev. D66 (2002) 055009,
[hep-th/0205300].
[85] I. Antoniadis and M. Tuckmantel, Nonlinear supersymmetry and intersecting D-branes,
Nucl.Phys. B697 (2004) 347, [hep-th/0406010].
[86] E. Izaguirre, M. Manhart, and J. G. Wacker, Bigger, Better, Faster, More at the LHC,
JHEP 1012 (2010) 030, [arXiv:1003.3886].
[87] T. J. LeCompte and S. P. Martin, Compressed supersymmetry after 1/fb at the Large
Hadron Collider, Phys.Rev. D85 (2012) 035023, [arXiv:1111.6897].
[88] T. J. LeCompte and S. P. Martin, Large Hadron Collider reach for supersymmetric
models with compressed mass spectra, Phys.Rev. D84 (2011) 015004,
[arXiv:1105.4304].
[89] B. Bhattacherjee and K. Ghosh, Degenerate SUSY search at the 8 TeV LHC,
arXiv:1207.6289.
[90] M. Drees, M. Hanussek, and J. S. Kim, Light Stop Searches at the LHC with Monojet
Events, Phys.Rev. D86 (2012) 035024, [arXiv:1201.5714].
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1408.3583
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1502.0151
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1409.7058
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1412.0618
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1501.0251
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0007178
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0404135
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0508156
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1105.2107
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0111209
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0012071
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0205300
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0406010
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1003.3886
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1111.6897
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1105.4304
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1207.6289
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1201.5714
[91] G. Belanger, M. Heikinheimo, and V. Sanz, Model-Independent Bounds on Squarks from
Monophoton Searches, JHEP 1208 (2012) 151, [arXiv:1205.1463].
[92] B. Bhattacherjee, A. Choudhury, K. Ghosh, and S. Poddar, Compressed supersymmetry
at 14 TeV LHC, Phys.Rev. D89 (2014), no. 3 037702, [arXiv:1308.1526].
[93] K. R. Dienes, S. Su, and B. Thomas, Distinguishing Dynamical Dark Matter at the
LHC, Phys.Rev. D86 (2012) 054008, [arXiv:1204.4183].
[94] K. R. Dienes, S. Su, and B. Thomas, Strategies for Probing Non-Minimal Dark Sectors
at Colliders: The Interplay Between Cuts and Kinematic Distributions,
arXiv:1407.2606.
[95] E. A. Mirabelli and M. E. Peskin, Transmission of supersymmetry breaking from a
four-dimensional boundary, Phys.Rev. D58 (1998) 065002, [hep-th/9712214].
[96] R. Sundrum, Effective field theory for a three-brane universe, Phys.Rev. D59 (1999)
085009, [hep-ph/9805471].
[97] N. Arkani-Hamed, T. Gregoire, and J. G. Wacker, Higher dimensional supersymmetry in
4-D superspace, JHEP 0203 (2002) 055, [hep-th/0101233].
[98] D. Marti and A. Pomarol, Supersymmetric theories with compact extra dimensions in
N=1 superfields, Phys.Rev. D64 (2001) 105025, [hep-th/0106256].
[99] A. Hebecker, 5-D superYang-Mills theory in 4-D superspace, superfield brane operators,
and applications to orbifold GUTs, Nucl.Phys. B632 (2002) 101113, [hep-ph/0112230].
[100] I. Linch, William Divine, M. A. Luty, and J. Phillips, Five-dimensional supergravity in
N=1 superspace, Phys.Rev. D68 (2003) 025008, [hep-th/0209060].
[101] J. L. Hewett and D. Sadri, Supersymmetric extra dimensions: Gravitino effects in
selectron pair production, Phys.Rev. D69 (2004) 015001, [hep-ph/0204063].
[102] N. Kaloper, J. March-Russell, G. D. Starkman, and M. Trodden, Compact hyperbolic
extra dimensions: Branes, Kaluza-Klein modes and cosmology, Phys.Rev.Lett. 85 (2000)
928931, [hep-ph/0002001].
[103] J. Alwall, M. Herquet, F. Maltoni, O. Mattelaer, and T. Stelzer, MadGraph 5 : Going
Beyond, JHEP 1106 (2011) 128, [arXiv:1106.0522].
[104] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for direct top-squark pair production in
final states with two leptons in pp collisions at
s = 8TeV with the ATLAS detector,
JHEP 1406 (2014) 124, [arXiv:1403.4853].
[105] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam, and G. Soyez, FastJet User Manual, Eur.Phys.J. C72 (2012)
1896, [arXiv:1111.6097].
[106] A. L. Read, Presentation of search results: The CL(s) technique, J.Phys. G28 (2002)
26932704.
[107] ATLAS Collaboration, Search for direct-slepton and direct-chargino production in final
states with two opposite-sign leptons, missing transverse momentum and no jets in 20/fb
of pp collisions at sqrt(s) = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Tech. Rep.
ATLAS-CONF-2013-049, ATLAS-COM-CONF-2013-050, CERN, Geneva, May, 2013.
[108] ATLAS Collaboration, Search for strongly produced supersymmetric particles in decays
with two leptons at
s = 8 TeV, Tech. Rep. ATLAS-CONF-2013-089,
ATLAS-COM-CONF-2013-109, CERN, Geneva, August, 2013.
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1205.1463
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1308.1526
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1204.4183
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1407.2606
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/9712214
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9805471
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0101233
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0106256
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0112230
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0209060
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0204063
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0002001
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1106.0522
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1403.4853
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1111.6097
[109] ATLAS Collaboration, Search for New Phenomena in Monojet plus Missing Transverse
Momentum Final States using 10fb-1 of pp Collisions at sqrts=8 TeV with the ATLAS
detector at the LHC, Tech. Rep. ATLAS-CONF-2012-147,
ATLAS-COM-CONF-2012-190, CERN, Geneva, May, 2012.
[110] W. Beenakker, M. Klasen, M. Kramer, T. Plehn, M. Spira, et. al., The Production of
charginos / neutralinos and sleptons at hadron colliders, Phys.Rev.Lett. 83 (1999)
37803783, [hep-ph/9906298].
[111] LEPSUSYWG,ALEPH,DELPHI,L3, and OPAL experiments Collaboration,
Combined LEP Selectron/Smuon/Stau Results, 183-208 GeV, Tech. Rep.
LEPSUSYWG/04-01.1, CERN, Geneva, June, 2004.
[112] ALEPH Collaboration, A. Heister et. al., Search for scalar leptons in e+ e- collisions
at center-of-mass energies up to 209-GeV, Phys.Lett. B526 (2002) 206220,
[hep-ex/0112011].
[113] L3 Collaboration, P. Achard et. al., Search for scalar leptons and scalar quarks at LEP,
Phys.Lett. B580 (2004) 3749, [hep-ex/0310007].
[114] OPAL Collaboration, G. Abbiendi et. al., Search for anomalous production of dilepton
events with missing transverse momentum in e+ e- collisions at s**(1/2) = 183-Gev to
209-GeV, Eur.Phys.J. C32 (2004) 453473, [hep-ex/0309014].
[115] DELPHI Collaboration, J. Abdallah et. al., Searches for supersymmetric particles in
e+ e- collisions up to 208-GeV and interpretation of the results within the MSSM,
Eur.Phys.J. C31 (2003) 421479, [hep-ex/0311019].
[116] ATLAS Collaboration, Search for direct production of the top squark in the all-hadronic
ttbar + etmiss final state in 21 fb-1 of p-pcollisions at sqrt(s)=8 TeV with the ATLAS
detector, Tech. Rep. ATLAS-CONF-2013-024, ATLAS-COM-CONF-2013-011, CERN,
Geneva, March, 2013.
[117] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for top squark pair production in final
states with one isolated lepton, jets, and missing transverse momentum in
s = 8 TeV
pp collisions with the ATLAS detector, arXiv:1407.0583.
[118] ATLAS Collaboration, Search for pair-produced third-generation squarks decaying via
charm quarks or in compressed supersymmetric scenarios in pp collisions at
s = 8 TeV
with the ATLAS detector, Phys.Rev. D90 (2014) 052008, [arXiv:1407.0608].
[119] LHC SUSY Cross Section Working Group.
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/LHCPhysics/SUSYCrossSections.
[120] M. Kramer, A. Kulesza, R. van der Leeuw, M. Mangano, S. Padhi, et. al.,
Supersymmetry production cross sections in pp collisions at
s = 7 TeV,
arXiv:1206.2892.
[121] CMS Collaboration, Exclusion limits on gluino and top-squark pair production in
natural SUSY scenarios with inclusive razor and exclusive single-lepton searches at 8
TeV., Tech. Rep. CMS-PAS-SUS-14-011, CERN, Geneva, 2014.
[122] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for direct pair production of the top
squark in all-hadronic final states in proton-proton collisions at
s = 8 TeV with the
ATLAS detector, JHEP 1409 (2014) 015, [arXiv:1406.1122].
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9906298
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ex/0112011
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ex/0310007
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ex/0309014
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ex/0311019
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1407.0583
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1407.0608
https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/LHCPhysics/SUSYCrossSections
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1206.2892
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1406.1122
[123] ATLAS Collaboration, Search for squarks and gluinos with the ATLAS detector in final
states with jets and missing transverse momentum and 20.3 fb1 of
s = 8 TeV
proton-proton collision data, Tech. Rep. ATLAS-CONF-2013-047,
ATLAS-COM-CONF-2013-049, CERN, Geneva, May, 2013.
[124] M. R. Buckley, J. D. Lykken, C. Rogan, and M. Spiropulu, Super-Razor and Searches for
Sleptons and Charginos at the LHC, Phys.Rev. D89 (2014) 055020, [arXiv:1310.4827].
[125] K. Rolbiecki and K. Sakurai, Constraining compressed supersymmetry using leptonic
signatures, JHEP 1210 (2012) 071, [arXiv:1206.6767].
[126] G. F. Giudice, T. Han, K. Wang, and L.-T. Wang, Nearly Degenerate Gauginos and
Dark Matter at the LHC, Phys.Rev. D81 (2010) 115011, [arXiv:1004.4902].
[127] P. Schwaller and J. Zurita, Compressed electroweakino spectra at the LHC, JHEP 1403
(2014) 060, [arXiv:1312.7350].
[128] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for contact interactions and large extra
dimensions in the dilepton channel using proton-proton collisions at
s = 8 TeV with
the ATLAS detector, arXiv:1407.2410.
[129] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for dark matter candidates and large
extra dimensions in events with a jet and missing transverse momentum with the
ATLAS detector, JHEP 1304 (2013) 075, [arXiv:1210.4491].
[130] S. Baek, S. C. Park, and J.-h. Song, Kaluza-Klein gravitino production with a single
photon at e+ e- colliders, Phys.Rev. D66 (2002) 056004, [hep-ph/0206008].
[131] G. F. Giudice, R. Rattazzi, and J. D. Wells, Quantum gravity and extra dimensions at
high-energy colliders, Nucl.Phys. B544 (1999) 338, [hep-ph/9811291].
[132] J. L. Hewett, Indirect collider signals for extra dimensions, Phys.Rev.Lett. 82 (1999)
47654768, [hep-ph/9811356].
[133] E. A. Mirabelli, M. Perelstein, and M. E. Peskin, Collider signatures of new large space
dimensions, Phys.Rev.Lett. 82 (1999) 22362239, [hep-ph/9811337].
[134] T. Han, J. D. Lykken, and R.-J. Zhang, On Kaluza-Klein states from large extra
dimensions, Phys.Rev. D59 (1999) 105006, [hep-ph/9811350].
[135] R. Contino, L. Pilo, R. Rattazzi, and A. Strumia, Graviton loops and brane observables,
JHEP 0106 (2001) 005, [hep-ph/0103104].
[136] G. F. Giudice and A. Strumia, Constraints on extra dimensional theories from virtual
graviton exchange, Nucl.Phys. B663 (2003) 377393, [hep-ph/0301232].
[137] G. F. Giudice, T. Plehn, and A. Strumia, Graviton collider effects in one and more large
extra dimensions, Nucl.Phys. B706 (2005) 455483, [hep-ph/0408320].
[138] R. Diener and C. Burgess, Bulk Stabilization, the Extra-Dimensional Higgs Portal and
Missing Energy in Higgs Events, JHEP 1305 (2013) 078, [arXiv:1302.6486].
[139] S. Hannestad and G. G. Raffelt, Supernova and neutron star limits on large extra
dimensions reexamined, Phys.Rev. D67 (2003) 125008, [hep-ph/0304029].
[140] A. J. Barr and C. G. Lester, A Review of the Mass Measurement Techniques proposed
for the Large Hadron Collider, J.Phys. G37 (2010) 123001, [arXiv:1004.2732].
[141] G. Moortgat-Pick, LHC/ILC Interplay in SUSY Searches, J.Phys.Conf.Ser. 110 (2008)
072027, [arXiv:0801.2414].
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1310.4827
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1206.6767
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1004.4902
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1312.7350
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1407.2410
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1210.4491
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0206008
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9811291
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9811356
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9811337
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9811350
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0103104
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0301232
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0408320
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1302.6486
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0304029
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1004.2732
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0801.2414
[142] ILC Collaboration, G. Aarons et. al., International Linear Collider Reference Design
Report Volume 2: Physics at the ILC, arXiv:0709.1893.
[143] H.-U. Martyn, Detection of sleptons at a linear collider in models with small
slepton-neutralino mass differences, hep-ph/0408226.
[144] H.-U. Martyn, Study of sleptons at a linear collider - supersymmetry scenario SPS 1a,
hep-ph/0406123.
[145] S. Asai, K. Hamaguchi, and S. Shirai, Measuring lifetimes of long-lived charged massive
particles stopped in LHC detectors, Phys.Rev.Lett. 103 (2009) 141803,
[arXiv:0902.3754].
[146] J. Pinfold and L. Sibley, Measuring the Lifetime of Trapped Sleptons Using the General
Purpose LHC Detectors, Phys.Rev. D83 (2011) 035021, [arXiv:1006.3293].
[147] T. Ito, K. Nakaji, and S. Shirai, Identifying the Origin of Longevity of Metastable Stau
at the LHC, Phys.Lett. B706 (2012) 314319, [arXiv:1104.2101].
[148] I. Hinchliffe and F. Paige, Measurements in gauge mediated SUSY breaking models at
CERN LHC, Phys.Rev. D60 (1999) 095002, [hep-ph/9812233].
[149] W. Kilian, T. Plehn, P. Richardson, and E. Schmidt, Split supersymmetry at colliders,
Eur.Phys.J. C39 (2005) 229243, [hep-ph/0408088].
[150] B. Allanach, C. Harris, M. A. Parker, P. Richardson, and B. Webber, Detecting exotic
heavy leptons at the large hadron collider, JHEP 0108 (2001) 051, [hep-ph/0108097].
[151] A. Rajaraman and B. T. Smith, Determining Spins of Metastable Sleptons at the Large
Hadron Collider, Phys.Rev. D76 (2007) 115004, [arXiv:0708.3100].
[152] R. Kitano, Study of chargino-neutralino production at hadron colliders in a long-lived
slepton scenario, JHEP 0811 (2008) 045, [arXiv:0806.1057].
[153] J. L. Feng, S. T. French, C. G. Lester, Y. Nir, and Y. Shadmi, The Shifted Peak:
Resolving Nearly Degenerate Particles at the LHC, Phys.Rev. D80 (2009) 114004,
[arXiv:0906.4215].
[154] M. A. Luty and D. J. Phalen, Higgsstrahlung from R-hadrons, JHEP 1111 (2011) 019,
[arXiv:1105.1166].
[155] S. Chang, C. Kilic, and T. Okui, Measuring Top Squark Interactions With The Standard
Model Through Associated Production, Phys.Rev. D84 (2011) 035015,
[arXiv:1105.1332].
[156] W. Buchmuller, K. Hamaguchi, M. Ratz, and T. Yanagida, Gravitino and goldstino at
colliders, hep-ph/0403203.
[157] W. Buchmuller, K. Hamaguchi, M. Ratz, and T. Yanagida, Supergravity at colliders,
Phys.Lett. B588 (2004) 9098, [hep-ph/0402179].
[158] P. W. Graham, K. Howe, S. Rajendran, and D. Stolarski, New Measurements with
Stopped Particles at the LHC, Phys.Rev. D86 (2012) 034020, [arXiv:1111.4176].
[159] K. Hamaguchi, Y. Kuno, T. Nakaya, and M. M. Nojiri, A Study of late decaying charged
particles at future colliders, Phys.Rev. D70 (2004) 115007, [hep-ph/0409248].
[160] J. L. Feng and B. T. Smith, Slepton trapping at the large hadron and international
linear colliders, Phys.Rev. D71 (2005) 015004, [hep-ph/0409278].
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0709.1893
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0408226
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0406123
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0902.3754
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1006.3293
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1104.2101
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9812233
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0408088
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0108097
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0708.3100
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0806.1057
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0906.4215
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1105.1166
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1105.1332
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0403203
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0402179
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1111.4176
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0409248
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0409278
[161] ATLAS, CMS Collaboration, P. de Jong, Supersymmetry searches at the LHC,
arXiv:1211.3887.
[162] CMS Collaboration, Searches for electroweak production of charginos, neutralinos, and
sleptons decaying to leptons and W, Z, and Higgs bosons in pp collisions at 8 TeV,
Eur.Phys.J. C74 (2014), no. 9 3036, [arXiv:1405.7570].
[163] J. F. Gunion and S. Mrenna, A Study of SUSY signatures at the Tevatron in models
with near mass degeneracy of the lightest chargino and neutralino, Phys.Rev. D62
(2000) 015002, [hep-ph/9906270].
[164] S. Mukhopadhyay, M. M. Nojiri, and T. T. Yanagida, Compressed SUSY search at the
13 TeV LHC using kinematic correlations and structure of ISR jets, JHEP 1410 (2014)
12, [arXiv:1403.6028].
[165] C. Han, A. Kobakhidze, N. Liu, A. Saavedra, L. Wu, and J. M. Yang, Probing Light
Higgsinos in Natural SUSY from Monojet Signals at the LHC, JHEP 02 (2014) 049,
[arXiv:1310.4274].
[166] CMS Collaboration, Search for top squarks decaying to a charm quark and a neutralino
in events with a jet and missing transverse momentum, CMS-PAS-SUS-13-009.
[167] Z. Han, G. D. Kribs, A. Martin, and A. Menon, Hunting quasidegenerate Higgsinos,
Phys.Rev. D89 (2014) 075007, [arXiv:1401.1235].
[168] CMS Collaboration, Search for physics beyond the standard model in events with two
opposite-sign same-flavor leptons, jets, and missing transverse energy in pp collisions at
sqrt[s] = 8 TeV, CMS-PAS-SUS-12-019.
[169] B. Dutta, T. Ghosh, A. Gurrola, W. Johns, T. Kamon, et. al., Probing Compressed
Sleptons at the LHC using Vector Boson Fusion Processes, arXiv:1411.6043.
[170] O. Shekhovtsova, I. Nugent, T. Przedzinski, P. Roig, and Z. Was, MC generator
TAUOLA: implementation of Resonance Chiral Theory for two and three meson modes.
Comparison with experiment, AIP Conf.Proc. 1492 (2012) 6266, [arXiv:1208.5420].
[171] ATLAS Collaboration, Search for direct-slepton and direct-chargino production in final
states with two opposite-sign leptons, missing transverse momentum and no jets in 20/fb
of pp collisions at sqrt(s) = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector, ATLAS-CONF-2013-049.
[172] G. Cullen, N. Greiner, and G. Heinrich, Susy-QCD corrections to neutralino pair
production in association with a jet, Eur. Phys. J. C73 (2013), no. 4 2388,
[arXiv:1212.5154].
[173] LEP SUSY Working Group (ALEPH, DELPHI, L3, OPAL) Collaboration,
Notes LEPSUSYWG/01-03.1, 04-01.1.
http://lepsusy.web.cern.ch/lepsusy/Welcome.html.
[174] K. Howe and J. Scoville, Benchmark Models for Maximally Natural Supersymmetry, In
preparation (2015).
[175] A. Delgado, G. von Gersdorff, P. John, and M. Quiros, One loop Higgs mass finiteness
in supersymmetric Kaluza-Klein theories, Phys. Lett. B517 (2001) 445449,
[hep-ph/0104112].
[176] R. Contino and L. Pilo, A Note on regularization methods in Kaluza-Klein theories,
Phys. Lett. B523 (2001) 347350, [hep-ph/0104130].
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1211.3887
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1405.7570
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9906270
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1403.6028
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1310.4274
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/CMS-PAS-SUS-13-009
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1401.1235
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/CMS-PAS-SUS-12-019
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1411.6043
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1208.5420
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/ATLAS-CONF-2013-049
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1212.5154
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0104112
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0104130
[177] N. Weiner, Ineffective supersymmetry: Electroweak symmetry breaking from extra
dimensions, in 36th Rencontres de Moriond on Electroweak Interactions and Unified
Theories Les Arcs, France, March 10-17, 2001, 2001. hep-ph/0106021.
[178] D. V. Belyaev, Boundary conditions in the Mirabelli and Peskin model, JHEP 0601
(2006) 046, [hep-th/0509171].
[179] R. Barbieri, L. J. Hall, and Y. Nomura, A Constrained standard model from a compact
extra dimension, Phys.Rev. D63 (2001) 105007, [hep-ph/0011311].
[180] T. Gherghetta and A. Riotto, Gravity mediated supersymmetry breaking in the brane
world, Nucl.Phys. B623 (2002) 97125, [hep-th/0110022].
[181] I. Antoniadis, S. Dimopoulos, A. Pomarol, and M. Quiros, Soft masses in theories with
supersymmetry breaking by TeV compactification, Nucl.Phys. B544 (1999) 503519,
[hep-ph/9810410].
[182] S. Choi, D. Choudhury, A. Freitas, J. Kalinowski, and P. Zerwas, The Extended Higgs
System in R-symmetric Supersymmetry Theories, Phys.Lett. B697 (2011) 215221,
[arXiv:1012.2688].
[183] A. Alloul, J. DHondt, K. De Causmaecker, B. Fuks, and M. Rausch de Traubenberg,
Automated mass spectrum generation for new physics, Eur.Phys.J. C73 (2013), no. 2
2325, [arXiv:1301.5932].
[184] D. S. M. Alves, J. Liu, and N. Weiner, Hiding Missing Energy in Missing Energy, JHEP
04 (2015) 088, [arXiv:1312.4965].
[185] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for direct scalar top pair production in
final states with two tau leptons in pp collisions at
s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS
detector, arXiv:1509.0497.
[186] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for massive supersymmetric particles
decaying to many jets using the ATLAS detector in pp collisions at
s = 8 TeV, Phys.
Rev. D91 (2015), no. 11 112016, [arXiv:1502.0568].
[187] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for squarks and gluinos with the ATLAS
detector in final states with jets and missing transverse momentum using
s = 8 TeV
protonproton collision data, JHEP 09 (2014) 176, [arXiv:1405.7875].
[188] ATLAS Collaboration, G. Aad et. al., Search for new phenomena in final states with
large jet multiplicities and missing transverse momentum at
s=8 TeV proton-proton
collisions using the ATLAS experiment, JHEP 10 (2013) 130, [arXiv:1308.1841].
[Erratum: JHEP01,109(2014)].
[189] CMS Collaboration, V. Khachatryan et. al., Searches for third-generation squark
production in fully hadronic final states in proton-proton collisions at
s = 8 TeV,
JHEP 06 (2015) 116, [arXiv:1503.0803].
[190] CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et. al., Search for new physics in the multijet and
missing transverse momentum final state in proton-proton collisions at
s= 8 TeV,
JHEP 06 (2014) 055, [arXiv:1402.4770].
[191] CMS Collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et. al., Search for supersymmetry in hadronic final
states with missing transverse energy using the variables T and b-quark multiplicity in
pp collisions at
s = 8 TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C73 (2013), no. 9 2568, [arXiv:1303.2985].
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0106021
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0509171
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/0011311
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-th/0110022
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/hep-ph/9810410
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1012.2688
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1301.5932
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1312.4965
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1509.0497
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1502.0568
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1405.7875
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1308.1841
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1503.0803
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1402.4770
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/1303.2985
	Introduction
	Motivations for new physics at the TeV scale
	The Standard Model
	Open problems in the Standard Model
	The hierarchy problem
	Other open problems in the Standard Model
	Supersymmetry in extra dimensions
	4D supersymmetry
	The structure of SUSY
	Broken SUSY and phenomenologically viable theories
	Extradimensional SUSY
	Monte Carlo simulations of hadron colliders
	From Lagrangian to Feynman rules
	From Feynman rules to simulated collisions
	Parton distribution functions
	Parton showers
	Jet matching
	Hadronization and decays
	From simulated collisions to analysis
	LHC, ATLAS, and BSM search strategies
	LHC and the ATLAS detector
	Object identification
	Classic SUSY search strategies
	Auto-concealment of supersymmetry in extra dimensions
	Introduction
	Decays to the bulk
	Bulk spectrum and profiles
	Brane couplings and decays
	SUSY limits and auto-concealment
	Probing extra dimensions
	Conclusions
	Monojet-like search for compressed sleptons at LHC14
	Introduction
	Simulation
	Tools
	Slepton signal
	Backgrounds
	Beating the backgrounds
	Key variables: m2 and mT2
	Analysis cuts
	Controlling background systematics: SF-DF
	LHC14 reach with 100 fb-1
	Conclusions
	Benchmark models for Maximally Natural Supersymmetry
	Conventions
	Field content
	5D SUSY field content
	Scherk-Schwarz supersymmetry breaking
	MNSUSY field content
	Lagrangian
	Gauge multiplet Lagrangian
	Hypermultiplet Lagrangian
	Brane localized terms
	Brane localized third generation fields
	Brane localized Yukawa interactions
	Soft masses and field mixing
	FeynRules implementation and user manual
	Benchmark simplified models
	Conclusions
	Summary and conclusions
	References
