A possible lowintermediate temperature proton conductor based on Silicon Oxide Phosphate, Stefan Saxin
A POSSIBLE LOW-INTERMEDIATE TEMPERATURE PROTON
CONDUCTOR BASED ON SILICON OXIDE PHOSPHATE
Stefan Saxin
A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of PhD
at the
University of St Andrews
Full metadata for this item is available in
St Andrews Research Repository
http://research-repository.st-andrews.ac.uk/
Please use this identifier to cite or link to this item:
http://hdl.handle.net/10023/11948
This item is protected by original copyright
http://research-repository.st-andrews.ac.uk/
http://hdl.handle.net/10023/11948
A possible lowintermediate temperature proton 
conductor based on Silicon Oxide Phosphate 
Stefan Saxin 
A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of PhD  
at the  
University of St Andrews 
29 May 2015 
1. Candidates declarations:	
I, Stefan Saxin, hereby certify that this thesis, which is approximately 31,000 words in length, has been 
written by me, and that it is the record of work carried out by me, or principally by myself in collaboration 
with others as acknowledged, and that it has not been submitted in any previous application for a higher 
degree. 
I was admitted as a research student in September 2009 and as a candidate for the degree of Doctor of 
Philosophy in August 2010; the higher study for which this is a record was carried out in the University 
of St Andrews between 2009 and 2014. 
Date  signature of candidate   
2. Supervisors declaration: 
I hereby certify that the candidate has fulfilled the conditions of the Resolution and Regulations 
appropriate for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the University of St Andrews and that the 
candidate is qualified to submit this thesis in application for that degree.  
Date  signature of supervisor  
3. Permission for publication: (to be signed by both candidate and supervisor) 
In submitting this thesis to the University of St Andrews I understand that I am giving permission for it to 
be made available for use in accordance with the regulations of the University Library for the time being 
in force, subject to any copyright vested in the work not being affected thereby.  I also understand that 
the title and the abstract will be published, and that a copy of the work may be made and supplied to 
any bona fide library or research worker, that my thesis will be electronically accessible for personal or 
research use unless exempt by award of an embargo as requested below, and that the library has the 
right to migrate my thesis into new electronic forms as required to ensure continued access to the 
thesis. I have obtained any third-party copyright permissions that may be required in order to allow such 
access and migration, or have requested the appropriate embargo below.  
The following is an agreed request by candidate and supervisor regarding the publication of this thesis: 
Embargo on all printed copy and electronic publication for a period of one year on the following ground: 
Publication would preclude future publication. 
Date .. signature of candidate  signature of supervisor  
Acknowledgements	
During the time of doing my PhD at St Andrews there have been a lot of people whose 
support has been invaluable. I would like to especially acknowledge the following people 
who have given advice and been helpful during the course of this project. 
First and foremost I would like to thank Prof. John Irvine for supervising and guiding me in 
this scientific endeavour, without which this project would not have been possible. 
For materials synthesis of germanium oxide phosphate compositions, Mark Tham is greatly 
acknowledged. The same is also acknowledged together with George Carins for assisting with 
neutron data collection in June 2013. I am also very thankful for the assistance and help from 
Dr Winfried Kockelmann and the technical team at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory that 
enabled successful collection of neutron data on the GEM instrument. 
I would also like to thank Dr Filip Wormald and Dr Daniel Dawson for helping me collect the 
solid-state NMR data, Ross Blackley with SEM, Sylvia Williamson with TG and DTA, Dr 
Cristian Savaniu for assisting in setting up EIS measurements and Julie Nairn for helping me 
with equipment needed for lab work. 
I am grateful to the remainder of my fellow colleagues in the JTSI group at the University of 
St Andrews, and to all the alumni too (I hope we will meet soon again). 
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank my dear wife, Jennifer, for being very 
patient, loving and supportive. I am also very grateful to my parents for their strong support 
and encouragement. 
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the funding for this project, which was provided by 
the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC). 
"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you" 
Matthew 7:7	
Abstract 
The main material studied in this project is silicon oxide phosphate, often referred to 
in the literature as Si5O(PO4)6. This material has highly unusual coordination of the 
silicon (octahedral, as well as the more common tetrahedral). The structure is 
hexagonal, it has been assigned to space group R -3 and lattice parameters a  7.85 , 
c  24.14 . 
This works main focus is on understanding the interplay between structure and 
properties in order to enhance protonic conductivity for a fuel cell electrolyte. 
Silicon oxide phosphate was synthesised with the solid-state method, using a gel 
precursor made from H3PO4, water and SiO2. Various compositions were made with 
different P/Si starting ratios, ranging between 0.57  1.5.  
There were small but significant differences in the a,b axes for the different 
compositions that corresponded to conductivity behaviour of hydrothermally treated 
P-Si compositions. This correlation was also found to appear in 31P NMR for the 
chemical shift at - 44 ppm for untreated P-Si compositions as well as in the 
temperatures of the DTA peaks for the hydrothermally treated compositions. This all 
implies that this particular P-Si system with the addition of water becomes a ternary 
system that enables protonic conductivity. 
A proposed mechanism for the protonic conductivity is given where it is suggested 
that protons flow along the internal channels of the structure using two waters that 
provide dual pathways for protons. This is possible through utilization of a proton 
thought to be in the structure (a P_OH bond of 1.57 ). 
Protonic conductivity could further be increased in the system by incorporating 85% 
H3PO4 in the P-Si materials, thus these materials act as matrices for the phosphoric 
acid. 
Another composition, Ge5O(PO4)6 with 5% extra germanium, was hydrothermally 
treated and found to have protonic conductivity at higher temperatures than the silicon 
oxide phosphate analogues. 
Abbreviations	
  Combined	
 Power	
  Central	
 Processing	
  Differential	
 Thermal	
 Analysis	
  Electrochemical	
 Impedance	
 Spectroscopy	
  General	
 Structure	
 Analysis	
 Software	
 package	
  International	
 Centre	
 Diffraction	
  Nuclear	
 Magnetic	
 Resonance	
  Phosphoric	
  Powder	
 Diffraction	
 (card)	
  Polymer	
 Electrolyte	
  Polymer	
 Electolyte	
 Membrane	
P-Si	
  Phosphorus	
 Silicon	
  Phosphorus	
 Silicon	
 (ratio)	
  Scanning	
 Electron	
 Microscopy	
  Solid	
 Oxide	
  Transmission	
 Electron	
 Microscopy	
  Thermogravimetrical	
 Analysis	
  X-ray	
 diffraction	
Table	
 Contents	
 Areas	
1.3.1	
 electrical	
1.3.2	
 Replacing	
 Filling	
 temperature	
 hydrogen	
1.5.1	
 Hurdles	
 toward	
 Hydrogen	
1.5.2	
 infrastructure	
 intermediate	
1.7.1	
 Scientific	
 query	
 scope	
1.7.2	
 Future	
 scientific	
 Overview	
 Literature	
 intermediate	
 temperature	
2.2.1	
 polymer	
 electrolyte	
2.2.2	
2.2.3	
 phosphoric	
2.2.4	
 solid	
 oxide	
 Structure	
 investigated	
 Water	
 phosphoric	
 among	
2.4.1	
 Related	
2.4.2	
 Protonic	
 conductivity	
2.4.3	
2.4.4	
 Oxygen	
 Experimental	
 characterization	
 Experimental	
3.1.1	
 Methodology	
3.1.2	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 methodology	
 neutron	
 Analytical	
 techniques	
3.3.1	
 Solid-state	
3.3.2	
 X-ray	
 powder	
 diffraction	
3.3.3	
 Neutron	
 powder	
3.3.4	
 Thermogravimetrical	
 analysis	
3.3.5	
 Differential	
 Thermal	
 Analysis	
3.3.6	
 Scanning	
 Electron	
 Microscope	
3.3.7	
 Electrochemical	
 Impedance	
 Spectroscopy	
3.3.8	
 using	
 Teflon	
 Results	
 discussion,	
 P-Si	
 Early	
 synthesis	
4.1.1	
 Synthesis	
4.1.2	
 Hydrothermal	
4.1.3	
 Solid	
 state	
4.2.1	
 Enriched	
 temperature	
 first	
 neutron	
 diffraction	
4.5.1	
 length	
4.5.2	
 Atomic	
 coordinates	
 temperature	
 varied	
4.5.3	
 hydrothermally	
 treated	
 (D2O)	
 neutron	
 diffraction	
 samples . 90	
 Neutron	
 diffraction:	
 high-temperature	
4.6.1	
 Sequential	
4.6.2	
 Similarities	
 between	
 manual	
 sequential	
 Correlations	
 between	
 physical	
 chemical	
4.7.1	
 Electrochemical	
4.7.2	
 parameters	
4.7.3	
 Acid-doped	
4.7.4	
 P-Si	
4.7.5	
 Investigation	
 possible	
 oxide	
 Summary	
 Substituted	
 phosphate	
 Aluminium	
 titanium	
 Germanium	
 oxide	
 phosphate	
 phosphosilicate	
 Summary	
6.4.1	
 P-Si	
6.4.2	
 Substituted	
 P-Si	
6.4.3	
 P-Si	
6.4.4	
 Proposed	
 proton	
 conducting	
Appendix	
 lengths	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 neutron	
 data,	
 lengths	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 neutron	
 data,	
 lengths	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 neutron	
 data,	
Appendix	
Summary	
 Rietveld	
 refinements	
 neutron	
 data,	
Summary	
 Rietveld	
 refinements	
 neutron	
 data,	
Summary	
 Rietveld	
 refinements	
 neutron	
 data,	
Summary	
 Rietveld	
 refinements	
 neutron	
 data,	
Summary	
 Rietveld	
 refinements	
 neutron	
 data,	
Summary	
 Rietveld	
 refinements	
 neutron	
 data,	
Appendix	
 methodology,	
 manual	
Sequential	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 methodology	
 neutron	
Appendix	
Combined	
 results	
 P-Si	
Appendix	
Sintering	
 temperatures	
Stoichiometries	
 substituted	
 samples	
 chapter	
Appendix	
Graphs	
 lengths	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
Graphs	
 lengths	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
Graphs	
 average	
 lengths	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
Appendix	
 lengths	
 angles	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 results,	
 untreated ..177	
 lengths	
 angles	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 results,	
hydrothermally	
Appendix	
 spectra	
 hydrothermally	
 treated	
Appendix	
Neutron	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 temperature,	
 banks	
Neutron	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 temperature,	
 banks	
 Introduction	
The first fuel cell was invented by William Grove in 1839; it was in its infancy known 
as a gaseous voltaic battery [9]. Since the days of Grove much has happened. 
Although research interest on fuel cells sprung more from curiosity than a need, fuel 
cell research was revived with the space age in the 1960s [10]. NASAs interest in 
fuel cells was because nuclear power in space was deemed too risky, and batteries 
were too bulky in space vehicles. 
Today fuel cells are once again interesting, this time with the call for sustainability 
and fuel efficiency. This is where one pillar could be the mass production of 
affordable and durable fuel cell systems that can replace batteries in mobile devices, 
substitute internal combustion engines in automotive vehicles or act as backup-
systems for e.g. cell towers and hospitals [11]. 
What began as a scientific curiosity in the mid-1800s is today a widespread scientific 
field that has great potential in revolutionizing the way energy is transported and 
stored. It is a field of its own within materials science, and if its potential is fully 
tapped into through collaborative efforts between academia and industry then the 
resulting products will solve some of the most critical aspects of todays energy 
problems. 
1.1 Why fuel cells? 
One important factor is the current energy crisis  there is here a clear need for 
developing new resources in order to satisfy the worlds growing energy demands. 
Especially in rural and / or underdeveloped areas it is important to create small 
independent sources of electrical energy that can benefit people and grow local 
economies. In sparsely populated areas it can many times be too costly to connect to 
the electrical grid. For those areas one could skip the step of connecting to a grid in a 
manner similar to how many underdeveloped regions of the world switched directly 
to mobile phone systems instead of first fully implementing telephone landlines. 
Furthermore, fossil fuels such as oil and natural gas are not endless resources and 
sooner or later they will need to be replaced  oil is also a crucial chemical feedstock 
and is expected to continue to be highly important for the chemical industry also in 
the long term future. Moreover, in the same industry there will be an increased 
demand for coal too along with renewable resources [12]. Therefore it would be 
prudent and beneficial if the available fuel and resources could be utilized in the most 
efficient manner. A third reason is the ongoing concern for greenhouse gases and their 
negative impact on climate change. Lastly, there is also the aspect of air quality, 
especially in regards to diesel vehicles that needs to be remedied. With widespread 
implementation of fuel cells emissions can be cut or in many cases cancelled out, 
especially when combined with clean renewable energy sources like solar, wind or 
wave power. Increased efficiencies in vehicles could also translate into longer range 
between fill-up, provided e.g. new and improved materials and technologies for 
hydrogen storage are developed. 
1.2 What are fuel cells? 
Fuel cells are electrochemical devices that convert chemical energy directly into 
electricity, thereby offering much more electrical output per unit fuel compared to 
classical combustion of the same fuel. They are highly efficient, silent and 
environmentally clean compared to any commercially available alternative today. 
There are several different types of fuel cells, most of them are all solid-state units. 
The more common type of fuel cell system found on the market today is the Polymer 
Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell (PEMFC). PEM fuel cells are operated at low 
temperatures (40  80C) and have the advantages of short start-up times, low 
emissions, low weight and small volume but disadvantages include the need for 
precious metals for their catalysts as well as utilizing ultra-pure hydrogen for fuel. 
This makes these types of fuel cells very expensive and hard to commercialize. 
Another type of fuel cell is the Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC). They have much 
higher operational temperatures (600  1000C) and enjoy the advantages of higher 
efficiencies and no need for precious metal catalysts. This also means they can offer 
higher flexibility in the choice of fuels. The disadvantages for these systems though 
are the longer startup times, but more seriously, the incoherent material expansions of 
the different components at the required operational temperatures are a problem 
associated with them. This issue often leads to degradation over time. Also, their 
weight, volume and inherent fragility (of primarily the ceramic electrolyte materials) 
make them unsuitable for e.g. automotive application and mobile devices, however 
they are highly suitable for stationary applications. Fuel cell types are summarised in 
Table 1. 
1.3 Areas of application 
Although some type of energy is needed to produce or extract hydrogen for low
intermediate temperature fuel cell systems there is one great advantage that this 
enables, which is the storage of energy. Unlike a battery, energy cannot be stored in 
the fuel cell. It is however stored elsewhere, because it is chemically bound in the 
hydrogen itself. Effective storage of the hydrogen is the key to realizing the inherent 
advantages of fuel cells over other energy converting devices. 
In the most efficient fuel cell systems, converting chemical energy to electrical power 
yields efficiencies of up to 60% (it can be over 80% if the heat is taken care of by 
adding a combined heat and power module, CHP). This can be contrasted to the petrol 
engine which efficiency is limited by the Carnot cycle, and in the ideal case can 
obtain 25% efficiency. If fuel cells were to substitute internal combustion engines in 
transportation, this would mean that the remaining reservoirs of fossil fuel could be 
used in a more optimal way. 
Fuel cell type PEFC PAFC SOFC 
Operating 
temperatures 
40 - 80C 150 - 220C 600 - 1000C 
Electrolyte Hydrated polymer 
(e.g. Nafion) 
Phosphoric acid in 
SiC matrix Primarily YSZ 
Catalyst Pt Pt Electrode material 
Advantages Short startup time Intermediate temperature High efficiency 
Disadvantages Lower efficiency, 
only ultrapure H2, 
Difficult thermal and 
water management 
Pressure induced 
corrosion 
Incoherent material 
expansion, long 
startup times 
Table	
 Overview of a few main fuel cell systems. Based on [13]. 
1.3.1	
 electrical	
Moreover, in todays society the supply and demand patterns for e.g. domestic use of 
electricity varies depending on geographical location and time of day. 
A chief principle by which all electrical grids function, is that there must always be a 
balance maintained between electricity input and output. If no auxiliary system exists 
to address over- and under production, then there will be losses due to overproduction 
at times when demand temporarily decreases or serious instabilities leading to grid 
failure if demand of electricity exceeds the production. The former issue of 
overproduction within the UK power grid are currently being temporarily remedied 
by e.g. paying out money for large wind farms not to operate during times of 
overproduction [14]. This is obviously non-sustainable, and yet it comes down to a 
seemingly simple question of managing temporary energy storage. 
There are systems already in use to take care of these cases, some more renewable 
than others. One can for instance have a backup of oil-powered electrical power 
stations which have a quick startup time, but on the other hand burn fossil fuels. 
Another alternative is to use hydroelectric power through a dam, however this 
requires that the operating conditions permit taking out the required amount of power 
at that point in time  there could be a drought and too little water available, or 
conversely, too much water in the dam and a restriction on the amount of water 
allowed through in order to avoid flooding below the dam. Naturally, renewables like 
wind, solar and wave power all have their respective weather dependencies; therefore 
outputs can subsequently vary to a large degree during very short time-spans making 
the electrical power-grid vulnerable. This would make widespread expansion of 
renewables highly difficult, especially when considering a large future part of any 
national power grid. One possible way of solving this problem would be to use 
renewables as independent power sources, separately and independently from any 
power grid. A farm could for instance have its own wind farm and solar panels to run 
everything from, yet there would still be electricity at a surplus at times and at other 
times a deficit would be the case (making it necessary to be connected to either a grid 
or a generator of some sort). The solution to both these cases (widespread 
implementation of renewables and making singular units self-sufficient on renewable 
energy) would be to couple renewable energy systems with fuel cell and electrolyzer 
systems. This way a farm could use e.g. solar panels during sunny days to not only 
power all electrical units but also electrolyze water and make hydrogen gas. The gas 
could then be stored and used in a fuel cell when the renewable source is unable to 
produce the amount of electricity needed. 
It is far from being technically impossible; however, because these units produce a 
varying amount of electricity depending on current weather conditions, whereas oil-, 
coal- or nuclear power plants can produce a stable amount of electricity, the latter 
become far more appealing than the former. It also comes down to economics and 
cost  investing in e.g. off-shore wind and hydrogen infrastructure is more expensive 
than simply using oil or other already available energy infrastructure [15]. 
Nevertheless, it still stands to reason that if fuel cell technology can be applied, there 
would be a way of taking care of all the power generated by renewables, thereby 
maximizing the use of the renewable power stations and harnessing a great deal more 
renewable energy. 
Another more localized solution would be to have a fuel cell driven vehicle that runs 
all the time (including charging a battery in the vehicle), also when parked at home or 
at a workplace. If the hydrogen is supplied and derived from stored hydrogen gas 
obtained from electrolysis of water via solar panels on the roof, this would provide 
renewable electrical energy to a home or office building as well as power the vehicle 
itself when on the road. The benefit of running a fuel cell system continuously like 
this would be that the stress is minimized and the durability of the materials in the 
fuel cell are extended, in addition, it would cut down consumption of electricity taken 
from the grid. Electricity generated from a renewable source in the home would, apart 
from the installation and component costs, be completely free. 
Today fuel cells have established themselves on a few markets, e.g. for fork lifts, cell 
towers and military portable power units. 
1.3.2	
 Replacing	
 batteries	
Perhaps one new area before the full implementation into automotive vehicles will be 
laptop devices and smartphones. The reason for this is that these devices are 
becoming increasingly power consuming, as demands for greater processing power 
for computing and graphical rendering increase from year to year. Developments in 
battery technology have up until now been able to keep up to a certain degree, as 
better and better batteries have been engineered to handle the increased loads. For 
example, in the past few years it has been quite common to have a battery life of 
around 7 hours in a standard laptop. Later years MacBook Airs from Apple (13.3 
models with either Intels Haswell or Broadwell processor and an all-solid-state 
architecture) have up to 12 hours of battery life depending on how they are used [16]. 
This is a very similar battery life compared to the very first Apple Macintosh Portable 
(from 1989) which had a lead-acid battery (similar to the battery technology found in 
cars); this was a portable computer that could run for 6  12 hours unplugged [17]. In 
the case of Apple portable computers the progression has gone from lead-acid, to Ni-
Cd, to Ni-Mh, to Li-ion and Li-polymer. For the last type of battery one has gone to 
great lengths to reduce redundant space (e.g. the safety enclosure) in order to use 
more of the available space for energy storage, effectively making the battery non-
removable, as well as optimizing the rest of the computer infrastructure (screen, hard-
drive and CPU) to make it less power consuming. The alternatives a laptop 
manufacturer like Apple faces is to either make the battery bigger, or keep it the same 
size or smaller and get a device that needs to be charged more frequently; or lastly, 
find a better technology that will power the device for much longer times than the 
current Li-polymer battery technology. Such an approach could well include a fuel 
cell setup that attaches to the computer or is built-in, provided adequate materials are 
found and the incentive for launching such a product is there. Indeed, Apple did file a 
patent for a fuel cell system for a portable computing device in August 2010 [18], and 
then a follow-up patent in April 2011 [19], and it is therefore conceivable that this 
type of application will find its way into some of the product line for its mobile 
devices in the near future. If this will be the case, then there is a great likelihood that 
other computer and mobile phone companies will follow suit by introducing their own 
fuel cell powered devices  companies like Samsung, Acer and Dell. This would be a 
true revolution that would familiarize people to fuel cell technology as well as trigger 
third-party solutions for small scale fuel storage and reforming. A related area where 
a smaller type of fuel cell would fill a critical need would be in smartphones, as these 
currently struggle to keep a days charge when operated normally. 
Deep cycle (heavy duty) batteries for mobile homes could also be replaced or 
complemented with a fuel cell for harnessing electricity produced by a renewable 
source. One could e.g. run a SOFC in electrolysis mode to produce synthetic fuel and 
then switch to fuel cell mode to utilize the electricity when needed. Or one could have 
a lowintermediate temperature option that could run on methanol. This would enable 
campervans, caravans and small cottages to be completely off-grid and store energy 
well beyond todays options. 
1.4 Filling the temperature gap 
Despite the number of benefits that PEM fuel cells have compared to other kinds of 
fuel cells there are a number of drawbacks. One major aspect is that the low operating 
temperature will yield slower kinetics. More specifically, CO from the fuel gasses 
will bind to the platinum sites of the catalysts, thereby poisoning the catalyst (i.e. 
there will be inhibition of the desired electrochemical reactions). This can be 
overcome by using ultra pure hydrogen as fuel, however this would not be feasible 
when fuel cells become more commercially available as it would be too expensive. If 
a variety of fuels are to be used, the operating temperature of the fuel cell would have 
to be increased to over 150C for the chemisorption of CO not to be a problem. 
Moreover, the relative humidity should not be too high as this requires humidifiers 
which adds to the weight and volume of the fuel cell system.  
1.5 The hydrogen economy 
The hydrogen economy is a term ascribed to a future global system in which 
hydrogen and electricity are the main energy vectors. It is widely held that oil is a 
limited resource and that it is only a matter of time until the modern world economy 
will have to adjust to a world that is less dependent on fossil fuels, and more 
dependant on renewables. 
Adjustments on a global scale have 
occurred before  the world 
economy has gone from wood to 
coal, to oil and is now moving 
toward natural gas  increasing the 
ratio of hydrogen to carbon for 
each fuel added. It is therefore not 
1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020
World population
Figure	
  The world population since 1820, after an 
estimate by Prof Angus Maddison [3].	
inconceivable that hydrogen one day will become the main fuel.  
To gain historical 
perspective it is worth 
looking at the world 
population (Figure 1) as 
well as taking a look at the 
actual world energy 
consumption of the past 
century, see Figure 2. This 
latter figure contains an 
estimate on world energy 
production data compiled 
from the Shift project [6]. 
According to this data one 
can draw the conclusion that 
when a new type of fuel 
becomes established it does not go away  it merely adds to the total amount of fuels 
available and yields a more diversified portfolio of available fuels. In the same graph, 
Figure 2, it can be noted that oil is the predominant fuel, although the energy 
production from coal which 
has been around for a long 
time has almost doubled in the 
recent decade  this is likely 
due to developing countries 
like China and India which are 
increasing their production as 
they seek to take their 
economies to a more 
developed state. 
Although the total world energy 
production does look quite 
Figure	
 An estimate of the world energy production since the year 
1900. Data summarised from the Shift Project [6], originally sourced 
from Bouda Etemad and Jean Luciani, World Energy Production 
1800  1985 for the period 1900-1980 and from US EIA Historical 
Statistics for 1981-2013 for the period 1981-2013. 
Figure	
 An estimate of world energy production per capita since 
the year 1900. Summarized data from the Shift Project [6] divided 
by an interpolated approximation of world population, originally 
approximated by Prof Angus Maddison [3] then interpolated 
linearly  by the author for the missing years in the early 1900s.	
dramatic (as seen from Figure 2), one has to bear in mind that the world population 
has grown a lot during the same time. Looking at the same energy production data 
and dividing it by a yearly estimate of the world population, so that a per capita figure 
over time is obtained, one can conclude that the total world energy production per 
capita has more than doubled since the mid-1950s, see Figure 3. 
Moreover, a decrease in growth rate for the past few decades seems to be the case 
compared to the massive growth period between 1945  1970, when looking at the 
energy production estimates on a per capita basis. 
The timing for when the hydrogen economy needs to be implemented depends on a 
number of factors. If indeed the current usage of fossil fuels is unsustainable then that 
certainly is a reason for a quicker implementation. This does hold true in the long run 
but there is also great uncertainty as to when the fossil fuel resources will be too 
expensive to extract, and when oil production in particular will peak [20]. The other 
aspect is whether the hydrogen economy can deliver on its promises. If for instance 
hydrogen is produced from fossil fuels one may as well use fossil fuels directly. 
1.5.1	
 Hurdles	
 toward	
 Hydrogen	
 economy	
The main problem to implementing the hydrogen economy is that the technology is 
too expensive at the moment. A major reason for the high cost is because it is not 
mass manufactured, and because of the usage of exotic materials such as rare-earth 
catalysts in low temperature fuel cell systems. Currently hydrogen technology is only 
produced in small volumes due to a low demand (which in turn is largely due to that 
prices are too high). Although calculations have been made suggesting that we are 
close to a point where the unit cost for producing hydrogen from a renewable source 
(wind) and running a fuel cell vehicle would correspond to a petrol cost of $1.7 / litre 
[21] which is below the current UK sale price of petrol. 
If prices came down to the point where it makes financial sense to the users, then it 
follows that it would be more attractive for companies and people to invest in 
hydrogen technology in order to harness the great benefits of renewable energy. 
It is however a simplification to solely attribute the reason for the lack of hydrogen 
infrastructure to a modern chicken and egg problem. From the materials side of the 
issue many practical problems still remain to be solved, before we see the hydrogen 
economy gaining any foothold. The chief things to solve are the sustainable 
production of hydrogen, cheap and efficient hydrogen-storage and making sure fuel 
cell systems are robust, long-lived and affordable. These are major challenges that are 
currently being addressed but will take some time to solve and implement on a large 
scale. Once viable solutions for these obstacles are on the market, hydrogen has the 
potential to become an energy vector on equal footing with electricity. 
1.5.2	
 infrastructure	
 materials	
Hydrogen is a very small and light molecule which will readily escape, moreover, it 
can embrittle certain metals such as steel and other metals [22]. Therefore, to for 
instance use current infrastructure, such as e.g. pipelines, gas tankers and trucks to 
transport hydrogen gas may not be a realistic option. 
Moreover, storage and handling of hydrogen gas raises questions of safety primarily 
because it is a very much unknown area in the consumer environment [23] and 
because of hydrogens odourless nature. In current PEM automotive technology high 
pressures are required which means a number of safety measures have to be taken 
such as hydrogen sensors and intricate design of the fuel tank [24]. Being able to 
refuel hydrogen gas into high pressure fuel tanks requires even higher pressures in the 
tanks at the filling stations, and to compress the gas in the first place requires extra 
energy, which of course impacts the overall efficiency. One candidate for solving 
some these problems could be a type of solid-state storage for hydrogen, perhaps in 
the form of metal hydrides, metal organic frameworks (MOFs) or carbon nanotubes.  
Currently a system with metal hydride would be considerably heavier than high 
pressure tanks, but the advantage would be that it is safe solid-state storage removing 
the need for high pressures; this would enable refuelling stations for hydrogen to have 
a simpler layout  because they would not require the high pressure capabilities but 
something more akin to what goes into a car tyre.  
There are also efforts to try and make an affordable and efficient liquid storage for 
hydrogen, using e.g. hydrous hydrazine or formic acid [25].  
Whichever technology comes out as the standard for delivering and storing hydrogen 
there will be more refuelling stations offering hydrogen in the coming decades, this in 
turn will make it more appealing for the average consumer to consider buying a 
vehicle that runs on hydrogen. Therefore, finding a lightweight, safe and cheap 
material that can store the necessary amounts of hydrogen gas needed (c:a 5 - 10 kg) 
is an ongoing challenge for materials scientists. 
A last but not unimportant bit to the puzzle would be the car manufacturers and 
electric power producers willingness to do research and development programs so 
that products can be on the market. With an extensive research program there are 
financial risks involved and as long as the demand for e.g. automotive vehicles with 
combustions engines is sufficiently high, there is little that will convince automotive 
manufacturers to implement a new long term strategy. Would the infrastructure be in 
place, then things would be very much different and there would be a direct incentive 
for the manufacturers to develop standardized technologies. 
The positive news is though that there are a number of car manufacturers that have 
ongoing research into fuel cell technology, among them are Ford, Volkswagen and 
Toyota. As examples of this can be mentioned a joint project between Ford, Daimler 
and Renault-Nissan who joined forces in 2013 in order to develop a hydrogen 
powered fuel cell for a vehicle. Their hope when doing this was to speed up the 
research process and introduce a vehicle in 2017 [26]. In 2013 Volkswagen AG 
announced that they signed a contract with Ballard Power Systems to develop and 
manufacture fuel cells for their demonstration fleet [27]. In early 2015 Toyota 
released all their fully owned fuel cell patents so that anyone can use them on a 
royalty-free basis. This should be interesting especially for hydrogen production and 
supply as those patents are released for unlimited time, whereas their fuel cell vehicle 
patents will only be available royalty-free until end of 2020. [28] 
Concept cars are also available by Toyota (their FCV), Honda has had their Clarity 
FCX available through leasing in California and Mercedes-Benz offers their B-Class 
F-cell for leasing in USA, Europe, Japan and Singapore. Both the Clarity FCX and the 
B-class F-cell have a range of 240 miles and are powered with electrical engines of 
134 horsepower, their pressurized hydrogen storage tanks have capacities of 4.1 kg 
and 3.7 kg, respectively [29]. Recently Toyota introduced a new fuel cell vehicle 
based on their FCV concept, the Toyota Mirai, which started selling in December 
2014 in Japan. It features two hydrogen tanks as well as a Nickel metal hydride 
battery which together gives the vehicle a range of 400  435 miles. The retail price is 
$57,600 before taxes and production volumes are planned to 400 in Japan and 300 in 
the rest of the world for 2015. [30]  
The worlds first mass produced fuel cell vehicle is the Hyundai ix35 Fuel Cell which 
in Korea is set to be lowered in price from the equivalent of about $138,000 to about 
$77,000 [31]  this vehicle is a SUV with an official range of 369 miles according to 
Hyundai [32] however has been shown in real-life conditions to manage 435 miles on 
a full tank [33]. 
In summary, fuel cell research is a promising field as products are being launched to 
the market, however there is a great need for infrastructure in order for it to develop 
its full potential. Because fuel cells offer higher efficiencies in converting fossil fuels 
for powering e.g. vehicles and portable appliances, this will in the long run fill an 
important role in society. Coupled with efficient electrolyzers and viable hydrogen 
storage they would enable widespread implementation of renewables, both for small 
independent units and for connecting to the electrical grid. The current challenges that 
fuel cells face are primarily a lack of hydrogen infrastructure (for hydrogen 
production, storage and re-fuelling [21]), high production costs and material issues. 
If the two primary problems of production and storage of hydrogen are not solved, 
then it is likely that one would have to use other fuels  e.g. methanol to power a 
future generation of fuel cells for automotive vehicles. It may be necessary to 
introduce fuel cells that are not primarily linked to hydrogen, which would be an 
intermediary step to hydrogen-based fuel cells. 
Another alternative could be to use SOFCs, even though this has its own set of 
problems due to the higher temperatures at which they operate. 
One important aspect here is the higher physical requirements on the materials  such 
as stability over time and the need for small thermal expansion coefficients. It is not 
unlikely that a reversed trend will occur for SOFCs compared to that of PEFCs  that 
a decrease in operating temperatures is at the horizon if other materials than YSZ 
come into question and other designs. As an example of this can be mentioned one 
such proposed system, the Cube, by Redox, which if realized promises to change 
the market for SOFC at costs that are substantially lower ( $800  1500 per kilowatt 
depending on scale of production) than what the standard is today  compared to e.g. 
Blooms energy server at an estimated $10,000 per kilowatt. [34] 
1.6 The fuel cell electrolyte 
In PEM and PAFC-types of fuel cells, protons are transported through the electrolyte 
from the anode to the cathode. The electrolyte must have a number of properties, such 
as being mechanically and thermally stable over time, show no electrical conductivity, 
have high proton conductivity and show no permeability to fuel (i.e. be gas tight). 
Solid state proton conductors that are thermally and mechanically stable would be an 
integral part of the hydrogen economy, especially when it comes to making fuel cells 
that need to be mobile, contain little or none precious metals, have short start-up times 
and offer some fuel flexibility. From a materials perspective, the hydrogen economy 
hinges on adequate storage and means of transportation for the hydrogen but also that 
the criteria set for the hydrogen fuel cell systems are met. Thus, there is a great need 
for finding inexpensive and well-performing materials for all the components of a 
hydrogen fuel cell, the electrolyte being no exception. 
1.7 The case for intermediate temperatures 
High temperature fuel cells are more efficient because waste heat to a large extent can 
be reused. In addition, no special catalysts are required and as a consequence more 
fuels are available. 
Low temperature systems on the other hand, may have less corrosion and are 
therefore more stable over time  they also start up quickly. Low temperature fuel 
cells could be used in mobile devices, such as laptop computers and smartphones 
because of their limited size. 
Fuel cells for the application of automotive vehicles have the potential to be air 
cooled instead of water cooled. Cooling with water uses more energy and takes up 
more space, and most importantly, lowers the overall efficiency of the fuel cell 
system. If the operating temperature is around 200C, the heat will be of sufficiently 
high grade to be used elsewhere, moreover heat management will be both less 
complicated and less energy consuming compared to any low temperature options. 
Using a higher temperature (as in SOFC) will lead to problems concerning mismatch 
of thermal expansion coefficients for the different components of the fuel cell, 
especially when powered on and off many times, which can lead to a failure of the 
system. An SOFC is also sensitive and fragile because of its ceramic construction; 
this severely limits its use in any non-stationary application.  
Thus, a fuel cell system for automotive vehicles should ideally operate in the 
temperature range of 180  400C. If developed for a mobile device the operating 
temperature could be lower as small amounts of rare-earth catalysts may then be 
utilized. Such a fuel cell could run at temperatures around 100C e.g. using excess 
heat from the CPU and would be a superior alternative to any battery. 
Developing a good proton-conducting electrolyte in the low-intermediate temperature 
range that shows stability over time is an objective of this project. 
1.7.1	
 Scientific	
 query	
 scope	
 thesis	
The scientific queries that this work will answer are: 
I) Is there a solid solution1 for the P-Si system which belongs to the R -3 space group, 
i.e. can there occur substitution between silicon and phosphorus in the ionic lattice? 
II) What are the possibilities to improve protonic conductivity for the silicon oxide 
phosphate system? 
III) Can a relationship be established for predicting protonic conductivity based on 
e.g. given cell parameters, that applies to the family of phosphosilicate materials that 
are structurally related to Si5O(PO4)6? 
1.7.2	
 Future	
 scientific	
 query	
A future question, that will only lightly be discussed in this thesis, is: 
Can this relationship be extended and developed into a theory also pertaining to other 
1 One definition for a solid solution is a mixture of two crystalline solids that coexist as a new 
crystalline solid, or crystal lattice. (35. Perkowitz, S., Solid solution, in Encyclopdia Britannica.) 
systems with the same structure, such as to Ge5O(PO4)6? 
This latter question is the starting point for continued future work, to which this thesis 
hopes to have laid the ground work in developing an approach and a methodology 
that takes into account the issues that have been encountered during the project, so 
that the development of a solid state proton conductor can be realized. 
1.8 Overview of this thesis 
In chapter 2 the parent composition, Si5O(PO4)6, is reviewed from the literature as 
well as SiP2O7. Also, a brief overview of different types of fuel cells is presented in 
this same chapter. 
Chapter 3 presents an overview of the experimental and characterization techniques 
used in this project. 
Chapters 4 and 5 discuss the results from the project; the first part is for the pure 
silicon oxide phosphate system and the second part is for substituted phosphate 
systems. Lastly, chapter 6 discusses the findings and conclusions of the project and 
offers a theory for how the protonic conductivity is related to water and structure of 
Si5O(PO4)6. 
Appendix A1 presents bond lengths and bond angles from Rietveld refinements based 
on neutron data where some occupancies were varied.  
Appendix A2 displays the coordinates and UISO values for both the fixed 
occupancies and varied occupancies Rietveld refinements. 
In Appendix B a couple of examples of Rietveld refinement methodologies are given, 
there is also a section at the end for the sequential refinements and how they were 
done. 
Appendix C contains combined TG and DTA data for the P-Si gels. 
Appendix D gives the sintering temperatures and times for all the important samples 
in this thesis, along with stoichiometries for the substituted silicon oxide phosphate 
samples in chapter 5. 
Appendix E1 displays the bond lengths for the untreated and hydrothermally treated 
compositions as a function of temperature, derived from neutron diffraction data 
where all occupancies were fixed to 1. Appendix E2 shows the same data (as well as 
bond angles) in table form. 
Appendix F gives some supplementary 2H NMR data which has been properly scaled 
to compensate for longer collection time on one of the hydrothermally treated 
compositions. 
Appendix G shows the model generated by GSAS and the collected neutron data for 
each bank of the GEM instrument at room temperature, untreated and hydrothermally 
treated parent composition in a side-by-side comparison. 
 Literature	
 review	
2.1 The intermediate temperature gap 
There are a number of different fuel cell systems available today  from low 
temperature to high temperature systems. High temperature fuel cells (SOFCs mainly) 
take advantage of the oxygen conductive nature of certain ceramics; whereas low 
temperature (PEFC and PAFC) are built around proton conducting electrolyte 
membranes. As	
  pointed	
  previous	
  chapter,	
  these	
  their	
respective	
  suited	
  different	
  application	
  areas,	
however,	
 thing	
 convert	
 electrochemically	
 stored	
 energy	
 electricity	
 without	
 combustion	
 step.  
There is a temperature gap between these fuel cell technologies where a good ionic 
conductor is needed in order to make a more optimal fuel cell. This gap is known as 
the intermediate temperature gap (illustrated in Figure 4) and has become an area of 
much interest for fuel cell and materials scientists. An ideal candidate for bridging 
this gap would be a true proton conductor, i.e. a material that conducts protons 
without the aid of humidity or liquid water. 
2.2 Fuel cell overview 
2.2.1	
 polymer	
 electrolyte	
 (PEFC)	
Amongst the different types of fuel 
cells perhaps the most relevant for 
this project is the polymer 
electrolyte fuel cell (PEFC). These 
fuel cells operate at a low 
temperature (normally between 80 
 90C) and are composed of a proton 
conducting electrolyte that fully or 
Figure	
 The intermediate temperature gap for protonic 
conductors. Adapted from Norby [4].	
partly consists of a polymer. A common electrolyte is Nafion, which has good 
chemical and thermal stability thanks to a perfluorinated backbone [36] (similar to 
Teflon). To conduct protons well it has to be soaked in water or an acid first, it then 
forms regions that are hydrophobic, as well as hydrophilic clusters. The protons are 
conducted through ionic channels that arise as a result of the interaction between 
hydrophilic SO3- groups and the hydrophobic perflourinated backbone and sidechain 
 the result is a clustering of hydrophilic domains which is where proton conduction 
occurs. Although Nafion could can be operational up to 190C, this is not possible 
when it has been made in membrane form (due to losses of both mechanical strength 
and water), and it is therefore operated at no higher temperature than 100C. 
Durability has been identified as the most critical issue to be solved before full 
commercialization of PEM fuel cells can occur [37]. The main problem with 
diagnosing degradation mechanisms is that a fuel cell is a solid electrochemical 
system with several interacting parts, where different components will affect one 
another in complex ways. Development of better methods for diagnosing the different 
problems of fuel cell degradation is presently something much needed. Clear is also 
that more real-life condition field studies will be needed accompanied with improved 
diagnostic and analytical methods for monitoring and studying durability and 
degradation. 
There are three types of classifications for membrane degradation: mechanical, 
thermal and chemical / electrochemical (ibid.) 
Generally for these systems it holds true that if humidity is held low with 
temperatures exceeding 100C the electrolyte will lose its proton conducting 
properties due to that it cannot retain enough water. At the same time higher 
temperatures are desired in order to suppress CO-poisoning of the platinum catalysts. 
If this can be done without decreasing the proton conductivity then higher efficiencies 
will follow and eliminate the need for complex water management of the fuel cell 
system (since the only water phase would be steam). The heat coming from the fuel 
cell could then be re-used, which is not possible with low temperature fuel cells 
because of its low grade character. 
A large part of the costs for a low temperature fuel cell system is in the fuel 
processing system, which is about 40  50% of the total cost [38]. The CO-
purification part of that fuel processing system is a major part therein, and if it could 
be eliminated it would make the fuel cell cheaper, lighter and smaller. 
Using polymers derived from organic materials will limit the operational limit to 
below 150C [39]. Inorganic materials however are thermally more stable and 
therefore more promising candidates for the electrolytes when designing new PEFCs. 
Moreover, raising the operational temperature in the PEFCs would open up options 
for a wider selection of fuels. For best performance only ultra pure hydrogen can be 
used at low temperatures. This is because of the presence of CO in reformed hydrogen 
which will strongly block the Pt-catalyst sites below 150C [40]. Using ultra pure 
hydrogen is a limiting factor because of cost of this fuel and the difficulty of hydrogen 
storage. However, at an intermediate temperature one could e.g. steam reform 
methanol or ethanol using the thermal energy from the waste heat and thereby 
produce hydrogen as needed, this can be done at temperatures of approximately 
250C for methanol and over 300C for ethanol [41]. If all performed in closely 
connected units, heat losses would be minimized and efficiencies high and the fuel 
storage would be a non-issue since the hydrogen would be derived from a liquid 
hydrocarbon fuel. 
2.2.2	
 chemistry	
The reaction at the anode is 
H2  2H+ + 2e-, whereby 
hydrogen molecules are 
split into protons with the 
help of a catalyst. A 
catalyst may consist of 
small Pt-particles scattered 
onto the surface of graphite 
particles (see Figure 5)  
this gives a lower cost 
compared to pure Pt-
electrodes; it also enables higher conductivity of electrons through the graphite and 
overall better fuel cell performance. Another advantage with this setup is that 
Figure	
  5 The carbon supported catalyst in a PEFC, covered with small Pt-
particles (centre of schematic). To the right of this is the polymer electrolyte 
and to the left of it is where the fuel (hydrogen) enters. Once split up, the 
protons will conduct through the electrolyte. Adapted from [5].	
hydrogen gas can easily pass between the particles. The electrolyte must however be 
sealed so no gas can diffuse through; and since it has taken up water this must not go 
into the electrodes (else no gas will pass through the electrodes). 
In order to address the CO-poisoning problems of Pt-catalysts, a PtRu catalyst can be 
used. The reactions as described by reference [5] will then be: 
Pt + CO  Pt-COads 
Ru + H2O  Ru-OHads + H+ + e 
Pt-COads + Ru-OHads  Pt + Ru + CO2 + H+ + e 
Even though this type of catalyst is superior in comparison to many others, it does 
show significant performance loss if operated at low temperature (80C) when more 
than 100 ppm of CO is present [38]; therefore either CO-purification of the fuel is 
necessary or operating at higher temperatures. 
Although less platinum is used, the amount of these and similar catalysts required will 
still be expensive to produce and therefore non-precious metal catalysts should be 
developed if PEFCs are to be commercially feasible. 
From the catalytic sites at the anode the protons are then transported through the 
electrolyte, being drawn by an electrochemical potential in order to recombine at the 
cathode where the following reaction takes place:  
O2 + 2H+ + 2e-  H2O 
Again, a catalyst is needed, but this time to reduce oxygen in the oxygen reduction 
reaction (ORR) which is a slower reaction than that at the anode. This means the 
cathode requires more Pt-catalyst compared to the anode, and it is therefore of greater 
importance to first find a cheap solution for cathodes. Efforts are being made to 
substitute the Pt-containing catalysts with non-precious cathode catalysts for PEFCs. 
One interesting development is a cobalt-polypyrrole composite that shows good 
performance and stability over time in PEFCs run with either H2-O2 or H2-air, see 
[42]. 
For the electrolyte, apart from having good proton conducting properties and being 
stable over time, it is important that it is an electrical insulator, since it is paramount 
that the electrons take a different route than the protons (i.e. through whatever device 
one wants to power electrically). This, in combination with the electrolyte being gas 
and water tight2, places quite a few requirements on a single material. 
2.2.3	
 phosphoric	
 (PAFC)	
The phosphoric acid fuel cell (PAFC) works with reformed hydrogen as fuel, but uses 
a SiC matrix soaked in phosphoric acid as the electrolyte. Anode and cathode 
reactions are the same as for the PEFC, although the operating temperature is higher 
(200C) compared to the PEFC, and therefore the CO-tolerance is also much higher. 
2.2.4	
 solid	
 oxide	
 (SOFC)	
Unlike PEFCs the solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) operates at much higher temperatures 
and has normally an oxide ion (O2-) conducting electrolyte. This electrolyte is usually 
yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ), which has unique oxygen ion conduction properties 
at higher temperatures. 
At the cathode, oxygen gas is split apart (through the help of a catalyst) resulting in 
oxygen ions according to the formula:  
O2 + 2e-  O2- 
Conversely, at the anode these oxygen ions combine with hydrogen gas (or any other 
suitable fuel) and form water. This electrochemical oxidization of the fuel results in 
the production of electrons, which in turn are lead through an external circuit. The 
reaction at the anode is: 
H2 + O2-  H2O + 2e- 
It is important that the electrolyte is thin so that internal resistance can be kept low. 
However, as with the other fuel cell systems, the electrolyte must also be gas tight in 
order to avoid chemical combustion of fuel. 
2 If the electrolyte is not gas tight then chemical combustion of the fuel will occur, and if it is not water tight then 
the electrodes will be flooded. 
One of the main advantages of the SOFCs is that different types of fuels can be 
utilized. Moreover, kinetics are very fast which yields higher efficiencies, and thanks 
to the high operating temperatures there is no poisoning of the catalysts. 
The drawbacks with SOFCs are that they need longer start-up time compared to fuel 
cells operating at lower temperatures. Especially planar geometries for the fuel cell 
require even and well-regulated heating, leading to start-up times until operational of 
about an hour. Newer non-planar designs, so called tubular designs, could be the 
answer to considerably shorting the start up time, although currently their areal power 
density is an order of magnitude lower than planar designs and their manufacturing 
costs are higher. [43] 
In summary, SOFCs are good to use as stationary modules, however they are less 
suitable for mobile applications. This is due to that they are ceramic in nature (making 
most of them fragile). The high operating temperatures require longer start-up times 
and produce incoherent thermal expansions in the different materials of the fuel cell. 
A possible solution is to lower the operating temperature and this involves developing 
better materials. 
2.3 Structure of investigated material 
Silicon oxide phosphate, Si5O(PO4)6, is an interesting material from a number of 
viewpoints. One is that it has two types of silicon coordinations present at the same 
time (Si+IV, in tetrahedral and octahedral coordination). This is very unusual among 
the phosphosilicates. In the case of glasses the octahedral coordination is rare, and it 
only occurs in a few crystalline materials such as SiP2O7 [44] and Si5O(PO4)6. 
Another unusual characteristic is that there is a theoretical possibility of element 
substitution as also the P+V is tetrahedrally coordinated which, if observed, would be 
rare [45]. 
Silicon oxide phosphates three-dimensional structure shows a network with cavities 
when viewed down the a- or b-axis, which may enable transport of oxide ions through 
these channels or make it suitable as a molecular sieve (see Figure 6). 
There is a report of the structure for the Si5O(PO4)6 material which suggests a 
hexagonal unit cell, space group R -3 with a  7.8  and c  24.0  [8]. Although the 
structure will eventually change upon increased amounts of phosphorus (into silicon 
pyrophosphate, SiP2O7), there should also be more subtle structural changes, if it 
indeed can be proven that P+V goes onto the sites of Si+IV.  
Figure	
 6 Unit cell of Si5O(PO4)6 viewed slightly off the b-axis. Phosphorus tetrahedra depicted in magenta, silicon 
tetrahedra in turquoise and silicon octahedra in light grey.	
Figure 7 shows a proposed binary phase diagram between SiO2 and P2O5. Although 
the materials synthesized in this project do show some amorphous phase for the 
silicon-rich samples compared to the parent Si5O(PO4)6 this is not to say that the 
composition cannot deviate from what is known. The phase diagram gives a mixture 
of Si3P4O16 and SiP2O7 when going from P/Si =1.33  2.0. On P/Si ratios lower than 
1.33 it gives a mixture of Si3P4O16 
and SiO2 (quartz). 
A question that this project attempts 
to answer is whether there is a solid 
solution for the SiO2  P2O5 system 
or not. Poojary et al [8] make the 
claim that there is no solid solution, 
only the Si5O(PO4)6. This is in 
opposition to the conclusion of 
Liebau et al [46] who proposed a 
solid solution for Si(1+5x)P4(7-x)O72, 
with x  2.5  3.5 (i.e. a system where 
the P/Si ratio can be varied between 
1.33  0.76). 
2.4 Water and / or phosphoric acid among phosphosilicates 
Surprisingly little is to be found in the literature about Si5O(PO4)6 when it combines 
with water. Krawietz et al came across the monohydrate Si(HPO4)2 . H2O when 
investigating their solid acid catalyst which consisted mostly of silicon oxide 
phosphate [47]. The same monohydrate species was observed by Coelho et al [48]. 
Poojary et al assign the weight losses in the 25  100C region to desorption of 
physisorbed water and in the 100  200C region to desorption of chemically bound 
water. From 200C and up to 750C they believe there could be dehydroxylation of 
OH groups. Finally, at 900C and above the mass loss is assigned as volatilization of 
chemically bound phosphorus species. Two of their samples were synthesised at 
lower temperatures  200C 5h (P/Si = 1.33) and 300C 5h (P/Si = 2.9)  and both 
Figure	
 Phase diagram between SiO2 and P2O5. 
Adapted from [2].	
these samples showed weight losses (from 50C to 1000C almost 6% for the former, 
and from 400C up to 1000C at almost 2% for the latter).  
The third sample (300C 5h, P/Si = 2.9) had had an extra firing at 1000C for 2 hours, 
and this displayed a stable TG profile throughout the temperature range. Samples had 
been washed in acetone after synthesis and dried in an air oven at 80C. 
The most important conclusions that Poojary et al reach is that the formula for silicon 
orthophosphate is Si5O(PO4)6, that there is no solid solution, and that the true P/Si 
ratio is 1.2 instead of 1.33. The weight loss for the low temperature compositions they 
assigned to H3PO4 gassing off as well as P-OH group condensation [8]. 
2.4.1	
 Related	
 systems	
In this project some substitutions were made in which aluminium and titanium were 
put into the phosphosilicate system. 
Also, hydrothermal treatments were done in order to obtain protonic conductivity. 
This may be analogous to the case of alumina which forms a ternary system with 
phosphate and water [49]. 
A question raised later in the project was, what would happen if silicon oxide 
phosphate compositions interacted with H3PO4  how would this affect conductivity? 
This has raised the issue that it is likely a quarternary system for silica, phosphate, 
water and phosphoric acid. This has earlier been shown to be the case for aluminium, 
phosphate, water and phosphoric acid [50] and the conductivity data suggests there is 
more to explore and understand. 
2.4.2	
 Protonic	
 conductivity	
 phosphosilicates	
There are no reports of the protonic conductivity for crystals of Si5O(PO4)6 made by 
the solid state sintering method. There are however reports on protonic conductivity 
for gels of various P/Si ratios. For example, Matsuda et al [51], tested hydrated P-Si 
gels of compositions 0.5, 1.0, and 1.5 and found that the best conductivity was that of 
the 1.0 ratio. They showed that protonic conductivity (10 mS / cm) can be achieved 
for a P/Si ratio of 1 at 150C, keeping it sustained after 400 mins with 0.4% relative 
humidity. 
The underlying reason for protonic conductivity is the materials ability to retain 
water at these temperatures, due to the formation of Si-O-P-OH groups. In this case it 
is theorized that the crystals of Si5O(PO4)6 are not helpful for protonic conductivity 
unless they are hydrolyzed. When this occurs it forms phosphoric acid and Si-O-P-
OH-units, which is good for the conductivity. 
This is also verified in a paper by Tadanaga et al [52], where the conductivity 
decreases as Si5O(PO4)6 crystals form. When their fuel cell was supplied with dry N2 
at 180C the amorphous gel started to form crystalline Si5O(PO4)6. The conductivity 
of their cell was found to be 2.5 mS cm-1 at 180C under 0.4% relative humidity. 
From the literature that concerns these gels it seems that if water vapour is introduced 
the crystallization of Si5O(PO4)6 is suppressed and protonic conductivity enhanced. 
Nakamoto et al, 2004 [53], constructed a polymer electrolyte fuel cell using small (<5 
m in diameter) gel particles of P/Si ratio 1.0 with 25% polyimide. It was tested 
continuously for 10h at 150C at 4% RH without observing any degradation, the 
measured current density was 50 mA cm-2. 
Nogami et al [54] concluded that protonic conductivity in water containing 
phosphosilicate glasses is due to that water molecules are adsorbed onto P_OH 
groups and are strongly hydrogen bonded, leading to better retention of water. In their 
case they claim that the protons are hopping via water (creating H2O+ radicals), the 
proton originating from dissociation of P_OH and / or Si_OH bonds. 
2.4.3	
 Si5O(PO4)6	
Poojary et als paper [8] contained three samples that showed different TGA 
behaviour. Their high temperature sample (P/Si starting ratio = 2.9) displayed no 
mass loss, whereas their two low temperature samples (P/Si starting ratios = 1.33 and 
2.9) showed some mass losses. 
From the XRD in the same paper, the low temperature samples (P/Si = 1.33) showed 
some evidence of amorphous phase which appeared to be absent in the other 
compositions, at 20  27 2. This is fairly consistent with the findings in this thesis  
that a high enough P/Si ratio leads to absence of amorphous phase. However, because 
the synthesis method differs so much compared with the materials of this thesis, it is 
not conclusive that Poojarys composition can be directly compared with those of this 
thesis. 
Their cell parameters for the high temperature composition (RB255C, P/Si = 2.9) a, 
b = 7.8481(2)  and c = 24.1780(6) , agree relatively well with samples produced 
for this thesis (P/Si   1.2). However, their P/Si starting ratio is beyond that of silicon 
pyrophosphate which has an altogether different structure [55]. 
For their low temperature (RB210) with P/Si = 1.33, a = 7.8985(5)  and c = 
24.022(2) , this does not resemble anything in this thesis even though the P/Si ratio 
is supposedly closer. 
Their 1.33 sample was washed with acetone after synthesis but this was prior to 
characterization. Furthermore, the material was made at a very low temperature 
(200C) and showed signs of having a small amorphous component in the final XRD. 
For the other high temperature composition the high temperature firing (1000C, 2h) 
would have made sure the structure was free from water and anything extra, which 
explains the stable TG result. 
The fact that the cell parameters are different for the two samples, yet both are pure 
crystalline phases, is an indication that the samples have different compositions  this 
in turn constitutes supporting evidence for a solid solution despite the authors claim 
to the contrary. 
Furthermore, there is a discrepancy in the Si_O bond distances in the silicon 
tetrahedra that supports partial occupancy of phosphorus at least for the high 
temperature sample, see right part of Figure 8. Also noteworthy in the same figure is 
that almost every bond angle is different when compared side by side. This indicates 
subtle structural differences that could be due to phosphorus replacing some of the 
silicon at the tetrahedral silicon sites, which indicates a solid solution. 
Note further that the P_O bond distances have an average of 1.522  and 1.530 . 
The longest P_O bond is 1.526  and 1.535  for each sample, respectively. In this 
work one of the bonds, P_O4, was found to be 1.57 , the other P_O bonds were 
comparable to Poojarys results (cf. Appendix A1). 
2.4.4	
 SiP2O7	
Although SiP2O7 on its own is not the best protonic conductor of the pyrophosphates 
(only a few mS cm-1 at the most [56]) it has been shown to be involved in enhancing 
the protonic conductivity at intermediate temperatures through the reaction with 
CsH2PO4 to form CsH5(PO4)2 ([57], [39]). Without any apparent chemical reaction3, it 
indirectly enabled the conductivity of the composite to that higher than CsH2PO4. It is 
further claimed that CsH5(PO4)2 is in the molten state yet since it is stabilized at the 
interface with SiP2O7, the composite is in the solid state at intermediate temperature. 
The maximum observed conductivity was 44 mS / cm at 266C in 30% H2O / Ar 
atmosphere. 
2.5 Oxygen conductivity 
If significant oxygen ion conductivity were to be found, it is expected to be due to the 
free oxygen in the parent composition Si5O(PO4)6, similar to the case of apatite, cf. 
Slater et al (2004) [58]. Thus it would not be due to any oxygen deficiency, as is the 
case in e.g. perovskite systems. 
3 Although, judging from X-ray diffraction from before and after heat treatment, it does appear that the structure of SiP2O7 is no 
longer intact. See figure 1, 39. Matsui, T., et al., Development of Novel Proton Conductors Consisting of Solid 
Acid/pyrophosphate Composite for Intermediate-temperature Fuel Cells. Journal of the Japan Petroleum Institute, 2010. 53: p. 1-
Figure	
 Sample RB210 (left) and RB255C (right) compared side-by-side, results after Poojary et als 
paper [8]. Note the short Si3_O4 bond lengths for the latter sample which are very similar to P_O 
bond lengths. In addition, the P_O4 bond length is shorter than 1.57  as obtained in this project. 	
RB210 RB255C
Si octahedra Bond length () Angle () Si octahedra Bond length () Angle ()
Si1_O3 1.789(5) O3_Si1_O3 180.00 Si1_O3 1.783(5) O3_Si1_O3 180.00
O3_Si1_O3 95.2(5) O3_Si1_O3 92.7(3)
O3_Si1_O3 84.8(5) O3_Si1_O3 87.3(3)
Si octahedra Si octahedra
Si2_O2 1.818(6) O2_Si2_O2 85.6(9) Si2_O2 1.813(7) O2_Si2_O2 88.0(4)
Si2_O5 1.697(10) O5_Si2_O2 95.6(9) Si2_O5 1.696(7) O5_Si2_O2 91.9(4)
O5_Si2_O2 95.6(5) O5_Si2_O2 88.6(3)
O5_Si2_O2 178.1(11) O5_Si2_O2 176.6(5)
O5_Si2_O5 82.8(8) O5_Si2_O5 91.5(5)
Si tetrahedra Si tetrahedra
Si3_O1 1.706(14) O4_Si3_O1 110.1(6) Si3_O1 1.659(8) O4_Si3_O1 108.1(4)
Si3_O4 1.654(6) O4_Si3_O4 108.8(6) Si3_O4 1.5299(6) O4_Si3_O4 110.8(4)
Phosphate groupPhosphate group Phosphate groupPhosphate group
P_O2 1.526(14) O3_P_O2 109.0(6) P_O2 1.533(7) O3_P_O2 113.5(4)
P_O3 1.518(6) O4_P_O2 110.0(7) P_O3 1.525(7) O4_P_O2 107.3(5)
P_O4 1.518(6) O5_P_O2 113.0(7) P_O4 1.535(6) O5_P_O2 111.5(5)
P_O5 1.525(6) O4_P_O3 111.3(7) P_O5 1.529(7) O4_P_O3 109.8(5)
O5_P_O3 105.9(7) O5_P_O3 103.8(6)
O5_P_O4 107.6(7) O5_P_O4 110.9(5)
The structure must however, be properly established and compared with measured 
data before the reasons for any oxygen conduction can be properly established. As 
with protonic conductivity impedance measurements can be used to extract the data 
on oxygen ion conductivity. 
A recent literature search in SciFinder has found no articles on the subject of oxygen 
conductivity for the silicon oxide phosphate system, or indeed for the composition 
Si5O(PO4)6. AC Impedance measurements have been carried out though and high 
temperature conductivity data is presented in chapter 4.  
 Experimental	
 characterization	
 techniques 
3.1 Experimental methodology 
The applied methodology for the work of this thesis has been in accordance with 
established scientific empirical methods within solid-state chemistry. 
Samples have been synthesised and analyzed with various characterization techniques 
and structural modelling has been undertaken to establish the chemical structure. 
Electrochemical impedance measurements have been used to evaluate the 
conductivities of the materials and this data has then been linked to the cell 
parameters. The result has been a model that considers the cell parameters to explain 
the physical characteristics that various P-Si compositions exhibit. 
As much as has been possible, various characterizations have been done on individual 
samples taken from the same batch. If this is not the case (for example, if an extra 
firing was done between different types of measurements) then this is mentioned 
either in the text or in diagrams or both. 
3.1.1	
 Methodology	
 diffraction	
In order to characterise crystals, which by definition are repetitive arrays of atoms, a 
very commonly used method is diffraction. What is taken advantage of here is the 
electromagnetic waves interaction with the atomic planes of the crystal.  
Most commonly used in chemistry labs is X-ray diffraction, although electron 
diffraction uses the same principles, however interacts much weaker and can be used 
to study surfaces in conjunction with microscopy. X-rays go deeper and since they 
interact with the electron shells of the atoms, atomic positions etc will be a result of 
this interaction. Neutrons can also be used for diffraction, and in this case the 
interaction is with the atomic nuclei  yielding more accurate positions than with X-
ray diffraction (XRD). Neutrons are also useful for mapping magnetic moments, for 
distinguishing between neighbouring elements and for mapping light elements like 
hydrogen. 
The most important equation for this is the Bragg equation, or Braggs law: 
 incident	
 angle	
 refracted	
 angle	
 lattice	
 spacing	
 X-ray	
 wavelength	
 integer	
 (usually	
Equation 1:  n = 2dhklsin              
where 
If the incident rays (provided they are parallel and monochromatic) fall in with angle 
 and Braggs law is fulfilled then constructive interference will occur resulting in 
diffraction. Braggs law is fulfilled if the angle of incidence equals the angle of 
reflection when atoms from different planes of the lattice scatter in phase. There will 
be different intensities as a function of the angle (due to constructive and destructive 
interference) and this is what produces the diffraction pattern. 
In XRD the sample is placed in a sample holder, usually made from stainless steel. 
Powder is placed in the centre of the sample holder and caution is taken to make sure 
the surface of the powder is absolutely flat and in line with the rest of the holder. 
When the sample is mounted in the diffractometer and the doors to the machine are 
closed, the shutter will open and the monochromatic X-ray beam will interact with the 
atoms and molecules of the sample and diffract. During this whole time the sample 
holder will rotate in its own plane (in order to statistically spread any error). 
Not all of the beams that diffract from the sample will reach the detector, however a 
sufficient amount will. Each intensity that the detector registers will be recorded in 
the computer as a function of the angle of incidence. This is what produces the 
diffractogram and for solids (crystals) it becomes a structural fingerprint.  
If the structure changes, but the elements remain the same, there will be a change in 
the type of pattern, i.e. a visibly different diffractogram. If however, one element is 
substituted by another and it is the same structure, then it will be harder to see a 
difference in the diffractogram4.  
3.1.2	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 methodology	
 neutron	
Manual refinements for the neutron data were done in two series shown in the logs in 
4 However, examining the peak positions usually will reveal differences  if e.g. all the peaks shift a little to lower two-theta 
then one can conclude that the unit cell has expanded. 
Appendix B. The refinement data presented in Chapter 4 is for the latter series (some 
fractional occupancies were varied, however the same XYZ positions retained in 
both). Tables with summaries of the results can be found in Appendix A1 and 
Appendix A2, the latter also containing data from the refinements where the 
occupancies were all fixed. 
More fixed occupancy data is also given in Appendix E1 and Appendix E2, where 
bond lengths and bond angles are given as a function of temperature for the parent 
compositions, both untreated and hydrothermally treated with D2O. 
Figure 9 shows an example of two plots from the refinements of the untreated parent 
composition, Si5O(PO4)6, at room temperature (from bank 2, top, and from bank 4, 
bottom).  Note that the calculated model (following space group R -3) matches the 
observed neutron data, further that peaks occur at the predicted position. This shows 
that the suggested model for this system displays high agreement with the measured 
data. 
Figure	
  Refinement result 
from the untreated parent 
composition from bank 2 
(top) and bank 4 (bottom). 
Note the correlation between 
the calculated pattern and 
the observed data. Additional 
plots are found in Appendix 
G for this sample and the 
hydrothermally treated 
sample.	
3.2 Synthesis 
The method of synthesis throughout this project was the solid-state sintering method 
[59], which is a common high-temperature method. 
The two oxide ingredients, SiO2 and NH4H2PO4, were ground together with a little 
acetone in an agate mortar resulting in a white powder mixture. For each composition 
these mixtures were then calcined at 200C (or just above) for three hours or more. 
After the calcination step the powders obtained a greyish colour, and they started to 
absorb water when crushed or stirred, or if left out for many hours (the samples rich in 
phosphorus content appeared to absorb most water). 
Finally the preheated powder mixtures (without further treatment, such as grinding or 
pressing pellets etc) were fired in alumina crucibles at elevated temperature. During 
the firing at the higher temperature the powders obtained a white colour. Upon 
grinding they all remained white and were no longer hygroscopic. A pellet of each 
composition was then pressed and re-fired at the same or higher temperature.  
After this stage pellets were pressed and re-fired from the different samples at either 
900C or 1000C provided the previous step was the same temperature or lower. The 
best results seemed to be two firings at 1000C for the P/Si ratios of 1.2 and 1.5, and 
one single firing at 800C for 24h in the case of ratio 2.0. 
By using this method it proved problematic however to obtain a pure phase. Not only 
was there a crystalline impurity phase present (SiP2O7) but also amorphous content. 
When the method of synthesis was modified so that the source of phosphorus was 
H3PO4 the end result was a composition that was single-phased with only minor 
amounts of amorphous content when fired optimally. 
For later synthesis, the precursor was made by stirring stoichiometric amounts of SiO2 
and 85% H3PO4 together along with distilled water in a teflon vessel. This mixture (a 
fairly wet slurry) was put inside a sealed hydrothermal vessel and then heat-treated at 
120C for two hours, followed by being dried on a glass plate in a drying oven at 
80C until it had become solidified gel. 
The resulting dehydrated gel was placed in an alumina crucible in the furnace and 
pre-fired at 300C for 3h before being sintered at 950  1000C for 12  50 hours. 
The key here was to make sure the solid gel was homogenous before calcination. This 
was no problem when only SiO2 and H3PO4 in water were present, since the SiO2 
came in the form of a finely dispersed pulp which would dissolve uniformly in the 
H3PO4-water mixture if stirred properly with a glass stirrer. However, when adding a 
third ingredient (e.g. GeO2) care had to be taken that the mixture was stirred regularly 
upon dehydration, or else the third ingredient would sink to the bottom of the gel as it 
was drying  a phase-impure composition would be the end result upon firing. 
3.3 Analytical techniques and equipment 
3.3.1	
 Solid-state	
In order to establish the proper structural relationships for the phosphorus and silicon 
in respective compositions a good technique is solid-state NMR. Since one can here 
differentiate between the two main elements, see e.g. Lejeune et al 2005 [60] or 
Coelho et al 2006 [61] for examples of how the technique can be applied more 
specifically. One great advantage with solid-state NMR is that amorphous phases also 
can be studied; these are not identifiable with XRD (since they are non-crystalline and 
therefore no diffraction peaks occur). 
In this project most solid-state NMR spectra were obtained using a Bruker Avance III 
spectrometer equipped with a 9.4T superconducting magnet. The rotors that were 
used were 4mm ZrO2. 
3.3.2	
 X-ray	
 powder	
 diffraction	
 (XRD)	
In this project the X-ray diffractometer used for sample characterization was initially 
a Stoe Darmstadt operating in transmission mode. This was eventually replaced by a 
PanAnalytical Empyrean running in reflection mode. Lastly, some high temperature 
scans were undertaken on the same type of machine fitted with an Anton Paar HTK 
1200N high-temperature chamber using Mo-radiation instead of Cu. 
On the Stoe instrument quick scans were done (30/90 mins) for phase 
characterization, as well as high resolution scans for Rietveld refinement (12 h); the 
typical range of the scans were 1030 and 1075 (2), respectively. The 
PanAnalytical instrument ran scans typically one hour each (1050 2), whereas the 
high resolution scans were 13 hours over 1090 2. 
3.3.3	
 Neutron	
 powder	
 diffraction	
The principle for neutron diffraction is very much the same as for X-ray diffraction  
the differences being mainly that neutrons are much harder to produce and therefore 
require more expensive facilities. There are two ways that neutrons are generated  
either from a nuclear fission reactor (continuous flow) or from a spallation source 
producing a pulsed neutron beam. All in all there are about 10 major neutron facilities 
worldwide, the two major ones in Europe being ISIS5 and Institut LaueLangevin 
(ILL). Each neutron facility houses many instruments that have different areas of 
application. 
Neutron diffraction is many times a superior technique, especially when it comes to 
mapping lighter elements like hydrogen and also in many cases when differentiating 
between elements that are close in the periodic table. Figure 10 shows the neutron 
cross section for elements of the periodic table as a function of their respective atomic 
number. The neutron cross section is a measurement of how likely an incoming 
neutron is to interact with a target nucleus. 
Since neutrons interact with the atomic nuclei magnetic studies can also be 
undertaken (one can 
e.g. map the magnetic 
moments in a crystal 
lattice). For the same 
reason neutrons are 
superior when it comes 
to obtaining greater 
accuracy in determining 
atomic positions.  
In the case of X-rays, 
one will often obtain good 
structural information, however 
5 Name refers to the ancient Egyptian goddess and local name for the river Thames. The facility was 
formerly known as Spallation Neutron Source (SNS). 
Figure	
 Neutron cross section (logarithmic axis) for elements in 
the periodic table. Adapted after [1].	
since X-rays only interact with electron densities there is also more uncertainty of the 
true positions of the nuclei. For most cases X-rays are sufficient for general 
characterization of a crystalline material, but in some cases neutrons may be the only 
viable choice.  
Lastly, X-rays do not penetrate much more than the surface of a material, whereas 
neutrons go much further into the bulk, enabling e.g. in situ studies of more complex 
systems such as studying stress in an airplanes wing or the operation of a battery or 
fuel cell.  
An overview of the instrument used for the neutron data collection is shown in Figure 
11. The sample is placed in a sample holder (middle-right), then placed into e.g. a 
specially designed furnace (bottom-left). The furnace is lifted in by using a crane 
(top-middle). A schematic of the GEM instrument itself is pictured in the bottom-right 
corner of the figure, the very advanced instrument is situated below the floor (bottom-
middle and top-right). There is also the possibility to run many samples in a sample 
changer (top-left). 
Figure	
  11 Overview of the GEM instrument at the Rutherford Appleton Laboratory in Harwell, United 
Kingdom.  The sample (pictured middle-right) is lowered down into the high temperature sample tank (lower 
left picture). For lowering the sample tank down into position a crane is used (top middle). Also pictured is a 
schematic overview describing the positions of the sensor banks on the GEM instrument (lower right), 
adapted after [7]. The GEM instrument and its banks is not visible other than from the sides when going 
beneath floor level, because the neutron beam runs under floor level. 
3.3.4	
 Thermogravimetrical	
 analysis	
 (TGA)	
This technique is used to constantly record a specimens mass upon heating and 
cooling in a gas flow of choice. After the experiment is done it is possible to calculate 
what the different phases were if one has positively identified the formula at start or at 
the end of the run. Phase transitions can be detected by combining the TGA with a 
DSC or DTA in the same setup (see next subsection). The instrument used for all the 
runs was a Stanton Redcroft STA-780. For a normal run about 2025 mg of sample 
was used. 
Most measurements were done in air (2528 mL / min) from room temperature to 
1000C at 5C / min with a 30 minute isotherm at both start and when programmed 
temperature had been reached, others were done with the same parameters however 
with lower maximum temperatures (500, 350C etc). 
3.3.5	
 Differential	
 Thermal	
 Analysis	
 (DTA)	
The DTA is a technique that is very useful for studying phase transitions. The basic 
principle is that the instrument has one chamber (the furnace) with two thermocouples 
close to two identical ceramic crucibles, one empty reference and one which contains 
the sample. As the furnace is heated, equal amounts of heat go into the two sub-
chambers and the difference in absorbed heat between the two crucibles is calculated 
and plotted. 
3.3.6	
 Scanning	
 Electron	
 Microscope	
 (SEM)	
The SEM works by the principle of bombarding a surface with an electron beam from 
an electron gun (usually a tungsten filament that is heated up with current). The beam 
is focused with the help of electromagnets (magnetic lenses) onto the sample in the 
specimen chamber, where secondary electrons from the material are emitted as a 
result of the focused electron beams impact. When some of these secondary electrons 
are passed through a collector they will hit a scintillator detector producing photons 
which are amplified in the photomultiplier. The signal again becomes electronic and 
as the electron beam scans the surface of the sample the signal changes strength, 
which is rendered as an image with contrast in the computer. 
The specimen chamber needs to be evacuated due to that air otherwise will interfere 
with the electron beam. 
3.3.7	
 Electrochemical	
 Impedance	
 Spectroscopy	
 (EIS)	
AC impedance data was collected with an HP 4192A Impdeance analyzer (in air only) 
and a Solartron SI 1260 Impedance/Gain-Phase Analyser (in air and humidified 5% 
H2 in Argon). 
Pellets had Pt-paste painted for electrodes and were then heated to 850C for 30 
minutes. Prior to measurements the pellets were put in a partially water filled 
autoclave and heated for 2h at 120C. The hydrothermal pressure at this temperature 
corresponds to 1.9 atm, and enables water vapour to enter the structure, which enables 
protonic conductivity. The hydrothermal method was chosen as a means of delivering 
water into the system and both pellets and powders underwent this treatment. In both 
cases the material was put in a glass vial and this floated on the water inside of the 
bigger Teflon container. The Teflon container had a lid in the same material that 
ensured a closed vessel. The outer vessel was a stainless steel bomb, and this screwed 
on putting a bit of initial pressure on the Teflon lid in order to keep it in place. Once 
the stainless steel bomb was placed in a preheated furnace, the temperature inside the 
vessel would start rising and because of the presence of liquid, the vapour pressure 
would rise correspondingly. 
Alternatively, for H3PO4-doped samples, these pellets were refluxed in 85% H3PO4 
for about one hour, and then Ag-paste was applied as electrodes which dried a few 
minutes at  80C. 
The instrument then measures the impedance of the material over a range of 
frequencies by applying an electric field. 
Once complex impedance plots were obtained the conductivity could be calculated by 
using the following simple relationship: 
 = pellet thickness / (R  pellet area) 
where R can be the entire resistance of the primary arch (if capacitance value  10-11 
F); alternatively, it can be where the arch intercepts the real axis (if capacitance value 
 10-5  10-7 F). The unit for  is Siemens / centimetre, provided the pellet thickness 
and area in the formula are given in cm and cm2, respectively.  
For then plotting the conductivity against temperature, the logarithm of the 
conductivity value is applied because the -value will vary quite extensively over the 
chosen temperature range. If the logarithm of the conductivity is plotted against the 
inverse temperature (1/T) then an Arrhenius plot is the result. From Arrhenius plots 
one can calculate the activation energy. 
From each electrochemical measurement one would in the ideal case obtain a double 
arc and followed by an electrode response (beginning of a third arc) as pictured in 
Figure 12. The first arc would originate at origo and is the bulk response. Directly 
following this arc, as frequency decreases, is the grain boundary arc followed by the 
electrode response, respectively. 
The total conductivity for the measured sample would be based on a real resistance 
value where the grain boundary arc ends on the Z axis. In this project focus has been 
on the bulk conductivity, and it is these values that have been presented. If the 
impedance analyzer could not record a bulk response however, and only a small grain 
boundary response, then values for the total conductivity are presented  these values 
are essentially the same as the true bulk conductivity. 
Each obtained arc has a characteristic frequency, i.e. that frequency that is at the 
highest Z value. In some cases this value can help in identifying the type of arc 
"#$%
"#$%&'()%*#"+&
"#$%&'(#)
Figure	
 A Nyquist plot of an ideal impedance response. On the y-axis is the imaginary component of the 
resistivity and on the x-axis is the real component of the same.	
(bulk, grain boundary or electrode) if the characteristic frequency at that temperature 
is previously known for the measured system. A more reliable way however is to 
make a quick estimate of the capacitance of the arc. If the estimated capacitance is in 
the order of 10-11F one can conclude that the fitted arc is not an electrode process, but 
must be a physical property of the material. i.e. the conductivity of the bulk. For a 
more comprehensive overview of impedance spectroscopy, see [62]. 
3.3.8	
 using	
 Teflon	
 setup	
In order to measure the impedance response from the P-Si gels a special teflon setup 
was designed as shown in Figure 13. It was made from three teflon rings that 
sandwiched the gel in the middle ring between two sheets of copper foil, all held 
together with a spring made from a paper clip. Some teflon tape was also wrapped 
around the three rings to prevent short-circuiting of the copper sheets when measuring 
the impedance response.  
Figure	
  The teflon setup 
built for measuring 
conductivity in PSi gels. A 
very basic construction was 
used, utilising teflon rings, as 
pictured. Copper foil was 
used as electrodes on both 
sides in direct contact with 
the gel. A bit of Teflon tape 
was wrapped around the 
mid-section, as to avoid any 
accidental electrical contact 
between the two copper foil 
bits (not shown here).  
The top and bottom were held 
together by a thick paper clip 
that had been reformed to act 
as a spring (lower-left). 
At higher temperatures the P-
Si gel loses water, and 
afterward a solid pellet is the 
result (lower-right).	
 Results	
 discussion,	
 P-Si	
 system	
Introduction 
The projects initial aim was to study the pure P-Si system, focussing on structure and 
properties in order to see whether these materials could be suitable candidates for 
future fuel cell electrolytes, in particular, as solid state protonic conductors that can 
operate at higher temperatures than e.g. Nafion. 
Moreover, the structure, and in particular the cell parameters, would have to be 
investigated in order to see if there are any differences between different P/Si starting 
ratios, and if these properties can be linked to the observed protonic conductivities. A 
theory for the system can then be constructed which will help in understanding how to 
boost conductivity in the future.  
In Table 2 it is given the peak positions for silicon oxide phosphate (PDF card 00-
040-0457 from ICDD [63]). This was for a composition where the a,b axes = 7.875  
and c = 24.09 and the chemical formula is  Si5P6O25, i.e. that same composition as 
the parent Si5O(PO4)6. 
Note further from Figure 14 the XRD diffractogram for one of the samples 
synthesized for this project (1.2 KM). Comparing this figure with Table 2 shows full 
agreement, i.e. the aimed material was successfully synthesized. 
Figure	
 XRD of P/Si composition with starting ratio 1.2. Values on X-axis are d-spacing and each peak is 
annotated with its respective d-spacing value. Compare values to table 2.	
 theta	
  Intensity	
10.9544	
  8.070000	
13.4865	
  6.560000	
14.8766	
  5.950000	
22.0937	
  4.020000	
22.5482	
  3.940000	
25.2078	
  3.530000	
26.2671	
  3.390000	
27.2492	
  3.270000	
29.0622	
  3.070000	
31.8193	
  2.810000	
32.1719	
  2.780000	
33.4069	
  2.680000	
35.0222	
  2.560000	
35.7431	
  2.510000	
37.1200	
  2.420000	
37.9327	
  2.370000	
39.8551	
  2.260000	
40.7964	
  2.210000	
41.1858	
  2.190000	
43.4716	
  2.080000	
43.9154	
  2.060000	
Table	
 Peak position values for Si5P6O25 from ICDD database [63].	
4.1 Early synthesis and characterization 
The first series of experiments utilized NH4H2PO4 and SiO2 mixtures that had been 
pre-treated at 200C for 3h at four different temperatures: 600C, 800C, 900C and 
1000C for 24 hours. The firing was done in a muffle furnace under ambient 
atmosphere. After initial calcination, the powders were too hygroscopic to be pressed 
into pellets, thus they could only be fired as powders to begin with. 
The XRD data for the 1.2, 1.5 and 2.0 compositions are shown in Figure 15. The top-
left stack plot, after 600C, there is a lot of amorphous material (seen from the high 
background intensity at low 2), also, any main phases have not formed yet. After 
800C, see bottom-left stack plot a pure phase of SiP2O7 has formed for the 2.0 ratio, 
and a small emerging phase of the parent composition for the 1.5 P:Si ratio is 
beginning to form. As expected the structure was different for P/Si = 2.0, i.e. SiP2O7, 
compared to the parent composition, Si5O(PO4)6. At 900C the main phase is 
dominating for the 1.2 and 1.5 ratios (see top-right stack plot) and there is now also 
some amount of this phase in the 2.0 composition. At 1000C, bottom right stack plot, 
it is close to phase purity for the 1.2 and 1.5 starting compositions. The 2.0 starting 
composition has a smaller amount of SiP2O7. Moreover, all three compositions have a 
hump in the baseline amorphous due to formed amorphous content. 
It was further observed that the structures for the remaining compositions, i.e. those 
with a P/Si starting ratio of 1.5 or lower, were isostructural with the parent 
composition. The XRD plots in Figure 15 and Figure 16 can be compared to the 
simulated pattern found in Figure 9  this latter figure shows agreement between the 
calculated and observed neutron pattern, hence the main phase for silicon oxide 
phosphate can be compared and found to be in agreement (cf. Figure 5 in Poojary et 
als paper, [8] compared to Figure 16 in this thesis). 
When calcined powders of P/Si ratios 1.0  1.5 were sintered at 950C for 24 hours 
and then for another 24 hours at 975C, see Figure 16, it was evident that higher 
phosphorus content lead to less amorphous contribution, as seen from the intensity of 
""#$%&'()&*+,-./0&
1-2/&34'&
1-2/&34+&
1-2/&'4"&
5""#$%&'()&*+,-./0&
1-2/&34'&
1-2/&34+&
1-2/&'4"&
6""#$%&'()&*+,-./0&
1-2/&34'&
1-2/&34+&
1-2/&'4"&
3"""#$%&'()&*+,-./0&
1-2/&34'&
1-2/&34+&
1-2/&'4"&
Figure	
 Firings of different P-Si ratios for 24 hours at different temperatures.	
the background between 15-35 2 in the same figure.  This suggests that the silicon 
content is important when understanding the amorphous phase. When sintered this 
way, the purest phase was the P/Si starting ratio of 1.5 which did not have any signs 
of the secondary crystalline phase, i.e. SiP2O7. This was initially thought to be due to 
evaporation of phosphorus during the sintering process, however, it is more likely that 
the sintering conditions needed further adjustment for the lower P/Si starting ratios. 
The two other P/Si starting ratios (1.0 and 1.2) had in addition to more amorphous 
content also a small amount of secondary phase, the main peak of SiP2O7 is seen just 
below 24 2 in Figure 16. 
When the first sintered samples had been sintered into pellets they produced very poor 
conductivities. It was in conjunction with these initial impedance measurements, that 
it was further discovered that water needed to be a crucial component of the system. 
A simple hydrothermal high-pressure treatment was chosen for delivering water into 
the system, thereby also boosting protonic conductivity. 
4.1.1	
 Synthesis	
 H3PO4	
Once the phase purity became better, a problem that remained was that of reducing 
24h at 950C,
24h 975C (powder)
P:Si starting 
ratio:
Figure	
 Samples sintered at 950C for 24h and then again at 975C for another 24h, P/Si ratios 1.0  1.5. Note 
the increasing amount of amorphous content with decreasing P/Si ratio (i.e. increasing amount silicon). 
 * denotes impurity peak, SiP2O7.	
the amorphous content. The amount of amorphous content could later be reduced 
through modification of the synthesis method, by using H3PO4 as the phosphorus 
source. This amounted to using a gel-precursor, which coincidentally sintered at 
similar temperatures as previously mentioned samples. By using this latter method the 
phase purity became better and more consistent too. An overview of the sintering 
times and temperatures for each sample is given in Appendix D. 
One observation that was made was that increasing the batch size required additional 
time of firing. This could be because having large batches requires more work to 
obtain the same degree of mixing; if mixing was insufficient then longer firing times 
would help. 
When making samples with the gel-method it was again clearly observed that 
decreasing the P/Si ratio increases the amount of amorphous phase, and conversely 
increasing the P/Si ratio decreases the amount of amorphous phase. A possible 
explanation to this was that the relative amounts of phosphorus and silicon are the 
same in the crystalline phase, and any surplus of either of these elements would go 
into the amorphous phase. However, small differences in cell parameters indicated 
that the amounts of phosphorus and silicon in the crystalline phase could be varied. 
To know for sure that this is the case collecting and analyzing neutron diffraction data 
was necessary. The results from that are presented in section 4.5 Main neutron 
diffraction study, and the following sections. 
4.1.2	
 Hydrothermal	
 treatment	
It was discovered that using the same setup for hydrothermal treatment the material 
could be made amorphous. The temperature of the furnace was set to 180C and a 
pellet was treated over night at a pressure corresponding to 7.5 atm. Prior to 
undertaking X-ray diffraction, a small amount of blu-tac was used to mount the pellet 
in the sample holder. Upon diffraction a new pattern resulted, which turned out to be 
the diffraction pattern of blu-tac, see top (green) XRD pattern in Figure 17. There was 
however an amorphous region between 16-28 2 that did not appear in the pure blu-
tac pattern (cf. right part of Figure 17), and this XRD pattern matches that of the 
hydrothermally treated pellet. Thus the material in the pellet had undergone a 
structural transition from crystalline to amorphous caused by the high hydrothermal 
pressure of 7.5 atm. 
Regular hydrothermal treatments, typically at 120C but also at 150C, would not 
structurally transform the material to the extent of destroying crystallinity, but regular 
hydrothermal treatment would have other structural implications.  
Si5O(PO4)6
Si5O(PO4)6
Si5O(PO4)6 after 1.9 atm
Si5O(PO4)6 after 7.5 atm
Blu-tac
Figure	
 XRD stack-plot (bottom). The red diffractogram (bottom curve) is the untreated parent composition, 
the blue (middle curve) is the same after hydrothermal treatment at 120C. The top green diffractogram is the 
parent composition after hydrothermal treatment at 180C. All XRDs were done on pellet surface. The very top 
part of the figure shows the XRD pattern for blu-tac. A small amount of blu-tac was used to keep the pellet in 
place on the XRD holder. Evidently, hydrothermal treatment at 180C makes the crystalline material 
amorphous, thus only the blu-tac pattern remains. 
To simply measure the impedance in the low temperature range in air for untreated P-
Si compositions proved to be impossible (when attempted the samples were too 
resistant to give an impedance plot). It was therefore decided to hydrothermally treat 
the pellets, and when this was 
done impedance data was 
obtained.  
It was possible to get some 
measurements in humidified 
5% H2 for a dry sample of P/Si 
ratio 1.5 (i.e. not necessarily 
untreated, but a close 
approximation), see Figure 18, 
where the sample is compared 
to a hydrothermally treated 
P/Si 1.5 composition in air. 
Between the two compositions 
there is quite a noticeable difference in conductivity in the low temperature region, 
and from about 140C the conductivity becomes the same. For the dry sample the 
conductivity was likely influenced by the humidity of the surrounding atmosphere 
affecting the sample, most likely corresponding to a light hydrothermal treatment 
which enabled a conductivity 
value.  
To get an idea of what 
untreated pellets measured in 
air would yield in conductivity, 
conductivity data in air for the 
hydrothermally treated parent 
composition was measured 
when both increasing and 
decreasing temperature, see 
Figure 19. This data shows that after being tested up until 250C and then 
subsequently cooled, that the difference in conductivity from 125C and below was 
Temperature (C)
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
P/Si starting ratio 1.5 (II GKMP,) conductivity v temperature in diiferent atmospheres
bombed pellet 120C 2h, air 
dry pellet in 5% H2 in Ar (hum)
Temperature (C)
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Hydrothermally treated Si5O(PO4)6 (1.2KM), from EIS data measured in air
Figure	
  Conductivity for a hydrothermally treated composition 
(P/Si=1.5) measured in air (blue data) compared to the same dry 
composition measured in humidified 5% H2 in Argon (green data 
points). 	
Figure	
 Conductivity in air for the hydrothermally treated parent 
composition plotted against temperature. Note the large difference in 
conductivity upon cooling.	
about three orders of magnitude to that of when the sample started off hydrothermally 
treated. This strongly implies that there are significant benefits to hydrothermally 
treating the compositions. 
Conductivities in air for the hydrothermally treated P/Si compositions are found in 
Figure 20. From this data it is evident that at 125C the conductivity depends on the 
P/Si starting ratio. The lowest conductivity value is the 0.57 starting ratio, followed 
by 0.7, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2 and 1.5. Data for the lower P/Si ratios was not recorded however 
it is reasonable to assume that it would continue to decline as is the case with all the 
other compositions. The 1.5 composition was measured to about 150C, it appears to 
closely follow the same conductivity pattern as the 1.2 composition. The composition 
that was overall best was the 1.0 composition, both at low temperature and from 
135C this is the case.  
Since the hydrothermal treatment with water affected the conductivity, it was of 
interest to see the possible change in cell parameters. After refinement what was 
found was a small expansion in the c-axis for the parent composition compared to the 
untreated parent composition, and a measurable contraction in the a,b, axes for the 
hydrothermally treated composition. Another sample from the same batch was fired at 
500C (to ensure it was dry), and scanned at room temperature shortly thereafter. For 
this dried sample the c-axis appeared to shrink a bit in comparison to the untreated 
Temperature (C)
25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275
Conductivities for hydrothermally treated P/Si compositions, from EIS measured in air, v temperature
P/Si = 1.0 (1.0 LN) P/Si = 1.2 (1.2 KM)
P/Si = 0.8 (0.8 UVW) P/Si 0.7 (0.7 VW)
P/Si = 0.57 (0.57 VW) P/Si = 1.5 (II GKMP)
1,0 LN bombed 120C 2h
Figure	
 Conductivities for hydrothermally treated compositions derived from EIS data measured in air. The 
different compositions have the following P/Si starting ratios: 0.57, 0.7, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2 and 1.5. Note that at 125C 
the conductivity depends on the P/Si starting ratio.	
sample, whereas the a,b axes expanded. Overall for the c-axis the changes were very 
minor and could as seen by Figure 21; the changes in a,b axes are more relevant. The 
conclusion is that there seems to be a trend, however the cell parameter change is 
quite small considering the values of the axes. 
4.1.3	
 analysis	
A hydrothermally treated sample (120C for 7h) of Si5O(PO4)6, shown in Figure 22, 
was investigated with SEM. The microstructure of this sample was compared to an 
untreated sample of the same P/Si starting ratio, the resulting micrographs are 
depicted in Figure 23.  
In regard to the microstructure there were some distinct differences between these two 
samples, the untreated composition (Figure 23) seemed to have a lot smoother 
surfaces and be more crystalline whereas the hydrothermally treated sample (Figure 
22) had vast domains of rough-looking surfaces. Most likely it is the amorphous 
phase that becomes more visible on the surface of the crystalline domains, cf. the 
increased background from XRD after hydrothermal treatment. This does not 
necessarily mean the amorphous phase is only on the surface of the crystals, in fact it 
can be in the crystals too (e.g. in the form of water occupying the channels). It may 
well be that this amorphous phase which is coating the surface is what gives the high 
initial step in proton conductivity (compare e.g. P/Si = 1.0 at start in Figure 20). One 
would expect it to leave the material first at low temperatures, after which proton 
conductivity carries on inside of the crystals.  
7,84100
7,84225
7,84350
7,84475
7,84600
24,1500 24,1508 24,1516 24,1524 24,1532 24,1540
A,b axes v c-axis for variants of 1.2 KM
Dried
Hydrothermal (H2O)
Untreated
C-axis length ()
Figure	
  Cell parameters for the 
dried (500C), untreated and 
hydrothermally treated parent 
composition plotted against one 
another. Error bars are given by GSAS, 
(refined from XRD data) in reality it 
may be an even greater error. 	
Figure	
 Hydrothermally treated composition, 
Si5O(PO4)6. The amorphous material (most likely 
decomposed Si5O(PO4)6 with water and 
phosphoric acid) appears to be coating the 
crystalline material.	
Figure	
 SEM micrographs of the untreated parent composition, Si5O(PO4)6. Note the general smoothness and 
formation of the crystalline particles.	
4.2 Solid state NMR data 
The solid-state NMR data was 
acquired from samples packed 
in 4 mm rotors with a volume 
of around 80 L. These rotors, 
although not weighed, were 
just about full during each 
measurement, therefore it is 
reasonable to assume that the 
volume was close to constant 
during all NMR measurements. The 
green area at the top of each figure is 
that part of the NMR range which is 
pictured in each main figure. 
The 1H NMR scans for the untreated 
compositions in Figure 24 show a 
visible difference in chemical shift for 
the 8 ppm peak. 
Figure 25 shows the 2H NMR spectra 
for the three hydrothermally treated 
compositions. Noted from this figure is that 
the intensity is very high for the 1.2 
composition, and that the relative positioning 
is the same as encountered in the 1H NMR 
scans for the untreated compositions 
(previous figure). The difference in 
magnitude was due to a longer collection 
time, Appendix F shows the scaled spectra. 
Returning to the 1H NMR data, it can be 
noted that there is also a change in chemical 
0.833
1.44 D2O
1.44 untreated
1.2 untreated
1.2 D2O
0.833
Figure	
 24 1H NMR spectra of the three untreated P-Si compositions. 
Note the difference in peak position for the chemical shifts at about 8 
ppm. The chemical shift at 42.5 ppm is a spinning sideband. The green 
area is that part of the NMR range which is pictured in main figure.	
Figure	
  Comparison of 1H spectra for the 
parent composition (top) and the 1.44 (lower), 
hydrothermally treated with D2O (red colour) v 
untreated (blue colour). Note the difference in 
peak shape as well as chemical shift.	
Figure	
  2H NMR spectra of the three hydrothermally 
treated (D2O) P-Si compositions. The relative shift is 
similar to that in the previous figure. See Appendix F for 
scaled figure (parent composition did have a longer 
collection time for the 2H scan, hence higher magnitude in 
peak).	
shift as a result of hydrothermally treating with D2O (see Figure 26 where the 1H 
spectra are compared for the 1.2 composition and 1.44 composition, before and after 
hydrothermal treatment). The change in chemical shift is likely due to D2O entering 
the channels of the material and interacting with the material, as the shape of the 
chemical shift has become much more well-defined. The chemical shift due to 
hydrothermal treatment with D2O changes character and becomes an average of that 
of D2O at 4.79 ppm [64] and that of the untreated sample, which indicates that there is 
high mobility of protons in the structure post hydrothermal treatment. The chemical 
shift for the untreated samples is likely due to a proton linked to the phosphate group, 
as this is not an unusual chemical shift for phosphates at circa 8 ppm [65]. 
In addition, there were some significant differences between the untreated 
compositions and those treated with D2O in the 31P NMR. What was most apparent 
was the much stronger occurrence of the phosphoric acid peak for the hydrothermally 
treated compositions, shown in Figure 27. This implies that phosphoric acid becomes 
more a part of the system upon hydrothermal treatment. Prior to hydrothermal 
treatment there was still some phosphoric acid peak, although this was small in 
comparison to the  44 ppm chemical shift, see Figure 28. After hydrothermal 
treatment the 0 ppm chemical shift is larger compared to the - 44 ppm chemical shift. 
Furthermore, there was a profound difference in the signal strength for the chemical 
shift at - 44 ppm when comparing the untreated compositions (Figure 28) to those that 
were hydrothermally treated (Figure 27). 
In the samples that were hydrothermally treated with D2O the intensity of this peak (at 
- 44 ppm) is much stronger than with the same peak for the untreated samples. Indeed, 
if plotted against the cell parameters  which are derived from the neutron diffraction 
results, shown in Figure 30  it is clear that there is a substantial difference in peak 
area and unit cell parameters especially for the parent composition, cf. Figure 29. The 
areas in Figure 29 were calculated through integration of the absolute intensities from 
the 31P NMR chemical shift at - 44 ppm, by using the integration function in TopSpin. 
These values have been visualized by plotting them against the cell parameters and 
then labelled and connected (between respective untreated and hydrothermally treated 
composition) so that they can be identified. The purpose of doing this is in order to 
visualize two parameters at the same time and see whether there is correlation or not. 
In the case of the - 44 ppm chemical shift there does not seem to be anything that 
indicates a full correlation to cell parameters. 
Figure 30 shows moreover three graphs of lattice parameters derived from the neutron 
diffraction data obtained at room temperature: unit cell volume versus P/Si starting 
ratio (left graph), a,b axes length versus P/Si starting ratio (middle graph) and c-axis 
versus P/Si starting ratio (right graph) for untreated samples (blue data points) 
compared to the same samples after they have been hydrothermally treated with D2O 
(red data points). For the P/Si starting ratio of 1.2 it can be noted that hydrothermal 
treatment with D2O yields expansion in all axes. The silicon-rich composition 
Figure	
  31P NMR of the P-Si compositions that 
were hydrothermally treated with D2O. The same 
spectrum is pictured with different magnification, 
largest in bottom figure. Note the strong phosphoric 
acid peak at 0 ppm. The peak at - 44 ppm is that of the 
Si5O(PO4)6 unit [48].	
Figure	
 31P NMR of untreated samples with varied 
P/Si starting ratios. The same spectrum is pictured 
with different magnification, largest in bottom figure. 
Note for this figure the smaller intensity of the 
phosphoric acid peak, which may be there as a result 
of water absorption from the air.	
contracts somewhat in all axes when hydrothermally treated, whereas the phosphorus-
rich composition also contracts in the a,b axes but stays virtually the same in the c-
axis. 
This shows that there are definite differences between the samples, and that there are 
different responses to the hydrothermal treatment. The conclusion must then be that 
these structural responses are due to differences in not only stoichiometry but also 
other factors may come into play  e.g. the amount of D2O in each of the 
hydrothermally treated compositions. From the DTA it was clear that the 1.44 sample 
had far more D2O to get rid off, it also has the longest a,b, axes of the three untreated 
compositions. 
In the same way were the plots below constructed in Figure 31, integrating instead the 
chemical shift at 0 ppm. The data presented like this produces a visual of what the 
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
Unit cell volume v P/Si starting ratio
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
a,b-axes v P/Si starting ratio
As is Added D2O
24,1200
24,1425
24,1650
24,1875
24,2100
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
c-axis v P/Si starting ratio
P/Si starting ratio P/Si starting ratioP/Si starting ratio
Figure	
 Graphs of lattice parameters derived from neutron diffraction data at room temperature: unit cell 
volume v P/Si starting ratio (left), a,b axes length v P/Si starting ratio (middle) and c-axis v P/Si starting ratio 
(right) for untreated samples (blue data, +) and hydrothermally treated with D2O (red data, o). For the P/Si 
starting ratio of 1.2 it can be noted that hydrothermal treatment with D2O yields expansion in all axes.	
375000000
750000000
1125000000
1500000000
1285 1287 1289 1291 1293 1295 1297 1299
Phosphate -44ppm v unit cell volume
P/Si = 1.44
P/Si = 1.2
P/Si = 0.833
Cell volume (3) Cell length () Cell length ()
375000000
750000000
1125000000
1500000000
7,84 7,85 7,86 7,87
Phosphate -44ppm v a,b-axes
P/Si = 0.833
P/Si = 1.2
P/Si = 1.44
375000000
750000000
1125000000
1500000000
24,12 24,14 24,16 24,18 24,20 24,22
Phosphate -44ppm v c-axis
P/Si = 1.2
P/Si = 1.44
P/Si = 
0.833
Figure	
 Integrated signal of the -44ppm chemical shift from 31P NMR plotted against unit cell volume (left), a,b 
axes length (middle) and c-axis (right) for the untreated samples (blue data, +) and hydrothermally treated with 
D2O (red data, o). Cell parameter data from neutron diffraction results.	
hydrothermal process accomplishes: there are stronger signal strengths in the 
chemical shifts from the Si5O(PO4)6 unit and phosphoric acid, and the hydrothermal 
treatment has an impact on the cell parameters. The a,b-axes and the unit cell volume 
appear to be a function of the phosphoric acid content for the hydrothermally treated 
compositions in Figure 31, whereas it is harder to establish any real correlation 
between the intensity of the Si5O(PO4)6 chemical shift compared with the same cell 
parameters in Figure 29. 
The most important result is from Figure 31 as it gives a vital clue to what is going 
on. It appears that the final cell length for the a,b axes of the hydrothermally treated 
compositions depend on the amount of phosphoric acid in the system. Since only D2O 
has been added it must be that the close proximity of D2O molecules and phosphate 
units create a chemical shift that is identified with phosphoric acid. Apart from the 
surface of the crystals it is only in the channels of the structure where water can 
reside. Moreover, a three-dimensional network of channels going through the 
structure filled with water or D2O is likely to cause a much stronger signal than 
merely covering the surface. 
Apart from the high intensity change, there is also a small change in chemical shift for 
the phosphoric acid peak  all samples increase by 0.2 ppm after hydrothermal 
treatment with D2O (see Table 3). This can be compared with a different sample of 
the parent composition (1.2 D) which was hydrothermally treated with H2O instead  
this chemical shift is found at 0.028 ppm, which can be compared to an untreated 1.2 
sample where the shift is at 0.00 ppm, and a D2O treated parent composition at 0.207 
Cell volume (3) Cell length () Cell length ()
375000000
750000000
1125000000
1500000000
1285 1287 1289 1291 1293 1295 1297 1299
Phosphoric acid v cell volume
P/Si = 1.2
P/Si = 1.44
P/Si = 0.833
375000000
750000000
1125000000
1500000000
7,84 7,85 7,86 7,87
Phosphoric acid v a,b-axes
P/Si = 1.44
P/Si = 1.2
P/Si = 0.833
375000000
750000000
1125000000
1500000000
24,12 24,14 24,16 24,18 24,20 24,22
Phosphoric acid v c-axis
P/Si = 0.833
P/Si = 1.44
P/Si = 1.2
Figure	
 Phosphoric acid content as derived from integration of the 0 ppm chemical shift from 31P NMR spectra 
plotted against unit cell volume (left), a,b axes length (middle) and c-axis (right) for untreated samples (blue data 
points, +) and hydrothermally treated in D2O (red circles). Cell parameter data from neutron diffraction results.	
ppm. Again, this could be showing that any surface adsorbed water is being 
substituted by D2O, not merely stopping at the surface but also entering the channels 
of the P-Si materials. 
A summary of the chemical shifts for the solid-state NMR data from primarily the 
neutron diffraction samples can be found in Table 3. 
Table	
  The chemical shifts from 31P, 1H and 2H solid state NMR. The -44ppm 31P-NMR chemical shift is 
assigned to the entire Si5O(PO4)6 unit [48], the 0ppm chemical shift in 
31P-NMR is phosphoric acid (ibid). The 1H 
chemical shift at 7 or 8 ppm is believed to be a proton linked to the phosphate group, as this is not an unusual 
chemical shift for phosphates at circa 8 ppm [65]. 
starting	
ratio	
Chemical	
 shift	
 44ppm	
 (ppm)	
Chemical	
 shift	
(ppm)	
Chemical	
 shift	
7-9	
 (ppm)	
Chemical	
 shift	
 (ppm)	
 GKMPR	
untreated	
 43.95	
  7.5951	
1.44G	
untreated	
 43.975	
  0.012	
  7.6318	
1.44G	
 43.92	
  0.1835	
  7.0474	
  6.5887	
untreated	
 43.889	
  8.3407	
 43.895	
  0.207	
  7.4462	
  7.0824	
H3PO4	
 43.90	
 0.1697	
 43.873	
  0.028	
  7.4319	
1.0LN	
untreated	
 43.996	
 0.015	
  8.249	
0.833A	
untreated	
  0.833	
 43.884	
 0.039	
  8.0951	
0.833A	
  0.833	
 43.858	
 missing	
  6.8927	
0.8UV	
untreated	
 43.873	
  7.957	
untreated	
 43.82	
  7.673	
0.57V	
untreated	
 43.793	
4.2.1	
 Enriched	
 sample	
A sample of the parent composition Si5O(PO4)6 was prepared with stoichiometric 
amounts of H3PO4 and SiO2, except that 20% of the SiO2 was substituted for 29SiO2. 
After multiple firings a phase pure sample was obtained. This sample was laid aside 
for five weeks before 
NMR was undertaken 
(red spectrum in Figure 
32). The second NMR 
was done more recently 
after another firing on the 
same sample (see blue 
spectra in the same 
figure). 
From the 29Si NMR an 
increase in amorphous 
SiO2 appears to be the 
case (at -112 ppm). The 
chemical shifts between -
210 to -220 ppm belong 
to the octahedrally 
coordinating silicons, and 
the chemical shift at -120 
ppm is the tetrahedral 
silicon [47]. 
There is a marked 
difference in the 1H 
NMR, with the peak at 
7.8 ppm entirely 
disappearing  this could 
be a water related peak 
that occurred as a result of 
absorbing humidity from 
Figure	
 29Si NMR (top), 31P NMR (middle) and 1H NMR (bottom) of the 
sample that had 20% SiO2 substituted for 
29SiO2. The sample represented 
by the blue lines is the same sample as the one represented by the red 
lines, except for an extra firing on the former.	
the air over time. 
4.3 High temperature behaviour 
A stoichiometric and phase pure sample of Si5O(PO4)6 was prepared and analyzed in 
a high temperature XRD setup, from room temperature up to 1000C. From the same 
batch a hydrothermally treated sample was produced and analyzed in much the same 
way except that more temperature steps were recorded including cooling data. It is 
clear that there are distinct differences between the two samples6.  
Regarding the untreated sample, it is evident that very little change occurs throughout 
the temperature range which is also what is seen from TG and DTA, see top part of 
Figure 34. The only visible and valid change that occurs is close to 1000C on heating 
and about 950C on cooling in the DTA (the other peaks on heating are likely 
instrumental errors). The important thing is that the DTA curve makes no changes in 
the lowintermediate temperature region. The hydrothermally treated (using H2O) 
composition on the other hand shows significant change as the temperature increases, 
in the two mass losses and double DTA peaks, see lower part of same figure. 
From the XRD (top part of Figure 33) there is little change in the untreated 
composition, however significant change (especially in the amorphous region) of the 
hydrothermally treated composition (bottom part of Figure 33). This happens 
especially in the low temperature region, although there is also a decrease all the way 
up to 1000C. 
The amorphous phase decreases substantially between 125  150C, see Figure 35. 
On cooling the background returns however there appears to be less of it, cf. red and 
dark green diffractograms in Figure 36. Note from this figure also the lower peak 
intensities in the peaks at lower 2, for the diffractogram at 1000C (pink colour), 
with exception for the peak at just over 16 2 which is stronger. 
What likely happens is that water is leaving the structure on heating  hence the 
diminishing amount of background. On cooling background does appear to return a 
6 Due to that the instrument was very new at the time it had not been not properly calibrated, and in 
addition the instrument parameter files were not available and thus the obtained data could not be 
refined. 
bit, however this cannot be water due to the fact that there is no mass increase on 
cooling, cf. lower part of Figure 34. 
Figure	
 High temperature XRD plots of untreated parent composition (top) compared to XRD plots of 
the hydrothermally treated (H2O) parent composition (bottom). The colour code for the diffractograms is: 
red = 25C, green = 400C, blue = 700C and purple = 1000C.	
Figure	
 TG and DTA data for the untreated parent composition (top) contrasted 
with the corresponding data for the hydrothermally (H2O) treated parent 
composition from the same batch (bottom).	
Figure	
 35 XRD stack-plot of the hydrothermally treated parent Si5O(PO4)6 in the low temperature region. 
Note the larger drop in amorphous content between 125C and 150C.	
Figure	
 XRD stack-plot of the hydrothermally treated parent Si5O(PO4)6 over the measured temperature 
range and then down to room temperature again. The amorphous phase decreases throughout the 
temperature range and is not fully retained upon cooling to room temperature. The temperatures are: room 
temperature start (red), 200C heating (light blue), 600C heating (light green), 1000C (pink), 600C 
cooling (light brown), 200C cooling (dark blue) room temperature final (dark green).	
4.4 A first look with neutrons 
A P/Si = 1.2 sample was initially tested in the GEM instrument as well as a sample 
which had been hydrothermally treated with D2O. This was a first test and performed 
in between changing other samples and therefore happened to be done in a cryostat at 
a temperature of - 63C. 
In this preliminary test there appeared to be a couple of extra peaks in the 
hydrothermally treated composition, which did not occur in the XRD of the same 
sample at room temperature, see Figure 37. Eventually it was found that the extra 
peaks matched a pattern for ice, which was not too surprising considering the 
experimental environment. 
A deeper study was undertaken in June 2013 at the same centre, at the Rutherford 
Appleton Laboratory in Harwell, UK. All measurements were done in the GEM 
instrument. A brief schematic of the GEM instrument can be found in Figure 11 in 
chapter 3, along with photographs showing parts of the experimental setup. 
"#$%&%
"#$%&$'()*+,-./0+1.2344,*
0.1301-*"5*67$*
$.-"53.,*"#$%&$'()**
-63C, GEM
7.75.804.653.853.302.902.602.352.15
RT, XRD-data
Figure	
  37 A neutron diffraction pattern (left) of the P/Si = 1.2 composition at  63C. The bottom red 
diffractogram is the untreated composition and the top blue diffractogram is the hydrothermally treated 
composition. The corresponding XRD patterns at room temperature are shown to the right.	
4.5 Main neutron diffraction study 
The compositions that were made for the main neutron study had the P/Si starting 
ratios of 0.833, 1.2 and 1.44. All compositions were measured as prepared and also as 
hydrothermally treated counterparts with D2O. All these runs were done at room 
temperature. 
Two comparative high temperature studies of the 1.2 composition were also 
undertaken  one dry and one hydrothermally treated with D2O. Both of these 
samples came from the same batch and were in the same experimental setup and 
running the same program. 
For the high temperature runs a quartz tube was used and in the case of all other 
measurements at room temperature, 6 and 8 mm Vanadium cans sealed with Indium 
wire were employed. 
A series of Rietveld refinements were carried out on the accumulated SUM-files 
(about 45 minutes of collection time) as well as sequential GSAS runs for the five 
minute runs. The refinements were all done in pretty much the same way in order to 
be able to more accurately compare results, see example in section 3.1.2 Rietveld 
refinement methodology for neutron data. Initially all the occupancies were held 
constant at 100% according to the structural model Si5O(PO4)6, and from there the 
coordinates were fixed. The occupancies were then varied (apart from the Si2 site and 
the O5 site that remained fixed at 100%), and again the atomic displacement 
parameters, UISO values, were varied (however not at the same time as the 
occupancies). Any occupancy value that exceeded 100% was manually changed to 
100%. The 2 values for the parent compositions were a bit high at the end of the 
refinements, this could be due to that these two measurements were done in a quartz 
vessel. 
The results showed that the unit cell expanded for the parent composition as a result 
of the hydrothermal treatment with D2O, and it remained expanded throughout the 
temperature range. For the other two compositions there was slight contraction in the 
unit cell volume. The results of the refined cell parameters can be found in Table 4. 
Table	
  Lattice parameters obtained from neutron data at room temperature for untreated as well as 
hydrothermally treated compositions. The statistical 2-value is given for each refinement in the far right column. 
The occupancy was held constant for the Si2-site at 1.000 as well as for the O5 site. Occupancies for these 
refinements are given in table Table 5. 
What can be clearly seen from the obtained cell parameters at room temperature is 
that both the unit cell volume for the phosphorus-rich composition (P/Si = 1.44) as 
well as for the silicon-rich composition (P/Si = 0.833) contract when subjected to 
hydrothermal treatment with D2O. The opposite trend occurs for the parent 
composition, Si5O(PO4)6: a 0.78% expansion in the total unit cell volume which is 
quite large in comparison to the contractions of the 0.833 (-0.12%) and 1.44 (-0.14%) 
compositions. The parent compositions expansion upon hydrothermal treatment is 
due to that all the axes in the unit cell are expanding; a, b axes (+ 0.25%) and in the c-
axis (+ 0.29%). 
Comparing the c/a ratios it is clear that they increase marginally in all cases when 
each composition is hydrothermally treated with D2O  most for the 1.44 composition 
where it increases from 3.071 to 3.074, this is mainly due to contraction in the a,b 
axes accompanied with a small expansion in the c-axis. For the two other 
compositions there is contraction (0.833) and expansion (1.2) in all axes, respectively. 
The biggest unit cell volume for the as prepared samples, was the 1.44 composition 
which had a total unit cell volume of 1292.12 3. Unlike the other compositions, this 
had an extra firing at 1100C for 20h. Before this happened there was a presence of 
silicon pyrophosphate, this decomposed and went into the crystalline phase; as it was 
incorporated into the primary phase, this most likely made the primary phase more 
 temperature	
parameters	
starting	
ratio	
 volume	
  c-axis	
  Reduced	
1GEM63213_818_0.833A_
dry_8mm_FixedF	
0.833	
  1288.14(21)	
  7.8480(7)	
  24.1497(23)	
  3.077	
  1.935	
GEM63215_A_6mm_0.833
A_D2O	
0.833	
  1286.55(24)	
  7.8441(9)	
  24.1439(27)	
  3.078	
  2.024	
GEM63046_HiT1_RT_start	
  1287.1(4)	
  7.8472(13)	
  24.136(4)	
  3.076	
  5.144	
  1297.2(6)	
  7.8666(19)	
  24.205(6)	
  3.077	
  7.113	
1GEM63214_831_1.44G_d
  1292.12(21)	
  7.8614(7)	
  24.1423(23)	
  3.071	
  2.960	
GEM63416_1.44G	
 (D2O)	
  1290.28(20)	
  7.8554(7)	
  24.1445(22)	
  3.074	
  1.791	
phosphorus-rich. The hydrothermal treatment of the 1.44 composition leads to a 
decrease in its cell volume (to 1290.28 3). From the occupancies in Figure 38 a 
decrease in phosphorus occupancy can be noted, accompanied by a much smaller 
decrease in Si3, see Table 5. Interesting to note is that there is a decrease in the 
occupancy for all elements when hydrothermal treatment is applied, and this could 
explain the unit cell contraction. 
Inversely, for the parent composition there is an overall increase in the occupancy for 
all elements and this could explain the cell expansion for that composition seen earlier 
in Figure 30. 
From the left diagram in Figure 38 it can be noted that the 0.833 composition 
decreases its occupancy of the tetrahedral Si3 site upon hydrothermal treatment  this 
is likely what causes this composition to contract its cell parameters despite extra 
phosphorus being added to the phosphorus site and despite a small addition of 
octahedral silicon to the Si1 site.  
O5 O4 O3 O2 O1 P Si3 Si2 Si1
P/Si starting ratio = 1.44 at RT
1.44 as is 1.44 D2O
O5 O4 O3 O2 O1 P Si3 Si2 Si1
P/Si starting ratio = 0.833 at RT
0.833 as is 0.833 D2O
Atom Atom
Figure	
 Fractional occupancies for the 0.833 compositions (left) and the 1.44 compositions 
(right) before and after hydrothermal treatment with D2O. Blue bars are the occupancies of the 
untreated compositions, red bars (to the right of the blue) are the occupancies for the 
hydrothermally treated compositions with D2O. The multiplicity factor has not been considered 
here but is considered in Table 4. 
Table	
 The fractional occupancies for each atomic site derived from neutron data. The difference columns in 
bold show the increase or decrease with multiplicity taken into consideration when hydrothermally treating with 
D2O and given in the unit of atoms per unit cell. The lower part of the table has the sums of each element. 	
Comparing what happens to all three compositions, the silicon-rich composition, 
0.833A D2O, has an even smaller unit cell volume (1286.55 3) and compared to both 
the hydrothermally treated 1.2 and 1.44 compositions it has a lower occupancy of 
both tetrahedral phosphorus and tetrahedral silicon (Si3), see right part of Figure 39. 
The hydrothermally treated 1.44 composition on the other hand has more phosphorus, 
which is not surprising since it had a higher amount of phosphorus to begin with (as 
O5 O4 O3 O2 O1 P Si3 Si2 Si1
Occupancies D2O
0.833 D2O 1.2 D2O 1.44 D2O
O5 O4 O3 O2 O1 P Si3 Si2 Si1
Occupancies as is
0.833 as is 1.2 as is 1.44 as is
Atom Atom
  Multiplicit
0.833	
0.833	
0.833	
difference	
difference	
difference	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
  0.9858	
  0.9915	
  0.1026	
  0.9888	
  0.9832	
 0.1008	
  1.0000	
  0.9950	
 0.0900	
  0.9857	
  0.9870	
  0.0234	
  0.9825	
  0.9972	
  0.2646	
  1.0000	
  0.9992	
 0.0144	
  0.9845	
  0.9829	
 0.0288	
  0.9908	
  0.9883	
 0.0450	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
  0.9903	
  0.9904	
  0.0003	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
  0.9811	
  1.0000	
  0.0567	
  0.9679	
  0.9695	
  0.0288	
  0.9613	
  0.9714	
  0.1818	
  0.9864	
  0.9795	
 0.1242	
  0.9413	
  0.9293	
 0.0720	
  0.9232	
  0.9378	
  0.0876	
  0.9769	
  0.9753	
 0.0096	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
  0.9933	
  1.0000	
  0.0201	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
  1.0000	
  1.0000	
  0.0000	
Atoms	
Si5O(PO4)6	
Atoms	
Atoms	
Change	
occupancy	
Atoms	
Atoms	
Change	
occupancy	
Atoms	
Atoms	
Change	
occupancy	
Total	
  74.1789	
  74.2764	
  0.0975	
  74.3178	
  74.4366	
  0.1188	
  74.9433	
  74.8956	
  -0.0477	
Total	
  17.4222	
  17.4510	
  0.0288	
  17.3034	
  17.4852	
  0.1818	
  17.7552	
  17.6310	
  -0.1242	
Total	
  14.6277	
  14.5758	
  -0.0519	
  14.5392	
  14.6268	
  0.0876	
  14.8614	
  14.8518	
  -0.0096	
Figure	
 Fractional occupancies for each atomic site derived from neutron data for untreated compositions 
(left) and hydrothermally treated with D2O (right). For the parent composition there is an increase in the Si3 and 
P occupancies with hydrothermal treatment. 
well as over 98% occupancy for the regular as prepared sample). 
Solely taking the total occupancies into account, the overall trends can be observed in 
Figure 40 where the total number of atoms per unit cell for each element is plotted 
against the P/Si starting ratio. What emerges is that for all the hydrothermally treated 
samples (red circles) there is a trend of increasing occupancy for each element as the 
P/Si starting ratio goes toward more phosphorus. For the untreated compositions (blue 
crosses) there is also a similar trend as far as the total oxygen content, however not for 
silicon and phosphorus. This latter discrepancy is likely due to a problem with the 
modelling (as they all were modelled the same, with the same starting stoichiometry, 
i.e. that of the parent composition). A different strategy will be adopted for future 
work, in which the starting ratios are varied (i.e. the same as respective starting ratio) 
and the occupancies of silicon and phosphorus set to full occupancy values. 
The graph of interest is that of the oxygen content. If this truly is the case then it 
means that there is some flexibility in oxygen content, and that a corresponding 
amount of phosphorus will accompany the higher oxygen content to balance the 
charge. Future work should investigate this aspect too as well as that mentioned in the 
previous paragraph. 
P/Si starting ratio
P/Si starting ratio
14,00
14,25
14,50
14,75
15,00
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
Total silicon occupancy / unit cell v P/Si starting ratio
74,00
74,25
74,50
74,75
75,00
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
Total oxygen occupancy / unit cell v P/Si starting ratio
P/Si starting ratio
17,00
17,25
17,50
17,75
18,00
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
Phosphorus occupancy / unit cell v P/Si starting ratio
As is Added D2O
O5 O4 O3 O2 O1 P Si3 Si2 Si1
P/Si starting ratio = 1.2 at RT
e Figure	
  Fractional occupancies for the 1.2 
composition before and after hydrothermal 
treatment with D2O. Blue bars (to the left) are the 
occupancies for the untreated composition, red 
bars (to the right) are the corresponding 
occupancies for the hydrothermally treated 
sample. The multiplicity factor has not been 
considered here but is considered in Table 5. 
Figure	
 Total occupancies for the unit cells derived from neutron data, plotted against the P/Si starting 
ratio. Note the increasing trend in oxygen occupancy as the P/Si starting ratio increases for both untreated 
(blue data, +) and hydrothermally treated compositions (red data, o).	
The positive c-axis shift for the parent composition upon being hydrothermally treated 
can possibly be explained by the increased occupancy of the tetrahedral Si3 site, 
pictured in Figure 41. Indeed, the parent composition is the only sample that increases 
in occupancy on the Si3 site and expands in the c-axis  whereas 0.833 decreases in 
Si3 along with its c-axis.	
The hydrothermally treated 1.44 composition appears to have quite a bit more 
tetrahedral silicon, as seen in Figure 39. It could well be in the case of the 1.44 
compositions that some of the atoms on the tetrahedral silicon site are in fact 
phosphorus; this would explain why there is so little change in the c-axis when 
considering the larger occupancy of the Si3 site compared to the 0.833 and 1.2 
compositions. 
4.5.1	
 length	
 analysis	
Neutron data for the three main compositions (P/Si starting ratio: 0.833, 1.2 and 1.44) 
and for their hydrothermally treated (with D2O) counterparts was analyzed with the 
disaglviewer function in GSAS. This program calculates the bond distances between 
atoms in the structure as well as gives the angles in between as a result of the refined 
coordinates. 
The refinements were based on the structural model found in Poojarys paper, i.e. 
Si5O(PO4)6 [8]. To a large extent the bond distances agree with Poojarys paper, 
however, there are some anomalies that are worthy of consideration. Figure 42 shows 
Poojarys results which can be compared to these here, graphically represented in 
Figure 43 for the P_O bonds and Figure 44 for the Si_O bonds, respectively. The 
observed bond lengths are also given in numerical form in the tables in Appendix A1. 
Comparative bond lengths were calculated from Shannon [66], and can be found in 
Table 6. These bond lengths were calculated by adding the quoted ionic radii for pairs 
of various conceivable elemental species. The observed bond lengths can be matched 
to a calculated one in almost all cases. 
For the 0.833 compositions there is no difference in the phosphorus  oxygen bond 
lengths upon hydrothermal treatment, and for the other two compositions the 
following can be noted: P_O3 and P_O5 expand a bit for the parent composition upon 
hydrothermal treatment with D2O, whereas for the 1.44 composition there is small 
expansion in P_O2 instead and almost negligible contraction in the P_O3 bond. 
The Si3_O4 bond is the same for the both 1.44 compositions, whereas it contracts a 
bit for the parent composition and still a bit more for the 0.833 compositions when 
those are hydrothermally treated. 
The overall trend for the parent composition is an expansion in bond lengths when it 
undergoes hydrothermal treatment, and this is most likely due the influence that D2O 
RB210 RB255C
Si octahedra Bond length () Angle () Si octahedra Bond length () Angle ()
Si1_O3 1.789(5) O3_Si1_O3 180.00 Si1_O3 1.783(5) O3_Si1_O3 180.00
O3_Si1_O3 95.2(5) O3_Si1_O3 92.7(3)
O3_Si1_O3 84.8(5) O3_Si1_O3 87.3(3)
Si octahedra Si octahedra
Si2_O2 1.818(6) O2_Si2_O2 85.6(9) Si2_O2 1.813(7) O2_Si2_O2 88.0(4)
Si2_O5 1.697(10) O5_Si2_O2 95.6(9) Si2_O5 1.696(7) O5_Si2_O2 91.9(4)
O5_Si2_O2 95.6(5) O5_Si2_O2 88.6(3)
O5_Si2_O2 178.1(11) O5_Si2_O2 176.6(5)
O5_Si2_O5 82.8(8) O5_Si2_O5 91.5(5)
Si tetrahedra Si tetrahedra
Si3_O1 1.706(14) O4_Si3_O1 110.1(6) Si3_O1 1.659(8) O4_Si3_O1 108.1(4)
Si3_O4 1.654(6) O4_Si3_O4 108.8(6) Si3_O4 1.5299(6) O4_Si3_O4 110.8(4)
Phosphate groupPhosphate group Phosphate groupPhosphate group
P_O2 1.526(14) O3_P_O2 109.0(6) P_O2 1.533(7) O3_P_O2 113.5(4)
P_O3 1.518(6) O4_P_O2 110.0(7) P_O3 1.525(7) O4_P_O2 107.3(5)
P_O4 1.518(6) O5_P_O2 113.0(7) P_O4 1.535(6) O5_P_O2 111.5(5)
P_O5 1.525(6) O4_P_O3 111.3(7) P_O5 1.529(7) O4_P_O3 109.8(5)
O5_P_O3 105.9(7) O5_P_O3 103.8(6)
O5_P_O4 107.6(7) O5_P_O4 110.9(5)
Figure	
 Sample RB210 (left) and RB255C (right) compared side-by-side, results after Poojary et als 
paper [8]. Note the short Si3_O4 bond lengths for the latter sample which are very similar to P_O 
bond lengths. In addition, the P_O4 bond length is shorter than 1.57  as obtained in this project.	
Central	
  Bonds	
 ionic	
 radii	
Octahedral	
  Si(VI)_O(IV)	
 hydrogens	
  Si(VI)_O(II)	
  Si(VI)_O(II)_H(II)	
  Si(VI)_OH(II)	
  Si(VI)_OH(II)_H(II)	
  Si(VI)_OH(III)	
  Si(VI)_OH(III)_H(II)	
Tetrahedral	
  Si(IV)_O(IV)	
 hydrogens	
  Si(IV)_O(II)	
  Si(IV)_O(II)_H(II)	
  Si(IV)_OH(II)	
 subst	
 P_O4?	
  Si(IV)_OH(II)_H(II)	
Tetrahedral	
  P(IV)_O(IV)	
 hydrogens	
  P(IV)_O(II)	
  P(IV)_O(II)_H(II)	
  P(IV)_OH(II)	
  P(IV)_OH(II)_H(II)	
Octahedral	
 P(5+)	
  P(VI)_O(IV)	
 hydrogens	
  P(VI)_O(II)	
  P(VI)_O(II)_H(II)	
  P(VI)_OH(II)	
  P(VI)_OH(II)_H(II)	
Octahedral	
 P(3+)	
  P(VI)_O(IV)	
 hydrogens	
  P(VI)_O(II)	
  P(VI)_O(II)_H(II)	
  P(VI)_OH(II)	
  P(VI)_OH(II)_H(II)	
Table	
 Bond lengths computed from Shannon [66]. Coordination numbers given within parenthesis.  
The bond lengths for P_O4 are highly interesting because they are considerably larger 
than the rest of the phosphorus  oxygen bonds, see Figure 43 where phosphorus  
oxygen bond lengths are drawn. Poojarys paper has the bond lengths for phosphorus
oxygen at about 1.52 , and the P_O4 bond in particular at 1.518(6) and 1.535(6)  
for the two samples given [8]. In comparison the samples here  both untreated and 
hydrothermally treated have that same bond around 1.57  (see Figure 43), which 
suggests there is something making that bond longer. In the literature a 1.57  bond 
length matches that of a P_OH bond for a phosphorus atom in tetrahedral geometry 
[67]. 
Also noteworthy is that the Si3_O4 bond is smaller than the Si3_O1 bond as seen 
from Figure 44, where silicon  oxygen bond lengths are pictured. This means that the 
bridging oxygen (O4) between the tetrahedral silicon and phosphorus sites, is shifted 
more toward the tetrahedral silicon atom than normal. It may well be that a hydrogen 
is linked to the O4, which is pushing the O4 further away from the phosphorus and 
closer to the Si3 atom. 
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
Phosphorus-Oxygen bond lengths for untreated compositions v P/Si ratio
P_O2 P_O3 P_O4 P_O5
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
Phosphorus-Oxygen bond lengths v P/Si ratio (D2O)
P_O2 P_O3 P_O4 P_O5
P/Si starting ratio
P/Si starting ratio
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
Silicon-Oxygen bond lengths v P/Si ratio (D2O)
Si1_O3 Si2_O2 Si2_O5 Si3_O1 tetr Si3_O4 tetr
0,50 0,75 1,00 1,25 1,50 1,75
Silicon-Oxygen bond lengths for untreated compositions v P/Si ratio
Si1_O3 Si2_O2 Si2_O5 Si3_O1 tetr Si3_O4 tetr
P/Si starting ratio
P/Si starting ratio
Figure	
  The bond lengths for the P_O bonds for the untreated (left) and hydrothermally treated 
compositions (right). Note the longer bond length for the P_O4 bonds compared to the remaining P_O bonds.
Figure	
 The bond lengths for the silicon-oxygen bonds for the untreated (left) and hydrothermally treated 
compositions (right). Note that for the tetrahedral Si3 the Si3_O4 bonds are shorter than the Si3_O1 bonds.	
Bond lengths for the untreated parent composition, as well as for the hydrothermally 
treated parent composition, are also given as a function of temperature in Appendix 
E1 and Appendix E2. As can be seen from those bond lengths they do not vary in the 
same manner between the untreated and hydrothermally treated parent composition 
throughout temperature, meaning that systematic error in the P/Si 1.2 case is not a 
significant factor to explain the variation in bond lengths over the P/Si ratio shown in 
the previously mentioned figures. 
4.5.2	
 Atomic	
 coordinates	
 temperature	
 varied	
 ratios	
Figure 45 depicts the atomic coordinates for the six different samples at room 
temperature as a function of P/Si starting ratio. The changes in atomic positions 
resulting from the hydrothermal treatment with D2O, affects the positions for the 
parent Si5O(PO4)6 the most.  
For the phosphorus atom there is almost no change whatsoever in all XYZ 
coordinates for the 0.833 and 1.44 compositions (top part of Figure 45). For the parent 
composition there is most change in the phosphorus X coordinate, which becomes 
smaller upon hydrothermal treatment. 
The only visible change in atomic coordinates for the 0.833 and 1.44 compositions is 
for the Si3 tetrahedra, where the Z coordinate is lower after hydrothermal treatment 
for the 0.833 composition, also for the parent Si5O(PO4)6 and a bit higher for the 1.44 
composition. Just comparing this coordinate it is clear there are some differences 
between the six samples. 
Figure	
 Diagrams of coordinates for the atomic positions of the atoms plotted against the P/Si 
starting ratio for each composition, untreated samples (blue data, +) and hydrothermally treated 
samples (red data, x). There is a difference between different P/Si starting ratios, as well as an effect 
caused by the hydrothermal treatment with D2O. X,Y coordinates for Si3, Si2 and X,Y,Z for Si1 and O1 
have been omitted due to that they are special positions, i.e. they do not change during the refinement.	
4.5.3	
 hydrothermally	
 treated	
 (D2O)	
 neutron	
 diffraction	
 samples	
The three hydrothermally treated compositions that went in to the neutron beam, P/Si 
= 0.833, 1.2 and 1.44, can be compared alongside one another. The data obtained 
from the TG setup is displayed in Figure 46 and the same data as a function of time in 
Figure 47. 
From Figure 46 it can be noted that these hydrothermally treated compositions show a 
similar mass loss up to about 70C, upon which they begin to diverge: the 0.833 has 
the lowest mass loss, followed by the parent composition, followed by a larger mass 
loss for the phosphorus-rich (1.44) composition. An interesting distinction can be 
made for the 1.44 composition compared to the other two. Not only is its mass loss 
quite significant in the 70-100C region, but there is also a noticeable increase in rate 
of mass loss at 550C which is not seen for the other compositions. This is of interest 
as it reveals that there was still some water above 500C. In conjunction with this is 
also a DTA peak at 560C as can be seen when tracing the red line in Figure 48. 
In the case of the hydrothermally treated solids, it thus appears that a high mass loss is 
a good indication of good protonic conductivity. The TG data strongly suggests that 
the displayed mass losses are revealing of the total water content available. Thus, if a 
significant mass loss occurs it is due to that water was present to a significant degree, 
and if it is lost to a smaller degree it is because water was only present to a small 
degree. Therefore, the samples with small water content will have lower protonic 
conductivity. All three samples show the same rate of mass loss when 1000C has 
been reached and during subsequent cooling, see Figure 47. 
 " # $ % & ' ( ) * "
+,-.,/012/,34567
"##$%&$'()
"($*&$'(+
)",--$.&$'(+
"#$#%&'(&)*%+)&,#-./)0%-&)'*11.#%)&*%&/#23456#70'(089%90:8
 " # $ % &
'()*+,)(-./*01
"##$%&$'()$(*$(+,
"($-&$'()$(*$(+,
+".//$0&$'()$(*$(+,
"#$#%&'(#)*+#,-.+*%,(+'/00-#%+(/%(.#12345#6*'7*8&%&*98
Figure	
 TGA of the hydrothermally treated compositions plotted as a function of temperature. 
Note the increased rate in mass loss seen for the hydrothermally treated 1.44 sample at 550C.	
Figure	
 TGA of the hydrothermally treated compositions plotted as a function of time.	
Figure	
 DTA of the hydrothermally treated compositions as a function of temperature. In addition to the low 
temperature peaks, there is a small response for the hydrothermally treated 1.44 sample at 550C.	
 " # $ % & ' ( ) * "
+,-.,/012/,34567
"##$%
"&$'
(")**$+
"#$%$&'()'*+&,*'-$./0*1&.'*(+22/$&*'+&'0$3456$71()189&91:8
4.6 Neutron diffraction: high-temperature study 
Two near identical7 high temperature programs were run of the stoichiometric parent 
composition, Si5O(PO4)6  one for the untreated and one for the hydrothermally 
treated sample. The heating programs are pictured in Figure 49 below. 
The hydrothermally treated sample was treated with D2O and came from the same 
batch as the untreated sample. Therefore, any change in occupancies or cell 
parameters etc would be entirely due to the hydrothermal treatment. 
Previously, the initial room temperature runs of these two compositions were 
described in the earlier part of this chapter. 
The refinements for the high temperature experiments were done in the same manner 
as those for the room temperature experiments, these are all referred to as manual 
refinements. These were all based on SUM-files, which are packets of data files at the 
same temperature that have been lumped together. This gives higher reliability due to 
7 The two runs were almost identical. Due to an adjustment to the ramp made in the second run (to make it smoother) and an 
error that occurred at above 900C for the second run (which was quickly corrected), the two runs would deviate a bit from one 
another. These deviations are however small and therefore the two runs can be treated as virtually identical. 
th D2
P/Si =
 1.2 (u
ntreat
Time (hh:mm:ss)
Time (hh:mm:ss)
Figure	
  Temperature 
profiles for the two high 
temperature neutron 
diffraction experiments. The 
first run was the untreated 
parent composition (1.2F), 
and the second run was the 
hydrothermally treated 
parent composition (1.2F 
D2O).	
the longer collection time. 
The collected neutron diffraction data for the entire temperature program is pictured 
for the two samples in Figure 50  to the left of this figure is the hydrothermally 
treated (with D2O) parent composition and to the right is the untreated parent 
composition. What can be noted in the left part of the figure are the turqoise regions at 
the early parts of the experiment; these regions are missing for the untreated parent 
composition. They translate into higher background, indicating amorphous phase 
presence. The interpretation that can be made is that this amorphous phase presence is 
due to liquid D2O, tentatively occupying the channels in the structure that run along 
the a and b axes. 
Figure	
 Thermoplots of the two high temperature runs. Observe the extra amount of amorphous contribution 
(a partially higher background in the left part of the figure at lower run numbers) for the sample that had been 
hydrothermally treated with D2O. The backgrounds look similar after a few hundred degrees. Run number 10 = 
150C, 20 = 183C and 30 = 223C for the high temperature run of the hydrothermally treated composition.	
"#$%&#'%%
"#$%()*%
"#$%&#'%% "#$%()*%
D-spacing () D-spacing ()
D-spacing ()D-spacing ()
4.6.1	
 Sequential	
 refinements	
The basic methodology for performing the sequential GSAS refinements was to keep 
the number of variables as low value as possible. On the other hand, care had to be 
taken to not fix too much either, since only a small amount of information can then be 
extracted. 
It was decided to take the UISO values from each respective run at 500C (on 
heating), and use these as the fixed UISO values for all temperatures from room 
temperature to 1000C. This would be a crude approximation and its validity must be 
verified against the results of the manual refinements; this should be borne in mind 
when evaluating the results that if two conflicting results then it is more likely the 
result of the manual refinement is correct. Not only is the data from a SUM file more 
accurate and less noisy, the manual refinements do all start from the same starting 
values whereas a sequential refinement starts with values from the previous 
refinement in the sequence. 
The benefit of doing the sequential refinements was that an approximation of how the 
cell parameters changed could be made throughout the measured temperature range. 
Also the occupancies were all allowed to vary, save for Si2, O1 and O5 which were 
set to 1. Only about three peak parameters were allowed to vary  these had been 
chosen due to that they all were varied in the manual refinements, and those 
parameters were excluded that for any reason could not be varied in any of the manual 
refinements. 
The positions of the atoms were all allowed to vary also (unless of course they were 
on a special position, e.g. 0.0.0). The refine cell option was ticked for both sequential 
runs as well as zero, DIFA and background (with 20 terms). 
The principle for a sequential GSAS run is that a refinement must be done for the first 
file (room temperature, in this case). In this first refinement, which is done manually, 
the print option must be enabled Output parameter name, value, and esd to file 
(1024). This will write the parameters to the .EXP file. The sequential program in 
GSAS, SEQGSAS, will take the information generated from the previous refinement 
and put it as input for the next refinement. This process is repeated until there are no 
more GSAS data files (.gss files). The precise instructions for how to set up sequential 
refinements are available online [68]. 
The results revealed fairly similar cell parameters when comparing manual 
refinements to the sequential refinements. The differences were in the occupancies at 
certain temperature, and here one would have to rely on the manual refinements, 
because the sequential refinements had fixed UISO values  and this will impact the 
occupancies as the two are linked. UISO values will change with the temperature, and 
therefore to obtain the occupancies with the highest accuracy, one would have to fix 
UISO values for each temperature step and run the sequential runs between these 
steps. 
The general trends in cell parameter results are quite reliable from the sequential 
refinements, even if the individual errors are larger than for the manual refinements. 
Also, the two sequential runs can be directly compared as they were done very much 
similarly. 
Two sets of sequential refinements were done for each run  one where all the 
occupancies of the oxygens and Si2 were set to 1 and not allowed to vary, (V4A). 
Another set of refinements was done where the occupancies for the O2, O3 and O4 
were allowed to vary, whereas the occupancies for all silicons and the phosphorus 
were fixed to 1, (V4B). This was done in order to minimize any effects that varying 
all the occupancies at once would have. 
In both above cases the UISO values were fixed, and all the profile options were un-
ticked. The cell parameter results were taken from the runs where all the oxygens 
were held at full occupancy. As can be seen from Figure 51 where the c-axis is 
compared for the hydrothermally treated composition for the same run but using two 
different sequential refinement runs the results look very similar.  
In order to see what the effect might be on the phosphorus and silicon occupancies 
results from the firstly described sequential refinement (V4A) presented in the 
following sub-chapter. 
4.6.2	
 Similarities	
 between	
 manual	
 sequential	
 refinements	
For the manual refinements it can be pointed out that there was a bit more occupancy 
on the phosphorus site for the hydrothermally treated parent composition, compared 
to the same composition not being treated at room temperature, as can be seen from 
the difference plot in Figure 52. This was the case at room temperature, then the 
occupancy for the P-site becomes similar at around 100C, 500C and 1000C. The 
biggest differences were at 850C and 950C going up and down in temperature, as 
well as at 500C on cooling. 
Further from Figure 52 the tetrahedral silicon occupancy also shows some difference 
from the start between the hydrothermally treated and untreated composition. 
Between 100-150C the occupancies for this site are the same, also at 500C, around 
750C and close to 1000C is this the case. The biggest differences are at room 
temperature, and 850-950C heating and 850C cooling. These variations between the 
samples are smaller than for the phosphorus site, as can be seen from Figure 52. 
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
HiT2 run, comparison of two different sequential refinements, c-axis v temperature
V4A V4B
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Figure	
 The c-axis for the hydrothermally treated composition, results from two different sequential 
refinements as described in the text.	
When comparing the cell parameters done with the sequential refinement (see Figure 
53) to the result of the manual refinements in Figure 54 it is clear that they are very 
similar, and when comparing the ratio of the c/a axes these values correspond very 
precisely due to it being a ratio of two values with what is likely similar amounts of 
relative errors. 
The largest discrepancy is at 950C on cooling for the untreated composition  here 
the cell parameters are significantly smaller for the manual refinements compared to 
the sequential refinement, as seen when comparing Figure 54 to Figure 53 at 950C 
cooling.  
Figure	
  The difference in occupancies for the two runs for each atomic site from the 
manual refinements: Occupancies for the untreated parent composition subtracted from the 
same hydrothermally treated composition. Notable is the difference in phosphorus occupancy 
from 850-950C. There is not much difference in O2 occupancy at room temperature, however 
as temperature increases it becomes more pronounced and is significant at 500C. 
O1, O5 and Si2 have been excluded from the graph since their occupancy was set to 1 in the 
refinements.	
0,4500
0,3000
0,1500
0,1500
0,3000
0,4500
0,6000
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Difference in occupancy / unit cell (D2O - untreated)
O4 O3 O2 P Si3 Si1
Temperature (C)
Cooling
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Unit cell volume v temperature (SeqGSAS)
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
C-axis v temperature (SeqGSAS)
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
A, b axes v temperature (SeqGSAS)
D2O Untreated
3,020
3,035
3,050
3,065
3,080
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
c/a v temperature (SeqGSAS)
c/a, untreated c/a, D2O
Cooling
Temperature (C) Temperature (C)
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Unit cell volume v temperature
Cooling
Untreated D2O
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
A, b axes v temperature
Untreated D2O
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
C-axis v temperature
Untreated D2O
Temperature (C) Temperature (C)
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Cooling
3,020
3,035
3,050
3,065
3,080
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
c/a v temperature
c/a, untreated c/a, D2O
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Figure	
 Unit cell volume versus temperature (top left) for the untreated parent composition, and its 
hydrothermally treated (D2O) counterpart. This unit cell volume corresponds well with the a, b axes lengths 
depicted in the top-right corner. Also depicted bottom left is the c-axis as a function of temperature, and to 
the right of this is the c/a values throughout the temperature range. Note how well these latter correspond to 
the manual refinements in the next figure. For these sequential refinements the occupancies for Si2 and all 
oxygens were held at 1, and UISO values set to those that each composition had at 500C on heating (V4A).	
Figure	
 Manually refined unit cell parameters as a function of temperature, same layout as previous figure. 
Note the discrepancy for the untreated composition at 950C upon cooling.	
Figure 56 and Figure 57 describe the results from the occupancies obtained from the 
manual and sequential refinements, respectively. The trends in occupancy for the Si3 
site in the low temperature region is described well by the sequential GSAS data, 
albeit a bit overestimated compared to the manual refinements  the result is 
nonetheless that the hydrothermally treated parent composition has higher occupancy 
on this site than that of the untreated counterpart. Judging from the manual refinement 
data, the Si3 occupancy for both runs appear to intersect at about 125C and then 
diverge upon further heating. 
Likewise it is for the occupancy of the phosphorus site in regards to the effect of 
hydrothermal treatment, i.e. the two refinements follow the same trend compared to 
the manual refinement data. The phosphorus occupancy is however a bit lower for the 
sequential runs compared to the manual refinements.  
The low-temperature occupancy 
data in Figure 56 suggests that the 
first peak in the DTA is connected 
to a process of D2O desorption at 
the phosphorus site, and that the 
second peak in the DTA involves 
D2O desorption at the tetrahedral 
Si3 site. TG and DTA data for the 
hydrothermally treated parent 
composition is given in Figure 55. 
It is the same data there as was 
given earlier for this sample in Figure 46 and Figure 48, only this time it is combined. 
Noteworthy is that the same characteristics of the DTA and TG are there as for the 
hydrothermally treated parent composition where  H2O was used. 
From the manual refinement data in Figure 56 one can conclude that at 100C the 
occupancy for the phosphorus sites appears the same for the two samples, see lower-
left part of Figure 56. Below this point there is good protonic conductivity for the 
hydrothermally treated (with H2O) parent composition as seen from Figure 63, most 
likely as a result of phosphoric acid in the structure. Above 100C the protonic 
Figure	
  DTA and TG plot of the hydrothermally treated 
(D2O) parent composition that was subjected to neutron 
diffraction at high temperature.	
conductivity becomes gradually lower, likely as a result of water leaving the material. 
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
P and Si3+P occupancies v temperature
P untreated P (D2O) Si3 + P untreated Si3 + P (D2O)
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si3 occupancy v temperature
Si3 untreated Si3 (D2O)
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si1 occupancy v temperature
Si1 untreated Si1 (D2O)
Temperature (C) Temperature (C)
CoolingCooling
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Phosphorus
Phosphorus + Si3
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si3 occupancy v temperature, SeqGSAS
Si3 (D2O) Si3 untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si1 occupancy v temperature, SeqGSAS
Si1 (D2O) Si1 untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
P and Si3+P occupancies v temperature, SeqGSAS
Si3 + P (D2O) P (D2O) Si3 + P untreated P untreated
Temperature (C) Temperature (C)
CoolingCooling
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Phosphorus
Phosphorus + Si3
Figure	
 Occupancy results for the manual Rietveld refinements plotted against temperature. The 
occupancy factor has been multiplied with the multiplicity to yield the above graphs. Note the differences 
in the low as well as high temperature regions. Si2 was held constant at 1 as well as O5 and O1.	
Figure	
 Occupancy results from the sequential GSAS runs for the same two high temperature runs as were in 
the previous figure. The occupancy factor has been multiplied with the multiplicity to yield the above graphs. Note 
the similar trends for the Si3 and Si1 compared to the manual refinements. The phosphorus occupancies show a 
different trend compared to what was found in the manual refinements, see previous figure.  
This sequentially refined data was generated by fixing the occupancies for Si2 and all oxygens to 1. Missing data 
points for Si1 occupancies exceed the maximum allowed value for that site, and should be equal to 100% (i.e. 3). 
From the top-left diagram in Figure 59 the following occurs with the X coordinate of 
the phosphorus atom in the lowintermediate temperature region: for the untreated 
composition a steady decrease is seen from 100C, whereas for the hydrothermally 
treated composition only a temporary decrease occurs at about 150C. There are very 
small differences between the two samples from 500C all the way up to 1000C. 
The sequential GSAS refinement for this coordinate (see diagram below previous in 
Figure 59) records the same trends in the lowintermediate temperature region, 
however shows a bit more difference at the higher temperatures that remains 
throughout. The overall trends are the same for the two diagrams. 
In the top-middle diagram of Figure 59, the phosphorus Y coordinate is somewhat 
larger at 100C for the hydrothermally treated composition, however both 
compositions appear to otherwise be the same throughout the rest of the temperature 
range. In the diagram below, the sequential refinements have yielded much the same 
result and overall trend as the manual refinements. 
The phosphorus Z coordinate is slightly smaller in the low-intermediate temperature 
region for the untreated composition, and then becomes the same for the two samples, 
see top right diagram in Figure 59. The diagram below this shows a very similar trend 
for the sequential refinements. 
From Figure 59 the Z coordinate for the Si3 atom is also shown (lower left part). 
Although otherwise similar trends for the untreated and hydrothermally treated 
compositions, a distinction can be made in the low temperature region where the Si3 
for the hydrothermally treated composition is closer to the Si1. 
The position for the octahedrally coordinating Si2 compares differently for each 
temperature, see lower right part of Figure 59. The general trend is an increase in the 
Si2 Z coordinate as temperature increases. This is contrary to the overall contraction 
in c-axis as a function of increased temperature, shown earlier in Figure 54. This 
means that there is significant and continuous movement of the Si2 octahedra toward 
the Si1 octahedra as temperature increases and the c-axis contracts. 
Figure 58 depicts the structure of three stacked unit cells for the parent composition 
viewed down the b-axis, noteworthy here is the channel structure. 
Figure	
  View down 
the b-axis of just over 
three stacked unit cells 
of the parent 
composition. The 
turquoise colour 
represents the Si-
tetrahedra, purple 
colour is for phosphorus 
tetrahedra and the grey 
octahedra are the 
silicon octahedras. Note 
the channel structure 
that becomes apparent. 
Figure	
  The coordinates for the 
phosphorus atom are depicted in the 
upper figure (comparing manual 
refinements to sequential), with X 
coordinates to the left, Y coordinates 
in the middle and Z coordinates to 
the right, plotted as a function of 
temperature. 
To the left are the Z coordinates for 
the two runs for the tetrahedral Si3-
site (far left) and the octahedral Si2 
site, in the same type of comparison. 
The agreement between the manual 
and sequential refinements is quite 
apparent. Although the data was a 
bit noisy from the sequential 
refinements, six order polynomial 
functions were applied to follow the 
data points (blue and red lines).	
The oxygen connecting the two Si3 tetrahedra is the O1, and since it is in a special 
position it is fixed. Coordinates for the other oxygens as a function of temperature are 
presented in Figure 60. The only other oxygen connected to the tetrahedral Si3 is the 
O4, and there are some differences as a cause of hydrothermal treatment. O2, O3, O4 
and O5 are all connected to the tetrahedral phosphorus atom, and all of these show 
differences in the lower temperatures. 
These coordinates8 give rise to bond lengths which are plotted in Appendix E1 and 
8 The referred bond lengths are from the first refinement in which no occupancies were varied (the 
previously discussed positions are from the secondary refinement in which some occupancies were 
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
X coordinates, O4
X, O4 (D2O) X, O4 untreated
0,475
0,485
0,495
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Y coordinates, O4
Y, O4 (D2O) Y, O4 untreated
0,075
0,077
0,079
0,081
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Z coordinates, O4
Z, O4 (D2O) Z, O4 untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
X coordinates, O5
X, O5 (D2O) X, O5 untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Y coordinates, O5
Y, O5 (D2O) Y, O5 untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
X coordinates, O3
X, O3 (D2O) X, O3 untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Y coordinates, O3
Y, O3 (D2O) Y, O3 untreated
0,037
0,039
0,041
0,043
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Z coordinates, O3
Z, O3 (D2O) Z, O3 untreated
0,125
0,135
0,145
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
X coordinates, O2
X, O2 (D2O) X, O2 untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Y coordinates, O2
Y, O2 (D2O) Y, O2 untreated
0,135
0,137
0,139
0,141
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Z coordinates, O2
Z, O2 (D2O) Z, O2 untreated
0,107
0,109
0,111
0,113
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Z coordinates, O5
Z, O5 (D2O) Z, O5 untreated
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Figure	
 The resulting coordinates for O5-O2 (from top to bottom) from the manual refinements of the neutron 
diffraction results, presented as a function of temperature. X coordinates to the left, Y coordinates in the middle 
and Z coordinates to the right; untreated sample (blue data, +) and hydrothermally treated sample (red data, o).	
given in table form in Appendix E2. Interesting to note from the graphs in Appendix 
E1 is that there is a correlation between the average P_O bond with that of the c-axis 
as temperature changes (cf. Figure 54). Why this is the case is not quite clear, 
however it could be because of some sort of element substitution. 
 Correlations	
 between	
 physical	
 chemical	
 properties	
Low temperature conductivity of the hydrothermally treated compositions is linked to 
the unit cell parameters of the untreated compositions, in particular the a,b axes, see 
Figure 61. This means that the measured conductivity occurs in the crystalline phase 
and is related to the expansion of the a,b axes. Most likely the protonic conduction is 
along these pathways (i.e. the three dimensional tunnels). 
Figure	
 Conductivities in air for hydrothermally treated compositions versus their respective P-Si starting ratio 
(top) compared to the a,b axes for the same samples before they are hydrothermally treated (middle), also 
compared to the unit cell volume for the same versus P-Si starting ratio (bottom). Note the very similar trends. 
Data points that are stars were from neutron diffraction data, corresponding conductivity data missing. The 
sample with P/Si starting ratio 1.5 was refined after an extra firing (thus giving a close approximation to the cell 
parameters of the actual measured sample).	
varied, however these two refinements still have very similar bond lengths due to that the position 
parameters (XYZ) were disabled throughout the secondary refinements). 
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
Conductivity in air v P:Si starting ratio
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
Unit cell volume as is v P/Si starting ratio
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
A,b axes as is v P/Si starting ratio
P/Si starting ratio
GKMPR
P/Si starting ratio
GKMPR
0.7VW
115C 125C 95-96C 65-67C
P/Si starting ratio
Untreated compositions with the same P/Si starting ratios as those tested in TG/DTA 
were scanned for the chemical shift of the - 44 ppm in 31P NMR. When plotting the 
exact chemical shift against P/Si starting ratio, a pattern occurs that is a reflection of 
the temperatures at which the DTA peaks occur for the hydrothermally treated 
compositions  this pattern is also much the same as for the low temperature 
conductivity, see Figure 62. This means the crystalline Si5O(PO4)6 units are 
responsible for the protonic conductivity. 
In Figure 63 and Figure 64 the linear conductivity for two hydrothermally treated 
compositions is plotted against temperature, also the DTA and TG data for the same 
samples. What is interesting to note is that the DTA and TG peaks correlates quite 
well to the conductivity. One has to bear in mind though that each point in the EIS 
44,10
44,02
43,94
43,86
43,78
43,70
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
31P NMR, peak position -44ppm for untreated P-Si compositions v P/Si starting ratio
0.8UV
0.57V
P/Si starting ratio
GKMPR
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
DTA 1 & DTA 2 v P/Si starting ratio
GKMPR
GKMPR
GKMP (pellet bits)
GKMP (pellet bits)
0.8UVW
0.8UVW
0.7VW
0.7VW
0.57VW
P/Si starting ratio
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
Conductivity in humidified 5% H2 in Ar v P:Si starting ratio
65-67C 94-96C 124-127C 115-118C
P/Si starting ratio
Figure	
  Correlation between the chemical shift for the - 44 ppm peak in 31P NMR (top) in untreated 
compositions with that of the temperature at which the DTA peaks occur for hydrothermally treated compositions 
(middle) and low temperature conductivity for hydrothermally treated compositions measured in humidified 5% H2 
in Argon (bottom). This all points to that the conductivity is linked to the phosphate group and its differing ability 
to bind water as a function of composition.	
measurements has been allowed to reach equilibrium, which is not the case for the 
DTA/TGA. If the latter had been run at a much slower rate it would likely become 
more matched with the EIS results. 
The anomaly seen at the beginning for each DTA and TG measurement is likely 
instrumental as the measurements start with an isotherm so that the system and 
equipment can reach equilibrium. 
Figure	
 TG (blue line) and DTA data (red line) and low temperature conductivity (black dots) plotted 
against temperature for hydrothermally treated P/Si 1.0 composition. All measurements were done in air.	
Figure	
 TG (blue line) and DTA data (red line) and low temperature conductivity (black dots) plotted 
against temperature for hydrothermally treated parent composition. All measurements were done in air.	
4.7.1	
 Electrochemical	
 properties	
Conductivities were calculated from impedance data obtained from hydrothermally 
treated samples in the low temperature range. These had typically been 
hydrothermally treated with H2O at 120C for two hours. At an early stage impedance 
was done on a few samples (primarily 1.5, 1.2 and 1.0 P/Si starting ratios). 
With the early samples it was found that an increased amount of silicon meant that the 
protonic conductivity increased. Therefore it was postulated that a further increase in 
silicon (a P/Si starting ratio below 1.0) would increase the conductivity even further. 
However, when investigated this was found not to be the case. Compositions of 
higher silicon content tend to be the worst from a conductivity point of view. One 
reason for this could be because the phosphoric acid content is lower, as indicated by 
Figure 31. This in turn is linked to the untreated compositions a,b axes  the longer 
these axes, the better protonic conductivity after hydrothermal treatment. Also the 
different P-Si starting ratios were reflected in the conductivity measurements that 
were done in air, especially at 125C (cf. top part of Figure 61). 
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Conductivity v temperature in 5% H2 in Ar, hum
P/Si = 1.2, (1,2 KM) P/Si = 0.8, (0.8 UVW)
P/Si = 1.0, (1,0 LN) P/Si = 0.7, (0.7 VW)
P/Si = 0.57, (0,57 VW) P/Si = 1.5, (II GKMP)
P:Si = 0.8
P:Si = 1.0
P:Si = 0.7
P:Si = 0.57
P:Si = 1.2
P:Si = 1.5
Temperature (C)
Figure	
  Conductivities obtained from impedance measurements on hydrothermally treated P/Si 
pellets, undertaken in humidified 5% H2 in argon. Note the inferior conductivity for the silicon-rich 
compositions, in particular P/Si = 0.57 and 0.7. The 0.8 composition shows vastly better conductivity up 
until 125C, from which it decreases and is only marginally better. The 1.0 composition is better yet, 
especially above 130C. The parent composition was best at about 120C, yet for temperatures 
approaching 150C P/Si = 1.5 was better. 	
Some measurements were done in air (Figure 20) while others were done in 
humidified 5% H2 in Argon (Figure 65). 
4.7.2	
 parameters	
 conductivity	
Cell parameters for the untreated P-Si compositions were coupled with the 
conductivities obtained from the same hydrothermally treated samples, shown in 
Figure 66. These cell parameters were primarily obtained from high resolution XRD 
data that had been Rietveld refined. EIS was measured in air. 
Electrical impedance measurements were done on hydrothermally treated pellets with 
platinum electrodes. The data was selected from four different temperatures that 
occurred on or very closely to: 65C, 95C, 115C and 125C. 
There is a clear trend when it comes to conductivity versus the P/Si starting ratio at 
125C: the more phosphorus the better protonic conductivity is attained. The 
exception is for the lower temperatures where the peak occurs for a P/Si starting ratio 
of 1.0. If this ratio is lower than 1.0, the protonic conductivity seems to be lower and 
the trend is a decrease in conductivity as the P/Si starting ratio decreases further. 
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
Conductivity in air v P:Si starting ratio
24,13 24,14 24,15 24,16
Conductivity in air v c-axis
P:Si = 0.57
P:Si = 1.2
P:Si = 0.7
P:Si = 1.0 P:Si = 0.8
P:Si = 1.5
1284,0 1285,5 1287,0 1288,5 1290,0
Conductivity in air v unit cell volume
115C 125C 95-96C 65-67C
P:Si = 1.0P:Si = 1.2
P:Si = 0.7
P:Si = 0.57
P:Si = 0.8
P:Si = 1.5
P/Si starting ratio
Cell length ()
Cell length ()
7,83800 7,84225 7,84650 7,85075 7,85500
Conductivity in air v a,b axes
P:Si = 1.0P:Si = 1.2
P:Si = 0.57
P:Si = 0.7
P:Si = 0.8
P:Si = 1.5
Cell volume (3)
Figure	
 Conductivities of the hydrothermally treated samples measured in air plotted against the 
P/Si starting ratio (above, left). Also pictured are the cell parameters for the untreated compositions: 
a,b axes (above, right), against the c-axis (below left) and versus the unit cell volume (below right). The 
trends are all similar in these plots except in the case for the c-axis. The sample with P/Si starting ratio 
1.5 was refined after an extra firing (thus giving a close approximation to the cell parameters of the 
actual measured sample).	
In Figure 67 impedance measurements were instead done in humidified 5% H2 in 
argon. This data shows a bit less variance over the temperature range and at the same 
time improved conductivity, yet the overall trends remain the same as the 
measurements done in air. 
Looking further to low-intermediate temperature desorption of water and how this 
could be related to any other properties. The desorption of water was quantified from 
TG data and plotted against the P/Si starting ratio as seen in the top graph of Figure 
The length of the c-axis for the untreated compositions (bottom graph in Figure 68) 
seems to be linked to the water desorption of the hydrothermally treated 
compositions. This holds true for compositions that range from a P/Si starting ratio of 
0.57  1.0, especially when considering the behaviour at 100C, see Figure 68. For 
compositions 1.2  1.5 there may still be a correlation to the c-axis, although it now 
appears as an inverse correlation compared to the case of the silicon-rich 
1284,0 1285,5 1287,0 1288,5 1290,0
Conductivity in humidified 5% H2 in Ar v unit cell volume
65-67C 94-96C 115-118C 124-127C
7,83800 7,84225 7,84650 7,85075 7,85500
Conductivity in 5%H2 in Ar v a, b axes
24,13 24,14 24,15 24,16
Conductivity in 5%H2 in Ar v c axis
P:Si = 0.57
P:Si = 1.2
P:Si = 0.7
P:Si = 1.0
P:Si = 0.8
P:Si = 1.5
P:Si = 1.0
P:Si = 1.2
P:Si = 0.7
P:Si = 0.57
P:Si = 0.8
P:Si = 1.5
P/Si starting ratio
Cell length ()
Cell length ()
P:Si = 1.0
P:Si = 1.2
P:Si = 0.57
P:Si = 0.7
P:Si = 0.8
P:Si = 1.5
Cell volume (3)
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
Conductivity in humidified 5% H2 in Ar v P:Si starting ratio
Figure	
 Conductivities of the hydrothermally treated samples measured in humidified 5% H2 in argon plotted 
against the P/Si starting ratio (above, left). Also pictured are the cell parameters for the untreated compositions: 
a,b axes (above, right), against the c-axis (below left) and versus the unit cell volume (below right). The trends are 
all similar in these plots except in the case for the c-axis. The sample with P/Si starting ratio 1.5 was refined after 
an extra firing (thus giving a close approximation to the cell parameters of the actual measured sample).	
compositions. The length of the a,b axes for the untreated compositions (mid graph in 
Figure 68) cannot be linked to the water desorption in any confident way, however, as 
was previously shown this cell parameter property is linked to the conductivity 
(compare e.g. mid-graph in Figure 68 with top-left graph of Figure 67). 
4.7.3	
 Acid-doped	
 compositions	
Impedance measurements were carried out on solid-state sintered materials that had 
been boiled in 85% phosphoric acid, using a reflux apparatus. These materials came 
from the same batches as some previously mentioned compositions, they were spare 
pellets that had not been painted with platinum paste or hydrothermally treated. Each 
pellet was in the boiling concentrated phosphoric acid for about 1.5 hours, after which 
they were carefully rinsed off on the outside with de-ionised water and then dried 
with paper. Each side of the pellet was painted with silver paste, with a brief five 
minutes in the drying oven to dry top and bottom layer. The conductivity data for the 
tested samples is given in Figure 69, the atmosphere being air. 
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
TGA weight at different temperatures as function of P/Si ratio, Bombed solid materials, H2O & D2O
24,12
24,13
24,14
24,15
24,16
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
c-axis as is v P/Si starting ratio
GKMPR
GKMPR0.7V
0.7VW
GKMP (pellet bits)
0.7VW
P/Si ratio
P/Si starting ratio
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8 1,0 1,2 1,4 1,6 1,8 2,0
a,b axes as is v P/Si starting ratio
GKMPR
Start (  25C) 50C 75C 100C 150C 200C 300C 350C 400C
P/Si starting ratio
Figure	
 TGA weight loss for hydrothermally treated compositions (top) v P/Si starting ratio, pictured 
against the cell parameters for the untreated P/Si compositions  the a,b-axes v P/Si starting ratio 
(middle) and the c-axis v P/Si starting ratio (lower). Note the correlation in regards to the c-axis and the 
TGA weight loss. 
The sample with P/Si starting ratio 1.5 was refined after an extra firing (thus giving a close 
approximation to the cell parameters of the actual measured sample).	
The consequence of the concentrated phosphoric was that it enabled even higher 
protonic conductivity. The differences are quite remarkable compared to 
hydrothermally treated compositions (compare results in Figure 69 to Figure 20). 
Nyquist plots for the parent composition, Si5O(PO4)6, and the 1.0 P/Si starting ratio at 
127C and 244C are given in Figure 70. 
No TG/DTA measurements were done on these samples because of the contamination 
risk in regards to phosphates could have on the instrument. 
Temperature (C)
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Conductivities in air for P-Si compositions refluxed in H3PO4 v temperature
Acid1,5h 1,2KM Ag 10mV 10ps
0,8UVW PhosphAcid2h, Ag-paste, air 10mV 10ps
Acid1,5h 0,7VW Ag 10mV 10ps
Acid1,5h 0,57VW Ag 10mV 10ps
Acid1,5h 1,0KM Ag 10mV 10ps
Figure	
  69 Conductivities plotted against temperature for P/Si pellets that were refluxed in 85% 
H3PO4. 	
Figure	
  Selection of Nyquist plots for P/Si starting ratio 1.0 (top) and 1.2 (bottom). The 
compositions were refluxed in 85% H3PO4. Measurement taken after letting sample stabilize at 
about 127C for 20 minutes (left half of figure) and 244C (right half of figure).	
4.7.4	
 P-Si	
Conductivity work was undertaken on the precursor material for the P-Si 
compositions, namely the P-Si gels. The preparation consisted of mixing together a 
gel consisting of H3PO4, SiO2 and de-ionised water which was then put in the teflon 
vessel. The resulting gel was then sandwiched between two pieces of mesh that were 
in contact with copper foil9, or alternatively measured in a teflon setup   also that 
using copper electrodes, but with the gel directly onto the flat metal surface. 
In the latter setup, the EIS measurements were done in a Teflon ring, which had an 
inner diameter of 12 mm and allowed a thickness of gel of 4 mm. The idea behind this 
was that the teflon ring would be sufficiently sealed all around with the prospect that 
no dehydration of the gel would occur, yielding perhaps better values of conductivity.  
The aim was to carry out measurements from room temperature up to 300C, as teflon 
melts at 326.8C. Teflon further shows excellent chemical inertness making it ideal 
for testing a range of materials in the aforementioned temperature range. 
The Teflon setup worked excellent in the low temperature region, however as 
temperatures increased the gel transformed into a pellet and eventually contact with 
the copper electrode was lost. It is conceivable that there was a leak somewhere that 
caused liquid to escape, although special care had been taken before the experiment to 
not only force the parts together with a spring but also insulate with Teflon tape 
around the interfaces to prevent short-circuiting. Worth noting further is that this 
occurred for all the experiments carried out with this setup, therefore it is likely either 
an inherent problem to the setup or a property of the gel itself. Likely the water in the 
gel started boiling, and even though the setup seemed intact after the experiments, 
water vapour might have escaped and thus dehydrated the gels. 
In lieu of treatment in a furnace followed by hydrothermal treatment with water, 
which was the case for the other samples in this thesis, the respective gels were taken 
out of the hydrothermal vessel and then impedance was measured. It was imperative 
to avoid any higher temperatures apart from when the actual conductivity 
measurements were taking place. 
9 A very minute amount of the same gel was used as a thin layer of glue between the mesh and the copper foil. 
Measurements were taken from low to high temperature, since the gel dehydrates with 
the added heat which negatively affects the conductivity. Figure 71 shows the 
conductivities for the gels with different P/Si ratios, there is a marked improvement 
compared to the solid-state sintered samples. 
TGA data reveals that the highest mass loss up to 100C occurs for the 0.57 gel, and 
the smallest happens for the 2.0 gel, see Figure 72. The TG and DTA data on these 
gels is interesting because it looks similar to that of high temperature made P-Si 
compositions that had been hydrothermally treated. Indeed they are alike, except for 
the magnitude of the mass losses; these are much larger for the P-Si gels, albeit the 
shape of the TG curve is much the same. The higher mass losses for the gels can be 
attributed to the higher water content, as more water was added to the more silicon-
rich mixtures in order to obtain similar gel-like consistency for all samples. 
Temperature (C)
0 100 200 300 400 500
Conductivity for P-Si gels in air
P/Si = 2.0 copper + mesh P/Si = 1.75 teflon
P/Si = 0.57 teflon P/Si = 1.2 teflon
Figure	
 Conductivities for P-Si gels with varying P/Si ratio. The 2.0 sample was measured in a different setup 
(copper + mesh) compared to the others which were measured in the teflon setup. This would explain the quicker 
drop in conductivity for the latter at around 100C. 
 " # $ % &
'()*(+,-.+(/0123
"#$%&'(
)"*%&'(
*"%&'(
"#$#%&'(&)*%+)&,#-./0#1&23
 " # $ % &
'()*(+,-.+(/0123
"#$%&'
#"()$%&'
*"$%&'
"#$%$&'()'*+&,*'-$./01$2'34
Figure	
 TG measurements of P-Si gels compared to one another. The 2.0 gel (precursor to SiP2O7 was tested 
up to 500C, the other two were run up to 350C. The larger losses of water for the silicon rich sample (P/Si = 
0.57) is due to that this sample contained more water which was necessary in order to form the gel. There is a 
shift in the curves with increasing amount of phosphoric acid where water is retained to slightly higher 
temperatures. Even above 200C there is mass loss for the 2.0 gel sample, however not for the more silicon-rich 
samples.	
Figure	
  DTA measurements for the gels as a function of temperature. Note the temperature 
dependence for the second peak on the P-Si ratio.	
The gels show some interesting trends. Not only does higher phosphate content yield 
better conductivity as concluded from Figure 71; also high mass losses in the low-
intermediate temperature region correspond to the composition performing more 
inferior in terms of protonic conductivity, cf. Figure 71 with Figure 72. This can be 
explained by that although some water is needed for the conductivity, the phosphoric 
acid is needed more so. The two species likely act together, and when the P/Si ratio is 
sufficiently high then conductivity is fine (a situation when conductivity is less 
dependant on water). When however there is too much water and too little phosphoric 
acid (as in the case of the P/Si 0.57 gel) then the low temperature conductivity is 
within an order of magnitude of the results previously obtained for the hydrothermally 
treated compositions (P/Si ratios 0.8  1.5). In this case, it is conceivable that there is 
a very similar mechanism to those hydrothermally treated samples, a situation where 
there are less phosphate units and the conductivity becomes more dependant on water. 
Note further from the TGA in Figure 72 that water desorption occurs later the higher 
the P/Si ratio is. For the P/Si 2.0 gel it appears to continue well beyond 200C, 
whereas for the other two samples it has levelled off before this temperature. The 
same is confirmed in the DTA (Figure 73) where the second peak (at about 150C) 
occurs later the higher the P/Si ratio is. For the peaks under 100C, it could be within 
the margin of error for the silicon-rich gel and the 1.2 gel, as they happen almost at 
the same temperature. 
4.7.5	
 Investigation	
 possible	
 oxide	
 conductivity	
In this project the primary focus has been on protonic conductivity. However, the 
silicon phosphate system can also be thought of as an oxide ion conductor at higher 
temperatures. Initial measurements were performed at an early stage, however, due to 
phase impurities the data showed the tested compositions were too insulating. Toward 
the end of the project EIS was carried out on phase pure compositions made from 
H3PO4 at the temperatures where oxide ion conduction is thought to occur. The only 
modifications that had to be done were to conduct the EIS measurements at a higher 
voltage and make sure to use Pt-paste as the electrode on the pellet surface. Figure 74 
shows a silicon-rich composition, P/Si starting ratio 0.7, that had been hydrothermally 
treated. A number of different measurements over the large temperature range have 
been combined, and the primary y-axis displays the logarithm of the conductivity (- 4 
to - 9), as well as the logarithm for the characteristic frequency (5.5 to 1). The 
secondary y-axis shows the TGA values in weight percent, the DTA is scaled to 
arbitrary values. All of these measurements were done in air and are plotted against 
temperature. 
The parent composition showed a similar behaviour to Zhangs measurement (cf. his 
figure 5 in [69]), which is substantially inferior to its germanium counterpart (ibid). 
The range measured was from 965C to just under 500C for this sample which had 
been previously hydrothermally treated.  Whereas a more silicon-rich composition 
was shown in the previous figure, the measurements for the hydrothermally treated 
parent composition are shown in Figure 75, plotted in the same way. 
The primary reason for the poor oxygen conductivities may be ascribed to the 
presence of silicon itself. Indeed, when compared to the Germanium counterpart it is 
clear that the latter is orders of magnitude better even though the two materials have 
 " # $ % & ' ( ) * "
+,-.,/012/,34567
1L,/?,=134M
6F0/0?1,/@G1@?3H/,I2,=?BE3/0-.32.
6F0/0?1,/@G1@?3H/,I2,=?BE3/0-.3><N=
+;O3@=30@/
P+O3@=30@/
6<=>2?1@A@1B3@=30@/E32.
6<=>2?1@A@1B3@=30@/E3><N=
"#$%&%'()%*+%,-.,/0%12'34%256%789%:5;<;:=/<$>=$:%?</@A/B:C%D>(%=/.E/<;=A</
Figure	
  One of the hydrothermally treated silicon rich 
compositions, 0.7VW, with various data plotted as a function of 
temperature: conductivity in air, as well as characteristic 
frequency, TG and DTA data. The conductivity and 
characteristic frequency values are on the left logarithmic Y-
axis, the TG data is on the right Y-axis, whereas the Y-axis for 
the DTA values has been omitted. 
Note that the processes are temperature dependent  protonic 
conductivity is in the low-intermediate region, oxygen 
conductivity is in the high temperature region. 
 " # $ % & ' ( ) * "
+,-.,/012/,34567
1L,/?,=134M
6F0/0?1,/@G1@?3H/,I2,=?BE3/0-.32.
6F0/0?1,/@G1@?3H/,I2,=?BE3/0-.3><N=
+;O3@=30@/
P+O3@=30@/
6<=>2?1@A@1B3@=30@/E32.
6<=>2?1@A@1B3@=30@/E3><N=
"#$%&%'()%*+%,-.,/0%12'34%256%789%:5;<;:=/<$>=$:%?</@A/B:C%D>(%=/.E/<;=A</
the same structure. 
In SOFC work the element silicon is avoided due to the negative effects of increased 
grain boundary resistance it brings about, even very small trace amounts of silicon 
contamination have shown these effects. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that 
the P-Si materials are poorly suited for the application as a fuel cell electrolyte, 
however the material could perhaps serve as a basis for oxygen sensors if a way to 
increase its oxygen conductive nature is developed. 
4.8 Summary of findings 
A good sintering method was found for producing single-phase silicon oxide 
phosphate, which included using H3PO4 as the phosphorus source, by using a gel 
precursor and the solid-state sintering method.  
This method not only made phase purity feasible but also reduced the amount of 
amorphous content in the final product. Throughout the investigation it was found that 
 " # $ % & ' ( ) * "
+,-.,/012/,34567
1K,/?,=134L
9:;36F0/0?1,/@G1@?3H/,I2,=?BE32.
9:;36F0/0?1,/@G1@?3H/,I2,=?BE3><M=
9:;36<=>2?1@A@1B3"N#OP3Q<-Q,>E32.
9:;36<=>2?1@A@1B3"N#OP3Q<-Q,>E3><M=
"N#3OP3Q<-Q,>3R+S
"N#3OP3Q<-Q,>3+;S
"#$%&%'()%*+%,-.,/0%')123%)4
 " # $ % & ' ( ) * "
+,-.,/012/,34567
1K,/?,=134L
"#$%&%'()%*+%,-.,/0%')123%)4
Figure	
 Data plot for the hydrothermally treated parent 
composition with high temperature data included. TG and 
DTA plots are also plotted (blue and red lines, respectively). 
The conductivity and characteristic frequency values are on 
the left logarithmic Y-axis, the TG data is on the right Y-
axis, whereas the Y-axis for the DTA values has been 
omitted. 
Note the close correlation between TG data and 
conductivity. 
the more silicon-rich compositions tended to have more amorphous phase. 
Different stoichiometries were chosen to investigate whether there was a solid 
solution and, if so, how this would affect the properties, especially in regards to 
protonic conductivity. 
It was found that hydrothermally treating solid state sintered materials with water 
improved protonic conductivities by several orders of magnitude. Too much 
hydrothermal treatment though (at 180C) made the materials amorphous. The 
preferred temperature and time were 120C for two hours. 
Differences were found in the microstructure between an untreated composition of 
Si5O(PO4)6 and its hydrothermally treated counterpart. The latter seemed to have its 
surfaces covered in what looked like small crystals, whereas the former had much 
bigger crystals clustered in certain areas only. 
The solid-state NMR data showed that there was a lot more phosphoric acid in the 
hydrothermally treated compositions compared to the untreated counterparts, even 
though only water was added in the hydrothermal treatment. The small amount of 
phosphoric acid that was found in the untreated compositions could be explained in 
that the samples absorb humidity from the air over time. Moreover, there were 
differences in the phosphoric acid content which could be linked to the unit cell 
volume. 
Also the integrated area of the tetrahedral phosphorus peak could be linked to the unit 
cell volume. The differences here between untreated and hydrothermally treated are 
not as vast as in the case with the phosphoric acid amount, however, they are large 
and different enough to suspect that something happens to the phosphorus content 
upon hydrothermal treatment. 
It was possible to do 29Si NMR on a sample that had been enriched with 20% 29SiO2. 
The sample had likely absorbed some water from the surrounding atmosphere, 
because there was a double peak in the 1H NMR, which did not occur when the 
sample was refired. In both cases 29Si NMR and 31P NMR spectra were attained 
confirming the local structure of the parent composition. 
The high temperature behaviour was studied for the parent composition, both the 
untreated and hydrothermally treated with H2O. It was found that background of the 
hydrothermally treated composition was diminishing as temperature increased, 
especially between 125 C and 150 C, whereas the untreated parent composition 
showed no change at all. This amorphous background is likely liquid water that is 
being desorbed, perhaps from the channels of the structure. 
4.9 Discussion 
For the neutron diffraction data collection D2O was used to hydrothermally treat three 
compositions with varying P/Si starting ratio (0.833, 1.2 and 1.44).  
For the parent composition hydrothermally treating with D2O made the unit cell 
parameters expand quite visibly, also seen in the sequential GSAS runs. Throughout 
the high temperature range this expansion remained, suggesting that some sort of 
substitution occurred during the hydrothermal treatment. 
The unit cell expansion seen after hydrothermal treatment with D2O  could this be 
due to a systematic error due to the placing of the samples in the furnace? Note that 
the parent composition experiments were done in quartz tubes, whereas the other 
compositions were done in sealed Vanadium cans (and for these latter samples no 
expansion was observed). 
However, if a systematic error was solely responsible for the different results then the 
amount of error would be the same on all the axes. For example, an expansion in a 
and b of 0.25% would result in the same expansion occurring in the c-axis also. There 
is now a small difference in the recorded values of the a, b axes (+ 0.247%) and the c-
axis (+ 0.286%) as a function of hydrothermal treatment with D2O.  
Note further that the c/a ratio is slightly different for the two samples  which can be 
taken as confirmation that systematic error cannot account for the entire change (if 
this was the case, the c/a ratio would be the same for both compositions). Moreover, 
there is variation of the c/a ratio with temperature for the hydrothermally treated 
composition which deviates from that of the untreated composition.  
Thus, if the differences in observed cell parameters were solely due to systematic 
error, then the c/a ratio would be the same for the two samples. It is likely therefore 
that there are changes in composition as a result of hydrothermal treatment.  
For the other compositions, 0.833 and 1.44, there was instead contraction when 
hydrothermally treating with D2O, however there are differences between the three 
samples; one strong trend seems to be the bigger the hydrothermally treated a,b axes 
are, the more phosphoric acid is picked up by the 31P NMR.  
Common for the neutron samples was that the hydrothermal treatment made the 
background (amorphous phase) more prevalent at room temperature. This greater 
amorphous phase largely persisted for the parent composition when going up in 
temperature, then gradually decreased in the region of 130  200C.  
Also for the high temperature XRD run with hydrothermally treatment with H2O, the 
biggest decrease in amorphous phase happened between 125C  150C. This is also 
where there is a large conductivity drop, and these two things may well be connected. 
More amorphous phase does however not mean more protonic conductivity. The 
protonic conductivity seems to be linked to the unit cell volume as shown in Figure 
66. There is moreover more direct evidence that the Si5O(PO4)6 units are responsible 
for the protonic conductivity. For example, the relative shift for the  44 ppm peak in 
the 31P NMR, shows small variations between untreated samples. These variations 
correspond very well to the low temperature conductivities for the hydrothermally 
treated compositions, as well as to the different temperatures at which the DTA peaks 
occur for the same, see Figure 62. 
There are many interesting differences between the compositions at room 
temperature. The changes that occur to cell parameters upon hydrothermal treatment 
appear to be linked to the occupancies of the crystal sites. Noteworthy to remember 
though is that even though the measurements were at room temperature, the 
hydrothermal treatment did not occur at room temperature  rather at around 120C 
and at elevated pressure. 
It is uncertain whether Poojarys model of the parent composition is the correct one, 
even for the untreated composition; however, it does serve well as a basic model to 
evaluate the neutron data. 
From the neutron data there appears to be a solid solution for the P-Si system, not 
merely because of the trends in the total occupancies versus the P/Si starting ratio 
(Figure 40), but it is also indicated when looking at the individual occupancies 
(Figure 39) and comparing them to the cell parameters (Figure 30). 
The fact that the chemical shift for the Si5O(PO4)6 unit is slightly different for a range 
of untreated compositions, and that this relative difference corresponds to other 
observed trends, does imply a solid solution. 
The P-Si materials have a lot of potential when combined with water and / or 
phosphoric acid. It has been established herein that the observed protonic conductivity 
does originate in the crystal lattice. 
Although the protonic conductivities for the hydrothermally treated P-Si compositions 
are moderate, one could make thinner membranes in an actual fuel cell and thereby 
lessen a membranes resistance to the proton flow and obtain greater protonic 
conductivity. 
A suggestion for future research is to create thin films through e.g. pulsed laser 
deposition (PLD) of a solid pellet target; or by depositing a spray of finely suspended 
powder in ethanol by the use of an airbrush and then sintering the material. The only 
drawback with using an airbrush is the lack of repeatable thickness and the usage of 
excess material. On an industrial scale the repeatability might not be an issue, but 
excess material (such as say platinum) would be. 
In any case, the choice of silicon oxide phosphate does have a huge advantage in that 
it is cheap to produce, the elements are ubiquitous, and it is environmentally friendly. 
Furthermore, if hydrothermal treatment can be maintained during fuel cell operation 
(or when the fuel cell is at rest), then good and stable protonic conductivity would be 
the result. The operating temperature would exceed 100C in either case. 
If ongoing hydrothermal treatment was maintained during fuel cell operation then it is 
not impossible to envision an operating temperature of around 180C. In 
hydrothermal conditions at 180C all crystalline material had become amorphous, as 
shown in Figure 17. A simple setup for testing the protonic conductivity of P-Si 
materials under hydrothermal conditions could be constructed for future work, as it is 
beyond the scope of this project. If this was done, a better understanding could be 
made of the protonic conductivity for the amorphous P-Si materials at low
intermediate temperatures when hydrothermally pressurised. 
Since the best results were for P/Si compositions with concentrated phosphoric acid in 
them (cf. Figure 69) it would be natural to think of the phosphosilicate system as a 
matrix for phosphoric acid. If further investigated for this purpose, it is not impossible 
to envision operating temperatures of a new PAFC system at around 200C, provided 
a way is found to further boost the conductivity (e.g. by operating in a humid 
environment). 
Silicon oxide phosphates appear to be poor oxygen conductors, even at the high 
temperature of 960C. This is thought to be due to the presence of silicon at the grain 
boundaries. It is therefore not a good material for SOFCs. 
 Substituted	
 phosphate	
 systems	
5.1 Aluminium and titanium doping 
A secondary goal in the project was to study the effects of partial substitution in the 
P-Si system, especially in regards to protonic conductivity. Samples were synthesised 
the same way according to synthesis method 1; temperatures, sintering times and 
starting stoichometries are given in Appendix D. The idea was to try start with the 
parent composition and substitute a certain amount of the silicon with either 
aluminium or a combination of aluminium and titanium. 
There was some secondary phase of SiP2O7, however the major phase was various 
amounts of aluminium substitution of the silicon in the parent composition. 
In Figure 76 the XRDs area shown for some different aluminium substitutions  blue 
diffractogram shows a sample that contains 2.5% aluminium, purple diffractogram a 
composition that has 7.5% aluminium and light green diffractogram shows a sample 
with 5% aluminium. The purest sample is the 2.5% composition, whereas there is a 
higher degree of SiP2O7 in the other two. 
2.5% Al
7.5% Al
5% Al
Figure	
 Stack-plot of XRDs for the different degrees of aluminium substitution. Blue XRD is has 
2.5% aluminium, light green XRD has 5% aluminium and the middle purple XRD has 7.5% aluminium. 
The amount of secondary phase, SiP2O7, increases with doping level. For the 7.5% aluminium there 
appears to be a bit more amorphous phase too compared to the others.	
For another set of aluminium doped compositions titanium was added as a co-dopant, 
the amount of aluminium was 5% and titanium was 1.66% and 5%. The XRD for 
these two samples is shown in Figure 77, from this figure it is clear that the amount of 
SiP2O7 is about the same as for the 7.5% aluminium doped composition seen in the 
previous figure. 
The conductivity data measured in air, pictured in Figure 78, reveals that there is a 
difference in conductivity that is most likely due to composition. The best sample up 
to 135C seems to be the 5% aluminium, narrowly followed by the 2.5% aluminium. 
Above 135C, 1.66% extra titanium to 5% aluminium seems to produce better 
conductivity. If the aluminium content is 7.5% a decrease in conductivity is noted, 
and 5% aluminium with 5% titanium performs worse yet. These were all 
hydrothermally treated at 120C for five hours, except the two latter compositions 
that were at 120C for 2.5 hours.  
5% Al, 5% Ti
5% Al, 1.66% Ti
Figure	
 XRD stack plots of untreated aluminium substituted compositions. There is some phase 
impurity, SiP2O7, most noticeable at 24 2.	
5.2 Germanium oxide phosphate composition 
Germanium oxide phosphate, Ge5O(PO4)6, has the same structure as silicon oxide 
phosphate, however a bigger unit cell due to that all the silicon atoms are substituted 
for larger germanium atoms. 
The synthesis of these compositions was performed by Mark Tham; the EIS and 31P 
NMR however were a collaborative effort and is here presented. 
Firstly, 31P NMR showed the chemical shift at - 33 ppm, which is markedly different 
from that of the silicon analogue (- 44 ppm), see Figure 79. 
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
Conductivites in air v temperature
5% Al, (Al5 TB) bombed 120C 5h
2.5% Al (Al2.5 TB) bombed 120 5h
2.5% Al, 5% Ti (Al5Ti5 TB) bombed 120C 2,5h
7.5% Al (Al7.5TB square) bombed 120C 2,5h
5% Al, 1.66 Ti (Al5Ti1.66 TB) bombed 120 5h
Temperature (C)
Figure	
 Conductivities for hydrothermally treated aluminium doped P-Si compositions. A small amount of 
titanium (1.66%) to 5% aluminium appears to have enhanced the conductivity at about 150C and above. Too 
much titanium (5%) with 5% aluminium proved to worsen conductivity.	
Another two compositions with slightly more germanium (5% excess) were 
hydrothermally treated at 120C for 2h and 72C for three hours, respectively. 
Although these two latter compositions had identical stoichiometry they showed 
different conductivities in the lowintermediate temperature region, see Figure 80. 
This can be attributed to the differing hydrothermal treatments  the 120C produced 
a composition that has more conductivity. It could be that the higher pressure made 
more water incorporate into the structure. 
Another observation is that the conductivity increases with temperature, and a 
maximum was found at 410C for the three hour hydrothermally treated sample, and 
350C for the two hour (120C) sample. The Nyquist plot for both these points are 
shown in Figure 81.  The conductivity increase with temperature is very much 
different behaviour to what was seen with the silicon oxide phosphate where 
conductivity decreased with increasing temperature. 
Unfortunately no DTA or TG analysis was done on the hydrothermally treated 
germanium oxide phosphate compositions due to lack of material. 
Ge5O(PO4)6 untreated
Si5O(PO4)6 untreated
Figure	
 31P NMR of Si5O(PO4)6 and its germanium analogue. The main chemical shift for Ge5O(PO4)6 occurs 
at - 33 ppm, whereas for Si5O(PO4)6 it is at - 44 ppm. 
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Hydrothermally treated 5% Ge excess Ge5O(PO4)6, conductivity in air v temperature
Ge5O(PO4)6 5percent extra Ge, bombed 120C 2h
5% extra Ge bombed 72C 3h
Temperature (C)
Figure	
  Nyquist plots for the two hydrothermally treated germanium oxide phosphate 
compositions (5% excess Ge) at peak conductivities. Impedance data recorded in air (350C 
and 410C).	
Figure	
 Conductivities for two hydrothermally treated germanium oxide phosphate compositions, both 
with 5% excess germanium. The blue data came from a pellet that was hydrothermally treated at 120C for 
two hours and the green data from another pellet that was treated at 72C for three hours. Note the 
difference in low temperature conductivity that a higher hydrothermal pressure appears to make. Also note 
that the conductivity increases in both cases as a function of temperature, unlike the cases of previously 
shown silicon oxide phosphate compositions.	
5.3 Ge3Si2O(PO4)6 
A composition replacing three of the five silicon atoms with germanium, i.e. a 
composition between Ge5O(PO4)6 and Si5O(PO4)6, was made. It included a final 
sintering step at 1100C for 16h. It was made from the gel precursor method with 
phosphoric acid. The XRD clearly indicated a larger unit cell than the ordinary 
Si5O(PO4)6, see Figure 82 where the sample is compared to ordinary Si5O(PO4)6. 
When hydrothermally treated for two hours at 120C, the TG and DTA shifted toward 
higher temperatures than what would otherwise be the case for the hydrothermally 
treated phosphosilicates, see Figure 83. Unfortunately there was not enough material 
to do conductivity measurements due to it being a small test batch, however the first 
DTA peak at 186C indicates that this could be a very good proton conductor. 
Figure	
 XRD of Ge3Si2O(PO4)6 in blue, contrasted to the Si5O(PO4)6 (red), both compositions untreated. Note 
the shift in peaks toward lower two theta indicating a larger unit cell for the germanium substituted composition.	
Figure	
  The partially substituted germanium silicon oxide phosphate 
(Ge3Si2O(PO4)6 that had been hydrothermally treated. The first DTA peak occurs at 
186C, which is vastly above that of the pure silicon oxide phosphates.	
 Conclusions 
6.1 Synthesis 
By employing the solid-state method it was firstly a priority to make single phase 
batches of primarily the parent Si5O(PO4)6 composition (P/Si = 1.2), and then some 
other P/Si ratios (e.g. 1.5, 1.0 and 0.8). The first major problem encountered was 
phase impurity (a secondary phase of SiP2O7 was often the case), a second problem 
was high amounts of amorphous material in the synthesised materials. Although these 
two problems were addressed from the start of the project, it did take some time 
before a material that showed phase purity and only had low amounts of amorphous 
phase could be found and then re-produced.  
The key seems to be that in order to avoid the amorphous contribution the phosphorus 
source should be H3PO4 as well as avoiding fast temperature ramps. Also, extending 
the sintering times has a positive effect. 
The problem with obtaining phase purity was generally solved by keeping a high 
enough sintering temperature (1000C) as SiP2O7 proved to be unstable at these 
temperatures. However, if the temperature was too high, the material would go into a 
glassy state altogether, which is not surprising since the silicon source is SiO2.  
In summary, having H3PO4 as the source for phosphorus greatly helped phase purity, 
in combination with adequate temperature settings. 
6.2 This phosphosilicate system 
Since the project has mainly focused on the compositions around and including 
Si5O(PO4)6, conclusions with certainty can only be made on this range of 
compositions. 
Key questions in this project have been: 
 Where does the protonic conductivity occur  is it in the crystalline phase, the 
amorphous phase, or both? If both, which has the higher conductivity, and why? 
 Can silicon oxide function as a matrix for phosphoric acid, and thereby enable 
greater protonic conductivity? 
It has previously been suggested that the phosphorussilicon system is a binary 
system, and the work for this thesis does support that. 
This may be analogous to the case of alumina which forms a ternary system with 
phosphate and water [49]. 
The fact that the conductivity changes so much for the more silicon-rich samples is a 
strong indication for a solid solution. The more silicon in the crystalline structure the 
less amount of phosphate groups there will be along the channels of the structure.  
Phosphate groups along with interconnecting water molecules are critical for the 
protonic conductivity. With less amount of phosphate groups the protons will have to 
rely on being transported to a higher degree by water (with additional water-water 
proton transfers), than they otherwise would in say the 1.2 parent composition. 
When phosphoric acid is incorporated in the structure the proton conducting 
mechanism switches to becoming almost fully dependant on the phosphoric acid, and 
not dependant on the host material. The fact that the protonic conductivity can be 
upheld well past the decomposition temperature of phosphoric acid, 213C [70], is 
proof that the acid as been integrated with the host matrix, silicon oxide phosphate, 
and as a result is stabilized by it. Therefore the protonic conductivity is likely in this 
case to go also along the channels of the host, but with a different mechanism than in 
the case of the hydrothermal treatment, namely from one H3PO4 group to another. 
Thus, the silicon oxide phosphate compositions appears to be able to act as matrices 
for H3PO4 which is something to take into consideration for the further development 
of solid state protonic conductors. The fact that a matrix supports the phosphoric acid 
means that one can take advantage of the solid electrolyte (without the mess of 
liquids), and perhaps operate the fuel cell at higher temperature than what would 
otherwise be permitted with liquid phosphoric acid. 
There is likely a quarternary system for silica, phosphate, water and phosphoric acid. 
It has earlier been shown to be the case for aluminium, phosphate, water and 
phosphoric acid [50] and the conductivity data in Figure 69 suggests some water may 
have been occupying some of the sites connected to the phosphate for the parent 
composition that had been refluxed in phosphoric acid. 
In this work it has not always been practically feasible to make a clear distinction 
between the amorphous and crystalline phases, in such way that they can both be 
separated and tested separately for conductivity, etc. It was an assumption that the 
amorphous contribution was the same as the gel (or at least, very similar in 
composition), however, this is likely not the case. For if a gel was the cause for the 
protonic conductivity, then this would be reflected in a similar order of magnitude in 
conductivity for the gel compared to a hydrothermally treated solid sample  they are 
clearly different. Furthermore, from Figure 32 it is clear that although the amorphous 
contribution shows a broad peak in the 29Si-NMR there is nothing correspondingly 
broad in the 31P-NMR, thus the amorphous contribution is thought to be comprised of 
SiO2 only. 
Solid-state NMR needs to be done on the P-Si gels to fully understand differences and 
similarities to the hydrothermally treated silicon oxide phosphate system.  
What can be said about the similarities between gel and hydrothermally treated 
phosphosilicates are that they both have the same elements (including water and 
phosphoric acid) and that their TG and DTA curves describe similar physical 
processes. The gels clearly showed higher mass losses than the hydrothermally treated 
compositions, even the extra high (P/Si 2.0 ratio) which had the lowest mass loss of 
the three gels, displayed a mass loss of 45 % which exceeds that of the 
hydrothermally treated compositions. An important point with the gels was that water 
was added to make the gels of similar consistency, therefore more water was added to 
the silica-rich gels which is why this shows the highest mass loss in the TGA. 
There is a trend in the conductivity for the gels (higher P/Si ratio = better conductive 
behaviour), yet this is a bit different for hydrothermally treated solid materials. In any 
case, it can be concluded that the phosphoric acid (along with water) is what is 
responsible for the gels protonic conductivity. 
The amorphous phase is not present to the same extent for all compositions. The 
greatest amorphous content was that of the silicon-rich samples, and when 
hydrothermally treated these showed overall lower conductivity compared to e.g. 
Si5O(PO4)6. 
Regarding silicon oxide phosphates function as a matrix for phosphoric acid, it has 
been shown that this is the case. In addition to this, it was discovered that the 
hydrothermal treatment induces phosphoric acid in the system, most likely from the 
phosphate units of the crystalline structure being in close proximity to water 
molecules. It remains to be studied the exact details of this mechanism. 
Other questions that were emphasized were: 
 Is there a solid-solution between SiO2 and P2O5? 
If yes, what are the properties and characteristics of the various compositions? 
One definition of a solid solution is a mixture of two crystalline solids that coexist as 
a new crystalline solid, or crystal lattice. [35] 
Both the X-ray and neutron diffraction data show different cell parameters for 
different P/Si starting ratios, which strongly suggests the existence of new crystalline 
solids. Moreover, the conductivity data shows differing conductivities depending on 
the P/Si starting ratio.  
Correlations can be made between the conductivity behaviour for the hydrothermally 
treated compositions and the unit cell parameters (a,b axes) of the untreated 
compositions, see Figure 61. 
Furthermore, the 31P NMR has the peak position (for the - 44 ppm chemical shift) in 
the untreated samples that correlates to the conductivity data for the hydrothermally 
treated compositions (Figure 62). This intrinsically ties the protonic conductivity to 
the Si5O(PO4)6 crystalline lattice. 
Moreover, if noting the temperatures at which the DTA peaks for the hydrothermally 
treated compositions occur, and these temperatures are plotted against the respective 
P/Si starting ratios, then the same pattern emerges as that for the conductivity when 
this too is plotted against the P/Si starting ratio, cf. Figure 62.  
From the start it was also realized that the DTA peaks are linked to the two mass 
losses in the TG. These two mass losses, one occurring below 100C and the other 
occurring above 100C occur as a result of previous hydrothermal treatment  
because neither TG nor DTA peaks occur for the untreated samples in the low-
temperature region, only the hydrothermally treated compositions show this 
behaviour.  
At about 115C conductivity starts to drop off as seen from the EIS measurements. 
The second DTA response occurs at a higher temperature (over 150C), however it is 
likely directly linked to the drop in conductivity. Since impedance is measured on a 
much slower timescale compared to DTA, processes that occur with the latter 
technique register at higher temperatures because the ramp rate is higher compared to 
when things are measured at equilibrium (in the case of EIS).  
Also for the first DTA curve this is the case, the DTA response occurs at about 60  
90C whereas the impedance shows a drop in conductivity just at the start of 
measurements ( 40C). 
The 2H NMR for the hydrothermally treated compositions show a correlation in 
chemical shift relative to the second DTA peak for respective sample. As previously 
pointed out there was also a correspondence between the 1H NMR for untreated 
compositions relative to 2H NMR for hydrothermally treated compositions. This 
means hydrogen was present in the untreated samples (likely from air absorption), and 
is in the sample. When the hydrothermal treatment occurs, deuterium substitutes 
hydrogen  thus showing up in the 2H NMR with similar relative chemical shift as for 
the 1H NMR for the untreated. The proof for a change upon hydrothermal treatment 
can be derived from comparing the 1H NMR for the untreated and post 
hydrothermally treated compositions. After hydrothermal treatment the chemical shift 
is much more well-defined as well as shifted  this indicates that the deuterium 
species is a part of the structure. 
0.833
 " # $ % & ' ( ) * "
+,-.,/012/,34567
"##$%
"&$'
(")**$+
"#$%$&'()'*+&,*'-$./0*1&.'*(+22/$&*'+&'0$3456$71()189&91:8
0.833
Figure	
  2H NMR spectra 
of the three hydrothermally 
treated (D2O) P-Si 
compositions. The relative 
shift is similar to that in the 
previous figure. See 
Appendix F for scaled figure 
(parent composition did have 
a longer collection time for 
the 2H scan, hence higher 
magnitude in peak).	
Figure	
  1H NMR spectra of the 
three untreated P-Si compositions. 
Note the difference in peak position for 
the chemical shifts.	
Figure	
 DTA of the hydrothermally treated compositions as a function of temperature.	
Furthermore, the refinement results revealed that one bond was significantly different 
compared to what was expected  namely, the P_O4 bond. Compared to Poojarys 
results this should have been much the same as the other phosphorusoxygen bonds 
(1.52 ), however in this project it was 1.57 , which set it apart from the other 
phosphorusoxygen bonds which were as expected. This was the case for both 
untreated and hydrothermally treated samples, and if the previously mentioned results 
from the 2 H- and 1H-NMR are taken into account, there appears to be a hydrogen in 
the structure. It is reasonable to suppose that this is a part of the P_O4 bond. This 
could be as a result of using H3PO4 as the phosphorus source, or it could be that the 
actual material does contain hydrogen, and it is just difficult to detect a small change 
in bond length using XRD, which is what Poojarys study used (since XRD looks at 
electron density, whereas neutrons pick up the actual nuclei positions). 
1.44 D2O
1.44 untreated
1.2 untreated
1.2 D2O
Figure	
  Comparison of 1H 
spectra for the parent composition 
(top) and the 1.44 (lower), 
hydrothermally treated with D2O 
(red colour) v untreated (blue 
colour). Note the difference in 
peak shape as well as chemical 
shift.	
This proton in the P_O4 bond is not sufficient to give proton conducting properties 
alone, however when hydrothermally treated or if phosphoric acid is in the material, 
then the P-Si material becomes proton conducting. 
This all suggests that the protonic conductivity is a property dependent on a physical 
process involving an external species, specifically water (or phosphoric acid) in 
connection with the phosphate units. Small changes in the crystal lattice may be the 
cause of the different unit cell parameters and the differing chemical shifts in the 31P 
NMR (- 44 ppm chemical shift). Most likely the different local phosphorus 
environment is what gives rise to the differences in conductivity when water (or 
phosphoric acid) becomes a part of the system. Thus, the whole system has become 
ternary and it is proton conductive in nature. 
When adding 85% phosphoric acid to the P-Si system the drop in protonic 
conductivity starts at the same temperature as in the case of water. However, at this 
temperature there is over an order of magnitude of improved conductivity compared 
to the best performing hydrothermally treated composition (1.0) under the same 
conditions (EIS measured in air). 
6.3 Summary of findings 
This thesis demonstrates 
 The first published solid-state synthesis of P-Si materials with varied composition 
(P/Si = 0.57  1.5), using starting ingredients of either SiO2 and NH4H2PO4 or SiO2 
and H3PO4. 
 The phosphosilicate compositions that differ in stoichiometry also differ in unit cell 
parameters. 
 The phosphate unit contains one P_O bond longer than the others (1.57 , compared 
to 1.50-1.53 for the others), which in actuality could be a P_OH bond. This is for 
both untreated and hydrothermally treated samples. This means one of the bonds in 
the phosphate is protonated, and this can hold the key to understanding the 
conductivity when water or phosphoric acid is added.  
 Hydrothermal treatment has an effect on the unit cell parameters of the respective P-
Si compositions, suggesting there is some substitution of elements as a result of 
hydrothermal treatment. 
 Hydrothermal treatment increases the amount of amorphous background, as seen 
from the higher background in the neutron diffraction experiments, see Figure 50. 
This could be water in the channels. 
 Hydrothermal treatment enables protonic conductivity, by addition of water to the 
crystalline lattice. According to 31P NMR data phosphoric acid is activated in these 
compositions when water enters the structure, since there is a strong increase in the 
signal of the 0ppm chemical shift. It could be that the channels along the a, b axes 
hold the water and interact with the phosphate groups, and that the protonic 
conductivity goes along these channels. What supports this is the fact that larger a, b 
axes for the untreated samples yield higher conductivity when hydrothermally treated. 
 The protonic conductivity differs depending on the P/Si starting ratio. The 
compositions that were rich in silicon tended to conduct worse than those closer to the 
P/Si ratio of 1.0. 
 The protonic conductivity is boosted for the silicon-rich samples if they are treated 
with concentrated phosphoric acid, more so than when the parent Si5O(PO4)6 
undergoes the same treatment. This could be because the phosphorus-richer 
composition had adsorbed a bit of water already, and therefore some of the sites were 
already occupied by water. An experiment where fresh samples are made that are 
guaranteed not to have water could be done, and refluxed in concentrated phosphoric 
acid  this might yield different results. 
 A method for measuring low temperature conductivity in phosphoric acid containing 
gels. The method is applicable as long as the gel is liquid. At higher temperatures it 
will crystallize and contract, thereby inhibiting contact. A modification could be 
possible to reduce the thickness of the material as it contracts, however one would 
have to monitor this thickness throughout the experiment. An option would be to 
increase the humidity. 
 An interesting composition has been successfully synthesized, Ge3Si2O(PO4)6. This 
composition is between Si5O(PO4)6 and Ge5O(PO4)6 and has been previously reported 
[71], however was now made through the method of using a phosphoric acid gel 
precursor. 
When hydrothermally treated, the composition does display the same type of 
behaviour as the silicon analogue, although due to limited sample amount no 
conductivity data could be obtained. Apparent was that the first DTA peak occurred at 
a much higher temperature, 186C, and it should therefore be of interest to measure 
the conductivity in its hydrothermally treated state. 
There could also be a solid solution between SiO2 and GeO2. Attention to further 
research in this area deserves to be pursued, especially in connection with water being 
introduced and the conductivity studied. 
6.4 Discussion 
6.4.1	
 P-Si	
In the search for an excellent protonic conductor, it would be natural to start with 
structure that can incorporate phosphoric acid, since liquid phosphoric acid has the 
highest intrinsic protonic conductivity of any known material at   0.15 S cm-1 [72]. 
Phosphoric acid mixed with silica and water (forming the P-Si gel) proved to be a 
very good protonic conductor (the exception seemed to be the silica rich gel (P/Si = 
0.57 which only produced very low conductivities). Gels having the P/Si ratios of 1.2 
and 1.75 performed well and with reasonable conductivities in the low temperature 
region, at 0.069 and 0.08 S cm-1, respectively, when tested in the Teflon setup. The 
latter was stable up to 100C whereas the former only up to 70C. 
The main problem with the gels was the rapidly decreasing conductivities at low  
intermediate temperatures. This was likely due to that the impedance measurements 
were only done in air for the P-Si gels and the lack of humidity severely dehydrated 
each gel. Future work should test conductivities in a humidified atmosphere to see if 
results show improvement in this temperature range. 
Although only three compositions had been tested in the same setup, a relationship 
seems to be the case at about 100C: the higher the P/Si ratio is the better conductivity 
for the gel. This is not really surprising as it suggests that the concentration of 
phosphoric acid is what yields the protonic conductivity. 
6.4.2	
 Substituted	
 P-Si	
 system	
Generally for all the phosphosilicates tested here (both hydrothermally treated solids 
and P-Si gels) an increase in temperature would produce a decrease in protonic 
conductivity. The exception was the hydrothermally treated germanium oxide 
phosphate system  this increased in conductivity as temperature increased. It had a 
maximum of protonic conductivity at about 400C (this is too low temperature to be 
oxygen conductivity). The conductivity could possibly be higher at slightly lower 
temperatures if silicon is incorporated into the structure, e.g. Ge3Si2O(PO4)6, and the 
material is hydrothermally treated. Incorporating phosphoric acid into a matrix like 
that is likely to cause even higher conductivities. 
6.4.3	
 P-Si	
 compositions	
Looking instead to the hydrothermally treated solid compositions, it is clear that the 
conductivities of these samples do not follow that of the gels. Instead it seems to be 
linked to that of the length of the a and b axes of the untreated P-Si compositions. 
Therefore it is most likely not the amorphous phase that is the principal conductor, but 
rather the crystalline phase in combination with water. 
Just sintering any P-Si composition and not hydrothermally treating it will not make a 
good conductor. However, when a high temperature sintered sample is 
hydrothermally treated (so that water can enter the structure) it will become proton 
conducting. 
Best conductivity results were obtained when incorporating 85% phosphoric acid into 
a sintered pellet, and then using silver paste for electrodes. The reason conductivity 
was better in these cases compared to the hydrothermally treated samples could be 
because when the P-Si composition acts more as a matrix for the phosphoric acid the 
concentration of phosphoric is noticeably greater than it is in the case of hydrothermal 
treatment. 
The reason why the Rietveld refinements were all done in accordance with the parent 
composition was to minimize the amount of variables. It was decided to refine the 
neutron samples in the same manner  including keeping the same stoichiometry  so 
that any differences seen in the end result were down the uniqueness of each sample, 
instead of because that variations had been done in one sample's refinement which 
had not been done in another. In future work refinements will take into consideration 
differences in stoichiometry too. 
One significant result that came about from keeping the refinements in the same way 
was the high temperature experiments for the two parent Si5O(PO4)6. It was 
discovered that there indeed was a difference in coordinates for almost all atoms in 
the low temperature region, this is indicative of that water (D2O in the actual case) 
does have an effect on the atoms positioning in the crystalline lattice. 
The total oxygen occupancy is a strong indication for a solid solution  since this goes 
up with increased P/Si ratio it means more negative charge to compensate for 
increased positive charge, indicative of more phosphorus (P+V) substituting silicon 
(Si+IV).  
6.4.4	
 Proposed	
 proton	
 conducting	
 mechanism	
In this work an anomaly was found in the P_O4 bonds, as this was proved to be 
consistently longer compared to the other phosphorusoxygen bonds, and also 
compared with what Poojary found for the P_O bond lengths [8]. It therefore becomes 
of interest to attempt to explain this anomaly. The suggestion is that there is a proton 
in the structure that makes the P_O4 bond a bit longer, and that this is important in 
order to understand the proton conductive nature once the material is hydrothermally 
treated. 
Furthermore, correlation was found between the a,b axes for the untreated 
compositions compared to the conductivity for the hydrothermally treated  the longer 
the a,b axes the better the conductivity. 
In Figure 88 a three unit cell deep and two unit cell high model of the parent 
composition is illustrated  the green atoms are O4 oxygens, red atoms are all other 
oxygens, purple atoms are phosphorus and turquoise atoms are Si3. The a-axis goes 
up, the c-axis is almost in the plane of the paper  the b-axis almost perpendicular to 
the plane of the paper coming out towards the reader. The figures perspective is 
slightly tilted so that that the channel structure becomes clear. 
In the following figure the perspective changes to looking along the side of the 
channels, perpendicular to the c-axis, see Figure 89. 
Figure	
 View of six unit cells of the parent composition (top) looking almost perpendicular down the b-axis. 
Green colour is for the O4 oxygens, red is all other oxygens, purple is phosphorus and turquoise is tetrahedral 
silicon (Si3), grey is Si1 and light yellow is Si2. The bottom picture is the same view only a bit enlarged to see the 
channels in more detail.	
The shortest distance between two Si3 tetrahedra measured from an O4 to the O4 of 
the neighbouring Si3 tetrahedra, along the b channel, is approximately 5.6 . This is 
the longest distance to travel between two O4s and the hardest part of the way. The 
next part is only 2.6 , i.e. between two O4s linked to the same silicon, these two O4s 
are also individually linked to each their phosphorus).  
If however there are water molecules present in these channels and a water molecule 
is bridging the distance between the two O4 oxygens of the different silicon 
tetrahedras in question, then it is likely that a proton transfer network throughout the 
channels can be facilitated. A water molecule has a diameter of about 2.75  [73], so 
if optimally situated the proton would only have to travel tentatively at least 1.43  
when leaving an O4 site to go to the water molecule (and then the same distance when 
5.6 
6.0  2
2.6 
1.63 2.6 
5.6 
6.0 
2.6 
2.6 
1.63 
Figure	
 A cross-section through six unit cells along where the channels run, b-axis running toward left (this is 
a slice of the same area as in the previous figure, only now viewed perpendicular to the c-axis). Top of figure has 
O4 oxygen atoms in green colour, remaining oxygens are red, phosphorus is purple and Si3 is turquoise. Bottom 
part of the figure show the same view but with polyhedra instead (phosphorus tetrahedra purple, Si3 tetrahedra 
turquoise, Si1 octahedra are grey and Si2 octahedra are light yellow).	
leaving it to go to the next O4 linked to a phosphorus). The water molecules will act 
as bridges for the hydrogen and enable two separate pathways along each channel. 
The second pathway will be on the opposite side of the channel wall, see Figure 91 
and Figure 90. In Figure 91 the perspective is shifted 180 degrees to that of Figure 89, 
looking along the c-axis in the opposite direction. Although it looks a bit different 
opposite side of the channel wall, the same principle could apply here too. A water 
can bridge the longer distance between two P_OH species and thereby enable a proton 
conducting network. 
Figure	
 The channel structure viewed almost perpendicular to the b-axis, only seen from the other 
side (model moved right relative to viewer compared to Figure	
 88). Colour code as in previous figure.	
Figure	
 A cross-section through six unit cells along where the channels run, b-axis running toward right (this 
is the opposite side of the channels compared to Figure	
 89). Top of figure has O4 oxygen atoms in green colour, 
remaining oxygens are red, phosphorus is purple and Si3 is turquoise. Bottom part of the figure show the same 
view but with polyhedra instead (phosphorus tetrahedra purple and Si3 tetrahedra turquoise) 	
2.6 
1.43 
5.6  1.43  2.6 
2.6 5.6  2.6 
1.43  1.43 
Moreover, the available space in these channels is very close to that of the size of a 
water molecule, and this could explain why hydrothermal treatment is the most suited 
method for getting water into these channel structures. 
The length of the channels depends on the length of the a,b axes  and this does  
matter when it comes to protonic conductivity. For a smaller a,b axes it will be more 
difficult to make the water molecules arrange in an optimal way, however for larger 
unit cells it will be easier. This is perhaps why the protonic conductivity depends on 
the size of the a,b, axes. 
If the theory is correct that protonic conductivity is mainly along the channel structure 
then this can explain the observed behaviour in conductivity. At start the conductivity 
was very high (water present conducting protons via both sides of the channels), and 
then it started to drop as temperature increased. It reached a local minimum at 60C 
and then began to increase somewhat. Below 60C for the conductivity (where the 
DTA registers the first peak at 71C) is where the first water inside of the channels is 
lost. This is the weakest bound of the two water molecules.  
Then at about 90C there is a maximum in conductivity and above that there is a 
small decline to about 115C. Between 90 to 115C could be where the second water 
is starting to leave the channels (picked up by the DTA at 156C). 
Although the materials synthesised did not qualify for filling the low-intermediate 
temperature gap for protonic conductors, this thesis has shown that silicon oxide 
phosphate is a good starting point for designing a proton conductor that can run at 
higher temperatures than current low temperature options. Even if only an operating 
temperature of around 150-200C was reached this would still be a good outcome. 
These types of materials are novel types of protonic conductors that consist of 
ubiquitous elements, and they would be suitable for fuel cell applications. More 
research should be done especially regarding incorporation of germanium to expand 
the lattice, and evaluate further its potential as a matrix for phosphoric acid, or 
perhaps other acids and how this will affect conductivity. 
 " # #" $ $" %
&'()'*+,-*'./012
<$
<=
<>
<4
<#
<#$
<#=
?:@-9,ABA,C./D
"#$%&$'()$*+(),*-./.-0$/$-12314'-,41#$56789$:0)4+-:142';;0$-41'-1)
Figure	
 TG (blue line) and DTA data (red line) and low temperature conductivity (black dots) 
plotted against temperature for hydrothermally treated parent composition. All measurements 
were done in air.	
References	
  Neutron	
 Cross	
 Section	
 elements.	
 Available	
 from:	
http://www.periodictable.com/Properties/A/NeutronCrossSection.html.	
  Robbins,	
 C.R.,	
 Levin,	
 McMurdie,	
 Phase	
 diagrams	
ceramists,	
 Volume	
 1964:	
 American	
 Ceramic	
 Society.	
  Maddison,	
 Statistics	
 World	
 Population,	
 Capita	
 (Vertical	
 file,	
 copyright	
 Angus	
 Maddison,	
 university	
 Groningen).	
Available	
 from:	
 http://www.ggdc.net/MADDISON/oriindex.htm.	
  Norby,	
 Solid-state	
 protonic	
 conductors:	
 principles,	
 properties,	
 progress	
 prospects.	
 Solid	
 State	
 Ionics,	
 1999.	
  Yuan,	
 X.-Z.,	
 Electrochemical	
 Impedance	
 Spectroscopy	
Cells	
 Fundamentals	
 Applications.	
 2010,	
 Springer.	
  Benichou,	
 team.	
 Shift	
 Project,	
 Portal.	
 March	
 2015];	
Available	
 from:	
 http://www.tsp-data-portal.org/Energy-Production-
Statistics.	
  Hannon,	
 A.C.,	
 Results	
 disordered	
 materials	
 General	
 Materials	
diffractometer,	
 ISIS.	
 Nuclear	
 Instruments	
 Methods	
 Physics	
Research	
 2005.	
 88107.	
  Poojary,	
 D.M.,	
 Borade,	
 Clearfield,	
 Structural	
 characterization	
silicon	
 orthophosphate.	
 Inorganica	
 Chimica	
 Acta,	
 1993.	
 208(1):	
 23-29.	
  Grove,	
 W.R.,	
 Gaseous	
 Voltaic	
 Battery.	
 London,	
 Edinburgh	
Dublin	
 Philosphical	
 Magazine	
 Journal	
 Science,	
 1842.	
 XXI(July	
December	
 1842):	
 417-420.	
  Perry,	
 Fuller,	
 Historical	
 Perspective	
 Technology	
 Century.	
 Journal	
 Electrochemical	
 Society,	
 2002.	
S59-S67.	
 fails.	
 2013;	
 Available	
 from:	
www.fuelcells.org/uploads/Fuel-Cells-in-Storms.pdf.	
  Diercks,	
 Material	
 Changes	
 Chemical	
 Industry.	
 Chem.	
 Technol.,	
 2008.	
 31(5):	
 631-637.	
 Technical	
 Services,	
 Handbook.	
 2004,	
 Department	
Energy,	
 Office	
 Fossil	
 Energy,	
 National	
 Energy	
 Technology	
 Laboratory.	
  Malnick,	
 working,	
Telegraph.	
 2014.	
  Loisel,	
 Economic	
 evaluation	
 hybrid	
 off-shore	
 power	
hydrogen	
 storage	
 system.	
 International	
 Journal	
 Hydrogen	
 Energy,	
 2015.	
  EveryMac.com.	
 http://www.everymac.com/systems/apple/macbook-
air/macbook-air-faq/macbook-air-mid-2013-real-world-battery-life.html.	
MacBook	
 Updated	
 April	
 April	
 April	
2015];	
 battery	
 "Mid-2013,"	
 "Early	
 2014"	
 "Early	
2015"	
 MacBook	
 models	
 "real-world"	
 usage	
 tests?	
 really	
 Apple	
 claims?].	
  http://applemuseum.bott.org/sections/computers/macport.html.	
Macintosh	
 Portable	
 April	
 2015].	
  Spare,	
 B.L.,	
 system	
 power	
 portable	
 computing	
 device,	
http://www.freepatentsonline.com/20110311895.pdf.	
 2010,	
 Apple	
  Iyer,	
 Spare,	
 system	
 coupled	
 portable	
 computing	
device,	
 http://www.freepatentsonline.com/20110313589.pdf.	
 2011,	
Apple	
  Jackson,	
 Smith,	
 Exploring	
 undulating	
 plateau:	
 future	
global	
 supply.	
 Phil.	
 Trans.	
 2014.	
  Alazemi,	
 Andrews,	
 Automotive	
 hydrogen	
 fuelling	
 stations:	
international	
 review.	
 Renewable	
 Sustainable	
 Energy	
 Rewiews,	
 2015.	
 483-499.	
  Wise,	
 Truth	
 About	
 Hydrogen.	
 [cited	
 July];	
 Available	
from:	
 www.popularmechanics.com/science/energy/a926/4199381/.	
  Royle,	
 Willoughby,	
 safety	
 future	
 hydrogen	
 economy.	
Process	
 Safety	
 Environmental	
 Protection,	
 2011.	
 452-462.	
  Anstrom,	
 Hydrogen	
 transportation,	
 Advances	
 Hydrogen	
Production,	
 Storage	
 Distribution.	
 2014.	
 499-524.	
  Yadav,	
 Liquid-phase	
 chemical	
 hydrogen	
 storage	
 materials.	
Energy	
 Environ.	
 Sci.,	
 2012.	
 9698-9725.	
  Press,	
 T.A.,	
 Hydrogen	
 Researched	
 Ford,	
 Daimler	
Nissan	
 Partnership,	
 Huffington	
 post.	
 2013,	
http://www.huffingtonpost.com.	
  Kaiser,	
 Ballard	
 Power	
 Systems	
 Cells	
 Volkswagen,	
DailyTech.	
 2013,	
 http://www.dailytech.com.	
  Fogelson,	
 Toyota	
 Share	
 Hydrogen	
 Patents,	
 Forbes	
Lifestyle.	
 2015,	
 Forbes.	
 Vehicles	
 Battery-Powered	
 Vehicles.	
 October	
 2011;	
Available	
 from:	
 http://www.fuelcells.org/uploads/Electric-Vehicles.pdf.	
 Guardian,	
 Toyota	
 begin	
 selling	
 hydrogen	
 Mirai	
first	
 time.	
 2014.	
  Edelstein,	
 Hyundai	
 Tucson	
 Price	
 Slashed	
 Korea;	
 Delivered	
Globally	
http://www.greencarreports.com/news/1096615_hyundai-tucson-fuel-
cell-price-slashed-in-korea-200-delivered-globally-so-far	
 2015.	
  Hyundai.	
 Cell.	
http://worldwide.hyundai.com/WW/Showroom/Eco/ix35-Fuel-
Cell/PIP/index.html	
 April	
 2015].	
  Ross,	
 Hyundai	
 Drives	
 Miles	
 Hydrogen	
 Fuel.	
http://www.autoevolution.com/news/hyundai-ix35-fuel-cell-drives-435-
miles-on-a-tank-of-hydrogen-fuel-83810.html	
 2014.	
 John,	
 Could	
 Cells?,	
http://www.greentechmedia.com.	
 2013.	
  Perkowitz,	
 Solid	
 solution,	
 Encyclopdia	
 Britannica.	
  Yang,	
 Structural	
 Morphological	
 Features	
 Acid-Bearing	
Polymers	
 Cells.	
 Polym	
 2008.	
 55126.	
 review	
 durability:	
 Degradation	
 mechanisms	
 mitigation	
 strategies.	
 Journal	
 Power	
 Sources,	
 2008.	
 Approaches	
 Recent	
 Development	
 Polymer	
 Electrolyte	
Membranes	
 Cells	
 Operating	
 above	
 100C.	
 Chem.	
 Mater.,	
 2003.	
 4896-4915.	
  Matsui,	
 Development	
 Novel	
 Proton	
 Conductors	
 Consisting	
Solid	
 Acid/pyrophosphate	
 Composite	
 Intermediate-temperature	
Cells.	
 Journal	
 Japan	
 Petroleum	
 Institute,	
 2010.	
 1-11.	
  Dhathathreyan,	
 Rajalakshmi,	
 Polymer	
 Electrolyte	
 Membrane	
 Cell,	
 Recent	
 Trends	
 Science	
 Technology,	
 Basu,	
Editor,	
 Anamaya	
 Publishers:	
 Delhi.	
  Pettersson,	
 Westerholm,	
 State	
 multi-fuel	
 reformers	
 vehicles:	
 problem	
 identication	
 research	
 needs.	
 International	
Journal	
 Hydrogen	
 Energy,	
 2001.	
 243-264.	
  Bashyam,	
 Zelenay,	
 class	
 non-precious	
 metal	
 composite	
catalysts	
 cells.	
 Nature,	
 2006.	
 63-66.	
  Solid	
 Oxide	
 Fuels	
 Cells:	
 Facts	
 Figures:	
 Present	
 Future	
Perspectives	
 Technologies	
 (Green	
 Energy	
 Technology).	
 Green	
Energy	
 Technology,	
 J.T.S.	
 Irvine	
 Connor.	
 2013,	
 London:	
Springer-Verlag.	
  Dupree,	
 Holland,	
 Mortuza,	
 Six-coordinated	
 silicon	
 glasses.	
Nature,	
 1987.	
 416-417.	
  Tofield,	
 B.C.,	
 Novel	
 phosphosilicate.	
 Nature,	
 1974.	
 722-723.	
  Liebau,	
 V.F.,	
 Bissert,	
 Kppen,	
 Synthese	
 kristallographische	
Eigenschaften	
 einiger	
 Phasen	
 System	
 Si02-P205.	
 schrift	
anorganiscbe	
 allgemeine	
 Chemie,	
 1968.	
 113-224.	
  Krawietz,	
 T.R.,	
 Solid	
 Phosphoric	
 Catalyst:	
 Multinuclear	
 Theoretical	
 Study.	
 Chem.	
 Soc.,	
 1998.	
 8502-8511.	
  Coelho,	
 Efficiency	
 Refocused	
 31P-29Si	
 MAS-J-INEPT	
Experiment	
 Characterization	
 Silicophosphate	
 Crystalline	
 Phases	
 Amorphous	
 Gels.	
 Inorg.	
 Chem.,	
 2007.	
 1379-1387.	
  Kniep,	
 Orthophosphates	
 Ternary	
 System	
 AI2O3-P2O5-H20.	
Angew.	
 Engl.,	
 1986.	
 525-534.	
  Brosheer,	
 J.C.,	
 Lenfesty,	
 Anderson	
 Solubility	
 System	
Aluminum	
 Phosphate-Phosphoric	
 Acid-Water.	
 Chem.	
 Soc.,	
 1954.	
 59515956.	
  Matsuda,	
 Medium	
 temperature	
 range	
 characterization	
 proton	
conductor	
 phosphosilicate	
 containing	
 large	
 amounts	
phosphorus.	
 Electrochimica	
 Acta,	
 2001.	
 47(6):	
 939-944.	
  Tadanaga,	
 Structural	
 change	
 proton	
 conductivity	
phosphosilicate	
 gelpolyimide	
 composite	
 membrane	
 operated	
 Journal	
 Membrane	
 Science,	
 2008.	
 324(324):	
 188-191.	
  Nakamoto,	
 Medium	
 temperature	
 operation	
 cells	
 using	
thermally	
 stable	
 proton-conducting	
 composite	
 sheets	
 composed	
phosphosilicate	
 polyimide.	
 Journal	
 Power	
 Sources,	
 2004.	
 138(1-
 51-55.	
  Nogami,	
 Miyamura,	
 Protonic	
 Conductors	
 Water-
Containing	
 P205-Zr02-Si02	
 Glasses.	
 Electrochem.	
 Soc.,	
 1997.	
 144(6):	
2175-2178.	
  Poojary,	
 D.M.,	
 Crystal	
 Structure	
 Silicon	
 Pyrophosphate	
 (Form	
 Powder	
 Diffraction	
 Data.	
 Journal	
 Solid	
 State	
 Chemistry,	
 1994.	
 106-112.	
 Shen,	
 Hibino,	
 Proton	
 conduction	
 metal	
 pyrophosphates	
(MP2O7)	
 intermediate	
 temperatures.	
 Mater.	
 Chem.,	
 2010.	
 6214
6217.	
  Matsui,	
 Intermediate-Temperature	
 Employing	
CsH2PO4/SiP2O7-Based	
 Composite	
 Electrolytes.	
 Journal	
Electrochemical	
 Society,	
 2006.	
 A339-A342.	
  Slater,	
 P.R.,	
 J.E.H.	
 Sansom,	
 Tolchard,	
 Development	
 Apatite-Type	
Oxide	
 Conductors.	
 Chemical	
 Record,	
 2004.	
 373-384.	
  West,	
 A.R.,	
 Basic	
 Solid	
 State	
 Chemistry.	
 2000:	
 Wiley	
 Sons,	
  Lejeune,	
 Studies	
 silicophosphate	
 derivatives	
 P-31	
 Si-29	
 Solid	
 State	
 Nuclear	
 Magnetic	
 Resonance,	
 2005.	
 27(4):	
 242-
  Coelho,	
 Application	
 MAS-J-HMQC	
 experiment	
 nuclei	
 {29Si,31P}:	
 Si5O(PO4)6	
 SiP2O7	
 polymorphs.	
 Journal	
Magnetic	
 Resonance,	
 2006.	
 114-119.	
  Irvine,	
 J.T.S.,	
 Sinclair,	
 West,	
 Electroceramics:	
 Characterization	
 Impedance	
 Spectroscopy.	
 Advanced	
 Materials,	
 1990.	
 132-138.	
  (1989)	
 Silicon	
 Phosphate,	
 00-040-0457.	
  Gottlieb,	
 H.E.,	
 Kotlyar,	
 Nudelman,	
 Chemical	
 Shifts	
Common	
 Laboratory	
 Solvents	
 Trace	
 Impurities.	
 Chem.,	
 1997.	
 7512-7515.	
  Nowlan,	
 Resolution	
 Chiral	
 Phosphate,	
 Phosphonate,	
Phosphinate	
 Esters	
 Enantioselective	
 Enzyme	
 Library.	
 Chem.	
Soc.,	
 2006.	
 15892-15902.	
  Shannon,	
 R.D.,	
 Revised	
 Effective	
 Ionic	
 Radii	
 Systematic	
 Studies	
Interatomie	
 Distances	
 Halides	
 Chaleogenides.	
Crystallographica,	
 1976.	
 751-767.	
  Maltezou,	
 Synthesis,	
 Solution,	
 Structural	
 Characterization	
Tetrahydrofuranyl-2,2-Bisphosphonic	
 Disodium	
 Salt.	
 Bioinorganic	
Chemistry	
 Applications,	
 2010.	
 2010(Article	
 563875).	
  Sequential	
 GSAS.	
 2012,	
 22:08;	
 Available	
 from:	
 https://wiki-
ext.aps.anl.gov/ug11bm/index.php/Sequential_GSAS.	
  Zhang,	
 Exploring	
 Novel	
 Functionalities	
 Oxide	
 Conductors	
Excess	
 Oxygen.	
 2011,	
 University	
 Andrews.	
  Safety,	
 I.I.P.o.C.	
 Phosphoric	
 acid.	
 October	
 2015].	
  Leclaire,	
 Raveau,	
 Ge3P6Si2O25:	
 Structure	
 Closely	
 Related	
 Intersecting	
 Tunnel	
 Structure	
 KMo3P6Si2O25.	
 Journal	
 Solid	
 State	
Chemistry,	
 1988.	
 397-402.	
  Viliauskas,	
 mechanism	
 proton	
 conduction	
 phosphoric	
acid.	
 Nature	
 chemistry,	
 2012.	
 461-466.	
  Chaplin,	
 Water	
 Molecule	
 Structure.	
http://www1.lsbu.ac.uk/water/water_molecule.html	
 2014.	
Appendix	
Bond lengths from Rietveld refinement of neutron data, P/Si = 0.833 
GEM63215_A_6
mm_0.833A_D2
Structure	
 length	
Number	
bonds	
Angle	
 between	
atoms	
  Angle	
Number	
angles	
0.833	
 octahedra	
  Si1_O3	
  1.75268(14)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  180.000(0)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  91.684(6)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  88.316(6)	
 octahedra	
  Si2_O2	
  1.77518(15)	
  O2_Si2_O2	
  90.548(6)	
  Si2_O5	
  1.74823(14)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  89.417(6)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  180.000(0)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  89.858(6)	
  O5_Si2_O5	
  90.178(6)	
 tetrahedra	
  Si3_O1	
  1.64485(18)	
  O4_Si3_O1	
  108.529(3)	
  Si3_O4	
  1.57594(16)	
  O4_Si3_O4	
  110.397(3)	
  Phosphate	
group	
  1.53485(12)	
  O3_P_O2	
  114.031(7)	
  1.50297(12)	
  O4_P_O2	
  105.807(2)	
  1.56684(16)	
  O5_P_O2	
  112.020(6)	
  1.50408(15)	
  O4_P_O3	
  108.847(6)	
  O5_P_O3	
  106.874(3)	
  O5_P_O4	
  109.175(1)	
GEM63213_818_0.
833A_dry_8mm	
  Structure	
 length	
Number	
bonds	
Angle	
 between	
atoms	
  Angle	
Number	
angles	
0.833	
 untreated	
 octahedra	
  Si1_O3	
  1.75441(13)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  180.000(0)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  91.705(5)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  88.295(5)	
 octahedra	
  Si2_O2	
  1.77909(13)	
  O2_Si2_O2	
  90.310(5)	
  Si2_O5	
  1.74211(12)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  89.475(5)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  89.905(5)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  180.000(0)	
  O5_Si2_O5	
  90.311(5)	
 tetrahedra	
  O1_Si3	
  1.63416(16)	
  O4_Si3_O1	
  108.973(2)	
  O4_Si3	
  1.58339(14)	
  O4_Si3_O4	
  109.965(2)	
  Phosphate	
group	
  1.53478(10)	
  O3_P_O2	
  113.958(6)	
  1.50290(11)	
  O4_P_O2	
  105.752(1)	
  1.56585(14)	
  O5_P_O2	
  112.025(6)	
  1.50638(13)	
  O4_P_O3	
  108.829(5)	
  O5_P_O3	
  107.000(2)	
  O5_P_O4	
  109.190(1)	
Bond lengths from Rietveld refinement of neutron data, P/Si = 1.2 
GEM63222_HiT2_RT
_start	
  Structure	
 length	
Number	
 bonds	
Angle	
 between	
atoms	
  Angle	
Number	
angles	
 octahedra	
  Si1_O3	
  1.77004(33)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  180.000(0)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  92.261(13)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  87.739(13)	
 octahedra	
  Si2_O2	
  1.75134(33)	
  O2_Si2_O2	
  92.541(13)	
  Si2_O5	
  1.79262(33)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  88.520(13)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  177.013(0)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  90.201(13)	
  O5_Si2_O5	
  88.684(14)	
 tetrahedra	
  Si3_O1	
  1.6708(4)	
  O4_Si3_O1	
  107.495(6)	
  Si3_O4	
  1.5672(4)	
  O4_Si3_O4	
  111.373(5)	
  Phosphate	
group	
  1.51895(27)	
  O3_P_O2	
  116.228(15)	
  1.51772(29)	
  O4_P_O2	
  107.846(3)	
  1.5709(4)	
  O5_P_O2	
  112.049(14)	
  1.53273(35)	
  O4_P_O3	
  108.645(13)	
  O5_P_O3	
  103.222(6)	
  O5_P_O4	
  108.590(2)	
GEM63046_HiT1_RT
_start	
  Structure	
 length	
Number	
 bonds	
Angle	
 between	
atoms	
  Angle	
Number	
angles	
 untreated	
 octahedra	
  Si1_O3	
  1.76158(23)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  180.000(0)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  92.162(9)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  87.838(9)	
 octahedra	
  Si2_O2	
  1.76052(23)	
  O2_Si2_O2	
  91.625(9)	
  Si2_O5	
  1.76820(22)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  89.078(9)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  90.088(9)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  178.129(0)	
  O5_Si2_O5	
  89.187(9)	
 tetrahedra	
  O1_Si3	
  1.64853(28)	
  O4_Si3_O1	
  108.332(4)	
  O4_Si3	
  1.57313(24)	
  O4_Si3_O4	
  110.586(4)	
  Phosphate	
group	
  1.52241(18)	
  O3_P_O2	
  115.249(11)	
  1.50863(20)	
  O4_P_O2	
  106.736(2)	
  1.56934(25)	
  O5_P_O2	
  112.297(10)	
  1.51690(24)	
  O4_P_O3	
  108.598(9)	
  O5_P_O3	
  104.982(4)	
  O5_P_O4	
  108.829(1)	
Bond lengths from Rietveld refinement of neutron data, P/Si = 1.44 
GEM63416_1.44G	
Structure	
 length	
Number	
 bonds	
Angle	
 between	
atoms	
  Angle	
Number	
angles	
 octahedra	
  Si1_O3	
  1.75587(12)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  180.000(0)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  91.991(5)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  88.009(5)	
 octahedra	
  Si2_O2	
  1.77967(12)	
  O2_Si2_O2	
  90.305(5)	
  Si2_O5	
  1.75049(12)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  89.882(5)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  180.000(0)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  89.889(5)	
  O5_Si2_O5	
  89.923(5)	
 tetrahedra	
  Si3_O1	
  1.60189(14)	
  O4_Si3_O1	
  110.080(2)	
  Si3_O4	
  1.59728(13)	
  O4_Si3_O4	
  108.856(2)	
  Phosphate	
group	
  1.53034(10)	
  O3_P_O2	
  113.830(6)	
  1.51110(10)	
  O4_P_O2	
  105.374(1)	
  1.57079(13)	
  O5_P_O2	
  113.104(5)	
  1.49647(12)	
  O4_P_O3	
  108.310(5)	
  O5_P_O3	
  106.850(2)	
  O5_P_O4	
  109.240(1)	
GEM63214_831_1,
44G_dry	
  Structure	
 length	
Number	
 bonds	
Angle	
 between	
atoms	
  Angle	
Number	
angles	
 untreated	
 octahedra	
  Si1_O3	
  1.75577(12)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  180.000(0)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  92.039(5)	
  O3_Si1_O3	
  87.961(5)	
 octahedra	
  Si2_O2	
  1.78066(12)	
  O2_Si2_O2	
  90.424(5)	
  Si2_O5	
  1.75342(12)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  89.892(5)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  89.939(5)	
  O5_Si2_O2	
  180.000(0)	
  O5_Si2_O5	
  89.742(5)	
 tetrahedra	
  Si3_O1	
  1.60865(15)	
  O4_Si3_O1	
  109.974(2)	
  Si3_O4	
  1.59854(13)	
  O4_Si3_O4	
  108.964(2)	
  Phosphate	
group	
  1.52306(10)	
  O3_P_O2	
  113.903(6)	
  1.51615(11)	
  O4_P_O2	
  105.631(1)	
  1.57083(14)	
  O5_P_O2	
  113.281(5)	
  1.49801(13)	
  O4_P_O3	
  108.154(5)	
  O5_P_O3	
  106.556(2)	
  O5_P_O4	
  109.171(1)	
Appendix	
Summary of Rietveld refinements from neutron data, P/Si = 0.833 
Fixed occupancies 
GEM63215_A_6m
m_0.833A_D2O_3
h_FixedF	
11Feb2014	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
0.833	
  0.45773(22)	
  0.25072(20)	
  0.11153(6)	
  0.514(33)	
  1.0000	
  0.35648(21)	
  0.48880(19)	
  0.07780(7)	
  0.755(35)	
  1.0000	
  0.20796(24)	
  0.14672(22)	
  0.04066(8)	
  0.737(40)	
  1.0000	
  0.12981(24)	
  0.21266(23)	
  0.13809(7)	
  0.858(37)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.500000	
  2.418(118)	
  1.0000	
  0.28481(21)	
  0.26849(19)	
  0.09238(8)	
  0.350(33)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.43187(12)	
  0.16(7)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.18013(16)	
  0.13(4)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.13(4)	
  1.0000	
GEM63213_818_0
.833A_dry_8mm_
FixedF	
11Feb2014	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
0.833	
 untreated	
  0.45836(17)	
  0.25118(15)	
  0.11163(4)	
  0.390(29)	
  1.0000	
  0.35609(16)	
  0.48827(15)	
  0.07768(6)	
  0.640(30)	
  1.0000	
  0.20822(18)	
  0.14642(17)	
  0.04068(6)	
  0.576(33)	
  1.0000	
  0.12994(18)	
  0.21256(17)	
  0.13798(5)	
  0.609(29)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.500000	
  1.923(86)	
  1.0000	
  0.28504(16)	
  0.26838(15)	
  0.09233(6)	
  0.258(28)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.43233(10)	
  0.104(55)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.18028(13)	
  0.044(35)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.044(35)	
  1.0000	
Summary of Rietveld refinements from neutron data, P/Si = 0.833 
Varied occupancies 
GEM63215_A_6m
m_0.833A_D2O_3
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
0.833	
  0.457734	
  0.250716	
  0.111529	
  0.648(32)	
  0.356479	
  0.488804	
  0.077797	
  0.813(33)	
  0.9915	
  0.207958	
  0.14672	
  0.040661	
  0.763(38)	
  0.987	
  0.129808	
  0.212661	
  0.138087	
  0.814(36)	
  0.9829	
  2.317(105)	
  0.9904	
  0.284813	
  0.268489	
  0.092375	
  0.193(29)	
  0.9695	
  0.431873	
  -0.14(6)	
  0.9293	
  0.180129	
  0.20(4)	
  0.20(4)	
GEM63213_818_0
.833A_dry_8mm	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
0.833	
 untreated	
  0.458358	
  0.251182	
  0.111629	
  0.540(29)	
  0.356095	
  0.488273	
  0.077682	
  0.674(29)	
  0.9858	
  0.20822	
  0.146424	
  0.040676	
  0.602(31)	
  0.9857	
  0.129939	
  0.212558	
  0.13798	
  0.597(29)	
  0.9845	
  1.853(79)	
  0.9903	
  0.285038	
  0.268381	
  0.092332	
  0.107(25)	
  0.9679	
  0.432332	
  -0.140(49)	
  0.9413	
  0.180282	
  0.113(34)	
  0.113(34)	
  0.9933	
Summary of Rietveld refinements from neutron data, P/Si = 1.2 
Fixed occupancies 
GEM63222_HiT2_R
T_start	
 12Feb2014	
fixed	
February	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
  0.4554(4)	
  0.2465(4)	
  0.11082(11)	
  0.43(7)	
  1.0000	
  0.3585(4)	
  0.4905(4)	
  0.07817(13)	
  0.41(7)	
  1.0000	
  0.2105(5)	
  0.1484(4)	
  0.04052(15)	
  0.77(8)	
  1.0000	
  0.1300(5)	
  0.2128(5)	
  0.13890(14)	
  1.72(9)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.500000	
  6.05(38)	
  1.0000	
  0.2808(4)	
  0.2693(4)	
  0.09308(16)	
  0.22(6)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.43097(22)	
  -0.40(6)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.17878(28)	
  -0.40(6)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  -0.40(6)	
  1.0000	
GEM63046_HiT1_
RT_start	
12Feb2014	
 fixed	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
 untreated	
  0.45706(29)	
  0.24894(25)	
  0.11119(7)	
  0.45(4)	
  1.0000	
  0.35734(26)	
  0.48951(24)	
  0.07786(9)	
  0.52(4)	
  1.0000	
  0.20993(30)	
  0.14750(28)	
  0.04052(10)	
  0.69(5)	
  1.0000	
  0.12994(32)	
  0.21276(31)	
  0.13835(9)	
  1.13(5)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.500000	
  3.30(18)	
  1.0000	
  0.28288(27)	
  0.26860(25)	
  0.09275(10)	
  0.24(4)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.43170(16)	
  -0.12(4)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.17925(20)	
  -0.12(4)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  -0.12(4)	
  1.0000	
Summary of Rietveld refinements from neutron data, P/Si = 1.2 
Varied occupancies 
GEM63046_HiT1_
RT_start	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
 untreated	
  0.45706	
  0.248944	
  0.111189	
  0.62(4)	
  0.35734	
  0.489514	
  0.077863	
  0.58(4)	
  0.9888	
  0.20993	
  0.147504	
  0.040518	
  0.72(5)	
  0.9825	
  0.129937	
  0.212764	
  0.138349	
  1.17(5)	
  0.9908	
  3.27(16)	
  0.282877	
  0.2686	
  0.09275	
  0.06(4)	
  0.9613	
  0.431697	
  -0.59(6)	
  0.9232	
  0.179251	
  0.06(5)	
  0.06(5)	
GEM63222_HiT2_
RT_start	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
  0.455416	
  0.246528	
  0.110822	
  0.52(6)	
  0.358489	
  0.490489	
  0.078173	
  0.37(6)	
  0.9832	
  0.21047	
  0.148371	
  0.04052	
  0.89(8)	
  0.9972	
  0.130029	
  0.212755	
  0.138903	
  1.72(9)	
  0.9883	
  6.01(34)	
  0.280809	
  0.269306	
  0.093082	
  0.09(6)	
  0.9714	
  0.430971	
  -0.85(8)	
  0.9378	
  0.178782	
  -0.20(7)	
  -0.20(7)	
Summary of Rietveld refinements from neutron data, P/Si = 1.44 
Fixed occupancies 
GEM63416_1.44G	
 fixed	
12Feb2014	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
  0.45834(19)	
  0.25176(18)	
  0.11145(5)	
  0.490(28)	
  1.0000	
  0.35517(19)	
  0.48755(16)	
  0.07761(6)	
  0.539(28)	
  1.0000	
  0.20897(20)	
  0.14590(19)	
  0.04050(7)	
  0.530(32)	
  1.0000	
  0.12931(20)	
  0.21250(19)	
  0.13765(5)	
  0.507(29)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.500000	
  1.303(80)	
  1.0000	
  0.28535(18)	
  0.26769(16)	
  0.09260(7)	
  0.132(26)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.43365(11)	
  0.23(6)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.17997(14)	
  0.11(4)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.11(4)	
  1.0000	
GEM63214_831_1
.44G_dry	
 Fixed	
12Feb2014	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
 untreated	
  0.45853(18)	
  0.25221(17)	
  0.11139(5)	
  0.512(28)	
  1.0000	
  0.35476(18)	
  0.48717(16)	
  0.07742(6)	
  0.562(28)	
  1.0000	
  0.20903(20)	
  0.14536(18)	
  0.04047(6)	
  0.741(34)	
  1.0000	
  0.12987(19)	
  0.21261(18)	
  0.13756(5)	
  0.500(28)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.500000	
  1.578(84)	
  1.0000	
  0.28507(17)	
  0.26773(16)	
  0.09271(7)	
  0.146(26)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.43337(11)	
  0.29(6)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.17982(14)	
  0.21(4)	
  1.0000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.000000	
  0.21(4)	
  1.0000	
Summary of Rietveld refinements from neutron data, P/Si = 1.44 
Varied occupancies 
GEM63416_1.44G	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
  0.458339	
  0.251758	
  0.111445	
  0.546(27)	
  0.355174	
  0.487549	
  0.077608	
  0.553(27)	
  0.995	
  0.208968	
  0.145897	
  0.040502	
  0.581(31)	
  0.9992	
  0.129311	
  0.212504	
  0.137645	
  0.544(28)	
  1.303(74)	
  0.285348	
  0.267688	
  0.092598	
  0.015(23)	
  0.9795	
  0.433654	
  0.123(54)	
  0.9753	
  0.179974	
  0.120(33)	
  0.120(33)	
GEM63214_831_1
.44G_dry	
  Ui/Ue*100	
  Fractn	
 untreated	
  0.458533	
  0.252209	
  0.11139	
  0.559(27)	
  0.35476	
  0.487173	
  0.077417	
  0.596(27)	
  0.209026	
  0.145362	
  0.040467	
  0.773(32)	
  0.129871	
  0.212609	
  0.137556	
  0.525(27)	
  1.419(77)	
  0.9811	
  0.285073	
  0.267728	
  0.092714	
  0.059(24)	
  0.9864	
  0.433368	
  0.169(55)	
  0.9769	
  0.179823	
  0.220(34)	
  0.220(34)	
Appendix	
GSAS methodology, manual refinement 
GEM63046_HiT1_RT_start 12Feb2014 fixed F 
GEM63046    12 February 2014 
Cell prm from original CIF-file: 1_2F_RTDRY_ALL 
Fixing all F's to 1.000 
Background 1, 8 terms - all histograms 
Powpref 
dmin - dmax, multiple banks 
6 cycles 
Refine cell     64.37 
UISO for P     64.20 
UISO for Si3     64.20 
UISO for Si2, Si1:    64.19 
Deactivate U's 
U for O1, O2     64.05 
U for O3       64.01 
U for O5     63.95 
Deactivate U for all. 
X for P:      63.87 
X for Si3:     63.72 
X for Si2, Si1:     63.61 
X for O1-O3:     62.36 
X for O4, O5:     61.86 
U for all, except O4    63.26 
Background 1, 12 terms ALL: 31.09 
Background 1, 20 terms ALL: 14.61 
U for O4     14.50 
Zero, ALL:     13.48 
DIFA ALL:     13.26 
beta, ALL:     10.45 
switch ALL:     9.470 
sig-0, ALL:     25.56 
sig-1, ALL:     5.504 
sig-2, ALL:     5.429 
gam-0, ALL:     6.309 
gam-1, ALL:      5.259 
gam-2, ALL:     6.337 
stec, ALL:        5.171 
Couple U for Si1, Si2, Si3  
(value of Si2=..)    5.213 
PowPr + genles     5.210 
200 variables 
Decent fit. 
Did this refinement pretty much exactly the same way as for the D2O one, so should be directly comparable. 
I have chosen to have all UISOs free, except Si1 and Si2 which are coupled (at the end). This because Si1 was 
negative prior to coupling. 
I will use the UISO values and XYZ values from this refinement for a new one to determine F values. 
GEM63046_HiT1_RT_start 30July2014 fixed F, Si2const 
GEM63046    30 July 2014 
Copied the entire folder of 
HiT1_RT_start, from the folder "RT Samples Fixed F, Feb2014" 
Deactivating UISO and XYZ for all atoms, now varying the F's (which all start at 1.00). All F's can be varied except 
Si2 and O5. 
(Starts at a chi square of 5.194) 
F for P      5.182    
F for Si3:     5.167 
F for Si2: 
F for Si1:     5.167 
F for O1:     5.168 
F for O2:     5.168 
F for O3:     5.171 
F for O4:     5.178 
F for O5:     
deactivated F for Si1-Si3 
U for Si1-Si3     5.176 
Deactivated F's for rest 
U for all      5.166 
Took away UISO constraint Si1-S3 
      5.111 
Constrained UISO for Si1 and Si2 
      5.142 
No U's 
F for Si1, Si3     5.130 
F for P, O1, O2     5.126 
F for O3, O4     5.137 
Powpref + genles    5.114 
Forced F to be 1 on Si1 and O1 as these were more than 1 
      5.114 
U on all      
Forced F to be 1 on Si1 and O1   5.111 
No F's, U on all      5.108 
Powpref + genles    5.144 
184 variables 
Sequential	
 Rietveld	
 refinement	
 methodology	
 neutron	
HiT1  Sequential GSAS 
Copied HiT1_RT_start from the folder: 
MyWork\ISIS2013\Beam time data\RT Samples Fixed F, Feb2014\Varied_F_post_fixed_F_Si2const 
Location of file: MyWork\ISIS2013\Beam time data\Sequential GSAS, post fixed F, Si2 const 
renamed to shorter file name: GEM63046.EXP 
gam-0 
untick: 
gam-1 
genles, PowPref + genles 
5.108 
untick gam-0 
Disabled all U's 
UISOs are to be set to the values they have at 500C on the way up (in between RT and 1000C) 
change UISO for P to: 0.00375 
      5.150 
changed UISO for Si's: 0.00180 (coupled all) 
5.260 
X on all:      5.245 
F on Si1, O2-O4    5.230 
F on P and Si3:     5.215 
Change UISO for O1 (0.05023) and O2 (0.01842) 5.331 
Changed UISO for O3 (0.01828), O4 (0.01497) and O5 (0.01296 5.996 
untick sig-1 
PowPr + genles 6.006 
Make sure print option 1024 is enabled. 
5.974 
All oxygens F set to 1 and can't be varied, no profile options ticked at all. 5.980 
5.974 
F for P and all Si's set to 1 and can't be varied, otherwise same as V3. 
 6.119 
Start runs 
Appendix	
Combined TG and DTA results for P-Si gels 
Figure	
  TGA and DTA 
measurements of P-Si gels. 
The 2.0 gel (precursor to 
SiP2O7 was tested up to 
500C, the other two were 
run up to 350C. Note the 
very large loss of water for 
the silicon rich sample (P/Si 
= 0.57) and that there 
appears to be a trend of 
retaining more water for 
higher amounts of 
phosphoric acid. The DTA 
peaks do also occur at higher 
temperatures for the 2.0 
sample compared to the 
others.	
Appendix	
Sintering temperatures and times 
Stoichiometries of substituted samples  chapter 5 
Sample name P/Si starting ratio Sintering temperature (C) and time (h) Ramp rate (C / hour) Note
0.57 V 0.57 300C 2h, 950C 12h +8C/h, -10C/h
0.57 VW 0.57 975C 15h +5C/h, -5C/h
0.7 V 0.7 300C 2h, 950C 12h +8C/h, -10C/h
0.7 VW 0.7 975C 15h +5C/h, -5C/h
0.8 UV 0.8 300C 2h, 950C 12h, 300C 2h, 
950C 12h
+8C/h, -10C/h, +8C/h, -10C/h
0.8 UVW 0.8 Same as 0.8 UV + 975C 15h +5C/h, -5C/h
0.833 A 0.833 300C 3h , 1000C 50h +8C/h, -10C/h RT neutron
1.0 KM 1.0 300 3h, 950C 15h; 975C 15h, +8C/h, -10C/h ; +5C/h, -5C/h
1.0 LN 1.0 300 3h, 950C 15h; 975C 15h +8C/h, -10C/h ; +8C/h, -10C/h
1.2 KM 1.2 300 3h, 950C 15h; 975C 15h, +8C/h, -10C/h ; +5C/h, -5C/h
1.2 F 1.2 300C 3h , 1000C 50h +8C/h, -10C/h RT and High temp neutron
1.2 D 1.2 300C 3h , 1000C 50h +8C/h, -10C/h
1.2 cryst 1.2 300C 3h , 1000C 33.3h +8C/h, -10C/h High temp XRD
1.2 29Si 1.2 300C 3h, 950C 15h +8C/h, -10C/h
1.2 975C 15h +8C/h, -10C/h
1.2 975C 24h +8C/h, -10C/h
1.2 300C 3h , 1000C 30h +8C/h, -10C/h
1.2 300C 3h , 1000C 33.3h +8C/h, -8C/h 29Si NMR 5 weeks later
1.2 1000C 1h +8C/h, -8C/h 29Si NMR shortly after
1.44 G 1.44 300C 3h , 1000C 50h +8C/h, -10C/h
1.44 G 1.44 Above + 1100C for 20h extra firing compared to 1.2F and 0.833 RT neutron
II 1.5 300 3h, 950C 15h; 300 3h, 950C 15h; +8C/h, -10C/h ; +8C/h, -10C/h
II GKMP 1.5 Above + 975C 15h; 1100C for 15h +5C/h, -5C/h; +8C/h, -8C/h
II GKMPR 1.5 Same as II GKMP + 300C 1h , 1000C 15h +8C/h, -8C/h
Al5 TB 240C over night, 900C 30h; 975C 12h
Al2.5 TB 240C over night, 900C 30h; 975C 12h
Al5Ti5 TB 240C over night, 900C 30h; 975C 12h
Al7.5 TB 240C over night, 900C 30h; 975C 12h
Al5Ti1.66 TB 240C over night, 900C 30h; 975C 12h
Ge3Si2O(PO4)6 300C 3h , 1000C 50h +8C/h, -10C/h
Ge3Si2O(PO4)6 1100C for 16h +8C/h, -10C/h
Samples firing temperatures and times
Al Ti Si P O P/Si P/(Si+dopant)
0,0000 5,0000 6,0000 25,0000 1,200 1,200
Al 2.5 0,1250 4,8750 6,0000 25,0000 1,231 1,200
Al 5 0,2500 4,7500 6,0000 25,0000 1,263 1,200
Al 7.5 0,3750 4,6250 6,0000 25,0000 1,297 1,200
Al5 Ti1,66 0,2500 0,0833 4,6667 6,0000 25,0000 1,286 1,200
Al5 Ti5 0,2500 0,2500 4,5000 6,0000 25,0000 1,333 1,200
Appendix	
Graphs of Si_O bond lengths from Rietveld refinement results 
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si3_O4 bond length v temperature
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si1_O3 bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si2_O5 bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si2_O2 bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Si_O bond lengths
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si3_O1
D2O Untreated
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Graphs of P_O bond lengths from Rietveld refinement results 
Graphs of average bond lengths from Rietveld refinement results 
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
P_O5 bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
P_O4 bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
P_O3 bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
P_O2 bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
Cooling
Temperature (C) Temperature (C)
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
P_O bond lengths
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
P_O average bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si1_O3 bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si2_O average bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
0 250 500 750 1000 1250 1500
Si3_O average bond length v temperature
D2O Untreated
Cooling
Temperature (C) Temperature (C)
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Cooling
Temperature (C)
Cooling
Average bond lengths
Appendix	
Bond lengths and bond angles from Rietveld refinement results, untreated 
Bond lengths ()
Number Bond HiT1 950 down HiT1 700 down 500 down
6 x Si1_O3 1.755(4) 1.7605(26) 1.7568(25)
3 x Si2_O2 1.759(6) 1.761(4) 1.761(4)
3 x Si2_O5 1.776(6) 1.777(4) 1.779(4)
1 x Si3_O1 1.667(6) 1.654(4) 1.650(4)
3 x Si3_O4 1.5761(34) 1.5737(24) 1.5735(23)
P_O2 1.520(5) 1.514(4) 1.5130(34)
P_O3 1.474(6) 1.486(4) 1.498(4)
P_O4 1.539(4) 1.5518(27) 1.5537(26)
P_O5 1.511(5) 1.518(4) 1.5160(34)
Angle Bond angles ()
3 x O3_Si1_O3 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0)
6 x O3_Si1_O3 90.78(20) 91.24(13) 91.35(12)
6 x O3_Si1_O3 89.22(20) 88.76(13) 88.65(12)
3 x O2_Si2_O2 92.2(4) 92.30(25) 92.51(23)
3 x O5_Si2_O2 88.74(16) 88.73(11) 88.62(10)
3 x O5_Si2_O2 177.9(5) 177.77(32) 177.56(30)
3 x O5_Si2_O2 89.62(15) 89.63(10) 89.60(9)
3 x O5_Si2_O5 89.4(4) 89.29(25) 89.23(23)
3 x O4_Si3_O1 107.67(26) 107.80(17) 108.13(16)
3 x O4_Si3_O4 111.21(25) 111.09(16) 110.78(15)
O3_P_O2 114.57(25) 115.35(17) 115.32(16)
O4_P_O2 107.09(28) 106.61(18) 106.98(17)
O5_P_O2 110.4(4) 111.03(23) 111.18(22)
O4_P_O3 109.0(4) 109.07(27) 109.05(25)
O5_P_O3 106.61(29) 105.99(19) 105.40(17)
O5_P_O4 109.10(27) 108.65(18) 108.78(16)
Number
Bond lengths ()
Bond HiT1 RT start HiT1 100 up HiT1 150 up HiT1 200 up HiT1 500 up HiT1 700 up HiT1 850 up HiT1 950 up HiT1 1000
Si1_O3 1.7614(21) 1.7622(22) 1.7627(22) 1.7608(23) 1.7610(24) 1.7600(28) 1.7568(29) 1.7588(29) 1.7592(30)
Si2_O2 1.760(4) 1.763(4) 1.761(4) 1.765(4) 1.761(4) 1.759(4) 1.764(4) 1.764(4) 1.761(5) 
Si2_O5 1.7680(35) 1.764(4) 1.769(4) 1.766(4) 1.775(4) 1.778(4) 1.782(4) 1.781(4) 1.785(5)
Si3_O1 1.648(4) 1.665(4) 1.660(4) 1.652(4) 1.657(4) 1.653(4) 1.655(4) 1.656(4) 1.660(4)
Si3_O4 1.5730(22) 1.5679(22) 1.5692(22) 1.5753(22) 1.5733(23) 1.5688(26) 1.5738(26) 1.5737(26) 1.5694(27)
P_O2 1.5222(31) 1.5293(33) 1.5272(33) 1.5200(32) 1.5197(34) 1.512(4) 1.513(4) 1.509(4) 1.510(4)
P_O3 1.5085(31) 1.4986(33) 1.4983(33) 1.5013(33) 1.497(4) 1.484(4) 1.488(4) 1.491(4) 1.486(5)
P_O4 1.5692(24) 1.5683(26) 1.5655(25) 1.5609(25) 1.5544(26) 1.5537(29) 1.5516(29) 1.5496(30) 1.5492(31)
P_O5 1.5167(32) 1.5144(33) 1.5176(33) 1.5181(33) 1.5143(35) 1.520(4) 1.512(4) 1.513(4) 1.519(4)
Angle Bond angles ()
O3_Si1_O3 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0)
O3_Si1_O3 92.16(10) 91.67(11) 91.72(11) 91.85(11) 91.45(12) 90.93(14) 91.16(14) 91.36(14) 91.26(15)
O3_Si1_O3 87.84(10) 88.33(11) 88.28(11) 88.15(11) 88.55(12) 89.07(14) 88.84(14) 88.64(14) 88.74(15)
O2_Si2_O2 91.62(21) 91.51(24) 91.79(24) 91.51(22) 91.86(23) 92.29(26) 92.16(26) 92.12(27) 92.20(28)
O5_Si2_O2 89.08(10) 88.98(10) 88.92(10) 88.98(10) 88.81(11) 88.57(12) 88.74(12) 88.83(12) 88.94(13)
O5_Si2_O2 178.13(26) 178.62(30) 178.22(31) 178.44(27) 178.31(30) 177.84(34) 177.99(34) 178.0(4) 177.8(4)
O5_Si2_O2 90.09(9) 89.78(9) 89.82(9) 89.96(9) 89.67(10) 89.66(11) 89.61(11) 89.60(11) 89.68(12)
O5_Si2_O5 89.19(22) 89.73(25) 89.45(25) 89.54(23) 89.64(24) 89.45(27) 89.46(27) 89.42(28) 89.14(29)
O4_Si3_O1 108.33(15) 107.77(15) 107.82(16) 108.19(16) 107.87(16) 107.65(19) 107.92(19) 107.94(19) 107.76(21)
O4_Si3_O4 110.59(14) 111.12(14) 111.07(15) 110.72(15) 111.02(15) 111.23(17) 110.98(18) 110.96(18) 111.13(19)
O3_P_O2 115.25(15) 115.00(15) 115.16(15) 115.24(15) 115.07(16) 115.18(18) 115.20(19) 115.19(19) 115.20(20)
O4_P_O2 106.74(16) 106.72(16) 106.80(16) 106.95(16) 107.19(17) 106.81(19) 106.82(19) 106.80(19) 106.93(21)
O5_P_O2 112.30(19) 111.82(21) 111.62(20) 111.76(20) 111.20(22) 110.85(24) 110.64(25) 110.93(26) 110.61(28)
O4_P_O3 108.60(21) 108.97(23) 109.18(23) 108.84(23) 109.08(26) 109.46(29) 109.18(29) 108.50(30) 109.09(32)
O5_P_O3 104.98(16) 105.45(16) 105.31(17) 105.20(17) 105.45(18) 105.88(20) 106.21(20) 106.27(21) 106.10(22)
O5_P_O4 108.83(15) 108.74(15 108.63(15) 108.71(15) 108.71(17) 108.54(19) 108.66(20) 109.03(20) 108.80(21)
Bond lengths and bond angles from Rietveld refinement results, hydrothermally 
treated 
Number
Bond lengths ()
Bond HiT2 RT start HiT2 100C HiT2 150 up HiT2 200 up HiT2 500 up HiT2 700 up HiT2 850 up HiT2 950 up HiT2 1000C
Si1_O3 1.7699(33) 1.766(4) 1.770(4) 1.7663(33) 1.7645(29) 1.7668(31) 1.7638(33) 1.7583(35) 1.7632(35)
Si2_O2 1.751(5) 1.752(7) 1.747(6) 1.755(6) 1.764(5) 1.759(5) 1.759(5) 1.763(5) 1.769(5)
Si2_O5 1.792(5) 1.790(7) 1.798(6) 1.789(6) 1.786(5) 1.790(5) 1.795(5) 1.797(5) 1.786(5)
Si3_O1 1.671(5) 1.687(6) 1.678(6) 1.675(5) 1.661(4) 1.662(4) 1.657(5) 1.662(5) 1.661(5)
Si3_O4 1.5671(31) 1.5607(35) 1.564(4) 1.5725(31) 1.5814(28) 1.5794(28) 1.5826(29) 1.5784(30) 1.5790(30)
P_O2 1.519(5) 1.524(6) 1.524(6) 1.526(5) 1.522(4) 1.522(4) 1.515(4) 1.519(5) 1.512(5)
P_O3 1.518(5) 1.515(6) 1.512(6) 1.507(5) 1.503(4) 1.491(5) 1.495(5) 1.484(5) 1.490(5)
P_O4 1.571(4) 1.565(4) 1.571(4) 1.570(4) 1.5612(32) 1.5539(33) 1.5517(34) 1.544(4) 1.549(4)
P_O5 1.533(5) 1.532(6) 1.534(5) 1.525(5) 1.523(4) 1.531(4) 1.526(4) 1.520(5) 1.524(5)
Angle Bond angles ()
O3_Si1_O3 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0)
O3_Si1_O3 92.26(17) 91.87(20) 91.83(19) 91.38(17) 91.57(15) 90.96(16) 90.99(17) 90.63(18) 91.01(17)
O3_Si1_O3 87.74(17) 88.13(20) 88.17(19) 88.62(17) 88.43(15) 89.04(16) 89.01(17) 89.37(18) 88.99(17)
O2_Si2_O2 92.54(31) 92.3(4) 92.7(4) 92.55(35) 92.43(27) 92.75(29) 92.85(31) 92.52(32) 92.20(31)
O5_Si2_O2 88.52(15) 88.38(17) 88.26(17) 88.37(14) 88.74(13) 88.38(13) 88.27(13) 88.44(14) 88.39(14)
O5_Si2_O2 177.0(4) 177.4(5) 177.2(5) 177.6(5) 177.6(4) 177.4(4) 177.2(4) 177.6(4) 178.1(4)
O5_Si2_O2 90.20(14) 90.14(16) 89.85(16) 89.60(13) 89.60(11) 89.55(12) 89.65(12) 89.68(13) 89.55(13)
O5_Si2_O5 88.68(31) 89.1(4) 89.1(4) 89.4(4) 89.19(28) 89.27(30) 89.17(31) 89.32(33) 89.84(32)
O4_Si3_O1 107.50(22) 107.00(24) 107.24(24) 107.58(21) 108.15(19) 107.75(20) 108.10(21) 107.89(23) 108.10(23)
O4_Si3_O4 111.37(20) 111.82(22) 111.61(22) 111.30(20) 110.76(18) 111.14(19) 110.81(20) 111.00(21) 110.81(22)
O3_P_O2 116.23(23) 115.76(26) 116.26(26) 115.54(22) 115.43(19) 115.28(20) 115.31(21) 114.71(22) 115.22(22)
O4_P_O2 107.85(24) 108.34(29) 108.17(28) 107.72(24) 107.11(20) 107.22(21) 107.31(22) 106.80(23) 107.21(24)
O5_P_O2 112.05(30) 111.3(4) 111.41(35) 111.40(30) 111.36(26) 110.49(28) 110.49(29) 110.00(31) 110.06(31)
O4_P_O3 108.64(32) 109.2(4) 108.9(4) 108.86(34) 108.73(30) 109.37(33) 108.76(34) 109.2(4) 108.7(4)
O5_P_O3 103.22(23) 103.32(28) 103.40(27) 104.56(24) 105.29(21) 105.61(22) 105.69(23) 106.40(24) 106.15(25)
O5_P_O4 108.59(22) 108.71(25) 108.43(25) 108.57(22) 108.76(20) 108.74(21) 109.17(23) 109.66(24) 109.38(24)
Bond lengths ()
Number Bond HiT2 950 down HiT2 700 down HiT2 500 down
6 x Si1_O3 1.7644(34) 1.7628(31) 1.7655(30)
3 x Si2_O2 1.767(5) 1.766(5) 1.762(4)
3 x Si2_O5 1.786(5) 1.785(5) 1.792(5)
1 x Si3_O1 1.661(5) 1.659(5) 1.664(4)
3 x Si3_O4 1.5800(30) 1.5795(28) 1.5784(28)
P_O2 1.513(4) 1.517(4) 1.518(4)
P_O3 1.488(5) 1.497(5) 1.501(4)
P_O4 1.5519(35) 1.5582(33) 1.5589(32)
P_O5 1.529(4) 1.525(4) 1.525(4)
Angle Bond angles ()
3 x O3_Si1_O3 180.000(0) 180.000(0) 180.000(0)
6 x O3_Si1_O3 91.06(17) 91.20(16) 91.10(15)
6 x O3_Si1_O3 88.94(17) 88.80(16) 88.90(15)
3 x O2_Si2_O2 92.05(32) 92.33(29) 92.77(27)
3 x O5_Si2_O2 88.54(14) 88.41(13) 88.38(12)
3 x O5_Si2_O2 178.1(4) 177.9(4) 177.3(4)
3 x O5_Si2_O2 89.72(13) 89.63(12) 89.59(11)
3 x O5_Si2_O5 89.66(32) 89.60(29) 89.21(28)
3 x O4_Si3_O1 108.08(22) 108.16(20) 108.13(19)
3 x O4_Si3_O4 110.83(21) 110.75(19) 110.77(18)
O3_P_O2 115.37(22) 115.29(20) 115.34(19)
O4_P_O2 107.36(23) 107.30(21) 107.56(21)
O5_P_O2 110.39(30) 110.76(28) 110.98(26)
O4_P_O3 108.66(35) 108.73(32) 108.88(30)
O5_P_O3 105.87(24) 105.65(22) 104.94(21)
O5_P_O4 109.07(23) 108.98(21) 109.02(20)
Appendix	
2H NMR spectra of hydrothermally treated compositions 
Figure	
  2H NMR spectra of the three hydrothermally treated (D2O) P-Si compositions. The 1.2 composition 
(blue) has been scaled down to compensate for the longer collection time and sensitivity. 
Credit: Dr Daniel Dawson 
Appendix	
Neutron data and Rietveld refinement room temperature, P/Si = 1.2, banks 1-3 
Neutron data and Rietveld refinement room temperature, P/Si = 1.2, banks 4-6 
