Microsoft Word - Thesis - submission copy - corrected.docx
The African Policy of Justinian I 
Miranda Eleanor Williams 
Submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in History 
University of Oxford 
Trinity 2015
Acknowledgements 
Acknowledgements 
Writing a DPhil thesis, particularly in the Humanities, is a solitary process.  Nevertheless, over 
the past five years of my DPhil studies, I have incurred particular debts of gratitude to several 
people whom I would like to acknowledge here. 
First, I would like to thank my supervisor, James Howard-Johnston, for his unceasing support 
during the course of my DPhil, and, indeed, during the preceding MPhil.  I am incredibly 
grateful for his willingness to continue to act as my supervisor following his retirement.  The 
completed thesis owes a great deal to the critique and good advice which he provided, and 
without his enthusiasm and belief in the value of my work, I dont believe that it would have 
been completed. 
I cannot thank my parents, Airlie and John, enough for their encouragement and support over 
the course of my postgraduate studies in Oxford.  They were not only incredibly generous in 
meeting the vast majority of the, not inconsiderable, cost of my studies, but, equally, they 
believed that what I was doing was worthwhile, even if my work often seemed entirely esoteric.  
In the final stages, they each also took the time to proofread a complete draft of this thesis. 
I would also like to thank the Faculty of History in Oxford for awarding me the Amy Mary 
Preston Read Scholarship in 20132014 to support my writing up. 
And last, but by no means least, thank you to the friends and colleagues who have been part of 
my time in Oxford. 
Miranda Williams 
June 2015 
Abstract 
Abstract 
In 533, Justinian I ordered the conquest of the former Roman provinces of Africa, which had 
been lost to the Vandals a century earlier.  The reconquest has been regarded, by 
contemporaries and modern scholars alike, as one of the defining successes of the reign.  
However, despite the evident achievements of the campaign, Roman victory over the Vandals 
marked little more than the beginning of the Eastern Roman Empires attempt to consolidate 
its position in Africa.  The unanticipated threat posed by hostilities from the Berber tribes 
would continue until 548. 
Roman-Berber relations, unlike other aspects of Justinians foreign relations, have received 
comparatively little attention, and this study aims to reassess the establishment of Roman 
authority in Africa and the Eastern Roman Empires response to the Berber threat.  In 
particular, it considers whether this response should be seen as a series of ad hoc reactions to 
immediate circumstances, or whether it is possible to identify a coherent Roman policy vis--
vis the Berbers. 
The major conclusions of this study fall in two areas.  First, it argues that Roman objectives in 
Africa were far more limited than has generally been supposed, with the empires territorial 
ambitions not extending beyond key coastal positions which offered strategic and commercial 
advantages, and from which the empire could project its limited authority into the interior.  
Second, this study concludes that the Eastern Roman Empires actions with respect to the 
Berber tribes lacked coherence.  Attempts to implement a system of client rulers were 
unsuccessful, partly as a result of the competition between individual Berber leaders as they 
sought to establish independent polities within the frontiers of the former Roman Empire; and 
partly as a result of an increasing lack of resources, as well as the instability caused by 
constantly changing leadership within the African civil and military administrations, which 
prevented the development of coherent long term strategies for addressing the Berber threat. 
Long Abstract 
Long Abstract 
In 533, the emperor Justinian I (527-565 CE) ordered the reconquest of the former Roman 
provinces of Africa, which had been lost to the Vandals a century earlier.  The reconquest, 
declared complete within a matter of months, has been regarded, by contemporaries and 
modern scholars alike, as one of the defining successes of the reign.  However, despite the 
successes of the campaign, Roman victory over the Vandals marked little more than the 
beginning of the Eastern Roman Empires attempt to consolidate its position in Africa, as it 
sought to counter the ongoing threat posed by the Berber tribes. 
Roman-Berber relations, unlike other aspects of Justinians foreign relations, have received 
comparatively little attention, and attempts to understand Roman policy vis--vis the Berbers 
have been dominated by the view that the Roman imperial government, and its military 
commanders, acted out of complete ignorance concerning the conditions of Africa in the 6th 
century, and thus completely failed to recognize the Berbers as a threat  a view most recently 
set out by Yves Modran, in Les Maures et lAfrique romaine (VIe-VIIe sicle) (2003). 
This study aims to reassess the Roman response to the Berber threat in Africa.  In particular, it 
considers whether this response should be seen as a series of ad hoc reactions to immediate 
circumstances, or whether it is possible to identify a coherent Roman policy vis--vis the 
Berbers  a policy specifically formulated to address the threat posed by a decentralised, tribal 
society, often affected by inter-tribal rivalries, as opposed to its more established policies for 
addressing the threat posed by a centralized state, such as Sasanian Persia. 
An assessment of Roman policy, or lack thereof, in Africa is important to the more general 
understanding of the development of imperial policy during Justinians reign.  The 
longstanding view has been that all imperial decision making could be explained by an 
ideological policy of renovatio imperii.  Although this view has now been challenged, no 
Long Abstract 
alternative has yet been proposed.  However, the assessment of any broader, empire-wide, 
approach to foreign relations is dependent on detailed studies of the various Roman frontier 
regions during Justinians reign being available. 
While the histories of the frontier regions of Italy, the East, and the Caucasus during the 6th 
century have all seen recent re-assessment, in relation to Africa, general studies of the period 
remain heavily dependent on Charles Diehls LAfrique byzantine: histoire de la domination 
byzantine en Afrique (533-709), first published in 1896, and for the early part of Justinians 
reign, Christian Courtoiss Les Vandales et lAfrique (1955), and supplemented, on 
archaeological matters, by the second edition of Denys Pringles The Defence of Byzantine 
Africa from Justinian to the Arab Conquest (2001).  A detailed re-assessment of the history of 
Africa in the 6th century, based on the written sources, is long overdue. 
It cannot be denied that the written sources for Africa in the 6th century are extremely limited, 
and, like earlier studies, this thesis rests heavily on the works of Procopius, in particular, books 
III and IV of the Bella.  In relation to Africa, any reassessment of the information provided by 
the Bella is complicated by the fact that it is, more often than not, the only source of 
information available.  Thus, the major overviews of the reign of Justinian, most notably John 
Burys History of the Later Roman Empire: From the Death of Theodosius I to the Death of 
Justinian (A.D. 395 to A.D. 565) (1923) and Ernest Steins Histoire du Bas-Empire: De la 
disparition de lempire d'occident  la mort de Justinien (1949), offer little more than a 
paraphrase of Procopius narrative of the African campaign.  While no new written source 
material has come to light, much previous scholarship has been excessively trusting of 
Procopius versions of events, as a result of its ostensibly classicizing nature, and books III and 
IV of the Bella, as much as any other portion of Procopius corpus, merit reassessment in light 
of more recent critical studies of Procopius and his works. 
Long Abstract 
In the area of Roman-Berber relations there is also the opportunity to reassess some of the 
information provided by Procopius through the examination of Corippus epic poem, the 
Iohannis, a work which, despite receiving some attention as a work of debatable literary merit, 
remains underappreciated and understudied as a historical source. 
This study therefore provides a reassessment of the Eastern Roman Empires involvement in 
Africa during the reign of the emperor Justinian I, with a particular focus on the Roman 
administrations relations with the Berber tribes. 
An introductory Prologue provides an overview of the key events and chronology of the 
initial Roman military campaign in Africa, from the departure of the Roman expeditionary 
force from Constantinople in June 533, until the formal surrender of the Vandal king in 
March 534.  While this campaign is not the primary focus of the thesis, the Prologue provides 
the essential context for what follows. 
Chapter 1: The Sources considers the major written sources for the history of Africa in the 
6th century  namely Procopius Bella and De Aedificiis; and Corippus epic poem, the Iohannis. 
It provides an assessment of the backgrounds of the two writers, and the context in which 
their works were produced. In particular, it focuses on the individual authors access to 
information concerning Africa, and their perceptions of imperial policy in the region.  The 
chapter also provides an overview of the value of the chronicle traditions in Greek, Latin and 
Syriac for the study of the history of Africa in the 6th century. 
Chapter 2: The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations sets out the background to the 
Roman invasion of Africa in 533, and its motivations, both real and advertised.  It begins by 
considering the domestic politics of the Vandal kingdom prior to the Roman invasion, and 
the manner in which this facilitated the invasion itself.  It then discusses the Roman imperial 
governments representation of the invasion, and, in particular, the presentation of the 
emperor as defender of legitimate rule in Vandal Africa and presentation of the invasion 
Long Abstract 
as religiously motivated.  It also considers the role of groups at Constantinople in 
encouraging Roman intervention in Africa in 533.  Finally, provides an assessment of the 
strategic concerns of the Eastern Roman Empire at the time of its invasion of Africa. 
Chapter 3: Establishment of Civil and Military Administration provides a detailed 
assessment of the establishment of the Roman civil and military administration in Africa, 
based on the administrative legislation (Codex Justinianus 1.27.1 and 1.27.2) which was 
promulgated in 534, as well as considering the initial commitment of military resources to 
Africa and the role of imperially sponsored building programs.  The legislation has previously 
been used as a basis for understanding the longer term objectives of the Roman imperial 
government in Africa, and this chapter provides a reinterpretation of its significance, 
arguing that the propaganda value of the legislation has been underestimated, and that 
effective Roman control in Africa, in 534, was less extensive than has generally been 
supposed. 
Chapter 4: Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 begins by providing a brief outline of what is 
known concerning relations between the Vandals and the Berber tribes, prior to the Roman 
invasion of Africa in 533.  In particular, it draws attention to the development of 
independent Berber polities within the boundaries of the former Roman limes in the late 
5th and early 6th century, as a result of the breakdown of Vandal authority within the region.  
The chapter then considers the initial contact between the Roman administration  and  the 
Berber tribes  the Berber embassies to the general Belisarius in 533  which have generally 
been regarded as the basis for understanding Roman strategy vis--vis the Berbers.  It 
argues that, in interpreting the agreement reached by the embassies, the role of inter-
tribal politics has been understated.  Furthermore, previous studies have both 
underestimated the Berber position, and overestimated the Roman position in the 
negotiations which occurred. 
Long Abstract 
Chapter 5: An Overview of Military Campaigns in Africa (534 to 548) provides the background 
information for the subsequent analysis presented in Chapter 6, offering a chronological 
overview of the Roman military campaigns undertaken in Africa between the outbreak of 
Berber hostilities against the Romano-African population in 534, and the Roman victory at 
the battle of the Plains of Cato, in 548, as well as some discussion of the key issues which 
significantly compromised any imperial intention of territorial  expansion  in Africa during 
this period  namely personnel decisions and the repeated outbreak of mutinies in the 
African army.  In particular, the chapter focuses on the change in the balance of power 
between the Berber tribes and the Roman administration during this period, and concludes 
that effective Roman control in Africa during this period was minimal, and that both 
maladministration and extraneous factors had contributed to a decentralisation of 
authority in the region. 
Chapter 6: Roman-Berber Relations (543 to 548) provides an outline of what is known 
concerning the five Berber leaders who emerge as key to the security of t h e  Roman 
administration in Africa  Cusina, Iaudas, Antalas, Ierna and Carcasan  and the tribes 
which they represented  some enemies and some allies.  It considers the manner in which 
the Eastern Roman Empire sought to both manage and exploit its relationships with these 
individuals and groups.  In conclusion, it assesses whether it is possible to identify a coherent 
Roman strategy vis--vis the Berbers after the initial campaign of conquest in Africa.  It 
concludes that, while the Roman campaign of conquest in Africa was well planned, and well-
resourced, the subsequent response to the Berber threat lacked coherence, as a result of both 
the multiplicity of Berber responses to the Roman presence in Africa, and the instability and 
continually changing leadership of the Roman administration. 
Finally, the Epilogue provides a summary of what little is known of the Roman administration 
of Africa from the Roman victory at the battle of the Plains of Cato, in 548, until Justinians 
Long Abstract 
death in 565, considering, in particular, the last known Berber revolt of Justinians reign, in 
The conclusions of this study fall in two major areas.  First, it challenges the view that the 
Roman conquest of Africa must have been motivated by the desire to reclaim the former Roman 
provinces of Africa in their entirety.  Instead, it argues that the initial Roman objective was to 
secure key coastal positions, which would provide strategic and commercial advantages and, 
while imperial authorities wanted to consolidate their position, to judge by the resources 
subsequently allocated and the actions taken, they made no serious attempt to greatly extend 
the area of Roman direct rule.  Rather, the empire sought to project its limited power into the 
interior from the coast. 
Second, this study concludes that there was no coherent Roman strategy vis--vis the Berber 
tribes across the period of time considered.  While the length of the African frontier, and the 
severely limited Roman military resources in the region would have made the establishment of 
Berber client rulers an obvious strategy to secure the stability of the region, attempts to 
implement such a strategy were unsuccessful.  This was in part of a result of the high level of 
competition between individual Berber leaders as they sought to establish and maintain 
independent polities within the frontiers of the former Roman Empire.  Equally, an increasing 
lack of willingness, on the part of the Roman imperial government, to commit resources to 
Africa, as well as the instability caused by constantly changing leadership, and distrust, within 
the African civil and military administrations prevented the development of coherent long 
term strategies for addressing the Berber threat. 
Contents 
Table of Contents 
Contents 
Contents 
List of Maps 
Map I: Africa in the 6th Century 
Map II: March from Caput Vada to Carthage 
Map III: Key coastal positions in Africa (533/4) 
Map IV: African provinces under Justinian 
Map V: African military command positions following CJ 1.27.2 
Map VI: Justinianic building inscriptions in Africa 
Map VII: African cities in the De Aedificiis 
Map VIII: The Aurs campaign (540) 
Map IX: Location of the Frexes 
Map X: African cities in the geographical treatise attributed to George of Cyprus 
Abbreviations 
Abbreviations 
Primary Sources 
The editions of the primary sources cited are given in the Bibliography. 
Aed. Procopius, De Aedificiis 
Agathias, Hist. Agathias, Historiae 
Ammianus Marcellinus Ammianus Marcellinus, Historiae 
AL Anthologia Latina 
AP Anthologia Palatina 
Anec. Procopius, Anecdota 
Bella Procopius, Bella 
 (Books of the Bella are numbered continuously I-VIII) 
CJ Codex Justinianus 
Chron. Pasch. Chronicon Paschale 
CIL Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum 
Coll. Avell. Collectio Avellana 
D Digesta Justiniani 
Ps. Dionysius Pseudo-Dionysius of Tel-Mahre, Chronicle 
 (All references to the English translation of W. Witakowski 
Pseudo-Dionysius of Tel-Mahre: Chronicle: Part III (Liverpool, 
1996)) 
Evagrius, HE Evagrius Scholasticus, Historia Ecclesiastica 
Gregory of Tours, Hist. Gregory of Tours, Historia Francorum 
Hydatius Hydatius, Chronicon 
In laudem Corippus, In laudem Justini augusti minoris 
I Institutiones Justiniani 
Ioh. Corippus, Iohannis 
IRT Inscriptions of Roman Tripolitania 
J. Edict. Edictae Justiniani 
J. Nov. Novellae Justiniani 
John of Nikiu John of Nikiu, Chronicle 
 (All references are to the English translation of R. H. Charles, The 
Chronicle of John, Bishop of Nikiu (London, 1916)) 
Jordanes, Rom. Jordanes, Romana 
John of Biclar John of Biclar, Chronicon continuans Victorem Tunnunensem 
Abbreviations 
John Lydus, De mag. John Lydus, De magistratibus 
Malalas John Malalas, Chronographia 
Marc. Com. Addit. Marcellini Comitis Chronicae Additamentum 
Marcellinus Comes Marcellinus Comes, Chronicon 
Paul the Deacon, Hist. Lang. Paul the Deacon, Historia Langobardorum 
Paul the Deacon, Hist. Rom. Paul the Deacon, Historia Romana 
Paul the Silentiary Paul the Silentiary, Descriptio Sanctae Sophiae 
Priscus Priscus, Historia Byzantina 
Prosper Prosper of Aquitaine, Epitoma chronicon 
Theophanes Theophanes, Chronographia 
Thucydides Thucydides, Historiae 
Victor of Tunnuna Victor of Tunnuna, Chronicon 
Victor of Vita Victor of Vita, Historia persecutionis Africanae provinciae sub 
Geiserico et Hunrico regibus Wandalorum 
Ps. Zachariah Ps. Zachariah of Mitylene, Chronicle 
 (All references to the English translation of F. J. Hamilton and E. 
W. Brooks The Syriac Chronicle Known as that of Zachariah of 
Mitylene (London, 1899)) 
Abbreviations 
Secondary Literature 
Secondary works have been referenced in full the first time they are cited in the text.  
Subsequent references have been abbreviated to authors surname and shortened title.  The 
abbreviations for frequently cited works and periodicals are given below: 
ActaAntHung Acta Antiquae Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 
AJ The Antiquaries Journal 
AJAH American Journal of Ancient History 
Annales (HSS) Annales.  Histoire, sciences sociales 
AntAfr Antiquits Africaines 
AnTard Antiquit Tardive 
BCTH Bulletin archologique du comit des travaux historiques et 
scientifiques 
BMGS Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies 
BSC Abstracts Byzantine Studies Conference: Abstracts of Papers 
BSNAF Bulletin de la socit nationale des antiquaires de France 
Bury, History J. B. Bury, History of the Later Roman Empire: From the Death of 
Theodosius I to the Death of Justinian (A.D. 395 to A.D. 565) (2 
vols., London, 1923) 
ByzF Byzantinische Forschungen 
BZ Byzantinische Zeitschrift 
CAH The Cambridge Ancient History (14 vols., Cambridge, 1970-2000) 
CCC Civilt Classica e Cristiane 
CCSL Corpus Christianorum  Series Latina 
CFHB Corpus Fontium Historiae Byzantinae 
CHR The Catholic Historical Review 
Courtois, Les Vandales C. Courtois, Les Vandales et lAfrique (Paris, 1955) 
CP Classical Philology 
CRAI Comptes rendus de lAcadmie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres 
CT Les Cahiers de Tunisie 
CQ Classical Quarterly 
Diehl, LAfrique byzantine C. Diehl, LAfrique byzantine: histoire de la domination byzantine 
en Afrique (533709) (New York, 1896) 
DOP Dumbarton Oaks Papers 
Durliat, Les ddicaces J. Durliat, Les ddicaces douvrages de defense dans lAfrique 
byzantine (Rome, 1981) 
Abbreviations 
EB Encyclopdie Berbre 
EncVirg Enciclopedia Virgiliana (5 vols., Rome, 1984) 
EME Early Medieval Europe 
FelRav Felix Ravenna: Rivista di Antichit Ravennati, Cristiane e 
Bizantine 
GRBS Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies 
JbAChr Jahrbuch fr Antike und Christentum 
JHS Journal of Hellenic Studies 
JB Jahrbuch der sterreichischen Byzantinistik 
Jones, LRE A. H. M. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 284602: A Social, 
Economic, and Administrative Survey (Oxford, 1964) 
JRA Journal of Roman Archaeology 
JRS Journal of Roman Studies 
LibStud Libyan Studies 
MA Le Moyen Age 
MBAH Mnstersche Beitrge zur antiken Handelsgeschichte 
MEFRA Mlanges de lcole franaise de Rome: Antiquit 
MGH Monumenta Germaniae Historica 
Modran, Les Maures Y. Modran, Les Maures et lAfrique romaine (IveVIIe sicle) 
(Rome, 2003) 
NC The Numismatic Chronicle 
NRS Nuova Rivista Storica 
ODB The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium, ed. A. P. Khazhdan (3 vols., 
Oxford, 1991) 
PLRE A. H. M. Jones, J. R. Martindale and J. Morris, The Prosopography 
of the Later Roman Empire (3 vols., Cambridge, 19711992) 
Pringle, Defence D. Pringle, The Defence of Byzantine Africa from Justinian to the 
Arab Conquest, revised edn. (Oxford, 2001) 
RLAC Reallexikon fr Antike und Christentum (16 vols., Stuttgart, 
19571994) 
REA Revue des tudes anciennes 
REAug Revue des tudes augustiniennes 
REL Revue des tudes latines 
SIFC Studi Italiani di Filologia Classica 
Stein, Histoire E. Stein, Histoire du Bas-Empire: De la disparition de lempire 
doccident  la mort de Justinien (2 vols., Paris, 1949) 
StudMagr Studi Magrebini 
Abbreviations 
TAPA Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological 
Association 
TRAC Theoretical Roman Archaeology Conference 
VigChr Vigiliae Christianae 
Other 
mod. Indicating a modern day place name 
Introduction 
Introduction 
In 533,1 Justinian I ordered the conquest of the former Roman provinces of Africa, which had 
been lost to the Vandals a century earlier.  The military campaign, declared complete within a 
matter of months, has been regarded, by contemporaries and modern scholars alike, as one of 
the defining achievements of Justinians reign.  However, despite the evident successes, Roman 
victory over the Vandals marked little more than the beginning of the Eastern Roman Empires 
attempt to consolidate its position in Africa, as it sought to counter an ongoing threat posed by 
Berber tribes.2 
The two major narrative sources for events in Africa during Justinians reign are books III and 
IV of Procopius Bella, and Corippus Iohannis, both of which conclude (in their extant forms) 
with the Roman victory over the Berber tribes at the battle of the Plains of Cato in 548.3  These 
texts provide a chronological focus.  Consequently, this study is concerned with the period 
between the Roman conquest in 533, and victory over the Berbers in 548.  It is, however, 
impossible to understand the events of this period without placing them in a broader context 
 within the domestic and foreign policy objectives of Justinians reign and as a continuation of 
events which had their beginnings during the period of Vandal rule in Africa (429 to 533).  This 
study provides a comprehensive history of the African policy of Justinians reign (527 to 565), 
commencing, in Chapter 2, with the conditions in the Vandal kingdom in the early 6th century, 
which were seen as justifying Roman intervention in Africa in 533.  However, no attempt has 
been made to provide a comprehensive treatment of the history of the Vandal kingdom, or of 
1  All dates are CE. 
2  On the use of the term Berber in this study see p. 28. 
3  Books III and IV of Procopius Bella, as they have survived, may reasonably be assumed to be complete, 
since additional information concerning events in Africa is subsequently provided in book VIII (see 
n. 194).  Corippus Iohannis, on the other hand, breaks off mid-line, and the last fifty lines contain a 
number of lacunae.  At 656 lines, the final book of the Iohannis (book VIII) is of a comparable length 
to the other books of the poem, so is probably close to complete, but it is conceivable that there were 
additional books.  On the date of the battle of the Plains of Cato see n. 1191. 
Introduction 
its relations with the Berber tribes, which have been discussed in detail by others.4  Subsequent 
chapters examine Berber tribal politics, which, while they were undoubtedly influenced by the 
ruling power at Carthage, be it Vandal or Roman, were also shaped by factors independent of 
either administration, and having their origins in the 5th century.  An Epilogue summarizes 
what little is known of events in Africa between 548 and 565. 
The context of the study is the Eastern Roman Empire of the 6th century.  References to the 
Western Roman Empire are to the western part of the earlier Roman Empire.  The Western 
Roman Empire was administered separately from the Eastern Roman Empire from 
approximately 285 until 476, although there were intermittent reunifications during this 
period.  References to the Roman Empire are generally to the earlier unified empire; and, in the 
ideology of Justinians regime, largely to the principate.  The adjective Roman is used in 
reference to the Roman Empire, and each of its eastern and western successors. 
More specifically, the study focuses on events in a geographical area which covers parts of the 
modern Libya, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco.5  The modern geographical designation North 
Africa is often employed in this context, but has been rejected here, on the basis that it is 
generally assumed to include modern Egypt and Sudan.  While the Maghreb more accurately 
reflects the geographical area under discussion, the term is anachronistic to the 6th century, 
being of Arabic origin.  Africa has therefore been adopted as the generic term for the 
geographical region being discussed.  While, in the modern context, the term Africa generally 
refers to the entire continent, it is here employed in its original Roman sense, referring to those 
4  For a recent survey of Vandal history see A. Merrills & R. Miles, The Vandals (Oxford, 2010).  On the 
specific question of Vandal-Berber relations see also Y. Modran, Le plus dlicat des peuples et le 
plus malheureux Vandales et Maures en Afrique, in G. Berndt & R. Steinacher, eds., Das Reich der 
Vandalen und seine (Vor-) Geschichten (Vienna, 2008), 21325. 
5  Henceforth, references to Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco may be assumed to refer to the political 
entities of the present day.  Libya, as a geographical term which was also used throughout antiquity, 
will be used in its late antique sense, in reference to the provinces of Libya Pentapolis and Libya 
Inferior, unless preceded by modern (mod.).  The term Libya is also sometimes used by the 
contemporary sources as a synonym for Africa, and will be retained in this sense where it appears in 
direct quotation. 
Introduction 
areas which had previously been Roman possessions, and, which were, in the period under 
discussion, deemed to belong to the Praetorian Prefecture of Africa.6 
This study is concerned with the African policy of Justinian I and thus with events which 
occurred in Africa.  However, the Roman conquest in 533 and the administration of the region 
in the years immediately following were the results of a strategy developed in Constantinople.  
Although there was a progressive divergence of imperial expectations concerning Africa and 
the reality on the ground during Justinians reign, the administration of Africa continued to 
be shaped, albeit indirectly, by the policies of the imperial centre.  Both the changing 
significance of Africa, in comparison to the empires other disparate frontiers, as well as 
domestic policy, dictated the level of resources and imperial intervention which could be 
expected in the region.  The geographical distance between Constantinople and Carthage is not 
a reason for events in Africa to be interpreted in isolation. 
The title of the study The African Policy of Justinian I is perhaps somewhat contentious.  Is it 
legitimate to speak of the policy of a pre-modern state?  This study takes the view that, 
irrespective of the level of sophistication of a government, consistency may (or may not) be 
identified in the actions of that government over a specified period of time.  This consistency 
may be assessed with respect to stated intentions; and/or with respect to the internal 
coherence of the actions themselves.  Where consistency is identified it is referred to as policy.  
Thus, the study considers the Roman imperial governments intentions in respect of Africa 
prior to, and immediately following, the initial campaign of conquest in 533; and then evaluates 
the consistency of its actions in Africa and its responses to the circumstances which developed 
- in particular, its responses to an emerging threat posed by Berber tribes, the major extraneous 
influence on Roman rule in Africa in the 6th century.  Ultimately, the study aims to assess 
whether a coherent Roman policy vis--vis the Berber tribes can be identified (or whether the 
6  On the creation of the Praetorian Prefecture of Africa under Justinian see section 3.2. 
Introduction 
actions of the Eastern Roman Empire in Africa were no more than a series of ad hoc responses 
to immediate circumstances), and whether this fits within a broader understanding of Roman 
frontier policy during Justinians reign. 
In order to evaluate the actions of the Eastern Roman Empire in Africa during Justinians reign, 
consideration must be given, in the first instance, to the military campaigns against the Berber 
tribes between 534 and 548.  This focus is, at least in part, unavoidable, given that both 
Procopius Bella and Corippus Iohannis are literary works about the campaigns.  Nevertheless, 
this study is by no means a military history.  The relationship between the Roman 
administration and the Berber tribes was undoubtedly more complex than simply being one of 
continuous hostility.  The study takes a broad view of the Eastern Roman Empires actions in 
Africa, incorporating a discussion of the military campaigns (albeit at the strategic, rather than 
tactical, level) (Chapter 5), but focusing on civil and military administration (Chapter 3), 
diplomacy (Chapter 4), and attempts at client management (Chapter 6).  It examines the factors, 
both intra- and extra-African, which affected those actions; and the changing interplay 
between those factors over the course of Justinians reign. 
The initial Roman conquest, in 533, is not discussed in detail, with only a summary being offered 
in the Prologue, in order to provide context.  There are two reasons for this.  First, while the 
historical geography of the campaign merits some greater consideration, given that the only 
detailed source of information on the campaign is Procopius Bella, little can be added to the 
paraphrases offered by the major overviews of late antique history, namely J. B. Burys History 
of the Later Roman Empire: From the Death of Theodosius I to the Death of Justinian (A.D. 395 
to A.D. 565) and Ernst Steins Histoire du Bas-Empire: De la disparition de lempire doccident  
la mort de Justinien; and by studies focused more specifically on late antique Africa, such as 
Charles Diehls LAfrique byzantine: histoire de la domination byzantine en Afrique (533709), 
and, more recently, Denys Pringles The Defence of Byzantine Africa from Justinian to the Arab 
Introduction 
Conquest.7  Second, this is not a study of Justinians so-called Vandalic War.  Rather, it is a 
study of the processes by which the Eastern Roman Empire sought to establish and maintain its 
authority in Africa after overthrowing Vandal rule.  Thus, the tactics employed by the Roman 
army, prior to the capture of Carthage in mid-September 533, are of minimal significance.8 
Unlike other aspects of Justinians foreign relations, Roman-Berber relations have received 
comparatively little attention.  This is not to say that the Berbers themselves have not been a 
subject of interest.  But work on the subject, notably that of David Mattingly and Yves Modran, 
has focused on rehabilitating the Berber tribes as significant late antique communities in their 
own rights, independent of their relations with the Eastern Roman Empire.9  Previous attempts 
to understand Roman policy vis--vis the Berbers have been dominated by the view that the 
imperial government, and its military commanders, acted out of ignorance concerning the 
conditions of Africa in the 6th century, and thus failed to recognise the Berber threat  a view 
most recently set out by Modran, in his study of the Berber tribes from the 4th century until 
the Islamic conquest of Africa, Les Maures et lAfrique romaine (IVeVIIe sicle).  Modrans 
work on the Berber tribes, their structures, localities, and relationships with one another is 
comprehensive.  However, in his presentation of the Berbers as being other than the primitive 
barbarians of Roman sources, Modran simplifies Roman understanding and motivations.  This 
study carefully examines that understanding and these motivations and the implications for 
7  J. B. Bury, History of the Later Roman Empire: From the Death of Theodosius I to the Death of Justinian 
(A.D. 395 to A.D. 565) (London, 1923), II, 12439; E. Stein, Histoire du Bas-Empire: De la disparition de 
lempire doccident  la mort de Justinien (Paris, 1949), II, 31118; C. Diehl, LAfrique byzantine: 
histoire de la domination byzantine en Afrique (533709) (Paris, 1896), 1533; and D. Pringle, The 
Defence of Byzantine Africa from Justinian to the Arab Conquest, revised edn. (Oxford, 2001), 1622. 
8  For the date of the capture of Carthage see n. 49. 
9  D. Mattingly, Libyans and the limes: culture and society in Roman Tripolitania, AntAfr 23 (1987), 
71-94; idem, The Laguatan: A Libyan tribal confederation in the Late Roman Empire, LibStud 14 
(1983), 96-108; Y. Modran, Des Maures aux Berbres en Afrique du Nord dans lAntiquit tardive, in 
V. Gazeau et al., eds., Identit et ethnicit: concepts dbats historiographiques, exemples (IIIeXIIe 
sicle) (Caen, 2008), 91134; idem, Les Maures de lAfrique romaine dans lantiquit tardive, REL 82 
(2004), 249-69; idem, Les Maures et lAfrique romaine (IVeVIIe sicle) (Rome, 2003); idem, Koutzinas-
Cusina: recherches sur un Maure du VIe sicle, LAfrica romana 7 (1990), 393-407.  See also P. von 
Rummel, The Frexes: Late Roman barbarians in the shadow of the Vandal kingdom, in F. Curta, ed., 
Neglected Barbarians (Turnhout, 2010), 571603. 
Introduction 
the Roman administration of Africa during Justinians reign, recognising the complex Berber 
society of 6th century Africa which Modran has reconstructed. 
In the broader context of the history of the 6th century, an assessment of Roman policy in Africa 
is important to the understanding of imperial policy during Justinians reign.  The longstanding 
view has been that many imperial decisions, and, in particular, decisions relating to foreign 
relations, could be explained by an ideological policy of renovatio imperii.10  Although this 
view is no longer current, no alternative has yet been proposed.  The formulation of such an 
alternative view of imperial foreign relations is dependent on detailed studies, such as the study 
reported in the pages which follow, of the various Roman frontier regions during Justinians 
reign being available. 
The histories of the frontier regions of Italy, the East, and the Balkans during the 6th century 
have all seen re-assessment in the last two decades.11  While the study of late antique Africa has 
not been entirely neglected, in relation to the political and administrative history of the 
region,12 the principal studies remain Charles Diehls LAfrique byzantine (1896), and, for the 
early period of Justinians reign, Christian Courtoiss Les Vandales et lAfrique.13  The historical 
overview which prefaces the archaeological gazetteer of Denys Pringles The Defence of 
Byzantine Africa is frequently cited but is relatively uncritical in its treatment of the written 
10  Eg. Bury, History, II, 134; A. H. M. Jones, The Later Roman Empire, 284602: A Social, Economic, and 
Administrative Survey (Oxford, 1964), 270. 
11  Eg. Italy: M. Kouroumali, Procopius and the Gothic War (Oxford University DPhil. thesis, 2006); the 
East: G. Greatrex, Rome and Persia at War, 502532 (Aldershot, 1998); G. Fisher, Between Empires: 
Arabs, Romans, and Sasanians in Late Antiquity (Oxford, 2011); the Balkans: A. Sarantis, The Balkans 
in the reign of Justinian: Barbarian invasions and imperial responses (Oxford University DPhil. thesis, 
2006); idem, War and diplomacy in Pannonia and the north-west Balkans during the reign of 
Justinian: The Gepid threat and imperial responses, DOP 63 (2009), 1540; F. Curta, The Making of the 
Slavs: History and Archaeology in the Lower Danube Region, c. 500700 (Cambridge, 2001). 
12  See, for example, the most recent monograph on the subject, J. Conant, Staying Roman: Conquest and 
Identity in Africa and the Mediterranean, 439700 (New York, 2012), which focuses on the question 
of identity in Africa between the Vandal and Islamic conquests. 
13  C. Courtois, Les Vandales et lAfrique (Paris, 1955); with n. 7. 
Introduction 
sources (which are not Pringles focus).14  A detailed re-assessment of the history of Africa in 
the 6th century, based on the written sources, is long overdue. 
Any study of the Roman provinces of Africa during the 6th century is limited by the scarcity of 
written sources, which leads to the problem of assessing a prime source when there is often 
nothing with which to compare it.  Thus, Burys History of the Later Roman Empire, while 
certainly comprehensive in its coverage of events, offers little more than a paraphrase of 
Procopius narrative.15  And it seems to have been assumed that this cannot be much improved 
upon.  Subsequent treatments of the reign of Justinian, such Steins Histoire du Bas-Empire, 
and, more recently, John Moorheads Justinian and J. A. S. Evanss The Age of Justinian: The 
Circumstances of Imperial Power, have largely followed suit, albeit with greater attempts to 
include additional sources of information, where they exist, and to reconstruct the 
chronology.16  It is, therefore, legitimate to ask what value a re-assessment of the existing 
material might have. 
Outside the field of archaeology, no new source material has come to light, and archaeological 
evidence does not necessarily clarify the picture.  On the archaeology of 6th century 
fortifications in Africa, the revised edition of Pringles The Defence of Byzantine Africa (2001) 
remains the standard work.  In the bibliographic review to this edition, Pringle noted the lack 
of work which had been done on late Roman fortifications in Africa since the publication of the 
first edition in 1981,17 and the state of archaeological research on 6th century Africa, on 
fortifications and otherwise, remains fragmentary.18  Some regions and sites are far better 
14  See n. 7. 
15  See n. 7. 
16  J. Moorhead, Justinian (London, 1994); J. A. S. Evans, The Age of Justinian: The Circumstances of 
Imperial Power (London, 2000). 
17  Pringle, Defence, 693. 
18  A recent survey of the literature on the archaeology of 6th century fortifications in Africa may be 
found in A. Sarantis, Fortifications in Africa: A bibliographic essay, in idem & N. Christie, eds., War 
and Warfare in Late Antiquity (Leiden, 2013), I, 30510. 
Introduction 
documented than others,19 and existing studies are primarily based on surveys, aerial 
photography and epigraphy, rather than on excavation.20  Furthermore, in many cases, 
interpretation of the archaeological evidence is heavily dependent on the written sources, in 
this context namely Procopius De Aedificiis, the significance of which remains debated.21 
Indeed, much previous scholarship has been excessively trusting of Procopius versions of 
events, not least because of the perception that the ostensibly classicizing nature of Procopius 
work is an indication of historical reliability.  Averil Cameron, in Procopius and the Sixth 
Century (1985), advocated a more critical reading of the Bella and, in the thirty years since that 
influential study was published, scholarship on Procopius has flourished.22  However, despite 
the significance attached to books III and IV of the Bella for the reconstruction of the history 
of 6th century Africa, no comprehensive study has as yet been devoted to them, and these books 
merit reassessment in light of more recent critical studies of Procopius and his works. 
In relation to events in Africa in the 540s, and, in particular, in the area of Roman-Berber 
relations there is also the opportunity to reassess some of the information provided by 
Procopius through the examination of Corippus epic poem, the Iohannis.  The last two decades 
have seen a resurgence in interest in the literary merits of the Iohannis.23  But discussion of the 
19  One of the few recent monographs, A. Leone, Changing Townscapes in North Africa from Late 
Antiquity to the Arab Conquest (Bari, 2007), for example, considers only the provinces of Zeugitana, 
Byzacena and Tripolitania. 
20  Sarantis, Fortifications in Africa, 298300. 
21  Thus, for example, the debate between P. Trousset (Les limites sud de la roccupation byzantine, 
AnTard 10 (2002), 14350; Les fines antiquae et la reconqute byzantine en Afrique, BCTH 19B (1985), 
36176) and P. Morizot ( propos des limites mridionales de la Numidie byzantine, AntAfr 35 (1999), 
14167; Archologie arienne de lAurs; Recherches sur les campagnes de Solomon en Numidie 
mridionales, CRAI 137.1 (1993), 83106) over the interpretation of the archaeological evidence for a 
Roman presence south of the Aurs massif in the 6th century. 
22  The recent review article, G. Greatrex, Perceptions of Procopius in recent scholarship, Histos 8 
(2014), 76121, offers an impression of the current state of Procopian research.  There is, of course, a 
huge body of secondary literature, which will be further discussed in section 1.2. 
23  V. Zarini: La prface de la Johannide de Corippe, certitudes et hypothses, REAug 32 (1986), 7491; 
Gotique, potique, politique: reflexions sur un passage de la Johannide de Corippe (3, 79155), in J. 
Dion, ed., Culture antique et fanatisme (Nancy, 1996), 11340; Posie officielle et arts figurs au sicle 
de Justinien: images de pouvoir dans la Johannide de Corippe, REL 75 (1997), 21940;, Images de 
guerre dans la posie officielle de lantiquit tardive: lexemple de la Johannide de Corippe, in C. 
Auvray-Assayas, ed., Images romaines (Paris, 1998), 16173; Rhtorique, potique, spiritualit: la 
Introduction 
text as a historical source has been largely limited to the catalogue of Berber tribes in book II, 
which forms the basis of Vincent Zarinis study, Berbres ou barbares?  Recherches sur le livre 
second de la Johannide de Corippe, as well as Yves Modrans work on the localisation of the 
individual Berber tribes in Les Maures et lAfrique romaine.24  Modrans study has begun the 
process of reintegrating the Iohannis into historical scholarship, but, as result of the perception 
that a text written in verse is inherently literary, rather than historical, the Iohannis remains 
underappreciated and understudied as a historical source, particularly in the context of Roman, 
rather than Berber, actions in Africa. 
Furthermore, given that Procopius reliability as a historian has often been taken for granted, 
little effort has been made to reconcile his account of events in Africa with such alternative 
documentary sources as do exist.  The Justinianic legislation, in particular, merits greater 
consideration, given that the decrees relating specifically to Africa offer information on both 
the Roman administration of the region, and the manner in which the Roman conquest was 
presented to audiences both in Africa and in Constantinople.  The legislation has seen limited 
study as a corpus.25  Attempts to integrate it into the study of the historiography of Justinians 
technique pique de Corippe dans le Johannide (Turnhout, 2003); Aspects et paradoxes du dsert 
dans une pope latine de lAfrique chrtienne du VIe sicle, in G. Nauroy, et al., eds., Le dsert, un 
espace paradoxal (Bern, 2003), 14357; pope et religion au VIe sicle: Le paganisme chez Corippe, 
Connaissance des pres de lglise 102 (2006), 5261.  C. Tommasi Moreschini: La Iohannis corippea: 
ricupero e riscrittura dei modelli classici e cristiani, Prometheus 27 (2001), 25076; Realt della storia 
e retorica dellimpero nella Iohannis di Corippo, Athenaeum 90.1 (2002), 16585; Persistenze pagane 
nellAfrica del VI secolo: la Iohannis corippea e la questione dei dii mauri, in M. Marin & C. 
Moreschini, eds., Africa Cristiana: Storia, religione, letteratura (Brescia, 2002), 269301; Exegesis by 
distorting pagan myths in Corippus epic poetry, in W. Otten & K. Pollmann, eds., Poetry and Exegesis 
in Premodern Latin Christianity: The Encounter Between Classical and Christian Strategies of 
Interpretation (Leiden, 2007), 17397. 
24  V. Zarini, Berbres ou barbares? Recherches sur le livre second de la Johannide de Corippe (Nancy, 
1997); Modran, Les Maures, chaps. 2 and 8. 
25  The only dedicated study of which I am aware is S. Puliatti, Ricerche sulla legislazione regionale di 
Giustiniano (Milan, 1980), which is concerned solely with the administrative legislation (CJ 1.27.12), 
and does not consider the novellae relating to Africa.  The administrative legislation is also discussed, 
in a more limited context, by M. Cesa, La politica di Giustiniano verso loccidente nel giudizio di 
Procopio, Athenaeum n.s. 59 (1981), 389409. 
Introduction 
reign have tended to treat the legislation, an official source, as a touchstone against which 
other sources might be tested, without recognising its inherent propaganda function. 
Before proceeding further, some explanation is required regarding the terminology which will 
be employed in this study.  The names for the peoples which inhabit Africa are problematic, 
particularly those for the indigenous populations of the region, which might today be termed 
Berber.  In the introduction to their book, The Berbers, Brett and Fentress note that, in the 
modern context, the definition of the term Berber is primarily linguistic.  However, in a 
historical context, this definition is of little value, as the languages of the African tribes may 
not have been seen as linguistically unified by contemporary writers.26  Cultural definitions are 
equally problematic, as they have often been derived from anthropological studies of modern 
Berber society, which have been inappropriately projected onto antiquity, on the basis of the 
mistaken view that Berber society is essentially unchanging.27  Indeed, Brett and Fentress note 
that the term Berber is somewhat arbitrary, being of external origin, and altogether absent 
from late antique sources.28  As a result, they suggest that, when considering the history of 
Africa, the term must be used in its broadest possible sense  referring to all groups perceived 
to be composed of indigenous Africans.29 
Both Procopius Bella and Corippus Iohannis identify four distinct communities within the 
African population.  For Procopius, these are , , , and .  The 
equivalent Latin terms, employed by Corippus, are Vandalici, Romani, Afri, and Mauri.  The first 
two pairs of terms are relatively clear in meaning  /Vandalici are essentially self-
explanatory, referring to the Vandal population (although it is, admittedly, unclear whether 
these terms include Romano-Africans integrated into the Vandal political class), while 
26  M. Brett & E. Fentress, The Berbers (Oxford, 1996), 35. 
27  Brett & Fentress, The Berbers, 5. 
28  Ibid. 
29  Ibid. 
Introduction 
/Romani, when used in a specifically African context, refers to the Roman army and, 
later, to Roman administrators, in the region.  The other terms are more difficult to define. 
Both /Afri and /Mauri are used to refer to the indigenous population of 
Africa, and both legitimately fall within Brett and Fentresss definition of the term Berber.  
However, in their 6th century context, the two pairs of terms are by no means synonymous - 
they do not so much reflect distinct ethnic, or even cultural, groups, as Roman perceptions 
(accurate or not) of the African population.  Thus, Modran has argued that the former terms 
were used to refer to the Romanized African population, which was likely to have been Latin 
speaking and Christian; while the latter terms were used to refer to those whom the Romans 
regarded as barbarians.30  This view will be followed in this study.  Although the distinction 
which the sources create between the /Afri and the /Mauri is, in many 
respects, artificial, it has significance for the understanding of how contemporary writers 
viewed African society. 
The term Romano-African will be used in this study to refer to the population designated 
/Afri by the contemporary sources, while the term Berber will be used to refer to the 
population designated /Mauri.31  Some studies of 6th century Africa have preferred 
the term Moor, on the basis that it is closer to the transliteration of the Greek and Latin terms 
(/Mauri); and have objected to the term Berber as being anachronistic to the 6th 
century.  However, in English, the term Moor carries connotations of Islamic Spain, making it 
inappropriate in this context; and Berber, while admittedly being anachronistic, is more 
neutral to an English speaking audience.32 
30  Modran, Les Maures, 35-42. 
31  In the case of direct quotations, the terms  and Mauri have been replaced by the term 
Berbers in the English translation. 
32  The term Berber is argued to post-date the Islamic conquest of Africa, and this is certainly true.  
However, it derives from the Greek and Latin terms  and barbari, which are, after all, 
frequently used interchangeably with the terms  and Mauri.  The phrase autochthonous 
population, adopted by W. Kaegi, Muslim Expansion and Byzantine Collapse in North Africa 
Introduction 
(Cambridge, 2010), while designed to avoid the problems of terminology outlined above, is equally 
problematic, as it is unclear that any of the groups to which this term refers were indeed 
autochthonous to the regions they inhabited in the 6th and 7th centuries. 
Prologue 
Prologue 
The Roman expeditionary force charged with the conquest of Africa sailed from Constantinople 
around 20 June 533.33  It was under the overall command of the pre-eminent general of the day, 
the magister militum per Orientem, Belisarius,34 and numbered ten thousand infantry  all 
comitatenses - and five thousand cavalry  composed of both comitatenses and foederati.35  
There were also a thousand additional non-Roman allied troops,36 as well as Belisarius 
bucellarii.37  These men were transported in five hundred ships,38 supported by a naval force of 
ninety-two dromones.39  The expeditionary force committed to Africa has been seen as being 
unusually small for a campaign of conquest.40  However, comparatively, a force of some 16 000 
men was not an unusually small army for the time.41 
Given that the only detailed narrative of military campaign is that provided by Procopius in the 
Bella, what follows below provides only an outline of events, from the departure of the 
expeditionary force from Constantinople, to the surrender of the Vandal king, Gelimer.42 
En route to Africa, the fleet made two strategic stopovers  at Heracleia (mod. Eregli, Turkey), 
and at Caucana, in Sicily.43  The stopover at Heracleia was seemingly for the purpose of 
33  Bella III.12.1: The emperor Justinian, being in the seventh year of his reign, at around the summer 
solstice, ordered that the generals ship be anchored off the promontory which was before the royal 
palace [            
              ].  
H. B. Dewing, Procopius: History of the Wars: Books IIIIV (London, 1916), 111, translates  
 as spring equinox, in which he is followed by A. Kaldellis, The Wars of Justinian 
(Indianapolis, 2014), 171, in his revision of Dewings translation.  But this is not the usual sense of the 
expression, and modern scholarship has almost universally interpreted it as referring to the summer 
solstice. 
34  Bella III.11.18, 20.  On Belisarius see PLRE IIIA, 181224. 
35  Bella III.11.2. 
36  Bella III.11.11. 
37  Bella III.11.11, 19. 
38  Bella III.11.134. 
39  Bella III.11.156. 
40  Bury, History, II, 123; Jones, LRE, 273. 
41  See pp. 1412. 
42  Bella III.12IV.7. 
43  Bella III.12.6; 3.14.4. 
Prologue 
collecting mounts for the cavalry.44  In Sicily, the immediate priority was to re-provision the 
fleet,45 but equally important was the need to gather intelligence on the Vandals, and, in 
particular, to learn whether the Vandals were aware of the Roman expedition; and to establish 
where it would be safe to land the fleet in Africa.46  There, the Romans learnt that the Vandals 
remained unaware of the expedition, the Vandal fleet was pre-occupied by a revolt in Sardinia, 
and Gelimer was not at Carthage, but at Hermione, in Byzacena, four days journey from the 
coast.47  The Roman fleet was thus able to advance towards Africa with some feeling of 
security.48 
The initial landing was at Caput Vada, in early September 533.49  From there, the Roman army 
marched on Carthage.50  It advanced along the coast, capturing the cities of Sullectum 
(, mod. Salakta, Tunisia), Leptis Minor (, near mod. Lamta, Tunisia), and 
Hadrumetum (/, mod. Sousse, Tunisia), until it reached Grassa.51  The 
44  Bella III.12.6. 
45  Bella III.14.56. 
46  Bella III.14.3. 
47  Bella III.14.711. Despite Procopius rough indication of Hermiones location, the site of the town 
remains unidentified.  See Courtois, Les Vandales, 250 n. 5; and Pringle, Defence, 350 n. 19.  On the 
revolt at Sardinia see Bella III.10.2534, 11.223. 
48  Bella III.14.10. 
49  Bella III.14.17 ().  Cf. Ioh. 1.369 (Caput Vadorum).  This site has long been identified as Ras 
Kaboudia in Tunisia (see G. Hannezo, Chebba et Ras-Kapoudia.  Notes historiques, Bulletin de la 
socit archologique de Sousse (1906), 135), presumably on etymological grounds, given that the 
Arabic rs [] means head or point. 
The primary sources do not offer any explicit date for the landing, which must be reconstructed from 
two pieces of chronological information provided by Procopius  that the fleet landed in Africa about 
three months later than their departure from Byzantium (Bella 3.15.31: [...    
       ]; contra Ps. Zachariah, 9.17); and that the 
expeditionary force entered Carthage of the day following the Feast of St Cyprian, which falls on 14 
September (Bella III.21.235; cf. Evagrius, HE IV.16.  Acta Cypriani (1st recension), 3).  A date about 
three months after the fleet left Constantinople would fall in mid- to late September 533 (cf. n. 33).  
The Roman force is said to have entered Carthage on 15 September 533  although this symbolic date 
should probably be treated with some caution, given how conveniently it fits Procopius literary 
agenda (cf. Bella 3.21.1725).  Cf. Stein, Histoire, II, 325 (31 August 533); Courtois, Les Vandales, 353, 
406 (30 August 533); and Pringle, Defence, 18 with 351 n. 20 (27 August 533). 
50  Bella III.17.1. 
51  Bella III.17.69.  Based on Procopius claim that Grassa was 350 stades (c. 73.5 km) south of Carthage, 
it must have been somewhere in the vicinity of mod. Hammamet, Tunisia.  See Courtois, Les Vandales, 
250 n. 6; and Pringle, Defence, 353 n. 32.  Contra Contra C. Tissot, Gographie compar de la province 
romaine dAfrique, ed. S. Reinach (Paris, 1888), II, 116; C. Diehl, LAfrique byzantine: histoire de la 
domination byzantine en Afrique (533709) (New York, 1896), 401; and Bury, History, II, 131.  See Map 
Prologue 
army then crossing the Cap Bon peninsula,52 passed between the Lake of Tunis and Sabkhet 
Sijoumi (the salt lake to the west of the Lake of Tunis), and approached Carthage from the 
west.53 
Gelimer, still at Hermione, had become aware of the invasion, and had written to his brother, 
Ammatas, at Carthage, ordering that he prepare a Vandal force and confront the Romans at 
Decimum.54  Gelimers nephew, Gibamund, and Gelimer himself would march from Hermione 
with additional forces, in order that the Romans might be caught in a multi-pronged attack.55  
However, the coordinated Vandal attack never occurred.  Ammatas, having departed from 
Carthage with only a few men (the remainder of the Vandal force being ordered to follow as 
soon as it was prepared), arrived at Decimum in advance of the agreed time,56 and unexpectedly 
encountered an advance Roman force.57  A battle ensued and Ammatas was killed.58  The Vandals 
then withdrew to Carthage, pursued by the advance Roman force.59  Simultaneously, Gelimers 
advance force, under the command of Gibamund, encountered Belisarius Hunnic allies near 
Sabkhet Sijoumi, and was entirely destroyed.60 
Meanwhile, Belisarius, having established a Roman camp 35 stades (c. 7.4 km) from Decimum, 
set out with the Roman cavalry, sending the federate cavalry in advance.61  When the federate 
52  Bella III.17.15. 
53  From Grassa the Roman force could conceivably have approached Carthage either by continuing 
along the coast of the Gulf of Tunis, which would have required it to cross the narrow passage of 
water by which the Lake of Tunis enters the Gulf, and approaching Carthage from the south; or by 
passing between the Lake of Tunis and Sabkhet Sijoumi, and approaching Carthage from the east.  
The former route has the advantage of being somewhat shorter, but would have required further 
involvement from the Roman navy in order to ferry the army across the water.  Given that there is 
no indication that this was the case, the longer, and arguably more secure, route, around the Lake of 
Tunis, appears to be the more likely. 
54  Bella III.17.1113.  On Ammatas see PLRE IIIA, 55.  Based on its etymology, Decimum should refer to 
the tenth milestone from the city of Carthage.  For the location of the site see n. 1354. 
55  Bella III.17.14, 18.1. 
56  Bella III.18.45. 
57  Bella III.18.5. 
58  Bella III.18.511. 
59  Bella III.18.710. 
60  Bella III.18.12. 
61  Bella III.19.1113. 
Prologue 
cavalry reached Decimum, they realised that a battle had already occurred.62  Being uncertain 
what they ought to do, and seeing the Vandal cavalry, under the command of Gelimer, 
approaching, they decided to withdraw to the main Roman force.63 
Militarily, the Vandals should have held the advantage following the battle of Decimum.64  
However, they failed to capitalise on this.  Gelimer, having arrived at Decimum and learnt of 
the death of his brother, insisted on burying him, rather than immediately launching an attack 
on the divided Roman forces.65  He thus provided Belisarius with time to gather the full Roman 
force at Decimum.66  The Vandals, by this time, were in disorder, and fled to the Plain of Boulla.67  
The following day, in mid-September 533, the Roman army entered Carthage unopposed.68 
From the Plain of Boulla, Gelimer attempted to regroup.  He wrote to his brother, Tzazon, who 
had been sent to suppress an insurrection in Sardinia, informing him of what had occurred, and 
recalling Vandal troops from Sardinia.69  Once these troops arrived, the Vandals effectively 
blockaded the city of Carthage, destroying a portion of the aqueduct which provided water to 
the city, and occupied the citys hinterland.70  Gelimer also appears to have attempted to 
orchestrate a campaign of civil disobedience, offering money to Romano-African farmers and 
a payment in gold to any man who could demonstrate that he had killed a Roman;71 as well as 
appealing to religious differences within the Carthaginian population, in the hope that Arians 
in the Roman army or among the citizens would open the gates of the city.72  Furthermore, he 
62  Bella III.19.1415. 
63  Bella III.19.1524. 
64  Cf. Bella III.19.25. 
65  Bella III.19.28. 
66  Bella III.19.3031. 
67  Bella III.19.312.  The location of the Plain of Boulla is located to the west of Carthage, in Numidia.  
For a more detailed discussion of its location see n. 972. 
68  Bella III.20.12.  For the date see n. 49. 
69  Bella III.25.1026.  On the presence of Vandal troops in Sardinia see n. 47.  On Tzazon see PLRE IIIB, 
13478. 
70  Bella IV.1.13. 
71  Bella III.23.12. 
72  Bella IV.1.4. 
Prologue 
attempted to elicit support from outside the Vandal kingdom calling, unsuccessfully, for the 
assistance of the Berber tribes;73 and sought to subvert the leaders of the Huns serving as 
foederati with the Roman army, who were not well disposed towards the Roman 
administration.74 
Once Belisarius had secured Carthage, the Roman army moved out from the city, with the 
specific intention of removing the ongoing threat posed by the Vandals.75  The Romans 
encountered the main Vandal army at Tricamarum.76  On a third attempt, they broke the Vandal 
line, forcing the Vandals to take refuge within their encampment.77  Belisarius then moved 
against the encampment,78 only to find that the Vandals had fled.79  The Romans pursued the 
fleeing Vandals, killing the men and enslaving the women and children.80 
Gelimer himself, together with some of his kinsmen, escaped along the road to Numidia,81 
ultimately taking refuge among the Berbers of Mount Papua.82  There he remained for three 
months until, suffering from starvation and having witnessed the deaths of a number of his 
kinsmen, he surrendered to the Romans in the spring of 534.83 
73  Bella IV.1.5., III.25.12. 
74  Bella IV.1.6, 10.  Procopius elsewhere refers to the Huns as Massagetae [ ].  Cf. Bella 
IV.1.911, 2.3. 
75  Bella IV.1.12, 14. 
76  Bella IV.3.2.  Procopius (Bella IV.2.4) locates Tricamarum some 150 stades (c. 30km) from Carthage, 
and it was presumably along the road between Numida and Carthage, since this was the direction 
from which the Vandals had moved from the Plain of Boulla (see nn. 67 and 972), but the site has not 
been identified.  Pringle, Defence, 21, suggests that Tricamarum must have been somewhere in the 
vicinity of mod. Mornaghia in Tunisia, but this is entirely speculative.  Against this identification is 
the fact that Mornaghia is today not located near any water course.  However, it is entirely possible 
that the geography has changed. 
77  Bella IV.3.1018. 
78  Bella IV.3.19. 
79  Bella IV.3.234. 
80  Bella IV.3.24. 
81  Bella IV.3.20. 
82  Bella IV.4.26.  The location of Mount Pappua remains uncertain, but it has generally been located in 
the Kroumirie, a mountainous region extending over the northern part of the moder-day Tunisia-
Algeria border.  J. Desanges, La dernire retraite de Glimer, CT 7 (1959), 42935; Pringle, Defence, 
22, 355 n. 62.  A more sceptical view is, however, presented by Modran, Les Maures, 432 n. 73. 
83  Bella IV.7.19; with n. 84. 
Prologue 
The battle of Tricamarum took place in mid-December 533, and marked the effective 
destruction of the Hasding dynasty and the end of a century of Vandal rule in Africa.84  
Nevertheless, even before this, the Roman imperial government appears to have regarded the 
reconquest of Africa as fait accompli.  As has frequently been noted, in the prefatory 
constitution to Justinians handbook for legal students, the Institutes, which was promulgated 
on 12 December 533  after the capture of Carthage, but well in advance of the surrender of the 
Vandal king  the emperor had already adopted the victors titles of Africanus, Vandalicus and 
Alanicus.85  Moreover, the decree promulgating the Digest, Justinians collection of juristic 
writings, declares: 
 And a third part of the world was annexed by us (for after Europe and Asia, 
the whole of Libya was added to our empire).86 
84  Bella IV.3.28. 
85  I. Const. Imperatoriam pref.; with Moorhead, Justinian, 69. 
86  D. Const. Tanta/ 23 (=CJ 1.17.2.23): [et tertia pars mundi nobis adcrevit (post Europam enim 
et Asiam et tota Libya nostro imperio adiuncta est)/         ,  
  ,    ...] 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
1.1  Introduction 
As has been noted in the Introduction, the works of Procopius and Corippus provide by far the 
majority of information concerning events in Africa during the reign of Justinian, and thus form 
the basis around which this study has been developed.  However, these works are not the only 
written sources and, in a field of history for which source material is extremely limited, it is 
essential to integrate as much of the available evidence as possible.  Thus, two further, and 
distinct, categories of written source material, the Justinianic legislation and epigraphy, will be 
drawn on - the Justinianic legislation in Chapters 2 and 3, and epigraphy relating to the 
Justinianic building program and to the Berber tribes in Chapters 3 and 4 respectively.  The 
value, and limitations, of each of these categories of source material for reconstructing the 
history of Africa in the 6th century will be discussed in detail in the relevant chapters. 
In addition, events in Africa receive sporadic mentions in a number of other historical accounts 
 John Malalas Chronographia and Evagrius Historia Ecclesiastica, both written in Greek; the 
Romana of Jordanes and chronicles of Marcellinus Comes and his continuator, and Victor of 
Tunnuna, all written in Latin; and the Syriac chronicle attributed to Zachariah of Mitylene  all 
of which were produced by individuals who lived during Justinians reign.87  These texts 
represent a diversity of literary genres  chronicles, histories, ecclesiastical histories  written 
in a variety of languages, by individuals with vastly different levels of personal interest in 
Africa, and access to information concerning the region.  As a result, these texts vary in the 
scope and foci of their coverage of events in Africa. 
Generally, their discussion of events in Africa is relatively limited, being primarily concerned, 
for a variety of reasons, with the launch of the initial campaign of conquest and its ultimate 
87  For the editions of these texts see the bibliography. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
success.  Thus, both the Historia Ecclesiastica of Evagrius and the chronicle attributed to 
Zachariah of Mitylene focus on the campaign as an action against the Arian rulers of Vandal 
Africa, and thus do not continue to record events following the Roman capture of Carthage88  
although the chronicle attributed to Zachariah of Mitylene does offer some otherwise 
unattested information about the campaign itself;89 while the chronicle of Marcellinus Comes, 
as it was written by Marcellinus himself,90 presents the victory in Africa as its dramatic 
conclusion,91 in tones reminiscent of the Justinianic legislation, suggesting that he was 
reproducing an official version of events.92  Similarly, John Malalas notes the circumstances in 
Africa which resulted in Roman intervention in the region and the outcome of the Roman 
military campaign, as well as one additional comment regarding a revolt in Africa in 563.93 
The Latin source tradition, in the form of the chronicle of Victor of Tunnuna and the 
Additamentum to the chronicle of Marcellinus Comes, as well as the Romana of Jordanes, 
perhaps offers a more coherent narrative of events in Africa, providing some information 
concerning the region in the late 530s and 540s.  In the case of Victor of Tunnuna, a stronger 
focus on events in Africa during this period is undoubtedly to be explained by the authors 
personal connection with the region.  As his name implies, Victor was bishop of Tunnuna (mod. 
Tunis, Tunisia), although he appears to have spent much of his life in Constantinople.  The 
88  Ps. Zachariah, IX.17; Evagrius, HE IV.1417.  Evagrius explicitly states that his source of information 
for these events was Procopius, and he provides little additional information beyond what is provided 
by Procopius in the Bella.  Evagrius is, however, highly selective in the information he reproduces 
from Procopius Bella, focusing largely on the accounts of miracles which are consistent with the 
ecclesiastical nature of his work (M. Whitby, The Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius Scholasticus 
(Liverpool, 2000), 218 n.47. 
89  See pp. 1024.  The chroniclers source for events in Africa, and for book IX more generally, is 
unknown.  See G. Greatrex, The Chronicle of Pseudo-Zachariah Rhetor (Liverpool, 2011), 55-6. 
90  The chronicle, as written by Marcellinus Comes himself, ends in 534.  It was continued, in the form of 
the Additamentum, by an anonymous continuator.  The Additamentum records events as far as 548, 
but probably continued beyond this date, as at least one folio of the manuscript is missing.  See B. 
Croke, Count Marcellinus and his Chronicle (Oxford, 2001), 223. 
91  Marcellinus Comes, s.a. 534.  B. Croke, The Chronicle of Marcellinus (Sydney, 1995), 126, speculates 
that Marcellinus may have been witness to the African triumph celebrated in Constantinople in 534 
(see pp. 756). 
92  Marcellinus Comes, s.a. 534.  Cf. I. Const. Imperatoriam pref.; CJ 1.27.1.1; and D. Const. Tanta/ 
93  Malalas, XVIII.57, 81, 145.  On the revolt in 563 see the pp. 2723. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
chronicle is, however, inherently biased on matters concerning the church, which are a clear 
focus.  Victor had been a vocal opponent of the Three Chapters, and after having been placed 
on trial in 556, was imprisoned, first in Egypt, and then, in 565, in Constantinople.  The 
anonymous author of the Additamentum and Jordanes lacked such personal connections with 
Africa.94  Nevertheless, the author of the Additamentum must have had access to a source of 
information for Africa, as there are entries for events in Africa for nearly every year, although 
the information provided is not extensive,95 and the source was either unreliable, or the 
continuator was inaccurate in his reproduction of it, since many of the entries are placed under 
the wrong years.96  The sources for the African material in Jordanes Romana are unclear, 
although the inclusion of Africa within Jordanes narrative fits well within the world view of 
the text, which concludes with the assessment that, through the text, the reader: 
 will know whence it [the empire] arose, how it expanded, or in what manner 
it subjugated all lands to itself, and how it lost them again through ignorant 
leaders.97 
The 9th century Byzantine chronicler, Theophanes, also offers an extended account of events in 
Africa.  He does not explicitly identify his source, but his account is reproduced almost verbatim 
from Procopius Bella.98  Given that Theophanes main source for events in Africa during 
94  Given that little is known concerning Marcellinus Comes continuator, the possibility that he himself 
was a Romano-African cannot be entirely dismissed.  However, he is sufficiently inaccurate 
concerning events in Africa so as to make this unlikely.  See Croke, Count Marcellinus, 2312. 
95  In the extant text of the Additamentum, which covers events from 1 September 534 until 31 August 
548, there are entries for every year except 537/8, 541/2, 543/4 and 547/8. 
96  Croke, Count Marcellinus, 2312. 
97  Jordanes, Rom. 388: [scietque unde orta, quomodo aucta, qualiterue sibi cunctas terras subdiderit et 
quomodo iterum eas ab ignaris rectoribus amiserit.]  B. Croke, Latin historiography and the barbarian 
kingdoms, in G. Marasco, ed., Greek and Roman Historiography in Late Antiquity: Fourth to Sixth 
Century AD (Leiden, 2003), 372. 
98  Theophanes, AM 6026 (ed. De Boor, pp. 186216).  Unusually, Theophanes presents the entire 
narrative under the year 533/4, rather than breaking it up into his customary annalistic structure (C. 
Mango & R. Scott, The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor: Byzantine and Near Eastern History, A.D. 
284813 (Oxford, 1997), 307 n. 2).  As far as the Roman victory at the Plains of Cato in 548, Theophanes 
narrative differs from that of Procopius Bella at only two points.  He appears to derive the date of the 
initial campaign from Malalas (see Mango & Scott, The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, 3067, 
nn. 1 and 2), and includes one addition to the text, from an unknown source (Mango & Scott, The 
Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, 312 n. 104; with n. 1227).  He subsequently includes reference to 
the Berber revolt of 563, which he appears to have derived from Malalas (See n. 1421). 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Justinians reign is clear, and he rarely interpolates additional material, this study will note 
references to his chronicle only where he offers information which differs from that of 
Procopius. 
It is also necessary to provide some discussion of the late Vandal context of the 5th and early 6th 
centuries (Chapters 2 and 4), for which, in addition to the information provided by the sources 
noted above, many of which reflect back on the 5th century, the historical record is 
supplemented by contemporary African sources, including the sole narrative account devoted 
to events in Vandal Africa, the Historia persecutionis Africanae provinciae sub Geiserico et 
Hunirico regibus Wandalorum (henceforth Historia) of Victor of Vita, which was written c. 484 
and details the persecution of Nicene Christians in Africa during the period of Vandal rule, and, 
in particular, during the reign of the Vandal king Huneric (477484);99 and the Vita of the 
Chalcedonian bishop Fulgentius of Ruspe, who was banished from Africa during the Vandal 
period, which is attributed to Ferrandus, deacon of Carthage, and was probably written c. 535.100  
While these texts were written by those who originated from Africa, they are inherently biased 
against the Vandal rulership on account of their authors religious persuasions.  Isolated 
references to events in Africa during the Vandal period may additionally be found in 5th century 
historiography produced outside of Africa  namely the western Latin chronicles of Hydatius 
and Prosper of Aquitaine - as well as the now fragmentary Historia Byzantina of Priscus of 
Panium, written in Greek. 
The focus of this study is on the information provided either by contemporary sources, or by 
those sources which demonstrably drew upon contemporary sources.  However, Justinians 
conquest of Africa was also a source of interest to chroniclers of the later Byzantine period, 
99  J. Moorhead, Victor of Vita: History of the Vandal Persecution (Liverpool, 1992), xvixvii. 
100  On the identification of Ferrandus as the author of the Vita see R. B. Eno, Fulgentius: Selected Works 
(Washington, 1997), 3.  On the date see G.-G. Lapeyre, Saint Fulgence de Ruspe (Paris, 1929), lxxvi; and 
Averil Cameron, Byzantine Africa  the literary evidence, in J. H. Humphrey, ed., Excavations at 
Carthage 1978 Conducted by the University of Michigan VII (Ann Arbor, 1982), 30. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
being noted by, among others, George Monachus in the 9th century, Symeon the Logothete in 
the 10th century, and John Zonaras, Michael Glycas, Constantine Manasses and John Tzetzes in 
the 12th century.  However, while the value of the information these accounts contain, 
concerning both events in Africa in the 6th century and later perceptions of Justinians reign, 
undoubtedly merits further consideration, these accounts have not been considered here, on 
the basis that their authors are far removed from the events concerned, and their sources of 
information are uncertain. 
The outline above is by no means intended to provide a comprehensive discussion of all the 
sources which will be cited in the course of this study.  The literature of the historiography of 
Justinians reign is extensive, and it is not my intention to review it here.  Rather, the above is 
intended to provide an indication of the extent of coverage of events in Africa, and any obvious 
biases, in literary sources other than the works of Procopius and Corippus.  Issues pertaining to 
individual authors and texts will be discussed in greater detail as they arise. 
This chapter will now turn to the two major writers on Africa in the 6th century  Procopius and 
Corippus, with sections 1.2 and 1.3 offering a discussion of the contexts of these writers, an 
overview of their literary production, and some general comments on their knowledge and 
perspectives on Africa. 
1.2 Procopius 
The key primary sources for events in Africa during the reign of Justinian are undoubtedly the 
works of Procopius.  Of Procopius corpus  the Bella, the De Aedificiis and the Anecdota  the 
texts dealing specifically with events in Africa are books III and IV of the Bella and book VI of 
the De Aedificiis, which are dedicated to the region.  References to events in Africa may also be 
found in book VIII of the Bella and in the Anecdota  the majority of the latter employing Africa 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
as an exemplum of Justinians destruction or pertaining to the maladministration of the Roman 
official Sergius.101 
Concerning Procopius background, what little is known must be extrapolated from his own 
writings, although personal interjections into the narrative are comparatively rare.  He 
describes himself as a native of Caesarea in Palestine  a point corroborated by other sources;102 
and subsequently notes that, following Belisarius appointment as dux of Mesopotamia, he 
became Belisarius assessor (an adviser),103 and possibly also his personal secretary.104  Procopius 
also served in this capacity during the campaign in Africa in 533534;105 and was still in 
Belisarius service in 540, when he witnessed the Roman army enter Ravenna.106  Procopius 
presumably returned to Constantinople with Belisarius when the latter was recalled from Italy, 
in order to be sent to the eastern frontier, passing the winter of 540/1 in the capital.107  Whether 
Procopius subsequently accompanied Belisarius to the East in 541 is, however, unclear.108  
Certainly, he was present at Constantinople when plague struck the city in spring 542.109 
Procopius probably began writing both the Bella and the Anecdota in the early 540s, which, 
given the close relationship between the two texts, seem to have been composed in parallel.110  
101  Bella VIII.17.2022, 24.317; Anec. V.28, 29, 3031, 33, 345; XVIII.10.  On Sergius see section 5.5. 
102  Bella I.1.1; Anec. 11.25.  Cf. Agathias, Hist. prooem. 22; Suda  2479. 
103  Bella I.12.24.  Cf. I.1.3. 
104  Suda  2479, in which Procopius is described as the secretary of Belisarius [ 
].  As PLRE IIIB, 1060, notes, this may well be a reference to Procopius role as assessor, 
although this is not the usual sense of the word . 
105  Bella III.14.3. 
106  Bella 6.29.32.  It is generally assumed that Procopius was continually in Belisarius service from 527 
to 540.  See J. A. S. Evans, Procopius (New York, 1972), 323; PLRE IIIB, 106062.  Cf. J. Howard-Johnston, 
The education and expertise of Procopius, Antiquit Tardive 8 (2000), 19, who suggests that there 
was a two year gap in Procopius service, between 534 and 536, during which time he was present in 
Africa.  Cf. pp. 5051. 
107  Cameron, Procopius, 14; Evans, Procopius, 36; PLRE IIIB, 1062.  On the date of Belisarius recall from 
Italy see PLRE IIIA, 208. 
108  Bella II.14.8. 
109  Bella II.22.9. 
110  The close relationship between the Bella and the Anecdota is underlined by the parallel wording of 
the prefaces to Bella VIII and the Anecdota, suggesting that these two texts were roughly 
contemporary.  Cameron, Procopius, 9, 50; G. Greatrex, Procopius the outsider?, in D. C. Smythe, ed., 
Strangers to Themselves: The Byzantine Outsider (Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1998), 216.  Contra J. A. S. 
Evans, The dates of Procopius works: A recapitulation of the evidence, GRBS 37 (1996), 31112, who 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Procopius writing process can only be speculated upon, however, he appears to have begun by 
writing a chronological account of those events in which he had participated while in 
Belisarius service, for which he had perhaps made drafts or notes during the 530s, and 
subsequently divided the material into the geographical divisions of the extant Bella, in the 
early 540s.111  The work was clearly revised from 545 onwards.112 
There is a general consensus that the first seven books of the Bella were completed in c. 551, 
with the invasions of the Slavs into the Balkans in early 551, discussed at the end of book VII,113 
providing a terminus post quem,114 with the majority of the work having been completed in the 
preceding decade.115  A terminus ante quem appears to be provided by the victories in Italy in 
552, of which Procopius seems to be unaware.116 
The date of completion of book VIII, apparently written later, in order to update the 
information provided in books IVII, is somewhat more contentious, being variously placed 
between 553 and 560.  A terminus post quem is provided by the last dateable event of the Bella 
suggests that the Anecdota must have been written after the composition of Bella VIII, interprets 
Procopius reference to ecclesiastical history which he intended to write in Bella VIII.25.13 as a 
reference to the discussion of ecclesiastical matters in the Anecdota.  However, contra Evans, there 
is no reason to suppose that Procopius did not genuinely intend to devote a separate work to 
ecclesiastical history, as Bella VIII.25.13 suggests. 
111  The evidence for the stages of composition of the Bella are outlined by G. Greatrex, The composition 
of Procopius Persian Wars and John the Cappadocian, Prudentia 27 (1995), 113. 
112  Cameron, Procopius, 236 and n. 66; cf. Evans, The dates of Procopius works, 3012, who suggests 
that the Bella must have been close to complete by 545, and that Procopius may have expected a rapid 
end to the Italian campaigns and thus to be able to publish the Bella in 545. 
113  Bella VII.40. 
114  Bury, History, 422; B. Croke, Procopius Secret History: Rethinking the date, GRBS 45 (2005), 423; 
Evans, Procopius, 41; G. Greatrex, The dates of Procopius works, BMGS 18 (1994), 102; idem, 
Perceptions of Procopius in recent scholarship, 97; A. Kaldellis, Procopius of Caesarea: Tyranny, 
History and Philosophy at the End of Antiquity (Philadelphia, 2004), 46; idem, Procopius Persian War: 
A thematic and literary analysis, in R. Macrides, ed., History as Literature in Byzantium (Farnham, 
2010), 253; W. Treadgold, The Early Byzantine Historians (Basingstoke, 2007), 1889.  Stein, Histoire, 
717, is still more specific, suggesting that books IVII of the Bella were completed in the spring of 551.  
Contra Cameron, Procopius, 8, who favours a date in 550. 
115  Cameron, Procopius, 8; Greatrex, The composition of Procopius Persian Wars, 49; Treadgold, The 
Early Byzantine Historians, 1857. 
116  Evans, Procopius, 41. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
 the battle of Mons Lactarius, in October 552.117  But the crux of the debate has been Procopius 
claim, in Bella VIII, that: 
For Khusro, having imposed an annual tribute of four centenaria upon the 
Romans, which he was clearly aiming for from the beginning, now, for 11 years 
and 6 months, he has plausibly received 46 centenaria on the pretext of a 
The original truce was that agreed in April 545, which was to last for five years, and required a 
payment of twenty centenaria from the Romans.119  In the autumn of 551, a second truce of five 
years was agreed, in exchange for a payment of twenty-six centenaria.120  Together, the two 
treaties cover a period of eleven and a half years, and would have ended in late 556.  However, 
whether Procopius was writing at this point (that is, in late 556),121 or whether he was simply 
noting the ultimate duration of the two treaties in exchange for two lump sum payments, 
remains contested.122  The latter interpretation is to be preferred, especially given that it is 
difficult to explain why, if Procopius did not finish writing book VIII of the Bella until 557 or 
later, he did not include discussion of any events after 552.123  Thus, Procopius probably 
composed book VIII of the Bella c. 553.124 
117  Bella VIII.35.20-38; with Greatrex Recent work on Procopius, 54 and n. 28.  Contra Bury, History, 422, 
who suggests that book VIII of the Bella covers military campaigns from 548 to 553. 
118  Bella VIII.15.17: [        ,  
     ,         ,  
      ...] 
119  Bella II.28.611, which dates the truce to the 19th years of Justinians reign (April 545 to March 546 
inclusive).  Cf. Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 546, who appears to place the entry a year too late.  See B. Croke, 
The Chronicle of Marcellinus: A Translation and Commentary (Sydney, 1995), 137.  For the precise 
date of the truce see Stein, Histoire, II, 502; and G. Greatrex, Recent work on Procopius and the 
composition of Wars VIII, BMGS 27 (2003), 545. 
120  Bella VIII.15.16, 12.  Cf. Agathias, Hist. 2.18.3.  Bella VIII.15.12 places the treaty in the 25th year of 
Justinians reign (April 551 to March 552 inclusive).  For the precise date see Stein, Histoire, II, 510; 
and Greatrex, Recent work on Procopius, 55. 
121  Thus, Evans, The dates of Procopius works, 3068, 312, who in fact suggests a date of 557 for the end 
of the truce; idem, The Power Game in Byzantium (London, 2011), 253. 
122  Greatrex, The dates of Procopius works, 1067; idem, Recent work on Procopius, 527; Croke, 
Procopius Secret History, 425. 
123  Croke, Procopius Secret History, 425.  Contra E. Kislinger, Ein Angriff zu viel.  Zur Verteidigung der 
Thermopylen in justinianischer Zeit, BZ 91 (1998), 546, whose suggestion that Bella II.4.1011 refers 
to the Cutrigur invasion of 558 or 559, and thus implies that the Bella was still being written at this 
point, has not won support. 
124  Bury, History, 422; Stein, Histoire, 717; Croke, Procopius Secret History, 425; Greatrex, Recent work 
on Procopius, 57; idem, Perceptions of Procopius in recent scholarship, 97; Howard-Johnston, The 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
As has already been noted, there is a close connection between the Bella and the Anecdota, and 
arguments that the views of the two works are completely incompatible with one another have 
now been dismissed.125  The date of completion of the Anecdota has been inferred from four 
references within the text to a period of 32 years during which Justinian had inflicted various 
misfortunes upon the Eastern Roman Empire.126  If this period were intended to refer to the 
length of Justinians reign at the time Procopius was writing, the Anecdota would have been 
written c. 558/9, since Justinian had been appointed co-emperor to his uncle, Justin I, on 1 April 
527.127  Alternatively, the 32 years could be counted from the accession of Justin I, on the basis 
that the Anecdota treats Justinian as the power behind the throne during the reign of his 
uncle,128 which would place the completion of the Anecdota c. 549/50.129 
The argument usually advanced in support of the latter interpretation is that there appear to 
be no clearly dateable references later than 550 in the Anecdota.130  The counter to this 
argument is, of course, that, if the Anecdota were envisaged as the complement to Bella IVII, 
it need only consider the period covered by that work, which concludes in 551, and that its 
contents therefore offer no indication of its date of completion.131  Procopius was, after all, 
education and expertise of Procopius, 2021; Treadgold, The Early Byzantine Historians, 18990.  Cf. 
Cameron, Procopius, 8. 
125  Greatrex, Procopius the outsider?, 2169. 
126  Anec. XVIII.33; XXIII.1; XXIV.29, 33. 
127  This view was originally advocated by F. Dahn, Prokopios von Csarea (Berlin, 1865), 485; and later 
revived by J. A. S. Evans, The dates of the Anecdota and De Aedificiis of Procopius, CP 64 (1969), 29
30; and, more recently, M. R. Cataudella, Historiography in the East, in G. Marasco, ed., Greek and 
Roman Historiography in Late Antiquity (Leiden, 2003), 4004; and Croke, Procopius Secret History, 
40531.  For the date of Justinians accession see PLRE II, 6478. 
128  Anec. VI.18, 26.  Cf. Bella III.9.5 and Aed. I.3.3. 
129  This argument was originally presented by J. Haury, Procopiana (Augsburg, 1891), 927; and has been 
followed by much subsequent scholarship.  See Bury, History, II, 422; Stein, Histoire, II, 72021; 
Cameron, Procopius, 89. 
130  Haury, Procopiana, 1819; Cameron, Procopius, 89; Greatrex, The dates of Procopius works, 105.  
Contra R. Scott, Justinians coinage and the Easter Reforms, and the date of the Secret History, BMGS 
11 (1987), 21521, who attempts to identify in the Anecdota two events after 550  a debasement of 
the coinage, which he correlates with a debasement noted by Malalas (XVIII.117) in 553 (Anec. 
XXV.1112); and Justinian requiring the Jews to postpone Passover if it fell before Easter, which would 
apparently have been the case in 553 (Anec. XXVIII.1618).  However, the dating of both events post-
550 has been strongly contested.  See Greatrex, The dates of Procopius works, 103-5; and Evans, The 
dates of Procopius works, 30810. 
131  Evans, The dates of Procopius works, 308. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
perfectly aware of the point at which Justinians reign began, since he dates other events by 
Justinians regnal years.  His decision to refer to periods of 32 years, without explicitly 
mentioning Justinians personal reign, suggests that he was referring to Justinians period of 
influence, rather than to his time as emperor. 
The matter is further complicated by the fact that the preface to the Anecdota implies that the 
text was not completed until after Bella IVII, which could not have been published before early 
551:132 
 Such things as have hitherto befallen the Roman people in their wars have been 
This would appear to render the earlier date for the Anecdota (549/50) impossible.  However, if 
the preface were a late addition, the sections referring to 32 years of Justinians influence, could 
well have been written in 549/50, prior to the publication of Bella IVII, and then completed 
after this, in late 551 or early 552.134 
The date of completion of the De Aedificiis is still more problematic, with scholarship split 
between an early and a late date.  With the exception of the contentious reference to the bridge 
over the Sangarius River (see further below),135 a terminus post quem for the works completion 
is provided by the repairs to the defences of Topirus, which had recently [  ] 
fallen to the Slavs (in 550).136  The completion of the De Aedificiis must also date to after the 
completion of Bella VIII, as it refers the reader to the discussion of the Euxine Sea in Bella VIII,137 
132  See p. 42. 
133  Anec. I.1: [               
...] 
134  Contra Evans, The dates of Procopius works, 308, who suggests that the preface to the Anecdota 
suggests that Procopius could not have begun writing the Anecdota until after Bella IVII was 
published. 
135  Bella V.3.811. 
136  Aed. IV.1114.  The date of the Slavic invasion is known from a reference to the same event in Bella 
VII.38.918. 
137  Aed. VI.1.8 and Bella VIII.6. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
and must thus be placed after 553.138  As a result, the early date for the De Aedificiis has generally 
been placed at c. 553/4.139 
However, a date of c. 553/4 has been contested on the basis that Procopius notes the 
construction of the bridge over the Sangarius River.140  The completion of the bridge is noted 
by both Paul the Silentiary, in his ekphrasis on Hagia Sophia, delivered at the re-dedication of 
the church in December 562; and in an epigram of Agathias, apparently engraved on the bridge 
itself, which appears to refer to the agreement of the peace treaty between the Eastern Roman 
Empire and Sasanian Persia in 560/1.141  The construction of the bridge is also noted by 
Theophanes, under the 33rd year of Justinians reign (April 559 to March 560 inclusive).142  
Construction of the bridge may therefore have begun in 559, and that year may be a terminus 
post quem for the completion of the De Aedificiis.143  But there are strong reasons to doubt the 
reliability of Theophanes text, for which his source is unclear.144 
Furthermore, there are convincing arguments in support of an earlier date.  While arguments 
ex silentio should undoubtedly be treated with caution,145 it is difficult to understand how 
Procopius could have described the floating dome of Hagia Sophia, in Constantinople, in such 
glowing terms, attributing the ingenuity of the structure to the emperor himself, had he been 
138  See pp. 423. 
139  Cameron, Procopius, 9-10; Greatrex, The dates of Procopius works, 10713. 
140  Bella V.3.811, esp. 10. 
141  Paul the Silentiary, 92833; Agathias, AP IX.641.  M. Whitby, Justinians bridge over the Sangarius and 
the date of Procopius De Aedificiis, JHS 105 (1985), 1367, stresses that it would not have been 
pertinent for Paul to mention the bridge were its completion not recent. 
142  Theophanes, AM 6052 (ed. De Boor, p. 234). 
143  The major proponent of this view has been Whitby, Justinians bridge over the Sangarius, 13647, 
who argues that the De Aedificiis could not have been completed until 562.  But see also Cataudella, 
Historiography in the East, 397401.  Contra Greatrex, The dates of Procopius works, 10713. 
144  Whitby, Justinians bridge over the Sangarius, 13740, argues that the information must be derived 
from Malalas, and should be regarded as accurate.  However, this cannot be verified, as there is a 
lacuna in Malalas text at this point.  See Mango & Scott, The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, 344 
n. 1. 
145  Whitby, Justinians bridge over the Sangarius, 142, is undoubtedly correct to stress that the 
objections to the late date raised by Stein, Histoire, II, 837, that the text does not mention the 
Samaritan revolt of 555 or the Tzani revolt of 557, are not significant, since such material could hardly 
have been included in a text which functioned as a panegyric. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
writing the De Aedificiis in 560, in full knowledge of the collapse of the dome in 558.146  While 
some have argued that mentioning the domes collapse would have been impolitic, and that 
after its reconstruction, this would have ceased to be an issue,147 the question remains as to why 
Procopius would not have exploited the encomiastic potential of the reconstructed dome.  The 
earlier date for the De Aedificiis is therefore to be preferred, although the argument that book 
I of the De Aedificiis was completed before the collapse of the dome of Hagia Sophia, and the 
remaining books were completed later, cannot be entirely dismissed.148 
Debates concerning the date and nature of the De Aedificiis are also complicated by the 
transmission of the text, which is preserved in two different recensions  the short and the 
long.  The standard edition of the text, that of Haury, is based on the long recension, since Haury 
regarded the short recension as lacunose, and thus does not acknowledge the differences 
between the two recensions in the apparatus criticus.149  Traditionally, the long recension of 
the text has been regarded as the original, and the short recension as a later epitome.150  
However, Federico Montinaro has now argued that the short recension of the De Aedificiis 
represents the original, with the long recension representing a subsequent version re-edited 
by Procopius himself.151  Such a conclusion would have significant implications for the 
understanding of Procopius writing process, implying, as it does, that he revised his own work 
after some years. 
146  Aed. I.1.4550. 
147  Whitby, Justinians bridge over the Sangarius, 1423. 
148  This view was originally advocated by G. Downey, The composition of Procopius De Aedificiis, TAPA 
78 (1947), 17183; and was subsequently adopted by Evans, The dates of Procopius works, 3036, 
149  Procopii Caesariensis opera omnia IV, ed. J. Haury (Leipzig, 1964), v. 
150  B. Flusin, Ltablissement du text, sa nature et la forme littraire: remarques sur la tradition 
manuscrite du De Aedificiis, Antiquit Tardive 8 (2000), 917. 
151  F. Montinaro, Byzantium and the Slavs in the reign of Justinian: Comparing the two recensions of 
Procopiuss Buildings, in V. Ivanievi and M. Kazanski, eds., The Pontic-Danubian Realm in the 
Period of the Great Migration (Paris-Beograd, 2012), 91-105.  This view had previously been proposed 
by Downey, The composition of Procopius De Aedificiis, 17183, albeit largely on stylistic grounds. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
However, the evidence for the anteriority of the short recension drawn from book VI of the De 
Aedificiis is unconvincing.  The long recension of the text, offered in the standard edition, 
includes the statement: 
 And in the interior, at the extremities of this land, where the barbarian Berbers 
dwell nearby, he [Justinian] had built the most powerful fortresses against 
them, on account of which they are no longer able to overrun the Roman 
Empire; 
while the short recension of the text omits: 
 on account of which they are no longer able to overrun the Roman Empire.152 
Montinaro argues that this last clause can only be a later addition to the text, added following 
the Roman victory over the Berbers at the battle of the Plains of Cato in 548.153  However, there 
is no reason to believe that this was the case.  Such claims concerning the security of Africa 
were disseminated by the Roman imperial government from the capture of Carthage in 533, 
irrespective of the reality of the situation.154  And, if Procopius were including aspects of 
imperial propaganda within the De Aedificiis, the inclusion of such a statement prior to 548 
would hardly be surprising. 
Given that a synoptic edition of the two recensions of the De Aedificiis is yet to be published, 
reaching a definitive conclusion on which of the two recensions of the De Aedificiis was written 
first is difficult.  However, when considering Procopius writings on Africa, the relationship 
between the two recensions is of limited significance  there are fewer differences between 
book VI of the De Aedificiis in the long and short recensions than in most other books of the 
text155 - and the issue will not be considered further here. 
152  Bella VI.6.17: [        ,      
,     ,         
  ]; with Montinaro, Byzantium and the Slavs in the reign of Justinian, 978. 
153  Montinaro, Byzantium and the Slavs in the reign of Justinian, 98. 
154  Cf. J. Nov. 1. pref.; with pp. 1545. 
155  Montinaro, Byzantium and the Slavs in the reign of Justinian, 934. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
According to other writers, although not by his own admission, Procopius was a lawyer 
[],156 and he is often thought to have received a legal education.157  Certainly, his writings, 
particularly the Anecdota, suggest that he was familiar with Roman law,158 and legal training 
was likely to have been an expectation for appointment as Belisarius assessor.159  But Procopius 
need not have practised as a lawyer (advocatus).  He provides no information concerning his 
own legal practice,160 and not everyone who undertook legal education ultimately practised as 
an advocatus.161 
Procopius evident level of education and his career path suggest that he may have belonged to 
a relatively well-to-do family.162  Later writers bestow upon him the rank of illustris.163  This 
was, however, a rank relatively commonly bestowed during Justinians reign, as the lower ranks 
ceased to have significance,164 and the reason for Procopius elevation, if indeed it occurred, is 
unknown.165  There is no reason to view him as the voice of a disenfranchised senatorial class.166 
156  Menander, frag. 27 (ed. Blockley); with PLRE IIIB, 1060, which notes that it is impossible to know 
whether Menander himself referred to Procopius as  or whether this was the supposition of 
Menanders 10th century excerptor.  Agathias, Hist. prooem. 22, 32; II.19.1; IV.15.1, 26.4; 29.5, 30.5; 
Evagrius, HE IV.12, 19; V.24; Suda  2479.  It is notable that, of the nine references to Procopius made 
by Agathias, seven are to  . 
157  Cameron, Procopius, 6; G. Greatrex, Lawyers and historians in late antiquity, in R. Mathisen, ed., Law, 
Society, and Authority in Late Antiquity (Oxford, 2001), 150; idem, Perceptions of Procopius in recent 
scholarship, 77; T. Honor, Tribonian (London, 1978), 6 n. 42, 243.  Cf. Howard-Johnston, The 
education and expertise of Procopius, 22, suggests that Procopius may be identified as a  by 
Agathias and Menander simply on the basis that this was their own background, and it was thus 
assumed to be a suitable background for a historian.  Contra G. Fatouros, Zur Prokop-Biographie, 
Klio 62 (1980), 51718, who suggests that the term , when used in reference to Procopius, was 
used generically to mean writer. 
158  Anec. XIX.17-25; XX.17, 20; XXVIII; XXIX.17-25; Bella I.19.26; III.3.3.  H. F. Hitzig, Die Assessoren der 
rmischen Magistrate und Richter (Munich, 1893), 169 n. 608; Greatrex, Lawyers and historians, 150 
and n. 11. 
159  Greatrex, Lawyers and historians, 150 
160  Cf. Agathias (Hist. prooem. 14), who describes himself as employed in the law courts. 
161  Cf. Menander (frag. 1 (ed. Blockley)), who notes that he completed his legal training, but decided not 
to pursue the profession. 
162  Greatrex, Perceptions of Procopius in recent scholarship, 79. 
163  Suda  2479. 
164  Jones, LRE, 528-30.  Contra Evans, Procopius, 38, who claims that this rank placed Procopius in the 
inner circle of the aristocracy. 
165  Cf. Greatrex, Lawyers and historians, 159, who suggests that Procopius might have been granted the 
rank illustris for his literary works.  However, this is entirely speculative. 
166  Greatrex, Procopius the outsider?, 226.  Contra B. Rubin, Das Zeitalter Iustinians (Berlin, 1960), I, 
23445. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
According to the 7th century chronicle of John, bishop of Nikiu, Procopius was praefectus urbi 
Constantinopolitanae.167  Certainly, a man named Procopius is otherwise attested as praefectus 
urbi Constantinopolitanae in 562/3,168 and Procopius the historian has sometimes been 
identified with the prefect.169  However, it is more likely that John of Nikiu, writing a century 
later, mistakenly conflated two different individuals called Procopius.170 
Procopius date of death is unknown.  The apparently unfinished state of the De Aedificiis 
suggests that Procopius may have died before he could finish revising the text.171  If an earlier 
date for the De Aedificiis is accepted,172 then Procopius literary production had ceased by the 
mid-550s, and his death should probably be placed around this point.  There is no indication 
that he outlived Justinian, which would have permitted more overt criticism of the emperor in 
the publicly available Bella, rather than simply in the Anecdota.173 
In the specific context of events in Africa, it is clear that Procopius was a member of the 
expeditionary force which landed at Caput Vada in September 533.174  He does not specify how 
long he remained in Africa, but it has generally been assumed that he returned to 
Constantinople with Belisarius in 534.175  However, Procopius was again in Africa at Easter 536, 
since he notes that he sailed for Syracuse with Solomon, following the mutiny,176 and it is 
possible that he remained in Africa, after Belisarius departure in 534, as an official in Solomons 
administration.177  This argument is perhaps supported by Procopius evident interest in 
167  John of Nikiu, XCII.20 (trans. R. H. Charles, The Chronicle of John, Bishop of Nikiu (London, 1916), 
233). 
168  John Malalas, XVIII.141; Theophanes, AM 6055 (ed. De Boor, pp. 2389).  See also PLRE IIIB, 1066 
(Procopius 3). 
169  T. Honor, Tribonian (London, 1978), 243. 
170  PLRE IIIB, 1066; Cameron, Procopius, 1415; Howard-Johnston, The education and expertise of 
Procopius, 22. 
171  Cameron, Procopius, 1415; Evans, The dates of Procopius works, 306. 
172  See pp. 457. 
173  Greatrex, Procopius the outsider?, 218-19. 
174  Bella 3.12.3. 
175  PLRE IIIB, 1061. 
176  Bella 4.14.3941. 
177  Contra PLRE IIIB, 1061, which suggests that Procopius had accompanied Belisarius to Sicily in 535, 
and was on a mission to Carthage at the time of the mutiny in 536. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Solomons campaigns between 534 and 536, concerning which he seems well informed,178 and 
his determination to present Solomon in a positive light, despite his evident inadequacies as a 
commander.179  Following his departure from Africa in 536, there is no evidence that Procopius 
ever returned. 
In the style of classical historiography, Procopius establishes his authority as narrator by 
stressing his use of autopsy.180  He notes at the opening of the Bella: 
 And he [Procopius] was aware that he, most of all, was able to write these things, 
on account of no other reason that that, since it came about that he was 
appointed adviser to the general Belisarius, he was present at almost all the 
events;181 
and returns to this point when narrating the launch of the campaign against Vandal Africa: 
 And Procopius, who wrote this account, was also with them [Belisarius and his 
wife].  Previously, he had been very much afraid of the danger, but later he saw 
a vision in a dream, which caused him to take courage and encouraged him to 
join the expedition.182 
Procopius presentation of himself as one of the sceptics won over to the virtues of the 
campaign by a vision reinforces the message that the campaign was undertaken by the will of 
God,183 thus personalizing a repeated theme of imperial representations of the campaign.184  In 
some respects, such comments are no more than a trope of classical historiography.  However, 
in contrast to other sections of the Bella, Procopius role as an eyewitness undoubtedly shaped 
his narrative of events in Africa, at least from the launch of the campaign of conquest until 
Belisarius departure in 534. 
178  On Solomons campaigns see Bella IV.1113; against which should be contrasted Procopius more 
minimalist treatment of the campaigns of John Troglita (Bella IV.28.4551). 
179  See p. 201. 
180  Cf. Thucydides, V.26.5. 
181  Bella I.1.3: [            ,  
            
 .] 
182  Bella III.12.3: [    ,   ,     
  ,              
 .] 
183  Cameron, Procopius, 173. 
184  See section 2.4.  Cf. I. Const. Imperatoriam pref.; CJ 1.27.1.1; and D. Const. Tanta/ 23. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Certainly, Procopius narrative of the Roman campaign against the Vandals is comparatively 
detailed.  The campaign occupies by far the greatest part of books III and IV of the Bella, and is 
the most extensively worked section of the narrative, despite covering a period of less than a 
year.185  And the campaign to capture Carthage is undoubtedly the high-point of the African 
narrative of the Bella, first reporting the Roman entry into Carthage, unopposed and welcomed 
by the local population;186 and then culminating in Belisarius triumph at Constantinople.187 
The African campaign is one of the few sections of the Bella in which Procopius reliance on his 
own observations is explicitly evident, the march from Caput Vada to Carthage being the only 
section of the text narrated in the first person plural.188  That said, it would have been 
impossible for any one individual to observe all that Procopius reports.  His ability to narrate 
events from multiple perspectives, such as the events surrounding the battle of Decimum, in 
relation to which he presents a number of parallel narratives, suggests that Procopius must 
have had access to a variety of sources of information, in addition to his own observations.189  
His role as Belisarius assessor, and then, perhaps, as an official in Solomons administration, 
would have given him access to the military high command, which at this point in time was 
also the civil administration, and to its documents.  Procopius may thus have been able to draw 
on the collective knowledge of the African administration in both oral and written form. 
However, Procopius was, at best, present in Africa between 533 and 536, which represents only 
a small portion of the period covered by his narrative,190 and he provides no explicit 
information on the sources upon which he must have drawn for information concerning those 
events which occurred after his departure from Africa.  Writing in Constantinople in the 540s, 
Procopius may have had access to official archival material, but, since nothing is known 
185  Bella III.12IV.8. 
186  Bella II.20.13, 21. 
187  Bella IV.9. 
188  PLRE IIIB, 1061. 
189  Bella III.1819. 
190  See pp. 5051. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
concerning his position in the capital, this is entirely speculative.  Alternatively, he may have 
been restricted to such information as was disseminated by the imperial government 
concerning events in Africa. 
Procopius narrative of events in Africa becomes progressively more compressed.  Consistent 
with his composition of Bella IVII as a whole,191 Procopius appears to have completed his 
original narrative of events in Africa by 545/6.  His account of John Troglitas campaigns in 
Africa (546 to 548) is cursory, and creates the impression of an after-thought, perhaps prompted 
by a desire to report the final victory at the Plains of Cato.192  The impression that Procopius 
lost interest in events in Africa, either after his own departure from the region in 536, or after 
it became clear that the dramatic victory of 533/4 was only the beginning of a long and drawn-
out process, is hard to avoid.  His last African reference in book IV of the Bella is to the Roman 
victory at the battle of the Plains of Cato, in 548  an event which is again noted in book VIII.193  
His latest dateable African reference in Bella VIII is to the dispatch of troops to Sardinia by John 
Troglita, the magister militum per Africam, in 551.194 
Procopius Bella is the major narrative source for events in Africa during Justinians reign, but, 
for events following the campaign against the Vandals, it is sparse in its presentation of 
anything other than the actions of the Roman military command, and it lacks any attempt to 
elucidate imperial intentions in the region.  In order to understand Procopius attitudes 
towards Justinianic policy in Africa, and thus his biases in presenting it, it is necessary to turn 
to the De Aedificiis and the Anecdota. 
Procopius sources of information about Africa in the De Aedificiis are uncertain.  He concludes 
the text with the observation: 
191  See p. 42. 
192  Bella 4.28.4552.  On John Troglitas campaigns see section 5.6. 
193  Bella IV.28.4752; VIII.17.2022.  On the battle of the Plains of Cato see p. 231. 
194  Bella VIII.24.317; with n. 1412. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
 Thus, as many of the constructions of Justinian as I have succeeded in learning, 
either having seen them myself or having heard about them from those who 
have seen them, I have set out in my account to the best of my ability.195 
However, Procopius account of the African buildings cannot have been written largely from 
memory.  The De Aedificiis cannot have been completed until at least 550,196 some twenty years 
after he had left Africa.  Procopius was unlikely to have remembered every detail of every site 
he had visited twenty years earlier, and some of the building work he reported must have been 
undertaken after his departure.  Furthermore, there is little reason to suppose that Procopius 
was well travelled beyond the route from Caput Vada to Carthage, an impression supported by 
the fact that the only African cities, other than Carthage, for which Procopius offers 
information beyond generic references to fortification, are Leptis Magna, Hadrumetum and 
Caput Vada, the latter two being cities through which the expeditionary force passed.197  The 
only African city with which Procopius was likely to have been really familiar was Carthage, 
and his personal knowledge of Africa should certainly not be overestimated.198 
Procopius may have compiled his list of sites in Africa from official lists of fortifications to 
which he might have had access when at Constantinople.199  However, even if he had access to 
official lists, they may have been lists of planned projects, rather than lists of completed 
projects.200  Verification of Procopius information through archaeological evidence is 
extremely difficult,201 and the level of trust placed in book VI of the De Aedificiis is somewhat 
surprising given the scepticism with which other books have been treated, and the problematic 
195  Aed. 6.7.18: [           
   ,     .] 
196  See p. 45. 
197  Aed. VI.4.211 (Leptis Magna); VI.6.17 (Hadrumetum); VI.6.816 (Caput Vada).  Cf. Aed. VI.5.111 
(Carthage).  Cf. Cameron, Procopius, 182. 
198  This point is stressed by Cameron, Byzantine Africa, 34; eadem, Procopius, 184. 
199  D. Roques, Les Contructions de Justinien de Procope de Csare, AT 8 (2000), 37.  Contra Cameron, 
Procopius, 183, who argues that there are far too many omissions to accept that Procopius was 
working from a list of completed fortifications. 
200  Cameron, Procopius, 183. 
201  See section 3.5. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
manner in which the text has been transmitted.202  The information provided has been 
interpreted as evidence for an imperially directed fortification program in Africa, and thus for 
a coherent defensive strategy in the region.203 
Two major themes emerge from Procopius account of a supposed fortification program in 
Africa.  The first is that Justinian, through his restoration of the fortifications of the region, was 
restoring to the African population the security which it had enjoyed under the Roman Empire 
prior to Vandal rule.  This point is most evident from Procopius repeated claim that the 
Vandals had destroyed the walls of many formerly Roman cities lest the fortifications be used 
against the Vandals should the Romans attempt to retake the region.204  However, in many 
cases, Procopius claims of the wilful Vandal destruction of earlier Roman fortifications, while 
certainly not impossible, cannot be verified, and could conceivably be seen as no more than a 
literary device intended to emphasize Justinians role as restorer of empire  a repeated theme 
of the De Aedificiis, and one which had particular resonance in relation to the conquered 
provinces of Africa.205 
The second theme which emerges from book VI of the De Aedificiis is the view that Justinians 
fortification program was intended to create a clear and tangible demarcation between the 
Romano-African population and the Berbers, and a barrier which would prevent the Berbers 
from entering Roman territory.  Procopius makes a direct statement of what he presents as 
imperial policy in this respect: 
 And our emperor had a care for it [Libya], watching over it, so that it might not 
suffer anything from the inroads of the Berbers living adjacent to it;206 
and similarly: 
202  See pp. 478. 
203  See n. 208; with section 3.5. 
204  Aed. VI.5.24, 6.2.  Similarly, Bella III.5.8, 15.9. 
205  Cf. the theme of restoration in the Justinianic legislation relating to Africa.  See p. 134. 
206  Aed. VI.2.2: [         ,      
      ...]  Similarly, Aed. VI.2.21, 6.17, 7.13. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
In the interior of this land [Byzacena], at its borders, where the barbarian 
Berbers lived nearby, he [the emperor] has built very strong fortresses against 
them, on account of which they [the Berbers] were no longer able to overrun 
the Roman Empire.207 
Procopius claim, that the Romans attempted to build defensive barriers along the frontiers of 
Roman Africa, in order to keep the Berbers from attacking the Romano-African population, has 
sometimes been accepted as a genuine statement of Roman strategy in Africa.208  However, such 
a defensive strategy would have been impractical.  The hypothetical Roman provinces of Africa, 
as outlined in the legislation establishing the military administration of the prefecture,209 would 
have covered a vast area, and the distances between individual settlements would simply have 
been too great to provide an effective defensive barrier.210  Furthermore, such a view of Roman 
strategy in Africa fails to take into account the porous nature of the Roman frontier and the 
degree of assimilation which had already occurred between the Romano-African and Berber 
populations.211  The idea of a clearly defined frontier line is simply not applicable in this 
context.212 
Nevertheless, it is not altogether surprising that Procopius should choose to present the 
objectives of Roman strategy in Africa in such a manner it is entirely consistent with his own 
presentation of the African population in the Bella.  Procopius is remarkably unsophisticated in 
his treatment of the Berbers, entirely failing to distinguish between the various tribal groups, 
207  Aed. VI.6.17; with n. 152.  On the level of Roman control in the Aurs massif see pp. 2136. 
208  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 13944, 2778.  Diehl argued, based on perceived parallels with defensive 
strategy in the eastern provinces and on the De Aedificiis, that Justinians strategy in Africa involved 
the construction of two lines of defense  an inner and an outer.  He suggested that the outer line of 
defence would have been composed of a string of fortified towns, interspaced with forts, all of which 
would have had small garrisons, while the inner line of defence would have been composed of larger 
fortified citadels with larger garrisons.  The purpose of the outer line was to act as the kind of barrier 
described by Procopius and to provide forward bases from which to launch punitive expeditions, 
while the purpose of the inner line was to provide support bases for the outer line and to provide 
places of refuge for the population, in the event the outer line was by-passed by invaders.  This view 
was followed by S. Gsell, Les monuments antiques de lAlgrie (Paris, 1901), II, 344-8. 
209  CJ 1.27.1.12; with pp. 1228. 
210  Pringle, Defence, 967. 
211  See section 4.3. 
212  Cf. Ioh. VI.36-52, which has been read as evidence that John Troglita re-established the limes system 
in Africa.  See Pringle, Defence, 367 n. 28. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
and their differing objectives.  Instead, he dismisses the tribes as , and falls back on the 
topos of the barbarian in order to explain their actions.  Throughout the Bella, the Berbers are 
characterised as being extremely untrustworthy and, in particular, as being faithless allies,213 as 
well as having no concern for the well-being of their children,214 and as being inclined to make 
covert attacks, which was apparently regarded as an additional form of dishonesty.215  Indeed, 
this characterisation is not significantly different to Procopius characterisation of other non-
Roman peoples in the Bella, with the exception of the Persians.216  For Procopius, Roman and 
Berber are entirely distinct, the civilized and the uncivilized, and this is reflected in his 
presentation of Roman strategy.217  Neither the Bella nor the De Aedificiis demonstrates any 
conception of Roman-Berber assimilation or of a frontier zone. 
Furthermore, given that the De Aedificiis cannot have been written until at least 550,218 
Procopius focus on fortification as a means of creating a barrier between the Romano-African 
population and the Berbers probably reflects a retrospective attempt to present Roman tactics 
in Africa immediately following the conquest as part of a coherent Roman strategy against the 
threat posed by the Berbers, which would have been far more evident following the raids of the 
540s.219  In this respect, book VI of the De Aedificiis functions not only as a panegyric, but also, 
in a sense, as an apology for imperial policy in Africa. 
Indeed, the sense that the Eastern Roman Empire had been less than successful in Africa is yet 
more evident in the Anecdota.  Procopius undoubtedly presents Justinians conquest of Africa 
in the Anecdota as an example of the emperors inclination towards destruction: 
213  Eg. Bella IV.8.9, 13.37, 17.10. 
214  Bella IV.8.10, 11.4. 
215  Bella IV.8.21. 
216  See Kaldellis, Procopius of Caesarea, 1312. 
217 Cameron, Byzantine Africa, 345. 
218  See p. 45. 
219  See pp. 1817, 19096. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
 And since it was nothing to him to destroy the Roman empire, he succeeded in 
the conquest of Libya and Italy for no other reason than in order to destroy the 
men of these countries together with those previously under his power.220 
Nevertheless, while his comments regarding Africa are expressed in terms similar to those used 
for his criticisms of other aspects of Justinians regime, they should not necessarily be dismissed 
as invective.  Procopius claims that Justinian made little attempt to consolidate his territorial 
holdings in Africa following the Vandal defeat and that he made no attempt to win over the 
local population, which had good reason to be hostile to the Roman administration, appear to 
be borne out by the problems faced by the Roman administration in Africa in the 530s and 
540s.221  As will be demonstrated in subsequent chapters, Procopius comments in the Anecdota 
appear to represent a legitimate retrospective critique of Justinians policy in Africa and, while 
studies of 6th century Africa have legitimately focused on books III and IV of the Bella, these 
texts need to be read in the context of Procopius corpus, rather than in isolation. 
1.3 Corippus 
Procopius Bella is undoubtedly the best known literary source for Africa during the Justinianic 
period.  However, its predominance rests as much on the fact that it is the only source of 
information for many events, as on its accuracy, which often simply cannot be assessed.  
However, for the Berber hostilities which occurred between 546 and 548, and for the Roman 
military response to them, as well as for some earlier events, an alternative account exists in 
Corippus Iohannis  an eight book, hexameter poem, which appears to have been modelled on 
Vergils Aeneid.222  Given the limited documentation for Africa during the 6th century, Corippus 
account might be expected to be regarded as providing a vitally important counter-check to 
220  Anec. VI.25: [         ,      
               
   .]  Cf. Anec. XVIII.14. 
221  Anec. XVIII.9. 
222  On this point see J. Blnsdorf, Aeneadas rursus cupiunt resonare Camenae: Vergils epische Form in 
der Johannis des Corippus, in E. Lefvre, ed., Monumentum Chilionense (Festschrift E. Burck) 
(Amsterdam, 1975), 524ff. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Procopius version of events.  And yet, there remains considerable doubt about the nature and 
value of the historical data which Corippus provides. 
Three poems have been attributed to Corippus.  Aside from the Iohannis, which will be 
discussed in greater detail below, Corippus was also the author of two panegyrics  the In 
laudem Iustini augusti minoris (henceforth, In laudem), to the emperor Justin II (565578), and 
the Panegyricus Anastasii, to Anastasius, who was magister officiorum in 565/6 and quaestor 
sacri palatii from 565/6 to 571/2.223  The two panegyrics are preserved in full in a single 10th 
century Visigothic manuscript (Matritensis 10029), although excerpts from the In Laudem are 
also preserved in four later manuscripts.224  The Panegyricus Anastasii, which comprises only 
51 lines, is incorporated into the far longer In laudem, as a second preface. 
The In laudem comprises of four books  the first three commemorating Justins accession to 
the throne and coronation on 14 November 565, and the fourth describing the emperors 
elevation to the consulship on 1 January 566.225  The final lines of book III suggest that the work 
was originally intended to comprise three books and was subsequently extended.226  A 
panegyric may be expected to be topical, and the first three books have generally been dated 
to 566, and the final book to late 566 or early 567.227  The Panegyricus Anastasii was composed 
slightly earlier than the In laudem, presumably in 565/6.228 
223  Contra H. Hofmann, berlegungen zu einer Theorie der nichtchristlichen Epik der lateinischen 
Sptantike, Philologus 132.1 (1988), 112, who argues that the Panegyricus Anastasii is only the 
preface to a now lost panegyric which was preserved in the also lost Codex Ovetensis.  On Anastasius 
see PLRE IIIA, 646. 
224  For a more detailed discussion of the manuscript tradition see Averil Cameron, Flavius Cresconius 
Corippus: In laudem Iustini Augusti minoris (London, 1976), 204. 
225  For the chronology of, and sources for, these events see PLRE IIIA, 755. 
226  Iust. III.4026. 
227  These dates were originally proposed by Cameron, Flavius Cresconius Corippus, 2 and 110, and have 
been accepted by subsequent studies, with the exception of S. Ants, Corippe: loge de lempereur 
Justin II (Paris, 1981), xviixix. 
228  E. Stein, Studien zur Geschichte des byzantinischen Reiches, vornehmlich unter den Kaisern Justinus 
II und Tiberius Constantinus (Stuttgart, 1919), 28.  This view is followed by R. Kastor, Guardians of 
Language: The Grammarian and Society in Late Antiquity (Berkeley, 1981), 261-2; and, more 
tentatively, by Cameron, Flavius Cresconius Corippus, 123.  On Anastasius, the addressee of the 
Panegyricus Anastasii, see PLRE IIIB, 646. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Although rarely contested, the evidence for the Iohannis and the In laudem and Panegyricus 
Anastasii having the same author is limited.  While secondary literature conventionally refers 
to the author of all three works as Flavius Cresconius Corippus, in the sole surviving manuscript 
of the Iohannis, the author of the poem is attested only as Crestonius.229  This has been 
corrected to Cresconius on the basis of an earlier, but no longer extant, manuscript  the 11th 
century Codex Casiensis  which was headed the Iohannis Cresconium de bellis Libicis.230  The 
Codex Matritensis, on the other hand, attributes the In laudem and the Panegyricus Anastasii 
to Corippus.231  The attribution of all three poems to the same author is based on the Codex 
Budensis, which has been lost since 1526, but is noted in the writings of the Austrian humanist, 
Cuspinian.232  The Codex Budensis apparently attributed the Iohannis to Fl. Cresconius 
Gorippus.233 
Given that all known manuscripts are comparatively late, and that the discrepancies between 
them can easily be explained as copying errors (neither the substitution of C for G, nor T for C, 
is particularly surprising), the established attribution of all three poems to the same author will 
not be challenged here.  And, while Riedlberger has some grounds upon which to argue that 
the author of the Iohannis (and, indeed, the author of the In laudem and the Panegyricus 
Anastasii) should be referred to as Gorippus, the name Corippus will be retained here, in 
reference to the author of all three poems, in the interests of clarity. 
The precise dating of the Iohannis will be discussed in greater detail below, but it suffices to say 
here that the two panegyrics were written almost twenty years later.  As a result, their 
relevance to any discussion of Corippus earlier work may be doubted.  However, given the 
229  Partsch, Corippi africani grammatici libri, xliii n.1. 
230  Ibid, xlvii n.1. 
231  Ibid, xliii n.1. 
232  P. Riedlberger, Philologischer, historischer und liturgischer Kommentar zum 8. Buch der Johannis 
der Gorippus nebst kritischer Edition und bersetzung (Groningen, 2010), 28-31. 
233  Partsch, Corippi africani grammatici libri, xliii n.1; Riedlberger, Philologischer, historischer und 
liturgischer Kommentar, 29. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
extreme paucity of information about Corippus himself, the meagre biographical information 
contained in the In laudem and the Panegyricus Anastasii is important for contextualizing the 
Iohannis. 
A scribal note in the Codex Matritensis describes Corippus as Africanus Grammaticus,234 and 
discussions of Corippus background have traditionally begun from the assumption that this 
description is accurate.235  However, the description is the supposition of a 10th century 
Visigothic scribe.236  While he may have had additional information concerning the author of 
the Iohannis, which has now been lost, it is equally possible that the description was simply his 
inference based on the contents of the text itself. 
Nevertheless, the scribe of the Codex Matritensis was undoubtedly right to regard Corippus as 
a native of Africa.  Aside from the general degree of knowledge of the region  both cultural 
and geographical - which the Iohannis appears to display, both the Panegyricus Anastasii and 
the In laudem show a continued interest in Africa.237  Furthermore, the Iohannis shows a good 
knowledge of the region surrounding Carthage.238  On the basis of his statement: 
Shall I, ignorant as I am, having once recited in the countryside, speak my 
verses openly among the people of the city?239 
Corippus has been assumed to have lived in one of the villages in Carthages hinterland.240  
However, the statement should probably not be taken literally.  Such self-depreciating remarks 
234  J. Partsch, Corippi africani grammatici libri qui supersunt (Berlin, 1879), xliii. 
235  Thus, for example, the title of Partschs edition, Corippi africani grammatici libri qui supersunt. 
236  B. Baldwin, The career of Corippus, CQ 28 (1978), 372. 
237  Pan. Anast. 3840. 
 Indeed, Stein, Histoire, II, 693, has argued that Corippus focus on Africa at the time of writing the 
Panegyricus Anastasii and the In laudem might have stemmed from concern over the revolt of the 
sons of Cusina in 563.  See pp. 2734. 
238  Zarini, La prface de la Johannide, 79. 
239  Ioh. pref. 256: [quid <quod ego> ignarus, quondam per rura locutus,/urbis per populos carmina mitto 
palam?] 
240  H. Hofmann, Corippus as a patristic author?, VigChr 43 (1989), 362; Kastor, Guardians of Language, 
261; C. Schindler, Per carmina laudes: Untersuchungen zur sptantiken Verspanegyrik von Claudien 
bis Coripp (Berlin, 2009), 227. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
and, in particular, the move from country to city, were a conventional literary opening.241  
Corippus was more likely to have been an inhabitant of Carthage itself,242 not least because the 
citys established literary circles would have afforded him far more extensive opportunities.243 
Whether or not Corippus was actually a grammaticus  a teacher within the classical education 
system - is difficult to answer.  He was undoubtedly well educated.  Whatever ones opinion of 
his poetic style, the Iohannis reveals a familiarity with the classical corpus, as well as with the 
works of various late antique writers.244  Furthermore, the Iohannis shows that Corippus had at 
least some familiarity with the technical requirements of classical Latin poetry.  The poem 
consists of a preface in elegiac couplets, followed by eight books of hexameters.  In its use of 
hexameters, the Iohannis is consistent with the technical requirements of Latin epic.  While 
Corippus use of metre has occasionally drawn criticism, and his adherence to its rules at times 
give his verse a feeling of monotony,245 his use of his chosen metre may not be especially 
inspired, but is for the most part correct.246 
One may thus conclude that Corippus had the technical knowledge required to compose Latin 
verse in the classical tradition, but was not always entirely successful in applying it, perhaps as 
a result of inexperience, or the need to produce the Iohannis in a hurry, or simply through a 
241  Zarini, La prface de la Johannide, 79. 
242  Thus, Blnsdorf, Aeneadas rursus cupiunt resonare Camenae, 524; Zarini, La prface de la 
Johannide, 79. 
243  See G. Hays, Romuleis Libicisque Litteris: Fulgentius and the Vandal Renaissance, in A. Merrills, 
ed., Vandals, Romans and Berbers: New Perspectives on Late Antique North Africa (Farnham, 2004), 
1257; and Y. Hen, Roman Barbarians: The Royal Court and Culture in the Early Medieval West 
(Basingstoke, 2007), 6971, 923, on the cultural context in which literature was produced at Carthage 
during the late Vandal period.  There is little reason to suppose that this context should have 
disappeared following the Roman conquest. 
244  R. Amann, De Corippo priorum poetarum Latinorum imitatore particula altera, in Programm des 
grossherzoglichen Gymnasiumszu Oldenberg (Oldenberg, 1888), 1326, identified clear allusions to 
some thirty-three classical and late antique authors, as well as potential allusions to numerous others. 
245  R. Dodi, La Iohannis di Corippo fonte storica dei fatti dAfrica del 546548, NRS 70 (1986), 116. 
246  Dodi, La Iohannis di Corippo, 112.  Blnsdorf, Aeneadas rursus cupiunt resonare Camenae, 526, 
equally stresses that Corippus metre is largely correct. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
lack of aptitude.247  In the absence of other 6th century Latin verse, it is impossible to know 
whether Corippus prosody is any better or worse than that of his contemporaries. 
Is it reasonable to assume that Corippus was a grammaticus?  In many respects the question is 
unimportant.  Corippus work suggests that he had almost certainly been the recipient of a 
classical education, which would have permitted him to have worked as a grammaticus.  But, 
equally, there is no conclusive evidence that he did.  The entry of a grammaticus into the 
imperial bureaucracy seems to have been very unusual  only five cases (including Corippus) 
are known in the 5th and 6th centuries, and all except Corippus taught at significant centres of 
learning.248 
Nevertheless, the assumption that Corippus was a grammaticus, together with his own claims 
of provincialism, have led to certain suppositions regarding his career  namely, that he should 
be identified with the so-called wandering poets  itinerant, professional poets, many of whom 
were also grammatici.249  While such individuals undoubtedly existed, there is no clear evidence 
that Corippus belonged to an itinerant intellectual class, and his association with this group has 
created a somewhat romanticized view of his leap from provincial obscurity to being a member 
of the imperial court, based solely on his own initiative and literary merits.  Rather, as is 
suggested below, Corippus connection with the Roman administration in Africa must have pre-
dated the composition of the Iohannis, and undoubtedly aided his move to Constantinople. 
The preface to the Iohannis implies that Corippus had previously written other poems,250 and, 
on the basis of his claim that he was inspired by a rustic Muse [Musa rustica], some have 
247  P. Riedlberger, Philologischer, historischer und liturgischer Kommentar zum 8. Buch der Johannis 
der Gorippus nebst kritischer Edition und bersetzung (Groningen, 2010), 89, suggests that Corippus 
metre suggests that the poem was written in a hurry. 
248  Kastor, Guardians of Language, 130; with prosopographical entries 21, 25, 85 and 114.  Kaster accepts 
that Corippus was indeed a grammaticus. 
249  Alan Cameron, Wandering poets: A literary movement in Byzantine Egypt, Historia 14.4 (1965), 470
250  Ioh. pref. 25-6; with n. 239. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
suggested that Corippus earlier works may have been bucolic;251 or even that Corippus claim 
to be ignorant [ignarus], suggests that his previous works could not have been epic, as this 
was a genre with which he was clearly unfamiliar.252  However, it was customary for late antique 
writers to be self-depreciating and to profess themselves unworthy to the task before them.253  
Furthermore, even if Corippus origins were provincial, there is no reason to suppose that he 
should have written bucolic poetry.  The assumption that bucolic poetry is the genre of inferior, 
or inexperienced, poets is simply unfounded.  Nevertheless, the perception that Corippus was 
a literary unknown prior to the composition of the Iohannis, frequently colours our view of his 
work. 
Indeed, Corippus may well have been an established poet.  An early 9th century library 
catalogue, from the Abbey of Lorsch, in Germany, noted that the library contained three biblical 
epics: 
 (459). Metrum Cresconii in evangelia liber unus 
 (460). Eiusdem de diis gentium luculentissimum Carmen 
 (461). Eiusdem versus de principio mundi vel de die iudicii et resurrrectione carnis,254 
while the mid-9th century catalogue of the nearby Abbey of Murbach, in France, notes: 
 (288). Metrum Cresconij.255 
Given that the poems are now lost, Cresconius cannot be conclusively identified with Corippus, 
and arguments in favour of this identification rest on the fact that Cresconius has not otherwise 
251  Ioh. pref. 28.  G. Shea, The Iohannis or De bellis Libycis of Flavius Cresconius Corippus (Lewiston, 
1998), 3. 
252  Dodi, La Iohannis di Corippo, 112. 
253  Averil Cameron, The career of Corippus again, CQ 30 (1980), 535.  Cf. p. 62. 
254  G. Becker, Catalogi bibliothecarum antique (Bonn, 1885), 111, cited in Hofmann, Corippus as a 
patristic author?, 376 n. 41. 
255  W. Milde, Der Bibliothekskatalog des Klosters Murbach aus dem 9. Jahrhundert (Heidelberg, 1968), 47.  
Hofmann, berlegungen zu einer Theorie der nichchristlichen Epik der lateinischen Sptantike, 112; 
idem, Review of Corippe: loge de lempereur Justin II by S. Ants, Mnemosyne 40.1/2 (1987), 213; 
idem, Corippus as a patristic author?, 372, is undoubtedly right to argue that the Murbach entry 
refers to the same text as the first of the Lorsch entries. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
been identified.256  Nevertheless, the identification of Cresconius with Corippus has won 
considerable acceptance.257 
The possibility that Corippus was the author of a corpus of works gives a different impression 
of the poet to that suggested by Iohannis.258  In the place of an inexperienced and unskilled 
provincial writer, Corippus would emerge as the author of a number of works, on diverse 
subjects, which won appreciation in the post-Roman West  an image which is far more 
consistent with that of a poet who was commissioned to write for the imperial administration 
in Africa (see further below) and later in Constantinople itself, and whose work was sufficiently 
well known among the Merovingians that, within a year of its composition, the In laudem was 
being imitated by Venantius Fortunatus.259  But this is entirely speculative. 
The precise date of the composition of the Iohannis is unknown.  However, a terminus post 
quem for its composition is provided by the final events narrated by the poem  the battle of 
the Plains of Cato in 548.260  And, certainly, 563 may serve as a terminus ante quem.  The Iohannis 
was probably completed shortly following the events it describes.  This is clear from Corippus 
statement that: Peace, having been returned to Libya, establishes itself, as the wars cease...261  
This would hardly have been appropriate following January 563, at which time the Berber 
256  Hofmann, Corippus as a patristic author?, 372. 
257  B. Bischoff, Lorsch im Spiegel seiner Handschriften (Munich, 1974), 92 n. 61; Milde, Der 
Bibliothekskatalog des Klosters Murbach, 47.  These arguments are followed by Hofmann, Corippus 
as a patristic author?, 3712; and Schindler, Per carmina laudes, 2278. 
258  How many additional works the Lorsch and Murbach catalogues attribute to Corippus is not entirely 
clear.  Hofmann, Corippus as a patristic author?, 372, argues that the catalogues refer to three 
unknown works, while Milde, Der Bibliothekskatalog des Klosters Murbach, 47, argues that Metrum 
Cresonij is a reference to the Iohannis and the In laudem. 
259  Venantius Fortunatus, Appendix 2.110; with Averil Cameron, The early religious policies of Justin 
II, 601. This argument is repeated by J. W. George, Venantius Fortunatus: A Poet in Merovingian 
Gaul (Oxford, 1992), 66 n. 20, albeit somewhat more tentatively.  Cameron also argues that 
Fortunatuss In laudem Mariae may have been modelled on the prayer to the Virgin Mary spoken by 
the empress Sophia in book II of the In laudem (Iust. 2.5269).  However, the attribution of the In 
laudem Mariae to Fortunatus is uncertain.  In his edition of Fortunatus poems, F. Leo, Venanti Honori 
Clemantiani Fortunati presbyteri Italici opera poetica (Berlin, 1881), 370-81, classifies the work as 
spurious. 
260  Ioh. VIII.378656.  On the battle of the Plains of Cato see p. 231. 
261  Ioh. I.9: [reddita pax Libyae bellis cessantibus astat...] 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
leader, Cusina, was murdered by the Roman official, John Rogathinus, resulting in a renewed 
period of hostilities between the Romans and the Berbers.262 
The preface to the poem is addressed to the proceres of Carthage [ad proceres 
Carthaginenses], and it seems clear from the text that the Iohannis was presented at Carthage, 
and that this presentation included a recitation of the work.263  The poem is undoubtedly 
triumphal in tone, with Corippus claiming that his subject will be the laurels of victory [lauri 
victoris], and songs of celebration in a time of peace [tempore pacifico carmina festa].264  Its 
presentation was surely intended to coincide with the feeling of victory following the battle of 
the Plains of Cato.265  The obvious occasion for the presentation would have been a victory 
celebration following the Roman victory in 548.  Certainly, the Iohannis must have been 
complete, in its entirety, by 549, at the latest, otherwise the poem would have lost its impact.266 
The preface to the Iohannis suggests that Corippus hoped to profit from his work.  He notes: 
 Surely glory ought to be granted for spoken praise: am I alone to be cheated of 
my reward, reciting nothing?267 
A poet who was, twenty years later, present at Constantinople and commissioned to write a 
panegyric to the new emperor, must have secured some high level patronage.  Thus, Averil 
Cameron has argued that Corippus first significant work (the Iohannis) was sufficiently 
262  Malalas, XVIII.145.  Cf. Theophanes AM 6055 (ed. De Boor, pp. 2389).  See pp. 2734. 
263  Ioh. pref. 3940. 
264  Ioh. pref. 12.  Cf. Ioh. pref. 35: If, amid so many triumphs, Carthage may so rejoice 
[gaudeat in multis sic si Carthago triumphis...] 
265  Zarini, La prface de la Johannide de Corippe: certitudes et hypotheses, 812. 
266  Cameron, Byzantine Africa, 36; Y. Modran, Corippe et loccupation byzantine de lAfrique: pour 
une nouvelle lecture de la Iohannide, AntAfr 22 (1986), 197.  Contra Zarini, La prface de la 
Johannide, 84, who suggests that the Iohannis must have been composed in two parts  books IV in 
551, and books VIVIII sometime before May 553, based on Corippus reference to a sacerdos in book 
VII (Ioh. 7.484), whom Zarini tentatively identifies as the bishop Verecundus of Iunci, who died on 14 
May 553.  There are, however, two significant difficulties with this interpretation.  First, it does not 
seem particularly likely that the poem should have been broken between books V and VI.  While 
Zarini is correct to note that book V concludes with a victory, the episode is really only concluded in 
book VI, with John Troglitas triumphal entry into Carthage.  Furthermore, assigning the poem to a 
period of calm following the Roman defeat of the Berbers, rather than the period of triumph itself, 
would deprive the poem of its impact. 
267  Ioh. pref. 2930: [nempe admittenda est dicendae Gloria laudi:/ fraudabor solus munere nulla 
canens?] 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
successful to win him the patronage of John Troglita, who secured the poets entre into the 
Constantinopolitan court.268  It is certainly reasonable to suppose that the patronage of John 
Troglita might have furthered Corippus literary career.  However, the Iohannis should be seen 
as more than simply the gesture of an ambitious and enterprising poet, who selected his subject 
matter based on what he hoped would win him the greatest favour.  Rather, the very subject 
matter of the poem suggests that Corippus was commissioned to write the Iohannis.269 
Corippus clearly states his primary subject matter to be: 
  Johns greatness in war, the deeds of a man destined to be read by a future 
generation.270 
The John to whom he refers is John Troglita, the Roman magister militum per Africam between 
546 and 551/1.271  While there is some novelty in Corippus decision to write such a panegyric 
to a military leader, rather than to the emperor,272 it is clear that the poem, at one level at least, 
was intended to be political panegyric, and subscribes to the conventions of this genre.  John 
Troglita is the undisputed hero of the work, and it must certainly be read with the 
understanding that his actions always had to be presented in a positive light. 
Corippus aligns himself with the tradition of classical epic, in particular, with Vergil.  He notes 
that: 
 John surpasses Aeneas in valour, but I do not recite a poem worthy of Vergil,273 
and John Troglita, like Aeneas, is clearly characterised by pietas.274  Thus, it is necessary to ask 
whether the historical detail which Corippus includes in his work was selected merely to fit 
his classical model(s).  Indeed, 19th century scholarship on Corippus was inclined to view the 
268  Cameron, The career of Corippus again, 534.  Contra Baldwin, The career of Corippus, 372. 
269  Riedlberger, Philologischer, historischer und liturgischer Kommentar, 89. 
270  Ioh. pref. 34: [scribere me libuit magnum per bella Iohannem,/uenturo generi facta legenda uiri.] 
271  On John Troglita see PLRE IIIA, 644-9 (Ioannes 36). 
272  Thus, Zarini, Posie officielle, 220. 
273  Ioh. pref. 1516: [Aeneam superat melior uirtute Iohannes,/ sed non Vergilio carmina digna cano.] 
274  Cameron, Corippus Iohannis, 1689. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Iohannis as little more than a collection of quotations from classical authors, calling into 
question its historical accuracy.275  More recent studies have been inclined to view Corippus 
amalgamation of panegyric and epic as innovative, with that innovation manifesting itself 
more fully in Corippus later work, the In laudem.276  Nevertheless, the degree to which Corippus 
was constrained by his models remains open to question. 
Whatever the works stylistic novelties, the Iohannis is far more than simply a poem praising 
the exploits of a military leader.  The poems ostensible subject  John Troglitas campaigns, 
which took place between 546 and 548  does not actually become its focus until the second half 
of the Iohannis, with books V to VIII presenting Johns campaigns in essentially chronological 
order. 
In addition to offering this narrative, the Iohannis essentially functions as an apology for 
Roman policy in Africa.277  The Roman conquest had been presented to the African population 
as a liberation from oppression.278  However, for the inhabitants of the region, this was far from 
the truth.  While Vandal rule had proven to be relatively stable, with the continuity of most 
Roman institutions,279 return to Roman rule marked the beginning of a period of considerable 
insecurity.  While the Berber raids of the early 530s were addressed by 536, the 540s saw almost 
continuous conflict between the Romans and the Berbers, the beginning of the Three Chapters 
Controversy, the outbreak of plague and the imposition of heavier taxation.  Roman rule may 
well have appeared less than attractive to the African population during this period.  And it is 
certainly conceivable that the Roman imperial government wished to reinforce the benefits of 
275  Thus, for example, M. Manitius, Zu sptlateinischen Dichtern, Zeitschrift fr die sterreichischen 
Gymnasien 37 (1886), 83101. 
276  Zarini, Posie officielle, 220. 
277  Averil Cameron, Corippus Iohannis: Epic of Byzantine Africa, Papers of the Liverpool Latin Seminar 
4 (1984), 169.  Similarly, Modran, Corippe et loccupation byzantine de lAfrique, 208. 
278  See pp. 8990. 
279  On the continuity of Roman institutions see F. Clover, The symbiosis of Romans and Vandals in 
Africa, in E. Chrysos & A. Schwarcz, eds., Das Reich und die Barbaren (Vienna/Kln, 1989), 5773. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Roman policy in Africa to individuals who were otherwise being encouraged to align 
themselves with the various autonomous Berber polities developing during this period.280 
Some of the insecurities of the African population are evident from Corippus work, while 
others are not, and the reasons for this appear to be political.  It is clear from Procopius Bella 
that one of the Roman imperial governments first actions following the defeat of the Vandals 
was to attempt to re-incorporate Africa into the Roman taxation system, a move which does 
not appear to have been well received by the local population.281  However, it is unsurprising 
that Corippus should make no mention of the taxation burden placed upon the people of Africa 
in a work intended to promote Roman policy.282 
Equally, the Three Chapters Controversy is never explicitly mentioned, despite being a subject 
of concern for other African writers of the period.283  While Christianity is certainly not absent 
from Corippus work, it is presented in fairly bland terms.  John Troglita himself is characterised 
by pietas,284 but this is as much an allusion to Corippus classical model than to anything else, 
and his army is generically pious - Roman success is certainly presented as being the result of 
divine favour.285 
Corippus is, however, sensitive to the threat posed to the African population by the ongoing 
conflict between the Roman army and the Berbers.  And this is the theme which he chooses to 
280  See pp. 1613. 
281  Bella IV.8.25.  Cf. Anec. XVIII.10. 
282  Cameron, Corippus Iohannis, 171. 
283  See Cameron, Byzantine Africa, 459. 
284  Eg. Ioh. 1.2825. 
285  This is reinforced by Corippus presentation of John Troglytas triumphal entry into Carthage, 
following his victory over the forces of Antalas in Byzacena in late 546/early 547 (Ioh. VI.54103).  As 
part of his victory celebration, John proceeded through the city, to the church, where: He prayed to 
the Lord of heaven, and earth, and sea, and he made an offering which the bishop, as was the custom, 
placed on the altar in thanks for the return of the general and the defeat of the enemies, and he 
sanctified the offering to Christ [orauit dominum caeli terraeque marisque,/ obtulit et munus, 
summus quod more sacerdos/ pro redituque ducis pro uictisque hostibus arae/ imposuit, Christoque 
pater libamina sanxit] (Ioh. VI.100-103).  On this note, Corippus concludes his description of Johns 
triumph, implying that the Romans were being rewarded for their righteousness.  See Cameron, 
Corippus Iohannis,  173. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
exploit.  To cite but one of many examples, he describes John Troglita upon arriving in Africa, 
thus: 
... he grieved for the cities deserted by their citizens, and the houses lying 
empty, and he groaned, lamenting the ruin of Libya...286 
Such depictions of Africa destroyed would have resonated with Corippus local audience, and 
encouraged them to believe that their plight was recognised by the Roman imperial 
government. 
However, the Iohannis makes no mention of the way in which the Roman imperial 
governments policies in Africa might have contributed to this situation.287  The role which 
Corippus attributes to the Roman army in Africa is that which the imperial government 
attributed to itself following the defeat of the Vandals  liberator of the African people.  Thus 
Corippus describes Johns motivations in Africa as: 
Not desiring gold, nor to acquire any profit, am I driven to go to Libya, but to 
break up the war and save wretched souls.288 
All blame for the situation in Africa in placed on the Berbers and, in particular, on the figure of 
Antalas, who represents the barbarian who refuses to assimilate.289 
That Corippus was commissioned to write the Iohannis is supported by the detailed 
information which appears to have been available to him.  He may have received information 
directly from the Roman military command,290 possibly when the Roman army was quartered 
in one of the towns of Byzacena  perhaps Iunci, which features frequently in the poem.291  This 
286  Ioh. I.41113: [...doluit desertas ciuibus urbes/ et uacuas iacuisse domos, Libycasque ruinas/ ingemuit 
miserans]. 
287  Modran, Corippe et loccupation byzantine de lAfrique, 210. 
288  Ioh. I.2935: [non auri cupidus, non ullo munere lucre/ in Libyam compulsus eo, sed scindere bellum/ 
et miseras saluare animas.] 
289  This issue is discussed in detail in section 6.3. 
290  W. Ehlers, Epische Kunst in Coripps Johannis, Philologus 124 (1980), 117.  This argument is followed 
by Cameron, Corippus Iohannis, 169. 
291  Cameron, Corippus Iohannis, 169. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
suggests that the poet made a proactive attempt to gather information with the support of the 
Roman military. 
The timing of the composition of the Iohannis may offer further insight into its intended 
purpose.  It is often assumed that the entire poem would have been recited before the proceres.  
But this is unlikely.  The Iohannis is, after all, a lengthy work, and the final couplet of the preface 
to the poem implies that only the preface and first book were recited: 
 If it is pleasing [to you] that I should recite the words of my first book, then, 
serving your commands, I shall recite the first verses.292 
The entire eight books must have been handed over to John Troglita in written form,293 and 
Corippus may have subsequently recited sections of the work in literary settings. 
Only the first book of the poem and the preface may have been complete at the time Corippus 
recited them at Carthage.294  Certainly, that Corippus should have written the Iohannis, in its 
entirety, between the victory at the battle of the Plains of Cato, and the victory celebrations, 
which could not have been more than a short time later, seems implausible.295  The far shorter, 
In laudem appears to have taken Corippus more than a year to write,296 although caution should 
be taken when comparing the Iohannis to the In laudem in this respect.297  The two works are 
stylistically distinct, and use of the Aeneid as an exemplar would have facilitated the Iohannis 
composition.  The In laudem, in contrast, had no obvious stylistic model, which called for 
greater originality on the part of the poet, and possibly a longer genesis.298  Nevertheless, in the 
292  Ioh. pref. 3940: [si placet ut primi recitem mea dicta libelli/ tunc meritus iussis carmina prima cano.] 
Hofmann, Corippus as a patristic author?, 373 n. 7; Riedlberger, Philologischer, historischer und 
liturgischer Kommentar, 83; Dodi, La Iohannis di Corippo, 111. 
293  Hofmann, Corippus as a patristic author?, 373 n. 7. 
294  L. Krestan & K. Winkler, Corippus, RLAC 3 (1957), col. 424. 
295  Ibid.  Cf. p. 66. 
296  T. Tandoi, Note alla Iohannis di Corippo, SIFC 54 (1982), 556, who accepts that the first three books 
of the In laudem were written in 566 and the final book in 567 (see p. 59). 
297  Contra Tandoi, Note alla Iohannis di Corippo, 556, who argues that, based on the speed at which 
the In laudem was composed, the Iohannis must have taken Corippus five years to write. 
298  Cameron, Corippus Iohannis, 175. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Iohannis Corippus was writing about contemporary events, and still had to expend time 
gathering relevent information. 
While the focus of Corippus work is the campaigns of John Troglita between 546 and 548,299 he 
also provides background information concerning events in Africa from c. 500, with a particular 
emphasis on the role played by the Berber leader, Antalas.300  This background information is 
contained in the speech of Liberatus.  The speech is a literary set-piece, in which the Roman 
tribune, Liberatus,301 narrates the course of events in Africa, from the birth of Antalas, in c. 
500,302 to the death of the rebel, Guntarith, in 546,303 in response to a request from John 
Troglita.304  As a result, the speech of Liberatus is of vital importance when considering the 
Iohannis as a historical source, and its function within the text merits some consideration. 
Liberatus speech, which occupies the majority of books III and IV of the Iohannis, has a clear 
structural function within the poem.  As has been noted above, the ostensible subject of the 
poem, John Troglitas campaigns, do not become the works focus until book V.  Books I to IV 
provide the background information necessary for the reader to interpret the second half of 
the poem.  The use of direct speech, as in the speech of Liberatus, to narrate events prior to the 
main action of the poem is typical of classical epic poetry, and has obvious precedents in the 
Odyssey and the Aeneid.305  In the first half of the poem, the poet presents episodes, not always 
connected or in chronological order, through which to elucidate the character of John Troglita 
and to stress the themes of imperial propaganda  namely, the benefits of Roman rule.306 
299  On John Troglitas campaigns see section 5.6. 
300  On Corippus focus on Antalas see pp. 2457. 
301  The tribune is also referred to as Caecilides (Ioh. III.47; VII.375, 475). 
302  For the date of Antalas birth see p. 248. 
303  On Guntariths death and its date see n. 1144. 
304  Ioh. III.54IV.246. 
305  Cf. R. Dodi, Corippo poeta della romanitas Africana, Aevum 60.1 (1986), 117; Schindler, Per carmina 
laudes, 231; and Zarini, Berbres ou barbares?, 56. 
306  Dodi, La Iohannis di Corippo, 117. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Liberatus has sometimes been proposed as Corippus source of information within the Roman 
administration, since he is given unusual prominence within the poem and, furthermore, that 
his being chosen as the narrator was by way of acknowledgement.307  However, Liberatus must, 
at least in part, have been chosen as the narrator of the speech because he was, or could be 
presented as being, of Romano-African origins.308  As such, he served as an appropriate 
mouthpiece for the poet, and legitimised the suffering of the Romano-African population.  
Given that Liberatus is attested by no other source,309 it is conceivable that he is entirely a 
literary construct.  The speech undoubtedly contains some genuine historical information.  
However, in view of its strongly literary features, any details which it provides must be 
carefully considered for their literary, as well as historical, implications. 
The Iohannis is certainly not an unknown text.  But it has primarily been treated as a repository 
of ethnographic information.  Corippus, like Procopius, did not have a high opinion of the 
Berbers, and occasionally resorted to the topos of the barbarian when discussing them.  
Nevertheless, it has generally been accepted that, as a native of Africa, he was comparatively 
well informed about the Berber tribes,310 and book II of the Iohannis has been seen as one of the 
primary sources of information on the Berbers in the 6th century.  Older studies of book II have 
treated it simply as a catalogue identifying and localizing the various tribes.311  But Modrans 
more recent study has suggested a political reading, and argues that the tribes are not 
presented in geographical order but in a network of political allegiances.312 
307  Riedlberger, Philologischer, historischer und liturgischer Kommentar, 889. 
308  Ioh. III.4951.  As Modran, Les Maures, 329 n. 59, notes, Corippus appears to suggest that Liberatus 
came from Hadrumetum (Ioh. IV.712).  Given that Liberatus is not attested by any source other than 
Corippus, it is conceivable that he is entirely a literary construct. 
309  PLRE IIIB, 7901. 
310  Cameron, Byzantine Africa, 40; and in more detail, Modran, Les Maures, 3842. 
311  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 30119; Courtois, Les Vandales, 348 n. 7.  Corippus is also the major source 
for many entries in J. Desanges, Catalogue des tribus africaines de lantiquit classique  louest du Nil 
(Dakar, 1962). 
312  Modran, Les Maures, 54-61.  On book II, see also Zarini, Berbres ou barbares?. 
Chapter 1:  The Sources 
Nevertheless, the Iohannis has otherwise been treated with considerable scepticism as a 
historical source.313  This scepticism appears to be based primarily on the fact that Procopius 
and Corippus are not always consistent in the information they provide,314 and on the view that 
Procopius, as part of the classicizing historical tradition, must, by default, be a more reliable 
source of information than a poet.315  This view is gradually being challenged, but there remains 
a tendency to consider Corippus account only if an event is not covered by Procopius Bella.  
Where possible, a more balanced comparative approach is intended here. 
313  For example, Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 923, who, while happy to accept Procopius account without 
question, notes Sans doute, il ne faut point prendre  la lettre ces hyperboles de pote. 
314  Modran, Corippe et loccupation byzantine de lAfrique, 198-201, presents the divergences between 
the two authors in tabular form. 
315  Modran, Corippe et loccupation byzantine de lAfrique, 196-7. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
2.1 Introduction 
In the first book of his panegyric to the emperor Justin II (565578), the In laudem, the poet 
Corippus describes the funerary ceremonies conducted for Justins uncle and predecessor, 
Justinian I.316  The text, composed within a year of Justinians death on 14 November 565,317 was 
undoubtedly intended to emphasize Justins filial piety, presenting him grieving over the body 
of his uncle, who is lying in state.  In this context, Corippus presents an ekphrasis on the funeral 
pall provided for the late emperor by Justins wife, Sophia, as a sign of her own devotion.318  The 
fabric, rich in purple, gold and gemstones, was embroidered with scenes of Justinians 
achievements,319 of which the poet chooses to highlight one: 
 But he himself [ie. Justinian] he [ie. the artist] depicted as victor in the midst 
of the court, trampling the cruel neck of the Vandal tyrant, [and] Libya 
bearing fruit and laurel320 
The scene which Corippus describes was not merely a generic depiction of imperial victory, but 
was clearly inspired by the triumph celebrated at Constantinople in the spring of 534, to which 
Corippus also alludes in book III of the In laudem,321 in which the deposed Vandal king, Gelimer, 
prostrated himself before the emperor.322  Nor was the episode restricted to literary depictions.  
In the De Aedificiis Procopius describes the no-longer extant mosaics of the Chalke Gate at 
316  Iust. I.22693. 
317  On the date of the In laudems composition see p. 59. 
318  Iust. I.27693. 
319  Iust. I.2788. 
320  Iust. I.2857: [ipsum autem in media victorem pinxerat aula/ effera Vandalici calcantem colla 
tyranni,/ plaudentem Libyam fruges laurumque ferentem] 
321  Iust. III.1245. 
322  Bella IV.9.114; John Lydus, De Mag. II.2 and III.55; Ps. Dionysius, 89 (trans. W. Witakowski, Pseudo-
Dionysius of Tel-Mahre: Chronicle: Part III (Liverpool, 1996), 82); Marius of Avenches, s.a. 534.2.  The 
event is also reported by Evagrius in his Historia Ecclesiastica (IV.17).  However, Evagrius himself 
acknowledges that he derives his account from that of Procopius and, although he does not reproduce 
Procopius words verbatim, his paraphrase offers no new information. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Constantinople.  The mosaics apparently included depictions of Belisarius campaigns in Africa 
and Italy, as well as a scene in which: 
 In the centre stand the Emperor and the Empress Theodora, both seeming to 
rejoice and to celebrate victories over the King of the Vandals and the King 
of the Goths, who approach as prisoners of war to be led into bondage.323 
The scene described by Procopius amalgamates Justinians victories over the Vandals and the 
Goths, but otherwise appears to be a representation of the triumph celebrated at Constantinople 
in 534.  Indeed, the Chalke mosaic may well have served as a visual inspiration for Corippus 
ekphrasis on Justinians funeral pall,324 although it should not be doubted that other visual 
representations existed.325 
Nevertheless, it is clear that all representations (literary or artistic) rested on their depiction of 
the ritual submission of the Vandal king to the Roman emperor.  This was an image exploited 
by Justinianic propaganda, and a defining image of Justinians reign, which apparently endured 
after his death. 
There is nothing inherently unusual about the use of the ideology of victory in imperial 
propaganda.  While the Roman emperor had ceased to function as a military commander well 
prior to the 6th century, military victory remained an important aspect of the imperial image.326  
However, the enduring significance of the African campaign is puzzling, given that Roman 
victory over the Vandals marked little more than the beginning of the Eastern Roman Empires 
attempt to consolidate its position in Africa.  Furthermore, the prominence granted to the 
323  Aed. I.10.17: [           ,    
          ,     
  .] 
324  Cameron, Flavius Cresconius Corippus, 1401. 
325  Corippus (Iust. III.1213) himself notes that Justinian gave orders that representations of his victories 
should be depicted on gold vessels. 
326  On Justinians use of the ideology of victory see A. D. Lee, The empire at war, in M. Maas, ed., The 
Cambridge Companion to the Age of Justinian (Cambridge, 2005), 1134. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
African campaign by its contemporaries has arguably distorted modern attempts to understand 
its strategic (as opposed to propagandist) significance. 
This chapter will, therefore, attempt to separate the African campaign, as a military venture, 
from the propagandist uses to which it was subsequently put, and to assess the motivations for 
a campaign which was subsequently granted such significance.  The chapter will begin by 
considering the internal politics of the Vandal kingdom in the early 6th century, and how this 
might have influenced the foreign policy of the Eastern Roman Empire in relation to Africa.  It 
will then consider the manner in which the campaign was justified by and to contemporaries, 
first by considering historical accounts, and then by considering imperial legislation.  
Subsequently, the chapter will discuss the role played by interest groups at Constantinople in 
the decision making process which led to the launch of the campaign, before concluding with 
an assessment of the pragmatic strategic concerns which might have served as motivations for 
the campaign. 
2.2 The Vandal context 
Procopius prefaces his discussion of the African campaign with a digression concerning the 
history of the Vandals down to his own day, with an emphasis on Vandal domestic politics of 
the 520s and 530s.327  The historian himself suggests that these events merely provided a pretext 
upon which the emperor might launch a preconceived invasion and, as will be demonstrated in 
this chapter, there is little reason to doubt that this was indeed the case.328  However, since 
Procopius is not explicit concerning the relationship between Vandal domestic politics and the 
Roman invasion, and since the former undoubtedly created circumstances favourable to the 
latter, before attempting to understand the impetus for the invasion of Africa in 533 it is 
necessary to give some consideration to the politics of the Vandal kingdom at this time. 
327  Bella III.39. 
328  Eg. Bella III.9.24. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
In 530/1, the Vandal king, Hilderic, who had reigned since 523, was deposed by his cousin and 
heir, Gelimer, and imprisoned, together with his nephews Hoamer and Hoageis.329  Gelimers 
actions were immediately condemned as unlawful by the Roman emperor and, under pressure 
from Constantinople, by the Ostrogothic king of Italy, Athalaric.330  However, it is far from clear 
that they were negatively received by the population of the Vandal kingdom.  The accounts of 
both Procopius and Corippus suggest that Gelimers coup had the support of much of the Vandal 
ruling class, as well as that of the army.331 
The domestic politics of the Vandal kingdom which resulted in these events cannot be entirely 
reconstructed from the extant sources, none of which presents a Vandal perspective.  
Nevertheless, two possible causes of Vandal disillusionment with Hilderics reign can be 
identified from Roman accounts. 
First, Hilderic, who was quite elderly when he ascended the throne,332 was not of martial 
temperament.333  However, the Vandal king was faced with a growing military threat from 
various Berber tribes, both inside and outside his territory.  In the late 520s, one of the tribes of 
Tripolitania, which Procopius identifies as the Levathae ( ),334 attacked and captured 
329  While Procopius (Bella III.9.69) narrates the events which occurred in some detail, he does not 
explicitly date Gelimers coup.  A date of 530/1 can, however, be inferred from Procopius claim that 
Hilderic reigned for seven years before he was deposed (Bella III.9.9), and Victor of Tunnunas claim 
that Hilderic ascended the throne in 523 (s.a. 523).  This is consistent with the explicit dating of 
Gelimers coup by Malalas (XVIII.57) and Victor of Tunnuna (115). 
330  Bella III.9.103, 159.  The Ostrogothic response is attested only by Malalas (XVIII.57). 
331  Bella III.9.8; Ioh. III.262-4. 
332  Bella III.9.6, 10, 12; Ioh. III.263. 
333  Bella III.9.1; Ioh. III.198. 
334  On the identity of the Levathae see pp. 2335. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
the Vandal city of Leptis Magna;335 and, shortly before Gelimers coup, the Vandals suffered a 
serious military defeat in Byzacena at the hands of the tribe (or tribes) ruled by Antalas.336 
The Vandal defeat in Byzacena is granted varying significance by Roman commentators.  
Procopius makes no explicit connection between the defeat and Gelimers decision to depose 
Hilderic.  He attributes to Gelimer the accusation that Hilderic was an unwarlike king who had 
been defeated by the Berbers.337  However, while this may be a direct reference to events in 
Byzacena, it could equally be the cumulative assessment of Hilderics reign, and is by no means 
the only accusation which Procopius attributes to Gelimer.338 
Corippus, on the other hand, implies that Hilderic was deposed as a direct result of the Vandal 
defeat.339  Indeed, he suggests that Hilderic had personally commanded the Vandal army in 
Byzacena,340 and that he was immediately deposed by the army upon its defeat.341  Although it 
is not explicitly stated, Corippus seems to imply that Gelimer was granted the Vandal kingship 
by the army, rather than seizing the throne.342  Nevertheless, Corippus is consistent with the 
other sources in presenting Gelimer as a usurper  the Vandal king is repeatedly described as a 
tyrant [tyrannus].343 
335  Aed. VI.4.6.  Procopius does not explicitly date the attack, however, he claims that it occurred during 
Justinians reign over the Eastern Roman Empire (which began in 527).  Y. Modran, Les premiers 
raids des tribus sahariennes en Afrique et la Johannide de Corippe, in Histoire et Archologie de 
lAfrique du Nord: Actes du IVe colloque international (Strasbourg, 1988) (Paris, 1991), 485, rightly 
suggests that this permits the attack to be dated to any point between 527 and 533.  However, Malalas 
(XVIII.57) notes that, during the reign of Hilderic, the Berbers captured Tripolis, Leptoma, Sabatha 
and Byzakin ().  His account implies that Byzakin is a city, like the other places he names, but 
it is almost certainly a reference to the province of Byzacena.  Modran is undoubtedly right to argue 
that Malalas has conflated the Berber attacks in Tripolitania and Byzacena.  However, there is little 
reason to doubt that Malalas is correct is placing both attacks during the reign of Hilderic. 
336  Bella III.9.3; Ioh. III.184261.  The defeat also appears to be alluded to by Malalas (XVIII.57).  Unlike 
Procopius and Corippus, Malalas does not identify the leader of the Berber force.  On Antalas and his 
power base see section 6.3. 
337  Bella III.9.8: [...      ...] 
338  Cf. pp. 845. 
339  Ioh. III.2624. 
340  Ioh. III.21924. 
341  Ioh. III.2624. 
342  Ibid. 
343  Ioh. I.3801; III.264. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
The differences between the accounts of Procopius and Corippus are probably to be explained 
by their different literary agendas.  While Procopius account is offered to justify the Roman 
invasion of Africa, and is thus little interested in relations between the Vandals and the 
Berbers,344 Corippus mentions the Vandal defeat at the hands of Antalas in order to stress 
Antalas savagery, rather than to make any particular comment on the Vandal monarchy.345  
The picture of an elderly and peaceful king who is defeated by a hoard of barbarians, and then 
turned on by his own army, conveys this emphasis far more vividly than a story of court 
intrigue. 
A third version of events is presented by John Malalas, who claims that the Vandals were 
defeated in Byzacena because Gelimer betrayed them by changing sides and fighting with the 
Berbers, and that he then marched on Carthage and seized the Vandal throne with a Berber 
army.346  It is impossible to completely discount this version of events, but, if such treachery 
had actually occurred (and were common knowledge at Constantinople), it is hard to explain 
Procopius failure to mention it, given that his justification of the Roman invasion of Africa is 
based on the illegality of Gelimers actions.347  Thus, it seems that either Malalas or, more 
probably, his source, elaborated upon existing information in order to further discredit 
Gelimer, in line with imperial attempts to justify the Roman invasion of Africa.348 
The second major reason for Vandal disillusionment with Hilderics reign appears to have been 
Hilderics attempt to align the Vandal kingdom more closely with the Eastern Roman Empire.  
Procopius presents Hilderic as a particular friend of Justinian,349 and also notes that Hilderic 
344  Cf. p. 84. 
345  On the role of Antalas in Corippus narrative see pp. 2457. 
346  Malalas, XVIII.57. 
347  See pp. 857. 
348  Modran, Les premiers raids des tribus sahariennes en Afrique, 486. 
349  Procopius (Bella III.9.5) describes Hilderic as       , which is 
translated by Dewing as a very particular friend and guest-friend of Justinian.  Following this 
conventional translation of  (guest-friend), J. Moorhead, Theodoric in Italy (Oxford, 1992), 216
7, argues that Hilderic had spent time in Constantinople.  However, this is not attested in the sources, 
and  might conceivably refer to a political rather than personal relationship. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
and Justinian made gifts of money to one another.350  The significance of these payments 
remains unclear.  Payments to the Vandals have never been identified as either tributary 
payments or donatives on the part of the Eastern Roman Empire,351 and the exchange of funds 
between Justinian and Hilderic has been interpreted as evidence of no more than a personal 
relationship.  However, given the foreign policy practices of the Eastern Roman Empire, it is 
certainly possible that the reciprocal exchange was intended to establish a more formal 
relationship between the two states. 
Furthermore, Hilderics reign appears to have been a period of unprecedented religious 
tolerance, after decades of intermittent persecution of Nicene Christians by the Vandal ruling 
class, which was predominantly Arian.352  Procopius describes Hilderic as being  harsh 
neither to the Christians nor to anyone else.353  This view is consistent with that presented 
by Nicene Christian sources, which might otherwise be expected to be hostile to the Vandal 
monarchy, which attest to Nicene bishops being permitted to return from exile,354 the 
ordination of new Nicene bishops, and the reopening of Nicene churches.355  Furthermore, the 
convention of Nicene councils at Iunci in 523 and Carthage in 525 also suggests a greater degree 
of religious freedom during Hilderics reign.356 
Such gestures of religious tolerance can only have been positively regarded by the Roman 
imperial government, which endorsed Chalcedonian Christianity, and might well have 
350  Bella III.9.5.  This claim is perhaps supported by Procopius accusation in the Anecdota (XIX.6), that 
Justinian dissipated the contents of the imperial treasury, upon his accession to the throne, by 
distributing largesse to barbarians. 
351  See J. Iluk, The export of gold from the Roman Empire to the barbarian countries from the 4th to the 
6th centuries, Mnstersche Beitrge zur Antiken handelsgeschichte 4 (1985), 91-2, who has compiled 
a list of such payments. 
352  On the Vandals as Arians see Bella 3.8.4, 21.20, 4.9.14; Victor of Vita, passim; Gregory of Tours, Hist. 
II.2-3.  Cf. pp. 8990. 
353  Bella III.9.1: [       ...].  Procopius uses  only 
to refer to Chalcedonian Christians. 
354  It may, however, be doubted how bishops did return, after potentially forty years in exile.  Cf. Victor 
of Vita, I.51. 
355  Vita Fulgentii 256; Victor of Tunnuna, 106. 
356  Courtois, Les Vandales, 30410.  For sources see J. L. Maier, Lpiscopat de lAfrique romaine, vandale 
et byzantine (Rome, 1973), 747. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
represented concessions on Hilderics behalf in order to foster a closer relationship between 
the Vandal kingdom and the Eastern Roman Empire. 
Indeed, it would not be surprising if Hilderic had deliberately cultivated his relationship with 
the Eastern Roman Empire, given that the Vandal kingdom had, by the 6th century, become 
increasingly politically isolated.  Relations between the Vandals and Ostrogothic Italy, in 
particular, were strained.  While relations had deteriorated during the reign of his predecessor, 
Thrasamund,357 Hilderic irrevocably alienated the Ostrogothic regime through the 
imprisonment of Amalafrida, Thrasamunds wife, and sister of the Ostrogothic king Theodoric; 
and through the murder of her Ostrogothic troops, whom he accused of rebellion.358  Amalafrida 
ultimately died in captivity, probably c. 525.359  No narrative source claims that she died of 
anything other than natural causes.  However, a letter from Theodorics successor, Athalaric, 
to Hilderic, suggests otherwise.  It accuses Hilderic of parricide, and advises that three legates 
were to be sent from Italy to investigate Amalafridas death.360 
Furthermore, there is some evidence that Theodoric was planning a punitive expedition against 
the Vandal kingdom at the time of his death.  In the mid-520s, the Ostrogothic king 
unexpectedly ordered the construction of a fleet of a thousand dromones.361  Cassiodorus, at 
this time serving as Theodorics magister officiorum, claimed that the fleet would both be able 
to carry public grain and, if it should be necessary, meet with hostile ships,362 but there seems 
357  See Moorhead, Theodoric in Italy, 192, who tentatively suggests that the 9th century historian, of 
Ravenna (Liber pontificalis ecclesiae ravennatis 39) may refer to a Vandal attack on Ostrogothic Sicily 
in c. 512/3. 
358  Bella III.9.4, 14.56.  See Bury, History, II, 129; and Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 15. 
359  Victor of Tunnuna, 106, appears to conflate her imprisonment and her death.  However, Moorhead, 
Theodoric in Italy, 248, is undoubtedly right to argue that there would have been Ostrogothic 
retaliation for her death had Theodoric and Amalafrida not died within a short time of one another 
(Theodoric died in 526).  He thus places Amalafridas death in 526.  Cf. Courtois, Les Vandales, 401, 
who places it in 525. 
360  Cassiodorus,Variae IX.1. 
361  Cassiodorus, Variae V.16.2. 
362  Cassiodorus, Variae V.16.2: [qui et frumenta publica possint convehere et adversis navibus, si necesse 
fuerit, obviare]. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
little reason to doubt that a fleet of this size, constructed at speed, was commissioned with 
military objectives in mind.363  This is further emphasized by Cassiodorus claim that, as a result 
of the fleets construction, the Greek [ie. the Eastern Roman Empire] would not dispute with 
us nor the African insult.364  It is highly unlikely that Theodoric would have intended 
aggressive military action against the Eastern Roman Empire, but, given the insult to his 
house caused by the imprisonment and death of Amalafrida, it is certainly possible that he 
intended an attack against the Vandal kingdom, which was, at this time, already weakened by 
repeated Berber incursions.365  Theodorics command that a fleet be constructed cannot be 
precisely dated, but it is reasonable to suppose that it was prompted by the death of his sister.366  
Thus, by the mid-520s, the Vandals and Ostrogoths may well have been on the verge of open 
hostilities. 
Ultimately, Hilderics actions against the Ostrogoths cost the Vandal kingdom dearly.  
Ostrogothic hostility towards the Vandals led them to allow the Roman expeditionary force to 
disembark in Sicily en route to Africa, and to encourage Ostrogothic merchants in Sicily to 
provision the Roman army, thus facilitating the overthrow of Vandal rule in Africa.367  Thus, 
while Hilderics attempt to align the Vandal kingdom with the Eastern Roman Empire may have 
been a prudent political move, it appears to have been a source of resentment to many Vandals.  
Procopius attributes to Gelimer the accusation, offered to the Vandal ruling class in order to 
encourage them to support his coup, that Hilderic had intended to surrender the Vandal 
kingdom to the Roman emperor, Justin I (Justinians uncle and predecessor).368  Procopius 
363  A thousand dromones was a large fleet by the standards of the day.  By way of comparison, the fleet 
which conveyed the Roman expeditionary force to Africa consisted of five hundred and ninety-two 
ships, of which only ninety-two were dromones (Bella III.11.134). 
364  Cassiodorus, Variae V.17.3: [non habet quod nobis Graecus imputet aut Afer insultet.] 
365  See pp. 7880. 
366  Moorhead, Theodoric in Italy, 246-8. 
367  Bella III.14.5-6.  Procopius does, admittedly, suggest that the Ostrogoths were also anxious to secure 
support from the Eastern Roman Empire, and were thus amenable to Justinians requests. 
368  Bella III.9.8. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
dismisses the accusation as slander, but it is certainly possible that Hilderics own people saw 
his policies in this light. 
2.3 Justinian as defender of legitimate rule in Vandal Africa 
The Bella is undoubtedly the most detailed extant account of Gelimers coup.  Nevertheless, it 
is important to bear in mind that Procopius narrative was intended to provide a justification 
for Justinians invasion of Africa.  The historian is, in fact, largely uninterested in the Vandals.369  
Although he refers to their history and politics, he does so only insofar as it furthers his pro-
Roman literary agenda, and it certainly cannot be assumed that he is concerned with the factual 
accuracy of the information he provides.370 
Procopius notes, prior to his account of Gelimers coup, that Vandal kingship did not pass from 
father to son, but rather to the eldest living descendent of the first Vandal king, Gaiseric, and 
that, on the basis of this rule, Gelimer was expected to be Hilderics successor.371  This 
information not only enables the historian to present Gelimer as a tyrant,372 who overthrew a 
legitimate ruler to seize the power he would ultimately have inherited anyway, but also, and 
more importantly, to present Justinian as defender of legitimate rule in Vandal Africa, 
according to its own laws.373  However, while Procopius is probably accurate in his depiction of 
political instability in Vandal Africa, he should not be assumed to provide an accurate account 
of the intricacies of Vandal politics. 
Procopius attributes to Gelimer a number of accusations against Hilderic.  However, he is 
inclined to dismiss these as slander, and thus as another indication of Gelimers base 
character.374  As a result, insufficient attention has perhaps been given to Gelimers claim that 
369  Eg. Bella IV.6.59. 
370  Cameron, Byzantine Africa, 32. 
371  Bella III.7.29, 9.6. 
372  Bella III.9.7.  Cf. Procopius depiction of Justinian in the Anecdota (VII.1921). 
373  Bella 3.9.19. 
374  Eg. Bella III.9.19. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
his cousin had attempted to remove him from his legitimate position in the line of succession 
because he came from another branch of Gaiserics descendants.375  If this were indeed the case, 
it would certainly explain why Gelimer was unwilling to wait and assume power in a legitimate 
manner, despite his own ostensible position as heir to the throne, and Hilderics advanced 
age.376  And this may well be what is implied in Gelimers statement, in a letter attributed to him 
by Procopius, that Hilderic had been planning a revolution against the house of Gaiseric.377 
Hilderic appears to have attached considerable significance to his own lineage.  As the son of 
Huneric and of Eudocia, the daughter of the Western Roman emperor Valentinian III (425455), 
Hilderic could claim descent from two royal lines  the Hasding and the Theodosian.378  Evidence 
that he attached some importance to the Theodosian connection may be found in some of the 
epigrams of the Anthologia Latina.  One such epigram not only promotes its subject, 
Vandaliricus, who may be identified as Hilderic, but also advertises the power of his ancestors 
 Theodosius, Honorius and Valentinian.379  Thus, it is possible that Hilderic attempted to 
restrict the royal succession to those individuals who could claim descent from both the 
Hasding and Theodosian families.380  This would have included Hilderics nephews, Hoamer and 
Hoageis, who were both targets during the coup, but excluded Gelimer, who could only claim 
descent from the Hasding family.381 
Hilderics deposition and imprisonment certainly precipitated a diplomatic response from 
Constantinople, which is presented by Procopius through an exchange of letters between 
375  Bella III.9.8. 
376  Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 76.  Both Procopius (Bella III.9.6, 12) and Corippus (Ioh. III.262) suggest 
that Hilderic was an elderly man when he assumed the Vandal kingship in 523. 
377  Bella III.9.21: [            
] 
378  On Hilderics lineage see PLRE II, 564-5 (Hildericus). 
379  AL 206 (Shackleton Bailey) [= 215 Riese]. 
380  Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 76. 
381  On Hoamer and Hoageis see PLRE IIIA, 6001 (Hoamer) and 452 (Euagees).  Procopius (Bella III.9.9) 
notes that Hoamer and Hoageis were initially imprisoned with Hilderic, and that Gelimer 
subsequently had Hoamer blinded following Justinians condemnation of his coup (Bella III.9.14). 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Justinian and Gelimer, which the historian implies that he reproduces verbatim.382  However, 
the veracity of the letters which he purports to present must be questioned.  The historical 
value of the letters in the Bella cannot, of course, be entirely dismissed.  If Procopius indeed 
had access to official documents at Constantinople while he was writing the Bella, he might 
conceivably have consulted the exchange of correspondence between Justinian and Gelimer.  
However, Procopius letters have often been seen as fulfilling a similar role to the paired 
commanders speeches presented before a battle in classical historiography.  While they might 
contain some element of plausible information, they are largely rhetorical exercises.383  
Furthermore, in the Bella, Justinian never speaks directly,384 and letters are thus a means of 
attributing views or intentions to the emperor himself.  As will be argued below, in this context, 
it seems likely that the genuine information contained in the letters may have been the 
imperial propaganda used to justify the Roman invasion of Africa, rather than a statement of 
Roman foreign policy. 
According to Procopius, Justinian initially wrote to Gelimer, stressing the unlawful nature of 
his actions, and requesting that Gelimer release Hilderic, and wait to assume the throne 
legally.385  When this missive accomplished nothing, Justinian wrote again, requesting that 
Hilderic (and his nephews) be allowed to seek sanctuary within the Eastern Roman Empire, and 
threatening Roman military intervention.386  Gelimer responded that his actions were at the 
behest of the Vandal people, and were thus according to Vandal law.387  Furthermore, he 
stressed that Roman interference in Vandal affairs was unwanted, and would be interpreted as 
a declaration of war.388 
382  Bella III.9.1023.  Malalas (XVIII.57) attests to Gelimer sending an ambassador to Constantinople with 
gifts, but does not suggest that he derives his information from genuine documents. 
383  Cameron, Procopius, 148. 
384  Cameron, Procopius, 149. 
385  Bella III.9.1013. 
386  Bella III.9.179. 
387  Bella III.9.21. 
388  Bella III.9.223. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
It has sometimes been suggested that Justinian had a personal obligation to intervene, given 
his friendship with Hilderic,389 and it is unclear whether Justinians response to the situation 
would have been different had Hilderic not been a friend and, potentially, an ally.390  Justinian 
may well have regarded Hilderics policies as favourably pro-Roman, and the personal 
connection cannot be entirely dismissed.  Nevertheless, it seems unlikely that this was an 
overriding concern, especially in light of Procopius claim that Justinian  having been angry 
with Gelimer even before then, was still more eager to punish him, suggesting an ulterior 
motive.391 
Certainly, it does not seem legitimate to push the significance of Hilderics status as an ally 
further, and to argue that Justinian felt that he had a legal obligation to intervene in Vandal 
Africa, on the basis of the treaties agreed between the Vandal king Gaiseric, and the Eastern 
and Western Roman Empires in the course of the 5th century.392  This argument might be seen 
to derive support from Procopius claim that Justinian presented himself to Gelimer, not as a 
military aggressor, but as defender of the constitutional arrangements established by 
Gaiseric,393 and from the fact that Roman emperors reserved the right to intervene in the 
politics of peoples to whom they had granted federate status.  However, if one traces the 
development of the relationship between the Roman Empire (both Eastern and Western) and 
the Vandal kingdom through the treaties agreed between them in the course of the 5th century, 
there is little evidence that, by the 530s, the Eastern Roman Empire had any legal basis, 
according to its own laws (recognised by the Vandals or not), upon which to exert political 
authority in Vandal Africa. 
389  Bella III.9.5. 
390  Stein, Histoire, II, 311. 
391  Bella III.9.24: [...      ,      .] 
392  Bury, History, II, 311; and, more recently, Puliatti, Ricerche sulla legislazione regionale di 
Giustiniano, 72.  Formal treaties had been struck with the Western Roman Empire, during the reign 
of Valentinian III, 435 and 442, and, after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, with the Eastern 
Roman Empire, during the reign of Zeno, in 476. 
393  Bella III.9.19. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Three treaties are known to have been struck between the Vandals and the Roman Empire (both 
Eastern and Western)  in 435, 442 and 476.394  Information concerning them is limited.  
However, it is clear that, while the Vandals may originally have been regarded as foederati by 
the Western Roman Empire,395 and thus subject to Roman political intervention, by 476, at the 
very latest, the Vandal kingdom was able to interact with the Eastern Roman Empire as a state 
in its own right.396  This is evident from the equivalent nature of the terms binding the two sides 
in the treaty agreed between Gaiseric and the Eastern Roman emperor, Zeno (474491), in 476, 
which required that both parties refrain from hostile action against one another.397 
Thus, unless it could be demonstrated that the friendship which Procopius notes between 
Hilderic and Justinian constituted the submission of the Vandal monarch to Roman client-
kingship, an argument not substantiated by the extant sources, the Eastern Roman Empire, 
according to its own laws, had no right, let alone obligation, to intervene in Vandal domestic 
politics.  And, indeed, in the letter attributed to him by Procopius, Gelimer rightly points out 
394  For the treaty of 435 see Prosper, s.a. 435, 437.  For the treaty of 442 see Prosper, s.a. 442; Victor of 
Vita, I.13; Bella III.4.134.  Procopius appears to conflate the agreements of 435 and 442.  However, it 
has generally been accepted that these provisions relate to that of 442.  See A. Schwarcz, The 
settlement of the Vandals in north Africa, in A. Merrills, ed., Vandals, Romans and Berbers: New 
Perspectives on Late Antique North Africa (Aldershot, 2004), 52.  For the treaty of 476 see Bella III.7.26. 
395  According to Prosper (s.a. 435): Peace was agreed with the Vandals, who were given a portion of 
Africa to inhabit [Pax facta cum Vandalis data eis ad habitandum Africae portione].  In his entry for 
the year 437, Prosper (s.a. 437) provides additional information concerning the division of land, 
suggesting that Gaiseric exerted influence over the former Roman provinces of Mauretania 
Sitifiensis, Numidia and part of Proconsularis.  See Schwarcz, The settlement of the Vandals in north 
Africa, 53.  It is, however, far from clear whether the Western Roman emperor, Valentinian III, ever 
relinquished control of these provinces.  It has generally been assumed that the Western Roman 
Empire would have regarded the treaty of 435 as little more than the formal reallocation of foederati 
from one region to another, and thus, that the agreement should not be seen as establishing any kind 
of Vandal state, or even as indicating a change in the nature of the relationship between the Western 
Roman Empire and the Vandals.  See Courtois, Les Vandales et lAfrique, 16970; and, more recently, 
Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 601. 
396  This was perhaps already the case in 442.  See Prosper, s.a. 442; and Victor of Vita, I.13.  Prospers 
reference to fixed regions [certis spatiis], in contrast to the granting of Roman lands to the Vandals 
in 435, suggests the demarcation of land between two distinct polities.  The terms noted by Procopius 
are consistent with this, and suggest that the Vandals were no longer regarded as foederati, and were 
thus required to pay tribute to the empire, rather than receiving imperial pay for their services.  See 
Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 63.  Cf. Bella III.4.134; with n. 394.  
397  Procopius notes (Bella 3.7.26) that an endless peace [ ] was agreed between 
Gaiseric and the Easter Roman emperor, Zeno (474-491), requiring that each party refrain from hostile 
action against the other. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
that it is Justinian who will act unlawfully in invading Africa, breaking the treaty agreed by 
Gaiseric and Zeno, which had been duly honoured by the subsequent Eastern Roman emperors 
Anastasius (491518) and Justin I (518527).398 
However, given that Procopius composed his account of the African campaign retrospectively, 
in c. 551, by which time it would have been evident that the campaign had not been the success 
that was initially proclaimed, it would have been necessary to present a strong justification for 
Roman intervention in the region.399  And it is certainly not impossible, that, by this date, the 
Roman imperial government had reworked its propaganda on Africa, and that this later version 
is what is evident in Procopius narrative. 
2.4 Imperial representations of the Roman invasion of Africa 
It is important to make a distinction between the manner in which the invasion of Africa was 
presented to the Roman population and its actual motivations.  The imperial justification of the 
African campaign, offered less than a year after the launch of the campaign, sets out 
motivations which were very different to the legal justification presented by Procopius.  In the 
administrative legislation (CJ 1.27.1 and 1.27.2), promulgated immediately following the 
apparent success of the conquest of Africa, on 13 April 534, an attempt is made to justify Roman 
intervention in the region by presenting it as a response to the atrocities committed by the 
Vandals against their Nicene Christian subjects.400  The legislation does not, in fact, make 
explicit reference to the religious beliefs of the Vandals themselves.  Nevertheless, given that 
it refers to them as enemies of body and soul,401 and the Vandals are elsewhere identified as 
Arians,402 CJ 1.27.1 has been interpreted as evidence that the Roman invasion of Africa was 
398  Bella III.9.223.  
399  On the date of the composition of the Bella see pp. 413. 
400  CJ 1.27.1.8. 
401  CJ 1.27.1 pref.: [animarum ... simul hostes et corporum]. 
402  Victor of Vita, passim; Bella III.8.4 and IV.21. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
religiously motivated, and intended to liberate the Nicene Christian population from the Arian 
heresies inflicted upon it by its Vandal rulers.403 
The two pieces of legislation  CJ 1.27.1 and 1.27.2  were promulgated with the intention of 
incorporating the newly conquered provinces of Africa into the imperial administrative 
system.404  However, considerable prefatory information is attached to CJ 1.27.1, presenting a 
justification for Roman intervention in Vandal Africa in 533.  It opens with the statement that 
the Roman conquest of the region represented the will of God,405 and then enlarges upon this 
statement, by claiming that, through Justinian, God would free the people of Africa from the 
yoke of servitude.406  Furthermore, the legislation details the injuries inflicted by the Vandals 
upon the Nicene Christian population  forced conversions, churches being converted into 
stables, and the torture and exile of venerable men.407 
The legislation does not provide any indication of the time at which this Vandal persecution 
took place.  Nevertheless, it has been cited as evidence for the religious motivation of the 
Roman invasion of Africa in 533.408  However, such citations overstate the historical reliability 
of the text.  As has been noted above, the situation of Nicene Christians in Vandal Africa had 
improved significantly during the reign of Hilderic.409  Given that Hilderics tolerance of Nicene 
Christianity may have contributed to his deposition, some have argued either that Gelimers 
reign saw an immediate backlash against Nicene Christians, and a return to the persecutions of 
the previous century410 or, alternatively, that such a backlash was believed to be imminent at 
403  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 15; E. L. Woodward, Christianity and Nationalism in the Later Roman 
Empire (London, 1916), 89; Jones, LRE, 270. 
404  The administrative significance of the legislation is discussed in detail in sections 3.2 and 3.3. 
405  CJ 1.27.1.1. 
406  CJ 1.27.1.5. 
407  CJ 1.27.2.24. 
408  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 78. 
409  See p. 81. 
410  In particular, Woodward, Christianity and Nationalism in the Later Roman Empire, 8991. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
the time the Roman invasion was launched.411  However, as has been argued above, Hilderics 
deposition was more likely to have been the result of Vandal domestic politics than religious 
concerns per se,412 and the violent persecution implied by CJ 1.27.1 is not evident in any other 
contemporary source. 
Furthermore, the legislations depiction of a persecution appears to be anachronistic.  
Similarities between CJ 1.27.1 and Victor of Vitas Historia have often been noted.413  However, 
parallels in a wide variety of texts, in both the Greek and Latin traditions, suggest that CJ 1.27.1 
does not simply imitate the style of Victor of Vita, but rather draws on a more wide-spread 
topos. 
The nature of the material included in CJ 1.27.1 is particularly evident from its account of an 
apparent miracle which occurred as a result of the persecution: 
 We saw venerable men, who, with their tongues cut off at the root, 
miraculously spoke of their punishment.414 
This statement is clearly very similar to Victor of Vitas earlier claim that: 
 He [a count acting on the command of the Vandal king Huneric] was to cut 
off their tongues at the root and their right hands.  When that had been done, 
through the presence of the Holy Spirit, they spoke and continue speaking, 
as they had spoken previously.415 
However, accounts of men who had had their tongues cut out during a persecution in Vandal 
Africa, and yet remained able to speak, may also be found in the later Latin writings of 
Marcellinus Comes, Victor of Tunnuna, and Pope Gregory I,416 as well as in the later Greek 
411  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 10, presents the Roman invasion of Africa in 533 as a pre-emptive strike 
based on the legitimate concerns of the Romano-African elite. 
412  See pp. 7885. 
413  Moorhead, Justinian, 69 n. 3, goes so far as to suggest that the author of the legislation, whom he 
accepts as being Justinian himself, was familiar with Victor of Vitas work. 
414  CJ 1.27.1.4: [vidimus venerabiles viros, qui abscissis radicitus linguis poenas suas mirabiliter 
loquebantur]. 
415  Victor of Vita, III.30: [linguas eis et manus dextras radicitus abscidisset.  Quod cum factum fuisset, 
spiritu sancto praestante, ita locuti sunt et loquuntur, quomodo antea loquebantur.] 
416  Marcellinus Comes, s.a. 484.2; Victor of Tunnuna, 78; Gregory, Dialogues III.32. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
writings of Procopius and Evagrius.417  The accounts are not identical, nevertheless, all writers, 
with the exception of the author of CJ 1.27.1 and Pope Gregory I, explicitly date the event to the 
reign of Huneric.  Victor of Vita and Marcellinus Comes specifically date it to 484, while Victor 
of Tunnuna dates it to 479.  Indeed, CJ 1.27.1 has, somewhat ironically, also been cited as 
evidence for the specific atrocities committed during Hunerics persecution.418 
Victor of Vita makes no claim to have witnessed the episode which he describes.  However, later 
writers appear to have made minor additions in order to maintain the storys currency.  Thus, 
both the author of CJ 1.27.1 and Marcellinus Comes claim to have seen such men;419 Procopius 
notes that such men were still present in Constantinople in his own day, and that two had 
subsequently lost the power of speech as a result of consorting with prostitutes;420 and Evagrius, 
despite explicitly stating that his account derives from Procopius Bella claims, contra 
Procopius, that the historian had actually spoken to these men.421  Interestingly, Evagrius also 
connected the story he presents with CJ 1.27.1, which he incorrectly attributes to Justin I.422  This 
suggests that contemporaries, in fact, understood that the references to religious persecution 
in the legislation were anachronistic. 
The account furthest removed from that of Victor of Vita is that of Pope Gregory I, written in 
the late 6th century, which claims that a group of bishops had their tongues cut out during the 
persecution which occurred during Justinians reign.423  Petersen, in attempting to explain how 
417  Bella III.8.4; Evagrius, HE IV.14.  Cf. Theophanes, AM 6026 (ed. De Boor, pp. 1867). 
418  Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 240, cite the legislation as evidence that the Romano-Africans were 
forced to convert to Arianism. 
419  CJ 1.27.1.4; Marcellinus Comes, Chron. s.a. 484. 
420  Bella III.8.4. 
421  Evagrius, HE IV.14; with P. Allen, Evagrius Scholasticus: The Church Historian (Leiden, 1981), 185, who 
stresses that Evagrius elaborates on Procopius account without indicating that he is doing so.  Contra 
J. Conant, Staying Roman: Conquest and Identity in Africa and the Mediterranean, 439700 
(Cambridge, 2012), 78, who suggests that Evagrius conflates the account of Procopius with that of 
Aeneas of Gaza. 
422  Evagrius, HE IV.14; with M. Whitby, The Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius Scholasticus (Liverpool, 
2000), 214 n. 38. 
423  Gregory, Dialogues III.32. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Gregory came to have misdated the event, suggests that he simply repeated a story which was 
well known in the Mediterranean region during the 6th century, and that he set it in Justinians 
reign because many versions of the story were written during this period.424  The story took on 
the form of an urban legend, possibly in the early 6th century.425  Thus, the historical reliability 
of CJ 1.27.1 is extremely doubtful. 
However, based on Honors argument, that CJ 1.27.1 and 1.27.2 are rare examples of legislation 
drafted by the emperor himself, rather than by members of the committee responsible for the 
recodification,426 it has sometimes been suggested that the true value of CJ 1.27.1 lies in the fact 
that it constitutes a genuine statement of the emperors personal beliefs, which, irrespective of 
their validity, were the primary force behind imperial policy.427  The extent to which the 
emperors personal beliefs might have dictated imperial policy is almost impossible to assess.  
But, while their role certainly cannot be dismissed, the undoubtedly propagandist nature of the 
prefaces of much of the Justinianic legislation offers reason to doubt that CJ 1.27.1 constitutes a 
genuine statement of Justinians personal views or his policies, irrespective of whether or not it 
was drafted by the emperor himself. 
Indeed, it might be argued that a greater understanding of the prefatory material of CJ 1.27.1, 
and thus its presentation of the Roman invasion of Africa, must come from an appreciation of 
the text as legislation, rather than as historical narrative.  CJ 1.27.1 was included among 
Justinians codified legislation.  However, it was one of the most recent additions, having been 
424  J. M. Petersen, The Dialogues of Gregory the Great in their Late Antique Cultural Background 
(Toronto, 1984), 1920. 
425  Indeed, C. Courtois, Victor de Vita et son oeuvre: tude critique (Alger, 1954), 84, raises doubts about 
the story as it appears in Victor of Vitas Historia, given that martyrs who lost their tongues but 
remained able to speak were a common motif in hagiography. 
426  T. Honor, Some constitutions composed by Justinian, JRS 65 (1975), 1179.  Honor bases his 
argument on the comparison of the legislation with Justinians letters to the Pope, which he argues, 
on stylistic grounds, were written by the same hand.  This is certainly plausible.  His identification of 
this hand as that of the emperor himself, on the basis that It is marred by lapses into vulgarity (107), 
is less certain. 
427  W. Kaegi, Arianism and the Byzantine army in Africa 533546, Traditio 21 (1965), 245 n. 4; 
Moorhead, Justinian, 69. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
issued a mere seven months prior to the promulgation of the Codex repetitae praelectionis.  And 
this has perhaps distorted its modern interpretation.  On the basis of its primary subject matter 
 the administrative organisation of the Roman provinces of Africa  the legislation may be 
better appreciated through comparison with the legislation relating to provincial 
administrative reform, which constitutes a significant proportion of Justinians Novellae 
(uncodified legislation issued from 535 onwards). 
Given that the Novellae were not re-edited as part of a codification process, their (often lengthy) 
prefaces and, indeed, some other portions of the texts, are of great importance to the 
understanding of the development of imperial propaganda and, in particular, imperial image, 
during Justinians reign.  In this context, the Novellae often make use of pseudo-historical 
accounts to present an ideology of renewal and reconquest, and thus bring together Christian 
and Roman traditions of authority.428  To cite but one of many examples, Novella 24, which 
concerns the amalgamation of administrative and military offices in Pisidia into the single office 
of a praetor, begins with a preface which attributes the extent of the classical Roman Empire to 
the efficacy of its magistrates,429 and stresses that historical investigation had revealed that the 
Pisidians were a dishonest and bloodthirsty people, and that: 
  this office had charge over those bandit-ridden and murderous regions which 
are to be found on the summit of a mountain called the Head of the Wolf, and 
those dwelling there are called Wolf-heads...430 
This anecdote is almost undoubtedly fictional, and uses questionable logic to justify the position 
of the praetor in Pisidia.  However, its significance derives from the fact that Justinians 
428  M. Maas, Roman history and Christian ideology in Justinianic reform legislation, DOP 40 (1986), 17
429  J. Nov. 24 pref. 
430  J. Nov. 24.1: [ et latrocinantibus illis et homicidis praediis, quae in aliqua summitate montis Lupi 
caput appellata commorantur  Lycocranitarum [Lupicapitorum] habitaculum nominatur  
administrationem hanc praeesse =        ,   
         ,  
  ...]  Novella 24 was promulgated bilingually. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
administrative reforms are presented as justified by anecdotes spuriously presented as 
historical precedent. 
CJ 1.27.1 deserves to be considered in this context.  In much the same manner as Novella 24, CJ 
1.27.1 presents a quasi-historical anecdote concerning the atrocities committed by the Vandals 
against the Romano-African population as a precedent for Roman intervention, including the 
complete administrative reorganisation of the region, as subsequently set out in the legislation.  
Indeed, on this basis, reference to a historical event (Hunerics persecution of Nicene Christians) 
rather than a contemporary one would have been seen as presenting a stronger justification for 
Roman intervention in Africa, as it created a longer standing precedent.431  Thus, when 
compared with Justinians reform legislation, CJ 1.27.1 appears to offer little more than 
propaganda in explanation of the Roman invasion of Africa in 533, and cannot be taken to imply 
that Justinian was genuinely motivated by concern for the well-being of Nicene Christians in 
Vandal Africa. 
Furthermore, since CJ 1.27.1 is the earliest source to suggest that the Roman invasion of Africa 
was motivated by imperial concern for, and obligation to, the Nicene Christian population of 
Vandal Africa, having been produced within months of the launch of the campaign, it must be 
speculated that all subsequent accounts which refer to such a motivation were written in the 
knowledge of such imperial propaganda, and were likely to have been influenced by this.  
Consequently, the role of religion in the Roman invasion of Africa should not be overstated. 
2.5 Other influences on the Roman invasion of Africa 
As noted in the preceding section, although the extent to which Justinians personal beliefs 
might have dictated imperial policy is impossible to assess, the role of those beliefs should not 
be dismissed.  However, as is clear from Procopius account of events leading to the launch of 
431  Cf. p. 94. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
the African campaign, the emperor was surrounded by advisers with their own views regarding 
such a venture.  And, while the emperor undoubtedly expected to claim credit for any decision 
which resulted in a positive outcome, there is no reason to suppose that he was not susceptible 
to influence by others.  Consequently, the influence of those around the emperor, and the way 
in which their interests might have shaped the campaign which was ultimately launched, merit 
some consideration. 
There was by no means unanimous support for an African campaign.  Procopius attributes to 
Justinians advisers a number of concerns regarding a campaign against the Vandals.  These 
concerns appear to have been primarily based on the consequences of the failures of previous 
Roman campaigns against the Vandals  namely the loss of men and funds.432  Procopius 
identifies only one of Justinians advisers by name, the Praetorian Prefect of the East, John the 
Cappadocian, but they undoubtedly included both administrators and military advisers.  He 
notes that the administrator of the treasury [   ], presumably the 
comes sacrarum largitionum,433 and all those who were responsible for the collection of taxes, 
despaired as to how they were to raise the funds required for an extended military campaign,434 
while the generals feared being placed in command of a campaign against such a formidable 
enemy, particularly when they, together with their soldiers, had only recently returned from 
the war in the East, against Sasanian Persia.435 
According to Procopius, John the Cappadocian was the only man prepared to voice his concerns 
to the emperor, and a detailed account of the risks of the campaign are attributed to him  the 
difficulties in reaching Carthage from Constantinople, either by land or by sea; the time-lag in 
receiving accurate information about events in Africa; the difficulty in holding the region 
432  Two unsuccessful campaigns had been launched against Vandal Africa during the reign of the Eastern 
Roman emperor Leo I, in 462 and 468. 
433  This individual has not been identified for the years 530 to 535.  See PLRE IIIB, 1483. 
434  Bella III.10.3. 
435  Bella III.10.45. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
securely while Italy and Sicily remained in the hands of the Ostrogoths, even assuming the 
campaign should be a success; and, should the campaign fail, the risk of Vandal retaliation 
against the Eastern Roman Empire, as well as the loss of men and resources.436  Johns speech to 
the emperor concludes with the assessment that: 
 It is before action that good council is profitable.  For regret is unprofitable 
to those who have failed, but, before disasters, there is no danger in changing 
ones mind.  Surely, then, it will be advantageous above all to use this time as 
is needful.437 
Given that the invasion of Africa occurred regardless, as Procopius was well aware when he 
wrote the Bella, his presentation of the debate which preceded it has sometimes been regarded 
as contrived in order to fit his literary purpose.  By presenting Justinian as having acted contrary 
to the recommendations of his advisers, Procopius was able to credit the entire success (and 
subsequent lack thereof) of the campaign to the emperor himself, as well as implicitly 
discrediting John the Cappadocian, whom the historian disliked.438  However, the concerns 
which Procopius claims were raised by both Justinians administrators and his generals, while 
possibly based on an outdated knowledge of Vandal military capabilities in the 6th century, were 
legitimate.439  It should not be doubted that significant concerns were raised at Constantinople, 
or that these concerns shaped the objectives of the campaign which was ultimately launched, 
as will be considered in greater detail in section 2.6. 
There were also groups, both at Constantinople and elsewhere, with interests in encouraging 
the Roman invasion of Africa.  According to Procopius, Justinian was initially discouraged from 
invading Vandal Africa by the concerns raised by John the Cappadocian.440  However, the 
emperor was subsequently persuaded to proceed with the invasion under pressure from the 
436  Bella III.10.146. 
437  Bella III.10.17: [       .       
 ,       .     
      ]. 
438  Moorhead, Justinian, 66. 
439  Thus, Bury, History, II, 127. 
440  Bella III.10.18. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Chalcedonian church.  Procopius notes that the emperor was visited by an anonymous bishop 
from the East.  This man claimed that God had appeared to him in a dream, and told him to 
rebuke the emperor for abandoning the campaign.441  The bishop describes Justinians purpose 
in Africa as  protecting the Christians in Libya from tyrants, and concludes with the claim 
that God had said to him that I myself will assist him [Justinian] in waging war and will make 
him lord of Libya.442 
Similarly, ecclesiastical interest in the invasion may also be inferred from the Vita of St Sabas, 
written by the Palestinian monk Cyril of Scythopolis.  In the Vita, Cyril describes how Sabas, 
having been granted an audience before the emperor at Constantinople, informed Justinian 
that, if he should follow Sabas advice, God would grant him Africa, in order that he might drive 
out Arianism.443  Such accounts are consistent with the argument that the Roman invasion of 
Africa was intended as a crusade against Arianism, and it is certainly plausible that the church 
had an interest in establishing what it regarded as orthodoxy in Africa. 
Thus, when considering the religious motivation for the African campaign, a distinction needs 
to be made between Justinians personal convictions  both his personal theology and his belief 
in his role as defender of the true faith (both of which were probably genuine)  and the 
interests of the church as an institution.  The religious motivation for the Roman invasion of 
Africa may have derived as much from ecclesiastical pressure to extend the churchs influence, 
as from the personal piety of the emperor. 
The Chalcedonian churchs interest in the Roman invasion of Africa has generally been seen as 
stemming from a pious concern for its brethren living under Arian rule and for those souls who 
441  Bella III.10.1821. 
442  Bella III.10.19: [...       ...]; and III.10.20: [ , 
,       .] 
443  Cyril of Scythopolis, Vita sancti Sabae 72; with B. Flusin, Miracle et histoire dans loeuvre de Cyrille 
de Scythopolis (Paris, 1983), 206-7, who argues that Cyril presents Sabas comments as a prophecy, 
and that its fulfilment constitutes one of the saints miracles. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
had yet to recognise the true faith.  Undoubtedly, theological concerns were a consideration, 
but the church, as an institution, may also have had other, more worldly, motivations for 
encouraging Roman intervention in Africa. 
On 1 August 535, Justinian promulgated Novella 37, Concerning the African Church [De 
Africana ecclesia], which is primarily concerned with the African churchs right to reclaim 
property seized from it during the period of Vandal rule.  The legislation was undoubtedly 
issued as an addendum to Novella 36, promulgated on 1 January 535, and concerned with the 
rights of individual Romano-Africans to claim restitution for property lost during the Vandal 
period. 
Novella 37 was addressed to Solomon, the recently appointed Praetorian Prefect of Africa.444  
However, unlike the administrative reform legislation, there is some indication that it may have 
been intended to have been disseminated far more widely than simply among the Roman 
provincial administration.  Novella 37 is one of a relatively small group of Justinianic novellae 
which were promulgated solely in Latin, rather than in Greek or bilingually.  The use of Latin 
for these select novellae has usually been explained by the desire of the Roman imperial 
government to ensure maximum comprehension of the legislation in the provinces which 
remained predominantly Latin speaking.445  And, certainly, it is unlikely that Novella 37 would 
have been composed solely in Latin were it only intended for circulation among the Roman 
administrative offices of Africa, which were likely to have been predominantly Greek 
speaking.446  While it was accessible to those Romano-Africans who had legal interests, the 
444  PLRE IIIB, 116776.  For the date of Solomons appointment see pp. 1367. 
445  See B. Hemmerdinger, Les lettres latines  Constantinople jusqu Justinien, Byzantinische 
Forschungen 1 (1966), 194. 
446  As Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 239, have argued, the repeated reminders in the Justinianic 
legislation that the Roman administrators not prey on African tax-payers (eg. CJ 1.27.1.5) suggest that, 
at the upper levels, at least, the new administration needed time to establish the good will of the local 
population, and was probably not composed of Romano-Africans.  On the use of Greek as the language 
of imperial administration in the 530s, see Honor, Tribonian, 12438. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
novella was also directed towards the imperial bureaucracy, both in Africa and in 
Constantinople, the legal profession, and the church. 
Following the conquest of Africa, the Roman imperial government is thought to have sought to 
redefine its relationship with the African population.  Legislation, such as Novella 37, was one 
means through which this may have been done.447  Although Novella 37 is entitled Concerning 
the African church [De Africana ecclesia], its contents are wide ranging, relating to both the 
Nicene Church as an institution, and to religious and social affairs in Africa more generally.  
Among other provisions it included a number of apparently oppressive measures against those 
who did not ascribe to Nicene Christianity  they were banned from performing ecclesiastical 
rites, ordaining bishops and clergy, and holding public office (the latter prohibition even 
applied to those who had been re-baptised as Nicene Christians).448  After the period of Vandal 
rule in Africa, during which time Nicene Christianity was, at the very least, not officially 
endorsed, Novella 37 appears to represent, prima facie, the restoration of Nicene Christianity 
to a position of unchallenged authority in the Roman provinces of Africa. 
On this basis, the promulgation of Novella 37 has been accepted as the culmination of Justinians 
short term objectives in Africa, and thus as a means through which to reconstruct the 
emperors intentions in the region prior to the launch of the campaign in 533.  In particular, it 
has been used to reinforce the longstanding view that the Roman invasion of Africa was 
primarily motivated by religious concerns.  The text has been read as entirely consistent with 
CJ 1.27.1, and as indicating that Justinians intentions in Africa were entirely religiously 
motivated.449  Indeed, it has sometimes been suggested that the prohibitions included in Novella 
37 closely resemble those measures taken against Nicene Christians during the reign of 
447  Thus, Pringle, Defence, 11, suggests that Novella 37 was a means through which the Roman imperial 
government sought to present itself as a liberator to the Romano-African population. 
448  J. Nov. 37.58. 
449  W. H. C. Frend, The Christian period in Mediterranean Africa, in F. D. Fage, ed., The Cambridge 
History of Africa (Cambridge, 1978), II, 485. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Huneric, and that they were intended as a quid pro quo response to the earlier Vandal 
persecutions.450 
However, recent scholarship has suggested that Novella 37 is, in fact, a significant development 
of Justinians original intentions in Africa.  The harsh religious policy presented in the 
legislation and the apparently tolerant manner in which the campaign was undertaken appear 
to be somewhat inconsistent.451  Thus, Novella 37 may, in fact, have marked a departure from 
Justinians original, tolerant, policy in Africa, and have been intended as a conciliatory gesture 
towards the Nicene church, which had originally approached the emperor regarding the matter 
of restitution.452 
Novella 37 also granted the Nicene church the right to reclaim property confiscated from it 
during the period of Vandal rule  a right which the legislation notes to have been requested 
by Reparatus, the bishop of Carthage, on the behalf of the bishops of the province of 
Proconsularis.453  There is nothing particularly remarkable in this.  The Roman imperial 
government effectively granted the Nicene church the same right to restitution as any other 
landowner, and reiterated its own right to tax church property in the region.454  However, the 
novella goes further.  It grants the Nicene church its former lands in perpetuity and as well the 
right to reclaim possessions held by Arians, pagans or others, outside the prescriptive time-
limit imposed for the restitution of secular property.455  Furthermore, the legislation specifies 
that synagogues be converted to churches, effectively also granting the Nicene church all 
450  See Victor of Vita, IIIIII passim. 
451  According to Procopius, Belisarius stressed to the Roman army the need to treat the Romano-African 
population with respect, since their support was essential to the success of the Roman campaign 
(Bella III.16.18.  Cf. III.17.6). 
452  Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 241.  The request from the African bishops for a decision regarding the 
status of church property in Africa is noted in Novella 37 itself (J. Nov. 37.1) and is also attested by a 
group of letters in the Collectio Avellana (858). 
453  J. Nov. 37.1. 
454  J. Nov. 35. 
455  J. Nov. 37.3. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
property previous held in common by the Jewish community.456  Consequently, the Nicene 
church stood to gain substantial material benefit from the Roman invasion of Africa. 
The Roman imperial government may have held the view that the support of the Nicene church 
in Africa would aid integration of the provinces into the imperial administration (although this 
was not ultimately the case), and was thus willing to make some concessions.  However, the 
letters of the Collectio Avellana, between Justinian and the pope Agapetus (535536),457 confirm 
that the restitution of church property was not merely a concern of the bishops of 
Proconsularis, but a matter of wider significance over which the pope petitioned the 
emperor.458  In light of this, it is tempting to suggest that the church at Rome also attempted to 
exert significant influence over Roman intervention in Africa, and that the promulgation of 
Novella 37 in Latin, the language of diplomatic communication, was intended to communicate 
the scale of the concessions made by the Roman imperial government as a result of 
ecclesiastical pressure. 
Nor was the church the only party which sought to benefit (either materially or otherwise) 
from the Roman invasion of Africa.  The chronicle attributed to Zachariah of Mytilene notes 
that: 
 Now there were in Constantinople certain magnates from Africa who, owing 
to a quarrel which they had with the prince of the land, had left their country 
and taken refuge with the king [Justinian].459 
In the 5th and 6th centuries, Constantinople appears to have had a significant Romano-African 
population, comprising mainly of refugees who had fled Vandal oppression.460  The extent of 
456  J. Nov. 37.8.  The extent to which this provision was enforced is unclear.  Archaeological evidence 
confirms that the synagogue at Hammam Lif (c. 20 km south-east of mod. Tunis, Tunisia) remained in 
use in the 6th century.  See K. B. Stern, Inscribing Devotion and Death: Archaeological Evidence for 
Jewish Populations of North Africa (Leiden, 2008), 95. 
457  On Agapetus see PLRE IIIA, 23 (Agapetus I). 
458  Coll. Avell. 868. 
459  Ps. Zachariah, IX.17 (trans. F. J. Hamilton & E. W. Brooks, The Syriac Chronicle known as that of 
Zachariah of Mitylene (London, 1899), 262). 
460  B. Croke, Justinians Constantinople, in M. Maas, ed., The Cambridge Companion to the Age of 
Justinian (Cambridge, 2005), 75. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
this migration, and its causes, are difficult to map.  However, a recent attempt to quantify 
Romano-African migration between 439 and 533 suggests that there were two distinct 
emigration peaks  one between 439 and 450, and the other between 481 and 490.461 
These peaks can be relatively easily explained.  As the account of Victor of Vita makes clear, 
following the Vandal capture of Carthage in 439, the Vandal king, Gaiseric, sent the 
Carthaginian clergy into exile.462  The senators and honorati of Carthage were also banished, 
first from the city, and then from the kingdom.463  The expulsions from Carthage appear to have 
represented a deliberate attempt to disrupt existing power structures.464  However, subsequent 
expulsions of Romano-African landowners do not appear to have been restricted to the centre 
of government, Carthage.  A novella of the Western Roman emperor, Valentinian III, 
promulgated in 451, refers to Romano-African landowners being deprived of their lands in the 
former Roman provinces of Mauritania Sitifiensis, Mauritania Caesariensis and Byzacena.465  
While this may have constituted an attempt to disrupt local power structures, it might equally 
be interpreted as an attempt to increase the territory of the sortes Vandalorum.  The second 
emigration peak (481490) coincides almost exactly with the persecution of Nicene Christians 
which occurred during the reign of Gaiserics successor, Huneric.466  While there is no clear 
evidence for Nicene Christians being expelled from the Vandal kingdom during this period, it 
is highly likely that many devout Romano-Africans, particularly from among the remaining 
Nicene clergy, fled Africa during the persecution. 
461  Conant, Staying Roman, 6790.  It must, however, be noted that Conants sample of Romano-African 
emigrants consists of only 54 individuals, identified from both literary and epigraphic evidence, over 
a period of close to a hundred years.  This is a relatively small sample, and the statistics drawn from 
it can provide, at best, no more than rough indication of the scale of emigration during this period. 
462  Victor of Vita, I.156. 
463  Victor of Vita, I.15; Vita Fulgentii 1. 
464  Conant, Staying Roman, 67. 
465  Val. Nov. 34.23. 
466  Victor of Vita, IIIIII passim. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
As noted above, Novella 36, promulgated on 1 January 535, granted former Romano-African 
landowners the right to reclaim property seized during the period of Vandal rule.467  The 
possibility of such restitution might well have served as an incentive to members of the 
Romano-Africa elite in Constantinople to encourage Roman invasion of Africa.  And it is 
certainly probable that there were those whose families had fled, or been exiled from, Africa 
decades earlier who saw that they might profit from a change in political circumstances in the 
region if Roman rule were re-established.  But the representatives of such families were 
probably acting opportunistically, and their actions may have been behind the provision in 
Novella 36, which restricted restitution claims to property which had been held by the 
claimants father or grandfather.468  While those who had been forced from their homes in the 
region as a result of religious or political persecution would certainly have had legitimate 
reason to agitate for Roman intervention, it is hard to explain why this agitation did not occur 
until the 530s, at least thirty years after most would have been forced into exile, and during a 
period in which the Vandal monarchy was far more positively disposed towards its non-Arian 
population (see section 2.2). 
It seems far more likely that the magnates to whom Pseudo-Zachariah refers469 had fled Africa 
relatively recently, in order to escape the political turmoil which had afflicted the Vandal 
kingdom during the 530s rather than because they objected to Vandal rule per se.  A brief 
statement in the Bella suggests that many of Hilderics partisans fled to Constantinople 
following his deposition, and attempted to exert influence on the emperor to intervene.470  It is 
these partisans who had arguably suffered the greatest recent losses (in terms of both power 
467  J. Nov. 36.1. 
468  J. Nov. 36.1. 
469  See n. 459. 
470  Bella IV.5.8:  after Hilderic had been removed from the office and was in confinement ... he 
[Apollinarius, one of Hilderics partisans] came to the Emperor Justinian with the other Libyans who 
were working in the interest of Hilderic... [         ... 
[Apollinarius] ,       ,    , 
 .] 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
and property) in Africa, who had the most to gain by agitating for Roman intervention in the 
530s. 
Justinians decision to invade Africa may also have been encouraged by commercial groups, 
although this argument is extremely difficult to sustantiate, since the extant written sources 
provide only limited information about commercial activity.471  Significantly, however, when 
the Romans entered the city of Carthage, they discovered a number of imprisoned eastern 
merchants.  According to Procopius, they had been imprisoned by Gelimer because he believed 
that the merchants had urged Justinian towards war.472  Unfortunately, Procopius provides no 
indication as to why the merchants might have wished for Roman intervention in Africa.  But 
the fact that he mentions them as having an interest in the African campaign is remarkable, as 
merchants are largely absent from historical writing of the Eastern Roman Empire. 
The specific causes for the merchants dissatisfaction with Vandal rule in Africa, or with 
Gelimers rule in particular, are difficult to determine, but may well have been economic.  The 
Vandal kingdom, like the former Roman provinces of Africa, was a prosperous and 
commercially active region.  Under Vandal rule, Africa remained a major producer of both grain 
and oil,473  and, while the trade in these products is difficult to trace, ceramic evidence indicates 
that the Vandal kingdom remained integrated into the pan-Mediterranean trading networks.474  
Both Vandal fine-ware and amphorae can be found throughout the western Mediterranean.475  
Furthermore, the increased presence of Palestinian and Aegean ceramics at Carthage in the late 
471  Commercial lobby groups have been suggested by both Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 6; and Evans, The 
Age of Justinian, 126. 
472  Bella III.20.6. 
473  Courtois, Les Vandales, 20514; D. Mattingly, Oil for export?  A comparison of Libyan, Spanish and 
Tunisian oil production in the Roman Empire, JRA 1 (1988), 3356; idem, The olive boom.  Oil 
surpluses, wealth and power in Roman Tripolitania, LibStud 19 (1988), 2141. 
474  R. Hodges & D. Whitehouse, Mohammed, Charlemagne and the Origins of Europe (Ithaca, 1983), 26
475  P. Reynolds, Hispania and the Roman Mediterranean, AD 100-700 (London, 2010), 91100. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
5th and early 6th centuries suggest that the Vandal kingdom had sought to develop stronger 
trading connections with the eastern Mediterranean.476 
However, it is possible that, while trade continued to be profitable to the Vandal state, it became 
increasingly less profitable for ship owners.  In the 4th and early 5th centuries, a significant 
proportion of grain from Africa had been shipped to Rome for the annona.  The shipping of 
grain was undertaken by state nominated shippers (navicularii) who enjoyed a number of 
subsidies, including exemption from tariffs.477  While the navicularii were only contracted to 
transport grain to Rome, it seems likely, given their commercial advantage, that they also 
traded in a large number of other goods, which were piggy-backed onto the annona 
shipments.478 
The annona shipments from Africa ceased in 439, when Gaiseric captured Carthage, but the 
region continued to produce a surplus and to trade.  In the absence of demand for grain from 
Rome, the Vandals may well have explored alternative markets in both the eastern and western 
Mediterranean, allowing for an expansion of their trade networks.479  But, without state 
subsidized shipping, the costs to both shippers and buyers of the traded goods would have been 
higher. 
Meanwhile, those navicularii responsible for transporting the annona shipments from 
Alexandria to Constantinople continued to receive generous subsidies from the Eastern Roman 
Empire.480  Consequently, those merchants with contracts with the Eastern Roman Empire 
enjoyed a commercial advantage over those trading solely in the western Mediterranean.  It is 
therefore possible, although it cannot be conclusively demonstrated, that commercial 
476  Ibid, 1057. 
477 On the laws relating to the navicularii see M. McCormick, Bateaux de vie, bateaux de mort: maladie, 
commerce, transports annonaires et le passage conomique du Bas-Empire au Moyen Age, in 
Morfologie Sociali e Culturali in Europa fra Tarda Antichit e Alto Medioevo (Spoleto, 1998), 8092. 
478  Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 1457. 
479  Reynolds, Hispania and the Roman Mediterranean, 93. 
480  A. R. Lewis, Naval Power and Trade in the Mediterranean: AD 5001000 (New York, 1970), 90. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
dissatisfaction with Vandal rule in Africa stemmed from the tariffs imposed on those trading 
out of Carthage, and that there were merchants who hoped that the return to Roman rule in 
Africa might result in a return to state subsidized commerce in the region. 
None of the individual factors outlined above will have been solely responsible for the decision 
of the Roman imperial government to invade Africa in 533.  Nevertheless, regardless of the 
presentation of the motivations of the campaign by contemporary sources, it is clear that the 
decision was the result of a complex inter-play of factors, each of which may have been every 
bit as influential as the will of the emperor. 
2.6 Strategic concerns 
All accounts of the African campaign were written retrospectively  either in the immediate 
aftermath of the Roman victory at Tricamarum, or decades later, in full knowledge of the 
conflict between the Roman administration of Africa and the Berbers in the 530s and 540s  and 
it is legitimate to ask whether modern scholarship can realistically hope to ascertain the Roman 
imperial governments intentions vis--vis Africa at the time its invasion was launched. 
Attempts to understand Justinianic policy, including that in relation to Africa, have long been 
skewed by the perception that there was an imperially directed policy of renovatio imperii, 
under which the emperor sought to restore the Roman Empire to its classical form and ideals.  
Key to such a policy would have been the (re)conquest of the former Western Roman Empire  
in particular, Italy, the former heartland of the Roman Empire, and also Africa and Spain.481  
Certainly, Justinianic legislation and, in particular, the Novellae, lend support to such an 
argument by presenting the incorporation of the provinces of the classical Roman Empire into 
481  This view is particularly dominant in the older scholarship, both on the reign of Justinian generally 
and on Justinianic Africa, which is inclined to interpret all aspects of Justinians regime as western 
orientated.  See Bury, History, II, 124; Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 4; C. Saumagne, Points de vue sur la 
reconqute de lAfrique au VIe sicle, CT 7 (1959), 286; and, more recently, S. Raven, Rome in Africa, 
3rd edn. (London, 1995), 210. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
the Eastern Roman Empire as the emperors ultimate intention and defining achievement.  
Thus, Novella 30, issued in 536, and ostensibly unconnected with the West (it reorganises the 
civil administration of the province of Cappadocia), proclaims: 
 God also gave us [Justinian]  hope that he would grant to us dominion over 
those places yet remaining, which the Romans of old held as far as the 
boundaries of each ocean, and subsequently lost through their negligence.482 
Particular value has been attached to the Justinianic legislation as a source of information on 
imperial policy, as a result of its official nature.  However, an official text is no less subjective 
and no more reliable than any other, and it has increasingly been recognised that the Justinianic 
legislation generally,483 and the Novellae in particular, were a means through which the imperial 
propaganda was consciously disseminated.484  Thus, while the theme of renovatio imperii was 
undoubtedly exploited and incorporated into the imperial image, it should certainly not be 
inferred from this that it was the rationale for imperial policy.  Rather, it served as a convenient 
historical pretext, and justification, for imperial actions (including the invasion of Africa) which 
were likely to have been unpopular.485 
Nevertheless, previous studies of the Roman invasion of Africa have inevitably begun from the 
premise that, for one reason or another, the Roman imperial government sought, from the 
outset, to lay claim to much of the classical Roman Empires holdings in Africa  perhaps not the 
classical provinces in their entirety, but certainly territory beyond the littoral.486  This is hardly 
482  J. Nov. 30.11.2: [ dedit nobis deus ... et spes habere bonas quia etiam reliquorum nobis detentionem 
annuet deus, quam prisci Romani usque ad utriusque oceani fines tenentes sequentibus neglegentiis 
amiserunt;/      ...           
             
    ]  Novella 30 was promulgated bilingually. 
483  Unlike the codified legislation of the Codex repetitae praelectionis, Digesta and Institutiones, the 
Novellae were not re-edited to remove superfluous material, and thus retain more information 
incidental to the legislation than the other legal texts. 
484  Maas, Roman history and Christian ideology, 26. 
485  Maas, Roman history and Christian ideology, 26, suggests that the theme of renovatio imperii was 
adopted in Novellae following the Nika riot, in order to create a more positive imperial image for 
propaganda purposes. 
486  On the extent of the Eastern Roman Empires authority in Africa following the conquest see pp. 127
8, 1334. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
an unreasonable premise.  Even if one dismisses the idea of a policy of renovatio imperii as 
retrospective propaganda, and thus the statements of the Justinianic legislation which proclaim 
that the African campaign resulted in the Roman conquest of a third part of the world,487 it is 
difficult to explain the imperial directive in the otherwise strictly pragmatic legislation setting 
out the military administration of Africa, which dictated that Roman military commanders 
should aim to extend Roman control in Africa to the boundaries of the classical Roman 
Empire.488  Nevertheless, this premise has never been tested, and this section will consider the 
possibility that, already, in April 534, imperial intentions in Africa were evolving, and that, when 
the Roman invasion was conceived (probably in 532), the imperial governments intentions may 
have been far less ambitious than they were subsequently presented to be. 
Closely connected with the view that the Roman invasion of Africa was envisaged as part of a 
grand plan to restore the Roman Empire to its classical form is the argument that Justinians 
ultimate foreign policy objective was always the conquest of Italy (begun in 535), and that this 
could not be undertaken until the Eastern Roman Empire had secured maritime positions in 
Zeugitana, Sardinia and Sicily.  These positions would have granted the Eastern Roman Empire 
control of the Strait of Sicily, and were therefore essential to the provisioning of any campaign 
in Italy.489  Thus, contrary to the ideological motivations presented in the Justinianic legislation, 
Justinians motives for invading Africa might be seen as entirely pragmatic and dictated by 
longer term military requirements. 
There is certainly some logic to this argument.  However, it rests on the unsubstantiated view 
that the conquest of Italy was Justinians objective from the outset, and not merely an 
opportunity afforded by the unexpected success of the African campaign.  While it is clear from 
the Justinianic legislation that the inhabitants of the Eastern Roman Empire were aware of a 
487  D. Const. Tanta/ 23; with n. 86.  Similarly, D. Const. Tanta/ pref. 
488  CJ 1.27.2.4; with p. 135. 
489  Saumagne, Points de vue sur la reconqute de lAfrique, 286; Raven, Rome in Africa, 210. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Roman past, in which the Roman Empire had controlled substantially greater territories, there 
is no reason to think that this knowledge superseded more practical considerations in the 
development of imperial policy.  Thus, it cannot be argued, on this basis, that the conquest of 
Italy was always Justinians priority.490  This does not, of course, discredit the possibility that 
Justinian had strategic, rather than ideological, reasons for planning a campaign against Italy, 
and that the African campaign was undertaken in order to facilitate the subsequent invasion of 
Italy.  However, when the propaganda of renovatio imperii is disregarded, there is little to 
suggest that the Roman imperial government ever prioritized the conquest of Italy over other 
foreign policy objectives.491  Nevertheless, the suggestion that the Roman invasion of Africa was 
motivated by longer term strategic concerns should not be entirely dismissed. 
The Roman expeditionary force captured Carthage, and other cities along the coast of 
Zeugitana, with remarkable speed and efficiency.492  However, the outcome of the campaign was 
by no means a foregone conclusion and, given the objections raised by Justinians advisers, it 
can certainly not be assumed that the campaign was undertaken on the understanding that it 
would be complete in a matter of months.  As has been noted previously, Procopius presents 
Justinian as having launched the African campaign against the wishes of his advisers in order to 
attribute to the emperor sole credit for a campaign which the historian knew to have been a 
success.493  Nevertheless, there is little reason to suppose that the objections to the campaign 
which Procopius attributes to John the Cappadocian and Justinians military advisers were not 
raised, given that they express realistic concerns that the Eastern Roman Empire risked over-
extending its resources if it attempted an aggressive campaign of conquest. 
490  Contra Saumagne, Points de vue sur la reconqute de lAfrique, 286. 
491  Kouroumali, Procopius and the Gothic War, 13551, stresses how little interest contemporary 
writers show in the Italian campaign. 
492  See pp. 313. 
493  See p. 97. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Given these concerns, the Roman imperial government is unlikely to have contemplated an 
aggressive campaign of conquest unless it were confident that the available military resources 
would not be required for the empires defence.  Thus, it has sometimes been argued that the 
terms of the so-called Endless Peace with Sasanian Persia, agreed in September 532,494 
sacrificed an outright military victory over the Persians in order that the Eastern Roman Empire 
might commit available military resources to the West in perpetuity.495  A connection between 
the Endless Peace and the African campaign is certainly implied by Procopius in his claim: 
 And when the Emperor Justinian considered that the situation was as 
favourable as possible, both as to domestic affairs and to his relations with 
Persia, he took under consideration the situation in Libya.496 
However, this should probably not be interpreted as meaning more than that the conclusion of 
the Endless Peace influenced the timing of, and facilitated, military action in the West.497  The 
notion of an endless peace is highly likely to have been the product of Roman propaganda 
needs, and the treaty was unlikely to have been conceived as truly endless by the Roman 
imperial government.498  Thus, the Eastern Roman Empire could only rely on a short-term lull 
in hostilities with the Sasanian Persia, and the time and resources which it could realistically 
expect to commit to the African campaign would have been calculated accordingly. 
In fact, the African campaign was undertaken in a period of considerable uncertainty and, as a 
result, its initial military objectives may have been considerably less ambitious than have 
generally been assumed.  The Roman imperial government simply could not be sure that it had 
494  The specific date of the conclusion of the Endless Peace remains the subject of some debate, largely 
as a result of the variety of dating systems employed by the sources.  On this issue see Stein, Histoire 
II, 295 n. 1; and Greatrex, Rome and Persia at War, 2145 with n. 5.  A date in September 532 has, 
however, been widely accepted. 
495  This view is dominant in the older scholarship on the reign of Justinian.  See J. W. Barker, Justinian 
and the Later Roman Empire (Madison, 1986), 118; Jones, LRE, 273; Stein, Histoire, II, 295. 
496  Bella III.10.1: [  ,             ,  
     .] 
497  Indeed, Moorhead, Justinian, 24 with n. 16, notes that Procopius is the only contemporary to suggest 
a connection between the two events. 
498  M. E. Williams, Roman-Sasanian relations (532 to 545 CE) (Oxford University MPhil. thesis, 2010), 
chap. 1. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
the time or resources to devote to a large scale campaign.  Indeed, the objections raised by 
Justinians advisers suggest that they doubted that even a more modest campaign was 
feasible.499 
What, then, were the initial Roman military objectives in Africa?  Despite the Eastern Roman 
Empires declaration of victory in Africa, it never held effective control of much more than the 
littoral.500  This has been seen as indicating a failure of Roman strategy in Africa and, in 
particular, a failure to appreciate the threat posed by the Berber tribes.501  However, it is possible 
that this is to misunderstand the intentions of the initial Roman invasion.  In the first instance, 
at least, Roman ambitions may not, in fact, have extended far beyond key coastal positions in 
Zeugitana. 
It is notable that, following the victory over the Vandals at the battle of Tricamarum, the 
immediate Roman military priority was not the subjugation of inland regions.  Procopius makes 
the somewhat generic statement that Belisarius  sent out an army to recover for the Romans 
everything which the Vandals ruled.502  However, the extent of effective Vandal control over 
the former Roman provinces of Africa is far from clear  not least because of the development 
of independent Berber polities inside the former Roman limes (see further Chapter 4).  Certainly, 
it cannot be inferred from Procopius account that the Romans immediately set out to 
consolidate their hold over the territories referred to in the legislation detailing the civil and 
military administration which was promulgated on 13 April 534.503  Indeed, Justinians failure to 
do just this is one of the criticisms made of his African policy in the Anecdota.504 
499  See pp. 967. 
500  See pp. 1278, 1335, 2136. 
501  Modran, Les Maures, 57384 
502  Bella IV.5.1: [        ,   .] 
503  CJ 1.27.1.12, 2.14. 
504  Anec. XVIII.9. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Procopius, in fact, provides quite specific information concerning Roman military priorities 
following the capture of Carthage.  These were the capture of Caesarea in Mauritania (mod. 
Cherchell, Algeria), Sardinia and Corsica, and the garrisoning of Septem (mod. Ceuta) and the 
islands of Ebusa, Majorica and Minorica (mod. Ibiza, Majorca and Minorca).505  These priorities 
do not, however, appear to be consistent with a military campaign intended to capture Africa.  
With the possible exception of Caesarea, itself a considerable distance from the Roman centre 
of power at Carthage,506 these coastal positions were of minimal value in establishing Roman 
control over the mainland Vandal kingdom, let alone over the former Roman provinces of 
Africa.  And, equally, none of these positions can reasonably be said to have constituted a 
military threat to the Roman presence in the region following the collapse of the Hasding 
dynasty at Tricamarum. 
But the significance of Sardinia and Septem, at least, is reinforced by the legislation setting out 
the civil and military administration of Africa.  Sardinia was confirmed as a province in its own 
right,507 and established as a ducal military command.508  The legislation also dictated that both 
soldiers and a fleet of dromones were to be stationed at Septem under the command of a 
tribune.509  Unusually, the legislation details the priorities of this command  namely, that the 
tribune was not only to guard the crossing between Spain and Africa, but that he was also to 
monitor events in Spain, Gaul and Francia, and report upon them to the dux.510  The attention 
505  Bella IV.5.37.  See Map III. 
506  Procopius (Bella IV.5.5) himself notes that the distance from Carthage to Caesarea was thirty days 
travel for an unencumbered traveller. 
507  CJ 1.27.1.12. 
508  CJ 1.27.2.3. 
509  CJ 1.27.2.2. 
510  Ibid.  It is not entirely clear to which dux the tribune was to report.  But, given Septems position 
within the provinces of Mauritania, and given that the tribunes position is set out following a clause 
establishing the ducal command in Mauritania (CJ 1.27.2.1), it may be assumed that the tribune was 
to report the the dux of Mauritania (see pp. 1323). 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
devoted to Septem in the legislation, as well as the commitment of a fleet,511 surely attests to 
strategic importance of the position.512 
Whether Sardinia or Septem were under Vandal control immediately prior to the Roman 
invasion of Africa is unclear.  While Sardinia is assumed to have been incorporated into the 
Vandal kingdom at some point between 456 and 466,513 Procopius attests to a revolt by the 
Vandal governor of Sardinia, Godas, shortly prior to the launch of the Roman invasion, and 
notes in particular that Godas refused to continue to pay tribute to Carthage.514  This suggests 
that, while Sardinia was nominally a Vandal possession, as long as its tribute continued to be 
paid, it was granted a significant degree of autonomy.515  Furthermore, Sardinias semi-
autonomous position is highlighted by the fact that it was the preferred place of exile for many 
of those who fled, or were exiled from, the Vandal kingdom during periods of religious 
persecution.516  Information concerning Corsica and the Balearic Islands under Vandal rule is far 
more limited.  But it is certainly possible that these islands too enjoyed a degree of autonomy as 
a result of their distance from the Vandal centre of power at Carthage. 
The political position of Septem in 533 is even more ambiguous.  Procopius claim in De 
Aedificiis, that  this [Septem] was built by the Romans in early times, but being neglected by 
the Vandals, it had been destroyed by time,517 has been cited both as evidence for the Vandal 
occupation of the site, 518 and as evidence that it lay outside Vandal control.519  In reality, 
511  The Eastern Roman Empire did not have extensive naval resources during this period.  J. Haldon, 
Warfare, State and Society in the Byzantine World, 5651204 (London, 1999), 68. 
512  Contra J. Wood, Defending Byzantine Spain: frontiers and diplomacy, EME 18.3 (2010), 313, who 
suggests that assigning the command to a tribune suggests that the position was unimportant. 
513  S. Cosentino, Byzantine Sardinia between West and East: Features of a regional culture, Millennium 
1 (2004), 336. 
514  Bella 3.10.27. 
515  G. Lulliri & M. Bonaria Urban, Le monete della Sardegna vandalica: storia e numismatica (Sassari, 
1996), 245; followed by Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 136. 
516  Victor of Vita, II.23; Vita Fulgentii 25. 
517  Aed. VI.7.14: [        ,     
  .] 
518  M. Vallejo Girvs, Bizancio y la Espaa tardoantigua (Ss. V-VII): un capitulo de historia mediterranea 
(Alcal de Henares, 1993), 523. 
519  M. Kulikowski, Late Roman Spain and its Cities (Baltimore, 2004), 407 n. 87. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Procopius statement is probably of little significance.  Throughout book VI of the De Aedificiis, 
Procopius claims that cities were either destroyed or neglected by the Vandals, and had to be 
rebuilt from their foundations by Justinian.520  Similarly, Procopius reference to the Vandal 
capture of Septem in the Bella offers no information concerning the political position of the city 
in 533.  Given its considerable distance from the main theatre of military operations, it is even 
possible that Procopius himself lacked this information. 
There is, however, no reason to believe that the Vandals held Septem immediately prior to it 
being captured by the Romans, particularly given that effective Vandal control of the former 
Roman province of Mauritania Tingitana is far from certain,521 and a number of theories have 
emerged concerning the political position of the city.  One possibility is that, by 533, Septem 
was an independent civitas governed by a local elite.522  The acquiescence of such a local 
government to Roman rule would certainly explain why Procopius offers no suggestion that the 
city resisted Roman occupation.523  Alternatively, it has been argued that Septem was held by 
the Visigoths in 533.  All such arguments rest on the Historia Gothorum of Isidore of Seville.  In 
reference to a later Visigothic attempt to capture Septem from the Eastern Roman Empire, 
Isidore notes that, previously, the Romans had expelled the Visigoths from the city.524 
Following the capture of Carthage, the Roman expeditionary force also attempted to seize 
Lilybaeum in Sicily (mod. Marsala),525 which had been a Vandal fort, having been gifted by the 
Ostrogothic king, Theodoric, to his sister, Amalafrida, on the occasion of her marriage to the 
Vandal king Thrasamund.526  But the Romans were initially repulsed from Sicily by the 
520  See p. 55. 
521  Vallejo Girvs, Bizancio y la Espaa tardoantigua, 52. 
522  Kulikowski, Late Roman Spain and its Cities, 273. 
523  Ibid. 
524  Isidore, Historia Gothorum (2nd redaction) 42.  The date of the later Visigothic attack on Septem 
remains the subject of considerable debate.  Little more can be said than that the attack must have 
occurred between 541 and 548.  Cf. R. Collins, Early Medieval Spain: Unity in Diversity, 4001000, 2nd 
edn. (Basingstoke, 1995), 37; Kulikowski, Late Roman Spain and its Cities, 407 n. 88. 
525  Bella IV.5.11. 
526  Bella III.8.134. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
Ostrogoths, who argued that Sicily was an Ostrogothic possession, and that the Romans had no 
claim to it.527  On this basis, perhaps the subsequent Roman conquest of Sicily (in 535) should be 
seen as one of the initial objectives of the African campaign, rather than as part of the later 
campaign against mainland Italy, with which Procopius associates it. 
Thus, it is far from clear that the African campaign was even envisaged, in the first instance, 
as an attack on Vandal sovereignty, which was fragmenting of its own accord, so much as a 
campaign to secure certain key positions irrespective of their existing political standing.  As has 
been noted previously, many of these positions would have been essential to a subsequent 
campaign against mainland Italy.  But this cannot have been the primary motivation for the 
African campaign.  The positions seized effectively granted the Eastern Roman Empire control 
of shipping routes through the western Mediterranean, including control of the key passages 
through the Strait of Sicily and the Strait of Gibraltar.  This was a valuable achievement in its 
own right. 
 The ambitions for the African campaign held by the Roman imperial government might then 
never have extended beyond the capture of these key western Mediterranean positions, to 
encompass the complete conquest of the former Roman provinces of Africa.  This would have 
fulfilled a number of objectives.  First, with minimal resources, the Eastern Roman Empire was 
able to establish forward bases in the western Mediterranean which could, potentially, facilitate 
(as yet unplanned) military activity against not only Ostrogothic Italy, but also Visigothic Spain, 
having secured the crossing into Europe at Septem.528  And, not only were these forward bases 
key military positions, they were also positions from which the Eastern Roman Empire could 
gather intelligence on the West.  Furthermore, this less ambitious campaign would appear to 
explain interest taken by merchant groups in the invasion of Africa.  Irrespective of the political 
527  Bella IV.5.11. 
528  Contra Wood, Defending Byzantine Spain, 294, who implies that the African campaign was 
undertaken with the intention of facilitating a pre-conceived invasion of Spain. 
Chapter 2:  The Roman Invasion of Africa and its Motivations 
developments in other Mediterranean kingdoms, the key ports would remain under the control 
of the Eastern Roman Empire. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
3.1 Introduction 
On 13 April 534, just one month after the surrender of the Vandal king,529 Justinian issued 
legislation establishing the civil administration (CJ 1.27.1) and military administration (CJ 
1.27.2) of the Eastern Roman Empires newly conquered provinces in Africa.  Although the two 
pieces of legislation are addressed to different individuals  CJ 1.27.1 to Archelaus and CJ 1.27.2 
to Belisarius (on the significance of the addressees see further below) - and were incorporated 
into the second edition of the Codex Justinianus, the Codex repetitae praelectionis, as distinct 
decrees,530 there is every reason to suppose that they were envisaged as a single, 
comprehensive, statement of imperial policy in Africa.  Not only were the two decrees 
promulgated simultaneously, but CJ 1.27.2 was clearly intended as a continuation of CJ 1.27.1.531  
Indeed, it is plausible that CJ 1.27.1 and CJ 1.27.2 were originally composed as a single decree,532 
and were subsequently divided, according to subject matter and the official responsible for 
execution, by the committee responsible for editing the Codex repetitae praelectionis.533  This 
would certainly explain the lack of significant prefatory clauses to CJ 1.27.2 and the cross-
references between the two decrees. 
529  For the date of this event see n. 83.  It should not necessarily be assumed that the legislation was a 
direct response to the Vandal surrender, since it is unclear how quickly knowledge of the event might 
have reached Constantinople and how far in advance of its promulgation the legislation might have 
been drafted. 
530  The Codex repetitae praelectionis was promulgated on 16 November 534.  The preface to this revised 
edition of the Codex Justinianus, the Constitutio Cordi, notes that the new legislation included in this 
edition required correction [emendatio], in order to remove superfluous material and improve 
clarity (CJ Const. Cordi 2-3).  This new legislation would have included CJ 1.27.1 and CJ 1.27.2, since 
these decrees were not promulgated until after 7 April 529, the date of the the first edition of the 
Codex Justinianus (CJ Const. Summa 5).  Thus, the form in which CJ 1.27.2 and CJ 1.27.2 are preserved 
need not be the form in which they were originally promulgated in April 534. 
531  CJ 1.27.2.1. 
532  Contra Rubin, Das Zeitalter Iustinians, I, 160, who argues that the original decrees establishing civil 
and military administration in Africa were incorporated into the Codex Justinianus without 
emendation. 
533  CJ Const. Cordi 2. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Prima facie, the legislation appears to lack internal consistency.  As noted in section 2.4, the 
opening clauses of CJ 1.27.1 have attracted considerable attention as a source of information on 
the religious and ideological motivations for the Roman invasion of Africa.534  However, the 
opening clauses contrast sharply with the subsequent contents of the legislation, which amount 
to a detailed hierarchy of the civil and military offices to be created in the African provinces 
and the schedule of payments to be associated with these offices.535 
The propagandist tone of the opening clauses of the legislation is unsurprising.  Despite the 
somewhat esoteric nature of their primary subject matter, new pieces of imperial legislation 
were public documents.  A number of Justinians novellae contain instructions for their public 
dissemination, most notably Novella 8, which directs the Praetorian Prefect of the East, to 
whom the novella was addressed, to ensure that its contents were made known to the 
inhabitants of the provinces under his jurisdiction;536 and, in an appended edict, that the 
bishops should see that the novella, which has no specific significance to the church, was 
inscribed on tablets or stone and placed in the porches of the churches, in order that it might 
be accessible to the population.537  While the legislation establishing the administration of 
Africa was ultimately included in the second edition of the Codex Justinianus, it differed from 
the majority of the codified legislation in having originally been promulgated during the 
Justinians reign,538 and it may be assumed that its contents were initially disseminated in the 
same manner as the later novellae. 
534  Eg. CJ 1.27.1.67 and 1.27.2. pref; and CJ 1.27.1.1 and 1.27.1.8. 
535  It is difficult to imagine for what audience other than the imperial bureaucracy the schedules of 
payments included at CJ 1.27.1.2142 and CJ 1.27.2.1935 could have been intended. 
536  J. Nov. 8. epilogue.  For similar provisions see J. Nov. 1. epilogue. 1 and J. Nov. 6. epilogue. 2. 
537  J. Nov. 8. epilogue. edictum.  R. Scott, Malalas and Justinians codification, in E. Jeffreys et al., eds., 
Byzantine Papers, Proceedings of the First Australian Byzantine Studies Conference, Canberra 1719 
May 1978 (Canberra, 1981), 19, pushes the interpretation of Novella 8 further, suggesting that the 
notices of new legislation were intended to be read to the public. 
538  See n. 530. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Similarly, the tone of many of the novellae suggests that the Roman imperial government was 
well aware of the value of legislation as a vehicle for the dissemination of imperial 
propaganda,539 and the legislation establishing the civil and military administration of Africa 
should be considered in this light.  While there are strong reasons to reject the interpretation 
of the opening clauses of the legislation as being a genuine statement of imperial policy in 
relation to Africa,540 it has sometimes been assumed that the legislation comprised distinct 
propagandist and practical clauses, directed at different audiences and intended to fulfil 
different purposes.541  However, the sheer quantity of administrative detail provided in the 
apparently practical clauses, sometimes in reference to geographical regions marginally, if at 
all, under Roman control,542 invites an alternative conclusion  that this administrative detail 
is itself intended to add weight to the significance of the empires achievements in Africa, and 
thus to reinforce the legislations propaganda message. 
The significance of the legislation to the understanding of Roman administration cannot, of 
course, be dismissed entirely.  It remains the most comprehensive source of information on the 
administration of the African prefecture  a subject which receives little attention in the 
literary sources concerned with the region.  Indeed, it is the only such detailed list of 
administrative offices and salaries for the 6th century, and has consequently been used in the 
reconstruction of the administrative structures of the other prefectures.543  But, if it is accepted 
that the legislations administrative details are, at least in part, an element of imperial 
propaganda, the significance of the apparently practical clauses merits far greater attention 
than it has received to date. 
539  For a full discussion see Rubin, Das Zeitalter Iustinians, I, 14668, and esp. 160-2 on CJ 1.27.1 and CJ 
1.27.2.  Rubins views are followed by Scott, Malalas and Justinians codification, 1213. 
540  See section 2.4 
541  Rubin, Das Zeitalter Iustinians, I, 161. 
542  See pp. 1278, 1335. 
543  Jones, LRE, 587. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
The legislation establishing the administration of the African prefecture is undoubtedly a 
unique source of information, but the significance of the information which it provides is not 
obvious.  While the legislation has been quarried for technical details of the African 
administration,544 in attempting to characterise this administration and its aims more generally, 
insufficient attention has been paid not only to the fact that the text fulfils a dual function, as 
both legislation and imperial propaganda, but also to the fact that the legislation reflects only 
the nature of the African administration (real or imagined) as it was envisaged from 
Constantinople in early 534, and need not reflect either the situation on the ground or the 
situation after this date.  The legislation was promulgated on 13 April 534, but it was not 
intended to come into effect until 1 September 534,545 a fact which has often been overlooked.  
By September 534 the situation in Africa had changed significantly  Belisarius had been 
recalled to Constantinople prematurely, and the Berber tribes of Byzacena were conducting 
raids against the Romano-African population.546  A distinction must be drawn between the 
practical realities of administration, and the Roman imperial governments expectations (or, 
perhaps, hopes) for the future of the African prefecture.  The former is, of course, essential to 
the understanding of 6th century Africa, but it is the latter which enables the reconstruction of 
a post-conquest African policy. 
3.2 Civil administration 
On a practical level, the civil legislation, CJ 1.27.1, was intended, first and foremost, to establish 
Africa as a prefecture in its own right, under the authority of the Praetorian Prefect of Africa.547  
The legislation is addressed to Archelaus, as Praetorian Prefect, and may have been intended to 
544  Especially, Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 97118 (on civil administration) and 11937 (on military 
administration); but also, Pringle, Defence, 556, on military administration. 
545  CJ 1.27.1.43 and CJ 1.27.2.18. 
546  See section 5.2. 
547  CJ 1.27.1.10. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
confirm his appointment, as there is no evidence for the appointment of any other civil official 
before this date.548 
This appointment may itself provide some insight into the Roman imperial governments 
intentions in Africa.  Archelaus had accompanied the expeditionary force to Africa as prefect 
of the army [  ],549 which Procopius notes was the title assigned to the 
officer responsible for the maintenance of the army [   ].550  Archelaus does 
not, however, appear to have participated in the military campaign, remaining with the fleet 
off-shore until the Roman army had captured Carthage.551  Appointment of a deputy Praetorian 
Prefect, to organize the logistics for an army, appears to have been common practice from the 
5th century and Archelaus appointment has been interpreted in this light.552 
It is certainly reasonable to suppose that Archelaus was entrusted with the logistics of the 
campaign.  He was an experienced administrator, having served as Praetorian Prefect of the 
East (524527) and Praetorian Prefect of Illyricum (dates unknown), two of the most senior 
administrative positions of the empire.553  Indeed, Archelaus seems to have been somewhat 
overqualified for the position to which he was initially appointed,554 and he might have been 
included in the expeditionary force as an administrator who would be competent to oversee 
548  Contra Honor, Some constitutions composed by Justinian, 117, who argues that the legislation 
ought to have been addressed to Belisarius. 
549  Bella III.11.17.  Haury, Procopius Caesariensis: opera omnia, I, 363, reads , although two 
manuscripts contain the reading  instead.  However, the sense of the phrase is not 
significantly altered. 
550  Bella III.11.17. 
551  Bella III.17.16 and III.20.11. 
552  Jones, LRE, 1261 n. 41; S. Barnish et al., Government and administration, in Averil Cameron et al., 
eds., CAH XIV (Cambridge, 2000), 146 with n. 145.  Indeed, Barnish et al. go so far as to suggest that 
Archelaus was the appointment of John the Cappadocian, who is known to have been concerned about 
the cost of the African campaign (Bella 3.10.3), rather than of the emperor himself. 
553  On Archelaus appointments see PLRE II, 1334. 
554  Jones, LRE, 1261 n. 41, identifies two other individuals as having held such a position  Germanus (in 
441) and Apion (in 504).  Germanus is described as magister militum vacans (CJ 12.8.2.4) and Apion as 
     (Bella I.8.5)and    (Theophanes, AM 
5997 (ed. De Boor, p. 146)).  Neither of these men is known to have held any administrative position 
prior to their logistical appointment.  Germanus is not otherwise attested, and Apion is otherwise 
attested as Praetorian Prefect of the East many years later (in 518).  See PLRE II, 1112 (Apion 2) and 
505 (Germanus 3). 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
the integration of Africa into the imperial administrative system should the campaign be a 
success.555  If Archelaus were indeed selected as a potential Praetorian Prefect of Africa before 
the launch of the campaign, this would imply a greater degree of forward-planning than has 
generally been associated with the campaign and its aftermath. 
The Praetorian Prefect of Africa was granted a staff of 396 men, who were divided among 
various administrative offices.556  Traditionally, the Praetorian Prefectures of the empire were 
divided into two distinct branches  the financial and the judicial - and this distinction appears 
to have been preserved in Africa.557  The African prefecture had four general financial offices 
[scrinia IIV], plus one responsible for public works [scrinium operum] and another responsible 
for the chest or treasury [scrinium arcae].  In addition, the financial division of the Praetorian 
Prefecture was also provided with its own secretaries [schola chartulariorum]. 
The prefecture of Africa was divided into seven provinces, the names of which remain open to 
debate as a result of inconsistencies between the readings of the various manuscripts in which 
this section of the Codex Justinianus is attested.558  Krgers 1892 edition of the text reads: 
 Et ab auxiliante deo septem provinciae cum suis iudicibus disponantur, 
quarum Zeugi, quae proconsularis antea vocabatur, Carthago et Byzacium ac 
Tripolis rectores habeant consulares: reliquae vero, id est Numidia et 
Mauritaniae et Sardinia, a praesidibus cum dei auxilio gubernentur 
 [And by the aid of God, seven provinces, together with their judges, shall be 
prescribed, of which Zeugi, which was previously called Proconsularis, Carthage 
and Byzacium and Tripolis shall have consular governors; but the others, that 
555  Cf. Ps. Zachariah, IX.17: And so the king [ie. the emperor] made ready an army under Belisarius and 
Martin and Archelaus the prefect (trans. Brooks & Hamilton, The Syriac Chronicle Known as that of 
Zachariah of Mitylene, 262), which appears to attribute to Archelaus greater significance than does 
Procopius. 
556  CJ 1.27.1.2240. 
557  Jones, LRE, 587. 
558  The standard text of the Codex Justinianus remains that of Paul Krger.  The edition cited here is: P. 
Krger, Corpus Iuris Civilis II: Codex Iustinianus, 5th edn. (Berlin, 1892).  For CJ 1.27.1 and 1.27.2 Krger 
appears to have relied on three manuscripts, which he designated C, R and Q.  These are Montecassino 
49, Berlin Lat. Fol. 273, and Berlin Lat. Fol. 275 respectively.  The three manuscripts have all been 
dated to the first part of the 12th century.  See G. Dolezalek, Repertorium manuscriptorum veterum 
Codicis Iustiniani (Frankfurt, 1985), I, 64 and 70. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
is, Numidia and the Mauritanias and Sardinia shall, with the aid of God, be 
governed by praesidential governors].559 
However, this reading immediately presents a problem  the text explicitly refers to seven 
provinces, but apparently names eight.  Furthermore, a number of variant readings exist.  
Zeugi, quae appears to be the emendation of Krger, who presumably had the pre-Vandal 
province of Zeugitana in mind - which was indeed otherwise known as Proconsularis.  But, 
according to the apparatus criticus, ms. C reads zeigi quae, ms. R reads tegi atque and ms. Q 
reads zegy et que.560  Additionally, ms. R reads Mauritania rather than Mauritaniae.561 
Given that there is no reason to doubt that there should be seven provinces (the manuscripts 
are consistent in reading septem provinciae), two possible means of resolving this 
inconsistency have been proposed.  One possibility would be to read Mauritania for 
Mauritaniae, and accept that the other six provinces were Zeugi, Carthage, Byzacium, Tripolis, 
Numidia, and Sardinia.562  Were there no other problems with the text, this would undoubtedly 
be the preferred solution, since the difference of one letter between Mauritania and 
Mauritaniae can easily be explained by scribal error. 
Alternatively, it is necessary to remove one name  that of Carthage [Carthago].  Although 
Carthage had never previously existed as a province in its own right, there is no reason why 
559  CJ 1.27.1.12.  This reading of the text is itself a correction of that presented by Krger in earlier 
editions of the Corpus Iuris Civilis II.  See, for example, P. Krger, Corpus Iuris Civilis II: Codex 
Iustinianus, 1st edn. (Berlin, 1877): 
 Et ab ea auxiliante deo septem provinciae cum suis iudicibus disponantur, quarum Tingi et quae 
proconsularis antea vocabatur, Carthago et Byzacium ac Tripolis rectores habeant consulares: 
reliquae vero, id est Numidia et Mauritania et Sardinia, a praesidibus cum dei auxilio gubernentur. 
 For the significant objections to reading Tingi rather than Zeugi see Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 107-
8, whose arguments are based on the 1884 edition of the text. 
560  For the identification of the manuscripts see n. 558.  I am here reliant on Krgers apparatus as I have 
not seen the three manuscripts. 
561  The apparatus criticus for earlier editions of the text do not include the reading Mauritaniae in ms. 
562  This was Krgers original reading of the text (see n. 559), and remained the solution preferred by J. 
Desanges, Un tmoignage peu connu de Procope sur la Numidie vandale et byzantine, Byzantion 33 
(1963), 60 n. 2, who argued that Zeugitana and Proconsularis were listed as separate provinces in the 
4th century Verona List.  This is true.  However, the most recent editor of the text, T. D. Barnes, The 
New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1982), 2018, esp. 208, suggests 
that Zeugitana is a mistake, and should refer to Tripolitania, which is otherwise omitted. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
the provinces established in 534 should follow the same organization as those of the pre-Vandal 
period.563  However, that the city of Carthage should have stood as a province in its own right 
within the province of Zeugi, which, if it indeed corresponds to Proconsularis, occupied the 
region surrounding Carthage, seems improbable.564  Furthermore, in the De Aedificiis, 
Procopius places the city within the province of Proconsularis.565 
On the basis of the late 6th/early 7th century geographical text attributed to George of Cyprus,566 
which associates the names Carthage [] and Proconsularis [] 
(albeit placing both in the province of Byzacena), it has sometimes been argued that the two 
words should be conflated to refer to a single province called Carthago-Proconsularis.567  
However, this argument would be more convincing if the two words appeared consecutively in 
the text.568  Arguments in favour of instead conflating the words Zeugi and Carthago to give a 
single province called Zeugi-Carthago, and then reading Proconsularis as being in apposition 
to this, are equally difficult to justify from the existing edition of the text.569 
Instead, it might be suggested that the entire phrase  quae proconsularis antea vocabatur, 
Carthago was not originally included in the decree.  Given that the intention of the legislation 
563  The best source of information on the pre-Vandal provincial organization of Africa is the early 5th 
century Notitia Dignitatum (OC II. 35-40), which identifies the provinces of Africa as Byzacium, 
Numidia, Mauritania Sitifensis, Mauritania Caesariensis and Tripolis. 
564  Thus, Pringle, Defence, 60, argues that there is no reason to suppose that Zeugi and Carthago were 
not one and the same province.  Contra Tissot, Geographie compare, 49; who accepts that Carthage 
and Zeugitana should be regarded as separate provinces post-534. 
565  Aed. VI.5.12.  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 1089. 
566  Based on internal references, E. Honigmann, Le Synekdmos dHirokls et lOpuscule Gographique 
de Georges de Chypre (Brussells, 1939), 49, argues that the text must have been composed between 
591 and 603. 
567  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 109.  However, Diehl bases his interpretation of the text on Georgii Cyprii 
descriptio orbis romani, ed. H. Gelzer (Leipzig, 1890), which is itself read on the assumption that CJ 
1.27.1.12 refers to a single province called Carthago-Proconsularis (Gelzer, Georgii Cyprii descriptio 
orbis romani, xxvi-xxviii). 
568  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 109, notes that CJ 1.27.1.12 includes a comma between the words 
proconsularis and Carthago, but implies that this is a scribal error, stressing that it should be 
compared with the phrase   in Gelzers edition of the geographical text 
attributed to George of Cyprus.  These words are not, however, to be found as a phrase in the more 
recent edition of Honigmann, Le Synekdmos dHirokls. 
569  Contra Pringle, Defence, 23, 601, who proposes this alternative, apparently also on the basis of the 
conflation perceived in the text attributed to George of Cyprus.  See previous note. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
was to establish a new provincial organization in a region which had not previously been 
administered by the Roman imperial government at Constantinople,570 it is in some respects 
surprising that the decree makes no attempt to define the geographical extent of the new 
provinces.  However, the Roman position in Africa remained insecure in April 534, and the 
administrative legislation was not intended to come into effect for another five months.  Precise 
definition of provincial boundaries which were still in the process of being extended may have 
been considered premature.571  Although, this must, presumably, have been done at some later 
date, as 6th century writers, including Procopius in the De Aedificiis and the anonymous author 
of the geographical treatise attributed to George of Cyprus, demonstrate an awareness of which 
cities were located within which African provinces.572 
That being the case, the decision to localize only one of the provinces listed in the legislation  
Zeugi, by noting that it was previously called Proconsularis  seems inconsistent.  After all, 
the province which contained Carthage was likely to have been the one African province, if any, 
of which those within the imperial administration would be aware.  Furthermore, given that 
the name Proconsularis for the region surrounding Carthage appears to have been well attested 
in the 6th century,573 contrary to the statement in the legislation, it seems unlikely that this 
clarification of the text would have been deemed necessary in the original decree.  It is more 
probable that it was added by a copyist sometime later.  Similarly, it might be argued that 
570  Pre-Vandal Africa, following the division of the Roman Empire into the Western Roman Empire and 
the Eastern Roman Empire, had been administered by the Western Roman Empire. 
571  This seems clear from the legislation establishing the military administration.  See nn. 6234. 
572  See Appendices III; with Maps VII and X.  Procopius is not, however, always consistent.  He identifies 
Sitifis as the capital of Mauritania I (Bella IV.20.30), and as being located in Numidia (Aed. VI.7.9).  
Contra Y. Duval, La Maurtanie sitifienne  lpoque byzantine, Latomus 29 (1970), 15860, who 
suggests that this is not an error on Procopius part, but rather reflects a change to the African 
provincial boundaries, following Solomons death in 544 (see n. 1095), since Honigmanns edition of 
the geographical treatise attributed to George of Cyprus emends the text, placing Sitifis in Mauritania, 
rather than in Numidia (see n. 1438).  However, given that Bella IVII and the De Aedificiis must both 
have been completed in the early 550s, most probably within a couple of years of one another (see 
pp. 413, 457), and well after Solomons death, there is little reason to suppose that a change in the 
African provinces boundaries should be reflected in one text and not the other. 
573  The term, and its derivations, certainly continued to be used throughout the 6th century.  It is attested 
in Procopius De Aedificiis () (VI.5.12), and in the geographical work attributed to 
George of Cyprus () (line 641; ed. Honigmann, Le Synekdmos dHirokls, 54). 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Carthage [Carthago] was again a later attempt to make the provinces location clear to 
readers largely unfamiliar with the geography of Africa. 
Thus, the legislation establishing civil administration in Africa divided the prefecture into 
seven provinces: Zeugi (henceforth Zeugitana), Byzacium (henceforth Byzacena), Tripolis 
(henceforth Tripolitania), Numidia, Mauritania I, Mauritania II and Sardinia.574 
The definitions of Mauritania I and Mauritania II also require some clarification.  Prior to the 
Vandal period, two African provinces were identified as Mauritania  Mauritania Sitifensis 
(Mauritania I) and Mauritania Caesariensis (Mauritania II).575  On this basis, the Mauritaniae to 
which the legislation refers have been assumed to be Mauritania Sitifensis and Mauritania 
Caesariensis.576  Procopius does not discuss Mauritania in the De Aedificiis, but in the Bella he 
notes that the capital of Mauritania Prima [ ] was Sitifis, and the capital of 
the other Mauritania [ ] was Caesarea,577 which is consistent with the 
traditional identifications. 
However, Procopius elsewhere notes that: 
  the land of Zabe, which is beyond Mount Aurasium, and is called Mauritania 
Prima, having Sitifis as its capital, he [Solomon] added as a tributary to the 
Roman empire.578 
This passage refers to Solomons campaign in the Aurs massif in 540.579  On this basis, it has 
sometimes been argued that the legislation establishing the civil administration cannot refer 
to Mauritania Sitifensis, since the region was not under Roman control at the time it was 
promulgated, or even when it came into effect; and that Mauritania I, in the legislation, must 
574  CJ 1.27.1.12.  See Map IV. 
575  Notitia Dignitatum OC II. 389.  The Verona List also identifies Mauritania Caesariensis, but designates 
Mauritania I, Mauritania Tabia Insidiana, which Barnes, The New Empire of Diocletian and 
Constantine, 208, suggests was the precursor of Mauritania Sitifensis. 
576  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 110. 
577  Bella IV.20.301; with n. 584. 
578  Bella IV.20.30: [...    ,            
  ,       ] 
579  Bella IV.19.1.  On the campaign see section 5.4. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
refer to Mauritania Gaditana.580  Mauritania Gaditana would have occupied the territory on the 
African side of the Strait of Gibraltar, which, prior to the Vandal period, was called Mauritania 
Tingitania.581  This argument might be seen to derive support from the fact that the only city 
which the geographical text attributed to George of Cyprus associates with Mauritania II 
[ ] is Septem.582 
Such an argument rests on the assumption that the provinces to which the legislation refers, 
and thus Mauritania Caesariensis and Mauritania Gaditana, must have been held by the Eastern 
Roman Empire in 534.  But this is demonstrably not the case.  The only position which the 
Romans are known to have held in north-west Africa is Septem itself;583 and concerning 
Mauritania Caesariensis, Procopius himself notes: 
 For of the other Mauritania, Caesarea is the first city, where Mastigas is 
established with his Berbers, holding the whole region here obedient and 
tributary, except the city of Caesarea  to which the Romans always travel by 
ship, not being able to go by land, since the Berbers live in this region.584 
It seems clear that the Romans had little authority in Mauritania Caesariensis, and there is thus 
no reason to suppose that the provinces to which the legislation refers were much more than 
hypothetical.  Consequently, it is more logical to assume that the provinces set out in the 
legislation were those indicated by Procopius in the Bella  Mauritania Sitifensis and Mauritania 
580  Pringle, Defence, 64 and 356 n. 14. 
581  Notitia Dignitatum OC III. 123.  Tingitania is not attested in the 6th century.  See Pringle, Defence, 393 
n. 156. 
582  Lines 670671a (ed. Honigmann, Le Synekdmos dHirokls, 56).  Pringle, Defence, 393 n. 154, 
suggests that Procopius reference to Gadira in Aed. VI.7.14 refers to the province of Gaditana.  But 
Gadira more commonly refers to the town of Gades (mod. Cadiz). 
583  Bella IV.5.6. 
584  Bella IV.20.31: [       ,      
   ,            
   .         ...   
     ,          
  .]  Cf. Bella IV.5.5.  Procopius (Bella IV.13.19) subsequently refers to the leader of 
the Berbers of Mauritania as Mastinas, but Mastigas and Mastinas are almost certainly the same 
individual.  The apparent inconsistency may easily be explained as scribal error, given that the 
difference between the two names is only that of one letter, and the forms of the letters  and  are 
quite similar.  Cf. Courtois, Les Vandales, 360; Morizot, Recherches sur les campagnes de Solomon, 
1034.  On Mastigas see further PLRE IIIB, 851. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Caesariensis, with the latter encompassing the limited Roman possessions which were held in 
the region of the former Roman province of Mauritania Tingitana (ie. Septem).585 
Furthermore, given that the Roman imperial government used the legislation to claim 
possession of the provinces of Mauritania Sitifensis and Mauritania Caesariensis on the basis of, 
in all likelihood, no more than the Roman occupation of the cities of Septem and Caesarea, the 
territorial extent of the Eastern Roman Empires provinces of Zeugitana, Byzacena, Tripolitania 
and Numidia in early 534 is also called into question.586  Consequently, Roman possessions in 
Africa in the early 530s should not be assumed to include cities other than those explicitly noted 
by Procopius in the Bella as being occupied by the Romans at this time. 
Whether or not the arrangements outlined in the legislation were ever fully implemented, there 
is every indication that the Roman imperial government attempted to establish the framework 
for a relatively sophisticated administration in Africa  albeit, an administration which was 
intended for a considerably larger territory than that held by the Eastern Roman Empire, in 
early 534, or subsequently.  Such an administration would undoubtedly have required 
considerable organisation and expense, although the extent to which the establishment of the 
African civil administration can be seen as an expensive exercise is open to interpretation.587  
Nevertheless, the legislation establishing the civil administration makes allowance for a 
significant number of individuals at not insignificant expense, suggesting planning had been 
undertaken for the future of Africa beyond the initial campaign of conquest.588 
585  Bella IV.20.301. 
586  Roman administration does appear to have been established on Sardinia by 534 (Bella IV.5.24), 
although Roman control over the island appears to have been tenuous, given that, in 535, Solomon 
was obliged to send troops to put down a Berber insurrection (Bella IV.13.415). 
587  G. Lapeyre & A. Pellegrin, Carthage latine et chrtienne (Paris, 1950), 148, stress the cost involved in 
establishing such an administrative system. 
588  Jones, LRE, 274. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
The newly created provinces of Africa included the five Roman provinces of Africa which had 
existed prior to the Vandal conquest of the region.589  Consequently, it has sometimes been 
suggested that the Roman imperial government deliberately attempted to recreate pre-Vandal 
Roman Africa in order to reinforce the Roman Empires historical claim to the region  a theme 
which is developed in greater detail in the military legislation (see below).590  At a superficial 
level, the legislation undoubtedly made use of historical precedent in order to justify Roman 
intervention in Africa  in much the same way as the Novellae justify administrative changes 
in other regions,591 and the choice of the names of the provinces should probably be interpreted 
in this light. 
However, at a practical level, there was a clear break with historical precedent.  This was partly 
the result of necessity.  There had not previously existed a Praetorian Prefecture of Africa.  The 
majority of the African provinces (Byzacena, Numidia, Mauritania Sitifensis, Mauritania 
Caesariensis and Tripolitania) had previously existed as a diocese under the jurisdiction of the 
vicarius of Africa, who reported to the Praetorian Prefect of Italy.592  Sardinia and Corsica, 
meanwhile, had been provinces of Italy, which fell under the jurisdiction of the vicarius of the 
City of Rome, who similarly reported to the Praetorian Prefect of Italy.593  And Mauritania 
Tingitania and the Balearic Islands had been provinces of Hispania, under the jurisdiction of 
the vicarius of Hispania, who reported to the Praetorian Prefect of Gaul.594 
589  The Notitia Dignitatum (OC II. 3540) gives the five provinces of Africa as: Byzacium, Numidia, 
Mauritania Sitifensis, Mauritania Caesariensis and Tripolis.  Cf. the Verona List, which lists them as: 
Proconsularis, Bizacina, Zeugitana (? Tripolitania), Numidia Cirtensis and Numidia Militiana 
(amalgamated in 314), Mauritania Caesariensis and Mauritania Tabia Insidiana (? Sitifensis).  See 
Barnes, The New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine, 208. 
590  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 11011, argues that the provinces outlined in the legislation, and the 
officials appointed to them are identical to those outlined in the Notitia Dignitatum, and that the 
legislation is evidence of Justinians desire to recreate anciennes traditions romaines.  Contra 
Pringle, Defence, 356 n. 14, who argues that, while there are obviously some similarities with the 
administration of pre-Vandal Roman Africa, these similarities are not as close as Diehl would suggest, 
not least because the provinces were far from occupied in their entirety in 534. 
591  See pp. 945. 
592  Notitia Dignitatum OC II. 58 and XX. 815. 
593  Notitia Dignitatum OC II. 267 and XIX. 1014. 
594  Notitia Dignitatum OC III. 123 and XXI.115. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Obviously, in 534, the conquest of Italy had not yet begun, so the recreation of this earlier 
administrative system would have been impossible.  However, the decision to amalgamate the 
provinces of Africa into a single administrative unit was novel.  Equally, there was no attempt 
to recreate the intermediate administrative level previously occupied by the vicarii, who had 
previously been responsible for the administration of the dioceses.595  But the office had largely 
been made redundant, since the Praetorian Prefecture of Africa comprised a single diocese.596  
Given that the provinces identified in the legislation potentially occupied a vast geographical 
area, the decision to restrict the Praetorian Prefecture to a single diocese again suggests that 
the Roman imperial government was well aware, in 534, that only parts of these provinces were 
under effective Roman control. 
Zeugitana, Byzacena and Tripolitania were to be consular provinces; and Numidia, Mauritania 
I, Mauritania II and Sardinia were to be praesidential provinces.597  This similarly shows some 
change from what is known of the administration of the African provinces during the pre-
Vandal period, during which Byzacena (which would have included Zeugitana) and Numidia 
were consular provinces; and Tripolitania, Mauritania Sitifensis, Mauritania Caesariensis and 
Sardinia were praesidential provinces.598  However, a specific motivation for this change, if it 
were even recognised as such, is not clear.599 
Interestingly, the legislation suggests that the decision to establish Africa as a prefecture was 
motivated by a deliberate desire to place the region, at least administratively, on a par with 
595  Stein, Histoire du Bas-Empire, II, 319. 
596  There is, in fact, no mention of the diocese of Africa in the legislation establishing the civil 
administration.  However, the term is employed in the legislation establishing military 
administration (CJ 1.27.2.13). 
597  CJ 1.27.1.12. 
598  Notitia Dignitatum OC XX. 815.  Sardinia was, according to the Notitia a province of Italy during this 
period, but was nevertheless a praesidential province (Notitia Dignitatum OC XIX. 1012). 
599  Contra Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 111, who argues that Tripolitania, rather than Numidia, would have 
merited a consular governor because, in 534, it would have been regarded as securely under Roman 
control.  This is not demonstrable. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Oriens and Illyricum.600  And, certainly, there are clear similarities between the financial 
administration of the three prefectures, which operated a number of sub-regional financial 
offices [scrinia], as well as offices responsible for the treasury of the prefecture and for public 
works.601  There is no indication that the Prefecture of Africa was intended to be seen as inferior 
to the longer standing prefectures of the empire, although its administration was somewhat 
smaller.602 
Indeed, the legislation appears to show a trend towards the standardization of administrative 
practices empire-wide, rather than the desire to recreate the past.  The guidelines for the 
conduct of officials demonstrate an attempt to ensure that administrative practices in Africa 
would be in line with those elsewhere in the empire,603 and the evident wish to address the 
problem of corruption is in keeping with the administrative reforms subsequently undertaken 
elsewhere.604 
The legislation establishing civil administration in Africa undoubtedly drew upon historical 
precedent in its presentation of the African provinces and, as a result, might be argued to 
overstate the extent of Roman authority in Africa in 534 for propagandist purposes.  But, it was 
also practical, reflecting careful advance planning.  The legislation appears to have been in line 
with administrative reforms undertaken elsewhere in the empire during Justinians reign.  
Furthermore, it aimed to balance the need to establish an administrative framework which 
could be both quickly and comparatively easily implemented, against the need for an 
administrative framework which could expanded at a later date, in accordance with such 
territorial expansion as might occur. 
600  CJ 1.27.1.11. 
601  For a comparison of the three prefectures see Jones, LRE, 44850. 
602  Jones, LRE, 589; Barnish et al. Government and administration, 186. 
603  CJ 1.27.1.1718. 
604  The provisions attempting to address the threat of corruption (CJ 1.27.1.1820) are notably similar to 
those which can be found in the Novellae.  Cf. J. Nov. 8 and 28.4.  Jones, LRE, 590, stresses that 
corruption was a particular concern for Justinian. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
3.3 Military administration 
The military administration, set out in CJ 1.27.2, and addressed to Belisarius, is primarily 
concerned with the establishment of ducal commands, based in five of the seven provinces set 
out in the legislation establishing the civil administration  Tripolitania, Byzacena, Numidia, 
Mauritania and Sardinia.605  The appointment of a dux to Mauritania is problematic given that 
the legislation setting out the civil administration refers to Mauritania I and Mauritania II.606  
Presumably, the dux appointed to Mauritania was intended to oversee both Mauritania I and 
Mauritania II, particularly given that these provinces were minimally under Roman control at 
the time the legislation was promulgated.607  There is no mention of a dux of Zeugitana and, at 
the time the legislation was issued, this may have been a role assumed by Belisarius, who, as 
overall military commander in Africa, was based at Carthage.  The dux of Tripolitania was to be 
based at Leptis Magna, the dux of Byzacena alternatively at Capsa and Thelepte, the dux of 
Numidia at Constantina, and the dux of Mauritania at Caesarea.608  The headquarters of the dux 
of Sardinia is only described as being  near the mountains, where the barbaricini may be 
seen.609  The legislation also dictates that both soldiers and a fleet of dromones were to be 
stationed at Septem under the command of a tribune.610 
Like the legislation setting out the civil administration, CJ 1.27.2 includes a detailed schedule of 
positions and salaries for each of the ducal commands.611  The provisions made for each 
605  CJ 1.27.1.12 and CJ 1.27.2.1. 
606  CJ 1.27.1.12.  The legislation establishing the military administration might, in this respect, be seen as 
evidence that CJ 1.27.1.12 should read Mauritania rather than Mauritaniae in its list of provinces (cf. 
p. 123).  However, since CJ 1.27.2.1 does not offer an alternative province in order to maintain the 
required seven, this argument can probably be discarded. 
607  See pp. 1278. 
608  CJ 1.27.2.1.  See Map V. 
609  CJ 1.27.2.3: [ iuxta montes, ubi Barbaricini videntur]  S. Dyson & R. Rowland Jr., Shepherds, Sailors, 
Conquerors: Archaeology and History in Sardinia from the Stone Age to the Middle Ages 
(Philadelphia, 2007), 178, 1846, argue that the Roman military administration must have been based 
at Forum Traiani, presumably on the basis of Aed. VI.7.2. 
610  See p. 113. 
611  CJ 1.27.2.1935. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
command are the same, with each dux granted funds of 1 582 solidi and a staff of 41 officials.612  
Additionally, the legislation notes that each dux was liable for the customary registration fees: 
6 solidi to the imperial registry office, 12 solidi to the office of the magister militum and 12 
solidi to the office of the Praetorian Prefect of Africa.613 
The legislation establishing the military administration may, however, have been somewhat 
optimistic in its allocation of military command positions.  As discussed in section 3.2, it is far 
from clear that the provinces defined in the legislation were much more than an ideal at the 
time the legislation was issued.  But, beyond this general uncertainty, it is unclear whether the 
Roman imperial government even held authority in the cities to which it assigned ducal 
headquarters. 
As has been discussed in section 2.6, a deliberate attempt was made to secure Caesarea, Sardinia 
and Septem, following the Roman capture of Carthage.614  Given that these positions were only 
loosely under Vandal control, if at all, it is reasonable to suppose that they would have been in 
Roman hands by April 534.615  However, there is no explicit evidence that the Eastern Roman 
Empire held Leptis Magna, Capsa, Thelepte or Constantina at this time, or that they were 
secured by September 534.  Concerning Leptis Magna, Procopius notes in the De Aedificiis that 
the Vandals had been driven from the city by the Berbers, and that the city then remained 
empty until its occupation by the Romans at an unspecified date.616  He does not note a Roman 
presence at Leptis Magna until 543/4, when Sergius, then governor of Tripolitania, is attested 
as having been present in the city, which at this time came under Berber attack and Sergius 
612  CJ 1.27.2.19-32. 
613  CJ 1.27.2.35. 
614  Bella IV.5.46. 
615  Cf. pp. 1145. 
616  Aed. VI.4.6.  Procopius presents this episode in the context of noting that Justinian built baths and 
restored the circuit wall at Leptis Magna, as well as coverting a nearby tribe to Christianity (Aed. 
VI.4.112).  These are such stereotypical comments regarding Justinians restoration of the African 
cities that it is impossible to infer any date from them. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
returned to Carthage.617  Capsa is not attested by Procopius at all, but two almost identical 
inscriptions (both in fragments), attest to city walls being constructed at Capsa during the 
Praetorian Prefecture of Solomon.618  These confirm that the city was under Roman control by 
the second prefecture of Solomon (539544), but offer no specific indication of when the city 
first came under Roman control.619  Thelepte is attested by Procopius in the De Aedificiis, but in 
the context of a generic list of cities in Byzacena which Justinian fortified.620  Again, there is no 
indication of the date at which the city might have come under Roman control.  Constantina is 
only noted by Procopius as being two days journey from Gadiaufala,621 and no archaeological 
evidence attests to the city being occupied by the Romans in the 6th century.622 
Although the civil legislation does not make any specific claim about re-establishment of the 
Roman provinces which had existed before the Vandal conquest (beyond using their names)  
and the civil administration is itself contrary to such a claim  the military legislation explicitly 
claims that Roman Africa is to be restored to its classical form, noting repeatedly that the 
provinces of Africa were to be returned to the boundaries they held prior to the Vandal 
conquest.623  Indeed, the re-establishment of the former provincial boundaries is presented as 
617  Bella IV.21.116.  PLRE IIIB, 1125, identifies Sergius as the dux of Tripolitania.  However, this is not 
clear from Procopius account (see n. 1079). 
618  Durliat, Les ddicaces, nos. 12 and 13. 
619  Solomon served two terms as Praetorian Prefect of Africa, between 535 and 536, and between 539 ad 
544.  See PLRE IIIB, 11701173.  Cf. Pringle, Defence, 191, suggests that the inscriptions could 
conceivably be dated to Solomons first term as Prefect.  Contra J. Durliat, Les ddicaces douvrages 
de defense dans lAfrique byzantine (Rome, 1981), 97 n. 13, who argues that all the inscriptions from 
Africa which mention Solomon should be viewed as a group, rather than divided between his first 
and second terms as Praetorian Prefect, and must therefore be dated to Solomons second prefecture.  
Cf. pp. 14753. 
620  Aed. VI.6.18.  No details specific to Thelepte are provided.  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 190-6, 
suggested, on the basis of observation, that Theleptes walls were Byzantine.  This has often been 
accepted, but the walls are no longer extant, and no excavations have been carried out.  Pringle, 
Defence, 2378; Leone, Changing Townscapes, 26970. 
621  Bella IV.15.52. 
622  Pringle, Defence, 1945.  Constantina lies beneath the mod. city of Cirta in Algeria.  Remains of a late 
antique city are known from the 19th century, but were never dated and have been largely destroyed. 
623  Eg. CJ 1.27.2.4.  Similarly, CJ 1.27.2.4a, 1.27.2.4b, 1.27.2.7 1.27.2.10 and 1.27.2.13. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
the primary responsibility not only of the duces but also of Belisarius, who was not expected to 
return to Constantinople until this objective was achieved.624 
The relationship between the ducal commands and the civil legislation is also set out in the 
military legislation.  The ducal commands were to be accountable to both Belisarius, as overall 
military commander in Africa, and to the Praetorian Prefect of Africa, as the highest ranking 
civil official.  Belisarius held the right to oversee the deployment of troops, and the duces were 
to report to him on matters of strategy and intelligence.625  However, financial matters  
including camps, provisions and pay  were placed under the authority of the Praetorian 
Prefect of Africa, following Belisarius return to Constantinople.626  How many duces were 
ultimately appointed is, however, open to question.  Only four are clearly identified by the 
sources, and these only for the provinces of Byzacena and Numidia.627 
While the nature of the ducal commands in Africa is clearly established by the military 
legislation (CJ 1.27.2), the nature or, indeed, existence, of a military high command in Africa 
remains contested. 
Procopius account of the launch of the African campaign makes clear that Belisarius, in his 
capacity as magister militum per Orientem, was granted extraordinary powers which gave him 
absolute authority over the Roman troops in Africa.628  There is, however, no suggestion that he 
was ever granted a specific position within the African administration, a view which is 
624  CJ 1.27.2.13.  On Belisarius recall p. 136. 
625  CJ 1.27.2.2, 1.27.2.5, 1.27.2.7 and 1.27.2.13. 
626  CJ 1.27.2.13. 
627  Marcellus is attested as dux of Numidia in 536 (PLRE IIIB, 814); Guntarith is attested as dux of Numidia 
in 545 (see n. 1135); Himerius is attested as dux of Byzacena in 544 (PLRE IIIA, 599); and Marcentius is 
attested as dux of Byzcaena in 545/6 (PLRE IIIB, 8189).  Contra PLRE IIIB, 1125, which also identifies 
Sergius as dux of Tripolitania (see n. 617); and PLRE IIIB, 1434 (Anonymus 41), which notes that 
Corippus (Ioh. VI. 4952) refers to two duces in Byzacena.  However, given that there is no other other 
suggestion that the ducal command of Byzacena had been subdivided by 546, and Corippus sometimes 
uses the term dux generically, to refer to a leader, there is no reason to suppose that he here uses the 
term dux as a title. 
628  Bella III.11.18. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
supported by the fact that CJ 1.27.2 is addressed Bel. mag. mil. per Orientem.  No specific issue 
arises from Belisarius being granted extraordinary powers to respond to the specific 
circumstances of the African campaign.  However, the Roman imperial governments longer 
term intentions regarding the military command of Africa are not clear.  Certainly, the 
legislation sets out the role assigned to Belisarius, including the instructions that he should 
return to Constantinople once he had ensured that the provinces of Africa were returned to 
their former boundaries.629  This suggests that Belisarius tenure in Africa was not envisaged, in 
April 534, as open ended. 
But, in early summer of 534,630 shortly after the legislation establishing civil and military 
administration was promulgated, Belisarius returned to Constantinople, almost undoubtedly 
ahead of schedule, given that his subordinates had made accusations against him to the 
emperor.631  His role in Africa, as set out in the legislation, was unlikely to have been regarded 
as fulfilled, particularly in view of the fact that his departure was immediately followed by 
Berber raids.632 
The state of both the civil and military administration of Africa immediately after Belisarius 
return to Constantinople is unclear.  The legislation attributes specific responsibilities to 
Belisarius, in his capacity as commander of the Roman army in Africa  including the re-
establishment for the former Roman provincial boundaries, and the allocation of the troops to 
the various defensive positions  and no subsequent legislation re-assigns these responsibilities 
629  CJ 1.27.2.13. 
630  The date of Belisarius return to Constantinople is not explicitly provided by the sources.  However, 
Gelimer did not surrender until late March 534, three months after the battle of Tricamarum (Bella 
IV.7.1); and Belisarius was still in office on 13 April 534, as he is the addressee of CJ 1.27.2.  His 
departure should therefore probably be dated to May or June 534.  Cf. Stein, Histoire, 320; PLRE IIIB, 
1170; Pringle, Defence, 22. 
631  Bella IV.8.12.  Procopius (Bella IV.8.5) implies that Belisarius wished to return to Constantinople to 
defend himself against the accusations levelled against him  that he intended to establish himself as 
the independent ruler of Africa.  But it is equally possible that Procopius uses this explanation to 
disguise the fact that his patron was recalled, as he does in relation to Belisarius recall from the East 
following the Roman defeat at Callinicum in 531 (Bella I.18; Malalas, XVIII.60). 
632  See pp. 1901. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
to other offices.633  Procopius notes that:  and he [Belisarius] granted to Solomon the practice 
of authority in Libya.634  This statement has often been interpreted as referring to Solomons 
appointment as Praetorian Prefect of Africa.635  But it might equally refer to a military 
appointment, particularly in view of the fact that, immediately after this statement, Procopius 
refers to the troops placed under Solomons command.636 
Indeed, whether Solomon was appointed Praetorian Prefect of Africa following Belisarius 
departure is not clear.  Archelaus is only attested as Praetorian Prefect on 13 April 534,637 and 
Solomon is not attested as holding this position until 1 January 535.638  Procopius, at no point, 
clarifies Solomons function within the African administration.  Nor does he provide the titles 
of the subsequent administrators or commanders of the Roman army in Africa.639  Procopius 
lack of precision is unsurprising.  His use of titulature is generally vague and he largely avoids 
Latin vocabulary, except where it can be used to demonstrate his own erudition.640  As result, 
the labels he attributes to Roman military commanders in Africa, and elsewhere, should be 
treated as descriptions rather than as technical terms.641 
Nevertheless, in the absence of any explicit evidence in either the works of Procopius or the 
Justinianic legislation, Solomon is assumed to have been granted the title of either magister 
militum Africae or magister militum per Africam following Belisarius departure from Africa, 
633  CJ 1.27.2.5, 1.27.2.7, 1.27.2.13 and 1.27.2.15. 
634  Bella IV.8.23: [...        ...] 
635  Certainly, Dewing, History of the Wars: Books IIIIV, 277, translates   as 
administration. 
636  Bella IV.8.23. 
637  CJ 1.27.1; with pp. 1145. 
638  J. Nov. 35. 
639  Germanus and Sergius are not accorded any specific title; while Artabanes and Areobindus are only 
described as   (Bella IV.24.4, 28.45; VII.13.7).  On these individuals see Chapter 5, as 
well as PLRE IIIA, 12531 (Artabanes), 1079 (Areobindus), 527 (Germanus), and PLRE IIIB, 11248 
(Sergius). 
640  On Procopius disinclination to use technical Latin terms see Cameron, Procopius, 356. 
641  Similarly, in the Iohannis, Corippus describes John Troglita, who was magister militum per Africam 
from 546 until 551/2 (see PLRE IIIA, 6449), as magister.  But this label should not be seen as holding 
any particular significance.  Magister is far more appropriate to Corippus literary (that is, epic) style 
than a more technical term. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
and in conjunction with his appointment as Praetorian Prefect of Africa.642  Such an assumption 
is certainly logical.  The structuring of a military command around a field army, under the 
overall command of a magister militum, was standard practice during Justinians reign.643  
There is no explicit reference to the title magister militum Africae or magister militum per 
Africam until at least 570.644  However, the argument that there is no reference to a magister 
militum Africae before 570 might be contested on the basis of the epigraphic evidence.  Fifteen 
extant building inscriptions refer to building projects undertaken in Africa during Solomons 
tenure as Praetorian Prefect of Africa.645  In two of these, Solomon is described as magister 
militum et praefectus Africae (and, in Greek,    ).646  That this 
is an epigraphic contraction of the title magister militum Africae and praefectus Africae is 
certainly possible.647 
642  This view was originally set out by Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 120; and was subsequently followed by 
Bury, History, II, 141; Stein, Histoire, 319; Jones, LRE, 655; and, more recently, Moorhead, Justinian, 
71.  J. Durliat, Magister militum   dans lempire byzantine (VIeVIIe sicles), BZ 72 
(1979), 308, 313, argues that there would have been a distinction between the titles magister militum 
per Africam and magister militum Africae, with the latter, his preferred term, being used being used 
for lesser administrative regions.  He thus notes that there was a magister militum Hispaniae but a 
magister militum per Orientem.  However, given the deliberate attempt to associate Africa with 
Illyricum and Oriens in the legislation establishing the civil administration (CJ 1.27.1.10), Durliats 
preference for magister militum Africae does not seem altogether logical, and magister militum per 
Africam will be used here. 
643  See Jones, LRE, 6545; Lee, The empire at war, 117; and W. Treadgold, Byzantium and its Army, 284
1081 (Stanford, 1995), 15, 60; all of whom assume that such an arrangement must have existed in 
Africa (and in Italy) under Justinian. 
644  The earliest literary reference to the title is to be found in the chronicle of John of Biclar (s.a. 570), 
who refers to Theoctistus, who was killed by the Berbers in 570, as magister militum provinciae 
Africae.  The date of the creation of the office is, however, contested.  Pringle, Defence, 56, accepts 
that such a position must have existed by 570, which view is followed by the PLRE IIIB, 1226-7.  Contra 
Durliat, Magister militum  , 3113, who argues that John of Biclaro is imprecise in 
his use of titulature and anachronistically attributes to him a title which did not exist until 572.  This 
is, however, a somewhat circular argument, given that Durliat accepts John of Biclaros testimony as 
evidence that the office must have existed within the chroniclers lifetime. 
645  A catalogue of buildings inscriptions erected between the Roman conquest of Africa and the Arab 
conquest of Africa has been compiled by Durliat, Les ddicaces.  Inscriptions number 1, 39, 12, 159, 
refer explicitly to Solomon. 
646  Durliat, Les ddicaces, nos. 6 and 12.  No. 6 is bilingual. 
647  Contra Durliat, Magister militum  , 3078, who, while acknowledging that the 
epigraphic evidence demonstrates that Solomon is attested as magister militum, argues that the 
epigraphic evidence does not constitute evidence for a formal military command in Africa in the 530s, 
and that the references to Solomon as magister militum are simply descriptions of his activities as 
Praetorian Prefect of Africa rather than indications of a specific position.  This argument is followed 
by Pringle, Defence, 556. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Certainly there were positions of military command, other than the prescribed ducal 
commands, within the Roman military administration in Africa.  Nevertheless, the established 
view is that the military commands of Solomon, Germanus, Sergius, Areobindus, Artabanes, and 
John Troglita, all of whom are identified as magister militum per Africam by the Prosopography 
of the Later Roman Empire,648 were all held as temporary, and extraordinary, appointments, 
which were created on an ad hoc basis to address exceptional military threats.649 
However, while the evidence can be interpreted in this light, a succession of extraordinary 
military commands, over a period of nearly forty years, appears to be both an extremely 
ineffective means of consolidating power in a region plagued by military incursions, and 
inconsistent with the nature of Roman military command elsewhere in the Eastern Roman 
Empire during Justinians reign.650  While the situation in Africa might have been unique, given 
the instability of the region, which saw intermittent conflict with the Berbers from the time of 
Belisarius departure, and the importance which the Roman imperial government placed on the 
region (as is evident from the claim in the civil legislation that the region was to be equal to 
Oriens and Illyricum), this seems a strangely ad hoc arrangement, particularly given the evident 
attention to detail in the legislation detailing military administration. 
Indeed, the legislation establishing the military administration may constitute the strongest 
evidence for a military high command in Africa  despite the fact that it does not explicitly refer 
to a magister militum per Africam.  The legislation obliged individual duces to pay fees to 
various administrative offices in order to register their appointment  including to the office 
of the master of soldiers [officium magistri militum].651  Furthermore, the fee required (12 
648  PLRE IIIB, 1500.  John Rogathinus may also have been magister militum per Africam (in 563), but it is 
unclear whether he held this position, or that of Praetorian Prefect (PLRE IIIA, 670). 
649  Durliat, Magister militum  , 309.  This argument is followed by Pringle, Defence, 56, 
who further notes that Roman military command in Africa continued on the same basis as the original 
command granted to Belisarius. 
650  See n. 643. 
651  CJ 1.27.2.35. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
solidi) was equal to that required by the office of the Praetorian Prefect of Africa, suggesting 
that the two offices were of similar importance.652  The most plausible interpretation of this is 
that it refers to the office of the magister militum per Africam  albeit possibly one which was 
yet to be established, given that the legislation makes no reference to a magister militum per 
Africam, and, at the time it was promulgated, Belisarius retained overall military command in 
Africa.  That such a provision should be made concerning successive extraordinary military 
appointments seems highly unlikely. 
Finally, the fact that Solomon, and probably also his successor, Sergius,653 held the office of 
Praetorian Prefect of Africa, does not, as has sometimes been suggested, constitute an 
impediment to the existence of the office of magister militum per Africam.654  While it is 
certainly the case that the two pieces of legislation suggest that a separation of civil and 
military powers was intended, the amalgamation of civil and military offices was not 
unprecedented.655  In fact, Justinian seems to have preferred to amalgamate offices, generally 
only separating civil and military administration in frontier regions, where the military 
commander needed to be able to concentrate fully on defence.656  Given the uncertainty of the 
security of Africa at the time the legislation was promulgated, the decision to separate civil and 
military powers appears pragmatically cautious. 
Thus, the fact that Solomon served as both Praetorian Prefect of Africa and as magister militum 
per Africam was perhaps less the result of deliberate policy, than the result of Belisarius 
652  Ibid.  By comparison, the imperial registry office [sacrum laterculum] was only entitled to a fee of 6 
solidi. 
653  Sergius may have served as both Praetorian Prefect of Africa and magister militum per Africam 
between 544 and 545.  See p. 220. 
On the correct dating of this episode see Stein, Histoire, II, 483 n. 1. 
654  Contra Pringle, Defence, 55, who suggests that civil and military administration in Africa could not 
have been amalgamated, since Justinian was deliberately attempting to recreate the administrative 
system which had existed prior to the Vandal conquest.  However, as has been noted above, there is 
little evidence that Justinian was actively striving for historical imitation. 
655  Civil and military offices were amalgamated in Pisidia (J. Nov. 24.1 and 26.12), Thrace (J. Nov. 25.2), 
Hellespont (J. Nov. 28.2) and Cappadocia (J. Nov. 30.1). 
656  Jones, LRE, 282. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
unexpected departure coinciding with serious Berber raids.  Rather than Solomon being 
granted an ad hoc military command at this time, the ad hoc response to the crisis may well 
have been the assimilation of the offices.  In the case of Sergius, who assumed both offices in a 
state of emergency, following Solomons death, the amalgamation of offices can hardly have 
been intended.657 
3.4 Military resources 
Closely connected to the nature of military administration in Africa is the question of the scale 
of military resources committed to Africa during Justinians reign, and what this might indicate 
about the significance which the Roman imperial government attached to the region.  While a 
significant military commitment appears to have been made to Africa at the outset of the 
campaign of conquest, consistent with the attention to detail and forward planning shown by 
the administrative legislation, this commitment does not appear to have been maintained over 
time. 
The expeditionary force had numbered ten thousand infantry  all comitatensian troops - and 
five thousand cavalry  composed of both comitatenses and foederati.658  Procopius additionally 
identifies two contingents of non-Roman allied troops (symmaxoi)  four hundred Heruls and 
six hundred Massagetae  who served as mounted bowmen and were commanded by their own 
officers.659  In addition to this force of 16 000 men, the expeditionary force has generally been 
assumed to have included Belisarius bucellarii, or personal guardsmen.660  Taking into account 
657  See pp. 2189. 
658  Bella 3.11.2. 
659  Bella III.11.1112.  On the officers see PLRE IIIA, 169 (Balas); and PLRE IIIB, 10156 (Pharas) and 1156 
(Sinnion). 
660  Cf. Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 167.  The term bucellarii, while existing in Greek, as , is 
never used by Procopius, who refers to the troops who accompanied Belisarius as  and 
 terms which he frequently uses together, as a set phrase, to refer to the soldiers attached 
to a particular commander (Bella III.11.19).  Cf. Contra J. Gascou, LInstitution des bucellaires, 
Bulletin de linstitut franais darchologie orientale 76 (1976), 146 n. 2, who assume that the entire 
phrase     must refer to bucellarii. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
a degree of attrition,661 the expeditionary force must, at the very least, have numbered c. 16 000 
men when it landed in Africa. 
The military force committed to the African campaign has sometimes been seen as unusually 
small for a campaign of conquest.662  However, a force of 16 000 men was not an unusually small 
army for the time.  Limited information exists concerning the overall manpower of the Roman 
army during the sixth century.  Nevertheless, Procopius does provide some indication of the 
size of field armies.  The Army of Armenia numbered 15 000 men in 530, the Army of the East 
numbered 20 000 men in 531, and the Army of Illyricum numbered 15 000 men in 546, even after 
the outbreak of plague.663  While the accuracy of Procopius figures is certainly open to question, 
particularly in view of his tendency to present the sizes of armies as multiples of five thousand, 
it may reasonably be supposed that these numbers accurately represent the comparative sizes 
of the various field armies.  Thus, the size of the expeditionary force committed to the African 
campaign was comparable with that of the provincial field armies and, indeed, must 
subsequently have been intended to form the basis for the Army of Africa.664 
Admittedly, the role of an army of conquest is not directly analogous to that of a standing field 
army.  By the mid-6th century, the role of the field armies was far more defensive than offensive, 
and they were undoubtedly heavily supported by limitanei.  Nevertheless, when the African 
expeditionary force is compared to the only other known army of conquest of Justinians reign 
 the army which invaded Italy in 535  it appears to represent a reasonable commitment of 
manpower on the part of the Roman imperial government.  A mere 7 500 men were initially 
committed to the Italian campaign, which can certainly not be regarded as having any less 
ideological, and thus political, significance than the African campaign.665  These men were, of 
661  On the recorded losses en route to Africa see Bella III.13.1120, 14.14. 
662  Bury, History, II, 123; Jones, LRE, 273. 
663  Bella I.15.11, 18.5; VII.29.3. 
664  Treadgold, Byzantium and its Army, 60. 
665  Bella V.5.14. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
course, subsequently reinforced,666 but this is equally true of the African expeditionary force.667  
The military resources initially committed to the African campaign were significant. 
There is no reason to suppose that, in 534, troop numbers in Africa were significantly less than 
the numbers originally committed to the expeditionary force.668  While many of the allied 
troops chose not to remain in Africa after the initial campaign of conquest,669 the majority of 
the comitatenses and foederati appear to have remained, along with some of Belisarius 
personal guard.670  At this time, the newly created Prefecture of Africa had military resources 
available for a field army of comparable size to the other major field armies of the empire.671 
However, these numbers appear to have declined rapidly.  When Belisarius returned to 
Carthage in 536, during the mutiny, he found only 2000 troops loyal to the Roman 
administration.672  Less than twelve months later, when the emperors nephew, Germanus, 
arrived at Carthage as the newly appointed magister militum per Africam, he found that those 
troops loyal to the Roman administration, in Carthage and at a small number of other Roman 
positions, amounted to no more than a third of the Roman army in Africa.673 
In the immediate aftermath of the Roman capture of Carthage, an attempt appears to have been 
made to maintain Roman troop numbers in Africa.  Following Belisarius departure in 534, the 
emperor sent an additional force, of unspecified number but described as an army [] 
666  Bella V.27.1, 6.5.12, VI.13.168. 
667  Bella IV.8.24. 
668  Cf. Treadgold, Byzantium and its Army, 60, who suggests a figure of c. 15 000 men. 
669  Belisarius had been forced to promise the allied troops of the Massagetae that, once the Vandals were 
defeated, they would be permitted to return home, in order to secure their loyalty prior to the battle 
of Tricamarum (Bella IV.3.7).  Given that neither the Massagetae generally, nor any of their leaders, 
are attested in Africa following the battle of Tricamarum, it must be assumed that this promise was 
fulfilled.  It is unlikely that any of the allied troops were expected to remain in Africa for an extended 
period of time.  While allied troops were regarded as valuable during a campaign, they were also seen 
as untrustworthy, and consequently unsuited to being stationed in permanent garrisons.  Cf. Bella 
IV.2.3; Strategicon VIII.2.228-32. 
670  Bella IV.8.10; with n. 660. 
671  See p. 142. 
672  Bella IV.15.11.  On the mutiny see section 5.3. 
673  Bella IV.16.3; with p. 206. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
by Procopius, as well as two additional commanders, to Solomon, which were presumably 
intended to compensate for those troops who had returned to Constantinople with Belisarius.674  
However, the Roman imperial governments subsequent willingness to commit additional 
military resources to Africa appears to have fluctuated, depending on priorities elsewhere in 
the empire.  In late 537/early 538, a large cavalry force was sent from Africa to Rome, where 
Belisarius was besieged.675  This was presumably drawn from the cavalry originally committed 
to Africa.  When Solomon assumed the role of Praetorian Prefect of Africa for the second time, 
in 539, the emperor sent an army and officers [ ...  ] to him.676  But, 
when Areobindus assumed the position of magister militum per Africam in 545, with the 
Eastern Roman Empire as yet at war with Sasanian Persia, he was accompanied by only a few 
soldiers [ ] and a few Armenians [ ], presumably because no 
further troops were available.677  From this, it can only be inferred that the significance of the 
provinces of Africa to the Roman imperial government declined over the course of Justinians 
reign, as events on other frontiers became greater priorities, and Roman control in Africa 
became an increasingly remote possibility. 
3.5 Building program 
In the Bella, one of the immediate Roman priorities following the capture of Carthage in 
September 533 was the restoration of the fortifications of the city, which Procopius claims had 
been allowed to fall into disrepair during the period of Vandal occupation.678  This subject is 
picked up, and elaborated upon, in the De Aedificiis, in which Procopius again attests to the 
complete reconstruction of the city walls,679 together with a complete program of urban 
renewal, which included the construction of shrines to the Theotokos and a local saint, Saint 
674  Bella IV.8.23-4; with n. 669. 
675  Bella VI.7.15.  For the date see PLRE IIIA, 616. 
676  Bella IV.19.1. 
677  Bella IV.24.1. 
678  Bella III.21.1113, 23.1920.  For the date of the capture of Carthage see n. 49. 
679  Aed. VI.5.89. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Prima, of stoas and baths, and of a monastery.680  Procopius thus attributes to Justinian the 
building of all the typical features of a Roman city, and justifies the renaming of the city as 
Carthago Justiniana,681 a name which is likely to have been connected with the re-establishment 
of Carthage as a Roman centre of power.682 
Archaeological evidence suggests that Procopius offers a relatively accurate account of the 
building program undertaken at Carthage after the Roman capture of the city.  That 
refortification, in the form of the re-cutting of a ditch surrounding the city wall, was carried 
out at Carthage in 533 or later seems to be clear from the archaeological record.683  Furthermore, 
the whole of the Byrsa hill (the Carthaginian citadel) is likely to have been fortified during this 
period.684  Archaeological evidence for the other building projects which Procopius claims were 
undertaken at Carthage under Justinian is less clear, but his general points appear to be broadly 
correct, if somewhat exaggerated.  The location of the baths noted by Procopius remains 
uncertain, but his reference to their construction has legitimately been interpretated as a 
reference to the restoration of the Antonine baths,685 which is otherwise known to have 
occurred in the 6th century;686 while the chapel to the Theotokos has been identified within the 
Vandal palace on the Byrsa hill.687  Identification of the fortified monastery is uncertain.  It has 
variously been identified with the transformation of the judicial basilica into a fortified church 
and with Koudiat el-Hobsia, both of which were in use in the 6th century, although neither can 
680  Aed. VI.5.911. 
681  Aed. VI.5.8; J. Nov. 131.4. 
682  Carthage may not, admittedly, have been renamed immediately following its capture.  Given that the 
city is first attested as Carthago Justiniana in J. Nov. 131, which was promulgated in 545, it may have 
been renamed following the suppression of the first period of Berber hostilities (5345) or after the 
Aurs campaign (540) (see sections 5.2 and 5.4). 
683  H. Hurst, Excavations at Carthage 1976: Third interim report, AJ 57 (1977), 2557; idem et al., 
Excavations at Carthage: The British Mission, Volume I,1 (Sheffield, 1984), 41.  The cutting of the ditch 
is noted by Procopius (Bella III.23.19), but no explicit archaeological evidence has been found for the 
improvements to the walls which he also mentions (Bella III.23.20). 
684  Leone, Changing Townscapes, 174. 
685  Y. Thbert, Thermes romains dAfrique du Nord et leur contexte Mditeranen (Rome, 2003), 4245. 
686  A. Lzine, Carthage-Utique: tudes darchitecture et durbanisme (Paris, 1968), 6773; Leone, 
Changing Townscapes, 171. 
687  Lzine, Carthage-Utique, 17780; Leone, Changing Townscapes, 173. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
be described as being on the coast, as implied by Procopius account.688  The shrine to Saint 
Prima remains unidentified.  But there is other clear evidence of church building and expansion 
during the 6th century.689 
Outside of Carthage, Procopius also attests to building work at some thirty-three African cities 
during Justinians reign in the De Aedificiis.690  However, with the exception of his descriptions 
of Leptis Magna and Sabratha,691 these references are to the generic construction or 
improvement of city fortifications, ostensibly to secure the security of the region against the 
threat posed by the Berber tribes.692  While the excavation necessary to confirm Procopius 
claims is, in many cases, lacking, there is no specific reason to doubt that the defences of 
individual African cities should have been improved during this period.  After all, the period 
following the Roman conquest was one which saw ever increasing raids against the Romano-
African population.693  However, the assumption that such construction work should be 
interpreted as an imperially directed, defensive, building program, coordinated by the Roman 
administration in Africa, is open to question. 
Durliat, in Les ddicaces douvrages de dfense dans lAfrique byzantine, identifies twenty-four 
building inscriptions from Africa which can be firmly attributed to Justinians reign  either 
because they include the name of the emperor (and often the empress), and/or because they 
bear the name of the Praetorian Prefect and magister militum, Solomon694  from sixteen 
688  Pringle, Defence, 176; Leone, Changing Townscapes, 1734 
689  Leone, Changing Landscapes, 1747. 
690  These cities are listed in Appendix I.  See also Map VII.  Not all of book VI of the De Aedificiis relates 
to the Prefecture of Africa, since Procopius also discusses Egypt, Libya Inferior and Pentapolis, which 
were part of the Prefecture of Oriens.  On Procopius description of Libya Inferior and Pentalopis see 
J. Reynolds, Byzantine buildings, Justinian and Procopius in Libya Inferior and Libya Superior, 
AnTard 8 (2000), 169-76. 
691  In addition to the construction of fortification, Procopius notes the construction of a church to the 
Theotokos, four other churches and public baths, as well as the reconstruction of the Severan palace 
at Leptis Magna (Aed. VI.4.45, 11); and a church at Sabratha (Aed. VI.4.13). 
692  See pp. 557. 
693  See Chapter 5. 
694  Durliat, Les ddicaces, nos. 124.  No. 24 does not, admittedly, refer to the emperor per se, but 
describes the city of Zabi as nova iustiniana. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
different sites.695  Many of these inscriptions are, however, both no longer extant and heavily 
reconstructed, and the inclusion of the names Justinian and Solomon are often reconstructed 
based purely on the assumption that the inscriptions must be Justinianic. 
While three inscriptions from Thamugadi, which are identical copies of the same text, date the 
restoration of the citys walls to the thirteenth year of Justinians reign (539/540),696 the other 
building inscriptions lack explicit indications of date.  Those inscriptions which refer to 
Solomon, with the exception of that at Gadiaufala, which notes that Solomon was in his second 
prefecture,697 could conceivably refer to either of the two periods in which he served as 
Praetorian Prefect and magister militum  535 to 536 and 539 to 544.698  Nevertheless, the 
twenty-four inscriptions have usually been dated to Solomons second prefecture (539544), on 
the basis that they reflect a deliberate fortification policy, and should therefore be viewed as a 
group, rather than divided between the two prefectures.699  Furthermore, since the Thamugadi 
inscriptions refer to Solomon as patricius,700 inscriptions which include this title have been 
assumed to date from the same period.701  However, while the Thamugadi inscriptions provide 
a terminus ante quem for Solomon being granted the title of patricius, there is no means of 
establishing a terminus post quem, and Solomon could well have been granted the title during 
the course of his first prefecture.702  Furthermore, many of the inscriptions, which are very 
fragmentary, have had the entire word patricius restored, on the assumption that it ought to 
695  Bordj Hellal, Calama, Madaura, Theveste, Thagura, An-Bou-Dris, Capsa, Sufes, Cululis, Bagai, 
Gadiaufala, Ksar Belezma, Thamugadi, Tigisis, Sitifis and Zabi.  See Map VI. 
696  Durliat, Les ddicaces, nos. 1921. 
697  Durliat, Les ddicaces, no. 17. 
698  For these dates see pp. 1367, 201, 209, 21920. 
699  This view was originally put forward by Durliat, Les ddicaces, 97 n. 13. 
700  Durliat, Les ddicaces, nos. 1921. 
701  PLRE IIIB, 1173.  Seven inscriptions (Durliat, Les ddicaces, nos. 35, 1617, 1921) explicitly list the 
title patricius, while it is plausibly reconstructed in two others (nos. 2 and 18). 
702  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 74 n. 5, who suggests that the title might have been awarded following the 
military victories of 535.  This argument is followed by Stein, Histoire, II, 321. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
be present.703  The arguments for assigning all the building inscriptions to Solomons second 
prefecture are thus somewhat circular. 
Four inscriptions from the corpus can be firmly dated to Solomons second prefecture.704 These 
four are all from Numidia, which is unsurprising, given Solomons campaign in the region in 
540.705  Some other inscriptions may also date to this period.  However, logically, an imperially 
directed building program would have been better launched in the initial period of optimism 
following the Roman conquest of Africa, rather than in a period of active conflict, when 
resources would be required elsewhere. 
The early 540s have often been assumed to have been a period of peace and prosperity, in which 
a building program could reasonably have been accomplished.706  However, this view is largely 
a product of Procopius neglect of Africa in the Bella during this period.  Having concluded his 
assessment of Solomons campaigns in the Aurs massif with the optimistic assessment: 
 And on account of this, all the Libyans, who were subjects of the Romans, 
having obtained a secure peace and the prudent and very wise rule of Solomon, 
and finally having no thought of hostility in their minds, seemed to be the most 
fortunate of all men,707 
703  Durliat, Les ddicaces, nos. 8 and 12 restore the title in its entirety, while no. 13 restores it entirely 
based on the presence of the letter  and no. 14 entirely on the basis of the case ending o. 
704  Durliat, Les ddicaces, nos. 17, 19, 20, 21.  Aside from the three inscriptions from Thamugadi, one from 
Gadiaufala notes describes Solomon as: praetorian prefect of Africa for the second time [BIS 
PREFECTO [PR]AETORIORUM AFRICAE]. 
705  See section 5.4. 
706  Bury, History, II, 145.  Pringle, Defence, 29, suggests that Corippus claim that: Flourishing, our earth, 
having been lightened, felt these joys for ten full years (Ioh. III.28990) [florens haec gaudia sensit/ 
nostra decem tellus plenos laxata per annos], should be similarly be interpreted as reference to a 
golden age under Solomons governance.  However, the emphasis is slightly different.  While 
Procopius refers specifically to a brief period of peace following Solomons campaigns in the Aurs, 
and stresses the role of Solomon as governor; Corippus refers to the entire period of Roman rule in 
Africa, prior to the outbreak of the Berber hostilities in 544, stressing the importance of Roman rule, 
generally, in Africa, during a period in which the Africa population was becoming disillusioned.  Cf. 
Ioh. III.32036, which presents similar themes in a more extended form. 
707  Bella IV.20.33: [    ,    ,   
         ,        
 ,     .] 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
he only resumes his narrative of the Roman campaigns against the Berbers with events four 
years later.708  He thus implies that Solomons second prefecture was so successful that Africa 
was entirely at peace.  However, Procopius myopia as a source should certainly be considered 
in this context.  Between 540 and 543, Procopius own interests, and thus the focus of his history, 
were elsewhere.  He appears to have been in Italy between 537 and 540, and in Constantinople 
between 540 and 542, and the sections of the Bella which relate to this period reflect these 
geographical foci.709  Consequently, Procopius entirely fails to mention the major extraneous 
influence on events in Africa in the early 540s  the outbreak of plague  which, regardless of 
the scale of its impact, must surely have acted as a deterrent to a large scale infrastructure 
project during this period.710 
Procopius claim, that Solomons building program in Africa was funded by wealth which the 
Romans seized from the Berber leader, Iaudas, following the capture of Toumar, during the 
campaign in the Aurs massif in 540, should certainly be treated with caution.711  The sack of a 
single position, even a large and wealthy town (which Toumar was not), would have been 
extremely unlikely to have funded a large scale provincial building program.712 
708  Bella IV.21.1: But in the fourth year after this, all our blessings became the opposite. 
[          .] 
709  PLRE IIIB, 10612. 
710  On the outbreak of plague in Africa see Victor of Tunnuna, 130; Ps. Zachariah, X.9 (trans. Brooks & 
Hamilton, The Syriac Chronicle known as that of Zachariah of Mitylene, 313); Ioh. III.34392.  Based 
on Victor of Tunnunas account, it has generally been accepted that the plague reached Africa in 542.  
See J.-N. Biraben & J. Le Goff, La peste dans le Haut Moyen Age, Annales (HSS) 24 (1969), 1494; J.-N. 
Biraben, Les hommes et la peste en France et dans les pays europens et mditerranens (Paris, 1975) 
27; P. Sarris, The Justinianic plague: origins and effects, Continuity and Change 17 (2002), 170.  D. 
Stathakopoulos, Famine and Pestilence in the Late Roman and Early Byzantine Empire (Aldershot, 
2004), 115, is still more specific, and suggests that the plague must have reached Africa at the end of 
542.  Contra P. Horden, The Mediterranean plague in the Age of Justinian, in M. Maas, ed., The 
Cambridge Companion to the Age of Justinian (Cambridge, 2005), 1356, 157 n.7, who argues that the 
plague first appeared in Africa in 543, although he offers no specific evidence to this effect beyond 
the (inaccurate) claim that he has followed Stathakopouloss chronology. 
711  Bella IV.20.289.  On the Aurs campaign see section 5.4. 
712  Contra Stein, Histoire, II, 328; and Pringle, Defence, 29; who assume that a building program could not 
have begun until these funds were acquired in 540. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
Furthermore, the period between 540 and 544 is unlikely to have been one in which the Eastern 
Roman Empire was channeling significant financial resources towards Africa in order to 
support a building campaign.  This period had seen the resumption of warfare on the eastern 
frontier while the empire remained committed in Italy, and resources were almost undoubtedly 
overextended.  Were a building campaign to have occurred during this period, it would have to 
have been self-supported by the African economy.713  However, the very evidence of the mutiny 
of 536, and the ongoing threat of mutiny from within the Roman army in Africa in subsequent 
years suggests that, even if the regions economy were prospering, resources were simply not 
reaching the administration at Carthage.714 
Indeed, the significance of information provided by these inscriptions concerning an imperially 
directed program of fortification in Africa is also questionable.  Sites at which there is epigraphic 
evidence attesting to construction or reconstruction, since a building inscription will typically 
name the emperor, confirming that the construction occurred under the auspices of the Roman 
imperial government, have generally been assumed to be official fortifications.  Thus, plotting 
sites from which Justinianic building inscriptions are known has been used as a means of gaining 
an impression of the extent of Roman control in the region.  However, the role of local initiative 
in the maintenance of fortifications should certainly not be overlooked.715  There is, after all, 
ample evidence in the written sources for individual African cities acting in their own defence 
when under siege,716 and the construction and maintenance of fortifications is but a step further.  
Furthermore, it is clear that, as had been the case during the Vandal period,717 local elites 
713  Pringle, Defence, 90. 
714  See pp. 2001. 
715  Reynolds, Byzantine buildings, 176, has argued, in relation to the provinces of Libya Inferior and 
Pentapolis, that the role of private building initiatives, both civic and military, has probably been 
underestimated, and this point is equally applicable to the provinces of the Prefecture of Africa. 
716  For example, the actions of the citizens of Sullectum when approached by the Roman army in 533 
(Bella III.16.911); and of the citizens of Laribus when besieged by the Berbers in 544 (Bella IV.22.18
717  Clover, The symbiosis of Romans and Vandals in Africa, 60. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
continued to exercise a considerable degree of control within their individual cities during the 
Justinianic period, particularly in respect of local expenditure.718 
The construction of unofficial fortifications was illegal, since such defences did not fall within 
the Roman imperial governments defensive strategy, and some have argued that it would not 
have occurred unless the state had lost control of the provinces.719  This is undoubtedly the 
case, but it need not imply that there were no unofficial fortifications.  The possibility that the 
administration at Carthage lacked significant control beyond the capital and its hinterland, 
particularly in view of the otherwise limited evidence for imperial control in the African 
provinces, should not be dismissed.720  The reality may have been that no prefecture-wide 
strategy coordinated from Carthage, let alone from Constantinople, existed.  Rather, smaller 
scale strategies for individual provinces, or even districts, were dictated by local 
administrations. 
While there is not explicit epigraphic evidence for the construction of fortifications by local 
initiative in Africa during Justinians reign, evidence does appear to exist from the reign of 
Tiberius II (574582).721  An inscription erected at An Ksar in Numidia states: 
 + Inper(erantibus) d(o)m(i)n(is) n(o)st(ris) Fl(avi)o Costantino et Anas/tasie, 
p(issimis) Agu{s}t{is}, t{e}m{p}(oribus) Ge{n}n(a)d(ii), m(agistri) m(i)l(itum)/ 
Afr(i)ca(e), auxiliante D(e)o perf{ici}e(n)t(ibus)(?),/ hic k(a)st(rum) 
consent[i]e(n)t(es) sibi cives istius loci/ p{r}ovid[e] de suis pr(o)p(riis) 
laborib{u}(s) fecerunt +722 
 During the reign of our masters Flavius Constantine and Anastasia, most 
pious augusti, in the time of Gennadius, magister militum per Africa with the 
aid of God [granted] to the executors, the inhabitants of this place, having 
718  J. Durliat, Les finances municipales africaines de Constantin aux Aghlabides, Actes de IIe congrs 
dhistoire et de civilisation du Maghreb (Novembre 1980) , 378-85. 
719  Pringle, Defence, 946. 
720  See pp. 1278, 1335. 
721  Durliat, Les ddicaces, no. 29. 
722  Durliat, Les ddicaces, 735.  The reading of the inscription is, unfortunately, contested.  Contra A. 
Cherbonneau, Inscriptions dcouvertes dans la province de Constantine, Annuaire de la socit 
archologique de la province de Constantine 6 (1862), 129; Courtois, Les Vandales, App. 2 no.168; and 
Pringle, Defence, Gaz. CB no. 31.  Cf. Durliat, Les ddicaces, no. 30, from Ksar Lemsa in Byzacena, which 
dates from the reign of Maurice (582602). 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
agreed among themselves, prudently built this castrum at their own 
labours.723 
This is followed by a list of names, presumably those local notables responsible for the 
construction.724  The inscription does not dispense with the traditional mention of the emperor 
(and, in this case, empress) and the local representative of the Roman administration, but their 
acknowledgement appears to be somewhat perfunctory, functioning largely as a dating 
formula and crediting neither the emperor nor the magister militum with any role in the 
construction.  It is therefore entirely plausible that not all inscriptions naming the emperor 
and his representative (whether the magister militum or Praetorian Prefect) should be 
regarded as imperial building projects, particularly given that no extant building inscriptions 
from Africa name the emperor as financial benefactor. 
The mention of the emperor (and empress) as part of the dating formula in the building 
inscription from An Ksar can perhaps be compared with the dating formula employed in the 
Bir Trouch ostraca - wooden tablets and ostraca which were discovered near Bir Trouch, in the 
eastern foothills of the Aurs massif.725  The ostraca, which record the produce of a local estate, 
are dated according to the regnal years of the Vandal king, Gunthamund (484496), using the 
Latin formula anno N Kartaginis domni nostri regis Gunthamundi,726 and have traditionally 
been accepted as evidence of a degree of Vandal political influence, if not outright authority, in 
the region.727  However, it is perhaps more accurate to say that the lands in which the Bir Trouch 
ostraca were found continued to be farmed by a Romano-African population728  albeit one 
which may well, by the late fifth century, have fallen under the influence of a local Berber 
723  My translation, based on Durliats French translation (Les ddicaces, 72). 
724  Contra Shaw, The structure of local society in the early Maghrib, 41, argues that the names listed 
represent a local council made up of Berber tribal elders, on the basis that the named listed are 
African rather than Roman. 
725  J.-P. Bonnal & P.-A. Fvrier, Ostraka de la rgion de Bir Trouch, Bulletin dArchologie Algrienne 2 
(19661967), 23949. 
726  Bonnal & Fvrier, Ostraka de la rgion de Bir Trouch, 247. 
727  Ibid, 249; A. Ben Abed & N. Duval, Carthage, la capitale du royaume et les villes de Tunisie  lpoque 
vandale, in G. Ripoll & J. M. Gurt, eds., Sedes regiae (ann. 400800) (Barcelona, 2000), 1756. 
728  Clover, The symbiosis of Romans and Vandals in Africa, 60. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
leader.729  The population which adopted the dating formula used in the Bir Trouch ostraca 
existed between two different power structures, and the continuity of the Vandal dating system 
in an area outside direct Vandal control might be interpreted as either practicality, or the desire 
to maintain connections with both communities.  The use of Roman imperial dating formulae 
in building inscriptions in Africa should thus not be interpreted as clear evidence for Roman 
authority in the region. 
This being the case, considerable care must be taken in speaking of a defensive building 
program.  While it is certainly possible to outline lines of fortifications on a map, not all of these 
fortifications would have been imperially commissioned, and intended to function within an 
imperial strategy of defence.  Equally, it is essential to recognise that the literary and 
archaeological sources for fortification in Africa provide different kinds of information, and that 
any attempt to reconcile them, in order to reveal a coherent defensive strategy in Africa, can 
only result in inaccuracy. 
The establishment of civil and military administration in Africa was undoubtedly the product of 
careful planning on the part of the Roman imperial government and, initially at least, the 
commitment of significant resources.  However, the administration, as envisaged from 
Constantinople, was not as effective as intended in practice, not least because territorial 
expansion does not appear to have occurred as rapidly as expected in the period between the 
promulgation of the legislation and its implementation, resulting in a high level of bureaucracy 
at Carthage, and in surrounding regions, but limited ability to impose regional policies on the 
prefecture as a whole.  As a result, at the local level, communities continued to function as they 
had previously, in their own interests.  The fragmentation, which had almost certainly begun 
729  On the increasing Berber encroachment in the southern areas of the Aurs massif in the 480s see pp. 
1612. 
Chapter 3:  Establishment of Civil and Military Administration 
during the Vandal period, had significant implications for the Roman administrations attempts 
to counter the threats posed by the Berber tribes. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
4.1 Introduction 
In January 535, Justinian promulgated Novella 1.  The legislation is primarily concerned with 
the reform of inheritance law.  However, in the preface, the novella offers some explanation 
(albeit rhetorical) as to why the emperor, at this specific time, should have chosen to begin a 
process of legislative reform.  It states that, while Justinian had previously been occupied with 
other concerns, all of them relating to the Eastern Roman Empires relations with peoples 
outside its borders, he now had the time to devote to the demands of his people: 
 Since the Persians are quiet, the Vandals, together with the Berbers, are 
obedient, the Carthaginians also have received their former freedom, and 
the Tzani now, for the first time, may be considered among our subjects, 
being under the Roman state730 
Although it is not explicitly stated, Novella 1 implies that the emperors foreign policy 
obligations, as set out above, had been fulfilled.  The statement was undoubtedly intended to 
fulfil a propaganda function, advertising the scope of imperial achievements.  Nevertheless, its 
claims cannot be entirely dismissed.  The Eastern Roman Empire had indeed concluded a peace 
agreement with Sasanian Persia in 532 and had received the surrender of the last Vandal king, 
Gelimer, in early 534. And the city of Carthage was once again under Roman control.731 
On the other hand, Novella 1s statement concerning the obedience of the Berbers would have 
been read with incredulous disbelief by the inhabitants of the newly conquered Roman 
provinces of Africa.  Despite an initial diplomatic overture by some of the Berber leaders, in late 
730  J. Nov. 1. pref.: [ quatenus Persae quidem quiescant, Vandali vero cum Mauris oboediant, 
Carchedonii autem antiquam recipientes habeant libertatem, et Tzani nunc primum sub Romanorum 
facti republica inter subiectos habeantur/      ,    
 ,       ,   
         ]  Novella 1 was 
promulgated bilingually. 
731  See n. 49. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
533,732 the provinces of Byzacena and Numidia had suffered from ongoing Berber raids since the 
autumn of 534 and, at the time the novella was promulgated, in January 535, the Roman army 
was yet to win any significant military victory against them.733 
The inclusion of the Berbers in the preface to Novella 1 is somewhat puzzling.  Certainly, the 
novellas claims regarding the Berbers can be interpreted as propaganda and wishful thinking 
on the part of the Roman imperial government, in much the same manner as the emperors 
declaration of victory over the Vandals was proclaimed prior to their surrender.734  
Furthermore, the inclusion of an additional non-Roman people in the novellas list of 
subjugated peoples served the literary purpose of enhancing the scale of the emperors foreign 
policy achievements.  However, the specific choice of the Berbers is interesting.  The author of 
the novella must have felt, at the beginning of 535, that there was propaganda value attached 
to their subjugation  that is, like the Persians and the Vandals, the Berbers were recognised as 
a legitimate adversary  a view which is entirely contrary to the argument that the Romans 
failed to recognise the Berbers as a threat.735  The basis of Roman-Berber relations in the 530s 
thus requires a reassessment. 
Unfortunately, any attempt to reconstruct the position of the Berbers vis--vis first the 
Vandals, and then the Romans, up to the Roman victory at the battle of Tricamarum, in mid-
December 533, is severely hampered by the limitations of the source material.736  The Berbers 
left no written accounts of their own history, and they are rarely mentioned by Greek and Latin 
writers prior to the end of the 5th century. 
732  See p. 173. 
733  For the date of the beginning of the raids see p. 191. 
734  I. Const. Imperatoriam pref.; D. Const. Tanta/ pref. and 23. 
735  Contra Y. Modran, La dcouverte des Maures: reflexions sur la reconqute byzantine de lAfrique en 
533, CT 1556 (1991), 2113; and idem, Les Maures, 5738, 58392, who argues that the profound 
failure of Roman-Berber relations in the 530s was the result of a complete ignorance of, and, indeed, 
indifference towards, the Berber tribes by both the Roman imperial government and its military 
commanders in Africa. 
736  For the date of the battle of Tricamarum see n. 84. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
Furthermore, the major narrative sources for the political history of Africa during the Vandal 
period are Procopius Bella and Victor of Vitas Historia.  As has been discussed in section 2.3, 
Procopius discussion of Vandal history is highly selective, and appears to be primarily intended 
to justify Justinians decision to invade Africa in 533.737  For 5th century history, for which his 
sources are unknown, Procopius focuses on the uncivilized behaviour of the Vandals, drawing 
on the topos of the barbarian, and their oppression of the Romano-African population; while 
for events of the early 6th century, concerning which he may have had access to official 
documents, his focus is on presenting a sympathetic portrait of the Vandal king Hilderic, in 
order to stress the illegitimacy of Gelimers coup, and on presenting Gelimer as a tyrant.738  It is 
therefore unsurprising that the Berbers rarely feature in Procopius narrative of Vandal 
history.  Their relations with the Vandals rarely elucidate his literary agenda.  Similarly, for 
Victor of Vita, whose primary subject matter is the persecution of Nicene Christians by the 
Vandals kings, the Berbers are, for the most part, incidental to his narrative. 
And, beyond the obvious problem  that the contemporary sources are only superficially 
interested in the Berbers during the Vandal period  there is also a problem of interpretation.  
The sources refer only to Berbers ( in Greek or Mauri in Latin), and provide no 
means of determining whether their statements are applicable to the Berber tribes generally 
(as has often been assumed), or only to specific groups. 
4.2 Vandals and Berbers 
Before attempting to assess Roman-Berber relations immediately following the Roman 
conquest of Africa, it is first necessary to consider the status quo at the time of the Roman 
737  See p. 84. 
738  See pp. 847. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
invasion  that is, the nature of Vandal-Berber relations.  This subject would itself merit further 
study, but here an overview of the known facts will suffice.739 
The sources note two episodes which may provide information concerning the nature of 
Vandal-Berber relations during the reign of the first Vandal king of Africa, Gaiseric (428477). 
In 455, the Vandals launched an attack against Rome, breaking the peace treaty agreed with the 
Western Roman Empire in 442, which they probably regarded as void following the death of the 
Western Roman emperor Valentinian III.740  In reference to this campaign, Procopius notes that: 
 And the names of the Alans and of all the other barbarians, except the Berbers, 
were (?)included in the name of the Vandals.  Then, once Valentinian was dead, 
Gaiseric, having won over the Berbers, every year, at the beginning of spring, 
made invasions into Sicily and Italy...;741 
Berber involvement in the campaign is also attested by Priscus, who wrote as a contemporary 
in the 5th century: 
 Since Gaiseric no longer kept the treaty having been set down with Majorian, he 
sent a multitude of Vandals and Berbers to ravage Italy and Sicily...742 
These statements certainly indicate contact between the Vandals and the Berbers, but they need 
not be interpreted, as has sometimes been the case, as evidence that the Berbers were obligated 
to provide the Vandals with military support  the possibility that they attest to no more than 
Berber mercenaries serving in the Vandal army cannot be dismissed.743  Indeed, perhaps the 
most significant aspect of these references is the fact that neither writer provides any indication 
739  The only recent study specifically devoted to the question of Vandal-Berber relations is that of 
Modran, Le plus dlicat des peuples et le plus malheureux, 21325. 
740  See n. 394. 
741  Bella III.5.212: [        ,  ,    
  .      ,  
 ,            
]   cannot, however, be correct, as it implies exclusion, which is clearly not the 
meaning intended here. 
742  Priscus, frag. 38.1 (ed. Blockley, 341): [          
           ...]  Cf. Paul 
the Deacon, Hist. Rom. XIV.16. 
743  Contra Modran, Le plus dlicat des peuples et le plus malheureux, 218, who interprets Bella 
III.5.212 as evidence for a formal alliance. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
that the Berbers were ever politically subordinate to the Vandals.  Rather, Procopius employs 
the verb , meaning to win the support of, which suggests that the Vandals were 
attempting to cultivate the Berbers as allies, rather than to subjugate them. 
A more formal arrangement between the Vandal kingdom and the Berber tribes is suggested by 
the Historia of Victor of Vita.  While this text does not mention Berbers serving with the Vandal 
army, it does note, in reference to the Vandal attack on Rome in 442, that: 
 When this multitude of captives [ie. those captured during the sack of Rome] 
reached the shore of Africa, the Vandals and the Berbers, dividing the vast mass 
of people...744 
Furthermore, Victor of Vitas work attests that cooperation between Vandals and Berbers was 
not restricted to military campaigns. The Historia notes, in reference to Nicene Christians being 
exiled from Africa following the arrival of the Arian Vandals, that: 
 The king [Gaiseric] immediately decreed that those who were to be banished 
ought to be sent to a pagan king of the Berbers, whose name was Capsur.745 
And it is clear that the practice of exiling Nicene Christians to the territories of the Berbers 
continued under Gaiserics successors, as it is also attested during the persecution undertaken 
by Huneric in 484.746  These episodes suggest that some kind of formal relationship must have 
existed between the Vandal kingdom and at least one (unidentified) Berber tribe.  However, the 
precise nature of this relationship remains unclear. 
The relationship between the Vandals and the Berbers during the reign of Gaiseric has often 
been interpreted as being akin to the Roman adoption of Berber leaders as client-rulers, a 
practice which had been employed in Africa from the days of the Roman Republic until the loss 
of the region to the Vandals.747  On this basis, the Berber tribes, while not formally part of the 
744  Victor of Vita, I.25: [Quae dum multitudo captivitatis Africanum attingeret litus, dividentes Wandali 
et Mauri ingentem populi quantitatem...] 
745  Victor of Vita, I.35: [Decernit statim rex cuidam gentili regi Maurorum, cui nomen inerat Capsur, 
relegandos debere transmitti.]  Nothing further is known concerning Capsur.  See PLRE II, 260. 
746  Victor of Vita, II.268 
747  For discussions of the Roman Empires use of client rulers in Africa prior to the Vandal period see D. 
Braund, Rome and the Friendly King: The Character of the Client Kingship (London, 1984), 289; G. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
Vandal kingdom, were nevertheless politically subordinate to it.  While the Vandal kingdom 
would presumably have had some responsibilities towards its clients (like the Eastern Roman 
Empire ostensibly did towards its own clients), the relationship would largely have been defined 
by the obligations of the Berber tribes, as the subordinate parties.  Based on the Roman model, 
these obligations could easily have included receiving those deemed politically undesirable by 
the Vandals and the provision of troops in a quasi foederate arrangement, consistent with the 
written sources on Vandal-Berber relations outlined above.748  Indeed, Procopius claim that 
some Berber leaders had been invested with the insignia of Roman client-rulers by the Vandal 
kings might be seen to lend support to this interpretation.749 
Alternatively, the relationship between the Vandals and the Berbers may be regarded as one of 
greater equality, potentially with formal treaty arrangements, under which the Berbers could 
be requested to provide military aid and were entrusted, rather than inflicted, with the 
responsibility for political and religious exiles.  Such a relationship might have been brought 
about by the Vandals recognition that they needed to maintain good relations with their 
increasingly powerful Berber neighbours.750 
Either interpretation of Vandal-Berber relations can be reconciled with the limited written 
evidence.  Thus, ones interpretation of the relationship between the Vandals and the Berber 
tribes during the reign of Gaiseric is heavily dependent on ones understanding of Roman 
relations with the Berbers, both before and after the Vandal period, and on the degree of 
continuity of Roman customs which one perceives in the early years of the Vandal kingdom.  
And, given the lack of explicit evidence, it is almost impossible to produce a definitive 
Camps, Rex gentium maurorum et romanorum: recherches sur les royaumes de Maurtanie des VIe 
et VIIe sicles, AntAfr 20 (1984), 183218; T. Kotula, Firmus, fils du Nubel: tait-il usurpateur ou roi 
des Maures?, ActaAntHung 17 (1970), 13746; D. Lengrand, Le limes interne de Maurtanie 
Csarienne au IVe sicle et la famille de Nubel, in A. Rousselle, ed., Frontires terrestres, frontires 
clestres dans lantiquit (Perpignan, 1995), 14361. 
748  This is the view of Vandal-Berber relations presented by Modran, Les Maures, 5434. 
749  Bella III.25.6.  The significance of this passage will be discussed in greater detail on pp. 17381. 
750  This interpretation is suggested by Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 128. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
interpretation.  Indeed, a relationship between the dominant Vandal kingdom and the 
subordinate Berber tribes may have gradually shifted towards a relationship of increasing 
political equality.  Certainly, as one traces the interaction between the Vandals and the Berbers 
in the late 5th and early 6th century, there is every indication that the balance of power between 
the parties changed, with Vandal authority being progressively reduced. 
Procopius suggests that the Berbers remained content with the political status quo until the 
reign of Gaiserics successor, Huneric (477484), at which time a change in the relationship 
between the Vandals and the Berbers occurred.  Procopius notes that: 
 During this time, while Huneric was ruling the Vandals, there was no war 
against anyone, except the Berbers.  For the Berbers, having remained quiet 
before this out of fear of Gaiseric, as soon as he was out of their way, both 
inflicted many evils on the Vandals and suffered them themselves,751 
and subsequently explains that the Berbers who revolted were those who dwelled on Mount 
Aurasium.752  The first outright Berber revolt against Vandal rule in Africa appears to have 
coincided with Hunerics persecution of Nicene Christians in 484, and, given that the Aurs 
region was highly Romanised, and Christianised, prior to the Vandal conquest of Africa, there is 
every reason to assume a connection between the two events.753  The outcome was undoubtedly 
751  Bella III.8.12: [         ,  
 , .           ,  
    ,         .] 
752  Bella III.8.5.  The location of Mount Aurasium [   ] is debated.  Procopius does not 
appear to use the term to refer to the entirety of the Aurs massif region, given that he claims that 
Mount Aurasium could be circumvented in three days (Bella IV.13.23), and the Aurs massif extends 
c. 360 km (Desanges, Un tmoignage peu connu, 45, 47; Morizot,  propos des limites mridionales, 
155).  Desanges, Un tmoignage peu connu, 47, suggests that Mount Aurasium must have been the 
part of the Aurs massif which extends to the south-west of Mascula (mod. Khenchela, Algeria).  This 
is certainly a plausible identification, being the closest part of the Aurs massif to Roman controlled 
territory, and falling in the centre of the triangle formed by Toumar, Babosis, Bagai and Thamugadi, 
locations where the Roman army is attested during the subsequent campaign against Mount 
Aurasium in 540 (see section 5.4 and Map VIII).  Contra Morizot,  propos des limites mridionales, 
156, who identifies Mount Aurasium was the Belezma Mountains (Algeria), further to the west. 
753  Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 127.  On the Romanisation of the Aurs region see P. Morizot, conomie 
et socit en Numidie meridionale: lexemple de lAurs, LAfrica Romana 8 (1991), 42946; and idem, 
Vues nouvelles sur lAurs antique, CRAI 123.2 (1979), 309-37. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
significant  the revolt resulted in the emergence of an independent Berber polity in the Aurs 
massif.754  Procopius somewhat misleadingly (in respect of the Roman position) remarks that: 
  they [the Berbers of Mount Aurasium] never again fell under the Vandals, 
since the Vandals were unable to carry out a war against the Berbers on a 
mountain both inaccessible and very steep,755 
but glosses over the true significance of the events to his own narrative.  The Aurs massif 
subsequently became a centre of resistance against the establishment of Roman authority in 
Africa half a century later. 
From the reign of Huneric forward, hostilities between the Vandals and the Berber tribes appear 
to have escalated.756  In relation to the reign of Gunthamund (484496), Procopius notes only 
that: 
 This Gunthamund fought against the Berbers in many engagements,757 
although the historian does present in greater detail the campaign waged during the reign of 
Thrasamund (496523), against the Berbers of Tripolitania, led by Cabaon,758 in which these 
Berbers again appear to have been subjugated by the Vandals.759  And, finally, as has been 
discussed in detail in section 2.2, the reign of Hilderic (523530/1) saw the capture of the Vandal 
city of Leptis Magna by one of the Berber tribes of Tripolitania,760 and the significant military 
defeat of the Vandals in Byzacena at the hands of the Berbers under the rule of Antalas761 - 
circumstances which appear to have been sufficiently catastrophic to have precipitated 
Gelimers coup against Hilderic.762 
754  Bella III.8.5. 
755  Bella III.8.5: [...     ,         
     .] 
756  Modran, Les Maures, 550. 
757  Bella III.8.7: [        ...] 
758  On Cabaon see PLRE II, 244. 
759  Bella III.8.1529. 
760  Aed. VI.4.6. 
761  Bella III.9.3; Ioh. III.184216; Malalas, XVIII.57.  For a more detailed discussion of Antalas and the tribes 
he controlled see section 6.3. 
762  See pp. 7880. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
It is thus clear that a significant change occurred in the political geography of Africa in the 5th 
and early 6th centuries.  However, at no point does Procopius, or any other historian who makes 
passing reference to Africa during this period, attempt to offer any explanation for the conflict 
between the Berbers and the Vandals.  This is not altogether surprising.  For Greek and Latin 
writers, the Berbers were simply barbarians, whose behaviour could be explained by that very 
fact.  Their motivations required no further analysis.  But, as a result, the literary sources are, 
in many respects, of little value in understanding the causes of the changes in Vandal-Berber 
relations, and thus the basis of Roman-Berber relations. 
4.3 Epigraphic evidence 
The establishment and consolidation of independent Berber polities within the frontiers of the 
former Roman provinces, in the late 5th and early 6th century, is well recognised, and has 
reasonably been explained as being a response to a power vacuum created by the gradual 
disintegration of former imperial power in the frontier regions.763  Logic suggests that this is 
correct, although there is little concrete evidence.  However, the establishment of polities by 
the stronger Berber tribes surely did not only occur at the expense of the Vandal kingdom but 
also, one may suppose, at the expense of the smaller and politically weaker Berber tribes, whose 
territories would have been integrated into these polities.  Thus, in order to understand the 
political transformation which occurred in Africa in the late 5th and early 6th century, it is 
necessary to give some consideration to the role played by inter-tribal politics. 
Further development of this argument is difficult, given Procopius general disinterest in the 
Berbers beyond their interactions with the Roman army in Africa, and the complete lack of 
written histories produced by the Berbers themselves.  However, some further information 
concerning the internal politics of the Berber world may be derived from the epigraphic 
evidence  in particular, the so-called Arris and Altava inscriptions (named for their places of 
763  Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 125. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
discovery)  which provide a unique Berber perspective on the politics of Africa in the late 5th 
and/or early 6th century. 
The Arris inscription has been the subject of numerous, and diverse, studies in the past.764  
Previous studies have largely focused on three distinct issues  the philological issues 
associated with the text, which will be given minimal attention here; attempts to identify those 
individuals named in the inscription with figures attested by Procopius, which have now been 
largely, and correctly, dismissed (see further below); and attempts to explain Roman-Berber 
relations, based on the apparently Roman features of the text, and the degree of contact which 
this was believed to imply between the two peoples (see further below).  With the exception of 
the recent study by Modran, historical interpretations of the inscription have, in a sense, 
focused on the manner in which the text can be rendered consistent with our understanding of 
Roman history, rather than what it might suggest about Berber history.  The value of the 
inscription as a source of information on the Berber tribes generally, and those of the Aurs 
massif more specifically, has not been fully appreciated.765 
The Arris inscription consists of nine lines of text, inscribed on a limestone block 0.74 x 0.48 x 
0.12m.766  It was discovered in 1942, and was first published in 1944, by Carcopino.767  Since this 
date, a number of significant emendations have been made to the reading, and the current 
accepted reading is: 
 D(is) M(anibus) S(acrum).  Ego Masties dux/ annis LXGII et imp(erator) annis X 
(+) qui nun/ quam per juravi, neque fide(m)/ fregi neque de Romanos, neque/ 
de Mauros, et in bellu parui et in/ pace et adversus facta mea/ sic mecu(m) Deus 
egit bene./ Ego Vartaia hunc edificium cum fratrib(us) me/is feci, in quod 
erogavi sil(icas) centu(m).768 
764  For a general overview of the secondary literature on the subject see Modran, Les Maures, 4008. 
765  Thus, Modran, Les Maures, 405. 
766  J. Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu daprs une inscription latine rcemment dcouverte 
dans lAurs, REA 66 (1944), 95. 
767  Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 92-120. 
768  This version of the text was first presented by P. Morizot, Pour une nouvelle lecture de lelogium de 
Masties, AntAfr 25 (1989), 274.  Morizots reading has largely been followed subsequent discussions 
of the text, including the most recent, that of Modran, Les Maures, 398415.  Contra J. Moorhead, 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
D.M.S.  I, Masties, dux for 67 years and imperator for 10 years, + have never been 
foresworn, nor broken faith, either with the Romans or with the Berbers, and I 
obeyed God, in war as in peace, and for that, because of my conduct, God has 
favoured me.  I, Vartaia, erected with my brothers this monument, for which I 
dispensed 100 siliquae.769 
The inscription was discovered about 1500m south of Arris, a town in the Aurs massif, in 
Algeria.770  Given the location of the inscription, and the fact that Masties is a Berber name,771 it 
has generally been inferred that Masties must have been a Berber chieftain who exercised 
control over a portion of the Aurs massif.772  This argument will be accepted here, albeit with 
some reservations.  It is certainly reasonable to suppose that an individual honoured in such a 
manner would have been known in the area in which his memorial was erected.  However, such 
arguments assume that the inscription was discovered where it was originally erected, and this, 
unfortunately, is unclear. 
The majority of the text of the inscription is presented as self-eulogy, narrated by Masties 
himself, in the first-person.  In the penultimate line, however, while the text remains in the 
first-person, the speaker changes, allowing the donor of the inscription, Vartaia, to note his 
own involvement.  Vartaia claims to have built an edificium.  This seems to be an unlikely word 
to describe the inscription itself and might reasonably be expected to refer to a tomb.773  No 
such tomb has been identified at Arris (or, indeed, elsewhere) and, as a result, it has generally 
The Roman Empire Divided, 400-700 (London, 2001), who accepts that Masties was imperator for forty 
years.  For discussions of the various problems in reconstructing the text see Morizot, Pour une 
nouvelle lecture, 271-4; J. Desanges,  propos de Masties, imperator barbre et chrtien, Ktema 21 
(1996), 1838; Modran, Les Maures, 398401; P. Salama, conomie montaire de lAfrique du Nord 
dans lAntiquit tardive, Bulletin archologique des travaux historiques et scientifiques n.s. 19B 
(1985), 1989. 
769  My translation, based on the French translation presented by Modran, Les Maures, 399400. 
770  Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 92. 
771  Desanges,  propos de Masties, 184. 
772  See most recently, Modran, Les Maures, 401.  Masties has occasionally been identified as Mastigas, 
the Berber leader of Mauritania Caesariensis attested by Procopius in 535 (Morizot, Pour une 
nouvelle lecture, 2823).  However, given that this identification is based solely on the similarities 
between the two names and that, in all likelihood, Masties died before the end of the 5th century, this 
argument should probably be dismissed.   
773  Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 98.  Indeed, Salama, conomie montaire du lAfrique 
du nord, 199, has argued that the inscription must have originally been attached to the tomb, and 
was removed at some later date 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
been accepted that the Arris inscription was intended as a cenotaph  a memorial to an 
individual buried elsewhere.774 
Given the location of the Arris inscription, Vartaia must also be assumed to have had 
connections with the Aurs massif.  However, his relationship with Masties is not clear from 
the inscription.  Given that he clearly places himself on the same level as Masties, with the 
parallel phrases ego Masties... ego Vartaia,775 it has sometimes been assumed that he must have 
been Masties political successor.776  This is certainly possible.  However, the assumption that 
Vartaia inherited Masties authority in the Aurs massif has been pushed further, with Vartaia 
often being identified with Ortaas, the Berber leader noted by Procopius in the context of the 
Roman attack on Mount Aurasium in 535.777  The similarities between the two names can 
certainly not be dismissed.  But the identification is extremely tentative, and unless further 
evidence comes to light, it is probably best discounted.778 
Unfortunately, attempts to date the erection of the inscription, and subsequently determine 
the lifetime of Masties, have relied on the identification of Vartaia with an otherwise attested 
historical figure, Ortaas, and discounting this identification means that it is also necessary to 
dissociate the inscription from the territorial dispute between Ortaas and Iaudas in the 530s,779 
which has otherwise been used to date and contextualise it.780  It is, therefore, impossible to say 
774  Courtois, Les Vandales, 337; Morizot, Pour une nouvelle lecture, 278.  Cf. Modran, Les Maures, 401, 
who, accepting this interpretation, further argues that Vartaia may well have had Masties epitaph, 
from a tomb located elsewhere, copied, adding the final two lines to stress his own reverence for 
Masties 
775  Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 101. 
776  B. H. Warmington, The North African Provinces from Diocletian to the Vandal Conquest (Cambridge, 
1954), 74. 
777  Bella IV.13.28.  On Ortaas see PLRE IIIB, 9578, which accepts the identification of Ortaas with 
Vartaia. 
778  Contra Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 112, who argues that the oratorical tone of the 
Arris inscription is consistent with Procopius account of Ortaas description of the Berber territories 
beyond Aurs (Bella IV.13.29). 
779  See pp. 1867. 
780  Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 1118; Courtous, Les Vandales, 3369; Morizot, Pour une 
nouvelle lecture, 2801. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
anything further than that, on palaeographic and linguistic grounds, the inscription may be 
dated to the late 5th or early 6th century.781 
Attempts have also been made to establish the chronology of Masties life based on his claim to 
the title imperator, and the assumption that this claim must have represented a direct 
challenge to Roman imperial authority in Africa.  Masties has thus been assumed to have 
adopted the title either in 476 or 477, following the fall of Rome to the Goths, and possibly 
following the death of the Vandal king, Gaiseric in January 477;782 or, alternatively, after Roman 
influence in Africa collapsed in 455, following the Vandal sack of Rome.783  However, as will be 
discussed below, it is far from clear that Masties claim to the title imperator was ever intended 
as a direct challenge to either the Eastern or Western Roman Empire, which was, after all, by 
the 5th century, no longer the dominant political power in Africa.  And, even had this been his 
intention, there is no reason why he should have waited until the Western Roman Empire was 
on the verge of collapse. 
Attempts to date the inscription based on Masties claim to the title dux are even more doubtful.  
It has sometimes been argued that Masties must have been granted this title by a reigning 
Roman emperor, assumed to be Valentinian III, and thus held an official position within the 
Roman administration.784  Certainly, it is well accepted that, during Republican and early 
Imperial periods, the Roman Empire appointed Berber client-rulers as duces and entrusted to 
them the defence of portions of the limes,785 and it has often been assumed that this practice 
781  Modran, Les Maures, 400. 
782  Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 116. 
783  Courtois, Les Vandales, 338.  More recently, this chronology has been accepted by Pringle, Defence, 
784  Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 117.  This argument is further developed by P.-A. Fvrier, 
Masuna et Masties, AntAfr 24 (1988), 1436, who argues that the words DUX and IMPR in the 
inscription are not the titles dux and imperator but rather the verbs duxi and imperavi, and that 
Masties was a Roman tribunes intrusted with the defence of the limes. 
785  See, in particular, P. Leveau, LAile II des Thraces, la tribu des Mazices et les praefecti gentis en 
Afrique du Nord, AntAfr 7 (1973), 15191; and n. 747. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
must have continued into the late antique period.786  However, there is little clear evidence for 
this, and it is certainly reasonable to suppose that the Vandal conquest of Africa would have 
resulted in a break in this practice.  Indeed, it appears to be far more likely, that the title dux 
simply continued to be used for the hereditary leaders of Berber tribes during the Vandal 
period.787  This view is supported by the case of Masties himself.  Given that he held the title for 
67 years, he must have assumed it at a relatively young age.788 
The titles dux and imperator thus appear to offer little insight on the chronology of Masties 
life.  However, the Christian nature of the inscription may provide an indication of the date at 
which Masties adopted the title imperator.  The inscription opens with the phrase dis manibus 
sacrum, which might appear to be strictly pagan, but is not uncommon in early Christian 
epitaphs in Africa.789  In all other respects, the inscription appears to emphasize Masties 
Christian faith.  It makes clear reference to the favour of God, and to Masties own adherence 
to Gods will, and includes the sign of the cross.  Furthermore, Masties claim neque fidem fregi, 
which has generally been interpreted as a reference to Masties political allegiances, may also 
have had Christian connotations.790 
Tentatively accepting that Masties was connected with the Aurs region, this declaration of 
Christian faith is unsurprising  the region adopted Christianity at an early date.791  And it is on 
this basis that a more plausible argument for the dating of the inscription, and for its purpose, 
may be proposed.  Rather than attempting to tie the inscription to events in Roman history, 
one should instead attempt to tie it more closely to events in the Aurs massif.792  As has been 
noted in section 4.2, in 484, the Vandal king, Huneric, initiated a persecution against Nicene 
786  Thus, Modran, Les Maures, 4815 
787  Thus, Desanges,  propos de Masties, 185. 
788  Ibid. 
789  Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 96. 
790  Desanges,  propos de Masties, 186-7.  This argument is followed by Modran, Les Maures, 408. 
791  See Morizot, conomie et socit en Numidie mridionale, 42946; and Modran, Les Maures, 407
792  Modran, Les Maures, 4057. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
Christians within his kingdom.793  And, simultaneously, according to Procopius, the Aurs 
region broke with Vandal rule.794  Thus, it is tempting to suggest that Masties wish to adopt the 
title imperator may reasonably be connected with the regions move towards autonomy in the 
480s, prompted by the persecution of Nicene Christians. 
Consequently, contrary to the traditional view, Masties adoption of the title imperator does 
not appear to have been a challenge to Roman political authority, so much as to Vandal 
authority.  And the inscriptions presentation of Masties as a defender of the Christian faith 
presents both Masties and his ostensible successor, Vartaia, to the persecuted Romano-African 
population as a viable alternative to Vandal rule.795  However, the significance of the title 
imperator and of Masties claim to it may be broader still.  The inhabitants of a highly 
Romanised region would surely have been well aware that the title imperator carried 
connotations of the Roman Empire.796  Indeed, the adoption of the title was most likely intended 
as a means of stressing the continuity of Masties rule with the former political power of the 
region.797  Masties adoption of the title imperator is thus consistent with a challenge to Vandal 
authority, coinciding with the Aurs regions claim to independence. 
The use of Latin for the inscription is, however, curious, and merits some further consideration.  
Undoubtedly, in a highly Romanised region, Latin would have been understandable to a 
significant body of the population.798  Nevertheless, if the intention of the inscription was to 
stress Berber autonomy from Vandal rule, Latin appears an odd choice.  Latin remained the 
language of the dominant power in Africa and, in a declaration of independence, one might 
793  Victor of Vita, IIIII, passim. 
794  Bella III.8.5; with pp. 1612. 
795  Modran, Les Maures, 40910. 
796  Contra Desanges,  propos de Masties, 1845, who argues that imperator was simply intended as the 
Latin translation of the Berber title MNKD(H), designating the leader of a confederation of tribes, and 
citing as precedent a parallel bilingual inscription from Leptis Magna. 
797  Thus, Modran, Les Maures, 406. 
798  See Morizot, conomie et socit, 42946; idem, Vues nouvelles sur lAurs antique, CRAI 123.2 
(1979), 30937. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
expect the Berbers to stress their own institutions.  The decision to use the Latin language can 
surely only be explained by the desire to appeal to the Romano-African population.799  In its 
stress on Christian faith, the Arris inscription may present Masties and Vartaia as an alternative 
to the Vandals, but in its claim to Roman institutional continuity, it effectively imitates the 
Vandals in attempting to use Roman institutions and symbolism to confer political 
legitimacy.800  Thus, one might well argue that Masties was also in competition with other 
Berber leaders for the support of the persecuted Romano-African population, and that it was in 
this local Berber competition that Masties claim to rule a highly Romanized region, defined by 
the continuity of Roman institutions, might have increased his, and Vartaias, legitimacy. 
Masties claim never to have broken faith with the Romans or the Berbers, and the decision to 
mention the Romans before the Berbers,801 while not a strictly political claim, nevertheless 
recognises that the Berber leaders required the support of the Romano-African population, and 
were prepared to cultivate this support.  Indeed, the significance of Masties claim is perhaps 
emphasized by the slightly later Altava inscription. 
The inscription, which was discovered in 1877, in unknown circumstances, at Altava (mod. 
Lamoricire, Algeria), consists of five lines of text inscribed on a limestone block 1.23 x 0.43 x 
0.35m.802  The inscription reads: 
 Pro sal(ute) et incol(umitate) reg(is) Masunae gent(ium)/ Maur(orum) et 
Romanor(um); castrum edificat(um) a Mas/giuini pref(ecto) de Safar, Iider 
proc(uratore) Cast/ra severian(a) quem Masuna Altava posuit/ et Maxim(us) 
proc(urator) Alt(auae) perfec(it) p(rouinciae anno) cccclxuiiii. 
For the salvation and safety of Masuna, king of the gens of the Berbers and of 
the Romans.  This castrum was built by Masguin, the prefect of Safar, [and] by 
Iider, the procurator of Castra Severiana, whom Masuna stationed at Altava, 
799  Modran, Les Maures, 406. 
800  On the Vandal imitation of Roman institutions see Clover, The symbiosis of Romans and Vandals, 
5773. 
801  Modran, Les Maures, 409. 
802  J. Marcillet-Jaubert, Les inscriptions dAltava (Aix-en-Provence, 1968), 126. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
and Maximus, the procurator of Altava completed it in the year of the province 
469.803 
Unusually, the Altava inscription is dated, to year 469 of a provincial dating system.  This dating 
system has been assumed to be that of the Vandals, as the Bir-Trouch ostraka confirm that this 
system of dating continued to be used in the Aurs massif after the region declared its 
independence from Vandal rule.804  The year 469 corresponds to 508 CE, making the inscription 
contemporary with the reign of the Vandal king Thrasamund.805 
Masuna has almost unanimously been identified as Massonas, whom Procopius notes to have 
been a Roman ally during the Roman attack on Mount Aurasium in 535.806  However, while the 
names Masuna and  are similar, objections to this identification, based on 
chronology, certainly merit consideration.807  According to Procopius account, Massonas aided 
the Romans against Iaudas because Iaudas had murdered Massonas father, and his own father-
in-law, Mephanias.808  No indication is given of the date of Mephanias death.  However, if 
Masuna and Massonas were the same individual, Massonas was, according to the Altava 
inscription, already the leader of his tribe by 508, and it may reasonably be assumed that his 
father had died prior to this date.  Thus, in 535, Mephanias would have been dead for more than 
27 years.  It therefore seems unlikely, although, admittedly, not impossible, that he would still 
have been remembered, let alone included in the account of a Roman historian only minimally 
interested in Berber politics.809  As result, while the identification of Masunas as Massonas 
cannot be entirely dismissed, it should certainly be treated with caution. 
803  Marcillet-Jaubert, Les inscriptions dAltava, no. 194 (my translation).  Unlike the Arris inscription, 
this reading of the Altava inscription has never been seriously challenged. 
804  Bonnal & Fvrier, Ostraka de la rgion de Bir Trouch, 239-49. 
805  G. Camps, Nouvelles observations sur linscription de roi Masuna  Altava, BCTH n.s. 18B (1988), 153. 
806  Bella IV.13.19.  Carcopino, Un empereur maure inconnu, 1102; Marcillet-Jaubert, Les inscriptions 
dAltava, 126; M. Janon, LAurs au VIe sicle: note sur le recit de Procope, AntAfr 15 (1980), 350; 
Camps, Rex gentium maurorum et romanorum, 191. 
807  Courtois, Les Vandales, 3345. 
808  Bella IV.13.19. 
809  Courtois, Les Vandales, 335, 337. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
Masunas claim, to have been rex gentium maurorum et romanorum has, however, attracted 
considerable attention, not least because the concept of a gens Maura is otherwise unattested.810  
However, for the purposes of this chapter, the existence of a rex gentium romanorum among 
the Berbers is of greater interest.  Unlike Masties, Masuna makes no claim to the far more 
exalted title of imperator, employing the far more conservative title rex, which had been 
granted to Berber leaders during the early imperial period, and which appear to have continued 
as hereditary titles among the Berbers during the period of Vandal rule in Africa. 
Like Masties, Masuna appears to make a bid for the support of the local Romano-African 
population.  And he does this not only through his use of Latin for the inscription and his 
titulature, but also through the evident institutional continuity which the inscription suggests 
within his area of influence.  The building inscription is typical of those which may be found in 
the Roman Empire, and the officials whom it names bear the titles prefectus and procurator. 
Courtois argued that the Arris inscription was evidence for a nascent revival of African unity 
following the fragmentation caused by the collapse of the Roman Empire in the region.811  But 
in fact, both it, and the Altava inscription, may be evidence for exactly the opposite, and it is in 
this context of inter-tribal rivalry for the support of the local population  be it Romano-African 
or Berber - that the first interactions between the Roman administration in Africa and the 
Berber tribes must be considered. 
4.4 Diplomacy and Investiture of Insignia 
The first documented interaction between the Eastern Roman Empire and the Berbers, in the 
6th century, occurred in November 533, shortly before the battle of Tricamarum, when Berber 
embassies from Byzacena, Mauritania and Numidia approached the Roman military 
810  Camps, Nouvelles observations, 153. 
811  Courtois, Les Vandales, 339. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
commander, Belisarius, at Carthage.812  Procopius provides a relatively detailed account of the 
episode, and, indeed, as a member of Belisarius household at the time, may well have been a 
witness to that which he describes.813  It is, of course, likely that there was some, undocumented, 
contact between the Roman army and the Berbers  the Berbers were, after all, sufficiently well 
informed as to the situation at Carthage to send embassies.  Nevertheless, it cannot be doubted 
that the embassies represented a unique point of official contact between two societies.  As 
such, the episode is of considerable importance as a basis for understanding the Eastern Roman 
Empires initial policy vis--vis the Berbers, and it is worth reproducing Procopius account in 
full: 
 For all those who ruled over the Berbers in Mauritania and Numidia and 
Byzacena sent envoys to Belisarius saying that they were slaves of the emperor 
and promised to fight with him.  There were some who even furnished their 
children as hostages and requested that the insignia of office be sent them from 
him according to the ancient custom.  For it was law among the Berbers that no 
one should be a ruler over them, even if he was hostile to the Romans, until the 
emperor of the Romans should give him the insignia of office.814 
And yet, despite all the requests of the Berber embassies being granted, in March 534, just as the 
Roman military commander in Africa, Belisarius, was preparing to depart for Constantinople, 
the Berber tribes of Byzacena and Numidia began raids against the Romano-African 
population.815  According to Procopius the raids occurred for no reason [  ],816 
but it it is clear that, for the historian, their explanation lay in the very character of the Berbers 
themselves.  He notes: 
812  Bella III.25.3. 
813  Cf. Bella III.12.3. 
814  Bella III.25.3-5: [          ,  
          .     
      ,          
     .       ,   
 ,           .] 
815  Bella IV.8.20.  The raids will be discussed in greater detail in section 5.2.  On the chronology see PLRE 
IIIA, 192 (Belisarius). 
816  Bella IV.8.9. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
 ... they decided, having broken the treaty, to suddenly revolt against the 
Romans.  And this was not contrary to their unique nature.  For among the 
Berbers there is neither fear of God nor respect of men.817 
Prima facie, Procopius repeated claims, that the Berbers simply rebelled out of the desire to 
break the treaty [] which they had previously agreed with Belisarius,818 an accusation 
which the historian also places in a letter which he attributes to the Roman magister militum, 
Solomon,819 appear to be little more than an attempt to illustrate the topos of the barbarian, and 
to provide little information of value for the reconstruction of political history.820 
However, given the repeated references to a treaty [] between the Romans and the 
Berbers following the Berber hostilities, it has sometimes been inferred that a formal 
arrangement had, in fact, been agreed between Belisarius and the Berber embassies at Carthage 
in November 533; or, rather, that the Romans believed that a formal treaty had been agreed.821  
Thus, the true significance of the embassies and their requests merits a re-examination. 
Central to the interpretation of Procopius account of the Berber embassies is the request made 
by some of the envoys, that Belisarius grant to them the insignia of office [   
].  Procopius describes these insignia in some detail, noting that they included a silver 
staff covered in gold, a silver cap, like a crown, a white cloak gathered on the right shoulder by 
a golden brooch, a white tunic with embroidery, and gilded boots.822  Belisarius duly granted 
these insignia to those who had requested them, together with a substantial monetary payment 
817  Bella IV.8.910: [...        .   
       .          
 .] 
818  Bella IV.8.9, 18, 11.4. 
819  Bella IV.11.34. 
820  See p. 57. 
821  Thus, Modran, Les Maures, 586, argues that the Romans would have interpreted the Berber request 
for insignia as their recognition of Roman sovereignty and their complete submission to this 
authority.  This, he suggests, is evident from Procopius attribution to the Berbers of the claim that 
they were slaves of the emperor [ ]. 
822  Bella III.25.7. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
[ ].823  However, the significance of the gesture, for both the Romans and the 
Berbers, is not entirely clear. 
It is clear that, from the Roman perspective at least, the insignia were important to a Berber 
leaders legitimacy and right to rule, as Procopius notes that: 
 For it was the law among the Berbers that no one should rule, even if he 
should be an enemy of the Romans, until the Roman emperor should give 
him the tokens of office.824 
The validity of this statement, from the Berber perspective, is reinforced by the very request 
itself, and also by Procopius claim that some of those requesting insignia from Belisarius had 
previously received them from the Vandal king.  Procopius implication, that, in 533, the Berber 
leaders already doubted the value of Vandal insignia, is undoubtedly coloured by his knowledge 
of the subsequent Vandal defeat at Tricamarum.825  Nevertheless, the urgency with which the 
Berber leaders sought to obtain Roman insignia, before the outcome of the Roman-Vandal 
conflict was even known, suggests that the insignia were of high value, and were likely key to 
individual Berber leaders political legitimacy. 
Why the Berbers should have attached such value to what were, after all, Roman insignia, is, 
however, less clear.826  Certainly, the granting of Roman insignia to Africa rulers appears to have 
had a long history, being first attested during the days of the Roman Republic.827  However, the 
insignia comprised elements of both the Roman ornamenta triumphalia and the ornamenta 
consularia, combining both the military and civil aspects of the Roman magistrate,828 and it has 
thus been inferred that the granting of such insignia to native African rulers was also intended 
823  Bella III.25.8. 
824  Bella III.25.5; with n. 814. 
825  Modran, Le plus dlicat des peuples et le plus malheureux, 219. 
826  Modran, Les Maures, 489, 493, concludes, through comparison of the insignia described by Procopius 
with representations of the symbolism of native African rulers, that the insignia could not have been 
African in origin. 
827  See n. 747. 
828  Braund, Rome and the Friendly King, 28. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
to recognised the rulers semi-autonomous status and to formalise their role as representatives 
of the Roman state among their own people.829 
Insignia, of the kind described by Procopius, are generally accepted as being associated with 
Roman client-rulership, although, for the Romans, the significance of the insignia rested on 
their overtly imperial connotations.830  These are perhaps most evident, in a 6th century context, 
from Corippus In laudem.831  In book II, Corippus provides a detailed description of the 
ceremonies surrounding Justin IIs coronation on 14 November 565.  He describes how the 
emperor, appearing before the people, was clothed in a white tunic trimmed with gold, purple 
boots, a belt worked with gold and precious stones, and a purple chlamys worked trimmed with 
gold and fastened with a gold brooch.832 
Modran argues that the granting of insignia to the Berber leaders in 533 should be considered 
within a purely African context, suggesting that Belisarius, as a general who had previously 
served in the East, would have understood his own gesture in light of his experience of similar 
investitures in the East, and thus misinterpreted the Berber request as a complete recognition 
of imperial sovereignty.833  Undoubtedly, Belisarius would have interpreted the gesture in light 
of similar investitures in the East (although there is no evidence that he had been involved in 
such a ceremony), but this is precisely the point.  Accurate or not, Belisarius interpretation of 
the gesture could only be based on a knowledge of the significance of such investitures 
elsewhere in the empire.  Therefore, in order to understand the significance which the Romans 
attached to the investiture of the Berbers in 533, it is necessary to understand the significance 
of such gestures elsewhere. 
829  Modran, Les Maures, 493. 
830  D. Braund, Georgia in Antiquity: A History of Colchis and Transcaucasian Iberia, 550 BCAD 562 
(Oxford, 1994), 280. 
831  Cameron, Flavius Cresconius Corippus, 110.  On the In laudem see p. 59. 
832  Iust. II.10025. 
833  Modran, Les Maures, 586. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
Perhaps the best attested example of a foreign rulers being invested with Roman insignia, in 
the 6th century, is the so-called conversion of Tzath.  The episode is reported, in almost 
identical accounts, in the Chronicle of John Malalas, the Chronicon Paschale, and the Chronicle 
of Theophanes, with the latter almost certainly drawing its information from the former.834  
According to these chronicles, in earlier times, when a king of Lazika came to the throne, his 
accession had to be ratified by the king of Persia.  It is not entirely clear whether this was a 
longstanding tradition, although Agathias, writing in the 570s,835 describes Roman investiture 
of the kings of Lazika as having occurred since early times.836  However, when Damnazes, king 
of the Laz, died, his son, Tzath I (521/2?), approached the Roman emperor, Justin I, and 
requested that he proclaim him king.837  Tzath I was duly received at Constantinople, baptised 
as a Christian, married to a high-born Roman woman, and crowned king of Lazika.838  Malalas is 
imprecise in his dating of this event, but appears to synchronise the event with the death of 
Paul, Patriarch of Antioch, in 521.839  The Chronicon Paschale and Theophanes are consistent in 
dating the event in 522, and this date generally been preferred.840 
The accounts of Tzath Is coronation describe the Laz kings paraphernalia in some detail.  He 
was dressed in a white tunic, with gold embroideries, including an image of the emperor; shoes 
studded with pearls, in the Persian fashion; and a belt, also decorated with pearls.  He received 
from Justin a crown [  ], and a white cloak with a gold border 
and a purple portrait medallion of the emperor.  Thus far, the sources are consistent.  However, 
834  Malalas, XVII.9; Chron. Pasch. s.a. 522; Theophanes, AM 6015 (ed. De Boor, pp. 1689).  Mango & Scott, 
The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, 258 n. 1. 
835  Cameron, Agathias, 9. 
836  Agathias, Hist. III.15.2. Braund, Georgia in Antiquity, 2778, argues, based on Malalas account of Tzath 
Is coronation, that the practice was longstanding.  However, Mango & Scott, The Chronicle of 
Theophanes Confessor, 278 n. 1, suggests that it might have begun with the reign of Damnazes, whom 
Malalas implies entered into a new agreement with the Persian king. 
837  Malalas, XVII.9; Chron. Pasch. s.a. 522; Theophanes, AM 6015 (ed. De Boor, pp. 1689). 
838  Ibid. 
839  M. Whitby & M. Whitby, Chronicon Paschale, 284624 AD (Liverpool, 1984), 106 n. 330. 
840  See Stein, Histoire, II, 267; Braund, Georgia in Antiquity, 276.  Contra Whitby & Whitby, Chronicon 
Paschale, 106 n. 330. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
the Chronicon Paschale and Theophanes both describe Tzaths shoes as red, and Theophanes 
notes that his belt was made of gold.841 
Like the insignia granted to the Berbers, the insignia granted to the kings of Lazika bears 
considerable similarities with the insignia described by Corippus as part of Justin Is coronation.  
The major difference between the two is the chlamys.  As Agathias himself stresses, in his 
description of the insignia granted to Tzath II, the wearing of the purple chlamys was restricted 
to the emperor himself.842  Thus, foreign rulers were always granted a white chlamys  albeit, 
in the case of the kings of Lazika, one with substantial decoration, which represented a 
compromise between the imperial chlamys and white chlamys with a purple stripe worn by 
Roman dignitaries.843  The position of the foreign ruler, relative to the emperor, and the officials 
of the Eastern Roman Empire was thus defined.844  And there is every reason to suppose that 
foreign rulers were aware of these connotations  especially in view of the elaborate ceremony 
which accompanied investitures such as those of the kings of Lazika. 
The symbolism of the investiture of insignia is thus clear.  But what of the political significance 
of the gesture?  More than anything else, the investiture appears to have created a connection 
between the Roman emperor and the client-ruler which entailed responsibilities and 
obligations to one another, and which would have entitled the Eastern Roman Empire to expect 
political, and military, support from the newly invested client-ruler. 
841  See n. 834.  Furthermore, it would appear that this was the established list of insignia for a king of 
Lazika.  see Agathias, Hist. III.14.215 and III.15.2; with Braund, Georgia in Antiquity, 281.  Similarly, 
one might compare the insignia which Procopius claims were granted to the satraps of the Armenian 
Pentarchy during the 5th century (Aed. III.1.1823). 
842  Agathias, Hist. III.15.2. 
843  Cameron, Flavius Cresconius Corippus, 159 nn. 1189. 
844  Braund, Georgia in Antiquity, 280. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
The Eastern Roman Empire granted insignia to show its support for particular rulers.845  While 
those rulers who received insignia were not bound by treaties in the traditional sense,846 the 
insignia were accepted in the full understanding that should the recipient not act in the 
interests of the Eastern Roman Empire, the empire had the capability, and will, to remove its 
support and install another native ruler.  In exchange, the client-rulers might have expected 
some degree of protection from external threats from the Eastern Roman Empire, but only 
insofar as it lay within Roman interests.  Such arrangements were, therefore, contingent on the 
Eastern Roman Empires ability to enforce them. 
It has sometimes been suggested that, in granting the Berbers insignia, Belisarius merely 
humoured a barbarian whim and, furthermore, that he would have been unwilling to enter into 
a formal treaty with them out of the belief that, as barbarians, they would not be bound by it.847  
This is certainly possible.  However, it should also be recognised that the Eastern Roman Empire 
was in no position to formally endorse native rulers in Africa.  In November 533, when the 
Berber embassies approached Belisarius at Carthage, the Roman military position in Africa 
remained precarious.  The Roman occupation of Carthage had certainly not been the coup de 
grce to the Vandal kingdom that it is sometimes presented to be.848  The Romans certainly did 
not negotiate with the Berbers from a position of strength.  Should those invested with insignia 
prove unwilling to support Roman interests, the empire lacked the resources to respond 
militarily, as is emphatically clear from its subsequent response to Berber hostilities,849 and 
failure to do so would undermine the authority of the empire in the region.  Thus, while the 
Eastern Roman Empire might, ordinarily, regard the investiture of insignia as a means of 
845  C. Morrisson, Les insignes du pouvoir imprial au Ve et VIe sicle, in M. Rouche, ed., Clovis, histoire 
et mmoire (Paris, 1997), 767. 
846  C. Toumanoff, Studies in Christian Caucasian History (Georgetown, 1963), 133. 
847  Modran, Les Maures, 489. 
848  On the capture of Carthage see the Prologue. 
849  See section 5.2. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
securing its influence over native rulers, Belisarius cannot have failed to recognise that, under 
the circumstances, any such gesture would be symbolic at best. 
Furthermore, there is every indication that the Berbers were well aware of the weakness of the 
Roman position.  Procopius makes the following accusation against the Berbers, following the 
investiture of insignia: 
 However, they did not come to him for an alliance, nor did they dare to 
come to the aid of the Vandals, but, standing out of the way of both, they 
were waiting to see how the fortunes of war would play out.850 
When this statement is considered in the context of Procopius characterisation of the Berbers, 
it might appear to be yet another example of the Berbers as unfaithful allies.851  However, this 
was also a pragmatic response on the part of a people anxious to derive the greatest personal 
benefit from the situation. 
Thus, the investiture of the kings of Lazika offers an imperfect paradigm for understanding the 
events which occurred in Africa in 533.  A more useful parallel may perhaps be drawn 
elsewhere.  Procopius claim that the Berbers: 
 Having already received these thing [the insignia] from the Vandals, they did 
not believe that they [the Vandals] held office securely,852 
has attracted attention as evidence for the continuity of Roman institutions in Africa during the 
Vandal period.853  However, it is important to recognise that the process of investiture which 
occurred during the Vandal period was, at best, an exchange between equals.  As will be 
discussed below, the Berber leaders who received insignia from the Vandals were those who 
were in the process of establishing autonomous polities within the borders of the former Roman 
provinces of Africa.  Clearly, under such circumstances, the Vandals were hardly in a position 
to demand concessions from the Berber leaders.  On the other hand, the Hasdings themselves 
850  Bella III.25.9: [     ,      , 
           .] 
851  See p. 57. 
852  Bella III.25.6: [           .] 
853  For example, Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 72. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
derived benefits from the investiture of Berber leaders  the right to confer political legitimacy 
on the Berber leaders, in the manner of the former rulers of Africa, whom the Vandals otherwise 
sought to emulate,854 underscored their own claim to legitimacy within their own kingdom.855  
The gesture was thus mutually beneficial. 
It might thus be argued that the Roman position vis--vis the Berbers in 533 was analogous to 
that of the Vandals, and was intended to increase the prestige of both parties in a mutually 
beneficial, but in all likelihood temporary, arrangement.  However, if this argument is accepted, 
how should one explain the Berber decision to request insignia from Belisarius at this time? 
In order to better understand the political significance of the Berber embassies to the Berbers 
themselves, some further consideration should be given to the individuals and/or groups which 
they represented.  Procopius notes that the embassies acted on the behalf of: 
  those who ruled over the Berbers in Mauritania and Numidia and 
Byzacena856 
However, in this context, he does not offer any explicit information concerning those 
individuals who comprised the embassies, nor the leaders and tribes which they represented.857  
As has been discussed previously, Procopius presentation of the Berbers is relatively 
unsophisticated.  Nevertheless, it is clear from his account of the subsequent Berber raids that 
he was, at least peripherally, aware of significant tribal leaders and the territories which they 
controlled.  And the information which he provides on the political geography is probably more 
reliable than might be supposed. 
It has sometimes been suggested that Procopius omission of the province of Tripolitania from 
the list of regions from which the embassies came is remarkable, given that he clearly intended 
854  See, for example, Clover, The symbiosis of Romans and Vandals in Africa, 60-9. 
855  Merrills & Miles, The Vandals, 72. 
856  Bella III.25.3: [ ...         ] 
857  Modran, Koutzinas-Cusina, 402, infers from the granting of insignia that the Berber leaders 
themselves must have been part of the embassies.  However, while this is a logical assumption, it is 
not evident from Procopius account (Bella III.25.3). 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
to encompass all the Berber tribes of Africa.858  However, had Procopius intended to be all 
encompassing in his description, it is unlikely that he would have made such an omission  
especially given that the provinces were Roman, rather than Berber, geographical and 
administrative designations.  Indeed, given that Procopius elsewhere refers to the Berbers 
simply as , or even , his (admittedly imperfect) attempt to identify the 
embassies with specific provinces suggests that a discrete group of tribes was involved.  Thus, 
the identification of these tribes and/or their leaders may provide further insight into the 
intentions of the embassies themselves. 
A comprehensive list of those involved in the embassies cannot be reconstructed from 
Procopius work.  However, some additional information concerning the tribes represented 
may be derived from his account of the subsequent raids.859  Procopius identifies the leaders of 
the raids in Byzacena in 534 and 535 as Cusina (), Esdilasas, Iourphouthes, and 
Medisinissas.860  The letter which he attributes to the Roman magister militum per Africam, 
Solomon, asks of these men: 
  what ever have you suffered that you thought to revolt against the great 
empire and to throw away your own security, and these things having 
given the strongest oaths in writing and having handed over your own 
children as pledges to that which has been agreed?861 
The reference to oaths and to the handing over of children appears to be an allusion to the 
agreement reached with Belisarius in 533  indeed, it is interesting to note that Procopius here 
refers to the oaths as being given  , a detail not provided elsewhere.  The letter is 
undoubtedly a literary creation.862  Nevertheless, Procopius creates a deliberate connection 
858  Modran, Koutzina-Cusina, 399. 
859  The raids themselves are discussed in greater detail in section 5.2. 
860  Bella IV.10.6  On these figures see PLRE IIIA, 366-8 (Coutzinas); 451 (Esdilasas); 717 (Iourphouthes); 
and IIIB, 870 (Medisinissas). 
861  Bella IV.11.34: [...               
  ;             
     ;] 
862  See pp. 856. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
between Cusina, Esdilasas, Iourphouthes and Medisinissas, and the Berber embassies to 
Carthage, and there is little reason to doubt that this information is accurate. 
Unfortunately, little is known concerning Esdilasas, Iourphouthes and Medisinissas.  
Iourphouthes is nowhere else attested, while Medisinissas is only otherwise attested in the 
context of the raids of 534, and Esdilasas as having surrendered to the Romans following the 
battle at Mount Bougaon in 535.863  Based on Procopius evidence that, these men were present 
in Byzacena in 534, the PLRE somewhat tenuously identifies them as chieftains of tribes in 
Byzacena.864  However, given that this identification cannot be conclusively demonstrated, and 
nothing further is known concerning the territories these leaders might have held or their 
relations with other tribes, it adds little to the understanding of the Berber embassies in 533. 
Cusina, on the other hand, is relatively well attested.865  He has traditionally been assumed to 
have been the leader of a nomadic tribe, largely on the basis of Procopius claims that Cusina, 
and those following him, pillaged Byzacena in 534, and that the Berbers were accompanied by 
their women and children.866  On the basis of Procopius reference to camels, Courtois identified 
the origins of Cusinas tribe as Tripolitania, arguing that Cusinas presence in Byzacena in 534 
(the first time he is attested) should be interpreted as the incursion of the nomadic tribes, 
unfamiliar with Roman culture, into the interior provinces.867  However, more recently, 
Modran has challenged this view, arguing that Procopius use of the verb , in reference 
to Cusinas presence in Byzacena, indeed implies that the tribe, while possibly semi-nomadic, 
was certainly established in this province.868  Furthermore, he suggests that the origins of the 
863  Bella IV.10.11, 12.26, 29.  On the battle of Mount Bourgaon see pp. 1934. 
864  PLRE IIIA, 451 and 717; and IIIB, 870. 
865  On Cusina see further section 6.4. 
866  Bella IV.11.17-9. 
867  Courtois, Les Vandales, 34950. 
868  Modran, Les Maures, 339. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
tribe can be identified more precisely, convincingly locating it to the west of Capsa (mod. Gafsa, 
in Tunisia),869 a region which archaeological evidence suggests was highly Romanised.870 
Procopius also identifies one other Berber leader with the province of Byzacena  Antalas.871  
Following his account of the battle at Mount Bougaon in 534, Procopius notes: 
 And the only Berbers who remained in Byzacena were those led by Antalas, who, 
during this time, having kept faith with the Romans, remained, together with 
his subjects, unaffected by the evils.872 
The statement does not, admittedly, explicitly connect Antalas with the embassies to Carthage 
in 533.  However, Procopius description of Antalas as having kept faith with the Romans [ 
   ] has tentatively been advanced as evidence that the Berber leader 
had entered into an agreement with the Romans.873  Given that Procopius elsewhere notes the 
inability of barbarians to keep     in relation to the failure of formal 
agreements between the emperor Arcadius and the Visigoths, and the emperor Diocletian and 
the Blemmyes,874 this appears to be a reasonable supposition. 
Procopius clearly identifies the leader of the Berber tribe of Mount Aurasium, in Numidia, as 
Iaudas.875  Like Antalas, Iaudas is not explicitly connected with the embassies in 533.  However, 
given that Procopius claims that the Berbers of Byzacena and Numidia broke their agreement 
with the Romans,876 and that Iaudas is the only Berber leader whom Procopius explicitly 
identifies with Numidia, it is reasonable to suppose that the historian intended to make a 
connection between the two. 
869  Ibid, 3412. 
870  S. Ben Baaziz, Les sites archologiques de la rgion de Gafsa, LArme et les affaires militaires (Paris, 
1991), II, 53548; Modran, Les Maures, 3423. 
871  On Antalas see further section 6.3. 
872  Bella IV.12.30: [        ,      
             .] 
873  Thus, Modran, Les Maures, 328. 
874 Bella III.2.7 and I.19.33. 
875  Bella IV.12.29, 13.1.  On Iaudas see further section 6.5. 
876  Bella IV.8.9. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
The leaders of the Berbers of Mauritania were also, according to Procopius, among those 
represented by the embassies to Carthage.  Procopius identifies only one Berber leader with 
Mauritania  Mastigas.877  However, the historian does not connect Mastigas, either explicitly or 
implicitly, with the embassies. 
The above discussion represents, at best, a very partial and tentative identification of the 
Berber leaders represented by the embassies to Carthage.  Nevertheless, two significant points 
emerge from the catalogue of leaders.  First, it is clear that the embassies sent to Carthage did 
not act in unison.  This is perhaps to state the obvious.  The Berber embassies are presented as 
comprising two distinct groups  those who merely proclaimed themselves   
and offered their children as hostages, and those who also requested insignia.878  Certainly, it 
appears likely that the embassies were not united in their intentions vis--vis the Eastern 
Roman Empire, as is demonstrated by the fact that some tribes almost immediately came into 
conflict with the empire and others did not.  However, the divisions may have been more 
significant than this - at least some of the tribes represented by the embassies appear to have 
been in conflict with one another at this time. 
A second point emerges from this conclusion.  The three most notable Berber leaders 
represented by the embassies were Antalas, Cusina and Iaudas.  These men are comparably well 
attested, and in hostile (Roman) sources.  Part of the reason for this is probably that they had, 
at the time of the Roman conquest, achieved something unprecedented.  All three had 
established themselves as the rulers of autonomous polities within the frontiers of the former 
provinces of Roman Africa.879  And the territorial ambitions of these rulers, which will be 
877  Bella IV.13.19. 
878  Modran, Les Maures, 488, suggests that the two groups represented two distinct agreements with 
the Romans.  But he nevertheless maintains that both groups recognised Roman authority and 
pledged their allegiance. 
879  The significance of this achievement is stressed by Camps, Rex gentium maurorum et romanorum, 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
considered in greater detail below, may be the key to understanding the Berber request for 
insignia in 533. 
The significance of territorial expansion is most evident from the information which Procopius 
provides concerning Numidia.  Mount Aurasium, the territory controlled by Iaudas at the time 
of the Roman conquest, lay within the Aurs massif, a region which, as has been discussed 
previously, had revolted against Vandal rule in 484 and established itself as an independent 
polity.880  Furthermore, there is every indication that, following the establishment of this polity, 
the leaders of the tribe attempted to continue to expand their territory, and were still 
attempting to do so in the 530s. 
Procopius opens his account of the Berber raids in Numidia by noting that Iaudas had plundered 
the region and enslaved the local Romano-African population.881  However, he is somewhat 
unclear as to the reasons for Roman military intervention in Numidia in 535, noting initially 
that Solomon: 
 ... led an army against Mount Aurasium and Iaudas, alleging that, while the 
Roman army was occupied in Byzacena, he [Iaudas] had plundered much of the 
lands of Numidia.  And this was so.882 
The concluding remark, if nothing else, itself casts some doubt on the truth of this statement.  
Furthermore, Procopius subsequently claims that Solomon was urged to act by the Berbers 
Massonas and Ortaas, both of whom were involved in personal disputes with Iaudas.883  Ortaas 
was the leader of a tribe to the west of Mount Aurasium884 and, prior to the failure of the Roman 
attack on the mountain, both men are described as  by Procopius.885  Procopius note, 
that Ortaas held a grudge against Iaudas because he, together with another tribal leader, had 
880  See pp. 1612. 
881  Bella IV.13.1. 
882  Bella IV.13.18: [...          ,   ,  
       ,      .    
 .] 
883  Bella IV.13.19. 
884  Bella IV.13.28. 
885  Bella IV.13.20, 28, 30, 35, 37. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
attempted to remove Ortaas from his territory, which lay immediately to the west of Mount 
Aurasium, suggests a territorial dispute.886  Ortaas appears to have attempted to exploit his 
connections with the Eastern Roman Empire in order to bring an end to the westward expansion 
of his better established neighbour, Iaudas,887 
Like Iaudas, Antalas was the leader of a tribe which had established its independence during the 
Vandal period.  As has been discussed in section 2.2, during the reign of Hilderic, the Vandals 
had suffered a significant defeat in Byzacena, at the hands of Antalas.888  In Byzacena, the 
differing positions of Cusina and Antalas vis--vis the Eastern Roman Empire may be connected 
with their own territorial dispute.  Procopius makes repeated mention of antagonism between 
these two leaders, noting: 
 The two were enemies and were hostile to one another by disposition...889 
The cause of this enmity is not explicitly attested.  However, if Modran is correct in suggesting 
that the territories of Antalas and Cusina bordered on one another,890 the territorial ambitions 
of one  clearly attested for Antalas, but possibly also applicable to Cusina  were likely to have 
been a cause for concern to the other.  Indeed, it is tempting to suggest that the raids in 
Byzacena and Numidia, which were characterised by pillage,891 rather than by attacks on Roman 
military infrastructure, were primarily driven by Berber tribal politics, as one tribe sought to 
prevent the expansion of another, and Roman intervention in these raids was exploited by one 
tribe against another. 
In such an environment of competition  and competition not merely for land, but, possibly, as 
the Arris and Altava inscriptions imply, for the support of the local Romano-African population 
 the appearance of political legitimacy was vital, and the Berber request for insignia in 533 
886  Bella IV.13.19. 
887 Bella IV.13.19. 
888  Ioh. III.2624; Bella III.9.3, 8. 
889  Bella IV.25.21: [         ...] 
890  Modran, Les Maures, 3412. 
891  See pp. 1901. 
Chapter 4:  Romans, Vandals and Berbers to 534 
should be seen in this context.  The insignia represented one claim, most likely among many, to 
legitimacy, which might be recognised by both the Berbers and the Romano-African 
populations, based on different historical precedents.  However, in a sense, the simultaneous 
request for insignia by multiple tribes might also be argued to represent little more than 
political one-upmanship. 
As has been argued previously, the Romans were in no immediate position, in 533, to address 
any potential threat posed by the Berbers.  The Berbers lack of willingness to actively back 
either the Romans or the Vandals prior to the battle of Tricamarum suggests that they were 
well aware of this fact.  Thus, they attempted to derive what benefit they could from the 
situation.  Given that the investiture of insignia could be represented to the Roman population 
as a gesture of superiority and benevolence on the part of the Roman imperial government, and 
served to aid the political legitimacy of the various Berber leaders who requested it, the 
negotiations which occurred in 533 represented a temporary gesture of goodwill, with 
advantages to both parties, at a time when both groups were otherwise occupied with more 
immediate concerns.  Despite Procopius depiction of the subsequent Berber raids as an example 
of the inability of barbarians to keep faith, there is no indication that the negotiations were ever 
intended to represent a long term political agreement. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
5.1 Introduction 
In mid-September 533, after a remarkably short campaign, the Roman army entered the city of 
Carthage unopposed and, according to Procopius, welcomed by the population.892  The capture 
of Carthage, the foremost city of the former Roman provinces of Africa and the Vandal capital, 
undoubtedly held symbolic value for the Roman imperial government.  While textual 
references to the capture of Carthage may have been used synecdochically to refer to the 
conquest of Africa more generally, it is notable that the prefatory constitutions to the Digest, 
the Constitutio Tanta and the Constitutio , which were promulgated on 16 December 
533, and proclaim the success of the African campaign, make a distinction between the capture 
of Carthage and the conquest of Africa more generally, proclaiming: 
 the complete capture of Libya and the recovery of most renowned 
Carthage893 
Within months, the Vandals been definitively defeated; key coastal position, the primary 
objective of the campaign, had been secured; and the basis of an administrative system had 
been established.  Contrary to all the objections raised by Justinians advisers, in the early 
months of 534, the campaign must have appeared, both from Carthage and from 
Constantinople, to have been an unmitigated success.  From this point forward, the Roman 
administration in Africa must have imagined, it had only to continue to consolidate and expand 
Roman authority in the region, a process already begun through the granting of insignia to 
Berber leaders who might otherwise have posed a threat. 
892  Bella III.20.1. 
893  D. Const. Tanta.  D. Const.  pref.: [         
 ...] 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
However, it was from early 534 that the Roman battle to establish authority in Africa truly 
began, as the Roman administration sought to counter the threat posed by the Berber tribes, 
while simultaneously being plagued by a lack of resources, inexperienced and incompetent 
commanders, and disaffection within the African army; and, in the face of these problems, an 
ever increasing lack of support from Constantinople, as Africa undoubtedly became seen as a 
lost cause, and other foreign policy objectives took priority. 
The intention of this chapter is to map the Roman response to the circumstances which 
developed in Africa, highlighting the factors which shaped the course of Roman policy in the 
region between 534 and 548, the period upon which the sources focus.  The Roman responses 
to the stituation in Africa which will be presented below have been broadly divided into five 
phases  Berber raids and Roman responses to them, from 534 to 536; mutinies within the 
Roman army, between 536 and 538; the Roman campaign in the Aurs massif, in 540; the 
resumption of Berber hostilities, between 544 and 546; and the campaigns of John Troglita, 
between 546 and 548 - each of which is characterised by a change in the balance of power which 
had been established between the Romans and the Berbers in 533.894 
5.2 Berber raids and Roman responses (534 to 535) 
As has been noted in section 4.4, in 534, mere months after sending embassies to Belisarius at 
Carthage, the actions of the Berber tribes of Byzacena and Numidia brought them into conflict 
with the Roman administration in Africa.  Procopius account, which is undoubtedly intended 
to stress the scale of the destruction wrought for literary effect, presents the Berbers as 
plundering the provinces, and murdering and enslaving the local Romano-African 
population.895  As has been discussed previously, Procopius makes no attempt to offer a 
motivation for these, apparently unexpected, hostilities, instead resorting to the topos of the 
894  For the negotiations which occurred between the various Berber tribes and the Roman commander 
in Africa, Belisarius, in 533, see pp. 17381. 
895  Bella IV.8.20, 22, 13.1. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
barbarian, and claiming that the inclination towards rebellion [ ] lay in the 
Berbers very nature.896 
Procopius gives the impression that these hostilities were timed to coincide with Belisarius 
departure from Africa in May or June 534.897  From the Roman perspective, the timing was 
certainly unfortunate.  The Berbers, almost certainly unintentionally, exploited the instability 
caused by a change in Roman leadership in Africa;898 the fact that the intended civil and military 
administrations were not yet in place;899 and the lack of preparedness of the Roman army in 
Africa.900  Procopius terminology and his implication, that the Berbers actions were an attempt 
to dislodge the newly established Roman administration in Africa, have resulted in the Berber 
raids in Byzacena and Numidia being termed revolts against Roman rule in Africa.901 
However, such an interpretation appears to be at odds with the inclination of individual Berber 
leaders to direct their hostilities primarily against the Romano-African population, rather than 
against Roman military and administrative positions, with direct confrontation between the 
Berbers and the Roman army occurring only as a result of Roman, rather than Berber, 
initiative.902  The possibility that such raids were an established part of the tribal economy and 
inter-tribal relations, should certainly not be dismissed.  Furthermore, as has been argued in 
section 4.4, the specific context of Berber tribal politics in the 530s appears to have contributed 
to the escalation of hostilities.  Consequently, the term revolt, which has innate political 
connotations, will be avoided here. 
896  Bella IV.8.9; with p. 57. 
897  Bella IV.1821.  On the date of Belisarius departure from Africa see n. 630. 
898  See pp. 1367. 
899  The legislation establishing civil and military administration in Africa was not intended to come into 
effect until 1 September 534.  See CJ 1.27.1.43 and 1.27.2.18. 
900  Bella IV.8.21. 
901  Eg. Bury, History, II, 141; Stein, Histoire, II, 320. 
902  Bella IV.10.5. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Indeed, the initial engagement between the Berbers and the Roman military was instigated by 
the commanders (Agan and Rufinus) of two detachments of Roman cavalry stationed in 
Byzacena.903  The Romans pro-actively, and apparently opportunistically, ambushed the Berber 
baggage train, killing those escorting it and seizing its contents.904  This relatively minor action 
proved to be disastrous for them.  The main Berber force was not far away and, having become 
aware of the attack, it turned back and trapped the Romans in the same pass they had used for 
their own ambush.905  The Romans, including their commanders, were slaughtered.906 
At Carthage, the recently appointed Praetorian Prefect and magister militum per Africam, 
Solomon, must have been dismayed at the loss of two experienced commanders as well as a 
significant number of cavalry.907  In response to the disaster, he personally led the entire Roman 
army in Africa into Byzacena.908  Procopius, consistent with his own interpretation of the Berber 
raids, presents the Roman push into Byzacena, in a letter attributed to Solomon, as an attempt 
to return the Berbers to their sworn obligations [].909  However, this interpretation 
undoubtedly reflects a profound misunderstanding, on Procopius part, of the Berber embassies 
to Carthage in 533, and may not be representative of the understanding of the situation within 
the Roman administration in Africa.910 
Solomon encountered the leaders of the Berbers of Byzacena - Cusina, Esdilasas, Iourphouthes 
and Medisinissas - at Mamma (the location of which remains unknown), where they were 
903  Bella IV.10.35.  Procopius does not provide any clear date for this engagement.  However, since the 
defeat appears to have prompted Solomons engagement with the Berbers at Mamma (see n. 908), a 
date in mid- to late 534 appears to be probable.  On Agan and Rufinus see PLRE IIIA, 323 and IIIB, 
1097-8 respectively. 
904  Bella IV.10.5. 
905  Bella IV.10.67. 
906  Bella IV.10.7. 
907  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 66.  On the date of Solomons appointment see pp. 1367. 
908  Bella IV.11.14.  The date of the battle of Mamma is unclear.  Given the timing of the battle of Mount 
Bougaon, which was probably in the spring of 535 (see n. 919), a date in late 534 appears to be 
plausible.  Cf. Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 69; followed by Pringle, Defence, 24.  Contra PLRE IIIB, 1170, 
which favours a date in the spring of 535. 
909  Bella IV.11.28; with pp. 1901. 
910  See p. 188. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
encamped with all their people.911  There, the Romans defeated the Berbers in battle.912  
Procopius presents the events at Mamma as a decisive Roman victory, claiming that some ten 
thousand Berbers were killed, and that all the women and children were taken as slaves.913  But 
these claims appear to be exaggerated.  Despite their supposedly heavy losses at Mamma, the 
Berbers in Byzacena regrouped quickly, and soon returned to raiding the province.914  
Furthermore, there is no evidence that the Romans were able to capitalise upon their victory 
in order to improve their own territorial position.  Instead of advancing further into Byzacena, 
or securing surrounding positions, the Roman army immediately returned to Carthage, 
apparently in order to celebrate its victory.915  This suggests that, whatever Solomons intention 
in engaging the Berbers at Mamma, the campaign should not be interpreted as one of territorial 
expansion, which does not appear to have been a priority in the first few years immediately 
following the Roman conquest, despite the stated intentions of the legislation establishing the 
military administration of Africa.916 
Solomon had barely reached Carthage when he was informed that the Berbers had again 
overrun Byzacena.917  He immediately led his army back into the field, suggesting that Roman 
military activity during this period was largely reactive, rather than part of a larger African 
strategy.918  On this occasion, the Romans encountered the Berbers encamped on Mount 
911  Bella IV.11.1516.  On the four Berber leaders see pp. 1824.  The location of Mamma remains 
uncertain.  On the basis of the limited topographical information provided by Procopius (Bella 
IV.11.16 and Aed. VI.6.18), M. Solignac, Recherches sur les installations hydrauliques de Kairouan et 
des steppes tunisiennes du VIIe au IXe sicle (J.-C.), Annales de linstitut dtudes orientales (Algiers) 
10 (1952), 15469, argues that Mamma must be in the vicinity of Henchir Douimis, between Djebel 
Ousselat and Djebel el-Cherichera, to the west of Kairouan, in mod. Tunisia.  This general location is 
certainly consistent with what little topographical information is known.  Cf. Pringle, Defence, 217, 
who rightly notes the lack of archaeological evidence for the stockade which Procopius claims that 
Solomon constructed in 535. 
912  Bella IV.11.1755. 
913  Bella IV.11.556. 
914  Bella IV.12.1; cf. Bella 4.11.55. 
915  Bella IV.11.56. 
916  See p. 134. 
917  Bella IV.12.2. 
918  Ibid. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Bourgaon, the location of which remains unknown.919  For a time, each force attempted to wait 
the other out.  However, once it became clear that the Berbers had no intention, after their 
defeat at Mamma, of confronting the Romans on open ground, Solomon ordered a small force 
to ascend the less accessible eastern side of the mountain by night.920  He was thus able to attack 
the Berbers on the mountain from both above and below, and defeat them.921 
With the battle at Mount Bourgaon, the threat posed by the Berbers in Byzacena was, for a time, 
suppressed.  Esdilasas surrendered to the Romans following the battle,922 and Cusina, 
Iourphouthes and Medisinissas, together with their surviving followers, fearing attack from the 
Romano-African population which they had terrorized, fled to Numidia, where they sought 
sanctuary with Iaudas, the leader of the Berbers of Mount Aurasium.923  Procopius claim, that 
the Berbers feared retaliation from the local population, rather than from the Roman army, 
reinforces the argument that the actions of the Berbers should not be viewed as revolts against 
Roman rule. 
Antalas, who alone among the Berber leaders of Byzacena had remained peaceable during this 
period (534535), was left as the sole Berber leader in Byzacena, with his rule apparently 
endorsed by the Roman administration.924 
919  Bella IV.12.3.  On the location of Mount Bourgaon see Pringle, Defence, 24 and 537 n. 25.  The date of 
the battle of Mount Bourgaon is uncertain, but a date in the spring of 535 appears to be likely, given 
that it must occur before the Roman move into Numidia (see n. 927).  Cf. Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 
69.  Pringle, Defence, 24, dates the battle to the spring of 534, however, the relevant note (357 n. 24) 
makes it clear that this is an error, and he means the spring of 535. 
920  Bella IV.12.319. 
921  Bella IV.12.208. 
922  Bella IV.12.26. 
923  Bella IV.12.26, 29.  In fact, neither Iourphouthes nor Medisinissas are cited by name at Mount 
Bourgaon, or subsequently, but their presence may be inferred.  Procopius refers, in the context of 
the battle at Mamma, to:  the four Berber leaders  whom I mentioned a little before [...   
   ...    ...] (Bella IV.11.15), which must refer to 
Bella 4.10.6; and subsequently notes, in the context of the battle at Mount Bourgaon, that: All the 
leaders of the barbarians also fled, except for Esdilasas [       
,     ...] (Bella IV.12.26).  On Iaudas see pp. 1847 and section 6.5. 
924  Bella IV.12.30.  On Antalas see further section 6.3. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
While the Roman army had been occupied in Byzacena, Iaudas, together with some thirty 
thousand men, had been pillaging the lands of Numidia and enslaving the Romano-African 
population there.925  The strong similarities between Procopius account of the Berber raids in 
Numidia and of those in Byzacena does, however, create the impression that he had no specific 
information concerning these events, which occurred in a region largely outside Roman 
control, and thus resorted to a generic description of barbarian atrocities.926 
Solomon, having briefly returned to Carthage following the defeat of the Berbers at Mount 
Bourgaon, marched into Numidia, probably late in the summer of 535, accompanied by Berber 
allies.927  The status of these allies is unclear.  They may have represented tribes which had 
sworn allegiance to Belisarius in 533, or, subsequently, to Solomon.928  However, the possibility 
that they were mercenaries should not be dismissed.  Regardless, the Roman administrations 
use of local military resources in its campaigns against the Berbers is notable. 
The expedition against Mount Aurasium was far from successful.929  Iaudas, being better 
acquainted with the geography of the region over which he ruled than Solomon, decided to 
array his troops on the mountain itself, rather than on the plain below.930  The Roman army was 
thus obliged to ascend Mount Aurasium, the difficult terrain of which Procopius describes in 
the De Aedificiis.931  Solomon attempted to facilitate this course of action by offering bribes to 
925  Bella IV.13.1. 
926  Contrast Bella IV.13.1:  [Iaudas]     ,     
; and Bella IV.10.5:             
    ... 
927  Bella IV.13.1820; Aed. VI.7.23.  As is the case for all the military campaigns of the period 534 to 535, 
the date of Solomons attack on Mount Aurasium is uncertain.  However, it is clear from Procopius 
account that it was called to a halt with the onset of winter 535 (Bella IV.13.39), and that the campaign 
in Numidia had dragged on for some time.  Cf. Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 71; Stein, Histoire, 321; 
Pringle, Defence, 24. 
928  Bella III.25.34. 
929  On the location of Mount Aurasium see n. 752. 
930  Bella IV.13.21. 
931  Aed. VI.7.17.  Procopius description of the geography of Mount Aurasium has sometimes been 
criticised for being excessively literary, particularly given the somewhat sinister manner in which it 
presents the mountain itself (see Janon, LAurs au VIe sicle, 348). 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
his Berber allies in order that they might act as guides.932  But, having spent ten days on the 
mountain without encountering Iaudas men, the Romans, running low on supplies, began to 
fear that they had been betrayed by their Berber allies, and again descended to the plain 
below.933  With winter (535) setting in, Solomon left behind a small force to guard the mountain, 
and returned to Carthage.934 
Procopius, clearly anxious not to present the campaign as a complete failure, claims that 
Solomon returned to Carthage in order that he might better prepare to march against Mount 
Aurasium in the spring, with greater numbers and without Berber allies.935  However, it cannot 
be denied that the years 534 to 535 appear to have seen no significant territorial gain by the 
Romans in Africa, and only minimal success in discouraging Berber raids on the Romano-
African population, if that were indeed the administrations intention.  Furthermore, the 
campaign against Mount Aurasium intended for 536 never occurred. 
5.3 The Roman mutiny (536 to 538) 
At Easter 536,936 the Roman army at Carthage mutinied, seriously disrupting Solomons plans 
for further military campaigns in the Aurs massif.937  The mutiny, which would continue for 
nearly three years, prevented the Romans from undertaking any campaigns of territorial 
expansion during this period, as well as disrupting any plans for infrastructure development in 
the African provinces.938  Between 536 and 539, the African provinces were effectively in a state 
of civil war, with imperial control at times extending no further than the city of Carthage 
itself.939 
932  Bella IV.13.30. 
933  Bella IV.13.318. 
934  Bella IV.13.39. 
935  Bella IV.13.40. 
936  Bella IV.14.67. 
937  Bella IV.14.13; with n. 935. 
938  Cf. section 3.5. 
939  Jordanes, writing in Constantinople in 550/1 (Rom. 363) indeed describes the conflict in Africa in the 
second half of the 530s as a civil war [civilia bella] (Rom. 369). 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
The ramifications of the mutiny lasted far longer.  Even after it was put down, the mutiny 
resulted in an effective depletion of the African army, as troops deemed to be untrustworthy 
were purged from the army, without alternative forces being available to replace them.940  The 
mutiny is also likely to have contributed to the ongoing ill-will which appears to have existed 
between the Roman army in Africa and its commanders, and which intermittently manifested 
itself in smaller scale mutinies.941  Furthermore, some of the Berber tribes appear to have been 
aware of factional conflict within the Roman army in Africa and, while the sources are largely 
silent concerning the actions of the Berbers between 536 and 539, the Berbers almost certainly 
used this period to consolidate their own positions.942  The overall Roman position in Africa was 
undoubtedly far weaker in 539 than it had been in early 536.  The factors which led to ongoing 
mutiny in Africa, and the steps taken by the Roman administration to address these factors, is 
thus essential to the understanding of the development of Roman policy in Africa. 
In his account of the events which occurred, Procopius explicitly identifies two major causes of 
resentment within the Roman army in 536  one pecuniary and the other religious - which 
initially contributed to the outbreak of mutiny. 
First, after the Vandals had been defeated, many Roman soldiers had taken Vandal wives.943  
They then attempted to secure as their own those lands which their wives had previously 
owned.944  However, Solomon, while agreeing that slaves and objects of value should be 
distributed among the soldiers, as was customary, maintained that all lands had been claimed 
940  Bella IV.19.3.  Solomons purge of the African army, on his return to Carthage in mid-to late-539, must 
have occurred mere months before the resumption of hostilities with Sasanian Persia in the spring 
of 540.  See Bella 2.5.1; with G. Greatrex & S. N. C. Lieu, The Roman Eastern Frontier and the Persian 
Wars: Part II AD 363-630 (London, 2002). 269 n. 6.  It is therefore highly unlikely that the Roman 
imperial government should have committed additional military resources to Africa in 540 (see pp. 
1435). 
941  See pp. 2089, 2301. 
942  See p. 207. 
943  Bella IV.14.8. 
944  Bella IV.14.9.  Procopius in fact specifies that it was the Vandal women themselves who urged their 
husbands to insist on their right to claim their wives property. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
in the name of the emperor, and belonged to the imperial estates.945  The soldiers thus felt that 
they were being deprived of their due. 
Regardless of his personal feelings, Solomon would have had little say in the matter.  Within a 
short time of the conquest, Justinian had promulgated legislation granting anyone who could 
produce legal proof that he, or his family, had held property in Africa, and had been 
dispossessed of it during the period of Vandal rule, a period of five years in which to reclaim 
it.946  Consequently, for the five year period dictated by the legislation, the emperor merely held 
the lands conquered in Africa in trust (albeit, while undoubtedly extracting taxation revenues 
from them), unless or until they should be claimed by their former occupants.947  In these 
circumstances, lands could not be granted to the soldiers who had participated in the campaign 
until 1 January 539 at the earliest.948 
Second, accurately or not, the African campaign had been presented to the population of the 
Eastern Roman Empire as being in defence of the Nicene Christian population of Africa.949  
Consistent with this image, and apparently under pressure from both the African bishops, who 
had assembled for a general council in early 535,950 and the Pope, Justinian followed the 
proclamation of the conquest with legislation intended to enforce the practice of Nicene 
945  Bella IV.14.10.  There may also be an allusion to this grievance in the speech which Procopius 
attributes to the leader of the mutiny, Stotzas, in which he exhorts the soldiers to remember that:  
you have been deprived of the spoils of the enemy, which the laws of war have set as prizes for the 
dangers in battle [      ,         
  ...] (Bella IV.15.55).  Cf. Anec. XVIII.10. 
946  The original legislation of this Pragmatic Sanction does not survive, but it is alluded to by Novella 36, 
promulgated on 1 January 535, which adds the additional stipulation that the property had to have 
been held by an ancestor no more than three generations distant from the claimant.  See C. Saumagne, 
tude sur la proprit ecclsiastique  Carthage daprs les novelles 36 et 37 de Justinien, BZ 22 
(1913), 812.  See also pp. 99102. 
947  Bella IV.8.25 makes it clear that, immediately following the Roman conquest, a census of lands in 
Africa was undertaken, in order to assess the taxes which should be drawn from them.  Cf. Anec. 
XVIII.10. 
948  Thus, Stein, Histoire, II, 3212. 
949  See pp. 8990. 
950  On the date of the council see P. Champetier, Les conciles africaines durant la priode byzantine, 
Revue Africaine 95 (1951), 104. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Christianity in the region.951  Like the legislation relating to African property, the original 
legislation relating to the church in Africa is no longer extant,952 but reference is made to it in 
Novella 37, promulgated on 1 August 535, which applies primarily to church property.953  
Novella 37 includes the stipulation, which may or not have been present in the original 
legislation, that: 
 We do not permit Jews or pagans or Donatists or Arian or any other heretics 
either to have dens or to conduct certain ecclesiastical practices like rites, 
since it is irrational to permit sacred rites to be carried out by impious men.954 
However, at least a thousand soldiers of Arian faith were serving with the Roman army in Africa 
 for the most part, among the Germanic foederati.955  As a result of Justinians legislation, these 
soldiers and their dependents were unable to receive any form of sacrament.956  According to 
Procopius, the tension caused by this issue was pushed to crisis point when the Arian soldiers, 
undoubtedly encouraged by the remaining Arian priests at Carthage,957 found themselves 
unable to baptise their children or celebrate the customary rites at Easter.958 
These two factors undoubtedly contributed to the outbreak of mutiny in 536.  However, a third 
factor, not explicitly noted by Procopius in the Bella, but suggested by the Anecdota, should 
also be considered  the fact that the soldiers pay was most likely in arrears.959  In the Bella, 
Procopius alludes to this issue in the context of a speech attributed to the leader of the mutiny, 
951  J. Nov. 37.1. 
952  See n. 946. 
953  J. Nov. 37.1 and 4; with Saumagne, tude sur la proprit ecclsiastique, 812. 
954  J. Nov. 37.8: [Neque enim Iudaeos neque paganos neque Donatistas neque Arianos neque alios 
quoscumque haereticos vel speluncas habere vel quaedam quasi ritu ecclesiastico facere patimur, 
cum hominibus impiis sacra peragenda permittere satis absurdum est.]  Similarly, J. Nov. 37.5. 
955  Bella IV.14.12. 
956  Bella IV.14.14.  Mention of this is also made in the Anecdota, specifically in reference to the Arians 
(XVIII.10). 
957  Bella IV.14.13. 
958  Bella IV.14.15. 
959  Anec. XVIII.11.  Cf. Stein, Histoire, II, 321; Jones, LRE, 1279 n. 164. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Stotzas, prior to the battle near Gadiaufala in the summer of 536.960  In this speech, Stotzas 
exhorts the forces of the Roman commanders: 
  do you not remember that you have been deprived of the pay long since 
owed to you?961 
The contents of Procopius speeches should undoubtedly be treated with caution, since they are 
largely literary constructs, and Procopius himself was definitely not present.962  Nevertheless, it 
is likely that the armys pay was indeed in arrears.  A lack of pay was a frequent complaint of the 
Roman army of Justinians reign,963 and the actions of both Belisarius and Germanus, on their 
arrivals at Carthage in 536  the distribution of outstanding pay - confirm that this was an issue 
in Africa.964 
These causes of resentment were not necessarily the product of mismanagement on the part of 
the Roman administration at Carthage, or of the Praetorian Prefect.  While Solomon was 
undoubtedly responsible for enforcing imperial decrees regarding the reallocation of property 
and religious orthodoxy, the legislation itself originated at Constantinople, and is likely to have 
been influenced by those groups at Constantinople which had originally advocated Roman 
intervention in Africa.965  Even the issue of soldiers pay may not have been within the power of 
the provincial administration.  While soldiers pay was generally drawn from the revenues of 
the provinces in the soldiers were stationed, the limited Roman holdings in Africa in 536 are 
unlikely to have provided sufficient taxation revenues to support a large number of troops.966  
The payment of troops was, therefore, contingent on the receipt of additional funds from 
960  On the battle see pp. 2045. 
961  Bella IV.15.55: [          ...;]  
Similarly, Bella IV.18.9. 
962  Procopius had by this point departed from Africa (Bella IV.14.39). 
963  This is one of the general criticisms of Justinians reign made by Procopius in the Anecdota (XVIII.11): 
He [Justinian] was also tardy in respect of the pay for his military forces [   
  ...].  Cf. Anec. XXIV, in which Procopius make a number of compaints 
regarding soldiers conditions of service during Justinians reign. 
964  Thus, Jones, LRE, 1279 n. 164.  Bella IV.15.11, 16.5. 
965  On groups with interests in the Roman invasion of Africa see pp. 97107. 
966  Jones, LRE, 677.  The practice of paying soldiers from the revenues of the province in which they were 
stationed is noted in J. Edict 13.13 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Constantinople, which were unlikely to be forthcoming when imperial resources were 
otherwise stretched. 
The culmination of these grievances was a plot to murder Solomon on Good Friday (23 March) 
536.967  The plot ultimately failed.  Despite two attempts (on 23 and 24 March), none among the 
mutineers had the conviction to carry out their plan, and some fled the city, fearing that their 
role in the conspiracy was known.968  Nevertheless, disaffection within the Roman army at 
Carthage escalated rapidly and, on 28 March,969 soldiers marched on the prefects palace, killing 
all those in their way and plundering where they could.970  As a result of these events, Solomon 
was forced to flee Africa, accompanied by Procopius, and take refuge with Belisarius in 
Syracuse, entrusting the administration of Carthage to his subordinate, Theodore the 
Cappadocian.971 
The mutineers, having plundered Carthage, gathered on the Plain of Boulla (Bulla Regia).972  
There, they chose Stotzas, who had previously been one of the guards of Martinus, one of the 
967  Bella IV.14.22; with V. Grumel, Trait dtudes byzantines: La chronologie (Paris, 1958), 310. 
968  Bella IV.14.258. 
969  Procopius describes the events as occuring on the fifth day [ ...  ] after Easter (Bella 
IV.14.31). 
970  Bella IV.14.316. 
971  Bella IV.14.3742.  Nothing is known of Theodore the Cappadocians position in the administration 
prior to the mutiny, although he had previously been sent by Solomon to try to win the soldiers 
support (Bella IV.14.33-4).  He was clearly trusted by Solomon, despite the fact he was, at one point, 
acclaimed as general by the mutineers, and his actions suggest that he must have been one of the 
commanders.  See PLRE IIIB, 1247. 
972  Bella IV.15.1.  Cf. Bella IV.14.28.  The location of the site of the Plain of Boulla remains contested.  
According to Procopius (Bella III.25.1), the Plain of Boulla was  distant from Carthage a journey of 
four days for an unencumbered traveller, not far from the boundaries of Numidia [   
     ,      ...]  
Traditionally, it has been identified with Bulla Regia (a site c. 5 km north of mod. Jendouba, Tunisia), 
largely on the grounds of etymological similarity.  See Tissot, Gographie compare, I, 62; Diehl, 
LAfrique byzantine, 24; Courtois, Les Vandales, 190; Desanges, La dernire retraite de Gelimer, 429
30; C.-A. Julien, Histoire de lAfrique du Nord, ed. C. Courtois, 2nd edn. (Paris, 1951), 259; A. Beschaouch 
et al., Les ruines de Bulla Regia (Rome, 1977), 9, 11.  J. F. Hopkins, The Medieval toponymy of Tunisia.  
Some identifications, CT 536 (1966), 345, also suggests that an identification with the plain south 
of Bulla Regia is consistent with the location of the Fahs Boll (Plain of Boll), noted by the 11th century 
geographer, al-Bakri (Description de lAfrique septentrionale, trans. de Slane, 1145).  Contra A. 
Mcharek, De saint Augustin  al-Bakri.  Sur la localisation de lager Bullensis dans lAfrica latino-
chrtienne et de Fahs Boll en Ifriqiya arabo-Musulmane, CRAI 143 (1999), 11542, who argues that 
al-Bakris Fahs Boll, and thus Procopius Plain of Boulla, should be identified with the plain of 
Boughanem, some 150 km south of Bulla Regia.  This view is tentatively accepted by Modran, Les 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
nine commanders of the cavalry who had accompanied Belisarius to Africa in 533, and who had 
been present in Africa with Martinus since 533, as their leader.973 
The mutiny initially appears to have been one of genuinely dissatisfied rank and file soldiers, 
rather than a bid for power by an ambitious commander, since the actions of the mutiny, in its 
initial plan to murder Solomon, appear to have lacked direction and leadership.974  
Subsequently, however, strong leaders began to emerge from within the officer class of the 
African army, and the selection of Stotzas as leader appears to have consolidated the mutineers 
into a genuine threat to Roman administration in Africa.975  However, their longer term 
objectives remain unclear.  Procopius claims that the mutineers intended to drive all the 
military commanders loyal to the emperor out of Africa.976  This may, of course, be his personal 
interpretation of events.  But, Procopius, Agathias, the continuator of Marcellinus Comes and 
Jordanes all describe Stotzas as a tyrant [/tyrannus], and Victor of Tunnuna claims 
that in Africa, Stotzas assumed the kingdom with tyranny.977  On the basis of these references 
Stotzas has sometimes been argued to have assumed the imperial title, which would imply the 
establishment of an African polity independent of the Eastern Roman Empire.978 
Maures, 432 n. 73.  However, not only would this place the Plain of Boulla c. 250 km from Carthage, at 
the very limit of the distance which Procopius suggests that a man could travel in a day (between 32 
and 62 km) (see Pringle, Defence, 352 n. 28), it also places it a considerable distance from the coast.  
Given that Gelimer waited at the Plain of Boulla to receive reinforcements from Sardinia in 533, Bulla 
Regia, being considerably closer to  the point of Libya which marks the boundary between the 
Numidians and the Mauritanians [     ,     
 ], where Procopius claims that the Vandal reinforcements landed, before 
travelling to the Plain of Boulla, on foot (Bella III.25.21-2), appears to be a more likely identification 
for the Plain of Boulla than the plain of Boughanem.  Although, the suggestion of Hopkins, The 
Medieval toponymy of Tunisia, 35, that there were two Fahs Boll cannot be discounted. 
973  Bella III.11.30 and IV.15.1.  Stotzas is attested under a number of spellings.  He is  in Procopius 
and Agathias, Stotzas in Jordanes, Stutias in Corippus, Stotias in the continuation of Marcellinus 
Comes, and Stuzas in Victor of Tunnuna.  See PLRE IIIB, 1199.  One Martinus see PLRE IIIB, 83948. 
974  Thus, W. Kaegi, Byzantine Military Unrest, 471843: An Interpretation (Amsterdam, 1981), 49. 
975  Bella III.11.30 and IV.15.1. 
976  Bella IV.15.1. 
977  Bella IV.15.1; Agathias, Hist. pref. 25; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 537.3; Jordanes, Rom. 369; Victor of 
Tunnuna, 129: [Stuzas apud Affricam regnum  cum tirannide assumit.]  The references to Stotzas in 
Agathias and Victor of Tunnuna do, admittedly, occur  propos of his actions in 541, rather than in 
the 530s. 
978  PLRE IIIB, 1200. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Stotzas proceeded to gather a force of 8 000 Roman soldiers, as well as some thousand 
Vandals.979  The scale of the mutiny is perhaps surprising, and suggests massive disaffection 
within the army in Africa.  If Procopius troop numbers for the original campaign of conquest 
are even close to accurate, the mutiny must have enjoyed substantial support.980  Stotzas forces 
would have amounted to more than half of the total military resources in Africa at the time.981  
Stotzas then marched on Carthage.982  When his terms for the surrender of the city were 
rejected by Theodore the Cappadocian, he besieged it.983 
Meanwhile, Belisarius, having been apprised of the situation by Solomon, sailed from Syracuse 
with a hundred of his own men and, landing near Carthage, encamped near the city.984  The 
mutineers, who had expected Carthage to capitulate imminently, fled once they learnt of 
Belisarius presence,985 and he, having offered bribes in order to secure the loyalty of those 
Roman soldiers remaining at Carthage  according to Procopius, only some 2 000 men  set out 
in pursuit.986  Belisarius encountered the mutineers in the vicinity of the town of Membressa 
(mod. Medjez el-Bab, Tunisia).987  Stotzas forces, although vastly superior in number, appear to 
have been disadvantaged by a poorly chosen defensive position and a lack of discipline.988  Once 
Belisarius committed his forces to the attack, the mutineers fled to Numidia.989  But, having only 
a small number of men at his disposal, Belisarius chose not to pursue them.990 
979  Bella IV.14.189, 15.23.  Stein, Histoire, II, 323, suggests that the Vandals who had escaped to Mount 
Aurasium had encouraged the Roman army to mutiny, but it seems to be more likely that they simply 
took advantage of the mutiny after the fact. 
980  The initial military commitment to Africa must have amounted to c. 16 000 men.  See p. 142. 
981  Bella IV.15.2.  On the number of troops in Africa see section 3.4. 
982  Bella IV.15.2. 
983  Bella IV.15.58. 
984  Bella IV.15.9; Marcell. Com. Addit. s.a. 535; Jordanes, Rom. 369.  The continuator of Marcellinus Comes 
places the event a year too early.  See Croke, The Chronicle of Marcellinus, 1278.   
985  Bella IV.15.10. 
986  Bella IV.15.11. 
987  Bella IV.15.12. 
988  Bella IV.15.404. 
989  Bella IV.15.44; Ioh. 3.31013. 
990  Bella IV.15.46. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
However, Belisarius victory at Membressa only temporarily checked the threat posed by 
Stotzas mutiny.  On his return to Carthage, Belisarius learned that a mutiny had also broken 
out in the army in Sicily.991  He was therefore forced to leave Carthage under the command of 
Theodore the Cappadocian and Ildiger, and depart for Sicily with all speed, leaving the situation 
in Africa unresolved.992 
In Numidia, the Roman commanders in Africa who remained loyal to the Roman imperial 
government gathered their forces, under the overall command of Marcellus, the dux of 
Numidia.993  Upon hearing that Stotzas was at Gazophylos (more commonly Gadiaufala, mod. 
Ksar Sbahi, Algeria), Marcellus led his forces against the mutineers.994  However, when the two 
armies approached one another, Stotzas addressed the troops under Marcellus command, 
urging them to remember the misfortunes which they had suffered and, in particular, that they 
had not been paid, and encouraged them to switch sides.995 
When the Roman commanders saw that their troops were receptive to Stotzas words, they 
hastily withdrew, and took refuge in a sanctuary at Gadiaufala.996  Stotzas combined the two 
military forces into a single army, and then, despite offering pledges for the safety of the Roman 
commanders, killed them.997  Procopius identifies the commanders of the foederati as Marcellus 
and Cyril, of the cavalry as Barbatus, and of the infantry as Terentius and Sarapis;998 and 
991  Bella IV.15.48. 
992  Bella IV.15.49.  Jordanes (Rom. 370) also mentions Belisarius defeat of the mutineers and Solomons 
return to the position of Praetorian Prefect.  However, he neglects to mention that Belisarius was 
forced to return to Sicily as the result of a mutiny there, instead merely noting that Belisarius had to 
return to Sicily because he was stationed there.  On Theodore the Cappadocian see n. 971.  Ildiger had 
been sent to Africa, together with Theodore the Cappadocian, in 534 (Bella IV.8.24).  He was, 
moreover, the son-in-law of Belisarius wife, Antonina.  See PLRE IIIA, 6156. 
993  Bella IV.15.51.  At the point of Solomons departure from Africa, he had directed Martinus to travel to 
Numidia to rally support (Bella IV.14.40).  On Marcellus see PLRE IIIB, 13556. 
994  Bella IV.15.52.  The events at Gadiaufala have sometimes been dated to the summer of 535, on the 
basis that they must occur before Germanus arrival in Africa.  See Stein, Histoire, 324.  This is a 
reasonable assumption, if the date of Germanus arrival (before the end of 536) is correct.  However, 
this date is itself not without problems (see n. 1000). 
995  Bella IV.15.547. 
996  Bella IV.15.589. 
997  Bella IV.15.59; Jordanes, Rom. 369. 
998  Bella IV.15.50. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Jordanes provides the additional note that Pharas, who had been commander of the Herul allied 
troops during the campaign of conquest, was also killed.999  The loss of five experienced 
commanders, all of whom had been in Africa since 533, was undoubtedly a serious blow to the 
Roman military administration in Africa. 
When news of the disaster at Gadiaufala reached the emperor at Constantinople, he sent his 
nephew, Germanus, to Carthage.1000  Justinians selection of a member of his own family as 
commander in Africa is testament to the seriousness of the situation.  Germanus was 
accompanied by Symmachus, who was to be Praetorian Prefect of Africa, as well as being 
responsible for the maintenance of the army; and Domnicus, who was to be commander of the 
infantry, under Germanus overall command.1001  Procopius describes both Symmachus and 
Domnicus as being men of the senate [  ], suggesting that they are likely to 
have had some administrative experience, although neither man is previously attested in a 
military capacity.1002  Given that the three men were sent to Africa together, as a response to 
the mutiny, and were subsequently recalled to Constantinople together in 539,1003 these men, 
as a unit, may have been envisaged as an interim administration in Africa, which had been 
selected, as much as for any other reason, for its lack of connections with the previous 
administration. 
999  Jordanes, Rom. 369.  On Pharas see PLRE IIIB, 101516.  It is interesting that he should have remained 
loyal to the Roman administration, given that Procopius implies that the Heruls, who were Arians, 
were among the initial mutineers (Bella IV.14.12). 
1000  Bella IV.16.1; Marcell. Com. Addit. s.a. 536.  On Germanus see PLRE II, 5056.  The continuator of 
Marcellinus Comes places Germanus arrival in Africa in the 14th indiction, which would place it 
between 1 September 535 and 31 August 536 (see Grumel, La Chronologie, 245).  On the basis of this, 
it has been argued that Germanus must have arrived in Africa before the end of 536.  See Diehl, 
LAfrique byzantine, 83 n. 7; Stein, Histoire, 324 n. 2; and Pringle, Defence, 26.  However, given that 
the continuator is not infrequently inaccurate in his dating of events in Africa (cf. n. 984), the event 
could as easily be a year later.  Confidence in the entry is not instilled by the fact that two other 
entries for this year (3 and 8) appear to be a year too early (see Croke, The Chronicle of Marcellinus, 
1278).  Although, entries 3 and 8 both refer to events in Italy, and it is plausible that the continuator 
had an alternative source for events in Africa. 
1001  Bella IV.16.2. 
1002  Ibid. 
1003  See n. 1029. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Germanus, upon arriving at Carthage, discovered that some two-thirds of the Roman army in 
Africa had joined Stotzas, with the remaining third divided between Carthage and various other 
Roman positions.1004  Presumably as a result of this numerical disadvantage,1005 Germanus did 
not immediately seek to engage Stotzas and his followers in battle, instead trying to encourage 
desertions from Stotzas forces by offering a general amnesty to those who returned, as well as 
all pay in arrears, including for the period during which the soldiers had been under Stotzas 
command.1006 
Stotzas, becoming alarmed at his declining forces, was anxious to hasten a military 
confrontation while he still held some numerical advantage, and thus marched again on 
Carthage.1007  He encamped 35 stades (c. 7.4 km) from the city, on the coast,1008 and Germanus 
marched his forces out to meet him.1009  The two armies remained in position opposite one 
another for some time.1010  However, when the mutineers saw that none among Germanus 
forces was deserting, as Stotzas had assured his men they would,1011 they once again withdrew 
to Numidia, where their women and wealth had remained.1012 
Germanus and his forces followed, overtaking the mutineers at Scalae Veteres.1013  The site of 
Scalae Veteres is not entirely certain, but has tentatively been identified with modern Faid es-
Siouda, c. 30 km south of Tbessa, in Algeria.1014  Here, for the first time, the Berber tribes 
appeared in the context of the mutiny.  According to Procopius, the mutineers were followed 
by many thousands of Berbers [  ].1015  This figure is almost 
1004  Bella IV.16.3. 
1005  Cf. Bella IV.16.7. 
1006  Bella IV.16.46. 
1007  Bella IV.16.89. 
1008  Bella IV.16.10. 
1009  Bella IV.16.10. 
1010  Bella IV.17.1. 
1011  Bella IV.16.9 and IV 17.1 
1012  Bella IV.17.1. 
1013  Bella IV.17.23.  Scalae Veteres is presumably identical to Corippus Cellas Vatari (Ioh. III.318). 
1014  Pringle, Defence, 360 n. 58. 
1015  Bella IV.17.8. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
certainly an exaggeration on Procopius part, but more than one tribal group does appear to 
have been represented.  Procopius notes that they were led by many leaders, but names only 
two  Iaudas and Ortaas - a slightly odd pairing, given that, while both are previously attested 
as leaders in Numidia, his previous reference to the two men suggests that they were hostile to 
one another.1016  Procopius stresses that the Berber tribes had not allied themselves to the 
mutineers, and had hung back because some had previously pledged themselves to Germanus, 
and were waiting to see how the battle would play out before committing themselves to either 
side.1017 
The battle which occurred at Scalae Veteres was one of complete disorder.  Procopius notes 
that, given that the two armies spoke the same language and used the same equipment, it 
became almost impossible for the two sides to distinguish friend from foe.1018  In the confusion 
which resulted, Stotzas, abandoned by all but a few of his Vandal followers, fled to Mauritania, 
where he married the daughter of an unnamed local ruler.1019  But his role in events in Africa 
was by no means over.  In 544, having clearly consolidated his position among the Berbers, he 
emerged from Mauritania and allied himself with Antalas, the leader of the Berbers in 
Byzacena.1020 
Either during or immediately following Stotzas mutiny, Maximinus, one of the guards of 
Theodore the Cappadocian,1021 with the support of very many soldiers [  
1016  Bella IV.17.8; with pp. 1867. 
1017  Bella IV.17.912. 
1018  Bella IV.17.21. 
1019  Bella IV.17.35; VII.39.12; Ioh. III.314-9; Marcell. Com. Addit. s.a. 537.  The only date for these events is 
again provided by the continuator of Marcellinus Comes, who places it in the 15th indication (1 
September 536 to 1 August 537; see Grumel, La Chronologie, 245), and its reliablility is open to 
question (see nn. 984 and 1000).  Nevertheless, it has generally been accepted that these events must 
have occurred in the course of 537.  See Stein, Histoire, 326; and Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 84, who 
offers a terminus post quem of the spring of 537.  Diehls rationale for narrowing the range of dates 
is not made clear, but presumably derives from the disinclination of the Roman army in Africa to 
campaign in winter (cf. Bella IV.13.3940).  The only clear terminus ante quem for Germanus actions 
in Africa is his recall, in 539 (see n. 1029). 
1020  See p. 220. 
1021  On Theodore see PLRE IIIB, 12478. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
], attempted to revolt against the Roman administration at Carthage and establish 
himself as ruler.1022  However, in the process of recruiting additional supporters to his cause, 
Maximinus confided his plans to Asclepiades, a friend of Theodore the Cappadocian, who 
conveyed this information to Theodore, who in turn informed Germanus.1023  Germanus, being 
at that time occupied with other concerns, initially attempted to contain the threat by 
appointing Maximinus as one of his personal bodyguards  a position which required him to 
swear allegiance to both Germanus and the Roman emperor.1024  However, when Maximinus 
and his followers attempted to stage a coup at Carthage, he was seized and executed.1025  
Procopius draws no explicit connection between Maximinus revolt and Stotzas mutiny.  
Nevertheless, it is likely that Maximinus was motivated by resentments about soldiers 
conditions of service, as Procopius claims that the soldiers following Maximinus complained 
that they were owed pay for a long period, and he may well have been inspired by Stotzas 
successes.1026 
Maximinus revolt was, ultimately, contained relatively easily, although Procopius notes that 
this might not have been the case had the rebels been permitted to assemble.1027  However, this 
was, at least in part, facilitated by the fact that the revolt occurred at Carthage, where 
Germanus was firmly established and surrounded by his own supporters; and even small scale 
insubordination, when it occurred in the army in the field, could pose a major threat to the 
African administration.1028 
1022  Bella IV.18.12.  Procopius places Maximinus revolt immediately following the battle of Scalae 
Veteres in his narrative.  However, the only internal evidence for the respective chronology of the 
events is that Maximinus revolt occurred during Germanus time in Africa  that is, between 537 and 
539 (see nn. 1000 and 1029).  Beyond his role as Theodore the Cappadocians guard and his revolt, 
nothing further is known about Maximinus.  See PLRE IIIB, 865. 
1023  Bella IV.18.34.  Nothing further is known about Asclepiades.  See PLRE IIIA, 134. 
1024  Bella IV.18.57.  The fact that Procopius claims that Germanus did not wish to act immediately might 
perhaps suggest that the incident occurred during Stotzass revolt, but this is inconclusive. 
1025  Bella IV.18.818. 
1026  Bella IV.18.9. 
1027  Bella IV.18.12. 
1028  For example, the mutiny in the Roman army in 546.  See pp. 2301. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
5.4 The Aurs campaign (539 to 540) 
By 539, the immediate problem of mutiny within the African army must have been regarded as 
resolved.  Germanus, Domnicus and Symmachus were recalled to Constantinople, and Solomon 
was again sent to Africa to resume both the position of Praetorian Prefect of Africa and that of 
magister militum per Africam.1029  The precise date of Solomons return to Africa is uncertain.  
Procopius notes only that it was  in the 13th year of his [Justinians] reign, which would place 
it between 1 April 539 and 31 March 540.  The continuator of Marcellinus Comes, on the other 
hand, places the event in the 2nd indication of Justinians reign (1 September 538 to 31 August 
539).1030  Given the rough correlation of the two chronologies, a date in mid-539 seems to be 
probable.  This would be consistent with three (identical) building inscriptions from 
Thamugadi, which are explicitly dated to the 13th year of Justinians reign, and name Solomon 
as magister militum and Praetorian Prefect, which must have been erected following Solomons 
subsequent campaign in the Aurs massif.1031 
Having firmly re-established his own administration,1032 Solomon again turned to the 
subjugation of the Berber tribes of the Aurs massif, which had originally been planned for 
536.1033  No source provides an explicit date for the campaign, resulting in its variously being 
dated to 539 and 540.1034  However, given the date of Solomons return to Africa, and his need to 
1029  Bella IV.19.1; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 539.5.  It is not explicitly stated that Solomon was again to 
combine civil and military responsibilities, but, while Solomon clearly exercised military 
responsibility, there is no suggestion that he was accompanied to Africa by anyone who was to replace 
Symmachus as Praetorian Prefect.  Cf. PLRE IIIB, 1172. 
1030  Bella IV.19.1: [      ]  Justinian was appointed co-
emperor to his uncle Justin I on 1 April 527.  On the date of Justinians accession see PLRE II, 6478.  
Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 539.5. 
1031  Durliat, Les ddicaces, nos. 1921.  Pringle, Defence, 361 n. 1.  These inscriptions are discussed further 
on pp. 1478, 2145. 
1032  See Bella IV.19.3. 
1033  Bella IV.13.40. 
1034  Modran, Les Maures, 593, favours 539; while Pringle, Defence, 27, is still more specific, dating the 
campaign to the summer of 539.  Contra PLRE IIIB, 1174, which favours a date in 540. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
secure his own position there, after the manner of his departure, a date in the spring of 540 
seems to be more likely. 
The objectives of the campaign are, by this point in time, unclear.  The Roman campaign against 
the Berbers of Mount Aurasium in 535 is presented as being a counter to Berber raids against 
the Romano-African population.1035  However, it would have been illogical to resume such 
action four years later, particularly in view of the fact that there is no evidence for ongoing 
Berber hostilities in the interim.  Instead, the 540 campaign in the Aurs massif was perhaps 
the first Roman action against the Berbers which can be interpreted as a deliberate attempt to 
expand the Roman frontiers in Africa,1036 in accordance with the terms of the legislation 
establishing military administration in Africa.1037  Furthermore, Solomon may have been 
anxious to achieve victory in his interrupted campaign against Mount Aurasium in order to 
regain prestige, and to restore confidence, among both the African army and the Roman 
imperial government at Constantinople, in his leadership.  A general forced to flee from his 
own army, can only have suffered a loss of status, and Solomons re-appointment represented 
a considerable risk on the part of the Roman imperial government. 
Solomon initially sent an advance force, which engaged the Berbers under the command of 
Iaudas near the city of Bagai,1038 which has reasonably been identified, on etymological grounds, 
with the modern city of Baghai in Algeria.1039  The Romans were defeated, and were forced to 
retreat into their camp, where they remained besieged.1040  The Berbers then took advantage of 
the geography of the site.  Bagai was located on a plain, which was watered by the tributaries 
of the Abigas River, flowing down from Mount Aurasium.1041  The Berbers cut off the streams, 
1035  See pp. 1901. 
1036  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 87, suggests that territorial expansion in Africa became a priority as the 
conquest of Italy drew to a close. 
1037  See nn. 6234. 
1038  Bella IV.19.57.  On Iaudas see section 6.5. 
1039  Morizot, Recherches sur les campagnes de Solomon, 85. 
1040  Bella IV.19.8. 
1041  Bella IV.19.113; with Morizot, Recherches sur les campagnes de Solomon, 85. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
channeling the entire flow of water from the mountains into the Roman camp, and creating a 
marsh around it.1042  When he heard what had occurred, Solomon, who had encamped some 
distance away with the main Roman force, moved towards Bagai.1043  The Berbers, meanwhile, 
withdrew towards the foot of Mount Aurasium, to a place called Babosis.1044  The main Roman 
force followed, defeating the Berbers at Babosis.1045 
Many of the Berbers who escaped from Babosis fled to Mauritania, and to the south of Mount 
Aurasium,1046 both of which regions must be assumed to be outside Roman control at this time.  
However, Iaudas, together with some twenty thousand men, remained on Mount Aurasium, in 
the hope that the Romans would abandon their pursuit on account of the difficult terrain.1047  
Iaudas initially withdrew to the fortress of Zerboule, on the side of the mountain1048 but, since 
the fortress lacked provisions for so many men, he left behind a garrison, and ascended to the 
summit of Mount Aurasium, to a place called Toumar.1049 
Meanwhile, Solomon, assuming the entire Berber force to be confined within Zerboule, and 
being unwilling to wait them out in a siege, led his army onto the plain surrounding Thamugadi 
1042  Bella IV.19.1415. 
1043  Bella IV.19.9, 15. 
1044  Bella IV.19.16.  The site of Babosis remains debated.  Morizot, Recherches sur les campagnes de 
Solomon, 924, identifies Babosis with mod. Babar, in Algeria.  He bases his argument on the fact that 
6th century archaeological remains have been found at Babar, and on his argument that Toumar 
should be identified with mod. Taberdga, in Algeria (see n. 1049).  Had Solomon marched south from 
Bagai to Toumar, as Procopius suggests (Bella IV.19.19), he would probably have passed through 
Babar.  See Map VIII.  Cf. Desanges, Un tmoignage peu connu, 58, has argued that Babosis should be 
identified with the fort, Dabousis, noted by Procopius in the De Aedificiis (VI.7.8).  But, as he himself 
notes, the location of Dabousis is equally unknown.  Contra Pringle, Defence, 307; and P. Trousset, Les 
limites sud de la roccupation byzantine, AnTard 10 (2002), 146, who identify Dabousis with 
Thabudeos, on the basis of homonymity.   
1045  Bella IV.19.178. 
1046  Bella IV.19.19. 
1047  Bella IV.19.189.  Cf. Aed. VI.7.23. 
1048  Bella IV.19.19.  The site of Zerboule remains unidentified.  Pringle, Defence, 362 n. 15, suggests that 
Zerboule should be identified with Corippus Zerquilis (Ioh. II.145), but this site is equally 
unidentified.  Morizot, Recherches sur les campagnes de Solomon, 92, argues that Zerboule must be 
located in the valley of the Oued al-Arab.  Based on Procopius description of the terrain, this is 
certainly plausible, but the site itself remains unidentified. 
1049  Bella IV.19.201.  Morizot, Les campagnes de Solomon en Numidie mridionale, 8792, reasonably 
identifies Toumar as mod. Tabergda, in Algeria.  See Map VIII. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
(mod. Timgad, Algeria).1050  There, they destroyed the ripening crops.1051  This suggests that the 
Romans had, as yet, made no territorial gains in Mauritania Sitifensis.  They would hardly have 
employed a scorched earth policy within their own provinces, so the land around Thamugadi 
must have been under cultivation by either the Berbers themselves, or by a Romano-African 
population, living under the protection of a Berber leader.  Indeed, much of Mauritania 
Sitifensis, while evidently a settled region, may well have been under the control of Iaudas  in 
much the same manner as Mauritania Caesariensis was under the control of Mastigas, with a 
local, tribute paying, population.1052 
The Roman army subsequently returned to Zerboule and besieged it.1053  After three days, the 
Berber garrison fled, and the Romans were able to seize the fortress unopposed.1054  The Romans 
then approached Iaudas position at Toumar, which they were able to seize by a direct 
assault.1055  The Berbers, taken entirely by surprise, fled.1056  Iaudas himself was wounded, but 
nevertheless managed to flee to Mauritania along with many of his followers.1057 
With this campaign, Procopius declares: 
And when the Berbers had retreated from Numidia, having been defeated as 
has been described, the land of Zabe, which is beyond Mount Aurasium, and is 
called Mauritania Prima, having Sitifis as its capital, he [Solomon] added as a 
tributary to the Roman empire,1058 
1050  Bella IV.19.20. 
1051  Ibid. 
1052  Bella IV.20.31; with pp. 1278.  Pringle, Defence, 28, suggests that Solomons intentions must have 
been to drive Berber cultivators off the land, in order to secure it for the Romans.  However, it is 
equally plausible, given that the Romans did not remain in Mauritania Sitifensis to secure the 
territory, that the intention was merely to highlight to the local Romano-African population the 
consequences of supporting a Berber leader. 
1053  Bella IV.19.20, 23. 
1054  Bella IV.19.2332. 
1055  Bella IV.20.119. 
1056  Bella IV.20.20. 
1057  Bella IV.20.21, 30.  Cf. Bella IV.19.19. 
1058  Bella IV.20.30: [      ,  ,  
  ,              
,       ] 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
and the provinces of Numidia and Mauritania Sitifensis have been accepted as having been 
incorporated into the Eastern Roman Empire.1059  Beyond the above statement, this assessment 
has been based primarily on Procopius claim in the De Aedificiis: 
 Taking care that the barbarians not pillage there again, having gained entry, he 
fortified cities around the mountain, having found them to be entirely deserted 
and lacking in fortifications.  I speak of Pentebagae, Phlorentiane, Bade, Meleon 
and Tamougade, as well as two forts, Dabousis and Gaiana.1060 
The cities of Pentebagae, Bade, Meleon and Tamougade are more commonly known as Bagai, 
Badias, Mileu and Thamugadi, while the forts Dabousis and Gaiana should probably be identified 
with Yabous and Vaiana.1061  Florentiane remains unidentified.1062  Furthermore, Procopius 
notes: 
 And he [Justinian] took the region beyond Aurasium, which had not been under 
the Vandals at all.  There he fortified two cities, Frice and Sitifis.1063 
Frice should probably be identified with the city which was subsequently Ksar el-Frigui.1064 
However, Procopius implication, that the Romans effectively created a ring of fortifications 
around Mount Aurasium, or even around the Aurs massif, is implausible.  On a practical level, 
the fortifications were simply not in the right place to provide an adequate line of defence for 
this purpose.  First, Mileu, assuming that the site has been correctly identified, is some 150 km 
to the north of the Aurs massif, and is thus unlikely to have been any kind of defence for the 
region.1065  Equally, Ksar el-Frigui and Sitifis, while certainly beyond Aurasium, are far 
removed from the Aurs massif, being to the north and north-west of respectively.  Vaiana and 
1059  Bella IV.30, 33.  Cf. Aed. VI.7.7.  Contra CJ 1.27.1.12, which implies that Mauritania Sitifensis was 
already part of the Eastern Roman Empire in 534.  See also pp. 1268. 
1060  Aed. VI.7.8: [          ,    
         ,     
                
...] 
1061  For these identifications see Appendix I and Map VII. 
1062  See n. 1432. 
1063  Aed. VI.7.9: [              
.      ,     .] 
1064  See Appendix I. 
1065  See n. 1434. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Badias are the only identified sites south of the Aurs massif.  But Vaiana is so far removed from 
any other known Roman site that it cannot have functioned effectively within any defensive 
strategy.  Furthermore, Badias does not appear to have been firmly under Roman control - 
according to Corippus, the Berbers of the region surrounding this city participated in the 
Berber hostilities of 546.1066  It seems more likely, given the citys location, that its population 
aligned itself far more closely with the Berber polity of the Aurs massif than with whatever 
administration, Vandal or Roman, held power at Carthage.1067 
This is not, however, to suggest that there is no evidence for a Roman presence in, and indeed 
to the south of, the Aurs massif.  Inscriptions bearing the name of Solomon are known from 
inscriptions from Bagai and Thamugadi, where it is otherwise known that the Roman army was 
present in 540,1068 as well as from Ksar Belezma and Gadiaufala in Numidia.1069  This is entirely 
consistent with the presentation of the Aurs campaign in the Bella, which confirms that the 
Roman army was present in this region. 
While Thabudeos has sometimes been identified as a post-Vandal fortification, this argument 
has been based primarily on the assumption that Procopius account of fortifications in the 
Aurs massif in the De Aedificiis, implies that there was a ring of Roman fortifications,1070 and 
1066  Ioh. 2.156-7. 
1067  Pringle, The Defence of Byzantine Africa, 183, suggests that the city might have been lost to the 
Berbers following its fortification, but this surely confirms that it was not firmly under Roman 
control. 
1068  Durliat, Les ddicaces, no. 16 (Bagai) and nos. 20 and 21 (Thamugadi).  Unusually, inscriptions nos. 20 
and 21 are explicitly dated to the 13th year of Justinians reign (539540).  It might therefore be 
suggested that the inscriptions were erected as statements of authority during the course of 
Solomons raids around Thamugadi, rather than as part of a building program following the 540 
campaign.  The same is possible of the inscription from Bagai (no. 16), although it cannot be dated 
more precisely than Solomons second prefecture (Durliat, Les ddicaces, 44).  The significance of the 
Justinianic building inscriptions in Africa is discussed in greater detail on pp. 14753. 
1069  Durliat, Les ddicaces, no. 17 (Gadiaufala) and no. 18 (Ksar Belezma).  The inscription from Ksar 
Belezma is, furthermore, extremely fragmentary, amounting to no more than:  --CIISOLOMONI---
CONSULE---.  While it cannot be doubted that it refers to Solomon, the purpose of the inscription is 
unclear.  One further inscription from the reign of Justinian has been identified in Numidia (Durliat, 
Les ddicaces, no. 22), at Tigisis.  However, it makes no mention of Solomon, and its purpose is 
unclear:  IMPIVSTI/ACTVSEST. 
1070  Trousset, Les limites sud, 146; idem, Les fines antiquae, 371, identifies Thabudeos with Procopius 
Dabousis.  Contra Morizot,  propos des limites mridionales, 160. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
epigraphic evidence from Thabudeos is inconclusive.1071  Equally, the evidence provided by the 
so-called Ngrine ostrakon, which is explicitly dated to the 16th year of Justinians reign, must 
be discounted on the basis that its provenance is unknown. 1072 
There is simply no clear evidence for a sustained Roman presence in, or south of, the Aurs 
massif, and only limited evidence for a presence in northern Numidia.1073 
Evidence for Roman expansion into the provinces of Mauritania is still more limited.  
Epigraphic evidence exists only from Sitifis and Zabi Iustiniana in Mauritania Sitifensis.1074  
Furthermore, both Sitifis and Zabi Iustiniana were close to the border with Numidia, so 
evidence for a Roman presence in the cities does not translate to Roman control over the entire 
province of Mauritania Sitifensis, but might conceivably be viewed as a result of the Roman 
campaign in Numidia.  The evidence for the most westerly Roman presence in Africa during 
Justinians reign comes from a coin hoard containing 14 827 coins, dating from the Hellenistic 
period to the 6th century, discovered at mod. Msila (Algeria) (c. 3 km to the west of Zabi 
Iustiniana) in 1982.  The hoard contains eight coins which are identifiably Justinianic, including 
three which were minted following the coinage reforms of 538, providing a terminus post quem 
for the hoard being buried.1075  However, the hoard, while attesting to Roman presence, is in no 
way evidence for long term Roman influence in the region. 
1071  Cf. Morizot,  propos des limites mridionales, 1545.  Contra Albertini, Ostrakon byzantin, 5960; 
and Trousset, Les limites sud, 155; idem, Les fines antiquae, 371, who identify Solomons name in 
the inscriptions. 
1072  The ostrakon was published by E. Albertini, Ostrakon byzantin de Ngrine, Cinquantenaire de la 
Facult des Lettres dAlger (18811932) (Alger, 1932), 538, and his interpretation of the ostrakon as 
evidence for the most southern extent of Roman control in Africa in the 6th century was followed by 
Les fines antiquae, 370.  Contra Morizot,  propos des limites mridionales, 1525. 
1073  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 2549; 23745; Cagnat, LArme romaine, 594; J. Lassus, La forteresse 
byzantine de Thamugadi: Fouilles  Timgad 19381956 (I) (Paris, 1981), 1920. 
1074  Durliat, Les ddicaces, no. 23 (Sitifis) and no. 24 (Zabi Iustiniana).  The inscription from Sitifis is again 
fragementary, and its purpose is unclear:  +ANTIQUAMC---/SOLOMONFORT---. 
1075  S. Deloum, Notes sur le trsor montaire de MSila, Proceedings of the 10th Annual Congress of 
Numismatics (London, September 1986) (London, 1986), 30513. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
The provinces of Numidia and Mauritania Sitifensis comprised a massive geographical area 
(roughly the northern half of Algeria), and the Roman campaign of 540 had taken place in a 
very small part of this.  It is hardly surprising that, in the course of the various Roman military 
campaigns conducted, particularly in Numidia, the temporary presence of the Roman army and 
its administration should be present.  However, the extent of practical Roman influence in 
either province remains far from clear.  Yvette Duval, stressing that, archaeologically, it is 
extremely difficult to distinguish between temporary and permanent occupation,1076 suggested 
that, following the campaign in the Aurs massif in 540, there was an initial attempt to hold the 
provinces of Numidia and Mauritania Sitifensis, and that the Roman presence was only 
withdrawn from these provinces following Solomons death in 546.1077  However, effective 
Roman control may not have lasted as long as that.  Following the mutiny, and with the 
outbreak of plague in the early 540s,1078 the Roman army in Africa can have had few troops to 
spare to reinforce its authority at positions far from its centres of power.  It is more probable 
that, while the Roman army was present in the provinces, cities were willing to affirm their 
allegiance to the dominant power in the region, but once the army departed, that allegiance 
meant little. 
Nevertheless, following the Aurs campaign, Africa appears to have enjoyed several years of 
peace between the Berbers and the Roman administration at Carthage. 
5.5 Resumption of Berber hostilities (543 to 546) 
After three years of peace, conflict between the Eastern Roman Empire and the Berbers began 
anew in Tripolitania in 543.1079  A tribe, to whom Procopius refers as the Leuathae [ ], 
1076  Duval, La Maurtanie sitifienne, 160 n. 1. 
1077  Ibid, 1579.  Followed by Laporte, Zabi, Friki, 160. 
1078  See n. 710. 
1079  The event is not, in fact, explicitly dated in the Bella.  Rather, Procopius (Bella IV.21.1) notes: But in 
the fourth year after this it came to pass that all their good fortune became the opposite.  For when 
the emperor Justinian was in the 17th year of his reign, Cyrus and Sergius, who were the sons of 
Solomons brother, Bacchus, were chosen by the emperor to rule over the cities in Libya, Cyrus, the 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
and who are clearly identifiable with Corippus Ilaguas,1080 sent an army to Leptis Magna, 
apparently under the pretence of requesting from the dux of Tripolitania, Sergius, the insignia 
of office and of concluding a peace agreement, but with the intention of murdering Sergius.1081  
Sergius invited eighty of the leading Ilaguas into the city, agreed to peace terms, and then 
invited the men to a banquet.1082 
Procopius does not explain the causes of enmity between the Ilaguas and Sergius, or, indeed, 
why an entire army was required for Sergius removal.  But, during the banquet, the Ilaguas 
became angered with the Romans, and accused them of plundering their crops.1083  Procopius 
does not confirm whether the Romans had indeed been plundering Berber crops, but the 
accusation is entirely plausible.  The Romans had, after all, adopted a scorched earth policy in 
elder, over Pentapolis, and Sergius over Tripolis [       
   .          
  ,    ,      , 
       ,     , 
  .]  Solomons decisive campaign in the Aurs massif, from which Procopius 
presumably dates the beginning of Roman good fortune in Africa, had taken place in 540.  The fourth 
year after this would have been 544.  The 17th year of Justinians reign fell between 1 April 543 and 31 
March 544.  Sergius appointment as dux of Tripolitania and the subsequent Berber hostilities, which 
Procopius implies occurred within a short time of Sergius appointment, may be assumed to have 
taken place in either late 543 or early 544.  Cf. Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 339; Stein, Histoire, 547; and 
PLRE IIIB, 1175; all of whom favour a date in 543, given that the battle of Theveste has been dated to 
the spring of 544 (see n. 1091). 
1080  Bella IV.21.2.  The Leuathae are only attested by Procopius and are, interestingly, the only Berber 
tribe (or alliance of tribes) he identifies by name, rather than by their leader.  The Leuathae have 
traditionally been identified with the people to whom Corippus refers as Ilaguas, among other names 
(see pp. 2334), who have themselves been identified with the Lawta or Louata of later Arabic writers 
(see Partsch, Corippi Africani grammatici libri, xii; Courtois, Les Vandales, 103, 344; Desanges, 
Catalogue des tribus africaines, 1012; W. de Slane, Ibn Khaldun.  Histoire des Berbres et les dynasties 
musulmanes de lAfrique Septentrionale (Paris, 1925), I, 323 n. 1).  The Arabic Lawta or Louata may 
well have been intended as a transliteration of the Latin Ilaguas, or more probably Laguatan.  
However, it is important to note that the phonetic similarity of the words need not imply a direct 
continuity of tribal identity from the 6th to the 14th century. 
1081  Bella IV.21.2.  Contra Anec. V.28, in which Procopius claims that: these men did not approach Sergius 
with treacherous intent [        ...]  The request on 
the part of the Ilaguas for the insignia of office has sometimes been interpreted as evidence that the 
Ilaguas must have been among the tribes which sent embassies to Belisarius in 533.  However, this 
need not be the case.  Contra Pringle, Defence, 29. 
The precise date of these events is unclear.  However, a terminus post quem is provided by Sergius 
appointment as dux of Tripolitania (see n. 1079), and a terminus ante quem by the battle of Theveste 
(see n. 1091). 
1082  Bella IV.21.4; Anec. V.28. 
1083  Bella IV.21.5. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
the region around Thamugadi as a means of trying to force the capitulation of the Berber leader 
of the region, Iaudas.1084  Certainly, this appears to be the most likely cause of conflict between 
the Ilaguas and the Roman administration, whom Sergius merely represented.  The accusation 
resulted in the murder, by the Romans, of all but one of the Ilaguas, who returned to the army 
which had remained outside the city.1085  The Ilaguas then marched against Leptis Magna, where 
they were defeated by the Romans.1086 
The army of the Ilaguas subsequently moved into Byzacena, where it pillaged much of the 
countryside, before entering into an alliance with Antalas, the pre-eminent Berber leader in 
the province at the time, apparently with the intention of marching on Carthage.1087  It is 
interesting to note that this is the first occasion on which Procopius suggests that a Berber tribe 
(or tribes) might have intended a direct assault on a city which was securely under Roman 
control, rather than simply a campaign of destruction and pillage intended to cow the Romano-
African population. 
Upon hearing that an alliance of Berber tribes had gathered in Byzacena, Solomon marched 
from Carthage with the Roman army,1088 as well as, according to Corippus, some Berber allies.1089  
The Roman force encountered the Berbers at Theveste (mod. Tbessa, Algeria),1090 and the 
1084  Bella 4.19.20; with p. 212.  Cf. Pringle, The Defence of Byzantine Africa, 30. 
1085  Bella IV.21.1011.  In the Bella, Procopius implies that the Berber leaders were murdered by Sergius 
guards in his defence.  Contra Anec. 5.28, in which Procopius claims that Sergius ordered the death 
of all eighty of the Berber leaders for no reason [ ].  However, the discrepancy between 
the two texts is not particularly surprising.  In the Bella, Procopius is primarily concerned to attribute 
the sufferings of Africa to the barbarian character of the Berbers; while in the Anecdota he prefers to 
stress the perfidy of Sergius, as a representative of Justinians corrupt administration. 
1086  Bella IV.21.14. 
1087  Bella IV.21.168; cf. Ioh. II.28, 401; III.3937.  The relationship between Antalas and the Ilaguas 
remains contested and is discussed in greater detail in sections 6.2 and 6.3. 
1088  Bella IV.21.19. 
1089  Ioh. III.40412. 
1090  Bella IV.21.19.  The identification of the site of the subsequent battle is unknown.  It has generally 
been assumed that it must have occurred somewhere in the vicinity of Theveste, since Procopius 
provides no suggestion that the Roman army moved from this location, and the location of the battle 
is not mentioned by Corippus.  However, a further (possible) reference to the battle appears in the 
chronicle of Victor of Tunnuna (131), which refers to a battle at Cillium (mod. Kasserine, Tunisia), at 
which Solomon was killed (cf. n. 1095).  Given that Cillium is c. 125 km from Theveste, the two 
accounts seem impossible to reconcile.  However, there are a number of problems with Victor of 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
battle which occurred there was to prove disastrous for the Romans.1091  After an initial, failed, 
attempt at negotiation, the Berbers marched against the Roman army in force.1092  However, at 
this key point, those among the Romans who resented Solomons command refused to engage 
the enemy.1093  The Romans, vastly outnumbered and disheartened by their comrades actions, 
were forced to retreat.1094  In the course of this retreat, Solomon was killed.1095 
With the death of Solomon, Sergius assumed sole control in Africa, acting as both Praetorian 
Prefect and magister militum per Africam.1096  Given that Solomon was killed in the spring of 
Tunnunas account.  In particular, it suggests that the Berber force against which the Romans fought 
was commanded by Stotzas, who had fled to Mauritania following the failed Roman military revolt of 
536 to 539 (Bella IV.17.1), in contrast to the account offered by Procopius (Bella IV.22.5), which claims 
that Stotzas joined Antalas, from Mauritania, following Antalas victory in 544 Cf. Stein, Histoire, 548 
n. 1, who suggests that Victor of Tunnuna here confuses Stotzas and Antalas.  The account of the 
continuator of Marcellinus Comes should also be considered in this context (Marcell. Com. Addit. s.a. 
543.3), which, pace Procopius, suggests that Sergius was confronted with rebellions by Stotzas and 
the Berbers [rebellionibus cum Stotza et Mauris].  Stein, Histoire, 349 n. 1 is surely correct in 
suggesting that the continuator has conflated the events which occurred in Tripolitania in 543 and 
in Byzacena in 544, and that this entry refers to the latter.  Similarly, it seems probable that Victor of 
Tunnuna has conflated a number of events into a single chronographic entry, particularly in view of 
the fact that he misdates the battle  although, the toponym Cillium, is, admittedly, difficult to 
explain.  Contra Bury, History, 145; Modran, Les Maures, 616; Pringle, Defence, 30, and PLRE IIIA, 574 
and IIIB, 1176, 1200; who accept that the battle took place at Cillium, rather than at Theveste; and 
Croke, The Chronicle of Marcellinus, 134, who suggests that the two engagements narrated by 
Procopius occurred in different places  the first at Theveste and the second at Cillium. 
1091  A date of spring 544 has generally been preferred, presumably on the basis that military campaigns 
would have halted over the winter.  See Stein, Histoire, 548 (followed by Pringle, Defence, 31 and 364 
n. 4).  Cf. Modran, Les Maures, 60913, 61621, who, while agreeing with this date, suggests that it is 
confirmed by the fact that the Ilaguas would have required the autumn and winter of 543544 in 
order to seize Berenice before moving into Byzacena.  However, these events, reported only by 
Theophanes (AM 6026) (ed. De Boor, p. 208), are suspect.  See n. 1227.  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 342
3; and Bury, History, II, 145, are less specific and date the battle only to 544. 
1092  Bella IV.21.201, 25. 
1093  Bella IV.21.235; Ioh. III.42732. 
1094  Bella IV.21.26.  Ioh. III.4324. 
1095  Bella IV.21.27-8; Anec. V.29.  Ioh. III.43941.  Corippus in fact suggests that Solomon was fighting on 
foot (Ioh. III.4334), but this is surely to add to the dramatic effect of the description of the 
commander, abandoned by his army, fighting on foot, and alone, in the middle of the field of battle.  
Solomons death is also noted by Victor of Tunnuna (131; with n. 1090); and by the Marc. Com. Addit. 
s.a. 541.3, which evidently misdates the event, and is out of sequence with the entry for 543, which 
notes that Solomon was troubled by revolts by the Berbers and by Stotzas, apparently conflating the 
Berber hostilities of 544 and Stotzas subsequent alliance with Antalas.  See Stein, Histoire, II, 483 n. 
1096  Bella IV.22.1; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 541.3.  For the date of the battle of Theveste see Stein, Histoire du 
Bas-Empire, II, 548 n. 1. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
544, Sergius must have assumed authority at much the same time, although his formal 
appointment by the emperor would have been confirmed some months later.1097 
Both Corippus and Procopius present the death of Solomon as heralding an intensification of 
Berber raids against the Romano-African population.  Both writers agree that the threat came 
from those Berbers under the command of Antalas, who had, by this point in time, been joined 
by the Roman mutineer, Stotzas, together with a small number of Roman and Vandal troops.1098  
However, despite the increase in hostilities, no official response against the Berbers in 
Byzacena appears to have been coordinated by Sergius.1099 
The Romano-African population instead appealed to the Roman commander, John Sisiniolus, 
to aid them.1100  John had arrived in Africa with Solomon in 539, however, his precise position 
within the Roman administration, in 544, is unclear.1101  He gathered an army, and commanded 
the dux of Byzacena, Himerius, to gather all available troops, and to meet him at Menephessa, 
in order to make a joint attack.1102  However, as a result of miscommunication, Himerius, 
together with his entire force, was captured by the Berbers, under the command of Antalas.1103  
Those soldiers who had been under Himerius command were persuaded to switch sides, and 
were placed under the command of Stotzas,1104 while Himerius himself was threatened with 
death if he would not aid the Berbers in the capture of the city of Hadrumetum (mod. Sousse, 
Tunisia).1105 
1097  The continuator of Marcellinus (s.a. 541.3) cannot be correct in dating Sergius command in Africa to 
541.  Croke, The Chronicle of Marcellinus, 134. 
1098  Ioh. III.44960; and 4.2930; Bella IV.22.56, 23.1; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 543.3. 
1099  Bella IV.22.6. 
1100  Bella IV.23.2. 
1101  Bella 4.19.1.  See also PLRE IIIA, 640. 
1102  Bella IV.23.25; Ioh. IV.1017.  The site of Menephessa is unknown, and the toponym is nowhere else 
attested. 
1103  Bella IV.23.59. 
1104  Bella IV.23.10. 
1105  Bella IV.23.1011. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
With Himerius assistance, the Berbers were able to seize Hadrumetum by deception.1106  Having 
plundered the city and left behind a small garrison, they again departed.1107  The city was 
subsequently retaken by the initiative of a local priest, Paul, whom the citizens of Hadrumetum 
aided in escaping from the captured city.1108  Having failed to secure more than a small number 
of soldiers from Sergius at Carthage, 1109 Paul spread the rumour that that Germanus, the 
emperors nephew, had returned to Carthage with a large army, which was, at that time, 
approaching Hadrumetum.1110  He therefore requested that the citizens of the city secretly open 
a small gate, at night, to enable the army to enter the city.1111  This the citizens did, and when 
Paul entered the city with his small force, the Roman soldiers killed the Berber garrison and 
recovered the city.1112  The episode is characteristic of an increasing tendency for individual 
cities to see to their own defence when under attack, rather than relying on support from the 
Roman administration.1113 
Perhaps as a result of pressure from those refugees who had been forced to flee Africa during 
this period of Berber hostilities, in the spring of 545,1114 the emperor sent an additional military 
commander to Africa, Areobindus.1115  Procopius describes Areobindus as: 
  a man of the senate and well-born, but in no respect experienced in matters 
of war.1116 
1106  Bella IV.23.135. 
1107  Bella IV.23.16. 
1108  Bella IV.23.189. 
1109  Bella IV.23.201. 
1110  Bella IV.23.223. 
1111  Bella IV.23.24; Ioh. IV.757.  Contra Pringle, Defence, 364 n. 13, Corippus account does not appear to 
imply that Liberatus and Marturius were involved in retaking Hadrumetum, merely that they escaped 
from the Berbers before the city was retaken. 
1112  Bella IV.23.25. 
1113  Cf. Bella IV.22.12.  The citizens of Laribus offer a ransom for their city when it is besieged by the 
Berbers. 
1114  Bella IV.23.289.  Stein, Histoire, II, 550. 
1115  Bella IV.24.1; Ioh. IV.82-4.  Areobindus name appears in a number of forms in the sources.  For the 
list of variants see PLRE IIIA, 107.  The spelling Areobindus will be used exclusively here, in the 
interests of clarity. 
1116  Bella IV.24.1: [...       ,     .] 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
As such, he appears an odd choice for the military commander of a prefecture in a state of crisis.  
He was, however, relatively well connected, being married to the emperors niece, Preiecta.1117  
Areobindus was not intended to replace Sergius, who remained in Africa, but rather to share 
authority with him, with Sergius being directed to address the threat posed by the Berber tribes 
in Numidia and Areobindus in Byzacena, and the troops assigned to Africa divided between 
them.1118  Areobindus was accompanied by Athanasius, who had previously served as Praetorian 
Prefect of Italy,1119 and was now to be Praetorian Prefect of Africa.1120  Athanasius was clearly a 
much-needed experienced administrator, but the accounts of both Corippus and Procopius 
suggest that he was elderly and passive in character, and Sergius appears to have continued to 
dominate.1121 
Once Areobindus reached Carthage, Sergius immediately departed for Numidia with the troops 
assigned to him.1122  Areobindus, meanwhile, made a pre-emptive attempt to halt the Berber 
raids on the Romano-African population in the autumn of 545.1123  Having learnt that Antalas 
and Stotzas were encamped near Sicca Veneria (mod. El Kef, Tunisia), he commanded John 
Sisiniolus to choose the best Roman troops and to engage the Berbers.1124  He also wrote to 
Sergius, requesting that he join forces with John.1125  But Sergius disregarded the message, 
presumably anxious to assert his own authority after the somewhat demeaning subdivision of 
his former command.1126  John was therefore forced to confront Antalas forces with vastly 
1117  Bella IV.24.3; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 546.3.  Preiecta was the daughter of Justinians sister, Vigilantia.  
Areobindus was also accompanied by his sister. 
1118  Bella IV.24.45. 
1119  Athasasius was Praetorian Prefect of Italy from 539 until at least 540, and possibly until 542.  See PLRE 
IIIA, 1423. 
1120  Bella IV.24.2. 
1121  Bella IV.26.33; Ioh. IV.237, 209; VII.202, 204, 208. 
1122  Bella IV.24.6. 
1123  Stein, Histoire, II, 551 with n. 1.  Contra Diehl, LAfrique Byzantine, 350. 
1124  Bella IV.24.6. 
1125  Bella IV.24.7. 
1126  Bella IV.24.8. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
inferior numbers.1127  The Roman troops were routed, and John was killed.1128  Stotzas, having 
been shot by John during the course of the battle, subsequently died from his wounds.1129 
According to Procopius, following this disaster, Justinian decided that it was not wise to have 
two generals,1130 and this certainly appears to have been the opinion of the inhabitants of the 
region.1131  Sergius was immediately recalled, in October 545, and sent to Italy,1132 and the 
military administration of Africa was handed entirely to Areobindus.1133 
Two months after Sergius departure from Africa, in December 545, the Roman administration 
in Africa was once again threatened by a revolt from within its military.1134  And, for the first 
time, the internal problems of the Roman administration in Africa intersected with the Eastern 
Roman Empires conflict with the Berber tribes.  Guntarith, the dux of Numidia, entered into 
negotiations with the Berbers of Numidia, who were led by Cusina and Iaudas, and the Berbers 
of Byzacena, who were led by Antalas, in the hope that they might march on Carthage, and 
establish him as ruler.1135  No source attributes any explicit motivation to Guntarith.  Procopius 
1127  Bella IV.24.8; Ioh. IV.104. 
1128  Bella IV.24.14; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 545.2; Victor of Tunnuna, 134; Ioh. IV.357  these lines of the 
Iohannis are considered to be out of place by the most recent editors of the text, Diggle and Goodyear, 
who, while retaining the original line numbering, insert the lines into the middle of line 201 of book 
1129  Bella IV.24.11, 14; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 545.2; Jordanes, Rom. 384. 
1130  Bella IV.24.16. 
1131  Corippus condemns the dual administration of Sergius and Areobindus (Ioh. IV.86102). 
1132  Bella IV.24.16; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 546.3;  
1133  Ibid.  Sergius was recalled two months before Guntariths coup (Bella IV.25.1), which occurred in 
December 545.  See n. 1134.  Contra Partsch, Corippi Africani Grammatici libri, xxiv; and Diehl, 
LAfrique byzantine, 350, who place Sergius recall in January 546. 
1134  Bella IV.25.1.  The date of Guntariths coup is one of the few events in Africa in the 540s which can be 
dated with any degree of precision.  Procopius subsequently notes (Bella IV.28.41) that Guntariths 
rule lasted only 36 days, and ended with his death in the 19th year of Justinians reign (1 April 545 to 
31 March 546), while Victor of Tunnuna (136) places Guntariths death in 546.  This suggests that 
Guntariths death must have occurred between 1 January 546 and 31 March 546.  If Guntariths rule 
lasted only 36 days, it must have begun between December 545 and February 546 (inclusive).  Given 
that Procopius elsewhere notes that Guntariths coup occurred as winter was setting in (Bella IV.26.5), 
a date in December 545 is to be preferred.  Cf. Modran, Les Maures, 623.  Contra Stein, Histoire, II, 
5512, who places Guntariths death in the winter of 545/6, and thus his coup in the autumn of 545; 
and Partsch, Corippi Africani Grammatici libri, xxiv, who places Guntariths death in May 546, and 
thus his coup in March 545; an argument followed by Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 353, 358; and Bury, 
Histoire, II, 146. 
1135  Bella IV.25.13.  Guntarith is attested under a number of spellings.  See PLRE IIIA, 3746 (Guntharis).  
He is only previously attested by Procopius as having been one of Solomons bodyguards and as 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
simply notes that he wished to establish a tyranny, while Corippus characterises Guntarith as 
evil by nature: 
 Behold, again, Guntarith, the evil man of corrupted mind, treacherous, 
unfortunate, cruel, coarse, an adulterer, plunderer, rapacious, the worst 
author of war...1136 
Like Stotzas, Guntarith appears to have aspired to outright sovereignty in Africa, as opposed to 
improved conditions of military service.1137  His bid for power was also supported by the Roman 
mutineers who had previously followed Stotzas, and were now led by John, otherwise known 
as Stotzas Iunior.1138 
Once the Berbers marched on Carthage, Guntarith was recalled from Numidia to Carthage by 
Areobindus in order to counter them.1139  With the Berbers approaching Carthage, Guntarith 
promised Antalas that, if events should occur as planned, once Guntarith assumed the position 
of king, ruling over Carthage and the rest of Africa, Antalas would rule Byzacena, taking half the 
possessions of the magister militum per Africam, Areobindus, and 1 500 Roman soldiers.1140  The 
negotiations which occurred between Guntarith and Antalas are of interest primarily for the 
fact that Guntarith appears to have believed that Antalas goal was ultimately the confirmation 
of his own independent polity in Byzacena. The evidence is inconclusive, but  the power of 
individual Berber leaders in Africa might actually have encouraged individual Romans to believe 
that the establishment of independent polities in the region represented a realistic possibility. 
having commanded the Roman advance force at the battle of Bagai in 540 (Bella IV.19.69).  However, 
Corippus also identifies him as having betrayed the Romans at the battle of Theveste by having 
ordered the troops under his command to retreat part way through the battle (Ioh. III.42732; with 
pp. 21920). 
1136  Ioh. IV.222-4: [Guntarith en iterum peruersa mente malignus,/ perfidus, infelix, atrox, insulsus, 
adulter,/ praedo, homicida, rapax, bellorum pessimus auctor] 
1137  On Stotzas ambitions see pp. 2023. 
1138  Bella IV.25.3.  On Johns (Stotzas Iuniors) appointment as Stotzas successor see also Jordanes, Rom. 
384; and Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 545.2.  According to Procopius, by this time, the mutineers amounted 
to about five hundred Romans, eighty Huns, and some Vandals (Bella IV.27.8). 
1139  Bella IV.25.2, 45. 
1140  Bella IV.25.10.  See also p. 253. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
However, once Guntarith had succeeded in having Areobindus murdered,1141 he reneged on the 
deal.  This resulted in the entirely unexpected submission of Antalas and the Berbers of Numidia 
to the Eastern Roman emperor.1142 
Meanwhile, the soldiers who had previously been commanded by Stotzas, together with their 
new commander, John, abandoned Antalas, and were received at Carthage by Guntarith, who 
had established himself as ruler.1143  Guntariths administration at Carthage was short-lived, 
lasting only 36 days,1144 before he too was murdered at a banquet by Artabanes, the leader of a 
force of Armenians who had been sent to Africa with Areobindus.1145  When the guards learnt 
of the death of Guntarith, many aligned themselves with Artabanes Armenians, and they 
acclaimed the emperor.1146  When the people of Carthage heard the acclamation, those who 
remained loyal to the emperor killed the mutineers who remained in the city.1147  John, their 
leader, escaped the massacre by hiding in the sanctuary with some of his Vandal troops, but, 
having received pledges for his safety from Artabanes, emerged from there, and was sent to 
Constantinople.1148 
On account of his actions, Artabanes was appointed magister militum per Africam.1149  He also 
appears to have confirmed Athanasius in his position as Praetorian Prefect of Africa, since 
Procopius notes that he requested that Athanasius take charge of the funds of the palace.1150  
Artabanes appointment is somewhat surprising.  While Artabanes had demonstrated his loyalty 
1141  Bella IV.26.2233.  Cf. Ioh. IV.225-6; Jord. Rom. 384; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 547.6; and Victor of 
Tunnuna, 136. 
1142  Bella IV.27.36; with pp. 2556. 
1143  Bella IV.27.8.  According to Procopius, by this time, the mutineers amounted to about five hundred 
Romans, eighty Huns, and some Vandals. 
1144  Bella IV.28.41; Victor of Tunnuna, 136.  Guntariths coup occurred in December 545 (see n. 1134), so 
his death must have occurred in late January or early February 546. 
1145  Bella IV.24.2, 28.631.  On Artabanes see PLRE IIIA, 12530. 
1146  Bella IV.28.356. 
1147  Bella IV.28.389. 
1148  Bella IV.28.401. 
1149  Bella IV.28.42. 
1150  Bella IV.28.35. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
to the Roman imperial government during the revolt, he was an Armenian who had been 
involved, in 538/9, in a successful conspiracy to assassinate the Roman governor of Armenia, 
Acacius.1151  The men who had accompanied him to Africa were also Armenians, who had 
recently deserted from Sasanian Persia, and were thus not to be trusted on the eastern 
frontier.1152  The Roman imperial government at Constantinople no longer seems to have been 
willing to commit experienced commanders to Africa, and was resorting to men it regarded as 
expendable.  Nevertheless, Artabanes appears to have been an effective magister militum per 
Africam, although he only remained in Africa for a short time, before requesting to be recalled 
to Constantinople.1153 
5.6 Campaigns of John Troglita (546 to 548) 
Following Artabanes recall to Constantinople, John Troglita was appointed magister militum 
per Africam.1154  The date of his arrival in Africa is unclear.  However, it is likely that John sailed 
from Constantinople in early summer 546, and arrived in Carthage in late summer 546.1155  
1151  Bella II.3.25; IV.27.17.  There appears to have been a deliberate attempt to remove Artabanes family 
from the eastern frontier.  Another Armenian commander in Africa, John, was Artabanes brother, 
and Procopius subsequently notes that another relative of Artabanes, Gregorius, was among this 
group of Armenian troops (Bella IV.17.11). 
1152  Bella IV.24.2. 
1153  Bella IV.28.44.  Cf. Bella VII.31.27, elaborating on the reasons why Artabanes wished to return to 
Constantinople. 
1154  Bella IV.28.45; VIII.17.20; Ioh. I.48-53; Jordanes, Rom. 385; Marc. Com. Addit. s.a. 547.6. 
1155  According to the De rei militaris of Vegetius (IV.32), which was, admittedly, written in the late 4th 
century, the period in which it was safe to undertake a trans-Mediterranean voyage was between 27 
May and 14 September.  Between 10 March and 27 May, and between 14 September and 11 November, 
a voyage would be dangerous, and between 11 November and 10 March the seas were closed (see J. 
Roug, La navigation hivernale dans lEmpire romain, REA 54 (1952), 318).  Given that the 
expeditionary force took around three months to travel from Constantinople to Carthage, John would 
presumably have had to sail from Carthage by the end of August, at the latest, and in all likelihood 
sailed at the beginning of the summer of 546.  Cf. Stein, Histoire, II, 555 n. 2, who suggests that John 
must have departed Constantinople in July 546; and Modran, Les Maures, 628 with n. 80.  Modran 
further adds that Corippus claim (Ioh. I.331), that John, upon arriving in Africa, saw that: The 
nourishing crops, ripe throughout the cultivated fields, were burned [uritur alma seges cultos 
matura per agros] suggests that John must have arrived in Africa before the harvest, and thus before 
July.  However, Corippus agricultural reference need not be quite as precise as this.  PLRE IIIA, 646, 
also argues in favour of a date in the summer, suggesting that the reference to good sailing conditions 
at Ioh. I.128-30 implies summer.  But this is tenuous.  The reference to favourable conditions might 
simply be intended to reinforce the impression that the voyage was divinely supported.  Contra Diehl, 
LAfrique byzantine, 366, who suggests the last months of 546; and Stein, Histoire, II, 555 n. 2, who 
suggests the autumn of 546. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Almost immediately upon arriving in Africa, he set out from Carthage with the intention of 
engaging the Berbers.1156  This is perhaps the first time that a Roman magister militum per 
Africam had acted in such a proactive manner to push the Berbers back from Roman controlled 
territory.  It is, however, unclear whether this change of approach was the product of Johns 
character, a shift in Roman policy, a response to the increasing state of crisis, or a combination 
thereof. 
John initially made camp at Antonia Castra, the location of which is unknown, where he 
received envoys from the Berber leader, Antalas, whom he took prisoner.1157  He then set out in 
pursuit of the Berbers, who had withdrawn into the mountains.1158  When John drew close to 
the Berber position - the location of which is not specified by the sources, but appears to have 
been in Byzacena - he made camp,1159 and sent an embassy to Antalas, offering peace in 
exchange for his submission to the Eastern Roman Empire.1160  The offer was, however, 
rejected.1161  On the following day, the Romans engaged the Berbers in battle, defeating them 
and recapturing the standards which had been captured from Solomons forces at the battle of 
Theveste in 544.1162  Ierna, the prominent leader of the Ilaguas, was among those killed.1163  The 
precise date of the battle is uncertain, however, it probably took place in the autumn of 546.1164 
1156  Bella IV.28.46; Ioh. I.41739.  If a date in late summer is accepted for Johns arrival in Africa, the 
campaign which followed should probably be dated to autumn 546.  Cf. Modran, Les Maures, 628, 
who dates the campaign more precisely to August 546.  Contra Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 370; Stein, 
Histoire, II, 555 n. 2; and Pringle, Defence, 33, 365 n. 1, all of whom suggest that the campaign must 
have taken place in the winter of 546/7.  This seems to be unlikely, given that military campaigns 
otherwise appear to have ceased in Africa during the winter months.  Cf. Bella IV.13.39. 
1157  Ioh. I.453-50.  On Antonia Castra see Pringle, Defence, 366 n. 17. 
1158  Ioh. I.50919; II.110. 
1159  Ioh. II.2701. 
1160  Ioh. II.342416. 
1161  Ioh. IV.35892. 
1162  Bella IV.28.46; Ioh. V passim. 
1163  Ioh. V.493502, 51921.  On Ierna see further section 6.2. 
1164  Modran, Les Maures, 626-8.  Contra Partsch, Corippi Africani grammatici libri, xxvi n. 132, who 
placed the battle in the winter of 546/7, on the basis that Ioh. III.237, makes a comparison between 
autumn 533, when John Troglita had first arrived in Africa, and his arrival in 546.  This view is followed 
by Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 364, 370; Bury, History, II, 147; Stein, Histoire, II, 555 n. 7; and PLRE IIIA, 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
John Troglita returned to Carthage, where he celebrated his victory.1165  However, the Ilaguas, 
having apparently returned to Tripolitania following their defeat in Byzacena, soon regrouped, 
under the leadership of Carcasan.1166  They again moved west, probably in the spring of 547,1167 
into Byzacena, where they again entered into an alliance with Antalas.1168 
John immediately set out from Carthage, accompanied by Berber allies, under the command of 
Cusina, with the intention of engaging the Berbers under the command of Carcasan and 
Antalas.1169  But the Berbers, becoming aware that the Roman army was approaching, withdrew 
into the desert.1170  John pursued them, despite the fact that it was, by this time, mid-summer.1171  
This proved to be misguided.  With the terrain failing to provide the Roman army with either 
water or food, and with the armys horses dying as a result of this,1172 John was forced to 
withdraw to the coast, where he might be re-provisioned by sea.1173 
The Berbers under the command of Carcasan and Antalas were equally suffering from a lack of 
water, and began to move towards a river in the region of Gallica (probably the Matmata plateau 
1165  Ioh. VI.58103.  It has sometimes been suggested that Corippus account implies that John celebrated 
a triumph (Blnsdorf, Aeneadas rursus cupiunt resonare Camenae, 542).  The poet may well have 
intended to create this impression, but it is highly unlikely that John actually celebrated a formal 
triumph.  The audacity of such a gesture would surely have resulted in his immediate recall to 
Constantinople.  Cf. the recall of Belisarius in 534 (Bella IV.8.15). 
1166  Ioh. VI.10444.  Carcasan is first attested in the context of the battle in which Ierna was killed (Ioh. 
IV.639). 
1167  Modran, Les Maures, 631, argues in favour of a date in the spring of 547, on the basis of Corippus 
claim (Ioh. VI.247): For the year was perceived to be fruitless [sterilis nam cernitur annus], which 
he suggests means that the Romans were aware that there would be no harvest that year, and thus 
that the harvest had not yet occurred.  Cf. Stein, Histoire, II, 5556; and Pringle, Defence, 36.  Contra 
Shea, The Iohannis, 153, whose translation of Ioh. VI.247, But you can see how poor the years harvest 
has been., implies that the Ilaguas moved into Byzacena after mid-summer. 
1168  Bella IV.28.47; Ioh. VI.2218.  In the Iohannis, Corippus attributes to John Troglita a speech in which 
he claims that he must prevent the Berbers from entering Byzacena (Ioh. VI.2502).  However, if the 
Ilaguas had indeed allied themselves with Antalas, as Procopius suggests, then it seems to be probable 
that the Ilaguas had already entered Byzacena, an argument apparently supported by Corippus claim 
at Ioh. VI.27980. 
1169  Ioh. VI.25575. 
1170  Ioh. VI.27691. 
1171  Ioh. VI.2703, 2925.  The season is given by Corippus claim that the events occurred under the 
constellation of Cancer [sub sidere Cancri].  Cf PLRE IIIA, 647. 
1172  Ioh. VI.295325, 35065. 
1173  Ioh. VI.36686. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
and the Monts des Ksour, in Tunisia), where they were seen by a Roman scout.1174  Urged by 
Cusina, John moved his forces towards them, with the intention of holding the river, and made 
camp at Marta (mod. Mareth, Tunisia).1175  At the battle which occurred at Marta, the Roman 
forces were routed.1176  John withdrew with the survivors, first to Iunci (mod. Bordj Younga, 
Tunisia), and then to Laribus (mod. Djebel Lorbeus, Tunisia).1177  He appears to have used the 
winter of 547/8 to re-consolidate the Roman position.1178  At Laribus, John regrouped, collecting 
additional troops, gathering supplies and, crucially, entering into alliances with a number of 
Berber tribes, including those under the command of Cusina, Ifisdaias and Iaudas.1179 
Probably in the spring of 548,1180 the Berbers again overran Byzacena, and advanced as far as 
Carthage itself.1181  John marched against the Berber alliance, led by Carcasan and Antalas, in 
Byzacena.1182  The Romans pursued the Berbers under the command of Carcasan and Antalas, 
who continually withdrew, apparently in the hope of exhausting the Roman armys supplies.1183 
John ultimately made camp at the harbour of Lariscus, where the Roman army could be re-
supplied by sea.1184  There the army mutinied.1185  Corippus, the only source for these events, is 
unspecific about the precise causes of the mutiny  employing a metaphor in which he 
compares the mutiny to a forest fire, and attributing to the soldiers a speech in which they 
condemn John Troglita forcing them to pursue the Berbers through the desert, despite a lack 
1174  Ioh. VI.43777.  On the location of Gallica see Pringle, Defence, 369 n. 45. 
1175  Ioh. VI.46795.  On the identification of Marta as the site of the battle, see Partsch, Corippi Africani 
grammatici libri, xxxi-xxxiii; and Pringle, Defence, 369 n. 45. 
1176  Bella IV.28.48; Ioh. VI.497773. 
1177  Ioh. VII.16, 10911, 13649. 
1178  Stein, Histoire, II, 557; Pringle, Defence, 37. 
1179  Bella IV.28.50.  Cf. Ioh. VII.1469; 26280.  On these alliances see sections 6.4 and 6.5. 
1180  Partsch, Corippi Africani Grammatici libri, xxvvi; Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 3767; Stein, Histoire, 
II, 557; PLRE IIIA, 648.  Contra Pringle, Defence, 38, who suggests mid-summer. 
1181  Bella IV.28.49; Ioh. VII.2837. 
1182  Bella IV.28.50; Ioh. VII.2815. 
1183  Ioh. VII.5248. 
1184  Ioh. VIII.2032, 418.  Corippus notes that the harbour was on the plain of Iunci (Ioh. VIII.201), but 
the site remains unidentified. 
1185  Ioh. VIII.49163. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
of food and water.1186  His implication appears to be that there was no cause other than the 
soldiers cowardice  a claim which he later places in the mouth of John Troglita.1187  However, 
given that Corippus was effectively a mouthpiece for the Roman administration in Africa, he 
could hardly be expected to have said otherwise.1188  Morale was almost undoubtedly low after 
years of continuous warfare, but conditions of service are again likely to have been a 
contributing factor. 
The ultimate intention of the mutineers was apparently to murder John Troglita.1189  The 
mutiny was only suppressed when the Roman troops were shamed into submission by John 
Troglitas claim that they should depart, if they had no wish to fight, since the allied Berber 
troops would remain loyal, and the allied Berbers indicated their willingness to stand behind 
him.1190  The proportion of the Roman army in Africa which was, by this point in time, Roman 
is open to question, if the mutineers could be cowed by the Berber troops.  By this point, the 
Roman army may well have comprised primarily of allied troops, but there is insufficient 
evidence for this to be assessed. 
Finally, at the Plains of Cato, in mid-548,1191 the Roman forces decisively defeated the Berbers 
under the command of Carcasan and Antalas in battle.1192  Carcasan himself was killed, along 
with seventeen other Berber leaders,1193 while Antalas was forced to submit to the authority of 
the Eastern Roman Empire.1194  Those Berbers who escaped from the battle of the Plains of Cato 
fled to the borders of Africa.1195 
1186  Ioh. VIII.6988. 
1187  Ioh. VIII.123: Leave our camp, you cowardly group [uos ignaua manus nostris discedite castris.] 
1188  See pp. 6870. 
1189  Ioh. VIII.87-8. 
1190  Ioh. VIII.119-31. 
1191  The precise date of the battle is uncertain, but it must fall after the spring of 548.  Cf. n. 1180. 
1192  Bella IV.28.50-1; 8.17.21; Ioh. VIII.378-656; Paul the Deacon, Hist. Lang. I.25. 
1193  Ioh. VIII.627-36; Jordanes, Rom. 385. 
1194  Bella VIII.17.21. 
1195  Bella IV.28.51. 
Chapter 5:  Roman Action and Reaction in Africa (534 to 548) 
Thus, according to Procopius: 
 after so long a time, it came to pass that there was some peace for the 
remaining Libyans, who were few and very poor.1196 
1196  Bella IV.28.52: [    ,      ,    
   .] 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (543 to 548) 
6.1 Introduction 
In Chapter 5, it has been argued that the period between 534 and 548 saw significant changes 
in the nature of relations between the Roman administration in Africa and the Berber tribes.  
The initial period of Berber hostilities following the Roman conquest, between 534 and 535, 
appears to have been the product of inter-tribal competition and conflict, rather than a 
deliberate attempt to overthrow the new Roman administration in the region.  However, by 
544, a previously unknown Berber group, the Ilaguas, had entered Byzacena, destabilizing the 
uneasy peace which had existed between the Roman administration and the tribes of Byzacena 
and Numidia since Solomons campaigns in the Aurs massif in 540.  In 545, in a dramatic 
reversal, a Berber army, comprised of tribes previously hostile to one another, was encamped 
outside the walls of Carthage. 
During this period, five Berber leaders emerge as key to the security of Roman administration 
in Africa  Cusina, Iaudas, Antalas, Ierna and Carcasan  although others, of lesser influence, 
such as Ifisdaias and Autiliten, were clearly known.1197  Of these, Antalas, Ierna and Carcasan 
were consistently hostile to the Eastern Roman Empire,1198 with the exception of a brief period 
in late 545, when Antalas attempted to back the imperially endorsed administration in Africa 
against the administration of the Roman rebel, Guntarith.1199  The roles played by Cusina and 
Iaudas are more ambiguous.  Cusina, who was retrospectively presented by the poet Corippus 
as the Berber leader always entirely loyal to the Roman state, was both enemy and ally to the 
Eastern Roman Empire during the period 534 to 548;1200 while Iaudas, a key figure of the conflict 
between 534 and 535, is entirely absent from the sources for the years 546 and 547, before 
1197  On Autiliten and Ifisdaias see PLRE IIIA, 159 and 613 respectively. 
1198  Carcasan succeeded Ierna as leader of the Ilaguas following Iernas death in 546/7.  Ioh. VI.1423; with 
n. 1261. 
1199  On these events see pp. 2235, 253. 
1200  Ioh. III.407: [Romanis rebus nimium semperque fidelis]. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
reappearing, as an ally of the Eastern Roman Empire at the decisive battle of the Plains of Cato, 
in 548.1201 
The intention of this chapter is, therefore, to outline what was known of these five Berber 
leaders, and the tribes which they represented, to the Roman administration; and to consider 
the manner in which the Eastern Roman Empire sought to both manage and exploit its 
relationships with these individuals and groups.  Finally, it will assess whether it is possible to 
identify a coherent Roman strategy vis--vis the Berbers after the initial campaign of conquest 
in Africa. 
6.2 The Ilaguas 
Given the prominent role played by the Ilaguas (or Leuathae) in Procopius narrative of the 
resumption of hostilities between the Berber tribes and the Eastern Roman Empire in 544, 
which began a period of conflict of greater intensity than the Berber raids of the 530s, their 
identity, and their sudden appearance in Roman awareness, merit some consideration. 
Before discussing the identity of the Ilaguas, a problem of terminology must first be discussed 
briefly.  As noted in section 5.5, the people to whom Corippus refers as Ilaguas, are referred to 
as Leuathae [ ] by Procopius. However, in addition to the fact that Procopius and 
Corippus use different terms from one another, Corippus uses a number of distinct terms within 
his own work  Leucada, Ilaguas, Hilaguas, Ilasguas, Laguantan, Laguantan, Ilaguaten, 
Languantan, Languentan, Languatan1202 - which have generally been assumed to be 
synonymous with one another, and with Procopius Leuathae.1203  The term Leucada can, 
1201  See pp. 1836, 1946, 22930, and section 6.5. 
1202  For full references to the various spellings see Partsch, Corippi Africani grammatici libri, xii; with 
minor emendations in Riedlberger, Philologischer, historischer und liturgischer Kommentar, 3701.  
The Iohannis also includes two apparently adjectival (following Latin grammar) forms  Ilaguatensis 
(Ioh. VI.278) and Illaguatensis (Ioh. VI.166). 
1203  Partsch, Corippi Africani grammatici libri, xii; Courtois, Les Vandales, 344; O. Brogan, Inscriptions in 
the Libyan alphabet from Tripolitania, and some notes on the tribes of the region, in J. Bynon & T. 
Bynon, eds., Hamito-Semitica (Paris, 1975), 284.  Cf. Desanges, Catalogue des tribus africaines, 101, 
who only identifies four main forms  Leucada, Laguatan, Ilaguas and Hilaguas. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
however, be discounted.  It occurs only once in the Iohannis, and appears to be used in parallel 
with Africa in the preceding line, thus seeming to refer to the land of the Ilaguas, rather than 
to the people.1204  Confusingly, the various spellings of Ilaguas appear to have been standardised, 
without explanation, in the now standard edition of Diggle and Goodyear (1970), which prefers 
two forms  Ilaguas and Laguatan.1205  This is somewhat misleading.  While some of the 
multitude of spellings may well be explained by scribal error,1206 deliberately varied spellings 
can also be explained on metrical grounds.1207  But the preference for Laguatan, which is not 
attested in the manuscript at all, and is now common in the secondary literature, is puzzling.  
Nevertheless, in the interests of clarity, the spellings of Diggle and Goodyears edition have 
been retained in the quotations presented in this study; and the term Ilaguas has been 
employed as the generic term. 
Corippus various terms for the Ilaguas have attracted some interest, since they are clearly not 
Latin, and appear to be transliterations of terms from a local Berber language.1208  Based on what 
is known of modern Berber linguistics, Hilaguas/Ilaguas/Ilasguas should be the singular form 
and Laguantan/Languantan/Languatan etc should be the plural form.1209  Nevertheless, 
Corippus treats all forms as grammatically singular, from which it must be inferred that, while 
Corippus, as a native Romano-African, was familiar with some Berber words, notably names, he 
did not have sufficiently close contact with the Berber tribes so as to be able to speak their 
1204  Ioh. III.2935: [non mentis consensit tunc Africa bellum/ te vigilante, pater.  spectauit Leucada 
pugnas/ uirtutemque tuam.]  Following the translation of Shea, The Iohannis or De Bellis Libycis, 105. 
1205  One usage each of Ilaguatan (Ioh. V.153), and the adjective, Ilaguatensis (Ioh. VI.166), remain, 
although not in the lines in which they may be found in the manuscript.  Cf. n. 1202. 
1206  Mattingly, The Laguatan, 106 (appendix). 
1207  Zarini, Berbres ou barbares?, 41. 
1208  Brogan, Inscriptions in the Libyan alphabet from Tripolitania, 284; Mattingly, The Laguatan, 96 and 
106 (appendix); idem, Laguatan, in EB 28/9 (Aix-en-Provence, 1008), 4314; Riedlberger, 
Philologischer, historischer und liturgischer Kommentar, 370; Zarini, Berbres ou barbares?, 41. 
1209  S. Chaker, Laguatan: Note complmentaire sur le nom des Laguatan, in EB 28/9 (Aix-en-Provence, 
2008), 4321; W. Vycichl, Les terminaisons de pluriel externe des noms berbres.  tude smantique 
et historique, in J. Drouin & A. Roth, eds.,  la croise des tudes libyco-berbres.  Mlanges offerts  
P. Galand-Pernet et L. Galand (Paris, 1993), 255.  Contra Mattingly, The Laguatan, 96; and idem, 
Laguatan, in EB, 4314, who claims that Ilaguas is the plural form. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
language(s),1210 and his level of knowledge of the Berbers generally, and of the Ilaguas in 
particular, should not be overestimated. 
A people referred to as the Austuriani (sometimes spelled Austoriani or Ausuriani) by 
contemporaries must also be considered when reconstructing the history of the Ilaguas.1211  The 
Austuriani are listed among the Berber tribes which Corippus claims gathered at the summons 
of Antalas, in the catalogue of tribes in book II of the Iohannis,1212 and are subsequently attested 
as being part of an alliance which included the Ilaguas.1213  Whether the Austuriani should be 
regarded as a specific sub-group of the Ilaguas, or whether the term Austuriani is synonymous 
with Ilaguas, is, however, uncertain, since it is often unclear whether Corippus is presenting a 
list, or two statements in apposition.1214  Nevertheless, the Austuriani of the 4th century1215 were 
either assimilated into the Ilaguas by the 6th century, or Austuriani is an anachronistic name 
for the Ilaguas.1216  Consequently, references to the Austuriani can also be used to reconstruct 
the history of the Ilaguas. 
The earliest apparent references to the Ilaguas, by a contemporary writer, are to the Austuriani.  
Ammianus Marcellinus, writing in the 4th century, notes attacks by the Austuriani on the 
1210  Riedlberger, Philologischer, historischer und liturgischer Kommentar, 370.  Contra Riedlberger, 
Corippus does not actually use the singular and plural forms synonymously.  In fact, the poet appears 
to use the singular form as a noun, and the plural form as an indeclineable adjective, with the 
exception of two contestable usages (Ioh. IV.629 and VII.535), in which he uses Languatan and 
Laguantan substantively.  This, however, reinforces Riedlbergers argument, as does the fact that 
Corippus is otherwise scathing in his references to the Berber language (Ioh. II.27 and IV.3501). 
1211  Ammianus Marcellinus uses Austoriani; Synesius of Cyrenaica uses Ausuriani; and Corippus uses both 
Austuriani and Austur.  See nn. 12123, 12178 for references. 
1212  Ioh. II.8991. 
1213  Ioh. II.20810, 3445; V.1712. 
1214  For example, the poet notes, in the context of the gathering of tribes: The Ilaguas, having never been 
overcome, gathered in innumerable thousands, and flying forth, terrified the whole world.  The 
savage Austur, having released the reigns of their horses, followed, trusting in their strength 
[conuenit innumeris numquam superatus Ilaguas/ milibus et totum uolitans conterritat orbem./ 
cornipedum saeuus laxatis Austur habenis/ uiribus hunc sequitur fidens](Ioh. II.8790). 
1215  See n. 1217. 
1216  Contra D. Roques, Synesios de Cyrne et les migrations berbres vers lOrient (398413), CRAI 127/4 
(1983), 660677, who argues that the Austuriani [Austoriani] noted by Ammianus Marcellinus (28.6.2, 
13) were remnants of Gildos defeated army. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
population of Tripolitania, including the city of Leptis Magna, between 363 and 365.1217  
Subsequent attacks by the Austuriani are attested in the early 5th century, both in Cyrenaica, 
by Synesius, bishop of Ptolemais (on the coast of Cyrenaica);1218 and in Tripolitania, based on 
epigraphic evidence.1219  However, no source explicitly identifies the original homeland of the 
Austuriani. 
By the early 6th century, Procopius suggests that there were Berbers living within the borders 
of what had previously been the Roman province of Tripolitania.1220  He notes in the Bella that 
the Berbers of Tripolitania were led by Cabaon, who defeated the Vandals in battle during the 
reign of the Vandal king Thrasamund (496523), presumably at some point in the early 520s.1221  
Furthermore, in the De Aedificiis, Procopius claims that, at the time of the Roman invasion of 
Africa, Leptis Magna had been abandoned by the Vandals, and the hinterland of the city was 
controlled by the Berbers.1222 Cabaon, or his successors, may be assumed to have gained control 
of the entire region.  These Berbers are, admittedly, named as neither Austuriani nor Ilaguas.  
1217  Ammianus Marcellinus, XXVIII.6.114.  Contra Mattingly, The Laguatan, 100; and idem, Laguatan, 
in EB 28/9 (2008), 431418, who suggests that the earliest historical reference to the Austuriani should 
be dated to the late 3rd century, when the emperor Maximian campaigned against them.  However, 
these events are not attested by any contemporary source, but rather by Corippus (Ioh. I.4802; 
V.17880; VII.53033), writing some three centuries after the events he describes, and the reliability 
of the information is open to doubt.  Indeed, it is worth noting that Corippus use of the terms Ilaguas 
and Laguatan, even in the context of the 6th century, appears to be quite generic.  He does, after all, 
refer to Antalas as Laguatan, despite otherwise naming his tribe as the Frexes (Ioh. I.4679), and 
despite Procopius categorically denying that Antalas was originally of the Ilaguas (Ioh. I.4679 and 
Bella IV.21.18).  It therefore seems to be likely that the terms Ilaguas and Laguatan were sometimes 
used simply to refer to those Berber tribes in opposition to the Eastern Roman Empire, perhaps to 
stress the barbarity of all the rebellious tribes by associating them with a powerful adversary on the 
fringes of the Roman world (see Y. Modran, Les Laguatan: Le problme des migrations des no-
Berbres, in EB 28/9 (Aix-en-Provence, 2008), 4320). 
1218  For full references to Synesius Epistulae see Mattingly, The Laguatan, 98. 
1219  IRT 480; J. M. Reynolds, The Austuriani and Tripolitania in the early fifth century, LibStud 8 (1976
1977), 13. 
1220  Thus, Modran, Les Maures, 289. 
1221  Bella III.8.1529; cf. Evagrius, HE IV.15.  Mattingly, Laguatan, in EB, 43148, places the Vandal defeat 
in 523.  However, this cannot be correct.  The Vandal king Thrasamund died in 523, and Procopius is 
clear in stating that the Vandal defeat occurred prior to this: Such was the suffering which befell 
Thrasamund at the hands of the Berbers.  And he died at a later time, having ruled the Vandals for 27 
years [      .      
      ] (Bella III.8.29).  On Cabaon see PLRE II, 244. 
1222  Aed. VI.4.610. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
But, when the information provided by Procopius is taken in combination with that of Synesius, 
they should probably be identified as such.1223 
Thus, while the Ilaguas appear to have been established in Tripolitania, and perhaps also in 
Cyrenaica, by the 6th century, albeit as a transhumant population, their origins remain much 
debated.  The two dominant, and opposing, views at present are that of David Mattingly, 
focusing on migration from the East, and that of Yves Modran, focusing on ethnogenesis.1224  
The arguments are complex, being based on extremely limited contemporary source material, 
and rest heavily on the Berber geneaologies constructed by medieval Arabic writers, notably 
Ibn Khaldun.1225  The origins of the Ilaguas are undoubtedly of interest, but a detailed analysis 
of the question is certainly beyond the scope of this study, especially given that the essential 
point, for this study - the movement of the Ilaguas from Tripolitania to Byzacena and their 
alliance with the Frexes, in 544 - is classified as anomalous according to both the model 
proposed by Mattingly and that proposed by Modran.1226 
Unfortunately, neither Procopius nor Corippus offers an explicit explanation for the westward 
movement of the Ilaguas from Tripolitania to Byzacena in 544.1227  Although, Corippus account 
1223  Thus, Mattingly, Laguatan, in EB, 43148. 
1224  See, in particular, Mattingly, The Laguatan, 96106; idem, Tripolitania, 1735; idem, Laguatan, in 
EB, 43148; and Modran, Les premiers raids des tribus sahariennes en Afrique, 47990; idem, Les 
Maures, 289310; idem, Les Maures de lAfrique romaine, 24969; idem, Des Maures aux Berbres, 
91134.  For a concise summary of the differences between the two views see Modran, Les Laguatan, 
in EB 28/9, 431821. 
1225  Modran, Les Laguatan, in EB, 431821. 
1226  Mattingly, Laguatan, in EB, 4315; Modran, Les Laguatan, in EB, 431821. 
1227  Contra Modran, Les Maures, 60913, who cites the chronicle of Theophanes (AM 6026) (ed. De Boor, 
p. 208) as evidence that the Ilaguas did not move directly from Leptis Magna to Byzacena, but instead 
initially moved to the East, to Cyrenaica, in order to capture the city of Berenice, which suggests that 
the invasion of Byzacena was not their immediate priority.  This argument has been followed by 
Zarini, Berbres ou barbares?, 45.  Theophanes, writing in the 9th century, generally offers no more 
than a paraphrase of Procopius account of the Roman campaigns in Africa during the reign of 
Justinian (see pp. 389).  But, in this instance, he does indeed offer a unique testimony, which has 
been argued to derive from a reliable, but no longer extant, source (see Mango & Scott, The Chronicle 
of Theophanes Confessor, 312 n. 104; and Modran, Les Maures, 610 n. 20).  However, the account of 
the capture of Berenice is inherently suspect, given that Theophanes is not writing as a 
contemporary; it does not derive from Procopius Bella, Theophanes major source for this section of 
his chronicle; and its source cannot be identified.  Furthermore, given that Africa was entirely under 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
might be interpreted as evidence that Antalas, the leader of the Frexes of Byzacena, invited the 
tribes of Tripolitania into Byzacena in order to aid his vengeance against the Eastern Roman 
Empire, following the death of his brother.1228  Procopius, on the other hand, notes only that 
the Ilaguas, upon entering Byzacena, plundered the surrounding countryside.1229  He 
subsequently claims that an attack on Carthage was intended, but does so only after noting the 
alliance of the Ilaguas with Antalas and the Frexes, implying that this directed military action 
occurred at Antalas instigation.1230 
Certainly, Corippus claim, that the Ilaguas entered Byzacena at the invitation of Antalas, 
cannot be entirely dismissed.1231  However, this need not imply that there was any longstanding 
connection between the Ilaguas and the Frexes.1232  To a certain extent, the debate as to whether 
the Ilaguas were a confederation of tribes or simply tribes intermittently brought together by 
alliances is not relevant.  Given that even the major proponent of a confederation concedes 
that, for much of its history, the confederation was inoperative but latent,1233 on a practical 
level, it is difficult to see how an activated confederation would have differed from a short-
Islamic rule by the beginning of the 8th century, and this is the only reference to Berenice in 
Theophanes chronicle, it is perhaps to be doubted that he were aware of its location. 
1228  Ioh. III.3936; with Modran, Les Maures, 608.  See further pp. 2456. 
1229  Contra Modran, Les Maures, 607, who suggests that Procopius account implies that the Ilaguas 
entered Byzacena in order to continue their retaliation against the Eastern Roman Empire for the 
murder of their notables at Leptis Magna and their subsequent defeat outside its walls.  While this 
possibility cannot be dismissed, Procopius statement does not obviously permit this interpretation: 
The barbarians, arriving in Byzacena, pillaged much of the land there through raids [   
         ] (Bella IV.21.17). 
1230  Bella IV.21.18: So, at that time, Antalas was happy to see the barbarians and having made an alliance 
with them, he led them against Solomon and Carthage [      
            .] 
1231  See n. 1230. 
1232  Contra Mattingly, Laguatan, in EB, 431418, who suggests that a confederation of tribes was 
assembled, possibly after a long abeyance, as a response to the murder of the leaders of the Ilaguas at 
Leptis Magna in 544, as a result of a longstanding agreement between various tribal groupings, 
including the Frexes. 
1233  Mattingly, Laguatan, in EB, 4318. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
term multi-tribe alliance, such as clearly occurs between the tribes of Cusina and Iaudas in 
535;1234 or, briefly, between Antalas, Iaudas and Cusina in 545, at Guntariths instigation.1235 
For the purposes of considering the events of the 6th century, the reasons why the Ilaguas and 
Frexes chose to act in collaboration at this specific point in time are far more important than 
whether or not they had previously done so.  And the comparatively recent emergence of the 
Frexes as a political power in Africa, and the unique circumstances which facilitated this, argues 
against a longstanding relationship between the two tribal groups.1236 
There were, however, evident benefits to the Frexes in a temporary alliance with the Ilaguas.  
As will be discussed in greater detail in section 6.3, Antalas hostilities against the Eastern 
Roman Empire between 544 and 548 appear to have been motivated by a desire to maintain his 
autonomy, and perhaps to expand his territory, and he may well have regarded the Ilaguas as 
a much needed military resource.1237  However, the catalyst for the Ilaguas to temporarily 
relocate to lands they had never previously occupied, regardless of whether or not an 
agreement existed with the Frexes, requires a more sophisticated explanation than merely the 
wishes of Antalas. 
Explanation for the movement of the Ilaguas in 544 must lie, at least in part, in their 
transhumant way of life.1238  Significantly, the Ilaguas do not remain in Byzacena after entering 
it, despite their evident military achievements under Antalas leadership.1239  In the spring of 
544, the united Berber tribes were ostensibly in a strong position.  They had defeated the 
1234  Bella IV.12.26, 29; with p. 194. 
1235  See Bella IV.25.13; with pp. 2234. 
1236  On the Frexes see pp. 24851. 
1237  Thus, Modran, Les Maures, 616. 
1238  Mattingly, The Laguatan, 1045, has legitimately argued against the older view of of the Ilaguas as 
les nomades chameliers (see Courtois, Les Vandales, 102104, 344350 and E. F. Gautier, Le pass de 
lAfrique du Nord. Les sicles obscurs (Paris, 1952), 188214), rightly stressing that the Ilaguas 
practised a mixed economy and were reliant on the agricultural production of settled populations, 
either their own or tributary tribes, as well as on nomadic pastoralism. 
1239  This point has been stressed by Modran, Les Maures, 62021. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Romans at the battle of Theveste, which resulted in the death of Solomon, and had gained the 
support of the disillusioned Roman, Vandal, and possibly Berber, forces, under the leadership 
of the Roman mutineer, Stotzas, who joined them from Mauritania.1240  The Berbers then moved 
north, presumably towards Carthage.  En route, they came to the city of Laribus, which they 
besieged.1241  Apparently as a result of their inexperience in siege warfare, the Ilaguas were 
unable to capture Laribus, and, rather than continuing to move north, towards Carthage, they 
returned home, presumably to Tripolitania,1242 leaving Antalas without the greater part of his 
army.  At this point, Antalas offered his surrender to the Eastern Roman Empire.1243 
This pattern of entering Byzacena, raiding, and then returning to Tripolitania was repeated by 
the Ilaguas over the next three years.1244  The Ilaguas failure to remain in Byzacena following 
each successive invasion, suggests that their movement cannot be interpreted as large-scale 
migration.1245  Rather, the movements of the Ilaguas appear to be seasonal,1246 although there is 
no clear indication of what might have prompted a change from their previous pattern of 
1240  Bella IV.22.16. 
1241  Bella IV.22.1220.  Modran, Les Maures, 61618, is almost certainly correct in suggesting that the 
events presented by Procopius in Bella 4.22 are both compressed and not in the correct chronological 
order.  In his account, Procopius claims that, following the death of Solomon, and Sergius assumption 
of the powers of magister militum and Praetorian Prefect, Antalas wrote to the emperor offering the 
surrender of the Berbers under his control (presumably including the Ilaguas), on the condition that 
Sergius be removed from office.  However, as Modran argues, it is implausible that Antalas should 
have offered his surrender having just won a military victory and received reinforcements; and at a 
point when the turmoil within the Roman administration can only have aided his own objectives.  
Rather, Antalas must have offered his surrender following the failed siege of Laribus, having been 
abandoned by his Ilaguas allies a short distance from Carthage.  The siege of Laribus should therefore 
placed a few weeks later than the battle of Theveste, given that both Theveste and Laribus were on a 
major route to Carthage, allowing for easy movement. 
1242  Bella IV.22.20. 
1243  Bella IV.22.710.  See n. 1241 on the chronology.  Procopius presents Antalas offer of surrender by 
means of a letter to the emperor, in which Antalas offers his own surrender in exchange for the 
removal of Sergius from office.  However, it is far more likely that Antalas should have negotiated 
directly with the Roman military commanders in Africa, rather than writing directly to the emperor 
 a process which would have taken some time.  Furthermore, it seems probable that the letter is a 
literary creation of Procopius, designed to further condemn the administration of Sergius.  Cf. pp. 85
1244  Modran, Les Maures, 61634.  For the chronology see sections 5.5 and 5.6. 
1245  Contra Mattingly, The Laguatan, 1013, 105; idem, Laguatan, 43148.  Modran, Les Maures, 631, 
rightly points out that no source attests to the return of the Ilaguas to Tripolitania following their 
invasion of Byzacena in 547.  However, given the pattern of previous years, it appears to be likely that 
it occurred. 
1246  Modran, Les Maures, 6201. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
behaviour.  The most obvious possibility is adverse environmental conditions in southern 
Tripolitania, but conclusive evidence for this being directly connected to events of the 540s 
remains lacking.1247  Nevertheless, a need to expand the Ilaguas economic base appears to be 
the most likely explanation. 
Specific to the events of the 540s, Corippus identifies the leader of the Ilaguas, in the catalogue 
of tribes in book II of the Iohannis, as Ierna.1248  Neither Ierna nor any other leader of the Ilaguas 
is named by Procopius, so it is impossible to know whether he was the one tribal leader who 
escaped the massacre at Leptis Magna, or whether he otherwise emerged as the sole leader of 
the Ilaguas as a result of this catastrophe.1249 
Beyond his position of leadership, little else is known about Ierna other than that he was also 
the priest of the god Gurzil.1250  According to Corippus, Gurzil was the son of the god Ammon, 
and was represented in the shape of a bull.1251  There is evidence for the continued practice of 
pagan religion in Tripolitania during the late antique period.1252  However, while it is clear that 
the Berber tribes retained their own deities during the Roman imperial period,1253 with the 
exception of Corippus testimony, there is no conclusive evidence beyond the 4th century,1254 
1247  A. Wilson, Foggara irrigation and early state formation in the Libyan Sahara: the Garamantes of 
Fazzan, in Internationales Frontinus-Symposium: Wasserversorgung aus Qanatan - Qanate als 
Vorbilder im Tunnelbau, 25 Oktober, Walferdange, Luxembourg (Bonn, 2003), 22334; and idem, 
Saharan trade in the Roman period: short-, medium- and long-distance trade networks, Azania 47.4 
(2012), 409449, has argued that the failure of the foggara irrigation system in the Fezzan (in the 
southwest of modern day Libya) caused in the collapse of north-south trans-Saharan trade, and 
resultant large scale population movements. 
1248  Ioh. II.109: Fierce Ierna was their [ie. the Ilaguas] leader and the priest of Gurzil [Ierna ferox his ductor 
erat Gurzilque sacerdos.] 
1249  Bella IV.21.1011. 
1250  See n. 1248.  Similarly, Ioh. V.236. 
1251  Ioh. II.11011; V.236. 
1252  von Rummel, The Frexes, 586 cites Mattingly, Tripolitania, 3840, in this context.  However, 
Mattinglys evidence for pagan religious practice in Tripolitania is the references contained in the 
Iohannis.  The same is true of O. Brogan & D. J. Smith, Ghirza: A Libyan Settlement in the Roman 
Period (Tripoli, 1984), 231 with 233 n. 64. 
1253  Brogan & Smith, Ghirza, 231. 
1254  It is doubtful how much value should be placed on the claim of the 11th century Arabic writer, al-
Bakri, that pagan practices continued in the region in his own time (trans. de Slane, Description de 
lAfrique septentrionale, 31).  Contra Mattingly, The Laguatan, 103, who interprets the reference as 
evidence for the continued practice of pagan religion well into the Islamic period. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
and evidence for the specific cult of Gurzil is tenuous.1255  Nevertheless, the paganism of Ierna 
and his people fulfils Corippus literary agenda.  As representatives of barbarians from far 
beyond the Roman frontiers, they would have been expected, by Roman contemporaries, to be 
entirely barbaric, and Corippus clearly exploits descriptions of their pagan practices in order 
to fulfil his audiences expectations.1256 
Ierna appears to have been responsible for the Ilaguas initial move into Byzacena in 544.  There, 
he entered into an alliance with Antalas, leader of the Frexes, which will be discussed in greater 
detail below.  The alliance, at least in the beginning, appears to have been one of equals, and 
Ierna is attested as the leader of the Ilaguas at the battle of Theveste.1257  However, the 
relationship with Antalas either changed over time, or was perceived to have changed by 
Roman observers.  By 546/7, Ierna, while still leader of his people, is described by Corippus as 
subordinate to Antalas leadership of the alliance.1258  Given that the Ilaguas were not 
continuously present in Byzacena, and had been known to withdraw part way through a 
campaign, they were presumably regarded as useful, but not necessarily reliable, allies by 
Antalas.1259  The Ilaguas perception of their own role in the alliance is impossible to determine. 
Ierna was killed in battle in the autumn of 546, when the Berbers were defeated at Antonia 
Castra by the Roman army under the command of John Troglita.1260  Following his death, the 
Berber tribes which had previously followed him appear to have reassembled around the figure 
1255  A. Elmayer, The Libyan god Gurzil in a Neo-Punic inscription from Tripolitania, LibStud 13 (1982), 
4950, identifies the name Gurzil in a neo-Punic inscription, originally from Leptis Magna.  The text 
is, however, barely legible, and its date is uncertain.  It has sometimes been suggested that the Roman 
city of Ghirza, in Libya, might have been named for the Berber god, Gurzil.  Cf. Brogan & Smith, Ghirza, 
232.  But while it is plausible that there might be a linguistic connection, this remains unproven.  
Contra Mattingly, The Laguatan, 103. 
1256  Cameron, Corippus Iohannis, 173; eadem, Byzantine Africa, 40. 
1257  Ioh. IV.59799; in which Ierna is described as princeps bellorum. 
1258  Ioh. IV.6312.  Ierna is described, in the battle line as comitante, which clearly indicates a subordinate 
position, usually an attendant.  Shea, The Iohannis, 129, translates second in command. 
1259  Cf. Modran, Les Maures, 621, who stresses that the intermitent presence of the Ilaguas within 
Byzacena should not be interpreted as evidence for disputes between various Berber factions, merely 
as evidence of their different ways of life. 
1260  Ioh. V.493502, 51921; with pp. 2278. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
of Carcasan.1261  Unfortunately, very little is known about Carcasan.  Prior to 547, he was the 
leader of a tribe called the Ifuraces, apparently a subgroup of the Ilaguas, which, according to 
Corippus, originated in the region of the Greater Syrtes, in modern day Libya.1262 
In an initiative perhaps motivated by the disintegration of Ilaguas unity following their defeat 
in 546, Carcasan appears to have rapidly launched a new offensive, albeit, according to 
Corippus, after having consulted the oracle of Ammon.1263  As a new leader, presumably anxious 
to establish his own authority, this would have been an unsurprising course of action.  He 
appears to have been solely responsible for leading the Ilaguas, and perhaps some Berber allies, 
to victory over the Romans at the battle of Marta, in 547;1264 before again entering into an 
alliance with Antalas in 548  this time apparently with Antalas as the subordinate partner.1265  
The dynamic of the Berber alliance, and, in all likelihood, its objectives, had clearly changed. 
The actions of Ierna in raiding Byzacena between 544 and 546 appear to have been primarily 
driven by economic motivations.  Carcasans objective, in contrast, might have been an 
independent Berber polity, albeit in Byzacena, rather than in Tripolitania.  Corippus notes: 
  under the leadership of Carcasan, the fierce tribes were advancing against 
the lofty walls of Carthage, promising to themselves a kingdom in name.1266 
1261  Ioh. VI.1424: Bruten had scarcely spoken these words, and the rest followed with a shout, and they 
shouted [the name] Carcasan, and said with tongues and hearts that Carcasan alone was their leader 
of all the tribes [uix ea Bruten ait, cuncti clamore sequunter/ Carcasanque fremunt, Carcasan 
omnibus unum/ gentibus esse ducem linguis animisque fatentur.] 
1262  Ioh. IV.63944 and VI.104. 
1263  Ioh. VI.14576. 
1264  In his account of the battle of Marta, Corippus (Ioh. VI.551773) makes no mention of Antalas or the 
Frexes, nor, indeed, of any Berber leader other than Carcasan.  Cf. PLRE IIIA, 648, which suggests that 
Procopius reference to Antalas in Bella IV.28.478 is in the context of the battle of Marta.  Procopius 
account of John Troglitas campaigns is, however, so compressed as to make this interpretation 
uncertain. 
1265  Ioh. VII.2837: The Austur were strewing the bodies of the rural people across the Mammensian plains 
with deadly weapons, seizing part of Byzacena and second spoils.  Antalas had again joined his own 
army to the enemy forces and was leading it to war [campis Mammensibus Austur/ rustica funereis 
sternebat corpora telis,/ Byzacii partem rapiens praedamque secundam./ Antalas rursus proprium 
tunc iunxerat agmen/ partibus aduersis seseque in bella ferebat]; with Modran, Les Maures, 629. 
1266  Ioh. VI.2257: [ Carthaginis altae/ Carcasan ductore feras ad moenia gentes/ ire docens nomenque 
sibi promittere regni.]  Cf. Ioh. VI.192; VII.51315. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Corippus presents Carcasan as motivated to attack Carthage by a prophecy which predicted that 
he would enter Carthage and that his people would hold Byzacena for eternity.1267  This 
reference to a prophecy may be a literary device, through which Corippus attempts to show the 
primitive Ilaguas as being misled by their pagan god.1268  This may well be the case.  Nevertheless, 
Corippus narrative requires its audience to believe that the possession of Byzacena was a 
legitimate ambition for the Ilaguas. 
Furthermore, if Corippus is correct in suggesting that the Ilaguas intended to attack Carthage, 
independent of Antalas, this is a marked change from their previous pattern of raiding in 
Byzacena.  Carcasans intentions are impossible to verify, and no other source supports 
Corippus implication.  Nevertheless, it is possible that, given the successes of Antalas, prior to 
his defeat in 546, other tribal leaders, including Carcasan, began to see independent Berber 
polities within the former Roman provinces of Africa as a possibility. 
Equally, Corippus may have been articulating a fear among the Romano-African population, 
which would have struggled to understand that a people could conduct a military campaign 
against them without a political agenda.  Also, Corippus may exaggerate the threat posed by 
Carcasan as a means of elevating the significance of John Troglitas campaigns, the primary 
subject matter of his poem.1269  Given the lack of comparative source material, it is impossible to 
present a definitive interpretation of either the events or Corippus presentation thereof. 
Whatever Carcasans objective, it was never achieved.  The outcome of the final Berber alliance 
against the Eastern Roman Empire in the 6th century was the decisive defeat of the Berbers at 
the battle of the Plains of Cato, and Carcasans death.1270 
1267  Ioh. VI.16672. 
1268  P. Castranuovo, La visione dei Mauri nella Iohannis di Corippo, in M. L. Silvestre & M. Squillante, 
eds., Mutatio rerum: Letteratura, filosofia, scienza tra tardo antico e altomedioevo.  Atti del convegno 
di studi (Napoli, 2526 novembre 1996) (Naples, 1997), 4024. 
1269  Modran, Les Maures, 633. 
1270  Ioh. VIII.627; with p. 231. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
6.3 Antalas and the Frexes 
Procopius account of the resumption of hostilities between the Berbers and the Eastern Roman 
Empire in 544 focuses on the role played by the Ilaguas, as outlined in the preceding section.  
However, Corippus account, which instead focuses on the Berber leader Antalas, and his 
people, the Frexes, must be considered in contrast to this.1271  Corippus makes no mention of 
the Berber attack on Leptis Magna, and his references to the outbreak of hostilities between 
the Eastern Roman Empire and the Berbers are less specific than the narrative offered by 
Procopius, being couched in the language of epic.  Unlike Procopius, Corippus presents Antalas 
as the instigator of the conflict, stating outright that Antalas first went to war,1272 and 
furthermore depicts Antalas as solely responsible for the attendant suffering inflicted on the 
Romano-African population.1273 
Corippus explains Antalas actions as a response to the death of his brother, Guarizila, who was 
killed on the order of an unjust general [dux iniquus].1274  This is not entirely incompatible 
with Procopius account, which claims that Antalas entered into an alliance with the Ilaguas, 
after their attack on Leptis Magna, because Solomon had killed his brother, who had led a revolt 
in Byzacena, and had subsequently deprived Antalas of the subsidies which he had been paid 
by the Roman imperial government, presumably since 533.1275  Procopius does not make clear 
whether Antalas was condemned by association, or had actively been involved in his brothers 
rebellion.  Nevertheless, his account implies that Antalas revolt was motivated by a desire to 
maintain his own autonomy. 
1271  The name is Antalas tribe is only given by Corippus (Ioh. II.4246, 184; III.1848; VII.383-4; VIII.647
1272  Ioh. II.28: [primus init bellum] 
1273  Ioh. II.401. 
1274  Ioh. IV.3646.  Cf. Ioh. II.3640. 
1275  Bella IV.21.17.  In the letter to the emperor which Procopius attributes to Antalas (Bella IV.22.710), 
Procopius claims that Antalas accused Solomon of having deprived him of his subsidies and killed his 
brother:  having no wrong-doing to charge against him [     ] 
(Bella IV.22.8).  However, as this letter is likely to have been a creation of Procopius, its contents 
should be treated with caution (cf. pp. 856). 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Unlike Procopius, Corippus attaches no specific political or military significance to Guarizilas 
death.  Instead, he presents Antalas as resorting to conflict as a result of grief.1276  Thus, while 
Corippus presents Antalas as an explanation for the misfortunes suffered by the people of 
Africa, and as a justification for Roman intervention in the region, he offers no sophisticated 
account of Antalas behaviour, resorting instead to little more than the topos of the barbarian, 
being governed by emotion rather than by reason.1277  And, beyond this attribution of blame, 
Corippus presents Antalas role as a destructive force as almost pre-destined.  Set within the 
speech attributed to the Roman tribune, Liberatus, detailing the misfortunes of Africa prior to 
the arrival of John Troglita,1278 is a set-piece, in which Antalas father consults the oracle of 
Ammon concerning the future of his son.1279  The poet attributes to the priestess the prophecy 
that: 
 When your Antalas rises in power, every fury and anger will throw this 
unhappy world into turmoil with its torch of horror.1280 
And yet, a discrepancy exists in Corippus characterisation of Antalas.  Despite Antalas role in 
the Iohannis, as the figure responsible for all the misfortunes of Africa, he had, from 533 until 
544, enjoyed the support of the Eastern Roman Empire.  In relation to the Berber raids in 
Byzacena between 534 and 535, Procopius notes that: 
And only the Berbers whom Antalas led remained in Byzacena, he alone, at 
this time, having kept faith with the Romans, 
and returns to this point when discussing Guarizilas revolt and Antalas own decision to ally 
himself to the Ilaguas.1281  For Procopius, at least, Antalas actions in 544 were at odds with the 
1276  Ioh. III.3834.  Cf. Ioh. II.28. 
1277  On this topos see Y. A. Dauge, Le barbare: recherches sur la conception romaine de la barbarie et de 
la civilisation (Brussels, 1981). 
1278  See pp. 723. 
1279  Ioh. III.81140. 
1280  Ioh. III.10910: [Antala crescente tuo furor omnis et ira/ horribili miserum turbabunt lampade 
mundum.]  Cf. Ioh. III.1169. 
1281  Bella IV.12.30; with n. 872.  Cf. Bella IV.21.17. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
status quo of the previous decade.  This was not something of which Corippus was entirely 
unaware, since he notes: 
 When peace had been taken up within the borders of Libya, he was loyal, and 
was so for ten full years.1282 
In order to fit the broader theme of the Iohannis, in which Roman imperial power in Africa 
acted as a bulwark against the threat of barbarian savagery,1283 such statements appear to have 
been included to highlight the perfidy of Antalas decision to turn against the Eastern Roman 
Empire, and to play on the topos of the barbarian as a faithless ally.1284  However, they are not 
particularly successfully resolved with the rest of Corippus presentation of Antalas. 
While Corippus presentation of Antalas is certainly negative, it is not entirely consistent, being 
primarily constructed to provide an unambiguous juxtaposition with John Troglita specifically, 
and with Roman culture more generally.1285  Corippus sets up Antalas as the embodiment of the 
threat facing Roman Africa.1286  This creates difficulties when considering the Iohannis as a 
historical source, as the presentation of Antalas is such as to obscure the motivations which 
might have inspired his actions.  However, since both Corippus and Procopius present Antalas 
as central to the events which occurred between 544 and 548, it is necessary to give some 
consideration to the nature of Corippus presentation of Antalas background,1287 and the 
position of his tribe, the Frexes, in Africa in the first half of the 6th century.1288 
The date of Antalas birth is not explicitly stated by any source.  However, Corippus provides 
two references which allow the date to be approximated.  He notes that there was peace in 
1282  Ioh. II.345: [finibus in Libycis suscepta pace fidelis/ ille fuit plenosque decem perfecerat annos.]  Cf. 
Ioh. II.2930. 
1283  Cameron, Corippus Iohannis, 1723. 
1284  This view underpins Procopius presentation of the Berbers.  See Bella IV.8.9, 13.37, 17.10. 
1285  Cameron, Corippus Iohannis, 173. 
1286  Thus, Modran, Corippe et loccupation byzantine de lAfrique, 209, argues that, in the Iohannis, 
Antalas is une vritable incarnation du mal. 
1287  No background information is provided by Procopius, who first refers to Antalas in the context of the 
defeat of the Vandal army in Byzacena in 530/1.  See n. 336. 
1288  The Iohannis is the only source to mention the name of Antalas tribe.  See Ioh. II.426, 1846; III.187
8; VII.3834; VIII.6478; and J. Desanges, Frexes, in EB 19 (Aix-en-Provence, 1998), 2935. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Africa until the thirtieth year of Antalas birth; and that the Vandal kingdom was destroyed 
in its hundredth year.1289  Both references appear to relate to Antalas first campaign against 
the Vandal kingdom, in which he defeated the forces of Hilderic.1290  The date of the Vandals 
crossing into Africa remains debated, but has conventionally been dated to 429,1291 which would 
place Antalas campaign in 529.  The events can also be dated from Malalas account, which 
places them in 530/1.1292  The minor discrepancy between the sources can easily be explained 
by the fact that Corippus was writing a literary, as well as historical, work, and preferred the 
round figure of hundred years.  Antalas must have been born c. 500, and a difference of a year 
or two in either direction would not affect the rest of the chronology.1293 
The localisation of Antalas tribe, the Frexes, has been the subject of considerable debate.  
Traditionally, the Frexes were argued to have been located in the region between Thala and 
Thelepte (both in Tunisia).1294  However, this localisation has now been demonstrated to have 
been based on a misunderstanding of the text of the Vita of Fulgentius of Ruspe.1295  Most 
recently, Modran has proposed locating the Frexes to the west of the Capsa-Thelepte route.1296  
Based on the areas in which the Frexes are attested by the literary sources,1297 and in the 
absence of further archaeological evidence, this localisation is plausible, and will be followed 
here. 
1289  Ioh. III.734: [usque ad ter denos  annos/ nascentis]; and III.185: [centeno anno]. 
1290  See pp. 7880. 
1291  Courtois, Les Vandales, 155 with n. 2. 
1292  Malalas, XVIII.57; with n. 335. 
1293  Cf. Camps, Encyclopdie Berbre, 706; Modran, Les Maures, 315 n. 2; von Rummell, The Frexes, 577; 
and Zarini, Berbres ou barbares?, 5. 
1294  Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 3034; Courtois, Les Vandales, 343-6; Mattingly, The Laguatan, 99. 
1295  F. Chtillon, LAfrique oublie de C. Courtois et les ignotae regiones de la Vita Fulgentii, Revue du 
Moyen Age Latin 11 (1955), 37188.  Chtillon does not, however, propose an alternative location. 
1296  Modran, Les Maures, 316-23, which also reviews the earlier literature.  This localisation is followed 
by von Rummel, The Frexes, 5789.  See Map IX. 
1297  For the textual evidence upon which this is based see Modran, Les Maures, 318 n. 14.  Incidentally, 
this is the region of a modern Berber tribe, the Frechich (or Fraichich) (G. Camps & A. Martel, 
Fraichich (Frechlich) in EB 19 (Aix-en-Provence, 1998), 2930; Modran, Les Maures, 323), who are 
believed to have derived their name from the Frexes (Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 303; C. Monchicourt, 
La rgion du Haut Tell en Tunisie (Paris, 1913), 2978; Courtois, Les Vandales, 346). 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Despite the central position which Corippus accords to the Frexes in his work, their 
predominance as a tribe appears to have been a relatively recent development at the time he 
was writing, and Antalas appears to have experienced a rapid rise to power.  According to the 
Iohannis, Antalas was the son of Guenfan, a Berber leader who is otherwise unknown,1298 and 
who has been assumed to have been responsible for uniting his people into a force sufficiently 
powerful as to challenge the Vandals.  Antalas would then have inherited his fathers position 
as leader. 
The hereditary aspect of this leadership is not in doubt.  However, it is unclear that the Frexes 
were already a major power in the region under Guenfans leadership.  Courtois, assuming that 
the pre-eminence of the Frexes must have been established prior to Antalas leadership, 
speculated that the various tribes of Byzacena were united into a royaume de Dorsale by 
Guenfan in c. 510, and that this established polity was inherited by Antalas in c. 517.1299  More 
recently, Courtois theory of a royaume de Dorsale has been re-evaluated by Modran, who 
endorses it, although he notes that Courtois was insufficiently appreciative of the evidence 
which Corippus provides in its favour.1300  However, both Courtois original argument and 
Modrans re-evaluation are highly speculative.  There is simply no clear evidence for a 
unification of Berber tribes under Guenfan, in 510 or at any other date, and Modrans claim, 
that this is supported by Corippus statement: 
 Guenfan was the unhappy source of our distress, when savage Antalas was 
born.  For, in earlier times, there was a most secure peace in all the lands of 
Libya,1301 
is not evident. 
1298  See PLRE IIIA, 562.  Guenfan is mentioned twice, in his own right, in the Iohannis (III.678, 1078), and 
his name is used adjectivally (Guenfeius) on six occasions, to refer to Antalas (Ioh. I.467-9; III.778; 
V.810; VII.2967, 522-4; VIII.23941). 
1299  Courtois, Les Vandales, 343.  This argument is followed by Pringle, Defence, 15. 
1300  Modran, Les Maures, 3256. 
1301  Ioh. III.657: [Guenfan miseris est tristis origo/ Antala nascente fero.  nam tempore prisco/ pax erat 
in cunctis Libyae tutissima terris]. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Indeed, there is evidence to suggest that Antalas did not establish the Frexes as independent of 
the Vandal kingdom, let alone as the predominant tribe in the region which would become the 
province of Byzacena until immediately prior to the Roman invasion of Africa.  This is suggested 
by Corippus depiction of Antalas early life.  He presents Antalas as almost a caricature of 
barbarian savagery - stealing sheep, slaughtering the animals with his bare hands, and eating 
their half-cooked flesh in a cave  which, given the poets literary agenda, must be treated with 
caution.1302  However, more significant is Corippus claim that Antalas:   drew other men 
around him1303 
and subsequently that: 
  He would dare to lie in ambush in a captured valley, and, hidden, to test the 
Vandal forces.  How many leaders, how many enemies did cut down with his 
sword, pressing them into an ambush in the middle of a pass.  Drawing 
barbarian forces with an evil power, the impious one strew them before him 
on the open fields with his spear1304 
In the above passage, Corippus presents Antalas actions as little more than banditry  an image 
consistent with his characterisation of the Berber leader.  Nevertheless, there was an uprising 
by the Frexes late in the reign of the Vandal king Hilderic, and events in Byzacena at this time 
were the motivation for Gelimers coup against Hilderic. 1305  This suggests that Antalas actions 
were not merely raiding, such as Corippus describes earlier, but a claim to political 
independence, as the Vandal kingdom began to lose control of its territory.1306 
There is little reason to suppose that the Frexes were a tribe of any particular significance prior 
to these events.  Corippus himself notes, concerning the Frexes, that, upon hearing the 
prophecy concerning Antalas as a child: 
1302  Ioh. III.15670. 
1303  Ioh. III.173: [contrahit inde uiros secumque...] 
1304  Ioh. III.17883: [...capta subsidere ualle/ Vandalicasque latens audet temptare phalangas./ quantos 
ille duces, quantos truncauerat hostes/ obsidione premens mediis in faucibus ense,/ barbaricasque 
trahens perverso numine turmas/ impius in latis prostrauit cuspide campis] 
1305  Bella III.9.3; Ioh. 3.184216; Malalas, XVIII.57.  See also pp. 7880. 
1306  Cf. pp. 7880. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
 Elated by these strange responses, the tribe rejoiced and was silent, for it was 
a humble tribe.1307 
Certainly, the claim that the Frexes were, at the time of Antalas birth, humble [humilis], 
suggests that their rise to power was rapid.  But, even in 544, at the time of his alliance with the 
Ilaguas, Corippus claims that Antalas: 
  did not have any power by which he might rise.1308 
The significance of this statement is not altogether clear.  But, given that it is presented in the 
context of Antalas summoning tribes from beyond the confines of Byzacena, it might be 
interpreted as evidence that he lacked the military resources to directly confront the Eastern 
Roman Empire in Africa, an interpretation which is consistent with his willingness to ally 
himself to the more numerous Ilaguas when they showed the intention to enter his territory.1309 
Furthermore, the Eastern Roman Empire had, in the mid-530s, created an opportunity for 
Antalas to consolidate his position in Byzacena.  It is clear from Procopius account of Berber 
hostilities against the Romano-African population between 534 and 535, that Antalas was not 
the only notable Berber leader in Byzacena in the 530s.  Procopius identifies the leaders of the 
raids in Byzacena during this period as Cusina, Esdilasas, Iourphouthes, and Medisinissas.1310  
However, as a result of their actions in 534, in which Antalas did not participate, these Berber 
leaders were removed from Byzacena.  Following their defeat at the battle of Mount Bourgaon 
in 535, Cusina fled to Numidia,1311 Esdilasas surrendered and was taken prisoner to Carthage,1312 
and Iourphouthes and Medisinissas are not further attested, suggesting that they were either 
1307  Ioh. III.1523: [responsis sublata nouis gaudetque siletque:/ namque humilis gens illa fuit.]  Cf. 
Modran, Les Maures, 327.  Modran, noting that the first quotation has been overlooked by earlier 
scholarship, suggests that Corippus included it to emphasize the theme that Antalas was pre-destined 
from birth to be the ultimate enemy of the Roman Empire  that is, on account of him alone, were the 
Frexes able to emerge from complete obscurity in c. 500 to become a significant threat by 544. 
1308  Ioh. III.385: [ uirtus non ulla fuit qua surgere posset.] 
1309  See pp. 2389. 
1310  Bella IV.10.6; with pp. 182-4, 1924. 
1311 Bella IV.12.29; with p. 194. 
1312  Bella IV.10.6. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
killed during the battle or fled following it.1313  The actions of the Eastern Roman Empire created 
the circumstances in which Antalas could consolidate his own autonomous region within the 
province of Byzacena, without competition from other Berber leaders. 
This is not, of course, to suggest that Antalas was not attempting to expand his influence in 
Byzacena prior to 535.  Corippus account of Antalas early activities against the Vandals 
certainly suggests that he was attempting to incorporate additional people(s) within the 
Frexes.1314  Furthermore, as has been argued in section 4.4, the attested enmity between Antalas 
and Cusina in the 530s may well have been the result of competition between the two leaders 
for the support of the local population.  However, this was more likely to have been competition 
for the support of the Romano-African population, rather than the support of other Berber 
tribes.1315 
Following the Roman victory at the battle of Mount Bourgaon in 535, Roman military activity 
was redirected against the Berbers of the Aurs massif, and, in particular, against those under 
the leadership of Iaudas.1316  While limited Roman military resources were based far to the west, 
Antalas had little reason to be concerned by the incorporation of his autonomous region into 
the province of Byzacena, which, while stipulated in the legislation establishing the civil 
administration of the Prefecture of Africa, does not appear to have been a practical reality.1317  
However, the Aurs campaign of 540 permitted a reallocation of Roman military resources, 
which had previously been concentrated in the Aurs region.  The movement of the Ilaguas 
towards Leptis Magna, and then into Byzacena, in 544, would have, from Antalas perspective, 
directed Roman attention towards his own region.  The prospect of direct confrontation with 
the Eastern Roman Empire appears to have prompted a pre-emptive bid for autonomy on 
1313  PLRE IIIA, 717 (Iourphouthes); and IIIB, 870 (Medisinissas). 
1314  Ioh. III.173. 
1315  On competition between Berber leaders for the support of the Romano-African population see section 
1316  See sections 5.2 and 5.4. 
1317  See pp. 1278, 1335. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Antalas part, and his more aggressive approach to relations with the Eastern Roman Empire 
following 544 should probably be interpreted as a desire to preserve the autonomy which he 
had established, and then maintained without Roman intervention for more than a decade. 
Indeed, by the mid-540s, Antalas ambitions appear to have extended beyond the rule of a single 
Berber tribe.  During the revolt of the dux of Numidia, Guntarith, against the Roman 
administration in Africa in late 545, Guntarith attempted to secure Antalas support by offering 
him the rule of the entire province of Byzacena, half the possessions of Areobindus, the then 
Praetorian Prefect of Africa, and 1500 Roman soldiers; while Guntarith himself would assume 
the position of king, and rule over Carthage and the rest of Africa.1318  The negotiations which 
occurred are of interest primarily for the fact that a member of the Roman administration 
appears to have believed that Antalas goal was the establishment of his own independent 
polity in Byzacena.  Ultimately, despite Antalas agreeing to the terms, and moving his forces 
towards Carthage, Guntarith reneged on the deal, depriving Antalas of the money and the 
soldiers which had been promised.1319  Procopius does not, however, mention the right to rule 
Byzacena, which Antalas had also been promised.1320 Whether or not Antalas considered himself 
the sole ruler of Byzacena from this point forward is, however, unclear. 
Furthermore, by this point in time, Antalas would have been aware that it was possible for 
independent Berber polities to exist on the peripheries of a fragmented Roman prefecture of 
Africa, without concern that they would soon be incorporated into the Eastern Roman Empire.  
As noted in section 3.2, Procopius states that, with the exception of the city of Caesarea, the 
rest of the nominal province of Mauritania Caesariensis fell under the authority of the Berber 
1318  Bella IV.25.10. 
1319  Bella IV.27.23. 
1320  Bella IV.25.10. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
leader Mastigas;1321 and there is no indication that this province was ever effectively 
incorporated into the Eastern Roman Empire. 
Procopius and Corippus are consistent in suggesting that the conflict between the Eastern 
Roman Empire and the Berbers which began in 544 involved an alliance of Berber tribes.  
Corippus suggests that Antalas conflict with the Eastern Roman Empire involved tribes from 
outside Byzacena.  He writes: 
 He [Antalas] sent to the furthest deserts of thirsty Libya, where Phaethon once 
parched the earth with too much sun, having been struck down with a 
thunderbolt, and he [Antalas] taught the malicious peoples and filled their 
ears[?] with our [ie. that of the Romano-Africans] slaughter.  And now the 
fierce tribes pour into the Libyan axis of the earth.1322 
The identification of the tribes with which Antalas allies himself remains unclear.  The use of 
the geographical term Libya provides little clarification, since Corippus uses it to refer to the 
region of Africa generally  as, indeed, is evident from the two different usages of the term in 
the passage above.  However, the reference to deserts on the edge of the poets geographical 
awareness might legitimately be interpreted as a reference to the tribes of Tripolitania, such as 
the Ilaguas. 
While Procopius does not depict Antalas as the instigator of the conflict, once the Ilaguas enter 
his territory, he is described as leading [] the entire Berber alliance against Carthage.1323  
Neither Procopius nor Corippus specifies the nature of the alliance agreed between Antalas and 
1321  Bella IV.20.301. 
1322  Ioh. III.3937: [misit ad extremas Libyae sitientis harenas,/ sole ubi tellurem nimio siccauerat olim/ 
fulmine deiectus Phaethon, populosque malignos/ edocuit nostrisque impleuit cladibus aures./ 
iamque ferae gentes Libycum funduntur in axem.]  All editors of the text agree that the manuscript 
offers oras as the final word of line 396.  Diggle & Goodyear, Iohannidos libri VIII; following 
Petschenig, Flauii Corippi Africani grammatici quae supersunt Partsch, Corippi Africani grammatici 
libri qui supersunt; emend this to aures.  Partsch, Corippi Africani grammatici libri qui supersunt; 
following Bekker, Merobaudes et Corippus; emended aures to ora.  oras, as the accusative plural of 
ora -ae [shore], obviously makes little sense.  However, ora, as the accusative plural of os, oris [mouth, 
speech], is plausible, and I would be inclined to prefer this reading as being closer to that of the 
manuscript. 
1323  Bella IV.21.18; Ioh. IV.6312. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
the Ilaguas.1324  But the presentation, by both authors, of the events which follow suggests that, 
until the death of Ierna, the Ilaguas were considered as subordinates by Antalas, despite the fact 
that Ierna continues to be named as their leader.1325  However, the fact that the Ilaguas 
repeatedly left Byzacena at times of their own choosing, suggests that they did not see 
themselves as entirely subject to Antalas authority.1326 
Following Carcasans assumption of the leadership of the Ilaguas, the objectives of the two 
Berber groups appear to have been at odds, given that Carcasan himself may have aspired to 
control of Byzacena.1327  Antalas was willing to aid the Roman rebel, Guntarith, in staging a coup 
at Carthage, if it should result in him being recognised as sole ruler of Byzacena by the 
administration at Carthage  whether or not this administration was endorsed by 
Constantinople.1328  But, when Guntarith failed to honour the deal, Antalas, as yet without 
reinforcements from the Ilaguas, was equally willing to negotiate with the imperially endorsed 
dux of Byzacena, Marcentius, who had fled to one of the islands off the coast of Byzacena 
following Guntariths revolt.1329 
According to Procopius, Antalas contacted Marcentius because, no longer trusting Guntarith, he 
wished to submit to imperial rule.1330  That Antalas genuinely wished to submit to imperial rule 
appears to be highly unlikely.  Rather, he probably hoped to negotiate an independent polity in 
Byzacena in exchange for his assistance to the beleaguered Roman administration in Africa as 
1324  Procopius (Bella IV.21.18) describes the agreement between Antalas and the Ilaguas as an .  
However, this is a fairly generic term for an alliance.  Dewing, Procopius: History of the Wars: Books 
IIIIV, 399, translates  as an offensive and defensive alliance, but this is probably too 
specific. 
1325  Bella IV.21.18. 
1326  See pp. 23941. 
1327  See pp. 2434. 
1328  Bella IV.25.10. 
1329  Bella IV.27.36. 
1330  Bella IV.27.34. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
yet loyal to the Eastern Roman Empire.1331  Clearly, an agreement was reached between Antalas 
and Marcentius, as Marcentius subsequently took up residence in Antalas camp.1332  However, 
when Guntarith was killed by Artabanes, and his regime was brought to an end by events in 
which neither Marcentius nor Antalas played a role,1333 Marcentius would no longer have been 
in a position to honour any commitment which might have been made.1334  Antalas was forced 
to abandon diplomacy, and return to attempting to achieve his objectives by military means  a 
course of action which again required the involvement of the Ilaguas. 
Corippus characterisation of Antalas as the source of all the evils suffered by the population of 
Africa in the 540s has frequently been treated as being no more than a literary foil for the 
generically good John Troglita and everything which he represents.1335  Undoubtedly, Corippus 
portrayal of Antalas is heavy influenced by the topos of the barbarian, presenting him as a little 
more than a caricature.  However, while his portrait is simplistic and stereotyped, Corippus is 
not incorrect in presenting Antalas as central to the misfortunes suffered by the Romano-
African population between 544 and 548.  But his portrayal of Antalas conceals the true agenda 
which Antalas appears to have been following.  Antalas was far from the savage barbarian, but 
rather pursued political objectives via both military and diplomatic means. 
6.4 Cusina 
In contrast to Ierna, Carcasan and Antalas, who are presented as significant threats to the 
Eastern Roman Empire between 544 and 548, must be considered Cusina, the most significant 
Berber ally of the Eastern Roman Empire during this period.  The position of Cusina at the time 
of the Roman invasion of Africa and immediately following has already been discussed in detail 
1331  As Modran, Les Maures, 6256, stresses, the increasingly weak position of the official Roman 
administration in Africa could only have strengthened the position from which Antalas could 
negotiate. 
1332  Bella IV.27.6. 
1333  On the events leading to Guntariths murder see pp. 2236. 
1334  Modran, Les Maures, 626. 
1335  Castranuovo, La visione dei Mauri, 41112; and p. 247. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
in section 4.4.  Cusina was the leader of a Berber tribe (or tribes) in Byzacena, probably based 
to the west of Capsa (mod. Gafsa, Tunisia).1336  He appears to have been among the Berber leaders 
who sent embassies to Belisarius at Carthage in November 533, and was one of the Berber 
leaders whose raids against the Romano-African population of Byzacena between 534 and 536 
brought him into conflict with the Roman administration in Africa.1337  Cusinas own tribe was 
defeated in battle by the Roman army, under the command of Solomon, at the battle of Mount 
Bourgaon, in 535.1338  Following this, he, together with his followers, fled to Numidia, where he 
took refuge with the tribe led by Iaudas, whose own people were also in conflict with the Roman 
administration in Africa.1339 
From Procopius account of events in Africa in the 530s, Cusina appears to be unequivocally 
hostile to Roman interests in the region.  However, Cusina next appears in the sources in the 
context of the battle of Theveste, in 544.1340  Corippus, in addition to noting that Solomon had 
drawn together all available Roman military resources, also suggests that the Roman 
commander drew on the support of those Berber tribes perceived to remain loyal to the Eastern 
Roman Empire.  He notes: 
 A letter was immediately sent, the direction of which was unfortunate, and, 
behold, he rushed forward willingly, not constrained by a need for equal 
forces, the general of the Berbers, the friend of wretched Solomon, always 
entirely loyal to the Roman state, great Cusina, with his Mastrician forces.1341 
Berber troops may well have served with the Roman army at this time.  As has been discussed 
in section 4.4, Berber leaders appear to have been willing to ally themselves with the Eastern 
1336  Following Modran, Les Maures, 3412. 
1337  See pp. 1824, 1924. 
1338  See pp. 1934. 
1339  See p. 193. 
1340  Ioh. III.4068.  On the battle of Theveste see pp. 2120. 
1341  Ioh. III.4048: [ilicet infausto mandatur pagina cursu,/ et ruit ecce uolans, aequo non Marte coactus/ 
Maurorum ductor, miseri Solomonis amicus,/ Romanis rebus nimium semperque fidelis/ Cusina 
Mastracianos secum uiribus ingens.]  Partsch, Corippi Africani grammatici libri qui supersunt; 
emends the crux to Mastracianis secum, which reading is adopted by Shea, The Iohannis or De Bellis 
Libycis, 108, 209, in his translation; and which I have followed in my own translation as making better 
sense. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Roman Empire temporarily if it served their interests, and Corippus subsequent references to 
the Mecales and Ifuraces among the Roman forces should probably be interpreted in this light 
 although it is, admittedly, impossible to rule out the possibility of Berber mercenaries serving 
with the Roman army in Africa.1342  The reference to Cusina is, however, problematic, given his 
role in Procopius narrative. 
Corippus, on the other hand, appears to have had a particular interest in Cusina.  In view of what 
is known about Cusina from Procopius Bella, Corippus description of him, in the context of the 
events of 544, as always entirely loyal to the Roman state, seems wildly inaccurate.1343  This 
statement is, however, typical of Corippus characterisation of Cusina.  The poet elsewhere 
describes the Berber leader as:  
  Roman in spirit, [and] not far removed in blood, distinguished by calm 
manners and Latin gravity, 
to cite but one of many examples.1344  Corippus presentation of Cusina is almost undoubtedly 
shaped by his knowledge of Cusinas role in the Roman campaigns commanded by John Troglita, 
between 546 and 548  the primary focus of Corippus poem.  But, unfortunately, the Iohannis 
offers no explanation of the course of events which led Cusina to this alliance. 
By autumn 546, Cusina was formally allied to the Eastern Roman Empire, serving on the Roman 
side at the battle of Antonia Castra.1345  However, Procopius account implies that this was the 
first occasion on which Cusina had entered into such an alliance.1346  Given that Corippus never 
mentions Cusinas actions against the Eastern Roman Empire between 534 and 536, or in 545, 
when he sided with Guntarith, rather than with the official Roman administration, it is entirely 
1342  Ioh. III.40912. 
1343  Ioh. III.407. 
1344  Ioh. IV.51112: [ille animo Romanus erat, nec sanguine longe,/ moribus ornatus placidis, grauitate 
Latina.]  Cf. Ioh. V.450; VI.2668, 467; VII.26271; VIII.1214. 
1345  Ioh. IV.50910; V.4505.  Cf. Bella IV.28.50, which appears to suggest to date Cusinas alliance with the 
Eastern Roman Empire to the winter of 547/8.  See pp. 22930. 
1346  Bella VIII.17.21.  It must, however, be acknowledged that, in this context, Procopius intends to present 
the achievements of John Troglita which led to peace in Africa.  He too may be guilty of exaggerating 
Cusinas role. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
possible that he backdates Cusinas alliance with the Eastern Roman Empire, in order to 
establish Cusina as the civilised barbarian and thus as a literary foil to Antalas, the archetypal 
barbarian savage in Corippus work.1347  Furthermore, Cusina may have been one of the few 
Berber leaders Corippus himself might have seen, which might have convinced the poet to 
represent him more sympathetically.1348  Cusinas presence with the Roman army in 544 should, 
therefore, be treated with scepticism.1349 
While Cusina could plausibly have decided that it was in his interests to ally himself temporarily 
with the strongest military force of the day - the Eastern Roman Empire - following Iaudas 
defeat by the Romans at the battle of Toumar and his flight to Mauritania in 540,1350 Procopius 
failure to mention this is difficult to explain.  Cusina was, after all, one of the few Berber leaders 
whom Procopius knew by name, and with whose actions he appears to have been comparatively 
familiar. 
In late 545, at the summons of Guntarith, Cusina marched on Carthage in alliance with 
Iaudas.1351  Cusina and Iaudas appear to have been jointly in command of the Berbers of Numidia 
- an interesting development, given that only Iaudas had previously been attested as a leader 
in Numidia1352  while Antalas was simultaneously summoned to march on Carthage from 
Byzacena.1353  However, after the combined Berber force had encamped at Decimum,1354 Cusina 
1347  On Corippus presentaton of Antalas see p. 2455, 250. 
1348  Cf. section 1.3. 
1349  Contra PLRE IIIB, 3667. 
1350  Bella IV.20.201. 
1351  For the date see n. 1134. 
1352  Cf. Bella IV.12.29, 13.1. 
1353  Bella IV.25.13. 
1354 Based on its etymology, Decimum should refer to the tenth milestone from the city of Carthage, which 
is consistent with Procopius claim that Decimum was 70 stades from Carthage (Bella 3.17.17).  It has 
sometimes been located on the plateau of Sidi Fathallah, in Tunisia, on the basis that the Roman 
foederati were able to survey the site from nearby hills (Bella 3.19.15), which have been assumed to 
be the scarp of the plateau (Tissot, Gographie compare, II, 120; followed by Bury, History, II, 132
3).  However, this argument is based on the assumption that the Roman expeditionary force must 
have approached Carthage from the south, crossing the Lake of Tunis at modern day La Goulette, 
which does not appear to have been the case (see n. 53).  More recently, Pringle, Defence, 19, has 
argued in favour of Decimum being somewhere in the vicinity of Bab Souika, a northern suburb of 
modern day Tunis.  This is a reasonable approximation of where ten miles from Carthage, following 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
was secretly summoned to Carthage by the Praetorian Prefect of Africa, Areobindus, who was 
then still in command, and who hoped to encourage a change of allegiance on Cusinas part.1355  
According to Procopius, the terms ultimately agreed were that, once battle began, Cusina would 
turn on Antalas and the Berbers of Byzacena.1356  These negotiations appear to have been the 
first occasion on which Cusina contemplated an alliance with the Eastern Roman Empire.  
Unfortunately, however, no indication is given by Procopius of what Cusina would gain from 
this alliance. 
For Procopius, Cusinas willingness to change sides was easily explained by the generalisation: 
 For the Berbers have trust in neither any other men nor in each other.1357 
However, another  motivation can be inferred.  As noted in section 4.4, Procopius explicitly 
attests that Cusina and Antalas were hostile to one another,1358 a situation perhaps explained 
by the territorial ambitions of the two rulers.1359  If the antagonism continued in the 540s, this 
would certainly explain Cusinas willingness to betray Antalas in battle, especially if further 
incentives were offered.  Indeed, after ten years of Roman presence in Africa, the Berber leaders 
may well have been becoming familiar with the Roman strategy of playing the tribes off one 
another, and were beginning to attempt to exploit it to their own advantage  but this is 
entirely speculative.  Furthermore, Areobindus decision to summon Cusina to negotiate 
suggests that he was aware of a conflict between the two Berber leaders, and believed that 
Cusina might be susceptible to influence as a result of this. 
the main Roman road entering Carthage from the west, might have been.  Unless further 
archaeological evidence should come to light, it seems unlikely that Decimum can be lodated with 
any greater degree of precision. 
1355  Bella IV.25.12, 15. 
1356  Bella IV.25.15. 
1357  Bella IV.25.16: [            
.] 
1358  Bella IV.25.21. 
1359  See p. 187. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
However, following Guntariths murder of Areobindus and the breakdown of relations between 
Guntarith and Antalas,1360 Cusina declared his support for Guntarith.1361  Again, what Cusina 
sought to gain by this alliance is unclear, but there appears, on some level, to have been a formal 
agreement between Cusina and Guntarith, since Procopius notes that the Berber leader handed 
over his son and his mother to Guntarith as hostages1362 - the exchange of hostages, particularly 
family members, being a typical feature of diplomatic agreements during the 6th century.1363  
When Guntarith sent Artabanes, together with the Roman troops loyal to him, to attack Antalas 
and his followers in Byzacena, Cusina and his forces accompanied them.1364  Following 
Guntariths coup, Cusina may have regarded his administration, rather than the imperially 
endorsed administration, as the most powerful organisation in Africa, and thus sought to ally 
himself with it.  While Cusina is presented by Corippus as the loyal Roman ally, his actions prior 
to 546 appear to have been every bit as opportunistic as those of Antalas, and, while his 
motivations are less well documented, they should not be assumed to be less politically 
sophisticated. 
Cusinas position following Guntariths murder by Artabanes is unclear.  However, he and his 
followers may be assumed to have returned to Numidia.  Cusina does not reappear in the 
sources until his subsequent alliance to John Troglita.1365  Henceforth, he appears to have been 
present in each of John Troglitas campaigns.1366 
By spring 547, Cusina appears to have been awarded the honorary title of magister militum 
within the Roman army,1367 and Corippus suggests that he had been granted command of 
1360  Bella IV.27.13. 
1361  Bella IV.27.24. 
1362  Bella IV.27.24. 
1363  See A. D. Lee, The role of hostages in Roman diplomacy with Sasanian Persia, Historia 40 (1991), 366-
74.  Cf. Bella 3.25.4. 
1364  Bella IV.27.25, 27. 
1365  See n. 1345. 
1366  See PLRE IIIA, 3678. 
1367  Ioh. VI.2678.  Cf. Ioh. VII.26780; VIII.26871.  For the date pp. 2289. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
soldiers other than those drawn from his own followers, which would suggest a degree of trust 
by the Roman administration.1368  However, this point should not be stressed too heavily.  
Corippus certainly describes Cusina as magister, but this could be used as a generic term, given 
that Corippus is not otherwise specific in his use of either military or civic titles, and appears 
to vary them on metrical grounds.1369 
Cusinas co-operation with the Roman administration in Africa should never be viewed as being 
anything other than on his own terms.  In 547, during the course of John Troglitas campaign, 
a dispute arose between Cusina and another Berber leader cooperating with the Romans, 
Ifisdaias.1370  This dispute was at risk of degenerating into outright warfare, which would have 
had a profound effect on the Roman campaign,1371 and was only resolved by hasty mediation on 
the part of John Stephanides, acting at John Troglitas command.1372  Corippus comment on the 
resolution of the dispute is, however, interesting.  He claims that: 
  he [John Stephanides] strengthened the agreement with the tribes.1373 
This suggests that individual tribes were entering into agreements with the Roman 
administration in Africa, or, at least, with John Troglita.1374 
The Roman administration in Africa appears to have valued Cusinas support between 546 and 
548.  Following the defeat of the Berbers under the command of Antalas and Carcasan at the 
battle of the Plains of Cato in 548, Cusina appears to have retained a privileged position in the 
1368  Ioh. VII.26670. 
1369  Contra PLRE IIIA, 367, which speculates that, in addition to the title magister militum, Cusina was 
probably granted additional honorary titles. 
1370  Ioh. VII.24261.  Aside from his role in John Troglitas campaigns, little else is known of Ifisdaias.  See 
PLRE IIIA, 613. 
1371  Ioh. VII.2447. 
1372  Ioh. VII.2423, 25361.  John Stephanides is otherwise unattested.  See PLRE IIIA, 6501. 
1373  Ioh. VII.257: [ pactum gentibus auxit] 
1374  Contra Shea, The Iohannis, 178, who translates the clause as strengthened the treaty between the 
tribes, which suggests a pre-existing agreement between the two tribal groups, rather than 
individual agreements with the Eastern Roman Empire, which appears to be the more likely 
interpretation in the context. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
eyes of the Roman administration.  He is attested as having been a leader among the Berbers, 
and in receipt of Roman subsidies, until 562.1375 
6.5 Iaudas 
Iaudas appears only sporadically in the written sources.  He appears to have been a far less 
significant figure for Corippus, who refers to him only three times in the Iohannis,1376 than for 
Procopius, who devotes considerable space to discussing Solomons campaigns against him in 
both 535 and 540.1377  Whether Iaudas more limited role in the events of the period 544 to 548, 
particularly in the Iohannis, reflects his lesser political significance to the Roman 
administration, or simply a lack of information on the part of the sources, is unclear. 
As has been discussed in section 4.4, Iaudas is presented by Procopius as being the pre-eminent 
Berber leader in Numidia in the 530s, and, in particular, as being leader of the Berbers of Mount 
Aurasium.  He appears to have been one of the leaders represented by the embassies to 
Belisarius at Carthage in 533; and, like Cusina, Iaudas was, between 534 and 535, involved in 
raids against the Romano-African population of the province which he inhabited.1378   An 
unsuccessful campaign was launched against the Berbers of Mount Aurasium by Solomon in 
535, apparently at the instigation of the Berbers Massonas and Ortaas, who were involved in 
personal disputes with Iaudas,1379 but Solomon only succeeded in defeating Iaudas and the 
Berbers of Mount Aurasium after an extended military campaign in 540.1380  Iaudas, wounded at 
the final battle at Toumar, fled to Mauritania, along with many of his followers.1381 
1375  Malalas, XVIII.145; Theophanes AM 6055 (ed. De Boor, pp. 238-9).  See further pp. 2734. 
1376  Ioh. III.302; VII.277; VIII.126. 
1377  See pp. 1956, 20913. 
1378  See pp. 1867, 195. 
1379  See pp. 1867. 
1380  See pp. 20913. 
1381  Bella IV.20.21. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Following these events, Iaudas disappears from the historical sources entirely until late 545,1382 
when he reappears among the forces assembled by Guntarith to attack Carthage.1383  Together 
with Cusina, he is identified by Procopius, as one of the leaders of the Berbers of Numidia.1384  
This is significant, given that Procopius claims that, following Iaudas defeat at the battle of 
Toumar, in 540, the province of Numidia was incorporated into the Eastern Roman Empire.1385  
However, Iaudas role in 545, as one of the two leaders of the Berbers of Numidia, suggests that 
the subjugation of Numidia may not have been as complete as Procopius narrative suggests, 
and that Iaudas himself must have returned to Numidia from Mauritania at some point between 
540 and 545. 
The failure of either Guntarith or Areobindus to sollicit Iaudas support in 545 suggests that he 
was regarded as a less influential Berber leader.1386  Indeed, beyond the initial note of his 
presence, he is not mentioned again in the context of Guntariths revolt, so there is no way of 
knowing what role, if any, he might have played in Antalas and Cusinas attempts to betray one 
another.  Given that Cusina had fled to Numidia, and the protection of Iaudas, in 535, following 
his defeat at the battle of Mount Bourgaon in 535,1387 and that he is likely to have fled to 
Mauritania together with Iaudas in 540,1388 Cusina may well have assumed leadership of the 
Berbers of Numidia during this period. 
Iaudas is entirely absent from the sources for the events of 546 and 547.  However, in the winter 
of 547/8, he is suddenly noted by Corippus as one of the allies of the Eastern Roman Empire  
notably only after Cusina becomes an ally to the Eastern Roman Empire.1389  It is, however, 
1382  For the date see n. 1134. 
1383  Bella IV.25.12. 
1384  Bella IV.25.2. 
1385  Bella IV.20.30. 
1386  Cf. Bella IV.25.622. 
1387  Bella IV.12.29. 
1388  Cf. n. 1057. 
1389  For the date see nn. 11789.  On Cusinas alliance to the Eastern Roman Empire see n. 1345. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
interesting that, in two of the three references which Corippus makes to Iaudas, he is described 
as servile, suggesting submission at some point prior to this.1390 
Iaudas is again present as a Roman ally at the battle of the Plains of Cato,1391 but is not attested 
subsequently. 
6.6 Roman client-management in Africa during the reign of Justinian 
The preceding four sections of this chapter have attempted to provide an overview of the major 
Berber groups which interacted with the Roman administration in Africa in the 540s.  It is clear 
from this outline that relations between the Berber tribes and the Roman administration were 
fluid  a situation which was additionally complicated by the split within the Roman 
administration created by Guntariths coup in 5451392 - and alliances with individual Berber 
leaders, or tribes, were often short-lived, and affected by inter-tribal politics, as much as by the 
actions of the Roman administration in Africa. 
Is it then possible to speak of a coherent Roman policy vis--vis the Berbers in the period 
following 540, when the Roman administration itself was in turmoil; or should Roman 
responses to the threat posed by the Berber tribe be seen as a series of ad hoc responses to 
emergent crises? 
The Eastern Roman Empire had a developed system of client-state management which was 
integral to its foreign relations policy, particularly on its eastern frontier, where it established 
one Arab tribe, the Ghassan, as its pre-eminent client in the region, in parallel to an equivalent 
1390  Ioh. VII.2778; VIII.1256.  Iaudas is referred to as famulatus and famulantis in these passages 
respectively. 
1391  Ioh. VII.2778.  Cf. Bella VIII.17.21, in which Procopius claims that John Troglita reduced to submission 
both Antalas and Iaudas.  This is possibly the case, but the two Berber leaders can not have submitted 
to Roman authority simultaneously, given that Corippus identifies Iaudas as a Roman ally at the battle 
of the Plains of Cato, and Antalas opposed the Romans at this battle. 
1392  See pp. 2236. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
relationship between Sasanian Persia and another Arab tribe, the Lakhmids.1393  The Eastern 
Roman Empires relations with the Ghassan have frequently been seen as the empires closest 
model for establishing its authority in a tribal society such as Africa.1394  However, while the 
client-state relationship between the Ghassan and the Eastern Roman Empire appears to have 
been reasonably successful during Justinians reign, attempts to foster a similar system of 
client-state relationships in Africa appear only to have fostered instability. 
In Chapter 4 it was argued that the initial contact between the Eastern Roman Empire and some 
of the Berber tribes in November 533, and the granting of insignia to the Berber leaders may be 
seen as an attempt to establish Berber client rulers in Africa.  But, while the arrangement was 
undoubtedly mutually beneficial at the time, allowing individual Berber leaders to elevate 
themselves within the context of inter-tribal competition, and the Roman administration in 
Africa to focus on definitively removing the threat posed by the Vandals and occupying key 
coastal positions without fear of interference from neighbouring Berber tribes, it was also short 
term.  As has been demonstrated in Chapter 5, conflict subsequently occurred between the 
Romans and the Berbers in the 530s, driven by attempts at territorial expansion by both parties, 
which was clearly of greater value than the benefits conferred by the investiture of insignia in 
While the initial military commitment to Africa was significant, by the 540s, the commitment 
of military resources to Africa had declined significantly,1395 and the Roman administration at 
Carthage had little reason to trust its own troops, who were prone to mutiny, or its provincial 
duces, who had been known to attempt to establish their own independent polities in the 
region.1396  Nevertheless, despite the Eastern Roman Empires limited effective authority 
1393  The role of Arab clients by the Eastern Roman Empire under Justinian is a complex issue which cannot 
be discussed in detail here.  See further Fisher, Between Empires, 7380. 
1394  Modran, Les Maures, 5768. 
1395  See pp. 1425. 
1396  See pp. 2236 on Guntariths coup.  Guntarith had been dux of Numidia. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
beyond the littoral, the original objectives of the conquest of Africa had required the 
acquisition of a number of key positions along the Africa coast, which had created a frontier 
covering an area far beyond the means of the Roman army in Africa to control.  In order to 
maintain its position in Africa, with the limited resources available to it, the Roman 
administration was forced to develop a strategy which was less militarily focused.  That it 
should have had recourse to client rulers  as Cusina may be interpreted to be - a well 
established Roman defensive strategy, is unsurprising.1397  The system of Roman client-state 
management was intended to allow the Eastern Roman Empire to create a buffer zone along 
frontiers which it lacked the military resources to defend actively.  In many respects, a system 
of client rulers should have been ideally suited to the African context. 
However, attempts to implement such a system of client rulers in Africa appears to have failed 
for a number of reasons.  While a preliminary step towards establishing client-state 
relationships in Africa had been taken in 533, these relationships were not consolidated by the 
Eastern Roman Empire during the following decade.  The Roman administration appears to 
have relied heavily on the fact that Antalas leadership in Byzacena ensured the provinces 
stability in the late 530s and early 540s.  The repeated mention by the sources of Antalas loyalty 
to the Eastern Roman Empire between 533 and 543 suggests that he might have been envisaged 
as a client ruler in the region.1398  However, the relationship between Antalas and the Roman 
administration seems to have rested on the fact that, after 534, the Eastern Roman Empires 
focus was on Numidia, and not to have entailed any significant obligations on either side.1399  
Thus, when the Ilaguas entered Byzacena in 544, disrupting the balance of power in the region, 
Antalas had no enduring loyalty towards the Eastern Roman Empire. 
1397  On Cusinas relationship with the Eastern Roman Empire see pp. 2613. 
1398  See nn. 12812. 
1399  See pp. 2513. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
The failure of the Roman administration to follow through the diplomacy initiated in 533 must 
to a large degree be explained by its domestic concerns.  The threat of mutiny within the Roman 
army in Africa from 536 onwards undoubtedly forced the African administration to focus 
inwards, rather than on the threats posed from outside.1400  Furthermore, the frequent changes 
in leadership in Africa proved detrimental to the development of a coherent strategy vis--vis 
the Berbers.  Not only did individual commanders have their own agendas, the lack of 
continuous leadership would have created the impression of weakness from the Berber 
perspective.  Interestingly, the role of individual commanders in this process suggests that 
Roman strategy with respect to the Berbers was being dictated from Carthage, rather than from 
Constantinople. 
This is not to say that individual commanders did not attempt to establish alliances with 
individual Berber leaders.  This undoubtedly occurred, and is evident not only in the overt 
gestures of Guntarith and Areobindus to secure the support of Antalas and Cusina respectively 
in 545/6, but also in the fact that Berber troops are regularly attested as serving with the Roman 
army.1401  However, the regularly shifting alliances between both the Eastern Roman Empire 
and individual Berber leaders and the Berber leaders themselves, suggests that these alliances 
were opportunistic and short term.1402 
Furthermore, the perceived weakness of the Eastern Roman Empire undoubtedly encouraged 
Berber leaders to seek short term alliances with the empire in order to gain an advantage in 
inter-tribal conflicts.1403  However, the value of a relationship with the Eastern Roman Empire 
1400  See sections 5.3 and 5.5. 
1401  Berbers are attested as serving with the Roman army under both Solomon (Ioh. III.40412) and John 
Troglita (Bella IV.28.50; Ioh. IV. 2678; VII.26280; VIII.11926). 
1402  Cf. the episode in which Cusina and Ifisdaias, having both allied themselves with the Eastern Roman 
Empire, came into conflict with one another (Ioh. VII.24261). 
1403  As in 535, when Massonas and Ortaas encouraged Solomon to attack Iaudas, as part of their own 
dispute (Bella IV.13.19; with pp. 1867). 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
had shifted.  The relationship was no longer valued for the prestige which it conferred, but 
rather for the military resources it might provide. 
With the arrival of John Troglita in 546, a renewed attempt appears to have been made to 
establish a client ruler in Africa.  Cusinas role from 546 onwards must certainly be interpreted 
in this light.  Both his command of Roman troops in battle and his integral role in forcing the 
mutineers within the Roman army to back down at Lariscus in 547 suggest that his relationship 
with the Eastern Roman Empire was more than a short term alliance.  Furthermore, the fact 
that Cusina is attested, in 562, to be in receipt of regular Roman payments, confirms that he 
served as a client ruler following the battle of the Plains of Cato.1404 
However, Procopius and Corippus give the impression that, in the 540s, Cusina, while valuable 
to the Eastern Roman as a source of much needed troops, lacked the authority within the region 
to effectively function as a Roman client ruler.  As has been suggested in section 6.5, Iaudas 
appears to have become subordinate to Cusina at some point in the early 540s, but Cusina 
otherwise lacked sufficient influence over other Berber tribes in the region so as to maintain 
the stability of the Roman frontier.  Furthermore, by 546, after two years of Roman military 
defeats and a split in the Roman administration during Guntariths revolt,1405 a client 
relationship with the Eastern Roman Empire lacked the value it had once held to the Berber 
leaders.  The empire was thus unlikely to be able to offer sufficient incentives to secure a client-
state relationship with a Berber leader strong enough to hold the other tribes in check.  Indeed, 
at this time, Antalas must have appeared to be the strongest power in the region, and only 
Berber leaders who were already in conflict with him, such as Cusina, were likely to consider a 
client relationship with the Eastern Roman Empire. 
1404  See n. 1421. 
1405  See section 5.5. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Given that Cusina subsequently served as a Roman client for more than a decade,1406 it must be 
assumed that the system of client-state relationships was more successfully implemented 
during the 550s than it had been in the preceding two decades.  However, the almost complete 
lack of information concerning Africa in the 550s makes the reasons for this impossible to 
determine.1407 
It has sometimes been argued that the over-arching Roman policy with respect to the Berbers 
was to covert them to Christianity.1408  This argument is primarily based on the information 
provided by Procopius in book VI of the De Aedificiis.  In reference to the inhabitants of Augila, 
who are claimed to have sacrificed to Ammon and to Alexander the Great until the time of 
Justinian, Procopius notes: 
 And now, the emperor, not only providing for the safety of the bodies of his 
subjects, but also acting with a concern to save their souls, provided in every 
respect for the people living in that place.1409 
Given that Augila was in Pentapolis, and thus part of the Prefecture of Oriens, rather than the 
Prefecture of Africa, it is uncertain what significance this statement might have for Roman 
policy vis--vis the Berbers more generally.  Certainly, Procopius statement may be read as a 
reference to the Ilaguas, since Corippus likewise refers to them sacrificing to Ammon.1410  
However, the Roman administration in Africa appears to have been largely disinterested in 
Pentapolis until the emergence of the threat posed by the Ilaguas, a decade after the Roman 
conquest. 
Equally, it is difficult to read Procopius statement as but one example of a general policy.  The 
idea of the Christianisation of the empire under Justinian is an underlying theme of the De 
1406  See n. 1421. 
1407  See Epilogue. 
1408  I. Engelhardt, Mission und Politik in Byzanz: Ein Beitrag zur Strukturanalyse byzantinischer Mission 
zur Zeit Justins und Justinians (Munich, 1974), 25-7; Cameron, Byzantine Africa, 35, 40. 
1409  Aed. VI.2.18: [               
 ,         .]  Cf. 
Aed. VI.2.23, 4.12. 
1410  Ioh. VI.145-8, 189-90, 554-8; VII.515-18; VIII.251-3. 
Chapter 6:  Roman-Berber Relations (534 to 548 CE) 
Aedificiis.  But, with the exception of the Ilaguas, the Berber tribes discussed in this chapter 
came from regions with a long term Christian presence.  They may not have been orthodox, as 
the Eastern Roman Empire saw it, but they are unlikely to have practised the kind of paganism 
which Procopius and Corippus attribute to the Ilaguas either.  Consequently, an underlying 
policy of religious conversion should be discounted. 
As has been argued in Chapter 3, the planning and commitment of resources to the original 
Roman campaign of conquest in Africa appears to have been significant, and ought to have 
facilitated the establishment, and then expansion, of Roman authority in the region.  However, 
the emerging threat posed by the Berber tribes does not appear to have been met with a 
coherently planned response, as a result of both a lack of unity among the Berber tribes and 
the instability and constantly changing leadership of the Roman administration in Africa.  The 
Roman response to the Berber threat in the period between 543 and 548 does not fit coherently 
with Roman actions in Africa in the 530s, nor is it possible to identify consistency in the actions 
of the Roman administration during this period.  While the Eastern Roman Empire was 
ultimately victorious at the battle of the Plains of Cato, its response to the Berber threat was ad 
hoc and circumstantially driven. 
Epilogue 
Epilogue (548 to 565) 
Little is known of events in Africa following John Troglitas defeat of the Berbers at the battle 
of the Plains of Cato, since both Corippus Iohannis (as it is extant) and book IV of Procopius 
Bella conclude with these events.  Nevertheless, care should be taken in assuming that the 
silence of the sources necessarily indicates peace and prosperity in the region from 548 
forward.1411 
For the years between 548 and 562, the written history of the region is largely reduced to names 
of its officials  and even those are few.  John Troglita himself appears to have remained in 
Africa as magister militum per Africam for some years.  Procopius notes that he was responsible 
for sending troops from Africa to Sardinia in 551, after the island had been seized by Totilas 
Goths.1412  However, after John Troglita no individual is firmly attested as holding the position 
of magister militum per Africam again until 570, with the possible exception of John Rogathinus 
(see further below).1413 
The African civil administration is equally problematic.  The Praetorian Prefect, Athanasius, is 
last firmly attested either late 547 or 548,1414 although it is probable that he was still in office in 
549/50, since the praise given him in the Iohannis suggests that he was present at Carthage 
1411  Contra Pringle, Defence, 39. 
1412  Bella VIII.24.317.  It is interesting to note that, despite both Corsica and Sardinia having been 
occupied by the Romans in 534, and being placed within the administrative structure of the diocese 
of Africa, by 551, neither island appears to have had a Roman significant garrison, since Procopius 
(Bella VIII.24.32) notes that: Having first sailed to Corsica, they [the Goths] took the island, since it 
was defended by no one, and, afterwards, they also seized Sardinia [       
,   ,   ,     ].  
Procopius probably overstates the case in claiming that neither Sardinia nor Corsica had any garrison, 
but they were almost certainly under-defended to ward off a full scale invasion.  He subsequently 
notes that the campaign to retake Sardinia in 551 was unsuccessful, and that a further campaign was 
planned for the following year.  He does not, however, note whether or not the Romans were 
ultimately successfully in retaking and holding Sardinia. 
1413  John of Biclar (s.a. 569.2) identifies Theoctistus as magister militum per Africam.  See also n. 644. 
1414  Ioh. VII.199208.  Athanasius is attested organising reinforcements to support John Troglita following 
the Roman armys defeat at the battle of Marta (see pp. 22930). 
Epilogue 
when the work was presented.1415  However, when a new decree was promulgated on 6 
September 552, it was addressed to Paul as Praetorian Prefect; and, Appendix 9, promulgated 
on 22 September 558, is addressed to John as Praetorian Prefect.1416  One further Praetorian 
Prefect of Africa is known from Justinians reign  Boethius, who was the addressee of a letter 
from Pope Pelagius I.1417  The date of the letter is uncertain - it claims that, at the time of writing, 
Italy had suffered from continuous warfare for more than twenty-five years.1418  Twenty-five 
years must, however, have been a convenient round number, since it would place the writing 
of the letter after Pelagius death on 3 March 561.1419  Thus, Boethius should probably be 
assumed to have held the office of Praetorian Prefect of Africa in 560 or 561.1420 
Despite the claims made by both Corippus and Procopius that, after John Troglitas campaigns 
against the Berbers, Africa was at peace, there is evidence that there was at least one other 
period of significant conflict between the Eastern Roman Empire and the Berbers during 
Justinians reign, which is unmentioned by either of the two major sources.  The chronicle of 
John Malalas, which is almost entirely silent concerning events in Africa after the initial Roman 
campaign of conquest, notes that, in January 563, Cusina approached the Roman governor 
[] of Africa, John Rogathinus, requesting his customary payment of gold  intended to 
secure an arrangement of mutual benefit, which had presumably existed since 548.1421  John 
1415  On the date of the presentation of the Iohannis see pp. 656. 
1416  J. Nov. App. 6 and 9. 
1417  Epist. 85.  Aside from being the addressee of this letter, Boethius is otherwise unknown.  It has 
sometimes been speculated that he is the son of the philosopher Boethius, but this remains uncertain.  
See PLRE IIIA, 2367. 
1418  Epist. 85: [post continuam XXV et eo amplius annorum uastationum bellicam in Italiae regionibus 
accidentem]. 
1419  PLRE IIIA, 2367. 
1420  Contra PLRE IIIA, 2367, which suggests that the dates 561 and 556 are equally plausible, given the 
lack of specific date for Epistula 85.  However, it seems to be more plausible that the number of years 
might have been rounded up a year or two, to reach the figure of twenty-five, which would have more 
dramatic effect than, for example, twenty-two or twenty-three, than that it should have been 
rounded up by five years, when the round figure of twenty would have been accurate. 
1421  Malalas, XVIII.145.  An almost identical account is provided by the chronicle of Theophanes (AM 6055) 
(ed. De Boor, pp. 2389), which almost certainly draws directly on Malalas account (Mango & Scott, 
The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, 352 n. 19).  The only difference between the two accounts is 
the date, with Theophanes placing the event in December 562.  In fact, both chronicles introduce the 
episode with the set-phrase in the same month [  ] with the actual date being provided 
Epilogue 
Rogathinus, whose precise office is not made clear,1422 for reasons which are not explained and 
are impossible to deduce from the text, decided to murder Cusina.1423  This inexplicable action, 
reminiscent of Sergius actions at Leptis Magna in 544,1424 prompted a rebellion, orchestrated 
by Cusinas children, which appears to have posed a significant threat to Roman authority in 
Africa.1425 
Justinians response was to send his nephew, Marcian, to Africa with an army.1426  The need to 
send military forces suggests that John Rogathinus, whatever his official capacity, had 
insufficient regular troops at his disposal to entirely crush the Berber rebellion.1427  Malalas 
account of events is very compressed, but Marcian appears to have restored the region to status 
quo ante bellum, and, once again, the sources declare that Africa was at peace.1428  Following 
this revolt, no further information is provided by the written sources concerning Africa during 
the reign of Justinian. 
by the preceding entry  in the case of Malalas, January of the 11th indiction, which is 563 (Grumel, La 
Chronologie, 245).  Theophanes, in reproducing Malalas chronicle, his primary source for this section 
of his work, omits Malalas entry for January 563 (XVIII.144) without emending the date for his 
subsequent entry, which is dependent upon it.  Malalas date is, therefore, to be preferred. 
1422   could refer to either magister militum per Africam or Praetorian Prefect of Africa, or, given 
that the two offices were intermittently consolidated in the hands of one individual, both. 
1423  Malalas, XVIII.145; Theophanes, AM 6055 (ed. De Boor, pp. 2389). 
1424  See pp. 2167. 
1425  Malalas, XVIII.145; Theophanes, AM 6055 (ed. De Boor, pp. 2389).  It seems to be notable that the 
accounts claim that:  part of Africa was seized by the Mauritanians [...     
   ], and subsequently reiterate this point.  Malalas must either use the 
term Mauritanians to refer to Berbers generally or be poorly informed about the political 
geography of Africa, as no other source connects Cusina with the provinces of Mauritania. 
1426  Malalas, XVIII.145; Theophanes, AM 6055 (ed. De Boor, pp. 2389).  On Marcian see PLRE IIIB, 821-3.  
As Mango & Scott, The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, 352 n. 19, argue, Marcians involvement 
is testament to the fact that the revolt was regarded as serious by those at Constantinople. 
1427  Contra PLRE IIIA, 670, which suggests that John Rogathinus is more likely to have been Praetorian 
Prefect than magister militum, since he appears to have had no troops available to him. 
1428  Malalas, XVIII.145; Theophanes, AM 6055 (ed. De Boor, pp. 2389).  Contra PLRE IIIB, 821, which 
suggests that the phrase   means they [the Berbers] welcomed him [Marcian], 
and thus that the Berbers saw a relative of the emperor as finally having the authority to address 
their grievances.  The translations offered by Jeffreys et al. for Malalas (The Chronicle of John Malalas, 
304); and by Mango and Scott for Theophanes (The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor, 350): They 
went over to him more accurately reflects the sense of the statement. 
Conclusions 
Conclusions 
The conquest of the former Roman provinces of Africa 533, after a century of Vandal rule, has 
been regarded as one of the defining successes of the reign of the emperor Justinian I.  
Justinians self-representation rested heavily on his role as the restorer of the empire to its 
classical form and ideals, and the African campaign was presented as a first, but vital, step, in a 
programme of reconquest, culminating in the capture of Rome itself, three years later, which 
would see Eastern Roman Empire restored in the West.  And, despite the misgivings of 
Justinians advisers, the African campaign was a success.  The Roman expeditionary force 
captured the Vandal capital, Carthage, within weeks, and victory was proclaimed within a 
matter of months, even before the formal surrender of the Vandal king. 
However, Roman victory in Africa was short-lived.  As the Roman military commander, 
Belisarius, prepared to depart from Africa, the Berber tribes, mere spectators in the conflict 
between the Eastern Roman Empire and the Vandals, began raids against the Romano-African 
population.  As the Eastern Roman Empire attempted to consolidate its position in Africa, it 
became a part of the underlying conflicts which had resulted from the establishment of 
autonomous Berber polities within the frontiers of the former Roman provinces, and these 
conflicts, with one or another Berber tribe or tribes, would continue intermittently until the 
Berber tribes from the provinces of Byzacena and Tripolitania were defeated by the Romans, 
together with Berber allies, at the battle of the Plains of Cato in 548. 
Despite the significance accorded to the initial campaign against the Vandals, the somewhat 
ignominious aftermath to these events has attracted comparatively little attention, a fact 
which must, at least in part, be explained by a comparative dearth of information on events in 
Africa in the 6th century, with the exception of that provided by Procopius and Corippus, as well 
as the problems inherent in the archaeological evidence - namely a lack of recent excavation, 
Conclusions 
the difficulty of identifying the sites named by the texts, and the problems of dating sites 
precisely. 
The last two decades have seen an increasing focus on the foreign relations of the Eastern 
Roman Empire.  The relationship between the Eastern Roman Empire and the Berber tribes, 
whose presence both within and without frontiers of the empire placed what was effectively a 
foreign relations dilemma within the borders of the empire itself, should undoubtedly be 
considered in this context.  However, to date, studies of the Berber tribes of the 6th century have 
been dominated by the desire to gain an understanding of the tribes themselves - their 
localities, political structures, economy and culture.  This is undoubtedly a vital preliminary 
step in the greater integration of the Berber tribes into an understanding of the wider 
Mediterranean world during the 6th century. 
Nevertheless, relations between the Eastern Roman Empire and the Berber tribes provide 
interesting material about both the methods used to establish authority in a newly conquered 
region, which might profitably be compared with the process subsequently undertaken in Italy 
and in Spain; and the Roman approach to managing a divided tribal society, rather than a 
centralised state such as Sasanian Persia, which may further elucidate Roman strategy in 
Arabia, the Balkans and the north Caucasus.  As scholarship on Justinianic foreign relations 
seeks to move away from an over-arching policy of renovatio imperii, an understanding of 
Roman policy in Africa in the post-Vandal period is integral to the creation of the broader 
picture. 
This study has therefore provided a re-assessment of Justinianic policy in Africa and, in 
particular, in relation to the Berber tribes, in the light of both a more critical reading of 
Procopius oeuvre and the evidence offered by such alternative sources as exist, including 
Corippus Iohannis, Justinianic legislation, chronicles in Latin, Greek and Syriac, and epigraphy.  
Chapter 1 offered an overview of this source material, stressing the need to incorporate all 
Conclusions 
available written evidence, despite the tendency of previous scholarship to prioritize the 
information provided by Procopius as a result of the ostensibly classicizing nature of his work. 
In the first instance, it is necessary to understand Justinians motivations for invading Africa in 
533, and to attempt to separate these motivations from the propaganda uses to which the 
events were subsequently put.  Contemporary sources detailing the launch of the African 
campaign stressed religious and ideological motivations  namely the need to free the Nicene 
Christian population of Africa from its Arian Vandal rulers, and the desire to restore the Eastern 
Roman Empire to its classical form and ideals.  However, such accounts, often produced by the 
Roman imperial government itself, undoubtedly fulfilled a propaganda function, justifying a 
drawn-out military campaign, which, with the exception of the moment of victory following 
the Vandal surrender in the spring of 534, lacked support at either Constantinople or among 
the African population. 
Rather, as has been argued in Chapter 2, it is clear that the Roman invasion of Africa was not 
solely the result of the emperors personal wishes, but also those of a number of distinct, 
influential, groups at Constantinople, and was motivated by variety of factors, not least of 
which was the need to secure key maritime positions in the western Mediterranean, an action 
with both strategic and commercial significance.  The chapter concludes that, in the first 
instance, at least, the military campaign in Africa in 533 should not be seen as a campaign to 
conquer the former Roman provinces, but rather as an attempt to secure key positions along 
the African coast, as well as Sardinia, Corsica and the Balearic Islands and, in all likelihood, 
Sicily, although this was not captured until two years later.  From these positions, as is argued 
subsequently, authority and influence could be projected into the African interior. 
Understanding the more limited objectives of the initial campaign, the conquest of key coastal 
positions, it is then possible to reconsider the legislation establishing the civil and military 
administration of Africa, which has often been interpreted as indicating that the Eastern 
Conclusions 
Roman Empire held significant territory in Africa, in a new light.  The campaign itself was 
carried out with remarkable speed and efficiency, although this was largely the result of good 
fortune and domestic problems within the Vandal kingdom rather than the superior strategy 
of the Eastern Roman Empire.  With the city of Carthage secured, the immediate Roman priority 
was to secure key coastal positions which were the campaigns original objective.  Following 
this, under direction from Constantinople, a framework was established for the incorporation 
of the region into the imperial administrative system.  At this stage, however, the empires 
territorial holdings in Africa are likely to have remained restricted to the littoral.  Furthermore, 
there is little evidence to suggest that, in the short term, the Eastern Roman Empire made 
significant territorial gains in Africa, and individual cities appear to have continued to act in 
their own interests, and for their own defence, irrespective of their assigned position within 
the imperial administrative system.  Thus, Chapter 3 has argued that, while the legislation 
establishing civil and military administration presents a picture of the conquest of the 
provinces of Africa which had existed prior to the Vandal conquest, in so doing, it merely 
demonstrates an awareness that Roman rule in Africa would develop.  It attests to a degree of 
forward planning on the part of the Roman imperial government, but allows for a degree of 
territorial expansion which was ultimately never achieved. 
Having considered the establishment of Roman administration in Africa, and its implications, 
in Chapter 3, Chapter 4 turned to the Berbers, and their position in Africa prior to, and 
immediately following, the Roman conquest.  First official contact between the Eastern Roman 
Empire and the Berbers occurred in November 533, following the capture of Carthage, but 
before the decisive Roman victory over the Vandals at the battle of Tricamarum.  At this point 
in time, with the Roman position in Africa still insecure, the Roman commander, Belisarius, was 
willing to grant those Berber embassies who requested it the insignia of office which was 
traditionally granted to Roman client rulers.  The arrangement was undoubtedly mutually 
beneficial.  Individual Berber leaders gained an endorsement from the new power in the region, 
Conclusions 
which would help elevate them in the competition for support from the local Romano-African 
population, which had begun during the Vandal period, as the vacuum created by declining 
Vandal authority on the frontiers of the former Roman provinces of Africa was filled by 
autonomous Berber polities.  Equally, the Roman administration in Africa, as yet insecure, 
avoided the threat of Berber hostilities as it sought to consolidate its position against the 
Vandals. 
The agreement was not, however, envisaged as long term, and in the spring of 534, the Berber 
tribes of Byzacena and Numidia began raids against the Romano-Africans.  Given the limits of 
Roman expansion in Africa at this time, these initial raids should be interpreted in the context 
of tribal competition, rather than as revolts against Roman authority in the region.  However, 
as the Eastern Roman Empire attempted to expand its territorial position, it increasingly came 
into direct conflict with the Berber tribes, whose willingness to accommodate Roman presence 
in the region undoubtedly decreased as the Romans encroached upon the territories of 
autonomous Berber polities. 
Chapter 5 focuses on the increasing levels of conflict between the Eastern Roman Empire and 
various Berber tribes, and well as on the domestic concerns of the Roman administration in 
Africa which affected its ability to respond effectively to these circumstances.  The chapter 
provides the reconstruction of events in Africa between 534 and 548 which is essential context 
for the analysis of Roman-Berber relations provided in Chapter 6.  It also highlights the fact 
that the Eastern Roman Empire ultimately lacked the resources to consolidate its authority in 
regions significantly beyond the littoral as a result of ongoing disaffection within the Roman 
army in Africa, as well as inexperienced and incompetent leadership, and a growing neglect 
from the Roman imperial government at Constantinople, which increasingly appears to have 
viewed Africa as a lost cause.  Consequently, the balance of power between the Roman 
administration in Africa and the Berber tribes is argued to have shifted significantly over the 
Conclusions 
course of the 530s and 540s, allowing the position of some Berber leaders, notably Antalas, to 
strengthen - a conclusion which is of vital importance for Chapter 6. 
In 544, a Berber tribe or tribes (the Ilaguas), which had previously been based in Tripolitania 
moved west, into the province of Byzacena, destabilising the relations between the Berber 
tribes themselves, as well as between the Berbers and the Roman administration in Africa.  With 
Roman attention refocusing on the threat in Byzacena, which was relatively close to Carthage 
and had been comparatively stable for the previous decade, Antalas pro-actively sought to 
assert his independence, presumably with the intention of further expanding his area of 
influence into an independent polity in Africa, and ultimately marching on Carthage itself.  
These events are considered in outline in Chapter 5, but are returned to in Chapter 6, with the 
intention of analysing the coherence of Roman responses to the situation. 
Roman attempts to counter this unexpected destabilisation of the region were initially 
hampered by poor Roman leadership, and by the outbreak of mutiny within the African army, 
which, for a short time, resulted in two parallel Roman administrations in Africa.  The Berbers 
sought to play off one against the other in order achieve their own ends, while the two Roman 
administrations sought to play off the Berber tribes against one another, offering the incentive 
of a Roman endorsed position of pre-eminence among the Berbers.  However, the arrival of 
John Troglita in Africa in 546 saw a return to a more traditional, but pro-active, military 
approach to the situation.  Johns initial campaigns against the Berbers were, however, 
unsuccessful.  Chapter 6 argues that he appears to have become increasingly aware of the need 
to apply a divide and conquer policy with respect to the Berber tribes, establishing formal 
alliances with those tribes which might be induced to halt the expansion of other tribes, as well 
as attempting to establish a Berber client ruler, Cusina, in the region.  However, by this time, 
after two years of Roman military losses and discord within the Roman administration which 
was evident to the Berber tribes, the Eastern Roman Empire lacked the authority in the region 
Conclusions 
to effectively implement client rulers, and a system of frontier management which might have 
been expected to stabilise the African provinces only resulted in instability, since Cusina 
himself lacked the authority to hold the tribes surrounding his own in check. 
Ultimately, Chapter 6 concludes that Roman actions in Africa across the two phases of the 
establishment of Roman authority in the region, before and after 540, do not exhibit a 
consistency.  Nor does the second period show internal consistency in the manner in which the 
Roman administration sought to counter the increasing threat posed by the appearance of the 
Ilaguas in Byzacena in 544.  Responses to the crisis which developed appear to have been ad hoc 
and circumstantially driven, most probably as a result of the general instability within the 
African administration, its constantly changing leadership, and the lack of trust which existed 
within the Roman army in Africa and between the army and the civil administration, all of 
which contributed to a lack of long term planning at Carthage, and insecurity which resulted 
in opportunistic responses. 
A fifteen year period of peace appears to have followed the Roman victory over the Berbers at 
the battle of the Plains of Cato in 548.  However, this may be an illusion of the sources, given 
that almost nothing is known of events in Africa during this period.  Certainly, by the 560s, 
grievances must have developed, resulting in the murder of the Berber leader Cusina, by the 
Roman governor of Africa, and a renewed period of hostilities. 
The over-arching conclusions which emerge from this study thus fall into two categories.  First, 
it challenges the view that the Roman conquest of Africa must have been motivated by the 
desire to reclaim the former Roman provinces of Africa in their entirety.  Instead, it argues that 
the initial Roman objective was to secure key coastal positions, which would provide strategic 
and commercial advantages, and that the Roman administration in Africa did not subsequently 
expand its area of effective rule to any significant extent.  Rather, the empire sought to project 
its limited power into the interior from the coast. 
Conclusions 
Second, this study concludes that there was no coherent Roman strategy vis--vis the Berber 
tribes across the period of time considered.  While the length of the African frontier, and the 
severely limited Roman military resources in the region would have made the establishment of 
Berber client rulers an obvious strategy to secure the stability of the region, attempts to 
implement such a strategy were unsuccessful.  This was in part of a result of the high level of 
competition between individual Berber leaders as they sought to establish and maintain 
independent polities within the frontiers of the former Roman empire.  Equally, an increasing 
lack of willingness, on the part of the Roman imperial government, to commit resources to 
Africa, as well as the instability caused by constantly changing leadership, and distrust, within 
the African civil and military administrations prevented the development of coherent long 
term strategies for addressing the Berber threat. 
These conclusions merit further consideration both in the context of attempts to understand 
the nature of provincial administration, and the relationship between the centre and the 
provinces during Justinians reign, as well as within the wider context of Justinianic foreign 
relations.  Furthermore, while the conquests of Africa and Italy, and the establishment of 
Roman authority in these regions, are often considered in parallel, as a result of the perception 
that they comprised the reconquest of the West, the far more limited territorial position of 
the Eastern Roman Empire in Africa, together with the decentralised society on its frontier, 
suggests that more fruitful comparisons might be made with Spain and with the regions 
surrounding the Black Sea. 
Taken in a broad chronological context, a detailed understanding of Roman policy in Africa in 
the 6th century and, in particular, the empires actions with respect to the Berbers, may offer 
some insight into the reasons for the rapid fall of the African provinces to Islamic forces over 
the course of the 7th century.  It has often been assumed that the Berbers Christianity, or lack 
thereof, was chiefly responsible for the rapid fragmentation of Africa in the 7th century which 
Conclusions 
facilitated its conquest.  However, this study has demonstrated that this fragmentation was the 
product of a long and complex process, which had begun during the Vandal period, but had 
been further facilitated by the actions of the Eastern Roman Empire in Africa during Justinians 
reign.  Consequently, the dynamics of the Islamic conquest of Africa would merit reassessment 
in light of the picture presented here. 
Appendices 
Appendices 
Appendices 
Appendix I:  African cities in the De Aedificiis1429 
African cities identified by Procopius in De Aedificiis as having been refortified by Justinian.  
Those cities marked with an * are also attested in the geographical treatise attributed to George 
of Cyprus (see Appendix II). 
 TRIPOLIS TRIPOLITANIA  
 Cidame Cidamus Aed. VI.3.9 
 Leptis Magna Leptis Magna Aed. VI.4.1 
 Sabratha Sabratha Aed. VI.4.13 
Also noted as being in Tripolitania, but not as having been fortified by Justinian: 
 Tacapa Tacape Aed. VI.4.14 
 Girgis Gigthis Aed. VI.4.14 
 PROCONSULARIA ZEUGITANA  
* Carthage Carthage Aed. VI.5.2 
* Vaga Vaga Aed. VI.5.12 
 Tucca Thugga1430 Aed. VI.5.15 
 BYZAKION BYZACENA  
* Adrymetus Hadrumetum Aed. VI.6.1 
 Caput Vada Caput Vada Aed. VI.6.8 
* Mammes (Unlocated) Aed. VI.6.18 
* Telepte Thelepte Aed. VI.6.18 
 Aumetra (Unlocated) Aed. VI.6.18 
N NUMIDIA NUMIDIA  
* Pentebagae Bagai1431 Aed. VI.7.8 
 Florentianae (Unlocated)1432 Aed. VI.7.8 
* Bade Badias1433 Aed. VI.7.8 
1429  See also Map VII. 
1430  Pringle, Defence, 2446, 312. 
1431  Following the argument of Desanges, Un tmoignage peu connu, 44-5, that  should be 
read as two separate words  [five] and , with Procopius listing five cities, the first of which 
is Bagai. 
1432  Morizot,  propos des limites mridionales, 157.  Contra Trousset, Les limites sud de la roccupation 
byzantine, 149; idem, Les fines antiquae, 371; who identifies Florentiane with Mdila.  This argument 
is tentatively followed by Duval & Saxer, Un nouveau reliquaire africain, 262.  Cf. n. 1442. 
1433  Pringle, Defence, 183, 306; Duval & Saxer, Un nouveau reliquaire africain, 262; Morizot,  propos des 
limites mridionales, 1567; Trousset, Les limites sud de la roccupation byzantine, 146.  Contra 
Diehl, LAfrique byzantine, 248. 
Appendices 
* Meleon Mileu1434 Aed. VI.7.8 
 Tamugade Thamugadi Aed. VI.7.8 
 Dabusis ?Yabous1435 Aed. VI.7.8 
 Gaeana ?Vaiana1436 Aed. VI.7.8 
 Frice Ksar el-Frigui1437 Aed. VI.7.9 
* Sitifis Sitifis1438 Aed. VI.7.9 
* Laribouzoudouon Laribus/Lares Aed. VI.7.10 
 Paratouron ?Ad Turres1439 Aed. VI.7.10 
 Cilana (Unlocated) Aed. VI.7.10 
 Sicca Veneria Sicca Veneria Aed. VI.7.10 
* Tigisis Tigisis Aed. VI.7.10 
 Lamfouaomba Obba1440 Aed. VI.7.10 
* Calamaa Calama Aed. VI.7.10 
* Medara Ammaedara1441 Aed. VI.7.10 
 Medela Mdila1442 Aed. VI.7.10 
* Scile (Unlocated)1443 Aed. VI.7.11 
 Fosala (Unlocated) Aed. VI.7.11 
 SARDINIA SARDINIA  
  Forum of Trajan Forum of Trajan Aed. VI.7.12 
1444 MAURITANIA MAURITANIA  
* Septon Septem Aed. VI.7.14 
1434  Pringle, Defence, 21920, 310.  Contra Morizot,  propos des limites mridionales, 158, who argues 
that Mileu is too far from the Aurs massif to be Meleum; and Trousset, Les limites sud de la 
roccupation byzantine, 149, who identifies Meleum with Gemellae. 
1435  Morizot,  propos des limites mridionales, 158.  Contra Trousset, Les limites sud de la roccupation 
byzantine, 146; idem, Les fines antiquae, 371; who identifies Dabousis with Thabudeos.  This 
argument is tentatively followed by Pringle, Defence, 307. 
1436  S. Lancel, Actes de la confrence de Carthage en 411 (Paris, 1991), IV, 13236.  Contra Pringle, Defence, 
306, who identifies Gaiana with Diana Veteranorum. 
1437  See Laporte, Zabi, Friki: notes ur la Maurtanie et la Numidie de Justinien, 1615; Kaegi, Muslim 
Expansion and Byzantine Collapse in North Africa, 117.  Contra Desanes, Un tmoignage peu connu, 
63 n. 5, who tentatively suggests that Frice was Centenarium Aqua Frigida. 
1438  Cf. Bella IV.20.20, in which Procopius locates Sitifis in Mauritania Sitifensis. 
1439  See Pringle, Defence, 279, 310. 
1440  Desanges, Un tmoignage peu connu, 45, argues that the first part of  should be 
discarded, leaving the reading , an alternative reading for Obba.  This is, however, somewhat 
tenuous. 
1441  Following Desanges, Un tmoignage peu connu, 45, who plausibly emends the reading  to 
. 
1442  Pringle, Defence, 283, 310.  Contra Courtois, Les Vandales, 69 n. 6; idem, Victor de Vita et son oeuvre, 
59 n. 290, who identified Medela with Medeli in Zeugitana. 
1443  Pringle, Defence, 311, suggests that Scile must be somewhere in the vicinity of Simitthu (mod. 
Chemtou, Tunisia). 
1444  The term Mauritania [] is never actually used in the De Aedificiis, but is used in the Bella 
(III.25.3; IV.10.29, 13.19, 14.20, 20.30, 31, 22.5). 
Appendices 
Appendix II:  African cities in the geographical treatise attributed to George of Cyprus1445 
African cities identified in the geographical treatise attributed to George of Cyprus.  Those cities 
marked with an * are also attested in Procopius De Aedificiis (see Appendix I). 
 Honigmann (1939)1446 Gelzer (1890)1447  
639.   BYZACENA 
640. *  Carthage 
641.   Proconsularis 
642.   Sufes1448 
643.   Capsa 
643a.   Cillium 
644.   Iunci 
645. *  Thelepte 
646.   (Unlocated) 
647.   (Unlocated) 
648.   (Unlocated) 
649. *  (Unlocated) 
650.   (Unlocated) 
651.   Cululis 
652.  (?)  Thapsus1449 
653. *  Hadrumetum 
653a.     Sufetula 
654.   NUMIDIA 
655. *  Calama 
656.   Theveste 
657.     Hippo Regius 
658. *   Bagai 
659. *  Badias1450 
659a. *  Mileu1451 
660. *  Laribus/Lares 
661. *    Ammaedara1452 
662. *  (Unlocated)1453 
1445  See also Map X. 
1446  E. Honigmann, Le Synekdmos dHirokls et lOpuscule Gographique de Georges de Chypre: texte, 
introduction, commentaire et cartes (Brussels, 1939). 
1447  H. Gelzer (ed.), Georgii Cyprii descriptio orbis romani (Leipzig, 1890). 
1448  Honigmann, Le Synekdmos dHirokls et lOpuscule Gographique de Georges de Chypre, 56. 
1449  Assuming that Honigmanns reading of , which differs from that of Gelzer, is indeed correct. 
1450  See n. 1433. 
1451  See n. 1434. 
1452  Cf. n. 1441. 
1453  See n. 1443. 
Appendices 
663.   (Unlocated) 
664. *  Tigisis 
665. *  Vaga 
666.   Constantina 
668.  1454  MAURITANIA SITIFENSIS 
667. * 1455 Sitifis 
669.  (?)  Rusuccuru 
670.    MAURITANIA 
CAESARIENSIS 
671a. *    []  Septem 
1454  Honigmann, Le Synekdmos dHirokls et lOpuscule Gographique de Georges de Chypre, 56, 
acknowledges that he has switched lines 667 and 668, presumably on the basis that Procopius places 
Sitifis in Mauritania in the Bella (IV.20.20).  Cf. Duval, La Maurtanie sitifienne  lpoque byzantine, 
1589, who suggests that this shift may not be entirely justified given that Procopius places Sitifis in 
Numidia in the De Aedificiis (VI.7.9). 
1455  See n. 1438. 
Maps were produced using the Ancient World Mapping Centers web-based Antiquity -la-
carte application: http://awmc.unc.edu/awmc/applications/alacarte/ 
They are reproduced here in accordance with the applications open-access policy for non-
commercial use, the terms of which may be found at: 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/ 
Bibliography 
Bibliography 
Primary sources are referenced by the editions cited in the bibliography below.  For the 
abbreviations used for primary sources see pages 78. 
All translations consulted are listed below, together with the relevant edition or editions.  
Translations of Greek and Latin sources included in the text are my own, unless otherwise 
noted.  All translations of Syriac and Arabic sources included in the text are from the 
translations listed. 
Primary Sources  Greek and Latin 
Acta Cypriani, ed. A. A. R. Bastiaensen and trans. G. Chiarini, in: Atti e Passioni dei Martiri, 2nd 
edn. (Milan, 1990). 
Agathias, Agathiae Myrinaei historiarum libri quinque, ed. R. Keydell (CFHB 2)(Berlin, 1967). 
, The Histories, trans. J. D. Frendo (CFHB 2A) (Berlin, 1975). 
Agnellus of Ravenna, Agnelli Ravennatis liber pontificalis ecclesiae Ravennatis, ed. D. 
Deliyannis (Turnhout, 2006). 
, The Book of the Pontiffs of the Church of Ravenna, trans. D. Deliyannis (Washington, 2004). 
Ammianus Marcellinus, Ammianus Marcellinus: History, ed. and trans. J. C. Rolfe (3 vols., 
London, 19351971). 
Anthologia Graeca, ed. H. Beckby, 2nd edn. (4 vols., Munich, 19651968). 
, The Greek Anthology, trans. W. R. Paton (5 vols., London, 19161918) 
Anthologia Latina: Anthologia Latina.  I, Carmina in codicibus scripta.  Fasc. 1, Libri Salmansiani 
aliorumque carmina, ed. D. R. Shackleton Bailey, new edn. (Stuttgart, 1982). 
, Anthologia Latina, sive, Poesis Latinae supplementum.  Pars prior, carmina in codicibus 
scripta, ed. A. Riese (2 vols., Leipzig, 18941906). 
Cassiodorus, Magni Aurelii Cassiodori senatoris opera: pars I, ed. . J. Fridh and J. W. Halporn 
(CCSL 96) (Turnhout, 1973). 
, Selected Variae of Magnus Aurelius Cassiodorus Senator, trans. S. J. B. Barnish (Liverpool, 
1992). 
Chronicon Paschale, ed. L. Dindorf (Bonn, 1832). 
Bibliography 
Chronicon Paschale 284628 AD, trans. M. Whitby and M. Whitby (Liverpool, 1989). 
Corpus Iuris Civilis I: Institutiones et Digesta, ed. P. Krueger and T. Mommsen, 5th edn. (Berlin, 
1889). 
Corpus Iuris Civilis II: Codex Iustinianus, ed. P. Krueger, 5th edn. (Berlin, 1892). 
Corpus Iuris Civilis III: Novellae, ed. R. Schoell and W. Kroll, 1st edn. (Berlin, 1895). 
Collectio Avellana: Epistulae imperatorum pontificum aliorum inde ab a. CCCLXVII usque ad a. 
DLIII datae Avellana quae dicitur collectio, ed. O. Gnther (2 vols., Vienna, 18951898). 
Corippus, Corippi Africani grammatici libri qui sunt supersunt, ed. J. Partsch (Berlin, 1879). 
, Flavius Cresconius Corippus: In Laudem Iustini Augusti minoris libri IV, ed. and trans. Averil 
Cameron (London, 1976). 
, Flavii Cresconii Corippi Iohannidos libri VIII ed. J. Diggle and F. R. D. Goodyear (Cambridge, 
1970). 
, The Iohannis or De Bellis Libycis of Flavius Cresconius Corippus, trans. G. W. Shea (Lewiston, 
1998). 
Cyril of Scythopolis, Vita Sabae, in: Kyrillos von Skythopolis, ed. E. Schwartz (Leipzig, 1939). 
, Lives of the Monks of Palestine, trans. R. M. Price (Kalamazoo, 1981). 
The Digest of Justinian, ed. T. Mommsen and P. Krueger, trans. A. Watson (4 vols., Philadelphia, 
1985). 
Evagrius Scholasticus, The Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius: with the Scholia, ed. J. Bidez and 
L. Parmentier (London, 1898). 
, The Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius Scholasticus, trans. M. Whitby (Liverpool, 2000). 
Pseudo-George of Cyprus, Le Synekdmos dHirokls et lOpuscule Gographique de Georges 
de Chypre: texte, introduction, commentaire et cartes, ed. and comment. E. Honigmann 
(Brussells, 1939). 
, Georgii Cyprii descriptio orbis romani, ed. H. Gelzer (Leipzig, 1890) 
Gregory the Great, Gregorii Magni Dialogi, ed. U. Moricca (Rome, 1924). 
, Dialogues, trans. O. J. Zimmerman (New York, 1959). 
Gregory of Tours, Libri historiarum X, ed. B. Krusch and W. Levison (MGH SRM 1.1) (Hanover, 
1951). 
, History of the Franks, trans. E. Brehaut (New York, 1969). 
Hydatius, Hydatii Lemici continuatio chronicorum Hieronymianorum, in: Chronica minora 
saec. IV. V. VI. VII. (II), ed. T. Mommsen (MGH AA 11), Berlin 1894). 
Bibliography 
Isidore of Seville, Las Historias de los godos, vndalos y suevosde Isidoro de Sevilla, ed. and 
trans. C. Rodrguez Alonso (Len, 1975). 
John of Biclar, Victor Tunnunensis Chronicon cum reliquiis Consularibus Caesaraugustanis et 
Iohannis Biclarensis Chronicon, ed. C. Cardelle de Hartmann (CCSL 173A) (Turnhout, 
2001). 
, in: Conquerors and Chroniclers of Early Medieval Spain, trans. and comment. K. B. Wolf, 2nd 
edn. (Liverpool, 1999). 
John Lydus, Des magistratures de ltat romain, ed. and trans. M. Dubuisson and J. Schamp (2 
vols., Paris, 2006). 
John Malalas, Ioannis Malalae Chronographia, ed. H. Thurn (CFHB 35) (Berlin, 2000). 
, The Chronicle of John Malalas, trans. E. Jeffreys, M. Jeffreys and R. Scott (Melbourne, 1986). 
John of Nikiu, The Chronicle of John, Bishop of Nikiu, trans. R. H. Charles (London, 1916). 
Jordanes, Iordanis Getica et Romana, ed. T. Mommsen (MGH AA 5.1) (Berlin, 1882). 
Laterculus regum Vandalorum et Alanorum, in: Chronicla minora saec. IV. V. VI. VII (III), ed. T. 
Mommsen (MGH AA 13) (Berlin, 1898). 
Marcellinus Comes, The Chronicle of Marcellinus, ed. T. Mommsen and trans. B. Croke (Sydney, 
1995). 
Marius of Avenches, La Chronique de Marius dAvenches (455-581), ed. and trans. J. Favrod 
(Lausanne, 1991). 
Paul the Deacon, Pauli historia Langobardorum, ed. L. Bethmann and G. Waitz (MGH SRL 1) 
(Hanover, 1878). 
, Pauli historiae romanae libri XIXVI, ed. H. Droysen (MGH AA 2) (Berlin, 1879). 
Paul the Silentiary, Descriptio Sanctae Sophiae: in Prokop: Werke, vol. V, ed. O. Veh (Munich, 
1977). 
, Three Political Voices from the Age of Justinian: Agapetus, Advice to the Emperor, Dialogue 
on Political Science, Paul the Silentiary, Description of Hagia Sophia, trans. P. Bell 
(Liverpool, 2009). 
Priscus, The Fragmentary Classicizing Historians: Eunapius, Olympiodorus, Priscus and 
Malchus, vol. II, ed. and trans. R. C. Blockley (Liverpool, 1983). 
Procopius, Procopii Caesariensis opera omnia, ed. J. Haury and rev. G. Wirth (3 vols., 19621964). 
, The Anecdota or Secret History, trans. H. B. Dewing (London, 1935). 
, Buildings, trans. H. B. Dewing (London, 1940). 
, History of the Wars: Books III, trans. H. B. Dewing (London, 1914). 
Bibliography 
, History of the Wars: Books IIIIV, trans. H. B. Dewing (London, 1916). 
, History of the Wars: Books VVI.15, trans. H. B. Dewing (London, 1916). 
, History of the Wars: Books VI.16VII.35, trans. H. B. Dewing (London, 1924). 
, History of the Wars: Books VII.368, trans. H. B. Dewing (London, 1928). 
, Procope: La guerre contre les Vandales, trans. and comment. D. Roques (Paris, 2009). 
, The Wars of Justinian, trans. H. B. Dewing, rev. and comment. A. Kaldellis (Indianapolis, 
2014). 
Prosper of Aquitaine, Epitoma chronicon: in Chronica Minora saec. IV. V. VI. VII. (I), ed. T. 
Mommsen (MGH AA 9) (Berlin, 1892). 
Das Strategikon des Maurikios, ed. G. T. Dennis and trans. E. Gamillscheg (CFHB 17) (Vienna, 
1981). 
, Maurices Strategikon: Handbook of Byzantine Military Strategy, trans. G. T. Dennis 
(Philadelphia, 1984). 
Suidae Lexicon, ed. A. Adler (5 vols., Leipzig, 19281938). 
Theophanes, Theophanis chronographia, ed. C. de Boor (2 vols., Hildesheim, 19631965). 
, The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor: Byzantine and Near Eastern History AD 284813, 
trans. C. Mango and R. Scott (Oxford, 1997). 
Vegetius, Flavii Vegeti Renati epitoma rei militaris, ed. C. Lang, revised edn. (Leipzig, 1885). 
, Epitome of Military Science, trans. N. P. Milner, 2nd edn. (Liverpool, 1996). 
Venantius Fortunatus, Venanti Honori Clementiani Fortunati presbyteri Italici opera poetica, 
ed. F. Leo (Berlin, 1881). 
, Venantius Fortunatus: Personal and Political Poems, trans. J. George (Liverpool, 1995). 
Victor of Tunnuna, Victor Tunnunensis Chronicon cum reliquiis Consularibus 
Caesaraugustanis et Iohannis Biclarensis Chronicon, ed. C. Cardelle de Hartmann (CCSL 
173A) (Turnhout, 2001). 
Victor of Vita, Victoris Vitensis Historia persecutionis Africanae provinciae sub Geiserico et 
Hunirico regibus Wandalorum, ed. C. Halm (MGH AA 3.1) (Berlin, 1879). 
, Victor of Vita: History of the Vandal Persecution, trans. J. Moorhead (Liverpool, 1992). 
Vita Sancti Fulgentii, ed. G.-G. Lapeyre (Paris, 1929). 
Fulgentius: Selected Works, trans. R. B. Eno (Washington, 1997). 
Bibliography 
Primary Sources  Syriac 
Pseudo-Dionysius of Tel-Mahre, Chronicle: Part III, trans. W. Witakowski (Liverpool, 1996). 
Pseudo-Zachariah of Mitylene, The Syriac Chronicle Known as that of Zachariah of Mitylene, 
trans. F. J. Hamilton and E. W. Brooks (London, 1899). 
, The Chronicle of Pseudo-Zachariah Rhetor: Church and War in Late Antiquity, trans. R. R. 
Phenix and C. Horn; and comment. G. Greatrex, S. P. Brock and W. Witakowski 
(Liverpool, 2010). 
Primary Sources  Arabic 
al-Bakri, Description de lAfrique septentrionale, trans. W. de Slane, revised edn. (Paris, 1965). 
Ibn Khaldun, Histoire des Berbres et les dynasties musulmanes de lAfrique Septentrionale, 
trans. W. de Slane, new edn. (4 vols., Paris, 1925). 
al-Yaqubi, Les pays, trans. G. Wiet (Cairo, 1937). 
Primary Sources  Epigraphic 
Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum VIII (7 vols., Berlin, 18791942). 
Les ddicaces douvrages de defense dans lAfrique byzantine, ed. J. Durliat (Rome, 1981). 
Les inscriptions dAltava, ed. J. Marcillet-Jaubert (Aix-en-Provence, 1968). 
Inscriptions latines de Tunisie, ed. A. Merlin (Paris, 1944). 
Inscriptions of Roman Tripolitania, ed. J. Reynolds and J. Ward-Perkins (Rome, 1952). 
Bibliography 
Secondary Literature 
Albertini, E., Ostrakon byzantin de Ngrine, Cinquantenaire de la Facult des Lettres dAlger 
(18811931) (Alger, 1932), 5362. 
Allen, P., Evagrius Scholasticus: The Church Historian (Leiden, 1981). 
Amann, R., De Corippo priorum poetarum Latinorum imitatore particula altera, in Programm 
des grossherzoglichen Gymnasiums zu Oldenburg (Ostern 1888) (Oldenburg, 1888), 13
Ants, S., Corippe: loge de lempereur Justin II (Paris, 1981) 
Atlas archologique de Tunisie: dition spciale des cartes topographiques, acompagne dun 
texte explicatif, ed. E. Babelon, R. Cagnat and S. Reinach (Paris, 1893). 
Baldwin, B., The career of Corippus, CQ 28 (1978), 37276. 
Barker, J. W., Justinian and the Later Roman Empire (Madison, 1986). 
Barnes, T. D., The New Empire of Diocletian and Constantine (Cambridge, Mass., 1982). 
Barnish, S., A. D. Lee and M. Whitby, Government and administration, in Averil Cameron, B. 
Ward-Perkins and M. Whitby, eds., CAH XIV (Cambridge, 2000), 164206. 
Ben Abed, A., and N. Duval, Carthage, la capital du royaume et les villes de Tunisie  lpoque 
vandale, in G. Ripoll and J. M. Gurt, eds., Sedes regiae (ann. 400800) (Barcelona, 2000), 
163218. 
Ben Baaziz, S., Les sites archologiques de la rgion de Gafsa, LArme et les affaires militaires 
(Actes du IVe colloque international dhistoire et darchologie de lAfrique du nord 
(Strasbourg, 1988)) (2 vols., Paris, 1991), 53648. 
Beschaouch, A., R. Hanoune and Y. Thbert, Les ruines de Bulla Regia (Rome, 1977). 
Biraben, J.-N., Les hommes et la peste en France et dans les pays europens et mditerranens 
(Paris, 1975). 
, and J. Le Goff, La peste dans le Haut Moyen Age, Annales (HSS) 24 (1969), 1484-510. 
Bischoff, B., Latin Palaeography: Antiquity and the Middle Ages, trans. D.  Crinn & D. Ganz 
(Cambridge, 1990). 
, Lorsch im Spiegel seiner Handschriften (Munich, 1974). 
Blnsdorf, J., Aeneadas rursus cupiunt resonare Camenae: Vergils epische Form in der 
Johannis des Corippus, in E. Lefvre, ed., Monumentum Chiloniense: Studien zur 
augusteischen Zeit (Amsterdam, 1975), 524-45. 
Blume, F., Annotated Justinian Code, 2nd edn., ed. T. Kearly (2009), at: 
http://www.uwyo.edu/lawlib/blume-justinian/_files/docs/code-revisions/book1rev-
copy/book%201-27rev.pdf 
Bibliography 
Bonini, R., Caduta e reconquista dellimpero romano dOccidente nelle fonti legislative 
giustinianee, FelRav 122 (1976), 293318. 
, Ricerche sulla legislazione giustinianea dellanno 535. Novella 8: venalit della cariche e 
riforme dellamministrazione periferica (Bologna, 1976). 
Bonnal, J.-P., and P.-A. Fvrier, Ostraka de la rgion de Bir Trouch, Bulletin dArchologie 
Algrienne 2 (1966-1967), 23949. 
Braund, D., Georgia in Antiquity: A History of Colchis and Transcaucasian Iberia, 550 BCAD 562 
(Oxford, 1994). 
, Rome and the Friendly King: The Character of the Client Kingship (London, 1984). 
Brett, M., and E. Fentress, The Berbers (Oxford, 1996). 
Brogan, O., Inscriptions in the Libyan alphabet from Tripolitania, and some notes on the tribes 
of the region, in J. Bynon and T. Bynon, eds., Hamito-Semitica (Paris, 1975), 26789. 
, and D. J. Smith, Ghirza: A Libyan Settlement in the Roman Period (Tripoli, 1984). 
Bury, J. B., History of the Later Roman Empire: From the Death of Theodosius I to the Death of 
Justinian (A.D. 395 to A.D. 565) (2 vols., London, 1923). 
Cagnat, R., LArme romaine dAfrique et loccupation militaire de lAfrique sous les empereurs 
(2 vols., Paris, 19121913). 
, and A. Merlin, Atlas archologique de la Tunisie: dition spciale des cartes topographiques 
publies par la Ministre de la guerre, accompagne dun texte explicatif (Paris, 1920). 
Cameron, Alan, Wandering poets: A literary movement in Byzantine Egypt, Historia 14.4 
(1965), 470509. 
Cameron, Averil, Vandal and Byzantine Africa, in Averil Cameron, B. Ward-Perkins and 
Michael Whitby, eds., CAH 14. Late Antiquity: Empire and Successors, AD 425600 
(Cambridge, 2000), 55269. 
, Gelimers laughter: the case of Byzantine Africa, in F. M. Clover and R. S. Humphreys, eds., 
Tradition and Innovation in Late Antiquity (Madison, 1989), 17190. 
, Procopius and the Sixth Century (London, 1985). 
, Corippus Iohannis: Epic of Byzantine Africa, Papers of the Liverpool Latin Seminar 4 (1984), 
16780. 
, Byzantine Africa  the literary evidence, in J. H. Humphrey, ed., Excavations at Carthage 
1978 Conducted by The University of Michigan (Ann Arbor, 1982), 2962. 
, The career of Corippus again, CQ 30 (1980), 53439. 
, The early religious policies of Justin II, in Baker, D., ed., The Orthodox Churches and the 
West: Papers Read at the Fourteenth Summer Meeting and the Fifteenth Winter 
Meeting of the Ecclesiastical History Society (Oxford, 1976), 5167. 
Bibliography 
, Flavius Cresconius Corippus: In laudem Iustini Augusti minoris (London, 1976). 
, Agathias (Oxford, 1970). 
Camps, G., Antalas, in EB 5 (Aix-en-Provence, 1988), 7067. 
, Nouvelles observations sur linscription du roi Masuna  Altava, BCTH n.s. 18B (1988), 153
, De Masuna  Koceila.  Les destines de la Maurtanie aux VIe et VIIe sicles, BCTH n.s. 19B: 
IIe colloque international sur lhistoire et larchologie de lAfrique du Nord (Grenoble, 
59 Avril 1983) (1985), 30725. 
, Qui sont les Dii Mauri?, BCTH 2021 (19841985), 1578. 
, Rex gentium maurorum et romanorum: recherches sur les royaumes de Maurtanie des VIe 
et VIIe sicles, AntAfr 20 (1984), 183218. 
, Berbres: Aux marges de lhistoire (Toulouse, 1980). 
, Linscription de Beja et le problme des Dii Mauri, Revue africaine 98 (1954), 23360. 
, and A. Martel, Fraichich (Frechich), in EB 19 (Aix-en-Provence, 1998), 293033. 
Carcopino, J., Un empereur maure inconnu daprs une inscription latine rcemment 
dcouverte dans lAurs, REA 66 (1944), 92120. 
Carri, J.-M., Ltat  la recherche de nouveaux modes de financement des armes (Rome et 
Byzance, IVe-VIIe sicles), in Averil Cameron, ed., The Byzantine and Early Islamic 
Near East III: States, Resources and Armies (Princeton, 1995), 2760. 
Casson, L., Belisarius expedition against Carthage, in J. H. Humphrey, ed., Excavations at 
Carthage 1978 Conducted by the University of Michigan (Ann Arbor, 1982), 2328. 
Castranuovo, P., La visione dei Mauri nella Iohannis di Corippo, in M. L. Silvestre and M. 
Squillante, eds., Mutatio rerum: Letteratura, filosofia, scienza tra tardo antico e 
altomedioevo. Atti del convegno di studi (Napoli, 2526 novembre 1996) (Naples, 1997), 
40119. 
Cataudella, Historiography in the East, in G. Marasco, ed., Greek and Roman Historiography in 
Late Antiquity (Leiden, 2003), 391447. 
Cesa, M., La pacificazione della Libia nella Iohannis di Corippo, CCC 6.1 (1985), 7788. 
, La politica di Giustiniano verso loccidente nel giudizio di Procopio, Athenaeum n.s. 59 
(1981), 389-409. 
Chaker, S., Laguatan: Note complmentaire sur le nom des Laguatan, in EB 28/9 (Aix-en-
Provence, 2008), 432122. 
Champetier, P., Les conciles africaines durant la priode byzantine, Revue africaine 95 (1951), 
10319. 
Bibliography 
Chtillon, F., LAfrique oublie de C. Courtois et les ignotae regiones de la Vita Fulgentii, 
Revue du Moyen Age Latin 11 (1955), 37188. 
Cherbonneau, A., Inscriptions dcouvertes dans la province de Constantine, Annuaire de la 
socit archologique de la province de Constantine 6 (1862), 76160. 
Clover, F. M., The symbiosis of Romans and Vandals in Africa, in E. Chrysos and A. Schwarcz, 
eds., Das Reich und die Barbaren (Vienna/Kln, 1989), 5773. 
, Felix Karthago, DOP 40 (1986), 116. 
, Le culte des empereurs dans lAfrique vandale, BCTH Series 2, 1516 (1984), 1218. 
, Carthage and the Vandals, in J. H. Humphrey, ed., Excavations at Carthage 1978 Conducted 
by the University of Michigan 7 (Ann Arbor, 1982), 122. 
Collins, R., Early Medieval Spain: Unity in Diversity, 4001000, 2nd edn. (Basingstoke, 1995). 
Conant, J., Staying Roman: Conquest and Identity in Africa and the Mediterranean, 439700 
(Cambridge, 2012). 
Cosentino, S., Byzantine Sardinia between West and East: Features of a regional culture, 
Millennium 1 (2004), 32967. 
Courtois, C., Les Vandales et lAfrique (Paris, 1955). 
, Victor de Vita et son oeuvre: tude critique (Alger, 1954). 
Croke, B., Justinians Constantinople, in M. Maas, ed., The Cambridge Companion to the Age of 
Justinian (Cambridge, 2005), 6086. 
, Procopius Secret History: Rethinking the date, GRBS 45.4 (2005), 40531. 
, Latin historiography and the barbarian kingdoms, in G. Marasco, ed., Greek and Roman 
Historiography in Late Antiquity: Fourth to Sixth Century AD (Leiden, 2003), 35875. 
, The Chronicle of Marcellinus: A Translation and Commentary (Sydney, 1995). 
, Malalas, the man and his work, in B. Croke, E. Jeffreys and R. Scott., eds., Studies in John 
Malalas (Sydney, 1990), 1722. 
, and J. Crow, Procopius and Dara, JRS 73 (1983), 14359. 
Curta, F., The Making of the Slavs: History and Archaeology in the Lower Danube Region c. 500
700 (Cambridge, 2001). 
Dahmani, S., Pouvoirs tribaux autochthones dans le maghrib central aux VIe et VIIe sicles, in 
P. Trousset, ed., VIe colloque international sur lhistoire et larchologie de lAfrique du 
nord: lAfrique du nord antique et mdivale (Paris, 1995), 31726. 
Dahn, F., Prokopius von Csarea (Berlin, 1865). 
Daniels, C., The Garamantes of Southern Libya (Stoughton, Wisconsin, 1970). 
Bibliography 
Dauge, Y. A., Le barbare: recherches sur la conception romaine de la barbarie et de la civilisation 
(Brussels, 1981). 
Deloum, S., Notes sur le trsor montaire de MSila (fin du Ve sicle dbut du VIe sicle, aprs 
J.-C.), Proceedings of the 10th International Congress of Numismatics (London, 
September 1986) (London, 1989), 30513. 
Dennis, G., Das Strategikon des Maurikios (Vienna, 1981). 
Desanges, J., Frexes, in EB 19 (Aix-en-Provence, 1998), 2935. 
,  propos de Masties, imperator barbre et chrtien, Ktema 21 (1996), 1838. 
, Un tmoignage peu connu de Procope sur la Numidie vandale et byzantine: (nouvelle 
lecture et commentaire de Procope, de Aed., VI, 7, 111), Byzantion 33 (1963), 4169. 
, Catalogue des tribus africaines de lantiquit classique  louest du Nil (Dakar, 1962). 
, La dernire retraite de Gelimer, CT 7 (1959), 42935. 
Devresse, R., LEglise dAfrique durant loccupation byzantine, MEFRA 57 (1940), 14366. 
Diehl, C., LAfrique byzantine: histoire de la domination byzantine en Afrique (533709) (New 
York, 1896). 
Dodi, R., La Iohannis di Corippo fonte storica dei fatti dAfrica del 546548, NRS 70 (1986), 585
, Corippo poeta della romanitas Africana, Aevum 60.1 (1986), 11119. 
Dolezalek, G., Repertorium manuscriptorum veterum Codicis Iustiniani (2 vols., Frankfurt, 
1985). 
Downey, G., The composition of Procopius De Aedificiis, TAPA 78 (1947), 17183. 
Dureau de la Malle, M., Recherches sur la topographie de Carthage (Paris, 1835). 
Durliat, J., Les transferts fonciers aprs la reconqute byzantine en Afrique et en Italie, in E. 
Magnou-Nortier, ed., Aux sources de la gestion publique (Lille, 1995), 89121. 
, La peste du VIe sicle: pour un nouvel examen des sources byzantines, in C. Abadie-Reynal, 
ed., Hommes et richesses dans lempire byzantin IVeVIIe sicle (Paris, 1989), 10719. 
, Les finances municipales africaines de Constantin aux Aghlabides, Actes de IIe congrs 
dhistoire et de civilisation du Maghreb (Novembre 1980) = CT 29 (1985), 51731. 
, Les ddicaces douvrages de defense dans lAfrique byzantine (Rome, 1981). 
, Les grands proprietaires africains et ltat byzantin, CT 1178 (1981), 51731. 
, Magister militum   dans lempire byzantine (VIeVIIe sicles), BZ 72 (1979), 
30620. 
Bibliography 
Duval, N., Ltat actuel des recherches archologiques sur Carthage chrtienne, AnTard 5 
(1997), 30950. 
, Ltat actuel des recherches sur les fortificatons de Justinien en Afrique, XXX corso di 
cultura sullarte ravennate e bizantina: seminario giustinianeo (Ravenna, 614 marzo 
1983) (Ravenna, 1985), 149204. 
, LAfrique byzantine de Justinien  la conqute musulmane.   propos de travaux rcents, 
MA 89 (1983), 43339. 
, Nouvelles recherches darchologie et pigraphie chrtinennes  Sufetula (Byzacne), 
MEFRA 68 (1956), 24798. 
, and V. Saxer, Un nouveau reliquaire africain et lvch Midilensis, Syria 75 (1998), 245
Duval, Y., La Maurtanie sitifienne  lpoque byzantine, Latomus 29 (1970), 15761. 
Dyson, S. L., and R. J. Rowland Jr., Shepherds, Sailors, and Conquerors: Archaeology and History 
in Sardinia from the Stone Age to the Middle Ages (Philadeplphia, 2007). 
Ehlers, W., Epische Kunst in Coripps Johannis, Philologus 124 (1980), 109-35. 
Elmayer, A., The Libyan god Gurzil in a Neo-Punic inscription from Tripolitania, LibStud 13 
(1982), 4950. 
Engelhardt, I., Mission und Politik in Byzanz: ein Beitrag zur Strukturanalyse byzantinischer 
Mission zur Zeit Justins und Justinians (Munich, 1974). 
Eno, R. B., Fulgentius: Selected Works (Washington, 1997). 
Evans, J. A. S., The Power Game in Byzantium (London, 2011). 
, The Age of Justinian: The Circumstances of Imperial Power (London, 2000). 
, The dates of Procopius works: A recapitulation of the evidence, GRBS 37 (1996), 30113. 
, Procopius (New York, 1972). 
, The dates of the Anecdota and De Aedificiis of Procopius, CP 64 (1969), 2930. 
Fatouros, G., Zur Prokop-Biographie, Klio 62 (1980), 51723. 
Feissel, D., Les edifices de Justinien au tmoignage de Procope et de lpigraphie, AnTard 8 
(2000), 81104. 
Fvrier, P.-A., Masuna et Masties, AntAfr 24 (1988), 13347. 
, Le maure ambigu ou les piges du discours, BCTH n.s. 19B (1985), 291304. 
Fisher, G., Between Empires: Arabs, Romans, and Sasanians in Late Antiquity (Oxford, 2011). 
Flusin, B., Ltablissement du text, sa nature et la forme littraire: remarques sur la tradition 
manuscrite du De Aedificiis, AnTard 8 (2000), 917. 
Bibliography 
, Miracle et histoire dans loeuvre de Cyrille de Scythopolis (Paris, 1983). 
Frend, W. H. C., The Christian period in Mediterranean Africa, c. AD 200 to 700, in F. D. Fage, 
ed., The Cambridge History of Africa II (Cambridge, 1978), 41089. 
Gaggero, G., I Mauri nella storiografia del tardo impero, LAfrica romana 7.1 (1989), 299308. 
Galand-Hallyn, P., La Johannide (De bellis Libycis): Corippe et le sublime dans la dernire 
epopee romaine, in J. Drouin and A. Roth, eds.,  la crois des tudes libyco-berbres: 
Mlanges offerts  Paulette Galand-Pernet et Lionel Galand (Paris, 1993), 7387. 
Gascou, J., LInstitution des bucellaires, Bulletin de linstitut franais darchologie orientale 
76 (1976), 14356. 
Gautier, E. F., Le pass de lAfrique du Nord.  Les sicles obscurs (Paris, 1952). 
George, J. W., Vandal poets in their context, in A. H. Merrills, ed., Vandals, Romans and Berbers: 
New Perspectives on Late Antique North Africa (Aldershot, 2004), 13343. 
, Venantius Fortunatus: A Latin Poet in Merovingian Gaul (Oxford, 1992). 
Goffart, W., The Narrators of Barbarian History (A.D. 550800): Jordanes, Gregory of Tours, Bede, 
and Paul the Deacon, paperback edn. (Princeton, 2005). 
Goodchild, R. G., The Roman and Byzantine limes in Cyrenaica, JRS 43 (1953), 6576. 
, and J. B. Ward Perkins, The limes Tripolitanus in the light of recent discoveries, JRS 39 
(1949), 8195. 
Greatrex, G., Perceptions of Procopius in recent scholarship, Histos 8 (2014), 76121. 
, Recent work on Procopius and the composition of Wars VIII, BMGS 27 (2003), 4567. 
, Lawyers and historians in late antiquity, in R. Mathisen, ed., Law, Society and Authority in 
Late Antiquity (Oxford, 2001), 148161. 
, Procopius the Outsider?, in D. C. Smythe, ed., Strangers to Themselves: The Byzantine 
Outsider (Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 1998), 21620. 
, Rome and Persia at War, 502532 (Aldershot, 1998). 
, The composition of Procopius Persian Wars and John the Cappadocian, Prudentia 27 (1995), 
113. 
, Procopius and Agathias on the defences of the Thracian Chersonese, in C. Mango and G. 
Dagron, eds., Constantinople and its Hinterland: papers from the twenty-seventh 
spring symposium of Byzantine studies, Oxford, April 1993 (Aldershot, 1995), 1259. 
, The dates of Procopius works, BMGS 18 (1994), 10114. 
, et al., The Chronicle of Pseudo-Zachariah Rhetor: Church and War in Late Antiquity 
(Liverpool, 2010). 
Bibliography 
, and and S. N. C. Lieu, The Roman Eastern Frontier and the Persian Wars: Part II AD 363-630 
(London, 2002). 
Grierson, P., Matasuntha or Mastinas, NC 19 (1959), 11930. 
Grumel, V., Trait dtudes byzantines I: La chronologie (Paris, 1958). 
Gsell, S., Atlas archologique de lAlgrie: dition spciale des cartes au 200.00e (Alger, 1911). 
, Les monuments antiques de lAlgrie (2 vols., Paris, 1901). 
Hadju, P., Corippuss attempt at writing a continuous narrative again, Latomus 60 (2001), 167
Haldon, J., Economy and administration: How did the empire work?, in M. Maas, ed., The 
Cambridge Companion to the Age of Justinian (Cambridge, 2005), 2859. 
, The idea of the town in the Byzantine empire, in G. P. Brogiolo & B. Ward-Perkins, eds., The 
Idea and the Ideal of the Town Between Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages 
(Leiden, 1999), 123. 
, Warfare, State and Society in the Byzantine World, 5651204 (London, 1999). 
, Recruitment and Conscription in the Byzantine Army c. 550950: A Study on the Origins of 
the Stratiotika Ktemata (Vienna, 1979). 
Hannezo, G., Chebba et Ras-Kapoudia.  Notes historiques, Bulletin de la socit archologique 
de Sousse (1906), 135-40. 
Haury, J., Procopiana (Augsburg, 1891). 
Hays, G., Romuleis Libicisque Litteris: Fulgentius and the Vandal Renaissance, in A. Merrills, 
ed., Vandals, Romans and Berbers: New Perspectives on Late Antique North Africa 
(Farnham, 2004), 10132. 
Hemmerdinger, B., Les lettres latines  Constantinople jusqu Justinien, ByzF 1 (1966), 174
Hen, Y., Roman Barbarians: The Royal Court and Culture in the Early Medieval West 
(Basingstoke, 2007). 
Hendy, M., Studies in the Byzantine Monetary Economy, c. 3001450 (Cambridge, 1985). 
Hitzig, H. F., Die Assessoren der rmischen Magistrate und Richter (Munich, 1893). 
Hodges, R., and D. Whitehouse, Mohammed, Charlemagne and the Origins of Europe (Ithaca, 
1983). 
Hofmann, H., berlegungen zu einer Theorie der nichtchristlichen Epik der lateinischen 
Sptantike, Philologus 132.1 (1988), 10159. 
, Corippus as a patristic author?, VigChr 43 (1989), 36177. 
Bibliography 
, Review of Corippe: loge de lempereur Justin II by S. Ants, Mnemosyne 40.1/2 (1987), 209
Honigmann, E., Le Synekdmos dHirokls et lOpuscule Gographique de Georges de Chypre: 
texte, introduction, commentaire et cartes (Brussells, 1939). 
Honor, T., Tribonian (London, 1978). 
, Some constitutions composed by Justinian, JRS 65 (1975), 10723. 
Hopkins, J. F., The Medieval toponymy of Tunisia.  Some identifications, CT 53-6 (1966), 319. 
Horden, P., Mediterranean plague in the Age of Justinian, in M. Maas, ed., The Cambridge 
Companion to the Age of Justinian (Cambridge, 2005), 134-60. 
Howard-Johnston, J., The education and expertise of Procopius, AnTard 8 (2000), 1930. 
Hurst, H., Excavations at Carthage 1976: Third interim report, AJ 57 (1977), 23161. 
, et al., Excavations at Carthage: The British Mission, Volume II, 1: The Circular Harbour, North 
Side: The Site and Finds other than Pottery (Oxford, 1994). 
, et al., Excavations at Carthage: The British Mission, Volume I,1: The Avenue du Prsident 
Habib Bourguiba, Salammbo: The Site and Finds other than Pottery (Sheffield, 1984). 
Iluk, J., The export of gold from the Roman Empire to the barbarian countries from the 4th to 
the 6th centuries, MBAH 4 (1985), 79103. 
Janon, M., LAurs au VIe sicle: note sur le rcit de Procope, AntAfr 15 (1980), 34551. 
Jones, A. H. M., The Later Roman Empire 284602: A Social, Economic, and Administrative 
Survey (Oxford, 1964). 
, J. R. Martindale and J. Morris, The Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire (3 vols., 
Cambridge, 19711992). 
Julien, C.-A., Histoire de lAfrique du Nord: Tunisie, Algrie, Maroc, ed. C. Courtois, 2nd edn. (2 
vols., Paris, 19511952). 
Kaegi, W. E., Muslim Expansion and Byzantine Collapse in North Africa (Cambridge, 2010). 
, Byzantine Military Unrest, 471843: An Interpretation (Amsterdam, 1981). 
, Arianism and the Byzantine army in Africa 533546, Traditio 21 (1965), 2353. 
Kaldellis, A., Procopius Persian War: A thematic and literary analysis, in R. Macrides, ed., 
History as Literature in Byzantium: Papers from the Fortieth Spring Symposium of 
Byzantine Studies, University of Birmingham, April 2007 (Farnham, 2010), 25373. 
, The date and structure of Prokopios Secret History and his projected work on church 
history, GRBS 49 (2009), 585616. 
Bibliography 
, Classicism, Barbarism, and Warfare: Prokopios and the Conservative Reaction to Later 
Roman Military Policy, AJAH New Series 3-4 (2004), 189218. 
, Procopius of Caesarea: Tyranny, History, and Philosophy at the End of Antiquity 
(Philadelphia, 2004), 
Kastor, R., Guardians of Language: The Grammarian and Society in Late Antiquity (Berkeley, 
1981). 
Kislinger, E., Ein Angriff zu viel.  Zur Verteidigung der Thermopylen in justanianischer Zeit, 
BZ 91 (1998), 4958. 
Kotula, T., Firmus, fils du Nubel: tait-il usurpateur ou roi des Maures?, ActaAntHung 17 (1970), 
13746. 
, Principes gentis et principes civitatis en Afrique romaine, Eos 55 (1965), 34765. 
Krestan, L., and K. Winkler, Corippus, RLAC 3 (1957), 4249. 
Kulikowski, M., Late Roman Spain and its Cities (Baltimore, 2004). 
Lancel, S., Actes de la confrence de Carthage en 411 (4 vols., Paris, 19721992). 
Lapeyre, G.-G., Saint Fulgence de Ruspe (Paris, 1929). 
, and A. Pellegrin, Carthage latine et chrtienne (Paris, 1950). 
Laporte, J.-P., Zabi, Friki: Notes sur la Maurtanie et la Numidie de Justinien, AnTard 10 (2002), 
15167. 
Lassre, J.-M., La Byzacne mridionale au milieu du VIe s. pC daprs la Johannide de Corippe, 
Pallas 31 (1984), 16378. 
Lassus, J., La forteresse byzantine de Thamugadi: Fouilles  Timgad 1938-1956 (I) (Paris, 1981). 
Lausberg, M., Parcere subiectis: Zur Vergilnachfolge in der Johannis des Coripp, JbAChr 32 
(1989), 10526. 
Lee, A. D., The empire at war, in M. Maas, ed., The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Justinian 
(Cambridge, 2005), 11333. 
, Information and Frontiers: Roman Foreign Relations in Late Antiquity (Cambridge, 1993). 
, The role of hostages in Roman diplomacy with Sasanian Persia, Historia 40 (1991), 36674.   
Lengrand, D., Le limes interne de Maurtanie Csarienne au IVe sicle et la famille de Nubel, 
in A. Rousselle, ed., Frontires terrestres, frontires clestres dans lantiquit 
(Perpignan, 1995), 14361. 
Leone, A., Changing Townscapes in North Africa from Late Antiquity to the Arab Conquest (Bari, 
2007). 
Bibliography 
, Change or no change? Revised perceptions of urban transformation in late Antiquity, TRAC 
98: Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Theoretical Roman Archaeology Conference, 
Leicester 1998 (1999), 12130. 
Lepelley, C., La prfecture de tribu dans lAfrique du Bas-Empire, in Mlanges d'histoire 
ancienne offerts  William Seston (Paris, 1974), 28595. 
Leveau, P., LAile II des Thraces, la tribu des Mazices et les praefecti gentis en Afrique du Nord, 
AntAfr 7 (1973), 15191. 
Lewis, A. R., Naval Power and Trade in the Mediterranean: AD 5001100 (New York, 1970). 
Lzine, A., Carthage-Utique: tudes darchitecture et durbanisme (Paris, 1968). 
, Sousse: les monuments musulmans (Tunis, 1968). 
Liebeschuetz, J. H. W. G., Gens into regnum: the Vandals, in H. W. Goetz, J. Jarnut and W. Pohl, 
eds., Regna and Gentes: The Relationship between Late Antique and Early Medieval 
Peoples and Kingdoms in the Transformation of the Roman World (Leiden, 2003), 55
Louth, A., The Eastern Empire in the sixth century, in P. Fouracre, ed., The New Cambridge 
Medieval History (Cambridge, 2005), 93117. 
Lowe, E. A., Palaeographical Papers, 19071965 (2 vols., Oxford, 1972). 
Lulliri, G., and M. Bonaria Urban, Le monete della Sardegna vandalica: storia e numismatica 
(Sassari, 1996). 
McCormick, M., Origins of the European Economy: Communications and Commerce, AD 300
900 (Cambridge, 2001). 
, Bateaux de vie, bateaux de mort: maladie, commerce, transports annonaires et le passage 
conomique du Bas-Empire au Moyen Age, in Morfologie Sociali e Culturali in Europa 
fra Tarda Antichit e Alto Medioevo (Spoleto, 1998), 35122. 
, Eternal Victory: Triumphal Rulership in Late Antiquity, Byzantium and the Early Medieval 
West (Cambridge, 1986). 
, Analysing imperial ceremonies, JB 35 (1985), 120. 
MacCormack, S., Art and Ceremony in Late Antiquity (Berkeley, 1981). 
Maas, M., Roman history and Christian ideology in Justinianic reform legislation, DOP 40 
(1986), 1731. 
Maier, J.-L., Lpiscopat de lAfrique romaine, vandale et byzantine (Rome, 1973). 
Mango, C., and R. Scott, with G. Greatrex, The Chronicle of Theophanes Confessor (Oxford, 
1997). 
Manitius, M., Zu sptlateinischen Dichtern, Zeitschrift fr die sterreichischen Gymnasien 37 
(1886), 83-101. 
Bibliography 
Mantke, J., ber den verlorenen Schlu der Johannis des Corippus, Eos 78.2 (1990), 32532. 
Mattingly, D., Laguatan, in EB 28/9 (Aix-en-Provence, 2008), 431418. 
, Historical summary, in J. D. Mattingly, ed., The Archaeology of Fazzn. Volume 1, Synthesis 
(London, 2003), 75106. 
, From one colonialism to another: imperialism and the Maghreb, in J. Webster and N. 
Cooper, eds., Roman Imperialism: Post-Colonial Perspectives (Leicester, 1996), 4969. 
, Tripolitania (London, 1995). 
, War and peace in Roman north Africa: observations and models of state-tribe interaction, 
in R. B. Ferguson and N. L. Whitehead, eds., War in the Tribal Zone: Expanding States 
and Indigenous Warfare (Santa Fe, 1992), 3160. 
, Oil for export?  A comparison of Libyan, Spanish and Tunisian oil production in the Roman 
Empire, JRA 1 (1988), 3356. 
, The olive boom.  Oil surpluses, wealth and power in Roman Tripolitania, LibStud 19 (1988), 
2141. 
, Libyans and the limes: culture and society in Roman Tripolitania, AntAfr 23 (1987), 7194. 
, The Laguatan: A Libyan tribal confederation in the Late Roman Empire, LibStud 14 (1983), 
96108. 
Mcharek, A., De saint Augustin  al-Bakri.  Sur la localisation de lager Bullensis dans lAfrica 
latino-chrtienne et de Fahs Boll en Ifriqiya arabo-musulmane, CRAI 143 (1999), 115
Merrills, A., Kingdoms of North Africa, in M. Maas, ed., The Cambridge Companion to the Age 
of Attila (Cambridge, 2014), 26481. 
, and R. Miles, The Vandals (Oxford, 2010). 
Milde, W., Der Bibliothekskatalog des Klosters Murbach aus dem 9. Jahrhundert (Heidelberg, 
1968). 
Modran, Y., Les Laguatan: Le problme des migrations des no-Berbres, in EB 28/9 (Aix-
en-Provence, 2008), 431821. 
, Des Maures aux Berbres en Afrique du Nord dans lAntiquit tardive, in V. Gazeau et al., 
eds., Identit et ethnicit: concepts, dbats historiographiques, exemples (IIIe-XIIe 
sicle) (Caen, 2008), 91134. 
, Le plus dlicat des peuples et le plus malheureux: Vandales et Maures en Afrique, in G. 
Berndt and R. Steinacher, eds., Das Reich der Vandalen und seine (Vor-) Geschichten 
(Vienna, 2008), 21325. 
, Les Maures de lAfrique romaine dans lantiquit tardive, REL 82 (2004), 24969. 
, Les Maures et lAfrique romaine (IVeVIIe sicle) (Rome, 2003). 
Bibliography 
, Ltablissement territorial des Vandales en Afrique, AnTard 10 (2002), 87122. 
, Les premiers raids des tribus sahariennes en Afrique et la Johannide de Corippe, in Histoire 
et Archologie de l'Afrique du Nord: Actes du IVe colloque international (Strasbourg, 
1988) (Paris, 1991), 47990. 
, Qui montana Gurubi colunt: Corippe et le mythe des Maures du Cap Bon, MEFRA 99.2 (1987), 
96389. 
, Corippe et loccupation byzantine de lAfrique: pour une nouvelle lecture de la Johannide, 
AntAfr 22 (1986), 195212. 
, La dcouverte des Maures: reflexions sur la reconqute byzantine de lAfrique en 533, CT 
155-6 (1991), 21137. 
, Koutzinas-Cusina: Recherches sur un Maure du VIe sicle, LAfrica romana 7 (1990), 393
Monchicourt, C., La rgion du Haut Tell en Tunisie (Paris, 1913). 
Moorhead, J., The Roman Empire Divided, 400700 (London, 2001). 
, Justinian (London, 1994). 
, Theodoric in Italy (Oxford, 1992). 
, Victor of Vita: History of the Vandal Persecution (Liverpool, 1992). 
Montinaro, F., Power, Taste and the outsider: Procopius and the Buildings revisited, in G. 
Greatrex and H. Elton, ed., Shifting Genres in Late Antiquity (Farnham, 2015), 191-206. 
, Byzantium and the Slavs in the reign of Justinian: Comparing the two recensions of 
Procopiuss Buildings, in V. Ivanievi and M. Kazanski, eds., The Pontic-Danubian 
Realm in the Period of the Great Migration (Paris-Beograd, 2012), 89114. 
Morizot, P.,  propos des limites mridionales de la Numidie byzantine, AntAfr 35 (1999), 151
, Archologie arienne de lAurs (Paris, 1997). 
, LAurs et lolivier, AntAfr 29 (1993), 177240. 
, Recherches sur les campagnes de Solomon en Numidie mridionale, CRAI 137.1 (1993), 83-
, Solomon et lAurs, BSNAF (1992), 32537. 
, conomie et socit en Numidie meridionale: lexemple de lAurs, LAfrica Romana 8 
(1991), 42946. 
, Pour une nouvelle lecture de lelogium de Masties, AntAfr 25 (1989), 26384. 
, Vues nouvelles sur lAurs antique, CRAI 123.2 (1979), 30937. 
Bibliography 
Morrisson, C., LAtelier de Carthage et la diffusion de la monnaie frappe dans lAfrique vandale 
et byzantine (439695), AT 11 (2003), 6584. 
, Les insignes du pouvoir imprial au Ve et VIe sicle, in M. Rouche, ed., Clovis, histoire et 
mmoire (Paris, 1997), 75368. 
The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium, ed. A. P. Khazhdan (3 vols., Oxford, 1991). 
Papencordt, F., Geschichte der vandalischen Herrstadt in Afrika (Berlin, 1837). 
Partsch, J., Corippi africani grammatici libri qui supersunt (Berlin, 1879). 
Petersen, J. M., The Dialogues of Gregory the Great in their Late Antique Cultural Background 
(Toronto, 1984). 
Pohl, W., Justinian and the barbarian kingdoms, in M. Maas, ed., The Cambridge Companion to 
the Age of Justinian (Cambridge, 2003), 44876. 
Pringle, D., The Defence of Byzantine Africa from Justinian to the Arab Conquest, revised edn. 
(Oxford, 2001). 
Pryor, J. H. and E. M. Jeffreys, The Age of the : The Byzantine Navy ca 5001204 (Leiden, 
2006). 
Puliatti, S., Ricerche sulla legislazione regionale di Giustiniano (Milan, 1980). 
Raven, S., Rome in Africa, 3rd edn. (London, 1995). 
Rebuffat, R., Notes sur les confins de la Maurtanie Tingitane et de la Maurtanie Csarienne, 
StudMagr 4 (1971), 3364. 
Reynolds, P., Hispania and the Roman Mediterranean, AD 100700 (London, 2010). 
Reynolds, J., Byzantine buildings, Justinian and Procopius in Libya Inferior and Libya Superior, 
AnTard 8 (2000), 16976. 
, The Austuriani and Tripolitania in the early fifth century, LibStud 8 (19761977), 13. 
Riedlberger, P., Philologischer, historischer und liturgischer Kommentar zum 8. Buch der 
Johannis der Gorippus nebst kritischer Edition und bersetzung (Groningen, 2010). 
Romanelli, P., La riconquista Africana di Giustiniano, in Africa Romana (Milan, 1935), 12340. 
Roques, D., Les Constructions de Justinien de Procope de Csare, AT 8 (2000), 3143. 
, Synesios de Cyrne et les migrations berbres vers lOrient (398413), CRAI 127/4 (1983), 
660677. 
Roug, J., La navigation hivernale dans lEmpire romain, REA 54 (1952), 31625. 
Rowland Jr., R., The Periphery in the Center: Sardinia in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds 
(Oxford, 2001). 
Rubin, B., Das Zeitalter Iustinians (2 vols., Berlin, 19601995). 
Bibliography 
von Rummel, P., The Frexes: Late Roman barbarians in the shadow of the Vandal kingdom, in 
F. Curta, ed., Neglected Barbarians (Turnhout, 2010), 571603. 
Rushworth, A., From Arzuges to Rustamids: State formation and regional identity in the pre-
Saharan zone, in A. H. Merrills, ed., Vandals, Romans and Berbers: New Perspectives on 
Late Antique North Africa (Aldershot, 2004), 7798. 
, From periphery to core in late antique Mauretania, in G. Fincham et al., eds., TRAC 99: 
Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Theoretical Roman Archaeology Conference which 
took place at The University of Durham, April 1999 (Oxford, 2000), 90103. 
Saastamoinen, A., The Phraseology of Latin Building Inscriptions in Roman North Africa 
(Helsinki, 2010). 
Salama, P., conomie montaire de lAfrique du Nord dans lAntiquit tardive, Bulletin 
archologique des travaux historiques et scientifiques n.s.19B (1985), 183202. 
Sarantis, A., Fortifications in Africa: A bibliographic essay, in idem and N. Christie, eds., War 
and Warfare in Late Antiquity (Leiden, 2013), I, 297315. 
, War and diplomacy in Pannonia in the north-west Balkans during the reign of Justinian: The 
Gepid threat and imperial responses, DOP 63 (2009), 1540. 
Sarris, P., The Justinianic plague: origins and effects, Continuity and Change 17 (2002), 169-82. 
Saumagne, C., Points de vue sur la reconqute de lAfrique au VIe sicle, CT 7 (1959), 28197. 
, tude sur la proprit ecclsiastique  Carthage daprs les novelles 36 et 37 de Justinien, 
BZ 22 (1913), 7787. 
Schindler, C., Per carmina laudes: Untersuchungen zur sptantiken Verspanegyrik von 
Claudian bis Coripp (Berlin, 2009). 
Schmidt, L., Geschichte der Wandalen, 2nd edn. (Munich, 1942). 
Schwarcz, A., The settlement of the Vandals in north Africa, in A. Merrills, ed., Vandals, 
Romans and Berbers: New Perspectives on Late Antique North Africa (Aldershot, 2004), 
49-58. 
Scott, R., Justinians New Age and the Second Coming, in idem, Byzantine Chronicles and the 
Sixth Century (Farnham, 2012), chap. IX. 
, Narrating Justinian: From Malalas to Manasses, in J. Burke et al., eds., Byzantine Narrative: 
Papers in Honour of Roger Scott (Melbourne, 2006), 2946. 
, Writing the reign of Justinian: Malalas versus Theophanes, in P. Allen and E. Jeffreys, eds., 
The Sixth Century: End or Beginning? (Brisbanes, 1996), 2034. 
, Justinians coinage and Easter Reforms and the date of the Secret History, BMGS 11 (1987), 
21521. 
, Malalas, The Secret History, and Justinians Propaganda, DOP 39 (1985), 99109. 
Bibliography 
, Malalas and Justinians codification, in E. Jeffreys, M. Jeffreys and A. Moffatt, eds., Byzantine 
Papers: Proceedings of the First Australian Byzantine Studies Conference, Canberra, 17
19 May 1978 (Canberra, 1981), 1231. 
de Slane, W., Ibn Khaldun.  Histoire des Berbres et les dynasties musulmanes de lAfrique 
Septentrionale, new edition (4 vols., Paris, 1925). 
Shaw, B. D., The structure of local society in the early Maghrib: the elders, The Maghrib Review 
16 (1991), 1854. 
, Fear and loathing: the nomad menace and Roman Africa, in C. M. Wells, ed., LAfrique 
romaine: Les confrences Vanier 1980 = Roman Africa: The Vanier Lectures 1980 
(Ottawa, 1982), 2950. 
Shea, G. W., The Iohannis or De Bellis Libycis of Flavius Cresconius Corippus (Lewiston, 1998). 
, Justinians North African Strategy in the Iohannis of Corippus, Byzantine Studies 10 (1983), 
2938. 
Solignac, M., Recherches sur les installations hydrauliques de Kairouan et des steppes 
tunisiennes du VIIe au IXe sicle (J.-C.), Annales de linstitut dtudes orientales 
(Algiers) 10 (1952), 15469. 
Southern, P., and K. Dixon, The Late Roman Army (London, 1996). 
Stathakopoulos, D. C., Famine and Pestilence in the Late Roman and Early Byzantine Empire 
(Aldershot, 2004). 
Stein, E., Histoire du Bas-Empire: De la disparition de lempire doccident  la mort de Justinien 
(2 vols., Paris, 1949). 
, Studien zur Geschichte des byzantinischen Reiches, vornehmlich unter den Kaisern Justinus 
II und Tiberius Constantinus (Stuttgart, 1919). 
Steinacher, R., The so-called Laterculus Regum Vandalorum et Alanorum: A Sixth-century 
African addition to Prosper Tiros Chronicle, in A. H. Merrills, ed., Vandals, Romans and 
Berbers: New Perspectives on Late Antique North Africa (Aldershot, 2004), 16380. 
Stern, K. B., Inscribing Devotion and Death: Archaeological Evidence for Jewish Populations of 
North Africa (Leiden, 2008). 
Stevens, S. T., Victor of Tonnena, a chronicler of African resistence, BSC Abstracts (1985), 34. 
Stolte, B., The partes of the Digest in the Codex Florentinus, Subseciva Groningana I (1984), 
7185. 
Tandoi, V., Corippo, EncVirg 1 (1984), 8902. 
, Note alla Iohannis di Corippo, SIFC 54 (1982), 4792. 
Teall, J., The barbarians in Justinians armies, Speculum 40 (1965), 294322. 
, The grain supply of the Byzantine Empire, 330-1025, DOP 13 (1959), 89139. 
Bibliography 
Thbert, Y., Thermes romains dAfrique du Nord et leur contexte Mditeranen: tudes 
dhistoire et darchologie (Rome, 2003). 
Tissot, C., Gographie compar de la province romaine dAfrique, ed. S. Reinach (2 vols., Paris, 
18841888). 
Tommasi Moreschini, C. O., Exegesis by distorting pagan myths in Corippus epic poetry, in W. 
Otten and K. Pollmann, eds., Poetry and Exegesis in Premodern Latin Christianity: The 
Encounter Between Classical and Christian Strategies of Interpretation (Leiden, 2007), 
17397. 
, Persistenze pagane nellAfrica del VI secolo: la Iohannis corippea e la questione dei dii 
mauri, in M. Marin and C. Moreschini, eds., Africa Cristiana: Storia, religione, 
letteratura (Brescia, 2002), 269-301. 
, Realt della storia e retorica dellimpero nella Iohannis di Corippo, Athenaeum 90.1 (2002), 
165-85. 
, La Iohannis corippea: ricupero e riscrittura dei modelli classici e cristiani, Prometheus 27 
(2001), 250-76. 
Toumanoff, C., Studies in Christian Caucasian History (Georgetown, 1963). 
Traina, G., LAfrica secondo Costantinopoli: il VI libro de De Aedificiis di Procopio di Cesarea, 
LAfrica Romana 7.1 (1990), 3416. 
Treadgold, W., The Early Byzantine Historians (New York, 2010). 
, Byzantium and its Army, 2841081 (Stanford, 1995). 
Trousset, P., Les limites sud de la roccupation byzantine, AnTard 10 (2002), 14350. 
, Les fines antiquae et la reconqute byzantine en Afrique, BCTH n.s.19B (1985), 36176. 
Vallejo Girvs, M., Bizancio y la Espaa tardoantigua (Ss. VVII): un capitulo de historia 
mediterranea (Alcal de Henares, 1993). 
Vycichl, Les terminaisons de pluriel externe des noms berbres.  tude smantique et 
historique, in J. Drouin & A. Roth, eds.,  la croise des tudes libyco-berbres.  
Mlanges offerts  P. Galand-Pernet et L. Galand (Paris, 1993), 25568. 
Wallinga, T., The continuing story of the date and origin of the Codex Florentinus, Subseciva 
Groningana 5 (1992), 719. 
, Tanta/: Two Introductory Constitutions to Justinians Digest (Utrecht, 1989). 
Warmington, B. H., The North African Provinces from Diocletian to the Vandal Conquest 
(Cambridge, 1954). 
Whitby, Michael, The army, c. 420-602, in Averil Cameron et al., eds., CAH XIV (Cambridge, 
2000), 288314. 
, The Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius Scholasticus (Liverpool, 2000). 
Bibliography 
, Recruitment in Roman armies from Justinian to Heraclius, in Averil Cameron, ed., The 
Byzantine and Early Islamic Near East III: States, Resources and Armies (Princeton, 
1995), 61124. 
, Procopius description of Dara (Aed. II.13), in P. Freeman and D. Kennedy, eds., The Defence 
of the Roman and Byzantine  East (1986), 73783. 
, Justinians bridge over the Sangarius and the date of Procopius de Aedificiis, JHS 105 (1985), 
12938. 
, and Mary Whitby, Chronicon Paschale 284628 AD (Liverpool, 1989). 
Wilson, A., Saharan trade in the Roman period: short-, medium- and long-distance trade 
networks, Azania 47.4 (2012), 409449. 
, Foggara irrigation and early state formation in the Libyan Sahara: the Garamantes of 
Fazzan, in Internationales Frontinus-Symposium: Wasserversorgung aus Qanatan - 
Qanate als Vorbilder im Tunnelbau, 2- 5 Oktober, Walferdange, Luxembourg (Bonn, 
2003), 22334. 
Wilson, N., A Greek palaeographer looks at the Florentine Pandects, Subseciva Groningana 5 
(1992), 16. 
Witakowski, W., Pseudo-Dionysius of Tel-Mahre: Chronicle: Part III (Liverpool, 1996). 
Wood, J., Defending Byzantine Spain: frontiers and diplomacy, EME 18.3 (2010), 292319. 
Woodward, E. L., Christianity and Nationalism in the Later Roman Empire (London, 1916). 
Zarini, V., pope et religion au VIe sicle: Le paganisme chez Corippe, Connaissance des pres 
de lglise 102 (2006), 52-61. 
, Aspects et paradoxes du dsert dans une pope latine de lAfrique chrtienne du VIe sicle, 
in G. Nauroy, et al., ed., Le dsert, un espace paradoxal (Bern, 2003), 143-57. 
, Rhtorique, potique, spiritualit: la technique pique de Corippe dans le Johannide 
(Turnhout, 2003). 
, Berbres ou barbares?  Recherches sur le livre second de la Johannide de Corippe (Nancy, 
1997). 
, Posie officielle et arts figurs au sicle de Justinien: images de pouvoir dans la Johannide 
de Corippe, REL 75 (1997), 21940. 
, Gotique, potique, politique: reflexions sur un passage de la Johannide de Corippe (3, 79
155), in J. Dion, ed., Culture antique et fanatisme (Nancy, 1996), 11340. 
, La prface de la Johannide de Corippe, certitudes et hypothses, REAug 32 (1986), 7491. 
, Images de guerre dans la posie officielle de lantiquit tardive: lexemple de la Johannide 
de Corippe, in C. Auvray-Assayas, ed., Images romaines (Paris, 1998), 16173. 
Zuckerman, C., La haute hirarchie militaire en Afrique byzantine, AnTard 10 (2002), 16975. 
Bibliography 
Unpublished Theses 
Kouroumali, M., Procopius and the Gothic War (Oxford University DPhil. thesis, 2006). 
Sarantis, A., The Balkans during the reign of Justinian: Barbarian invasions and imperial 
responses (Oxford University DPhil. thesis, 2006). 
Williams, M. E., Roman-Sasanian relations (532 to 545 CE) (Oxford University MPhil. thesis, 
2010). 
