Durham E-Theses
Constraining anomalous couplings in the gauge-Higgs
sector at high-energy colliders
OCHOA-VALERIANO, OSCAR
How to cite:
OCHOA-VALERIANO, OSCAR (2022) Constraining anomalous couplings in the gauge-Higgs sector at
high-energy colliders, Durham theses, Durham University. Available at Durham E-Theses Online:
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/14418/
Use policy
The full-text may be used and/or reproduced, and given to third parties in any format or medium, without prior permission or
charge, for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-prot purposes provided that:
 a full bibliographic reference is made to the original source
 a link is made to the metadata record in Durham E-Theses
 the full-text is not changed in any way
The full-text must not be sold in any format or medium without the formal permission of the copyright holders.
Please consult the full Durham E-Theses policy for further details.
http://www.dur.ac.uk
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/14418/
 http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/14418/ 
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/policies/
Academic Support Oce, Durham University, University Oce, Old Elvet, Durham DH1 3HP
e-mail: e-theses.admin@dur.ac.uk Tel: +44 0191 334 6107
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk
Constraining anomalous couplings
in the gauge-Higgs sector at
high-energy colliders
Oscar Ochoa Valeriano
A Thesis presented for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy
Institute for Particle Physics Phenomenology
Department of Physics
Durham University
United Kingdom
May 2022
Dedicated to
Los Toya, Exiliados y deportados
Pato
Constraining anomalous couplings in the
gauge-Higgs sector at high-energy colliders
Oscar Ochoa Valeriano
Submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy, May 2022
Abstract
Several physical phenomena suggest that the Standard Model is not the ultimate
theory possible for describing Nature, and looking for deviations from the theory
prediction might be a hint for physics beyond the Standard Model. Nevertheless,
the lack of tantalising evidence for new resonant physics, along with our ignorance
of the energy scale at which such physics should arise, require us to improve current
precision measurements to further test the Standard Model.
It is possible to treat the Standard Model as an Effective Field Theory, valid up to
a high cut-off energy scale above the electroweak scale, equipped with a new set of
Lorentz structures, the so-called anomalous couplings, that extend and parametrise
with modified couplings the vertices allowed by the Standard Model. The interactions
between the Higgs and the gauge bosons are thought to be a promising avenue to
scrutinise the Standard Model for any new physics effects.
In this Thesis we explore the gauge-Higgs sector to segregate the anomalous couplings
that arise in viewing the Standard Model as an Effective Field Theory. In doing so,
we investigate the capability of current and future experiments at constraining said
anomalous couplings through standard processes involving gauge-Higgs interactions
that might shed light on what potentially lies beyond the Standard Model.
We study the so-called golden channel in the environment of the High-Luminosity
Large Hadron Collider, as well as the Higgs-strahlung and Z-boson fusion processes
at the high-energy stages of both the International Linear Collider and the Compact
Linear Collider. These channels allow us to project stringent bounds on anomalous
couplings in the gauge-Higgs sector that can be probed at high-energy colliders.
Declaration
The work in this Thesis is based on research carried out at the Institute for Particle
Physics Phenomenology, Department of Physics, University of Durham, England,
United Kingdom. No part of this Thesis has been submitted elsewhere for any other
degree or qualification and it is all my own work unless referenced to the contrary
in the text. The chapters listed below are based on joint research:
 Chapter 4 contains results which have been published in: S. Banerjee, R.
S. Gupta, O. Ochoa-Valeriano, M. Spannowsky and E. Venturini, A fully
differential SMEFT analysis of the golden channel using the method of moments,
JHEP 06 (2021) 031 [arXiv:2012.11631] [inSPIRE]. I generated the Monte
Carlo samples, as well as implemented and optimised the collider analysis.
 Chapter 5 contains results which have been published in: S. Banerjee, R.
S. Gupta, O. Ochoa-Valeriano and M. Spannowsky, High energy lepton col-
liders as the ultimate Higgs microscopes, JHEP 02 (2022) 176 [arXiv:2109.14634]
[inSPIRE]. I generated the Monte Carlo samples, as well as implemented and
optimised the collider analyses.
Copyright  2022 Oscar Ochoa Valeriano.
The copyright of this thesis rests with the author. No quotation from it should be
published without the authors prior written consent and information derived from
it should be acknowledged.
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2021)031
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.11631
https://inspirehep.net/literature/1837847
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2022)176
https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.14634
https://inspirehep.net/literature/1935821
Acknowledgements
Hace algunos cuantos aos escuch del escritor argentino Andrs Oppenheimer la
siguiente frase: toda gran innovacin es el ltimo eslabn de una larga cadena de
fracasos. Me parece ms atractivo el caso general: todo gran logro. . . He aqu, pues,
mi gran logro: el compendio de once aos de trabajo, desde la licenciatura hasta
el doctorado, que no se podran entender sin el apoyo incondicional de mi familia.
A ustedes, mis grandes pilares, les dedico cada una de las letras que hay en estas
pginas, pues difcilmente encontrar otra manera de escribir en unas cuantas lneas
lo que signific para m aprender a la distancia que siempre encontrar en ustedes
una gran fuente de fortaleza, sin importar lo sinuoso del camino.
After nearly sixty months of ups and downs learning what doing research in particle
physics is like, this Thesis illustrates the outcome of such an experience at the
Institute for Particle Physics Phenomenology. Throughout the years I have met
extraordinary people that pushed me, one way or another, several times to keep
going. I am most thankful to my supervisor, Michael Spannowsky, who gave me
the possibility to work with him and write this work under his mentorship. Danke
schn, Michael, not only for giving me the chance to learn a bit from a top physicist
like you, but for the patience and guidance during all those chats that lasted more
than ten minutes against your will, too.
As a PhD student I worked on several research projects that involved absorbing
knowledge from heavyweights in their fields. To Cline Bhm, Christoph Englert,
Chris Hays, Roman Kogler, and Frank Krauss, my sincere gratitude for sharing your
expertise and having me on board, mostly since I know that I was a particularly
annoying student when I could not figure things out by myself.
x Acknowledgements
Frustration kicked in several times throughout this journey, which made it difficult
for me to be as productive and independent as I would have wanted. However,
Shankha Banerjee, Raquel Gmez Ambrosio, Rick Sandeepan Gupta, and Elena
Venturini, took me under their wings and did their best to guide me when I needed
it the most. I am having a really hard time trying to put into words everything I
would like to say to you all, but perhaps a huge thank you might do for now.
On a daily basis I had the chance to walk through the same front doors as several
caring people that, one way or another, quickly became a support network for me.
Asli, Andrew, Joey, Matthew, Phil, Robin, Ryan, Tommaso, Wendy: this experience
would have been way more complicated without you around, and am grateful for
having had the chance to meet you all. Kudos to Adam, Joanne(s), Linda, Paul,
and Trudy, for being the best support staff one could ask for.
I am grateful to Jessica, Joey, Matthew, Parisa, Phil, Raquel, Rick, Ryan, and
Shankha, who kindly agreed to proofread parts of this Thesis, and would like to
apologise in case their eyes ended up bleeding. Further, my warmest thanks to David
J. Miller and Frank Krauss for acting as examiners.
Estar lejos de Mxico ha sido complicado, pero afortunadamente encontr en Durham
gente que me hizo sentir como en casa, y espero con ansias el da en el que nuestros
caminos se encuentren nuevamente. Abraham, Andrea, Balder, David, Diego, Diana,
Ishiba, Karen, Marcos, as como mis chavos del Domin ahora por whats, han jugado
un papel importante en mi desarrollo personal durante los ltimos aos, y eso nunca
lo olvidar. Agradecimientos especiales para Alexis, Carlos, M, y Maura,
por tantas veces en las que convivir con ustedes eran pequeos momentos que me
mantenan a flote un da a la vez.
Aunque este captulo de mi vida lo he escrito en el extranjero, difcilmente lo habra
podido lograr sin el continuo aliento de todas aquellas personas que han sido part-
cipes de ello, de una u otra manera, desde muchos mensajes de texto contestados
semanas despus de haberlos ledo. Amor Ibero, IFOS uia, Agustn, Claudia, Erick,
Hctor, Hugo, Laura, Maca, Manuel, Mariana, Mario, Michael, Mnica, Pancho,
Acknowledgements xi
Paola, Pepe, Ricardo, Sara: gracias por su paciencia y soporte, pues s que un
simple mensaje siempre es suficiente para que estn junto a m al pie del can.
Asimismo, agradezco al Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologa (CONACYT) por
financiar mis estudios de posgrado.
Mi inters en las turbias aguas de la fsica fue un despertar involuntario en un
inicio, y en un acto de justicia debo agradecer a Jos Zahoul y Jess Flores Tllez
por empujarme en esta direccin y compartir sus experiencias conmigo. Una vez
sumergido, la participacin de Alfredo, Fabiola, Felipe, James, Nacho, y Salvador,
fue crucial para tomar las decisiones adecuadas en momentos llenos de dudas. Y esas
resoluciones me llevaron a aprender y ver hacia arriba a Cristy, mi gur particulera,
a quien le debo ms de lo que puedo escribir en unas lneas gran parte de lo que
he aprendido ha sido gracias a que sigues guindome, y este alumnito siempre estar
agradecido de haber tenido una miss como t. A todos, gracias
Last but not least, quiero dedicar estas ltimas lneas desde el fondo de mi corazn
a Atenea, quien me ha acompaado tanto a la distancia como en persona desde
hace varios aos. El gran apoyo incondicional que me has brindado continuamente,
muchas veces soportando y tolerando varios episodios de desesperacin, es algo
que atesoro con especial cario. Tu gran fortaleza, entre otras cualidades de las
cuales aprendo continuamente, me ha enseado que siempre es posible hacer que los
demonios ms asesinos beban agua de nuestras manos. Gracias totales
For I wouldnt have made it this far without any of you.
Physics is like sex: sure, it may give some practical results, but
thats not why we do it.
 R. P. Feynman
Contents
Abstract v
Declaration vii
Acknowledgements ix
List of Figures xix
List of Tables xxiii
1 Introduction 1
1.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.1.1 Gauge sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.1.2 Fermion sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.1.3 Higgs sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
1.2 Higgs phenomenology at colliders . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
1.2.1 Higgs production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
1.2.2 Higgs decays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
1.3 Shortcomings of the Standard Model . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
1.3.1 The hierarchy problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
1.4 Going beyond the Standard Model . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
xvi Contents
2 Effective Field Theory 33
2.1 Warmup: basic idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
2.2 Power counting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
2.3 Top-down & bottom-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
2.3.1 Fermi theory of muon decay . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
2.3.2 SMEFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
2.3.3 Renormalisation Group Equations . . . . . . . . . . 50
3 Collider Phenomenology 53
3.1 The benchmark case: a proton-proton collider . . . . . . . . 54
3.1.1 Collision energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.1.2 Collision rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
3.1.3 Detectors and kinematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
3.2 Interlude: EFT and collider phenomenology . . . . . . . . . 66
3.2.1 Resonances: on-shell production . . . . . . . . . . . 67
3.2.2 Indirect searches: hints and clues . . . . . . . . . . 69
3.3 A clean environment: electron-positron colliders . . . . . . . . 74
3.3.1 The role of beam polarisation . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
4 The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT 83
4.1 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
4.2 The pp h 4` in the dimension-six SMEFT . . . . . . . . 85
4.3 Angular dependence of the h 4` amplitude . . . . . . . . . 90
4.3.1 Helicity amplitudes for ZZ production . . . . . . . . 92
4.3.2 Helicity amplitudes for Z`` production through hZ`` contact
interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
Contents xvii
4.3.3 Visible angular modulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
4.4 The method of moments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
4.4.1 Angular moments for h  4` . . . . . . . . . . . 97
4.4.2 Basics of the method of moments . . . . . . . . . . 100
4.4.3 Estimates of moments and uncertainties . . . . . . . . 102
4.5 Collider analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
4.5.1 Analysis setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
4.5.2 Angular extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
4.6 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
4.7 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
5 Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes 117
5.1 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
5.2 The leptonic high-energy primaries . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
5.2.1 The high-enery e+e  Zh,W+W processes in the dimension-
six SMEFT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
5.2.2 The ZBF channel: crossing symmetry . . . . . . . . . 123
5.3 Collider analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
5.3.1 Event selection of the Zh channel . . . . . . . . . . 126
5.3.2 Event selection of the ZBF channel . . . . . . . . . . 129
5.4 Sensitivity to EFT couplings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
5.4.1 Combination for universal case . . . . . . . . . . . 135
5.4.2 Combination for general case . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
5.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
6 Summary and Outlook 141
xviii Contents
A Bosonic sector in the Warsaw basis 145
B Elements of Fourier analysis 149
C The Golden Channel: Monte Carlo samples 153
D Derivation of the recoil mass observable 155
E The Higgs at e+e colliders: Monte Carlo samples 157
F Anomalous couplings and the Higgs at e+e colliders 161
Bibliography 165
List of Figures
1.1 Example scalar potentials V
for differ-
ent signs of the mass 2 and self-coupling  parameters. . . . . . 13
1.2 Feynman diagrams illustrating the four dominant single-Higgs pro-
duction channels at the LHC. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
1.3 Feynman diagrams illustrating the three dominant single-Higgs pro-
duction channels at e+e colliders. . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
1.4 Higgs production cross-sections at colliders as a function of the centre-
of-mass energy
s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
1.5 Higgs decay branching ratios as a function of the Higgs mass mh. . 23
1.6 Feynman diagrams illustrating the one-loop contributions associated
to the quantum corrections received by the Higgs mass squared. . . 28
2.1 Feynman diagrams illustrating the interactions described in the left:
full theory, and right: effective theory. . . . . . . . . . . . 38
2.2 Leading-order Feynman diagrams illustrating the muon decay in the
left: Standard Model, and right: Fermi effective theory. . . . . 43
2.3 Interplay between matching and the RGEs. . . . . . . . . . 51
3.1 Illustration of the change of parton distributions, from left: 2F =
Q2 = 10 GeV2 to right: 2F = Q
2 = 104 GeV2. . . . . . . . . 57
xx List of Figures
3.2 Production cross-sections of some SM processes at hadron colliders
as a function of the centre-of-mass energy
s. . . . . . . . . 59
3.3 Cylindrical coordinate system used in the CMS detector. . . . . 61
3.4 Sketch of the major components of the CMS detector surrounding the
beam channel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
3.5 Invariant-mass distribution of the dilepton system in the Drell-Yan
process pp `+`. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
3.6 Schematic representation of direct and indirect searches for discovering
BSM physics at colliders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
3.7 Production cross-sections of some SM processes at e+e colliders as
a function of the centre-of-mass energy
s. . . . . . . . . . 75
3.8 The various spin-assignment configurations in the beam direction at
e+e colliders. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
3.9 Impact of beam polarisation P
+ , P
 in the cross-sections SM``h as a
function of the centre-of-mass energy
s for the production of a Higgs
boson in association with a pair of leptons at e+e colliders. . . . 80
4.1 Definition of the various scattering angles for the sequential decay
h ZZ 
`+1 `
`+2 `
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
4.2 Invariant-mass distribution M(4`) of the four-lepton system. . . . 107
4.3 Invariant-mass distributions M (Zi) of the Z1 and Z2 candidates. . 109
4.4 Differential distribution of the cross-section with respect to the azi-
muthal angle between the scattering planes. . . . . . . . . . 110
4.5 Bounds at 68% CL on the CP-even anomalous couplings. . . . . 113
4.6 Bounds at 68% CL on the CP-even anomalous couplings after combin-
ation with the results of the angular moment analysis of the pp V h
processes, and with the projection of the pp h W+W process. 114
List of Figures xxi
5.1 Feynman diagrams illustrating the interplay between the Goldstone
Boson Equivalence Theorem and the leading high-energy contributions
to e+e  Zh,W+W amplitudes. . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
5.2 Feynman diagram illustrating the crossing symmetry between Zh and
ZBF single-Higgs production. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
5.3 The m
 and mrecoil distributions of the ILC1000 Zh selection with
the left polarisation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
5.4 The
y
 and m
 distributions of the CLIC3000 ZBF selection
with the right polarisation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
5.5 Projected sensitivities for the case of universal new physics at ILC1000
and CLIC3000. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
5.6 Projected sensitivities for the leptonic high-energy primaries at CLIC3000
in two-dimensional planes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
5.7 Projected sensitivities on the individual leptonic high-energy primaries
at CLIC3000. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
List of Tables
1.1 Some fundamental properties of gauge bosons. . . . . . . . . 7
1.2 Some fundamental properties of quarks. . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.3 Some fundamental properties of leptons. . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.1 List of D6 operators in the Warsaw basis contributing to various
vertices of the pp h 4` process. . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
4.2 Set of cuts showing the effect of each stage of the selection on the
fraction of retained Monte Carlo events. . . . . . . . . . . . 106
5.1 List of processes included in the high-energy fit. . . . . . . . . 119
5.2 List of D6 operators contributing to e+e  Zh,W+W, and ZBF. 121
5.3 Interplay between Zh event selection and surviving cross-sections. . 128
5.4 Interplay between ZBF event selection and surviving cross-sections. 132
A.1 Class X3: Operators containing only gauge field strength tensors. . 146
A.2 Classes 6 and 4D2: Operators affecting the scalar sector. Note
that the box operator  is defined as   . . . . . . . . 146
A.3 Class 23: Operators affecting Yukawa interactions. . . . . . 146
A.4 Class X22: Purely bosonic operators. . . . . . . . . . . 147
A.5 Classes 2X and 22D: Fermionic dipole (left) and gauge-
Higgs-fermion vertex (right) operators. . . . . . . . . . . . 147
Chapter 1
Introduction
The late 19th and early 20th centuries correspond to a period of rapid evolution of
scientific ideas1 concerned with the description of physical phenomena that were bey-
ond what common sense dictates; since the discovery of the electron in 1897 by J. J.
Thomson, the understanding of Natures building blocks, a.k.a. elementary particles,
has been one of the main tasks of modern physics over time.
From Max Planck and his postulate on quantisation of the electromagnetic energy,
giving birth to Quantum Mechanics, to Emmy Noethers discovery of the interplay
between symmetry and conservation laws, passing through Albert Einsteins the-
ory of Relativity and Paul Diracs attempts to construct a relativistic framework
of Quantum Mechanics, physicists were able to group together the mathematical
foundations of quantum systems and field theory at high energies and accommod-
ate them into arguably the most successful description of Nature to date, called
Quantum Field Theory [1, 2].
The current and best understanding of the particle world we have is called the
Standard Model of Particle Physics, which encompasses a set of quantum field theories
that allow us to study, describe, and predict the interaction between elementary
particles [35] at length scales of O
1018 m
to a high precision. Despite its success
1One could refer to Thomas Kuhns or Karl Poppers treatises on scientific discovery for an
in-depth philosophical discussion, although this is beyond the scope of this work.
2 Chapter 1. Introduction
the Standard Model fails to account for several physical phenomena, as we will see
later, which suggests that it is not the ultimate theory available for the description
of Nature. However, if one wants to construct a more robust description of the
quantum fields that compose our Universe, inevitably one has to begin by taking
the Standard Model, due to its well-tested agreement with many observations, and
extend it to the physical scale of interest in some way. In other words, the ultimate
theory (if any exists) of Nature at even smaller lengths (or, equivalently, higher
energies), should reproduce or resemble the Standard Model in its low-energy limit.
Although the Standard Model is known to agree well with a plethora of measurements,
there is still room for an improvement of the precision studies carried out by the
experiments. Any deviation from the theory prediction might be a hint for new
physics beyond the Standard Model that might help explain the shortcomings of our
current theory related to unexplained phenomena observed in Nature. It is therefore
of great importance to set tighter bounds on areas of the Standard Model that are
more loosely constrained than others to determine whether experiments can find
discrepancies between theory and data.
Measuring the properties of the particles described by the theory will help to set
constraints on new physics scenarios from experimental observations, such as the
mass, couplings, decay width, and cross-sections of the recently discovered Higgs
boson. Because of their large masses, the interactions between the Higgs and the
gauge bosons (gauge-Higgs sector) are thought to be an avenue to scrutinise the
Standard Model for any new physics effects, regardless of the energy scale (unknown
to date) at which these become evident and relevant. In performing such studies, it
is possible to extend the Standard Model by parametrising its allowed interactions
with modified couplings and a new set of Lorentz structures, the so-called anomalous
couplings. These arise from viewing the Standard Model as an effective theory valid
up to a high cut-off energy scale which is expected to lie well above the electroweak
scale, i.e., the low-energy approximation of a more complete, robust theory.
In this Thesis we explore the gauge-Higgs sector to segregate the anomalous coup-
1.1. The Standard Model of Particle Physics 3
lings that arise in the perturbative expansion of the Standard Model viewed as an
Effective Field Theory at current and future colliders. In doing so, it is possible to
set constraints on processes that might shed light on what potentially lies beyond the
Standard Model. This Thesis is structured as follows: the remainder of Chapter 1
is aimed at introducing the Standard Model, along with some of its features, short-
comings, and possible ways in which physicists intend to extend it. In Chapter 2
we introduce the basic ideas of Effective Field Theory, and discuss the interplay
between effective theories and measurements at colliders in Chapter 3, which is the
core idea behind constraining Standard Model expectations to look for discrepancies
with data. In Chapters 4 and 5 we consider the application of using differential
distributions to constrain Wilson coefficients at colliders. Finally, we conclude and
summarise the Thesis in Chapter 6.
1.1 The Standard Model of Particle Physics
Natures elementary particles are described by one of the most successful physical
theories to date, known as the Standard Model of Particle Physics (SM). Being a
Quantum Field Theory (QFT) it encompasses a set of operator-valued quantum
fields invariant under the Poincar group2, with their excitations understood as
fundamental particles, and interactions encapsulated in a Lagrangian formulation
necessary to predict and interpret the experimental data delivered by high-energy col-
liders. It is a non-Abelian gauge field theory3 which combines the theory of Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD), weak interactions, and Quantum Electrodynamics (QED).
The interactions between bosons (integer spin; Bose-Einstein statistics) and fermions
(half-integer spin; Fermi-Dirac statistics) are described by the concept of symmetry.
Bosons are responsible for the interactions we commonly know as forces, while
fermions constitute the building blocks of matter in the Universe; mass terms in the
2The group of space-time symmetries, a combination of both Lorentz boosts and translations.
3QFT in which the Lagrangian density remains invariant under local transformations of the
operator-valued fields.
4 Chapter 1. Introduction
Lagrangian are generated by the so-called Higgs mechanism. Together (gauge bosons
+ fermions + Higgs boson) these construct the Lagrangian defining the theory.
The gauge symmetry of the SM corresponds to the gauge group,
GSM = SU(3)C  SU(2)L  U(1)Y , (1.1.1)
formed by the non-Abelian SU(N) (N = 3, 2) and the Abelian U(1) groups, each
describing a fundamental force in Nature: strong, weak, and electromagnetic, re-
spectively4.
The SU(3) non-Abelian gauge group corresponds to the strong interaction between
colour charges, mediated by gluons (g), and described by QCD [68]. Yang and
Mills [9] explained the weak interactions, responsible for radioactive decays and
coupled to the left-handed weak isospin, with a non-Abelian gauge theory based
on the SU(2) symmetry group. Finally, the Abelian U(1) symmetry group corres-
ponds to hypercharge interactions. The electro-weak unification by Glashow [10]
concluded that the weak and hypercharge interactions are, similar to electricity and
magnetism, two sides of the same coin, giving rise to the theory of electroweak (EW)
interactions [11,12] described by the SU(2)L  U(1)Y gauge group.
The theory predicts the gauge bosons to be massless. However, experimental evidence
for the short-range action of weak interactions imply that these mediators are massive.
Introducing by hand in the Lagrangian mass terms for the weak bosons breaks gauge
invariance, needed for the theory to be renormalisable [13,14], and violates unitarity
in WLWL scattering, where L stands for the longitudinal polarisation. What to do?
Adding a complex scalar field with non-zero vacuum expectation value (vev) in the
Lagrangian, charged under the gauge group, generates mass terms for the particle con-
tent of the underlying theory, preserving gauge invariance, and keeping it unitary and
renormalisable. This mechanism, owed (independently) to Brout and Englert [15],
Higgs [16], and Guralnik, Hagen and Kibble [17], is called spontaneous symmetry
4The remaining known fundamental force, gravity, is best described by Einsteins Theory of
General Relativity, and it is beyond the scope of the SM (see Sec. 1.3).
1.1. The Standard Model of Particle Physics 5
breaking (SSB), or Higgs mechanism for short. After SSB, which gives mass to
the weak W+,W, andZ-bosons, the EW gauge group is broken down to the U(1)Q
symmetry group as,
SU(2)L  U(1)Y  U(1)Q, (1.1.2)
corresponding to interactions between electrically charged particles, mediated by
(massless) photons (), and described by QED [18].
We now turn our attention to describing the terms constructing the Lagrangian of
the theory, which consists of gauge-invariant terms as follows:
LSM = LGauge + LFermion + LHiggs. (1.1.3)
Here, the kinetic terms for the gauge and matter fields, as well as their interactions,
are encapsulated in the first two pieces. The Higgs term contains the gauge-Higgs,
matter-Higgs interactions, and the potential for the additional complex scalar field.
1.1.1 Gauge sector
Gauge bosons, obeying Bose-Einstein statistics, are the mediators of interactions
between elementary particles. These are spin-1 particles which correspond to the
excitation of gauge fields arising from the gauge-invariant requirement of the SM
Lagrangian, belonging to the adjoint representation of the gauge group as,
SU(3)C : G
  (8,1, 0), SU(2)L : W
  (1,3, 0), U(1)Y : B  (1,1, 0), (1.1.4)
where the first and second entries in the parentheses correspond to the representation
under SU(3)C and SU(2)L, respectively, and the third one gives the hypercharge.
The spin-1 property of these gauge bosons associate them to a vector field represented
by four-vector potentials condensed in the field-strength tensors,
Ga = G
  G
 + gSf
abcGbG
W i = W
  W
 + g
ijkW jW
B = B  B,
(1.1.5)
6 Chapter 1. Introduction
where gS and g are the coupling strengths of their respective groups. The index
a  [1, 8] is a colour index in the adjoint representation of SU(3)C , and the index
i  [1, 3] stands for each SU(2)L W
 field in the adjoint representation of the gauge
group. Further, the structure constants for SU(3)C and SU(2)L are denoted by f
and the Levi-Civita tensor ijk, respectively.
The structure constants Kmnp of the associated SU(N) gauge group5 are part of the
commutation relations satisfied by the generators Tm of the group,
[Tm, T n] = iKmnpT p, (1.1.6)
with the indices m, n, and p running from 1 to N2  1 for each SU(N) symmetry
group. The generators Tm are traceless Hermitian matrices with a representation-
dependent dimension: N  N matrices in the fundamental representation, and(
N2  1
N2  1
in the adjoint representation6. It is important to mention that
in Eq. (1.1.5) the gauge group U(1)Y also has a coupling strength denoted by g
not shown, and the third term in the non-Abelian field-strength tensors gives rise
to gauge-boson self interactions.
With the field-strength tensors associated to the gauge group displayed in Eq. (1.1.5),
we can then write the first term in Eq. (1.1.3) as,
LGauge = 
GaG
a, 
W iW
i, 
(1.1.7)
which condenses the dynamics and (self-)interactions of the gauge fields.
Several times we have mentioned the concept of gauge invariance of the Lagrangian
throughout the text, and it is about time to show why. Recalling that the contraction
 should result in a Lorentz scalar, and taking the Abelian field B as an
example for simplicity, we apply a gauge transformation parametrised by (x) as a
5In the case of Abelian gauge groups, such as U(1), the structure constant is zero.
6In the adjoint representation, N2  1 corresponds to the total number of generators as well.
1.1. The Standard Model of Particle Physics 7
Table 1.1: Some fundamental properties of gauge bosons [19].
Boson Interaction Mass [GeV] Charge [e]
 Electromagnetism 0 0
g Strong 0 0
W Weak 80.379 0.012 1
Z Weak 91.1876 0.0021 0
function of the space-time coordinate x as,
B  B
 = B 
(x), (1.1.8)
from where it is easy to see that BB
 6= BB
, hence not invariant under such a
gauge transformation. Given the experimental evidence for the massiveness of the
W- and Z-bosons, one might be tempted to include a mass term by hand in the
Lagrangian. However, from Eq. (1.1.8) it is evident that a mass term like m2W iW
is forbidden. Hence, in the unbroken theory the gauge bosons are massless, and
it is through the Higgs mechanism in Sec. 1.1.3 that gauge bosons acquire mass
dynamically.
In summary, in QCD the index a runs from 1 to 8, giving 8 massless gluons for the
8 generators of the gauge group SU(3)C . For SU(2)L, the index i runs from 1 to 3,
giving rise to three massive weak bosons. For QED and U(1), we have 1 massless
photon. The main properties of the gauge bosons after SSB are shown in Table 1.1.
1.1.2 Fermion sector
As mentioned before, the fundamental matter particles are spin-1/2 fermions, obeying
Fermi-Dirac statistics: quarks and leptons. Evidence related to the spin structure of
weak interactions revealed that only left-handed fermions, in particular neutrinos,
take part in interactions mediated by the W -boson if existing at all, right-handed
neutrinos are sterile (do not interact weakly through the W -boson). This implies
that there is a distinction within the SM between left- and right-handed fermions,
meaning that we are dealing with a chiral theory: one can decompose the fermion
8 Chapter 1. Introduction
fields into their chiral components,
 = L + R, (1.1.9)
where  denotes a matter field, and the subscripts L and R correspond to the left-
and right-handed projections, respectively. In terms of projection operators PL and
PR, the chiral components of a fermion field  are,
L  PL =
1 5
R  PR =
1 + 5
(1.1.10)
with 5 = i0123 the fifth Dirac matrix.
Quarks and leptons come in three families or generations, and each generation is
represented under the SM gauge group7 as,
uL
  (3,2, 1/3), uR  (3,1, 4/3), dR  (3,1,2/3),
L
  (1,2,1), `R  (1,1,2).
(1.1.11)
Quarks, in the first row above, are SU(3)C triplets, which means they carry colour
charge. Leptons, in the second row, are SU(3)C singlets and do not interact via the
strong force8. Above, u, d, , and `, stand for up-type quarks, down-type quarks,
neutrinos, and charged leptons, respectively.
Mass terms for fermions mix left- and right-hand components, and spoil gauge
invariance,
LFermion, mass = im = im
L + R
(L + R)
LR + RL
(1.1.12)
since L and R have different quantum numbers under the EW gauge group. Hence,
7Although each family has a copy of these representations, they only differ by their mixings and
masses.
8Strictly speaking, quarks and leptons are in the triplet and trivial representation of SU(3)C ,
respectively.
1.1. The Standard Model of Particle Physics 9
a fermion mass term like the one shown above violates gauge invariance and in the
unbroken theory fermions end up being massless, the same way as gauge bosons do.
For massless fermions, the kinetic term of the Lagrangian reads,
LFermion, kinetic = i/ = i
L + R
/ (L + R)
= iL/L + iR/R,
(1.1.13)
where /  , and it is made evident that kinetic terms decompose into left- and
right-handed sectors this would allow us to ignore the right-handed fermions for
weak interactions. However, fermions interact with each other via the gauge bosons,
so the actual gauge-invariant kinetic term of the Lagrangian involving the fermion
sector reads,
LFermion, kinetic =
L + u
R + d
+ LkLi
L + `
(1.1.14)
summing explicitly over the fermion families. We further define the covariant deriv-
ative9 D acting on a fermion field  as,
D =   igS
Ga  ig
W i  ig
B, (1.1.15)
which contain the gauge fields corresponding to the SM gauge group. In the equation
above, the a and i are the Gell-Mann and Pauli matrices, respectively, and when
divided by 2 these can be identified with the generators of the gauge groups SU(3)C
and SU(2)L. The purpose of introducing the covariant derivative is to make the
term D covariant, such that 
D is gauge invariant.
From Eq. (1.1.15), with T i = i/2 the three generators of SU(2)L and Y the
hypercharge of U(1)Y , the algebra followed by the EW sector is,
T i, T j
= iijkT k,
T i, Y
= 0, [Y, Y ] = 0. (1.1.16)
9Note that the second term in the definition of D vanishes in the case of leptonic fields.
10 Chapter 1. Introduction
Table 1.2: Some fundamental properties of quarks [19]. Since quarks are found in
bound states, except for the top which decays before hadronising, and not observed
as physical particles, their masses are determined indirectly from the influence in
hadronic states. Note that antiquarks carry opposite electric charge.
Generation Flavour Mass [GeV] Charge [e]
1 up (u) 0.00216
+0.00049
0.00026 +2/3
down (d) 0.00467+0.000480.00017 1/3
2 charm (c) 1.27 0.02 +2/3
strange (s) 0.093+0.0110.005 1/3
3 top (t) 172.76 0.30 +2/3
bottom (b) 4.18+0.030.02 1/3
Defining T = T 1  iT 2, and the charged and neutral physical fields as,
W =
W 1  iW
Z
 =
cos W  sin W
sin W cos W
 (1.1.17)
it is possible to rewrite the covariant derivate D in terms of the physical gauge
fields, barring the gluon field term for illustration purposes only, as,
D =   i
T+W+ + T
 igZ
T3 Q sin
Z  ieQA, (1.1.18)
where W is the weak mixing angle, a.k.a. Weinberg angle, defined as,
tan W =
. (1.1.19)
From Eq. (1.1.18), gZ = g/ cos W , and e = g sin W = g
 cos W the coupling strength
of the electromagnetic interaction. In the doublet representations of SU(2)L, where
T3 are the eigenvalues of the third component of SU(2)L generators, the upper fields
have T3 = 1/2, and the lower fields have T3 = 1/2. The electromagnetic charge Q is
related to the weak isospin T3 and weak hypercharge Y by the Gell-MannNishijima
relation [20,21],
Q = T3 +
. (1.1.20)
In summary, we have two types of fermions: quarks and leptons, grouped into three
generations with two fermions each. They differ by their electric charge, as well
as by their masses. All fermions, except for the neutrinos, are electrically charged,
1.1. The Standard Model of Particle Physics 11
Table 1.3: Some fundamental properties of leptons [19]. Unlike quarks, the masses of
leptons can be measured directly and the ones shown here correspond to their pole
masses. In the case of neutrinos, upper bounds are reported. Note that antileptons
carry opposite electric charge.
Generation Flavour Mass [GeV] Charge [e]
1 electron (e
) 5.11 104  3.1 1012 1
electron-neutrino (e) < 460 10
2 muon (
) 0.10566 2.4 109 1
muon-neutrino () < 0.00019 0
3 tau (
) 1.77686 1.2 104 1
tau-neutrino ( ) < 0.0182 0
and hence interact with electromagnetic fields. Given that the SM seems to be a
chiral theory, only left-handed fermions and right-handed antifermions take part in
weak interactions mediated by the W -boson. Quarks carry colour charge and are
affected by the strong force, while leptons are insensitive to it since each quark has
a colour quantum number, these are three-fold degenerate in EW interactions. The
main properties of quarks and leptons after SSB are shown in Tables 1.2 and 1.3,
respectively.
With the information encoded in Eqs. (1.1.7) and (1.1.14), we are now ready to move
on and discuss the mechanism by which the particle content we have introduced so
far acquires mass by breaking the symmetry of the theory but leaving the Lagrangian
invariant under gauge transformations: the Higgs mechanism.
1.1.3 Higgs sector
So far we have discussed what the kinetic terms are for the gauge and fermion
sectors of the SM Lagrangian. As pointed out in Secs. 1.1.1 and 1.1.2, although we
have described a gauge theory of strong interactions, weak isospin and hypercharge,
we have a theory of massless particles. However, experimental findings of massive
fermions and (three) gauge bosons of weak interactions contradict our Lagrangian
density. Requiring the theory to obey gauge symmetry prohibits any explicit mass
terms for the gauge fields, and we cannot write gauge invariant mass terms for
12 Chapter 1. Introduction
fermions. Generating masses in the SM implies that the EW symmetry must be
broken somehow, so let us get to it. The following description of the Higgs mechanism
and Higgs physics in general is inspired by comprehensive texts like Refs. [2230].
From the continuity equation of Classical Electrodynamics [31,32],
 = 0, (1.1.21)
where J =
, ~J
is the four-current with sources  and ~J the charge and current
densities, respectively, we know that electric charge is a conserved quantity this
means that the symmetry group of electromagnetic interactions, U(1)Q, is unbroken.
Hence, the mechanism which gives mass to the weak bosons and breaks the symmetry
of the gauge group should do so as noted in Eq. (1.1.2),
SU(2)L  U(1)Y  U(1)Q,
so as to keep U(1)Q unbroken, which SSB does. Strictly speaking, since we are
dealing with a gauge theory, and the EW symmetry group is the one being broken,
we should call this electroweak symmetry breaking (EWSB), instead of SSB as we
have done until now.
Since the Lagrangian of the theory needs to be Lorentz invariant, and scalars do
not break the Lorentz group, a complex scalar charged under the SM gauge group
is introduced,
 = 12
1 + i2
3 + i4
  (1,2, 1), (1.1.22)
where j are real scalar fields. With this new multiplet, we can now sketch the
general form of the Lagrangian associated to the scalar sector,
LHiggs = D
D V
 LYukawa, (1.1.23)
where the first term encodes the couplings of the scalar to the gauge fields, the second
term corresponds to the potential of the scalar field, and the last term (known as
the Yukawa sector) stands for the interactions between the scalar and the fermions.
1.1. The Standard Model of Particle Physics 13
 < 0
2 > 0
2 < 0
V()
Figure 1.1: Example scalar potentials V
for different
signs of the mass 2 and self-coupling  parameters. Dashed red:  < 0 dominates
over the sign of 2, and the potential is unbounded from below. Dotted blue:
Both 2 and  > 0 yield a minimum at the origin, and the EW symmetry remains
unbroken in the vacuum. Solid black: For 2 < 0 and  > 0 the EW gauge
symmetry is spontaneously broken in the ground state as the vacuum is away from
|| = 0 and degenerate. See text for details.
14 Chapter 1. Introduction
The potential V
, responsible for EWSB, has the form,
, (1.1.24)
where 2 and , the coefficients of the mass term and the self-coupling, respectively,
are real numbers. We now need to determine what the ground state (vacuum) of
the scalars is, which we will do by minimising the potential,
= 0 ||2 = 
. (1.1.25)
If  < 0, the potential is unbounded from below and there is no stable ground state. If
both 2 and  > 0, the potential finds its minimum at || 
 = 0, which keeps
EW symmetry unbroken in the vacuum. Finally, if 2 < 0 and  > 0, the potential
finds a degenerate minimum away from || = 0, which spontaneously breaks the
EW gauge symmetry as the ground state is not invariant under SU(2)L  U(1)Y
transformations. Fig. 1.1 shows a sketch of the shape of the scalar potential for
different signs of the mass 2 and self-coupling  parameters. Hence, the non-zero
vacuum expectation value (vev, v) of the scalar doublet is,
 =
, (1.1.26)
where v =
)1/2
 246 GeV is fixed by the Fermi constant GF [33].
Since the Higgs doublet is written in terms of four real scalar fields j as shown in
Eq. (1.1.22), the vev can lie in any of these fields. However, as U(1)Q remains an
unbroken symmetry, this vev must be chosen in the electrically neutral component of
the doublet, i.e., 3 or 4. For simplicity, let us choose 4 = v, and set to zero the
vev of the remaining fields. It is possible to gauge away the unphysical degrees of
freedom 1, 2, and 3, which are Nambu-Goldstone bosons [3436]. In the unitary
gauge, the Higgs doublet then becomes,
 0
v + h
 , (1.1.27)
1.1. The Standard Model of Particle Physics 15
where we denote h as the physical Higgs boson. Recalling that the symmetry-
breaking pattern of the gauge group is the one shown in Eq. (1.1.2), it is possible to
check what the broken symmetries are given the Higgs doublet in Eq. (1.1.27): by
acting with the generators T of the gauge group into , invariance implies T = 0,
which only holds for U(1)Q, as expected.
Expanding the potential in Eq. (1.1.24) around the vev,
(v + h)2 +
(v + h)4, (1.1.28)
one can see that there are Higgs self-interactions parametrised by , whereas the
mass of the Higgs boson is,
2v. (1.1.29)
To fully describe the Higgs potential V
, measurements of the free parameters
2 and  are needed, since these are not predicted by the SM. In 2012, the discovery
of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) [37] by the ATLAS and CMS
collaborations [38, 39] was announced, reporting mh  125 GeV. However, Higgs
self-interactions remain elusive experimentally.
Having looked into the Higgs potential V
, we now turn our attention to the
gauge-Higgs couplings in Eq. (1.1.23). Using the definitions shown in Eq. (1.1.17) for
the physical fields, the interaction between the Higgs and the gauge bosons reads,
D2 = 12
g2(v + h)2W+ W
, +
(v + h)2
g2 + g2
. (1.1.30)
One can now see that the Lagrangian of the Higgs field in Eq. (1.1.23) contains the
terms,
LHiggs 
g2v2W+ W
, +
g2 + g2
, (1.1.31)
giving rise to the masses for the W- and Z-bosons,
m2W =
, m2Z =
, (1.1.32)
where the second relation is a consequence of the definition for c2W in Eq. (1.1.19),
16 Chapter 1. Introduction
and is uniquely specified by the mixing between the EW gauge groups. Finally, as
the Higgs does not couple to the A field, the photon does not acquire mass and the
U(1)Q symmetry remains unbroken. What just happened?
We started with a theory that has no masses. Then, we introduced an interaction
between the (EW) gauge fields and some constant scalar background field with
four degrees of freedom, whatever that might be. As the vev of the scalar field is
a non-zero parameter, the gauge symmetry is (spontaneously) broken by fixing a
value for its ground state. After EWSB, only one of the four degrees of freedom
we started with remains physical (the Higgs boson), while the other three act as
longitudinal modes obtained by the W and Z gauge bosons becoming massive
the three unphysical degrees of freedom generate the masses of three gauge bosons.
In short, if a local gauge symmetry gets broken, the gauge boson associated to its
generator acquires a non-zero mass10.
The doublet nature of the Higgs field allows for interactions with fermion fields
, called Yukawa couplings Y ij , which correspond to the last piece of the Higgs
Lagrangian in Eq. (1.1.23), allowing fermions to acquire mass. From Eq. (1.1.11),
the Yukawa piece of the Lagrangian reads,
LYukawa = Y
` LL,i`R,j + Y
u QL,i
cuR,j + Y
d QL,idR,j + h.c., (1.1.33)
where c, also an SU(2)L doublet with hypercharge Y = 1, allows for Yukawa
interactions with up-type quarks, and is defined as,
c  i2 =
 
 . (1.1.34)
Note that, in order to maintain gauge invariance, Eq. (1.1.33) contains both left-
and right-handed SU(2)L multiplets. Masses of fermions can be read off directly
10Gauge bosons of unbroken symmetries remain massless.
1.1. The Standard Model of Particle Physics 17
from the Lagrangian, and for this let us consider the term involving the tau lepton,
YLL,`R, + h.c. = m
+ +
h+, (1.1.35)
where we identify m  Yv/
2. Not only masses, but fermion-Higgs interactions
too are parametrised by Y, the fermion  Yukawa coupling, which is a free parameter
of the theory.
From Eq. (1.1.33), the parameter Y ij stands for 33 (since there are three generations
of fermions) complex matrices: one for leptons Y ij` , one for up-type quarks Y
u , and
one for down-type quarks Y ijd . As these matrices are not necessarily diagonal in the
gauge basis, one needs to rotate the Yukawa matrices from the weak interaction
flavour basis in such a way that in the mass basis these are diagonal11. With V L
and V R unitary matrices that diagonalise the Yukawa matrices,
Y = V
L YV
R , (1.1.36)
we obtain the diagonalised version of the Yukawa matrices, Y. As there is only one
Yukawa matrix in the lepton sector due to the absence of right-handed neutrinos
that can mix with their left-handed counterparts as explained before, gauge-lepton
interactions remain diagonal with a suitable definition of the gauge eigenstates
aligned with the mass eigenstates. For quarks, neutral-current interactions (- and
Z-mediated) are insensitive to these rotations as the effects cancel. However, charged-
current interactions mediated by the W-boson in Eq. (1.1.14) get modifications of
the form,
LFermion, kinetic  uL
W+ V
L dL + h.c., (1.1.37)
where we define the non-diagonal, unitary matrix VCKM  V
L , known as the
Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix [40, 41]. As a result, charged currents
change the flavour (mass eigenstates) of the interacting quarks (gauge eigenstate).
At last we can show what the SM Lagrangian looks like. With the renormalisable12
11In other words, the fields are not necessarily aligned with the (physical) mass eigenstates.
12Operators with mass-dimension less than or equal to four.
18 Chapter 1. Introduction
and gauge-invariant fields and interactions described above it can be written as,
LSM = 
 + iD +
D2  V () Y ij ij + h.c., (1.1.38)
where, in summary, the first term describes the gauge sector; the second one corres-
ponds to the kinetic terms of fermions; gauge-Higgs interactions are contained in
the third term; the Higgs potential, responsible for EWSB, is the fourth term; the
fifth term accounts for Yukawa interactions giving rise to fermion masses; finally,
the Hermitian conjugate includes antiparticles.
1.2 Higgs phenomenology at colliders
In the previous section we discussed the gauge group of the SM Lagrangian and the
interactions between fermions and gauge bosons, as well as the Higgs mechanism that
gives rise to the mass spectrum of the particles contained in the theory. Let us now
see some predictions of the SM Lagrangian in Eq. (1.1.38) related to the Higgs sector:
Higgs production at colliders and its decay channels so far, ATLAS and CMS have
managed to establish a picture of consistency of Higgs measurements with the SM
expectations [4244]. The experimental evidence suggests anmh = 125.250.17 GeV,
h = 3.2
2.2 MeV Higgs boson [19,4549], where h corresponds to the total decay
width of the Higgs.
1.2.1 Higgs production
As this Thesis is aimed at studying Higgs phenomenology at current (LHC) and future
linear e+e colliders [50] such as the International Linear Collider (ILC) [5153] or
the Compact Linear Collider (CLIC) [5456], we briefly outline what the main
single-Higgs13 production mechanisms favoured at high-energy experiments are.
13Since di-Higgs production has not been observed to date, we restrict to present the single-Higgs
channels only.
1.2. Higgs phenomenology at colliders 19
At the LHC, there are four production modes of the Higgs boson. The gluon-
gluon fusion (ggh) [57] is the dominant production mode because of the high gluon
luminosity,
pp gg  h,
induced by top- and bottom-quark loops. The vector-boson fusion (VBF) chan-
nel [58],
pp qq + V V   jjh,
where j refers to a quark that could have changed flavour under charged current
interactions and V = W/Z, is mediated by the fusion of W or Z weak bosons
and subleading with respect to the ggh mode14. Sizeable, but suppressed compared
to ggh and VBF, the Higgs-strahlung (Vh) channel [59],
pp qq  V   V h,
where V = W/Z, consists of Higgs radiation off of weak bosons V . Similar to Vh,
a Higgs can be radiated off of top- or bottom- quark pairs
tth/bbh
[60],
pp qq/gg  QQh,
where Q = t/b, subdominant with respect to the other production modes, completing
our list. Other processes, such as Higgs produced in association with a single top-
quark, are highly suppressed with respect to the ones mentioned above. The Feynman
diagrams of the outlined processes are illustrated in Fig. 1.2.
At e+e colliders, there are three single-Higgs production modes15. At low centre-
of-mass energies
s, the dominant channel is Higgs-strahlung (Zh),
e+e  Z  Zh,
which, just as for the LHCs Zh channel, consists of Higgs radiation off of a Z-boson.
14From Fig. 1.4 it can be seen that the cross-section of the ggh process dominates over the rest
of the production mechanisms, and the VBF s cross-section is the second largest.
15Lepton colliders provide an excellent alternative to hadron colliders for observing di-Higgs
production above the m2h+Z threshold.
20 Chapter 1. Introduction
t/b
Figure 1.2: Feynman diagrams illustrating the four dominant single-Higgs production
channels at the LHC (see text for details). Top left: ggh, the dominant production
mode. Top right: VBF, subleading with respect to ggh. Bottom left: Vh, where
a Higgs is produced in association with a weak boson V = W/Z. Bottom right:
Higgs radiation off of a third-generation quark (tth/bbh).
Figure 1.3: Feynman diagrams illustrating the three dominant single-Higgs produc-
tion channels at e+e colliders (see text for details). Top left: Zh dominates at a
centre-of-mass energy
s  250 GeV, and its cross-section  falls as   1/s. Top
right: VBF, which can be W- or Z-mediated, takes over Zh as
s increases, with
  ln2
s/m2V . Bottom: Higgs radiation off of a top-quark pair, can be accessed
once the mtth threshold is reached.
1.2. Higgs phenomenology at colliders 21
Its cross-section  reaches its maximum at
s  250 GeV, near the mZh threshold,
and then falls as   1/s. As
s increases, the vector-boson fusion (VBF) mode,
e+e  ee/e
+e +W+W/ZZ  eeh/e
+eh,
which can be either W- or Z- mediated, begins taking over with a cross-section
that grows as   ln2
s/m2V , where mV corresponds to the V boson mass. Finally,
similar to the LHC case, the Higgs can be radiated off of a top-quark pair,
e+e  Z/  tth,
once the mtth threshold is reached. The Feynman diagrams of the single-Higgs
production modes at e+e colliders are illustrated in Fig. 1.3, and the cross-sections
of all the production channels outlined above are shown in Fig. 1.4 as a function of
the centre-of-mass energy
1.2.2 Higgs decays
As the Higgs mass is not predicted by the SM, this parameter has to be measured by
experiments. Once this is done, the decay pattern of the Higgs boson is unambigu-
ously determined. Since its couplings to fermions and gauge bosons are proportional
to their masses, the Higgs tends to prefer decays into the heaviest particles allowed by
phase-space restrictions. The decay processes of the Higgs boson can be categorised
 Fermionic: The Higgs boson couples to fermions with a strength proportional
to the corresponding Yukawa coupling. For mh  125 GeV, the preferred
fermionic decay is the h bb channel.
 Massive gauge bosons: Even though there is not enough phase space for
Higgs decays to a pair of on-shell weak bosons, the h V ()V 
V = W/Z
decay mode to one or two off-shell weak bosons is still kinematically accessible.
22 Chapter 1. Introduction
 [TeV] s
6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
210 M(H)= 125 GeV
 H (N3L
O QCD
 + NLO
 qqH (N
NLO QC
D + NLO
 WH (NN
LO QCD
 + NLO E
 ZH (NNL
O QCD +
 NLO EW
 ttH (
 bbH (NN
LO QCD
 in 5FS, 
NLO QC
D in 4FS
 tH (N
CD, t
-ch +
Figure 1.4: Higgs production cross-sections at colliders as a function of the centre-of-
mass energy
s (see text for details). Left: Cross-sections , in pb, as a function of
the centre-of-mass energy
s, in TeV, relevant at the LHC for single production of
an mh  125 GeV Higgs boson via ggh (blue), VBF (red), Wh (green), Zh (black),
associated production with a pair of bottom quarks (pink), associated production
with a pair of top quarks (purple), and associated production with a single top quark
(magenta), at different orders in perturbation theory (shown in parentheses). The
bands correspond to theory uncertainties. Taken from Ref. [46]. Right: Cross-
sections , in fb, as a function of the centre-of-mass energy
s, in GeV, for Higgs
production at e+e colliders. The dominant single-Higgs production channel at low
energies is Zh (yellow). As
s increases, WBF (red) and ZBF (blue) are enhanced.
Above the mtth threshold, the Higgs can be produced in association with a pair of
top quarks (green). Also displayed are some di-Higgs production channels. Taken
from Ref. [61].
1.2. Higgs phenomenology at colliders 23
 [GeV]HM
80 100 120 140 160 180 200
 Z
 [GeV]HM
120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130
Figure 1.5: Higgs decay branching ratios as a function of the Higgs mass mh, in
GeV (see text for details). Left: As the mass of the Higgs boson varies in the range
[80, 200] GeV, the phase space available for its decays gets enhanced or reduced,
which allows or restricts the preferred tree-level and loop-induced decays into the
heaviest particles and massless gauge bosons, respectively. Right: Idem left panel,
but in the range mh  5 GeV, with mh = 125 GeV. The bands correspond to theory
uncertainties. Both figures taken from Ref. [46].
 Loop-induced: Massless gauge bosons (g and ) do not couple to the Higgs
field directly. However, the h gg decay is mediated by quark loops, whereas
the h   and h  Z channels are mediated by W -boson and charged-
fermion loops.
The partial width hab of the Higgs decaying to a pair of particles a,b and its total
decay width h are used to define the dimensionless quantity called branching ratio,
BR(h ab) =
hab
, (1.2.1)
which is a useful parameter to determine the fraction of Higgs decays to a given
final state; Fig. 1.5 shows the branching ratios as a function of mh. The ATLAS
and CMS experiments at CERN have carried out direct searches of the decay modes
h  bb [62, 63], h  cc [64, 65], h  + [66, 67], h  + [68, 69],
h  WW  [59,70], h  invisibles [71,72], h  `+` [73,74], as well as the silver
mode h   [75, 76], and finally the golden channel h  ZZ  2`2` [77, 78].
Despite their low rates, as shown in Fig. 1.5, the clean final-state signatures of
24 Chapter 1. Introduction
the silver and golden channels allow us to extract signal events from background
processes16 in a narrow window around the nominal Higgs mass. Thus, these are
the modes preferred by experiments to carry out precision measurements of Higgs
properties, such as mh and h [4749].
Experimental searches have been useful to either observe certain decay modes, or set
bounds on the rate at which others occur. As explained before, the silver mode along
with the golden channel were the ones used to claim the discovery of a Higgs-like
boson in 2012 by the ATLAS and CMS experiments at CERN. In Chapter 4 of this
work we will explore the golden channel in the ggh production mode at the LHC,
and Chapter 5 aims to study the Zh and ZBF single-Higgs production channels at
high-energy e+e colliders.
1.3 Shortcomings of the Standard Model
Despite its several and accurate predictions, the SM fails to describe pressing issues
which will be outlined below; thus it is often seen as an incomplete theory: many
questions remain unanswered that a fundamental theory of Nature should try to
address. Some deep questions that need to be answered are,
 Electric charge. In the SM we often deal with the electric charge as the
coupling constant in processes involving charged fermions and photons. In the
case of quarks, why the up (down) quark charge is exactly e/3 (2e/3)?
 Patterns. The number three seems to constantly appear in the SM. For
instance, to date we are aware of the existence of three families for quarks and
leptons. In the case of quarks, electric charges are quantised by a third, and
the number of colours equals three. Is there a specific reason for this, or is it
a happy accident of Nature?
16See Chapter 3 for more details.
1.3. Shortcomings of the Standard Model 25
 Symmetries. Why does Nature demand that the gauge group of the SM GSM
follows the gauge symmetry of Eq. (1.1.1)?
 Free parameters. As a theory capable of predicting phenomena, the SM is
built upon many parameters that do not seem to have theoretical predictions,
but need to be measured by experiments, such as the Higgs self-coupling. Can
we build a theory powerful enough to predict the values of the free parameters
of the SM which can be later on confirmed by experiments?
The SM further fails to account for a set of observed phenomena that are not
predicted by the theory and need to be explained,
 Neutrino masses. In the SM, the particle spectrum contains three massless
left-handed neutrinos. However, there is clear experimental evidence to claim
that neutrinos are actually not massless, contrary to the SM predictions. The
quantum-mechanical effect of neutrino oscillation [79, 80], parametrised by
the PontecorvoMakiNakagawaSakata (PMNS) matrix [81, 82], has been
observed [8386] and requires neutrinos to be massive [87, 88]. However, we
are unaware of their absolute masses. Moreover, the Dirac or Majorana nature
of these fermions remains elusive [89]. The most popular SM extension to give
masses to neutrinos is the so-called seesaw mechanism [90], in which a massive
right-handed neutrino is added to the particle content of the SM.
 Dark matter. Our available evidence to claim for the existence of dark matter
(DM) is supported and based on gravitational effects, and cannot be accounted
for only by the observed luminous matter. Observations of the Coma cluster in
1933 by Fritz Zwicky [91] suggested that some galaxies were moving faster than
predicted by Newtonian mechanics. Vera Rubins studies in 1970 of rotation
curves of spiral galaxies showed that there was a slow decrease with the galactic
radius [92], providing hints for the existence of a new mass component. Lensing,
large-scale structure, and anisotropies in the Cosmic Microwave Background
26 Chapter 1. Introduction
(CMB) contain data that support the existence of DM [93]. Results from
the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite [94] and the Wilkinson
Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) [95] have shown that our Universe is
highly dominated by a large amount of DM and dark energy (see next bullet
point Dark energy). The Planck mission [96], as a dedicated search for the
precision measurement of cosmological parameters, has determined the relation
between the power spectrum of the CMB and the amount of matter in the
Universe, concluding that DM is responsible for approximately 26% of the
energy density of the Universe. Todays issue is to detect and characterise
the nature of DM [97,98] from cosmology [99,100], or indrectly from collider
experiments [101].
 Dark energy. From the Dark matter bullet point above, the Planck mission
concluded that dark energy (DE) constitutes about 68% of the energy density
in our Universe. An unknown form of energy, DE is supposed to be responsible
for the accelerated expansion of the Universe [102].
 Gravity. The most evident missing piece in the SM is a particle-like de-
scription of gravity [103, 104]. To date, the best description of gravitational
phenomena we have is Albert Einsteins Theory of General Relativity (GR).
String theory [105] and loop quantum gravity [106] are the most popular at-
tempts to either unify gravity with the other fundamental interactions, or
quantise the gravitational field away from the other interactions, respectively.
 Baryon asymmetry. There is an observable difference between the baryonic
and anti-baryonic matter in our Universe. In 1979, Andrei Sakharov17 showed
that there are certain rules to be fulfilled in order to achieve the aforemen-
tioned asymmetry [107], namely baryon number violation, C-symmetry and
CP-symmetry violation, and phase out of thermal equilibrium. The amount
17The father of the Soviet hydrogen bomb was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1975 for
his struggle for human rights in the Soviet Union, for disarmament and cooperation between all
nations.
1.3. Shortcomings of the Standard Model 27
of baryon asymmetry in the Universe cannot be explained in the SM, even
though CP-violation is present.
One more issue to be addressed is related to the Higgs boson and its mass, which
receives radiative corrections due to quantum effects, known as the fine-tuning
problem. As mh is well separated from the Planck scale MP  10
19 GeV, there seems
to be some kind of interplay between the fine-tuning of the Higgs mass and MP .
This is known as the hierarchy problem [108], and deserves a special mention. . .
1.3.1 The hierarchy problem
The mass of the Higgs boson receives quantum corrections, illustrated in Fig. 1.6, that
can be large unless there is something that protects it from a divergent behaviour.
Quantum contributions give rise to corrections of the form,
m2h  m
 2NP
9g2 + 3g2
 y2t
, (1.3.1)
wherem0h is the Higgs bare mass, and NP the cut-off scale of the momentum running
in the loops. From Eqs. (1.1.29), (1.1.32), and (1.1.35), it is possible to see that
corrections to the Higgs mass squared are proportional to the square masses of the
particles running in the loops. If there exist new heavier states that couple directly
to the Higgs boson, their contributions to the Higgs mass squared are proportional
to the square mass of these states,
m2h  hm
, (1.3.2)
where we have assumed the existence of a new scalar  with mass m  mh and
coupling strength to the Higgs h. In both cases, if m
h  m
h then there must
be a large cancellation taking place so that we recover the experimentally measured
mh  125 GeV. Since in the SM m
h < m
h, then mh is protected from fine-tuning.
However, when new heavy states that couple to the Higgs in some way are introduced,
28 Chapter 1. Introduction
Figure 1.6: Feynman diagrams illustrating the one-loop contributions associated to
the quantum corrections received by the Higgs mass squared. From left to right, the
scalar, gauge, and fermion diagrams are shown.
then the issue of the Higgs mass receiving large corrections appears. In other words,
why is the Higgs boson so light?
All of these problems are clear evidence of the need for new physics above the EW
scale that address these issues, motivating the need to extend the SM somehow.
These extensions are commonly referred to as physics beyond the SM (BSM), and
some ideas will be outlined next.
1.4 Going beyond the Standard Model
Solving the issues outlined in Sec. 1.3 is not an easy thing to do. As we have seen
before, the SM is a theory valid at the EW scale; however, it cannot be extrapolated
to arbitrarily high energies since gravitational effects might become relevant above
MP , and QED develops a Landau pole
18 at an energy scale Q  10286 eV [4]. So,
if we want to come up with a theory valid up to very high energies, such as MP ,
that not only answers our questions but is also able to make accurate and testable
predictions, we would want its low-energy behaviour to reproduce the SM19. In this
sense, the SM is an effective theory, i.e., the low-energy approximation, valid up to a
finite energy scale NP, of a fundamental theory; to date we can estimate that NP
must be O(TeV).
One of the goals of the high-energy and high-luminosity runs of the LHC will be
18Energy scale at which perturbation theory breaks down due to a coupling constant becoming
infinite.
19For example, one can think of Newtonian mechanics as the low-energy approximation of Special
Relativity.
1.4. Going beyond the Standard Model 29
to discover new physics at energies higher than the EW scale, or to observe those
particles that have so far escaped detection. The extended particle spectrum of
the SM is known as a simplified model contrary to ultraviolet-complete (UV)
models, simplified models contain just a few new particles and interactions described
by Lagrangians that respect the symmetries of the SM, providing robust tools to
interpret data collected at colliders that can be later matched to UV models. Hence,
simplified models can be seen as effective theories of UV models, but that have
extended the particle spectrum of the SM.
The common feature of many simplified-model extensions of the SM is the existence
of new heavy fields, the so-called bottom-up approach. On the other hand, a top-down
approach studies specific, complex UV models and its implications on the low-energy
phenomenology. Although the study of BSM extensions of the SM from a simplified-
model perspective is beyond the scope of this Thesis, we outline below some of these
for illustration purposes,
 Supersymmetry (SUSY) introduces a wider particle spectrum mapping bo-
sons into fermions, and vice versa, cancelling some divergences of the quantum
corrections affecting the Higgs mass [109112]. However, experimental bounds
do not seem to favour the minimal SUSY extensions of the SM [113,114]. For
more information, see Refs. [115119].
 Grand Unification Theories (GUT) attempt to encode the description of
fundamental particles and their interactions into a single theoretical framework
based on the guiding principle of gauge symmetry. Analogous to the EW
unification, its major goal is to unify the strong and the EW interactions into
a single force at high energies [120128].
 Extra dimensions introduce additional gauge fields that can interact with
the Higgs, controlling the quadratic divergences of its mass [129,130].
 Vector-like quarks (VLQ) are hypothetical, massive quarks, whose left- and
right-handed projections belong to the same representation of the SM gauge
30 Chapter 1. Introduction
group. In the SM, the charged-current Lagrangian involving chiral fermions
has a vectoraxial (V  A) structure in Eq. (1.1.37), while for VLQ has only
a V component [131141].
 Little Higgs models extend the gauge group of the SM to naturally accom-
modate a light Higgs boson, with vector-like fermionic partners cancelling the
quadratic divergences of the Higgs mass [142147].
 Composite Higgs is aimed at describing the Higgs as a bound state, and not
as a fundamental particle [148155]. It is analogous to the case of the pion ()
in QCD: it went from a fundamental scalar to a bound state of quarks [156].
 Two-Higgs-Doublet Models (2HDM) incorporate two copies of the SM
doublet 1 and 2, at least one of which carry a non-zero vev [157162]. These
models contain five physical states after EWSB: two CP-even neutral scalars h
and H (mH > mh), two charged Higgsses H
, and a CP-odd pseudoscalar A.
One can also come across with models postulating three Higgs doublets [163,
164].
A common feature of the models outlined above is that the Higgs boson and the
rest of the SM particles are conjectured to be part of a wider spectrum. We must,
however, measure precisely the properties of the SM Higgs what if the particle
discovered in 2012 is nothing but an additional scalar which happens to resemble
the SM Higgs? Precision measurements must be carried out in the Higgs sector to
determine its coupling strengths to gauge bosons and fermions, since any variation
from the SM expectations might be a hint for new physics.
In the context of the bottom-up approach employed by simplified-model studies, we
can extend the SM starting with its Lagrangian and adding more terms constructed
out of SM fields,
LEFT = LSM +
D4NP
O(D)i , (1.4.1)
1.4. Going beyond the Standard Model 31
where NP is the scale of new physics we had previously introduced, and c
i are
the dimensionless Wilson coefficients of the perturbative expansion standing for
the coupling strength of each dimension-D (D > 4) operator O(D)i . Each term
O(D)i /
NP must be consistent with the mass-dimension four of the SM Lagrangian.
Eq. (1.4.1) corresponds to the effective theory description [165167] associated with
the SM. The Wilson coefficients encode the high-energy behaviour of new physics and
need to be measured, whereas the operators parametrise the long-distance physics.
Contrary to the simplified-model approach, this way of encapsulating the low-energy
effects of an unknown UV theory does not require additional degrees of freedom,
and one only has to deal with new higher-dimensional Lorentz structures arising
from the dimension-four SM operators. It is then within the framework of effective
theories that the following Chapters are devoted to study the variations of the Higgs
couplings to Z-bosons at the LHC, as well as showing how these can be probed at
future linear e+e colliders.
Chapter 2
Effective Field Theory
In Chapter 1 we introduced some of the basic elements that construct the best the-
oretical framework we have to date to describe the interactions between the building
blocks of the Universe, the Standard Model of Particle Physics. Its predictions have
been put to the test several times throughout the years, and it has been found that
the results agree well with a plethora of measurements. Nevertheless, the Standard
Model fails at explaining several physical phenomena, which is an evidence of the
need for a more powerful theory that is able to include suitable candidates that
provide an answer to the questions raised by the experimental data. In coming up
with a robust theory, one should bear in mind that the Standard Model remains a
framework with powerful predictive power up to the electroweak scale.
There are many competing theories available on the market1 that extend the particle
spectrum of the Standard Model in the so-called simplified-model approach. These
contain just a few new particles and interactions described by Lagrangians that
respect the symmetries of the Standard Model, which could be later matched to
UV-complete models. If it exists, the ultimate theory of Nature should reproduce in
its low-energy limit the accurate predictions of the Standard Model. In this sense,
not only the Standard Model but simplified models, too, are effective theories, valid
up to a finite energy scale NP, of a fundamental theory.
1For a non-exhaustive list, see Sec. 1.4 of this Thesis.
34 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
We can estimate that NP must be O(TeV). As explained in Chapter 3, the energy
reach of the Large Hadron Collider limits its potential to perform direct searches for
physics beyond the Standard Model above a few TeV. Although currently there are
plans to build more powerful colliders able to reach higher centre-of-mass energies,
these would take several years from now to begin collecting data. Since direct
production of new physics has remained elusive, and we are unaware of what is
the value of NP, then indirect searches and precision measurements are the best
alternative to look for potential deviations from the theory predictions that carry
the imprint of said new physics2.
In looking for deviations from the Standard Model expectations, we need to find
a way to parametrise our lack of knowledge on the type of interactions that would
induce such measurable and testable deviations. One option is to extend the Stand-
ard Model starting with its Lagrangian and adding more terms constructed out
of its particle content. This new set of operators of higher mass dimension that
respects the underlying symmetries of the theory encapsulates the low-energy effects
of an unknown UV-complete model. Thus, additional higher-dimensional Lorentz
structures and modified vertices encode the effects of physics beyond the Standard
Model in an effective-theory fashion, without the need to worry about additional
degrees of freedom and their interactions with the fields known to date.
In this Chapter we give a brief description of the Effective Field Theory framework
and its interplay with the Standard Model of Particle Physics. Using Fermis theory
of muon decay, we motivate the need to study the Standard Model as an Effective
Field Theory. Further, we introduce some key concepts needed to get to grips with
the notion of parametrising unknown high-energy physics through its low-energy
manifestations. The following description of the basic elements building up the
Standard Model as an Effective Field Theory is inspired by comprehensive texts like
Refs. [168184].
2In Chapter 3 we describe some key aspects of direct and indirect searches for new physics at
colliders.
2.1. Warmup: basic idea 35
2.1 Warmup: basic idea
Let us begin with the following statement: in studying a physical system, one
does so from a distance for sake of simplicity. In other words, when tackling a
physics problem we only care about the relevant degrees of freedom. Let us take
the case of an undergraduate student who is being taught about geometrical optics.
For the student to understand Fermats principle, it is not necessary to know the
short-distance behaviour of light-matter interactions, nor the long-distance physics
governing the laws of electric dipole radiation. However, a more experienced student
would argue that an expensive experiment might be sensitive to polarisation effects,
and so more calculations would be needed to account for any discrepancies between
the theory prediction and the experimental outcome. Putting it differently, we are
free to choose the physics needed to describe a system to the desired precision.
There is physics that is far away, in some sense, from the physics that one might
be interested in. In such case, then the far-away physics can be removed from the
theory when you are not talking about it, i.e., the high- and low-energy degrees
of freedom can be decoupled from each other. This is precisely the purpose of an
effective theory: to describe the physics at some scale , we do not need to know the
detailed dynamics of what is going on at    (or   ). Nevertheless, given
a full theory that describes a physical phenomenon, the subdominant effects can
be computed to correct the leading-order approximation3. From an Effective Field
Theory (EFT) perspective, one can say that high-energy effects show up as small
modifications to low-energy interactions when studying a physical system in the
long-distance regime, where a short-distance description is not needed.
As explained in Chapter 1, we know that the SM is not a complete theory of Nature,
and so we expect new resonant physics to appear at a yet unknown energy scale NP.
The EFT framework provides us with a powerful toolkit that allows us to construct
3For example, consider the relativistic corrections O
to Newtons second law of motion,
which are subdominant for v  c.
36 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
an effective description of the particle world, taking the SM as an IR-complete
theory, while remaining agnostic about the fundamental UV theory that lies beyond
NP. Conversely, if we know what is the high-energy theory and want to look at
certain low-energy phenomena, the EFT structure is useful when calculations are
somewhat nasty in the IR. In short, effective theories are useful to parametrise our
ignorance [168] of the physics at some energy, far away from the scale that we are
probing, in terms of free parameters contained in the EFT Lagrangian.
Let us consider the Lagrangian of a UV-complete theory LUV (,), where  is a
field of mass m,  is a field of mass M  m, and these are allowed to interact with
each other. Since the dynamics of said system are encoded in LUV, one can make
computations of processes involving these two fields at an energy scale E M , where
the kinematic threshold allows  to be produced on-shell. But what happens if we
are interested in calculating the cross-section of certain modes at E  m, i.e., with
only s in the external states and  being too massive for its resonant production?
To simplify calculations in the latter case, using the path-integral formulation of
QFT [1] we can integrate out  from LUV, obtaining an effective theory describing
a system with s only. To do this, we must use the partition function ZUV of the
UV-complete theory,
j, j
DD exp
LUV (,) + j+ j
, (2.1.1)
which, differentiated with respect to the currents ji (i = {,}), gives the n-point
correlation functions of s and s. In the equation above,
DD denotes a
functional integral over all fields  and  present in the Lagrangian of the theory.
Integrating over the field configurations D, the partition function ZEFT of the
effective theory is,
D exp
LEFT () + j
, (2.1.2)
where LEFT () corresponds to the Lagrangian of the effective theory that does not
know anything about . Thus, one might be tempted to claim that we would only
2.1. Warmup: basic idea 37
need to require,
= ZUV
j, 0
. (2.1.3)
However, LEFT () 6= LUV (, 0) in general
4, and simply setting j = 0 means that
s are never external, but these can appear as internal propagators. In the low-
energy regime E  mM the exchange of s looks like an interaction between s
only [184]. If the momentum transfer carried by  is p M , then the propagator
can be expanded as,
p2 M2
 . . . (2.1.4)
and one can see that higher-order corrections are suppressed in the low-momentum
limit due to the appearance of the heavy mass scale in the denominator of the
expansion. Since  is too massive to be produced on-shell, we are blind to the
physics involving said field. In integrating out the heavy fields, one should bear in
mind that although LUV and LEFT differ in the UV, their predictions must agree in
the IR and in their overlap region.
Following Ref. [185], let us wrap things up by considering the Lagrangian L(, ,)
of a model consisting of a heavy field , and light fields  and ,
L(, ,) = LH(, ,) + LL(, ), (2.1.5)
with M  m,. Note that we have split L(, ,) into its heavy and light
interactions. We now use the path integral to integrate out the heavy field  as,
D exp
d4xL(, ,)
= exp
d4xLEFT(, )
, (2.1.6)
where LEFT(, ) corresponds to the effective Lagrangian,
LEFT(, ) = LL(, ) + L(, ). (2.1.7)
The corrections L(, ) consist of a tower of higher-dimensional operators con-
structed out of the fields contained in LEFT(, ), and correspond to an infinite
4This could be the case if the fields  and  were completely decoupled from each other.
38 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
Figure 2.1: Feynman diagrams illustrating the interactions described in the left:
full theory, and right: effective theory. At energy scales  M, the propagator
looks like a contact interaction between light fields. These diagrams are meant for
illustration purposes only.
series in decreasing relevance of whatever expansion we are doing,
L(, ) =
D4NP
O(D)i , (2.1.8)
with the desired precision telling us where to truncate the series5. The c(D)i are
the dimensionless Wilson coefficients, which stand for the coupling strength of each
dimension-D (D > 4) operator O(D)i [167]. The infinite series is constructed out of
the most general possible interactions consistent with the symmetries that we are
imposing [174]. Although the Wilson coefficients are unknown, it is possible to fit
them to experimental data. In Fig. 2.1 we illustrate the idea of integrating out the
heavy field  from the theory to recover a contact interaction between the remaining
degrees of freedom  and .
Heavy particles might show up if we probe those energies directly. However, in the
EFT we are probing the physics at low energy, and the way that the high-energy
degrees of freedom would show up is by a contribution to one of the O(D)i operators.
Suppose we added a new particle with massM = 20 TeV. If we perform an expansion
p/M as in Eq. (2.1.4), then what happens is that we get an operator O where that
particle has been removed. Its mass will show up in the denominator of the expansion
as NP (which can be thought of as the propagator). New particles do not show
up in the operator, but affect the prefactors c(D)i /
NP in Eq. (2.1.8). In this sense,
5Note that the effective theory is only valid below NP, as beyond this scale the EFT is no
longer predictive.
2.2. Power counting 39
the Wilson coefficients encode the high-energy behaviour of new physics, and the
operators parametrise the long-distance physics by inducing a new set of vertices
and interactions, the so-called anomalous couplings.
2.2 Power counting
From Eq. (2.1.8), one can see that the EFT Lagrangian LEFT is constructed out of a
large number of dimension-D operators O(D)i entailing new interactions not included
in the original theory. It is also possible to notice that the higher the mass dimension
the bigger the suppression factor owed to the expansion parameter,
(2.2.1)
of the infinite series. To see this, consider computing an amplitude where we insert
an arbitrary higher-dimensional operator O(D), and assume that we want to probe
such an interaction at an energy E  NP. Said amplitude scales roughly as,
, (2.2.2)
and it is clear that, depending on the desired accuracy, it is possible to neglect
consistently the contributions of order larger than the chosen D in  [178]. Thus,
truncating the series in Eq. (2.1.8) at the desired dimension D gives a finite set of
terms, from where observables can then be expanded in powers of E/NP [179].
In practice, the operators O(D)i are constructed out of the SM scalar , fermion ,
and gauge V fields, and the dimension D is determined from the field content of O.
Since the action,
d4xL, (2.2.3)
is a dimensionless quantity6, it is possible to apply reverse engineering to work out
6In natural units, ~ = c = 1.
40 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
the mass dimension of each SM field by looking into its Lagrangian,
LSM = 
F aF
a, + iD +
D2  V () Y ij ij + h.c., (2.2.4)
introduced in Chapter 1. From Eq. (2.2.3), one can notice that,
[x] = 1

[LSM] = 4
(2.2.5)
Since F = V  V, [
= 2. (2.2.6)
Thus,
[] = 1, [] =
= 1. (2.2.7)
Once we know what is the mass dimension of each field in LSM, it is possible to
write down the most generic structure of an operator O. Following the convention
adopted in Ref. [183],
)N (
)NF (
)ND ()N  [O] = 3N + 2NF +ND +N, (2.2.8)
where the exponents Nobject correspond to the number of insertions of said object
in the operator under consideration. One can notice that the coefficients on the
right-hand side of the expression above correspond to the mass dimension of the
(composite) structures , F , D, and .
Let us now look at an example in a scalar field theory to illustrate another important
concept, following Refs. [174,184]. Consider the action,
S() =
m22 
, (2.2.9)
What we want to do here is to understand how each term in the equation above
behaves when we rescale the space-time coordinates as,
x  x
. (2.2.10)
2.2. Power counting 41
The limits   0 and    correspond to the high- and low-energy ends of the
theory7, respectively. Changing the coordinates and normalising the kinetic term by
rescaling  1 yields,
m222 
4 
, (2.2.11)
such that the kinetic term dominates the action integral. Now, let us compare
Eq. (2.2.9) and Eq. (2.2.11) by taking the low-energy limit    of the latter.
Depending on their behaviour, each term in Eq. (2.2.11) can be categorised [165,166]
 Relevant. As we approach the IR, these terms become more and more im-
portant, as is the case of the mass term.
 Marginal. No matter if we are in the IR or the UV, these terms are equally
important as they were before, such as the 4 term.
 Irrelevant. The more we go to larger distances, the more suppressed the
effects of these operators are, for which 6 is an example.
We can as well relate the mass dimension D of each operator and the space-time
dimension d = 4 of the action integral with the categories above. Notice that,
 2: D = 2 < 4, relevant.
 4: D = 4, marginal.
 6: D = 6 > 4, irrelevant.
These imply that, for finite (large) , the dimension of the operators tells us their
importance. With these ideas in mind, it becomes more evident that the expansion
parameter  in Eq. (2.2.1) plays an important role to determine at which dimension
7The rescaling x  0 () zooms in (out) to smaller (larger) distances, hence probing higher
(lower) energies.
42 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
D should we truncate the series in Eq. (2.1.8) and neglect higher-order corrections.
From Eq. (2.2.2),
we can see that as E approaches NP, the terms neglected in the series become more
relevant [183]. With the EFT looking towards the IR of the underlying theory [174],
we find yet another reason to have a cut-off scale NP for the effective theory.
2.3 Top-down & bottom-up
As mentioned previously, the EFT framework allows us to separate the energy scales
relevant to the study of a physical phenomenon from those that are not necessary
for an adequate description of the system under consideration. If one is able to write
the Lagrangian of a theory in the form of Eq. (2.1.5), then the UV is said to be
decoupled from the lower energies of the spectrum [186]. In the low-energy effective
theory, the possible effects induced by heavy fields of mass M impact the values of
the couplings, which can be probed by precision measurements, or are suppressed by
factors of 1/M [174]. In this sense, at the UV one might want to simplify the known
theory to compute observables where not all the degrees of freedom are relevant.
Further, at the IR one can remain agnostic about the UV that lies beyond NP
and still use Eqs. (2.1.7) and (2.1.8) to perform calculations. These approaches to
construct an effective theory are called top-down and bottom-up, respectively, and
we will now have a quick look into these.
2.3.1 Fermi theory of muon decay
Let us illustrate the top-down approach at constructing an EFT by introducing
Fermis theory of muon decay, involving four-fermion contact interactions8. The
8Strictly speaking, Enrico Fermi used this type of interaction in a bottom-up fashion to explain
the energy spectrum of -decay in the early 1930s [187], when the W -boson had not been discovered
yet, and a few years after Wolfgang Pauli proposed the existence of the neutrino. However, for
2.3. Top-down & bottom-up 43
 
Figure 2.2: Leading-order Feynman diagrams illustrating the muon decay in the
left: Standard Model, and right: Fermi effective theory. Note that the W -boson is
present in the full theory, but is integrated out in the effective theory giving rise to
a four-fermion contact interaction.
four-lepton vertex, shown in the right panel of Fig. 2.2, is described by,
LEFT  GFOFermi =
1 5
1 5
+ h.c., (2.3.1)
where GF is the Fermi constant, and the lepton fields stand for their associated spinor.
The low-energy weak interactions, well below the W -boson mass mW  80 GeV (see
Table 1.1), are accurately described by these vertices since the mass scale m  mW ,
and the propagator can be expanded as shown in Eq. (2.1.4). Further, GF absorbs
the effect of the W -boson, which cannot be produced on-shell, and the high-energy
physics are encoded in the leading order expansion containing the four-momenta of
the low-energy degrees of freedom. Notice that OFermi in Eq. (2.3.1) is a dimension-
six operator, following the power-counting rules shown in Eq. (2.2.8), which implies
that [GF ] = 2.
Taking the SM as our starting point, we focus on the degrees of freedom relevant
to describe the decay of the muon at leading order, as shown in the left panel of
Fig. 2.2. The decay process,
  e
e, (2.3.2)
is mediated by the W -boson, and its interactions with leptons are given by the
charged-current Lagrangian,
 LSM 
W 
`=e,
1 5
`+W 
`=e,
1 5
 , (2.3.3)
illustrative purposes we can use the SM as a UV-complete theory, and the guiding principle applies
to muon decay, too.
44 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
From Eq. (2.3.3) one can derive the amplitude for the tree-level process shown in
Eq. (2.3.2), which in the Landau gauge reads,
iMSM =
1 5
] i (g  pp/p2)
p2 m2W
1 5
, (2.3.4)
with p the four-momentum transfer, which is limited by the three-body decay
kinematics as,
0  p2  m2, (2.3.5)
in the limit where the other leptons (electron and neutrinos) are massless. Since
m2/m
W  1.73 10
6, the W -boson can be safely integrated out, and the decay of
the muon is thus approximated by the four-lepton interaction,
MSM  
1 5
1 5
, (2.3.6)
which follows from the binomial expansion of the denominator in Eq. (2.3.4). Keeping
n terms in this expansion, the accuracy of the equation above with respect to the
full theory goes like
p2/m2W
. The amplitude in Eq. (2.3.6) does not develop a
pole at mW , and so one can construct an EFT that does not know anything about
the interchange of a virtual W -boson. The EFT Lagrangian,
LEFT 
1 5
1 5
+ h.c., (2.3.7)
reproduces the leading-order amplitude in Eq. (2.3.6) if,
 = mW , c = 
, (2.3.8)
known as the matching conditions, which roughly speaking are the boundary condi-
tions9 such that the full Lagrangian in Eq. (2.1.5) describes the same physics as the
effective Lagrangian in Eq. (2.1.7), just below the cut-off scale   mW . As long
as the energy scale E  mW , Eq. (2.3.7) describes all charged-current processes
involving electrons, muons, and neutrinos [184], which is a valid approximation of the
9One can think of the matching conditions as the continuity conditions for S-matrix elements
between the effective and full theories, which differ by their particle content, but must describe the
same IR physics. See, e.g., Refs. [168,169,174,176,179] for more information on the subject.
2.3. Top-down & bottom-up 45
EW process in the SM. In this sense, one can understand the effect of integrating
out the propagator as contracting the W -boson to a point in the Feynman dia-
gram (see Fig. 2.2). The effective coupling encapsulates the high-energy behaviour
induced by the virtual propagator, now absent in the interaction vertex, and the
dimension-six operator describes the long-distance physics10.
From Eqs. (2.3.4) and (2.3.6), one can see that the expansion parameter p2/m2W  1
suppresses all higher-order corrections to the amplitude, fixing NP  mW . As
p2  m2W , the perturbative expansion breaks down since more and more terms are
needed to keep the predictive power of the effective theory under control. As long
as one stays in the EFT validity regime, i.e., p2  m2W , Eq. (2.3.7) can be used
as an effective theory that gives good approximations of the full EW sector in the
SM. Nevertheless, one should notice that the information concerning the massive
propagator is not available to a large-distance observer, and so the validity scale of
the EFT cannot be extracted only from large-distance measurements [184].
2.3.2 SMEFT
In the previous subsection we introduced the top-down approach to construct an
EFT. Given a physical process at an energy scale E, pick your UV-complete theory
and determine which heavy (M  E) degrees of freedom are not relevant to provide
a low-energy description of said process. Once you identify these, integrate them out
from the full theory to obtain the Lagrangian of your EFT, shrinking the massive
propagators to point interactions. The amplitudes of the process under consideration
can be written as a power series of the expansion parameter (E/M)2n, where n
determines the number of terms included in the expansion, as well as the accuracy
to which the effective amplitude will reproduce that of the full theory. Make sure
that E2/M2  1 not to break the perturbative expansion as E  M . And youre
all set But what happens if we do not know what the structure of the UV theory
10Notice that in the SM all the terms involved in the Lagrangian are dimension-four operators,
except for the mass term of the scalar field which is a dimension-two operator.
46 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
looks like, and want to go to higher energies instead of larger distances?
As outlined in Chapter 1, we know that the SM is not the ultimate theory of Nature,
despite its many accurate predictions. This motivates the need for a more powerful
description of the short-distance physics that take place in our Universe well beyond
mh. Given that no new resonant physics has appeared at the LHC (apart from the
Higgs boson in 2012), we can take the SM as our starting point and construct new
operators out of its particle content to look for deviations from the SM expectations
at experiments. This bottom-up approach helps us in constructing an EFT where
the SM is the low-energy limit of an unknown UV-complete theory. Hence, looking
into the IR theory we can set constraints on the Wilson coefficients that encode the
short-distance physics of the higher-dimensional operators containing new tensor
structures that can be probed at colliders.
Let us take Eqs. (2.1.7) and (2.1.8) to write our effective Lagrangian, barring Her-
mitian conjugation, as,
LEFT = LSM +
D4NP
O(D)i , (2.3.9)
where, as before, the c(D)i are the dimensionless Wilson coefficients, which stand for
the coupling strength of each dimension-D (D > 4) operator O(D)i [167]; LSM is the
dimension-four SM Lagrangian (see Chapter 1), and NP is the scale of NP. Notice
that with each increasing (D), the corresponding c(D)i are suppressed by increasing
powers of D4NP .
Remaining agnostic about the UV theory implies that we should make some minimal
assumptions to construct the higher-dimensional operators, namely,
1. These are built out of all SM fields only.
2. Should respect the SM gauge symmetry SU(3)C  SU(2)L  U(1)Y .
3. Need to be invariant under the Poincar group.
2.3. Top-down & bottom-up 47
Beyond the previous numbered assumptions, one can make some additional choices,
such as a universal flavour structure of the fermion families. Further, one can
choose EW symmetry to be linearly realised, i.e., that the Higgs and the would-be
Goldstones form a doublet charged under the EW gauge group (see Eq. (1.1.22)), the
so-called linear EFT (SMEFT). The are other scenarios in which the m = 125 GeV
scalar discovered in 2012 at the LHC is thought to be a singlet, i.e., does not form a
doublet with the Goldstones as in the SM, and as such are treated independently11.
In the latter case, EW symmetry is said to be non-linearly realised [188], known as
non-linear Higgs EFT (HEFT).
The first higher-dimensional correction to LSM occurs at D = 5, which only consists
of the so-called Weinberg operator [189],
O(5)Weinberg =
L`
i20
L`
+ h.c., (2.3.10)
where L is the lepton doublet, and  is the SM Higgs doublet (see Appendix A for an
explanation on the notation). This operator violates lepton number, and generates
a Majorana mass term for the neutrinos after EWSB. Since a mass term for the
neutrinos is forbidden in the SM, adding this term to LSM makes it compatible with
the experimental evidence of neutrino oscillations. Further, it has been shown in
Ref. [190] that operators of odd mass dimension cannot preserve simultaneously
baryon and lepton number12.
Let us consider next the set of dimension-six operators in the SMEFT, where the
Wilson coefficients are suppressed by a factor of 1/2NP. These give the leading
baryon- and lepton-number-conserving BSM contributions to LEFT in Eq. (2.3.9).
In 1985, W. Buchmller and D. Wyler [167] derived a set of 80 said operators. How-
ever, in 2010, B. Grzadkowski, M. Iskrzyski, M. Misiak, and J. Rosiek, showed
that some linear combinations of operators in Ref. [167] were redundant and van-
11This topic is beyond the scope of this Thesis, and we restrict to the linear realisation of EW
symmetry.
12One can choose baryon- and lepton-number conservation to be an assumption in constructing
the set of higher-dimensional operators of the effective theory, which is our case of study.
48 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
ished by the equations of motion. The so-called Warsaw basis [191] is this new,
reduced set of gauge-invariant operators13 containing 59 independent terms (2499
for three generations of fermions). Other popular operator bases14 are the Hagiwara
IshiharaSzalapskiZeppenfeld (HISZ) [192], and the Strongly-Interacting Light Higgs
(SILH) [193195].
The dimension-six SMEFT Lagrangian contains operators of the form,
L(6)EFT 
6, D24, 23, F 22, 2F, 2D, F 3, 4
, (2.3.11)
following the convention introduced in Eq. (2.2.8). These operators induce new
vertices not allowed by the SM. Further, they can contribute to tree-level interactions
that are already present at the dimension-four level, provided they have the same
field content after EWSB through the introduction of either two additional powers
of  or two more derivatives [175,180]. These contributions scale respectively as,
, (2.3.12)
where g2? corresponds to the coupling parameter of the interaction [193,196]. These
impact directly the total rate of the process, as well as the momentum that is being
exchanged in the corresponding vertex, which can be probed in the high-energy tails
of differential distributions at colliders (see Chapter 3).
Although these violate lepton- and baryon-number conservation, a set of dimension-
seven operators can be found in Refs. [197, 198]. Dimension-eight operators are
spanned by the bases in Refs. [199, 200]. Thus, the leading effective Lagrangian
respecting lepton- and baryon-number conservation reads,
LEFT = LSM +
O(6)i +
O(8)j , (2.3.13)
where it is easy to notice that the Wilson coefficients of the dimension-eight operators
are suppressed by a factor of 1/4NP. In general, the leading BSM effects are encoded
13The list of bosonic operators relevant to this Thesis is shown in Appendix A. For the complete
set of operators, including the fermionic ones, see Ref. [191].
14These operator bases are related to each other via the equations of motion.
2.3. Top-down & bottom-up 49
in the D = 6 operators. The amplitude corresponding to the Lagrangian above can
be parametrised as,
MEFT =MSM +
M(6) +
M(8), (2.3.14)
and one can obtain the inclusive cross-section,
|MEFT|
2 = |MSM|
2 + 2<
M(6)MSM
M(8)MSM
M2(6)  
Theoretical uncertainty
+ . . .
(2.3.15)
where the terms to the right of the M(6)MSM piece can be used to estimate the
theoretical uncertainty15. Note that one can receive contributions from the (D = 6)2
and the interference (D = 8)  SM terms, simultaneously, that are suppressed
by a factor of 1/4NP. In such scenarios, one needs to check whether the 1/
piece dominates over the 1/4NP one, since the latter terms, both (D = 6)
2 and
(D = 8) SM, might need to be taken into account. However, including dimension-
eight contributions in SMEFT studies is not straightforward, and most of these are
performed using dimension-six operators, as is our case. For the remainder of this
Thesis, we restrict to the set of dimension-six operators in the Warsaw basis, unless
stated otherwise.
In practice, observables measured at colliders are quantities more easily related to
interactions in the mass basis than to unbroken-phase operators. Ref. [202] provides a
translation for the Wilson coefficients entering a particular process in the Warsaw to
those in the mass basis, and the Higgs basis is described in Ref. [203]. In Chapters 4
and 5 we use the parametrisation known as the BSM primary effects [204] to probe
the correlations between anomalous couplings and EW precision measurements. As
we have seen in this subsection, the bottom-up approach predicts that any impact on
the value of the couplings, total rates, or distributions expected by the SM, might
be a hint for the eagerly awaited BSM physics.
15For a systematic methodology to assign theoretical uncertainties in SMEFT studies see
Ref. [201].
50 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
2.3.3 Renormalisation Group Equations
The basic idea of EFTs is to perform calculations at an energy scale that is blind to
the effects of physics far away from such energy scale. In the previous subsections
we outlined the top-down and bottom-up approaches to construct EFTs. In the
former, one starts from a UV-complete theory and obtains an effective Lagrangian
upon integrating out the heavy degrees of freedom. In the latter, one needs to
remain agnostic about the UV physics: higher-dimensional operators built out of
all the fields in the theory encode the information of the long-distance physics, and
the unknown high-energy effects are encapsulated in the Wilson coefficients of the
perturbative expansion. In both cases, the effective theory description is valid up
to a cut-off scale NP. The boundary conditions are set by the matching procedure:
both the EFT and the full theory must describe the same physics for the light fields
just below NP, relating the Wilson coefficients of the effective Lagrangian to the
couplings of the UV theory.
If we go beyond tree-level processes, a wild unphysical scale dependence appears16 in
the calculations. This new scale M now corresponds to the matching scale; since
momentum running in the loops is unconstrained, we are free to choose the value of
such scale, given that actual physical observables cannot explicitly depend on it [177].
However, performing the loop-level matching induces scale-dependent Wilson coef-
ficients ci (N) through dimensional transmutation. Fixing M to arbitrarily low
values yields large logarithms in our results of the form,
NPM
 , (2.3.16)
where NP corresponds to the energy scale of physics that were integrated out.
To remove these large logarithms, one needs to go to higher and higher orders
in perturbation theory [179], or use the Renormalisation Group (RG) improved
perturbation theory to sum up these logarithms to all orders [174].
16Disclaimer for the untrained eye: a reference to Pokmon was suitable in this case.
2.3. Top-down & bottom-up 51
High-energy scale
<latexit sha1_base64="zhVhKwsZ+VMvTUk4KP0YG9sA3XA=">AAACAnicbVDJSgNBEO2JW4zbqCfx0iQIghJmRNRj0IvHCGaBdAg9nZ5Mk56F7hohDMGLn+AvePGgiFe/wlv+xs5y0MQHBY/3qqiq5yVSaHCckZVbWl5ZXcuvFzY2t7Z37N29uo5TxXiNxTJWTY9qLkXEayBA8maiOA09yRte/2bsNx640iKO7mGQ8HZIe5HwBaNgpI59QCT3gWQkCcQpJtVAECV6AZBhxy45ZWcCvEjcGSlViuTkeVQZVDv2N+nGLA15BExSrVuuk0A7owoEk3xYIKnmCWV92uMtQyMact3OJi8M8ZFRutiPlakI8ET9PZHRUOtB6JnOkEKg572x+J/XSsG/amciSlLgEZsu8lOJIcbjPHBXKM5ADgyhTAlzK2YBVZSBSa1gQnDnX14k9bOye1E+vzNpXKMp8ugQFdExctElqqBbVEU1xNAjekFv6N16sl6tD+tz2pqzZjP76A+srx86TZpQ</latexit>
{,}
Low-energy scale
<latexit sha1_base64="ydmMmhVVU90NRzOn2yUFeBYTZB0=">AAAB/HicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vaJduhhZBEEoioi6LblxWsA9oQplMJ+3QySTM3Agh1K9w78aFIm79EHf9G6ePhbYeuHA4517uvSdIBNfgOBOrsLa+sblV3C7t7O7tH9iHRy0dp4qyJo1FrDoB0UxwyZrAQbBOohiJAsHaweh26rcfmdI8lg+QJcyPyEDykFMCRurZZU+wELzcS4bcU3wwBG/cs6tOzZkBrxJ3Qar1inf2PKlnjZ797fVjmkZMAhVE667rJODnRAGngo1LXqpZQuiIDFjXUEkipv18dvwYnxilj8NYmZKAZ+rviZxEWmdRYDojAkO97E3F/7xuCuG1n3OZpMAknS8KU4EhxtMkcJ8rRkFkhhCquLkV0yFRhILJq2RCcJdfXiWt85p7Wbu4N2ncoDmK6BhV0Cly0RWqozvUQE1EUYZe0Bt6t56sV+vD+py3FqzFTBn9gfX1A3nDmEs=</latexit>
Renormalisation 
Group
Particle mass
Renormalisation 
Group
Matching<latexit sha1_base64="7A2dRnufZNyESZ3DG6RWfZRj1Ts=">AAAB7nicbVDLSgNBEOz1GeMr6lGRwSB4Crsi6kUIevEiJGAekCxhdjKbDJmZXWZmhbDk6Ad48aCIVz8h3+HNb/AnnDwOmljQUFR1090VxJxp47pfzsLi0vLKamYtu76xubWd29mt6ihRhFZIxCNVD7CmnElaMcxwWo8VxSLgtBb0bkZ+7YEqzSJ5b/ox9QXuSBYygo2Vak2RoCt018rl3YI7Bpon3pTkiwfD8vfj4bDUyn022xFJBJWGcKx1w3Nj46dYGUY4HWSbiaYxJj3coQ1LJRZU++n43AE6tkobhZGyJQ0aq78nUiy07ovAdgpsunrWG4n/eY3EhJd+ymScGCrJZFGYcGQiNPodtZmixPC+JZgoZm9FpIsVJsYmlLUheLMvz5PqacE7L5yVbRrXMEEG9uEITsCDCyjCLZSgAgR68AQv8OrEzrPz5rxPWhec6cwe/IHz8QMZL5J4</latexit>
 = M
<latexit sha1_base64="KC2Ouye7nEfQ3NgXhmD8X+SCI9w=">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</latexit>
LUV (,) = LH (,) + LL ()
<latexit sha1_base64="L64JFDtO3bDXFnfSvQZXcPaR+R4=">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</latexit>
LEFT () = LL () + LL ()
Figure 2.3: Interplay between matching and the RGEs. Start at a high energy scale
H with a UV-complete theory containing heavy () and light () fields, of masses
M and m respectively, and Lagrangian LUV (,) = LH (,) + LL (). Using the
RGEs, evolve the theory to lower energy scales until  = M is reached, where the
 fields can be integrated out. Since the particle content changed for  < M , and
hence its parameters, one needs an effective theory with no heavy particles, described
by the Lagrangian LEFT () = LL () + LL (), where the term L parametrises
the corrections due to the matching condition. In both the effective and the UV-
complete theories, the physics of the light fields  should be the same at  = M .
Reproduced from Ref. [168].
One might want to perform loop-level calculations of low-energy observables at
energy scales E  M  NP, resumming all the large logarithms of the theory.
Since the Wilson coefficients were fixed at the matching scale M as ci (M), we need
to run the value of these couplings down to ci (E) using the Renormalisation Group
Equations (RGEs),
dci ()
ijcj () , (2.3.17)
where ij is the anomalous dimension matrix, which encodes the information of the
mixing between operators as they evolve through different energy scales. A schematic
representation of the interplay between matching and the RGEs is shown in Fig. 2.3.
52 Chapter 2. Effective Field Theory
In the studies presented in Chapters 4 and 5 we do not take the RGE effects into
account, since we perform these at a fixed energy scale. Thus, relevant subjects
for an in-depth description of the RGE, such as renormalisation and dimensional
regularisation, among others, are beyond the scope of this Thesis. For a review on
those and other topics in the context of the SM and EFTs, as well as some RGE
results, see, e.g., Refs. [1, 2, 4, 170173,179,184,205,206].
Having introduced the (very) basic elements of Effective Field Theory, we now move
a bit away from theory concepts to broadly talk about direct and indirect searches
for hints of new physics at high-energy colliders.
Chapter 3
Collider Phenomenology
In Chapter 1 we introduced the basic ideas underpinning the SM, and Chapter 2
helped us to understand the concept of the SM as an EFT. At this stage we know
that the theory, although powerful by itself, has several shortcomings, and alternat-
ives have been proposed throughout the years to address these issues (see Secs. 1.3
and 1.4). Following the bottom-up approach explained before, what we as physicists
have in our toolkit to describe Nature with BSM physics is a bunch of Lagrangians
constructed out of SM fields and either new Lorentz structures (effective theories)
or new degrees of freedom (simplified models). We can predict how the interac-
tions allowed by our Lagrangians should behave, and what the phenomenological
implications of these are.
However, as Richard Feynman once said, it doesnt matter how beautiful your theory
is, it doesnt matter how smart you are. If it doesnt agree with experiment, its
wrong. In short, we need experiments to test our theories. We want particles to be
produced so we can then go and measure their masses, couplings, electric charge,
etc. And this is the purpose of high-energy colliders: take two bunches of particles
A and B, give them enough energy, smash them together, and see what particles C,
D, E. . . come out of the reaction.
This is Quantum Mechanics, though, and the particles we are interested in to be
produced on the collision might not live long enough to reach our detectors: they
54 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
can decay on-the-fly producing a bunch of other particles, and we will need to
indirectly characterise these particles through their decay products. But perhaps
there are other objects that produce the same particles we detect, so we need to
learn how to extract signal events from background noise. Essentially we would be
detectives standing on the crime scene: two cars collided head-to-head1, and we need
to reconstruct the dynamics of the crash by looking at what the scatter pattern
of the spark plugs, brake pads, screws, and many other parts looks like over the
pavement of a street. . . on a rainy day, at night. But we are smart and know how
to build big collider experiments with robust detectors to ease things a bit for us
now we only need to understand what particles look like in the detectors, and learn
how to analyse and interpret the data.
The broad description of collider physics presented next is inspired by comprehensive
texts like Refs. [207209]. We consider two types of collider-target2 experiments:
electron-positron (e+e), such as the ILC or CLIC, and proton-proton (pp). Since
the LHC is the biggest pp accelerator built to date, we will use it as our benchmark
study case. We first address the case of a pp collider, and then we will explain
what makes an e+e experiment different from the former. We remit the reader to
Refs. [37, 52, 54] for specific details on the technical design of the LHC, ILC, and
CLIC, respectively.
3.1 The benchmark case: a proton-proton
collider
The LHC is a collider-target experiment designed to accelerate protons to very high
energies. In order to reach the nominal collision energy, a series of accelerators boost
the energy of the proton beams before injecting them into the 27 km ring. As they
need to follow a circular path, the trajectory of the beams is bent using magnetic
1Luckily there were no fatalties nor injuries.
2We will neglect fixed-target colliders.
3.1. The benchmark case: a proton-proton collider 55
fields produced by superconducting electromagnets that surround the beam-carrying
channels. The curvilinear motion of the protons produces synchrotron radiation that
needs to be compensated for by radio-frequency cavities, with a per-cycle loss,
, (3.1.1)
with R the radius of curvature, E the beam energy, and m the mass of the particle.
To prevent protons from moving in the transverse plane, called betatron oscillations,
beams are focused in the vertical-horizontal plane and forced to move towards the
centre of the channel using quadrupole magnets, narrowing the beams and allowing
them to overlap at the interaction point.
3.1.1 Collision energy
The beams carrying the bunches of protons move in opposite directions around the
ring. The energy E and three-momentum ~p of a single proton of mass m is encoded
in the protons four-momentum p  p = (E, ~p) obeying the on-shell condition,
p2  pp
 = E2  ~p  ~p = m2. (3.1.2)
It is customary to adopt a coordinate system in which the protons are moving in the
z direction, with the x axis pointing to the centre of the ring and y completes the
right-handed set, since quadrupole magnets focus the beams in the plane transverse
to the channel (transverse plane x  y), . In the relativistic limit, with E  m,
p2  0,
p = (E, 0, 0, E). (3.1.3)
The energy transfer in the centre-of-mass frame between any two protons A and B of
the incoming beams follows from four-momentum conservation and can be expressed
in terms of the Lorentz-invariant Mandelstam variable s as,
s  (pA + pB)
2 = (EA + EB)
, (3.1.4)
56 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
since in the centre-of-mass frame pAz = p
z . At the LHC, the collision energy is
equally shared between both beams, EA = EB, and the nominal collision energy
is then,
s = 2EA. (3.1.5)
Protons, however, are not fundamental particles: these are composite objects made
up of not only valence quarks (proton = |uud), but sea quarks and gluons, too.
One can then have several combinations for the partons involved in the hard scatter,
i.e., the actual collision: qq, qq, qq, qg, gg. . . All these combinations lead to different
charge and spin assignment in the initial state, hence opening up the possibilities
of producing intermediate-state resonances, and giving access to a large variety of
particles allowed in the final state of the collision. But since protons are extended
objects, and there are O
protons per crossing bunch, many interactions might
be taking place at the same time, often referred to as underlying event.
What does proton compositeness have to do with the collision energy? Protons are
bound states of partons charged under the SU(3)C group, meaning that they are
affected by the strong interaction and partons can radiate gluons. But we are talking
about electrically charged particles (in the case of quarks) too, so these couple to
photons as well, which can also be emitted by the incoming quarks photon and
gluon radiation can smear the energy of the colliding particles. Moreover, parton i
carries a fraction xi of the protons momentum ~pproton,
~pi = xi ~pproton, (3.1.6)
which leads to the so-called parton distribution functions (PDFs) fi/p
x, 2F
[210,
211], which parametrise the distribution of partons inside the proton3. More precisely,
x, 2F
represents the density of (valence or sea) partons of type i ({q, q, g}) as
a function of their momentum fraction x in Eq. (3.1.6) when a proton p is probed at
an energy scale 2F . Fig. 3.1 shows the difference between parton distributions at two
3When talking about PDFs, one would need to discuss the factorisation theorem [212], as well
as the DGLAP equation [213215]. However, these topics are beyond the scope of this Thesis.
3.1. The benchmark case: a proton-proton collider 57
10 -210 -110 1
2 = 10 GeV2Q
10 -210 -110 1
10 -210 -110 1
2 GeV4 = 102Q
10 -210 -110 1
MSTW 2008 NLO PDFs (68% C.L.)
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the change of parton distributions, from left: 2F = Q
10 GeV2 to right: 2F = Q
2 = 104 GeV2. Taken from Ref. [216].
different scales. Hence, the effective energy transfer s in the collision expressed in
terms of the momentum fraction x of the interacting partons follows from Eqs. (3.1.3)
and (3.1.4),
q = (xE, 0, 0, xE) s = (xA + xB)
E2  (xA  xB)
= 4xAxBE
= xAxBs,
(3.1.7)
where E corresponds to the beam energy, xA and xB to the momentum fraction
carried by the interacting parton from proton A and B respectively, and s is the
nominal centre-of-mass energy squared.
In summary, the composite nature of the colliding protons leads not only to a
plethora of charge and spin assignments, but to a per-event energy-varying collision
due to the PDFs. The effective and nominal centre-of-mass energies
s and
respectively, are related as,
s, (3.1.8)
58 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
which makes evident the major impact that PDFs have in the nominal collision
energy. Figure 3.2 shows the cross-sections of some relevant SM processes that can
be produced at pp, such as the Tevatron [217], and pp colliders, as a function of
3.1.2 Collision rate
Since protons travel in bunches4, and beams overlap at the interaction points, it is
customary to define the interaction rate N as,
n1n2f
, (3.1.9)
where ni are the number of protons in bunch i, f is the frequency at which collisions
take place (can be as high as 40 MHz at the LHC), A is the area of the bunch at
collision point, and  is the cross-section of the pp collision. From Eq. (3.1.9), we
define the instantaneous luminosity L, a measure of how tightly packed together the
bunches are, as,
n1n2f
, (3.1.10)
where for convenience A is measured in femtobarns (fb), with 1 fb = 1043m2. Hence,
it follows from Eq. (3.1.9) that the cross-section  is measured in femtobarns, too,
and the instantaneous luminosity is given in units of (fb s)1.
The machine collides protons and collects data during several days, weeks, months
. . . The total number of recorded events over a given period of time t is known as
the integrated luminosity L (not to be confused with the Lagrangian density),
L dt (3.1.11)
where L is the instantaneous luminosity defined in Eq. (3.1.10). Since it began
running on November 2009 and until the end of the Run 2 phase on December
2018, the LHC has delivered L = 189.3 fb1 of data. It has performed collisions
at different
s: 1.8 TeV and 2.36 TeV during its first days of operations before the
4There are roughly 2000 bunches of protons per beam, with nearly 1011 protons each. The
length of a single bunch is about 30 cm.
3.1. The benchmark case: a proton-proton collider 59
100 101 102 103
Center-of-mass s  / TeV
Total [Chin. Phys. C 40 100001 (2016)]
bb [Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (2017) no.5, 052002; , , ]
W [JHEP 1110 (2011) 132; , , ]
Z [JHEP 1110 (2011) 132; , , ]
tt [Comput. Phys. Commun. 185 (2014) 293; , , ]
ggH [CERN-2017-002-M; , , JHEP 10 (2015) 146, ]
WW [1305.3773; , , ]
ZZ [1305.3773; , , ]
VBFH [CERN-2017-002-M; ]
ttH [CERN-2017-002-M; , , ]
VH [CERN-2017-002-M; , , ]
WH [CERN-2017-002-M; , , ]
ZH [CERN-2017-002-M; , , ]
tH [CERN-2017-002-M; ]
HH [LHCXSWG-2019-005; , , JHEP 10 (2015) 146, ]
[normalization; shape]
 = JHEP 07 (2014) 079
 = JHEP 03 (2008) 042
 = JHEP 06 (2012) 095,
      Comput. Phys. Commun. 185
       (2014) 2771-2797,
      JHEP 1606 (2016) 060
CC-BY lhc-xsecs.org
Figure 3.2: Production cross-sections , in pb, of some SM processes at hadron
colliders as a function of the centre-of-mass energy
s, in TeV. The dotted vertical
line corresponds to the
s = 1.96 TeV Tevatron; curves to its left are cross-sections
at pp colliders, and curves to its right are cross-sections at pp colliders. From left
to right, vertical dashed lines correspond to the
s = 7, 8, 13, and 14 TeV LHC,
respectively. Taken from Ref. [218].
60 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
2009 shutdown over the winter; in March 2010 it began the Run 1 phase, period
over which the Higgs boson was discovered, with the centre-of-mass energy increased
to 7 TeV and later on to 8 TeV until 2013; and finally the Run 2 phase at 13 TeV.
The high-energy stage, Run 3, is expected to begin at the start of March 2022;
the machine will run at
s = 14 TeV and is expected to collect L = 300 fb1 of
data. The plan is to perform a high-luminosity run (HL-LHC) that would operate
s = 14 TeV and collect L = 3000 fb1 of data after Run 3.
3.1.3 Detectors and kinematics
Experiments have big and robust detectors that help us in studying, directly or
indirectly, the particles that are produced as a result of the pp collisions. Let us
take the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) [219], one of the four main experiments at
the LHC along with ALICE [220], ATLAS [221], and LHCb [222], as an example to
broadly describe what its coordinate system and components are.
CMS is a cylindrical detector, forward/backward symmetric about the interaction
point. As mentioned in the above paragraphs, the x axis points to the center of
the ring, the z axis points in the direction of the beam, and y completes the right-
handed set, with the plane formed by the x and y axes known as the transverse
plane. As the geometry of the detector suggests, cylindrical coordinates are more
suitable to describe the physics than the Cartesian ones. The polar angle  between
the direction of the particle and the beam is measured from the z axis in the y  z
plane, with   [0, ], and the azimuthal angle  is measured from the x axis in
the transverse plane, where   [0, 2). An illustration of the coordinate system is
shown in Fig. 3.3.
Let us consider a bunch of particles, each with four-momentum p = (E, ~p) obeying
Eq. (3.1.2), reaching our detector. From four-momentum conservation in Eq. (3.1.3),
the vector sum of the transverse components of the particles produced after the pp
collision should vanish. From Eq. (3.1.7), one can see that the possible ambiguities
3.1. The benchmark case: a proton-proton collider 61
Figure 3.3: Cylindrical coordinate system used in the CMS detector (see text for
details). The x axis points to the centre of the accelerator; the z axis points in
the direction of the beam; finally, the y axis completes the right-handed set. Note
that the polar angle  (green), measured in the y  z plane, gets replaced by the
pseudorapidity  (brown), with  =  ln |tan(/2)|. The azimuthal angle  (blue) is
measured in the transverse (x y) plane. Taken from Ref. [223].
62 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
related to the four-momenta of particles reaching the detectors are along the beam
direction (z), which means that variables defined in terms of only the transverse
components are invariant under longitudinal boosts. As such, the aim is to describe
the physics in terms of as many boost-invariant quantities as possible. We introduce
the transverse momentum pT ,
p2x + p
y = |~p| sin , (3.1.12)
with pi the projection of ~p onto the i axis, and  the polar angle described above.
We find in the azimuthal angle  another quantity which remains invariant under
longitudinal boosts, since it is measured about the z axis and lies in the transverse
plane.
We define the rapidity y,
E + pzE  pz
 , (3.1.13)
which is additive under longitudinal boosts, with E and pz the energy and the z-
component of the three-momentum ~p of our particle, respectively. In the relativistic
limit, or in the (nearly) massless case, E  |~p| and one can define the quantity called
pseudorapidity ,
E|~p|
1 + cos 1 cos 
 = ln
cot
)
=  ln
tan
)  ,
(3.1.14)
where  <  < . Differences in pseudorapidity are not necessarily invariant
under longitudinal boosts, unlike rapidity differences. For massless particles, y = ,
and these can be swapped at convenience; however, they differ for massive objects.
Thus, it is recommended to use y whenever possible.
Having introduced all these well-behaved (under longitudinal boosts) quantities, one
can rewrite the four-vector of a particle of mass m as,
E, px, py, pz
 (ET cosh y, pT cos, pT sin,ET sinh y) , (3.1.15)
3.1. The benchmark case: a proton-proton collider 63
where ET =
p2T +m
2, and it is easy to see that p2 = m2. Finally, it is customary
to quantify the separation between two particles reaching the detector, in the y  
plane, in terms of the angular separation R,
(y)2 + ()2, (3.1.16)
which is also an invariant quantity under longitudinal boosts.
Now that we have seen how to express the four-momentum of a particle in terms
of the kinematic quantities measured at colliders, it is time to turn our attention
to the components that build the detection system. To understand the nature of
the particles produced on the collisions, it is necessary to look at their tracks and
energy deposits. Detectors make use of a series of components designed to measure
the momenta, charges, and energies of the final-state objects. In the SM, massive
particles
W, Z, h, t . . .
decay promptly5, and their presence can only be inferred
from the production and subsequent detection of their stable decay products. Due
to colour confinement [224226], quarks and gluons undergo a series of small-angle
fragmentations and produce a bunch of collimated (color-neutral) hadrons, which can
subsequently decay until stable bound states are formed, that are often referred to as
jets6. The stable particles and objects (electrons, muons, jets, photons) reaching our
detectors are characterised by their footprints in the different layers of the detection
system illustrated in Fig. 3.4 and outlined next.
i. Inner tracker. Located immediately around the interaction point, it is used
to identify the tracks of individual charged particles that can be matched to the
vertices from which they were produced. Its pseudorapidity coverage is roughly
|| ' 2.5, and can estimate a particles momentum and mass by determining
the curvature of its track.
ii. Electromagnetic Calorimeter (ECAL). Surrounding the inner tracker, the
5The lifetime  of a massive particle is related to its decay width  as  = ~/ , where ~ is the
reduced Planck constant ~ = h/2.
6For a more detailed explanation of jet definitions, see Ref. [209].
64 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
Figure 3.4: Sketch of the major components of the CMS detector surrounding the
beam channel (see text for details). From the inside to the outside: inner tracker,
electromagnetic calorimeter, hadronic calorimeter, magnet, and muon chambers.
Taken from Ref. [227].
3.1. The benchmark case: a proton-proton collider 65
ECAL is designed to measure the energies of charged particles and photons by
bremsstrahlung and pair production, respectively, provided the resulting particles
are energetic enough to undergo a cascade of electromagnetic showers inside the
material. The rapidity coverage of the ECAL is || ' 3.0.
iii. Hadronic calorimeter (HCAL). Similar to the ECAL where radiative pro-
cesses allow for particle identification, the HCAL creates both electromagnetic
and hadronic cascades, the latter driven by strong interactions between the ma-
terial and the hadrons reaching this layer. Its pseudorapidity coverage || ' 5.0
is meant to create an environment as hermetic as possible around the interaction
point.
iv. Magnet. Creates an homogeneous and strong magnetic field inside the solenoid
in which the inner tracker is placed to determine the momentum of charged
particles to high precision, as well as increasing the resolution of the calorimeters.
Moreover, it also serves as a barrier for particles that manage to escape the
calorimeters, except for muons.
v. Muon chambers. Due to its large mass, the muon barely interacts with
the calorimeters. As such, muons are the only particles that can escape the
innermost layers of the detection system left at this stage. Its pseudorapidity
coverage is close to || ' 2.7.
The combined particle-reconstruction algorithms [228] for electrons and photons [229],
muons [230], and jets [231] allow for a high level of accuracy on identifying these
objects, while suppressing their mutual fake rates.
Particles can avoid detection for several reasons, namely escaping the detector
through the forward region (|| > 5.0) close to the beam channel; not being en-
ergetic enough to produce cascade showers in the calorimeters, or not interacting
with the detector system at all, as is the case for neutrinos. Four-momentum conser-
vation allows us to, in principle, quantify the amount of energy that was not detected.
66 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
However, we saw that for pp collisions it is difficult to determine
s because of the
ambiguity due to the PDFs, but not everything is lost: we can look into the miss-
ing transverse momentum vector
. In an event, the overall transverse energy
deposits should be zero from four-momentum conservation (see Eq. (3.1.2)), so the
~/pT observable balances the vector that results of summing the transverse momenta
of all objects visible to the detection system,
~/pT = 
visible
~pT , (3.1.17)
with complex algorithms designed to estimate to a high level of accuracy the amount
of missing transverse momentum /pT =
~/pT
 in an event [232].
Although robust analysis techniques and detection systems have been developed
and constructed over the years, these have to deal with many sources of radiation
present in each collision that can contaminate the energy deposits recorded by the
calorimeters. If we want to study and characterise a specific signal process, we not
only have to rely on the resolution of the detector, but we must also come up with
strategies that allow us to accurately identify those noisy background processes that
yield the same final-state configuration that we are after, suppress these, and extract
the signal contributions by looking into as many observables and distributions as
possible (invariant masses, pT , y. . . ), unique to the objects of our signal, that can
be constructed from the four-momenta of the detected particles.
3.2 Interlude: EFT and collider phenomenology
Having seen the major components of the detection system, as well as the basic
kinematic variables that can be extracted from measurements at pp colliders, now
it is time for us to briefly describe what the interplay between effective field theory
and collider phenomenology is, mostly inspired by Refs. [185,233]. For this, we will
first discuss what the physics effects induced by resonances that can be produced
on-shell are, to then broadly explain the search strategy for those effects induced by
3.2. Interlude: EFT and collider phenomenology 67
heavy particles with masses above the energy attainable by the experiment.
3.2.1 Resonances: on-shell production
The discovery of a new, massive particle has a clear signature: a resonant signal.
Let us assume that there is an undiscovered and unstable particle N with mass
MN within the energy reach of the LHC
, and decay width N , that
can be produced on-shell through an s-channel process of the form pp  N with
a subsequent two-body (ab) decay N  ab. The propagator of the full process
pp N  ab is of the form,
sM2N
+ iMNN
and the Breit-Wigner resonance R (s) parametrises the probability density of the
process pp N  ab as,
R (s) =
sM2N
+M2N
, (3.2.1)
which develops a kinematic peak around the pole mass s M2N , assuming a weakly-
coupled particle (N MN). In practice, the massive particle N is unstable and
one has to detect and reconstruct the four-momenta pa and pb of the decay products
a and b, respectively. Four-momentum conservation implies,
pN = pa + pb  p
N = (pa + pb)
= m2a +m
b + 2pa  pb
= M2N M
(3.2.2)
called the invariant mass of the ab-system, which is the most useful observable
that one can use to discover a heavy resonance provided its mass is within the
energy reach of the collider, and the four-momenta of its decay products can be fully
reconstructed7.
7If the four-momenta of the decay products cannot be unambiguously reconstructed, then one
has to use other kind of observables such as the transverse mass, which is an end-point function of
68 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98
Invariant mass [GeV]
Figure 3.5: Invariant-mass distribution, in GeV, of the dilepton system in the Drell-
Yan process pp  `+` (see text for details). Top: Differential cross-section as a
function of the invariant mass of the dilepton system, d/dm, in pb/GeV, in pp
collisions at
s = 13 TeV. Taken from Ref. [234]. Bottom: Line shape of the
probability density function for a Breit-Wigner distribution peaking at the nominal
mass MZ of the Z-boson. Note that the width Z is measured at half-maximum of
the distributions peak. Reproduced from Ref. [235].
3.2. Interlude: EFT and collider phenomenology 69
The cross-section  of the s-channel process pp  ab, proportional to the Breit-
Wigner resonance (pp  ab)  R (s), is energy-dependent and peaks at MN .
To illustrate this effect, Fig. 3.5 shows the cross-section of the Drell-Yan process
pp  Z/  `+` (` = e, ) as a function of the invariant mass of the dilepton
system, with a clear line shape associated to the on-shell production of a Z-boson
as the massive propagator of such a process.
However, there is a major caveat concerning the potential reach of experiments to
produce and observe a massive resonance, which is the attainable energy at colliders:
if the scale of new physics is well beyond the energy threshold of the LHC, then
such particles cannot be produced on-shell, so any direct evidence for their existence
might remain elusive until a new, more energetic accelerator complex is built. For
now, our best hope to constrain new physics effects rely on indirect searches.
3.2.2 Indirect searches: hints and clues
The lack of tantalising evidence for new resonant BSM physics during the LHCs
Runs 1 and 2 seem to suggest that the next energy scale NP at which experiments
could find such resonances (if any exists) is well beyond the reach of current colliders.
Several questions trying to address these issues arise, such as how to reconstruct
a TeV-scale Lagrangian with the current data, or what the best strategies to look
for certain observables would allow us to best anticipate incoming data. Although
direct searches will be part of the LHC programme during its high-energy and
high-luminosity stages, it is possible to look for hints of BSM physics in precision
measurements since the existence of heavy degrees of freedom may impact the
distributions and observables contained in the SM by showing deviations from the
predictions of the theory.
From an EFT perspective, as outlined in Chapter 2, the extension of the SM Lag-
rangian by higher-dimensional operators would allow us to parametrise the effects of
the resonances mass. See Ref. [207] for more details.
70 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
new BSM physics in terms of Lorentz structures made up of SM fields only, and any
deviation from the SM predictions is expected to be a hint for effects of new physics
at the low-energy regime. The leading BSM effects are encoded in dimension-six
operators, and it is crucial to understand what the predictions of these are: new
vertices ensuing from EFT can produce novel or enhanced effects in certain regions
of the phase space, and it is vital to determine what the best observables to study
the effects of certain operators or procceses are. At what extent would current or
future colliders be able to probe the presence of vertices and interactions arising from
searches for non-resonant extensions of the SM?
Since this Thesis studies gauge-Higgs interactions, let us use the Higgs sector to
illustrate the idea behind indirect searches, as EFT effects can impact their kinematic
distributions. For a given observable, experiments count the number of events per
bin, which get translated to cross-sections: these encode the information related
to a certain process within the phase space defined by the detectors, as well as tests
for non-standard couplings or production/decay modes. Upon looking for deviations
sensitive to short-distance physics, the predictive power of the SM allowed us to
use total rates [4244] to parametrise deviations from the SM predictions in the
form of signal strengths fi , defined as the ratio of the measured rates to their SM
predictions,
i B
i B
, (3.2.3)
where i and B
f are the production cross-section (i  h) and decay branching
fraction BR(h  f), respectively (see Sec. 1.2). Although useful to shed light on
Higgs couplings, signal-strength measurements are not physical quantities and fail at
separating signal contributions to their different phase-space regions, which might be
sensitive to BSM contributions that can be parametrised in a model-independent
way by a bottom-up EFT approach.
In order to measure cross-sections in mutually exclusive regions of phase space, spe-
cific to the different production modes and inclusive on Higgs decays, the Simplified
3.2. Interlude: EFT and collider phenomenology 71
Template Cross Section (STXS) measurements [236,237] provide kinematic templates
that can potentially isolate possible BSM effects. The results of STXS measurements
can be interpreted in an EFT fashion [238,239]. Consider the perturbative extension
of the SM Lagrangian by new operators of dimension D > 4 [203],
LEFT = LSM +
D4NP
O(D)i
 LSM + LBSM,
(3.2.4)
where, as before, c(D)i are the Wilson coefficients and O
i are the dimension-D
operators8. The (square) amplitude of a generic process governed by the Lagrangian
above is,
M =MSM +MBSM  |M|
2 = |M|2SM + 2< (M
SMMBSM) + |M|
= |M|2SM + |M|
Interference + |M|
BSM ,
(3.2.5)
where |M|2Interference  2< (M
SMMBSM) is the interference of the dimension-D amp-
litude with the SM. The Higgs boson production cross-section  in a generic STXS
region  is then,
 = ,SM + ,Interference + ,BSM, (3.2.6)
which makes clear that it is possible to build a bridge between cross-section meas-
urements at colliders and higher-dimensional operators, provided distributions can
be binned in mutually exclusive phase-space regions, sensitive to BSM effects.
While signal-strength and STXS measurements allow to look for small deviations in
couplings and probe specific phase-space regions, respectively, new physics typically
shows up modifying the tail of the differential distributions at high energies [233].
From Eq. (3.2.5), the interference piece of the amplitude9,
|M|2Interference = 2< (M
SMMBSM)  cos , (3.2.7)
8Since dimension-six operators entail the leading BSM effects, it is customary to deal with the
D = 6 case and consistently drop the O
1/4NP
terms as the latter are suppressed.
9Note that for a fixed dimension D, and allowing only one operator O(D) insertion at a time, the
cross-section of the interference term Interference behaves linearly with respect to the corresponding
Wilson coefficient c(D).
72 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
where  is a generic angle related to the kinematics of the process. Since the cross-
section Interference of the interference piece of a process is proportional to the square
amplitude |M|2Interference,
Interference 
d |M|2Interference  Interference 
d cos , (3.2.8)
with d the phase-space volume element, it is clear that the interference piece will
vanish upon integration over , and any clues of the impact of this kinematic angle
would be missed should we analyse total rates only [185]. Retaining these effects
is crucial to extract hints for new physics, which is a strong motivation to carry
out differential analyses as a complementary strategy to total-rate searches [240].
Differential observables such as the pT of Higgs decay products [75, 241243] can
show deviations in the tails of their distributions which get translated into EFT in-
terpretations of Higgs properties [244], and along with signal-strength measurements
are used to set constraints on higher-dimensional operators [245,246]. A schematic
representation of direct and indirect searches at colliders is shown in Fig. 3.6.
Since experiments provide measurements, these need not only interpretation, but
strategies that allow us to anticipate incoming data, too. Meaningful results rely
heavily on the energy reach of the accelerator complex, as well as on its precision:
in order to probe high-energy effects, we require high-energy collisions and high-
precision measurements. As we saw before, although the LHC is a high-energy
collider, its centre-of-mass energy is limited due to the PDFs of the incoming beams,
and hadronic activity is somewhat annoying to deal with. Future e+e colliders,
high-energy and precision experiments that circumvent these problems, can carry
out complementary direct and indirect searches in our quest to look for new physics
effects at higher and higher energies, and these will be broadly described next.
3.2. Interlude: EFT and collider phenomenology 73
Figure 3.6: Schematic representation of direct and indirect searches for discovering
BSM physics at colliders assuming the existence of a new heavy degree of freedom
at energy scale NP. The differential distribution of the cross-section with respect
to an arbitrary energy-dependent observable O, d/dO, in fb/GeV, is shown. If the
scale of new physics is attainable at colliders, i.e., NP <
s, the resonance can be
produced on-shell (turquoise) and a clear deviation from the SM prediction (brown)
can be seen, both in total rates and differential distributions. If instead
s < NP,
then it is expected that a departure from the SM prediction in the high-energy tail
of the differential distribution (orange) can be extracted from data and interpreted
in an EFT fashion. Reproduced and modified from Ref. [183].
74 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
3.3 A clean environment: electron-positron
colliders
As we have seen, pp colliders are machines that can accelerate protons to high energy,
with a plethora of charge and spin assignments owed to the interacting partons at
the hard scatter level. However, the presence of coloured objects in the initial state
produce large amounts of radiation in the form of jets. Moreover, the associated
PDFs introduce an ambiguity when one tries to compute the collision energy, and
the highly hadronic environment can turn out to be cumbersome to deal with while
trying to extract the signal from the overwhelmingly large QCD backgrounds.
Electron-positron accelerators offer a convenient alternative when it comes to collider
experiments. Since leptons are colour singlets, any presence of hadronic activity in
the detectors can only be related to the production and further decay of massive
resonances. Furthermore, as electrons and positrons are fundamental particles, unlike
protons, the nominal centre-of-mass energy
s is fixed and determined by the energy
of each beam, contrary to a pp collider. Figure 3.7 shows the cross-sections of some
relevant SM processes that can be produced in e+e collisions as a function of
However, as the incoming beams undergo acceleration before the collision, there is
radiation in the form of collinear photons that tend to escape detection through the
beam channel. Additionally, because of the small masses of electrons and positrons
compared to the protons, it can be seen from Eq. (3.1.1) that there is more per-cycle
energy loss on an e+e than on a pp collider, which limits the achievable energy at
the interaction point. For example, the Large Electron-Positron Collider (LEP) [248]
was the LHCs predecessor and collided electron-positron beams at
s = 209 GeV
in the same tunnel that the latter occupies nowadays. Hence, a much higher energy
can be achieved at pp colliders compared to the e+e ones. To mitigate the energy
loss due to synchrotron radiation, linear colliders (such as ILC or CLIC) can be used
to achieve an even higher
s, although the incoming beams have to be accelerated
over a large distance.
3.3. A clean environment: electron-positron colliders 75
Figure 3.7: Production cross-sections , in fb, of some SM processes at e+e colliders
as a function of the centre-of-mass energy
s, in GeV. Taken from Ref. [247].
76 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
In terms of the kinematics and the detection systems, pp and e+e colliders are
similar. Both types of experiments use cylindrical coordinates to characterise the
four-momenta of final-state particles in the detector, although it is customary for
the latter not to make use of the (pseudo) rapidity since there is no ambiguity in the
collision energy of the incoming beams, and the polar angle  suffices to describe the
trajectory of a particle in the y z plane. Detectors such as the International Large
Detector (ILD) [249] at the ILC use a layout for the detection systems similar to
CMS, although the technologies implemented might vary, but overall one has to deal
with the exact same set of reconstructed final-state objects. The main difference
between pp and e+e colliders in terms of the observables is the missing transverse
momentum vector ~/pT : while in the former case one needs to stick to transverse
variables as explained before, the latter allows to introduce the more general missing
momentum vector ~/p,
~/p = 
visible
~p, (3.3.1)
as a consequence of Eq. (3.1.2). However, as we will see in Chapter 5, four-momentum
conservation can be exploited in different ways to implement analyses that target
inclusive searches, so stay tuned
Note that, unlike pp colliders, in electron-positron collisions the net charge has to
be zero, and there are only two possible spin assignments |S| depending on the
properties of the interacting e+e pair: |S| = 0, 1. It is possible to resolve the spin
dependence of certain production processes and decay channels by reconstructing
complete quark and lepton momenta, providing access to their SU(2)U(1) quantum
numbers through the observation and categorisation of spin asymmetries that are
difficult to measure at pp colliders, a critical ingredient for our understanding of the
electroweak sector and the Higgs mechanism. The cross-sections of spin-dependent
processes can be enhanced or suppressed for their study since the point-like, initial-
state particles only couple through electroweak interactions: experimentally it is
possible to make use of beam polarisation to have a certain degree of control over
the chiral couplings between the e+e beams and the weak bosons, which play an
3.3. A clean environment: electron-positron colliders 77
important role in high-energy searches for vector resonances, as well as extracting
signal contributions from background processes.
3.3.1 The role of beam polarisation
As we saw in Sec. 1.1.2, the SM is a chiral theory since it distinguishes fermions
handedness. The opportunity at e+e colliders to implement beam polarisation
allows us to access to the structure of interactions between fermions and weak
bosons through their chiral couplings, as well as to determine the best strategies
to enhance signals cross-sections while suppressing background processes merely
from an experimental configuration. Below we will broadly outline the impact of
longitudinal beam polarisation in the physics programme of future linear electron-
positron colliders, inspired by comprehensive texts like Refs. [54, 250253]. For
technical details on polarised beams, from their generation to their transportation,
and for a discussion on transverse polarisation, see Refs. [254,255].
For a particle of mass m with momentum ~p and intrinsic angular momentum (spin)
~, we introduce the helicity operator h as,
~  ~p
2 |~p|
, (3.3.2)
which is to be understood as the component of spin in the direction of motion. A
particle with a helicity eigenvalue h = +1/2 is called right handed, whereas a particle
with a helicity eigenvalue h = 1/2 is called left handed10. We define the longitudinal
beam polarisation P as,
NR NL
NR +NL
, (3.3.3)
where NL(R) corresponds to the number of left- (right-) handed particles in a beam.
Therefore, it corresponds to the number asymmetry between left- and right-handed
particles in a beam: with this notation, P = 100% (100%) corresponds to a fully
right- (left-) handed polarisation.
10In the massless limit, chirality and helicity are equivalent.
78 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
From basic tree-level QFT calculations of QED processes, such as e+e  +,
assuming that we do not know what the polarisation of the initial state is and
neglecting the electrons mass (in the high-energy limit), then to get the unpolarised
cross-section 00 we have to average over the four possible chiral states [1, 4] as,
00 =
{RR + LL + RL + LR} , (3.3.4)
where RL corresponds to a right-handed (left-handed) positron (electron), and
so on. Now let us consider the case where the electron (positron) beam has a
polarisation P
. The polarised cross-section 
 of an arbitrary process in
e+e collisions is computed from the chiral cross-sections RR, LL, RL, LR [252]
and is given by,
1 + P
1 + P
RR +
1 + P
RL +
1 + P
(3.3.5)
and it can be seen that an apt choice of beam polarisation can enhance or suppress
the polarised cross-section. Note that in s-channel (annihilation) diagrams, the
helicities of the interacting initial-state particles are coupled to each other, whereas
in t-channel (exchange) processes the initial states couple their helicities directly to
the final-state objects. In the SM, 2 2 exchange processes in e+e collisions will
only lead to final-state leptons, while annihilation channels allow for the production
of quarks as well.
For illustration purposes Fig. 3.8 shows the different longitudinal spin configurations
that can be achieved at e+e colliders with polarised beams. In Fig. 3.9 we show
the interplay between beam polarisation and the cross-sections for single-Higgs
production in association with a pair of leptons in e+e collisions, where it is made
evident that polarised beams impact directly the chiral couplings of the initial-state
electron-positron pair to weak bosons, which are the mediators of such processes
(see Fig. 1.3).
Annihilation processes with polarised beams are of particular interest. From the
3.3. A clean environment: electron-positron colliders 79
e+ e-
JZ = 0
JZ = 1
Figure 3.8: The various spin-assignment configurations in the beam direction at
e+e colliders. The solid, thin arrow represents the direction of motion of positrons
(second column) and electrons (third column), and the double arrow the projection
of their spin in the z axis. For any given particle, the right-handed (left-handed)
configuration corresponds to the case where both the arrows of motion and spin
point in the same (opposite) direction. The first column shows the cross-section
 for each spin configuration of the e+e pair. The last column indicates the
total spin projection onto the beam direction JZ . Reproduced from Ref. [250].
various configurations shown in Fig. 3.8, in the SM only the JZ = 1 processes are
allowed at e+e colliders11 through the interchange of a vector boson (Z/). BSM
physics could potentially contribute to both spin configurations, and measuring
the properties of the final-state objects using different settings for the initial-state
polarisation would allow us to shed light on processes that might be produced at
these colliders. Since each initial-state spin assignment probes on itself different
processes and couplings, e+e can be thought of as four colliders in one, providing
an option to enhance (suppress) the cross-sections of signal (background) processes,
while accessing observables that allow to access the couplings driving the collisions.
Both pp and e+e colliders are powerful machines that allow us to study the particle
spectrum of the SM and explore whether new physics shows up at high energy scales.
While pp colliders can accelerate proton beams at higher energies and combine dif-
11Although the JZ = 0 recombination into a scalar particle (Higgs boson) is possible, the
  h process is suppressed by the small masses (Yukawa couplings) of electrons and
positrons.
80 Chapter 3. Collider Phenomenology
e+ e- h
l+ l- h
250 500 1000 2000 3000
s [ GeV ]
(e+ e- l l h)
Figure 3.9: Impact of beam polarisation P
+ , P
 in the cross-sections SM``h , in fb, as
a function of the centre-of-mass energy
s, in GeV, for the production of a Higgs
boson in association with a pair of leptons at e+e colliders. We consider the case
of unpolarised beams (solid), P
+ , P
 = +50%,50% (dashed), and P
+ , P
50%,+50% (dotted), with ` = {, }.
3.3. A clean environment: electron-positron colliders 81
ferent charge and spin assignments at the cost of dominant QCD backgrounds, e+e
colliders can make use of a clean environment, as well as the impact of beam polarisa-
tion to enhance or suppress cross-sections, and exploit four-momentum conservation
to extract signal processes from background noise to perform precision measure-
ments to a high level of accuracy. In Chapters 4 and 5 we will explore the potential
reach of the LHC and future linear e+e colliders, respectively, at constraining the
possible contributions from high-energy underlying physics by combining differential
distributions and total rates in the gauge-Higgs sector, illustrating more clearly what
the interplay between EFT and collider phenomenology looks like.
Chapter 4
The Differential Golden Channel
in the SMEFT
In this Chapter, based on Ref. [256], we perform our first investigation into the
interplay between effective theories and measurements at colliders by considering
the LHCs capability to constrain effective operators in the so-called golden channel.
Using a technique analogous to Fourier analysis, called the method of moments, it
is possible to use the conservation of angular momentum to disentangle the relative
contributions of the decay channel h 4` to its various phase-space regions in a fully
differential fashion. Deviations from the distributions predicted by the SM allow us
to set constraints on the gauge-Higgs anomalous couplings affecting the kinematics
of the leptons originating from the decay of the Higgs boson. All equations, tables,
and figures, are taken from Ref. [256].
4.1 Motivation
One of the main goals of the LHC is to perform and improve precision studies of
Higgs couplings to weak bosons, as these will allow us to understand and disentangle
the nature of EWSB. The data provided so far by the LHC that accounts for the
gauge-Higgs couplings [57, 59,70,244,257] needs to be complemented by differential
84 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
studies of relevant processes, such as Higgs decays to gauge bosons and VBF/Vh
Higgs production. Such studies would allow us to resolve the tensor structure of these
couplings: upon including higher-order operators in the SMEFT expansion1, new
tensor structures for these couplings arise unavoidably. As outlined in Chapter 3,
it is of great importance to develop differential strategies that probe anomalous
couplings in the gauge-Higgs sector to anticipate the incoming data of the HL-LHC.
Using the method of moments [296,297], in this Chapter we present a fully differential
analysis of the golden channel, h 4` [298302]. From the conservation of angular
momentum, it is possible to write the full angular distributions of the final-state
leptons as a sum of basis functions. The extraction of the so-called angular moments,
analogous to Fourier analysis, allows us to study the differential distributions of the
leptons reaching the detectors, hence probing the tensor structure of the gauge-Higgs
coupling that corrects the SM process in the D6 SMEFT.
Current multivariate techniques, such as Optimal Observables [303], the Matrix
Element Likelihood Analysis (MELA) [304, 305], or even machine-learning based
methodologies [306], can be complemented by the method of moments. Although
MELA is largely used by the experiments to study gauge-Higgs couplings, and it
might be difficult to surpass its power, we show that the more transparent and
intuitive method of moments is able to achieve bounds comparable to those of the
matrix-element approach. If a deviation from the SM prediction is observed in a
particular angular moment it would not only provide a hint for the distributions
receiving EFT contributions but also information about the corresponding helicity
amplitudes.
In Ref. [292], the method of moments was used to set bounds on the operators
affecting the Higgs-strahlung process at the LHC. The combination of the constraints
from Vh and the projections obtained from our analysis of the golden channel results
in stringent bounds on the EFT deformations of the gauge-Higgs couplings affected by
1A non-exhaustive list of other relevant SMEFT studies can be found in Refs. [167,175,176,191,
193195,204,233,240,245,258295].
4.2. The pp h 4` in the dimension-six SMEFT 85
these processes, since complementary directions in the parameter space are probed.
The remainder of this Chapter is divided as follows. The D6 operators contributing
to the various vertices that are deformed for the pp 4` process in the Warsaw basis
are listed in Sec. 4.2. Section 4.3 shows the derivation of the amplitudes angular
dependence. The method of moments is introduced in Sec. 4.4. In Sec. 4.5 we outline
the collider analysis along with the angular extraction, followed by our results in
Sec. 4.6. Finally, a summary is presented in Sec. 4.7.
4.2 The pp h 4` in the dimension-six
SMEFT
Due to its dominant cross-section compared to the remaining single-Higgs produc-
tion modes at the LHC, we study the gluon-initiated pp  h  4` process, with
` = {e, }2. In the SM, the dominant contribution to this final-state topology is
from the h Z()Z  4` process, with at least one off-shell Z-boson (in most of the
events analysed, the resonant propagator of the Z-boson enhances its on-shellness).
The Feynman diagram illustrating the ggh process can be seen in Fig. 1.2, and the
single-Higgs production cross-sections at the LHC as a function of the centre-of-mass
energy are shown in Fig. 1.4.
Although the h 4` decay can be driven in the SMEFT by anomalously large h`+`
couplings, these topologies are tightly bounded3, and as such are not comparable
to the standard h Z()Z  4` channel4. The current bounds on the branching
fractions for h   [308, 309] and h  Z [73, 74]5, and the fact that these are
2As discussed in Sec. 4.5, imposing a hard cut on the missing transverse energy, /ET , mostly
eliminates stable leptons arising from Z   , where the  s decay leptonically.
3ATLAS searches for the h e+e channel [307] have set the (observed) limit on Higgs decays
to electrons BR(h  e+e) < 3.6  104 at 95% confidence level, while the expected value is
BR(h  e+e) < 3.5  104, which shows a great consistency with the SM expectation. In the
case of Higgs decays to muons, the expected branching fraction is BR(h +) = 2.18 104,
and CMS have constrained its value to BR(h +)  [0.8, 4.5] 104 [69].
4Higgs production cross-section measurements in the h 4` decay channel [244] yield a global
signal strength  = 1.01 0.11, in excellent agreement with the SM prediction.
5For HL-LHC projections, see Ref. [310].
86 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
loop-suppressed processes, makes us not consider the possibility of leptons arising
from intermediate-state photons as these would need to be enhanced by at least one
order of magnitude to have any sizeable impact. Moreover, the contact interaction
hZ`+` gives rise to a new diagram that is not present in the standard theory.
Various vertices of the SM diagram for the h  4` process can receive EFT cor-
rections, namely hZZ and Z`+`, condensed in the following broken-phase Lag-
rangian [27,204],
L6  g
gZ` Z`
+ ZZ
ZZ + ZZ
ZZ ,
(4.2.1)
where for simplicity we only include the first-generation leptons, such that the
fermionic bilinear ` = {eL, eR, 
L}. We further assume that the above Lagrangian
can be extended to include the second and third generations, such that the lepton
couplings to the Z-boson gZ` and g
Z` are flavour-diagonal and universal in the
interaction basis6.
In the unitary gauge, the aforementioned vertices arise from operators containing
the Higgs doublet. Table 4.1 shows the list of operators, in the Warsaw basis [191],
contributing to the process under consideration, as well as those affecting single-
Higgs production at the LHC. The correlations between D6 operators and the said
6This way, strong constraints can be imposed on these couplings [264,311].
4.2. The pp h 4` in the dimension-six SMEFT 87
Table 4.1: List of D6 operators in the Warsaw basis contributing to various vertices
of the pp h 4` process in Eq. (4.2.1), such as the anomalous hV V /hV ff , the
effective ggh, Yukawa, and chromomagnetic couplings. Details about the notation
can be found in Ref. [191], as well as in Appendix A.
OH =
OHB = |H|
2BB
OHD =
HDH
HDH
OHWB = H
iHW iB
OH` = iH
DHeR
eR OHW = |H|
2WW
O(1)HL = iH
DHL
= |H|2BB
O(3)HL = iH
DHL
iL O
= HiHW iB
OtG = Q3HT
atRG
a, O
= |H|2W iW
ObG = Q3HT
abRG
a, Oyb = |H|
Q3HbR + h.c.
OHG =
GaG
a, Oyt = |H|
Q3HtR + h.c.
vertices are,
gZ` =
gY`sW
cHWB 
(T `3  c(1)HL  T `3c(3)HL + (1/2 T `3 ) cH`)
2cW s
T `3c
+ Y`s
ghZZ =
cH +
ghZ` =
(T `3  c(1)HL  T `3c(3)HL + (1/2 T `3 ) cH`) ,
ZZ =
c2W cHW + s
cHB + sW cW cHWB
GG =
ZZ =
c2W cHW + s
+ sW cW cHWB
(4.2.2)
where our input parameters are (mW ,mZ , em). It is important to notice that in the
equation for gZ` , the term,
2tW cHWB +
, (4.2.3)
shows that a linear combination of two of the previously listed operators contribute
88 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
to a shift in mZ , which is one of our input parameters.
In Eq. (4.2.2), only the anomalous couplings ghZZ , ZZ , and ZZ are relevant for our
study, since the remaining ones can be probed more stringently in other processes. To
begin with, the anomalous couplings gZ` have been tightly constrained at LEP [312]
by the leptonic partial width of the Z-boson 
Z  `+`
[264, 311], and so we
neglect any corrections due to these couplings.
Any contributions from the couplings ghZ` can be ignored since these can be stringently
constrained at the HL-LHC. It can be seen that ghZ` receive corrections from the
same operators affecting gZ` using the D6 SMEFT correlations, apart from cHWB
and cHD (which enters into the corresponding equation through the shift in mZ) that
contribute to gZ` . Moreover, cHWB and cHD contribute to the anomalous (charged)
Triple Gauge Couplings (TGCs) [313],
gZ1 =
2s2W
 =
cHWB,
(4.2.4)
and so these Wilson coefficients can be constrained by other processes. Finally,
plugging the above expressions for the TGCs into the correlations for ghZ` and g
in Eq. (4.2.2) we obtain7,
ghZ` =
 + 2g
T `3c
+ Y`s
gZ1 . (4.2.5)
While the gZ` couplings have been tightly constrained at LEP as explained above,
projections of the HL-LHC show that TGCs can be bounded at the per-mille level
[283, 285]. Hence, tight constraints on the contact-term couplings ghZ` using the
correlation shown in Eq. (4.2.5) are expected at the HL-LHC8. Furthermore, future
linear e+e colliders running at the TeV scale are machines suitable to constrain the
ghZ` couplings by probing the corresponding contact interaction through either the
7A derivation of these correlations is shown in Refs. [27, 204].
8In Ref. [284], it was shown that the contact-term couplings involving quarks can be constrained
above the per-mille level at the HL-LHC.
4.2. The pp h 4` in the dimension-six SMEFT 89
Higgs-strahlung or ZBF channels, which is the focus of Chapter 5.
The corrections to Higgs production in the pp  h process involve five additional
operators, listed in Table 4.1: Yukawa operators Oyb,yt , chromomagnetic operator
OtG,bG, and effective gluon-Higgs operator OHG [314, 315]. As will be discussed in
the following sections, we perform our study in the rest frame of the Higgs boson, so
that these operators will only affect the total rate and do not have an impact on the
leptons distributions, since these can be decoupled. However, since the couplings
ghZZ affect only the total rate too, the effects of the D6 operators mentioned above
yield the redefinition,
1 + ghZZ
1 + ghZZ
1 + f
cHG, cyt , cyb , ctG, cbG
, (4.2.6)
where f
cHG, cyt , cyb , ctG, cbG
corresponds to a linear combination of the shown
Wilson coefficients [314,315]. Hence, the contributions due to the operators affecting
the pp h process need to be studied using other production modes, such as tth or
h+jets, and decay channels more sensitive to the effects of these couplings.
Non-Higgs processes also receive EFT contributions. Considering the dominant
background qq  4`, corrections arise from the TGCs and Z-coupling deviations
gZ` which, as previously mentioned, can be tightly constrained by looking into other
processes. As discussed in Sec. 4.5, the subleading gg  4` background is much
smaller than the dominant qq  4` process and the SM-driven signal pp h 4`,
and so EFT modifications parametrised by anomalous vertices, such as ttg or ttZ,
will not be considered. Although the gg  h  4` amplitude interferes with the
gg  ZZ  4` continuum, we neglect this effect since, as explained in Sec. 4.5, our
signal region is defined at invariant masses close to mh, where the modification to
the total cross-section is negligible with respect to the gg  h 4` process [316].
90 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
Figure 4.1: Definition of the various scattering angles for the sequential decay
h ZZ 
`+1 `
`+2 `
(see text for details). Following the convention used in
Ref. [317], we use two different reference frames to compute i) the azimuthal angle
 between the planes containing the lepton pairs in the Higgs rest frame, and ii) the
polar angle i (i = {1, 2}) of the lepton in its parent Z-boson rest frame measured
with respect to the direction of motion of Zi in the Higgs rest frame. Both frames
contain back-to-back objects.
4.3 Angular dependence of the h 4`
amplitude
As explained in the previous section, due to the dominant cross-section at the LHC
of single-Higgs production through the ggh mode, the main contribution to the
pp  h  4` process comes from gg  h  4`, where Higgs decays are mediated
by a Z()Z pair in the SM. In the D6 SMEFT, two processes can contribute to
the h  4` mode: the first involves modifications to the hZZ vertex through the
insertion of the ghZZ , ZZ , and ZZ couplings in a diagram similar to the SM process
with two intermediate Z-bosons, and the second corresponds to an amplitude that
contains a contact interaction of the form hZ`+` as shown in Eq. (4.2.5), induced by
the OHL,` operators (see Table 4.1), with the single Z-boson decaying leptonically
Our goal is to analyse the angular variables and their differential distributions,
which we describe next. As shown in Fig. 4.1, the final-state lepton pairs are defined
by three angles in two different reference frames, and we use the fact that in the
9In both diagrams there are two fermion currents, where at least one is coupled to a vector.
4.3. Angular dependence of the h 4` amplitude 91
experiment the leptons can be characterised by their electric charges. However, in
calculating the analytic expressions of the angular distributions it is more convenient
to consider the final-state leptons with definite helicity10, so we will refer to the
angles defined by the positive-helicity lepton for the remainder of this section, unless
stated otherwise11. In what follows, we will modify our notation and denote the
two-lepton states as an `+` system, where the subscript + () indicates a positive-
(negative-) helicity lepton. From this point on, we will drop the superscripts referring
to the leptons charge, and will use instead ` to refer to the antilepton
, unless
stated otherwise, to aid readibility.
In Fig. 4.1, the polar angles i (i = {1, 2}) are measured from the three-momentum
of `i,+ to the direction of motion of its parent `i,+`i, system, evaluated in the `i,+`i,
rest frame, where we have back-to-back lepton momenta. Further, for each `+`
system we consider the azimuthal angle i that describes the orientation of the
plane containing the two-lepton momenta, evaluated in the four-lepton centre-of-
mass frame12, with respect to the scattering plane; then, we define  as the relative
azimuthal angle between the two said planes. A more concise explanation on the
definition of these angles and planes is given in Sec. 4.5.2.
As noted above, the structure of the lepton currents is such that in the massless
limit each `+` system has two opposite-helicity leptons, with  = 1/2. In the
`+` centre-of-mass frame, the total angular momentum J of each two-lepton state
and its projection M along the direction of motion of the `+` system uniquely
determine the angular dependence of the amplitude. More specifically, the total
amplitude is proportional to the Wigner d-functions13 dJM,=1 (i, i) for both final-
state `+` pairs, where the angles are evaluated with respect to the momentum of
the positive-helicity leptons as explained above, and   `+  ` = 1. Since the
`+` pair comes from the decay of a Z-boson, J = 1 and M = {0,1} depending
10In the massless limit each outgoing lepton and antilepton have opposite helicities.
11A translation from fixed helicity to fixed charge is provided in subsection 4.3.3.
12This frame is equivalent to the frame where the Higgs boson is at rest.
13The study of the analytic structure of said functions is beyond the scope of this Thesis. For
details on the subject, see Ref. [318].
92 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
on the helicity of the vector. Hence, the Wigner d-functions describing the angular
dependence of the amplitude are,
d1+1,=+1 (i, i) = cos
2 (i/2) e
+ii ,
d11,=+1 (i, i) = sin
2 (i/2) e
ii ,
d10,=+1 (i, i) =
sin i
(4.3.1)
Consequently, studying the helicity amplitudes corresponding to the h ZZ and
h Z`` processes is crucial, and these are shown in subsections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2.
4.3.1 Helicity amplitudes for ZZ production
The process h ZZ consists of a scalar particle decaying into two states in the
scalar rest frame, the two-body system has a total angular momentum J = 0. To
guarantee that M = 0, the two final-state objects, having back-to-back momenta,
should have the same helicities14. Hence, the helicity configurations that are allowed
for the ZZ final states are, following our earlier notation to denote the helicity of an
object, Z+Z+, ZZ, and Z0Z0, with their corresponding helicity amplitudes A++,
A, and A00, respectively.
The hZZ* interactions that we are looking into can deviate from the SM if these
are indeed induced by the two CP-even ghZZ and ZZ effective couplings, which
contribute toA++, A, andA00, whereas the CP-odd ZZ coupling only contributes
to the transverse amplitudesA++ andA. The helicity amplitudes for the h ZZ
process are,
A++ = 2
ghZZ + 1
amZmZ  2i
bmZmZ ,
A = 2
ghZZ + 1
amZmZ + 2i
bmZmZ ,
A00 = 2
ghZZ + 1
a  2
mZmZ
(4.3.2)
14It is important to remember that M can take (2J + 1) values, M  [J, . . . , 0, . . . , J ].
4.3. Angular dependence of the h 4` amplitude 93
where the Lorentz factors a,b are defined as,
mZmZ
E1E2 + |~q|
mZmZ
qZ  qZ ,
mZmZ
|~q| (E1 + E2) =
mZmZ
|~q|mh,
(4.3.3)
where ~q = ~qZ = ~qZ are the three-momenta of the Z-bosons in the rest frame of the
Higgs, and m2
() = q2
() is the squared invariant mass of the on- (off-) shell Z-boson.
In Eq. (4.3.2) above, the term independent from ghZZ , ZZ , and ZZ corresponds to
the SM amplitude.
Although we have analysed the structure of the h ZZ amplitude, the final lepton
angles that we are interested in are actually determined by the helicities of the
vector bosons. Summing over the allowed polarisations of the intermediate bosons,
the h ZZ  `+``+` helicity amplitude is,
h ZZ  `1+`
= gZ`1g
h ZZ  `1+`
h ZZ
) gZ`1
q2Z m
Z + iZmZ
Z  `
q2Z m
Z + iZmZ
  `2+`
A (h ZZ
gZ`1
q2Z m
Z + iZmZ
d1,=1 (1, 1)
q2Z m
Z + iZmZ
d1,=1 (2,2) ,
(4.3.4)
where A
h ZZ  `1+`
and A
()  `
are the amplitudes with
the Z-lepton couplings factorised in front. In the equation above, the parameter
T3,` Q`s
corresponds to the SM chirality-dependent coupling of the Z-boson to the lepton
` = `L,R. Fixing the helicity results in different chiralities for leptons and antileptons,
since positive helicity corresponds to left-hand chirality for positive-charge leptons,
and to right-hand chirality for negative-charge leptons (discussed in Sec. 4.3.3). In
Eq. (4.3.4), () is the helicity of the Z()-boson, and in going from the second to the
94 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
third line we use the fact that  =  in the rest frame of the Higgs.
The polarisation of the intermediate vectors determines the form of the angular de-
pendence, which is made explicit in Eq. (4.3.4) and encoded in the Wigner d-functions.
Since the Breit-Wigner propagators are independent of the vectors helicities, these
can be factored out. However, the A (h ZZ
) helicity amplitude depends on
the polarisation  and receives BSM corrections, so the lepton angular observables
are sensitive to deviations from the SM that impact their differential distributions.
Then, the A++, A, and A00 amplitudes are each multiplied by products of two
Wigner d-functions d1,=1, encoded in a set of angular functions f++, f, and f00,
f++ = cos
e+i,
f = sin
ei,
f00 =
sin 1 sin 2
(4.3.5)
where  = 12. Notice that, if we choose to compute the angles for the negative-
helicity lepton, the d1,=1 Wigner d-functions enter in the amplitude.
Although so far we have assumed that there is an on-shell Z-boson, it might be the
case that both vectors are off-shell, in which case mZmZ  mZ1mZ2 in Eqs. (4.3.2)
and (4.3.3). However, the cross-section of said process is suppressed with respect to
the one with an on-shell Z-boson due to the resonant enhancement of the latter, as
can be seen from Eq. (4.3.4). As discussed in Sec. 4.5, the collider analysis selects
one pair of leptons with invariant mass around mZ , which happens in the majority
of the cases.
4.3.2 Helicity amplitudes for Z`` production through
hZ`` contact interactions
We now discuss the contribution of the anomalous couplings ghZ` to the angular
distributions derived in subsection 4.3.1. As we mentioned before, we do not consider
4.3. Angular dependence of the h 4` amplitude 95
the effect of these vertices in our numerical analysis, although we keep track of them
in our analytical expressions. Here we show how the corrections due to ghZ` in the
h  4` amplitude can be understood as a shift in the coupling gZ
of the off-shell
Z-boson to the leptons in Eq. (4.3.4). Even in the case of the amplitude with an
insertion of a hZ`` contact term, the angular modulation turns out to be completely
described by d1M,=1(, ) functions.
Under Lorentz transformations, the fermion bilinear in the operator hZ`
` does
so as a vector, which means that the contact interaction has the form hZV
, where
V  is a spin-one object. Hence, the two-lepton system `+` in the g
Z` vertex has
J = 1. As discussed in the previous sections, the h ZV decay evaluated in the rest
frame of the scalar must have J = 0, implying that Z and V have the same helicity,
which holds independently of the form of the interaction. Consequently, in the
centre-of-mass frame of the `+` system, the quantum number M equals the helicity
of the emitted Z-boson. Thus, the angular modulation in these contact interactions
is the same as that for leptons produced from the decay of an intermediate Z-boson;
in other words, the angular observables are described by d1M,=1(, ) and are
determined by the helicity  = M of the Z-boson present in the contact interaction.
In the SM, the hZZ vertex is hZZ
. It can be seen that the form of the contact
interaction hZV
 is analogous to the SM case, so the amplitudes are the same
for all the helicity configurations A++, A, and A00: the g
Z` contribution to the
h  Z2`  4` process is equivalent to a shift in the SM M (h ZZ  4`)
amplitude in Eq. (4.3.4), which can be expressed as a shift in the gZ
coupling,
 ghZ`2
m2Z m
  iZmZ
. (4.3.6)
So far, our heuristic reasoning has assumed that there is an on-shell Z-boson involved
in the described vertex. However, it is possible to have an off-shell Z-boson radiated
off the ghZ` contact interaction, although its cross-section is suppressed with respect
to the on-shell case since the former does not receive resonance enhancement.
96 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
4.3.3 Visible angular modulation
Experimentally, it is not possible to determine the helicities of the final-state leptons.
For this reason, although so far we have evaluated the angles for leptons with  = +12 ,
in the angular analysis of the h 4` helicity amplitudes the electric charge is instead
fixed. We now consider the angles subtended by the negatively charged leptons `i
(see Fig. 4.1 and Sec. 4.5 for further details), since at colliders it is possible to resolve
the electric charge of the leptons reaching the detectors. Our squared amplitude
should then be summed over the four possible helicity configurations `1`
M (h `1`1`2`2)2 = 
M (h `1`1`2`2)2 . (4.3.7)
In the cases with `i=+ 12 , the differential distribution coincides with the emission
angles i and i entering in Eq. (4.3.4). Whenever `i= 12 , the measured angles
i and i refer to the negative-helicity leptons and, in consequence, the angular
distributions are described by the Wigner d-functions,
d1,=1(, ) = d
,=+1(  ,  + ). (4.3.8)
As mentioned in subsection 4.3.1, since positive helicity corresponds to positive
charge in the case of left-handed leptons and to negative charge for right-handed
leptons, taking the angles  and  (or equivalently ) into account for negative-
charge leptons leaves the angular definition for right-handed leptons unchanged. In
the case of left-handed chirality (, )  (  ,  + ) in the angular functions
shown in Eq. (4.3.5). Thus, the total squared amplitude of the physical process
h 4` observed at the collider can be expressed as,
M (h `1`1`2`2)2 =(gZ`R2gZ`R 2 |A (1, 2, )|2
+ gZ`L
|A (  1,   2, )|
+ gZ`L
|A (  1, 2,  + )|
+ gZ`R
|A (1,   2,  + )|
(4.3.9)
4.4. The method of moments 97
withA (1, 2, ) = A
h `1+`
(1, 2, ) the helicity amplitude in Eq. (4.3.4),
where the angles are evaluated with respect to the positive-helicity leptons, and the
Z-lepton couplings gZ
`L(R)
have been factorised out.
4.4 The method of moments
Using the results derived in the previous section, we now show that the squared
amplitude of the h  4` process can be expressed as the sum of a set of angular
functions, both in the SM and D6 SMEFT. In doing so, we discuss both the technique
that allows us to extract the coefficients of these functions, so-called angular moments,
and the corresponding estimates of the uncertainties. As mentioned in Sec. 4.1, the
method of moments is analogous to Fourier analysis; for illustrative purposes, an
overview of the basic elements of Fourier analysis in calculating Fourier series is
presented in Appendix B.
4.4.1 Angular moments for h  4`
The total cross-section of the gg  h  4` process is obtained by summing the
squared amplitudes in Eq. (4.3.9), noting that it is induced by the contributions of
the cases studied in subsections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2. As seen from Eq. (4.3.5), it is a
98 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
linear combination of the functions,
f1 = sin
2 1 sin
2 2,
cos2 1 + 1
cos2 2 + 1
f3 = sin (21) sin (22) cos,
cos2 1  1
cos2 2  1
cos (2) ,
f5 = sin 1 sin 2 cos,
f6 = cos 1 cos 2,
cos2 1  1
cos2 2  1
sin (2) ,
f8 = sin 1 sin 2 sin,
f9 = sin (21) sin (22) sin,
(4.4.1)
which depend on the angles of the negatively charged leptons as discussed previously
(see Fig. 4.1), and where the f7, f8, and f9 functions appear in the CP-odd terms
(linear in the ZZ coupling). Our results are in agreement with those shown in
Ref. [317].
The nine angular functions shown in Eq. (4.4.1) arise in the computation of the cross-
section in Eq. (4.3.9), and the angular moments are the coefficients accompanying
said functions. These angular moments can be written as a function of the couplings
4.4. The method of moments 99
ghZZ , ZZ , ZZ , and g
Z`, as,
a1 = G
(1 + a) +
bmZ
a2 = G
(1 + a)2
2c2m2Z
a3 = G
1 + a
bmZ
a4 = G
(1 + a)2
2c2m2Z
a5 = 
2 (1 + a)2
2 (1 + a) bmZ
a6 = 
2 (1 + a)2
8c2m2Z
a7 = G
4 2 (1 + a) cmZb
a8 = 
4 (1 + a) cmZb
4bcm2Z
a9 = G
(1 + a) cmZb
bcm2Z
(4.4.2)
where 2 can be understood in the SM as a measure of the asymmetry between
Z-boson couplings to left- and right-handed leptons,
 0.162 = 0.0256. (4.4.3)
From Eqs. (4.4.2) and (4.4.3) it can be seen that the angular moments a5, a6, and a8
are numerically suppressed and contribute only marginally to the numerical bounds.
To understand the suppression of these angular moments, let us consider how f6
in Eq. (4.4.1) depends on cos 1 cos 2 by looking at Eq. (4.3.9): in the second
term, cos 1 cos 2 retains its sign after (1, 2)  (  1,   2), whereas having
only one left-handed lepton with negative helicity in the third and fourth terms
implies cos 1 cos 2   cos 1 cos 2, which gives rise to a factor of 
2 in the squared
amplitude, making its contribution numerically small. The charge-helicity interplay
can lead to a partial or even complete cancellation of the angular distributions since
100 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
it is not possible to access the helicity of the lepton at the detector level15.
In Eq. (4.4.2),
)2)((
, (4.4.4)
contains the effect of the contact terms ghZ` through the shift of the g
coupling in
Eq. (4.3.6), and we choose a normalisation such that aSM1 = G
4. The Lorentz factors
a,b are defined in Eq. (4.3.3), and the variables a, b, and c, are,
a = ghZZ  ZZa
m2Z m
b = ZZ ,
c = 
(4.4.5)
4.4.2 Basics of the method of moments
As seen in the previous subsection, the squared amplitude of the h  4` process
under study can be written as a linear combination of a set of angular functions
fi (1, 2, ) that are parametrised by the angular moments ai. We now explain
how to extract the ai coefficients considering the method of moments [296, 297], a
powerful technique for smaller datasets [319,320].
For clarity, we can view this technique as an analog of Fourier analysis (see Ap-
pendix B). The basic idea is, given a set of angular functions {fi}i, to seek for a dual
basis
of weight functions wj (1, 2, ) that can extract all the coefficients ai
unambiguously,
(aifi)wj sin 1 sin 2 = aj,
dfiwj sin 1 sin 2 = ij,
(4.4.6)
where the linear combination
i aifi corresponds to the total rate, as described before.
This essentially means that the weight wj is able to project the total rate onto the
angular coefficients aj, and we can assume these weight functions wi (1, 2, ) to be
15This statement implies that, in general, by averaging over all the helicity configurations the
information encoded a priori in the angular functions (see Eq. (4.3.5)) is partly washed away.
4.4. The method of moments 101
linear combinations of the functions in the original basis,
wj = ijfi. (4.4.7)
Using Eq. (4.4.6) it is possible to show that ij = M
ij , with,
Mij =
dfifj sin 1 sin 2. (4.4.8)
In other words, we assume that the
set is a linear transformation of the
{fi}i set (Eq. (4.4.7)), with the orthogonality condition (Eq. (4.4.6)) fixing such a
transformation matrix Mij (Eq. (4.4.8)).
For the set of basis functions listed in Eq. (4.4.1), the transformation matrix is,

25 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
6272
225 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 256225 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 256225 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 169 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 89 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 256225 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 169 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 256225

, (4.4.9)
where we organise the basis functions fi according to the order shown in Eq. (4.4.1).
It is simpler to work in a basis such that Mij is diagonal, and so we perform an
orthogonal rotation of the first two moments,
f1 = cos f1  sin f2,
f2 = sin f1 + cos f2,
(4.4.10)
by an angle,
tan  = 
. (4.4.11)
In the fully-orthogonal basis, where Mij and thus its inverse ij are diagonal, the
102 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
rotated matrix M  M is,
M = 1 = diag
(4.4.12)
with  =
53 9
. Further, the (rotated) weight functions can be expressed
wi = M
ij fj, (4.4.13)
with ~f =
f1, f2, f3, f4, f5, f6, f7, f8, f9
. We can now convolute the various differen-
tial distributions from our recorded events with these weight functions to extract
the angular moments in the diagonal basis,
{a1, a2, a3, a4, a5, a6, a7, a8, a9} . (4.4.14)
In case needed, one can simply rotate back these moments to the original, non-
diagonal basis.
4.4.3 Estimates of moments and uncertainties
The weight functions wj allow us to project the total rate
i aifi of the h  4`
process onto the angular coefficients aj, as shown in Eq. (4.4.6) of the previous
subsection. From the analytic expressions for the aj, it is clear that in doing so we
assume that the weights are defined over a continuous phase space. However, in
practice we have a finite number of events delivered by the collider. In this subsection
we show how to estimate the angular moments, as well as the uncertainty in this
procedure, starting from the experimental dataset, or from the Monte Carlo samples
in case we want to obtain projections.
Looking at Eq. (4.4.6), it is noticeable that the angular moments represent the
expectation values of the weights wj for a probability distribution
i aifi, which
happens to be the total cross-section, normalised to the total squared amplitude.
4.4. The method of moments 103
Let us consider the random variable ai for each recorded event,
ai = Nwi, (4.4.15)
where N corresponds to the total number of observed events, which helps us in
changing the normalisation of Eq. (4.4.6) to N . To obtain the observed value of the
angular moments one needs to take the average over all events,
ai = Nwi =
1,n, 2,n, n
, (4.4.16)
which corresponds to the discrete version of Eq. (4.4.6). In the experiment this is
the way to extract the angular moments.
Since our goal is to anticipate the incoming data of the HL-LHC, we perform a
projection using Monte Carlo samples with and without insertions of the EFT
couplings, where the SM case corresponds to no EFT insertions and consists of both
Higgs and non-Higgs backgrounds. As we are able to control the parameters of the
simulations, the Monte Carlo samples have a much larger number of events NSM,EFTMC
than the actual number of expected events NSM,EFT at L = 3 ab1.
Given a sufficiently large number of events, the weight functions wi converge to a
(multivariate) Gaussian distribution16, for which the estimate of the expectation
value,
1,n, 2,n, n
, (4.4.17)
and covariance matrix,
ij =
NMC  1
[wi  wi]
wj  wj
, (4.4.18)
are given by the above equations for both the SM- and EFT-driven Monte Carlo
samples. We can evaluate the estimates for the expectation values of the angular
moments ai as,
SM,EFT
NSM,EFT
SM,EFT
i = N
SM,EFTw
SM,EFT
i , (4.4.19)
16As expected from the Central Limit Theorem.
104 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
where we asumme that NSM,EFT is a Poisson-distributed variable with both mean
and variance given by NSM,EFT. As discussed in Sec. 4.6, in our statistical analysis
we take the null hypothesis to be the SM expectation and assume that an excess
over the SM is observed at the detectors due to the presence of EFT insertions.
In practice, one is supposed to evaluate the wSM,(EFT)i in an expected (observed)
dataset containing NSM,(EFT) events which is in principle much smaller than the
number of events in the Monte Carlo samples. The covariance ij matrix of the
random variable wSM,EFTi in Eq. (4.4.17), which provides good estimates of the
expectation value of the weight functions wi, follows from Eq. (4.4.18) and can be
written as,
ij =
, (4.4.20)
which holds for both the SM and EFT cases. In performing the projections of the
angular moments, we find that as NSM,EFTMC increases and is large enough (O(100)),
the wi and ij approach fixed values since the estimates converge to the true values
of the parameters. Thus, the ij values decrease for increasing N , becoming more
precise.
As we deal with estimators, we must take into account their statistical uncertainties;
the latter are computed as covariances of functions of the random variables N and
ai, aj
) 
w=w,N=N
) 
w=w,N=N
aiaj + Nij.
(4.4.21)
Since our null hypothesis is the SM prediction, the uncertainties entering into our
final statistical analysis in Sec. 4.6 correspond to those of the SM expectation. We
assume a flat systematic covariance on the SM prediction given by 2systa
j , where
we take syst = 0.02 in line with the experimental search described in Ref. [310].
4.5. Collider analysis 105
Finally, the total covariance of the set of estimated SM angular moments is,
ij =
+ 2syst
 aSMi aSMj + NSMSMij . (4.4.22)
4.5 Collider analysis
In this section we discuss the collider analysis performed to suppress the background
processes qq  4`, gg  4`, and Z/+ jets, and extract the gg  h  4` signal
events17 to set bounds on the operators under consideration. Details of the Monte
Carlo samples are presented in Appendix C.
4.5.1 Analysis setup
The analysis strategy employed in this study is based on the experimental search18
described in Ref. [257]. A simplified detector analysis is implemented with the help
of HepMC [321] and FastJet [322], where we select visible final-state objects
within || < 4.7 and require pT > 0.5 GeV. The preselection of electrons (muons) is
performed within the acceptance region of the detector || < 2.5 (2.4), with pT > 7
(5) GeV. Leptons are further tagged as isolated if the total hadronic activity around
a cone of radius R = 0.3, centred in the leptons direction, is less than 35% of its
transverse energy ET . The missing transverse energy /ET , which corresponds to
the magnitude of the total transverse momentum of the event, is calculated from
the transverse components of all particles fulfilling the preselection criteria, and its
corresponding vector ~/ET points in the opposite direction of the overall transverse
momentum. Hadrons, photons, and non-isolated leptons are clustered into jets using
the anti-kt algorithm [323] with a radius parameter 0.4 and pT > 30 GeV.
17Note that the SM-driven process gg  h 4` is a background in itself, and the signal events
come from interactions ensuing from the EFT corrections explained in the previous sections.
18Our analysis is calibrated against the experimental search, and we find that our results are
compatible with the experimental numbers within 96%.
106 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
Table 4.2: Set of cuts showing the effect of each stage of the selection on the fraction
of retained Monte Carlo events for the SM-driven gg  h 4` signal, as well as on
the qq  4` and gg  4` irreducible backgrounds.
Selection cut SM gg  h qq  4` gg  4`
Jet veto 0.419 0.779 0.319
/ET < 25 GeV 0.348 0.667 0.248
2 pairs of isolated OSSF leptons,
R(`i, `j) > 0.02, 0.127 0.036 0.130
 > 4 GeV
pT,`1 > 20 GeV, pT,`2 > 10 GeV, pT,`3 > 10 GeV 0.121 0.031 0.124
M(Z1)  [40, 120] GeV, M(Z2)  [12, 120] GeV 0.110 0.021 0.112
M(4`)  [118, 130] GeV 0.095 0.001 0.001
The detector response in the reconstruction of final-state objects, such as electrons,
muons, and jets, is simulated by applying a flat Gaussian smearing [324], as im-
plemented in Rivet [325], to their energy, pT , and three-momentum components,
respectively. In the case of leptons, the mass- and direction-preserving smearing
functions are applied before the selection takes place; for jets, the mass-preserving
smearing is applied after the clustering stage. A flat leptonic reconstruction efficiency
of 0.92 is assumed, and we consider a rapidity-dependent jet-to-electron fake rate of
0.016 (0.044) for jets with
yj < 1.48 (1.48 < yj < 2.5) [229].
The selection strategy is optimised to select signal candidates from events with
no jet activity, /ET < 25 GeV, and exactly two pairs of opposite-sign same-flavour
(OSSF) leptons. To mimic the way in which Ref. [257] treats preselected leptons, we
require R
`i, `j
> 0.02, and to protect the selection against events where leptons
originate from the decay of low-mass resonances we further impose M
 > 4 GeV
(irrespective of flavour). Hard leptons are selected by demanding a cut on the
leading leptons pT > 20 GeV, and require that at least two of the trailing leptons
fulfil pT > 10 GeV.
Once a four-lepton topology satisfying the previous criteria is selected, we combine
pairs of OSSF leptons into Z1Z2 candidates, where Z1 corresponds to the two-
lepton system with an invariant mass closest to the nominal Z-boson mass mZ =
91.1876 GeV [326], and Z2 is the remaining pair. Since low-mass dilepton resonances
4.5. Collider analysis 107
) [GeV]lM(4
100 150 200 250 300
 = 14 TeVs, -1L dt = 3000 fb 
) (2 hSM gg 
* ZZ, Z qq
) (2* ZZ, Zgg 
) (2* + jetsZ/
Figure 4.2: Invariant-mass distribution M(4`), in GeV, of the four-lepton system
after performing the reconstruction of the Z1Z2 pairs (see text for details). Shown
are the stacked histograms of the SM gg  h (red) signal, quark-initiated qq  4`
(light blue), gluon-initiated gg  4` (dark blue), and Z/ + jets (green) back-
grounds, all of which are normalised to the expected number of events at the HL-
L = 3000 fb1
. Except for the qq  4` background, all distributions are
scaled (2) for visualisation purposes. Note: The settings used in generating the
gg  h  4` MC samples (see Appendix C) are such that the effect of off-shell
Higgs production is negligible away from mh  1 GeV, and hence not visible on top
of the continuum backgrounds above (below) 140 GeV (100 GeV) after smearing the
momenta of final-state leptons.
108 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
can be produced in association with an on-shell Z-boson, we reject these events by
demanding that M (Z1)  [40, 120] GeV and M (Z2)  [12, 120] GeV. To conclude
the selection, we define the signal region of the four-lepton system to be within the
mass range M(4`)  [118, 130] GeV, given that a sharp peak is expected to rise near
the nominal Higgs-boson mass mh = 125 GeV [45,46,48,49] on top of a continuum
background, as shown in Fig. 4.2. In Table 4.2, we illustrate the impact of the
selection cuts on the fraction of retained (Monte Carlo) events for the SM-driven
signal and the irreducible backgrounds. In Fig. 4.3, we show the invariant-mass
distributions of the reconstructed Z1Z2 pairs surviving the selection.
4.5.2 Angular extraction
As previously explained in Sec. 4.3.3, the determination of the helicity of a final-state
lepton has major experimental limitations. To overcome this situation we define the
various scattering angles, as illustrated in Fig. 4.1, with respect to the negatively
charged leptons originating from the decay of their parent Zi-boson, with i = {1, 2},
and which we refer to from now on as `i .
In order to extract the angular observables and analyse their differential distributions
as described in sections 4.3 and 4.4, we Lorentz-boost the four-lepton system from the
laboratory frame to the centre-of-momentum frame S  where the Higgs boson is at
rest, and we have back-to-back Z-boson momenta. In S  a new Cartesian coordinate
system
x, y, z
is constructed on an event-by-event basis as follows: the positive
z axis points in the direction of motion of the Z1 candidate; y
 is normal to the
plane generated by z and B, where B = (0, 0, 1) corresponds to the vector which in
the laboratory frame defines the beam direction; finally, the x axis completes the
right-hand set. The azimuthal angle i,S formed in S
 between `i and the scattering
plane is calculated as,
tani,S =
`i,y
 , (4.5.1)
where `
 corresponds to the projection of `i s three-momentum onto the e
 axis in
4.5. Collider analysis 109
) [GeV]
40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120
 = 14 TeVs, -1L dt = 3000 fb 
 hSM gg 
* ZZ, Z qq
) (5* ZZ, Zgg 
) (5* + jetsZ/
 [118, 130] GeV) lM(4
) [GeV]
20 30 40 50 60 70 80
 = 14 TeVs, -1L dt = 3000 fb 
 hSM gg 
* ZZ, Z qq
) (5* ZZ, Zgg 
) (5* + jetsZ/
 [118, 130] GeV) lM(4
Figure 4.3: Invariant-mass distributions M (Zi), in GeV, of the Z1 (top) and Z2
(bottom) candidates after defining the signal region M(4`)  [118, 130] GeV (see
text for details). The shown stacked histograms follow the same colour coding and
normalisation as Fig. 4.2. The gg  4` and Z/ + jets background distributions
are scaled (5) for visualisation purposes.
110 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
/2  /23 2
l 4 h SM gg 
 = 0.5 )ZZSM + interference ( 
 = 0.5 )ZZ
SM + interference ( 
Figure 4.4: Differential distribution of the cross-section , with respect to the
azimuthal angle  between the scattering planes, d/d, in fb/bin, for the SM-
driven gg  h  4` process (solid black), as well as the SM + interference terms
for the CP-even ZZ = 0.5 (dotted red) and CP-odd ZZ = 0.5 (dashed blue)
operators. Note that the interference term of the CP-odd operator closely matches
the expectation of the SM, while the CP-even histogram clearly departs from the
black curve. In generating the MC samples, the interference effects occur at the level
of the final-state leptons. See text for details.
4.6. Results 111
S , and   [0, 2). Finally, the azimuthal angle S between the planes formed by
the leptons pairs in S  is defined as,
tanS  tan
2,S  1,S
, (4.5.2)
with   [0, 2). We show the (differential) azimuthal distribution of the signal
process gg  h  4` in Fig. 4.4. Finally, each pair of OSSF leptons constructing
the Z1Z2 candidates is Lorentz-boosted from S
 to the rest frame S  of its parent
Z-boson where, similarly to the case in going from the laboratory frame to S , we
have back-to-back lepton momenta. The polar angle i,S between `
i in S
 and the
direction of motion of its parent Z-boson in S  is defined as,
cos i,S 
  ~qZi,S~p
 ~qZi,S
 , (4.5.3)
where the vector ~kMi,N corresponds to the three-momentum of particle Mi in frame
N, and   [0, ].
4.6 Results
We now discuss the statistical analysis used to obtain the bounds on the relevant
anomalous couplings ghZZ , ZZ , and ZZ . We define a 
2 function as,
ghZZ , ZZ , ZZ
aEFTi  a
1ij
aEFTj  a
, (4.6.1)
where the covariance matrix ij is defined in Eq. (4.4.22). In performing the analysis
we neglect the contributions of the ghZ` couplings of the hZ`` contact terms since, as
discussed in Secs. 4.2 and 4.3, these are best constrained using other processes (see,
e.g., Chapter 5 of this Thesis).
In Fig. 4.5 we show the 68% confidence-level (CL) bounds, obtained using Eq. (4.6.1),
in the ZZ  g
ZZ space. Here, the green band corresponds to the bound obtained
including only the information related to the total rate of the gg  h 4` process,
and it is evident that there is flat direction, ZZ  3.7 g
ZZ , which is lifted by
112 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
introducing the differential information of the angular moments described in Sec. 4.4.
Also shown are the bounds obtained by including the interference-only term between
the SM and EFT (red ellipse), which almost coincide with the bounds that include
the EFT squared term (purple ellipse). This overlap implies that, if  is the UV cut-
off of the EFT expansion, truncating the cross-section at O
already includes
most of the BSM effects that are encoded by the D6 operators; hence, the 1/4 level
does not need to be taken into account, and neglecting dimension-eight operators can
be considered consistent. For ghZZ = 0, and assuming no systematic uncertainties,
we obtain the bound,
|ZZ | < 0.05, (4.6.2)
which is comparable to MELAs |ZZ | < 0.04 [304].
In obtaining the bounds in Fig. 4.5 we have taken ZZ = 0. However, we have
checked that a non-zero value of the ZZ coupling does not have a visible impact
in the plot, i.e., to a very good approximation we obtain the same bounds if ZZ
is marginalised over. The reason for this is that the angular moments a7  a9 in
Eq. (4.4.2) hardly contribute to 2 in Eq. (4.6.1), since these are the only moments
containing a linear term in ZZ ; the dominant contribution is given by the a1  a6
angular moments which depend on 2ZZ , and so the 
2 function mildly depends on
ZZ . It is for these reasons that a very weak bound on ZZ is obtained,
|ZZ | . 0.5, (4.6.3)
after marginalising over the ghZZ and ZZ couplings. This result is not competitive
with the projection |ZZ | < 0.05 from the pp W
h/Zh processes in Ref. [292].
We combine the bounds reported above with the projections in Refs. [292,310], which
consider the pp  Wh
and pp  h  W+W  2`2 processes,
respectively. To perform such a combination, we need to i) assume that the function
f in Eq. (4.2.6), as well as the EFT deformations rescaling the branching ratio of
the decay h bb, can be constrained in a global fit that takes into account all the
processes relevant to Higgs physics; ii) use the constraints on the Z`+` couplings,
4.6. Results 113
Total Rate
All moments
-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
g h
Figure 4.5: Bounds at 68% CL on the CP-even anomalous couplings. The green band
corresponds to the bound obtained including only the information related to the
total rate of the gg  h 4` process, which keeps a flat direction ZZ  3.7 g
unconstrained. The purple ellipse, corresponding to the EFT squared term, shows
the bounds including all the angular moments. The red ellipse, obtained by including
only the interference terms between the SM and EFT, also shows the results of the
angular-moment analysis.
114 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
h->4l
-0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
-0.04
-0.02
g h
Figure 4.6: Bounds at 68% CL on the CP-even anomalous couplings after combina-
tion with the results of the angular moment analysis of the pp Wh/Zh processes
carried out in Ref. [292], and with the projection of the pp h W+W process
in Ref. [310]. The blue band shows the results of our differential study of the golden
channel. The green ellipse shows the bounds from the pp Wh/Zh processes, and
the red region corresponds to the combination of these angular-moment studies. The
(dashed) yellow ellipse shows the final bound after combining the angular analyses
with the total rate of pp h W+W.
4.7. Conclusions 115
and iii) use the EFT correlations between the anomalous gauge-Higgs couplings
involving the weak bosons [292]. In Fig. 4.6 we show the final bounds obtained
after combining the angular analyses gg  h  4` and pp  V h
with the
total rate for pp  h  W+W  2`2. Since these processes probe different
linear combinations of ghZZ and ZZ , we get strong bounds on these couplings at
the per-cent level.
Although transparent, our approach can be criticised for several reasons, namely
being based on leading-order matrix elements, not taking detector effects and se-
lection cuts into account, or not being optimised to include parton-shower effects.
We then compare our results with a Boosted Decision Tree (BDT) analysis, which
does not rely on any a priori assumptions and does not have the aforementioned
shortcomings. To make sure that we are comparing apples with apples, we perform
a simple BDT analysis19 with the angular observables 1, 2, and , obtained from
the Monte Carlo samples as outlined in Sec. 4.5. Since the ghZZ coupling does not
leave differential signatures as it only rescales the SM matrix element, we only vary
ZZ and obtain the bound |ZZ | < 0.052, with the hypothesis of zero systematic
uncertainties. This bound can be directly compared with the angular-moment res-
ult of |ZZ | < 0.051; these numbers are very close to each other, and the nominal
difference might be due to statistical reasons. This validation shows that the effects
outlined above (leading-order matrix elements, parton-shower effects not included,
and lack of detector effects or selection cuts) do not affect the extent at which the
method of moments is sensitive to this particular final-state topology.
4.7 Conclusions
A fully differential study of the golden channel h 4` in the ggh production mode
has been carried out. Owing to the experimental resolution in reconstructing leptonic
19We choose the Gradient Boost Decision Tree (BDTG) algorithm, which is suitable for handling
events with negative weights that arise upon including next-to-leading order and interference-only
samples.
116 Chapter 4. The Differential Golden Channel in the SMEFT
final states, a wealth of differential information can be extracted from these final-
state topologies. We show that in the centre-of-mass frame of the four-lepton system,
or equivalently the rest frame of the Higgs boson, three angles suffice to characterise
and determine the direction of the leptons reaching the detectors. Thus, to probe the
tensor structure of the Higgs couplings to gauge bosons at colliders and set bounds
on potential new contributions in the D6 SMEFT, a detailed differential study of
the three-dimensional space is needed.
In this Chapter we showed that the full angular distributions can be written as a
linear combination of a set of basis functions in both the SM and the D6 SMEFT,
where the coefficients accompanying these angular functions, the so-called angular
moments, encode the full angular information of the process under consideration.
We presented the derivation of the analytical expressions for these angular moments,
including D6 EFT deformations. Moreover, we employed the method of moments,
analogous to Fourier analysis, to extract said angular moments from our Monte Carlo
samples, which are simulated and analysed using a strategy that follows closely that
of the CMS experiment at the LHC during Run 2.
Further, we projected bounds on the gauge-Higgs couplings deformations that are
parametrised by ghZZ , ZZ , and ZZ in Eq. (4.2.1), using the angular moments
associated to the SM and D6 SMEFT predictions. As shown in Fig. 4.5, carrying
out the angular analysis eliminates the flat directions arising from including only
the information of the total rates in the statistical analysis. Finally, we performed a
combination of our results with those of Ref. [292], where the method of moments
was used to analyse the pp V h process, which allowed us to obtain strong bounds,
shown in Fig. 4.6, on the anomalous gauge-Higgs couplings.
Chapter 5
Future Linear e+e Colliders as
Higgs Microscopes
In this Chapter, based on Ref. [327], we perform our second investigation into the
interplay between effective theories and measurements at colliders by considering
the capability of future linear e+e colliders, such as ILC and CLIC, at constraining
dimension-six operators through the Higgs-strahlung and Z-boson fusion single-Higgs
production mechanisms. The leading contributions to these processes in the SMEFT
are given by a subset of three operators, which are used to perform a high-energy
fit. The clean environment of electron-positron accelerators along with the fixed
and controllable centre-of-mass energy of the collision allow us to set strong bounds
on the so-called leptonic high-energy primaries. All equations, tables, and figures,
are taken from Ref. [327].
5.1 Motivation
Particle physics has as one of its ultimate goals to reach higher and higher energies
to probe smaller and smaller length scales. Where direct measurements are limited
to the energy reach of the colliders, indirect searches are suitable avenues to test
higher energies than the former, as explained in Chapter 3. At LEP, Z-pole precision
118 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
measurements were able to probe energies up to a few TeV, well beyond the nominal
collision energy sLEP = 209 GeV, and some of these measurements have provided
the most stringent constraints on the new-physics scale to date. Indirect effects of
BSM physics are sensitive to irrelevant operators of the SMEFT1, which convey the
stamp of new physics at energy scales higher than that of the process under study.
As described in Chapter 2, the scaling of indirect effects due to D6 operators in
the SMEFT behaves as m2W/
2 or s/2, where s corresponds to the centre-of-mass
energy squared, and  is the UV cut-off of the EFT expansion or, equivalently, the
scale of new physics. Future linear e+e colliders, such as ILC or CLIC, have a clear
advantage2 over LEP, given their higher
s 3, at probing indirect effects that scale
as s/2. Compared to low-energy measurements performed at LEP, the same EFT
effects probed at future lepton colliders are larger by a factor of s/sLEP. The aim of
this study is to show that high-energy e+e collisions allow us to explore scales up
to tens of TeV, the smallest length scales probed in the EW and Higgs sectors.
In this Chapter we identify a subset of D6 operators in the SMEFT, sensitive to
the highest possible energy scale, that give the leading high-energy contributions in
standard EW and Higgs processes at e+e collisions, such as e+e  Zh,W+W
and single-Higgs production through Z-boson fusion (ZBF). We find, for a single
generation of leptons, that only three linear combinations of operator coefficients, the
so-called leptonic high energy primaries, give the leading high-energy contributions
to all these channels, and in doing so we perform a high-energy fit taking into
account only this subset of EFT insertions. Further, we exploit the relation at high
energies between the amplitudes of these processes due to i) the Goldstone Boson
Equivalence Theorem, which relates the e+e  Zh and e+e  W+W modes,
and ii) the crossing symmetry that connects the Higgs-strahlung channel to ZBF.
1A non-exhaustive list of other relevant SMEFT studies can be found in Refs. [167,175,176,191,
193195,204,233,240,245,258295].
2In Refs. [283, 284, 295] it is shown that in some cases even the LHC can surpass the energy
reach attained by indirect measurements at LEP.
3See Section 3.3 for a brief comparison between linear and circular e+e colliders.
5.2. The leptonic high-energy primaries 119
Table 5.1: List of processes included in the high-energy fit performed in this study
s = 1 TeV (ILC1000) and
s = 3 TeV (CLIC3000). See text for details.
Process ILC1000 CLIC3000
e+e  Z
h X X
e+e  e+eh X X
e+e  W(2j)W(2j)  X
e+e  W(2j)W
The remainder of this Chapter is divided as follows. In Sec. 5.2 we list the D6
operators that give the leading high-energy contributions to the processes mentioned
above. We outline the collider analyses that help us in extracting signal contributions
from major background processes in Sec. 5.3, followed by the projected sensitivities
to EFT couplings in Sec. 5.4. Finally, a summary is presented in Sec. 5.5.
5.2 The leptonic high-energy primaries
In this section we identify the set of D6 operators in the SMEFT giving the leading
high-energy contributions to Zh, W+W, and ZBF processes at electron-positron
colliders. The aim is to perform a high-energy fit of said leptonic operators; in
doing so we assume and further verify numerically that the Wilson coefficients of
other D6 operators, generated at the same scale, are negligible compared to those
giving the dominant contribution at high energies, namely the
s = 1 TeV ILC
s = 3 TeV CLIC. The linear combinations of operator coefficients entering
the high-energy amplitudes of the standard electroweak processes considered in our
study, outlined above, are the so-called leptonic high-energy primaries [283].
For our
s = 1 TeV projections we take into account the Zh and ZBF single-Higgs
production mechanisms, and incorporate the e+e  W+W to our
s = 3 TeV
projections. We perform our own collider analyses for the Higgs-strahlung and ZBF
processes (see Sec. 5.3), and further include the results of the e+e  W+W mode
described in Ref. [56]. A summary of these processes is shown in Table 5.1. We note
that, in each case, the same set of three leptonic high-energy primaries dominate
120 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
the SMEFT contribution at high energies4. A statistic combination of the results
from each channel gives very stringent bounds on this three-dimensional space5. In
the following subsections we describe the high-energy behaviour of these processes
in the SMEFT, as well as the underlying theory relating each other.
5.2.1 The high-enery e+e  Zh,W+W processes in the
dimension-six SMEFT
In the high-energy limit
s mW , bosons produced with longitudinal polarisation
are correlated as a consequence of the Goldstone Boson Equivalence Theorem [328,
329]. This way, and up to a factor of mW/
s, the external legs of a Feynman
diagram containing longitudinally-polarised gauge bosons can be represented by
Goldstone lines. Thus, one can study the high-energy behaviour of these processes in
the symmetric phase, where the symmetry group of the SM SU(2)LU(1)Y remains
unbroken the EW bosons remain massless, and the Higgs doublet contains not
only the physical h-boson, but the Goldstones as well. It is for this reason that in
the high-energy regime the EW processes e+e  Zh,W+W are correlated6, given
that these are dominated by the longitudinal final-state modes ZLh,W
The amplitude for these processes involving diboson production in the SM at high
energies can be computed by evaluating the left diagram in Fig. 5.1. In the D6
SMEFT, the leading contributions are given in the right diagram (Fig. 5.1), and
these arise from the contact terms e+ehG0 and e
+eG+G, where G0 and G
 are
the Goldstone bosons. In the absence of a propagator connecting the leptons with
the Goldstones, the D6 diagram corresponds to an amplitude that grows quadrat-
ically with energy, and so one can expand the operators in Table 5.2 to read off
4In Ref. [56] a study of the Drell-Yan process, not included here, shows its sensitivity to very
high scales, where an independent set of operators from the ones we consider in our study gives
the leading contribution to the high-energy amplitude of said process.
5Strictly speaking, to obtain the best possible bounds one should also take into account the
deformations involved in single-Higgs production through W-boson fusion (WBF) e+e  eeh,
as its high-energy limit in the SMEFT can also be completely described by the same set of operators.
6See Refs. [283,284] for the study of said processes in hadronic collisions.
5.2. The leptonic high-energy primaries 121
e h/G
e h/G
SM D6
Figure 5.1: Feynman diagrams illustrating the interplay between the Goldstone
Boson Equivalence Theorem and the leading high-energy contributions to e+e 
Zh,W+W amplitudes in the left: SM, and right: D6 SMEFT. The dashed lines
represent the corresponding Goldstone bosons.
Table 5.2: List of D6 operators contributing to e+e  Zh,W+W, and ZBF
processes at high energies.
SILH Basis Warsaw Basis
OW = i
DW i O
`,(3)
LiL
iHi
OB = i
B O
`,(1)
OHW = i (D
H) i (DH)W i O
R = (eR
OHB = i (D
H) (DH)B
O2W =
DW i
O2B =
B
122 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
the amplitudes for these processes from the coefficients of the contact interactions
e+ehG0 and e
+eG+G. In the high-energy limit s m2Z ,
eReRW
eReRW
AeReRZh
ASMeReRZh
2qZeR
eR ,
AeLeLZh
ASMeLeLZh
2qZeL
(L1 + L3) ,
eLeLW
eLeLW
2qZeL
(L1  L3) ,
(5.2.1)
where ASM are the SM amplitudes, A correspond to the EFT contributions, and
qZ` =
T `3 Q`s
. The terms eR , L1, and L3 stand for the leptonic high-energy
primaries, a linear combination of Wilson coefficients of D6 operators in the SMEFT.
We make use of the SILH Lagrangian [193] to parametrise the BSM physics effects,
L1 =
m2W t
(cB + cHB  c2B) ,
L3 = 
(cW + cHW  c2W ) ,
(5.2.2)
from where it can be seen that only two out of the three directions remain inde-
pendent. The primaries L1 and L3 can be written in terms of some universal
pseudo-observables as,
L1 =
= t2W
  S  g
L3 = g
(5.2.3)
where the set of anomalous couplings above can be independently constrained
and best probed in other processes at high-energy collisions. We use the Warsaw
basis [191] (see Appendix A) to write the expressions for the high-energy primaries
in the general case as,
eR = 
L1 = 
`,(1)
L3 = 
`,(3)
(5.2.4)
In terms of the anomalous couplings in Eq. (5.2.3), the expressions for the high-energy
5.3. Collider analyses 123
primaries in the general case shown in Eq. (5.2.4) take the form,
L1 =
gZeL + g
+ s2W g
1  t
L3 =
gZeL  g
+ c2W g
eR =
gZeR + 2s
gZ1  2t
(5.2.5)
We show in Appendix F a derivation of these relations.
5.2.2 The ZBF channel: crossing symmetry
From Fig. 5.2, it can be seen that the diagram corresponding to the ZBF channel can
be obtained by rotating the one for the Higgs-strahlung mode these processes are
related by crossing symmetry7. Thus, by replacing s t in the relevant expressions
of Eq. (5.2.1) one obtains the corresponding amplitude for the ZBF mode,
AeRZeRh
ASMeRZeRh
AeReRZh
ASMeReRZh
(s t) =
2qZeR
eR ,
AeLZeLh
ASMeLZeLh
AeLeLZh
ASMeLeLZh
(s t) =
2qZeL
(L1 + L3) ,
(5.2.6)
where s and t are the usual Mandelstam variables.
5.3 Collider analyses
In this section we discuss the collider analyses that help us in extracting the signal con-
tributions from the background processes at future linear e+e colliders [50,51,55].
As explained previously, we focus on the Higgs-strahlung e+e  `+`h, where
` = {e, , }, and ZBF e+e  e+eh channels, targeting a semi-inclusive search of
Higgs-boson decays that do not yield charged leptons in the final state to avoid re-
dundancies in reconstructing the dilepton system8. Even though interference between
these processes arises in the case of Zh with final-state electrons, the invariant mass
7See, e.g., Ref. [295] for an analysis of these processes at the LHC.
8Although it is not an inclusive search, we still keep  90% of Higgs decays.
124 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
Z Boson Fusion (ZBF)
Figure 5.2: Feynman diagram illustrating the crossing symmetry between Zh and
ZBF single-Higgs production. Note that by exchanging the Mandelstam variables
s t in the amplitude of a given process one can go from one channel to the other.
Consequently, the same direction in the parameter space of the SMEFT controls Zh
at high s and ZBF at high t.
5.3. Collider analyses 125
of the dilepton system is in itself a powerful discriminating variable that allows us
to define mutually exclusive analysis categories.
We choose to sacrifice event rates, owed to the suppression of the leptonic decay
channel of the Z-boson compared to the hadronic one, for a clean and unambiguous
signal in the final state. Thus, the event topologies for the signal processes are
characterised by exactly two leptons, satisfying an opposite-sign same-flavour (OSSF)
requirement, and additional activity reaching the detectors in the form of jets,
photons, missing energy, or a combination of these. Details of the Monte Carlo
samples for the signal and background processes considered in our analyses, as well
as the parameters of the colliders and the nomenclature employed, are presented in
Appendix E.
It is possible for us to exploit the energy and momentum conservation since at e+e
colliders the four-momentum p
 of the incoming beams is well known. In events
where the Higgs is produced in association with a pair of charged, final-state leptons,
one can uniquely specify Higgs-boson decays,
ph = pe+e  p`+` , (5.3.1)
with p
 the four-momentum of the final-state two-lepton system. The equation
above can be used to implement model-independent studies of the width of the Higgs
boson, h, as well as its inclusive production rate. In our analyses we make use of
the dimensionful variable called the recoil mass,
m2recoil  s 2
 +m2
 , (5.3.2)
which acts as a powerful discriminating observable against background process, and
follows from Eq. (5.3.1). Given the Higgs small width h  4.088 MeV [46, 47], the
mrecoil distribution should show a narrow resonance centred at mh = 125 GeV [45,46,
48,49] for events where the Higgs is produced on-shell. For a derivation of Eq. (5.3.2),
see Appendix D.
Initial- (ISR) and final-state radiation (FSR), as well as beam-strahlung effects, yield
126 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
collinear photons that can have a visible impact on the mrecoil distribution. Given
that said collinear photons tend to escape the acceptance region of the detector,
experimentally it is possible to control the smearing of the mrecoil observable by
imposing certain selection cuts on the pT of the final-state two-lepton system, as
non-detected photons do not contribute largely to the overall transverse momentum
of the recorded events.
5.3.1 Event selection of the Zh channel
In order to suppress background contributions from the SM-driven e+e  `+`h
process, where ` = {e, , }, at ILC250,1000 and CLIC3000
9, we implement a simplified
cut-and-count analysis on the final-state objects after performing a fast detector
simulation. The Higgs-strahlung channel is in itself a great avenue to select leptons
originating from the decay of an on-shell Z-boson and, in doing so, make use of
Eq. (5.3.2) to reconstruct the Higgs boson in a model-independent way, since the
information of its decay products is encoded in Eq. (5.3.1).
As an s-channel process, the cross-section of the Zh mode decays with the centre-of-
mass energy as   1/s, being at low energies the dominant single-Higgs production
mechanism at e+e colliders, as explained in Chapter 1. The ILC250 is a Higgs factory
that allows us to use the Higgs-strahlung channel to probe gauge-Higgs couplings
through the reconstruction of Z-bosons decaying leptonically, a clean signature for
the study of said process. However, at ILC1000 and CLIC3000 its cross-section is
suppressed with respect to the t-channel ZBF process, and in order to enhance the
total rate of the Zh mode at high energies one can target the hadronic decay channel
of the Z-boson since its branching ratio is the largest. Nevertheless, even though
the hadronic modes of the Z-boson are dominant with respect to the leptonic ones,
Z  qq decays are less clean, and the QCD activity associated with these Z-boson
decays might present additional challenges requiring a detailed background analysis.
9Similar studies that target inclusive, or h bb, Higgs decays can be found in, e.g., Refs. [265,
330,331].
5.3. Collider analyses 127
 [GeV]- l+lm
75 80 85 90 95 100
 = +20%, -80%-e , P+e ; P1000ILC
 h- l+ l - e+SM e 2l 2l 2
2l 2j l2l 2  l2l 2
tt 2l 2W 2l 2Z
 [GeV]recoilm
80 90 100 110 120 130 140
 = +20%, -80%-e , P+e ; P1000ILC
 h- l+ l - e+SM e ) (62l 
)   (62l 2 )   (32l 2j
)   (3
2l 2 )   (6 
2l 2
Figure 5.3: The m
 and mrecoil distributions of the ILC1000 Zh selection with the
left polarisation for the SM-driven e+e  `+`h (black), 2` (red), 2`2 (blue),
2`2j (green), 2`2` (magenta), 2`2` (orange), tt (brown), 2`2W (lilac), and 2`2Z
(pink) processes. All histograms are normalised to unity. Top: m
 distribution, in
GeV, before applying them
  [86.0, 96.0] GeV cut. Bottom: mrecoil distribution,
in GeV, before requiring mrecoil  [123.0, 127.0] GeV, where at this stage of the event
selection the tt process is already negligible, and the 2`2V backgrounds lie beyond
the right edge of the plot. Some histograms in the bottom panel are scaled for
visualisation purposes. See text for details.
128 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
in 25
in 10
in 30
5.3. Collider analyses 129
In practice, we apply a minimal set of energy-dependent selection cuts to the Monte
Carlo events. We require the presence of exactly one pair of OSSF leptons with
  [86, 96] GeV in e+e collisions it is possible to achieve high resolution in
detecting final-state leptons, providing a clean reconstruction of the Z-boson mass
mZ  91 GeV [326], irrespective of
s. Further, at the ILC250,1000 and CLIC3000 we
impose the requirement p`
T  {[40, 70], [400, 900], [1350, 1500]} GeV, respectively.
Finally, we make use of Eq. (5.3.2) to apply a hard cut on the mass of the recoiling
system mrecoil  [123, 127] GeV, which exploits the fact that the mrecoil distribution
exhibits a sharp, narrow peak at mh  125 GeV on top of a continuum background.
In Fig. 5.3 we show the m
 and mrecoil distributions of the ILC1000 collider analysis
with the left polarisation, and Table 5.3 illustrates the impact of the event selection
on the cross-sections of the SM processes considered in this subsection at three
centre-of-mass energies as well as for the left and right polarisation settings10.
As the aim of this study is to project bounds in D6 contact operators that grow
with energy, we find in the collider analysis of the Zh channel that the results of
the ILC250 do not show sensitivity to the effects of said operators. Thus, we neglect
these and focus only on the high-energy regime, i.e., ILC1000 and CLIC3000. We
reserve the discussion of the projected sensitivities to EFT couplings for Sec. 5.4.
5.3.2 Event selection of the ZBF channel
We now discuss the analysis used to tackle the ZBF mechanism e+e  e+eh, which
does not seem to be of much interest in the literature [332334]. For this t-channel
mode, the cross-section grows with energy as   ln2
s/m2Z , and the interference
with the Zh channel at ILC250 makes it difficult to disentangle its kinematic features,
such as m
 well above mZ or a high-energy e
+e pair in opposite forward regions
of the detector, due to the reduced phase space. However, Fig. 3.9 makes evident that
at  500 GeV its total rate takes over the Zh one. Thus, the enhanced cross-section
10We note that the kinematic distributions used in implementing the selection cuts exhibit similar
shapes in both the left and right polarisation settings.
130 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
of the ZBF channel at higher centre-of-mass energies provides access to observables
involving Z-h interactions that are best probed at ILC1000 and CLIC3000.
Similar to the event selection of the Zh channel, here we also perform a simplified cut-
based analysis on the Monte Carlo samples after running a fast detector simulation
at ILC250,1000 and CLIC3000. The invariant mass of the dilepton system me+e , along
with the recoil mass mrecoil in Eq. (5.3.2), are the main variables used to discriminate
non-Higgs backgrounds the mrecoil distribution exhibits a resonant behaviour that
peaks at  125 GeV on top of a continuum background, while the broad m
distribution exhibits large values well above mZ at the TeV colliders but receives
large contamination from the Higgs-strahlung process at ILC250. Being a forward
process, the final-state electron-positron pair tends to favour larger values of |ye| as
s increases. However, one faces an experimental limitation to tag these leptons
because of the absence of electromagnetic calorimeters able to reconstruct their
tracks in the forward region of the detector, thus reducing the available phase-space
(and consequently its total rate) to study the ZBF process at higher energies.
In performing the event selection we impose a minimal set of cuts, beginning with
the forward-process requirement ye
< 0, as the electron and positron should
lie in opposite hemispheres of the detector. Due to this feature, one can expect
a large rapidity gap y
 that, for the reasons explained above, is not present
at ILC250; however, at ILC1000 (CLIC3000) we require
y
  [3, 5] ([3.5, 5]).
Further, them
 distribution is used to suppress background contributions, and we
impose the condition m
  {[105, 130], [600, 880], [2100, 2880]} GeV at ILC250,1000
and CLIC3000, respectively. Experimentally it is possible to control the effects of
ISR, FSR, and beam-strahlung, that smear the mrecoil distribution by demanding
T  {[20, 50], [80, 300], [150, 800]} GeV. The event selection concludes by defining
our signal region mrecoil  [123, 127] GeV. In Fig. 5.4 we show the
y
 and
 distributions of the CLIC3000 collider analysis with the right polarisation, and
Table 5.4 illustrates the impact of the event selection on the cross-sections of the
SM background processes considered in this subsection at the three centre-of-mass
5.3. Collider analyses 131
- e+e
0 1 2 3 4 5
 = 0%, +80%-e , P+e ; P3000CLIC
 h- e+ e - e+SM e 2e 2e 2
2e 2j l2e 2  l2e 2
tt 2e 2W 2e 2Z
 [GeV]- e+em
1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 2400 2600 2800 3000
 = 0%, +80%-e , P+e ; P3000CLIC
 h- e+ e - e+SM e ) (0.52e 2e 2
2e 2j l2e 2  l2e 2
tt 2e 2W 2e 2Z
Figure 5.4: The
y
 and m
 distributions of the CLIC3000 ZBF selection
with the right polarisation for the SM-driven e+e  e+eh (black), 2e (red), 2e2
(blue), 2e2j (green), 2e2` (magenta), 2e2` (orange), tt (brown), 2e2W (lilac),
and 2e2Z (pink) processes. All histograms are normalised to unity. Top:
y
distribution, illustrating the nature of the forward process e+e  e+eh. Bottom:
 distribution, in GeV, before imposing the cutm
  [2100, 2880] GeV, where
the 2e distribution is scaled (0.5) for visualisation purposes. See text for details.
132 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
in 25
in 10
in 30
5.4. Sensitivity to EFT couplings 133
energies as well as for the left and right polarisation settings11.
As previously explained, the t-channel nature of the ZBF process implies that its
cross-section dominates over the Zh mode at high energies and, similar to the event
selection of the Higgs-strahlung channel, the results of the ILC250 are not promising
to probe the effects of the contact operators considered in our study. Thus, we
neglect these and focus only on ILC1000 and CLIC3000. We reserve the discussion of
the projected sensitivities to EFT couplings for Sec. 5.4.
5.4 Sensitivity to EFT couplings
We now present the sensitivity projections to the EFT couplings outlined in Sec. 5.2.
As described in Sec. 5.3, we generate our signal Monte Carlo samples with the
EFT couplings turned on, and apply the selection criteria to extract these from the
background processes. We include the interference and EFT squared contributions
as a function of the Wilson coefficients of the D6 operators listed in Table 5.2 for
both Zh and ZBF processes.
Let us first look into the Higgs-strahlung process. The cut-and-count analysis de-
scribed in Sec. 5.3 to suppress the background processes is enough to isolate the
EFT-driven e+e  `+`h signal. As noted in Sec. 5.2, the absence of a propag-
ator in the Feynman diagram shown in the right panel of Fig. 5.1 implies that the
high-energy EFT and SM amplitudes have the same angular dependence (see also
Ref. [284]), where the latter is the dominant background. To derive the sensitivity
to EFT couplings we define a 2 function,
2Zh =
Zh N
, (5.4.1)
where N expZh denotes the number of events predicted by the SM (null hypothesis), and
we assume that the number of observed events NobsZh differs from the SM prediction
11We note that the kinematic distributions used in implementing the selection cuts exhibit similar
shapes in both the left and right polarisation settings.
134 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
because of the EFT insertions. The error Zh,
Zh =
sysN
, (5.4.2)
where we take sys = 0.03 in line with Ref. [56], includes the statistical and systematic
uncertainties.
Let us now move on to the ZBF channel. Similar to the Zh case, the analysis
strategy implemented to separate the SM e+e  e+eh process from the other
backgrounds also isolates the EFT-driven signal, where the SM is the dominant
source of background noise. In terms of the amplitudes, the EFT and the SM are
alike except for a quadratic growth with t of the former as described in Sec. 5.2,
which we use to segregate the EFT process from the SM using the phT distribution
as the discriminant. In doing so, we define the following 2 function,
2ZBF =
i,ZBF N
i,ZBF
i,ZBF
, (5.4.3)
where as done in the case of the Zh channel our null hypothesis corresponds to the SM
prediction. In the equation above, N expi,ZBF stands for the number of events predicted
by the SM for the i-th bin in the phT distribution, and the binned uncertainty i,ZBF
takes the form of Eq. (5.4.2) (Zh  i,ZBF).
As far as the e+e  W+W process is concerned, we infer the 2WW function from
Table 15 in Ref. [56] for the hadronic and semileptonic channels. Finally, we combine
all these processes (Zh, ZBF, and W+W) as,
2total =
2Zh +
2ZBF +
2WW , (5.4.4)
where the sums run over the polarisation settings outlined in Appendix E for ILC1000
and CLIC3000.
5.4. Sensitivity to EFT couplings 135
5.4.1 Combination for universal case
Let us consider the case where new physics contributions are correlated with universal
operators in Table 5.2. Expressing the Wilson coefficients of the operators contained
in the SILH Lagrangian as a function of the universal parameters
  S
gZ1 , we present our bounds in the two-dimensional planes shown in Fig. 5.5, where
we neglect the W and Y parameters in Eq. (5.2.3) as these can be more stringently
constrained in other processes [56, 283,335,336].
We show the results for ILC1000 and CLIC3000, as well as their comparison with LEP
bounds [337] and HL-LHC projections [285]. In both cases, the ZBF channel allows
us to set strong bounds at the per-mille level, surpassing LEPs. Nevertheless, the
combination in Eq. (5.4.4) produces bounds that are an order of magnitude larger
than the ZBF ones since at high phT the number of events filling the histograms
becomes negligible, even though the cross-section of the ZBF process is dominant
with respect to the Zh one. This effect can be seen in the top panel of Fig. 5.5, where
at ILC1000 the Higgs-strahlung process is more sensitive than the ZBF mode, and
the Zh bounds are indistinguishable from the final ones. However, at CLIC3000 the
Zh and e+e  W+W processes probe two different directions in the parameter
space, with the total combination giving stringent bounds.
We also show in Fig. 5.5, enclosed by the solid box, the energy scale,
gZ1 c
  S
, (5.4.5)
that can be probed in each case. Notice that scales as large as 4 TeV (10 TeV) can
be probed at ILC1000 (CLIC3000), which is a confirmation that we indeed respect the
considerations related to EFT validity. Finally, we note that the scales that can be
accessed through our study far surpass the scales derived from LEP bounds on the
S-parameter corresponding to LEP  1.6 2.5 TeV [193].
136 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
Figure 5.5: Projected sensitivities to EFT couplings for the case of universal new
physics and their comparison with LEP bounds [337] and HL-LHC projections [285]
at top: ILC1000, and bottom: CLIC3000. In both panels the grey area corresponds
to LEP bounds; the region enclosed by the blue box shows the energy scale that can
be accessed in each case; the dotted lines stand for the HL-LHC projections, and
the pink area is the bounds obtained from the ZBF channel. In the top panel, the
yellow area is the final bounds, which overlap with the bounds from the Zh channel.
In the bottom panel, the blue region is the bounds from the Higgs-strahlung process;
the purple area corresponds to the W+W process, and the yellow region shows the
results of the overall combination. We assume W = Y = 0. See text for details.
5.4. Sensitivity to EFT couplings 137
5.4.2 Combination for general case
Let us now focus on the case where the three linearly independent combinations
of the leptonic primaries under study contribute at high energies to new physics in
the considered processes12 as detailed in Sec. 5.2. The Higgs-strahlung, ZBF, and
e+e  W+W channels can be used to probe different linear combinations of the
Wilson coefficients corresponding to the operators listed in Table 5.2.
Looking at Eqs. (5.2.1) and (5.2.6), one can notice that the Zh and ZBF channels are
not sensitive to the direction (L1  L3), and so including the bounds derived from
the W+W process in Ref. [56] allows us to lift and further constrain an otherwise
flat direction in the EFT space, as mentioned before. We show in Fig. 5.6 the two-
dimensional bounds resulting after the third parameter is marginalised over, and the
95% confidence-level (CL) bounds on the individual leptonic high-energy primaries
obtained after marginalising over the remaining two are,
L1  [8.5, 8.8] 10
L3  [9, 9] 10
eR  [2.2, 1.5] 10
(5.4.6)
with these bounds illustrated graphically in Fig. 5.7. Further, we show in Figs. 5.6
and 5.7 the energy scale that can be accessed,   v/i, which can be as high as
2030 TeV.
As shown in Eq. (5.2.5), one can write the leptonic high-energy primaries in terms
of pseudo-observables measured at LEP,
L1 =
gZeL + g
+ s2W g
1  t
L3 =
gZeL  g
+ c2W g
eR =
gZeR + 2s
gZ1  2t
where these correlations allow us to directly compare our bounds with existing
12Note that this does not necessarily imply that the leptonic primaries are statistically independ-
ent parameters.
138 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
Figure 5.6: Projected sensitivities for the leptonic high-energy primaries, defined in
Eq. (5.2.4), at CLIC3000 in two-dimensional planes, where the remaining parameter
has been marginalised over. See text for details.
5.5. Conclusions 139
Figure 5.7: Projected sensitivities on the individual leptonic high-energy primaries,
defined in Eq. (5.2.4), at CLIC3000, after marginalising over the remaining two
parameters. See text for details.
LEP ones and HL-LHC projections, arising mainly from constraints on anomalous
(charged) Triple Gauge Couplings (TGCs) [313] on the right-hand side of the above
expressions. The bounds obtained from leptonic Z-boson decays at LEP, given by
Ref. [264], are,
gZeL  [1, 9] 10
gZeR  [4, 2] 10
(5.4.7)
We note that our bounds in Eq. (5.4.6) are stronger than the Z-pole constraints at
LEP, where we assume that EFT contributions to TGCs vanish13.
5.5 Conclusions
The multi-dimensional parameter space of the SMEFT has been widely used to
parametrise indirect effects of BSM physics including all possible D6 operators
that contribute to a given process is a systematic way to summarise the projections
and bounds set by indirect searches. Nevertheless, to study the dominant high-energy
deformations of a process due to EFT insertions one only has to include its most
13This statement is motivated by the fact that existing LEP bounds and HL-LHC projections
are roughly 100 and 10 weaker, respectively, than those shown in Eq. (5.4.6).
140 Chapter 5. Future Linear e+e Colliders as Higgs Microscopes
sensitive effects, which in turn opens up the possibility to ask the question: what is
the highest energy scale that can be probed by the experiments?
In this Chapter we addressed this question by considering the capabilities of future
linear e+e colliders, such as the high-energy stages of ILC and CLIC, at studying
standard electroweak processes, namely the Higgs-strahlung and Z-boson fusion
single-Higgs production mechanisms, and their correlations with EFT effects that
grow with energy. In doing so, we performed a high-energy fit of the corresponding
operators, including the results of the e+e  W+W channel described in Ref. [56].
We took into account the processes listed in Table 5.1. We identified that three linear
combinations of the Wilson coefficients of the D6 operators listed in Table 5.2, the so-
called leptonic high-energy primaries, entail the dominant high-energy contribution
to these processes, shown in Eqs. (5.2.1), (5.2.2), (5.2.4), and (5.2.6). The growing-
with-energy EFT effects of these operators are larger by a factor of s/m2Z than those
that do not grow with energy these translate to roughly two orders of magnitude
at the
s = 1 TeV ILC and
s = 3 TeV CLIC. Even if one takes into account EFT
effects that are linear functions of the energy, these are still smaller by roughly one
order of magnitude than the ones we consider in our study.
We showed in Figs. 5.55.7 and Eq. (5.4.6) our projections for the sensitivity to EFT
couplings, and found that these estimates correspond to more stringent constraints
on the considered anomalous couplings than existing LEP bounds and HL-LHC
projections by at least two and one orders of magnitude, respectively. In addressing
the question related to the energy scales that can be accessed at the colliders, we
also showed in Figs. 5.55.7 our projections for the scales that these experiments
can probe, and find that the effects considered in this study are capable of accessing
energy scales up to tens of TeV. All these make future linear e+e colliders the
ultimate miscroscopes to probe fundamental physics in the electroweak and gauge-
Higgs sectors.
Chapter 6
Summary and Outlook
The SM is the best understanding we have to date of the interactions between
elementary particles it has been tested time and again, and is known to agree well
with a plethora of experimental measurements. However, several physical phenomena
suggest that the SM is not the ultimate theory possible for an adequate description
of Nature. Thus, to account for the shortcomings of the SM, a more robust theory is
needed. Because of its well-tested agreement with many observations, to construct a
new framework that supersedes the SM it is necessary to begin by taking the current
theory, and extend it to the energy scale of interest in some way. This means the
ultimate theory (if any exists) that predicts the behaviour of the quantum fields
composing our Universe should reproduce the SM in its low-energy limit.
It is possible to view the SM as an EFT, valid up to a high cut-off energy scale. In
this framework, we parametrise our ignorance of the short-distance physics and the
energies at which it becomes relevant. In doing so, the SM Lagrangian gets extended
by operators of higher mass dimensions: these are built out of SM fields, and respect
the underlying symmetries of the theory, with the coefficients of the perturbative
expansion encoding the high-energy behaviour of new physics. This way of encap-
sulating the low-energy effects of an unknown theory does not require additional
degrees of freedom. Thus, one has to deal with a new set of higher-dimensional
Lorentz structures and modified vertices, the so-called anomalous couplings, that
142 Chapter 6. Summary and Outlook
extend the interactions allowed by the SM.
After the discovery of the Higgs boson in 2012, the Large Hadron Collider has yet
not succeeded to deliver tantalising evidence for new resonant physics. As we are
unaware of the exact energy scale at which such new resonant physics should show
up, improving our current experiments and performing new precision measurements
are among the most pressing issues that the particle physics community needs to
address, since looking for deviations from the theory prediction might be a hint for
physics beyond the SM. Thus, setting stringent bounds on loosely-constrained areas
of the current framework is of great importance to determine whether discrepancies
between theory and data can be found by the experiments. Due to the large masses
of the Higgs and the weak bosons, gauge-Higgs interactions are thought to be a
promising avenue that might shed light on what potentially lies beyond the SM.
In this Thesis we have investigated the interplay between effective theories and
measurements at colliders by considering the capability of current and future ex-
periments at segregating anomalous couplings through standard processes involving
interactions between the Higgs and the gauge bosons.
In Chapter 1 we introduced the Standard Model of Particle Physics and listed some of
its shortcomings, as well as the possible ways in which the particle physics community
intends to extend it. Then, in Chapter 2 Fermis theory of muon decay was used to
give an overview of the EFT framework, and to motivate the study of the SM as
an effective theory by extending its Lagrangian with higher-dimensional operators.
From the collision energy to the detection system, in Chapter 3 we presented a non-
exhaustive description of collider physics, and outlined the main differences between
hadron and electron-positron colliders, as well as between direct and indirect searches.
In Chapter 4 we used the method of moments to probe the tensor structure of the
Higgs couplings to gauge bosons in the golden channel at the Large Hadron Collider,
and we projected strong bounds which are competitive and complementary to the
existing ones. Finally, in Chapter 5 we performed a high-energy fit and set stringent
constraints on the so-called leptonic high-energy primaries that can be probed in
the gauge-Higgs sector at future linear electron-positron colliders.
Past and present experiments have delivered a huge amount of data, testing the
predictions of the SM. All these measurements, as well as the absence of new resonant
physics at the Large Hadron Collider, seem to suggest that the scale of new physics
is well separated from the electroweak scale. Several questions arise, such as how to
reconstruct a TeV-scale Lagrangian with the current data, or which strategies are
most effective in looking for certain differential observables and would allow us to
best anticipate incoming statistics?
While the predictions of the SM Lagrangian have been addressed and tested experi-
mentally, it now becomes crucial to understand what are the complete predictions
from the dimension-six Lagrangian in the context of the SM EFT. New vertices can
produce novel or enhanced effects in certain phase-space regions, and it is of vital
importance to determine which the best observables to study the effects of certain
operators or processes are. As shown in Chapters 4 and 5, some Higgs deforma-
tions have already been constrained by electroweak precision physics, and going to
the regime of high energies or luminosities might be the only way to obtain newer
information at collider experiments.
Correlations between Z-pole measurements and anomalous couplings inform the
Higgs observables measured at colliders, which means that some physical processes
are not independent and are instead related to each other. This can be useful if a
departure from the SM predictions is observed; but if no deviations are found, these
correlations can be used to set constraints on the size of the additional terms of
the effective theory expansion. In other words, how well can we probe the tensor
structure of gauge-Higgs couplings and be competitive with existing constraints from
precision physics?
Although the nature of the boson discovered in 2012 is more or less consistent with
the SM Higgs, some of its decay channels and interactions are still to be observed
and measured. It is expected that some of these will be achieved during the High-
Luminosity stage of the Large Hadron Collider, or even at future electron-positron
144 Chapter 6. Summary and Outlook
colliders. The precision expected at these machines is such that some projections
show they have the potential to constrain couplings at the per-cent, or even per-mille,
level. We can expect that the technical capabilities of the colliders to come can be
exploited to achieve the precision needed for a successful physics programme.
As outlined in the previous paragraphs, the quest to come up with the ultimate
theory of Nature seems to be far from being around the corner. Nevertheless, this
Thesis could be a tiny contribution, one way or another, towards achieving this
goal. With computational tools evolving and improving rapidly, comes a deeper
understanding of the underlying theory of particle physics. Moreover, sophisticated
analysis techniques, along with experiments reaching higher and higher energies, can
benefit from precision measurements that might reveal hints of where to look for the
eagerly awaited new physics.
All in all, despite the numerous theoretical and experimental challenges ahead, the
years to come promise to be a good time to get on board and search for physics
beyond the SM by constraining anomalous couplings in the gauge-Higgs sector at
high-energy colliders.
Appendix A
Bosonic sector in the Warsaw basis
In this Appendix we list the dimension-six operators O(6) in the Warsaw basis
involving the scalar field  and field-strength tensors X 
Ga , W
 , B
presented in Ref. [191]. In what follows, dual field strength tensors are defined as,
X =
X
. (A.0.1)
The complex conjugate of the Higgs field is,
j = jk
. (A.0.2)
Moreover, terms containing Hermitian derivatives have the following definition,
D  i
, i
  i
 iD 
. (A.0.3)
Gauge field strength tensors are defined according to Eq. (1.1.5) (see Sec. 1.1.1), and
their covariant derivatives are,
DG
= G
 + gSf
abcGbG
 ,(
DW
= W
 + g
ijkW jW
DB = B .
(A.0.4)
146 Appendix A. Bosonic sector in the Warsaw basis
Table A.1: Class X3: Operators containing only gauge field strength tensors.
OG fabcGa, G
fabcGa, G
OW ijkW i, W
ijkW i, W
Table A.2: Classes 6 and 4D2: Operators affecting the scalar sector. Note that
the box operator  is defined as   .
6 and 4D2
D
D
Table A.3: Class 23: Operators affecting Yukawa interactions. Flavour indices
are denoted by p and r.
23 + h.c.
`per
qpur
qpdr
Table A.4: Class X22: Purely bosonic operators.
OG GaG
G 
 GaG
OW W iW
W 
 W iW
OB BB
B 
 BB
OWB  iW iB
WB 
 i W iB
Table A.5: Classes 2X and 22D: Fermionic dipole (left) and gauge-Higgs-
fermion vertex (right) operators. Flavour indices are denoted by p and r.
2X+ h.c. 22D
 iW i O
B O
i`r
T aur
 Ga Oe
 iW i O
 B O
iqr
T adr
Ga Ou
 iW i Od
B Oud i
Appendix B
Elements of Fourier analysis
In Chapter 4, the method of moments is introduced as a technique analogous to
Fourier analysis. To illustrate and complement the idea, in this Appendix we will
show the basic elements of the Fourier-series expansion of a function with arbitrary
period defined on a finite interval, mostly inspired by Refs. [338,339].
A function f is called T-periodic, with T > 0, if it satisfies the identity,
f(x) = f (x+ T ) x. (B.0.1)
Let f be defined on the interval [a, b]. The function is continuous at c  [a, b] iff,
f(x) = lim
f(x) = lim
f(x), (B.0.2)
where,
f(x)  f
corresponds to the limit of f as x approaches to c from the right (+) or from the
left (). If the limits f
and f
exist, and f is continuous and defined on
the interval (a, b)1, the function f is piecewise continuous on [a, b].
If f is defined on the interval [a, b], the function is said to be piecewise smooth if f
is piecewise continuous on [a, b]; f  exists and is continuous in (a, b)2, and f 
1It is possible that there exist a finite number of points where f is not continuous.
2Except possibly at a finite number of points c where f 
and f 
exist.
150 Appendix B. Elements of Fourier analysis
and f 
exist.
Let g(x) and h(x) be piecewise smooth functions on [a, b]. These are orthogonal over
the interval [a, b] if,
g|h 
dx gh = 0. (B.0.3)
With these concepts at hand, we can turn our attention to the trigonometric system
{1, cos(nx), sin(nx)} (n > 0): these are orthogonal, periodic functions that satisfy the
continuity and smoothness conditions3 outlined above. The orthogonality properties
of the trigonometric system on the interval [, ]4 are such that,
cos(mx)| cos(nx) = sin(mx)| sin(nx) = 0 if m 6= n,
cos(mx)| cos(mx) = sin(mx)| sin(mx) =  m 6= 0,
cos(mx)| sin(nx) = 0 m andn.
(B.0.4)
The set of these trigonometric functions forms a basis for the vector space (of their
linear combinations) over R of continuous functions defined on [a, b]. We define
a Fourier series as an expansion of a function f in a series of the trigonometric
functions sine and cosine with an expression of the form,
f(x) = a0 +
(an cos(nx) + bn sin(nx)) . (B.0.5)
The coefficients of the series expansion are extracted making use of the orthogonality
properties in Eq. (B.0.4) as,
a0  f(x)|1  a0 =
dx f(x),
an  f(x)| cos(mx)  am =
dx f(x) cos(mx),
bn  f(x)| sin(mx)  bm =
dx f(x) sin(mx),
(B.0.6)
since,  
dx cos(mx) =
dx sin(mx) = 0. (B.0.7)
3Also known as Dirichlet conditions.
4Since these functions are 2-periodic, the orthogonality properties hold for any interval of
length 2.
So far we have worked with 2-periodic functions for simplicity. The results can
be extended to functions with arbitrary period. Let us assume that f is a function
satisfying the Dirichlet conditions mentioned above, with period T = 2p > 0, and
perform the following change of variables,
h(x) = f
, (B.0.8)
such that h is 2-periodic. The main result in Eq. (B.0.5) can be extended as,
f(x) = a0 +
an cos
+ bn sin
, (B.0.9)
where the coefficients can be extracted using the prescription in Eq. (B.0.6) as,
dx f(x),
dx f(x) cos
dx f(x) sin
(B.0.10)
The moral of this story in terms of the method of moments in Chapter 4 is as follows:
given a set of functions {fi}i, we might assume there exists a dual basis of weights
{wi}i orthonormal to the set containing the f s,
dwjfi = ij, (B.0.11)
such that the wjs are able to project the linear combination aifi (total rate) onto
the coefficients aj, 
(aifi)wj = aj, (B.0.12)
where we have assumed that the {wi} set is a linear transformation of the {fi} set,
with the orthogonality condition fixing the transformation matrix,
wi = ijfj   = M
1, withMij =
d fifj. (B.0.13)
Appendix C
The Golden Channel: Monte
Carlo samples
In this Appendix we outline the details of the Monte Carlo samples used in Chapter 4
to obtain bounds on the relevant operator combinations.
Our UFO [340] model is implemented with the help of FeynRules [341], which
we use to generate the Monte Carlo signal samples including the interference and
squared terms ensuing from D6 interactions. Since the process under consideration
is gg  h  4`, we identify the quark- and gluon-initiated qq  4` and gg  4`
irreducible backgrounds, respectively, where ` = {e, , }. Given that, in practice,
at the LHC the overwhelmingly large QCD activity can produce jets that might
fake charged leptons in the fiducial region of the detector, we take into account the
reducible backgrounds Z/+ jets, tt, W+W+ jets, and WZ + jets. We find that
the dominant source of fake backgrounds arises from the Z/ + jets process, which
we generate as pp `+` + 2 jets, and neglect the remaining reducible processes.
We consider a centre-of-mass energy
s = 14 TeV in generating our Monte Carlo
events. Leading-order (LO) samples which include the full decay chain, consisting
of the SM- and EFT-driven gg  h  4` process, as well as the main redu-
cible background Z/ + jets, are generated with MadGraph [342]. The dom-
inant background process qq  4` is generated at next-to-leading order (NLO)
154 Appendix C. The Golden Channel: Monte Carlo samples
with POWHEG BOX v2 [343345]. The PDF sets NNPDF23_lo_as_0130 and
NNPDF31_nlo_hessian_pdfas [346] are used to generate MadGraph events and
quark-initiated background samples, respectively. The gluon-initiated gg  4`
events are generated at LO with MCFM 7 [347], using the CTEQ6L [348] PDF set.
In all cases, the parton-level samples are passed on to Pythia 8 [349] for showering
and hadronisation.
At the generator level, the quark-initiated qq  4` events are required to fulfil
an invariant-mass cut for each pair of opposite-sign same-flavour (OSSF) leptons of
  4 GeV. The remaining samples must satisfy
`  3 and R(`i, `j)  0.015,
where R =
2 + 2 is the angular distance between two objects in the   
plane. We impose an additional set of cuts in MadGraph, namely p`1T  15 GeV,
T  8 GeV, and p
T  3 GeV, where the leptons indices indicate their ordering with
respect to pT . Moreover, we require the Z/
 + jets samples to satisfy pjT  20 GeV,yj  3, R(j, `)  0.015, R (jm, jn)  0.015, as well as M2`,2j  [95, 155]
GeV. Finally, in MCFM 7 we apply the p`T  3 GeV, M`+,`  2.5 GeV, and
M4`  70 GeV cuts. For a description of the geometry and major components of the
detection system, see Chapter 3.
The LO production cross-section of the gg  h Monte Carlo events is scaled to the
N3LO-accurate prediction of the LHC Higgs Cross-Section Working Group [46] (LHC
HXSWG, CERN Report 4), for Mh = 125 GeV, which results in a K-factor of 3.155
applied to the SM- and EFT-driven samples. For consistency with the LHC HXSWG,
we further set h = 4.088 MeV. In the case of the qq  4` background, we consider
a flat NNLO/NLO K-factor of 1.1 [350]. Moreover, we apply an NNLO/LO flat
K-factor of 2.27 to the gg  4` cross-section, in line with the experimental search
described in Ref. [241]. Finally, a conservative approach is adopted by applying a
flat K-factor of 0.91 [351] to the Z/ + jets events.
Appendix D
Derivation of the recoil mass
observable
In this Appendix we derive the equation that describes the recoil mass observable,
at e+e colliders, introduced in Chapter 5. For simplicity and illustration purposes,
let us consider the process e+e  Z +X, with the Z-boson decaying leptonically
Z  `+`, where ` = {e, }, and X an arbitrary final state recoiling against the
Z-boson. Hence, the full reaction is,
e+e  Z +X  `+` +X.
Let p
+ and p
 be the four-momenta of the incoming positron and electron, respect-
ively, each with mass me. For a centre-of-mass energy
s, each beam carries an
energy E such that E
+ = E
  E and 2E =
s. In the relativistic limit, E  me,
the four-momenta of the incoming particles in the laboratory frame can be written
+ = (E, 0, 0, E), p
 = (E, 0, 0,E), (D.0.1)
156 Appendix D. Derivation of the recoil mass observable
where we take the +z axis in the direction of the positron. The four-momentum of
the incoming electron-positron pair p
 is simply,
  p
+ + p
 = (2E, 0, 0, 0)
s, 0, 0, 0
(D.0.2)
Similarly for the decay products of the Z boson,
+ , ~q
 , ~q
, (D.0.3)
the four-momentum of the final-state dilepton system q
 is,
 , ~q
, (D.0.4)
with q`
 = m2Z the invariant mass squared of the Z-boson. The four-momenta
of the reaction under consideration can then be written as,
 = q
 + kX , (D.0.5)
where kX is the four-momentum of the arbitrary final state X fixed by,
kX = pe+e  q`+` . (D.0.6)
Plugging Eqs. (D.0.2) and (D.0.4) in the expression for kX above, four-momentum
conservation implies,
k2  m2X = (pe+e  q`+`)
  2p
  q
 + q2
= s 2
 +m2
(D.0.7)
which corresponds to the invariant mass m2X of the set of objects recoiling against
the dilepton system, or equivalently against the Z-boson. For a 2  2 process it
is enough to reconstruct one of the intermediate-state objects to fix completely the
kinematics of the object recoiling against it.
Appendix E
The Higgs at e+e colliders:
Monte Carlo samples
In this Appendix we outline the details of the Monte Carlo samples used in Chapter 5
to define the analysis categories, extract the signal contributions from the background
processes, and obtain bounds on the relevant operator combinations.
Our UFO [340] model is implemented with the help of FeynRules [341], which
we use to generate the Monte Carlo signal samples including the interference and
squared terms ensuing from D6 interactions. Since the analysis categories correspond
to the (Zh) e+e  `+`h, where ` = {e, , }, and (ZBF) e+e  e+eh channels,
we consider for both cases the following set of background processes: 2`, 2`2,
2`2`, 2`2`, and 2`2j. Where the phase space permits, we also take into account
2`2V (V = {W,Z}), as well as the fully-leptonic tt process1. Further, for Zh-like
backgrounds, ` = {e, , }, whereas for the ZBF -like case, ` = {e, }2.
For simplicity, we neglect reducible backgrounds that arise from charged leptons
being faked by jets or photons reaching the electromagnetic calorimeters of the
detector. Note that the SM-driven Zh and ZBF processes are the major sources
of background noise in themselves, and the signal events come from interactions
1We find that these high-energy background processes are rendered negligible.
2Note that v` always stands for the set of all three neutrino flavours.
158 Appendix E. The Higgs at e+e colliders: Monte Carlo samples
ensuing from the EFT corrections explained in Chapter 5.
We examine the centre-of-mass energies
s = {250, 1000, 3000} GeV, where the
first and second values correspond to the projected low- and high-energy phases
of the International Linear Collider (ILC) [52, 53], respectively, and the last one
to the high-energy run of the Compact Linear Collider (CLIC) [54, 56]. We adopt
the nomenclature ILC250,1000 (CLIC3000) to refer to the ILC (CLIC) collider run at
s subscript. In line with the recommendations of Ref. [352], we incorporate
longitudinal beam polarisation [250,252,253,353] into our collider setup3. Denoting
L as the integrated luminosity of the collider, and P
+ , P
 as the polarisation of the
positron and electron beams4, respectively, we use the following parameters to set
up the environment of the e+e colliders considered in our study:
 ILC250:
s = 250 GeV, L = 2000 fb1, P
+ , P
 = 30%,80%.
 ILC1000:
s = 1000 GeV, L = 8000 fb1, P
+ , P
 = 20%,80%.
 CLIC3000:
s = 3000 GeV, L = 5000 fb1, P
+ , P
 = 0%,80%.
From the list above, we call left and right polarisation the cases P
+  0, P
 < 0,
and P
+  0, P
 > 0, respectively. Given that for each
s there are two possible
polarisation settings, we effectively have a two-in-one collider, where a different
fraction of the total integrated luminosity corresponds to each left and right beams.
We refer the reader to Chapter 3 for an explanation of the role of beam polarisation
in e+e collisions.
We use MadGraph [342] to generate the leading-order (LO) Monte Carlo samples,
and further pass on the parton-level events to Pythia 8 [349] for showering and
hadronisation. We perform a fast detector simulation with the help of DEL-
PHES 3 [354], where the ILD Tune [249,355] and CLICdet Stage3 Tune [356,357]
3Throughout the text, the term polarisation stands for longitudinal polarisation.
4In this notation, P = +100% stands for a fully right-handed polarised beam, and P = 100%
corresponds to a fully left-handed polarised beam.
are used for the ILC250,1000 and CLIC3000 collider scenarios, respectively. We im-
pose a minimal set of generator-level cuts, namely p`,j,T > 5 GeV, mjj > 10 GeV,yj, (y`) < 5 (3), and Ra,b > 0.1, where Ra,b = ()2 + (y)2 is the angular
distance between two objects (a, b) in the  y plane5.
The invariant mass of the dilepton system is the observable that helps us best in
discriminating between the Zh and ZBF categories. For the Zh-like samples we
require m
  [70, 110]GeV, while for the ZBF ones we impose a
s-dependent
cut m
 as follows: m250`+` > 100 GeV, m
 > 300 GeV, and m3000
 > 1000 GeV.
Further, since the ZBF channel is a forward process we require y`
< 0 to ensure
that the leptons lie in opposite hemispheres of the detector. For a description of the
geometry and major components of the detection system, see Chapter 3.
5Note that, although the polar angle  is used in lepton colliders to help defining the three-
momentum of a particle reaching the detectors, here we use the rapidity y to be consistent with
the parameters of the generator and detector simulation. In the massless limit,   2 arctan
Appendix F
Anomalous couplings and the
Higgs at e+e colliders
In this Appendix we show what the connection between the Wilson coefficients of
the operators listed in Table 5.2 of Chapter 5 and anomalous couplings is.
The Lagrangian which is relevant to the universal case is,
Luniv = 
ggv2
W 3B
W 3
B
+ iggZ1 cWZ
W+,W W
,W+
ZcWZ
 + sW A
W+ W
(F.0.1)
where Z = g
1  t
. In the equation above, S and T are the usual Peskin-
Takeuchi parameters [358]; W and Y correspond to two-other EW Precision Ob-
servables (EWPO) defined in Ref. [359], and gZ1 and  are the TGCs defined in
Ref. [313]. In the SILH basis [193], the Wilson coefficients are related to the above
EWPO and TGCs by,
cT , S =
(cW + cB) , Y =
c2B, W =
c2W ,
gZ1 = 
(cW + cHW ) ,  = 
(cHW + cHB) ,
(F.0.2)
162 Appendix F. Anomalous couplings and the Higgs at e+e colliders
where cT corresponds to the Wilson coefficient of the operator OT =
and the input parameters are (GF ,mZ , em). From the equations above, it is possible
to derive the following correlations,
  S  g
(cB + cHB  c2B) ,
gZ1 c
(cW + cHW  c2W ) ,
(F.0.3)
used in Secs. 5.2 and 5.4 to obtain the two-dimensional bounds in the EFT parameter
space shown in Fig. 5.5.
Following Ref. [204], the Lagrangian which is relevant to the general case is,
L6 = g
W+ L
eL + h.c.
+ ghW`
W+ L
eL + h.c.
gZ` Z`
+ iggZ1 cWZ
W+,W W
,W+
ZcW Z
 + sW A
W+ W
(F.0.4)
where, for simplicity, L is the first-generation lepton doublet, and ` = eL, eR, 
Taking the operators of the Warsaw basis [191] (see Appendix A) into account, listed
in Table 5.2, we get the contributions,
gW` =
`,(3)
2gc2W
4s2W
ghW` =
`,(3)
gZ` = 
gY`sW
cHWB +
2cW s
T `3c
+ Y`s
(T `3  c`,(1)L  T `3c`,(3)L + (1/2 T `3 ) ceR) ,
ghZ` = 
(T `3  c`,(1)L  T `3c`,(3)L + (1/2 T `3 ) ceR) ,
gZ1 =
2s2W
 =
cHWB,
(F.0.5)
where, following Ref. [204], we use the (mW ,mZ , em) input scheme. As mentioned
in Chapter 4, the input parameter mZ gets shifted by,
2tW cHWB +
, (F.0.6)
due to the operators OHWB and OHD [292]. Finally, the correlations used in Secs. 5.2
and 5.4 can be derived using the above equations,
`,(1)
gZeL + g
 s2W g
1 + t
`,(3)
gZeL  g
 c2W g
gZeR  2s
gZ1 + 2t
(F.0.7)
Bibliography
[1] M. E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder, An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory.
Perseus Books, 1995.
[2] S. Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields. Cambridge University Press,
1995.
[3] F. Halzen and A. D. Martin, Quarks & Leptons: An Introductory Course in
Modern Particle Physics. John Wiley & Sons, 1984.
[4] M. D. Schwartz, Quantum Field Theory and the Standard Model. Cambridge
University Press, 2013.
[5] M. Thomson, Modern Particle Physics. Cambridge University Press, 2013.
[6] M. Gell-Mann, Symmetries of Baryons and Mesons, Phys. Rev. 125 (1962)
10671084.
[7] S. Weinberg, Non-Abelian Gauge Theories of the Strong Interactions, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 31 (1973) 494497.
[8] D. J. Gross and F. Wilczek, Asymptotically-Free Gauge Theories. I, Phys.
Rev. D 8 (1973) 36333652.
[9] C. N. Yang and R. L. Mills, Conservation of Isotopic Spin and Isotopic
Gauge Invariance, Phys. Rev. 96 (1954) 191195.
[10] S. L. Glashow, Partial Symmetries of Weak Interactions, Nuclear Physics 22
(1961) 579588.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.125.1067
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.125.1067
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.31.494
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.31.494
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.8.3633
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.8.3633
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.96.191
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0029-5582(61)90469-2
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0029-5582(61)90469-2
166 Bibliography
[11] S. Weinberg, A Model of Leptons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19 (1967) 12641266.
[12] A. Salam, Weak and Electromagnetic Interactions, Conf. Proc. C 680519
(1968) 367377.
[13] G. t Hooft, Renormalizable Lagrangians for Massive Yang-Mills Fields, Nucl.
Phys. B 35 (1971) 167188.
[14] G. t Hooft and M. J. G. Veltman, Regularization and Renormalization of
Gauge Fields, Nucl. Phys. B 44 (1972) 189213.
[15] F. Englert and R. Brout, Broken Symmetry and the Mass of Gauge Vector
Mesons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 (1964) 321323.
[16] P. W. Higgs, Broken Symmetries and the Masses of Gauge Bosons, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 13 (1964) 508509.
[17] G. S. Guralnik, C. R. Hagen and T. W. B. Kibble, Global Conservation Laws
and Massless Particles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13 (1964) 585587.
[18] J. Schwinger, Quantum Electrodynamics. I. A Covariant Formulation, Phys.
Rev. 74 (1948) 14391461.
[19] Particle Data Group collaboration, P. A. Zyla, R. M. Barnett,
J. Beringer, O. Dahl, D. A. Dwyer, D. E. Groom et al., Review of Particle
Physics, Progress of Theoretical and Experimental Physics 2020 (2020) .
[20] K. Nishijima, Charge Independence Theory of V Particles, Progress of
Theoretical Physics 13 (1955) 285304.
[21] M. Gell-Mann, The interpretation of the new particles as displaced charge
multiplets, Il Nuovo Cimento (1955-1965) 4 (1956) 848866.
[22] J. D. Wells, Lectures on Higgs Boson Physics in the Standard Model and
Beyond, in 38th British Universities Summer School in Theoretical
Elementary Particle Physics, 2009, 0909.4541.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.19.1264
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789812795915_0034
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789812795915_0034
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(71)90139-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(71)90139-8
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(72)90279-9
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.321
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.508
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.508
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.13.585
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.74.1439
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.74.1439
https://doi.org/10.1093/ptep/ptaa104
https://doi.org/10.1143/PTP.13.285
https://doi.org/10.1143/PTP.13.285
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02748000
https://arxiv.org/abs/0909.4541
Bibliography 167
[23] L. Reina, TASI 2011: lectures on Higgs-Boson Physics, in Theoretical
Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics: The Dark Secrets
of the Terascale, pp. 39106, 2013, 1208.5504, DOI.
[24] T. Plehn, Lectures on LHC Physics, Lect. Notes Phys. 844 (2012) 1193,
[0910.4182].
[25] J. Ellis, Higgs Physics, in 2013 European School of High-Energy Physics, 2013,
1312.5672, DOI.
[26] H. E. Logan, TASI 2013 lectures on Higgs physics within and beyond the
Standard Model, 1406.1786.
[27] A. Pomarol, Higgs Physics, in 2014 European School of High-Energy Physics,
pp. 5977, 2016, 1412.4410.
[28] S. Dawson, C. Englert and T. Plehn, Higgs Physics: It aint over till its over,
Phys. Rept. 816 (2019) 185, [1808.01324].
[29] C. Englert, Higgs Physics, PoS TASI2018 (2019) 003.
[30] P. A. Waite, Precision Physics in Extensions of the Standard Model, Ph.D.
thesis, Durham University, 2019.
[31] J. D. Jackson, Classical electrodynamics; 2nd ed. Wiley, 1975.
[32] D. J. Griffiths, Introduction to Electrodynamics; 4th ed. Pearson, 2013.
[33] T. van Ritbergen and R. G. Stuart, Complete 2-Loop Quantum
Electrodynamic Contributions to the Muon Lifetime in the Fermi Model, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 82 (1999) 488491, [hep-ph/9808283].
[34] Y. Nambu, Quasi-Particles and Gauge Invariance in the Theory of
Superconductivity, Phys. Rev. 117 (1960) 648663.
[35] J. Goldstone, Field theories with Superconductor solutions, Il Nuovo
Cimento (1955-1965) 19 (1961) 154164.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1208.5504
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789814390163_0002
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24040-9
https://arxiv.org/abs/0910.4182
https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5672
https://doi.org/10.5170/CERN-2015-004.117
https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.1786
https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.4410
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2019.05.001
https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.01324
https://doi.org/10.22323/1.333.0003
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.82.488
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.82.488
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9808283
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.117.648
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02812722
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02812722
168 Bibliography
[36] J. Goldstone, A. Salam and S. Weinberg, Broken Symmetries, Phys. Rev. 127
(1962) 965970.
[37] L. Evans and P. Bryant, LHC Machine, Journal of Instrumentation 3 (2008)
S08001S08001.
[38] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Observation of a new particle in the
search for the Standard Model Higgs boson with the ATLAS detector at the
LHC, Phys. Lett. B 716 (2012) 129, [1207.7214].
[39] CMS collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., Observation of a New Boson at a
Mass of 125 GeV with the CMS Experiment at the LHC, Phys. Lett. B 716
(2012) 3061, [1207.7235].
[40] N. Cabibbo, Unitary Symmetry and Leptonic Decays, Phys. Rev. Lett. 10
(1963) 531533.
[41] M. Kobayashi and T. Maskawa, CP-Violation in the Renormalizable Theory
of Weak Interaction, Progress of Theoretical Physics 49 (1973) 652657.
[42] ATLAS and CMS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurements of the Higgs
boson production and decay rates and constraints on its couplings from a
combined ATLAS and CMS analysis of the LHC pp collision data at
s = 7
and 8 TeV, JHEP 08 (2016) 045, [1606.02266].
[43] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Combined measurements of Higgs
boson couplings in protonproton collisions at
s = 13TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C
79 (2019) 421, [1809.10733].
[44] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad, B. Abbott, D. C. Abbott, O. Abdinov,
A. Abed Abud, K. Abeling et al., Combined measurements of Higgs boson
production and decay using up to 80 fb1 of proton-proton collision data at
s = 13 TeV collected with the ATLAS experiment, Phys. Rev. D 101 (2020)
012002, [1909.02845].
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.127.965
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.127.965
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/s08001
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/s08001
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2012.08.020
https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.7214
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2012.08.021
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2012.08.021
https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.7235
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.10.531
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.10.531
https://doi.org/10.1143/PTP.49.652
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP08(2016)045
https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.02266
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-019-6909-y
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-019-6909-y
https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.10733
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.101.012002
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.101.012002
https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.02845
Bibliography 169
[45] ATLAS and CMS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Combined Measurement of
the Higgs Boson Mass in pp Collisions at
s = 7 and 8 TeV with the ATLAS
and CMS Experiments, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 191803, [1503.07589].
[46] The LHC Higgs Cross Section Working Group collaboration,
D. de Florian et al., Handbook of LHC Higgs Cross Sections: 4. Deciphering
the Nature of the Higgs Sector, 1610.07922.
[47] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Measurements of the Higgs boson
width and anomalous HV V couplings from on-shell and off-shell production
in the four-lepton final state, Phys. Rev. D 99 (2019) 112003, [1901.00174].
[48] ATLAS collaboration, Measurement of the Higgs boson mass in the
H  ZZ  4` decay channel with
s = 13 TeV pp collisions using the
ATLAS detector at the LHC, tech. rep., CERN, Geneva, 2020.
[49] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., A measurement of the Higgs boson
mass in the diphoton decay channel, Phys. Lett. B 805 (2020) 135425,
[2002.06398].
[50] CLICdp, ILD concept group collaboration, A. F. Zarnecki, On the
physics potential of ILC and CLIC, PoS CORFU2019 (2020) 037,
[2004.14628].
[51] H. Yamamoto, Physics at International Linear Collider (ILC), J. Phys. Soc.
Jap. 76 (2007) 111014, [0709.0899].
[52] T. Behnke, J. E. Brau, B. Foster, J. Fuster, M. Harrison, J. M. Paterson
et al., The International Linear Collider Technical Design Report - Volume 1:
Executive Summary, 1306.6327.
[53] D. M. Asner, T. Barklow, C. Calancha, K. Fujii, N. Graf, H. E. Haber et al.,
ILC Higgs White Paper, in Community Summer Study 2013: Snowmass on
the Mississippi, 2013, 1310.0763.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.114.191803
https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.07589
https://arxiv.org/abs/1610.07922
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.99.112003
https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.00174
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135425
https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.06398
https://doi.org/10.22323/1.376.0037
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.14628
https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.76.111014
https://doi.org/10.1143/JPSJ.76.111014
https://arxiv.org/abs/0709.0899
https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.6327
https://arxiv.org/abs/1310.0763
170 Bibliography
[54] L. Linssen, A. Miyamoto, M. Stanitzki and H. Weerts, Physics and Detectors
at CLIC: CLIC Conceptual Design Report. CERN Yellow Reports:
Monographs. CERN, Geneva, 2012, 10.5170/CERN-2012-003.
[55] H. Abramowicz et al., Higgs physics at the CLIC electronpositron linear
collider, Eur. Phys. J. C 77 (2017) 475, [1608.07538].
[56] J. de Blas et al., The CLIC Potential for New Physics, 1812.02093.
[57] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud, G. Aad, B. Abbott, O. Abdinov,
B. Abeloos, D. Abhayasinghe et al., Measurements of gluon-gluon fusion and
vector-boson fusion Higgs boson production cross-sections in the
H  WW   e decay channel in pp collisions at
s = 13 TeV with the
ATLAS detector, Phys. Lett. B 789 (2019) 508529, [1808.09054].
[58] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Search for Higgs boson production in
association with a high-energy photon via vector-boson fusion with decay into
bottom quark pairs at
s=13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 03 (2021)
268, [2010.13651].
[59] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad, B. Abbott, D. Abbott, O. Abdinov, A. Abed
Abud, K. Abeling et al., Measurement of the production cross section for a
Higgs boson in association with a vector boson in the H  WW   ``
channel in pp collisions at
s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Phys. Lett.
B 798 (2019) 134949, [1903.10052].
[60] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Measurement of the Higgs boson
production rate in association with top quarks in final states with electrons,
muons, and hadronically decaying tau leptons at
s = 13 TeV, Eur. Phys. J.
C 81 (2021) 378, [2011.03652].
[61] R. K. Ellis et al., Physics Briefing Book: Input for the European Strategy for
Particle Physics Update 2020, 1910.11775.
https://doi.org/10.5170/CERN-2012-003
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-4968-5
https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.07538
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02093
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2018.11.064
https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.09054
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2021)268
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2021)268
https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.13651
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2019.134949
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2019.134949
https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.10052
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09014-x
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09014-x
https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.03652
https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.11775
Bibliography 171
[62] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurements of Higgs bosons decaying
to bottom quarks from vector boson fusion production with the ATLAS
experiment at
s = 13TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C 81 (2021) 537, [2011.08280].
[63] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Observation of Higgs boson decay
to bottom quarks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018) 121801, [1808.08242].
[64] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Search for the Decay of the Higgs
Boson to Charm Quarks with the ATLAS Experiment, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120
(2018) 211802, [1802.04329].
[65] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., A search for the Standard Model
Higgs boson decaying to charm quarks, JHEP 03 (2020) 131, [1912.01662].
[66] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Test of CP invariance in vector-boson
fusion production of the Higgs boson in the H   channel in
protonproton collisions at
s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Phys.
Lett. B 805 (2020) 135426, [2002.05315].
[67] CMS collaboration, A. Tumasyan et al., Measurement of the inclusive and
differential Higgs boson production cross sections in the decay mode to a pair
of  leptons in pp collisions at
s = 13 TeV, 2107.11486.
[68] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., A search for the dimuon decay of the
Standard Model Higgs boson with the ATLAS detector, Phys. Lett. B 812
(2021) 135980, [2007.07830].
[69] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Evidence for Higgs boson decay to
a pair of muons, JHEP 01 (2021) 148, [2009.04363].
[70] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan, A. Tumasyan, W. Adam, F. Ambrogi,
T. Bergauer, M. Dragicevic et al., Measurement of the inclusive and
differential Higgs boson production cross sections in the leptonic WW decay
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09192-8
https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.08280
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.121801
https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.08242
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.211802
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.120.211802
https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.04329
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2020)131
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01662
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135426
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135426
https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05315
https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.11486
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135980
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135980
https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.07830
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP01(2021)148
https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.04363
172 Bibliography
mode at
s = 13 TeV, Journal of High Energy Physics 2021 (2021) 3,
[2007.01984].
[71] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Combination of searches for
invisible Higgs boson decays with the ATLAS experiment, Phys. Rev. Lett.
122 (2019) 231801, [1904.05105].
[72] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Search for invisible decays of a
Higgs boson produced through vector boson fusion in proton-proton collisions
s = 13 TeV, Phys. Lett. B 793 (2019) 520551, [1809.05937].
[73] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., A search for the Z decay mode of the
Higgs boson in pp collisions at
s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Phys.
Lett. B 809 (2020) 135754, [2005.05382].
[74] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Search for the decay of a Higgs
boson in the `` channel in proton-proton collisions at
s = 13 TeV, JHEP
11 (2018) 152, [1806.05996].
[75] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Measurements of Higgs boson
properties in the diphoton decay channel with 36 fb1 of pp collision data at
s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Phys. Rev. D 98 (2018) 052005,
[1802.04146].
[76] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Measurements of Higgs boson
production cross sections and couplings in the diphoton decay channel at
= 13 TeV, JHEP 07 (2021) 027, [2103.06956].
[77] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Measurements of the Higgs boson
inclusive and differential fiducial cross sections in the 4` decay channel at
= 13 TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C 80 (2020) 942, [2004.03969].
[78] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan, A. Tumasyan, W. Adam, J. W.
Andrejkovic, T. Bergauer, S. Chatterjee et al., Measurements of production
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2021)003
https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.01984
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.231801
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.231801
https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.05105
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2019.04.025
https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.05937
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135754
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135754
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.05382
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2018)152
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2018)152
https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05996
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.98.052005
https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.04146
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2021)027
https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.06956
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-020-8223-0
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.03969
Bibliography 173
cross sections of the Higgs boson in the four-lepton final state in protonproton
collisions at
s =13 TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C 81 (2021) 488, [2103.04956].
[79] A. Strumia and F. Vissani, Neutrino masses and mixings and...,
hep-ph/0606054.
[80] B. Kayser, Neutrino Mass, Mixing, and Flavor Change, 0804.1497.
[81] B. Pontecorvo, Inverse beta processes and nonconservation of lepton charge,
Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 34 (1957) 247.
[82] Z. Maki, M. Nakagawa and S. Sakata, Remarks on the unified model of
elementary particles, Prog. Theor. Phys. 28 (1962) 870880.
[83] Super-Kamiokande collaboration, Y. Fukuda, T. Hayakawa, E. Ichihara,
K. Inoue, K. Ishihara, H. Ishino et al., Measurements of the Solar Neutrino
Flux from Super-Kamiokandes First 300 Days, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998)
11581162, [hep-ex/9805021].
[84] SNO collaboration, Q. R. Ahmad, R. C. Allen, T. C. Andersen, J. D. Anglin,
G. Bhler, J. C. Barton et al., Measurement of the Rate of
e + d  p + p + e
 Interactions Produced by 8B Solar Neutrinos at the
Sudbury Neutrino Observatory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 071301,
[nucl-ex/0106015].
[85] KamLAND collaboration, T. Araki, K. Eguchi, S. Enomoto, K. Furuno,
K. Ichimura, H. Ikeda et al., Measurement of Neutrino Oscillation with
KamLAND: Evidence of Spectral Distortion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 (2005)
081801, [hep-ex/0406035].
[86] RENO collaboration, C. D. Shin et al., Observation of reactor antineutrino
disappearance using delayed neutron capture on hydrogen at RENO, JHEP 04
(2020) 029, [1911.04601].
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09200-x
https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.04956
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0606054
https://arxiv.org/abs/0804.1497
https://doi.org/10.1143/PTP.28.870
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.81.1158
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.81.1158
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ex/9805021
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.87.071301
https://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-ex/0106015
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.081801
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.94.081801
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ex/0406035
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2020)029
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2020)029
https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.04601
174 Bibliography
[87] J. Lesgourgues and S. Pastor, Massive neutrinos and cosmology, Phys. Rept.
429 (2006) 307379, [astro-ph/0603494].
[88] M. C. Gonzalez-Garcia and M. Maltoni, Phenomenology with Massive
Neutrinos, Phys. Rept. 460 (2008) 1129, [0704.1800].
[89] P. B. Pal, Dirac, Majorana and Weyl fermions, Am. J. Phys. 79 (2011)
485498, [1006.1718].
[90] S. M. Boucenna, S. Morisi and J. W. F. Valle, The low-scale approach to
neutrino masses, Adv. High Energy Phys. 2014 (2014) 831598, [1404.3751].
[91] F. Zwicky, Die Rotverschiebung von extragalaktischen Nebeln, Helv. Phys.
Acta 6 (1933) 110127.
[92] V. C. Rubin and W. K. Ford, Jr., Rotation of the Andromeda Nebula from a
Spectroscopic Survey of Emission Regions, Astrophys. J. 159 (1970) 379403.
[93] H. Baer and X. Tata, Dark matter and the LHC, 0805.1905.
[94] G. F. Smoot, COBE observations and results, AIP Conf. Proc. 476 (1999)
110, [astro-ph/9902027].
[95] WMAP collaboration, C. L. Bennett et al., Nine-Year Wilkinson Microwave
Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations: Final Maps and Results, Astrophys.
J. Suppl. 208 (2013) 20, [1212.5225].
[96] S. Galli, Planck results 2015, in 51st Rencontres de Moriond on Cosmology,
pp. 36, ARISF, 2016.
[97] G. Bertone, D. Hooper and J. Silk, Particle dark matter: Evidence, candidates
and constraints, Phys. Rept. 405 (2005) 279390, [hep-ph/0404175].
[98] M. Lisanti, Lectures on Dark Matter Physics, in Theoretical Advanced Study
Institute in Elementary Particle Physics: New Frontiers in Fields and Strings,
pp. 399446, 2017, 1603.03797, DOI.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2006.04.001
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2006.04.001
https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0603494
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2007.12.004
https://arxiv.org/abs/0704.1800
https://doi.org/10.1119/1.3549729
https://doi.org/10.1119/1.3549729
https://arxiv.org/abs/1006.1718
https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/831598
https://arxiv.org/abs/1404.3751
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10714-008-0707-4
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10714-008-0707-4
https://doi.org/10.1086/150317
https://arxiv.org/abs/0805.1905
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.59326
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.59326
https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/9902027
https://doi.org/10.1088/0067-0049/208/2/20
https://doi.org/10.1088/0067-0049/208/2/20
https://arxiv.org/abs/1212.5225
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2004.08.031
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0404175
https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.03797
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789813149441_0007
Bibliography 175
[99] PICO collaboration, C. Amole et al., Dark Matter Search Results from the
Complete Exposure of the PICO-60 C3F8 Bubble Chamber, Phys. Rev. D 100
(2019) 022001, [1902.04031].
[100] PandaX-II collaboration, Q. Wang et al., Results of dark matter search using
the full PandaX-II exposure, Chin. Phys. C 44 (2020) 125001, [2007.15469].
[101] O. Buchmueller, C. Doglioni and L. T. Wang, Search for dark matter at
colliders, Nature Phys. 13 (2017) 217223, [1912.12739].
[102] P. J. E. Peebles and B. Ratra, The Cosmological Constant and Dark Energy,
Rev. Mod. Phys. 75 (2003) 559606, [astro-ph/0207347].
[103] V. A. Rubakov, M. V. Sazhin and A. V. Veryaskin, Graviton Creation in the
Inflationary Universe and the Grand Unification Scale, Phys. Lett. B 115
(1982) 189192.
[104] G. Amelino-Camelia, Quantum theorys last challenge, Nature 408 (2000)
661664, [gr-qc/0012049].
[105] D. Tong, String Theory, 0908.0333.
[106] C. Rovelli, Loop quantum gravity, Living Rev. Rel. 1 (1998) 1,
[gr-qc/9710008].
[107] A. D. Sakharov, Baryonic Asymmetry of the Universe, Sov. Phys. JETP 49
(1979) 594599.
[108] G. Burdman, New solutions to the hierarchy problem, Braz. J. Phys. 37
(2007) 506513, [hep-ph/0703194].
[109] T. Moroi and Y. Okada, Radiative corrections to Higgs masses in the
supersymmetric model with an extra family and antifamily, Mod. Phys. Lett.
A 7 (1992) 187200.
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.022001
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.022001
https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.04031
https://doi.org/10.1088/1674-1137/abb658
https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15469
https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys4054
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.12739
https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.75.559
https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0207347
https://doi.org/10.1016/0370-2693(82)90641-4
https://doi.org/10.1016/0370-2693(82)90641-4
https://doi.org/10.1038/35047210
https://doi.org/10.1038/35047210
https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0012049
https://arxiv.org/abs/0908.0333
https://doi.org/10.12942/lrr-1998-1
https://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9710008
https://doi.org/10.1590/S0103-97332007000400006
https://doi.org/10.1590/S0103-97332007000400006
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0703194
https://doi.org/10.1142/S0217732392000124
https://doi.org/10.1142/S0217732392000124
176 Bibliography
[110] K. S. Babu, I. Gogoladze, M. U. Rehman and Q. Shafi, Higgs Boson Mass,
Sparticle Spectrum and Little Hierarchy Problem in Extended MSSM, Phys.
Rev. D 78 (2008) 055017, [0807.3055].
[111] P. Athron, S. F. King, D. J. Miller, S. Moretti and R. Nevzorov, Constrained
Exceptional Supersymmetric Standard Model with a Higgs Near 125 GeV,
Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 095003, [1206.5028].
[112] M. Hirsch, M. E. Krauss, T. Opferkuch, W. Porod and F. Staub, A
constrained supersymmetric left-right model, JHEP 03 (2016) 009,
[1512.00472].
[113] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Search for new phenomena in final
states with b-jets and missing transverse momentum in
s = 13 TeV pp
collisions with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 05 (2021) 093, [2101.12527].
[114] CMS collaboration, A. Tumasyan et al., Combined searches for the
production of supersymmetric top quark partners in proton-proton collisions
s = 13 TeV, 2107.10892.
[115] S. P. Martin, A Supersymmetry primer, Adv. Ser. Direct. High Energy Phys.
18 (1998) 198, [hep-ph/9709356].
[116] A. Bilal, Introduction to supersymmetry, hep-th/0101055.
[117] D. J. H. Chung, L. L. Everett, G. L. Kane, S. F. King, J. D. Lykken and L.-T.
Wang, The Soft supersymmetry breaking Lagrangian: Theory and applications,
Phys. Rept. 407 (2005) 1203, [hep-ph/0312378].
[118] M. J. Strassler, An Unorthodox introduction to supersymmetric gauge theory,
in Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics
(TASI 2001): Strings, Branes and EXTRA Dimensions, pp. 561638, 2003,
hep-th/0309149, DOI.
[119] A. Signer, ABC of SUSY, J. Phys. G 36 (2009) 073002, [0905.4630].
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.78.055017
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.78.055017
https://arxiv.org/abs/0807.3055
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.86.095003
https://arxiv.org/abs/1206.5028
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2016)009
https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.00472
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP05(2021)093
https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.12527
https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.10892
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789812839657_0001
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789812839657_0001
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9709356
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0101055
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2004.08.032
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0312378
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0309149
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789812702821_0011
https://doi.org/10.1088/0954-3899/36/7/073002
https://arxiv.org/abs/0905.4630
Bibliography 177
[120] H. Georgi and S. L. Glashow, Unity of All Elementary Particle Forces, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 32 (1974) 438441.
[121] J. C. Pati and A. Salam, Lepton Number as the Fourth Color, Phys. Rev. D
10 (1974) 275289.
[122] A. J. Buras, J. R. Ellis, M. K. Gaillard and D. V. Nanopoulos, Aspects of the
Grand Unification of Strong, Weak and Electromagnetic Interactions, Nucl.
Phys. B 135 (1978) 6692.
[123] D. V. Nanopoulos, PROTONS ARE NOT FOREVER, Stud. Nat. Sci. 16
(1979) 91114.
[124] H. Terazawa, Unifying All Elementary-particle Forces Including Gravity, in
19th International Conference on High-Energy Physics, pp. 617623, 1979.
[125] P. Nath and P. Fileviez Perez, Proton stability in grand unified theories, in
strings and in branes, Phys. Rept. 441 (2007) 191317, [hep-ph/0601023].
[126] C. Englert, D. J. Miller and D. D. Smaranda, Phenomenology of
GUT-inspired gauge-Higgs unification, Physics Letters B 802 (2020) 135261,
[1911.05527].
[127] C. Englert, D. J. Miller and D. D. Smaranda, The Weinberg angle and 5D
RGE effects in a SO (11) GUT theory, Phys. Lett. B 807 (2020) 135548,
[2003.05743].
[128] J. Wang, Ultra Unification, Phys. Rev. D 103 (2021) 105024, [2012.15860].
[129] I. Antoniadis, K. Benakli and M. Quiros, Finite Higgs mass without
supersymmetry, New J. Phys. 3 (2001) 20, [hep-th/0108005].
[130] Y. Hosotani, S. Noda and K. Takenaga, Dynamical gauge-Higgs unification in
the electroweak theory, Phys. Lett. B 607 (2005) 276285, [hep-ph/0410193].
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.32.438
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.32.438
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.10.275
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.10.275
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(78)90214-6
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(78)90214-6
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-3024-0_4
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4613-3024-0_4
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2007.02.010
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0601023
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135261
https://arxiv.org/abs/1911.05527
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2020.135548
https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.05743
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.103.105024
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.15860
https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/3/1/320
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0108005
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2004.12.029
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0410193
178 Bibliography
[131] J. A. Aguilar-Saavedra, Identifying top partners at LHC, JHEP 11 (2009)
030, [0907.3155].
[132] J. A. Aguilar-Saavedra, R. Benbrik, S. Heinemeyer and M. Prez-Victoria,
Handbook of vectorlike quarks: Mixing and single production, Phys. Rev. D 88
(2013) 094010, [1306.0572].
[133] M. Buchkremer, G. Cacciapaglia, A. Deandrea and L. Panizzi, Model
Independent Framework for Searches of Top Partners, Nucl. Phys. B 876
(2013) 376417, [1305.4172].
[134] O. Matsedonskyi, G. Panico and A. Wulzer, On the Interpretation of Top
Partners Searches, JHEP 12 (2014) 097, [1409.0100].
[135] N. Gutierrez Ortiz, J. Ferrando, D. Kar and M. Spannowsky, Reconstructing
singly produced top partners in decays to Wb, Phys. Rev. D 90 (2014) 075009,
[1403.7490].
[136] M. Backovi, T. Flacke, S. J. Lee and G. Perez, LHC Top Partner Searches
Beyond the 2 TeV Mass Region, JHEP 09 (2015) 022, [1409.0409].
[137] L. Basso and J. Andrea, Discovery potential for T   tZ in the trilepton
channel at the LHC, PoS EPS-HEP2015 (2015) 107, [1509.07646].
[138] J. Reuter and M. Tonini, Top Partner Discovery in the T  tZ channel at
the LHC, JHEP 01 (2015) 088, [1409.6962].
[139] B. A. Dobrescu and F. Yu, Exotic Signals of Vectorlike Quarks, J. Phys. G
45 (2018) 08LT01, [1612.01909].
[140] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Combination of the searches for
pair-produced vector-like partners of the third-generation quarks at
s = 13
TeV with the ATLAS detector, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018) 211801,
[1808.02343].
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2009/11/030
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2009/11/030
https://arxiv.org/abs/0907.3155
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.88.094010
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.88.094010
https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.0572
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2013.08.010
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2013.08.010
https://arxiv.org/abs/1305.4172
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP12(2014)097
https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0100
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.90.075009
https://arxiv.org/abs/1403.7490
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP09(2015)022
https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.0409
https://doi.org/10.22323/1.234.0107
https://arxiv.org/abs/1509.07646
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP01(2015)088
https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.6962
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6471/aacbfd
https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6471/aacbfd
https://arxiv.org/abs/1612.01909
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.211801
https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.02343
Bibliography 179
[141] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Search for pair production of
vectorlike quarks in the fully hadronic final state, Phys. Rev. D 100 (2019)
072001, [1906.11903].
[142] N. Arkani-Hamed, A. G. Cohen, E. Katz and A. E. Nelson, The Littlest
Higgs, JHEP 07 (2002) 034, [hep-ph/0206021].
[143] N. Arkani-Hamed, A. G. Cohen, E. Katz, A. E. Nelson, T. Gregoire and J. G.
Wacker, The Minimal moose for a little Higgs, JHEP 08 (2002) 021,
[hep-ph/0206020].
[144] T. Han, H. E. Logan, B. McElrath and L.-T. Wang, Phenomenology of the
little Higgs model, Phys. Rev. D 67 (2003) 095004, [hep-ph/0301040].
[145] M. Perelstein, M. E. Peskin and A. Pierce, Top quarks and electroweak
symmetry breaking in little Higgs models, Phys. Rev. D 69 (2004) 075002,
[hep-ph/0310039].
[146] M. Perelstein, Little Higgs models and their phenomenology, Prog. Part. Nucl.
Phys. 58 (2007) 247291, [hep-ph/0512128].
[147] S. Matsumoto, T. Moroi and K. Tobe, Testing the Littlest Higgs Model with
T-parity at the Large Hadron Collider, Phys. Rev. D 78 (2008) 055018,
[0806.3837].
[148] R. S. Chivukula, B. A. Dobrescu, H. Georgi and C. T. Hill, Top Quark
Seesaw Theory of Electroweak Symmetry Breaking, Phys. Rev. D 59 (1999)
075003, [hep-ph/9809470].
[149] H. Collins, A. K. Grant and H. Georgi, The Phenomenology of a top quark
seesaw model, Phys. Rev. D 61 (2000) 055002, [hep-ph/9908330].
[150] R. Contino, L. Da Rold and A. Pomarol, Light custodians in natural
composite Higgs models, Phys. Rev. D 75 (2007) 055014, [hep-ph/0612048].
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.072001
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.072001
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.11903
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2002/07/034
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0206021
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2002/08/021
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0206020
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.67.095004
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0301040
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.69.075002
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0310039
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppnp.2006.04.001
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ppnp.2006.04.001
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0512128
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.78.055018
https://arxiv.org/abs/0806.3837
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.59.075003
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.59.075003
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9809470
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.61.055002
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9908330
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.75.055014
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0612048
180 Bibliography
[151] A. Carmona, M. Chala and J. Santiago, New Higgs Production Mechanism in
Composite Higgs Models, JHEP 07 (2012) 049, [1205.2378].
[152] M. Gillioz, R. Grober, C. Grojean, M. Muhlleitner and E. Salvioni, Higgs
Low-Energy Theorem (and its corrections) in Composite Models, JHEP 10
(2012) 004, [1206.7120].
[153] C. Anastasiou, E. Furlan and J. Santiago, Realistic Composite Higgs Models,
Phys. Rev. D 79 (2009) 075003, [0901.2117].
[154] K. Agashe, R. Contino and A. Pomarol, The Minimal composite Higgs model,
Nucl. Phys. B 719 (2005) 165187, [hep-ph/0412089].
[155] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Constraints on new phenomena via
Higgs boson couplings and invisible decays with the ATLAS detector, JHEP
11 (2015) 206, [1509.00672].
[156] P. Maris, C. D. Roberts and P. C. Tandy, Pion mass and decay constant,
Phys. Lett. B 420 (1998) 267273, [nucl-th/9707003].
[157] G. C. Branco, P. M. Ferreira, L. Lavoura, M. N. Rebelo, M. Sher and J. P.
Silva, Theory and phenomenology of two-Higgs-doublet models, Phys. Rept.
516 (2012) 1102, [1106.0034].
[158] N. Craig and S. Thomas, Exclusive Signals of an Extended Higgs Sector,
JHEP 11 (2012) 083, [1207.4835].
[159] C.-Y. Chen, S. Dawson and M. Sher, Heavy Higgs Searches and Constraints
on Two Higgs Doublet Models, Phys. Rev. D 88 (2013) 015018, [1305.1624].
[160] F. J. Botella, F. Cornet-Gomez and M. Nebot, Flavor conservation in
two-Higgs-doublet models, Phys. Rev. D 98 (2018) 035046, [1803.08521].
[161] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Search for heavy resonances decaying
into a pair of Z bosons in the `+``+` and `+` final states using 139
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2012)049
https://arxiv.org/abs/1205.2378
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2012)004
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2012)004
https://arxiv.org/abs/1206.7120
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.79.075003
https://arxiv.org/abs/0901.2117
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2005.04.035
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0412089
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2015)206
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2015)206
https://arxiv.org/abs/1509.00672
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0370-2693(97)01535-9
https://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/9707003
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2012.02.002
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2012.02.002
https://arxiv.org/abs/1106.0034
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2012)083
https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.4835
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.88.015018
https://arxiv.org/abs/1305.1624
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.98.035046
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.08521
Bibliography 181
fb1 of protonproton collisions at
s = 13TeV with the ATLAS detector,
Eur. Phys. J. C 81 (2021) 332, [2009.14791].
[162] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Search for a light charged Higgs
boson in the H  cs channel in proton-proton collisions at
s = 13 TeV,
Phys. Rev. D 102 (2020) 072001, [2005.08900].
[163] V. Keus, S. F. King and S. Moretti, Three-Higgs-doublet models: symmetries,
potentials and Higgs boson masses, JHEP 01 (2014) 052, [1310.8253].
[164] N. Darvishi, M. R. Masouminia and A. Pilaftsis, Maximally Symmetric Three
Higgs Doublet Model, 2106.03159.
[165] K. G. Wilson, Renormalization group and critical phenomena. i.
renormalization group and the kadanoff scaling picture, Phys. Rev. B 4 (1971)
31743183.
[166] K. G. Wilson, Renormalization group and critical phenomena. ii. phase-space
cell analysis of critical behavior, Phys. Rev. B 4 (1971) 31843205.
[167] W. Buchmuller and D. Wyler, Effective Lagrangian Analysis of New
Interactions and Flavor Conservation, Nucl. Phys. B 268 (1986) 621653.
[168] H. Georgi, Effective field theory, Ann. Rev. Nucl. Part. Sci. 43 (1993)
209252.
[169] D. B. Kaplan, Five lectures on effective field theory, nucl-th/0510023.
[170] W. Skiba, Effective Field Theory and Precision Electroweak Measurements, in
Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics: Physics
of the Large and the Small, pp. 570, 2011, 1006.2142, DOI.
[171] E. E. Jenkins, A. V. Manohar and M. Trott, Renormalization Group
Evolution of the Standard Model Dimension Six Operators I: Formalism and
lambda Dependence, JHEP 10 (2013) 087, [1308.2627].
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-021-09013-y
https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.14791
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.102.072001
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.08900
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP01(2014)052
https://arxiv.org/abs/1310.8253
https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.03159
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.4.3174
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.4.3174
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.4.3184
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(86)90262-2
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ns.43.120193.001233
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ns.43.120193.001233
https://arxiv.org/abs/nucl-th/0510023
https://arxiv.org/abs/1006.2142
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789814327183_0001
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2013)087
https://arxiv.org/abs/1308.2627
182 Bibliography
[172] E. E. Jenkins, A. V. Manohar and M. Trott, Renormalization Group
Evolution of the Standard Model Dimension Six Operators II: Yukawa
Dependence, JHEP 01 (2014) 035, [1310.4838].
[173] R. Alonso, E. E. Jenkins, A. V. Manohar and M. Trott, Renormalization
Group Evolution of the Standard Model Dimension Six Operators III: Gauge
Coupling Dependence and Phenomenology, JHEP 04 (2014) 159, [1312.2014].
[174] I. W. Stewart, Effective Field Theory.
https://courses.edx.org/c4x/MITx/8.EFTx/asset/notes_EFT.pdf,
Lecture notes. Accessed 01 October 2021.
[175] R. Contino, A. Falkowski, F. Goertz, C. Grojean and F. Riva, On the Validity
of the Effective Field Theory Approach to SM Precision Tests, JHEP 07
(2016) 144, [1604.06444].
[176] I. Brivio and M. Trott, The Standard Model as an Effective Field Theory,
Phys. Rept. 793 (2019) 198, [1706.08945].
[177] M. J. Kirk, Charming New Physics in Beautiful Processes?, Ph.D. thesis,
Durham University, 2018.
[178] E. Venturini, Search for Beyond Standard Model physics at high and low
energy colliders, Ph.D. thesis, SISSA, Trieste, 2019.
[179] T. Cohen, As Scales Become Separated: Lectures on Effective Field Theory,
PoS TASI2018 (2019) 011, [1903.03622].
[180] A. Biektter, Know its limits: A global view on Higgs couplings at the LHC,
Ph.D. thesis, Heidelberg University, 2019.
[181] T. Cohen, N. Craig, X. Lu and D. Sutherland, Is SMEFT Enough?, JHEP 03
(2021) 237, [2008.08597].
[182] J. M. Cullen, Precision Higgs Physics in the Standard Model Effective Field
Theory, Ph.D. thesis, Durham University, 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP01(2014)035
https://arxiv.org/abs/1310.4838
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2014)159
https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.2014
https://courses.edx.org/c4x/MITx/8.EFTx/asset/notes_EFT.pdf
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2016)144
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2016)144
https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.06444
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2018.11.002
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08945
https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03622
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2021)237
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2021)237
https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.08597
Bibliography 183
[183] L. Mantani, Searches for new interactions within the SMEFT framework at
present and future colliders, Ph.D. thesis, Cathol. U. Louvain (main), 2021.
2109.03104.
[184] A. Falkowski, Lectures on Effective Field Theories.
https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/22195/contributions/86017/
attachments/59873/81148/eftlectures.pdf, Lecture notes. Accessed 01
October 2021.
[185] J. Y. Reiness, Pieces of the Higgsaw, Ph.D. thesis, Durham University, 2020.
[186] T. Appelquist and J. Carazzone, Infrared singularities and massive fields,
Phys. Rev. D 11 (1975) 28562861.
[187] E. Fermi, An attempt of a theory of beta radiation. 1., Z. Phys. 88 (1934)
161177.
[188] I. Brivio, T. Corbett, O. J. P. boli, M. B. Gavela, J. Gonzalez-Fraile, M. C.
Gonzalez-Garcia et al., Disentangling a dynamical Higgs, JHEP 03 (2014)
024, [1311.1823].
[189] S. Weinberg, Baryon and Lepton Nonconserving Processes, Phys. Rev. Lett.
43 (1979) 15661570.
[190] A. Kobach, Baryon Number, Lepton Number, and Operator Dimension in the
Standard Model, Phys. Lett. B 758 (2016) 455457, [1604.05726].
[191] B. Grzadkowski, M. Iskrzynski, M. Misiak and J. Rosiek, Dimension-Six
Terms in the Standard Model Lagrangian, JHEP 10 (2010) 085, [1008.4884].
[192] K. Hagiwara, S. Ishihara, R. Szalapski and D. Zeppenfeld, Low-energy effects
of new interactions in the electroweak boson sector, Phys. Rev. D 48 (1993)
21822203.
[193] G. F. Giudice, C. Grojean, A. Pomarol and R. Rattazzi, The
Strongly-Interacting Light Higgs, JHEP 06 (2007) 045, [hep-ph/0703164].
https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.03104
https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/22195/contributions/86017/attachments/59873/81148/eftlectures.pdf
https://indico.in2p3.fr/event/22195/contributions/86017/attachments/59873/81148/eftlectures.pdf
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.11.2856
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01351864
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01351864
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2014)024
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2014)024
https://arxiv.org/abs/1311.1823
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.43.1566
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.43.1566
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2016.05.050
https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.05726
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2010)085
https://arxiv.org/abs/1008.4884
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.48.2182
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.48.2182
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2007/06/045
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0703164
184 Bibliography
[194] R. Contino, M. Ghezzi, C. Grojean, M. Muhlleitner and M. Spira, Effective
Lagrangian for a light Higgs-like scalar, JHEP 07 (2013) 035, [1303.3876].
[195] J. Elias-Mir, C. Grojean, R. S. Gupta and D. Marzocca, Scaling and tuning
of EW and Higgs observables, JHEP 05 (2014) 019, [1312.2928].
[196] D. Liu, A. Pomarol, R. Rattazzi and F. Riva, Patterns of Strong Coupling for
LHC Searches, JHEP 11 (2016) 141, [1603.03064].
[197] L. Lehman, Extending the Standard Model Effective Field Theory with the
Complete Set of Dimension-7 Operators, Phys. Rev. D 90 (2014) 125023,
[1410.4193].
[198] Y. Liao and X.-D. Ma, Renormalization Group Evolution of Dimension-seven
Baryon- and Lepton-number-violating Operators, JHEP 11 (2016) 043,
[1607.07309].
[199] H.-L. Li, Z. Ren, J. Shu, M.-L. Xiao, J.-H. Yu and Y.-H. Zheng, Complete set
of dimension-eight operators in the standard model effective field theory, Phys.
Rev. D 104 (2021) 015026, [2005.00008].
[200] C. W. Murphy, Dimension-8 operators in the Standard Model Eective Field
Theory, JHEP 10 (2020) 174, [2005.00059].
[201] M. Trott, A methodology for theory uncertainties in the SMEFT, 2106.13794.
[202] A. Dedes, W. Materkowska, M. Paraskevas, J. Rosiek and K. Suxho,
Feynman rules for the Standard Model Effective Field Theory in R -gauges,
JHEP 06 (2017) 143, [1704.03888].
[203] A. Falkowski, Higgs Basis: Proposal for an EFT basis choice for LHC
HXSWG, 2015.
[204] R. S. Gupta, A. Pomarol and F. Riva, BSM Primary Effects, Phys. Rev. D 91
(2015) 035001, [1405.0181].
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2013)035
https://arxiv.org/abs/1303.3876
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP05(2014)019
https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.2928
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2016)141
https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.03064
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.90.125023
https://arxiv.org/abs/1410.4193
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2016)043
https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.07309
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.104.015026
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.104.015026
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.00008
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2020)174
https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.00059
https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13794
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2017)143
https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.03888
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.91.035001
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.91.035001
https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0181
Bibliography 185
[205] M. Ghezzi, R. Gomez-Ambrosio, G. Passarino and S. Uccirati, NLO Higgs
effective field theory and -framework, JHEP 07 (2015) 175, [1505.03706].
[206] A. V. Manohar, Introduction to Effective Field Theories, 1804.05863.
[207] T. Han, Collider phenomenology: Basic knowledge and techniques, in
Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in Elementary Particle Physics: Physics
in D = 4, pp. 407454, 2005, hep-ph/0508097, DOI.
[208] S. Banerjee, Anomalous Higgs couplings and collider data: some
model-independent studies, Ph.D. thesis, Harish-Chandra Research Institute,
2015.
[209] S. Marzani, G. Soyez and M. Spannowsky, Looking inside jets: an
introduction to jet substructure and boosted-object phenomenology, vol. 958.
Springer, 2019, 10.1007/978-3-030-15709-8.
[210] P. Skands, Introduction to QCD, in Theoretical Advanced Study Institute in
Elementary Particle Physics: Searching for New Physics at Small and Large
Scales, pp. 341420, 2013, 1207.2389, DOI.
[211] PDF4LHC21 combination group collaboration, T. Cridge, PDF4LHC21:
Update on the benchmarking of the CT, MSHT and NNPDF global PDF fits,
in 28th International Workshop on Deep Inelastic Scattering and Related
Subjects, 2021, 2108.09099.
[212] J. C. Collins and D. E. Soper, Parton Distribution and Decay Functions,
Nucl. Phys. B 194 (1982) 445492.
[213] Y. L. Dokshitzer, Calculation of the Structure Functions for Deep Inelastic
Scattering and e+ e- Annihilation by Perturbation Theory in Quantum
Chromodynamics., Sov. Phys. JETP 46 (1977) 641653.
[214] V. N. Gribov and L. N. Lipatov, Deep inelastic e p scattering in perturbation
theory, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 15 (1972) 438450.
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2015)175
https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.03706
https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.05863
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0508097
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789812773579_0008
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-15709-8
https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.2389
https://doi.org/10.1142/9789814525220_0008
https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.09099
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(82)90021-9
186 Bibliography
[215] G. Altarelli and G. Parisi, Asymptotic Freedom in Parton Language, Nucl.
Phys. B 126 (1977) 298318.
[216] A. D. Martin, W. J. Stirling, R. S. Thorne and G. Watt, Parton distributions
for the LHC, Eur. Phys. J. C 63 (2009) 189285, [0901.0002].
[217] R. R. Wilson, The Tevatron, Phys. Today 30N10 (1977) 2330.
[218] F. Sauerburger, LHC cross section plot. https://lhc-xsecs.org/,
Accessed 12 September 2021.
[219] CMS collaboration, S. Chatrchyan et al., The CMS Experiment at the CERN
LHC, JINST 3 (2008) S08004.
[220] ALICE collaboration, K. Aamodt et al., The ALICE experiment at the
CERN LHC, JINST 3 (2008) S08002.
[221] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., The ATLAS Experiment at the CERN
Large Hadron Collider, JINST 3 (2008) S08003.
[222] LHCb collaboration, A. A. Alves, Jr. et al., The LHCb Detector at the LHC,
JINST 3 (2008) S08005.
[223] T. Lenzi and G. D. Lentdecker, Development and Study of Different Muon
Track Reconstruction Algorithms for the Level-1 Trigger for the CMS Muon
Upgrade with GEM Detectors, 2013.
[224] J. S. Schwinger, Gauge Invariance and Mass, Phys. Rev. 125 (1962) 397398.
[225] J. S. Schwinger, Gauge Invariance and Mass. 2., Phys. Rev. 128 (1962)
24252429.
[226] K. G. Wilson, Confinement of Quarks, Phys. Rev. D 10 (1974) 24452459.
[227] CMS collaboration, A. Knsken, SiPM Operational Experience in Outer
HCAL in CMS, in 2nd Large Hadron Collider Physics Conference, 2014,
1408.5709.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(77)90384-4
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(77)90384-4
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-009-1072-5
https://arxiv.org/abs/0901.0002
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.3037746
https://lhc-xsecs.org/
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08004
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08002
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08003
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/3/08/S08005
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.125.397
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.128.2425
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.128.2425
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.10.2445
https://arxiv.org/abs/1408.5709
Bibliography 187
[228] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Particle-flow reconstruction and
global event description with the CMS detector, JINST 12 (2017) P10003,
[1706.04965].
[229] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Electron and photon
reconstruction and identification with the CMS experiment at the CERN LHC,
JINST 16 (2021) P05014, [2012.06888].
[230] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Performance of the CMS muon
detector and muon reconstruction with proton-proton collisions at
s = 13
TeV, JINST 13 (2018) P06015, [1804.04528].
[231] CMS collaboration, J. Strologas, Performance of Jet reconstruction in CMS
at 13 TeV, PoS ICHEP2016 (2016) 736.
[232] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Performance of missing transverse
momentum reconstruction in proton-proton collisions at
s = 13 TeV using
the CMS detector, JINST 14 (2019) P07004, [1903.06078].
[233] C. Englert and M. Spannowsky, Effective Theories and Measurements at
Colliders, Phys. Lett. B 740 (2015) 815, [1408.5147].
[234] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Measurement of the differential
Drell-Yan cross section in proton-proton collisions at
s = 13 TeV, JHEP 12
(2019) 059, [1812.10529].
[235] J. Ocariz, Probability and Statistics for Particle Physicists, in 1st
Asia-Europe-Pacific School of High-Energy Physics, pp. 253280, 2014,
1405.3402, DOI.
[236] J. R. Andersen et al., Les Houches 2015: Physics at TeV Colliders Standard
Model Working Group Report, in 9th Les Houches Workshop on Physics at
TeV Colliders, 2016, 1605.04692.
[237] N. Berger et al., Simplified Template Cross Sections - Stage 1.1, 1906.02754.
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/12/10/P10003
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.04965
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/16/05/P05014
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.06888
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/13/06/P06015
https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.04528
https://doi.org/10.22323/1.282.0736
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-0221/14/07/P07004
https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.06078
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2014.11.035
https://arxiv.org/abs/1408.5147
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP12(2019)059
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP12(2019)059
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.10529
https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.3402
https://doi.org/10.5170/CERN-2014-001.253
https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.04692
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02754
188 Bibliography
[238] ATLAS collaboration, Methodology for EFT interpretation of Higgs boson
Simplified Template Cross-section results in ATLAS, tech. rep., CERN,
Geneva, 2019.
[239] ATLAS and CMS collaboration, N. Belyaev, Interpretation of ATLAS and
CMS Higgs measurements in STXS and EFT, PoS LHCP2020 (2021) 137.
[240] G. Panico, F. Riva and A. Wulzer, Diboson interference resurrection, Phys.
Lett. B 776 (2018) 473480, [1708.07823].
[241] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Measurements of properties of the
Higgs boson decaying into the four-lepton final state in pp collisions at
s = 13 TeV, JHEP 11 (2017) 047, [1706.09936].
[242] ATLAS collaboration, M. Aaboud et al., Measurement of inclusive and
differential cross sections in the H  ZZ  4` decay channel in pp
collisions at
s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 10 (2017) 132,
[1708.02810].
[243] CMS collaboration, A. M. Sirunyan et al., Measurement of inclusive and
differential Higgs boson production cross sections in the diphoton decay
channel in proton-proton collisions at
s = 13 TeV, JHEP 01 (2019) 183,
[1807.03825].
[244] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad, B. Abbott, D. C. Abbott, A. A. Abud,
K. Abeling, D. K. Abhayasinghe et al., Higgs boson production cross-section
measurements and their EFT interpretation in the 4` decay channel at
s =13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, Eur. Phys. J. C 80 (2020) 957,
[2004.03447].
[245] C. Englert, R. Kogler, H. Schulz and M. Spannowsky, Higgs coupling
measurements at the LHC, Eur. Phys. J. C 76 (2016) 393, [1511.05170].
https://doi.org/10.22323/1.382.0137
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2017.11.068
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2017.11.068
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.07823
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2017)047
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.09936
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2017)132
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02810
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP01(2019)183
https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.03825
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-020-8227-9
https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.03447
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-016-4227-1
https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05170
Bibliography 189
[246] J. Ellis, C. W. Murphy, V. Sanz and T. You, Updated Global SMEFT Fit to
Higgs, Diboson and Electroweak Data, JHEP 06 (2018) 146, [1803.03252].
[247] CLICdp collaboration, Physics processes at CLIC.
https://clic.cern/physics-processes, Accessed 12 September 2021.
[248] R. Tanaka, LEP accelerator and detectors, in LEP Symposium 2001: Beyond
the Electroweak Scale, 2001.
[249] H. Abramowicz et al., The International Linear Collider Technical Design
Report - Volume 4: Detectors, 1306.6329.
[250] G. Moortgat-Pick et al., The Role of polarized positrons and electrons in
revealing fundamental interactions at the linear collider, Phys. Rept. 460
(2008) 131243, [hep-ph/0507011].
[251] H. Baer et al., The International Linear Collider Technical Design Report -
Volume 2: Physics, 1306.6352.
[252] K. Fujii et al., The role of positron polarization for the inital 250 GeV stage
of the International Linear Collider, 1801.02840.
[253] Linear Collider collaboration, J. List, Polarised Beams at Future e+e
Colliders, PoS ICHEP2020 (2021) 691, [2012.11267].
[254] K.-i. Hikasa, Transverse Polarization Effects in e+e Collisions: The Role of
Chiral Symmetry, Phys. Rev. D 33 (1986) 3203.
[255] C. Adolphsen et al., The International Linear Collider Technical Design
Report - Volume 3.II: Accelerator Baseline Design, 1306.6328.
[256] S. Banerjee, R. S. Gupta, O. Ochoa-Valeriano, M. Spannowsky and
E. Venturini, A fully differential SMEFT analysis of the golden channel using
the method of moments, JHEP 06 (2021) 031, [2012.11631].
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2018)146
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.03252
https://clic.cern/physics-processes
https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.6329
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2007.12.003
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2007.12.003
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0507011
https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.6352
https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.02840
https://doi.org/10.22323/1.390.0691
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.11267
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.33.3203
https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.6328
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2021)031
https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.11631
190 Bibliography
[257] CMS collaboration, Measurements of properties of the Higgs boson in the
four-lepton final state in proton-proton collisions at
s = 13 TeV, Tech. Rep.
CMS-PAS-HIG-19-001, CERN, Geneva, 2019.
[258] R. S. Gupta, Probing Quartic Neutral Gauge Boson Couplings using
diffractive photon fusion at the LHC, Phys. Rev. D 85 (2012) 014006,
[1111.3354].
[259] R. S. Gupta, H. Rzehak and J. D. Wells, How well do we need to measure
Higgs boson couplings?, Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 095001, [1206.3560].
[260] S. Banerjee, S. Mukhopadhyay and B. Mukhopadhyaya, New Higgs
interactions and recent data from the LHC and the Tevatron, JHEP 10 (2012)
062, [1207.3588].
[261] R. S. Gupta, M. Montull and F. Riva, SUSY Faces its Higgs Couplings,
JHEP 04 (2013) 132, [1212.5240].
[262] S. Banerjee, S. Mukhopadhyay and B. Mukhopadhyaya, Higher dimensional
operators and the LHC Higgs data: The role of modified kinematics, Phys.
Rev. D 89 (2014) 053010, [1308.4860].
[263] R. S. Gupta, H. Rzehak and J. D. Wells, How well do we need to measure the
Higgs boson mass and self-coupling?, Phys. Rev. D 88 (2013) 055024,
[1305.6397].
[264] A. Falkowski and F. Riva, Model-independent precision constraints on
dimension-6 operators, JHEP 02 (2015) 039, [1411.0669].
[265] G. Amar, S. Banerjee, S. von Buddenbrock, A. S. Cornell, T. Mandal,
B. Mellado et al., Exploration of the tensor structure of the Higgs boson
coupling to weak bosons in e+e collisions, JHEP 02 (2015) 128, [1405.3957].
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.85.014006
https://arxiv.org/abs/1111.3354
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.86.095001
https://arxiv.org/abs/1206.3560
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2012)062
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2012)062
https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3588
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2013)132
https://arxiv.org/abs/1212.5240
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.89.053010
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.89.053010
https://arxiv.org/abs/1308.4860
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.88.055024
https://arxiv.org/abs/1305.6397
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2015)039
https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.0669
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2015)128
https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.3957
Bibliography 191
[266] M. Buschmann, D. Goncalves, S. Kuttimalai, M. Schonherr, F. Krauss and
T. Plehn, Mass Effects in the Higgs-Gluon Coupling: Boosted vs Off-Shell
Production, JHEP 02 (2015) 038, [1410.5806].
[267] N. Craig, M. Farina, M. McCullough and M. Perelstein, Precision
Higgsstrahlung as a Probe of New Physics, JHEP 03 (2015) 146, [1411.0676].
[268] J. Ellis, V. Sanz and T. You, Complete Higgs Sector Constraints on
Dimension-6 Operators, JHEP 07 (2014) 036, [1404.3667].
[269] J. Ellis, V. Sanz and T. You, The Effective Standard Model after LHC Run I,
JHEP 03 (2015) 157, [1410.7703].
[270] S. Banerjee, T. Mandal, B. Mellado and B. Mukhopadhyaya, Cornering
dimension-6 HV V interactions at high luminosity LHC: the role of event
ratios, JHEP 09 (2015) 057, [1505.00226].
[271] D. Ghosh, R. S. Gupta and G. Perez, Is the Higgs Mechanism of Fermion
Mass Generation a Fact? A Yukawa-less First-Two-Generation Model, Phys.
Lett. B 755 (2016) 504508, [1508.01501].
[272] C. Degrande, B. Fuks, K. Mawatari, K. Mimasu and V. Sanz, Electroweak
Higgs boson production in the standard model effective field theory beyond
leading order in QCD, Eur. Phys. J. C 77 (2017) 262, [1609.04833].
[273] J. Cohen, S. Bar-Shalom and G. Eilam, Contact Interactions in Higgs-Vector
Boson Associated Production at the ILC, Phys. Rev. D 94 (2016) 035030,
[1602.01698].
[274] S.-F. Ge, H.-J. He and R.-Q. Xiao, Probing new physics scales from Higgs
and electroweak observables at e+e Higgs factory, JHEP 10 (2016) 007,
[1603.03385].
[275] A. Biektter, J. Brehmer and T. Plehn, Extending the limits of Higgs effective
theory, Phys. Rev. D 94 (2016) 055032, [1602.05202].
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2015)038
https://arxiv.org/abs/1410.5806
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2015)146
https://arxiv.org/abs/1411.0676
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2014)036
https://arxiv.org/abs/1404.3667
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2015)157
https://arxiv.org/abs/1410.7703
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP09(2015)057
https://arxiv.org/abs/1505.00226
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2016.02.059
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2016.02.059
https://arxiv.org/abs/1508.01501
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-4793-x
https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.04833
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.94.035030
https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.01698
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2016)007
https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.03385
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.94.055032
https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.05202
192 Bibliography
[276] J. de Blas, M. Ciuchini, E. Franco, S. Mishima, M. Pierini, L. Reina et al.,
Electroweak precision observables and Higgs-boson signal strengths in the
Standard Model and beyond: present and future, JHEP 12 (2016) 135,
[1608.01509].
[277] H. Denizli and A. Senol, Constraints on Higgs effective couplings in H
production of CLIC at 380 GeV, Adv. High Energy Phys. 2018 (2018)
1627051, [1707.03890].
[278] A. Azatov, J. Elias-Miro, Y. Reyimuaji and E. Venturini, Novel
measurements of anomalous triple gauge couplings for the LHC, JHEP 10
(2017) 027, [1707.08060].
[279] T. Barklow, K. Fujii, S. Jung, R. Karl, J. List, T. Ogawa et al., Improved
Formalism for Precision Higgs Coupling Fits, Phys. Rev. D 97 (2018) 053003,
[1708.08912].
[280] T. Barklow, K. Fujii, S. Jung, M. E. Peskin and J. Tian, Model-Independent
Determination of the Triple Higgs Coupling at e+e- Colliders, Phys. Rev. D
97 (2018) 053004, [1708.09079].
[281] H. Khanpour and M. Mohammadi Najafabadi, Constraining Higgs boson
effective couplings at electron-positron colliders, Phys. Rev. D 95 (2017)
055026, [1702.00951].
[282] C. Englert, R. Kogler, H. Schulz and M. Spannowsky, Higgs characterisation
in the presence of theoretical uncertainties and invisible decays, Eur. Phys. J.
C 77 (2017) 789, [1708.06355].
[283] R. Franceschini, G. Panico, A. Pomarol, F. Riva and A. Wulzer, Electroweak
Precision Tests in High-Energy Diboson Processes, JHEP 02 (2018) 111,
[1712.01310].
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP12(2016)135
https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.01509
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/1627051
https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/1627051
https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.03890
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2017)027
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2017)027
https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.08060
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.97.053003
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.08912
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.97.053004
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.97.053004
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.09079
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.95.055026
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.95.055026
https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.00951
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-5366-8
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-5366-8
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.06355
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2018)111
https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.01310
Bibliography 193
[284] S. Banerjee, C. Englert, R. S. Gupta and M. Spannowsky, Probing
Electroweak Precision Physics via boosted Higgs-strahlung at the LHC, Phys.
Rev. D 98 (2018) 095012, [1807.01796].
[285] C. Grojean, M. Montull and M. Riembau, Diboson at the LHC vs LEP,
JHEP 03 (2019) 020, [1810.05149].
[286] A. Biekoetter, T. Corbett and T. Plehn, The Gauge-Higgs Legacy of the LHC
Run II, SciPost Phys. 6 (2019) 064, [1812.07587].
[287] D. Goncalves and J. Nakamura, Boosting the H  invisibles searches with Z
boson polarization, Phys. Rev. D 99 (2019) 055021, [1809.07327].
[288] R. Gomez-Ambrosio, Studies of Dimension-Six EFT effects in Vector Boson
Scattering, Eur. Phys. J. C 79 (2019) 389, [1809.04189].
[289] F. F. Freitas, C. K. Khosa and V. Sanz, Exploring the standard model EFT in
VH production with machine learning, Phys. Rev. D 100 (2019) 035040,
[1902.05803].
[290] S. Banerjee, R. S. Gupta, J. Y. Reiness and M. Spannowsky, Resolving the
tensor structure of the Higgs coupling to Z-bosons via Higgs-strahlung, Phys.
Rev. D 100 (2019) 115004, [1905.02728].
[291] A. Azatov, D. Barducci and E. Venturini, Precision diboson measurements at
hadron colliders, JHEP 04 (2019) 075, [1901.04821].
[292] S. Banerjee, R. S. Gupta, J. Y. Reiness, S. Seth and M. Spannowsky, Towards
the ultimate differential SMEFT analysis, JHEP 09 (2020) 170, [1912.07628].
[293] A. Biektter, R. Gomez-Ambrosio, P. Gregg, F. Krauss and M. Schnherr,
Constraining SMEFT operators with associated h production in weak boson
fusion, Phys. Lett. B 814 (2021) 136079, [2003.06379].
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.98.095012
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.98.095012
https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.01796
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2019)020
https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.05149
https://doi.org/10.21468/SciPostPhys.6.6.064
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.07587
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.99.055021
https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.07327
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-019-6893-2
https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.04189
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.035040
https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05803
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.115004
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.100.115004
https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.02728
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2019)075
https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.04821
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP09(2020)170
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.07628
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2021.136079
https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.06379
194 Bibliography
[294] K. Rao, S. D. Rindani and P. Sarmah, Study of anomalous gauge-Higgs
couplings using Z boson polarization at LHC, Nucl. Phys. B 964 (2021)
115317, [2009.00980].
[295] J. Y. Araz, S. Banerjee, R. S. Gupta and M. Spannowsky, Precision SMEFT
bounds from the VBF Higgs at high transverse momentum, JHEP 04 (2021)
125, [2011.03555].
[296] I. Dunietz, H. R. Quinn, A. Snyder, W. Toki and H. J. Lipkin, How to extract
CP violating asymmetries from angular correlations, Phys. Rev. D 43 (1991)
21932208.
[297] A. S. Dighe, I. Dunietz and R. Fleischer, Extracting CKM phases and
Bs  Bs mixing parameters from angular distributions of nonleptonic B
decays, Eur. Phys. J. C 6 (1999) 647662, [hep-ph/9804253].
[298] D. Stolarski and R. Vega-Morales, Directly Measuring the Tensor Structure of
the Scalar Coupling to Gauge Bosons, Phys. Rev. D 86 (2012) 117504,
[1208.4840].
[299] Y. Chen, R. Harnik and R. Vega-Morales, Probing the Higgs Couplings to
Photons in h 4` at the LHC, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 191801,
[1404.1336].
[300] Y. Chen, R. Harnik and R. Vega-Morales, New opportunities in h 4`,
JHEP 09 (2015) 185, [1503.05855].
[301] Y. Chen, J. Lykken, M. Spiropulu, D. Stolarski and R. Vega-Morales, Golden
Probe of Electroweak Symmetry Breaking, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117 (2016) 241801,
[1608.02159].
[302] J. S. Gainer et al., Adding pseudo-observables to the four-lepton
experimentalists toolbox, JHEP 10 (2018) 073, [1808.00965].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2021.115317
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2021.115317
https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.00980
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2021)125
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP04(2021)125
https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.03555
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.43.2193
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.43.2193
https://doi.org/10.1007/s100520050372
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9804253
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.86.117504
https://arxiv.org/abs/1208.4840
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.113.191801
https://arxiv.org/abs/1404.1336
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP09(2015)185
https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.05855
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.117.241801
https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.02159
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP10(2018)073
https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.00965
Bibliography 195
[303] D. Atwood and A. Soni, Analysis for magnetic moment and electric dipole
moment form-factors of the top quark via e+ e- > t anti-t, Phys. Rev. D
45 (1992) 24052413.
[304] I. Anderson et al., Constraining Anomalous HVV Interactions at Proton and
Lepton Colliders, Phys. Rev. D 89 (2014) 035007, [1309.4819].
[305] A. V. Gritsan, J. Roskes, U. Sarica, M. Schulze, M. Xiao and Y. Zhou, New
features in the JHU generator framework: constraining Higgs boson properties
from on-shell and off-shell production, Phys. Rev. D 102 (2020) 056022,
[2002.09888].
[306] S. Chen, A. Glioti, G. Panico and A. Wulzer, Parametrized classifiers for
optimal EFT sensitivity, JHEP 05 (2021) 247, [2007.10356].
[307] ATLAS collaboration, G. Aad et al., Search for the Higgs boson decays
H  ee and H  e in pp collisions at
s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS
detector, Phys. Lett. B 801 (2020) 135148, [1909.10235].
[308] CMS collaboration, A. Sirunyan et al., Measurements of Higgs boson
properties in the diphoton decay channel in proton-proton collisions at
13 TeV, JHEP 11 (2018) 185, [1804.02716].
[309] CMS collaboration, Measurements of Higgs boson properties in the diphoton
decay channel at
s = 13 TeV, tech. rep., CERN, Geneva, 2020.
[310] ATLAS collaboration, Projections for measurements of Higgs boson cross
sections, branching ratios, coupling parameters and mass with the ATLAS
detector at the HL-LHC, tech. rep., CERN, Geneva, 2018.
[311] A. Pomarol and F. Riva, Towards the Ultimate SM Fit to Close in on Higgs
Physics, JHEP 01 (2014) 151, [1308.2803].
[312] ALEPH, DELPHI, L3, OPAL, SLD, LEP Electroweak Working
Group, SLD Electroweak Group, SLD Heavy Flavour Group
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.45.2405
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.45.2405
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.89.035007
https://arxiv.org/abs/1309.4819
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.102.056022
https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.09888
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP05(2021)247
https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.10356
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2019.135148
https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.10235
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP11(2018)185
https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.02716
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP01(2014)151
https://arxiv.org/abs/1308.2803
196 Bibliography
collaboration, S. Schael et al., Precision electroweak measurements on the Z
resonance, Phys. Rept. 427 (2006) 257454, [hep-ex/0509008].
[313] K. Hagiwara, R. D. Peccei, D. Zeppenfeld and K. Hikasa, Probing the Weak
Boson Sector in e+ e- > W+ W-, Nucl. Phys. B 282 (1987) 253307.
[314] C. Degrande, J. M. Gerard, C. Grojean, F. Maltoni and G. Servant, Probing
Top-Higgs Non-Standard Interactions at the LHC, JHEP 07 (2012) 036,
[1205.1065].
[315] N. Deutschmann, C. Duhr, F. Maltoni and E. Vryonidou, Gluon-fusion Higgs
production in the Standard Model Effective Field Theory, JHEP 12 (2017)
063, [1708.00460].
[316] R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, F. Maltoni, R. Pittau and P. Torrielli,
Four-lepton production at hadron colliders: aMC@NLO predictions with
theoretical uncertainties, JHEP 02 (2012) 099, [1110.4738].
[317] R. M. Godbole, D. J. Miller and M. M. Muhlleitner, Aspects of CP violation
in the HZZ coupling at the LHC, JHEP 12 (2007) 031, [0708.0458].
[318] E. P. Wigner, Group Theory: And its Application to the Quantum Mechanics
of Atomic Spectra. Pure and applied physics. Elsevier Science, 2012.
[319] F. James, Statistical methods in experimental physics. World Scientific
Singapore, 2006.
[320] F. Beaujean, M. Chrzszcz, N. Serra and D. van Dyk, Extracting Angular
Observables without a Likelihood and Applications to Rare Decays, Phys. Rev.
D 91 (2015) 114012, [1503.04100].
[321] M. Dobbs and J. B. Hansen, The HepMC C++ Monte Carlo event record for
High Energy Physics, Comput. Phys. Commun. 134 (2001) 4146.
[322] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam and G. Soyez, FastJet User Manual, Eur. Phys. J.
C 72 (2012) 1896, [1111.6097].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physrep.2005.12.006
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ex/0509008
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(87)90685-7
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2012)036
https://arxiv.org/abs/1205.1065
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP12(2017)063
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP12(2017)063
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.00460
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2012)099
https://arxiv.org/abs/1110.4738
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2007/12/031
https://arxiv.org/abs/0708.0458
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.91.114012
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.91.114012
https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.04100
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-4655(00)00189-2
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-1896-2
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-012-1896-2
https://arxiv.org/abs/1111.6097
Bibliography 197
[323] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam and G. Soyez, The anti-kt jet clustering algorithm,
JHEP 04 (2008) 063, [0802.1189].
[324] A. Buckley, D. Kar and K. Nordstrm, Fast simulation of detector effects in
Rivet, SciPost Phys. 8 (2020) 025, [1910.01637].
[325] A. Buckley, J. Butterworth, D. Grellscheid, H. Hoeth, L. Lonnblad, J. Monk
et al., Rivet user manual, Comput. Phys. Commun. 184 (2013) 28032819,
[1003.0694].
[326] The Particle Data Group collaboration, M. Tanabashi et al., Review of
Particle Physics, Phys. Rev. D 98 (2018) 030001.
[327] S. Banerjee, R. S. Gupta, O. Ochoa-Valeriano and M. Spannowsky, High
energy lepton colliders as the ultimate Higgs microscopes, JHEP 02 (2022)
176, [2109.14634].
[328] M. S. Chanowitz and M. K. Gaillard, The TeV Physics of Strongly
Interacting Ws and Zs, Nucl. Phys. B 261 (1985) 379431.
[329] A. Wulzer, An Equivalent Gauge and the Equivalence Theorem, Nucl. Phys. B
885 (2014) 97126, [1309.6055].
[330] N. Craig, J. Gu, Z. Liu and K. Wang, Beyond Higgs Couplings: Probing the
Higgs with Angular Observables at Future e+e Colliders, JHEP 03 (2016)
050, [1512.06877].
[331] J. Yan, S. Watanuki, K. Fujii, A. Ishikawa, D. Jeans, J. Strube et al.,
Measurement of the Higgs boson mass and e+e  ZH cross section using
Z  + and Z  e+e at the ILC, Phys. Rev. D 94 (2016) 113002,
[1604.07524].
[332] J. F. Gunion, T. Han and R. Sobey, Measuring the coupling of a Higgs boson
to Z Z at linear colliders, Phys. Lett. B 429 (1998) 7986, [hep-ph/9801317].
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2008/04/063
https://arxiv.org/abs/0802.1189
https://doi.org/10.21468/SciPostPhys.8.2.025
https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01637
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2013.05.021
https://arxiv.org/abs/1003.0694
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.98.030001
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2022)176
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2022)176
https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.14634
https://doi.org/10.1016/0550-3213(85)90580-2
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2014.05.021
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2014.05.021
https://arxiv.org/abs/1309.6055
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2016)050
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP03(2016)050
https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.06877
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.94.113002
https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.07524
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0370-2693(98)00450-X
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/9801317
198 Bibliography
[333] T. Han and J. Jiang, CP-violating ZZh coupling at e+e linear colliders,
Phys. Rev. D 63 (2001) 096007, [hep-ph/0011271].
[334] T. Han, Z. Liu, Z. Qian and J. Sayre, Improving Higgs Coupling
Measurements Through ZZ Fusion at the ILC, Phys. Rev. D 91 (2015)
113007, [1504.01399].
[335] R. Torre, L. Ricci and A. Wulzer, On the W&Y interpretation of high-energy
Drell-Yan measurements, JHEP 02 (2021) 144, [2008.12978].
[336] G. Panico, L. Ricci and A. Wulzer, High-energy EFT probes with fully
differential Drell-Yan measurements, JHEP 07 (2021) 086, [2103.10532].
[337] ALEPH Collaboration, DELPHI Collaboration, L3
Collaboration, OPAL Collaboration, LEP TGC Working Group
collaboration, A Combination of Preliminary Results on Gauge Boson
Couplings Measured by the LEP experiments, tech. rep., CERN, Geneva, 2003.
[338] G. B. Arfken and H. J. Weber, Mathematical methods for physicists; 4th ed.
Academic Press, 1995.
[339] M. L. Boas, Mathematical methods in the physical sciences; 3rd ed. Wiley,
2006.
[340] C. Degrande, C. Duhr, B. Fuks, D. Grellscheid, O. Mattelaer and T. Reiter,
UFO - The Universal FeynRules Output, Comput. Phys. Commun. 183 (2012)
12011214, [1108.2040].
[341] A. Alloul, N. D. Christensen, C. Degrande, C. Duhr and B. Fuks, FeynRules
2.0 - A complete toolbox for tree-level phenomenology, Comput. Phys.
Commun. 185 (2014) 22502300, [1310.1921].
[342] J. Alwall, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, F. Maltoni, O. Mattelaer et al.,
The automated computation of tree-level and next-to-leading order differential
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.63.096007
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0011271
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.91.113007
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.91.113007
https://arxiv.org/abs/1504.01399
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2021)144
https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.12978
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2021)086
https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.10532
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2012.01.022
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2012.01.022
https://arxiv.org/abs/1108.2040
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2014.04.012
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2014.04.012
https://arxiv.org/abs/1310.1921
Bibliography 199
cross sections, and their matching to parton shower simulations, JHEP 07
(2014) 079, [1405.0301].
[343] P. Nason, A New method for combining NLO QCD with shower Monte Carlo
algorithms, JHEP 11 (2004) 040, [hep-ph/0409146].
[344] S. Frixione, P. Nason and C. Oleari, Matching NLO QCD computations with
Parton Shower simulations: the POWHEG method, JHEP 11 (2007) 070,
[0709.2092].
[345] S. Alioli, P. Nason, C. Oleari and E. Re, A general framework for
implementing NLO calculations in shower Monte Carlo programs: the
POWHEG BOX, JHEP 06 (2010) 043, [1002.2581].
[346] NNPDF collaboration, R. D. Ball et al., Parton distributions from
high-precision collider data, Eur. Phys. J. C 77 (2017) 663, [1706.00428].
[347] J. M. Campbell and R. K. Ellis, MCFM for the Tevatron and the LHC, Nucl.
Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 205-206 (2010) 1015, [1007.3492].
[348] J. Pumplin, D. R. Stump, J. Huston, H. L. Lai, P. M. Nadolsky and W. K.
Tung, New generation of parton distributions with uncertainties from global
QCD analysis, JHEP 07 (2002) 012, [hep-ph/0201195].
[349] T. Sjstrand, S. Ask, J. R. Christiansen, R. Corke, N. Desai, P. Ilten et al.,
An introduction to PYTHIA 8.2, Comput. Phys. Commun. 191 (2015)
159177, [1410.3012].
[350] M. Grazzini, S. Kallweit and D. Rathlev, ZZ production at the LHC: fiducial
cross sections and distributions in NNLO QCD, Phys. Lett. B 750 (2015)
407410, [1507.06257].
[351] J. M. Campbell and R. K. Ellis, Next-to-Leading Order Corrections to W + 2
jet and Z + 2 Jet Production at Hadron Colliders, Phys. Rev. D 65 (2002)
113007, [hep-ph/0202176].
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2014)079
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP07(2014)079
https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0301
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2004/11/040
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0409146
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2007/11/070
https://arxiv.org/abs/0709.2092
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP06(2010)043
https://arxiv.org/abs/1002.2581
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-017-5199-5
https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.00428
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysbps.2010.08.011
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysbps.2010.08.011
https://arxiv.org/abs/1007.3492
https://doi.org/10.1088/1126-6708/2002/07/012
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0201195
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2015.01.024
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2015.01.024
https://arxiv.org/abs/1410.3012
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2015.09.055
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physletb.2015.09.055
https://arxiv.org/abs/1507.06257
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.65.113007
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.65.113007
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0202176
200 Bibliography
[352] J. de Blas et al., Higgs Boson Studies at Future Particle Colliders, JHEP 01
(2020) 139, [1905.03764].
[353] G. Durieux, C. Grojean, J. Gu and K. Wang, The leptonic future of the Higgs,
JHEP 09 (2017) 014, [1704.02333].
[354] DELPHES 3 collaboration, J. de Favereau, C. Delaere, P. Demin,
A. Giammanco, V. Lematre, A. Mertens et al., DELPHES 3, A modular
framework for fast simulation of a generic collider experiment, JHEP 02
(2014) 057, [1307.6346].
[355] P. Demin and M. Selvaggi, Delphes Card ILD. https://github.com/
delphes/delphes/blob/master/cards/delphes_card_ILD.tcl, Accessed 1
June 2021.
[356] CLICdp collaboration, D. Arominski et al., A detector for CLIC: main
parameters and performance, 1812.07337.
[357] E. Leogrande, P. Roloff, U. Schnoor and M. Weber, A DELPHES card for the
CLIC detector, 1909.12728.
[358] M. E. Peskin and T. Takeuchi, Estimation of oblique electroweak corrections,
Phys. Rev. D 46 (1992) 381409.
[359] R. Barbieri, A. Pomarol, R. Rattazzi and A. Strumia, Electroweak symmetry
breaking after LEP-1 and LEP-2, Nucl. Phys. B 703 (2004) 127146,
[hep-ph/0405040].
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP01(2020)139
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP01(2020)139
https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.03764
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP09(2017)014
https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.02333
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2014)057
https://doi.org/10.1007/JHEP02(2014)057
https://arxiv.org/abs/1307.6346
https://github.com/delphes/delphes/blob/master/cards/delphes_card_ILD.tcl
https://github.com/delphes/delphes/blob/master/cards/delphes_card_ILD.tcl
https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.07337
https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.12728
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.46.381
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2004.10.014
https://arxiv.org/abs/hep-ph/0405040
